THE MOST famous History of the Seven Champions of Christendom: Saint George
of England, Saint Dennis of France, Saint James of Spain, Saint Anthony of
Italy, Saint Andrew of Scotland, Saint Pattricke of Ireland, and Saint David
of Wales. Showing their Honorable battles by Sea and Land: their Tilts,
Iousts, and Tournaments for Ladies: their Combats with Giants, Monsters, and
Dragons: their adventures in foreign Nations: their Inchauntments in the holy
Land: their Knighthoods, Prowess, and Chivalry, in Europe, Africa, and Asia,
with their victories against the enemies of Christ.

AT LONDON Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Royal Exchange. 1596.

To the Right Honorable Lord Thomas Howard, etc. R. I. wishes health, honor
and happiness.
Having heard (Right Honorable) by a general report of the laudable and
virtuous qualities, vvherevvith your Honors mind is beautefied, and your
favorable acceptance of good will from the meanest, I have attempted (though
fearing to fall like Phaiton) to present into your Lordships hands this homely
gift: which is a History of the seven Champions of Christendom, whole
names to this day is held in great estimation through Europe: where in steed
of music, I bring you mislike: for a learned book, an ildle discourse:
thereby to beguile your ingenious Judgments exercised in the best rudiments.
Yet presuming upon this, that as the Noblest minds are ever the most courteous,
so your Honor will vouchsafe to cast a smiling glaunce at this simple toy: if
not for the vvorkemanship, yet for the good will of the giver: vvherevvith if
I be favored (as I hope well) my labor has his revvard, and my desire his
content: in which assured hope resting, I commit your Honor to the Almighty.

Your Honors in all humility most affectionate. R. I.

To all courteous Readers, Richard Johnson wishes increase of virtuous
knowledge.
GEntle Readers in kindness accept of my labors, and be not like the chattering
Cranes nor Momus mates, that carps at euerything: what the simple say I care
not: what the spightfull speak I pass not: only the censure of the conceited
I stand unto, that is the mark I aim at: whose good likeinges if I obtain,
I have vvonne my race: if not, I faint in the first attempt, and so loose the
quiet of my happy goal.

Yours in kindness to command. R. I.

The Authors Muse upon the History.
THe famous factes O Mars derived from thee*
By weary pen, and paynefull Authors toil:
Enroulde we find, such feats of Chivalry,
As has been seldom seen in any soil.
Thy ensigns here we find in field displaide,
The Trophies of thy victories erected:
Such deeds of Arms, as none could have assaide,
But Knights, whose courage fear has not detected*
Such Ladies saved, such monsters made to fall,
Such Giants slain, such hellish Furies queld:
That Humane forces few or none at all,
In such exploits, their lives could safely shield.
But virtue stirring up their Noble minds,
By valiant Conquests to enlarge their Fames:
Has causde them seek, adventures forth to find,
Which registreth their never dying names.
Then Fortune, Time, and Fame agree in this,
That Honors gain the greatest glory is.
Gentle Reader, bear with the faults ouerpast in correction, and they shall be
amended God willing, in the next Impression.

The Honorable History of the Seven Champions of Christendom.
CHAP. I.
Of the wonderful and strange birth of Saint George of England, how he was
cut out of his Mothers womb, and after stole from his Nurses by Kalyb the Lady
of the woods: Her love to him, and her gifts, and how he enclosed her in a
rock of stone, and redeemed six Christian Knights out of prison.

AFter the angr^e Greeks has (...) the chiefest City in Phrigi^, and turn^
King Priams glorious buildinges to a (...) and desolate wilderness, Duke Aenzas
exempted from his native habitation, with many of his distressed countrymen
((...) Pilgrims) wandered the world to (...) some happy r^gion, where they
might erect the Image of their late subue^ted Troy, but before that labor
could (...) accomplished, Aenaeas ended his days in the con^i^^s of Italy,
and left his son Askanius to govern in his (...), Askanius dying (...)
Siluius to rule, Siluius deceasing, le^t ^he noble and ^^^ent^rous Brutus,
which Brute (being the (...) (...) and hollow trees, wherein they were
entertained with such a dismal croking of night Ravens, hissing of Serpents,
b^llowing of Bulls, and roaring of monsters, that it rather seemed a
wilderness of furies, than any worldly habitation: by which they knew it to be
the inch^^ted vale of Kalyb the Lady of the woods: So pacing (...) the middle
of the thicket, they came to a Ca^e whose gate and entrey was of Iron, whereon
hung a mighty brazen borne for them to wind that would speak with the
Sorceresse, first offering their Lamb with great humlitie before the post^rne
of the Cave, then exempting all fear they winded the brazen horn, the sound
whereof seemed to shake the foundation of the earth, after which they heard a
loud and hollow voice that uttered these words following.

Sir Knight from whence thou camst return,
Thou have a Son most strangely borne:
A Dragon fell shall split in twain,
Thy Ladies womb with extreme pain:
A Champion bold from thence shall spring,
And practice many a wondrous thing:
Return therefore make no delay,
For it is true what I do say.
THis da^ke Ri^^le or rather mystical Oracle being thrice repeated in this
order, so much amazed them that they stood in doubt whether it were b^st to
return, or to wind the br^^en borne the second time: but being persuaded by
the other Knight not to mo^ue the impatience of Kalyb, he rested satisfied
with that answer.

Thus le^^ he the i^chaunted Cave to the government of Kalyb, and with all
sp^^de dispatched his journey to his (...) hab^tation, but in the mean^ time
his Lady b^ing ouerch^rged with extr^^me pain and bitter anguish of her
laborsome womb, (...) forced either to the spoil of her Infant, or decay of
her own life: But regarding more the benefit of her country, than ^er own
safety, and for the preservation of her child, ^hee most willingly committed
her tender womb to be opened, that her Infant might be taken forth alive.

Thus with the consent of many learned Chirurgions, this most Noble and
Magnanimious Lady was cast into a dead sl^epe, her womb cut up with sharp
razers, and the Infant taken from the bed of his creation: Upon his breast
nature had picturde the lively form of a Dragon, upon his right hand a bloody
Cross, and on his left leg a golden garter, they named him George, and
provided him three nurses, one to give him suck, another to keep him a sleep,
and the third to provide him food, not many days after his nativity, the
fell Inchantresse Kalyb being the utter enemy to true Nobility, by charms
and witchcrafts st^le the Infant from his car^les Nurses: At which time (though
all too late) her Noble Lord and Husband returned in g^^d hope to he^re a
joyful delivery of his Lady, and a comfort of a Son: but his wished joy,
was turned into a lasting sorrow, for he found not only his Lady dismembered
a^ her womb, but his young Son wanting, without (...) of his abode; which
woeful spectakle berea^^d (...) of his wi^^, that for a time he stood s^ncele^
like weeping N^obe, but a^ l^st brake into these bitter e^clamations.

O heau^n^! why cover you not earth with everlasting night? or why do these
accursed eye^ b^hold the sun? O that the wo^s of Oedipus might end my da^es,
or like an exile joy in banishment, where I may warble forth my sorrows to the
whispering woods, tha^ senceles tr^^s may record my loss, and vn^ame^ beasts
grieve at my want. What monster has ber^aud^ me of my Child? or what Tyrant
has been glutted with his Tragedy? ^ that the wind would be a messenger and
bring me happy news of his abode, if he be drenched in the deepest Seas,
^^ether will I diue to fetch him (...) he be hidden in the (...) earth,
th^ther will I dig to se^ my sonn^* or if he like a scathered foul lie
houering in the air, yet thither will I fly, and embrace him that never (...)
eyes behold^: But why do I thunder forth my excla^ations thus in (...), when
neither heaven, nor earth, nor seas, nor (...) heaven, in earth, nor seas will
lewd me comfort for (...) couerie?

Thus complained he many mon^hs for the los^^ of his son, and sent messengers
into every C^rcuite of the Land, but no man pro^^e so fortunate as to return
him happy tidings: He then b^eing frustrate of all good hopes, stored himself
with Jewels, and so intended to travail the wide world, either to speed in his
journey, or to leave his bones in some foreign region: T^ns leaving his native
Country, wandered from place to place, till the hair^s of his head were grown
as white as silver, and his beard like to the thistle down, but at l^st he
ended his travail in Bohemia, where what for age and excessive grief, laid
him self down under a ruinate Monastery wall and dyed, the Commons of that
country having knowledge of his name (by a Jewel he wore in his bosom)
ingraued it in Marble stone right over his sepulcher, where we leave him
sleeping in peace, and return to his son remaining with Kalyb the Lady of
the woods in the inchaunted Cave.

Now twice seven years were fully finished since Kalyb first had in keeping
the Noble Knight Saint George of England, whose mind many times thirsted after
honorable adventures, and often attempted to set him self at liberty, but the
f^ll inchantresse tendering him as the apple of her eye, appointed twelve sturdy
Satiers to attend his person, so that neither force nor policy could further
his intent: she kept him not to triumph in his Tragedy, nor to spend his
d^yes in slavery, but feeding his fancy with all the delights and pleasures
that Art or Nature could (...): For in him she fixed her chiefest felicity,
and luste^ after his be^^tie: But he seeking to advance his name by Martial
Discipline and Knightly attempts, utterly refused her preffered courtesies, and
highly disdainde to affect so wicked a creature: who seeing her love bestowed
in vain, upon a time being in the secretst corner of her Cave, began (...)
him in this manner.

^hou know (Sir Knight) how worthily I have deserved thy Love, and how for
thy sake I have kept my Uirginity vnstainde* yet thou more cruel than the
Tigers breed in Libia, reiect^th me. Dear Knight fulfill my desiers, and at
thy pleasure my charms shall practice woondrous things, as to move the
heavens to rain a shower of stones upon thy enemies, to convert the Sun to
f^re, the Moon to blood, or make a desolation of the whole world.

The Noble Knight Saint George considered in his mind that Love would make the
wisest blind: Therefore by her fair promises he hoped to obtain his liberty,
the which moou^e him to make her this answers.

Most wise and learned Kalyb, the wonder of the world, I condescend to all thy
desiers upon this condition, that I may be sole Proiector and Governor of this
Inchaunted Cave, and that thou discribe to me my birth, my name, and Parentage,
whereto she willingly consented, and began her discourse in this manner. Thou
art by birth said she, son to the Lord Albert high Steward of England, and to
this day have I kept (...) within these solitary woods: So taking him by the
hand she led him (...)* wherein remained as prisoners, fire of the (...) k^^ghts
in the world: These are said she six of the ^orthiest (...) of Christendom,
the first is Saint Dennis of France, the second Saint James of Spain, the
third Saint A^ho^ie of Italy, the fourth Saint Andrew (...) ^cotland* (...)
Pattricke of Ireland, the sixth Saint David of Wales (...) of thou art borne to
be the (...), and thy (...) Sa^^t George of England, for so thou shall be
(...) to come* Then leading him a (...) further she brou^^t him into a large
fair (...) whe^^ s^ood seven of the (...) Steedes that ^uer the world behold,
^ixe of these (said she) belong to the six Champions, and the seventh will*
bestow on thee, whose name is Ba^ard: likewise she lead him to another room,
where hung the richest Armor that ^uer eye beheld, so choosing out the
strongest Cor^let (...) Armorie, she with her own hands buckled it on his
breast, laced on his Hel^ne, and attyred him with rich Caparison, then fetching
forth a mighty ^a^chion, she put it likewise in his hand, (now said she) art
thou Armed in richer furniture than was Ninus the first Monarke of the world:
thy steed is of such force and invincible power, that whilst thou art mounted
on his back, there can be no Knight in all the world so hardy as to conquer
thee: Thy Armor of the purest Lidian steel, that neither weapon can pearce,
nor Battle axe bruise, thy sword which is called Ascalon is framed of such
excellent mettle by the curious workmanship of the Ciclops, that it will
separate and cut the hardest ^lint, and how in sunder the strongest steel, for
in the pummell lies such precious virtue, that neither treason, witchcrafts,
nor any violence can be proffered thee, so long as thou wearest it.

Thus the lustful Kalyb being so blinded in her own conceit, that she not
only bestowed the riches of her Cave upon him, but gave him power and
authority through a silver wand which she put in his hand to work her own
destin^tion for coming by a huge great rock of stone, this valiant minded
Knight stroke his charming r^d thereon, whereat it opened, and showed
apparently before his eyes a number of sucking Babes which the Inchauntress^
had mirthered by her witchcrafts and sorceries: O said she this is ^ place of
horror, where naught is heard but scrikes and (...) groans of dead men's souls,
but if thy ears can ind^re^ hear them, and thy eyes behold them, I will lead
the (...) So the Lady of the woods boldly stopping in before* (...)
mistrusting the pr^tended pol^icie of S. George, (...) in her own practices,
for no sooner entered the the rock, but he stroke his silver wand thereupon,
and immediately it closed, where she bellowed forth exclamations to the
senceles stones without al hope of delivery.

Thus this Noble Knight deceived the wicked Inchant^esse Kalyb, and set the
other six Champions likewise at liberty, who rendered him all Knightly
courtesies, and gave him thanks for their safe delivery, so storing themselves
with all things according to their desiers, took their iournies from the
Enchanted grove, whose proceeding fortunes and heroical adventures shall be
showed in this Chapter following.

CHAP. II.
Kalybs Lamentation in the Rock of stone, her Will and Testament, and how she
was torn in pieces by Spirits: with other things that happened in the Cave.

BUT after the departure of the seven worthy Champions, Kalyb seeing her self
fast closed in the rock of stone, by the policy of the English Knight, grew
into such extreme passion of mind, that she cursed the hour of her creation,
and bitterly b^nned all motions of coniuration, the earth she wearied with her
cries, whereby the very stones seemd to relent, and as it were, wept cristall
tears, and sweat with very anguish of her grief: the blasted Oaks that
grew about the Inchaunted rock, likewise seemde to rue at her exclamations,
the blustering winds were silent, the murmuring of Birds still, and a
soli^^rie dumbnes took possession of every (...) within the (...) of the
woods, to hear her woeful Lamentation, which she uttered in this man^^^.

O miserable Kalyb! accu^sed be thy desteny, for (...) thou art incl^sed within
a desolate and darkesome den, where neither sun can lend thee comfort with
his bright beams, nor air extend his breathing coolenes to thy woeful soul,:
for in the deep foundations of the earth, thou art for evermore enclosed: I
that have been the wonder of my time for Magic, I that by Art have made my
journey to the deepest dungeons of hell, where multitudes of ugly black and
fearful spirits has trembled at my charms: I that have bound the furies up
in beds of steel, and caused them to attend my pleasure like swarms of
hornets, that ouerspreads the mountains in Egypt, or the flies upon the
parched hills, where the tawnie tanned Mores do inhabit* am now constrained
to languish in eternal darkness: woe to my soul: woe to my charms, and woe
to all my Magic spells: for they have bound me in this hollow rock: pale be
the brightness of the clear sun, and cover earth with everlasting darkness,
skies turn to pitch, the elements to flaming fire, ror^ hell, quake earth,
swell seas, blast earth, rocks rend in twain, all creatures mourn at my
confusion, and sighe at Kalybs woeful and pitiful exclamations.

Thus wearied she the time away, one while accusing Fortune of t^rrany, another
while bl^ming the falsehood and treachery of the English Knight, sometimes
fearing her curled locks of bris^led hair, that like a wreath of s^^kes hung
dangling down her deformed neck, then beating her breasts, another while
rending her ornaments, whereby she seemd more liker ^ fury than an earthly
creature, so impacient was this wicked inchantres Kalyb being ^^u^trate of all
hope of recou^ry, began a fresh to thund^^ forth these terms of coniuration:
Come, come you Princes of the elements, come, come and tear this rock in
pieces, and let me be enclosed up in the eternal languishment: appea^e you
shadows of black missie nigh^: Mag^ll, C^math, Helueza, Zontomo: Come when I
call, venite ^estinate inquam: At which words the earth began t^ quake, and
the very elements to tremble: for all the spirits both of air, of earth, of
water, and of fire were obedient to her charms, and by multitudes came fl^cking
at her call: some from the fire in the likeness of burning Dragons, breathing
from their tearefull nostrels, sulphu^e and flaming Brimstone, some from the
water in shape of Fishes, with other d^formed creatures, that has their
abiding in the Seas, some from the air the purest of the ellements, in the
likeness of Angels and other bright shadows, and other some from the gross
earth most ugly, bl^^ke and dreadful to behold: So when the legions of
spirits had incompast the wicked Inchantresse, hell began to rore such an
infernal and harsh mellodie, that the Enchanted rock burst in twain, and
then Kalybs ch^rmes took no effect, for her Magic no longer endured, than the
term of an hundred years, the which as then were fully finished and brought
to end: for the Obligation which she subscribed with her dearest blood, and
sealed with her own hands, was brought as a witness against her, by which she
knew and fully persuaded herself that her life was fully come to end:
therefore in this fearful manner she began to make her Will and latest
Testament.

First welcome (said she) my sad Executors, welcome my grave and everlasting
toombe, for you have di^d^ it in the fiery lakes of Phlegethon my winding
sheet wherein to shrowde both my body and condemn^d soul, is a Calderne of
boiling l^^d and brimstone, and the wor^es that should consume my Car^^sse, are
the fiery forkes which toss burning fire^^ands from place to place, from
furnace to furnace, and from calderne to calder^^* therefore attend to Kalybs
woeful testament* and ingra^e the Legacies she gives in brass rolls upon the
burning banks of Acheron. First these eyes that now too late weep helples
tears I give unto the watrie spirits, for they have rakt the treasures hidden
in deepest Seas to satisfy their most insatiate looks: next I bequeath th^se
hands which did subscribe the bloody Obligation of my perpetual banishment
from joy, unto those spirits that houer in the Air: my tongue that did
con^pire against the Majesty of Heaven, I give to those spirits which have
their b^^ing in the fire: my earthly heart I bequeath to those grace Demons
that dwell in the ^ungeons of the earth: and the rest of m^ condemned body, to
the torments due to my deseruings: which strange and fearful Testament,
being no sooner ended, but all the spirits generally at one instance ceazed
upon the Inchantresse and dismembered her body to a thousand pieces, and
divided her limbs to the corners of the earth, one member to the Air, another
to the water, another to the fire, and another to the earth, which was carried
away in a moment by the spirits, that departed with such a horror, that all
things within the hearing thereof suddenly died, both Beasts* Byrds, and all
creeping worms which remained within the compass of those enchanted woods,
for the trees which before was wont to flourish with green leaves, withered
away and died, the blades of grass perished for want of natural moisture,
which the watrie cloud denied to nourish in s^ wicked a place.

Thus by the judgments of the heavens, sensles things p^rished for the
wickedness of Kalyb, whom we leave to her endless torments both of body and
soul, and return to the seven worth^ Champions of Christendom, whose
laudable adventures fame has in^old in the books of memory.

CHAP. III.
How Saint George slew the burning Dragon in Egypt, and redeemed Sabra the
Kings Daughter from death: How he was betrayed by Almidor the black King of
Moroco, and sent to the Sultan of Persia, where he slew two Lions and remained
seven years in prison.

AFter the seven Champions departed from the Inchaunted Cave of Kalib, they
made their abode in the C^^tie of Couentrie, for the space of nine months, in
which time they erected up a sumptuous and costly monument over the hearse of
Saint Georges Mother, and so in that time of the year, when the spring had
ouerspred the earth, with the mantles of Flora, they Armed themselves like
wandering Knights, and took their journey to seek for foreign adventures,
accounting no dishonor so great, as to spend their days in idleness atchiuing
no memorable accident: So travailing for the space of thirty days without any
adventure worthy the noting, at length came to a large broad Plain, whereon
stood a brazen pillar, whereat seven several ways divided, which caused the
seven Knights to forsake each others company, and to take every one a
contrary way, where we leave six of the Champions to their contented
travails, and wholly discourse upon the fortunate success of our worthy
English knight, who after some few months travail, happily arrived within the
^eretories of Egypt, which country as then was greatly annoyed with a
dangerous D^^gon but before he had iournied fully the distance of a (...),
the silent night approached, and solitary stil^es took possession of all living
things, at last he espied (...), wherein he purposed to rest his horse, and to
take so^e repast after his weary journey, til the (...) had renewed his
mornings light that he might f^^l to (...) ^rauaile ag^ine: but entering the
Cottage, he found (...) Hermit ouerworne with years, and almost consumed with
grief: to whom he beg^n in this manner to confer.

Father (said he) for so you seem by your grauety, may a trauailer for this
night crave entertainment within your Cottage, not only for himself but his
horse, or is there some City near at hand, whetherto I may take my journey
without danger: The oldman starting at the sudden approach of Saint George,
replied unto him in this order.

Sir Knight (quoth he) of thy country I need not demand, for I know it by
thy Burgonet, (for indeed thereon was graven the Arms of England,) but I
sorrow for thy ^ard fortune that it is thy destenie to ariue in this our
country of Egypt: Wherein is not left sufficient alive to bury the dead, such
is the distress of this land, through a dangerous and tirrible Dragon now
ranging up and down the country: which if he be not every day appeased with
a pure and true virgin, which he deuoureth down his venomous bowels, but that
day so neglected will he breath such a stench from his nostrels, whereof will
grow a most grievous plague and mortallity of all things, which use has been
observed for these four and twenty years, but now there is not left one true
virgin but the Kings only daughter throughout Egypt, which D^msell to morrow
must be offered up in Sacrifice to the Dragon: Therefore the King has m^de
Proclam^tion, that if any Knight dare prove so aduenterous as to combat with
the Dragon, and preserve his daughters life* shall in reward have her to his
wife, and the Crown of Egypt after his dis^^ase.

This large proffer so encouraged the English Knight that he vowde either to
redeem the Kings Daughter, or else to loose his life in that honorable
enterprise: So taking his repose and nightly rest in the old man's Hermitage,
till the cheerful Cock being the true messenger of day, gave him warning of
the Suns vp-rise, which causd him to bu^kle on his Armor, and to furnish his
Steed with strong habilliments of war, the which being done he took his
journey guided only by the old Hermit to the valley where the kings Daughter
should be offered up in Sacrifice: But when he approached the sight of the
valley, he espied a far off a most fair and beautiful Damsel, ^ttired in pure
Arabian silk going to sacrifice, guarded to the place of death only by s^ge
and modest Matrons, which woeful sight so encouraged the English Knight to such
a forwardness, that he thought every (...) a day til he had redeemed the
Damsel from the Dragons tyrran^e: So approaching the Lady, gave her comfort of
delivery, and returnde her back to her Fathers Palace again.

After this the Noble Knight like a bold aduenterous Champion entered the
valley, where the Dragon had his residence, who no sooner had a fight of him,
but he gave such a tir^able y^ll as though it had thundered in the ^llements,
the bigness of the Dragon was fearef^^^ to behold, for betwixt his shoulders and
his tail were fifty foot in distance, his scales glistered brighter than
silver, but far more harder than brass, his belly of the color of gold,
but more bigger than a Tun. T^us weltred he from his hideo^s den, and
fi^rcely assailed the stu^die Champion with his burning wings, that at the
first encounter, he had alm^st fell^d him to the ground, but the Knight nimbly
recovering him self, gave the Dragon such a thrust with his (...), that it
shiuerd in a thousand pieces, whereat the furious Dragon so ^iercely smote him
with his venomous tail, that down fell man and horse, in which fall two of
Saint Georges ribs were sore bruised, but yet stepping backward, it was his
chance to leap under an Orringe tree, which tree had such precious virtue,
that no venomous worm durst come within the compass of the branches, nor
within seven foot thereof, where this valiant Knight rested himself until
he had recovered his former strength: who no sooner feeling his spirits
revived, but with an eger courage smote the burning Dragon under his yellow
burnisht belly with his trusty sword Askalon, whereout came such abundance
of venom, that it sprinkled upon the Champions Armor, whereby immediately
through the impoysoned strength of the venom his Armor burst in twain, and
the good Knight fell into a grievous and dead sound, that for a time he lay
breathles: but yet having that good memory remaining, that he tumbled under
the branches of the Orringe tree; in which place the Dragon could proffer him
no further violence. The fruit of the tree was of such an excellent virtue,
that whosoever tasted thereof should presently be cured of all manner of
diseases and infirmities whatsoever: So it was the Noble Champions good and
happy fortune, a little to recover through the virtue of the tree, and to
epsy an Orringe which a little before had dropped down wherewith he so
refreshed himself, that he was in short time as sound as when he first began
the encounter: Then kneeled he down and made his divine supplication to
heaven, that God would send him (for his dear sons sake) such strength and
agillity of body as to slay the furious and tirrable monster, which being
done, with a bold and courageous heart, he smote the Dragon under the wing,
where it was tender without scale, whereby his good sword Askalon with an easy
passage went to the very hilts through both the Dragons heart, liver, bone and
blood, whereout issued such abundance of purple gore, that it turned the
grass which grew in the valley into a crimson color, and the ground which
before partched through the burning stinch of the Dragon, was now drenched with
overmuch moisture which voyded from his venomous bowels, where at last through
want of blood, and long continuance in fight, the Dragon yielded his vital
spirits to the mercy of the conquering Champion. The which being happily
performed, the Noble Knight Saint George of England, first yielding due honor
to Almighty God for the victory, then with his good sword Askalon he cut off
the Dragons head and pitched it upon the trunchion of a spear, which at the
beginning of the battle he shiuered against the Dragons scaly back: During
this long and dangerous Combat, his trusty Steed lay altogether in a sound
without any moving, which caused the English Champion with all speed to crush
the joyce of an Orringe into his cold mouth: the virtue whereof, presently
expelled the venomous poisons, and recovered his former strength again.

There was as then remaining in the Egiptian Court, one Almidor the black King
of Moroco, who long had prosecuted (in the way of marriage) the Love of Sabra
the Kings daughter, but by no policy, means, nor manhood, could he
accomplish what his har^ desired: But now finding opportunity to express his
treacherous mind, intended to rob and spoil Saint George of his victory,
whereby he thought to attain the gracious favor, and singular g^^d liking of
his Lady and Mistress, who lothed his company like the detested Crokadiles,
but even as the Wolf though all in vain barks at the Moon: So this
fantastical and cowardly Almidor, through many rich gifts and fair promises,
hired twelve Egiptian Knights to beset the valley where Saint George slew the
burning Dragon, and by force bereave him of his conquest: But when this
magnanimious Champion of England came ryding in triumph from the valley,
^spected to have been entertained like a Conqueror with Drums and Trumpets,
or to have heard the belles of Egypt rung a joyful sound of victory, or to
have have seen the str^etes beautified with bonefires: but contrary to his
imagination was he met with Troops of Armed Knights, not to conduct him
peacefully to the Egiptian Court, but by falsehood and treachery to dispoyle him
of his life and honor: For ne sooner had he ridden past the entry of the
valley, but he espi^d how the Egiptian Knights brandi^hed their weapons, and
divided themselves to inte^c^pt him in his journey to the Court: By which he
knew them to be no faithful friends, but vowed enemies: So tying his Horse to
a Hatkorne tree, he intended to try his fortune on foot for fear of
disadvantage, they being twelve to one, but in the skirmish Saint George so
valiantly behaved himself with his trusty sword Askalon, that at one stroke
he slew three of the Egiptian Knights, and before the golden Diamond of heaven
had wandered the zo^iack the compass of an hour: but some he dismembered of
their heads: some had their limbs lopt off: some their bodies cut in twain,
and some their intrayles trayling down, so that not one was left alive to
carry news to Almidor the black King, which stood (during all the time of
skirmish) a far off upon a mountain top, to behold the success of his hired
Champions: But when he saw the Egiptians bloody Tragedies, and how the happy
fortune of the English Knight had won the honor of the day: he accursed his
destenie, and accused the Queen of chance with cruelty, for disapointing his
pretended enterprise, but having a heart fr^ught with all wicked motions*
s^cretlie vowed in his soul, to practice by some other treachery S. Georges
utter confusion: So ^unning before to the Court of King Ptolomie, not reueali^g
what had happened to the twelve Egiptian Knights, but ^rying in every place as he
went, Victoria, Victoria, the enemy of Egypt is slain. Then Ptolomie
commanded euer^e street of the City to be hung with rich Ar^as and
imbrothere^ Tapestry, and likewise provided a sumptu^us Chariot of gold, the
wheels and other timb^^ work of the purest ^bonie, the covering thereof was
made of purple silk, cross b^rde with sta^es of gold: Likewise a hundred of
the Noblest Peers of Egypt, attired in Crimson Ueluet and white, mounted on
milk white Coursers with rich Caparison attended the coming of S. George:
Thus all things apopinted for his Honorable intertainement, which they
performed in such solemn order, that I lack memory to discribe it: For when
he first entered the gates of the City, he heard such a mellodious h^rmonie
of heavenly sounding Music, that it seemed in his conceit to surpass the
sweetness of the Cherubins, or the holy company of Angels: Then they most
Royally presented him with a sumptuous and co^^ly Pale of gold, and after
invested him in that Iuorie Chariot, wherein he was conducted to the Palace of
King Ptolomie, where this Nobl^ and Princeli^ minded Champion, surrendered up
his conquest and victory to the seemly hands of the beauteous Sabra: where
she with like courtesy and more humillity requited his bounty: For at the
f^^st sight of the English Knight, she was so ravished with his Princely
countenance, that for a time she was not able to speak: Yet at last taking
him by the hand she led him to a rich pauillion, where she unarmed him, and
with most precious sal^^s imbalmed his wounds, and with her ^eares washed away
the blood, which being done she furnished a table with all manner of dillicates
for his repast, where her Father was present, who demanded his Country*
P^rentage and name: after the banq^et was ended, he insta^^d him with the
hon^ur of Knighthood, and put upon his feet a pair of golden spurs: But
Sabra who feeding upon the banquet of his love, conducted him to his nights
repose, where she sat upon his bed and wa^ bl^^ forth most heavenly melody
upon her Lute, till his senses were overcome with ^ asweet and silent sleep,
where she left him for that night after (...) dangerous battle: But no sooner
did Auroraes ^adi^nt blush, distaine the beauty of the East, and the sun show
his morning countenance, but Sabra repaired to the English Champions lodging,
and at his first vprising presented him with ^ Diamond of most rare and
excellent virtue, the which he wore upon his finger: The next that entered his
lodging, was the Treacherous Almidor the black King of Moroco, having in his
hand a boule of Greeki^h Wine* which he offe^ed to the Noble Champion Saint
George of England* but at the receaite thereof, the Diamond the Lady gave him
which he wore upon his finger waxed pale, and from his nose felt three drops
of blood, whereat he started: which sudden accident caused the kings daughter
to suspect some secret poison compounded in the Wine, and thereupon so
vehemently s^riked, that a sudden uproar presently ouerspread the whole Court,
whereby it came to the Kings intelligence of the proffered Treachery of
Almidor against the English Champion: But so bear was the love of the Egiptian
King, to the black King of Moroco, that no belief of Treachery could enter
into his mind.

Thus Almidor the second time was prevented of his pr^ctise, whereat in mind
he grew more enraged than the chafed Bore: yet thinking the third should pay
for all^ So (...) spying a time wherein to work his wicked purpose, which he
brought to pass in this manner.

Many a day r^mained Saint George in the Egiptian Court, sometimes reu^lling
am^ngst Gentlemen, dancing and sporting with Ladies, other s^m^ in Tilts and
Turnim^nts, with other Honorable exercises: Likewise long and extreme was the
love that beauteous Sabra bore to the English Champion, of the which this
Treacherous A^midor had intelligence by many secret practices, and many times
his ears were witness of their discourses: So upon an Evening, when the
gorgious Sun lay l^uell with the ground, it was his fortune to walk under a
Garden wall, to take the coolenes of the Euenings air, where unseen of the
two Lovers, he heard their amorous discourses a^ they sat dallyin^ in the
bower of Roses, Courting (...) another in this manner.

My souls delight, my hearts choose comfort* sweet^ George of England, said
the loue-seeke Sabra! Why art thou more obdurate than the Flint: which the
tears of my true heart can never mollify? How many thousand sighs have I
breathde for thy sweet sake, which I have sent to thee as true messe^gers of
love, yet neue^ would thou requite me with a smiling countenance. Refuse not
her dear Lord of England, that for thy love will forsake her Parents, Country
and Inheritance, which is the Crown of Egypt, and like a Pilgrim f^llowe thee
throughout the wide world. O therefore knit that gordion knot of wedlock, that
none but death can afterward vnty, that I may say the Sun shall loose his
brightness, the Moon her sple^dant be^mes, the Sea her ^ides, and all thing^s
under the cope of heaven grow contrary to kind, before Sabra the Heir of
Egypt prove unconstant to her dear S. George of England.

Th^se words so fiered the Champions heart, that he was almost entangled in
the snares of love, which before time only aff^cted Martial discipline: But
yet to try patience, a little more, made her this a^swere. Lady of Egypt,
cans^ thou not be content that I have ventured my (...) to set thee free from
death, but that I should link my f^ture fortunes in a woman's l^ppe, and so
bury all my Honors in Oblivion? No, no Sabra George of England is a Knight
borne in a Country where tru^ C^iualrie is n^urisht, and has sworn to search
the world so far as ever the Lam^e of Heaven does lend his light, before he tie
himself to the troublesome state of marriage* therefore attempt me no more,
that am a stranger and a wanderer from place to place, but s^^k to aim at
higher States, as the ^ing of Mo^roco, who will attempt to climb the ^e^uens
(...) gayn^ (...) love and good liking: at which speeches she suddenly (...)
in this manner.

The King of Moroco is as bloody minded as a Serpent, but thou more gentle th^n
a Lamb, his tongue as ominous as the scriking night Owl* but thine more
sweeter than the morninges Lark, his kind imbracinges like the stinging
Snakes, but thine more pleasant than the creeping vine: ^^at if thou be a
Knight of a strange country? thy body is more precious to mine eyes than
Kingdoms in my heart. There stay (replied the English Champion,) I am a
Christian, thou a Pagan: I honor God in heaven, thou earthly shadows below:
therefore if thou will obtain my love and liking, thou must forsake thy
Mahomet and be christened in our Christian faith. With all my soul (answered
the Egiptian Lady) will I forsake my country Gods, and for thy love become a
Christian, and therewithal she burst a ring in twain, the one half she gave
to him in pledge of Love, and kept the other half her self: and so for that
time departed the Garden.

But during all the time of their discourses, the Treacherous minded Almidor
stood listening to their speeches, ^ fretted inwardly to the very gall to heat
the Mistress of his heart, reject his former courtesies: Therefore intending now
or never to infringe their plighted band, went in all have to the Egiptian
King, and in this manner made his suplication.

Know great M^narke of the East, that I have a secret to unfold, which touches
nerely the sauegard of your country: It was my chance this Evening at shutting
up of Titons golden gates, to take the comfort of the Western^ breathing air
under your private Garden walks, where I heard (though all unseen) a deep
pretended Treason betwixt your Daughter and the English Knight, where she has
vowde to forsake her God and believe as the Christians do, and likewise she
intendes to fly from her native Country, and to go with this wandering
trauailer, which has been so highly honored in your Court.

Now by Mahomet, Apollo, and Termagaunt, three Gods we Egiptians commonly ador^
(said the King) this damned Christian shall not gain the conquest of my
daughters love, for he shall loose his head, though not by violence in our
Egiptian Court: Therefore Almidor be secret in my intent, for I will send him
to my cosen the Persian Sultan, from whence he never shall return to Egypt
again, except his Ghost bring news of bad success unto my Daughter, and
thereuppon they presentlye contrived this Letter.

The Letter to the Sultan of Persia.
I Ptolomie King of Egypt and the Eastern territories sends Greeting to thee
the mighty Sultan of Persia, great Emperor of the Provinces of (...) Asia.
This is to request thee upon (...) of friendship betwixt us, to show the
bearer hereof thy servant death, for he is an utter enemy to all Asia and
Africa, and a proud contemner of our Religion: Therefore fail me not in my
request, as thou will answer on thine oath, and so in have farewell.

Thy kinseman Ptolomie the King of Egypt.


WHich Letter being no sooner subscribed and sealed with the great Seal of
Egypt, but Saint George was dispatched with Embassage for Persia, with the
bloody sentence of his own destruction: to the true delivery whereof, he was
sworn by the honor of his Knighthood, and for his pawn he left behind him
his good Steed, and his trusty sword Askalon in the keeping of Ptolomie the
Egiptian King, only taking for his puruay and easy travail (...) of the
Kings horses.

Thus the Innocent Lamb betrayed by the willie Fox was sent to the
hungerstarued Lions den, being s^ffered not once to give his Lady and Mistress
understanding of his sudden departure, but trauailde day and night through
many along and solitary Wilderness without any adventure worthy the memory,
but that he heard the dismal cry of Night-Rauens thundering in his ears, and
the fearful sound of Crickets in the creueses of the earth, and such like
messengers of mischance, which foretelled some fatal accident to be at hand:
yet no fear could daunt his noble mind, nor danger hinder his intended
travail, till he had a sight of the Soldians Palace, which seemed more liker
a Paradise than any earthly habitation for as the History reports the walls
and towers of the Palace was of the purest Marble stone, the windows of caued
silver work, inamiled with Indian Pearl, beset with lattine and crystal
glass, the outward walls and buildings painted with gold, the pillars and gates
were all of brass, about the Palace was a mighty ditch of a wonderful
breadth and depth, over the ditch stood a stately bridge, erected up with
s^mp^uous workmanship of graven Images, under the bridge a hundred silver
Belles were hung by Art, so that no creature might pass into the Palace, but
they gave warning to the Soldans Guard, at the end of the bridge was built an
Allablaster Tower, whereon stood an Eagle of gold, his eyes of the richest
precious stones, the brightness whereof glisterd so much, that all the Palace
did shine with the light thereof.

Upon the day ( Saint George entered the Soldians Court) when the Persians
solemnly sacrificed to their Gods Mahomet, Apollo, Tirmigaunt, which
unchristian Procession so moved the impatience of the English Champion, that
he took the ensigns and streamers whereon the Persian Gods were pictured, and
trampled them under his feet: whereupon the Pagans presently fled to the
Sultan for succor, and showed him how a strange Knight had despised their
Mahomet and trampled their banners in the dust, then presently he sent a
hundred of his Armed knights, to know the cause of that sudden uproar, and to
bring the Christian Champion bound unto his Majesty: but the Persian Knights,
were in^^inde with such a (...) banquet, that same of their heads run tumbling
in the streets, and the Channels ouerflowde with streams of blood: the
Pauements of the P^ll^ce were ouer^^^ed with slaughtered men and the walls
besprinkled with purple gore: so victoriously he behaude himself against the
enemies of Christ, that ^re the Sun had declined in the West, he brought to
ground a hundred of the Soldans Soldiers, and enforced the rest like flocks
of sheep to fly to the Sultan for aid and succor, which as then remained in
his Palace with the guard of three thousand soldiers: Who at the report of
this vnspected uproar, furnished his Soldiers with habilliments of war, and
came marching from his Palace with such a mighty power as though the strength
o^ C^rist^ndome had been come to invade the te^retories of Asia: But such was
the invincible courage of Saint George, that he encountered with them all, and
made such a Massaker in the Soldans Court, that the Pauements were ouerspread
with slaughtered Persians, and the Palace gates stuffed with heaps of
murdered Pagans: At the last the larum bells was caused to be rung and the
Beacons s^t on fire, whereat the commons of the Country rose in Arms, and came
slocking about the English Champion like swarms of Bees, where at last through
his long encounter, and the multitude of his enemies, his never daunted courage
was forced to yield, and his restles Arm wearied with fight, constray^ed to
let his weapons fall to the ground.

Thus he whose fortitude sent thousands to wander on the banks of Acharon,
stood now obedient to the mercies of ten thousands, which with their
brandishing weapons, and sharp edged ^auchions environed him about.

Now bloody minded monster (said the Sultan) what country man ^o ever* (...),
Jew, Pagan, or misbeleeuing Christian: ^^ke for a sentence of severe punishment
for every dropp^ of blood thy unhappy hand has shed. First, thy skin with
sharp razers shall be pared from thy flesh ^liue: (...) fle^^ with burning
Irons (...) from thy bones, and lastly thy accursed ^^mbes ^rawne in y^eces
joint from joint with untamed horses. This blo^dy Judgment pronounced by the
(...) not a little m^oued S. George to reply in this manner. Great Potentate of
Asia, I crave the liberty and law of Arms, whereto all the kings of the earth
by ^^th are ho^nd: Fr^^ my descent in (...) native Country (...) of Royal
blood, and therefore challenge I a combat: secondly an Ambassador I am from
Ptolmoie the King of Egypt, and therefore no violence must be proffe^ed^^e,
las^lie, the laws of Asia graunts me safe conduct back to Egypt: therefore
what I hau^ done Ptolomie must answer, and thereuppon he delivered the Letter
seeled with the great seal of Egypt, the which was no sooner broken up and
read, but the Soldans eyes sp^rkled like unto (...), and upon his countenance
appea^ed the Image of wrath and discontent.

Thou art by the report of Ptolomie (said the Sultan) a great contemner of our
Gods, 12 despis^^ of our Laws: Therefore his pleasure is that I should end
the days by some inhum^ne death: the which I swe^re by Mahomet, Apollo, and
Term^gaunt to accomplish, and thereupon ^e gave ^im in ke^ping to a hundred of
his Ianisaries till the day of cre^^tion, which was appointed within thi^tie
da^^s f^ll^wing: So they (...) him of his apparel and attired him in simple
and bate ^tray: His aims that late was employed to wild the mighty T^rget,
and fesse ^he wai^hty (...), they stron^ly ^et^ered up in iron bolts* and those
hands which were want to be^ garnished with steel^ Gauntlets, they bound up
fast in hemp^ bands, that the purple blood tric^l^d down from his fingers
ends, and so being dispoylde of all Knightl^ dignit^e, they co^paide him to a
deep, dark and des^late dungeon: wherein the golden Sun did never show his
splendant beams, nor never could the comfortable light of heaven be seen:
betwixt the day and night no difference could be made, the the summers*
partching heat and winters freezing cold were both al^ke, his chiefest comfort
was to number the Persians he had slain in the conflic^* one while ponde^ing
in his restles thoughts the ingratitude of Ptolomie the Egiptian King another
while remembering his love, his vow, and deep affection that he bore to the
Egiptians daughter, and ^ow^ unkindly she took his departure, caruing her
picture with the na^les of his fingers upon the wall^s of the dungeon: to which
sensles substance he many times we^^^ thus complai^e.

O cruel destenies! Why is this grievous punishment allotted to my penance?
Have I conspired against the majesty of ^^auen, that they have thrown this
vengeance on my ^ea^^ shall I never recover m^ fo^^er liberty, that I may be
revenged upon the ca^sers of my imprisonment* frown angry heavens upon these
blo^dy minded Pagans, those daring miscreants, and professed enemies of Christ,
and may the pl^gues of Pharo light upon their countries, and the misery of
Oedipus upon their Princes: that they may be eye witnesses of their d^ughters
rauishments, and behold their Cities fl^ming like the burning ba^tail^mentes
of Troy. Thus lamented be the l^sse of his liberty, accursing his birth day,
and hour of his cre^tion, wishing that it never might be numbered in the year,
but coun^ed ^min^^s to all ensuing ages: His sighs exceeded the number of the
Ocian lands, and his tears the water (...) in a raynie day, and as one
deminished, another pres^ntl^ appearde.

T^us sorrow was his companion, and despair his chief (...), till Hiperion
with his golden C^^ch had thirty times rested in Thetis purple Pall^ce, and
Ciniliia thirty times daunst upon the Crystal waves: which was the very
time his complete mones should end, according to the severe and cruel
Judgment of the Sultan of Persia: Bu^ by what extraordenary means he knew not:
So looking every minnute of an hour to entertain the wished messenger of
death, he heard a far off the tirrable roaring of two hunger starued Lions,
which for the space of fourteen days had been restrained from their food,
and natural sustinance, only to devour and staunch their hunger starued
bowels with the body of this thrice renowned Cha^pion: which cry of the Lions
so terrified his mind that the hair of his head gr^w stiff, and his brows
sweat blood through anguish of his soul, so extremely be feared the
remorceles stroke of death: that by violence he burst the chains in sunder
wherewith he was bound, and rent the curled tresses from his head, that was of
the color of Amber, the which he wrapped about his arms against the Assault
of the Lions, for he greatly suspected them to be the ministers of his
Tragedy, which indeed so fell out, for at that same instant they descended
the dungeo^, being brought thither by the Guard of Iam^saries, only to make a
full period of the Champions life: But such was the invincible fortitude of
Saint George, and so polliticke his defense, that when the starued Lions came
running on him with open Jaws, he valiantly thrust his sinnewed Arms into
their throats (being wrapped about with the hair of his head) whereby they
presently choked, and so he pulled out their bloody hearts.

Which sp^ctakle the Soldans Iannsaries beholding, were so amazed with fear,
that they ran in all haste to the Palace, and certified the Sultan what had
happened, who commanded every part of the Court to be strongly guarded with
Armed Soldiers, supposing the English Knight rather to be some monster
ascended from the Sea, than any creature of humane substance, or else one
possessed with some divine inspiration, that by force of Arms has
accomplished so many aduenterous stratagems: such a terror assailed the
Soldans heart, se^ing he had slain two Lions, and slaughtered two thousand
Persians with his own hands, and likewise ha^ intelligence how he slew^ a
burning Dragon in Egypt: caused the dungeon to be closed up with bars of Iron,
lest he should by policy or fortitude recover his liberty, and so endanger
the whole country of Persia: where he remained in want, pennury, and great
necessity, for the term of seven winters, feeding only upon rats and
mice, with other creeping worms which he caught in the dungeon.

During which time he never tasted of the bread of Corn, but of wheat branne
and Channel water, which daily was served him through the Iron grates, where
now we leave Saint George, languishing in great misery, and return again into
Egypt, where we left Sabra the C^ampions betrothed Lady, lamenting the want of
his company, whom she loved dearer than any Knight in all the world.

Sabra that was the fairest maid that ever mortal eye beheld, in whom both
Art and nature seemed to excel in ^urious workmanship, her body being
comlier than the stately C^der, and her beauty purer than the Paphian Queens:
the one with over burdened grief was quite alter^d, and the other stained
with floods of brackish tears, that daily trickled down her crystal
cheeks: whereby she found the very Image of discontent, the nap of woe, and the
only mirror of sorrow, she accounted all company loathsome to her sight, and
excluded the fellowship of all Ladies, only betaking her self to a solitary
Cabbinet, where she sat sowing many a woeful story upon a crimson Sampler:
whereon sometimes bathing a wounded heart with luke warm tears, that fell
from the Conduits of her eyes, then presently with her crisped locks of hair
which dangled down her Iuorie neck, dry up the moisture of her sorrowful
tears: then thinking upon the plighted promises of her dear beloved Knight,
fell into these passionate and pitiful complaints.

O Love (said she) more sharper than the pricking Brier! with what vnequallity
do thou torment my wounded heart, not ^^^cking my dear Lord in the like
affection of mind? O Venus! if thou be imperious in thy Deity, to whom both
Gods and men obey, command m^ wandered Lord to return again, or that my
soul may flee into the clouds, that by the winds it may be blown into his
sweet bosom, where lives my bleeding heart: But foolish fondling that I am, he
has rejected me, and s^uns my company like the Sirens, else had he not
refused the Court of Egypt where he was honored like a king, and wandered the
world to seek another love: No, no it cannot be: he bears no such inconstant
mind, for I greatly fear some treachery has bereaude me of his sight, or
else soon s^onny prison includes my George from me: If it be so sweet Morpheus
thou God of golden dreams, reveal to me my loves abiding, that in my sleep
his shadow may appear and report the cause of his departure. After this
pa^^^on was breathed from the mansion of her soul, she committed her watchful
eyes to the government of sweet s^eepe, which being no sooner closed, but
there appeared as she thought, the shadow and very shape of her dearly beloved
Lord Saint George of England, not as he was wont to be, flourishing in his
graven Burgonet of steel, or mounted on a stately Genet, decked with a watchet
Plume of spangled ^eathers, but in ouerworne and simple attire, with pale looks
and leave* body, like to a Ghoast risen from some hollow grave, breathing as it
were these sad and woeful passions:

Sabra I am betraide for love of thee,
And logde in hollow Caves of dismal night:
From whence I never more shall come to see,
Thy loving countenance and beauty bright.
Remain thou true and constant for my sake,
That of thy love, they may no conquest make.
Let tyrants think if ever I obtain,
What now is lost by treasons cursed guile^
False Egipts scourge I surely will remain,
And turn to streaming blood Morocos smile.
The damned dog of Barbary shall rue,
The balefull stratagems that will ensue.
The Persian towers shall smoke with fire,
And lofty Babylon be tumbled down:
The Cross of Christendom shall then aspire,
To wear the proud Egiptian triple Crown.
Jerusalem and Judah shall behold*
The fall of Kings by Christian Champions bold.
Thou maid of Egypt still continue chaste,
A Tiger seeks thy virgins name to spill:
Whilst George of England is in prison plast,
Thou shall be forced to wed against thy ^ill.
But after this shall happen wondrous things,
For from thy womb shall spring three mighty kings.
This strange and tragical discourse b^^ng no sooner ende^, but she awaked
from her sleep, and presently ^each^^ forth her seemly hands (...) king to
(...) him, but she catched nothing but the bri^^le (...), which caus^d (...)
to renew her former c^mplaints; O wherefore (...) in this my troubl^some
dream* (...) that my Ghost might have haunt^d the (...) m^nsters which falsely
betr^yed the brauest Champion under the cope of heaven? ^et for his sake will I
(...) against the ingratitude of Egypt, and like the (...) Philom^ (...) fill
every corner of the land with echoes of his (...): any woes shall exceed the
sorro^s of Dido qu^^ne of C^^tha^^, mourning for the ingratitude of Aeneas:
with (...) like passions wearied she the time away, ^till twelve mont^s were
fully finished: at last her father understanding what fervent affection she
bore to the English Champion began ^n this manner to dilate.

Daughter (said the Egiptian King) I charge she by the hands of nature, and
the true obedience thou ought to bear my age, to banish and ex^lude all
fond affections from thy mind, and not to settle thy love upon a wandr^ng
Knight that is unconstant, and without habitation: thou see he has forsaken
thee, and returnde into his own Country, where he has wedded a wife of that
Land and Nation: Therefore I charge thee upon my displeasure, to affect and
love the black King of Moroco, that rightfully has d^s^rued thy love, which
shall be Honorably holden to the Honor of Egypt, and so departed without any
answer at all: By which Sabra knew he would not be cro^t in his will and
pleasure: therefore she sighed out these lamentable words.

O unkind Father to cross the affection of his child! and to force love
where no liking is: Yet shall my mind continue true unto my dear betrothed
Lord, although my body be forced against nature to obey, and Almidor have the
honor of my marriage bed: Yet English George shall enjoy my true Uirginity, if
ever he return again to Egypt* and therewithal she pulled forth a chain of
gold, and wrapped it seven times about her Iuorie neck. This (said she) has
seven days been steept in Tigers blood, and seven nights in Dragons milk,
whereby it has obtainde such excellent virtue, that so long as I wear it
about my neck, no man on earth can enjoy my virginity: though I be forced to
the state of marriage, and lie seven years in wedlocks bed: yet by the virtue
of this chain I shall continue a true virgin.

Which words being no sooner ended, but Almidor entered her sorrowful
Cabbinet, and presented her with a wedding garment, which was of the pure
unspotted silk, imbost with Pearl, and rich refined gold, perfumed with sweet
Si^rian powders* it was of the color of the Lilly when Flora had be decked the
field in May with natures orniments, so glorious and costly her vestures
seemed, and so stately were her Nuptial rights solemnized, that Egypt admired
the bounty of her wedding* which (...) days was (...) in the Court of King
(...) removed (...) T^ipoli^, the (...) Almidors forced Bride was Crowned
Queen of Moroco: at which Coronation the Conduits ra^ne with Greekish Wines,
and the streets of Tripolie were beauti^^ed with Pageants and delightful
shows. The Court resounded such melodious Harmony as though Apollo with his
sil^er Har^e had de^cended from the heauen^* such Tilts and Turniments were
performed betwixt the Egiptia knights, and the Knights of Barbary, that they
exceeded the Nuptials of Hec^uba, the beauteous Queen of Tro^: which
Honorable proceedings, we leave for this time to their own contentments:
some (...): some dancing: some reuelling: some Tilting* and some banqueting*
(...) the Champion of England Saint George, (...) in the Dungeon in Persia as
you heard (...), and (...) to the other six Champions of C^ristendome, which
^eparted from the brazen pille^, every one h^s s^ueral way, whose Knightly and
Noble adventures, if the Muses grant me the bounty of ^aier (...) springes,
I will most (...) discover, to the honor of Christendom.

CHAP. IIII.
How Saint Dennis the Champion of France, lived seven years in the shape of a
Heart, and how proud Eglantine the Kings Daughter of Thessalie, was transformed
into a M^lberie Tree, and how they both recovered their former shapes by the
means of Saint Dennis his horse.

CAlling now to memory the long and weary travails S. Dennis the Champion of
France endured after his departure from the other six Champions at the brazen
pillar, as you heard in the beginning of the former Chapter, from which he
wa^dred through many a desolate grove and wilderness, without any adventure
worthy the noting, till he arrived upon the borders of Thessalie, (being a
Land as then inhabited with wild beasts): wherein he endured such a pennurie
and scarcity of victualles: that he was forced for the space of seven years
to feed upon the herbs of the fields, and the fruits of trees, till the
hairs of his head were like to Egles feathers, and the nails of his fingers
to birds claws: his drink the dew of heaven, the which he licked from the
flowers in the meadows, the attire he clothed his body withal, bay leaves
and broad dockes, that grew in the woods: his shoes the bark of trees,
whereon he trauailde through many a thornie brake: But at last it was his
fortune and cruel destiny, (being ^^^rpressed with the extreamitie (...)
hunger) to taste and feed upon the berries of a Mulberie tree, whereby he lost
the lively form and Image of his humane substance, and was transformed into
the shape and like^es of a w^lde Heart: Which strange and sod^ine
transformation, this Noble Champion little mistrusted, till he espied his
misshapen form in a clear fountain, w^i^h nature (...) in a tool and (...)
villey^ but when he beheld the shadow of his deformed substance, and how his
head late Honored with a Burgonet of steel, no^ di^^onoured with a pair of
(...) horns: his face whereon the countenance of true Nobility l^te car^^red,
now covered with a beastlike similitude, and (...) body late (...) true Image
of magnanimity, now ouerspread with a hea^^e hide, in color like to the fallow
fields: which strange alteration not a little perple^ed the mind of S.
Dennis, that it ^am^d him with all speed (having the natu^all reason of man
still remaining) to repair back to the Mulberie tree again, supposing the
b^rries he had eaten to be the cause of h^s transformation, under which tree
the distressed ^night laid (...) formed limbs upon the bare ground, and thus
woefully began to complain.

What Magic charms (said he) or rather bewitching spells, remaynes within
this accursed tree* whose wicked fruit has confounded my future fortunes, and
conu^^ted me to the tipe of misery* O thou celestial dir^^ter of the world*
and all you pitteo^s powers of heaven: Look down with kindly looks upon my
hapless transformation, and bend your b^owes to hear my woeful lamentation;
I was of late a man but now a ^orned beast; I was a soldier and my Countries
Champion: but now a loathsome creature and a pray for dogs; my glistring Armor
is exchaunged into a hid^ of hair: my brave array more baser than the lowlye
earth: henceforth in steed of Princely Palaces, these shadie woods must serve
to shrowde me in: wherein my Bed of down must be a hea^e of sunbu^nde
moss: my sweet recording Music the blustering of the winds, that with
T^mpestious guste^ do make the Wilderness to tremble* ^

The voice in the Mulber^e tree.

Cease to lament thou famous man of France,
With gentle ears, come listen to my moan;
In former times it was my fatal chance
To be the proudest maid that ere was known.
By birth I was the D^ughter of a King,
Though now a breathles tree and sensles thing.
M^ pride was such that heaven confounded me,
A Goddess in mine own conceit I was:
What nature lent too bace I thought to be*
But dead my self all earthly things to pass:
And therefore Nectar and Ambrosia sweet,
The food of heaven for me I counted meet.
My pride contemned still the bread of wheat,
Bu^ pure food I day he sought to find
Refined gold was boiled in my meat*
Such self conceit my fancies fo^d did blind:
For which the Gods above transported me,
From humane substance to this sensles tree.
Seven years in shape of Heart thou must remain,
And then the purple Rose by heavens decree;
Shall bring thee to thy former shape again,
And end at last thy woeful misery:
When this is done be sure thou cut in twain,
This fatal tree wherein I do remain.
After the (...) had breathed these speeches from the Mulberie tree, he stood
so much amazed at the straungnes of the words, that for a time his sorrows
bereaved him of (...) speech, and his long appointed punishment constrained his
thoughts to loose their natural understanding: But yet at last recovering his
senses, though not his humane lik^nes, bitterly complained his hard misfortunes.

O vnhapp^ creature (said the wof^ll Ch^mpion) more miserable than Prog^e, in
her transfor^^tion, had more distressed than Acte^n was, whose perfect
im^tation I am made: His misery ^^ntinued but a short season, (...) own
dogs the same day* tore him in a thousand pieces* and buried his transformed
carcass in their hungry bowels: mine is appointed by the angry destenies,
till seven times the summers sun has replenisht his radient brightness, and
seven times the winters rain has washed me with the showers of heaven. Thus
complained the transformed Knight of France: sometimes remembering his former
fortunes, and (...) he had spent his days in the Honor of his country:
sometimes thinking upon the place of his Nativity, renowned France the Nur^e
and Mother of his life: sometimes treading with his feet (as for hands he had
none) in sandy ground, the print of the words the which the Mulberie tree had
repeated, and many times numbering the min^utes of his long appointed
punishment, with the Flowers of the field. Ten thousand sighs he^ daily
breathed from his breast, and when the black and pitchy mantles of dark night
had ouerspred the az^rde firmamentes, and drawn her sable Curtains, before
the brights^me windows of the heavens, all creatures took their sweet reposed
rest, and committed their tired eyes to quiet ^^^^pes: All things were silent
except the murmering of the running waters: which sounding music was the
chiefest comfort this distressed Champion enjoyed: the glistering Queen of
night ^lad in her crystal robes, three Hundred times a year, was witness of
his nightly lamentations: the wondering Howla^, that never singes but in the
night, sat yelling over his head: the ruf^ll weeping Nightingale with
mournful mellodie, chearefully att^^ding ^n his person: for during the
limitation of his seven years misery, his tru^tie Steed never forsook him,
but with all diligence and true love attended upon him day and night, never
wandering away, but ever k^^ping him company: I^ the extream^ heat of Summer
were intolerable, or the pinching cold of Winter violent, his Horse would
be a shelter to defend him

Thus when the term of seven years were fully finished, and that he should
recover his former substance, and humane shape, his good Horse which he
tendered as the Apple of his eye, clambered a high and steepy Mountain, which
nature had beautified with all kind of fragrant flowers, as odorifferous as the
garden of Hesperides: from whence he pulled a branch, of purple Roses and
brought them betwixt his teeth to his distressed Master, being in his former
passions of discontent, under the Mulberie Tree: The which the Champion of
France no sooner beheld, but he remembered that by a purple Rose he should
recover his former similitude, and so joyfully received the Roses from his
trusty Steed: then casting his eyes up to the celestial throne of heaven, he
conuayed these consecrated flowers into his empty stomack^.

After which he laid him down upon the bosom of his m^thers earth, where he
fell into such a sound sleep, that all his senses and vital spiri^s were
without moving, for the space of four and twenty hours: In which time the
windows and the doors of heaven were opened, from whence descended such a
shower of rain, that it washed away his hairie form and beastlike shape* his
horned head and long visage, was turned again into a lively countenance, and
all the rest of his members, both arms, legs, hands, feet, fingers, toes,
with all the rest of natures gifts, received their former shapes.

But when the good Champion awaked from his sleep, ^ perceauing the wonderful
workmanship of the Heavens, in transforming him to his humane likeness: First
gave honor to Almighty God: next kissing the ground whereon he had lived so
long in misery: then beholding his Armor which s^oode hard by him best a^nde
and almost spoild with rust, hi^ Burgonet and kine edged Curtl^-a^e be^indered
over with dust: then l^stlie pondring in his mind of the faithful service his
trusty Steed had done him during the time of his calamity, whose sable
colored ma^^ hung (...) down his brauny neck, which before was wont to be
pleyted curiously with artificial knots, and his foreheade which was wont to
be beautified with a tawnie plume of feathers? ^ow disfigured with ouergrowne
hair, whereat the good Champion Saint Dennis of France so much grieved, that
he stroaked down his Iettie ^acke, fill the hair of his body lay as smooth as
Arabian silk, then pulled he du^ his trusty Fa^ch^on, which in many fierce
assaults and dangerous Combats, had been b^thed in the blood of his enemies,
which by the long continuance of idle time was almost consumed with cank^red
(...), but by his labor and industrious pains, he recovered the former beauty
and brightness again.

Thus both his sword his horse, his Martial furniture, and other habilliments
of war, bee^ng brought to their first and proper quallities, the Noble
Champion intended to persevere and go forward in the adventure in cutting
down the unhappy Mulberie tree: So taking his sword which was of the purest
Spanish steel, gave such a stroke at the root thereof, that at one blow he
cut it quite in sunder, wherout presently flashed such a migh^ie flame of fire,
that the mane from his horse neck was burned, and likewise the hair of his
own head had been fiered; if his Helmet had not preserved him: for no sooner
was the flame extinguished, but there ascended from the hollow tree, a naked
Uirgin, in shape like Daphnie which Apollo turnde to Bay: fairer then
Pigmalions Iuorie Image, or the Northen driven snow, her eyes more clearer than
the I^^e mountains, her cheeks like Roses dipped in milk, her lips more
louelier than the Turkish (...), her Alablaster teeth like Indian Pearls, her
seemly neck an Iuorie Tower, her dainty breasts a Palladice where milk
white Doves may fit and ^^ng, the rest of natures liniaments a stain to Juno
Queen of heaven: at whose most excellent beauty this valiant and undaunted
Champion more admired, then at her wonderful transformation: For his eyes
were so ravished with such exceeding pleasure, that his tongue could endure no
longer silent, but was forced to unfold the secrets of his heart, and in these
terms began to utter her mind.

Thou most divine and singular ornament of nature, (said he) fairer than the
feathers of the silver Swannes, that swim upon Maeanders Crystal stream ^
far more beautiful than Auroraes morning countenance, to thee the fairest of
all f^^ers, most humbly therefore to thy beauty do I only submit my
affections: Also I swear by the Honor of my Knighthood, and ^y the love of my
Country France: which vow I will not violate for all the Treasures of rich
Ameria, nor the golden Mines of higher India: Whether thou be an Angel
descended from the Heavens, or a Fury ascended from the dominions of
Proserpine: whether thou be some Fayrie or siluaine Nymph; which inhabits in
these fatal woods, or else an earthly creature for thy sin transformed into
this Mulberie tree, I may not judge: Therefore sweet Saint in whom my heart
must pay his devotion, unfold to me thy Birth, Parentage, and ^am^, that I may
the bolder pr^sume upon thy courtesies: At which demand this new borne
Uirgin with a shamefaste look, modest gesture, sober grace and blushing
countenance, ^^gan thus to reply.

Sir Knight by whom my life, my love, and fortunes, are to be comm^nded, and
by whom my humane shape and natural form is recovered: First know thou
Magnanimious Champion, that I am by birth the King of Thessalies Daughter, and
my name was called for my beauty, proud Eglantine: For which contemptuous
pride, I was transformed into this Mulberie tree: in which green substance I
have continued f^urteene years; as for my love thou haste deserved it before
all other Knights in the world, and to thee do I plight that true promise
before the Omnipotent Iudge^ of all things, and before that secret promise
shall be infringed, the S^n shall cease to shine by day, and the M^^ne by night,
and all the Pl^nets forsake their proper natares.

At which words the Champion gave her the courtesy of his country, and
sealed her promises with a loving kiss: After which the beautiful Eglantine
being ashamed of her nakedness, weaued her such a garment of (...) rushes
inter^i^ed with such variet^ of sundr^ flowers; that it surpassed for
workmanship the Indian maidens curious webs: her crisped locks of hair
continued still of the color of the Mulberie tree: whereby she seemde like
Flora in her greatest royalty, when the f^elds were be decked with natures
tapestrie.

After which she washed her Lilly hands, and Rosy colored face in the dewes
of heaven, which she gathered from a bed of violets. Thus in her green
vestments, she intendes in company of her true Lover (the valiant Knight of
France) to take her journey to her Fathers Court, being as then the King of
that country: where after some few daye^ travail they arrived safely in the
Court of Thessalie: whose welcomes were to their own wishes, and their
entertainements most Honorable: for no sooner did the King behold his
Daughters safe approach, of whose strange transformation he was ever ignorant,
fell into such a dead sound through the exceeding joy of her presence, that for
a time his senses were without vital moving, and his heart embraced so kindly
her dainty body, and proffered such courtesy to the strange Knight, that Saint
Dennis accounted him the mirror of all c^rtesie, and the pattern of true
Nobility.

After the Champion was unarmed, his stifle and weary limbs were bathed in new
milk and white wines, he was conuaied to a sweet smelling fire made of
Ginniper, and the fair Eglantine conducted by the Maidens of Honor to a
private chamber, where she was disrobed of her Siluaine attire, and apparriled
in a Pall purple silk: In which Court of Thessalie we will leave this our
Champion of France with his Lady, and go forward in the discourses of the
other Champions, discovering what adventures happened to them during the time o^
s^auen years: But first how^ Saint James the Champion of Spain fell in love
with a fair Jew, and how for her sake he continued seven years dumb, and
after if Apollo grant my Muse the gift of Scolorisme, and dip my pen in the
ink of Art: I will not rest my weary hand, till I have explainde the
Honorable proceedings of the Knights, of England, France, Spain, Italy,
Scotland, Wales, and Ierland, to the Honor of Christendom, and the dishonor
of all the professed enemies of Christ.

CHAP. V.
How Saint (...) the Champion of Spain, continued seven years dumb for the
love of a fair Jew, and how he should have been shot to death by the Maidens
of Jerusalem, with other things which chanced in his travails.

NOw must my Muse speak of the strange adventures of Saint James of Spain,
the third Champion and renow^ed Knight of Christendom, and what happened unto
him in his seven years travails through many a strange country, both by
Sea and land, where his Honorable acts were so dangerous and full of wonder,
that I want memory to express, and Art to subscribe, also I am forced for
breuities sake, to pass over his fea^efull and dangerous battle with the
burning Drake upon the flaming mount in Sicill, which terrible Combat continued
for the space of seven days and seven nights: Likewise omitting his travel
in Capadocia thorough a wilderness of Monsters, with his passage over the red
seas, where his ship was devoured with worms, his Mariners drowned, and
himself his horse and furniture safely brought to land by seanymphs and
Meremaids, where after his long travels, passed perrils, and dangerous
tempests, amongst the boisterous billows of the raging seas, arrived in the
unhappy dominions of Judah; unhappy by reason of the long and troublesome misery
he endured for the love of a fair Jew: For coming to the rich and beautiful
City of Jerusalem, (being in that age the wonder of the world for brave
buildings, Princely Palaces, gorgeous Monuments, and time woondering Temples)
he so admired the glorious situation thereof, (being the richest place that
ever his eyes beh^ld) that he stood before the walls of Jerusalem one while
gazing upon her golden gates glistering against the Suns bright countenance,
another while beholding her stately P^nnacles, whose lofty peering tops seemde
to touch the Clouds; another while woondring at her towers of Jasper, Iett, and
Ebony, her strong and fortefied walls three times doubled about the City, the
glistering Spires of the Temples of Sion built in the fashion and similitude of
two Piramides the ancient monument of Greece, whose battlements were covered
with steel, the walls burnished with silver, and the ground paued with tin.
Thus as this inobled and famoused knight at A^m^s stood beholding the
situation of Jerusalem, there suddenly thundered such a peale of Ordinance
within the City, that it seemed in his ravished conceit, to shake the vales of
heaven and to move the deep foundations of the fastened earth, whereat his
horse gave such a sudden start, that he le^t forty foot from the place
whereon he stood: After this he heard the cheerful sound of Drums, and the
echoes of brazen Trumpets, by which the good Champion exspected some honorable
pastime, or some great t^rnament to be at hand, which indeed so fell out, for
no sooner did he cast his vigilant eyes toward the East side of the City, but
he beheld a troop of well appointed horse come marching through the Gates,
after them twelve Armed Knights mounted on Warlike Coursees, bearing in their
hands twelve blood red streamers, whereon was wrought in silk, the picture of
Adonis wounded with a Bore, after them the King drawn in a Chariot by Spanish
Genets, (which be a certain kind of Steeds engendered by the wind.) The Kings
Guard were a hundred n^ked Moors, with Turkish Bows and Darts feathered with
Ravens quilles, after them marched Celestine the ^ing of Ierusalems fair
Daughter, mounted on a t^me Unicorne, in her hand a Iauelin of silver, and
Armed with a breast plate of gold, artificially wrought like the skales of a
Porcupine, her Guard were a hundred Amazonian Dames ^lad in green (...), after
them foll^wed a ^umber of ^^quiers* Gentlemen, some upon Barbarian Steeds, some
upon Arabian Palfray^s* and some on foot, in pace more nimbler than the
tripping D^are, ^ more swifter than the tameles Hearts v^on the mountains of
Thessalie.

Thus N^buzaradan great King of Jerusalem (for so was he called,) solemnly
^unted in the Wilderness of Judah, b^eing a country very much anoyed with wild
beasts, as the Lion, the Leopard, the Bore and such like: In which exercise the
King appointed as it was procl^imed by his chief Harrold at Arms: (the which
he heard repeated by a shepherd in the fields,) that whosoever s^ewe the
first wild beast in the Forest* should have in reward a Cors^et of steel so
richly ingraued, that it should be worth a thousand sickles of silver. Of which
Honorable enterprise when the Champion had understanding, and with what
liberal bounty the aduent^rus Knights should be rewarded, his heart was
^^ang^ted with invincible courage, thirsting after glorious attempts, not only
for hope of gain, but for the desire of Honor: At which his illustrious and
undaunted (...) aimed at to internize his deeds in the memorable records of
Fame, and to shine as a Crystal mirror to all ensuing times: So closing
down his Beuer, and locking on his furniture, scoured over the plains before
the Hunters of Jerusalem, in pa^e more swifter than the winged winds, till he
aproched an old solitary and unfrequented Forest, wherein he espied a huge
and mighty wild Bore lying before his mossie den, gnawing upon the mangled
joints of some passenger which he had murdered as he travailed through the
Forest.

This Bore was of a wonderful length and bigness, and so tyrrable to behold,
that at the first sight, he almost daunted the courage of this Spanish Knight:
for his monstrous head seemed ugly and deformed, his eyes sparkeled like a
^irie furnace, his tuskes more sharper than picks of ste^le, and from his
nostrels fumed such a violent breath, that it seemed like a tempestious whirle
wind, his brissels were more harder than seven times milted brass, and his
tail more loathsome than a wreath of Snakes: N^re whom^ when Saint James
approached, and beheld how he drank the blood of humane creatures, and devoured
their flesh, he blew his silver horn* which as then hung at the pummell of
his saddle in a scarf of green silk: whereat the furious monster roused
himself, and most fiercely assailed the Noble Champion, which most nimbly
leaped from his horse, and with his spear stroke such a violent blow against
the breast of the Bor^, that it shiuered into twenty pieces: Then drawing his
good Fauchion from his side, gave him a second encounter: but all in vain, for
he stroke as it were on a Rock of stone, or a pillar of Iron nothing hurtful
to the Bore: but at last with staring eyes (which sparkled like burning
steel,) and with open Jaws the greedy monster assailed the Champion,
intending to swallow him alive, but the nimble Knight as then trusted more upon
policy than to fortitude, and so for advantage skipped from place to place,
till on a sudden he thrust his keen edged (...)-a^e down his intestine
throat, and so most valiantly split his heart in sunder: The which being
accomplished to his own des^ers he cut off the Bores head, and so presented the
Honor of his Combat to the king of Jerusalem, (who as then with his mighty
train of Knights, were but now en^^red the Forest: but ha^ing graciously
accepted the gi^t and bountifully fulfilled his promises, demanding the
Champions Country, his Religion and place of Nativity: who no sooner had
intelligence how he was a Christian Knight, and borne in the territories of
Spain: but presently his patience exchaunged into extreme fury, and by these
words he^ expressed his cankered stomach toward the Christian Champion.

Know thou not bold Knight (said the King of Jerusalem) that it is the law of
Judah to harbor no vncircumsiced man, but either bannish him the land, or end
his days by some vntimel^ death: Thou art a Christian and therefore shall thou
die, not all thy countries treasure, the wealthy Spanish mines, nor if all the
Alphes which divide the countries of Italy and Spain were turned to hills of
burnisht gold, and made my lawful heritage, they should not redeem thy life:
Yet for the Honor thou haste done in Judah, I grant thee this love by the law
of Arms to choose thy death, else had thou suffered a timmerous torment:
which severe Judgment amazed the Champion, that desperately he would have
gorgde him self upon his own sword, but that he thought it an honor to his
country, to die in the defense of Christendom: So like a true innobled Knight
fearing neither the threats of the Jews, nor the impartial stroke of the
fa^all sisters gave this sentence of his own death: First he requested to be
bound to a pine tree with his breast laid open naked against the Sun: then to
have an ^owers respite to make his suplication to his Creator, and afterward
to be shot to death by a pure Uirgin.

Which words were no sooner pronounced* but they disarmed him of his
furniture, bound him to a Pine tree, and laid his breast open ready to
entertain the bloody str^ke of some unrelenting maiden: but such pity, m^^ke
mercy, and kind len^ty lodged in the heart of ^^rie maiden, that none would
take in hand to be the bloody Executioner of so brave a Knight: At last the
tyrranous Nabuzaradan gave strickt commandment upon pain of death, that lot^
should be cast amongst the maidens of Judah that were there present, and to whom
the lot did fall should be the fatal executioner of the condemned Champion:
But by fortune the chance fell to Celestine the Kings own Daughter, being
the Parragon of beauty, and the fairest Maid then living in Jerusalem, in
whose heart no such deed of cruelty could be harbored, nor in whose hand no
blood^ weapon could be entertained. In steed of deaths fatal Instrument,
she^ shot toward his breast, a deep strained sigh the true messenger of love,
and afterward to heaven she thus made her humble supplication.

Thou great commander of celestial moving powers, convert the cruel motions
of my Fathers mind, into a spring of pitiful tears, that they may wash away
the blood of this innocent Knight from the habitation of his stained purple
soul. O Judah and Jerusalem! within whose b^somes lives a Wilderness of Tigers,
degenerate from natures kind, more cruel than the hungry Canibals, and more
obdurate than untamed Lions: what merciles Tiger can unrip that breast, where
lives the Image of true Nobility, the very pattern of Knighthood, and the
map of a Noble mind? No, no, before my hands shall be stained with Christians
blood, I will like Scilla against all nature sell my countries safety, or like
Maedea wander with the golden Fleece to unknown Nations.

Thus, and in such manner complained the beauteous Celestine the Kings Daughter
of Jerusalem, till her sighs stopped the passage of her speech, and her tears
stained the natural beauty of her Rosy Cheeks, her hairs which glistered
like to golden wiers, she b^sm^^de in dust, and dis^obed her self from her
costly garments, and then with a train of her Amazonian Ladies, went to the
King her Father, where after a long (...)* she not only obtainde his life, but
liberty, yet therwithall his perpetual banishment from Jerusalem, and from
all the border^ of Judah, the want of whose sight more grieved her heart, than
the loss of her own life: So this Noble and praise worthy Celest^ne returned
to the Christian Champion, that expected every minnute to entertain the
sentence of death, but his expectation fell out contrary: for the good Lady,
after she had sealed two or three kisses upon his pale lips, being exchaunged
through the fear of death, cut the ^andes that bound his body to the tree in a
hundred pieces, and (...) with a ^^oud of fault tears, the motions of true
love, she thus revealed her mind.

Most Noble Knight and true Champion of Christendom, thy life and liberty I
have gainde, but therewithal thy banishment from Judah, which is a hell of
horror to my soul: for in thy bosom have I built my happiness, and in thy heart
I account the Paradise of my true love: thy first ^^ght and lovely countenance
did so ravish me, when these eyes beh^ld thee mounted on thy Princely Pa^fray,
that ever since my heart has burnde in affection: therefore dear Knight in
reward of my love, be thou my Champion, and for my sake wear this ring with
this pos^e engraven in (...). Ardio affectione: and so giving him a ring from
her finger, and there withal a kiss from her mouth, she departed with a
sorrowful sigh, in compani^ of her Father and the rest of his Honorable
train, back to the City of Jerusalem, being as then near the setting of
the Sun: But now Saint James the Champion of Spain, having passed the danger
of death, and at full libe^^^e to depart from that unhappy Nation, he fell
into a hundred cogitations, one while thinking vp^n the true love of Celestine,
(whose name as yet he was ignorant of.) another while upon the cruel^ie of her
father: then ^ntending to depart into h^s his own country, but l^^king (...)
to the Towers of Jerusalem his mind suddenly alt^red, for thither he
purposed to go, hoping to have a sight of hy^ Ladi^ and Mistress, and to live
in some disguised ^ort^^ her presence, and be her loves true Champion against
all (...): So gathering certain blackberies from the trees, he colored his
body all over like a Bla^kamoore: But yet considering that his speech would
discover him, intended likewise to continue dumb all the time of his residence
in Jerusalem* So all things ordered according to his desire, he took his
journey to the City, where with signs and other motions of dumbnes, he
declared his intent: which was to be entertained in the Court, and to spend
his time in the service of the King: But when the King behold^ his countenance,
which seemed of the natural color of the Moore little mistrusted him to be
the Christian Champion whom before he greatly envied, but accounted him one
(...) the brauest Iudean Knights that ever his eye beheld: therefore he
instauld him with the honor of Knighthood, (...) ^ppointed him to be one of
his Guard* and likewise his Daughters only Champion^* But wh^^ Saint James of
Spain saw^ himself in^ested in that honored place, his soul was ra^ished
with such exceeding joy, that he thought no pleasure comparable to his, no
place of Elisium but the Court of Jerusalem, and no Goddess (...) his beloved
Celestine.

L^ng continued he (...), casting forth many a loving sigh in the presence of
his Lady and Mistress, not knowing how to reveal the secrets of his mind.

So upon a time there arrived in the Court of Nabuzaradan the King of Arabia,
with the Admiral of Babylon, both presuming upon the love of Celestine, and
craving her in the way of marriage: but she exempted all motions of love from
her chaste mind, only building her thoughts upon the Spanish Knight, which
she supposed to be in his own Countri^.

At whose melancholy passions her importunate suitors the King of Arabia, and
the Adm^^all of Babylon (...): and therefore intended vpp^^ ^n Evening to
pr^sent her with some rare devised Mask: ^o choosing out fi^ consorts for
their Courtly pastimes: Of which number the King of Arabia was chief and first
leader of (...) train, the great Admiral of Babylon was the second, and her
own^ Champion Saint James the third, who was called in the Count by the name of
the dumb Knight, and in this manner the Mask was performed.

First entered a most excellent Consort of M^sicke, after them the aforesaid
Maskers in cloth of gold, most curiously imbrothered, and danced a course about
the hall, at the end^ whereof, the King of Arabia presented Celestine with a
costly sword, at the hilt whereof hung a silver Globe, and upon the point was
erected a golden Crown: then the Music sounded another course, of which the
Admiral of Babylon was leader, who presented her with a vesture of purple
silk, of the color of the rainebow; brought in by Diana, Venus, and Juno:
which being done the Music ^^unded the third time, in which course Saint
James (though unknown) was the leader of the dance, who at the end whereof
likewise presented Celestine with a garland of Flowers, which was brought in by
the three Graces, and put upon her head: Afterward the Christian Champion
intending to discover himself to his Lady and Mistress^, took her by the
seemly hand and led her a stately Morisco daunte: which being no sooner
finished, but he ^ffered her the Diamond ring which she gave him at his
departure in the woods, the which she presently knew by the pos^e, and
shortly after had intelligence of his long ^ontinued dumbness, his counterfe^
color, his changing of nature, and the great danger that he put himself in
for her sake, which caused her with all the speed she could possibly make,
to break^ off c^m^anie, and to retire into a Cabbinet which she h^d h^rd by,
where the same Evening she had a long conf^rence ^ith ^er true and faithful
lover and aduenterous Champion* and to conclude, they made (...) ag^^^ment
be^wixt them* that the some night unknown to any in the Court, she bad
Jerusalem a due, and by the light of Cinthias glistering beams, stole from her
Fathers Palace, where in company of none but S. James she t^^ke her journey
toward the country of Spain: But this noble Knight by policy prevented all
ensuing dangers, for he shodde his horse backewar^s, whereby when they were
missed in the Court that they might be followed the contrary way.

By this means escaped the two Lovers from the fury of the Jews, and arrived
safely in Spain in the City of Civil, wherein the g^^d Champion Saint James
was bo^ne: where as now we leave them for a time to their own contented
minds: Also passing over the hurly burly in Jerusalem for the loss of
Celestine, the vain pursutes of aduenterous Knights, in stopping the Ports and
Havens, the preparing of fresh horses to follow them, and the mustering of
soldiers to pursue them, the frantic passions of the King for his daughter,
the melancholy mon^^ of the Admiral of Babylon for his Mistress, and the
woeful lamentations of the Arabian King for his Lady and Love, and return to
the adventures of the other Christian Champions.

CHAP. VI.
The tyr^ible battle betwixt S. Anthony the Champion of I^alie, and the
Giant Blanderon, and afterward of his strange entertainment in the Giants
Castle by a Thrasian Lady, and what happened to him in the same Castle.

IT was at that time of the year, when the earth was newly decked with a
summers liuerie, when the Noble and Heroical minded Champion Saint Anthony of
Italy arrived in Thrasia, where he^ spent his seven years travails to the
honor of his country, the glory of God, and to his own lasting memory: For
after he had wandered through many a wear^^some way both by Sea and Land,
through woods and wildernesses, by hills and dales, by caves and dens, and
other unknown passages, he arrived at last upon the top of a high and steep^e
mountain, whereon stood a wonderful huge and strong Castle, which was kept
by the most mightiest Giant under the cope of heaven, whose puissant force all
Thrasia could not overcome, nor once attempt to withstand, but with the danger
of their whole country. The Giants name was Blanderon, his Castle of the
purest Marble stone, his gates of yellowe Brass, and over the principal gate
was graued in Letters of gold these verses following.

Within this Castle, lives the scourge of Kings,
A furious Giant, whose unconquered power:
The Thracian Monarke to subjection bringes,
And keeps his Daughters prisoners in his Tower.
Seven Damsels fair the monstrous Giant keeps,
That singes him Music while he rightly sleeps.
His bats of steel a thousand Knights has felt,
Which for these virgins sakes have lost their lives:
For all the Champions bold that with him dealt,
This most intestiue Giant still suruiues,
Let simple passengers take heed in time,
When up this steepie mountain they do clime.
But Knights of worth, and men of Noble mind,
If any chance to travail by this Tower:
That for these Maidens sakes will be so kind,
To try their strengthes against the Giants power:
Shall have a virgins prayer both day and night,
To prosper them with good successful fight.
After he had read what was written over the gate, desire of Fame so encouraged
him, and the thirst of honor so imboldned his valiant mind, that he either
vowed to redeem the Ladies from their servitude, or die with honor by the
fury of the Giant: So going to the Castle gate, he stroke so vehemently
thereon with the pummell of his sword, that it sounded like a mighty thunder
clap: Whereat Blanderon suddenly started up, being fast a sleep close by a
Fountains side, and came pacing forth at the Gate with a mighty Oak upon
his neck: which at the fight of the Italian Champion, so lightly flourished it
about his head, as though it had been but a light Dimmilaunce, and with these
words gave the Noble Champion entertainment

What Fury has incenst thy over boldned mind (proud Princockes) thus to
adventure thy feeble force against the violence of my strong arm: I tell thee
had thou the strength of Hercules, who bore the mountain Atlas on his
shoulders, or the policy of Ulysses, by which the City of Troy was
ruinated, or the might of Xerxes, whose multitudes drunk huge rivers as they
passed: yet all too feeble, weak, and impudent, to encounter with the mighty
Giant Blanderon: thy force I esteem like a blast of wind, and thy strokes as
light as a few drops of water: Therefore betake thee to thy weapon, which I
compare unto a bulrush, for on this ground will I measure out thy grave, and
after cast thy feeble Palfray in one of my hands headlong down this strep^e
mountain.

Thus boasted the vain glorious Giant upon his own strength: During which
time, the valerous and hardy Champion had alighted from his horse: where after
he had made his humble supplication to the heavens for his good sp^ede, and
committed his Fortune to the impartial Queen of destenie, he approached
within the compass of the Giants reach, who with his great Oak so nimbly
besturde him with such vehement blows, that they seemed to shake the earth,
and to rattle against the walls of the Castle like mighty thunder claps, and
had not the polliticke Knight continually skipped from the fury of his blow,
he had been bruised as small as flesh unto the pot, for every stroke that
the Giant gave, the root of his Oak entered at the least two or three foot
deep into the ground^. But such was the wisdom and policy of the worthy
Champion, not to withstand the force of his weapon, till the Giant grew
breathles, and not able through his long labor to lift the Oak above his
head, and likewise the heat of the Sun was so intolerable, (by reason of
the extreme haight of the Mountain, and the mighty weight o^ his Iron coat)
that the sweat of the Giants brows ran into his eyes, and by the reason that
he was so extreme fat, he grew blind, that he could not see to endure
Combat with him any longer, and as far as he could perceive, would have
retired or run back again into his Castle; but that the Italian Champion
with a bold courage assailed the Giant so fiercely, that he was forced to let
his Oak fall, and stand gasping for breath, which when the noble Knight
beheld, with a fresh supply he redoubled his blows so courageously, that
they battered on the Giants Armor like a storm of winters ha^le: whereby at
last Blanderon was compelled to ask the Champion mercy, and to cra^e at his
hands some respite of breathing, but his demand was in vain, for the valiant
Knight supposed now or never to obtain the honor of the day, and therefore
never resting his weary arm, but redoubling blow after blow, till the Giant
for want of breath, and through the anguish of his deep gashed wounds, was
forced to give the world a farewell, and to yield the riches of his Castle to
the most renowned Conqueror S. Anthony the Champion of Italy: But by that
time the long and dangerous encounter was finished, and the Giant Blanderons
head disseuered from his body, the Sun sat mounted on the highest part of
the Elements, which caused the day to be extreme hot and sulthie, whereby the
Champions Armor so extremely scalded him, that he was constrained to unbrace
his Corslet, and to lay aside his Burgonet, and to cast his body on the cold
earth, only to mittiga^e his ouerburthened heat: But such was the unnatural
coolen^s of the earth, and so unkindly to his ouerlabored heart, that the
melted grease of his inward parts was ouercooled suddenly, whereby his body
received such unnatural distemperature, that the vapors of the cold earth
stroke presently to his heart, by which his vital air of life was excluded,
and his body without sense or moving: wherein the mercy of pale death he lay
bereaved of feeling for the space of an hour.

During which time fair Rossalinde (one of the Daughters of the Thracian
Kings, being as then Prisoner in the Castle,) by chance looked over the
walls, and espied the body of the Giant headles, under whose subjection she
had continued in great servitude for the time of seven months, likewise by
him a Knight unarmed, as she thought panting for breath, the which the Lady
Judged to be the Knight that had slain the Giant Blanderon, and the man by
whom her delivery should be recovered, she presently descended the walls of
the Castle, and ran with all speed to the aduenterous Champion, whom she
found dead: But yet being nothing discouraged of his recovery, feeling as yet
a warm blood in every member, retired back with all speed to the Castle,
and fetched a box of precious Balm, the which the Giant was wont to pour into
his wounds after his encounter with any knight: with which Balm this courteous
Lady chafed every part of the breathles Champions body, one while washing
his stiff limbs with her salt tears, the which like pearls fell from her
eyes, another while drying them with the tresses of her golden hair, which
hung dangling in the wind, then chafing his li^eles body again with a Balm
of a contrary nature, but yet no sign of life could she epsy in the dead
Knight: which caused her to grow desperate of all hope of his recovery:
Therefore like a loving, meek, and kind Lady, considering he had lost his
life for her sake, she intended to bear him company in death, and with her
own hands to fin^^ up her days, and to die upon his breast, as This be died
upon the breast of her true Pyrramus: therefore as the Swanne singes a while
before her death, so this sorrowful Lady warbl^d forth this Swan-like song
over the body of the Noble Champion.

Muses come mourn with doleful mellodie,
Kind Siluane Nymphs that sit in Rosy bowers^
With brackish tears commix your harmony,
To wail with me both minutes, months and hours:
A heavy, sad, and Swan-like song sing I*
To ease my heart a while before I die.
Dead is the Knight for whom I live and die,
Dead is the Knight which for my sake is slain:
Dead is the Knight, for whom my careful cry,
With wounded souls, for ever shall complai^^^
A heavy, sad, and Swan-like song sing I,
To ease my heart a while before I die.
I Will set my breast upon a silver stream,
And swim unto Elisium lilly fields:
There in Ambrosian trees I Will write a Theme,
Of all the woeful sighs my sorrow yields:
A heavy sad and Swan-like song sing I,
To ease my heart a while before I die.
Farewell fair woods where singes the Nightingales,
Farewell fair fields, where feeds the light foot Does,
Farewell you groves, you hills and flourish dales*
But fare thou ill the cause of all my woes:
A heavy, sad, and Swanlike song sing I,
To ease my heart a while before I die.
Ring out my ruth you hollow Caves of stone,
Both birds, and beasts, with all things on the ground:
You sencsles trees be all assistant to my moan,
That up to heaven my sorrows may resound:
A heavy, sad, and swanlike song sing I,
To ease my heart a while before I die.
Let all the Towns of Thrace ring out my knell,
And write in leaves of brass what I have said:
That after ages may remember well,
How Rosalinde, both liude and did a Maid:
A heavy, sad, and Swanlike song sing I,
To ease my heart a while before I die.
This woeful Dittie being no sooner ended, but the desperate Lady unsheathed
the Champions sword, which as yet was all besprinkled with the Giants blood,
and being at the very point to execute her intended Tragedy, and the bloody
weapon directly placed against her Iuorie breast, but she heard the distressed
Knight give a grievous and t^rrible groan: whereat she stopped her remorc^les
^and, and with more discreation tendered her own safety, for by this time the
Balm wherewith she anoynt^d his body, by wonderful operation rec^uered the
dead Champion, insomuch that after some few gaspes and earnest sighs, he
raised up his stiff limbs from the cold earth, where like one cast into a
trance, for a time gazed up and down the Mountain: but at the last having
recovered his lost senses, espied the Thracian Damsel standing by, not able to
speak one word her joy so abounded: But after some continuance of time, he
revealed to her the manner of his dangerous Encounter, and successful
victory, and she the cause of his recovery, and her intended Tragedy: Where
after many kind salutations, she courteously took him by the hand and led him
into the Castle, where for that night he lodged his weary limbs in an easy bed
stuffed with Turtles feathers, and softest thistle down, the chamber had as
many windows where he lay, as there were days in the year, and as many
doors as there were minutes in a day, and to discribe the curious architecture
and the ^rificiall workmanship of the place, wore too tedious and a work
without end,

But to be short, the Noble minded Knight slept soundly after his dangerous
battle, without mistrust of Treason, or such Rebellious cogitations, till
golden Phoebus ^ad him good morrow, then rising from his slothful bed, be
attired himself, not in his wonted habilliments of war* but in purple
garments according to the time of peace, and so intended to ouerview the
Nobilities of the Castle: But the Lady Rossalinde all the night was busied in
looking to his Horse preparing dilicates for his repast, and in making a fire
against his vprising, where after he had refreshed his weary spirits with a a
dainty banquet, and caroused down two or three bowls of Greekish Wines, he
after by the counsel of Rossalinde, stripped the Giant from his Iron
furniture, and lest his naked body upon a craggie Rock to be devoured of
hungry Ravens: which being done the Thracian Uirgin discovered all the
secrets of the Castle to the aduenterous Champion: First she led him to a
leaden Tower, where hung a hundred well approved Corslets, with other Martial
furniture, which were the spoils of such Knights as he had violently slain,
after that she brought him to a stable, wherein stood a hundred pampered
Iades, which daily fed upon nothing but humane flesh: Against it was directly
placed the Giants own lodging, his bed was of Iron, corded with mighty bars
of steel, the testerne and covering of carved brass, the curtains were of
leaves of gold, and the rest of a strange and wonderful substance of the
color of the Elements: after this she led him to a broad pond of water, more
clearer than quicksiluer, the streams whereof lay continually as smooth as
Crystal Ice, whereon swam six mike white Swans with Crowns of gold about
their necks.

O here said the Thracian Lady, begins the hell of al my grief! At which
words a pearled shower of tears ran from the Conduits of her eyes, that for a
time they staide the passage of her tongue, but having discharged her heart
from a few sorrowful sighs, she began in this manner to tell her passed
fortunes.

These six milke-white Swans most honored Knight, you behold swimming in this
river (quoth the Lady Rossalinde) be my natural sisters, both by birth and
blood, and all Daughters to the King of Thrace, being now Governor of this
unhappy Country, and the beginning of our imprisonment befell in this
unfortunate manner.

The King my Father ordained a solemn hunting to be holden through the land,
in which Honorable pastime, my self in company of my six sisters were
present: ^o in the middle of our sportes, when the Lords and Barrons of Thracia
were in chase after a mighty she Lion, the heavens suddenly began to lower,
the firmaments over cast, and a general darkness ouerspread the face of the
whole earth, then presently rose such a storm of lightning and thunder, as
though heaven and earth had met together-by which our mighty troops of
Knights and Barrons were separated one from another, and we poor Ladies forced
by misfortune to seek for shelter under the bottom of this high and steepie
mountain: where when this cruel Giant Blanderon espied us as he walked upon
his Battailements, suddenly descended the mountain, and fetched us all under
his Arm up into his Castle, where ever since we have lived in great
servitude, and for the wonderful transformation of my six sisters, thus it
came to pass as follows.

Upon a time the Giant being ouercharged with wine, grew innamored upon our
beauties, and desired much to enjoy the pleasures of our virginities, our
excellent gifts of nature so inflamed his mind with just, that he would have
forced us every one to satisfy his sinful desires: but as he took my
sisters one by one into his lodging thinking to deflowre them, their earnest
prays so prevailed in the sight of God, that he preserved their chasteties by
a most strange and wonderful miracle, and turned their comely bodies into
the shape of milke-white Swannes, even in the same form as here you see them
swimming: So when this monstrous Giant saw that his intent was crossed, and how
there was none left behind to supply his want, but my unfortunate self, he
restrained his filthy lust, not violating my Honor with any stain of
infamy, but kept me ever since a most pure Uirgin, only with svveet
inspiring mu^sike to bring him to his sleep.

Thus have you heard (most Noble Knight) the true discourse of my most unhappy
fortunes, and the wonderful transformation of my six sisters, whose loss to
this day is greatly lamented throughout all Thrace, and with that word she made
an end of her Tragical discourse, not able to utter the rest for weeping:
whereat the Knight being oppressed then with like sorrow, embraced her about
the slender waste, and thus ki^dely began to comfort her.

My most dear and kind Lady, within whose countenance, I see how virtue is
inthronized, and in whose mind lives true Magnanimity, let these few words
suffice to comfort thy sorrowful cogitations: First think that the Heavens
are most beneficial unto thee in preserving thy chastity from the Giants
insatiate desires, then for thy delivery by my means from thy slavish
servitude: Thirdly and lastly, that thou remaining in thy natural shape and
likeness, may live to be the means of thy sisters transformations:
Therefore dry up those Cristall pearled tears, and b^d thy long continued
sorrows adue: for grief is companion with despair, and despair a procurer
of an infamous death.

Thus the woeful Thracian Lady was comforted by the Noble Christian Champion:
where after a few kind greetings they intended to travail to her Fathers
Court, there to relate what had happened to her sisters in the Castle, likewise
the Giants confusion, and her own safe delivery by the illustrious prowess of
the Christian Knight: So taking the keys of the Castle, which was of a
wonderful weight, they locked up the gates and paced hand in hand down the
stee^ie mountain, till they aproached the Thraci^n Court, which was distant
from the Castle some ten miles: but by that time they had a sight of the
Palace the Sun was wandered to the under world, and the light of heaven, sat
^^^^fled up in clouds of pitch, the which not a little discontented the weary
trauailers: but at last coming to her Fathers Gates, they heard a solemn
sound of belles, ringing the funeral knell of some Noble estate: the cause of
which solemn ringing they demanded of the Porter, who in this manner
expressed the truth of the matter unto them.

Fair Lady, and most renowned Knight, (said the Porter) for so you seem both
by your speeches and Honorable demaundes, the cause of this ringing is for the
loss of the Kings seven daughters, the number of which Belles be seven,
called after the name of the seven Princes, which never yet has ceased their
doleful melody, since the departure of the unhappy Ladies, nor never must
until joyful news be heard of their safe return.

Then now their taskes be ended, (said the Noble mindded Rossalinde) for we
bring happy news of the seven Princes abidings: At which words the Porter
being ravished with joy, in all have ran to the steeple, and caused the
Belles to cease: whereat the King of Thrace being at his Royal supper, and
hearing the Belles to cease their wonted melody, suddenly started up from his
Princely seat, and like a man amazed ran to the ^allace gate, where as he
found his Daughter Rossalinde in company of a strange Knight, which when he
beheld his joy so exceeded, that he sounded in his daughters besome, but
being recovered to his former sense, he brought them both up into his Princely
Hall, where their entertainements were so honorable, and so gracious in the
eyes of the whole Court, that it were too tedious and ouerlong to describe, but
their joy continued but a short season, for it was presently dashed with
Rosalindes tragical discourse: for the good old King when he heard of his
daughters transformations, and how they liude in the shapes of milke-white
Swans, he rent his locks of silver hair, which time had died with the pledge
of wisdom, his rich and imbrothered garments he tore into a thousand p^eces,
and clad his aged limbs in a dismal black, and sable mantle, more
discontented than the wof^^ King of Troy, when he beheld his own Sons by the
hair of the heads dragged up and down the streets, also he commanded that
his Knights and aduenterous Champions in steed of glistring Armor should
wear the weeds of death, more black in h^w than winters darkest nights, and
all the Courtly Ladies and gallant Thracian maidens in steed of silken
vestments he commanded to wear both heavy sad and melancholy ornaments, and
even as unto a solemn funeral, so to attend him to the Giants Castle, and
there obsequiously to offer up unto the angry Destenies, many a bitter sigh and
tear in remembrance of his transformed daughters: Which decree of the
sorrowful Thracian King was performed with all convenient speed, for the next
morning no sooner had Phoebus cast his beauty unto the Kings bedchamber, but
he apparrelled himself in mourning garments, and in company of his
melancholy train set forward to his woeful Pilgrimage: But now we must not
forget the Princely minded Champion of Italy, nor the Noble Lady Rossalinde
who at the Kings departure toward the Castle crau^^ leave to slay behind,
and not so suddenly to begin a new travel, whereunto the King quickly
condiscended, considering their late journey the evening before, so taking the
Castle keys from the Champion, he bid his Palace adieu, and committed his
fortune to his sorrowful iour^^^: where we lea^^ him in a world of
discontented passions, and a while discourse what happened to the Christian
Champion and his beloved Lady, for by that time the Sun had thrice measured
the world with his restles steedes, and thrice his sister Luna wandered to the
west, the Noble Italian Knight grew weary of his long continued rest, and
thought it a great dishonor and a scandal to his valiant mind, to remain
where naught but Chamber sportes were resident, desired rather to abide in a
Court that entertaynde the doleful murmuring of tragedyes, where the joyful
sound of Drums and Trumpets should be heard, therefore taking Rossalinde by
the hand, being then in a dumpe for the want of her father, to whom the good
Knight in this manner expressed his secret intent* My most devoted Lady and
Mistress (said the Champion) a second Dido for thy love, a stain to Venus for
^y beauty, Penelopes compare for constancy, and for c^astetie the wonder of
all maids: the faithful love that hitherto I have found since my arrival,
for ever shall be ^^^ined in my heart, and before all Ladies under the cope of
h^uen, thou shall live and die my souls true gouernesse, an^ for thy sake ^e
stand as Champion against all Knights i^ the world: But to impair the honor
of my Knighthoo^, and to live like a carpet dancer in the laps of Ladies I will
not, though I can tune a Luts in a Princes Chamber, I can sound as well a
fierce alarm in the field: honor ca^l^s me forth dear Rossalinde, and fame
intendes to burkle on my Armor, which now lies rusting in the idle Court of
Thrace: Therefore I am constrained (though most unwilling) to leave the
comfortable sight of thy beauty, and commit my fortune to a longer travail,
but I protest wheresoever I become, or in what Region soever I ^e harbored,
there will I mainetaine to the loss of my life, that both thy love,
constancy, beauty, and Chastetie* surpasses all Dames alive, and with this
promise my most divine Rossalinde, I bid thee farewell: But before the
honorable minded Champion could finish what he had purposed to utter, the Lady
being wounded inwardly with exstreame grief, not able to endure to keep
silent any longer, but with tears falling from her eyes, brake off his
speeches in this manner.

Sir Knight (said she) by whom my liberty has bin obtained: Therefore the
name of Lady and Mistress wherewith you entitle me, is to high and proud a
name, but rather call me handmaid, or ^eruile slave, for on thy Noble person
will I evermore attend: It is not Thrace can harbor me when thou art absent,
and before I do forsake thy company and kind fellowship, the heaven shall be
no heaven* the sea no sea, nor the earth no earth: but if thou pro^est
unconstant, as Ninus did to Scilla, who for his sake stole her Fathers purple
hair, whereon depended the safety of his country, or like wandering Aenaeas
fly from the Queen of Carthage: yet shall these tender hands of (...) which
neu^r shall unclasp, but hang upon thy horse bridle, till my bode like Thesius
sons be dashed in sunder against hard flintie stones: Therefore forsake me not
dear knight of Christendom. If ever Camma was true to her Sinatus, or ever
Alsione to her Ce^x, so Rossalinde will be to thee, and with t^is plighted
promise she caught him fast about the neck, from whence she would not
unclose her hands, till he had vos^de by the Honor of true Chivalry, to make
her sole companion, and only partner in his treuailes, and so after this order
it was accomplished.

Thus being both agreed, she was most trimlye attired like a Page in green
sarcenet, her hair^ bound up most cunningly with a silken list, and so
artificially wrought with curious knots, that she might travail without
suspicion or blemmish of her honor, her Rapier was a Turkish blade, and her
Po^^ard^ of the finest fashion, the which she wore at her back tied with an
Orringe tawnie colored scarf, beautefied with tassels of vnwouen silk, her
Bus^^ns of the smoothest Kiddes skins, her Spurs of the purest Liddian
steel: In which when the Noble and beautiful Lady was attired, she seemed in
stature like the God of love, when he sat dandled upon Didos lap, or rather
Ganemede, Jove's minnion, or Adonis when Venus shewde her silver skin, to
intrappe his eyes to her unchaste desires: But to be brief, all things
being got in readiness for their departure from Thrace, this famous worthy
Knight mounted upon his ^ger Steed, and (...) magnanimious Rossalinde on her
gentle Palfray, in pace more easter than the winged winds, or a Cockbo^e
floting upon the Crystal streams, they both bid adue to the Country of
Thracia, and committed their journey to the Queen of chance: Therefore smile
heavens and guide them with a most happy star, until they ariue where their
souls do most desire. The brauest and boldest Knight that ever wandered by the
way, and the most loueliest Lady that ever any eye beheld: In whose travails
my Muse must lea^ them for a season, and speak of the Thracian mournes, which
by this time had watered the earth with abundance of their ceremonious tears,
and made the elements (...) witnesses of their sad laments, as hereafter
follows in this next Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
How Saint Andrew the Champion of Scotland travailed into a vale of walking
Spirits, and how he was set at liberty, by a going fire. After his journey
into Thracia, where he recovered the six Ladies to their natural shapes, that
had lived seven years in the likeness of milk-white Swannes, with other
accidents that befell the most Noble Champion.

NOW of the Honorable adventures of Saint Andrew the famous Champion of
Scotland must I discourse, whose seven years travails were as strange as
any of the other Champions: For after he had departed from the Brazen Pillar,
as you heard in the beginning of the History. He travailed through many a
strange and unknown Nation, beyond the cercuit of the sun, where but one
time in the year she shows her brightsome beams, but continually darkness
ouerspreads the country, and there is a kind of people that have heads like
dogs, and in the extremity of hunger do devour one another: from which
people this Noble Champion was wonderful strangely delivered, or after he
had wandered some certain days, neither seeing ^he gladsome brightness of the
Sun, nor the comfortabl^ countenance of the Moon, but only guided by duskie
pale^es of the elemen^s, he happened to a vale of walking spirits: which he
supposed to be the very dungeon of burning A^^aron: For there he heard
blowing of unseen fires, boiling of furnases, rattling of Armor, trampling of
horses, g^^^ling of chains, l^mbring of t^bbes, roaring of spirits, and such
like horrible hearinges, that it made the Scottish Champion almost at his wits
end: But yet having an undaunted courage, exempting all fear, he humbly made
his supplcation to heaven, that God would deliver him from that discontented
place of terror: and so presently as the Champion kneeled upon the barren
ground (whereon grew neither herb, flower, grass, nor any other green
thing,) he beheld a certain flame of fire walking up and down before him,
whereat he grew into such an ecstasy of fear, that he stood for a time amazed
whether it were best to go forward, or to stand still: But yet recalling his
senses, he remembered himself, how he had read in passed times of a going
fire called Ignis fatuis, the fire of destenie, or some Will with the wispe, or
Will with the lantern, and likewise by some simple country people, the fair
maid of Ireland, which commonly used to lead wandering trauailers out of their
ways. The like imagination entered the Champions mind: So encouraging
himself with his own conceits, and chearing up his dull senses late oppressed
with exstreame fear, he directly followed the going fire which so justly went
before him, that by the time the guider of the night had climbed twelve degrees
in the zodiac, he was safely delivered from the vale of walking spirits, by
the direction of the going fire.

Now began the Sun to dance about the firmament, which he had not seen in
many months before: whereat his dull senses so much rejoiced, being so long
^ouered before with darkness, that every step he troad was as pleasurable, as
though he had walked in a garden bedeckt with all kind of fragrant flowers.

At last without any further molestation he arrived within the territories of
Thracia, a country as you heard in the former Chapter, adorned with the
beauty of many fair Woods and Forrestes, through which be travailed with
small rest, but less sleep, till he came to the foot of the mountain,
whereupon stood the Castle wherein the woeful King of Thrace in company of
his sorrowful subjects, still lamented the unhappy destenies of his six
daughters turnde into Swannes, with Crowns of gold about their necks: But
when the valiant Champion Saint Andrew beheld the lofty scittuation of the
Castle, and the invincible strength it seemed to be of, expected some strange
adventure to befall him in the said Castle: So preparing his sword in
readiness, and buckling close his Armor, which was a shirt of silver maile for
lightness in travail: He climbed the Mountain, whereupon he espied the Giant
lying upon a craggie Rock, with limbs and members all to be rent and torn,
by the fury of hunger starued fowls: which loathsome spectakle was no little
wonder to the worthy Champion, considering the mighty stature and bigness of
the Giant: So leaving his putrified body to the winds, he approached the
gates: where after he had read the superscription over the same, without any
interruption entered the Castle where he expected a fierce encounter by some
Knight that should have defended the same, but all things fell out contrary to
his imagination, for after he had found many a strange nouelty and hidden
secret closed in the same, chanced at last to come where the Thracians duly
observed their ceremonious mournings, which in this order was daily performed:
for upon sondayes which in that Country is the first day in the week, all the
Thracians attyred themselves after the manner of Bacchus Priests, and burned
perfumed incence and sweet Arabian francumsence upon a religious shrine which
they offered to the (...) as chief governor of that day, thinking thereby to
appease the angry destenies, and so recover the unhappy Ladies to their
former shapes: upon Mundaies clad in garments after the manner of Syluanes, and
color like to the waves of the sea, they offered up their woeful tears to the
Moon, being the g^t^er and mistress of that day: upon Te^sdayes like
Soldiers trayling their Banners on the dust, and Drums sounding sad and
doleful melody in sign of discontent, they committed their proceedings to the
pleasure of Mars, being ruler and guider of that day: upon Wensday like
scholars unto Mercury: upon Thursday like Potentates to Jove: upon Fridayes
like lovers with sweet sounding Music to Venus: and upon Saterdaies like
Manual professors to the angry and discontented Saturn.

Thus the woeful Thracian King with his sorrowful subjects, consumed seven
months away, one while accusing fortune of dispite, another while the heavens
of injustice: the one for Childrens transformations, the other for their long
limited punishments: But at last when the Scottish Champion heard what bitter
moan the Thracians made about the river, he demanded the cause, and to what
purpose they observed such vain ceremonies, contemning the Majesty of high
Iehoua, and only worshipping but outward and vain Gods: to whom the King
after a few sad tears strained from the Conduits of his aged eyes replied in
this manner.

Most noble Knight for so you seem, both by your gesture and other outward
appearance, (quoth the King,) if you desire to know the cause of our continual
grief, prepare your ears to hear a tragic and woeful tale, whereat I see
the elements begin to mourn, and cover their azurde countenance, with sable
clouds. These milk-white Swannes you see, whose necks be beautified with
golden Crowns, are my six natural Daughters, transformed into this Swan-like
substance, by the appointment of the Gods: for of late this Castle was kept by
a cruel Giant named B^a^deron, who by violence would have ravished them: But
the heavens to preserve their chasteties, prevented his lustful desires, and
transformed their beautiful features to those milk-white Swannes: And now
seven times the cheerful spring has renewed the earth with a S^mmers
liuerie, and seven times the nipping Winters ^^ostes, has bereaved the trees
of leaf and bud, since first my Daughters lost their Uirgins shapes: Seven
summers have they swamme upon this Crystal stream: where in steed of ric^
attire, and imbrothered Uestments, the smooth silver colored feathers adornes
their comely bodies: Princely Palaces wherein they were wont like unto
tripping Sea-nimphes dance their measures up and down, are now exchanged into
cold streams of water: wherein their chiefest m^lodi^, is the murmuring of the
liquid bubbles; and their ioyfullest pleasure, to hear the harmony of humming
Bees, which the Poets ca^^ the Muses birds.

Thus have you heard most worthy Knight the rufull Tragedies of my Daughters,
for whose sakes I will spend the remnant of my days, chearefully complaining
of their long appointed punishments, about the Banks of t^ys unhappy river.
Which sad discourse being no sooner ended, but the Scottish Knight (having a
mind furnished with all Princely thoughts, and a tongue washed in the Fountain
of Eloquence), thus replied to the comfort and great rejoicing of all the
company.

Most noble King (quoth the Champion) your heavy and dolorous discourse, has
constrained my ^eart to a wonderful passion, and compelled my very soul ^o
^ue your Daughters miseries: But yet a greater g^ief^ (...) a deeper sorrow
then that, has taken possession in my (...), whereof my e^es has bin witness,
and my ears unhappy ^earers of your misbeliefe, I mean your unchristian
faith: For I have seen since my first ariuall into th^s same Castle your
profane and vain worshipping of (...) and fals^ Gods, as to Phoebus, Luna,
Mars, Mercury, and such like Poetical names, which the Majesty of high
Iehoua utterly contemnes: but magnificent governor of Thracia; if you seek to
recover your Daughters happiness by humble prayers, and to obtain your souls
content by true tears, you must abandon all such vain Ceremonies, and with
true humillity believe in the Christians God, which is the God of wonders, and
chief commander of the rouling Elements, in whose quarrel this undaunted
arm, and this unconquered heart of mine shall fight: and now be it known to
thee great King of Thrace, that I am a Christian Champion, and by birth a
Knight of Scotland, bearing my countries Arms upon my breast (for indeed
thereon he bore a silver Cross set in blue silk) and therefore in the honor
of Christendom I challenge forth thy prowdest Knight at Arms, against whom I
will mayntaine that our God is the true God, and the rest fantastical and
vain cerem^nies.

Which sudden and unexpected challenge so daunted the Thracian Champions that
they stood amazed for a time; gazing one upon another, like men dropped from the
clouds: but at last consulting together, how the challenge of the strange
Knight, was to the dishonor of their Country, and utter scandal of all
Knightly dignity: therefore with a general consent they craved leave of the
King that the challenge might be taken, who as willingly condiscended as they
demanded: ^o the time and place was appointed which was the next morning
following by the Kings commandment upon a large and plain meadowe close by
the river side, whereon the six Swans were swimming, and so after the
Christian Champion had cast down his steely Gaun^let and the Thracian Knights
accepted thereof, every one departed for that night, the Challenger to the E^st
side of the Castle to his lodging, and the Defendants to the west, where they
slept quietly till the next morning, who by the break of day were wakened by a
Harrold at arms, but all the passed night our Scottish Champion never
^ntertaynde one motion of rest, but busied himself in trimming his horse,
buckling on his Armor, lacing on his Burgonet, and making his prayers to the
Divine Majesty of God for the conquest and victory, till the mornings beauty
chaced away the darkness of the night, but no sooner was the windows of the
day fully opened, but the valiant and Noble minded Champion of Christendom
entered the Li^t, where the King in company of the Thracian Lords were present
to behold the Combat: and so after saint Andrew had twice or thrice traced his
horse up and down the Listes bravely flourishing his Lance, at the top
whereof hung a pendant of gold, whose Posie was thus written in silver
letters: This day a Martyr or a Conqueror. Then entered a Knight in exceeding
bright Armor, mounted upon a Courser as white as the northern snow whose
caparison was of the color of the elements, betwixt whom was a firc^
encounter, but the Thracian had the foil, and with disgrace d^parted the
Listes: Then secondly entered another Knight in Armor varnished with green
varnish, his Steed of the color of an Iron gray, who likewise had the repulse
by the worthy Christian: Thirdly entered a knight in a black cor^let, mounted
upon a bi^ bond Palfray, covered with a vale of sable silk, in his hand he
bore a Lance n^^led round about with plates of steel: which Knight amongst the
Thracians was accounted the strongest in the world, except it were those Giants
that descended from a monstrous linnage: But no sooner encountered these hardy
Champions, but their Lances shiuered in sunder, and flew so violently into the
Air, that it much amazed the beholders: Then they alighted from their Steedes,
and so valiantly besturd them with their keen edged Fauchions, that the fiery
sparkles flew as fierc^ly from these Noble Champions steely Helmets, as from
an Iron Anuill: But the Combat endured not very long before the most hardy
Scottish Knight espied an advantage, wherein he might show his matchles
fortitude: then he stroke such a violent bl^w upon the Thracians Burgonet, that
it cleaued his head justly down to the shoulders: whereat the King suddenly
started from his seat, and with a wrathful countenance, threatened the
Champions death in this manner.

Proud Christian (said the King) thou shall repent his death, and curse the
time that ever thou camst to Thracia: his blood we will revenge upon thy head,
and quit thy committed cruelty with a sudden death: and so in company of a
hundred Armed Knights, he encompassed the Scottish Champion, intending by
multitudes to murder him: But when the valiant Knight Saint Andrew saw how he
was suppressed by treachery, and environed with mighty Troops, he called to
heaven for succor, and annimated him self by these words of encouragement:
Now for the Honor of Christendom, this day a Martyr or a Conqueror, and
therewithal he so valiantly behaved himself with his trusty Curtleaxe, that
he made Lanes of murdered men, and feld them down by multitudes, like as the
harvest man does mo^^e down ears of ripened corn: whereby they fell before
his face like leaves from trees, when the Summers pride declines her glory: So
at the last after much blood shed, the Thracian King was compelled to yield to
the Scottish Champions mercy, who swore him for the sauegarde of his life, to
forsake his profaned religion and become a Christian, whose living true God
the Thracian king vowde for evermore to worship, and thereupon he kissed the
Champions sword.

This conversion of the Pagan King, so pleased the Majesty of God, that he
presently gave end to his Daughters punishments, and turned the Ladies to their
former shapes: But when the King beheld their smooth feathers, which were
whiter than the Lilly, exchanged to a natural fairenes, and that their black
bills and slender necks were converted to their first created beauties, (where
for excellent faireles, the Queen of love might build her Parradice,) be bad
adue to his grief and long continued sorrows, protesting ever hereafter to
continue a true Christian for the Scottish Champions sake: by whom and by
whose divine Orrizons his Daughters obtained their former features: So taking
the Christian Knight in company of the six Ladies, to an excellent rich
Chamber, prepared with all things according to their wishes: where first the
Christian Knight was unarmed, then his wounds washed with white Wine, new
Milk, and Rose Water, and so after some dainty repast, conuayed to his nights
repose. The Ladies being the ioyfullest creatures under heaven, never
entertainde one thought of sleep, but passed the night in their Fathers
company, (whose mind was ravished with unspeakable pleasure,) till the
mornings messengers bad them good morrow.

Thus all things being prepared in a readiness, they departed the Castle, not
like mourners to a heavy Funeral: but in triumphing manner marching back to
the Thracian Palace, with streaming Banners in the wind. Drums and Trumpets
sounding joyful melody, and with sweet inspiring music, causing the air to
resound with harmony: But no sooner were they entered the Palace, (which was in
distance from the Giants Castle, some ten miles) but their triumphs turned to
exceeding sorrow, for Rossalinde with the Champion of Italy as you heard
before was departed the Court: which unexpected news so daunted the whole
company, but especially the King, that the triumphs for that time were
deferred, and messengers dispatched in pursuit of the aduenturous Italian, and
the ^o^ely Rossalinde.

But when Saint Andrew of Scotland had intelligence, how it was one of the
Knights that was imprisoned with him under the subjection of the wicked (...)
Kalyb, as you heard first of all in the beginning of the History, his heart
thirsted for his most Honorable company, and his eyes never closed quietly,
nor took any rest at all until he was likewise departed in the pursuit of
his sworn friend, which was the next night following, without making any
acquainted with his intent: likewise when the six Ladies understood the secret
departure of the Scottish Champion, whom they affected dearer than any Knight
in all the world, stored themselves with sufficient treasure, and by stealth
took their journey from their Fathers Palace: intending either to find out
the victorious and approved Knight of Scotland, or to end their lives in some
foreign Region.

The rumor of whose departure, no sooner came to the Kings ears, but he
purposed the like travail, either to obtain the sight of his Daughters
again, or to make his toombe in a country beyond the cercuite of the Sun:
So attyring himself in a homely russet, like a Pilgrim with an ^bon staff in
his hand tipped with silver, took his journey all unknown from his Palace,
whose s^d^ine and secret departure, stroke such an extreme and intolerable
heaviness in the Court, that the Palace gates were sealed up with sorrow, and
the walls be-hung with sable mourning cloth. The Thracian Lords exempted all
pleasure, and like a flock of sheep strayed up and down without a shepherd,
the Ladies and Courtly gentles, sat sighing in their private chambers: where
we leave them for this time, and speak of the success of the other Champions,
and how Fortune smiled on their aduenterous proceedinges.

CHAP. VIII.
How Saint Pattricke the Champion of Ireland, redeemed the six Thracian Ladies
out of the hands of thirty bloody minded Satiers, and of their purposed
travail in the pursuit after the Champion of Scotland.

BUT now of the valiant and hardy Knight at Arms Saint Pattrick the Champion
of Ireland must I speak, whose aduenterous accidents were so Nobly performed,
that if my pen were made of steel, yet should I wear it to the stumpes,
sufficiently to declare his prowess and worthy adventures. When he departed
from the brazen P^ller, from the other Champions, the heavens smiled with a
kind aspect, and sent him such a happy star to be his guide, that it lead
him to no Courtly pleasures, nor to vain delights of Ladies beauties, but to
the throne of fame, where honor sat instauld upon a seat of gold: Thither
travailed the warlike Champion of Ireland, whose illustrious battles the
northen Isles has Chronicled in leaves of brass: therefore Ireland be proud,
for from thy bowels did spring a Champion, whose prowess made the enemies of
Christ to tremble, and watered the earth with streams of Pagans blood: witness
whereof the I Will of Rhodes, the key and strength of Christendom was recovered
from the Turks, by his Martial and invincible prowess: where his dangerous
battles, fierce encounters, bloody skirmishes, and long assaults, would
serve to fill a mighty volume, all which I pass over, and wholly discours^ of
things appertaining to this History: for (...) wars at Rhodes were fully
ended, which continued some two years the worthy Champion saint Pattricke
(accounting idle ease the nurse of cowardice) bad Rhodes farewell, being then
strongly fortefied with Christian Soldiers, and took his journey thorough
many an unknown Country, where at last it pleased so the Queen of chance to
direct his steps into a solitary wilderness, inhabited only by wild
Satyrs, and a people of inhumane quallities, giving their wicked minds only
to murder, lust and rape, wherein the noble Champion traveled up and down
many a weary step, not knowing how to sustain his hunger, but by his own
industry in killing of wild venison, and pressing out the blood betwixt two
mighty stones, daily r^sted it by the heat of the Sun, his lodging was in
the hollow truncke of a blasted tree, which nightly preserude him from the
dropping showers of heaven, his chief companion was the sweet resounding
echo, which commonly reanswered the Champions words: In this manner lived
saint Pattrick the Irish Knight in the woods, not knowing how to set him self
at liberty, but wandering up and down as it were (...) a maze wrought by the
curious workmanship of some excellent Gardner, it was his chance at last to
come into a dismal shady thicket beset about with bal^full misselto, a place
of horror wherein he heard the cries of some distressed Ladies, whose bitter
lamentations seemd to pierce* the clouds, and to crave succor at the hands of
God, which unexpected cries not a little daunted the Irish Knight: so that it
causde him to prepare his weapon in readiness, against some sudden encounter: So
couching himself close under the root of an old withered Oak, (which had
not flourished with green leaves in many a year) he espied a far off a
crew of bloody minded Satyrs, hauling by the hair the six unhappy Ladies
thorough many a thorny brake and bryer, whereby the beauty of their crimson
cheeks, was all to besprent with purple gore, and their eyes (within whose
clear glasses one might behold the God of love dancing) all to be rent and
torn by the fury of the briars, whereby they could not see the light of
heaven, nor the place of their unfortunate abiding: which woeful spectacle
forced such a terror in the heart of the Irish Knight, that he presently made
out for the rescue of the Ladies, against the bloody fury of the merciless
Satyrs which were in number about some thirty, every one having a mighty clubbe
upon his neck, which they had made with roots of young Oaks and Pine trees,
yet this aduenterous Champion being nothing discouraged, but with a bold and
resolute mind he let drive at the sturdiest Satyr, whose Armor of defense was
made of a Bulls hide, which was dried so hard against the Sun, that the
Champions Curtle-axe little prevailed: after which the fell Satyrs encompassed
the Christian Knight round about, and so mightily oppressed him with down right
blows, that had he not by good fortune leapt under the boughs of a mighty
tree, his life had been forced to give the world a speedy farewell: But such
was his nimblenes and active policy, that ^re long he sheathed his sharp
pointed Fauchion in one of the Satyrs breasts, which woeful sight caused all
the rest to fly from his presence, and left the six Ladies to the pleasure and
disposition of the most Noble and courageous Christian Champion.

Who after he had sufficiently breathed and cooled himself in the chill Air
(being almost windles through the long encounter and bloody Skyrmish*) he
demanded the cause of the Ladies travels, and by what means they happened into
the hands of those m^^ciless^ Satyrs, who most cruelly and tyrannically
attem^^ed the utter ruin and endless spoil of their unspotted ^^^ginity: To
which courteous demand one of the Ladies a^^er a deep fetched sigh or two (being
constrained from the b^^tome of her most sorrowful heart) in the behalf of her
self and the other distressed Ladies, replied in this order.

redeemed us distressed Ladies from a double death: the one in preserving our
chasteties from the lustful desires of the Satiers, the other in saving our
lives from the threatening furies of the monsters.

Know brave minded Knight, that we are the unfortunate Daughters of the King
of Thrace, whose lives has been unhappy ever since our creations: For first
we did endure a long imprisonment under the hands of a cruel Giant, and
after the heavens to preserve our Chasteties from the wicked desires of the
said Giant, transformed us into the shape of Swans, in which likeness we
remained seven years, but at last recovered by a worthy Christian Knight,
named S. Andrew the Champion of Scotland, after whom we have travailed many a
weary step, never crossed by any violence, until it was our angry fates to ariue
in this unhappy Wilderness, where your eyes have been true witnesses of our
woeful misfortunes: Which sad discourse being no sooner finished, but the
worthy Champion began thus to comfort the distressed Ladies.

The Christian Champion after whom you take in hand this weary travail (said
the Irish Champion) is my approved friend, for whose company and wished
sight, I will go more weary miles, than there be trees in this accursed
Wilderness, and number my steps with the multitude of sands hidden in the
seas: therefore most excellent Ladies, true ornaments of beauty, be sad
companions in my travails, for I will never cease til I have found our
honorable friend the Champion of Scotland, or some of those brave Knights
whom I have not seen these seven Summers.

These words so contented the sorrowful Ladies, that without any exception
they agreed, and with as much willingness consented, as the Champion demanded:
So after they had recovered their sights, eased their wearines, and cured their
wounds: which was by the secret virtues of certain herbs growing in the
same woods, took their iournies anew, under the conduct of this worthy
Champion Saint Pattrick, where after some days travail, obtained the fight of
a broad beaten way, where committing their fortunes to the fatal sisters, and
setting their faces toward the east, merrily iournied together: In whose
fortunate travails we leave, and speak of the seventh Christian Champion,
whose aduenterous exployts and Knightly Honors, deserves a golden pen, dipped in
the ink of true Fame to discourse at large.

CHAP. IX.
How Saint David the Champion of Wales slew the County Palatine in the
Tartarian Court, and after how he was sent to the Inchaunted Garden of
Ormondine, wherein by Magic Art he slept seven years.

SAint David the most Noble Champion of Wales, after his departure from the
brazen pillar where as the other Champions of Christendom divided themselves
severally, to seek for foreign adventures, he atchiued many memorable
things, as well in Christendom, as in those Nations that acknowledge no true
God: which for this time I omit, and only discourse what happened unto him
amongst the Tartarians: For being in the Emperor of Tartaries Court (a place
very much honored with valerous Knights, and highly grac^e with a train of
beauteous Ladies) where the Emperor upon a time ordained a solemn Ioust and
Turnament to be holden in the honor of his birth day: whether resorted at the
time appointed, (from all the borders of Tartarie) the best and hardiest
Knights there remaining: In which honorable and Princely exercise, the Noble
Knight Saint David was appointed Champion for the Emperor, who was mounted
upon a Moroco Steed, betrapped in a rich Caparison, wrought by the curious
workmanship of the Indian women, upon whose shield was set a golden Griffon
rampant in a field of blew.

Against him came the County Palatine, Son and heir aparant to the
Tartarian Emperor, brought in by twelve Knights, richly furnished with all
habilliments of honor, and paced three times about the Lists, before the
Emperor and many Ladies that were present to behold the honorable Turnament:
The which being done, the twelve Knights departed the Lists, and the County
Palatine prepared himself to encounter with the Christian Knight: being then
appointed chief Champion for the day: who likewise locked down his Beuer, and
at the Trumpets sound by the Harrolds appointment, ran so fiercely one against
the other, that the ground seemed to thunder under them, and the skies to
resounde echoes of their mighty strokes.

At the second race the Champions ran, Saint David had the worse, and was
constrained through the forcible strength of the County Palatine, to fall
backwarde almost beside his saddle: whereat the Trumpets began to sound in
sign of victory: but yet the valiant Christian nothing dismayed, but with a
courage (within whose eyes say Knightly revenge) ran the third time against
the County Palatine, and by the violent force of his strength, he overthrew
both horse and man, whereby the Counties body was so exstreamly bruised with the
fall of his horse, that his heart blood issued forth from his nostrels, and
his vital spirits pressed from the mancion of his breast, that he was forced
to give the world a timeles farewell.

This fatal overthrow of the County Palatine, abashed the whole company: but
especially the Tartarian Emperor, who having no more sons but him, caused
the Lists to be broken up, the Knights to be unarmed, and the murdered County
to be brought by four Squiers into his Palace: where after he was dispoyled
of his furniture, and the Christian Knight received it in the honor of his
victory. The woeful Emperor bathed the Tartarians body with tears which
dropped like Crystal Pearls upon his congealed blood, where after many sad
sighs he breathed forth this woeful lamentation.

Now are my triumphs turned to everlasting woes, from a commicall pastime, to a
dierefull and bloody tragedy: O most unkind fortune, never constant but in
change! Why is my life deferde to see the downfall of my dear Son, the Noble
County Palatine? why rends not this accursed earth whereon I stand, and
presently swallow up my body into her hungry bowels: Is this the use of
Christians for true Honor, to repay dishonor, could no bace blood serve to
stain his deadly hands withal, but with the precious blood of my dear
Son, in whose revenge the face of the heavens is stained with blood, and
cries for vengeance to the Majesty of high eternal Jove, the dreadful
furies, the direful daughters of dark night, and all the balefull company of
burning Acharon, whose loins be girt with Serpents, and hair be hangde with
wreathes of Snakes* shall haunt, pursue and follow tha^ a^cursed Chrstian
Champion, that has bereaved my Country Tartarie, of so precious a Jewel as
my dear Son the County Palatine was, whose magnanimious prowess, did
surpass all the Knights of our Country.

Thus sorrowed the woeful Emperor for the death of his Noble son: sometimes
making the echoes of his lamentations pearce the elements: another while
forcing his bitter curses to sink to the deep foundation of Acharon: one
while intending to be revenged upon Saint David the Christian Champion, then
presently his intent was crossed with a contrary imagination, that it was against
the Law of Arms, and a great dishonor to his Country, by violence to
oppress a strange Knight, whose actions has ever been guided by true honor,
but yet at last this firm resolution entered into his mind.

There was adjoining upon the borders of Tartary, an inchaunted garden kept by
Magic art, from whence never any returned that attempted to enter; the
Governor of which garden was a notable and famous Nigromancer named Ormondine,
to which Magitian the Tartarian Emperor intended to send the aduenterous
Champion saint David, thereby to revenge the County Pallatines death: So the
Emperor after some few days passed* and the Obsequies of his son being no
sooner performed* but he caused the Christian Knight to be brought into his
present, to whom he committed this heavy task and weary labor. Proud Knight
(said the angry Emperor) thou know since thy ariuall into our Territories
how highly I have honored thee, not only ingraunting liberty of life, (...)
making thee chief Champion of Tartarie, which high honor thou haste repaide
with great ingratitude, and blemished true Nobility, in acting of my dear
sons Tragedy: For which unhappy deed thou rightly haste deserved death: But
yet know accursed Christian, that mercy harbors in a Princely mind, and
where honor sits inthronize^, there Justice is not too severe. Although thou
have deserved death: yet if thou will adventure to the Inchaunted garden, and
bring hither the Magitians head, I grant thee not only thy life, but
therewithal the Crown of Tartarie after my discease: because I see then haste
a mind furnished with all Princely thoughts, and adornde with true
Magnanimity.

This heavy task, and strange adventure, not a little pleased the Noble
Champion of Wales, whose mind ever thirsted after strange adventures: and so
after some considerate thoughts, in this manner he replied.

Most high and magnificent Emperor (said the Champion) were this task which
you inioyne me to, as wonderful as the labors of Hercules, or as fearful as
the interprise which Jason made for the golden ^le^ee: yet would I attempt to
finish and return with more triumph to Tartarie, than the Macedonian Monark^
did to Babylon, when he had conquered the Angels of the world: Which words
being no sooner ended, but the Emperor (...) by his oath of Knighthood, and
by the love he bears unto his native country, never to follow any other
adventure, till he had performed his promise, which was to bring the Magitian
Ormondines head into Tartarie: And so the Emperor departed from the Noble
Knight Saint David, (...) ^^uer to see him return, ^ut rather ^eare his utter
confusion, or everlasting imprisonment.

Thus this valiant Christian Champion, being bound to a heavy task, within
three days prepares all necessaries in readiness for his departure: and so
travailed westward, till he approach to the sight of the Inchaunted Garden, the
scittuation whereof somewhat daunted his valiant courage: for it was
encompassed with a hedge of withered thorns, and briers, which seemed
continually to burn: upon the top thereof, sat a number of strange and
deformed things, some in the likeness of night Owls, that woondered at the
presence of Saint David: some in the shape of Progines transformation,
foretelling his unfortunate success: and some like Ravens, that with their
harsh throuts ring forth a balefull knell of some woeful Tragedy: the
elements which covered the Inchaunted Garden, seemed to be ^uerspread with
(...), from whence continually shot ^^ames of fire, as though the skies had bin
^^led with blazing Commets: which (...), or rather the very pattern of hell,
stroke such a terror into the Champions heart, that twice he was in mind to
return without performing the adventure; but for his oath and Honor of
Knighthood, which he had pawnde for the accomplishment thereof: So laping his
body on the bare earth, being the first nurse and mother of his life, her made
his humble petition to God, that his mind might be never oppressed with
cowardice, nor his heart daunted with any faint fear, till he had performed
what the Tartarian Emperor had bound him to, the Champion rose from the
ground, and with cheerful looks beheld the elements, which seemed at his
conceit to smile at the enterprise, and to foreshew a luckie event.

So the Noble Knight Saint David with a valiant courage went to the Garden
gate, by which stood a Rock of stone, ouerspread with moss: In which Rock by
Magic Art was enclosed a sword, nothing outwardly appearing but the h^^t,
which was the richest to his judgment that ever his eyes beheld, for the
steel work was ingraued very curiously, beset with Jasper and Saphier stones,
the pummell was in the fashion of a Globe, of the purest silver that ever the
mines of rich America brought forth: about the pummell was engraven in Letters
of gold these verses following.

My Magic spells, remains most firmly bound,
The worlds strange wonder unknown by any one:
Till that a Knight within the North be found,
To pull this sword from out this Roc^ of stone:
Then ends my charms, my Magic Arts and all,
By whose strong hand, wise Ormondine must fall.
These verses drove such a conceited Imagination into the Champions mind, that
he supposed himself to be the Northen Knight, by whom the Nigromancer
should be conquered: Therefore without any further aduisement he put his hand
into the hilt of the rich swor^e, thinking presently to pull it out from the
Inchaunted Rock of Ormondine: But no sooner did he attempt that vain
enterprise, but his valiant courage and invincible fortitude failed him, and
all his senses was over taken with a sudden and heavy sleep, whereby he was
forced to let go his hold, and to fall flat upon the barraine ground, where
his eyes were so fast locked up by Magic Art, and his wa^ing senses drowned
in such a dead ^^umber, that it was as much impossible to recover himself from
his sleep, as to pull the ^unne out of the firmament: For through the secret
mystery of the Nigromancers skill, he had intelligence of the Champions
unfortunate success: who sent from the Inchaunted garden four spirits, in the
similitude and likeness of four beautiful Damsels, which wrapped the drousie
Champion in a sheet of the finest Arabian silk, and conuayed him into a Cave,
directly placed in the middle of the Garden, where they laid him upon a soft
bed, more softer than the down of Culuers: where these beautiful Ladi^s
through the Arts of wicked Ormondine, continually kept him sleeping for the
term of seven years: one while singing with sugered songs, more sweeter
and delightfuller than the Sirens mellodie: another while with rare conceited
Music, surpassing the sweetness of Arions Harp, which made the mighty
Dolphins in the Seas, to dance at the sound of his sweet inspiring Melody:
or like the Harmony of Orpheus when he iournied down into hell, where the
diuelles reioyst to hear his admired notes, and on earth both ^rees and stones
did leap when he did but touch the silver stringes of his Iuorie Harp.

Thus was Saint David's adventure crossed with a w^onderfull bad success, whose
days travails was turned into a nights repose: whose nights repose, was made
a heavy sleep, which endured until seven years were fully finished: where
we le^^e Saint David to the mercy of the Nigromancer Ormondine sleeping, and
return now to the most Noble and magnanimious Champion S. George, where we
left him imprisoned in the S^ldans Court: But now gentle Reader thou will
think it strange, that all these Christian Champions should meet together
again, (...) that they be separated into so many borders of the world: For
Saint Dennis the Champion of France, (...) maineth now in the Court of
Thessalie, with his Lady Eglantine: Saint James the Champion of Spain, in the
City of Ciuell with Celestine, the fair Lady of Jerusalem: Saint Anthony the
Champion of Italy, travailing the world, in the company of a Thracian maiden,
attired in a Pages apparel: Saint Andrew the Champion of Scotland, seeking
after the Italian: Saint Pattricke the Champion of Ireland, after the Champion
of Scotland, Saint David of Wales, sleeping in the Inchaunted garden adjoining
to the Kingdom of Tartarie, and Saint George the famous Champion of England,
imprisoned in Persia: of whom, and of whose noble adventures, I must a while
discourse, till the honored Fame of the other Champions, compelles me to
report their Noble and Princely atchiuementes.

CHAP. X.
How Saint George escaped out of prison at Persia, and how he redeemed the
Champion of Wales from his Inchauntment, with other things that happened to the
English Knight, with the Tragical tale of the Nigromancer Ormondine.

NOW seven times had frosty bearded winter covered both herbs and flowers
with snow, and behung the trees with Crystal I sickles, seven times had
Lady Vir beautified every field with natures ornaments, and seven times had
withered Autum robbed the earth of springing flowers, since the unfortunate
Saint George beheld the cheerful light of heaven, but obscurely lived in a
dismal dungeon, by the Sultan of Persias commandment, as you heard before in
the beginning of the Historie^ His unhappy fortune so discontented his rest^es
thoughts, that a thousand times a year he wished an end of his life, and a
thousand times he cursed the day of his creation, his sigh^ in number did
counteruaile a heap of sand, whose top^^ might seem to reach the skies, the
which he vainly breathed forth against the walls of the Prison: Many times
making his humble supplication to the heavens, to redeem him from that vale of
misery, and many times seeking occasion desperately to abridge his days,
whereby to triumph in his own Tragedy.

But at last when seven years were fully ended, it was the Champions luckie
fortune to find in a secret corner of the dungeon, a certain Iron Engine,
which time had almost consumed with rust: wherewith by long labor, he dug
himself a passage under the ground, till he ascended just in the middle of the
Soldans Court, which was at that time of the night when all things were
silent: the heavens he then beheld beautified with stats, and bright Cinthia,
whose glistering beams he had not seen in many a hundred nights before seemed
to smile at his safe delivery, and to stay her wandering course till the noble
English Champion found^ means to get without the compass of the Persian
Course, where danger might no longer attend him, nor the strong^ Gates of the
City hinder his flight, which in this manner was performed: For the Noble
Knight b^^ing as fearful as the Bird newly escaped from the Fowlers nets,
gazed round about, and listened where he might hear the voice of people: At
last he heard the Grooms of the Soldans stable, furnishing forth Horses
against the next morning for some Noble atchiuement: then the valiant Champion
S. George taking the Iron Engine, wherewith he redeemed himself out of prison
and burst open the doors, where he slew all the Grooms in the Soldans stable,
which being done he took the strongest Palfray, and the richest furniture,
with other necessaries appertayning to a Knight at Arms, and so rode in great
majesty to one of the City Gates, where he saluted the Porter in this manner.

Porter, open thy Gates, for S. George of England is escaped, and has murdered
his warders, in whose pursuit the City is in Arms: which words the simple
Persian believed for a truth, and so with all speed opened the Gates, whereat
the Champion of England departed and left the Sultan in his dead s^eepe, little
mistrusting his sudden escape.

But by that time the purple spotted morning had parted with her gray, and the
Suns bright countenance appeared on the mountain tops, Saint George had
ridden twenty leagues from the Persian Court, and before his departure was
bru^ed in the Soldans Palace, the English Champion had recovered the sight of
Grecia, past all danger of the Persian Knights, that followed him with a swift
pursuit: By which time the extremity of hunger so sharply tormented him, that
he could travail no further, but was constrained to suffice himself with
certain wild Chestnuts in stead of bread, and sewer oringes in stead of
drink, and such fainte food that grew by the ways as he traveled, where the
necessity and want of victualles compelled the Noble Knight Saint George to
breath forth this pitiful complaint.

O hunger, hunger, (said the Champion) thou art more sharper than the stroke
of death, and the extremest punishment that ever man endured: if I were now
King of Armenia and chief Potentate of Asia, yet would I give my Diadem my
Scepter with all my pr^uinces for one shiuer of brown bread oh that the earth
would be so kind, as to rippe her bowels, and to cast up some food, to
sustain my want, or that the air might be choakt with mistes, whereby the
fethered fowls for want of breath might fall and yeald me some succor in this
my ^^nishment, and exstreame penurye, or that the Oceans would outspread their
braunched arms and cover those sunburnd ^^llyes with their treasures, that I
might suffice my hunger: but now I see both heaven and earth, the hills and
da^es, the skies and seas, the fish and fowls, the birds and Siluan^ beasts,
and all things under the cope of heaven, conspires my utter overthrow: better
had it been it I had ^^ded my days in Persia, than to be famish^^ in the
broa^^ (...) wh^^e all things by natures appointment is ordained for man's use:
now in steed of Courtly dillicates, I am forced to eat the fruit of trees, and
in steed of Greekish wines, I am compelled to quench my thirst with the
mo^nings dew, that nightly falls (...) the blades of grass.

Thus complained Saint George, until glistering Phoebus had mounted the top of
heaven, and drawn the mistie vapors from the ground, where he might behold
the prospects of Grecia, and which way to travail for most safety, he espied
directly before his face a Tower standing upon a chalkie clift, in distance
from him some three miles, whether the Champion intended to go, not to seek
for any adventure, but to rest himself after his long journey, and to get such
victuals as therein he could find to suffice his want.

So setting forward with an easy pace, the heavens seemed to smile, and the
birds to ring such a cherping peale of mellodie, as though they did
prognosticate a fortunate event: The way he found so plain, and the journey so
easy, that within half an hour he approached before the said Tower: where
upon the wall st^^de a most beautiful woman, her attire after the manner of a
distressed Lady, and her looks as heavy as the Queens of Troy, when she
beheld her Palace set on fire. The valiant Knight S: George, after he had
alighted from his horse, he gave her this courteous saluta^ion.

Lady (said the Knight) for so you seem by your outward appearance, if ever
you pitied a trauailer, (...) granted succor to a Chrstian Knight, give to
me one me^ le^ meat, n^w almost famished: To whom the Lady after a ^urst
frown or two, answered him in this order.

Sir Kn^ght (quoth she) I advise thee with all speed to depart, for here thou
gets a cold dinner* my Lord is a mighty Giant, and believes in Mahomet, ^
Terinag^unt, and if he onc^ understand how thou art a Christian Knight: ^t is
not all the gold of higher India, nor the riches of wealthy Babylon that can
preserve thy life. Now by the honor of my Knighthood, (replied Saint George)
and by the God that Christendom adores: were thy Lord more stronger than was
mighty Hercules, that bore a mountain on his back: here will I either
obtain my (...), or die by his accursed hands.

These words so abashed the Lady, that she went with all speed from the
Tower, and told the Giant how a Christian Knight remained at his Gate, that had
sworn to suffice his hunger in dispite of his will: whereat the furious Giant
suddenly started up, being as then in a sound sleep, for it was at the
middle of the day: who took a bat of Iron in his hand, and came down to the
Tower Gate: his stature was in haight five yeardes: his head brisled like a
Bores, a foot there was betwixt each brow, his eyes hollow, his mouth wide,
his lips were like two flaps of steel, in all proportion more like a devil
than a man: Which deformed monster so daunted the courage of Saint George, that
he prepared himself to death: not through fear of the monstrous Giant, but
for hunger and feeblenes of body: but God so provided for him, and so restored
the Champions decayed strength, that he endured battle till the closing up
of the Evening, by which time the Giant was almost blind, through the sweat
that ran down^ from his monstrous brows, whereby Saint George had the
advantage, and wounded the Giant so cruelly under the short ribs, that he was
compelled to fall to the ground, and to give end to his life.

After which happy event of the Giants slaughter, the invincible Champion
Saint George: first gave the honor of his victory to God, in whose power all
his fortune consisted: Then entering the Tower, whereas the Lady presented him
with all manner o^ dillicates, and pure wines: but the English Knight
inspecting some treachery to be hidden in her proffered courtesy, caused the
Lady first to taste of every dainty dish: Likewise of his wine, lest some
violent poison should be therein commixt: So ^^nding all things pure and
halsome as nature required, he suffized his hunger, rested his weary body,
and refreshed his horse: And so leaving the Tower in keeping of the Lady, he
committed his fortune to a new travail: where his reui^ed spirits never
entertained longer rest, but to the refreshing of himself and his horse: So
travailed he through the parts of Grecia, the confines of Phrigia, and so into
the borders of Tartarie, within whose Territories he had not long iournied, but
he approached the sight of the Inchaunted Garden of Ormondine, where S. David
the Champion of Wales had so long slept by Magic Art. No sooner did he behold
the wonderful situation thereof, but he espied Ormondines sword enclosed in
the Inchaunted Rock: where after he had read the superscription written about
the pummell, he assaied to pull it out by strength: where he no sooner put his
hand into the hilt, but he drew it forth with much ease, as though it had been
hung but by a thread of untwisted silk: but when he beheld the glistring,
brightness of the blade, and the wonderful richnes of the pummell, he
accounted ye prize more worth than the Armor of Achilles, which caused Ajax to
run mad, and more richer than Medeas golden Fleece: But by that time Saint
George had circumspectly looked into every secret of the sword, he heard a
strange and dismal voice thunder in the skies, a tyrrible and mighty lumbring
in the earth, whereat both hills and mountains shook, Rocks removed, and
huge Oaks rent into pieces: After this the Gates of the Inchaunted Garden flew
open, whereat incontinently came forth Ormondine the Magitian, with his hair
staring on his head, his eyes sparckling, his cheeks blushing, his hands
quiuering his legs trembling, and all the rest of his body distempered, as
though legions of spirits had incompast him about: he came directly to the
worthy English knight that remained still by the Inchaunted Rock^, from whence
he had pulled the Magitians sword, where after the Nigromancer had
sufficiently beheld his Princely countenance, whereon true honor sat
inthronized, and viewed his portly personage, the Image of true Knighthood, the
which seemed in the Magitians eyes, to be the rarest work that ever nature
framed: First taking the most valiant and magnanimious Champion Saint George of
England by the steely Gauntlet, and with great humility kissed it, then
proffering him the courtesies due unto strangers, which was performed very
graciously: he after conducted him into the Inchaunted Garden, to the Cave
where the Champion of Wales was kept sleeping by the four virgins delightful
songs, and after setting him in a chair of Ebonie, Ormondine thus began to
relate of wonderful things.

Renowned Knight at Arms (said the Nigromancer) Fames worthiest Champion,
whose strange adventures, all Christendom in time to come shall applaude:
therefore be silent till I have told my Tragic tale, for never after this my
tongue shall speak again: The Knight which thou see here wrapped in this
sheet of gold, is a Christian Champion as thou art, sprung from the ancient
feed of Trojan warriors, who likewise attempted to draw this Inchaunted
sword, but my Magic spells so prevailed, that he was intercepted in the
enterprise, and forced ever since to remain sleeping in this Cave: but now the
hour is almost come of his recovery, which by thee must be accomplished: thou
art that aduenterous Champion, whose invincible hand must finish up my detested
life, and send my fleeting soul to draw the fatal Chariot upon the banckes
of burning Acharon: for my time was limited to remain no longer in this
Inchaunted Garden, but until that from the North should come a Knight that
should pull this sword from the Inchaunted Rock, which thou happily have now
performed: therefore I know my time is short, and my hour of destenie is at
hand: what I report write it up in brazen lines, for the time will come when
this discourse shall highly benefit thee. Take heed thou observe three things:
first that thou take to wise a pure maid: next that thou erect a Monument over
thy Fathers grave, and lastly that thou continue a professed foe to the enemies
of Christ Jesus, hearing Arms in the Honor and praise of thy Country. These
things being truly and justly observed, thou shall attain to such honor,
that all the Kingdoms of Christendom shall admire thy dignity* What I speak
is upon no vain imagination sprung from a frantic brain, but pronounced by
the mystical and deep Art of Nigromancie.

These words being no sooner ended, but the most honored and fortunate
Champion of England requested the Magitian to describe his passed fortunes, and
by what means he came first to be governor of that inchaunted garden.

To tell the discourse of mine own life (replied Ormandine) will breed a new
sorrow in my heart, the remembrance whereof will ^end my very soul: but yet
most (Noble Knight) to fulfill thy request, I will force my tongue to declare
what my heart denies to utter: therefore prepare thy ears to entertayne the
wo^^lst tale, that ever any tongue delivered, and so after saint George had a
while sat silent expecting her discourse, the Magitian spoke as follows.

The woeful and tragical discourse pronounced by the Nigromancer Ormondine, of
the misery of his children.
I Was informer times, (so long as fortune smiled upon me) the King and only
commander of Scythia, my name Ormondine: gracte in my youth with two fair
daughters, whom nature had not only made beautiful* but replenisht them with
all the gifts that Art could devise, the elder whose name was Castria, the
fairest maid that ever Scythia brought forth, her eyes like flaming torches to
dazeled the gazers, that like attractiue Adamants, they coniured all eyes to
admire her beauty, amongst a number of knights that were ensnared with her
love: there was one Floridon son to the King of Armenia: equal to her in all
excellent ornaments of nature, a louelier couple never trod on earth, nor
gracte any Princess Court in the whole world.

This Floridon so fervently burned in affection, with the admired Castria, that
he lusted after virginity, and practiced both by policy and fair promises
to enjoy that precious pleasure, which after ^ell to his own destinction: For
upon a time when the mantles of dark night had closed in the light of heaven,
and the whole Court had entertained a silent rest: this lustful Floridon
entered Castrias lodging furthered by her chamber mai^e, where to his hard ha^
he crapped the bud of sweet virginity, and left such a pawn with in her womb,
that before many days were expired, her them began to appear, and the
deceived Lady was constrained to reveal her grief to Floridon: Who in the
mean time had betrothed himself (...) my younger daughter, whose name was
Marcilla, no less beautified with natures gifts, than her elder sister: But
when this unconstant Floridon perceived that her belly began to grow big with
the burden of his unhappy seed, he vpbraided her with shame, laying dishonor
in her dish, calling her strumpet, with many ignominiou^ words, forswearing
himself, never to have committed any such infamous deed, protesting that he
ever scornde to link in woman's ba^des, and counter chamberl^ne a deadly
sting, and a deep infection to the honor of knighthood.

These unkind speeches drove Castria into such extreme passion of mind, that
she with a shamefast look, and blushing cheeks, after this manner revealed
her secrecy unto him.

What knows not Floridon (quoth the Lady) her whom his lust has stained with
dishonor? See see unconstant Knight the pledge of faithles vows, behold the
womb where springes thy lively image, behold the mark which stains my
Fathers ancient house, and sets a shamefaste blush upon my cheeks. When I
behold the company of ^haste virgins, dear Floridon shadow this my shame with
marriage rightes, that I be not accounted a by word to the world, nor that my
Babe in time to come, he termed a base borne child, remember what plighted
promises, what vows and protestations past betwixt us, remember the place and
time of my dishonor, and be not like the furious Tiger, to repay love with
dispite.

At which words Floridon with a wrathful countenance, replied in these
words. Egregious and shameless creature (quoth he) with what brazen face dare
thou out brave me thus: I tell thee Castria, my love was ever yet to follow
Arms, to hear the sound of Drums, to ride upon a nimble Steed, and not to
trace a carpet dance, like Priams son before the lustful eyes of Maenalaus
wife: Therefore begone disturbing strumpet, go sing thy harsh melody in
company of nightly birds, for I tell thee the day will blushe to cover thy
monstrous shame.

Which reproachful speeches being no sooner ended, but Floridon departed her
presence, leaving not behind (...) so much as a kind look: whereat the
distressed Lady, being oppressed with intolerable grief (...) down dead,
not able to speak for a time, but at last recovering her senses she began a new
to complain.

I that was w^nt (quoth she) to walk with Troops of maids, must now
abandon and vtt^rly forsake all companies and seek some secret Cave, wherein I
may ^it for evermore and bewail my lost Uirginitie: If I return unto my
Father, he will refuse me: if to my friends they will be ashamed of me: if
to strangers, they will scorn me: if to my Floridon, oh he denies me, and
accounts my ^ight as ominous as the baleful Crokadiles. Oh that I might in the
shape of a bird, or like the ravished Philomele fill every wood and wilderness
with my dishonor, for now am I neither chaste virgin, nor honest wife, but
shameless strumpet, and the worlds chief scorn: whereat me thinks I see how
virtuous and chaste maidens point, and terms me a viscious dame. Oh
unconstant Floridon! thou did promise to shadow this my fault with
marriage, but vows I see are vain: Thou haste forsaken me, and tied thy
faith unto my sister Marcilla, who must enjoy thy love, because she continu^s
chaste without any spot of dishonor. Oh woe to th^e unconstant knight, thy
flattering eyes deceived me, and thy golden tongue enticed me to commit that
sin, which all the Ocean streams can never wash away: But why stand I relating
thus in vain, the (...) is done, and Floridon will triumph in the spoil of my
virginity, while he lies dallying in my sisters Arms: Nay first the fatal
lights of Funeralles shall mask about his marriage bed, and his bridal blaze,
I Will quench with blood: for I will go unto their marriage Chamber, where as
these hands of mine shall rende my sisters womb, before she shall enjoy the
interest of my bed: rage heart, in steed of love delight in murder, let
vengeance be ever in thy thoughts, until thou haste quenched with blood, the
furies of disloyal love.

Thus complained the woeful Castria, up and down the Court of Scythia, until
the mi^^resse of the night had spent five months* at the end of which time, the
appointe^ marriage of Floridon and Marcilla drew nigh: the thought whereof,
was an endless terror to her heart, and of a more intolerable burden, than the
pains of her womb: the which she girded in so extremely for fear of
suspicion, and partly under color to bring about he^ intended Tragedy, which
was in this bloody manner accomplished and brought about.

The day at last came, whereon Floridon and Marcilla should tie that sacred
knot of marriage, and the Princes and Potentates of Scythia were al present as
witnesses to Hymen's holy rites: In which Honorable assembly, none were more
buster than Castria to beautify her sisters wedding. The Ceremonies b^eing no
sooner perfe^^^ed, and the day spent in all pleasures fitting the Honor of so
great and mighty a train, but Castria requested the use of the Country, which
was this, that ye first night of every maidens marriage, a pure virgin should
lie with the Bride, which honorable tas^^ was committed to Castria: who
provided against the hour appointed, a silver bodkin and hid it secretly in
the trammels of her hair, wherewith she intended to prosecute revenge. The
Brides lodging chamber was appointed far from the hearing of any one, lest
the noise of people should hinder their quiet sleep.

But at last when the hour of her wishes approached, that the Bride should
take lean of the Ladies and maidens that attended her to her Chamber, the new
married Floridon in company of many Scythian knights, committed Marcilla to her
quiet rest, little mistrusting the bloody intent of her sisters mind.

But now behold how every thing fell out according to her desires. The Ladies
and gentle women being no sooner departed, and silence taken possession of the
whole Court, But Castria with her own hands locked the chamber door, and
secretly conuaide the keys under the b^ds head, not perceived by the betrayed
Marcilla: which pore Lady after some few speeches departed to bed: wherein she
was no sooner laid, but a heavy sleep over mastered her senses, whereby her
tongue was forced to give her Sister good night, who as then sat discontented
by her bed side, watching the time wherein she might conveniently inact the
bloody Tragedy: upon a Court table stood two burning Tapers that gave light
to the whole Chamber, which in her conceit seemed to burn bl^w: which fatal
spectakle encouraged her to a speedy performance, and by the light of the two
lamps she unbraced her vestures and stripped her self into her milke-white
smock, having not so much upon her head as a Caul to hold up her golden hair:
After this she took her silver bodkin that before she had secretly hidden in
her hair, and with a wrathful countenance (upon whose brows sat the image
of pale death) she came to her n^we married sister, being then overcome with
a heavy slumber, and with her Bodkin perced her tender breast: who immediately
at the ^^oke thereof, started from her sleep, and gave such a pitiful
^^rike, that it would have w^kened the whole Court, but that the Chamber (...)
far from the hearing of all company, except her bloody minded sister, whose
hand was ready to redouble her fury with a second stroke.

But when Marcilla beheld the sheets and ornaments of her bed bestained with
p^^ple gaze, and from her breast ran streams of Crimson blood, which like to a
fountains trickled from her Iuorie bosom, she breathed forth this earnest
exclamation against the cruelty of Castria.

O sister (said she) has nature harbored in thy breast a bloody mind! What
Fury has incenst thee thus to commit my Tragedy? In what have I (...), or
wherein has my tongue (...)? What cause has been occasion that thy
remorceles hand, against true nati^^^y has converted my joyful Nuptials, to a
woeful Funeral. This is the cause (replied Castria, and therewithal showed
her womb grown big through the burden of her Child) that I have bathed my
hands in thy detested blood.

See, see, Marcilla (said she) the unhappy bed wherein thy accursed husband
oath s^wen his seed, by which my virgins honor (...) for ever stainde: this is
the spot which thy heart blood must wash away, and this is the shame that
nothing but death shall (...): Therefore a sweet revenge, and a present
murder will I likewise commit upon my self, whereby my loathed soul,
incompany of my unborn babe shall wander with thy Ghost along the Stygi^n
lakes.

Which words being no sooner finished, but she violently pierced her own
breast: whereby the two sisters (...) were equally mingled together: but now
Marcilla being the first wounded, and the nearer drawing toward death, she
woefully complained this dying Lamentatio^.

Draw nere (said she) you blazing stars, you earthly Angels and imbrothered
Girls, you lovely Ladies and flourishing Dames of Scythia, behold her woeful
end, whose glor^^^ mounted higher than the elements, behold my marriage bed
which is beautified with Tapestrie, now converted to deaths bloody habitation,
my brave attire to earthly mould, and my Princely Palaces, to Elysium (...),
being a place appointed for those Dames that liude and did true virgins: for
now I feel the pains of death closing my lives windows, and my heart ready
to entertain the stroke of desteni^: Come Floridon come, in steed of arms get
Eagles wings, that in thy bosom I may breath my murdered Ghost: world fare
thou well, I was too proud of thy enticing pleasures: thy Princely pomp, and
all thy glistering ornaments I must for ever bid adue. Father farewell with all
thy masking Train of Courtly Ladies, Knights and Gentlewomen: my death I know
will make thy Palace ^^aths gloomie regiment, and last of all farewell thy
Noble Floridon, for thy sweet sake Marcilla now is murdered.

At the end of which words, the dying Lady being faint with the abundance of
blood that issued from her wounded breast, gave up the Ghost: No sooner had
pale death ceazed upon her ^^eles body, but Castria likewise through (...) of
her wound was ready to entertain the stroke of the fatal sisters who
likewise complained in this manner. Harken you loving Girls (said she) to
you I speak, that knows what endless grief, disloyal and false love br^^des
inconstant minds, the thought whereof is so intolerable to my soul, that it
exceeds the torments of Danaus daughters, that continually filles water into
the bottomless tubs in hell. Oh that my ears had never listened to ^^^fugered
speeches, or never known what Courtly pleasures meant, where beauty is a
bait for every lustful eye: but rather to have liude a Country Less, where
sweet content is harbored, and beauty shrouded under true humility then had
not Floridon bereaved me of my sweet virginity: nor had not this accu^sed hand
committed this cruel murder: but oh I feel my soul passing to Elizi^^
shades, where Crusas shadow, and Didos Ghost has their abiding* thither does
my spirit fly, to be entertained amongst those unhappy Ladies that unconstant
love has murdered: thus Castria not being able to speak any longer, gave a
very grievous sigh, and so bad adue to the world.

But when the morninges sun had chaste away the darksome night, Florido^ who
little mistrusted the tragedy of the two sisters, repaired to the chamber door
with a Consort of skillfull Musicians, where their conspiring h^rmonye sounded
to the walls: and Floridons morninges salutations were spente in vain: for
death so stopped the two Princes ears that no resound of thanks at all
reanswered his words, which caused Floridon to depart thinking them to be a
sleep, and to return with in an hour (...), who with out any company came to
the chamber door where be a gain found all silent: at which suspecting some
further event burst open the door, where being no sooner entered, but he found
the two Ladies w^ltring in purple ^ore: which woeful spectackle presently so
bereaved him of his wits, that like a frantic man he raged up and down, and
in this manner bitterly complained. Oh you immortal powers! open the wrathful
gates of heaven, and in your Justice punish me, for my unconstant love has
murdered two of the brauest Ladies that ever nature framed: revive sweet^
Dames of Scythia and hear m^e speak, that (...) the wofullest wretch that
ever spoke with tongue: If Ghost may here be given for Ghost, dear Ladies take
my soul and live, or if my heart might dwell within your breasts, this hand
shall equally divide it: What are words vain? although my proffer cannot
purchase life, nor recover your breathing spirits again, yet vengeance shall
(...) have: (...) shall (...) my fatal (...), and here (...) bloody breast of
soul, ^hereby my unhappy Ghost shall follow you, through (...) Tartar
gulfes, through burning lakes* and through the low (...) shades of dreadful
Coffitus: gape* gape, (...) earth (...) womb make all our toombes together.

(...) woeful lamentation being no sooner br^athed (...) his sorrowful breast
(...) finished his days, by the s^^^ke of that same accursed ^^^kin, that was
the bloody instrument of the two sisters deaths, the which he found shall
remaining in the remorceles hand of Castria.

Thus have you heard (most worthy Knight) the true Tragedy of three of the
goodliest personages, that ever nature framed: but now with dilligent ears
listen to the unfortunate discourse of mine own misery, which in this unhappy
manner fell out: For no sooner came the ^l^ing ^^^sicke of the murdered
Princes to my ears, but I (...) into such a discontented passion, that I
abandoned my self from company of people, and fate for seven months (...) a
solitary passion lamenting the loss of my Children, (...) weep^ng Niobe,
which was the sorrowfull^st Lady (...) nor lived.

During which time the report of Floridons unhappy Tragedy, was bruted to his
fathers ears, being the sole King of Armenia: whose griefs so exceeded the
bounds of reason, that with all convenient speed the greatest strength Armenia
could make, and in revenge of his sons unhappy murder, entered our
Territories, and with his well approved warrious, subdued our Provinces,
slaughtered our Soldiers, conquered our Captains, slew our Commons, burnt our
Cities, and left our Country villages desolate: whereby when I beheld my
Country ouerspread with famine, fire and sword* three intesti^e plagues
wherewith heaven scourges the sins of the wicked, I was forced for safeguard
of my life to forsake my native habitation and Kingly government, only
committing my fortune (like a (...) Exile) to (...) unknown passages, where
care was (...) companion, and discontent my only soliciter: At last it was my
desteny to ariue in this unhappy place which I supposed to be the walks of
despair, where I had not remained many days in my melancholy passions* but
(...) thought the wary ^awes of deep Auerna op^ned from whence ascended a
most fearful devil, that enticed me to bequeath my fortune to his
disposing, and he would defend me from the fury of the whole world: to which I
presently condescended upon some assurance: Then presently he placed before my
face, this Inchaunted sword, so surely closed in stone, that should never be
pulled out but by the hands of a Christian Knight, and till that task were
performed I should live exempt from all danger, although all the Kingdoms of
the earth assailed me: which task (most aduenterous Champion) thou now haste
performed, whereby I know the hour of my death approaches, and my time of
confusion to be at hand.

This discourse pronounced by the Nigromancer Ormondine was no sooner finished,
but the worthy Champion Saint George heard such a tyrrible rattling in the
skies, and such (...) in the earth, that be exspected some strange event to
follow^ then casting his eyes aside, he saw the Inchaunted Garden to vanish,
and the Champion of Wales to awake from his dead sleep, wherein he had
remained (...): who like one newly risen from a sounds, for a (...) stood
speechles, not able to utter one word, till he beheld the Noble Champion of
England, that steadfastly gazed upon the Nigromancer: who at the vanishing of
the Inchauntment, presently gave a most tyrrible groan and died.

The (...) Champions after many courteous imbrasinges and kind greetings
revealed each to other the strange adventures they had passed, and how Saint
David was bound by the oath of his Knighthood to perform the adventure of
Ormondine: to which Saint George presently condescended, who delivered the
Inchaunted sword, with the Nigromancers head into the hands of Saint David the
which he presently disceuered from his dead body: Here must my weary Muse
leave Saint David travailing with Ormondines ^ead to the Tartarian Emperor,
and speak of the following adventures that happened to Saint George; after his
departure from the Inchaunted Garden.

CHAP. XI.
How Saint George (...) at Tripolie in Barbar^^, where he stole away Sabra the
Kings Daughter of Egip^ from the Blackamore King, and how she was known to
be^ a pure virgin by the mo^ne^ of a Lion, and what happened to him in the same
adventure.

SAint George after the recovery of Saint David, as you heard in the former
Chapter, dispatched his iourny toward Christend^^^, whose pleasant banks he
long desired to behold, and thought every day a year till his eyes enjoyed a
sweet sight of his Native Country England, upon whose Chalkey cliffes he had
not tread in many a weary Summers day: therefore committing his journey to a
fortunate success, trauailde through many a dangerous country: where the
people were not only of a bloody disposition given to all manner of wickedness,
but the s^yle greatl^ anoyed with wild Beasts, through which he could not well
travail without danger: therefore he carried continually in one of his
hands* a weapon ready^ charged to (...) with the Heathen people if occasion
should serve, and in the other hand, a bright burning blaze of fire, to defend
him from the fur^e of the wild Beasts, (...) by violence they assailed him.

Thus in extreme danger travailed the Noble and aduenterous Champion Saint
George, till ^ee ari^ed in the Territories of o^ Barbary, in which Country he
purposed for a time to remain, and to seek for some noble atchiuement,
whereby his (...) ^ight be (...) and his honored (...) through all the King
(...) of the world* and b^^ing encouraged with this Princely ^^gitation, the
Noble Champion of England, climbed to the top of a huge mountain, where he
unlocked his Beuer, which before had not been lifted up in many a day, and
beheld the wide and spacious Country how it was beautified with lofty Pines,
and a^^rnde with many goodly Palaces: But amongst the number of the Towns and
Cities which the English Champion beheld, there was one which seemed to exceed
the rest, both in s^ituation and brave buildinges, which he supposed to be the
chiefest City in all the Country, and the place where the King usually kept
his Court: to which place S. George intended to travail, not to furnish
himself with any needful thing, but to accomplish some Honorable adventure,
whereby his worthy deeds might be enternized in the Books of memory: So
after he had descended from the top of the steepy mountain, and had travailed
in a low valley about some two or three miles, he approached an old and almost
ruinated Hermitage over grown with moss* and other wither^d weeds: before
the entry of which Hermitage sat an ancient Father upon a round stone*
taking the heat of the warm Sun, which cast such a comfortable brightness upon
the Hermits face, that his white ^eard seemed to glister like silver, and his
head to exceed the whitelies of the Northen (...) Of whom after Saint George
had given the due reverence that belonged unto age, demanded the name of the
Country, and the City he travailed to, and under what King the Country was
governed: to whom the courteous Hermit thus replied.

Most Noble knight, for so I g^sse you are by your (...) and outward appearance
(laid the Hermit) you are now in the confines of Barbary, the City oppos^^e
before your eyes is called Tripolie, (...) the (...) of Almidor the black King
of Moroco: in which City he now keeps his Court, attended on by as many
valiant Knights, as any King under the ^ope of heaven.

At which words the Noble Champion of England suddenly started, as though he
had intelligence of some ^al^full news, which d^epely discontented his
Princely mind, his heart was presently incenst with a speedy revenge, and his
mind so extremely thirsted after Almidors Tragedy, that he could scarce make
answer again to the Hermit^ words: But yet brideling his fury, the angry
Champion spoke in this manner.

Grave father (said he) through the treachery of that accursed King, I endured
seven years imprisonment in Persia, where I suffered both hunger, cold, and
extreme misery: but if I had my good sword Aaskalon, and my trusti^ Pa^^ray
which I lost in the Egiptian Court, where remains my betrothed Love the Kings
Daughter of Egypt, I would be revenged upon the head of proud Almidor, were
his Guard more stronger than the Army of Xerxes, whose multitudes drank
Rivers dry: Why said the Hermit, Sabra the Kings Daughter of Egypt is now
Queen of Barbary, and since her Nuptials were solemnly performed in
Tripolie, are seven Summers fully finished.

Now by the Honor of my Country England (replied Saint George) the place of
my Nativity, and as I am true Christian Knight, these eyes of mine shall never
close, nor this undaunted heart never entertain one thought of peace, nor this
unconquered hand receive one minutes rest, until I have obtained a fight of
that sweet Princess, for whose sake I have endured so long imprisonment:
therefore dear Father be thus kind to a trauailer, as to exchange thy
clothing, for this my rich furniture and lusty Steed which I brought from the
Sultan of Persia: for in the Habit of a Palmer I may enjoy the fruition of her
sight without suspicion: otherwise I must needs be constrained by violence,
with my trusty Fauchion to make way into her Princely Palace: where I know
she is attended on most carefully by (...) valiant and courageous Champions:
therefore courteously deliver me thy Hermit^ gown, and I will (...) with my
Horse and Armor, this Box of precious Jewels* which when the grave Hermi^^
behold, he humbly thanked the Noble Champion, and so with all the speed* they
could possibly ma^e, exchaung^^ apparel* and in this manner departed.

The Palmer being glad, repaired to his Hermitage with Saint Georges furniture,
and Saint George in the Palmers apparel travailed toward the City of
Tripolie: who no sooner came near to the sumptuous buildinges of the Court,
but he espied a hundred pore Palmers kneeling at the Gate, to whom Saint
George spoke in this manner, not with lofty and Heroical spe^ches, beseeming
a Princely Champion: but with meek and humble word like to an aged Palmer.

My dear brethren (said the Champion) for what intent remain you here, or
what exspect you from this Honorable Court.

We abide here (answered the Palmers) for an (...) which the Queen once a day
has given this seven years, for the sake of an English Knight, named Saint
George, whom she affects above all the Knights in the world. But when will
this be given (said Saint George*)

In the afternoon (replie^ the Palmers) until which time upon our bended
knees we hourly pray for the good Fortune of that most Noble English Knight:
which speeches so highly pleased the valiant minded Champion Saint George,
that he thought every minute a whole year, till the Golden (...) had past
away the middle part of Heaven: for it was but newly risen from Auroraes bed,
whose light as* ^t with a (...) radiant blush distained the Eastern sky.

During which time the most valiant and Magnan^^^ous Champion Saint George of
England, one while remembering of the extreme misery he endured in Persia for
her sa^e, whereat (...) many (...) tears from (...) another (...) thinking upon
the tyrible (...) a^^ail^ he had (...) burning Dragon in Egypt, where (...)
redeemed her from the fatal (...) of death: But at (...) it was his chance to
walk about the Court, beholding the sumptuous buildings, and the curious
engraven works by the atchiuement of man bestowed upon the glistering windows:
where he board to h^s exceeding pleasure the heavenly voice of his beloved
Sabra descending from a window upon the West side of the Palace* where she
warbled forth this sorrowful Dittie upon her Iuorie Lute.

Dye all desires of joy and Courtly pleasures,
Dye all desires of Princely Royalty:
Dye all desires of wealth and worldly treasures,
Dye all desires of stately Majesty:
Since he is gone that pleased most mine eye,
For whom I wish ten thousand times to dye.
O that mine eyes might never cease to weep,
O that my tongue might ouermore complain:
O that my soul might in his bosom sleep,
For whose sweet sake my heart does live in pain:
In woe I sing with ^^inish tears besp^en^,
Outworne with grief ^^^sumde with discontent.
In time my sig^^s will dim the heaven fair light*
Which hourly (...) from my tormented br^st.
Except Saint George that noble English Knight.
With safe return abandon m^ (...)
Then careful cries* shall end with deep annoy,
Exchaunging wee^^^g tears for smiling joy.
Before the face of heaven this vow I make,
Though unkind friends has wed me to their will*
And Crownde me Queen (...) to s^a^e,
That in despite of them shall (...) still.
Bear wa^es heaven and earth what I have said,
For Georges sake I live and die a maid.
Which sorrowful Dittie being (...) so^ner ended (...) she departed the
window, quite from the hearing of the English Champion that stood gazing up to
the casements, preparing his ears to enterta^^e her sweet^ tuned mellody the
second time, but his expectation was in vain: whereat he grew into more
perplexed passions, than A^u^as when he had lost his beloved Crus^ amongst the
^^ruite of the Graecians: sometimes wishing the day to vanish in a moment, that
the hour of his benevolence might approach, other times comforting his sad
cogitations with the remembrance of her true chastetie and long continued
constancy for his sake: comparing her love unto Thisbes, her chaste^^e to
Dianaes, and her constancy to Penelopes.

Thus spent he the (...) away* till he (...) began to decline to the western
parts of the earth, and the Palmers should reca^e her w^nted benevolence:
against which time the English Champion placed himself in midst of the
Palmers, that expected the wished hour of her coming, who at the time
appointed came to the Palace (...) vesture, like Poli^^a King Priams D^^ght^^
(...) she went to sacrifice: her hair after (...) almost (...), to the color
of silver, thee and (...) her long (...) (to whose excellent fairenes all the
^adies in the world did sometimes yield (...)) was now stained with the
Pearled dew that trickled down her cheeks: where after the sorrowful Queen
had justly numbered the Palmers, and with vigilant eyes beheld the Princely
countenance of saint George, her color began to exchange from red to white,
(...) white to read, as though the Lilly and the Rose had (...) for
superiority, but yet coloring her cogitations under a smooth browe, first
delivered her alms to the Palmers, then taking saint George aside, to whom
she thus kindly began to cou^er: Palmer (said sh^^) th^^ resemblest (...)
Prince^^ (...), and courteous behavior, that thrice honored Champion of
England, for whose sake I have daily bestowed my (...) for this seven years,
his (...) George, his fame I know thou have heard reported in many ^ country,
to be the brauest Knight that ^uer buckled steeled He^^^t, therefore for his
sake will I grace thee with the chiefest honor in this Court: In steed of thy
(...), I will cloth thee in purple sil^e, and in steed at thy ^ban staff^, thy
hand shall wielde the richest sword that ever Princely eye beheld, to whom
the Noble Champion saint George, replied in this courteous manner.

I have heard (quoth he) the Princely atchieuements and magnanimious adventures
of that honored English Knight which you so dearly affect, bruted through
many a Princes Court: and how for the love of a Lady he has endured along
imprisonment, from whence he never looks to return but to spe^^ the remnant
of his days in lasting misery ^ At which words the (...) let fall from her
eyes such a shower of Pearled tears, and sent such a number of strained sighs
from her grieved heart, that her sorrow seemed to exceed the Queens of
Carthage, when sh^^ had for ever l^st the sight of her beloved Lord: But the
brave minded Champion saint George, purposed no longe^^ to continue secret,
but with his discovery to convert her sorrowful means to smiling ^oy: And so
^^sting off his Palmers weed, acknowledged himself to the Queen, and
therewithal showed the half Ring, whereon was engraven this Pos^e, ardeo
affectione: which Ring in (...) (...) (as you may read before) they had most
equally divided betwixt them, to be kept in remembrance of their plighted
faithes: which unsuspected sight highly pleased the beauteous Sabra, and her
joy so exceeded the bounds of reason, that she could not speak one word, but
was constrained through the new conceived pleasure, to breathe a sad sigh or
two into the Champions bosom: who like a true innobled Knight, entertained her
with a loving kiss: But after these two lovers had fully disco^rsed each to
other the secrets of their souls: Sabra how she continued for his love a pure
Uirgin, through the secret nature of a golden chain steept in Tigers blood,
the which she wore seven times doubled about her Iuorie neck: took him by
the portly han^, and led him to her husbands stable, where stood his approved
Palfray, which she for seven years had ^ed with her own hands: who no
sooner espied the return of his master, but he grew more prouder of his
presence, than Bucephalus of the Macedonian Monarchs, when he had most
joyfully returned in triumph from any victorious Conquest.

Now is the time (said the excellent Princess Sabra) that thou may seal up
the quittance of our former love therefore with all convenient speed, take
thy approved Palfray, with thy trusty sword Askalon, which I will presently
deliver into thy hands, and with all celeritie convey me from this unhappy
country, for the King my husband, with all his aduenterous Champions, are now
rode forth on hunting, whose absence will ^urther ^ur flight: But if thou stay
till his return, it is not a hundred of the hardiest Knights in the world can
bear me from this accursed Palace. At which word Saint George having a
mind gra^^e with all excellent virtues, replied in this manner.

Thou know my divine Mistress, that for thy love I would endure as many
dangers, as Jason suffered in the I Will of Calcos, so I might at last enjoy the
pleasures of true Uirginitie: But how can thou remain a pure m^ide. when
thou haste been a Crowned Queen for these (...) years, and every night
haste entertained a King unto thy bed? If thou find me not a true maid in
all that thou can say or do, ^end me back again hither unto my (...),
whose bed I account more loathsome, th^n (...) ^f snakes, and his fight more
^^inous than the Crocodiles: As for the Moroco Cr^wne, which by force of (...)
was set upon my head, I wish that it might be turned into a blaze of quenchles
^^er, so it might not endanger my body, and for the name of Queen, I account
it a vain (...), for I had rather be thy English Lady, than the greatest
Empress in the world.

At which speeches (saint George) willingly condiscended, and with all speed
purposed to go into England* and therewithal sealed an assurance with as
sweet a kiss, as Paris gave to lovely Hellena when she consented to forsake
her native count^y, and to travel from her husband Menelaus into Troy: So
loosing no time lest delay might breed danger: Sabra furnished her self with
sufficient treasure, and speedily delivered to saint George his trusty sword,
which she had kept seven years for his sake, with all the furniture belonging
to his approved Steed, who no sooner received her pr^ffered gifts, which he
accounted dearer than the Asian Monarchy, but presently sadled his horse, and
beautified his strong limbs with rich caparison. In the mean time Sabra
through fair speeches and large premises, obtained the good will of an
Euenuke, that was appointed for her guard in the Kings absence, to accompany
them in their intended travails, and to serve as a trusty guide if occasion
required: which with the Lady stood ready at the Champions commandment: who
no sooner had furnished himself with sufficient habilliments of war*
belonging to so dangerous ^ journey, but he pla^^^ his beloved Mistress upon a
gentle Palfray, which always kneeled down until she had ascended the
saddle: And likewise her Euenuke was mounted upon another Steed, whereon all
their rich furniture with costly Jewels and other treasure was borne:

So these thr^e worthy Personages committed their travels to the guide of
fortune, who preserved them from the dangers of pursuing enemies, which at the
Kings return from h^^ting, followed amayne to every Port and Ha^^n that
divided the kingdom of Barbary from the Confines of Christendom: But kind
destenie so guided their steps that they travailed another way, contrary to
their e^spectations: for when they looked to ariue upon the Territories of
Europe, they were cast upon the fruitful banks of Graecia: in which Country
we must tell what happened to the three traua^lers, and omit the vain pursuit of
the Moroco Knights: the wrathful melancholy of the King, and the bruted rumor
that was amongst the Commons of the Queens departure: who caused the
L^rum-belles to be rung out, and the Beacons to be set on fire, as though the
enemy had entered their Country.

But now Melpomine, thou Tragic Sister of the Muses, report what unlucky
cro^^^s happened to these three trauailers in the Con^^nes of Graecia, and how
their smiling C^m^die was by ill fortune turned into a weepin^ Tragedy: For
when they had iournied some three or four^ Leagues over many a loftieh^ll, they
approached into a mighty and fearful Wilderness: through which the ways
seemed so long, and the (...) exceedingly glo^ed, that Sabra what for wearines
in travail, and the extreme heat of the day, was constrained to res^ under
the shelter of a mighty Oak, whose branches had not been lopt in many a
year: where she had not long remained, but her heart began to fain^ for
hunger, and her color that was but a little before as (...) as any Ladies in
the world, began to change for want of some drink: whereat the famous
Champion Saint George half dead with grief, comforted her as well as he
could after this manner.

Faint not my dear Lady (said the Champion) here i^ that goodsword, that once
preserved thee from the burning Dragon, and before thou die for want of
sustenance, it shall make wa^ to every corner of this wilderness: where I will
either kill some venis^n to refreshe thy hungry stomach, or make my toomb in
the bowels of some monstr^us beast: therefore abide thou here under this tree
in company of thy faithful Euenuke, till I return either with the flesh of
some wild Dear, or else some ^lying Bird to refreshe thy spirits to a new
travail.

Thus left he his beloved Lady with the Euenuke to the mercy of the woods, and
travailed up and down the Wilderness, till he espied a Heard of faited Dear,
from which company he ^^^gled out the fairest, and like a tripping Satire
coursed her to death: then with his keen edged sword cut out the goodlyest
haunch of venison, that ever Hunters eye beheld: which gi^t he supposed to be
most welcome to his beloved Lady. But mark what happened in his absence to the
two weary trauailers abiding under the ^ra: where after Saint Georges
departure, they had not long sit^^n discoursing, one while of their long
iournies, another while of their safe delivery from the Blackamoore King,
spending the stealing time away with many an ancient story: but there
appeared out of a thicket two huge and m^nstrous Lions, which came directly
pacing toward the two trauailers: which fearful spectakle wh^^ Sabra
beheld, having a heart oue^charged with the extreme fear of death, wholly
committed her soul into the ^ands of God, and her body almost famished for
food, to suff^ce the hunger of the two furious Lions: who by the appointment
of heaven, pro^^^red not so much as to lay their wrathful paws upon the
smallest part of the Ladies garment: but with eger mood assailed the Euenuke
till they had buried his body in the empty vaults of their hungry bowels: then
with their teeth lately imbrued in blood, r^nt the Euenukes Steed (...) a
thousand pieces: which being done they came to (...) Lady which sat quaking
^^lfe dead with fear, and like two Lambs couched their (...) upon her la^:
where with her hands she stroked down their brisled hair, not daring almost
to breath, till a heavy sleep had ouer-mastered their refreshed senses: by
which time the Princely minded Champ^on Saint George returned with a piece of
venison upon the point of his sword: who at that unexpected fight, stood in a
maze whether it were best to fly for sauegard of his life, or to venture his
fortune against the furious Lions: But at last the love of his Lady so
incouragde him to a forwardnes, which he beheld quaking before the dismal gates
of death: So laying down his v^nison, he presently like a victorious Champion,
sheathed his approved ^auchion most furiously into the bowels of one of the
Lions. Sabra kept the other sleeping in her lap till his prosperous hand like
wise dispatched him: which adventure being performed, he first thanked heaven
for the victory, and then in this kind manner saluted his Lady.

Now Sabra (said he) I have by this sufficiently prou^^ thy true virginity:
for it is the nature of every Lion, be he never so furious, not to harm the
unspotted virgin, but humbly to lay his bri^^ed head upon a ma^dens lap.
Therefore divine Paragon; thou art the worlds chief wonder for love and
chastetie* whose honored virtues shall ring as far as ever Phoebus lends his
light, and whose constancy I will mainetaine in every Land where as I co^^, to
be the truest under the cercuit of the Sun: At which word he cast his eye
aside, and beheld the bloody spe^takle of the Euenukes Tragedy, which ^y Sabra
was woefully discoursed, to the great grief of Saint George: whose sad ^ighes
served for a doleful knell to bewail his vnt^^eles death: but having a Noble
mind not subject to vain sorrow, where al hope of life is past, ceased his
grief, (...) pr^pared the venison in readiness for his Ladies repast: which in
this order was dressed.

He had in his pocket a fire-looke, wherewith he stroke fire* and kindled it
with sun-(...), and increased the (...) with other dry (...) he gathered in
the Wilderness: against which they roasted the venison and s^ff^^ed themselves to
their own contentments. After which joyful repast, these two Princely persons
set forward to their wonted travails, whereby the happy guide of heaven ^o
conducted their steps, that before many days passed, they arrived in the
Grecian Court, even upon that day when the marriage of the Grecian Emperor
should be solemnly holden: which Royal Nuptials in former times had bin
bruted into every Nation in the world, as well into Europe as Africa and Asia:
At which Honorable marriage the brauest Knights that ever liude on earth were
present: for golden fame had bruted the report (...) of to the ears of the
seven Champions: into Theslie to saint Dennis the Champion of France, there
remaining with his beauteous Eglantine: into Ciuillia to saint James the
Champion of Spain, where he remained with his lovely Celestine: to saint
Anthony the Champion of Italy then travailing in the borders of Scythia with
his Lady Rossalinde: likewise to saint Andrew the Champion o^ Scotland: to
saint Pattricke the Champion of Ireland: and to saint David the Champion of
Wales: who achieved many memorable adventures in the Kingdom of Tarta^ie as
you have heard before discoursed at large.

But now Fame and smiling Fortune consented to make their Knightly
atchiuement^ to shine in the eyes of the whole world: therefore by the
conduction of Heaven, they generally arrived in the Grecian Emperors Court: Of
whose Tilts and Tournaments there in performed, to the honor of his Nuptials,
my weary Muse is bound to discourse.

CHAP. XII.
How the seven Champions arrived in Graecia at the Emperors Nuptials, where
they performed many Noble atchiuements, and how after open Wars was
proclaimed against Christendom by the discovery of many Knights, and how
every Champion departed into his own Country.

TO speak of the number of Knights that assembled in the Grecian Court
together, were a labor over tedious* requiring the pen of a second Homer:
Therefore will I omit the Honorable frame of Knights and Ladies that attended
him to the Church: their costly garments and glistring ornaments, exceeding
the Royalty of Heccuba the beauteous Queen of Troy* Also I pass over the
beauteous banquets: the Honorable services and delicious cheer that
beautified the Emperors Nuptials: with the statelye Maskes and Courtly
daunces, performed by many Noble personages, and chiefly discourse of the
Knightly atchiuements of the seven Champions of Christendom, whose honorable
proceedings, and magnanimious Encounters has deserved a golden pen to
relate: for after some few days spent in Chamber sports, to the great pleasure
of the Grecian Princes: the Emperor presently proclaimed (...) ^^usting to
be holden for the space of seven (...) in the honor of his marriage, and
appointed for his names (...) Champions the seven Christian Knights: whose
(...) were not known by any one except their own attendants.

Against the appointed day the Tournaments should begin, the Emperor caused a
wonderful large frame of timber work to be erected: whereon the Empress
and her Ladies might stand for the better view of the Tilters, and at pleasure
behold the Champions Encounters m^st Nobly performed in the Honor of their
Mistresses: likewise in the compass of the Li^^es were pitched seven Tents of
seven several colors, wherein the seven Champions might remain till the
sound of silver Trumpets summoned them to appear.

Thus every thing prepared in readiness fitting so great a Royalty: the Princes
and Ladies placed in their seats: the Emperor with his new married Empress
invested on their lofty throanes strongly guarded with a hundred Armed Knights,
the Kings Harrolds solemely proclaimed the Tournaments, which in this most
Royal manner began.

The first day Saint Dennis of France was appointed chief Champion against
all comers, who was called by the title of the golden Knight, who at the
sound of the Trumpet entered the Lists: his Tent was of the color of the
Marigold, upon the top an artificial Sun framed, that seemed to beautefie
the whole assembly: his Horse of an Iron Gray, gra^te with a spangled plume of
feathers: before him rode a Page in purple silk, bearing upon his crest three
golden Fl^re-d^-luces, which did signify his Arms: Thus in this Royal manner
entered Saint Dennis the Listes: where after he had traced twice or thrice up
and down to the open view of the whole company, he prepared himself in
readiness to begin the Tournament: against whom ran many Grecian Knights,
which were ^oyled by the French Champion, to the wonderful admiration of all
the beholders: but to be brief, he so worthelie behaved himself, and with
such fortitude, that the Emperor applauded him for the brauest Knight in all
the world.

Thus in great Royalty to the exceeding pleasure of the Emperor, was the
first day spent, till the dark Evening caused the Knights to break off
company, and repair to their nights repose: But the next Morning no sooner did
Phoebus show his splendant brightness, but the King of Harrolds under the
Emperor, with a noise of Trumpets awaked the Champions from their silent
sleep, who with all speed prepared for the second days exercise. The chief
Champion appointed for that day, was the victorious Knight saint James of
Spain: which (after the Emperor with his Empress had seated themselves with a
stately train of beautiful Ladies) entered the Listes upon a Spanish Gennet
betrapt with rich Caparison, his Tent was pitched directly over against the
Emperors Throane, which was of the color of quicksilver, whereon was
portrayed many excellent devices: before the Tent attended four Squiers,
bearing four several scutchions in their hands, whereon were curiously
painted the four Elements: likewise he had the title of the silver Knight, who
behaved himself no less worthy of all Princely commendations, than the French
Champion the day before: The third day saint Anthony of Italy was chief
challenger in the Turnanament* whose Tent was of the color of the Skies, his
Steed furnished with costly Habilliments: his Armor after the Barbarian
manner, his shield plated round about with steel, whereon was painted a golden
Eagle in a field of blew: which signified the ancient Arms of Rome: likewise
he had the Title of the Azurde Knight, whose matchless Chivalry for that
day, wan the Prize from all the Grecian Knights, to the great reoysing of his
Lady Rossalinde, the King of Sycils Daughter, that still remained in Pages
a^tyre, wherein (for the dear love she bore saint Anthony) disguisedly stole
from the Court, whose discovery shall hereafter be expressed: The fourth day
by the Emperors appointment, the valiant and worthy Knight saint Andrew of
Scotland obtained that Honor, as to be chief challenger for the Turnament:
his Tent was framed in the manner of a ship swimming upon the waves of the
Sea, environed about with Dolphins Tritous, and many strange contrived
Mearemaides: upon the top stood the picture of Neptune, the God of the
Seas, bearing in his hand a Streamer, where on was wrought in crimson silk a
corner Cross, which seemed to be his countries Arms, he was called the red
Knight, because his horse was covered with a bloody vale: his worthy
atchiuements obtained such favor in the Emperors eyes, that he threw him his
silver Gauntlet which was prized at a thousand Portegues, and with his own
hands conducted him to a rich Pauilion, where after his noble encounters he
enjoyed a sweet repose: The fifth day saint Pattricke of Ireland, as chief
Champion entered the Lists, upon an Irish Hobbie, covered with a val^ of green,
attended on by six siluane Knights: every one bearing upon his shoulder a
blooming tree: his Tent resembled a summers bower, at the entry whereof stood
the picture of Flora, beautefied with a wreath of sweet smelling Roses: he was
named the green Knight, whose worthy prowess so daunted the defendants, that
before the Turnament began they gave him the honor of the day: upon the sixth
day the Heroical and Noble minded Champion of Wales obtained such favor at
the Emperors hands, that he was likewise chief challenger: who entered the
Lists upon a Tartarian Palfray, covered with a vale of black, to signify a
black and Tragical day should befall to those Grecian Knights that durst
approve his invincible fortitude: his Tent was pitched in the manner and form
of a Castle in the west side of the Listes: before the entry whereof, hung a
golden shield: when (...) was lively portraied a silver Griffon rampant upon
a golden Helmet, which signified the ancient Arms (...) of Britain: his
Princelye atchiuements, not only obtained due commendations at ^he Emperors
hands, but of the whole assembly of Grecian Ladies, whereby they applauded
him to be the most Noblest Knight that ever shiuered Lance, and the most
fortunates Champion that ever entered into the Grecian Court: upon the
seventh and last day of these Honorable Tournaments and most Noble
proceedinges, the famous and valiant Knight at Arms saint George of England as
chief challenger entered the Listes, upon a ^able colored Steed, betrapt with
bars of burnisht gold, his forehead beautefied with a gorgeous plume of
purple feathers, from whence hung many pendants of gold, his Armor of the
purest Lidian steel, nailed fast together with silver plates, his Helmet
engraven very curiously, beset with Indian Pearl, and Jasper stones: before
his breast plate hung a silver Table in a dammaske scarf, whereon was pictured
a Lion rampant in a bloody field, bearing three golden Crowns upon his head,
before his Tent stood an Inorie Chariot guarded by twelve coleblacke Negars,
wherein his beloved Lady and Mistrsse Sabra, sat invested upon a silver Globe
to behold the Heroical Encounters of her most Noble and Magnanimious ^hampion
saint George of England: his Tent was as white as the Swannes feathers,
glistring against the Sun, supported by four ^eyntles Elephants framed of the
purest brass, about his Helmet he tied a wreath of Uirgins hair, where hung
his Ladies glove, which he wor^^^ maintain her excellent gifts of nature to
exceed al (...) on the earth. These costly habilliments ravished the
beholders with such unspeakable pleasure, that they stood gazing at his
furniture, not able to withdraw their eyes from so heavenly a sigh^: But when
they beheld his victorious Encounters against the Grecian Knights, they
supposed him to be the (...) tamer of that seven hea^ed monster that clambred
(...) the elements, offering to pull Jupiter from his throne. His ^^eede never
gave Encounter with any Knight, but he tumbled horse and man to the ground,
where they lay for a time bereaft of sense. The Turnament endured for that day,
from the Suns rising, till the cole black Euenings Star appeared: in which
time he conquered five hundred of the hardiest Knights then living in Asia, and
shiuered a thousand Lances, to the wonderful admiration of the beholders.

Thus were the seven days brought to end by the seven worthy Champions of
Christendom, in reward of whose Noble atchieuements the Grecian Emperor
(being a man that highly favored knightly proceedinges, gave them a golden
tree with seven branches to be divided equally amongst them. Which Honorable
Prize they conuayed to saint Georges Pauilion, where in dividing the branches,
the seven Champions discovered themselves each to other, and by what good
fortune they arrived in the Grecian Court, whose long wished sights so rejoiced
their hearts, whereby they accounted that happy day of meeting, the ioyfullest
day that ever they beh^ld: But now after the Tournaments were fully ended, and
the Knights res^ed themselves some few days, recovering their wonted agillitie
of body, they fell to a new exercise of pleasure: not appearing in glistring
Armor before the Tilt, nor following the loud sounding Drums and silver
Trumpets, but spending away the time in Courtly daunces amongst their beloved
Ladies and Mistress^s, in more Royalty than the Phrigian knights, when they
presented the Paragon of Asia with an Enchanted ^aske. There wanted no
inspiring Music to delight their ears, no heavenly Sonets to ravish their
senses, nor no curious daunces to please their eyes. Sabra she was the
Mistress of the Revels: who gra^^e the whole Court with her excellent beauty,
which seemed to exceed the rest of the Ladies, as far as the M^^ne
surpasses her attending Stars in a frostie night: and when she daunst, she
seemde like Thetis tripping on the silver sands, with whom the Sun did fall in
love: and if she chaunst to smile, the cloudy elements would clear and drop
down heavenly dew, as though they mournde for love. There likewise remained in
the Court, the six Scythian Uirgins, that in former times lived in the shape of
Swans, which were as beautiful Ladies as ever eye beheld: also many other
Laidies attended the Empress, in whose companies the seven Champions daily
delighted: sometimes discoursing of amorous conceits: other times delighting
themselves with sweet tuned Music: then spending the day in banqueting,
reuelling, dancing, and such like pastimes, not once iniuring their true
betrothed Ladies. But their Courtly pleasures continued not long, for they were
suddenly dashed with a present news of open Wars proclaimed against
Christendom, which fell out contrary to the expectations of the Christian
Knights. There arrived in the Grecian Emperors Palace, a hundred Harrolds of
a hundred several Provinces, which proclaimed utter defiance to all Christian
kingdoms by these words.

We the high and mighty Emperors of Asia and Africa, great commanders both
of land and seas, proclaim by general consent of all the Eastern Potentates,
utter ruin and destruction to the Kingdoms of Christendom, and to all those
Nations where any Christian Knights are harbored: First the Sultan of Persia
in revenge of a bloody slaughter done in his Palace, by an English Champion:
Ptolomie the Egiptian King in revenge of his daughter violently taken away by
the said knight: Almidor the black King of Moroco in revenge of his Queen
likewise taken away by the said English Champion: The great Governor of
Thessaly in revenge of his daughter taken away by a French Knight: The King of
Jerusalem in revenge of his daughter taken away by a Spanish Knight: The
Tartarian Emperor in revenge of his Son the County Palatine, slain by the
unhappy hand of the Champion of Wales: The Sicillian Monarke in revenge of his
vain travail after his seven daughters, now in the keeping of certain
Christian Knights: in revenge of which injuries, all the Kingdoms from the
furthest part of Prester John's Dominions to the borders of the red Seas, has
set down their hands and seals to be ayders in this bloody War.

This Prolamation being no sooner ended, but the Grecian Emperor likewise
consented to their bloody determination, and thereupon gave speedy commandment
to muster up the greatest strength that Graecia could afforde, to join with
the Pagans, to the utter ruin and confusion of Christendom: which bloody
edict, or rather inhumane Judgment pronounced by the accursed Infidels,
compelled the Christian Champions to a speedy departure, and every one to
haste into his own country, there to provide for the Pagans entertainment: So
after due considerations the seven Champions departed from Graecia in company
of their betrothed Ladies: who chose rather to live in the bosoms of their
husbands, than in the arms of their misbeleeuing Parents: where after some few
days they arrived in the spacious bay of Portingale, in which Haven they vowed
by the Honor of true Knighthood, to meet again within six months ensuing:
there to conioyne all their Christian Armies into one Legion: upon which
plighted resolution the worthy Champions departed one from another: Saint
George into England: Saint Dennis into France: Saint James into Spain: Saint
Anthony into Italy: Saint Andrew into Scotland: Saint Pattrick into Ireland:
Saint David into Wales: whose pleasant banks they had not beheld in many a
year before: where their entertainments were as Honorable as their hearts
desired: But to speak of the mustring up of Soldiers in every Christian
Kingdom, and what strength arrived at the appointed time in the bay of
Portingale, shall be discoursed in the sequel of this History, and how
troublesome wars ouerspread the whole earth, where the Heroical deeds of
these Noble Champions shall at large be discribed: Also of the ^uerthrow of
many Kings, and Kingdoms, ruins of Towns, and Cities, and the decay of many
flourishing Commonweals: Likewise of the bloody Tragedies of many unchristian
Princes: whereat the heavens will mourn to see the effusion of blood trickle
from the breasts of murdered Infants, the heaps of slaughtered Damsels
trampled to pieces by soldiers horses, and the streets of many a City
sprinkled with the blood of reverent age: Therefore gentle Reader accept of
this my labor with a smooth brow and a kind countenance, and my weary Muse
shall never rest, till I have finished the true History of these Heroical
Champions.

CHAP. XIII.
How the seven Champions of Christendom arrived with their Troops in the bay
of Portingale, the number of the Christian Armies, and how Saint George made an
Oration to his Soldiers.

AFter the seven Champions of Christendom arrived in their Native Countries,
and by true reports had blazed abroad to every Princes ear the bloody
resolution of the Pagans, and how the Provinces of Africa and Asia, had
mustered up their forces to the invasion of Europe. All Christian Kings then
at the entreaty of the Champions, appointed mighty Armies of well approved
soldiers both by sea and land, to intercept the Infidels wicked intention:
likewise by the whole consent of Christendom, the Noble and Fortunate Champion
of England saint George, was appointed chief General, and principal leader
of the Armies, and the other six Champions elected for his Council, and
chief assistants in all attempts that appertained either to the benefit of
Christendom, or the furtherance of their fortunate proceedings. This Honorable
war so fired the hearts of many youthful Gentlemen, and so encouraged the
minds of every common Soldier, that some morgagde their lands, and at their
own proper charges furnished themselves: Some sold their Patrimonies to serve
in this Honorable wars: and other some forsook Parents, Kindred, Wife,
Children, friends and acquaintance, and without constraint of pressing, offered
themselves to follow so Noble a General, as the renowned Champion of England,
and to spend their blood in the just quarrel of their Native Country. To be
brief, one might behold the streets of every Town and City throughout
all the Dominions of Europe, beautefied with Troops of Soldiers, which
thirsted after nothing but Fame and Honor. Then the joyful sound of thundering
Drums, and the echoes of silver Trumpets summoned them to Arms, that followed
with as much willingness, as the Graecians followed Agamemnon to the woeful
overthrow of Troy: for by that time the Christian Champions had sported
themselves in the bosoms of their kind Mistresses* the forward Captains
taken leave of their Courtly pastimes, and the willing Soldiers bidden adue to
their friends and acquaintance, the spring had covered the earth with a new
liuerie: which was the appointed time, the Christian Armies should meet in
Portingale, there to conioyne their several Troops into one Legion: which
promise caused the Champions to bid adue to their Native Countries, and with
all speed to buckle on their furnitures, and to hoyst up sails: where after a
short time, the wind with a calm and prosperous gale, cast them happily into
the bay of Portingale. The first that arrived into that spacious Haven, was the
Noble Champion saint George, with a hundred thousand of courageous English
Soldiers, whose forwardnes betokened a fortunate success, and their willing
minds a joyful victorie^. His Army being set in Battle ray, seemed to
counteruaile the number of the Macedonian Soldiers, wherewith worthy Alexander
conquered the Western world: his Horsemen being in number twenty thousand,
were Armed all in black Corslets: their Lances bound about with plates of
steel: their Steedes covered with Ma^le three times doubled: their colors
were the sanguine Cross, supported by a golden Lion: his sturdy bowmen, whose
conquering Gray-goose wing in former times has terrified the cercled earth:
being in number likewise twenty thousand, clad all in red Ma^dillians, with
Caps of the same color, bearing thereon likewise a sanguine Cross, being the
true badge and honor of England: their Bows of the strongest Ewe, and their
Arrows of the soundest Ash, with forked heads of steel, and their feathers
bound on with green wax, and twisted silk: his Musketters being in number ten
thousand, their Muskets of the widest bore, with firelocks wrought by curious
workmanship, yet of such wonderful lightness, that they required no rest at
all, to ease their headdy aiming arms, hi^ Caliuer shot likewise ten
thousand of the smaller timbred men, but yet of as courageous a mind as the
tallest soldier in his Army, his Pikes and Bill^s, to guard the wauing
Aunsients thirty thousand strong, clad all in glistering bright Armor,
likewise followed ten thousand laboring Pioners, if occasion served to
undermine any town or castle, to entrench Forts or Sconses, or to make a
passage thorough hills and mountains, as worthy Hanniball did when as he made
away for his soldiers through the lofty Alphes, that divide the Countries of
Italy and Spain: The next that arrived within the bay of Portingale, was the
Princely minded Champion saint David of Wales with an Army of fifty thousand
of true borne Britains, furnished with all habilliments of War to so Noble
and valiant a service, to the high renown of his country and true Honor of
his Progeny: their Armor in richnes nothing inferior to the Englishm^ns:
their colors were a golden Cross, supported by a silver Griffon: which
Scutchion signified the ancient Arms of Wales: For no sooner had saint George
a sight of the valiant Britains, but he caused his Musketters presently to
entertain them with a voll^^ of shot, to express their happy and joyful
welcome to shore, which speedely they performed so courageously with such a
rattling noise as though the firmaments had burst in sunder, and the earth made
echo to their thundering mellodie.

But no sooner were the skeyes cleared from the smoke of the reaking powder,
and that saint George might at pleasure deserve the Noble and Magnanimious
Champion of Wales: who as then rode upon a milke-white Hobbie in silver
Armor, guarded with a trai^e of Knights in purple vest^res, but he greeted
saint David with kind courtesies, and accompanied him to the English Tent,
which they had erected close by the Port side, where for that night these two
Champions remained spending the time with unspeakable pleasure, and so upon
the next day after saint David departed to his own Tent, which he had caused
to be pitched, a quarter of a League, from the English Army: The next that
arrived on the fruitful banks of Portingale, was saint Pattrick the Noble
Champion of Ireland, with an Army likewise of ^iftie thousand, attired after a
strange and woonderful^ manner: their furnitures were of the skynnes of wild
Beasts: but yet more vnpearceable than the strongest Armor of proof: they
bore in their hands mighty Darts, ^ipt at the end with pricking steel,
which the courageous and valiant Irish (...) by the agillitie of their arms
could throw a (...) mile, and with such a forcible strength, that they would
strike three or four inches into an Oak, and with such a certain aim that
they would not miss the breadth of a foot.

These aduenterous and ^ardie Soldiers no (...) arrived on the (...), but the
English M^sketters gave them a Princely entertainment, and presently conducted
the Noble minded Champion saint Pattrick to the English Tent: where the three
Champions of England, Wales, and Ireland passed away the time with (...) great
Royalty: saying down plots how to pitch their Camps to the most disadvantage
of the m^^beleeuing enemy, and setting down* perfect directions which way
they were best (...) martch, and such like deuicies for their own safeties and
the benefit of Christendom: The next that landed on the banckes of Portingale,
was saint Andrew the worthy Champion of Scotland, with threescore thousand of
well approved Soldiers, his horsem^n the ^olde aduent^^us Gallowayes, clad all
in ^uilted Iacke^s, with la^^es of the Turkish fashion, thick and short,
bearing upon their B^auers the Arms of Scotland, which was a corner C^^sse
supported by a naked Uirgin* his Pikemen the (...) hardy men of Or^^die, which
continually uses to (...) upon the freezing Mountains, the Is^e Rock^ and the
Snowie Uallyes: his shot the light footed Callidonians, that if ocsion serve,
can climb the highest hill, and ^ee nimblenes in running* over got the swift
footed Sta^.

These bold aduenterous Scottishmen in all forwardnes, deserved as much honor at
the English Champions hands* as any of the other Nations before: therefore he
commanded his shot at the first entry on land to give them a Noble
entertainment: which they (...) most Royal* and also conducted saint Andrew
to the English Tent: where after he had giued S. George* the courtesy of his
(...), departed to his Tent, which was distant from the English Tent a mile:
The next that arrived was S. Anthony the Champion of Italy with a hand of four
score thousand brave Italian Soldiers mounted on warlike Coursers, every
Horseman attended on by a naked Neger, bearing in his hand a Streamer of
watchet ^ilke, with the Arms of Italy thereon set in gold, every footeman
furnished with approved furniture, in as stately a manner as the Englishmen:
who at their landing received as Royal an entertainment, as the other Nations,
and likewise saint Anthony was as highly honored by the English Champion, as
any of the other Christian Knights: The next that arrived was saint Dennis the
victorious Champion of France, with a ba^d of four score thousand: After him
marched twelve Dukes, of twelve several Dukedomes, being then under the
government of the French King, every one at his own proper cost and charges,
mainetaining two thousand soldiers in these Christian wars: their
entertainments were as glorious as the rest: The last of all the Christian
Champions that arrived upon the fruitful banks of Portingale, was the
Magnanimious Knight saint James of Spain, with a band likewise of four score
thousand: with him he brought from the Spanish Mines ten tun of refined gold,
only to mainetaine Soldiers in the defense of Christendom: who no sooner
landed with his Troops* but the other six Champions gave him the Honorable
welcome of a Soldier, and ordained a solemn banquet for the general Armies,
whose number justly surmounted to five hundred thousand: which Legions they
conjoined into one Camp Royal, and after placed their wings and squadrons
Battle wise, chiefly by the direction of saint George, being then chief
General by the consent of the Christian Kings: who after he had ouerviewd
the Christian Armies, his co^^t^nance seemed to pognosticate a Crowned
victory, and to foretell ^ fatal overthrow to the misbeleeuing Potentates:
Therefore to encourage his Princely followers to persevere in their wonted
willingness, pronoun^ed this Princely Oration.

You men of Europe (said he) and my country men, whose Conquering fortunes
never yet has feared the enemies of Christ: you see we have forsook our
Native Lands, and committed our destenies to the Queen of chance, not to
fight in any unjust quarrel, but in the true cause of Isreal's anointed, not
against nature to climb the heavens as Nemrod and the Giants proffered in
former times: but to prevent the invasion of Christendom, the ruins of
Europe, and the intended overthrow of all Christian Provinces: the bloody
minded Infidels, have mustred up Legions in numbers like the blades of grass,
that grow upon the flourishing Downs of Italy, or the stars of heaven in
the coldest winters night, protesting to fill our Countries with seas of blood,
to scatter our streets with mangled limbs and convert our glorious Cities into
flames of quenchles fire: Therefore dear Countrymen live not to see our
Christian Uirgins spoyld by lustful Rape, nor dragde along our streets like
guiltles Lambs to a bloody slaughter: Live not to see our harmeles Babes with
bruised brains dashed against hard flinty stones, nor live to see our unlusty
age, whose hayres resemble silver Mines, lie bleeding on the Ma^ble pauements:
But like true Christian soldiers fight in the quarrel of your Countries: What
though the Pagans be in number ten to one: yet heaven I know will fight for
Christendom, and cast them down before our faces, like drops of April
showers. Be not dismayed to see their men in ordered ranks, nor fear not
when you behold the streamers houering in the wauing wind, when as their
steeled Pikes like to a thornie Forest will ouerspread whole Countries:
thousands of them I know will have no hearts to fight, but fly with cowardly
fear like flocks of sheep before the greedy Wolf. I am the leader of your
Noble minds, that never fought in vain, nor never entered battle but
returnde with Conquest. Then every one with me build upon this Princely
resolution: for Christendom fight, for Christendom we live and die.

This Souldierlike Oration being no sooner finished, but the whole Army with a
general voice cried, to Arms, to Arms with the victorious George of England:
which Noble resolution of the Soldiers, so rejoiced the English Champion, and
likewise encouraged the other Christian Champions with such a forwardnes of
mind, that they gau^ speedy* commandment to remove their ^ents and to ma^tch
with easy iournies toward Tripolie in Barberie, where Almidor the black King
of Moroco had his residence: In which travail we must leave for a while the
Christian Army, and speak of the innumerable Troops of Pagan Knights that
arrived at one instant in the Kingdom of Hungary, and how they fell at
varience in the election of a General: which ciuell mutenie caused much
effucion of blood, to the great hurt both of Africa and Asia, as here after
follows.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the dessention and discord that happened amongst the Army of the Pagans in
Hungary: the battlle betwixe the Christians and the Moors in Barberie, and
how Almidor the black King of Moroco was sodden to death in a cau^ldrone of
boiling lead and brimstone.

THE (...) Pagans after they had leuie^ their Martial forces both by Sea and
Land, repaired to their general place of meeting, thereto conclude of the
utter confusion of Christendom: for no sooner co^l^ Winter withdraw his chil^
frosts from the earth, and Flora took possession of his place: but the
Kingdom of Hungary suffered excessive pennurie through the number^es Armies
of the accursed Infidels, being their appointed place of meeting: For though
Hungary of all other Countries both in Africa and Asia, then was the richest,
and plentifullest of victuals to mainetaine a Camp of men: yet was it mightily
^uerprest and greatly burdened with multitudes: not only with want of
necessaries to relieve soldiers, but with extreme cruelty of those bloody
minded miscreants, that through a ciuell discord which happened among^^ them,
about the ^lection of a General, they converted their unity to, a most
inhumane slaughter, and their triumphant victory to a dismal bloody Tragedy:
For no sooner ar^^ed their Legions upon the plains of Algernos b^eing in
length and breadt^ one and twenty L^agues: but the King of Hungary caused
their muster Rolls to be publicly read, and justly numbered in the hearing of
the Pagan knights, which in this manner was proclaimed through the Camp.

First be it known unto all Nations that fights in the quarrel of Africa and
Asia under the conduct of our three great Gods, Mahomet, Termigaunt, and
Apollo: what invincible forces be now arrived in this renowned Kingdom of
Hungary, a Land Honored through the world, not only for Arms: but curious
buildings, and plentif^ed with all manner of riches. First we have from the
Emperor of Constantinople two hundred thousand Turks. From the Emperor of
Graecia two hundred and fifty thousand. From the Emperor of Tartarie a
hundred threescore and three thousand. From the Sultan of Persia two hundred
thousand. From the king of Jerusalem four hundred thousand. Of Moors one
hundred and twenty thousand. Of coleblacke Negars one hundred and forty
thousand. Of Arabians one hundred and sixty thousand. Of B^bilon^ans one
hundred thirty thousand and ^dd^. Of Armenians one Hundred and fifty
Thousand. Of Macedonians two hundred and ten thousand. Of Saracusians fifteen
thousand six hundred. Of Hungarians three hundred and six thousand. Of
Sissillians seauenteene thousand three hundred. Of Scythians one hundred and
five thousand. Of Parthians ten thousand and three hundred. Of Phrigians seven
thousand and two hundred. Of Ethiopians sixty thousand. Of Thracians a eleauen
thousand: Likewise from the Provinces of Prester John three hundred thousand of
unconquered Knights, with many other petty Dominions and Dukedomes: whose
numbers I omit for this time, lest that I should seem over tedious to the
reader: But to conclude, such a Camp of Armed soldiers arrived in Hungary,
that might in one month have destroyed Christendom, had not God defended them
from those barbarous nation, and by his invincible power confounded the Pagans
in their own practices: For no sooner had the Harrolds proclaimed through the
Camp what number of Nations joined their bands together, but the soldiers
fell at discention one with another about the election of a General: some
vowe^ to follow none but the king of Jerusalem: some Ptolomie the Egiptian
King: and some the Sultan of Persia, every one protesting either to perse^er
in their own wills or to loose their lives in the same quarrel.

Thus in this manner parties were taken on all sides, not only by the meaner
sort, but by leaders and commanders of bands: whereby the King^^^ and
Potentates, were forced to commit their wills to the soldiers pleasure. This
ciuell broyle so d^scouraged the whole Army, that many with drew their
forces, and presently marched homewards: As the King of Moroco with his tawnie
Moors and coleblacke Negers: Likewise the Sultan of Persia: Ptolomie the
Egiptian King: The Kings of Arabia and Jerusalem every one departed into their
own countries, cur^^ng the time they attempted first so vain an enterprise:
The rest not minding to pocket up abuse, ^ell from brauing boastes, to down
right blows, whereby grew such a sharp and bloody war, that it cost more
soldiers lives, than the ciuell mutenie at the destruction of Jerusalem: which
battle by the irefull Pagans, continued without ceasing for the space of
three months: In which Encounters: the murdered Infidels like scattered corn
ouerspred the fields of Hungary: the fruitful valleys lay drowned in purple
gore: the fields of Corn consumed with flames of fire: their Towns and
Cities ruinated with wasting war: wherein the Fathers were sad witnesses of
their Childrens slaughters, and the Sons beheld their Parents reverent
hairs, more whiter than trye^ silver, besmeered with clodded blood: there
might the Mothers see their harmless Babes b^rne up and ^owne the streets
upon soldiers Lances: there might they see their silken ornaments and rich
attire in pooles of blood lie swimming up and down: there might the^ see the
brains of honest Dames and pure Uirgi^s da^^t against hard ^^intie stones:
there might they (...) the^^ C^urts and Pallace^ by souldi^rs burned to the
ground: there might they see how Councellers in their Scarlet gowns lay
burning in the fire: there might they see how Kings and Queens were arm in
arm consumed to ashes: there might they behode and see how melted gold in
cho^ked sinkes lay every where: there might they see the bloodiest tragedies
that ever eye beheld, and the woful^^ news that ever Christians ear heard
told: In this long and bloody war, one sucking child was not left alive to
report the story to ensuing ages: No not a soldier to carry Arms throughout
the Kingdom of Hungaria, so ^ustly was the vengeance of God thrown upon the
heads of these misbeleeuing miscreants* that durst attempt to lift their hands
against his true anointed Nations: for no doubt but the invincible Army of the
Pagans, had ru^^^ted the borders of Europe, had not the mighty hand of God
with his unspeakable mercy, been Christendomes defense, and confounded the
Infidels in their own ciuell wars: which bloody and strange overthrow of
those unchristian people, let us for ever bury in the lake of oblivion, and
persevere in the fortunate proceedinges of the seven Champions ^^ Christendom,
who had entered the borders of Barberie, before Almidor the black king of
Moroco with his scattered Troops of Moors and Negars returned from Hungary,
and by fire and sword, had wasted ^any of his chiefest T^wnes and Fortes,
whereby the Country was much weakened, and the Common^ compelled to sue for
mercy to the Champions hands: who bearing (...) Christian minds within their
hearts continual (...) h^^boured, vouchsafed to grant me^cie to those that
yielded their li^es to the pleasure of the Christian Knights: But when S.
George had intelligence of Almidors approach with his weakened Troops,
presently prepared his Soldiers in readiness to give the Moors a bloody
banquet: which was the next morning by break of ^ay performed to the high
honor of Christend^me: but the night before the Moors knowing the country
better than the Christians, got the advantage both of wind and Sun: whereat
Saint George being something displeased, but yet nothing discouraged, imboldned
his souldies with many Heroical speeches, proffering them frankly the enemies
spoils, and so with the Suns vprising entered battle, where the Moors fell
before the Christians swords, as ears of corn before the reapers f^^kle:
During this conflict, the seven Champions still in the fore^runt of the
battle, so aduenturously behaved them selves, that they slew more Negars than
a hundred of the brauest Knights in the Christian Armies: At last Fortune
intending to make saint Georges prowess to shin^ brighter than the rest,
singled out the Moroco King, betwixt whom and the English Champion, was a long
and dangerous fight: But saint George so couragiouslye behaved him with his
trusty sword, that Almidor was constrained to yield (...) his mercy. The
Army of the Moors seeing their King taken prisoner, presently would have
fled: but that the Christians being the lighter of foot, ouertooke them, and
made the greatest slaughter that ever happened in Barberie.

Thus after the battle ended, and the joyful sound of victory rung through
the Christian Army, the soldiers furnished themselves with the enemies
spoils, and martched by saint Georges direction to the City of Tripolie,
being then almost unpeopled through the late slaughter: In which City after
they had r^sted some few days, and refreshed themselves with wholesome food, the
English Champion in revenge of his former proffered injuries by the Moroco
King, gave his severe sentence of death: First he commanded a brazen cauldron
to be filled with boiling Lead and Brimstone: then Almidor to be brought to
the place of death by twelve of the Noblest Pieres in Barberie, therein to be
consumed, flesh, blood, and bone: which was duly performed within seven
days following, the brazen cauldron was erected by the appointment of saint
George, directly in the middle of the chiefest Market place, under which a
mighty hot fire continually burned, for the space of of eight and forty
hours: whereby the boiling Lead and B^imstone seemed to sparckle like the
fiery furnaces in hell, and the heat to e^ceede the burning Oven at Babylon.
Thus all things being no sooner prepared in a readiness, and the Christian
Champions present to behold the woeful spectakle; but the condemned Black^more
King came to the place of Execution, in a shirt of the finest Indian silk, his
hands pinniond together with a chain of gold, and his face covered with a
Damske Scarf, his attendants, and chief conducters, twelve Moroco Pieres,
clad in Sabl^ gowns of Taffetie, carring before him the wheel of fortune,
with the picture of a Usurper climbing up, with this Motto on his breast: I
will be king in spite of Fortune: upon the top of the wheel, the picture of a
Monarke vaunting with this Motto on his breast: I am a King in spite of
Fortune: Lastly on the other side of the Wheel, the picture or perfect image
of a deposed Potentate, falling with his head downwards, with this Motto on
his breast: I have been a King so pleases Fortune: which plainly signified
the chance of war, and the constancy of destenie: his guard was a thousand
Christian soldiers, holding fortune in disdain: after them attended a hundred
of Moroco virgins in black ornaments, their hair bounds up with silver wiers,
and covered with vales of black silk, signifiing the sorrow of their country
for the loss of their Sovereign. In this mournful manner came the
unfortunate Almidor to the boiling C^ulderne: which when he beheld, his heart
waxed cold, and his tongue d^ueide of utterance for a time: yet at last he
brake forth into these earnest protestations, proffering more for his life
than the whole Kingdom of Barberie can perform.

Most mighty and invincible Champion of Christendom (quoth he) let my life be
ransomed, and thou sh^l^ yearly receive ten tons of ^ried gold, a hundred
inchs of wouen silk, the which our Indian maids shall sit and spinne ^ith
silver wheels: a hundred Arguses of spices and ^efined sugar, shall be yearly
paid thee by our Barberie (...): a hundred wagons likewise richly laden wit^
(...) and Jasper stones, which by our cunning Lapidisies shall (...) yearly
chosen forth and brought ^hee home to England, ^o make that blessed country
the richest land within the Dominions of Europe: Likewise I will ^eliuer up my
Diadem, with all my Princely dignities, and in company of these Moroco Lords,
like bridled Horses draw thee daily in a silver Chariot up and down the
ser^led earth, til death gives end to our lives Pilgrimage: Therefore most
admired Knight at Arms, let these salt tears that trickle from the Conduits
of my eyes, obtain one grant of comfort at thy hands, for on my bended knees
I beg for life, that never before this time did kneel to any mortallman.

Thou speakst in vain (replied saint George) it is not the treasures hidden in
the deepest seas, nor all the golden mines of rich America that can redeem thy
life: thou know accursed Homicide, thy wicked practices in the Egyptian
Court, where thou profferedst wrongfully to bereave me of my life: Likewise
through thy treachery, I end^red a long imprisonment in Persia: where for
seven years I drank the Channel water, and suffizde my hunger with the
breads of branne meal: My food the loathsome flesh of Rats and Mice, and my
resting place a dismal dungeon, where neither sun nor the cheerful light
of heaven lent me comfort during my long continued misery: For which inhumane
dealing and proffered injuries, the h^auens inforceth me to a speedy revenge,
which in this manner shall be accomplished. Thou see the Engine prepared for
thy death, this brazen Caldron filled with boiling lead and brimstone, wherein
thy cursed body shall be speedily cast, and boiled till thy detested limbs be
consumed, to a watery s^bstance, by this sparckling lickour: therefore prepare
thy self to entertain the violent stroke of death, and willingly bid all thy
kingly dignities farewell: But yet I let thee understand, that mercy harboreth
in a Christians heart, and where mercy dwells there faults are forgiven upon
some humble penetence, though thy trespass deserves (...) pity, but severe
punishment, yet upon these considerations I will grant thee liberty of life:
First that thou will forsake thy false Gods Termagaunt, Mahomet, and Apollo:
which he but the vain imaginations of man: and believe in our true and ever
living God, under whose banner we Christians have taken in hand this long
war: Secondly thou shall give commandment, that all thy barbarous Nations be
christened in the faith of Christ: Thirdly and lastly, that thy three Kingdoms
of Barbary, Moroco and India, swear true alleagance to all Christian Kings,
and never to bear Arms, but in the true quarrel of Christ and his anointed
Nations. These things duly observed, thy life shall be preserved, and thy
liberty obtained, otherwise look for no mercy, but a speedy and most ^yr^ible
death.

These words more displeased the unchristian King of Morco, than the sentence
of his condemnation, and in these brief speeches set down his resolution.

Great Potentate of Europe (replied Almidor) by whose mightines fortune sits
fettered in the chains of power, my golden Diadem and regal Scepter by
constraint I must deliver up: but before I forsake my country Gods, I will
endure a hundred deaths, and before my conscience be reformed to a new faith,
the earth shall be no earth, the sea no sea, nor the heaven no heaven. Think
thou now proud Christian, by thy threatened torments to make me forget my
creator, and believe in thy false God, which was but the son of a Carpenter,
and bacely borne under an Ox stall: No, no, accursed Christians, you
ofspringes of Cayne* you generations of Iesmaell, you seed of Uipers, and
accursed through the world, look for a speedy shower of vengeance to rain
from heaven upon your wicked Nations, your bloody practices has pearst the
Battlements of Jove, and your tyrranies beaten open the ga^es of mighty
Mahomet, who has provided whips of burning wier to scourge you for your
cruelties, proffered against his blessed worshippers, and now with this deadly
curse I bid you all farewell: the plagues of Egypt light upon your kingdoms:
the curse of Cayne upon your children: the famine of Jerusalem upon your
friends, and the misery of Oedipus upon yourselues.

This wicked resolution and balefull curse being no sooner ended by the
desperate minded Almidor, but the impatience of saint George was so highly
moved, that he gave present commandment to the appointed Executioners, to
cast him into the boiling cauldron, which incontinently they performed to the
terror of all the beholders: to behold this wofulll spectakle the Battlements
of Temples we^e so thronged with people, the houses covered with women and
children, and the streets filled with Armed Soldiers, that it was a wonder
to behold: amongst which multitudes there were some particular persons, that
at the sight of Almidors death fell down and broake their necks: But the
general number, as well of Pagans as Christians, cried with cheerful voices,
Honor and victory follow saint George of England, for he has redeemed
Barbary from a miserable servitude. Which joyful hearing so delighted the
seven Champions of Christendom, that they caused the Conduits to run with
wine, the streets to be beautefied with bonefiers, and a sumptuous banquet to
be proclaimed through the City, which after continued for the space of seven
days, in more magnificent Royalty, than the banquet at Babylon, when the
Macedonian Monarke returned from the worlds Conquest.

The Champions liberality procured such faithful love in the hearts of the
Moroco Pieres, that with a general consent, they chose saint George for their
lawful King: where after they had invested him in the Princely seat of the
Moroco Potentates, they set the Crown upon his head* and after presented him
with an imperious Pall which the Kings of Barbary usually wore upon their
Coronation day, protesting to forsake their profane Religion, and (...)
christened in the faith of Christ.

This promised conuertion of the Infidels, more delighted the English Champion,
than to have the whole worlds honor at command, for it was the chiefeest
point of his Knightly oath to advance the faith of Christ and to enlarge the
bounds of Christendom: after his Coronation was solemnly performed, the other
six Champions conduct^ him to a Princely Palace, where he took the true
alegance of the Moroco Lords by plighted oath to be true to his Crown: after
this he established Christian laws, to the benefit of the whole country: then
he commanded all the ceremonious rites of Mahomet to be trodden under foot,
and the true Gospel of Christ to be preached: likewise he caused all that did
remain in Barberie to be Christened in the new faith: But these observations
continued but a time as shall hereafter shall be discoursed at large: For fame
not intending to let the worthy Champions long to remain in the idle bowers
of peace: but summoned them to persevere in their Noble atchiuements; and t^
muster up a new their soldiers, whose Armor, canckered ease had almost staind
with rust: therefore saint George committed the government of his country, to
four of the principal Pears of Moroco, and martched toward the Country of
Egypt, where lived treacherous Ptolomie, the Father of his beloved Lady Sabra,
whom he had left in the Kingdom of England: In which journey and happy
ariuall in Egypt, w^ will leave the seven Champions for a time, and speak of
the faithles Infidels in Barberie, after the departure of the Christians, whose
former Honors they slightly regarded: For no sooner had saint George with his
martial Troops bidden their country adue, but the faithles Moors reconciled
themselves to their former Gods, and purposed a speedy revenge for the death
of Almidor, against all Christians that remained within the limmets of that
Heathen Nation: For there were many soldiers wounded in the late battle:
Likewise a number oppressed with sickness, had the Christian Champions left
behind for their better recoueries: upon whom the barberous Moors committed
their first tyrranie: for they caused the distressed soldiers to be drawn
upon ^lids to the outermost part of the City, and there put them into a large
and old Monestarie, which they presently set on fire, and most inhumanely
burned the Christian soldiers, and after converted the place into a filthy
leastall: many women and succourles children they dragged up and down the
streets, till their brains were dashed against the stones, and the blood had
covered the earth with a purple hue: Many other cruelties were committed by the
wicked Infidels against the distressed Christians, which I ^urpose to pa^^e
over, and wholly discourse of the woeful and bloody murder of an English
Merchant and his wife in the same City of Tripolie, the report whereof may
force the merciles Tigers to relent, and those eyes to shed a spring of tears
that never wept before. The bloody minded Negars violating both oath and
promise before plighted to saint George: by violence set upon the Merchants
house, where first they made a massaker of his servants, and before his face
cast their dead bodies to hunger starued Dogs: then coming to the Merchant,
they bound him fast with hempen cords to the strongest post in his house, and
after took his children, being seven of the goodliest boys, that ever
nature ^^amed, and likewise tied round about him: Then one of the Moors being
crueller than the rest, proffered to deflowre the Merchants wife before his
face: but she in chastetie like Camma, chose rather an honorable death* than
an infamous life, spit in the Negars face, and most bitterly reviled him*
yielding neither to his force, nor his bloody threats: but snatching a knife
from his girdle, vowed to sheath it in her bosom before she would loose that
precious Gemme of honor, that once being gone cannot be recovered for all
the worlds treasure.

This resolution of the English Merchants wife, caused the stern Negars to
exceed in cruelty: but the principal of that wicked company, being a
bloody and merciles Tyrant, stabbed one of the silly Children before the
mothers face.

Now stubborn Dame (quoth he) will thou yield to my desires, and preserve the
lives of thy other six Children, otherwise shall thou behold them butchered
in the same manner. To sell my honor for the lives of my Children (replied
she) will be an offense to God, and a continual corrasiue to my husbands
heart if we live together: Therefore accursed monsters prosecute your tyrranie:
It is not all your threats and bloody dealinges shall convert my chaste
mind, nor once enforce my thoughts to give any consent thereunto.

These words being no sooner ended, but the lu^^full Moore took an other of
her children and stabed before her husbands face, thincking thereby to fore the
Merchant to entreat his wife to consent to the wicked N^gars determinations,
but he being as resolute as his virtuous wife (spoke in this manner.

O you cursed black Dogs of Barberie! more worse in quallitie than the
bloody Tigers, and more merciles than the wicked Cannibals: think you that the
murder of our children shall enforce our hearts to yield to your lustful
desiers: N^ no, persevere in your tyrranies: if I had a hundred children, twice
the number of King Priams, yet would I loose them all, before I will endure to
see my wives dishonor: children may be gotten again but her honor never
recovered.

These words pricked the Negars to the gall and caused them to commit the
wickedst deed that ever was practiced under the celestial Globe of heaven:
First they sheathed there Poniards in the breasts of all the Marchantes
children, whose guiltles blood stay^d all the chamber with a crimson color,
then with there Fauchions did they cu^ there bodies all in sunder, and caused
seven P^es to be made of there flesh, and after served in a banquet to there
woeful Parents, whom the merciles Moors set at a square table, the Merchant
placed directly opposite against his wife, where they were constrained either to
feed upon there own children, or starve for want of other sustenance.

This woeful spectakle stroke such a grief into the English Merchants heart,
that he could scarce endure to speak for weeping: his wife when she behold
the heads of her lovely sons lying upon the table, as it were looking to
heaven for revenge, breathed fort^ this woeful dying lamentation.

O silly Babes, I would you had been strangled in my womb at your first
conception: then should not these accursed Infidels have triumphed thus in your
^nhappie Tragedies: Nor your unfortunate Parents beh^ld this luckles day:
whereon I pray that never S^nne may shine again, but be accounted an ominous
day throughout the whole earth, for heaven I hope (poor Babes) will reign a
shower of vengeance on their heads that has caused this your untimely death,
and with this prayer I bit the world^ fa^^well.

At which words her grief so exceeded the bounds of reason, that it stayed
the passage of her speech: whereby she was forced to yield her soul to the
Paradise of peace. She being no sooner dead but the sorrowful Merchant
likewise biterly exclaimed against the injustice of Fortune, and the tyrranie
of the barbarous Moors, accounting his destenie more ha^les than the Thracian
Kings, that buried his children in his own Bowels: and the cruelties of the
Infidels to exceed the tyrranie of Nero, that caused his Mothers womb to be
opened, that he might behold the place of his creation: but when the Merchant
had sufficiently bewailed the murder of his children, the death of his wife,
and his own misery, he yielded his soul likewise to the furious stroke of
death: The end of whose long languishments when the wicked Moors had
intelligence* they caused their dead bodies to be carried to the top of a hi^h
mountain, and there left for the pray of hungry Ravens: But God most
miraculously preserved them both from the fury of Fowls, and the violence of
ravenous beasts, for the su^ consumed their bodies like the morninges dew, and
by the w^nderfull workmanship of heaven, in the some place sprung a bower of
Roses, to signify the unspotted honor of the Merchant and his virtuous wife:
which miracle we leau^ to the wonder of the Moors, and speak of the
Christian Champions proceedinges, that by this time were arrived in the Kingdom
of Egypt.

CHAP. XV.
How the Christians arrived in Egypt, and what happened to them there: the
Tragedy of the lustful Earl of Couentrie: how Sabra was bound to a stake to
be burned, and how Saint George redeemed her: lastly how the Egiptian king cast
himself from the top of a Tower and broake his neck.

DUring the time of the bloody murder wrought by the barbarous Moors upon
the English Merchant and his Wife, with his seven Children as you heard in
the former Chapter, the Champions of Christendom arrived upon the Territories
of Egypt, where they supposed to have met with Legions of Armed Soldiers, and
to have adventured their lives upon the chance of War: but all things fell
out contrary to their expectations, for they found the Gates of every City
set open, and every Uillage and Town unpeopled: for the Commos at the report
of the Christians ariuall, secretly hid their treasure in the Caves of the
earth, in deep Wells, and such like obscure places, and a general fear and
extreme terror assailed the Egiptians: as well the Pieres of the Land, as the
simple country people: Many fled into woods and wildernesses, and closely hid
themselves in hollow trees: Many dug caves in the ground, where they thought
best to remain in safety, and many fled to high mountains, where they long
tim^ lived in great extremity, feeding upon the grass of the ground: So
greatly the Egiptians feared the Army of Christians, that they expected
nothing but the ruin of their own country, with the loss of their own
lives, and the murder of their wives and Children.

But to speak of the Christian Champions: who finding the country desolate of
people, suspected some deep policy of the Egiptians, thinking them to have
mustered their general forces to bid them battle: therefore Saint George
gave commandment through the whole Camp, that not a man upon pain of death
should break his rank, but martch advisedly with three weapons ready pressed to
enter battle, as though the enemy had directly plast themselves opposite
against them: which special charge the Christian Soldiers duly observed,
looking neither after the wealth of Cities, nor the spoil of Uillages, but
circumspectly martched according to their leaders directions, along the
Country of Egypt, till they approached the sight of King Ptolomies Court:
which when the noble Champion of England beheld, in this manner encouraged he
his followers.

Behold (said he) you invincible Captains of Christendom yonder cursed
Towers where wicked Ptolomie keeps his Court, those Battlements I say, were
they as richly built as great Piramides of Greece, yet should they be
subverted and laid as level with the ground, as the City of Carthage: there
has that accursed Ptolomie hy^ residence, that for preserving his Daughter
from the burning Dragon, trecherouslie sent me into Persia, where for seven
years I lived in great extreamie in a dismal dungeon, where the Sun did
never lend me light, nor the company of people comfort: In revenge whereof, my
heart shall never rest in quiet till I see the buildinges of his Palace set on
fire, and converted into a place of desolation, like ^o the glorious City in
Phrigia, now ouerspread with stin^king weeds and loathsome puddles:
Therefore let a^ Christian Soldiers, that fights under the banner of
Christendom, and all that loves George of England your chosen General, draw
forth their warlike weapons, and like the angry Greeks ouerturne these
glistring Battlements, leave not one stone upon another, but lay it as level
with the ground, as the harvest reapers ^at the fields of ripened corn: let
your wrathful furies fall upon these Towers like drops of April showers,
or like a storm of winters hail, that it may be bruted through the world,
what lustful vengeance did light upon the pride of Egypt: Leave not (I say) as
^ou love your General, when you have subverted the Palace not one man alive,
no not a sucking babe, but let them suffer vengeance for the wickedness of their
King. This is my decree brave Knights of Christendom: therefore martch
forward, Heaven and Fortune be your good speed.

At which words the soldiers gave a general shoute in sign of their willing
minds. Then began the s^^ken streamers to flourish in the air, the Drums
chearefully to sound forward, the silver Trumpets recorded echoes of victory,
the barbed Steedes grew proud of this attempt, and would ^^and upon no ground,
but leapt and daun^t with as much courage as did Bucephalus the horse of
Macedonian Alexander always before any notable victory, yea every things gave
an evident sign of good success, as well sensles things as living creatures.

With this resolution martched the Cstristians, purposing the utter confusion
of the Egiptians, and the woeful ruin and destruction of Ptolomies sumptuous
Palace: but when the Soldiers approached the gates with wrathful weapons,
ready to assault, there came pacing out thereat the Egiptian King, with all the
chiefest of his Nobles attired in black and mourn^full ornaments, bearing in
their hands Olive branches: next them the brauest soldiers in Egypt, bearing
in their hands broken weapons, shiuered Lances, and t^rne Ancients: Likewise
followed thousands of women and children, with Laurel wreathes about their
heads, and in their hands Olive branches crying for mercy to the Christians,
that they would not utterly destroy their declining country, but show mercy
to unhappy Egypt. This unexpected sight, or rather admirable wonder, caused
saint George to sound retreat, and gave commandment through the Christian
Army, to withhold their former vowed vengeance from the Egiptians, till he
understood what they required: which charge being given and only observed,
saint George with the other six Champions came together, and admitted the
Egiptian king wi^h their powers to their presence, who in this manner began to
speak for his country.

You unconquered knights of Christendom, whose worthy victories and Noble
atchiuements, the whole world admires, let him that never kneeled to any man
t^ll now, and in former times disdained to humble himself to the greatest
Potentate on the earth: Let him I say, the most unfortunate wretch alive crave
mercy, not for my self, but for my country: my Common^ blood will be required
at my ha^d^: our murdered Infants will call to heaven for revenge, and our
slaughtered Widows cries s^nk^ down to hell for revenge: so will the
vengeance of heaven light upon my soul, and the curse of hell upon (...)
renowned Champions of England, under whose cu^todie my dear daugh^er is kept,
e^^n for the love of her be merciful to Egypt: The former wrongs I proffered
thee, when I sent thee like a guiltles Lamb into Persia was contrary to my
will: For I was incenst by the flattery of that accursed Blackamon^e King:
whose soul for evermore he scourged with whips of wier, and plagued with the
punish^^^t of Tantalus in hell: If my life will serve for a (...) re^enge, here
is my naked breast: let my heart blood st^ine some Christian-sword, that you may
bear the bloody wi^hes of my (...) into Christendom or let me be torn^ into a
thousand p^eces, by (...) untamed Steeds, as was Hippolitus the Son of The^^^s
in his charmed Chariot.

Most mighty controulers of the world, command the dearest things in Egypt,
they be at your pleasures, we will forsake our Gods, and believe in that God
which you commonly adore, for he is the true and living God, ours false and
hateful in the sight of heaven.

This penitent lamentation of the Egiptian King caused the Christian Champions
to relent, but especially Saint George: who having a heart beautified with the
welspring of pity, not only granted mercy to the whole Country, but
vouchsafed Ptolomie liberty of life, upon condition that he would perform
what he had promised: which was to forsake his false gods, and believe in our
true God, Christ Jesus.

This kindenes of saint George almost ravished Ptolomie with joy, and the whole
land, both Pieres and Commons more rejoiced at the friendship of the
Christians, than if they had been made Lords of the western world. The news
of this happy vnetie, was bruted into all the parts of Egypt: whereby the
commons that before fled for fear into woods and wildernesses, dens and caves,
hills and mountains, returned joyfully to their own dwellings, and caused
bonefires to be made in every City, Town, and Uillage, the Bells of Egypt
rung day and night, for the space of three months: in every place was seen
banqueting* dancing and masking, sorrow was banished, wars forgotten, and
peace proclaimed.

The King at his own charges ordained a sumptuous and costly banquet for the
Christian Champions: wherein for bounty it exceeded that which the Troianes
made when Paris returned from Greece with the conquest of Menalaus Queen. The
banqueting house was built with Cipresse wood, covered with the purest Adamant
stone: so that neither steel nor bace Iron could come therein, but it was
presently drawn to the top of the rooffe: as for the variety of services,
which graced forth the banquet, it were too tedious to repeat: but to be
brief, what both the Land and Sea* could afford b^^re there present (...) The
(...) that attende^ the C^ampions a^ the banquet, were (...) in da^maske
vestments wrought with the purest (...) Indian virgins spin upon their silver
wheels: at every course the seruit^rs brought in, a Consort of Egiptian
Ladies upon their Iuorie Lu^es, strayned forth such admired Harmony, that it
surpassed Arions music (...) when he was cast into the Se^, caused the (...)
himsa^e on the (...) sweetness of Orpheus (...), which made both (...) and trees
to dance, or the mel^odie of Apollos inspiring music, when he descended from
heaven for the love of D^aphne.

These pleasures so ravished the Christian Champions, that the^^ forg of the
sound of warlike Drums that were wont (...) call them forth to bloody
battles: But these delights continued but a short time, for there arrived a
knight from England that brought such unexpected news to saint George, which
changed his joys into extreme sorrow, for after this manner began the
messenger to tell his woeful tale.

Fair Englands Champion (said he) in steed of Arms get Swallows wings and
fly to England, if ever thou (...) see thy beloved Lady, for she is judged to
be burned at a ^take for murdering the Earl of Couentrie: whose lustful
desires would (...) stained her honor with infamy, and made her the (...) of
virtuous women: Yet this ^ercie is granted by the ^ing of England, that if
within ^oure and twenty mon^^ (...) Champion may be found, that for her sake
will ventu^^ (...) life, and if it be his happy fortune to overcome the
cha^^^nger of her death, she shall live: But if it b^ his fatal destenie to
be conquered, then must she suffe^ the heavy judgment before pronounced:
therefore as (...) love the life of your chaste and beloved Lady, hai^e into
^ngland, delay no time, for delay is dangerous, and her lif^ in hazard to be
lo^^.

This woeful disourse stroke such a terror to S. Georges heart, likewise to the
Egyptian King her father, that for a (...) they stood gazing^^^ (...) face, as
though they had b^n ^^raught of their wit^, not able to speak one word, but at
last saint George recovered his former senses, and breathed forth this
sorrowful lamentation.

O* England, unkind England, have I adventured my life in thy defend, an^ for
thy safety have layn^ in the fields (...) Ma^^ (...), in many a partching (...)
day, and ma^^ a freezing winters night, when you have taken your quiet sleeps
in beds of Down: and will you repay me with this discurtesie, or rather
undeserved wrong, to adiudge her spotles body to consuming (...)* whos^ bl^^d
if it (...) before I come, I vow never to draw my trusty sword in Englands
quarrel more, nor never account my self her Champion, but I will rend my
warli^e colors into a thousand pieces, the which I wear upon (...) Burgonet
(I mean the crimson Cross of England) and wander unknown Countries,
obscurely from the sigh^ of any Christians eye: Is it possible that England is
so ungrateful to her friend? Can that renowned Country harbor such a lustful
monster, to seek to dishonor her, within whose heart the fountain of virtue
springes? Or can that Noble City, the Nurse and Mother of my life, entertayne
so vile an Homeside, that will offer violence to her, whose chastety and true
honor hat^ caused tamelesse Lions to sleep in her lap?

In this sorrowful mam^^ wearied saint George the time away, until the
Egyp^ian King, whose sorrows being as great as his, put (...) from his
complaint^s, and requested the English Knight to tell the true discourse of
Sabraes proffered violence, and how she mu^t^^red the lustful Earl of
Couentry, to whom after a bitter sigh or two, the woeful messenger replied in
this manner.

Most Noble Princes and Potentates of ^he ear^h, prepare your ears to
entertain the wofulst ^ale* that ever English Knight (...), and your eyes to
weep a sea of brackish tears: I would I had no tongue to tell it, nor heart to
remember it: But seeing I am compelled through the love and duty I owe to the
Noble Champions of Christendom to express it, then thus it was.

It was the fortune, nay I may say unhappy destenie of your beloved Lady:
upon an Evening when the S^^ne had almost lodged in the West, to walk without
the walls of Couentrie to take the pleasures of the sweet fields, and flowring
meadows, which Flora had beautefied in a Summers liuerie: but as she walked up
and down, sometimes taking pleasure to hear the mellodie of chirping Birds,
how they strained their silver notes: other times taking delight to see how
nature had covered both hills and dales with sundry sorts of Flowers: then
walking to see the Crystal running Rivers, the murmuring Music of whose
streams exceeded the rest for pleasure: But she (kind Lady) delighting her
self by the Rivers side, a sudden and strange alteration troubled her mind:
for the Cha^ne of gold that she did wear about her neck presently changed
color, from a yellow burnisht brightness to a dim palenes: her Kings flew
from her fingers, and from her nose fell three dro^s of blood: whereat her heart
began to throb, her ears to glow, and every joint to tremble with fear. This
strange accident caused her speedily to haste homeward: but by the way she met
the noble Earl of Couentrie, walking at that time to take the pleasure of the
Eueninges Air, with such a train of worthy Gentlemen, as though he had been
the greatest Piere in all England: whose sight when she beheld a far off,
her heart beg^nne to misgiue, thinking that Fort^ne had allotted th^se Gentlemen
to pro^^ar her some iniurie^ (...) upon her cheeks fear had set a vermillion
(...), whereby ^er beauty grew admirable: which when the Earl beheld he was
ravished therewith, and deemed her the excellents creature that ever nature had
framed: their meeting was ^^lent, she showed the h^militie of a (...) Lady
(...) ^he courtesy of a kind Gentleman, she departed homeward^^, and (...)
into the (...) thinking all danger past, but h^ ^^actised in his mind her utter
(...) and downfall: for the dart of love had shot from her beauteous cheeks
into his heart, not true love, but lust: so that nothing might quench his
desir^, but the conquest of her chastetie, such ext^eame passion bewitched his
mind, that he caused his s^^uants eu^ry one to depart, and then like a
discontented man he wandered up and down the ^^eldes, beating in his mind a
thousand sundry ways how to obtain his desire, for without he inioyed her
love, he was likely to live in endless languishment: but ^t last he^ ^ighed out
this passion of love.

O you immortal powers, why have you transported her from an earthly Lady, to
a heavenly Angel: Sabra is no worldly creature, but a divine substance, her
beauty is a stain unto the Queen of love, and her countenance of more
ma^e^^ie than Iunos grace: her twinkling eyes, that gliste^ like to flaming
stars, and her beaut^ous cheeks more pleasant than Roses dipped in milk, has
p^erst my heart with the pricks of love, and her love I will enjoy or loose my
life: O but there is a bar which thwartes kind affections, and hinders my
desires: Saint George I mean her true and lawful husband, the honor of whose
bed she will not violate for all the Kingdoms in the world: Tush faint hearted
fool that I am, Sabra is b^autefull, and therefore to be tempted: she is
wise, and therefore easy to be woone: Her husband he is sporting in the
fields of Mars* then why may not she take pleasure in the Chamber of Venus: I
(...) many flattering glose^, many kind speeches, and many (...)* but I will
croppe that budde, which but to taste, I would give my whole (...) and (...): I
will tell her saint George is a wandere^, and one that never will return:
where as I am a mighty Piere in England, and (...) that (...) acc^mplish whatso
^uer she desiers: (...) this lustf^ll (...) used, to flatter himself in his
vain conceit. At last the scouling night with pitchy clouds began to
ouerspread the brightsome heavens, whereby he was forced to repair homewards,
and to smother up his love in silence, no quiet sleep that night could enter
in his eye, but fond and restles dreams, sometimes he thought he had his
lovely Mistress in his Arms, dallying like the Paphian Queen upon her
Minnions knee, but presently awaking, he found it but a glyding shadow, which
added new grief to his louesicke passions: then by and by he thought he saw
how the wrathful Champion with dreadful bloody Fauchion, came to revenge his
Ladies rauishment, whereat the troubled Earl started from his bed, and with
loud voice cried to his Chamberlayne for help, and how saint George was come
to murder him: which sudden outcry not only awaked the Chamberlayne but the
whole house: which generally came to bear him company, they set up Camphire
Tapors to give light, and made him Music to comfort him, and to drive all
fond^ fancies from his mind: but no sooner c^ased the Music, but he fell
into his former cogitations, pondering in his mind, which way he might obtain
his purpose, whereat a dismal night Raven beat her wings against his Chamber
window, and with a harsh voice, gave him warning of a bad success: then
presently began the Tapors to burn blue as though a troop of ghastly spirits
did encompasse his lodging, which was an evident sign, that some strange and
unhappy murder would shortly follow: All which could nothing withdraw the
lustful Earl from his wicked enterprise, nor convert his mind from the
spoil of so sweet a Lady. In this manner spent he the night away, till the
Suns bright countenance summoned him ^^om his re^^lesse bed, from whence
being no sooner risen, ^ut he (...) the Steward of his house, and gave him a
charge to provide a most sumptuous and costly banquet, for he intended to
inuit thereunto all the principal Ladies in Cou^^try: what bountefull cheer
was ^rouided, I think it (...) to repeat, but to be short, at the time and
hour appointed the invited Ladies repaired: the banquet was brought in by the
Earls servants, and placed upon the table by the Earl himself* who after
many welcomes given, began thus to move the Ladies delight.

I think my house most highly honored (said he) that you have vouchsafed to
grace it with your presence: for me thinks you beautefie my hall, as the
twinkling stars beautefie the vale of heaven: but amongst the number of you
all* you have a Cinthia, a glistring silver Moon, that for brightness exceeds
all the rest: for she is fairer than the Queen of Cipresse: louelier than Dido
when Cupid sat^ upon her knee, wiser than the Prophetess of Troy: Of
personage more comlier than the Grecian Dame, and of more Majesty than the
Queen of heaven: so that all the Muses with their Iuorie pens, may write
eternally, and yet not sufficiently discribe her excellent ornaments of
nature. This commendation caused a general smile of the Ladies, and made them
look one upon another whom it should be: Many other Courtlike discourses
pronounced the Earl, to move the Ladies delight, till the vanquet endded:
which being finished, there came in certain Gentlemen, by the Earls
appointment with most excellent Music: other some that daunced most
curiously, with as much Majesty as Paris in the Grecian Court: At last the
Earl requested one of them to choose out his beloved Mistress, and lead her
some stately Caranta: likewise requesting that none would be offended what Lady
soever he did affect to grace with that Courtly pastime: at which request all
of them were silent, and silence is commonly a sign of consentment: therefore
he imboldned himself the more, to make his desires known to the beholders:
then with exceeding courtesy and great humility, he kissed the beauteous hand
of Sabra, who with a blushing countenance and bashful look accepted his
courtesy, and like a kind Lady disdained not to dance with him: So when the
Musicians stra^ed forth their inspiring mellodie, the lustful Earl lead her
the first course about the Hall, in as great Majesty as Ma^ors did the Queen
of Paphos to gain her love, and she followed with as much grace, as if the
Queen of pleasure had been present to behold their Courtly delights: and so
when the first course was ended, he found a fit opportunity to unfold his
secret love, and reveal unto the Lady his exstreame passion of mind, which
were in these speeches expressed.

Most Divine and Piereles Paragon (said he) thou only wonder of the world, for
beauty and excellent ornaments of nature: know that thy two twinkling eyes
that shine more brighter than the lightness of heaven, being the true Darts of
love, has pierced to my heart, and those thy Crimson cheeks as lovely as
Auroraes countenance, when she draws the Curtains of her purple bed to
entertain her wandering Lover: those cheeks I say has wounded me with love,
therefore except thou grant me kind comfort, I am like to spend the remnant
of my life in sorrow, care, and discontent: I blush to speak what I desire,
because I have settled my love where it is unlawful, in a bosom where Kings
may sleep and surfeit with delight: thy breast I mean my most divine Mistres,
for there my heart is kept a prisoner, beauty is the keeper, and love the key,
my ransom is a constant mind: thou art my Venus, I will be thy Mars: thou art
my Hellen, and I will be thy Paris: thou art my Hyren, I will be thy Mahomet:
thou art my Cressida, I will be thy Troylus: thou art my love, and I will be
thy Parramour: Admit thy Lord and Husband be alive, yet has he most unkindly
left thee to spend thy young years in sollitarie widdowhood: he is
vnconstantlike Aeneas, and thou more haples than Dido: he martcheth up and
down the world in his glistring Armor, and never does intend to return: he
abandoneth thy presence, and lies sporting in strange Ladies laps: therefore
dear Sabra live not to consume thy youth in singlenes, for age will overtake
thee too soon and convert thy beauty to wrinckled frow^es.

To which words Sabra would have presently made answer, but that the music
called them to dance the ^^^and course, which being (...) replied in this
manner.

My Noble Lord (said she) for our bounteous banquet and courteous entertainment,
I give the humble thanks of a poor Lady: but for your suit and unlawful
desire, I d^ detest as much as the sight of a Crokadile, and your flattering
glozes I esteem as much, as does the Ocean of a dri^ling shower of rain: your
Sirens songs shall never entice me to listen to your fond requests: but I will
like Ulysses stop my ears, and bury all your flattering inticementes in the
lakes of forgetfulness* Think you that I will stain his marriage bed with the
least spot of infamy, that will not proffer me one thought of wrong for all the
treasures of the wealthy seas: therefore the gorgeous sun shall loose his
light by day, the silver Moon by night, the skies shall fall, the earth shall
sink, and every thing shall change from his kind and nature, before I
false^^e my faith, or prove disloyal to my beloved George: attempt no more my
Noble Lord to batter the fortress of my good name, with the Gunshot of your
flattery, nor seek to stain my honor with your lustful desires. What if my
Lord and Husband prove disloyal, and choose out other loves in foreign Lands:
yet will I prove as constant to him, as did Penelope to her Ulysses: and if it
be his pleasure never to return, but spend his days amongst strange Ladies,
then will I live in single solitarines like to the Turtle Dove, when she has
lost her mate, abandoning all company, or as the mournful Swan that swimmes
upon Maeanders silver streams, where she records her dying tunes to raging
bellows: so will I spend away my lingering days in grief and die.

This resolution of the virtuous Lady daunted so the Earl, that he stood
like a sensles image gazing at the Sun, not knowing how to reply, but yet when
they had daunced the third course, he began a new to assault her unspotted
chastetie in these terms.

Why my dear mistress, have you a heart more hard than Flint, that the
tears of my true love can never molefie? can you behold him plead for grace
that has been s^de unto by many worthy Dames? I am a man that can command
whole countries: yet can I not command thy stubburne heart to yield. Divine
Sabra if thou will grant me love, and yield to my desire: I Will have thee clad
in sliken Robes and damask U^stures, imbost with Indian Pearls and rich
refined gold, perfumed with Camphier Bisse, and Syrrian sweet perfumes: by day
a hundred Uirgins like to Thetis tripping on the silver sands, shall evermore
attend thy person: by night a hundred Euenukes with their strained Instruments
shall bring thy senses in a golden slumber: If this suffizeth not thy sweet
content, I will prepare a sumptuous Chariot made of gold, wherein thou shall
be drawn by Sable spotted Steedes along the fields and gallant pastures
adjoining to our City walls, whereas the Evening air shall breath a
coolenes* far more sweeter than Balm upon thy cheeks, and make thy beauty
glister like the purple Palace of Hiperion, when he leaves Aurora blushing in
her bed, whereby the heavens and all the powers therein shall stand and wonder
at thy beauty* and quite forget their usual courses: All this my dear,
divine and dainty Mistress, is at thy command, and more, so that I may enjoy
thy love and favor: which if I have not, I will discontentedly end my life in
woods and desert places, Tigers and untamed beasts shall be my chief
companions.

These vain promises and flattering inti^^^ents caused Sabra to blush with
bashfulnes, and to give him this sharp answer. Think you my Lord with
golden (...), to obtain that precious Gem, the which I will not loose for
Europes treasury: henceeforth be silent in that enterpr^^e* and never after
this attempt to practice (...) dishonor which if you do, I vow by heaven to
make it known to every one within the City, and fill all places with rumors
of thy wilful lust: A Troop of modest maidens I will procure to haunt thee up
and down the streets, and wonder at thee like an Owl, that never comes
abroad but in the darkest nights: this I am resolved to do and so farewell.

Thus departed Sabra with a frowning countenance, whereby the rest of the
Ladies suspected that the Earl had attempted her dishonor by secret
conference, but they all assuredly knew that she was as far from yielding to
his desires as is the aged man to become young again, or the azurde firmament
to be a place for siluaine beasts to inhabit: In such like imaginations they
spent away the day, till the dark night caused them to break off company.
The Earl smothering his grief under a smiling countenance, till the Ladies
were every one departed, whom he courteously caused his servants to conduct
homewards with Torch lights, because it began to be very dark: After their
departure he accursed his own Fortune, and like a Lion wanting food, raged up
and down his Chamber, filling every corner with bitter exclamations, rending
his garments from his back, tearing his hair, beating his breast, and using
all the violence he could devise against himself.

In this manner spent he away the night, suffering no sleep to close the
windows of his body: such a melancholy and extreme passion discontented his
mind, that he^ purpose^ to give an end to his sorrows by some untimely
death: So when the morning appeared he made his repair to an Orchard^, where
Sabra commonly once a day walked to take the Air. The place was very
melancholy, and far from the noise of people: where after he had spent some
certain time in exclaiming against the unkindness of Sabra, he pulled his
Poyniard from his back, and prepared his breast to entertain the stroke of
death: but before the pretended Tragedy, with his dagger he ingrau^d these
verses following upon the bark of a walnut tree.

O heart more hard than bloody Tiger fell,
O ears more deaf, than senceles troubled seas:
O cruel foe, thy rigor does excel,
For thee I dye, thy anger to appease:
But time will come when thou shall find me slain,
That thy repentance will increase thy pain.
I here ingraue my will and testament,
That my sad grief thou may behold and see:
How that my woeful heart is torn and rent,
And gorged with blooddy blade for love of thee:
Whom thou disdayndst as now the end does try,
That thus distressed do suffer me to dye.
Oh Gods of love if so their any be,
And you of love that feels the deadly pain:
Or Sabra thou that thus afflictest me,
Hear these my words, which from my heart I strain:
Ere that my corpse be quite bereaud of breath,
Let me declare the cause of this my death.
You mountain Nymphs which in the deserts reign,
Cease off your chase from savage beasts a while:
Prepare to see a heart oppressed with pain,
Address your ears to hear my doleful style*
No strength nor Art, can work me any weal,
Since she unkind and Tyrantlike does deal.
You Fayrie Nymphs of lovers much adorde,
And gracious Damsels which in Eueninges fair:
Your Closets leave, with heavenly beauty storde*
And on your shoulders spread your golden hair:
Record with me, that Sabra is unkind,
Within whose breast remains a bloody mind.
Ye savage Bears in Caves and Dens that lie,
Remain in peace if you my sorrows hear:
And be not moved at my misery,
Though too extreme my passions do appear:
England farewell and Couentrie adue,
But Sabra, heaven above still prosper you.
These verses being no sooner finished; and engraven about the Bark of the
Walnut tree, but with a grisly look and wrathful countenance he lift up his
hand, intending to strike the Poyniard up to the hil^s in his breast: but at
that same instant he beheld Sabra entering the Orchard to take her wonted
walks of pleasure, whose sight hindered his purpose, and caused other bloody
cogitations to enter into his mind. The Furies did incense him to a wicked
deed, the which my trembling tongue faints to report: for after she^ had
walked to the furthest side of the melancholy Orchard, he rigerously ran unto
her with his dagger drawn, and catching her about the slender waste, thus
spitefulli^ threatened her.

Now stubburne Dame (quoth he) will I obtain my long desired purpose, and
revenge by violence thy former proud denials: First will I wrappe this dagger
in thy lo^kes of hair, and nail it fast into the ground: then will I ravish
thee by force and violence, and triumph in the conquest of thy chastetie: which
being done, I Will cut thy tongue out of thy mouth, because thou shall not reveal
nor discrie thy bloody rauisher: Likewise with this Poyniard will I chop off
both thy hands: whereby thou shall neither write with pen thy stain of honor,
nor in Sampler sow this proffered disgrace: Therefore except thou willingly
yield to quench my desired love with the pleasures of thy marriage bed, I will
by force and violence inflict these vowed punishments upon thy dellicate body:
be not too resolute in thy denials, for if thou be, the gorgious Sun shall
not glyde the compass of an hour, before I obtain my long desired purpose,
and thereupon he st^pped to the Orchard^ door, and with all expedition locked
it, and put the key into his pocket: then returned he like the hunger starued
Wolf to cea^e upon the silly Lamb, or like the chased Bore when he is
wounded with the hunters Lance, came running to the helples Lady, intending
her present Rape, and foul dishonor: But she thinking all hope of aid or
succor to be void, fell into a dead sound, being not able to move for the
space of a quarter of an hour: But yet at last having recovered her dead
senses to their former vital moving, she began in this pitiful manner to
defend her assailed chastetie, from the wicked Earl that stood over her with
his bloody dagger, threatening most cruelly her small confusion.

My Lord of Couentrie (said she with weeping tears, and kneeling upon the
bare ground) is virtue banished your breast? have you a mind more tyrranous
than the Tigers of Hercania, that nothing may suffi^e to satisfy your lustful
desires, but the stain of my honor, and the conquest of my chastetie? if it
be my beauty that has intised you, I am content to have it converted to a
loathsome Leprosy, whereby to make me odious in your eyes: If it be my rich
and costly garments that makes me beautiful, and so intangles you, henceforth
I will attire my body in poor and simple array, and for evermore dwell in
country Caves and Cottages, so that I may preserve my chastetie unspotted: If
none of these may suffice to abate your tyrranous intent, but that your lust
will make me times wonder, and a pointing stock and scorn of virtuous Ladies:
then will the heavens revenge my wrongs, to whom I will vncessantlie make my
petitions: the birds in the air after their kind will evermore (...) against
your wickedness: the siluane beasts that abides in woods and deserts, will
breath forth clamors of your wickedness: the creeping worms that live within
the creuc^es of the earth, will give dumb signs (...) tokens of your
wickedness, the running Rivers they (...) at your wickedness, the wo^ds and
trees, both herbs and flowers, with every sensles thing will soun^some
motions of your wickedness: Return, return^, my Noble Lord unto your former
virtues: bannish such ^^nde de^^res out of your mind: stain no^ the honor of
your house with such black scandales and disgrace, bear this in mind before
you do attempt so vile a sin. What became of Hellens rauishment, but the
destruction of renowned Troy? What of Roman Lucresiaes Rape, but the
banishment of Tarquin? and what of Prognies soul deflowrement by her sisters
husband, the lustful King of Thrace, but the bloody banquet of his young Son
I^is, whose tender body they served to his table baked in a Pie? At which
speeches the irefull Earl wrapped his hands within her locks of hair, which
was covered with a costly Caul of gold, and in this manner presently replied
unto her.

What tellest thou me of Poets tales (said he) of Prognies Rape, and Terius
bloody banquet: thy rauishment shall be an Induction to thy Tragedy, which if
th^^ yield not willingly, I will obtain by force and violence: therefore
prepare thy self either to entertain the sentence pronounced, or yield thy
body to my pleasure. This vnrecanting and vowed resolution of the Earl, added
grief upon grief, and heaped mountains of sorrow upon her soul: twice did
the haples Lady cast her eyes to heaven, in hope the Gods would pity her
distress, and twice unto the earth, wishing the ground might open and devour
her, and so deliver her from the fury of the wicked Homecide: but at last when
she saw that neither tears, prayers, nor wishes could prevail, she gave an
outward sign of consentment upon some conditions, under color to devise a
present me^nes to preserve her chastetie, and deliver her self from his
lustful assailements. There is no condition said the Earl, but I will yield
unto, so thou will grant my desire, and make me chief commander of thy love.

First my Lord (quoth she) shall you suffer me to fit some certain hours upon
this bed of violets, and bewail the loss of my good name, which shortly shall
be yielded up to your pleasure: then shall you lie and dally in my lap
thereby to make my affections, yet freezing cold, to flame with burning brandes
of love: that being done you shall receive your wished desires. These words
caused the Earl to convert his furious wrath to smiling toy, and so casting
down his dagger, he gave her a courteous kiss, which she in his conceit
graciously accepted: whereby his mind was brought into such a vain opinion,
that he thought no Heaven but in her presence: no comfort but in her sight: and
no pleasure but in her love: then caused he Sabra to sit down upon a bed of
violets, beset about with diverse sorts of flowers, whose lay he made his
pillow, whereon he laid his head, intending as he thought to increase desire:
But as women in extreamitie have the quickest wits: So Sabra busied her self
by all means possible, either now or never to remove the cause of her deep
distress by practicing his death, and so quit her self from her importunate
suitor: one while she told him pleasant tales of love, in hope to bring his
senses to a slumber, the better to accomplish her desires: other whiles she
played and sported with his hair that hung dangling below his shoulders like
to threads of silk: But at last when neither discoursing tales, nor her
^allying pastime with his hair could bring him a sleep, she strained forth
the Organs of her voice, and over his head song this woeful Dittie.

Thou God of sleep and golden dreams appear,
That bringst all things to peace and quiet rest:
Close up the glasses of his eyes so clear,
Thereby to make my fortune ever blessed:
His eyes, his heart, his senses and his mind.
In peaceful sleep let them some comfort find.
Sing sweet you pretty birds in top of Skies,
With warbling t^nes and many a pleasant note:
Till your sweet Music close his watchful eyes,
That on my love with vain desires does dote:
Sleep on my dear, sleep on my loves delight,
And let this sleep be thy eternal night.
You gentle Bees the Muses lovely birds,
Come aid my doleful tunes with silver sound:
Let your inspiring melody record,
Such heavenly music that may q^ite confound,
Both wit and sense, and tier his eyes with sleep,
Tha^ on my lap in sweet content I keep.
You silver streams which murmuring music makes,
And filles each dale with pleasant Harmony:
Where at the floting fish much pleasure takes,
To hear their sweet recording melody:
Assist my tunes his slumbring eyes to close,
That on my lap now takes a sweet repose.
Let whispering winds in every sensles tree,
A solemn, sad, and doleful Music sing:
From hills and dales, and from each mountain ^ie,
Let some inspiring sound or echo ring:
That he may never more awake again,
Which sought my marriage bed with lust to stain.
This delightful song rocked his senses to such a careless and heavy slumber,
that ^e slept as soundly upon her lap, as if he had been couched in the
softest bed of down, whereby she found a fit opportunity to (...) her
undefiled body from his lustful desires: So taking the Poyniard in her hand,
which he had cast a little aside, and gazing thereon with an irefull look, she
made this sad complaint.

Grant you immortal powers of heaven (said she) that of these two extremes I
choose the best, either must I yield my body to be dishonored by his unchaste
desires, or stain my hands with the trickling streams of his heart blood* If
I yield unto the first, I shall be then accounted for a viscious Dame in every
place: but if I commit the last I shall be guilty of a wilful murder, and for
the fame the law will adiudge me to a shameful death. What shall I fear to
die and loose my virtue and renown? No, my heart shall be as tyrranous as
Danaus Daughters, that slew their fifty husbands in a night, or as Medeas
cruelty, which scattered her brothers bloody joints upon the sea shore,
thereby to hinder the swift pursuit of her father, when Jason got the golden
Fleece from Calcos I Will: Therefore stand still you glistring Lamps of heaven,
stay wandering time and let him sleep eternally. Where art thou sad Melpomene,
that speakst of nothing but of murders and Tragedies? Where be those Dames
that evermore delights in blood? Come, come, assist me with your cruelties, let
me exceed the hate of Progne, for her rauishment: rage heart, and take delight
in blood, banish all thoughts of pity from thy breast, be thou as merciless
as King Priams Queen, that in revenge of five and twenty murthred sons, with
her own hands staynd the pauements of Agamemnons Court with purple gore: these
words being no sooner ended, but with wrathful and pale countenance, she
sheathed the Poyniard up to the hilts in the closure of his breast, whereat he
started, and would have got upon his feet, but the stream of blood so
violently gushed from his wound, that he declined immediately to the earth, and
his soul was forced to give the world a doleful adue.

But when Sabra behold the bed of violets stainde with blood, and every
flower converted to a crimson color, she sighed grievously, but when she saw
her garments all to be sprinkled with her enemies blood, and he lay wallowing
at her feet in purple go^e she ran speedily unto a flowing fountain that
stood on the further side of the Orchard, and began to wash the blood out of
her clothes, but the more she washed, the more it increased, a sign that
heaven will never suffer wilful murder to be hid, for what cause soever it is
done.

This strange spectakle or rather wonderful accident, so amazed the
sorrowful Lady, that she began a new to complain. O that this wicked
murder never had bin done (said she) or that my hand had been stricken lame,
by some unlucky Plannet, when first it did attempt the deed! whether shall I
fly to shrowde me from the company of virtuous women, which will for evermore
shun me as a detested murderer? If I should go into some foreign Country,
there heaven will cast down vengeance for my guilt: If I should hide my self
in woods and solitary wildernesses, yet would the wind discover me, and blow
this bloody crime to every corner of the world: or if I should go live in
Caves or darkesome Dens, within the deep foundation of the earth, yet will
his Ghost pursue me there, and haunt me day and night: so that in no place a
murderer can live in rest, such discontented thoughts shall still oppress his
mind. After she had breathed forth this comfortles lamentation to the air,
she tore her blood stained Garment from her back and cast it into the
fountain, where it turned the water into the color of blood: so heinous is
murder in the sight of heaven.

Thus being disrobed into her Petticote, she returned to the slaughtered
Earl, whom she found covered with moss, which added more grief unto her
sorrowful soul, for she greatly feared her murder was discried, but it fell
not out as she mustrusted: for it is the nature and kind of a Robbin Red-brest
and other birds, always to cover the body of any dead man, and them it was
that br^d this fear in the Ladies heart: by this time the day began to shut up
his bright windows, and sable night entered to take possession of the earth:
yet durst not the woeful and distressed Sabra make her repair homewards, lest
she should be discried without her upper garment.

During which time there was a general search made for the Earl by his
servants, for they greatly suspected some danger had befallen him,
considering that they heard him the night before so woefully complain in his
Chamber: At last with Torch light they came to the Orchard gate, which they
presently burst open: wherein no sooner entering, but they found their murdered
Master, lying by a bed of violets covered with moss, likewise searching to
find out the murderer: At last they espied Sabra in her naked Petticote, her
hands and face besprinckled with blood, and her countenance as pale as ashes:
by which signs they suspected her to be the bloody bereauer of their Lord and
Masters life: therefore because she descended from a noble linnage, they
brought her the same night before the King, which did then keep his Court in
the City of Couentrie: who immediately upon the Confession of the murder,
gave this severe judgment against her: First to be conveyed to Prison, there to
remain for the term of twelve months, and at the end whereof, to be burned
like a most wicked offender: yet because she was the Daughter of a King, and
loyal Lady to so Noble a Knight, his Majesty in mercy granted her this
favor: that if she could get any Knight at Arms before the time were expired,
that would be her Champion, and by Combat redeem her from the fire, she should
live: otherwise, if her Champion were vanquished, then to suffer the former
Judgment. Thus have you heard the true discourse of all things which happened,
till my departure from England, where I left her in Prison, and since that
time, five months are fully exspired: Therefore most renowned Champion, as
you love the life of your Lady and wish her delivery make no tarriance, but
with all speed post into England, for I greatly fear before you ariue upon
that blessed shore, the time will be finished, and Sabra suffer death for want
of a Champion to defend her cause.

This doleful discourse drove saint George with the other Knights and Champions
to such an e^tasie of mind, that every one departed to their lodging Chambers
with dumb signs of sorrow, being not able to speak one word, where for that
night they lamented the mishap of so virtuous a Lady: The Egyptian King her
father, he abandoned the sight of all companies, and repaired to the top of
an high Tower built of Marble stone, wherein he barred himself fast with iron
bolts, so that none could come within the hearing of his lamentations: then
raged he up and down like frantic Oedipus, tearing his eyes from their
natural Celles, accusing heaven of injustice, condemning earth of iniquity,
and accursing man for such an execrable crime, one while wishing his daughters
birth hour, had been her burial day, another while, that some unlucky
Plannet would descend the firmament, and fall upon his miserable head: being
in this extreme passion, he never hoped to see his daughters countenance
again, and so about midnight, being a time when desperate men practice their
own destructions, he cast himself headlong from the top of the Tower and
broake his neck, and all besprinckled the flinty pauements with his blood and
brains.

No sooner was the night vanished, and bright Phoebus entered the Zodiac of
heaven, but his bruised body liueles and senseles, was found by his servants
lying in the Palace yard, all to be beaten in pieces against the ground. The
woeful news of this selfe-wild murderer, they presently told to certain
Egyptian Knights, who took his scattered limbs and carried them to saint
Georges Chamber; where they found him arming himself for his departure
toward England: But at this woeful spectackle, he took a second conceited
grief, in such extreme manner, that it had almost cost him his life, but that
the Egyptian Knights gave him many comfortable speeches, and by the^ consent of
many Dukes Earls, Lords, and Barrons, with many other of the late Kings privy
Council, they el^cted him the true succeeding King of Egypt by the marriage of
Ptolomies daughter: which Royal proffer saint George refused not, but took
upon him the Regiment of the whole Country, so that for that day his journey
toward England was stayed, and upon the third day following, his Coronation
was appointed, which they solemnly performed, to the high honor of all the
Christian Champions: For the Egyptian Pieres caused saint George to be
apparralled in Royal U^stures like a King, he had on a suit of flaming green
like an Emerauld, and a Mantle of scarlet very richly furd, and wrought
curiously with gold, then the other six Champions lead him up to the Kings
Throane, and set him in a Chair of Ebony with pummells of silver, which stood
upon an Allablaster Elephant: then came three of the greatest Lords in Egypt
and set a Crown of gold upon his head, then followed two Knights with a
Scepter and a naked S^^^rde, to signefie that he was chief Champion of all the
R^alme, and Lord of all that appertained to the Crown of Egypt: This being
performed in most sumptuous and stately manner* the Trumpets with other
Instruments began to sound, whereat the general company* with joyful voices,
cried all together, Long live saint George true Champion for England, and King
of Egypt: Then was he conducted to the Royal Palace, where for ten days he
remained amongst his Lords and Knights, spending the time in great joy and
pleasure: the which being finished, his Ladies distress constrained him to a
sudden departure, therefore he left the guiding of his Land to twelve
Egyptian Lords, binding them all by oath, to redeliuer it at his return,
likewise charging them to interre the body of Ptolomie in a sumptuous Tomb,
befitting the body of so Royal a Potentate: Also appoynting the sixth Champions
to raise their Tents, and muster up anewe their soldiers, and with all speed
march into Persia, and there by dynt of bloody war, revenge his former
injuries upon the cursed Sultan. This change being given, the next morning by
break of day, (...) buckled on his Armor, mounted on his swift footed Steed,
and had his friends in Egypt for a season adue, and so in company of the
Knight that brought him that unlucky news, he took his journey with all
speed toward England: In which travail we leave him for a time: Also passing
over the speedy provision made by the Christian Champions in Egypt for the
invasion of Persia, and return to sorrowful Sabra being in priosn, awayting
each minute to receive the final stroke of impartial death: for now had the
rolling Plannets brought their years travails to an end: yet Sabra had no
intelligence of any Cha^pion that would defend her cause: therefore she
prepared her dilicate body to receive her latest breath of life: the time
being come she was brought to the place of execution: whether she went as
willingly, and with as much joy, as ever she went before time unto her
marriage, for she had made her humble submission to the world, and unfeignedly
committed her soul to God. She being at the stake (where the king was present
with many thousands, as well of Noble personages, as of Common people to behold
this woeful Tragedy) the deaths-man stripped off her Garment, which was of
black sarce^et, and in her snow-white smock, bound her with an Iron chain
unto the stake, then placed they round about her tender body, both Pitch,
Turpentine and Gunpowder, with other merciles things, thereby to make her death
the more easier, and her pain the shorter. Which being ^one the King caused
the Harrold to summon in the Challenger: who at the sound of the Trumpet came
trasing in upon a Rone colored Steed, without any kind of mark, and trapped
with rich trappinges of gold and precious stones of great price: there came
forth at the Horse mouth, two tuskes like unto an Elephants, his nostrelles
were very large and big, his head little, his breast some what broad, well
pitched, and so ^ard that no sword were it never so sharp, was able to enter in
thereat. The Champion was called the Barron (...) Chester, a hold* and hardier
Knight they thought lived not then upon the face of the whole earth: he so
advanced himself up and down as though he had been able to Encounter with a
hundred Knights: then the King caused the Harrold to summon in the Defendant,
if there were any to defend her cause both Drums and Trumpets sounded three
several times up and down the fields, betwixt every rest was full a quarter
of an hour, but yet no defendant did appear: therefore the King commanded
the Executioner to set the stake on fire presently.

At which words Sabra began to grow as pale as ashes and her Joints to tremble
like to Aspen-leaues, her tongue that before continewed silent began to record
a swanlike dying tale, and in this manner uttered she the passion of her heart.
Be witness heaven, and all you bright celestial Angels: be witness sun and
moon the true beholders of my ^act: be witness thou clear firmament and all
the world be witness of my innocence: the blood I shed was for the sauegard of
my honor and unspotted Chastety: Great God of heaven, if the prayers of my
unstained heart may assail thy mighty Majesty, or my true innocence prevail
with thy immortal power. Command that either my Lord may come to be my
Champion, or sad beholder of my death: But if my hands were stained with blood
about some wicked enterprise: then heaven show present vengeance upon me by
fire, or else let the earth open and devour my body up alive. At which
instance she heard the sound of a shrill and loud horn, the which S. George
winded: (for as then he was near) which caused the Execution a while to be
deferred: At last they beheld a far off a stately Banner wavering in the
Air, the which the Knight carried before saint George: then they espied nere
unto the Banner a most valiant Armed Knight mounted upon a cole black Palfray,
with a mighty great Lance set charged in his Rest, by which sudden approach
they knew him to be some Champion that would defend the distressed Ladies
cause.

Then the King commanded the Drums and Trumpets to sound, whereat the people
gave a general sh^w^, and the poor Lady half dead with fear, began to
revive, and her blushing cheeks to be as beautefull, as red Roses dipped in
milk, and blood mingled with snow: but when saint George approached the sight
of his true and constant L^d^, whom he found chayned to a stake, encompassed
with many instruments of death, his heart so relented with grief, that he
almost fell beside his horse: yet remembering wherefore he came, he recalled
his courage, and intended to try his fortune in the Combat, before he would
discover himself unto his Lady: And so when the Trumpets sounded deaths
Alarm, the two Knights set spurs to their horses, and made them run so
fiercely, that at the first encounter, they shiuered both their Lances to
their hands, then rushed they together so rigorously with their bodies and
Helmets, that they fell down both to the earth: But saint George who was the
more lustier Knight, nimbly leapt upon his feet without any hurt, but the
Barron of Chester lay still with his h^ad downwards, casting from his mouth
abundance of blood, he was so mightily bruised with the fall, but when he
revived from his trance, he took his shield, drawing out a mighty Fawchion,
and with a wrathful countenance ran at saint George: Now proud Knight (quoth
he) I swear by all the Saints in heaven, to revenge the blood which thou have
shed, and therewithal he stroke so violently upon saint Georges shield, that
it cleaued quite a sunder: then began he to wax angry, and took his sword in
great wrath, and gave the Barron of Chester such a stroke, that he cut away
arm and shoulder, and all the flesh of his side to the bare ribs, and likewise
cut his leg almost cleave a sunder, in the thichest place of his thigh, and
yet for all that the sword entered half a foot into the earth, then fell the
Barron of Chester to the ground, and breathed forth this lamentable cry: Now
frown you fatal stars eternally, that did predominate at my birth, for he
is slain and vanquished that never st^^pt to any Knight before this day, and
thereuppon the blood st^pped the passage of his speech, and his soul went
flying to Elysium, whereat the whole company rejoiced, and applauded saint
George for the most fortunates Knight in the world: then the King delivered
Sabra with his own hands to saint George, who most courteously received her,
and like a kind Knight cast a scarlet Mantle over her body, the which a Lady
standing by bestowed upon him, yet he minding not to discover himself, but set
her upon his portly Steed, (that presently grew proud in carrying so rich a
burden) and with his own hands lead him by the bridle raynes: so great was
the joy throughout the City, that the belles rung without ceasing, for three
days together, the Citezens thorough every place that saint George should
pass, did hang forth at their windows, and on their walls cloth of gold and
silk, with rich Carpets, Cushions, and couerings of green velvet lay abroad
in every window: the Clergy in Copes of gold and silk met them with solemn
Processions: The Ladies and beautefull Damsels strowd every street where as
he past with Roses and most pleasant flowers, and Crowned him with a wreath of
green bays, in sign of his triumphant victory and Conquest.

In this manner went he unto the Kings Palace, not known by any what he
should be, but that he was a Knight of a strange Country, yet Sabra many times
as they walked by the way, desired to see his face, and know his name, in that
he had adventured so far for her sake, and that for her delivery had
vanquished the brauest knight in England. Yet for all her persuasions he kept
himself undiscovered, till a troop of Ladies in company of Sabra got him into
a chamber richly hung with Arras cloth, and there unlaced his Beuer, whose
countenance when she beheld, and saw that it was her Lord and husband which
had redeemed her from death* she fell into a dead sound for very joy: But
saint George sprinkled a little cold water on her face, and revived her
presently: After this he gave he^ many a kind and loving kis^e, calling her
the most truest, and the most loyallest Lady that ever nature framed, that to
the very death would not loose one jot of her unspotted honor: Likewise she
accounted him the truest Knight and the loyall^st husband, that ever heavenly
Hymen kne^^ in ban^s of marriage with any woman. But when the King had notice
that it was saint George, his Countries Champion, which achieved that Noble
Conquest in vanquishing the Barron of Chester* he was ravished with such joy,
that he came running small have to the Chamber, and most kindly embraced him*
and after he was unarmed, and had washed his wounds in white wine and new
milk, the King conducted him with his Lady in his banqueting (...) where they
feasted for that evening, and after he kept open Court for all comers so long
as saint George continued there, which was for the space of one month: At the
end whereof he took his Lady and one Page with him, and had England (...), and
then he traveled toward Persia, to the other Christian Champions, whose
dangerous journey and strange adventures you may read in this Chapter
following,

CHAP XVI.
How Saint George in his journey toward Persia, arrived in a Country
inhabited only by maids, where he atchiued many strange and wonderful
adventures: Also of the rauishment of seven Virgins in a wood, and how Sabra
preserved her Honor from a tirrible Giant.

AFter saint George with his virtuous Lady departed from England, and had
travailed through many Countries, taking their direct courses toward Egypt,
and the Confines of Persia, where the other si^e Champions remained with their
warlike Legions: At last they arrived in the Country of the Amazonians, a land
inhabited by none but women: In which Region saint George atchiued many brave
and Princely adventures, which are most wonderful to rehearse, as after shall
be declared: For traveling up and down the Country, they found every Town
and City desolate of people, yet very sumptuosly builded: the earth likewise
untilled: the pastures vncherished, and every field ouergrowne with weeds:
whereby he deemed that some strange accident had befalle^ the country, either
by war, or immortality of some grievous plague, for they could neither let eye
of man, woman, nor child, whereby they were forced to feed on Berries*
Ro^tes, and in steed of brave ^as^^ces, they were constrained to lie in broad
pastures, upon banks of mass, and insteede of Curtens of silk, they had the
black and scowling (...) to cover them.

In this extreamety they traveled up and down for thirty days, but at last
it was their happy fortunes to ariue before a rich Pauillion, situate and
standing in the open fields, which seemed to be the most glorious sight that
ever they beheld, for it was wrought of the richest work in the world, all of
green and crimson satin, bordred with gold and azure, the posts that (...)
was of Iuory, the cords of green silk, and on the top thereof there stood
an Eagle of gold, and at the two corners, two great silver Griffons shining
against the sun, which seemed in richnes to exceed the monument of Mausalus
being one of the worlds twelve wonders. They had not there remained long,
admiring at the beauty of the workmanship, but at the entry of the Pauillion,
there appeared a maiden Queen Crowned with an imperial Diadem, who was the
most fairest creature that ever he saw: on her attended twenty Amazonian
Dames, baring in their hands silver bows of the Turkish fashion, and at their
backs hung quiuers full of golden Arrows: upon their heads they wore silver
Coronets, beset with Pearls and precious stones: their attire comely and
gallant: their faces fair and gentle to behold, their foreheads plain and
white, the tramels of their hayrelike burnisht gold, their brows small and
proper, somewhat drawing to a brown color: their visages plain, neither too
long, nor too round, but colored like Roses and Lillies mixed together, their
noses long and strait, their ruddy mouths somewhat smiling, their eyes lovely,
and all the rest of their parts and liniaments by nature framed most excellent,
who had made them in beauty without compare: The Queen her self was clothed
in a gown of green, straight gyrt unto her body with a lace of gold, so that
somewhat her round and Lilly white breast might be seen, which became her
wonderful well, beside all this, she had on a crimson Kertle, lined with
violet velvet, and her wide sleeves were likewise of green silk unbrothred
with flowers of gold, and with rich Pearls: when saint George had
sufficiently beheld the beauty of this maiden Queen, he was almost intrapped
in her love, but that the dear affection he bare to his own Lady prevented
him, whom he would not wrong for all the treasures betwixt the highest
heavens, and the lowest earth: At last he alighted from his horse, and humbled
himself unto her Excellence and thus courteously began to question with her
after this manner.

Most divine and fayer of all fayers, Queen of sweet beauty (said he) let a
traveling Knight obtain this favor at your hands, that both himself and his
Lady whom you behold here wearied with travel, may take our rest within your
Pauillion for this night: For we have wandered up and down this Country many a
day, neither seeing man to give us lodging, nor finding food to cherrish us,
which made us wonder that so brave a Country, and so beautefied with natures
ornamenes as this is, should be left desolate of people, the cause whereof is
strange I know and full of wonder,

This question being courteously demanded by saint George, caused the
Amazonian Queen as kindly to reply: Sir Knight quoth she, (for so you seem
both by your behavior, and galiant stature) what favor my Pauillion may
afford be assured of: But the remembrance of my Countries desolation which you
speak of, breeds a sea of sorrow in my soul, and makes me sigh when I
remember it, but because you are a Knight of a strange Land, I will report it
though unto my grief: about some twelve years since, it was a Nigromancers
chance to ariue within this Country, his name is Osmond, the cunningst Artist
this day living upon the earth, for he can at his call raise all the spirits
out of hell: and with his charms make heaven to rain continual showers of
blood, my beauty at that instance tempted him to love, and drowned his senses
so in desire, that he assayed by all persuasions that either wit or Art could
devise, to win me to his will: but I having vowde my self to Dianaes
chasteti^, to live in singlenes among the Amazonian maids, (...) love,
disp^sed his person, and accounted his (...) as the hissing of v^n^mous snakes*
for which he br^ught the destruction of this my Realm and Kingdom: for by
his Magic (...) and damned Charms, ^ee r^ysed from the earth a mighty
Tower, the mortar whereof he mingled with virgins blood: wherein are such
Inchantmentes wrought, that the light of the Sun, and the brightness of the
Sky is quenched, and the earth blasted with a tyrrible vapor, and black
mist, that ascends from the Tower, whereby a general darkness ouerspreades
our Land, the compass of four and twenty Leagues: so that this country is
clean wasted and destroyed, and my people fled out thereof. This Tower is
haunted day and night with gastlie f^ends: and at his departure into Persia,
where he now by Inchauntment aides the Sultan in his Wars against the
Christians, he left the guarding of the same to a mighty and tyrrible Giant:
In shape the vgliest monster that ever eye beheld, or ^are heard tell: For he
is thirty f^^te in length: his head three times larger than the head of an
Ox: his eyes bigger than two pewter dishes, and his teeth standing out of his
mouth more than a foot: wherewith he will break both Iron and Steel: his
arms big and long without any measure, and all his body as black as any
coal, and as hard as brass: Also of such a strength that he is able to carry
away at once, three Knights Armed, and he never eats any other meat but raw
flesh of mankind: he is so light and swift that a horse cannot run from him,
and oftentimes he has been assayed with great Troops of Armed men, but all
of them could never do him any harm, neither with sword, spear, crosbow, nor
any other weapon.

Thus have you heard most noble and courteous Knight, the true discourse of my
utter r^ine, and the vengeance showed upon my Country by this wicked
Nigromancer: for which I have remained ever since in this Pauilion amongst my
maids, where we pray both day and night, that some unhappy fortune, or
tyrrible vengeance may fall upon this wicked Coniurer.

Now as I am true English Knight (replied S. George) no sooner shall the
morninges Sun appear but I will take my journey to that inchaunted Tower: in
to which I Will enter in despite of the Giant, and break the Enchantment, or make
my grave within the Monsters bowelles: which if I happily perform, then will
I travail into Persia, and feltes up the most wicked and damned Nigtomancer,
and like a blood hound lead him up and down the world in Chains*

Most dangerous is the adventure (quoth the Amazonian Queen) from whence as
yet did never Knight return: But if thou be so resolute and Noble minded as to
attempt the enterprise, then happy be your fortune. And know brave Knight,
that this tower lies westward, from hence some threescore miles, and thereupon
she took him by the hand, and caused Sabra likewise to alight from her
Palfray and led them both into her Pauilion: where they were feasted most
royally, and for that night slept securely: But when the days bright windows
opened, and the Morning Sun began to glister, in all the haste saint George
that valiant minded Champion, arose from his sweet content, and Armed him
self: where after he had taken his leave of the Queen, and gave her thanks
for his courteous entertainment, and also taken his leave of Sabra: whom he
left in company of the Queens maids, till his return with conquest, and so
rode forth till it was Noone, and then he entered into a deep Ualley, and ever
he rode lower and lower. It was then a fair day, and the Sun shined clear:
but by that time he had ridden two miles and a half, he had lost both the
light of the Sun, and also the sight of heaven: for it was there as dark as
night, and more dismal than the deepest dungeon*

At last he found a mighty river with streams as black as pitch, and the
banks were so high, that the water could scarce be seen running underneath,
and it was so full of Serpents, that none could enter amongst them that ever
returned back with life: About his head flewe monstrous byrds and diverse
Griffons, who were able to bear away an Armed Knight horse and all, and were
in as great multitudes, as though they had been Starlings: Also there were
flies as big as nuts, and as black as pitch, which s^ung him and his horse
so grievously, that there issued down such store of blood, that it changed
his horse from a sable to a crimson color: likewise the Griffons struck at
saint George with their talents so furiously, that had not he defended
himself with his shield, which covered his whole body, he had been pierced
to the heart.

In this dangerous manner rode he on, till he came to the gates of the
inchaunted Tower, where as the Giant sat in his iron coat upon a block* with
a mace of steel in his hand, who at the first sight of saint George, beat his
teeth so mightily together, that they rung like the strokes of an Anuile, and
ran raging like a Fiende of hell, thinking to have taken the Champion horse and
all in his long teeth, that were as sharp as steel, and to have borne them
presently into the Tower: But when saint George perceived his mouth open, he
took his sword and thrust therein so far, that it made the Giant to roar so
loud, that the Elements seemed to thunder, and the earth to tremble, his mouth
smoakt like a fiery Furnace. and his eyes rolled in his head lik^ brands of
flaming fire: the wound was so great, and the blood issued so fast from the
Giants mouth, that his courage began to quayle, and against his will, he was
forced to yield to the Champions mercy, and to beg for life, to which saint
George agreed, but upon condition, that the Giant would discover all the
secrets of the Tower, and ever after ^e sworn his true servant, and to attend
on him with all diligence: To which the Giant swore by his own soul, never to
leave him in extreamitie, and to answer him truly to all questions
whatsoever: Then saint George demanded the cause of the darkness, and how it
might be ceased, to which the Giant answered in this manner.

There was within this Country about some twelve years since, a cunning
Nigromancer that by Inchauntment built this Tower, the which you now beheld,
and therein caused a tyrrible fire to spring from the earth, that cast such a
smoke over the whole land: whereby the people that were wont to dwell therein
are fled and famished for hunger: Also this Inch^unter by his Art, made the
River that you have passed, the which did never man before this time without
death: Also within the T^wer nere unto the fire, there stands a fair and
plentiful fountain: to which if ever any Knight be able to attain, and cast
the water thereof into the fire: then shall the darkness ever after cease, and
the Enchantment end: for which cause I have been bound to guard and keep this
Tower from the atchiuement of any Knight.

Thus when the Giant had ended his discourse, saint George commanded him to
remain at the Gat^, for he would adventure to end the Inchauntment, and
deliver the Country from so grievous a plague: Then went he close by the
windows of the Tower, the which were sixteen spears in length and breadth,
til he came to a little wicket, through which he must needs enter* yet was it
set as thick with pickes of steel, as the pricks of an Urchens skin, to the
intent that no Knight should approach near unto the door, nor once attempt to
enter the Tower: yet with great danger he opened the wicket: whereout came such
abundance of smoke, that the darkness of the country doubled: so that neither
Torch nor Candle would burn in any place: yet nevertheless saint George
entered, and went downewardes upon stayers, where he could see nothing: but yet
felt so many great blows upon his Burgonet, that he was constrained to kneel
upon his knees, and with his shield to defend himself, or else he had been
bruised to pieces: At last he came to the bottom, and there he found a faier
great vault, where he felt so tyrrible a heat, that he sweat exceedingly, and
as he felt about him, he perceived that he approached near the fire, and
going a little further he espied out the Fountain, whereat he greatly
rejoiced: and so he took his shield, and bore therein as much water as he
could and cast it into the fire: In conclusion, laboring so long till the fire
was clean quenched, then began the skies to receive their perfect lightness,
and the golden Sun to shine most clearelie about him, whereby he plainly
perceived how there stood upon the stayers many great Images of Brass,
holding in their hands mighty Maces of steel, the which had done him much
trouble at his coming down: but then their power was ended, the fire
quenched, and the Inchauntment finished.

Thus when saint George through his invincible fortitude had performed this
dangerous adventure, he grew weary of travail: what with heat and sweating,
and the mighty blows he received from the Br^zen Images, that he returned
again to the little wicket: whereas the deformed Giant still remained: who
when he beheld the Champion return both safe and sound, he fell upon his
knee before him and said.

Sir Knight you are most welcome, and happily returned: for you are the flower
of Chivalry, and the brauest Champion in the world. Command my service, duty
and obedience: for whilst I live I do protest by the burning Banckes of
Acharon, never to follow any Knight but you, and thereupon I kiss your golden
spur, which is the Noble badge of Knighthood.

This humble submission of the Giant caused the Champion to rejoice, not for
his overthrow, but that he had gotten so mighty a servant: then unlaced he his
Helmet, and lay down after his weary Encounter, where after he had
sufficiently rested himself, he took his journey in company of the Giant to
the Amazonian Queen: where he left his Lady, in company of her virgins: who
like a kind, modest, and virtuous wife, during all the time of her husbands
absence, continually prayed to the immortal powers of heaven, for his fortunate
success, and happy return, otherwise resolving her self, if the lowering
destenies should cross his intent, and vnluckilie end his days before the
adventure were accomplished: then to spend the remnant of her life, amongst
th^se happy virgins: But on the sudden before the Queen and her virgins were
a ware, S. George arrived before the Pauillion, dutifully attended on by the
Giant: who bore upon his shoulder the body of a tal Oak, by which the Queen
knew that his prowess had redeemed her country from darkness, and delivered
her from sorrow, care, and trouble: so in company of he^ maids very
gorgeously atired, she conducted the Champion to a bower of Roses, intermingled
with creeping vines, the which in his absence, they had planted for his Ladies
delight: there found he Sabra at her divine prayers, like a solitary Widow,
clad in mourning habilliments: but when she beheld her Lord return in saftie,
she banished grief, and in all haste ran unto him, and in his bosom ravished
her self with pleasure: But to speak how the Amazonian Queen feasted them,
and in what manner she and her Maids devised pastimes for their contents, were
too tedious to repeat: but when night gave end to their pleasures, and sleep
summoned all things to a quiet silence, the Queen brought them to a very
sumptuous lodging: wherein stood a bed framed with Ebon wood ouerhung with
many pendants of gold, the Tik^ was stuffed with Down of Turtle-Doue, the
sheets of Maedian silk: thereon lay a rich quilt wrought with cotton, covered
with dammaske, and sticht with threads of gold. The Queen bestowed on saint
George at his going to bed, an imbrothered shirt, curiously wrought with many
rare devises, as the labors of Hercules, the triumphs of Mars, and the loves of
many Potentates wrought in such curious manner, as though Art her self had
been the contri^er. Sabra at her going to bed was likewise presented by the
Queens maidens, with a light Kirtle of chaungable ^iolet, somewhat blushing on
a red color: Also they put a white Kerchiefe of silk upon her head, somewhat
lose and untied: so that under the same her Iuorie throat might be easily
seen, and her fair golden hair flying about her neck: over them was cast a
mantle of green silk, which made the bed seem more beautiful, than Floraes
richest ornament: By them the Queen and her virgins fate making sweet
music upon their silver tuned Lutes, till golden sleep had closed up their
eyes: The which being done the Queen with her Ladies departed likewise to
their natural restes: But all this while the Giant never entered the Pauilion,
but slept as soundly under the root of a Pin^ tree, as saint George did in his
imbrothered bed, for he knew not what pleasures belonged thereunto, nor never
before that time beheld any woman's face: At last the night withdrew her black
Curtens, and gave the morning leave to appear, whose fearful light caused
saint George to forsake his bed, and to walk some few miles to ouerview the
Country: In which journey he took such exceeding pleasure, that he thought
it the goodliest Realm that ever he saw: for he perceived well, how that it
was full of worldly wealth.

At last he climbed up to the top of a high Mountain being some two miles
from the Queens Pauilion: whereon he stood and beheld many stately Towns and
Towers, high and mighty Castles, many large woods and meadows, and many
pleasant Rivers, and about the Towns fair Uines, goodly Pastures and fields:
At last he beheld the City of Argenia shining against the Sun, the place
where the Queen in former time was wont to keep her Court: which City was
environed with deep Ditches, the walls strongly builded, and more than five
hundred Towers made of lime and stone: also he saw many fair Churches covered
with Lead, having tops and fyiers of gold, shining most gorgeously with
weather Cocks of silver glistring against the Sun: also he saw the Burgesses
houses stand like Palaces closed with high and strong walls, barred with
chains of Iron from house to house: whereat in his heart he praised much the
Noblenes and richnes of the City, and said to himself that it might well be
called Argenia, for it seemed to be of Argent, that is as much to say of silver.

During the time of the Champions pleasurable walk, which continued from the
break of day, to the closing of the evening, behapned a woeful Tragedy nere
unto the Queens Pauilion, committed by the monstrous Giant, whom S. George
brought from the Inchaunted Tower: For that same morning when the Sun had
mounted some few degrees into the firmament: Seven of the Queens Uirgins in
Sabraes company, walked into a pleasant thicket of trees adjoining to her
Pauilion, not only to take the pleasure of the mornings air: but to hear the
chirping mellodie of birds: In which thicket or groaue under a Pyne tree this
Giant lodged the passed night: for no sooner came these beautiful Ladies under
the branches of the trees, but the Giant cast his eye upon them, whose rare
perfections so fired the heart of the lustful Giant, that he must either
quench his desires with the spoil of their chasteties, or end his days in
some monstrous manner: Therefore he starts up from the place where he lay, and
with a wrathful countenance ran amongst the Ladies* and catching them all
eight at once betwixt his Arms, he bore them to the furthest side of the
grove, where he ravished seven of the Queens Maidens, and afterward devoured
them alive into his loathsome bowels: But Sabra being the eighth of that
woeful number, which in her sight she beheld butchered by that bloody wolf:
still continuing the time of their rauishments, making her supplication to the
Gods, that they would in mercy defend her chastetie from the lustful ra^e of
so wicked a monster, and immediately upon these words she saw an ugly toade
come crauling before her: through which by policy she saved her life, and
preserved her Honor: For she took the toade betwixt her hands, and crushed
the venom from her impoysoned bowels, wherewith she all to be sprinkled her
face: so that presently her saier beauty, was changed into loathsome
blisters: for she then seemed more like^ a creature deformed with Leprosy,
than a Lady of excellent feature. At length she being the last of all, her
time came that she should be deflowred, and the lustful Giant came to fetch
her: but when he beheld her visage so inuenomed, he loathed her sight, seeking
neither to ravish her, nor proffering to devour her: but discontentedly
wandered away, greatly greeuing at the committed crime, and sorely repenting
himself of so wicked a deed: not only for the spoil of the seven Uirgins,
but for the wrongs proffered to so Noble a Knight: who not only granted him
liberty of life, but received him into his service: therefore he raged up and
down the groaue, making the earth to tremble at his exclamations: one while
cursing his fortune and hour of creation: another while banning his Sire and
devilish Dam: But when he remembered the Noble Champion saint George, whose
angry frown he would not see for all the world: therefore to prevent the same,
he run his head most furiously against a knobbed Oak and brayned himself:
where we will leave him now weltring in his blood, and speak what became of
Sab^^ after this bloody accident: for after she had wandered up and down the
thicket many a weary step, incensing heaven against the Giants cruelty: the
Sun began to set, and the dark night drew on, which caused her thus to
complain.

O you immortal powers of heaven, and you celestial Planets, being the true
guiders of the firmaments! open your bright celestial gates, and send some
fatal Plannet, or some burning thunderbolt, to rid me from the vale of
misery, for I will never more return to my beloved Lord, since I am thus
deformed, and made an ugly creature, my loathsome face will prove a corasiue
to his heart, and my body a torment to his soul, my sight will be displeasant,
my company hated, my presence loathed, and every one will shun my sight as from
a Crocadiles: therefore I will remain within this grove, till the heavens
either bring me to my former beauty, or end my languishing misery* yet
witness heaven of my loyalty unto my Lord, and in what extremity I have
maintained my chastety, in remembrance of my true love here will I leave this
chain of gold, for my beloved Lord to find, that he may know, for his sake I
have endured a world of woe: At which speeches she took her Chain (which was
doubled twenty times about her neck) and left it lying all be smeard in the
blood of those virgins whom the Giant had ravished and slain, and so betook
her self to a sad and solitary life, intending never to come in the sight of
men, but to spend her days wandering in the woods: where we will likewise leave
her for a time and speak of saint George, who by this was returned to the
Queens Pauillion, where he missing his Lady, and had intelligence how that
she in company of seven other Ladies, walked in the morning into a pleasant
grove, to hear the mellody of birds, and since that time no news has been
heard of them: for as then it grew toward night, which caused saint George
greatly to mistrust that some mischance had befalne his Lady: then he demanded
what was become of the Giant, but answer was made that he was neither seen
nor heard off since morning, which caused him greatly to suspect the Giants
treachery, and how that by his means the Ladies were prevented of their
purposed pleasures.

Therefore in all have like a frantic man he ran into the thicket, filling
each corner with clamours and resounding echoes of her name, and calling for
Sabra through every bramble bush: but there he could neither hear the voice of
Sabra, nor the answer of any other Lady, but the woeful echo of his
exclamations, which ratled through the leaves of trees: then began he to wax
something melancholy and passionate, wearing the time away with woeful
lamentations, till bright Cinthia mounted on the Hemispheeres: by whose
glistring beams, he saw the ground besprinckled with purple gore, and found
the chain that Sabra was wont to wear about her neck all be smeerde in
blood* he bitterly complained against his own fortune, and his Ladies haples
destenie, for he supposed then that the Giant had murdered her.

O discontented sight (said he) here lies the blood of my beloved Lady, the
truest woman that ever Knight inioyed: that body which for excellence deserved
a Monument of gold, more richer than the Toombe of Angelica, I fear lies
buried in the bowels of that monstrous Giant, whose life vnhapps^ie I granted.
Here is the chain besmeered with blood, which at our first acquaintance I
gave her in a Courtly Mask. This golden chain I say stained with the blood
of my dear Lady, shall for evermore be kept within my bosom, ne^e unto my
bleeding heart, that I may st^ll remember her true love, faith and constancy:
but fond fool that I am, why do I talk in vain? It will not recompense her
murdered soul, the which me thinks I hear how it calls for revenge in
every corner of this groan: It was I that left her carelessly within the
danger of the Giant, whom I little m^strusted: therefore will I meet her in
the Elizian shades, and crave remission for my committed trespass, for on this
Oak I will abridge my life, as did the worthy Knight Melmerophon for the love
of his Lady Sillera: which lamentation being no sooner ended, but he took
the chain of gold and fastened one end to the Arm of a great Oak, and the
other end to his own neck, intending presently to strangle himself, but
heaven prevented his desperate intent after a strange manner: For under the
sam^ tree the brayned Giant lay not yet fully dead, who in this manner spoke to
saint George.

O stay thy hand most Noble and invincible Knight the worlds chief wonder for
admired Chivalry, and let my dying soul conuer^ thee from so wicked a deed:
Seven virgins in this Thicket have I ravished, and buried all their bodies in
my accursed bowelles: but before I could deflower, the eighth, in a strange
manner her bright beauty was converted in to a loathsome leprosy, whereby I
detested her sight, and lost her chastetye undefiled: but by her sad complaynts
I since have understood, how that she is your Lady and Lo^^, and to this hour
she has her residence with in the c^^uite of this thicket, and thereuppon with
a doleful groan which seemed to shake the ground he had a due to the world*
then saint George being glad to hear such tidings reuerted from his desperate
intent, and searched up and down the Grove, till he found Sabra where she
sat, sorrowing under the branches of a mulberie tree, betwixt whom was a sad
and heavy greeting, and as they walked back to the Queens Pauillion, she
discoused to him the truth of this bloody stratagem: where she remained till
the Amazonian Queen had cured her leprosy by the secret virtue of her skill:
of whom after they had taken leave, and given her thanks for her kind
courtesies, saint George with his Lady took their journey toward Persia,
where the Christian Armies lay incampt: At whose ariuall you shall hear
strange and wonderful things, the like was never done in any age.

CHAP XVII.
How Saint George and his Lady lost themselves in a wilderness, where she was
deluered of three goodly boys: The Fayerie Queens Prophecy upon the
Childrens fortunes: Of Saint Georges return into Bohemia, where he christened
his Children, and of the finding of his Fathers grave, over which he built a
stately Toombe.

SAint George having atchiued the adventure of the Inchaunted Tower, and Sabra
the Fury of the lustful Giant: they took their journey toward Persia, where
the Christian Champions lay encamped before the Seldans great City of Graund
Belgor, a place most straungely fortefied with spirits and other gastlie
illusions by the Inchauntment of Osmond, whom you heard before in the last
Chapter, to be the rarest Nigr^mancer in the world: But as the English
Champion with his Lady trauiled thetherward, they happened into a D^sart, and
mighty Wilderness, ouergrowne with lofty Pines, and Ceder trees, and many huge
and mighty Oaks, the spreading branches whereof, seemed to withold the light
of heaven from their untrodden passages, and the tops for exceeding height to
reach into the Elements: the Inhabitants were Siluaines, Satiers, Faieries,
and other woodie Nymphs, which by day sported up and down the Forest, and by
night tended the pleasure of Proserpine the Fayrie Queen. The music of
silver sounding birds, so chearefullie resounding through the woods, and the
whistling wind made ^uch m^l^die amongst the leaves of trees, that it ravished
their ^eces like the harmony of Angels, and made them think they had entered
the shades of gladsome Elizian: one while they wondered at the beauty of the
Woods, which nature had ornefied with a Summers liuerie: another while at the
green and fragrant grass, drawn out in round circles by the Fayries daunces:
so long till they had lost themselves amongst the unknown passages, not knowing
how nor by what means to recover the per^ect path of the^e intended journey,
but were constrained to wander in the Wilderness like solitary Pilgrims,
spending the day with weary steps, and the night with vain imaginations,
even as a child when he has lost himself in a populous Citt^e, runs up
and down not knowing how to retur^e to his native dwelling: Even so it happened
to these two lost and disconsolate trauailers: for when they had wandered many
days one way, and finding no end to their toils, they retired backward to
the place of their first setting forth: where they were wont to hear the
noise of people resound in Country Uillages, and to meet trauailers posting
from place to place: but now they heard nothing but blustering of winds*
rattling in the woods, making the brambles to whistle, and the trees to groan,
and now and then to meet a speckled beast like to the rainebow, weltring from
his Den to seek his natural sustenance: In their travail by night they were
wont to hear the crowing Cock, recording glad tidings of the cheerful days
approach, the naying of horses in pasture fields, and the barcking of dogs in
Farmers houses: but now they were affrighted with the roaring of Lions, yelling
of Caves, the crooking of Toades in roots of rotten trees, and the rufull
sound of Prognies rauishment, recoroded by the Nightingale.

In this solitary manner wearied they the rouling time away, till thrice three
times the silver Moon had renewed her borrowed light: by which time the
burden of Sabraes womb began to grow painful, and the fruit of her body
to wax ripe, the hour of her delivery drew on, wherein she required Lucinaes
help to make saint George the father of a Princely Son: time called for
Midwiues to aid and bring her Babe into the world, and to make her a happ^e
mother: but before the painful hour of her delivery approacht, Saint George
had provided her a bower of (...) branches, which he erected betwixt two
pleasant Hills* where in steed of a Princely Cabbinet, be hung with Arras and
rich Tapestrie, she was constrained to suffice her self with a simple
lodging, covered with Roses and other fragrant flowers: her bed he made of
green moss and thistle Down, beeset curiously round about with Olive
branches, and the sprigges of an Orring tree, which made it seem more
beautiful than Floraes Pauillion, or Dianaes Mansion: but at the last when
she felt the pains of her womb grow intolerable, and the seed ready to be
reaped, and how she was in a Wilderness deuoyde of women's company, that should
be ready to assist her in so secret a matter, she cast her self down upon
her mossie bed, and with a blushing countenance she discovered her mind in
this order to saint George.

My most dear and loving Lord (quoth she) my true and only companion at all
times and seasons except at this hour, for it is the painful hour of my
delivery: therefore depart from out the hearing of my cries, and commit my
fortune to the pleasures of the heavens: for it is not convenient for any man's
e^e to behold the secrets of a woman in such a case: stay not I say dear Lord
to see the Infant now sprawling in my womb to be delivered from the bed of his
creation, forsake my presence for a time, and let me like the Noble Queen of
France, obtain the favor of some Fayrie to be my Midwife, that my Babe may
be as happily borne in this Wilderness, as was her valiant Sons Vallentine and
Orson: the one of them was cherrisht by a King, and the other by a Bear; yet
both of them grew famous in their deeds: My pain is great dear Lord,
therefore depart my Cabbinet, and before bright Phoebus lodges in the W^st, I
shall either be a happy mother, or a liueles body: thou a joyful Father, or a
sorrowful Widdower. At which words Saint George sealed agreement with a kiss
and silently departed without any reply: but with a thousand sighs he had her
adue, and so took his way to the top of a Mountain, being in distance from
his Ladies abiding a quarter of a mile: there kneeled he during the time of
her travails, with his bare knees upon the bowels of the earth, never ceasing
prayer, but continually soliciting the M^^estie of God, to grant his Lady a
speedy delivery: at whose divine orizons the heavens seemed to relent, and all
the time of her pain, co^ered the world with a vale of darkness: whole
flights of birds, with Troops of untamed beasts ^ame flocking round about the
Mountain where he kneeled, and in their kinds assisted his celestial
contemplations: where I will leave him for a time, and speak what happened to
Sabra in the middle of her pains and extreamitie of her travails: for after
saint Georges departure, the fury of her grief so raged in her womb, that it
exceeded the bounds of reason, whereby his heart was constrained to breath so
many scortching sighs, that they seemed to blast the leaves of trees, and to
wither the flowers which beautefied her Cabbinet: her burdened torments
caused her star-bright eyes like fountains to distill down silver drops, and
all the rest of her body to tremble like a Castle in a tyrrible earthquake: so
grievous was her pains, and rufull was her cries, that she caused the
merciless Tigers to relent, and untamed Lions with other wild Beasts, like
silly Lambs to sit and bleate: her grievous cries and bitter moanes, caused
the Heavens as it were to bleed their vapors down, and the earth to weep a
spring of tears: both herbs and trees did s^eme to droope, hard stony
Rocks to sweat when she complained.

At last her pitiful cries pierced down too the lowest vaults of direful
Di^, where Proserp^^e ^is Crowned amongst her Fayries, and so prevailed: that
in all haste she ascended from her regiment to world this Ladies (...)
delivery, and ^o make her mother of (...): who (...) the duty of (...) her
womb, and safely brought her (...) into the world: At whose first sight the
heavens began to smile, and the earth to rejoice, as a sign and token that in
time to come, they would prove three of the Noblest Knights in the world.

This ^urteous deed of Proserpine* being no sooner performed: but she laid
the three boys in three most rich and sumptuous Cradles, the which she caused
her Fayries to fetch inuicible from three of the richest kings in the world,
and therewithal mantles of silk, with other things thereunto belonging:
Likewise she caused a winged S^^^er to fetch from the furthiest borders of
India, a covering of dammaske Ta^^^tie imbrodered with gold, the most richest
ornament that even mortal eye beheld: for thereon was wrought and (...)
portraied by the curious skill of Indian (...), how God created heaven and
earth, the w^ndring courses both of Sun and Moon, and likewise how the
golden Plannets daily do prodominate: Also there is no Story in any age
remembered since the beginning of the world, but it was thereon most p^^fectly
wrought: So excellent it was that Art herself could never devise a cuninger.
With this rich and sumptuous ornament she covered the Ladies Childe-bed:
whereby it seemed to surpass in bravery the gorgeous bed of Juno Queen of
heaven: when first she entertained imperious Jove. After this Proserpine laid
under every childs pillow a silver Tablet, whereon was written in letters of
gold, their good and happy fortunes. Under the first were these verses
caractered, who at that time lay frowning in his Cradle like the God of War.

A souldi^^ ^old a man of wondrous might,
A King likewise this royal babe shall di^
Three golden D^^de (...) bloody fight,
By this brave Prince shall conquered be:
The Towers of fay^r (...) and Room,
Shall yield to him in happ^ (...) to come.
Under the pillow of the second Babe was caractered these verses following: who
lay in his cradle smil^^g like Cupid upon the la^^e of Dido, whom V^nus (...)
to the liknes of As^^nius.

This child shall likewise live to be a King,
Times wonder for device and Courtly spor^*
His Til^es and Turniments a broad shall ring,
To every coast where Knights resort:
Queens shall atend and humble at his feet:
Thus love and beauty shall together meet.
Lastly, under the pillow of the third were these verses likewise caractred,
who blushed in his cradle like Pallas when her strove for the golden aple with
Venus and the Queen of heaven.

The Muses darling for true sapience,
In Princes Court this Babe shall spend his days:
Kings shall admire his learned eloquence,
And write in brazen books his endless praise*
By Pallas gift he shall atchiue a Crown,
Advance his fame and lift him to renown*
Thus when the Fayrie Queen had ended her Prophecy upon the Children, and had
left their golden Fortunes lying in their Cradles, she vanished away, leaving
the Lady rejoicing at her safe delivery, and woondred at the gifts of
Proserpine; which she coniectured to be but shadows to dazell her eyes, and
things of a va^ing substance: but when she had laid her b^ndes upon the
rich covering of Dammaske Taffatie which covered her mossie bed, and felt that
it was the self same form that it seemed: she cast her eyes with a
cheerful look up to the Majesty of heaven, and not only gave thanks to
immortal Jove for her rich received benefits: but for his merciful kindness in
making her the happy Mother of three such goodly children: but we will now
return again to the noble Champion Saint George, whom we left praying upon
the mountain top: and as you heard before, the skies were ouerspred with Sable
Clouds, as though they had been mourning witnesses of his Ladies torments:
but before the golden Sun had diu'de into watery The^is lap, the ^lemen began
to clear, and to withdraw her former mourning Mantles: by which he supposed
that heaven had pi^^ied his Ladies pains, and granted her a safe delivery:
therefore in all have he retired back to the Siluaine Cabbinet, the which he
found most strangely decked with sumptuous habilllments, his Lady lying in her
Childbed as glorious, as if she had been the greatest Empress in the world,
and three Princely boys sweetly sleeping in their several Cradles: At whose
first sight his heart was so ravished with joy, that for a time it withheld the
passage of his tongue: but at last when he found the silver Tablets lying
under the pillows, and had read the happy fortunes of his Children, he ran
unto his Lady, embraced her most lovingly, and kindly demanded the true
discourse of that strange accident, and by whose means the bower was
beautefied so gorgeously, and the prop^under of his Childrens Prophecy: who
with a countenance blushing like the purple Morning, replied in this manner.

My most dear and well-beloved Lord, the pains I have endured to make you the
happy Father of three lovely boys* has been more tyrrible than the str^ake
of death: but yet my delivery more joyful than the pleasures of Elizian: the
winds carried my groans to every corner of this Wilderness, whereby both
trees and herbs assisted my complaints, beasts, birds, and feathered fowls,
with every sensses thing that nature framed on this earth, seemed to agrauate
my mones: but in the middle of my torments, when my soul was ready to forsake
this worldly habitation: there appeared to me a Queen Crowned with a golden
Diadem, in state and gesture, like imperious Juno, and in beauty to divine
Diana: her garments for bravery seemed to stain the Rainbow in her
brightest hue, and for diversity in colors, to surpass the Flowers in the
fields: On her attended many beautiful Nymphs, some clad in garments in
color like the marble Ocean, some in attire as gallant as the purple Rose, and
some more glorious than the azurde firmaments: her wisdom might compare with
Apolloes* her judgment with Pallas, and her skill with Lucinaes: for no sooner
entered she my presence but my travails ceased, and my womb delivered up her
grievous burden: my Bab^s being brought to light by the virtue of her skill,
she prepared these rich and sumptuous Cradles, the which were brought invisible
to my Cabbinet: Likewise these Mantled and this imbrothered Couerled she
franckly bestowed upon me, and so immediately vanished away.

At which words saint George gave her so many kind embraces, and kissed her
so lovingly, as though it had bin the first day of their Nuptials: At last her
hunger increased, and her desires thirsted so much after food, that except
she received some comfortable sustenance, her life were in danger. This
extreme desire of Sabra, caused S. George to burkle on his Armor, and to
vnsheath his trusty sword, ready to gorge the intrails of some Dear: who
swore by the honor of true Knighthood, never to rest in peace, till he had
purchased his hearts content. My Love (quoth he) I will adventure for thy sake,
more dangers than Jason ^id for Medeas love: I Will search the thickest Groves,
and chase the nimble Do to death: the flying Foul I Will follow up and down
from tree to tree, till over wearied they do fall and die: For love of thee
and these my tender Babes, whom I esteem more dearer than the Conquest of
rich Babylon: I will adventure more dangers than di^ Hercules for the love of
Dianaria, and more extremes than Turnus did in his blody battles, and
thereupon with his Fanchion ready charged, he traced the woods, leaving no
thornie brake nor mossie Cave unsearched, till he had sound a heard of fallow
Dear: from which number he singled out the fattest to make his Lady a
bountiful banquet: but in the time of his absence there hayned to Sabra a
strange and wonderful accident: for there came weltring into her Cabbinet
three most wild and monstrous beasts, a Lion, a Tiger, and a she Wolf,
which took the Babes out of their cradles, and bore them to their secret Canes.

At which sight, Sabra like one distraught of sense, started from her bed, and
to her weak power offered to follow the Beasts: but all in vain: for before
she could get without her Cabbinet, they were past sight, and the Childrens
cries without her hearing: then like a discontented woman she turned back,
beating her breasts, re^ding her hair, and raging up and down her Cabbinet,
using all the rigor she could devise against her self, and had not Saint
George returned the sooner, she had most violently committed her own
slaughter: but at his return when he beheld her face stained with tears, her
head disrobde of ornaments, and her Iuorie breasts all to be rent and torn,
he cast down his venison, and in all haste asked the cause of her sorrow.

O (said she) this is the wofullest day that ever hapt to ^e: for in the time
of your unhappy hunting a Lyones, a Tygresse, and a Wolf came into my
Cabbinet and took my Children from their Cradles, what is become of them I
know not: but greatly I fear by this time, they are intoombed within their
hungry bowels.

O simple Monuments (quoth he) for such sweet Babes! Well Sabra, if the
monsters have berea^ed me of my children: this bloody sword that diu^de into
the intrailes of fallow Dear, shall riue my woeful heart in twain. Accursed
be this fatal day: the Planets that predominate, and Sun that shines
thereon: Heaven blot it from the year, and let it never more be numbered, but
accounted for a dismal day through all the world: let all the trees be
blasted in these accursed woods: let herbs and grass consume a way and die,
and all things perish in this Wilderness: but why breath I out these curses in
vain, when as me thinks I hear my Children in untamed Lions dens crying for
help and succor: I come sweet Babes I come, either to redeem you from the
Tigers wrathful Jaws, or make my grave within their bowels: then took he up
^^s sword besmeered all with blood, and like a man bereau^e of wit and sense
raged up and down the Wilderness, searching every corner for his Children: but
his Lady remained still in her Cabbinet lamenting for their loss* washing
their Cradles with her Pearled tears that trickled down her stained cheeks
like silver drops.

Many ways wandered saint George: sometimes in valleys where W^lfes and Tigers
lurk: sometimes on mountain tops where Lions whelps do sport and play,
and many times in dismal thickets where Snakes and Serpents live.

Thus wandered S. George up and down the Wilderness for the space of two days,
hearing no news of his unchristened Children: At last he approached the sight
of a pleasant River, which smoothly glided down betwixt two Mountains: into
whose streams be purposed to cast himself, and so by a desperate death give
end to his sorrows: But as he was committing his body to the mercy of the
waters, and his soul to the pleasure of the heavens, he heard a far off the
rufull s^rike as he thought of a comfortles Babe: which sudden noise caused
him to refrain his desperate purpose, and with more discreation tender his
own safety: Then casting his eye aside, it was his happy destenie to spy
the three inhumane beasts lying at the foot of the hill, tumbling themselves
against the warm Sun, and his three pretty babes sucking from their wombes
their most unkindly milk: which spectackle so encouraged the Champion, that
without further aduisement, with his single sword he assailed at one time the
three Monsters, but so furiously they pursued him, that he little prevailed,
and being almost breathless, was forced to leap into an Oringe tree, else had
he been buried in their merciless bowels: but when the three wild beasts
perceived him above their reaches, and that by no means they could come near
him, with their wrathful jaws they so rent and tore the root of the tree,
that if by policy he had not prevented them, the tree had been pulled in
pieces, for at that time it was so full of ripe Oringes, and so ouerloden, that
the branches seemed to bend, and the boughs to break: of which fruit he cast
such abundance down to the beasts, whereby they restrained their furies, and
fed so fast thereon, that in short time they grew drunk, and quite overcome
with a dead and heavy sleep, this good and happy fortune caused S. George
nimbly to leap from the tree, and with his keen edged sword, delivered their
monstrous heads from their bodies the which being done he went to his
children, lying comfortless upon a mossy bank, who so pleasantly smiled in
his face, that they made him greatly to rejoice, and to receive as great
pleasure in their sights, as though he had been honored with the Conquests
of Caesar, or the Royalty of Alexander, therefore after he had given them his
blessing, he took them up in his Arms, and spoke these words following.

Come, come my pretty Babes, your safe deliueries from these inhumane Monsters,
will add long life unto your mother, and has preserude your father from a
desperate death: from henceforth let heaven be your guides, and send you as
happy fortunes as Remus and Romulus, the first founders of imperious Rome,
which in their infancies were nurced with the milk of a ravenous Wolf: and as
prosperous in your adventures, as was that Persian Potentate which fed upon
the milk of a Bitch: At the end of which speeches he approached the Cabbinet,
where he left his Lady mourning for the loss of her children: but at his
return, he found her almost without sense or moving, being not able to give
him a joyful welcome, whereat he fell into this extreme passion of sorrow.

O fortune, fortune (quoth he) how many griefs heapest thou upon my head?
will thou needs inioyne me to an endless sorrow? See, Sabra see, I have
redeemed our sons and freed them from the Tigers bloody iaws, whose wrathful
countenance did threaten death: Which comfortable speeches caused her presently
to revive, and to take the silly Infants in her Arms, laying them sweetly upon
her yuorie bosom, at which they seemed to smile as ^^easantly, as Cupid upon
the lap of Dido, when Aeneas sported in the C^u^t of Carthage, the kind
embraces, loving speeches, and joyful conference that past betwixt the
Champion and his Lady, were now too long to be discoursed: But to be short,
they remained in the wilderness without fu^ther disturbance either of wild
beasts or other accident, till Sabra had recovered her Childbed sickness: and
then being conducted b^ a happy star, they returned back the ready way to
Christendom* where after some few days travail they arrived in the Bohemian
Court, where the King of that Country, (...) two other bordering Princes, most
Royally Christened (...) Children: The eldest they named Guy: the second
Alexander* and the third David: the which being performed, and the Triumphs
ended: which in most sumpteous manner continued, for the space of one month:
then the Bohemian King for the great love he bare unto S. George, provided
most honorably for his childrens bringing up: First, he appointed three
several Ambassadors, with all things necessary for so Princely a charge, to
conduct the three Infants to three several Countries: the first and eldest,
whose fortune was to be a soldier, he sent to the imperial City of Rome,
(being then the wonder of the world for Martial discipline) there by the
Emperor to be trained up. The second, whose fortune was to be a Courtly
Prince, he sent to the rich and plentiful Country of England, being the pride
of Christendom for all delightful pleasures: The third and last, whose
fortune was to prove a Scholar, he sent into Germany, to the Uniuersity of
Wittenberge, being thought at that time to be the excellenst place of
learning, that remained throughout the whole world.

Thus were saint Georges Children provided for by the Bohemian King: For when
the Ambassadors were in a readiness, the ships for their passage furnished,
and their attendance appointed, saint George in the company of his Lady, the
King of Bohemia with his Queen, and a train of Lords, gentlemen, and Ladies,
conducted them to shipbord, where the wind served them so prosperously, that
in short time they bid adieu to the shore, and sailed chearefully away: But as
saint George returned back to the Bohemian Court, it was his chance to come
by an old ruinated Monastery, under whose walls in former time his Father was
buried, the which he knew by certain verses that was carved in stone over his
grave by the Commons of the Country (as you may read before in the beginning
of this History.) Over the same, he requested of the King, that he might erect
a stately Monument, that the remembrance of his name might live for ever, and
not be buried in the grave of obscurity.

To which reasonable demand, the King most willingly consented, and in all
have gave special commandment, that the cunningest Architectors that remained
within his Dominion, should forthwith be sent for, and withal gave a tun of
gold forth of his own treasury toward the performance thereof.

The sudden report of this memorable deed, being bruted abroad, caused
workmen to come from every place of their own accord with such willingness,
that they in short time finished it. The foundation of the Toombe, was of the
purest Marble, whereon was engraven the frame of the earth, and how the watery
Ocean was divided: with woods groves, hills and dales, so lively portrayed,
that it was a wonder to behold: the props and Pinacles of Allablaster, beset
with knobs of Jasper stone, the sides and Pillars of the clearest Iette, upon
the topp stood four golden Lions, holding up as it were an Elemen^, therein
was curiously contrived the golden Sun and Moon, and how the heavens have
usual courses, with many other excellent things wrought both in gold and
silver, which for this time I omit, because I am forced at large to discover
the Princely proceedings of saint George, who after the Monument was finished,
he with his Lady most humbly took their leave of the King, thanking him for
his love, kindness, and courtesy, and so departed toward Egypt and Persia, of
whose adventures you shall hear more in this Chapter following.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Saint George with his Lady, arrived in Egypt: Of their Royal
entertainements to the City of Graund Cayer: And also how Sabra was Crowned
Queen of Egypt.

MAny strange accidents, and dangerous adventures saint George with his Lady
passed, before they arrived within the territories of Egypt, that I want memory
to relate them, and A^te to discribe them: But at last when fortune smiled,
which before had long time crossed their intents with her inconstant chances,
and had cast them happily upon the Egiptian shore, being the nurse and mother
of Sabraes first creation: The twelve Pieres with whom saint George before
time had committed the guiding of the Land, and keeping of his Crown, as you
heard before discou^sed, now met him and his Lady, at the Sea side, most
richly mounted upon their costly trapped Steedes, and willingly surrendered up
his Scepter, Crown and Regiment: and after in company of many Princely
Estates, both of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, and Royal Gentlemen. They
attended them to the rich City of Graund Caier, being then under the
subjection of the Egiptian Monarchy, and the greatest City in the world: For
it was in breadth and compass full threescore miles, and had by just account
within the walls twelve thousand Churches, besides Abbeys, Priories, and
houses of Religion

(...)
