The true history of the Christen departing of the reuere^de man, D. Martyne
Luther, collected by Iustus Jonas, Michael Celius, and Ioannes Aurifaber which
were present thereat, and translated into Englysh by Johan Bale.

Arma Ducis Saxoniae.



I heard a voice from heaven (says S. Johan) which said thus unto me. Blessed
are the dead which depart in the lord. For they from hens forth shall rest
from their labors.

Apoca. xiiij. The true hystorye of the Christen departing of the reuere^de
man D. Martyne Luther, collected by Iustus Jonas, Michael Celius, and Ioannes
Aurifaber which were present thereat, and translated into Englysh by Johan Bale.
IN the year of our lord a M.D.XLVI. at the instaunt request of the worthy
and noble earls of Mansfelde. the Reverend man of God Doctor Martyne Luther
departed from Wittemberge the 23. of Ianuarye, Iournaye
and rested the first night at Bitterfelde. For this only cause ded they call
him thydre at that time, to end by his godly dyscressyon serten greuouse
scysmes and controuersyes, which had long (and not without parell) continued
betwixt them. Rather coueted they him than any other person to fynysh those
varyaunces. for that they knew him a man of most grounded conscience,
learning, and judgment, and also natyue borne within their domynyon in a city
called ISlebe^. ISleben.
And though the treatye of soch polytyck causes perteyned not to his vocacyo^*
yet was he not vndylyge^t in reducynge that long co^ceyned malice and
daungerouse hate, in to a most agreeable Christen concord. And the rather, that
it was in his own natyue contraye.

On the xxiiij. day of Ianuarye about eleven of the clock, Hallis.
he came to Hallis and remained there all that day forth and iij. days after
in the house of Doctor Iustus Jonas. In the mean time he made there a solemn
sermon in the temple, of the Conuersyon of S. Paul, out of the Apostles Acts.

On the frydaye after / which was the xxviii. day of Ianuarye, he departed
from Hallis with Doctor Jonas and his iij. sons Johan, 3. sons.
Martyne, and Paul, and so passed over the daungerouse flode in a small whyrye,
taking his iournaye from thens toward ISleben his own natyue city.

As he had ones entered the countye of Mansfelde, he was honorably received
of an C. and xiij. horse men. Anon after in the charett he became so sore
sick, that all they which were present, Sore syck
much doubted of his life. Whereupon they took the next harbor, and releued
him with soch prouysyon as there was, so that he was very cherefull that
night, and complained no more of sickness.

From the xxix. day of Ianuarye till the xvij. day of Februarye, he was
contynuallye occupied about the matters of concord and agreement of the
forseyd noble princes, bringing it unto a most godly conclusyon. And besides
his great labor in so necessary a cause, Preached
he preached in the mean time iiij. worthy sermons, and ij. times
communycated with the Christian church there in the holy supper of the lord.
And in the latter communyon, which was upon the sunday, he ordained ij.
mynysters of the word of God, after the Apostles manner.

From the before said.xxix. day of Ianuarye to the xvij. of Februarye, many a
wonderful sentence came out of his mouth, and many confortable words ded he
utter. Many hard places of the scriptures he opened in the presence of those
noble princes, both at their tables and other where else, whereof a book is now
compyled and imprented. And among all other, he often times complained of his
age, and said. If it pleased God that he came again to Wittemberge, he would
desire no longar to live, but depart in the lord.

And always at even, he used by the space of these xxi. days, to go from the
princes great haule i^to his own chamber, where as standing right up against
the wyndowe, he occupied a serten time in most fervent prayer unto God the
eternal father. Prayer.
Whereof we Iustus Jonas, Michael Celius, Ioannes Aurifaber, and Ambrose his
own servant much marueled, understanding often times serten of his words. And
this done, he turned him always from the wyndowe toward us with a merye
countenance, as one delivered of a very heavy burden. The^ would he a little
commen with us, and so go to his bed.

On the wedynsdaye, which was the xvij. day of Februarye, Princes.
both the noble princes and we desired him to keep his chamber, and no longar
to accombre him self in their matters, which were before that fullye and
clerelye pacyfyed. Notwithstanding he came forth that morning and again at
even, like as he had done every day before. In the very same evening after
supper, about a vij. or viij. hours before his departing from this world, A
sermon
he made us a most grounded sermon of death necessary and of the life to
come, having therein this sentence among other.

O most blessed lord, xx. years are a very small time. Yet if there were no
increace therein according to thy godly creacyon and ordinance, the world
would in a manner be clerelye vacaunt, or without people. The greatter part of
his church, does God gather unto him from infauntes. And verelye I believe this
to be true, that when a young child of one year of age dies, there departs
out of the world with him* a M. or ij. of the same age. Departing.
But when I now depart the world which am three score years old, there will
scant iij. score depart hens with me of the same age, so few are there which
live to that age. And nothing else win we by our long contynuaunce here, but
daily affliccyons and sorrows, in beholdynge the wickedness, falsehede, and
calamytees of this world. What a cruel sprete our common aduersarye is, we
need to go no farther for record than ourselves. And non other thing else is
mankind, than a sheep fold appointed to the slaughter.

Afterward in the night as we were in diverse communycacyons, he chanced upon
this questyon. Whether in the world to come or in the perpetual congregacyo^,
A questyo^
one of us should know an other or nay? And as we instauntlye desired him
therein to say his mind, he made us this answer. How ded Adam (said he) how
ded Adam? As he arose from the sleep that God cast him in, Gene. 2. and beheld
Eua standing by him, whom he never saw before, he said not, what art thu? or
from whens do thu come? But he said. Adam.
This is now a bone taken of my bones, and a very flesde of my flesh. Thus
perceived he her, not to be made of a dead stock or a stone, but of his own
flesh. And full was he of the holy Ghost in that hour, having the perfyght
and through knowledge of God. To this full knowledge shall we come after this
life, being renouated in Christ and shall know one another by countenance,
more perfyghtlye than ever Ada^ knew Eua his wife.

After these communycacyons, he arose and went unto his own chamber* his ij.
sons Martyne and Paul with Michael Celius following him. Anon after leaning
in the wyndowe, he gave himself to prayer after his accustomed manner. Prayer.
Then went Michael Celius down again / and mastre Johan Aurifaber came up.
Unto whom he said. I wexe now very sick, and much pain I feel about my
heart. Than said the said mastre Johan vnro him. When I was tutour to the young
earls here, as either of the^ felt any grefe about the stomach, the countess
mynystred thereunto soch a confortable medycyne as releued them straight ways.
Medycyne.
If ye will have that, I shall procure it for you to the easement of your
grefe. He desyered him so to do. Then went he down, and sent up Jonas and
Celius unto him. Which axt him, how he ded? And he complained of a wonderful
grefe about his heart. Then ded they confort him with warmed kerchers, whereupon
he sumwhat amended.

Ano^ after came earl Albert in great have unto him with M. Johan Aurifaber,
bringing the before rehearced medycyne. And the earl said unto him. Earl
Albert.
How do ye mastre doctor. He answered. No parell is here to be doubted most
benygne and gentle prince, but my hope is within a while to be much better
tha^ I now am. Then commanded the noble earl, the said medycyne to be given
unto him. And so after certain communycacyons he departed from him again.

Immedyatlye after, as he sumwhat amended. he desired to lie down upon the
bed about ix. of the clock, and slept the requyetouslye by the space of
more than half an hour, Watchynge.
D. Jonas, Michael Celius, his ij. sons Martyne and Paul, with Ambrose his
servant remaining still in the chamber. And as he awoke about x. of the
clock, he said unto them. What syttye there yet still? Ye may go to your
rest. They answered. No, mastre Doctor, it is mete we watch and se what ye
have need of. With that he desired to rise* and so went into the stodye which
was next to his chamber. And as he had entered the said stodye, he spoke these
words. The everlasting God be my confort, unto god
for now I go to my bed. Into thy hands, o lord, I commend my sprete. For
thu God of truth have redeemed me.

And as he had done of his clothes, and was laid in the bed, he gave to yche
one of them his hand, and said Fare well to you all sweet brethren in the
lord. Pray for the congregacyon and holy Gospel of God, that they may have
prosperou^e success. For the wicked counsel of Trydent and that abhomynable
pope has sought and yet seeks to do them both great harm. The pope
Anon after he fell again on sleep, and rested quyetouslye till one of the
clock. And as he awoke, he called his servant Ambrose, and commanded him to
make hot the stoue or hot house.

Then doctor Jonas Asked him, how he felt himself? Whereunto he answered. O my
lord God, Jonas.
how sick am I this hour? O mastre Jonas, I reckon non other than here in
ISleben where I was both borne and baptized, to lay my mortal bones. Then
said Doctor Jonas and his servant Ambrose unto him. We doubt not but God our
eternal father will be your syngular confort, through his son Jesus Christ,
whom you have so ernestlye preached to the world. With that he arose up alone
without help, and went into the stoue, repetynge again the words a fore
spoken. Into thy hands, o lord, I commend my soul. For thu God of truth
without fail have redeemed me, unto god.
And so ones or twyse he walked up and down in the stoue, and than returned
again to his bed.

Then came there in unto him, his host and hostasse, mastre Simon field a
Doctor of Physyck, and one Ludouicus a medycyne mastre also, with serten other
of the city. Anon after resorted unto him earl Albert and his lady with
other noble men and women, Resort.
bringing with them all manner of sweet odours, oyntme^tes, spyces, and
confortatyues. And all they ded their best to confort him there. Then called he
unto God, saying. O my lord God, how greuouse anguysh suffer I now about my
heart? I shall now dye, lord, I thank the hyghlye. I shall now lay my bones
in ISleben mine own natyue city.

Then said Doctor Jonas and Michael Celius unto him. To Christ
Reverend father, call now upon the lord Ihesus Christ whom you so inteyrlye
have loved, our only medyatour and high Bishop of our sowles, and no doubt of
it, he will gracyouslye hear you. Ye have now well swett, god will (we trust)
better it. Whereunto he answered. Yea, but the sweat is cold and full of
death. I give over this life, for my pains increase more and more.

O my euelastynge father, the God and father of our lord Jesus Christ, yea the
lord of all Ghostlye confort. Thanks.
I render unto the most high thanks this hour, that it has pleased thy
inestymable goodness, to make open unto me a sinner, thy most derelye beloved
son my lord Jesus Christ, whom I have now (I thank the) in full and
perfyght believe. Him have I preached, him have I confessed, him have I loved
and gloryfyed, whom the most wicked Pope with his cursed cormorontes do still
yett darken, The pope
dysdayne, mock, persecute and blaspheme. I besyche the most dear lord Jesus
Christ, mercyfullye to receive my soul.

O my heavenly father, though I now leave this mortal body, and am taken
from this life, yet do I certaynlye know that I shall evermore dwell with the,
and that non shall be hable to witholde me from thy gracious hands.

So has God loved the world, that he has given it his only son, that non
which believe in him should perysh, but have the life everlasting. Joan. 3.
For God sent not his son into the world to condemn the world, but that
the world through him, might be saved. He that believes on him, shall not be
condemned. The God (says David) which is our sauer, is even the same lord
God, by whom we escape death. Psalm. 67.
Give thanks unto that lord in the congregacyon, for the welsprynges of
Israel. For his glory is here, and his might in the clouds.

Then resorted unto him the medycyne mastre, of whose hands he received to the
quantyte of a spone full of that he mynystred. Anon after he said again, I go
hens, I go hens. My soul I commend unto God which created it. And with that
he thryse repeted again these words. unto god.
Lord and father, into thy hands I commend my sprete. Thu God of truth have
truly redeemed me. And as he had thus commended his soul to the heavenly
father, he lay quyetouslye still, and moved not at all. Then they which were
about him, uttered many ghostlye words, they moved him, refreshed him, and
called dyuerslye upon him to speak. But he neither opened eye, nor yet
answered one word.

As he was thus in quiet / and departed to every mannis thinking, Doctor
Jonas and Michael Celius cried with a loud voice, Reverend father, doctrine.
will ye persevere in Christ and his holy doctrine, which ye have hitherto
taught and constauntlye now dye in the same? He answered with stomach that all
which were present might hear it. Yea, And with that he turned himself on the
right side, Co^staun^^
and so slept the space of a quarter of an hour, so that many reckened he
should have recovered. But we lyked nothing that sleep, but from thens fourth
with lyghtes we most dylygentlye marked his eyes.

Anon after came in Earl Johan Henryck of Swartzenburch with his lady. And by
that time he wexed very pale in the face. His fete and hands were deadlye
cold, and from the heart ward he sumwhat panted, but it was so softlye that we
very little perceived it. In the which light breathynge he gave over his life
to God, In peace
without any pain to all our judgments. For he neither moved hand nor foot
theri^. Neither was there any of us (as we testyfye here in conscience both
before God and man) that could perceive in him any perturbacyon, dolor, or
other unquietness of body in his departing. But quyetouslye and swetelye
with all gentylnesse of sprete he rested in the lord. Simeon.
Like as old Symeon said. Now letyst thy servant depart in peace, according
to thy promise. So that this saying of Christ in the vii^. of Ioha^ may well be
veryfyed on him. Verelye I say unto you, he that keep my word shall never se
death.

This text out of the viij. chaptre of Ioha^, was the last clause that in this
life he wrote with his own hand, about x. days before he departed. And for a
memoryall he regestred it in the Bible of huldrick hans his frynde, which was
there the rent mastre of that city. And he left it after this sort. Ioann. 8.
Never to se death. What an incredyble speaking is this, if it be conferred
with manifest and common experyence? Yet he which is the veryte it self, has
so spoken it. Truly when a man has this sentence in seryouse remembrance,
stedefastlye beleuynge it, and departs hens therein, he must plesauntlye pass
away, and not feel the hard panges of death. And undoubtedly blessed is
that man in that word of believe which he has so remembered in the very
death. Herunto he thus subscrybed. Martynus Luther Doctor. 1546. die 7.
Februarij.

After this was his dead body wrapped in a new white lynen vesture, His body.
and so laid again upon the bed, remaining there still by the space of v.
hours. In the mean time came there in many worshypfull and honest cytiezens,
beholdynge it not without tears of faith fullness and love.

On the xix. day of Februarye about ij. of the clock at after none, was the
corpse carried fourth with great solempnyte and spirytuall songs in their
mother tunge, Princes.
into the pryncypall church of S. Andrewe. And many great princes and earls
followed the same, as wolfangus prince of Anhalt with his ij. brethren earl
Philipp and earl Johan with their wives and whole famylyes, earl Albert,
earl Johan and earl Wolfange of Mansfelde with their wives and howsholdes
also, prince Eucrarde with his ij. sons earl George and Christopher with
their ladies and assemblyes, with a great sort of lords and gentylmen more,
and a wonderful nombre of the commen people. Where as doctor Iustus Jonas made
the funeral sermon dyuyded into iij, Jonas.
parts the first treating of the personage and godly gifts of Martyne
Luther, the second of the lattre resurreccyon and life to come, the third
comprehends serten commynacyons and thretteninges against the truths
adversaries, that he being dead, should not yet cease to invade Antichrists
blasphemouse kyngedome. And this was upon the lattre part of the fort chaptre
of S, Paul's first epistle to the Thessalonyanes.

Anon after at the instaunt petycyo^ and request of the most noble prince
electour Ioha^ Frederick duke of Saxon, The duke
the corpse was decred to be carried, with solemn obsequyes unto the famous
city of Wittemberge, the noble princes and earls aforenamed, acco^panyenge it
with great worshypp to the farther gates of ISlebe^

And about six of the clock at night the next day after, Hallys.
they came therewith to Hallis, where as it was also received with like
solempnyte of the senate and cytiezens, and so reserved in S. Maryes church
there all that night. In all the towns and vyllages as they came by, were the
belles solempnelye ronge, with no small lamentacyon and dolor of the commen
people.

The next day was it most honorably received of the lords and high officers
of the noble duke of Saxon, the earls of Anhalt, Princes.
Swartze^burg and Ma^sfelde, and other great estates more with a mighty nombre
of horse men, and so brought sole^pnelye to Bitterfelde, and from thens to the
city of Wittemberge. Long were it to rehearce all the funeral ceremonies,
and sorrowful mournynges among the common people in the towns as they went.

As they were ones comen to the gates of Wittemberge, at the commandment of
the prince electour Johan Frederick which was there present, Electour
the rectour and masters of that noble university with their great nombre of
scolers on the one side, and the worthy senate with their great commynalte on
the other side, received them worshyplye in their degrees. Before the hearce
went from thens in order, the mynysters of the churches and scoles with their
scollers, and they sange spirytuall songs in their mother tunge, as their
common manner is at buryals. Next after the corpse followed his most Christen wife
Kateryne Luther with serten sober and dyscrete matrones. After them followed his
iij. sons, His wife and sons
Ioha^, Martyne, and Paul, James Luther a burger of Mansfelde, with diverse
other of his kynsfolke. The^ followed the high rectour or deane of the
university with soch yo^ge princes, earls, and barons as were studeauntes in
the same.

After them followed Doctor Georgius Pontanus, doctor Philippus Melan^ho^,
Doctor Iustus Jonas, doctors
Doctor Johan Pomeranus, Doctor Gaspar Cruciger, Doctor Hieronymus, with other
ancient doctors and masters of the university in a comelye order. After these
followed the great commynaltces both of studeauntes and also of the common
people. Last of all followed there honest matrones and vyrgynes in a semelye
order also. And after them soch a nombre of strangers as never in Witte^berge
was seane before that day. Strangers.
And as they had ones brought it into the to church, they set it before the
pulpett, and sange unto God their accustomed songs, had commenlye at great
buryalles in there mother tunge. Pomeranus.
Then went doctor Johan Pomeranus into the pulpet, and made a most confortable
sermon, to that most worshypfull audyence, which is now imprented. In like case
Phylypp Melanthon made a funeral oracyon with very ernest sprete to the
confort of that congregacyon, which is also imprented and here into Englysh
translated.

After this oracyon, serten learned mastres thereunto appointed, reuerentlye took
the body and so buried it, not far from the tombs of the noble dukes in the
same church. Buried.
Thus is the precyouse organe and instrument of the holy Ghost, the body of
this Reverend Doctor Martyne Luther, committed to the earth in the tower
temple of Wittemberge, not far from that pulpett wherein he made many a
notable and godly sermon by his lyfetyme, in the presence of the most worthy
electours Dukes of Saxon, and many other noble princes more. So that it may
well be veryfyed that Saint Paul writes 1. Corinthiorum 15. That is sown in
weakness, 1. Cor. 15
shall arise in power The body that is sown in corrupcyon, shall rise again
uncorrupted.

So Christen a departing from this myserye unto the eternal felycyte, our
everlasting heavenly father grant us of his mercy infynite, which so
gracyouslye called this elect servant of his Martyne Luther to so worthy an
office, and also the lord Jesus Christ whom he so faythfullye preached and
confessed to the world, with the holy Ghost which gave him most syngular
strength in daungerouse parcls against the wicked pope and the gates of hell.
Amen.

We Iustus Jonas, Michael Celius, and Ioannes Aurifaber, witnesses
which were present at the godly and gracious departing of Doctor Martyne
Luther from the beginning to the end, do testyfye here in conscience as we
saw and heard, as we will be saved before God in the great day of trial. And
not we only, but the noble princes and earls which were there also present,
do witness the same. God the father of our lord Jesus Christ grant us all
his most flowynge and habundaunt grace. Amen.

An oracyon or process rehearced off Philipp Melanchton at the buryall of the
Reverend man, Doctor Martyne Luther, Translated by Johan Bale.
THough in this public and common sorrow, my vtteraunce be sumwhat dulled by
doloure and heaviness, yet must I in so worthy an assemblye as here is now
gathered, of duty say sumwhat. Not as the paganes used in only commending
the dead, but rather in admonyshynge this auditorye of the wonderful
governance and parels of the Christen church. 3. things.
That they may thereby know before hand, what is to be cared for, what to be
desyered, and what to be followed of their youth concerning examples of a
Christen life. What though profane and dessolute men in so confuse an order of
living, do rashlye interpret many things, and judge them to happen by
chauce or fortune Let us yet which are confirmed by the manyfolde testymonyes
of God, seclude the true church from the unfaithful rabble, and let us well
think yt to be governed and preserved of God. Yea, Church.
let us ryghtlye behold his polytyque order, perceive his truly appointed
governors* and consydre well their just course. Fynallye let us thereupon
chose us out right leaders, and able instructours yea, soche as we may
faythfullye both follow and reverence.

Of these so ernest causes, will yt be necessary for us both to think and to
speak, so often times as that reverend man of God, Luther.
Doctor Martyne Luther, our most derelye beloved father and mastre is had in
remembrance among us. Who^ though a great nombre of wicked lyuers ded most
bytterlye hate, yet shall yt be mete for us which knew him a true mynystre of
the Gospel raised of God, to fauer, regard, and allow him, Doctrine.
and in the end to show so hable testymonyes as may prove his doctrine in no
case to be sedycyouse and boystuouse fearcenesse as the blind beastlye
belligoddes report him.

And though in soche oracyo^s as are commonly in this place uttered, many
things are spoken to the pryuate praises of the^ they are made for. Yet that
thing here omytted, will I now at this time only speak of his ecclesiastic
office or funccyo^ of Gods eternal word. Office.
For me^ of conscience will judge this always true That if he has made open
in the co^gregacyo^ the wholesome and necessary doctrine (as we ca^ say no
less of him) God is greatly to be lauded, which raised him for that purpose,
and his just labors, faith perseueraunce, and other virtues are much to be
commended, and his remembrance to be admytted of all Godly men.

Let this therefore stand for the fore fro^te of our oracyo^. Christ.
The son of God (says Paul) sytteth at the right hand of his eternal
father, and gives gracious gifts unto men, as are the true vtteraunce of the
scriptures, and the holy ghost In whose free dystrybucyon, he rayseth up
Prophets, Apostles, teachers, and ouersears. And these he takes out of our
studyouse nombre, which either read, hear, or Christe^lye fauer the Apostles
and Prophets wrytynges. And not only calls he them unto that labouryouse
office, which are in autoryte before, Teachers
but most commonly he gives those men sharp battle, by workmen of a much
meaner sort to se to. And truly a very plesaunt and profitable aspect is it,
to behold the church by all ages, and so to co^sydre the great goodness of
God, which evermore has sent good theachers in an order or course of
co^tynuau^ce, that they might (as in an host of warryours) one succeed in an
others rowme.

Known is the order of our former fathers, Adam, Fathers.
Seth, Enoch, Mathusale, Noe, and Se^, which being alive, and dwelling nygh
to the Sodomytes, as the people there i^ process of time neglected his good
instruccyo^s, and the wholesome doctrine of Noe his father, and so myserablye
enclyned to the worshyppynge of Idolles, was Abraham sturred up of God, to be
unto the said Se^ an assister and fellawe helper in that worthy work of the
verytees furtherau^ce. Abraham.
Unto him succeeded in that Godly office, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, which
through out the land of Egypt, than being the most floryshynge kyngedome of
the world, plentuously spread the light of that heavenly doctrine.

Tha^ followed Moses, Iosue, Samuel, David, Helias, and Heliseus, of whom Esaias
received knowledge, and of him Hieremias. prophets
After that was Daniel instructed of the said Hieremias, and of the said
Daniel, Zacharias. Anon after them came fourth Esdras and Onias. Than followed
next them, the mighty Machabees, than Symeon and Zacharias the pressed, Johan
Baptyst.
than Johan Baptist, Christ, and his Apostles. Much profitable were yt, to
mark well this contynuall successyo^ of Godly teachers, which is a most
manifest sign of the presence of God in his congregacyon.

After the Apostles succeeded an other sort, which though they were not so
strong as the other, yet were they bewtyfullye adourned with the testymonyes
of God. doctors
Of this company was Polycarpus, Ireneus, Gregorius Neocesariensis, Basilius,
Chrisostomus, Cyrillus, Augustinus, Prosper, Maximus, Hugo Bernardus, Taulerus,
Johan Wicleue, Johan hufs, and other in diverse quarters. And though this
lattre age were more blind than all the rest, Re^naunt
yet God always reserved a remnaunt to his peoples behoue. And manifest is yt,
that by the voice of Luther, the light of the Gospel has apered more clear,
than of long time before.

He is therefore worthelye to be joined to this most bewtyfull nombre of notable
men, whom God has hither sent to rectyfye and restore his fathfull church.
Luther.
These ought we always to accept for the most oryent flowers of the kind of
man. No doubt of it, but Themistocles, Scipio, Augustus, and soche other like,
were me^ famous and worthy note, Gouerners.
which either constytute or governed great empyres, yet were they nothing in
comparyson to these our leaders Esaie, Johan Baptyst, Paul, Augustyne,
Wycleue, and Luther. Convenient is it therefore that we in the congregacyon know
these dyuersytees.

What great and notable things than are they, that of Luther are truly
opened, which should seem to declare hyscourse praise worthy? Troubles
Blown is yt abroad of many, that the church is sore troubled, and that
inextrycable controuersyes are spread the world over. Unto those me^ I answer,
that soche has followed always of the churches right governance. As the holy
Ghost rebukes the world of sin, dyssensyons arise by the workynge of wicked
obstynates. And the ground of those sedycyo^s are they, which dysdayne to
hear the true son of God, Obstynates.
of who^ yt father everlasting has said with open voice. In any wise hear
him.

Luther has made open to the world the most true and necessary doctrine.
Euydent is yt what exceeding darkenesses have dwelt in the doctrine or article
of penance. They now put aside, he has clerelye taught what true penance is,
and what the sowles only refuge. What is the strong anchor and sure stay of
that troubled conscience, which doubtfullye fears the high dyspleasure of
God. Faith.
He throughlye clered and taught that doctrine of Paul, which stronglye
testyfyeth man to be iustyfyed by faith. He truly declared, what the
dyfference is of the law and Gospel, and of the spirytuall justice from the
polytyque or outward ryghtwysnesse.

He showed the true inuocacyo^ of God and from the paganes frantyck madness,
in a manner revoked the whole church, whose frenesye feigned God to be ryghtlye
called upon, wha^ the minds were very far of, and busylye occupied with
Achademycall doubts. Inuocacyon.
Luther wylled inuocacyon non other wise to be, than with a pure faith and an
uncorrupted conscience. He sent us alone to Christ, as to our only medyatour
and true son of God, now sitting at the right hand of his eternal father,
Christ.
and there beco^mynge our advocate. He neither led us to dead men nor their
images, as the horrible madness of beastlye blind bussardes has used before
time, in worshyppynge both them and their Idolles.

Other true offices accepted unto god* ^ed he most christenlye teach. And so
he adourned and autorysed the foren cyuyle order, Cyuyle order.
as yt was never before done by any mannys writings. He also secluded from
necessary works, the baby she ordinance of me^nis tradycyo^s and rytes, and
put aside all laws withstanding the true honourynge of God. The Bible.
And that the pu^e doctrine of the lord might the better be known to men and
women, he translated into the Germanetu^ge, all the scriptures of the Apostles
and Prophets, with so apparent clerenesse, that his only translacyon gives
now more light to the readers, than many great commentaryes could do before.

More over he adjoined soche declaracyons to the text, as far excels the
exposycyons of all men that wrote before him, Erasmus
by the very testymonye of Erasmus And as yt is veryfyed of the instauracyon
of Jerusalem, that the buylders thereof wrought with the one hand, and in the
other hand held weapon to fight. So truly ded this man. He withstode the
enemies of the lords heavenly word, and yet never the less, left behind
him works full of ghostlye decumentes. a buylder
Yea, many a feeble and weak conscience have he made strong by his most
godly crudycyons.

For as much as a great part of his doctrine is above mannys cumpasse, as are
his wrytynges of remyssyon and faith, we must of congruence grant that he was
taught of God. And without fail many of us have beholden his troubles, Of God.
wherein both he and we have learned, to hold this for a most sure ground, that
by only faith we are accepted, and heard of God.

Contynuallye than at all times from hens fourth, will all good me^ recognysh
soche heavenly benefyghtes as the lord has now largelye given to his
congregacyon by Luther. And first of all they will render thanks unto God for
it, Thanks.
and than grant themselves beholden greatly to that man for his fruitful
labors, what though soche wicked workers as dysdayne the true church, do
judge those doctrynes a vain dallyaunce or else mere madness.

Never moved he any questyon of darkness, or yet gave fourth the apple of
parelouse contencyon (as they falselye report him) neither proponed he any
doubtful matter or obscure allegorye. allegorye
Let sober and godly wise men give the judgment, all quarellers put a part,
and yt will be easy to perceive, as the sentences are conferred, which of them
are agreeable with the sacred scriptures, Scriptures.
and which are dyscordaunt, No doubt of it, but yche party of those
controuersyes is well known to men that are christenlye faithful. For
considering that God has appointed himself and hy^ heaue^lye will in the
scriptures of both testamentes to be known (in whom he has clerelye showed
himself) it is not to be thought that their speakynges are doubtful,
Scriptures.
as are the fyckle flerynges of Sybilla.

But some persons, not all ill, have laid unto Luther, that he has been more
sharp in rebukes tha^ has well become^ him. I will not much reason upon either
of both parts. But I will answer by this often repeted sentence of Erasmus.
That God has given in this lattre age for the great increace of euyls therein
reignynge, Erasmus.
a very hard phesycyane. As he always rayseth any soche organe or fearce
instrument against the proud and unshamefast adversaries of his heavenly
veryte, he says as he said unto the prophet Hieremye. Behold I put my ernest
words in thy mouth, that thu may both destroy and build. And when it is
his pleasure to send fourth soche a mighty gyaunt with spear and shyelde, A
gyaunt
it avails no man to reason with him why he does so.

For God never governs his church after ma^nys wisdom, neither wylleth he
his workynge instruments to be all after one sort. Co^monlye is this seane
among men, that mean and soft wits can in no wise abide any vehement or
boystuouse handelynges, Weakelynges.
be they good or bad, profitable or unprofitable. Aristides beheld how
Themystocles with stought stomach took great matters in hand, and brough the^
well to pass. And though he were well contented, that the public welthe had
thereby good furtherau^ce yet sought he by all means possible, to moderate that
hot hastye passion in him.

Neither will I deny yt, but that vehement shource offe^deth often times.
Neither is there any man without fault, Veheme^cye.
which has that infirmyte of nature. Yet in the mean season, if any soche be
(as the old writers accounted Hercules, Cimon, and diverse other no less) he
that ca^ well dyscusse what is co^modyouse and profitable, is a full good man
and worthy praise And in the co^gregacyon (as S. Paul rehearceth it) he that
is faithful and has a good conscye^ce, Conscience.
pleases well God, and is worthy of man to have honor.

For soche a wo^ have we known Martyn Luther. For most constauntlye has he
defended the pure doctrine, and in no point demynyshed the right rules of good
conscience. Never regarded he any dyssolute wyldenesse, or any sedycyouse
mutterynges, either yet any troublouse mouynges. Rather has he been the
occasyon, Polycyes
that wars in diverse quarters have ceased. No polycyes used he, to augment
the churches power, neither yet his own, nor of any man perteynynge to him.
This judge I soche virtue and wysdom, as should seem not to be obtained by maunys
only industrye. Of God should mennys hearts seem to be dyrected, specyallye
they which are so strong, mighty, Strong
and ernest, as of this Luther the clear experyence shows.

What shall I report of his other godly gystes? Myself very often coming
suddenly upon him, have found him in most fervent prayer, Prayer.
with habundaunce of tears com^ynge from his eyes for the prosperouse estate
of the universal Christen church. He appointed to himself every day, a
serten time of psalms reading, wherein he mixed his prayers to God with
contynuall syghynges and wepynges. And said commonly, that he allowed not
them, which either for wordlye work or for slothfulness, supposed yt enough
a little to mourn in their deuocyons. Tears.
For non other purpose (says he) are fashyons of prayer prescrybed unto us, by
the lords appoyntement, but that through reading, our minds might be
inflamed, and that our voice might so confess outwardlye that God, which is
only to be called upon.

More over than this, as diverse and manyfolde daungerouse doubts of publyque
parels, have often times chanced unto us, we have always found him strong and
mighty stomaked, and never cowardlye hearted, mighty.
nor yet terryfyed with wordlye sorrows. He evermore set hand upon the most
sure anchor. His trust was in the only help of God, and had always to stand
by him a faith invyncyble.

Farthermore this special grace he had, to se very far in things of great
wayght or danger, and wyselye before hand to seek out the best remedies.
wisdom.
Neither was he, as many men have supposed, negligent in consyderacyon of the
publyque welthe, not yet in knowledge whereunto men has therein been enclyned.
But he perfyghtlye knew what was most commodyouse thereunto, and most warelye
perceived and considered the polycyes and co^iecturs of his own cytiezens. and
though he were most quyck of wytt, yet trusted he not all to that but
affectuouslye red the ecclesyastyck wrytynges both old and new, Chronycles.
sacred and profane, with other hystoryes and chronycles, whose clear examples
he proponed in all that was to be done.

Of his eloquence are left monumentes* that never will perysh, yea, soche as
does prove him equal with them, which had that gift most hyghlye. eloquence.
A man of so excellent wit and learning, with so many noble virtues adourned,
so long contynuynge among us, and most syngularlye appointed of God for the
instauracyon of his sore decayed church, now also clerelye taken from us to
our no small dysconfort, let no man blame us though we have doloure. A father.
For most like are we now to orphans, depryued of our valeaunt and faithful
father. And though it becomes us to be contented with that our lord God has
done here, yet may we not suffer his benefyghtes and graces in him, to be
vnrecorded among us.

We may well co^sydre this man, to be the very sweet organe of god, let us
not than draw back, but studyouslye enbrace his good learning. Organe of God.
His necessary virtues also, let us follow to our power as his true fear of
God, his faith and feruencye in prayer, his gentle behauer in office, his
honest sober living, his warenesse in avoiding sedycyon, and his sore and
laboryouse stodye to profyght other. And as other godly governors of Christ's
church, as Hicremye, Johan Baptyst, Teachers
and Paul (whose hystoryes we have) are greatly and often* to be looked upon for
example, so let us many times have respect to the doctrine and course of this
godly man. And se that we join theunto both thanks and prayer to God,
specyallye at this present as well becomes us. Say therefore with me no^^, in a
faithful heart to that lord almyghtye.

We thank the omnipotent God, the eternal father of our lord Jesus Christ,
the only founder of thy true church, together with thy son unto the
coeternal, our lord Jesus Christ, and the holy ghost, wise, good, merciful,
ryghtouse, true, mighty, and most liberal, that thu gatheryst unto that son
of thine the promised heritage out of mankind, and vpholdest the true
mynysterye of thy Gospel, specyallye now that thu have restored yt unto us by
thy faithful servant Luther. The we most hartelye desire, Prayer.
that from hens fourth thu wit save to preserve and govern that true
congregacyon of thine, and that thu firmelye plant in us the most sure
doctrine, like as Esaias desyered unto his dyscyples, and lighten our minds
with thy most holy sprete, that we may both ryghtlye call upon the, and also
lead a godly conuersacyon. Amen.

And because the departynges of mighty governors, Warnynges.
are often times no small decay or loss to them that are left behind. We
instauntlye require you, that is to say, both I and all they which are here
appointed in Godliness to instruct you, that ye wyselye take heed to the
dangers of this world. On the one side the Turk comes upon us very fast,
on the other side the enemies thretneth us battle here, even at our own
doors. Threttes
And much dyssolute wantonness of mennys wits reigns every where, which
now that Luthers grounded judgment is no longar to be feared will be the much
more bold to corrupt that pure learning which he has ryghtlye given us.

That God may the rather preserve us from these dangers, let us dylyge^tlye
labor to apply both our conuersacyons and stodyes to the best. Christe^ly
And evermore let us bear this wayghtye sentence in mind. That so long as
we shall Christenlye retain, hear, learn, and love the sincere doctrine of
the Gospel, we shall be Gods own congregacyon, dwelling place, and church,
like as the son of God has most firmelye promised. He that loves me (says
he) will regard my word, Christ.
and my father will also love him. And we together shall resort unto him, and
appoint our dwelling place within him. Let this so large a promise most
ernestlye move us, to apply to that heavenly doctrine. And let us well
think, that for his elect congregacyons sake, God vpholdeth mankind and the
public polycyes of regyons. Also let us inwardlye behold the eternal life
to come, whereunto God has us of his mere goodness called, Life to come.
which has not all without cause thus manyfested himself unto us by so many
worthy witnesses, neythet has he sent his most dear son in vain. But
truly he both loves and regards all them which are not of these most
special benefygtes oblyuyous se and unthankful. I^ have said.

Thus ends the oracyo^ or process rehearced off Philipp Melanchton at the
buryall of the Reverend man, Doctor Martyne Luther. Translated by Johan Bale.
Anno M.D.LXVI.
The Christen sermon made at the buryall of the honorable Doctor Martyne
Luther, by Doctor Johan Pomerane the chief Pastoure of the church of
Wittemberge. Anno Dn^i M. D. XLVI.
Translated by Johan Bale.
IN his first Epistle to the Thessalonyanes, and the fort chaptre, has S.
Paul the Apostle these words. We would not (brethren) that ye should be
ignorant, concerning them which are fallen a sleep, neither yet that ye
should sorrow as they do which have no hope. For if we believe, that Jesus dyed
and rose again, 1. These. 4
even so them also which are a sleep, through Jesus shall God bring with him.

Dear fryndes in the lord, I am now constrained of duty and love, to preach
unto you at this sole^pne buryall of our dear father Doctor Martyne Luther,
the true Apostle of God. But how to be have my self therein to your
consolacyon, for very heaviness and doloure, I know not. And to speak it
truly, who should in this public sorrow solace you if I your pastoure and
preacher should not do it? pastoure.
Yet am I in this sermon more like to increase your tears than demynysh them.
God has now taken from us to our great hynderaunce, that notable servant of
his and man honorable, Doctor Martyne Luther, by whom he liberallye dyspersed
innumerable gifts of his grace, not only to us here in Wittemberge, and
diverse other Christen churches of Germanye, but to other foren nacyons
abroad. For by him both they and we (the praise be given to god) do at this
day notablye tryumphe against the blasphemouse kyngedome of Satan, Tryu^phe.
the horrible ydolatryes and vain tradycyons of men, or as S. Paul does call
them, the crastye inuencyons of the devil.

By him has God the father in these lattre days clerelye manyfested in the
Gospel, that ample, ineffable, and heavenly mysterye, even his son Jesus
Christ, as S. Paul to the Ephesyanes and Collossyanes calls him. By this
chosen mynystre of his, have the said son of God Ihesus Christ, defended that
Gospel against the most wicked pope, The Gospel.
against all sects and tyrauntes, and against all the gates of hell. Yea,
unto this so mighty a servant of his, gave he a sprete so effectual and
strong, that he never yet staggered for no worldly power nor threttenynge. So
ernest was he in supporting the pure doctrine of the Gospel against the
corrupters thereof, that many have judged evil of his vehement sprete,
Hypocrytes.
as ded the vyperouse Pharysces of Johan Baptyst and Christ. No greatter
dyspleasure can be done to the hypocrytes, than their acts to be rebuked by
the manifest veryte. And against their nature is it always, to give place
thereunto.

But now that the lord has thus taken from us this noble doctor and prophet
of his, yea, this excellent massenger most gracyouslye sent of him to refourme
his church, how can we from we pynges desyst? Or how shall we obey the former
saynges of Saint Paul? that we ought not to be heavy over them that sleep in
Christ. S. Paul
We must consydre therein what follows. That we ought not desperatlye to
mourn, as does the unfaithful without hope of resurreccyon. For we that
believe in God, do perfyghtlye know, that they are reserved to a much better
life, and shall at the general metynge be raised up again with us, and
evermore from thens fourth, we shall dwell together without separacyo^.

But truly the world was full unworthy any longar to retain so worthy a
servant of God, to rebuke and dysdayne as it has done, The world.
Many syngular benefyghtes has it received by his admynystracyon in the
word, specyallye delyueraunce from the great throldome of conscience and
tyranny of the papysme, yet has it been unthankful hitherto.
Notwithstanding a great no^bre of our adversaries, which has yet had some
wit and dyscressyon, Adversaries.
have much rather covered his long life than death.

All this have I spoken in preface, to show that we mourn not without just
cause, so notable a gyde taken from us. And I doubt it not, but if mourning
might help, all those worthy princes governors, Princes.
cities, and comynaltees which knows the power of the Gospel, would also
lament this dolorouse chance with us. Therefore can I not think that we mourn
now alone, but many thousands more with us all Christendom over. The pope
Neither shall the wicked pope with his Cardynall of Magunce, and hysduke of
Brunswyke, have any great cause to rejoice in the death of this man, which
have so many times with the manifest veryte confounded them, neither yet any
other sturdye adversaries of God. For though his worthy person has departed
hensin the lord, yet tarryeth his sincere doctrine here still, and will
herafter more effectuallye work.

He was without fail that Angel specyfyed Apoc. 14. an angel
Which ded fly in the mids of heaven or congregacyon of God, having an
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, innacyons,
kynredes, tunges, and peoples, for never was there any, that ever more
ernestlye uttered this sentence, fear your lord God, and give him due honor
(which comprehends the law and Gospel) than he. 2. parts of his doctrine.
For they without fail were the ij. chief parts of his whole doctrine, by
whom the whole scripture is opened, and Christ ryghtlye known, which is our
only ryghtwysnesse, health, and perpetual life. It follows in the text. The
hour of his judgment is come. Worshypp him that made heaven and earth etc.
Herin taught he the true inuocacyon and prayer to God our heavenly father in
sprete and veryte without supersticyon.

After the manyfestacyon of this Angels doctrine, will there yet come an other,
An other
that shall bring consolacyon to the myserablye afflicted congregacyon of God,
and unto the truths adversaries the ponnyshmentes of fire and brymstone in the
perpetual judgment of dampnacyon. The voice of this Angel will be this. She
is fallen, she is fallen, even Babylon that great city. For making all
nacyons dronken with the wine of her whoredom, Ye shall well perceive it, that
our enemies shall not long rejoice of our sorrows. But as Christ has spoken
it, Joan, 16. Our heaviness will be turned to joy. Joan. 16.
By conferring the Apocalypse with our time, we perceive sumwhat past, and as
sure we are that more is yet coming.

What need I then any farther to wade in this sorrowful oracyon, concerning
the absence of this our pastoure and Bishop? Yes, and therein to acknowledge
the great mercy and goodness of God to wards us, and so to render unto him
most ernest thanks. That after an hundred years sens the death of that
blessed man Johan Huss (which in the year of our lord. Johan Huss.
1415. was murdered for the veryte) he raised unto us by his holy sprete,
this mighty Apostle S. Martyne Luther, against the Antichristyane doctrine of
that deuylysh pope and his smokye swarm. Like as the said Johan Huss
prophesied in the very hour of his death. For Huss in the Bohemysh tunge is
as much to say as a gander. a swanne
Ye roast now the gander (said he) but after my death God will raise soche a
swa^ne as ye shall neither be hable to roast nor yet to brenne. And as they had
sore acco^bred him with more ydell clamours and cries than he was well hable to
answer, he concluded thus with them. An hundred years hens (said he) shall
God and I answer you.

This faithful promise of his true prophet have the lord now most iustlye
performed by our most dear father S. Luther, Luther.
which in the year next following that hundred, began in his word to invade
the kyngedome of Antichrist. Most high thanks ought we to give unto God, that
he in so hard battayles, so long preseruered him to his true churches behoue,
and that Christ by the space of xxx. years, have so often in him tryumphed over
his adversaries. Unto him be honor and glory perpetual without end. Amen.

Great cause have we on the other side to rejoice, Rejoice.
i^ that our father here has so frutefullye performed his course in the
Apostles doctrine and prophets office. And therein is so gracyouslye hens
departed unto our lord Jesus Christ. There has he now the felyshypp of the
patryarkes, prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other faithful fathers. Namelye
of the^ whom here he so faithfully instructed in the Gospel of saluacyo^.
with Lazarus is he there in Abraham's bosom, Lazarus.
or in the perpetual Joy of all heavenly cytiezens. The experyment thereof
have we in Saint Paul which said, Phil. 1. A desire I have to dye, and to be
with Christ. The same have we also in Steven, which said, Acto. 7. Lord Jesus,
receive my sprete. More over Christ gave us a taft thereof, when he said to the
thief, This day shall thu be with me in paradyse. Luce 23.

And no doubt of yt, our sprete
as the sprete of Christ was in the hands of his father till the day of his
complete resurreccyon, after he had said, father into thy hands I commend my
sprete. So shall our spretes be in the hands of Christ till our complete
resurreccyon. For so sound the words which Abraham spoke to the rich glotton
concerning Lazarus. He is in confort, where as thu art in afflyccyon, Luce 16.
The faithful are in quyett and confortable solace, the wicked has unquietness
with paynefull anguysh, and shall have to the lattre day full sweet therefore is
that sleep which the scripture affermeth the electes to rest in. the sleep.


Yea, and like as in a natural sleep, the hole man rests plesauntlye, is
refreshed, and becomes more strong and helthefull. So do the syckeman,
specyallye if he be terryfyed with the fear of death, by greuouse and
horrible dreams, vnquyetouslye rest. The sleep of soch a wone, Death.
is often times more greuouse and horrible, than washys watchynge before. A great
dyfference therefore is there betwixt the slepes of the faithful and
unfaithful. Of these shall it become us non otherwise to dyffyne, than the
scripture leads us.

Now have our dear father here obtained, that he long had in desire. Wherefore
if he were now again among us, he would ernestlye rebuke our present
mournynges with these words of Christ, Joan. 14. Luther.
If ye love me, ye would truly rejoice in my most profitable passage unto God
my eternal father, or at the least be contented with my perpetual felycyte
and quyett. Christ has for us ouercomen the death, why should we than any
more fear the stynge thereof? Non other is the death of our bodies now, Death.
than an entrance of a life contynuall through Jesus Christ our lord, which
was for us a most precyouse sacryfyce.

I yet remember it well, that I often times heard this blessed man Doctor
Luther say, as he beheld any faithful person peceablye depart hens in
Christ's believe. The eternal God of heaven grant me at his time appointed, so
plesauntlye to pass hens into the bosom of Christ my redemer, Prayer.
and that my body be not long vexed with the terrors of death.
Notwithstanding yet Gods will be fulfilled in that matter.

In this university now of late years Mastre Ambrose Bernarde, An example.
a man sober, wise, virtuous, and soch a won as loved Christ inteyrlye,
chanced (as ye know) certain days before he dyed, to be sick and to keep
his bed. Yet felt he no sore grefe of his syckenesse, but seemed by and by
therein transfourmed, as it had been into an other life. For he spoke unto us
most solacyouslye and plesauntlye, that he would rejoice with us, as one
neither feeling of death nor yet disease. He could not fear the death, for
he felt nothing thereof. And ever as mencyon was made of Christ, from the
very heart he rejoiced and said, No fear.
that grace, health, and mercy from God the everlasting father, has only
chanced to us by his most meke sufferynges. An unspeakable love had he unto
Christ and always called upon God the father in only sprete and veryte.

As mencyon was made of his dear wife and children, or of his possessions,
rentes, and dettes owing him, he was so ignorant in all soch causes, Innocent.
as they never had been known to him. Us at all times he knew as we commened
of Christ, and named us by our names. He talked ioyfullye, yea he both dallyed
and laughed, but all was in spirytuall things. That a man not throughlye
knowing the matter, would have thought him never to have been worldly wise in
his life, neither yet to have need of his bed at that hour. In this
innocencyeded the lord Jesus Christ take him he^s, Departure.
most plesauntlye and swetelye, without other pains to all our sight. So that
having knowledge of the Christen faith, with the inteyre lone of God and hope
of the lattre resurreccyon, he neither felt doloure nor death, neither tasted
it nor yet se it. As Christ says Joan. 8. He that observes my word. shall
never behold death, but pleasauntlye pass hens from death unto life.

And though all godly beleuers do not so peaceablye depart as ded this
Ambrose, Ambrose.
but have great pains and suffer great anguyshes, as ded on the cross the
dear son of God, yet when the extreme hour comes, they truly se life and
no death. As our sweet father here ded, Luther.
which so often times, and so inteyrlye commended his sprete into the hands of
God. Which gracyouslye has now delivered him from this life miserable to a
life most happy and sure. To him therefore be honor and glory world without
end. Amen.

This helthsome and myrye hystorye of our ambrose, brought I in here for causes.
causes. First thereby sumwhat to mytygate your present dolours for the absens
of our father here, which ye have not without cause. Secundlye for that I se
the said hystorye so conform to the matter we have now in hand. This mastre
Ambrose was very nygh of kynne to S. Martyne Luther, which caused him often
times to frequent his cumpanye both in his syckenesse and before. Last words.
And these were the last words that ever he spoke unto him. Mastre Doctor, I
thank you of your gentle vysytacyon. I hope as gentyllye to vysyte you again
where we shall together commen of most joyful causes. And now in deed they
may commen those matters in an other life, and hold soch heavenly felyshypp
as they never could do here.

The same very time that Doctor Martyne went so from him, I am well remembered
that he said thus unto me. Thysman is surely gone, though he seem still here.
No death.
For he knows no manner of thing perteynynge to the flesh nor yet to death.
When we put him in mind of his matters, he knows not the world nor yet,
this life. He is merye he ioyfullye laugheth, and propouneth unto us in his
innocent state most wonderful mysteryes. But in the end he derydeth us. As
who should say, fare ye well now, I have no more to do with this world. The
lord of his infynyte mercy (says he at the last) grant me soch a gracious
end, Prayer.
that in the hour of death, I nothing remember this world.

In like manner at an other season, after the said Ambrose was buried in the
year of our lord a M.D.XLII. in the monthe of Ianuarye, as he one day passed
by, he poynted with his hand to his grave, Ambrose.
and said unto me. This man neither felt himself sick neither yet reckened
of death, yet was he never without Christ's knowledge. Here lies he enclosed
which yet knows of no death. O lord Jesus Christ, I besyche the wore save
to take me so from this miserable life. Yea, many times said this blessed
father here both to me and to other. Pray unto our most merciful father, that
he shortly take me unto him. good man.
for here can I no more do, neither yet am I any longar profitable unto you.
Help me hens with your prayers, and prolonge not my life on the earth. Herbye
may ye well perceive, that he had no great pleasure here, but that his full
desire was as was Saint Paul's, S. Paul
to be dysolued and with Christ. He sange his consummatum long before he
departed, committing his soul to the hands of God.

Many other prognostycacyons we had, or signs asore hand, of his going
away from us. For all the year before he said often times unto us, that he
coueted to iournaye an other way. And as he desyered, so came it to pass. For
as the noble earls of Mansfelde had sent for him into his own natyue city of
ISleben, ^hearles
by his ghostlye counsel to quiet their matters of controuersye, as he ded
most gracyouslye, he deceased there clerelye from this life. The manner of this
Christen departing ye have in writynge, by diverse men learned and of most
grounded testymonye, which were there present, with the prayer which he made
before he gave up his life. Which here to repete were superfluouse.

S. Martyn.
Here am I compelled to call to remembrance the holy Bishop S. Martyne. In
whose hystorye Seuerus Sulpicius mencyoneth, that the Arryanes and all other
heretykes trembled as they heard him but named, and that there was among the
Christen beleuers sore lamentacyon and mourning at his buryall. More over that
after his death was great dysputacyon betwyn certain cities, which of them
should retain his body. And all this has also (as ye know full well)
chance ^o our Martyne here, Luther.
the elect Apostle and Prophet of God to withstand the great Antichrist in
this worthy land of the Germans. Him has Christ now in his dear bosom,
reserving him to honor, for that he so inteyrlye loved him and his true
church. Unto us his posteryte the lord grant his double sprete, Helias.
specyallye in those churches which he here so frutefullye planted, like as the
Prophet Eliseus desired of Helias as he was from hens translated.

If we think that God for our sins and unthankfulness has depryued us of
him, let us studyouslye amend our lives and desire of the same God our
merciful father, that we may from he^s forth persevere in the pure doctrine
and sincere Christen faith, and that Christ therein may defend us from
sects, tyrauntes, Faith.
and the gates of hell. Most gracious lord Jesus Christ defend now thy
careful congregacyon that they perpetuallye may praise the a right. Help us
our merciful God, and redemer, and deliver us for the glory of thy mo^^ holy
name. Be favorable to our inyquytees for thy gracious promise sake. preachers
Conserve in our church the sincere and faithful mynysters. Grant them by
thy holy sprete, thy mighty strength and power, as the 67. Psalm specyfyeth
God with strong words, will assyst his preachers.

Truth is it, that both the unshamefast and horrible blasphemies of the
obstynate papystes and monks, Papystes
and also our daily vnthankefulnesses and vices have deserved sore plages and
penaltees Yet let us not cease to call upon god our most merciful father with
amendeme^t that he defend us from all false worshyppynges, for his only
sons sake our lord Jesus Christ. And that this prophetycall verse or
Epitaphe of our fathers own making, may be clerelye fulfilled.

Pestis eram uiuens, morie^s ero mors tua papa.
Alyne I was, thy pestylence.
Thu Antichrist, thu pope of Rome.
And now I dead, will be from hence.
Thy death and thy most dredefull dome.
God have the praise for ever. Amen.
The Christen prayer of the most noble prince electour Johan Frederick duke of
Saxon, in his godly wars against Antichrist and his vpholders Translated by
Johan Bale.
O Lord eternal and my God / in the put I all my trust. Preserve me from my
pursuers / and keep me out of their cruel hands. Let them not rauyne me up /
as the lion the sheep / neither yet tear me in pieces / while there is non to
assyst me. O lord and my God / if I have done soch thing as the pope and
Emprour do now lay to my charge / as that I should support ill doctrine and
renounce true obedyence. If I have done evil to any faithful servant of
thine or begun this war uncompelled. Suffer mine enemies to vex me and
take me / yea let them tread my life into the earth / and throw my honor
/ my power / possessions / and peoples / with all that thu have given me / into
the dust.

But thu my ryghteouse lord God / know the hearts of us both. Therefore
stand up lord strongelye in thy wrath / and show thy self as a mighty God
against the furyouse indygnacyons of mine enemies. Establysh me a fresh in the
office wherewith thu have charged me / that in mine own lands and among mine
own folk I may dwell in peace. That they may into a faithful congregacyon
be gathered unto the and not to the pope. Let them hear thy blessed word
lord / and not his / call upon thy name and not on ydolles / and bring up
their children and famelyes according to thy most holy will and
commandments.

Therefore arise most blessed lord / and let it be well known that thu art
more mighty than all our bloudthurstye adversaries. And the much more rather /
for that there is at this day in no kyngedome (lord) under the sun / any
other manifest church or Christen congregacyon / wherein thy holy word is
apertlye / frelye / and purelye taught / and the sacraments according to thy
true instytucyon mynystred / neither yet (eternal father) thy holy name
called upon ryghtlye by thy dear son Jesus Christ our lord in the holy
Ghost / than only our churches and those that be of our true believe.

The Pope and the Emprour will in no wise abide this church / but sete in all
their polycyes the utter destruccyon thereof. They now labor with tothe and
nail / for (...) sincere and pure doctrine to set up mennys lies / and in
place of thy true worshyppynges to auaunce foul ydolatrye. We know it
(blessed lord) to be our bound duty / both to stop and withstand their
wicked and frantyke enterprise / as well for our own subjects as for their
posterytees. And therefore good lord / what we have / and what we may / we put
now whollye in hasarde / that the high treasure of grace / thy precyouse word
and thy holy name / may gracyouslye remain still among us / and so be had
in contynuaunce / and left for imytacyon unto our posterytees.

Thu God almyghtye / which art the most ryghteouse judge of thy peoples / judge
me in this present cause according to thy ryghtwysnesse / and no^ otherwise
tha^ my innocencye therein requires. For neither the pope nor yet the Emproure
can show hitherto any honest pretense of this their most detestable
enterprise. I besyche the therefore as thu art my true god let the malyee of
mine enemies come to naught. Hitherto have they against thy holy word done
this vyolence. Defend thy true servants / which have both loved and embraced
thy Gospel of salvation. Thu God without fail / art the self ryghteouse
judge / that serchest the inward hearts and reins. Thu lord so clerelye
beholdest the most hydden secrets of the heart / that neither they ca^ deceive
the nor yet mock the with all their persuasyble gloses / as they do soch men
as know not their wyckedcraftes.

God is my strong shyelde of defe^se / preserving the^ which are true hatred.
But to soch dyssemblers and scorners as with craftye colors de clock their
inward myschefe and m(...)e / he is a mo^ ernest enemy. the lord is a
ryghteouse judge / (...) soche a lyberall God as gives himself daily to the^
that hear his word / and saves them all dangers. But where as his word is
co(...) and blasphemed / as with the cruel Pope and Emproure / which have
long time continued in their wicked purpose / Loo / behold / my lord God
becomes a strong warryour / yea his armoure and weapons are laid fourth / he
has sharpened his sword / he has bent his bow and made it redye / thereupon
also he has done his arrows of destruccyon / so that perpetual death will
upon them fasten that shall with those darts be stryken.

The blasphemouse Pope and Emproure have now conceived myschefe / they travail
all great with iniquyte / but a thing of naught are they life to bring
fourth. They both have labouryouslye dygged a pytt / and with wicked haman
shall in conclusyon drop into the snare they have made. Their unhappy works
will he auylye light upon their own pates / and upon their backs will their
wickedness fall to their no small grefe. In the mean season will I render
thanks unto my lord God for his ryghteousnes sake / and magnyfye the name of
the king that is highest. Amen.


