The nine Worthies of London Explayning the honorable exercise of Arms, the
virtues of the valiant, and the memorable attempts of magnanimious minds.
PLEASANT FOR GENTLEmen, not unseemly for Magistrates, and most profitable for
Prentises.

Compiled by Richard Johnson.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at
his shop at the west door of Paul's. 1592.

To the right Honorable sir William Web Knight, Lord Mayor of the famous
City of London, Richard Johnson, wishes health, with increase of honor.
BEING not altogether (right honorable) unacquainted with the fame of this well
governed city, the head of our English flourishing common wealth: I thought
nothing (considering it somewhat touched my duty) could be more acceptable to
your Honor, then such principles as first grounded the same as well by
domestical policy of peace, as foreign excellence in resolution of war.
This caused me to collect from our London gardens, such especial flowers, that
sauoured as well in the wrath of Winter, as in the pride of Summer, keeping one
equiuolence at all kind of seasons. Flowers of chivalry (right honorable I
mean) some that have sucked honey from the Be, sweetness from war, and
were possessed in that high place of prudence, whereof your Lordship now
partaketh. Other some that have been more inferior members, and yet have
given especial aid to the head, been buckler to the best, and thereby reached
to the aspiring top of arms: If your Lordship shall but like of it,
proceeding from the barren brain of a poor apprentice, that dare not promise
moulhils, much less mountains, I shall think this by-exercise, which I
undertook to expel idleness, a work of worth, whatsoever the gentle cauld
kind, that are ungently inkindled, shall with ostentation inueigh. These (right
Honorable) the nine Worthies of London, now unable to defend themselves, seek
their protection under your gracious favor: and the Author pricked on by
Fame, to be patronagde for his willing labor, whereof not misdoubting, I
humbly commit your Honor to the defense of heaven, and the guider of all just
equality:

Your L in all humble duty to be commanded. Richard Johnson.

To the Gentlemen Readers, as well Prentices as others.
AL is not gold (Gentlemen) that glisters, nor all dross that makes but a
dark show: so should copper some time be current, and pearls of no price.
Aesope for all his crutchback, had a quick wit. Cleanthes, though in the night
he carried the watertankard, yet in the day would dispute with Philosophers. A
mean man may look upon a king, and a wren build her nest by an Egle. In the
games of Olympus, any man might try his strength: and when Apelles lived
others were not forbid to paint: So gentlemen, though now a days many great
Poets flourish (from whose eloquent works you take both pleasure and profit)
yet I trust inferiors (whose pens dare not compare with Apollos) shall not be
contemned or put to silence. Every weed has his virtue, and studious travail
(though without skill) may manifest good will. Vouchsafe then intertainment to
this new come guest, his simple truth shows he is without deceyte, and his
plain speech proves, he flatters not. He can not beast of Art, nor claim the
privilege of scholasticall cunning: what he says is not curious, being
without any great praemeditation, or practice, more then his necessary
affairs would permit. If his unpolished discourses may merit the least motion
of your good liking, let the envious fret, and the captious malice melt
themselves, neither the objection of Mechanical, by such as are themselves
diabolical, whose vicious baseness in a self conceyte presuming above the
best, is in deed but the dregs and refuse of the worst, nor the reproach of
prouerbiall scoffs as ( Ne suitor vltra crepidam) shall discorage me from
proceeding to invent how further to content you. And so trusting to my fortune,
and ending in my hap, neither dispairing of your censures, nor fearing what the
maleuolent can inflict.

Yours to command as he may. Richard Johnson.

A Catalogue or brief Table, declaring the names of these worthy men, and
when they lived.
First. SIr William VValworth Fishmonger, in the time of Richard the second.
Second. Sir Henry Pitchard Vintener, in the time of Edward the third. Third.
Sir William Seuenoake Grocer, in the time of Henry the fifth. Fourth. Sir
Thomas White Marchant-tailer, in the time of Queen Marie. Fifth. Sir John
Bonham Mercer, in the time of Edward the first. Sixth. Sir Christopher Croker
Vintener, in the time of Edward the third. Seventh. Sir John Haukwood
Marchant-tailer, in the time of Edward the third. Eight. Sir Hugh Cauerley
Silke-weauer, in the time of Edward the third. Ninth. Sir Henry Maleueret
Grocer, in the time of Henry the fourth.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, being encouraged through your gentle acceptance of my Cynthia, I
have once more adventured on your Courtesies: hoping to find you (as I have
done hertofore) friendly. Being determined to write of something, and yet not
resolved of any thing, I considered with my self, if one should write of Love
(they will say) why, every one writes of Love: if of Virtue, why, who regards
Virtue? To be short, I could think of nothing, but either it was common, or
not at all in request, At length I bethought my self of a Subject, both new
(as having never been written upon before) and pleasing (as I thought) because
Man's Nature (commonly) loves to hear that praised, with whose pressence, he
is most pleased.

Erasmus (the glory of Netherland, and the refiner of the Latin Tongue) wrote a
whole Book, in the praise of Folly. Then if so excellent a Scholar, writ in
praise of Vanity, why may not I write in praise of that which is profitable?
There are no two Countries where Gold is esteemed, less than in India, and
more then in England: the reason is, because the Indians are barbarous and our
Nation civil.

I have given Pecunia the title of a Woman Both for the termination of the
Word, and because (as Women are) she is loved of men. The brauest Voyages in
the World, have been made for Gold: for it, men have venterd (by Sea) to the
furthest part of the Earth: In the Pursuit whereof, Englands Nestor and Neptune
(Haukins and Drake) lost their lives. Upon the Deaths of the which two, of the
first I writ this: The Waters were his Winding sheet, the Sea was made his
Toome;
Yet for his fame the Ocean Sea, was not sufficient room.
Of the latter this: England his heart; his Corpse the Waters have:
And that which raysd his fame, because his grave.


The Praetorians (after the death of Pertinax) in the election of a new
Emperor, more esteemed the money of Iulianus, then either the virtue of
Seuerus, or the Valor of Pessennius. Then of what great estimation and
account, this Lady Pecunia, both has been in the World, and is at this
present, I leave to your Judgment. But what speak I so much of her praise in
my Epistle, that have commended her so at large, in my Book? To the reading
whereof, (Gentlemen) I refer you.

The nine worthies of London, explaying the honorable exercise of Arms, the
virtues of the valiant, and the innumerable attemptes of Magnanimious minds.
WHat time Fame began to feather her self to fly, and was winged with the
lasting memory of martial men, the Orators ceast perswasiue Orations, the
Poets neglected the pleasures of their Poems, and Pallas her self would have
nothing painted upon her shield but Mottoes of Mars, and short emblemes in
honor of noble atchiuements. Then the ashes of ancient Uictors without
scruple or disdain had sepulture in rich and golden monuments: and they that
reached the height of honor by worthy deeds, had their former baseness,
shadowed by deserts. Fame then fearing that her honor would faint, and her
armor rust (for though she favored all professions, yet she chiefly dignified
arms) on a sudden, mounted into the air, and never stayed the swiftness of
her flying course, until she pitched her feet upon Parnassus forked top,
whose springing Laurels gave shade, and shelter to her weariness. This was the
fruitful place where she plotted her flowrie garlands, to crown the temples of
virtuous followers, and wreathes of renown to illustrate undaunted courages.
Here likewise remained her chief secretaries the ix. Muses, as in a seat of
most pleasure best befitting their divine perfections, whose necessary aids
she always craved, when occasion ministered any thing worthy record: and though
the wholesome freshness of the air, the greenenesse of the valleys, the
comfortable odours of sundry sorts of flowers, the pride and beauty of the
trees, the harmonious lays of Nightingales and other birds, the variable
delights of artificial bowers, and the musical murmures of Crystal running
fountains, might well have inchaunted the roughest Cyaink, or crabbedst
Malecontent to cheer up his spirits, and banish melancholy passions, yet this
Goddess pretending business of importance, had such a care to effect it, as
that she would not be overcome with pleasure, nor yield to ease, (though in
reason her laborious travel did require rest) but painfully passing up and
down, was not moved with the one, nor maistred with the other. At last as her
busy eye pried every way, she espied a path of Uiolets, whose tops were
pressed down with the steps of such as had lately passed that way: by this she
coniectured the Nymphs were not far off, and therefore following the tract
their feet had made upon the flowers, she was quickly brought to the head of
Hellicon, where, in an arbor of Eglantine, and damask Rose trees, one twisted
so cunningly within another, as hard it was to judge whether nature or art had
bestowed most to the bewtifying of that bower. She found the Muses every one
seriously applying their several exercises, whom when they saw (having saluted
her with a dutiful reverence) stood attentive (being well assured her coming
was not without cause) what charge she would give, or what she would command
to be registered. To whom Fame, to the intent they might not long be in
suspense about her sudden approach, as well for that her business was
impatient of delay, as to resolve their earnest expectation, spoke in this
manner.

You need not muse (gracious nurces of learning) at my presence in this place,
because I use not oftentimes to visit you, nor trouble your minds with ambiguous
imaginations concerning my purpose, since I seldom crave your furtherance but
for memorable accidents: notwithstanding, for the variety of matter requires
not always one form, and still with process of time as men's manners change,
our method alters, you shall perceive I am not now to begin: but to revive what
ignorance in darkness seems to shadow, and hateful oblivion has almost rubbed
out of the book of honor. It is not of Kings and mighty Potentates, but
such whose virtues made them great, and whose renown sprung not of the
noblenes of their birth, but of the notab^e towardness of their well qualified
minds, advanced not with lofty titles, but praised for the trial of their
heroycal truths: of these must you indite, who though their states were but
mean, yet does their worthy prowess match superiors, and therefore have I
named them Worthies. Nine were they in number, their Country England, the
City they lived in famous London, famous in deed for such men, and yet
forgetful to celebrate the remembrance of their names, and negligent, (I may
say) in performing the like attempts, having for imitation such goodly
presidents as these to supply them that want, with wisdom, and with better
instruction. I am determined to discourse again what I have often bruted,
thereby to stir up sluggards, and to give secure worldlings to understand
(who extends no further then for wealth, and whose hearts suppose a heap of
coin the greatest happiness) that the censure of honor ought to increase, when
as by substance they arise to authority, and none so abject but may be made a
subject of glory and magnanimity, if so thereunto they will bend their
endeavors.

For performance hereof, I know my theme so large, and copious, as all your
wits might ingenerall be employed to dilate and express the same, yet only
Clio shall be sufficient, whom alone I make choice off, the rather because it
chiefly concerns her, and so beckning toward her with her head, made an end
of her speech.

She had no sooner said, but all the rest as satisfied in that they desired to
know, presently cast down their looks, that were before steadfastly fixed upon
the brows of Fame, and began to turn to their labors, which all this while
by reason of her talk they had intermitted, only Clio clasping up her book
of famous hystories, and taking her golden pen in hand, rose from the seat
where she sat, and leaving her sisters with due reverence, was ready to follow
Fame where so ever she would conduct her.

At the door of the entrance into the Arbor, there stood a silver chariot
drawn by the force of Pegasus, which Fame of purpose had provided, because
Clio therein might the better keep wing with her. Into the which she was no
sooner mounted, but straightway as swift as the burning darts of Jupiter, they
made their passage through the subtle air, until they soared over the hollow
vault, through which the way leads down to the rule of under earth: there
Clio pulled her rain, and with a headlong fall (according to her guides
direction) never stayed until the steely house of Pegasus did beat against
the gates of Tartara, where being received in, they left the crooked thornie
way smoking with sulpher, and never ceasing contagious vapors, and kept
directly on the other side, which delighted their eyes with so many glorious
sights, that before they knew it, they were arrived under the Elesian shades:
where when the Gods had remained a while, discoursing with her companion the
several habitations, as that of lovers in sweet groves of musk she spide at
last the place where Electrum grows, sweetened continually with burning baulme
boughs, with which brave soldiers, and warlike cauilliers cured their rank
scatres. There did she shake her bright immortal wings, and with the
melodious noise, and with the sweet breath was fanned from those Phoenix
feathers she awaked nine comely knights, yt arm in arm upon a green bank,
strewed with Rose buddes, had laid their conquering heads to rest in peace.

This, quoth she is the farthest end of our journey, here must we take our
stations for a while, and those whom thou see eleuating their bodies from the
ground, from whose brows sparkle gleames of immortal glory, are the nine
worthy Champions I told you of, whom, as by my power I have awaked: so will I
cause to speak and declare their own fortunes, only be thou attentive, and
set down with thy pen, what thou shall hear them speak: and so coming, to
the first, which was a tall aged man, his hair as white as snow, upon his
back a scarlet robe, his temples bound about with baulme, and in his hand a
bright shining blade: she touched his lips with her finger, and straightway
his tongue began to utter these words.

Sir William Wallworth Fishmonger, sometime Mayor of London.
WHat I shall speak, suppose it is not vain,
Nor think Ambition tunes my sounding voice;
It boots not clay to stand on glorious gain,
An other place bereaues us of that choice:
For when the Pomp of earthly pleasures gone,
Our goasts lie buried underneath a stone.
Nor when I lived carpt I at Phoebus light
My deeds did pass without comparing pride,
Who shone the least (me thought apear'd more bright)
I wished it secret what the world discride,
Nor would now show (fair Goddess but for thee,)
The charge beseemes an other and not me.
To ouerpasse then how I was instaul'd
To wear the purple robe of Maiestrate,
It shall suffice I su'de not, but was calde,
Of Fortunes gifts let baser minds relate:
In such a time it was my chance to sway,
When riches quaild, and Virtue won the day.
In Richards Raygne the second of that name
Of Londons weal Liefetenant to his Grace,
Wallworth was chose unworthy of the same
Within his hand to bear the Cities mace:
To Fishmongers the honor did redownd,
Whose brotherhood was my preferments grownd.
These were not days of peace but broyling war,
Dissension spread her venom through the land,
And stird the Prince and subject to a jar
Hated love, Rigor duty did withstand:
In such a tempest of unbridled force,
As many lost their lives without remorse.
For by a tax the King requirde to have,
The men of Kent and Essex did rebel,
Their first Decree concluded none to save
But havoc all, a heavy tale to tell:
And so when they were gatherde to a head,
Toward London were these graceless Rebels ledd.
What spoil they made in Countries as they came,
How they did rob and tyrranize in pride,
The widows cries were patterns of their shame,
And sanguin streams of infants blood beside:
For like the sea when it has caught a breach,
So rusht these Traitors, past compassions reach.
So desperate was their rage as they preuailde,
And entered the City by the sword,
The tower walls were mightily assayld,
And prisoner there made headless at a word:
Earls manner houses were by them destroyed,
The Sauoy and S. Jones, by Smithfield spoyld.
All men of law that fell into their hands
They left them breathless weltering in their blood,
Ancient records were turned to firebrands,
Any had favor sooner then the good:
So stout these cutthrotes were in their degree,
That Noblemen must serve them on their knee.
In burning and in slaughter long they toyld,
That made the King and all his train aghast,
Such rancour had their stomachs ouerboyld
They hopte to get the Soueraignitie at last:
In deed his Majesty was young in years,
Which brought distress to him and to his Peers.
Yet with a loyal guard of bills and Bows
Collected of our tallest men of trade,
I did protect his person from his foes,
Where there presumption trembled to invade:
It yerkt my soul to see my Prince abusde,
In whose defense no danger I refusde.
In these extremes it was no boot to fight,
The Rebbels marched with so huge an host,
The King craved Parley by a noble Knight
Of stern Wat Tiler ruler of the roast:
A country Boore, a goodly proper swayne,
To put his Country to such wretched pain.
This Rustic scoft at first the Kings request
Yet at the last he seemed to give consent,
Aleaging he would come when he thought best:
It Is well (quoth he) is all their courage spent:
I Will make them on their bended knees entreat,
Or cast their bodies in a bloody sweat,
Begirt with steel, our gowns were laid apart,
Age hindered not, though feeble were my joints.
It Would make a fearful coward take a heart
When Prince oppressed a Countries cause appoynts:
Who would refuse, and death or grievous pain
To follow him that is his Souenaygne?
The place appointed where to meet these mates
(That like audatious pessants did prepare,
As if their calling did concern high states,
With brazen looks deuoyd of awful care)
Was Smithfeeld, where his Majesty did stay,
An hour ere these Rebels found the way.
At last the leaders of that brutish rowt
Jack Straw, Wat Tiler, and a number more,
Aproacht the place with such a yelling showt,
As seldom had the like been heard before:
The King spoke fair, and bad them lay down arms,
And he would pardon all their former harms.
But as fierce Lions are not tamed with words,
Nor savage Monsters conquered but by force,
So gentleness vnshethes a Traitors sword,
And fair persuasions makes the wicked worse:
His clemency prouoake, and not dismaide,
Because of them, they thought the King affraide.
And as a witness of their inward vice
Their tongues began to taunt in sawsie sort,
Obedience blushed, and Honor lost her price,
A modest shame forbids the foul report:
How Presumption made these Caitifes swell,
As if the Devils did bellowfoorth of Hell.
Their loathsome talk inkindle, angers fire
And fretting passions made my sinews shake,
It Was death to me to see the Base aspire:
Such wounds would men in deadly slumber wake.
Yet I refrainde, my betters were in place,
It were no manners Nobles to disgrace.
But when I saw the Rebels pride increase,
And none control and counterchecke their rage,
It Were service good (thought I) to purchase peace,
And malice of contentious brags assuage:
With this conceyt all fear had taken flight,
And I alone pressed to the traitors sight.
Their multitude could not amaze my mind,
Their bloody weapons did not make me shrink,
True valor has his constancy assignde,
The Eagle at the Sun will never wink:
Amongst their troops incenst with mortal hate,
I did arest Wat Tiler on the pate.
The stroke was given with so good a will,
It made the Rebel coutch unto the earth,
His fellows that beheld (it is strange) were still
It mard the manor of their former mirth:
I left him not, but ere I did depart,
I stabd my dagger to his damned heart.
The rest perceiving of their captain slain,
Soon terrified did cast their weapons down,
And like to sheep began to fly amain,
They durst not look on Justice dreadful frown.
The king pursude, and we were not the last,
Till fury of the fight were ouerpast.
Thus were the mangled parts of peace recurde;
The Princes falling state by right defended;
From common weal all mischief quite abiurde,
With love and duty virtue was attended.
And for that deed that day before it was night,
My king in guerdon dubbed me a knight.
Nor ceast he so to honor that degree.
A costly hat his highness likewise gave,
That Londons maintenance might ever be,
A sword also he did ordain to have,
That should be carried still before the Mayor,
Whose worth deserude succession to that chair,
This much in age when strength of youth was spent,
Has Walworth by unwonted valor gaind,
It Was all he sought, his country to content.
Success has fortune for the just ordaind,
And when he died, this order he began,
Lord Majors are knights their office being done.
WOrthily had this father of his Country the foremost place in this discourse,
whose valerous attempts may be a light to all ensuing ages, to lead them in the
darkness of all troublesome times, to the resurrection of such a constant
affection as will not faulter or refuse any peril to profit his Country and
purchase honor. Such was his desert, as even then when good men dispaired of
their safety, and the very pillars of the common wealth tottered: his courage
redeemed the one, and underpropped the other: Martialists and patrones of
magnanimity, trembled at that which he beyond all expectation adventured. Let
envy therefore retract the malice of her blistring tongue, which heretofore
(and now not a little) strives by her contentious and ripening nature to
obscure the brightness of their praise, and scoff at their ingenious
dispositions, whose education promises small: But yet when occasion has
required, have performed more then they whose brags have vapord to ye clouds. I
wish the like mind, and the like loyalty in all those that make the City the
Nurse of their lives, and subject of their fortunes, that London may continue
still that credit to be called the great chamber of her kings, and the key of
her Countries bliss. But to proceed, Fame having marked the gravity,
eloquence, and orator-like gesture of this good knight during the continuance
of his talk, was so well pleased as she vowed to erect his stature, where in
spite of al contrarious and maleuolent blasts of virtues carpers, it should
stand immovable: and Clio that had pend his speech, grieved she had not
leisure (as she desired, and he deserved) to set down his actions in better and
more ample manner: for already another of the knightly crew stood up ready to
delate what Fame expected: therefore she was forced to let it somewhat rawly
pass, hoping that the excellency of the matter, would excuse the rudensse of
the rhyme.

The next being a man whom nature had likewise bewtified with the color and
badge of wisdom and authority, as one on whom a greater power then Fortunes
feigned deity had bestowed, the fullness of worldly treasure, and heavens
perfection, began accordingly to frame his tale.

Sir Henry Pitchard Knight.
THe potter tempers not the massy gold,
A meaner substance serves his simple trade,
His workmanship consistes of slimie molde,
Where any plain impression soon is made:
His Pitchards have no outward glittering pomp,
As other mettels of a finer stamp.
Yet for your use as wholesome as the rest,
Though their beginning be but homely found,
And sometime they are taken for the best,
If that be precious that is always sound.
From gould corrupting poisons do infect,
Where earthen cups are free from all suspect.
So censure of the Pitchard you behold,
Whose glory springes not of his lowly frame,
Though he be clay he may compare with gould
His properties nere felt reproachful shame:
For when I first drew breath upon the earth,
My mind did beawtifie creations birth.
I dare not sing of Mars his bloody scarres,
It is a style too high for my conceit,
Yet in my youth I served in the wars,
And followde him that made his foes entreat:
Edward the third the Phoenix of his time,
For life and prowes spotted with no crime.
From France returned, so well I thriu'd at home,
As by permission of celestial grace,
I rose by that men termd blind Fortunes dome
To such a lofty dignity of place:
As by election then it did appear,
I was Lord Mayor of London for a year.
I used not my promotion with disdain,
Nor suffered heaps of coin to fret withrust,
I knew the end of such a noble gain,
And saw that riches were not given for lust:
But for relief and comfort of the poor,
Against the stranger not to shut my door.
I could repeat perhaps some liberal deeds,
But that I fear vaine-glories bitter check,
His plenties want, his harvest is but weeds,
That does in words his proper goodness deck:
It shall suffice he has them in record,
That keeps in store his stewards just reward.
Yet for advancement of fair Londons fame,
I will omit one principal regard,
That such as hear may imitate the same,
When avarice by bounty shall be barde:
Rich men should think of honor more then pelf,
I lived as well for others as my self.
When Edward triumphed for his victories,
And held three crowns within his conquering hand,
He brought rich Trophies from his enemies,
That were erected in this happy land:
We all reioyc'd and gave our God the praise,
That was the author of those fortunate days.
And as from Dover with the prince his son,
The King of Cypres, France, and Scots did pass,
All captive prisoners to this mighty one,
Five thousand men, and I the leader was,
All well preparde, as to defend a fort,
Went forth to welcome him in martial sort.
The riches of our armor, and the cost*
Each one bestowd in honor of that day,
Were here to be expressed but labor lost,
Silk coats and chains of gold bare little sway.
And thus we marched accepted of our King,
To whom our coming seemd a gracious thing.
But when the City pearde within our sights,
I craved a boune submisse upon my knee,
To have his Grace, those Kings, with Earls and knights,
A day or two to banquet it with me:
The king admirde, yet thankefully replide,
Unto thy house both I and these will ride.
Glad was I that so I did prevail,
My heart reuiud, my parts (me thought) were young,
For cheer and sumptuous cost no coin did fail,
And he that talked of sparing did me wrong:
Thus at my proper charge I did retain
Four kings, one prince, and all their royalltraine.
Yet lo this pomp did vanish in an hour,
There is no trusting to a broken staff,
Man's careful life does wither like a flower,
The destenies do stroy what we do graffe:
For all his might, my gold wherewith I pleased,
Death took us both and would not be appeasde.
Of all there now remains no more but this,
What virtue got by toyling labors pain,
To shrine our spotless souls in heavenly bliss,
Till to our bodies they return again.
What else we find is vain and worthless dross,
And greatest getting but the greatest loss.
AFter that Clio had writ what this famous knight had told, she no little
wondered at his modest audacitie. Therefore she said this to Fame, Renowned
Goddess enemy to the fatal sisters, and only friend to the good deseruers:
it were beseeming thy excellency to proceed altogether with the honorable
acts of these memorable men, and only touch their virtuous endeavors,
whereunto the Goddess condiscended: and seeing another lift up his head, as if
he were desirous to speak: Fame heartned him on with smiling countenance to
say as follows.

Sir William Seuenoake.
MY harmless birth misfortune quite contemd,
And from my pappe did make my youth a pray,
So scarcely budd, my branches were vnstemd;
My birth hour was Deaths black and gloomie day:
Had not the highest stretched forth his might
The break of day had been the darkest night.
Some Monster that did euie Natures work
(When I was borne in Kent) did cast me forth
In desert wilds, where though no Beast did lurk
To spoil that life, the Heavens made forwoorth:
Under seven Oaks yet mischief flung me down,
Where I was found and brougha unto a town.
Behold an ebb that never thought to flow;
Behold a fall unlikely to recover;
Behold ashrub, a weed, that grew full low;
Behold a wren that never thought to houer:
Behold yet how the highest can command,
And make a sand foundation firmly stand.
For when my infants time induste more years
After some education in the school,
And some discretion in my self appears
With labor to be taught with manual tool:
To learn to live, to London thus being found,
Apprentise to a Groser I was bound.
To please the honest care my master took,
I did refuse no toil nor drudging pain,
My hands no labor ever yet for sooke
Whereby I might increase my masters gain:
Thus Seuenoake liud (for so they called my name,)
Till Heaven did place me in a better frame.
In time my prentise years were quite expirde,
And then Bellona in my homely breast,
My Countries honor with her flames had firde,
And for a Souldior made my fortune pressed:
Henry the fifi my King did war with France,
Then I with him his right to readuance.
There did courageous men with love compare
And strive by arms to get their Prince renown,
There silly I like thirsty soul did fare
To drink their fill, would venture for to drown:
Then did the height of my inhaunst desire,
Grant me a little leisure to aspire.
The Dolphyne then of France a comely Knight,
Disguised, came by chaunee into a place,
Where I well wearied with the hear of fight,
Had laid me down (for war had ceast his chase)
And with reproachful words, as layzie swain,
He did salute me ere I long had layne.
I knowing that he was mine enemy
A bragging Frenchman (for we tearmd them so,
Ill brookt the proud disgrace he gave to me,
And therefore lent the Dolphyne such a blow:
As warmd his courage well to lay about,
Till he was breathless (though he were so stout.)
At last the noble Prince did ask my name,
My birth, my calling, and my fortunes past,
With admiration he did hear the same,
And so a bag of crowns to me he cast:
And when he went away he said to me,
Seauenoake be proud the Dolphyn fought with thee.
When English had obtainde the victory,
We crossed back the grudging seas again,
Where all my friends supposed war to be
For vice and folly, virtues only bane:
But see the simple how they are deceaude,
To judge that honor, Honor has bereaud.
For when my Soldiers fame was laid aside,
To be a Grocer once again I framde,
And he which rules above my steps did guide,
That through his wealth Seuenoake in time was famde
To be Lord Mayor of London by degree,
Where justice made me sway with equity.
Gray hairs made period unto honors call,
And frostie death had furrowed in my face,
Cold Winter gashes, and to Summers fall,
And fainting nature left my mortal place:
For with the date of flesh my life decade,
And Seuenoake did: (for every flower must fade.)
By Testament in Kent I built a town,
And briefly calde it Seuenoake, from my name,
A free school to sweet learning, to renown
I placde for those that playde at honors game:
Both land and living to that town I gave,
Before I took possession of my grave.
Thither I bare my flesh, but leave my fame,
To be a president for London wights,
And you that now behold fair Virtues maime,
Think he is happy for his Country fights,
For, for my guerdon to this pleasant field,
My carkas did my dying spirit yield.
BY that time this famous man had thus innobled his name by telling his nature,
the pitiful and lovely Muse had delated at large his eternal honor, having
in no part been nigardly of his prodigal praise: but Fame dismissing him to
his former rest, hard by a still silver stream that beat warbling Echoes
into the vaultie banks, whereas deceassed Sea-nymphes use to sport, pressing
his manlike paulme upon the ground, he bent his comely body to the earth:
where not as possessed with heaviness, but with Paradice-like joy he safely
and sweettly reposed his comely limbs: like as the woonted Martialists of
former memory were accustomed to do, when returning from hot encountered
broils, they unbuckled their steeld enclosures to enjoy the fresh and
delightsome breath of peace. There they yt woonted to be of Pans musical
Parliament, fair Forresters and carrolling sheepheards, delighted, and almost
inchaunted with this Champions story, thought to present him with some short
recreation, therefore upon a bush of Juniper brambles where Philomelie had set
her speckled breast, they all at once did beat with silver wings: then from
this sweet sauouring thicket rowsed the tripping Dear, and after them the
nimble footed Fawn, wrestling together, once overtaken with pleasing and
delectable sport, rubbing their horned brows upon their sweet twined bowers,
this did they do in favor of his birth, being committed to their governments
before his mothers milk had made him blithe.

This pastime put the famous Seuenoake in mind of his beginning, how Nature
first had inniciated her work in misery, and ended it in miracles, not
arguing herein her unconstant kind, but her provident foresight to withstand
the mischief of all misfortunes: and whilst Fame with her admiring Muse was
busied in posing the rest, this meritorious man did please himself with this
Poem.

WHere Fortune had her birth the Sun sat down,
Yet gave no living glory to the child,
She grew and gave the God a golden crown,
It pleased him not, for he was ever mild:
Yet drew she disposition from his throne,
That without her no wight can move alone.
Then he betook him to his former meditation, from whom he was first awaked:
when another knight of that advanced crew, was by Fame assigned to speak,
called sir Thomas White, the Goddess cleaped him, who lifting up his aged
limbs, yet not decayed, said as follows.

Sir Thomas White.
White is my name, and milk white are my hairs,
White were my deeds, though vain is proper praise,
White for my country were my kind affairs,
White was the rule that measurd all my days:
Yet black the mould that coutcht me in my grave,
By which more pure my present state I have.
I cannot sing of arms and blood-redwarres,
Nor was my color mixed with Mars his hew:
I honor those that ended Country iarres,
For therein subjects show that they are true.
But privately at home I shewde my self,
To be no lover of vain worldly pelf.
My deeds have tongues to speak though I surcease,
My Orator the learned strive to be,
Because I twined paulmes in time of peace,
And gave such gifts that made fair learning free:
My care did build them bowers of sweet content,
Where many wise their golden time have spent.
A noise of grateful thanks within mine ears,
Descending from their studies (glads my heart)
That I began to wish with private tears,
There lived more that were of Whites desert:
But now I look and spy that time is balde,
And Virtue comes not, being seldom calde.
But since I am awaked not to wail,
But to unfold to Fame my former life.
I must on forward with my single tale,
For sorrow will but break the heart with strife,
White is no warrior (as I said before,)
Nor entered ever into dangers door.
The English Cities and incorporate towns,
Do bear me witness of my Countries care,
Where yearly I do feed the poor with crowns,
For I was never niggard yet to spare,
And all chief Burrowes of this blessed land,
Have somewhat tasted of my liberal hand.
He that did lend to me the grace of wealth,
Did not bestow it for to choke with store,
But to maintain the needy poor in health,
By which expense my wealth increased more,
The oil of gladness ever cheered my heart,
Why should I not then pity others smart.
Lord Mayor of London I was called to be,
And Justice balance bare with upright hand:
I judged all causes right in each degree,
I never partial in the law did stand:
But as my name was White so did I strive,
To make my deeds whilst yet I was alive.
But my prefixed fate had twinde my thread,
And White it was, and therefore best she like it,
She set her web within a loome of lead,
And with her baulme of grace she sweetly dight it:
And with consent her sisters gave this grace,
That White should keep his color in this place.
WHen this aged knight had peaceably (observing decorum with his passed state)
told his plame and unpolished tale, in all points like himself, clothed with
the fashion of his mind, upon a bed of Lillies he laid him down, whose
color answerable to his snowie beard, made them take especial delight in the
simpathie of their quality. Then said Clio, thou fair and swift foot
Goddess, winged with the Dove, and eyed with the Eagle, let me be boldned
(with thy favor) to demand one question, which of all this noble company,
shall next dilate his life. Sweet Muse (quoth Fame) this knight, pointing to
sir John Bonham, sometimes apprentice to a Merchant in London. Your deity,
said Clio then (under correction) will mistake the placing. For this gallant
lived in England in the time of Edward the first, and we are already come
down so far as Queen Marie. Therein, said Fame, we do prefer their
age, and the honor of their calling, before the observation of time which
derogates from no other course then that which sometimes our Poets have used,
placing ever the worthiest foremost, as to induce the rest by example, not to be
stark for want of courage. Therefore it shall not be uncomely or preposterous
when the younger knights shall speak after those that bare the honor of the
Maioraltie.

This excuse well contented the laboring Muse, who framing her golden pen in
her fingers, fixed it ready to her memorial leaves, whilst Fame did rouse
this worthy from his rest. A man of stature mean, in countenance mild, in
speech man-like, and in performance courageous: his beard Abron, and his body
big, and thus he began, when Fame had given him caveat to speak.

Sir John Bonham knight.
LEt them that pull their quils from Griffons wings,
And dippe them in the blood of Pagans bane,
Let them describe me from the breast that sings,
A Poem of bloody showers of reign:
And in my tale a mournful Eleagie,
To such as do the laws of God deny.
A gentleman I am of gentle blood,
A Knight my Father was, yet thought no scorn
To place his son within a prentise hood,
For nature will appear as she was borne:
A Devonshire man to London lo I came,
To learn to traffic of a Merchant man.
Shortelie from thence to Denmark was I bound,
Well shipped with ware my master gave in charge,
I deemd the water better then the ground,
And on the seas a man might see at large:
Me thought that Fortune there might fly her fill,
And pitch and light upon what place she will.
Ariud at last, in Denmark was I set,
Where Bonham did demean himself sowell,
That though some strangers there had pitched a nett
To catch my feet, themselves therein soon fell:
And such dishonor dropped upon their head,
As they their native Country quickly fled.
My worthless Fame unto the King was brought,
Who showed himself both mild and debonare,
A cause of gracious kindness still he sought,
And for my Country did commend my care:
And though I say it, that might better cease,
Bonham did purchase fame, and loves increase.
A virtuous Lady, and a courteous prince,
This famous king unto his daughter had,
Her countenance did the baser sort convince,
Yet did she bare her gently to bad:
Such was her beauty, such was her grace and favor,
That watchful Envy no way could deprave her.
Excepting still the praise of Proserpine,
I may a little glance upon her grace,
The words she spoke did ever seem divine,
And Nature chose her alters in her face:
Where in the day her golden flames do burn,
And they that gaze shall fry except they turn.
There bodies once consumed, love took their souls,
And there satte binding them within her hair,
She need not frown, her smoothest looks controles,
See how she slayes, yet does the guiltless spare:
Guiltless they are that dare not stay so long,
To hear the music of inchaunting song.
Should I but speak the words unto her face,
Perhaps you would suppose I flatter her,
If so I have too long vpheld the chase,
And negligentlie spard the pricking spur:
In whose sweet praise I end not yet begun,
Because my lame conceit wants feet to run.
Who will not judge the brauest Denmark Knights,
Will crack their Lances in her proud defense,
And now by this a troop of worthy wights
Prepared Iustes, her beawtie to incence:
And unto me unworthy me she gave,
A favor to adorn my courage brave.
I know your ielouslie will judge me now,
And say I praised her for her favors sake,
Alas he looks not up, is bound to bow,
A Ceader never springs from a Brake:
It pleased her well age not displeased me,
Why then should Envy still with Honor be.
They that have guiders cannot choose but run,
Their Mistress eyes do learn them Chivalry,
With those commands these Turneys are begun,
And shiuerd Lances in the air do fly:
No more but this, there Bonham had the best,
Yet list I not to vaunt how I was blessed.
Each Knight had favor bound to his desert,
And every Lady lent her love a smile,
There boldly did I not my self insert,
Nor secret practice did my pride compile.
But of her self the gentle Princess gave
Reward of Honor unto me her slave.
In fine my Masters ship with goods were fraught,
And I desirous to return again,
For all the favors that my Fortune wrought,
Unto my Masters business was no main:
But so occasion trusty friend to time,
Prepared me steps, and made me way to clime.
Great Solimon the Turkish Emperor,
Made sudden wars against the Danish King,
And most unlike a noble Emperor
Did spoil and ruin to his confines bring:
A thing unlike, yet truth to witness call,
And you shall find he made me General.
A puissant army then was le^ted straight,
And skillful pilars sent to guide my ship,
Imagine but a Christians deadly hate,
Against the heathen that our blood does sip.
Then think how Bonham bent against the Turk,
Wrought wonders by the high almighties work.
Half of his army smouldred with the dust,
Lay slaughtred on the earth in gorie blood,
And he himself compeld to quell his lust,
By composition for his peoples good
Then at a parlie he admirde me so,
He made me knight, and let his army go.
He gave me costly robes, and chains of gold,
And guarded with his Galleys sent me back:
For Fame unto the Danish King had told,
My gotten glory, and the Turkish wrack:
He gave me gifts in guerdon of my fight,
And sent me into England like a knight.
How I was welcomd there it were vain to tell,
For shortly after life had run his race,
And hither was I summoned to dwell,
My other fellow Worthies to embrace:
Thus gently borne, a Merchant by my trade,
And in the field Bonham a knight was made.
CLio with the strangeness of this report, was wrapped so much into admiration
(both in respect of his feature, fortune and fair tongue) as she seemed cast
into a trance, never remoouing her eyes from of his youthful face, till Fame
perceiving her deep cogitations, put herforth of her dumps, by asking her why
she pawsed so long, her chaste eyes (it appeared) having all this while seen no
other but such, whose countenance resembled winters frosts, began now with the
cheerful heat of this flowring spring, to wax warm with secret working of
some amorous passion to excuse with suspicion (for it stood with her credit
not to be faulty in any such idle toy) she answered, it was not the
inticement of any misbeseeming fantasy that allured her to that sudden
silence, but only a kind of conceyte she fostered, how it could be
possible that the Turk being a man of nature barbarous and cruel, and
especially toward Christians) should now be so much mollifyed, and brought
from his wonted fierceness, to favor and honor one, whom by by nature he
loathed and detested. For what though Bonhams valor had gotten that advantage,
as by reason and law of arms he might enforce the Turk confess, the
safegarde of his life depended on his clemeneie, yet since the brutishness of
that nature esteems of virtue but to serve their own lust and profit, I see
no argument of likelihoode, why the Turk having his adversary in his Court,
that a little before had made him bow, not with gentle persuasions, bue with
downright strokes, should not rather be incensed to cut off his head, then
do him the least good in the world: so severe is the regard of honor, as
rather then it will be vpbrayded with disgrace (though that disgrace were cause
of many incomparable pleasures) no hateful, unnatural, or ungrateful
practice shall be attempted, til the eyesore of their grudging heart be
removed, and Princes if they cannot hear words, much less will put up wounds,
and that was it (quoth she) that troubled my serious Muse.

As these words Fame began to frown, her patience was provoked, that one so
well instructed in the knowledge of such matters as she was (her whole study
consisting of nothing else but of civil discipline) should make a doubt in so
slender a contrariety, yet to cut off further protraction of time, she
replied her this resolution: that she was sure she could not be ignorant,
how that it was the affect of virtue that wrought such an alteration in the
Turk, which, as it is divine, descended from the Gods: so it works beyond
the expectation of men. And for proof thereof, already sundry authorities
were alleged, as that of Dyonisius whose murtherous mind could not but
reverence Plato, although he continually inueighed bitterly against his
tyranny, and that of Alexander, who loved Darius for his fortitude, although
he was his enemy. Therefore it ought not seem miraculous unto her, when
usually such accidents, as those follow Virtues favorites: But (quoth she) I
rather think you were amazed to hear such rare exploits proceed from a
Prentice, and one of no more experience: but let not that seem strange, he
spoke no more then truth, nor all that might be said concerning his ha^htie
endeavors: the other four whom you see on his left hand, will (if you seem
incredulous) confirm a possibility in his speeches: they are of the like
condition and quality as he was, prentices that purchased estimation by the
sword. Clio blushed that she had been so inquisitiue: but as it may be
coniectured, it was not so much for her own satisfaction, as to take away
hereafter all controversy, and needless cauillation as might concur by the
curious view of such as should fortune to have the reading of her lines. By
this sir John Bonham had coucht himself again in the bed of his secure
rest, when another gay knight, stern in his looks, and strong set in his
limbs, carrying in his brows the picture of Mars, and in his manners the
majesty of a Prince, with a low salutation made himself known by this
brief oration.

Sir Christopher Croker knight of London Vintner.
IT is not birth that makes a man renownde,
Nor treasures store that purchases our fame,
Big words are but an empty vessels found,
And death is better then a life with shame.
This proves Croker in his travails made,
Of London once a Vintner by his trade.
In Gracious-streete there was I bound to serve,
My masters name hight Stodie in his time,
From whom in duty I did never swerve,
Nor was corrupted with detested crime:
My education taught me so to live,
At by my pains my masters purse might thrine.
My fellow servants loved me with their hearts;
My friends reioyc'd to see me prosper so,
And kind Doll Stodie (though for small deserts)
On me vouchsaft affection to bestow:
Whose constancy was such that for her sake,
No toil was grievous I did undertake.
Such was my state as I my self could wish,
Deuoid of care, not touched with egr^ want,
My sleep secure, my food choice bewties dish,
Only in this my pleasure seemed scant,
That I unable was her state to raise,
That was the lengthner of my happy days.
Whilst thus I was perplexed owth that thought,
Behold how Fortune fauourde my desire,
Of sudden wars the joyful news was brought,
And Edward aid of Soldiers did require,
Amongst the rest it fell unto my chance,
That I was pressed to follow him to France.
My master would have sewd for my discharge,
His daughter with her tears began me assail,
On every side they prayed and promised large,
But nothing could in that respect prevail:
Such thirst of honor spurd my courage on,
I would to wars although I went alone.
My forwardness perceyu'd, my valor known,
Over a band of Soldiers I was chief,
Then sproute the seeds that were but lately sown,
My longing soul had quickly found relief:
I sparde no cost, nor shrunk for any pain,
Because I meant my Love should reap the gain.
To prove my faith unto my Countries stay,
And that a prentice (though but small esteemd,)
Unto the stoutest never gives way,
If credit may by trial be redeemd:
At Bordeaux siege when other came too late,
I was the first made entrance through the gate.
And when Don Peter driven out of Spain,
By an usurping Bastard of his line,
He craved some help his crown to reobtaine,
That in his former glory he might shine:
Our king ten thousand seuerd from his host,
My self was one, I speak it not in boast.
With these Don Peter put the Bastard down,
Each City yielded at our first approach,
It was not long ere he had got the crown,
And taught his wicked brother to encroch:
In these affairs so well I showed my might,
That for my labor I was made a knight.
Thus labor never loses his reward,
And he that seeks for honor sure shall speed,
What crauen mind was ever in regard?
Or where consists manhood but in deed?
I speak it that confirmd it by my life,
And in the end Doll Stodie was my wife.
This Worthy having finished his task set down by Fame, to confirm the
order of his first honor, reposed himself amongst the rest, where he found a
sweet murmuring of private and secret conference what had passed by the
several annotations of every ones praise, where they began (contemning the
order of envy) to colaude the endeavors of one another actions, none
particularly arrogating in arrogancy the praise of himself, to him that did
most, they gave most applause, and so sweetly concorded in simpathie, that all
the Elesian harmony might have liberally commended their conditions: the
hushing rivers were caulme without murmur or contempt: the leaves stood still
to admire these famous enterprises, and excellent atchieuements: the winds
bound themselves up in the contentation of voluntary stillness, that they
might be at liberty to hearken to these meritorious men, and yielded them
praise condescending to their pains. The Goddess of darkness (for envy
approached not the place, so that it was by that means continually day) whereby
the Sun was ever glorious in the pride of his height without grudging or any
show of declining: the bright shining of whose alluring countenance enticed
another up, called sir John Haukwood, or sit John Sharp, from the Italians,
John Acute, and from thence indeed he brought back into England both his name
and his nobleness. The pictures of his renown, for as an emblem of endless
honor, the Venecians wrought underneath his stature, set up in the city,
Giouanno Acuto Caualiero. This John Haukwood knight, he lived likewise in the
time of Edward the third, that Prince of famous memory: when he plesantly
looked about him, being a man of a most courageous countenance, and an
ingenious nature, thus he began to speak, as who should say he had wrong to
be deferred so long.

Sir John Haukwood knight.
WHo knows my offspring, does not know my prime,
Who knows my birth, perhaps will scorn my deeds,
My valor makes my virtue more then slime,
For that suruiues though I wear deaths pale weeds:
Ground does consume the carkas unto dust,
Yet cannot make the valiants armor rust.
After that eighteen years had touched my head.
Being a Printice boy in Lumbard street,
A Tailor by my trade, and I had lead
A few wild years for striplings far unmeet:
A Souldior I was pressed to serve in France,
The Prince of Wales mine honor to inhaunce.
I serude as private soldier for a while,
Till courage made me greedy of renown,
And causde me give a noble man the foil,
That though with sturdie Lance did bear me down,
On foot that day my self did keep in chase,
Some worthy knights that feared to show their face.
That day the Prince of Wales surnamde the black,
Did mount me on a gallant English steed.
Where I bestirde me so upon his back,
That none incountred me that did not bleed,
It was not I, nor Fortune, nor my fate,
His hand it was that seldom helps to late.
His be the honor then, and his the praise,
Yet have I leave to speak what Haukwood did,
When noble Edward had dispersed the rays,
And by his prowes of the French was rid.
Three more then If my self did make the fourth)
The gentle Princes then du^^ knights of worth.
His knights he tearmd ^s still amongst the rest,
And gave us honor fitting our estate,
For England to be bound it seemd him best,
Because the French had swallowed Edwards bait:
I took my leave, and begged on my knee,
That I might wander other parts to see.
The Prince inkindled with my honors heat*
Discharging me, bestowde on me a chain,
For still fresh courage on my heart did beat,
Which made me love, and women's acts refrain*
Hearing the Duke of Millaine was distressed,
To Italy my voyage their was pressed.
The Seas I quickly past, and came to shore,
With me were fifteen hundred English men,
We marched to Millaine walls, where we had more
Of other nations to conioyne with them,
There did the Italians term me John Acute*
Because I had their foes in such pursuit.
Castles and towers I had for my reward,
And got enough to pay my men withal:
But I to hired pay had no regard,
That pricked me on which climbs the highest wall,
Honor and Fame, whereof they gave me store,
Which made me more audacious then before.
Millaine thus peac'd, the Pope oppressed Spain,
Then thither was I sent to quell his pride:
Which being done I did return again,
And stoopt with age, in Padua Palace did*
And he that yet will hear of John Acute.
In Millaine shall not find the people (...)*
All wars you see do end as well as peace,
And then remains but a tumbe of dust,
A voice of Fame, a black and mourning hearce,
To what then may we like this worldly lust:
It is an evil vapouring smoke that fumes,
Breaths in the brain, and so the life consumes.
WHen sir John Haukwood had boldly presumed by Fames authority to speak, be
laid him dawne like one that wreaked no guerdon for this grace, but as if
Nature brought him forth of duty to perform these deeds. So ought every
martial mind imagine, that he is borne for his Country, as the custom of
the ancient and famous Romans was in all their actions, to study to redounde
the honor of their deeds to their Country. If this were ambition and pride,
it would be laid flat in the dust, magnanimity extolled to the highest tip of
dignity, and such a sweet concord and unity amongst men, that be would be
counted most happy that lived longest, for the profit of his friend: when sit
John Haukwood of this perfection of mind had laid him down again, another
of the same stamp called sir Hugh Caluerley, as little ambitious as his
fellow, and as resolute in every degree, arose, looking about him, being
ignorant what to do: but Fame iogging him on the elbowe soon awaked him from
his maze, whose suppose was his desert, which made him covet to be obsurde.
Therefore the Goddess was feign to antimate him on further, before he would be
persuaded to speak. Gentle he was and full of humanity, insomuch that he
might have wunne all the powers of that place to admire the baseness of his
profession being a weauer. But they that have honor harboring in their
breasts, cannot but give him the right of his due, except the train of envy
see upon the train of honor, as commonly it does if it do see he that shall
for himself, and appeal to the most precise, whose wits being more busy then
beautified with moral manners, thrust boldly, yet ignorantly upon the well
trained sort, approaching famous persuasion he began as suddenly as he arose
suddenly, as if now life had newly revived, began to breath this gentle breath
from out his mouth.

Sir Hugh Caluerey knight.
WHo fears to swim a river dreads the sea,
But he that is best resolved dare venture both,
The greatest lump does not the greatest die,
Base metals to compare with gold are loath:
And why my quiet wit refraines to speak,
Is this because the tallest ship may leake.
In England late young Cauerley did live,
Silke-weauers honor merited by deeds,
In foreign broils continually I strive
Of lasting memory to sow the seeds:
As by experience they in Poland may
Express my English valor every way.
After my Princes service done in France,
I was entreated to the Polish King,
Where as the Frizeland horse does break the lance,
And tamelesse beasts a valiant race does bring:
There Maximilian hunted with his Lords,
Entangling mankind Bears in toyling cords.
There did I bring a Boar unto the bay,
That spoyld the pleasant fields of Polonie,
And ere the morning parted with her gray
The foming beast as dead as clay did lie:
The Ladies cheeks looked red with cheerful blood,
And I was much commended for that good.
Some said I looked like Olympian Jove,
When as he cracked in two the Centaurs bow,
As swiftly footed as the God of Love,
Or green Syluanus when he chaste the Roe:
They brought me crowns of Laurel wreathd with gold,
The sweet and daintiest tongues my praises told.
These favors fronted me with courage frown,
That like the young Alcides I did look,
When he did lay the greedy Lion down.
No beast appeard when I the woods forsook,
So that the King supposd I was some wight,
Ordaind by heaven to expel their flight.
In scarlet and in purple was I clad,
And golden buskins put upon my feet,
A casket of the richest pearls I had,
And every Noble gently did me greet.
So with the King I rode unto the court,
Where for to see me many did resort.
At Iustes I ever was the foremost man,
In field still forward, Fame can witness it,
And Cauerley at tilt yet never ran,
But foming Steed so champed on the bit:
But still my horse his masters valor showed,
When through my Beavir I with heat had blood.
Yet men of arms, of wit, and greatest skill,
Must die at last when deaths pale sisters please,
But then for honor Fame remains still,
When dead delights in grave shall find their ease:
Ye long to know the truth in France I d^^e,
When from the valiant Polands I did ri^^.
Now honor let me lay me down again,
And in thy pillow rest my weary head,
My passed praise commands my soul remain,
Wheerin these rosy bowers, with sweet dew fed:
Though I was valiant, yet my guiltless blood,
In cruelty of war I never stood.
THus this aduenturous Martialist having expressed the zeal of his conscience
toward his Country, the toil and labor he sustained to better the tredite
of his first calling, and the perils he waded through to patronage the ancient
name of Citizens, he reposed himself again down by the sides of his noble
warre-fellowes.

Thus Fame and Clio (the one having marked his amiable parts and knightly
gesture, the other delineated with her pen the eloquence of his oratour-like
Oration) questioning together some few points, concerning the force of valor,
and the virtuous inclination of many obscure persons, that although they like
sepultured (as it were) without regard, yet if opportunity fit them to
revive their courage, will (like the Diamond racked out of clay) excel, or at
least compare with the brightness of glories. Rarest jewels concluded that
there was no pernition but by virtue, no climbing to honor but by Fortitude,
and none base, abject and ignoble but the vicious slothful, and faintharted
milkesops. They were not wearyed, nor seemed these former knights tales tedious
unto them, although many would think it a pain to be tied to the hearing of
so large a circumstance, and very few but would exclaim it were plain
slavery to write such and so many several conceytes from the mouths of the
speakers. Yet such was their desire to publish these men's deserts, and the
delight they took to see the increase spring of the seeds of virtue, for they
would not take the finallest recreation, till every one of the nine had fully
finished their discourses, and therefore they attended when the last would
breath the secrets of his breast.

This was a Printice as the rest, and a Grocer, sometime dwelling in Cornehill,
his face was not effeminate, or his parts of a slender or weak constitution,
but by his looks be seemed courageous, and in the height, strength* and fair
proportion of his body, victorious. Thus being in all points armed like a
champion, the very aspect of his outward abite, made semblance both of
manhood and courtesy, wisdom and valor, knit in such a simpathie of
opmyeration, that be seemed as much to be loved for peace, as praised for
prowes: and thus with a voice neither too mean like a child, nor too big like
a giant, but indifferent betwixt both, he spoke as follows.

Henry Maleueret Grocer, surnamed Henry of Cornhill.
A Precious cause has still a rare effect,
And deeds are greatest when the dangers most,
It is no care that travels does neglect,
Nor love that has respect to idle cost:
A Bramble never brings forth a Rose,
Where fields are fruitful there the Lilly grows.
By this conjecture what may be the end,
Of his defensive force that fought for Christ,
It is no common matter if we spend
Both life and goods in quarrel of the hiest:
The least desert does merit his reward,
And best employde should have not worst regard.
No vain presumption follows my devise,
For of my actions it is in vain to boast,
Yet with the Pagans I encountered twice*
To win again fair Sion that was lost:
Unto which war I was not forced to go,
It Was honors fire that did incense me so.
For when the Jews oppressed with heathens pride,
Of Christian princes craude some friendly aid,
In every Country they were flat denide
Save that in England here their suit preuailde:
Such was the fury of intestiue strife,
All Europe sought to spoil each others life.
And as in London there was order taken
To make provision for the holy land,
My youthful mind that fearde no foreign bane,
Was so admirde by might of conquering hand:
As for a single combat they did see,
Th'ambassadours made special choice of me.
Then for the Tankerd I did use to bear
And other things belonging to mine art,
Mine hand did weeld Bellonas warlike spear,
For I was armde in steel to play my part:
A long we went to beard our daring foes,
That soon were queld with terror of our blows.
I never left the field, nor slept secure,
Until I saw Jerusalem regainde,
To watch and labor I did still endure,
What is it that diligence has not obtainde?
Yet grudging envy valor to deface*
By treasons malice brought me indisgrace.
The good that I had done was clean forgot,
Ingratitude preuailde against my life,
And nothing then but exile was my lot,
Or else abide the stroke of fatal knife:
For so the ruler of the Jews concluded,
His Grace by (...) reports was much deluded.
There was no striving in a foreign soil,
I took it patient though it were causeless done,
And to avoid the stain of such a foil,
That slanderous tongues had wickedly begun,
Where to the holy well of Jacobs name,
I found a cave to shroude me from their blame.
And though my body were within their power,
Yet was my mind untouched of their hate.
The valiant faint not, though that fortune lower,
Nor are they fearful at controlling fate:
For in that water none could quench their thirst,
Except he meant to combat with me first.
By that occasion for my pleasures sake,
I gave both Knights and Princes heavy strokes,
The proudest did presume a draught to take
Was sure to have his passeport sealed with knocks:
Thus lived I till my innocence was known,
And then returnde, the king was pensive grown.
And for the wrong which he had offered me,
He vowde me greater friendship than before,
My false accusers lost their liberty,
And next their lives, I could not challenge more:
And thus with love, with honor, and with fame,
I did return to London whence I came.
THis valerous champion (having here made an end) bowed himself. Then Fame
with her own hand gently laid his head upon a soft downy pillow wrought with
gold, and set with pearl, and so leaving him and the rest to the happiness of
their sweet sleep, commanded Clio to claspe up the book, wherein she had
wri^^^ the deeds of these nine Worthies, and as her leisure (...) her (...)
publish it to the view of the world, the (...) read their honorable actions,
and take exam^^^ up them to follow virtue, and aspire to honor, and the rather
(quoth she) because I would have malicious minds that envy at the deserts of
noble Citizens, by proof of these men's worthiness to repent their contempt,
and amend their captious dispositions, seeing that from the beginning of the
world, and in all places of the world, Citizens have flourished and been
famous, as in Rome, Caesar, in Athens, Themistocles, and in Carthage, Hannibal,
with an infinite number more, that were by birth Citizens, up nature martial,
and by industry renowned: and so they departed from Elisian: and within a
while after, Clio according to the charge was given her, sent forth this
pamphlet of her Poems.

FINIS.

