The second Part of the famous History of the seven Champions of Christendom.

Likewise shevving the Princely provvesse of Saint Georges three Sons, the
lively Spark of Nobility.

With many other memorial atchiuements worthy the golden spurs of
Knighthood.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his shop, under
the Royal Exchange 1597.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD WILIAM HOWARD, Richard Johnson wishes
increase of all prosperity.
AS it has, Right Honorable, of late pleased your most noble brother in
kindenes to accept of this history, and to grace it with a favorable
countenance. So am I now embouldened to dedicate this second part unto your
honor, which here I humbly offer to your Lordships hands, not because I
think it a gift worthy the receauer: but rather that it should be, as it were
a witness of the love and duty which I bear to your Right Noble House.

And when it shall please you to bestow the reading of these my rude
Discourses, my humble request is, that you would think I I wish your Honor as
many happy days, as there be letters contained in this History.

Thus praying for your Honors chief happynes, I end.

Your Honors in all dutiful love to his poor power. R. I.

To the Gentle Reader.
I Have finished the second part of the seven Champions of Christendom, only
for thy delight, being thertoo encouraged by thy great courtesy in the kind
acceptance of my first part. I have no eloquent phrases to inuit thy
willingness to read, only a little barren invention, whereof I have no cause to
boast, so excellently the wits of many in these days in that kind exceed.
Only thy courtesy must be my Buckler, against the carping malice of mocking
iesters, that being worst able to do well, scoff commonly at that they cannot
mend, censuring all things, doing nothing, but (monkey like) make apish jests
at any thing they see in Print: and nothing pleases them, except it savor of
a scoffing or inuectiue spirit. Well, what those say of me I do not care, thy
delight only is my desire: And accept it and I am satisfied, reject it and
this shall be my penance never again to come in Print. But having better
hope, I boldly lead thee to this maine from this doubtful floude of suspicion
where I rest. Walk on in the history, as in an ouergrown and ill husbanded
garden: if among all the weeds thou find one pleasing flower I have my wish.

Thine Richard Johnson.

The second part of the most honorable History of the seven Champions of
Christendom.
How Sa. Georges three sons were entertained into the famous City of
London, and after how their Mother was slain in a wood with the pricks of a
thornie brake, her blessing she gave her sons, S. Georges lamentation over
her bleeding body: and likewise of the Journey the seven Champions intended
to Jerusalem to visit the Sepulcher of Christ.

AFter Saint George with the other six Champions of Christendom (by their
invincible conquests) had brought into subjection, all the Eastern Parts, and
by dint of bloody wars yoaked the stubborn Infidels even to the furthest
bounds of India, where the golden Sun begins to arise, as you heard
discoursed in the former Part of this History, they returned with the conquest
of Imperial Diadems, regal crowns and kingly scepters to the rich and
plentiful Country of England: where in the famous City of London they many a
day soiourned, a place not only beautefied with sumptuous buildings, but
graced with a number of valiant Knights and gallant Gentlemen of courtly
behavior, and therewithal adornd with troops of Ladies, of divine and
celestial beauties, that trip it up and down the streets like to the Grecian
Queens, when as they tied the Phrigian Warriers in the silken snares of love:
whereby it seemed rather a paradise for heavenly Angels, than a place for
earthly inhabiters.

Here the Christian Champions laid their Arms aside, here hung they up their
weapons on the bowers of peace, here their glistering corslets rusted in their
Armories, here was not heard the warlike sound of drums nor silver trumpets,
here stood no Centinells nor Courts of guard, nor barbed steedes prepared to
the battle, but all things tended to a lasting peace, They that had wont in
steeled coats to sleep in champion fields, lay dallying now in beds of silk:
they that had wont with weary arms to weeld the warlike fawchions, sat now
embracing lovely Ladies on their knees: and they whose ears had wont to hear
the rufull cries of slaughtered soldiers, were now orecloyd with musickes
pleasant harmony.

In this delicious manner lived these Champions in the City of London,
burying the remembrance of all their former Adventures in the lakes of
oblivion, and spending their times in honorable Tiltes and courtly Tournaments:
where S. George performed many atchiuements in honor of his beloved Lady, and
the other Knights in honor of their Mistresses.

But at last Saint Georges three Sons, Guy, Alexander and David, being all
three borne at one birth, as you heard before in the wilderness, and sent into
three several Kingdoms by their careful Father to be trained up: the one
into Rome to the warlike Romans. another unto Wittenberg to the learned
Germans, the third into Britain to the valiant English. But now being grown
to some ripenes of age and agilitie of strength, they desired much to visit
their parents, whom they had not seen from their infancies lying in their
cradles: and to crave at his hands the honor of true Knighthood, and to wear
the golden Spur of Christendom.

This earnest and princely request so highly pleased their Tutors, that they
furnished them with a stately train of Knights, and sent them honorably into
England where they arrived all three at one time in the famous City of
London, where their entertainments were most princely, and their welcomes so
honorable, that I want art to describe and memory to express.

I omit what sumptuous Pageants and delightful Shows the Citizens provided,
and how the streets of London were beautefied with tapestrie, the solemn bells
that rung them joyful welcomes, and the silver strained instruments that gave
them pleasant entertainment. Also I pass over their fathers joy, who prized
their sightes more precious in his eyes, than if he had been made sole Monarch
of the golden mines of rich America: or that every hair that grew upon his
head had been equalled with a kingdom, and he to give as many golden diademes
in his Arms. Also the Mothers welcomes to her Sons, who gave them more kisses
than she breathed forth groans at their deliueries from her painful womb in
the wilderness.

The other Champions courtesies were not the least nor of the smallest in
account to these three young Gentlemen: but to be short, Saint George (whose
love was dear unto his Children) in his own person conducted them unto their
lodgings, whereas they spent that day and the night following in royal
banqueting amongst their Princely Friend.

But no sooner appeared the Mornings Sun upon the Mountain tops, and the
clear countenance of the Elements made motion of some ensuing pastime, but S.
George commanded a solemn Hunting for the welcome of his Sons.

Then began his knights to arm themselves in troops, and to mount upon their
nimble Iennets, and some with well armd Boare-speares in their hands, prepared
for the game on foot: but S. George with his Sons clad in green vestments
like Adonis, with silver horns hanging at their backs in scarffes of colored
silk, were still the foremost in this Exercise. Likewise Sabra (intending to see
her Sons valors displaied in the field, whether they were in courage like
their Father or no) caused a gentle Palfray to be provided, whereon she mounted
her Princely Person to be a witness of these Siluane sportes: she was armd with
a curious breast plate wrought like to the scales of a Dolphin, and in her hand
she bare a silver bow of the Turkish fashion, like an Amazonian Queen, or Diana
hunting in the groves of Arcadie.

Thus in this gallant manner rode forth these Hunters to their Princely
pastimes, where after they had ridden some six miles from the City of
London, fell from Sa. Georges nose three drops of purple blood, whereat he
suddenly started, and there withal he heard the croaking of a Flight of night
Ravens, that houered by the Forest side, all which he judged to be dismal
signs of some ensuing stratagem: but having a princely mind he nothing
discouraged thereat, nor little mistrusted the woeful accident that after
happened, but with a noble resolution entered the Forest, accounting such
foretelling tokens for old wives ceremonies. Wherein they had not passed the
compass of half a mile, but they started a wild and swift Stag, at whom they
uncoupled their Hounds, and gave bridle to their horses, and followed the game
more swifter, than Pirates that pursue the Merchants upon the seas. But now
behold how frowning Fortune changed their pleasant pastimes to a sad and
bloody tragedy: for Sabra proffering to keep pace with them, delighting to
behold the valiant incounters of her young sons, and being careless of her
self thorough the over swiftnes of her Steed, she slipped beside her saddle,
and so fell directly upon a thornie brake of brambles, the pricks whereof more
sharp than spikes of steel entered to every part of her delicate body: some
pierced the lovely closets of her star bright eyes, whereby (in stead of
crystal pearled tears) there issued drops of purest blood: her face before
that blushed like the mornings radiant countenance, was now exchanged into a
crimson red: her milk white hands that lately strained the yuorie Lute, did
seem to wear a bloody scarlet glove: and her tender paps that had so often
fed her Sons with the milk of nature, were all berent and torn with these
accursed brambles: from whose deep wounds there issued such a stream of purple
gore, that it converted the grass from a lively green to crimson hicu, and the
abundance of blood that trickled from her breast, began to enforce her soul to
give the world a woeful farewell. Yet notwithstanding, when her beloved Lord,
her sorrowful Sons, and all the rest of the woeful Champions, had washed her
wounded body with a Spring of fears, and when she perceived that she must of
force commit her life to the fury of imperious death, she breathed forth
this dying Exhortation.

Dear Lord (said she) in this unhappy Hunting must you loose the truest Wife
that ever lay by Princes side: yet mourn you not, nor grieve you my Sons,
nor you brave Christian Knights, but let your warlike drums convey me royally
unto my Toombe, that all the world may write in brazen Books, how I have
followed my Lord (the Pride of Christendom) thorough many a bloody field, and
for his sake have left my Parents, Friends, and Country, and have traveled
with him through many a dangerous Kingdom: but now the cruel Fates have
wrought their latest spites, and finished my life, because I am not able to
perform what love he has deserved of me. And now to you my Sons, this
blessing do I leave behind: even by the pains that forty weeks I once
endured for your sakes, when as you lay enclosed in my womb, and by my travels
in the wilderness, whereas my groans upon your birth day did (in my thinking)
cause both trees and stones to drop down tears, when as the merciless Tigers
and tamelesse Lions did stand like gentle Lambs, and mournd to hear my
lamentations: and by a Mothers love that ever since I have borne you, imitate
and follow your Father in all his honorable attempts, harm not the silly
Infant, nor the helpless Widow, defend the honor of distressed Ladies, and
give freely unto wounded Soldiers: seek not to stain the unspotted virgins
with your lusts, and adventure evermore to redeem true Knights from
captivity: live ever professed enemies to paganism, and spend your lives in
the quarrel and defense of Christ, that Babes (as yet unborn) in time to come
may speak of you, and record you in the Books of fame to be true christian
Champions. This is my blessing, and this is the Testament I leave behind: for
now I feel the chillness of pale death closing the closets of my eyes:
Farewell vain world, dear Lord farewell, sweet Sons, you famous fellows of
my George, and all true Christian Knights, adieu.

These words were no sooner ended, but with a heavy sigh she yielded up the
ghost: whereat Saint George (being impatient in his sorrows) fell upon her
liuelesse body, rending his hair, and tearing his Hunters attire from his
back into a thousand pieces: and at last when his griefs somewhat diminished,
he fell into these bitter lamentations.

Gone is the Star (said he) that lightened all ye Northern world, withered is
the Rose that beautefied our Christian fields, dead is the Dame that for her
beauty stained all Christian women: for whom I Will fill the air with
everlasting moanes. This day henceforth be fatal to all times, and counted
for a dismal day of death. Let never the Sun show forth his beams thereon
again, but clouds as black as pitch cover the earth with fearful darkness.
Let every Tree in this accursed Forest, henceforth be blasted with unkindly
winds: let brambles, herbs and flowers consume and wyther, let grass and
blooming buds perish and decay, and all things near the place where she was
slain, be turned to a dismal, black and sable color, that the Earth it
self in mourning garments may lament her loss. Let never Bird sing
cherefully in top of trees, but like the mournful music of the Nightingale,
fill all the air with fatal tunes: let bubling rivers murmr for her loss,
and silver Swans that swim thereon sing doleful melody: let all the dales
belonging to these fatal woods be covered with green bellyed serpents,
croaking toades, hissing snakes, and sightkilling cockatrices: in blasted trees
let fearful Ravens shrike, let howlets cry, and crickets sing, that after
this it may be called a place of dead men's wandering ghosts. But fond wretch,
why do I thus lament in vain, and bathe her bleeding body with my tears,
when grief by no means will recall her life? Yet this shall satisfy her
soul, for I will go a Pilgrimage unto Jerusalem, and offer up my tears to
Jesus Christ upon his blessed Sepulcher, by which my stained soul may be washed
from this bloody guilt, which was the causer of this sorrowful days mishappe.

These sorrowful words were no sooner ended, but he took her bleeding limbs
between his fainting arms, and gave a hundred kisses upon her dying colored
lips, retayning yet ye color of Alablaster new washed in purple blood, and in
this ecstasy a while lying, gave way to others to unfold their woes.

But his Sons whose sorrows were as great as his, protested never to neglect
one day, but duly weep a sea of tears upon their Mothers grave, till from the
Earth did spring some mournful flower, to bear remembrance of her death, as
did the Uiolet that sprung from chaste Adonis blood, when Venus wept to see him
slain. Likewise the other six Champions (that all the time of their
lamentations stood like men drowned in the depth of sorrow) began now a little
to recover themselves: and after protested by the honor of true Knighthood,
and by the Spur and golden Garter of S. Georges leg, to accompany him unto the
holy Land, bare footed without either hose or shoo, only clad in russet
gaberdines, like the usual Pilgrims of the world, and never to return till
they have paid their vows upon that blessed Sepulcher.

Thus in this sorrowful manner wearied they the time away, filling the woods
with Echoes of their lamentations* and recording their dolors to the whistling
winds: but at last, when black Night began to approach, and with her sable
mantles to ouer-spred the crystal firmament, they retired (with her dead
body) back to the City of London, where the report of this tragical
accident, drowned their friends in a sea of sorrow: for the news of her
timelesse death was no sooner bruted abroad, but the same caused both old and
young to lament the loss of so sweet a Lady. The silver headed age that had
wont in scarlet gowns to meet in Council, sat now at home in discontented
griefs: the gallant youths and comely virgins that had wont to beautefie the
streets with costlye garments, went drouping up and down in black and
mournful vestures: and those remorcelesse hearts that sildome were oppressed
with sorrow, now constrained their eyes like fountains to distill a flood of
brinish and pearly tears.

This general grief of the Citizens continued for the space of thirty days,
at the end whereof Saint George with his Sons and the other Champions
interred her body very honorably, and erected over the same a ^ith and
costly Monument (in sumptuous state like the toomb of Mausolus, which was
called one of the Wonders of the World: or like to the Pyramides of Greece,
which is a stain to all Architectures): for thereon was portrayed the Queen
of Chastity with her Maidens, bathing themselves in a crystal Fountain, as
a witness of her wondrous Chastity, against the lustful assailements of
many a Knight. Thereon was also most lively pictured a Turtle-doue sitting
upon a tree of gold, in sign of the true love that she bore to her betrothed
husband. Also a silver colored Swan swimming upon a Crystal river, as a
token of her beauty: for as the Swan excels al other fowls in whitenes, so
she for beauty excelled all Ladies in the world.

I leave to speak of the curious workmanship of the pinacles that were framed
all of the purest ^eat, the pummels of silver and Jasper stones. Also I omit
the Pendants of gold, the Scutchions of Princes, and the Arms of Countries
that beautefied her Toombe: the discourse whereof requires an Orators
eloquence, or a pen of gold dipped in the dew of Hellicon or Pernassus Hill,
whereas the Muses do inhabit. Her Statue or Picture was carved cunningly in
alablaster, and laid (as it were upon a pillow of green silk, like unto
Pigmal^ons yuorie Image, and directly over the same hung a silver Tablet,
whereon in letters of gold was this Epitaph written.

Here lies the vvonder of this vvorldly age
For beauty, wit, and princely majesty,
Whom spiteful death in his imperious rage
Procurde to fall through ruthlesse cruelty:
In leauie sports within a fragrant wood,
Upon a thornie brake she spilt her blood.
Let Virgins pure and Princes of great might,
With silver perled tears imbalme this tomb,
Accuse the fatal sisters of despite,
For blasting thus the pride of natures bloom:
For here she sleeps within this earthly grave,
whose worth deserves a golden tomb to have
Seven years she kept her sweet Virginity,
In absence of her true betrothed Knight,
When thousands did perceive her chastity,
Whilst he remaind in prison day and night:
But yet we see that things of purest prize,
Forsakes the earth to dwell above the skies.
Maidens come mourn with doleful melody
And make this monument your settled bower
Here shed your brackish tears eternally,
Lament both year, month, week, day, hour:
For here she rests whose like can nere be found
Her beauties pride lies buried in the ground.
Her wounded heart that yet does freshly bleed,
Has causd seven knights a iourny for to take
To fair Jerusalem in Pilgrims weed,
The fury of her angry ghost to slake:
Because their siluane sports was chiefest guilt,
And only cause her blood was timeles spilt.
Thus after the Toomb was erected, and the Epitaph engraven in a silver Tablet,
and al things performed according to Saint Georges direction, he left his
Sons in the City of London under the government of the English King: and in
company of the other six Champions, he took his journey toward Jerusalem.

They were attired after the manner of Pilgrims, in russet gaberdines down to
their foot, in their hands they bore staves of Ebon wood tipped at the ends
with silver, the pikes whereof were of the strongest Lydian steel, of such a
sharpnes that they were able to pierce a target of Tortoys shell: upon their
breasts hung Crosses of crimson silk, to signify that they were Christian
Pilgrims, traveling to the Sepulcher of Christ.

In this manner set they forward from England in the Spring time of the year,
when Flora had beautefied the earth with Natures tapestrie, and made their
passages as pleasant as the Gardens of Hesperides, adorned with all kind of
odoriferous flowers. When as they crossed the seas, the silver waves seemed to
lie as smoothe as crystal ice, and the Dolphins to dance above the waters, as
a sign of a prosperous journey. In traveling by land, the ways seemed so
short and easy, and the chirping melody of birds made them such music as
they passed, that in a short season they arrived beyond the borders of
Christendom, and had entered the confines of Africa.

There were they forced in sted of downie beds nightly to rest their weary
limbs upon heaps of sun burnt mess: and in sted of silken curtens and
curious canopies, they had the clouds of heaven to cover them. Now their naked
legs and bare feet, that had wont to stride the stately steedes, and to trample
in fields of Pagans blood, were forced to clyme the craggie mountains, and to
endure the torments of pricking briers, as they trauayled thorough the desert
places and comfortless solitary wildernesses.

Many were the dangers that happened to them in their Journey, before they
arrived in Judea, and most princely their atchieuements, and honorable their
adventures: which for this time I pass over, leaving the Champions for a time
in their travel toward the holy Sepulcher of Christ, and speak what happened
to Sa. Georges three Sons in visiting their Mothers Tomb in the City of
London.

CHAP. II.
Of the strange gifts that S. Georges sons offered at their Mothers Toombe,
and what happened thereupon: how her Ghost appeared to them, and counseled
them to the pursuit of their Father: also, how the Ki. of England installed
them with the honor of knighthood, and furnished them with abiliments of
war.

THe swift foot steedes of Titans fiery Carre had almost finished a year,
since Sabraes Funeral was solemnized: in which time Saint Georges three Sons
had visited their Mothers Tomb oftener than there were days in the year, and
had shed as many tears thereon in remembrance of her love, as there were
stars in the glistering veyle of Heaven: but at last these three young Princes
fell at a civil discord and deadly strife, which of them should bear the
truest love unto their Mothers dead body, and which of them should be held in
greatest esteem. For before many days were expired, they concluded to offer
up three several devotions at her Tomb: and he that devised a gift of the
rarest prize and of the straungest quality, should be held in the greatest
honor, and accounted the noblest of them all. This determination was speedily
performed, and in so short a time accomplished, that it is wonderful to
discourse.

The first thinking to exceed his brothers in the strangenes of his Gift, made
repair unto a cunning Inchauntresse, which had her abiding in a secret cave
adjoining to the City, whom he procured (through many rich gifts and large
promises) by art to devise a mean to get the honor from his Brethren, and to
have a gift of that strange nature, that all the world might wonder at the
report thereof.

The Inchauntresse (being won with his promises) by her arts and magic
spells, devised a Garland containing all the diversity of flowers that ever
grew in earthly Gardens: and though it were in the dead time of winter, when as
the silver ysicles had disroabd both herb and flower of their beauties, and
the Northern snow lay freezing on the mountain tops, yet was this Garland
contrived after the fashion of a rich Imperial Crown, with as many several
Flowers as ever Flora placed upon the downs of rich Arcadia: in diversity of
colors like the glistering Rainbow, when as it shines in her greatest
pride: and casting such an odoriferous sent and sweet savor, as though the
Heavens had rained down showers of Campheere, Bisse, or Ambergris.

This rare and exceeding Garland was no sooner framed by Inchauntment, and
delivered into his hands, but he left the Inchauntresse sitting in her Ebon
chair upon a block of steel (practicing her fatal arts), with her hair
hanging about her sholders, like wreaths of snakes or inuenomed serpents: and
so returned to his Mothers tomb, where he hung it upon a pillar of silver
that was placed in the middle of the Monument.

The second Brother likewise repaired to the Tomb, and brought in his hand an
yuorie Lute, whereon he played such inspiring melody, that it seemed like the
harmony of Angels, or the celestial music of Apollo when he descended
heaven for the love of Daphne, whom he turned into a Bay tree. The music
being finished, he tied! is Lute in a damask scarffe, and with great humility
he hung it at the west end of the Tomb upon a knobbe of Jasper stone.

Lastly, the third Brother likewise repaired with no outward devotion or
worldly gift: but clad in a vesture of white silk, bearing in his hand an
instrument of death, like an innocent Lamb going to sacrifice: or one ready
to be offered for the love of his mothers soul.

This strange manner of repair, caused his other brothers to stand
attentively, and with vigilant eyes to behold the conclusion.

First, after he had (submissiuely and with great humility) let fall a shower
of silver tears from the cesternes of his eyes, in remembrance of his Mothers
timeles tragedy, he pricked his naked breast with a silver bodkin, the which he
brought in his hand, from which there trickeled down some thirty drops of
blood, which he after offered up to his Mothers Tomb in a silver basin, as an
evident sign that there can be nothing more dearer, nor of more precious
price, than to offer up his own blood for her love. This ceremonious gift
caused his two other Brothers to swell in hatred like two chased Lions, and
with fury to run upon him, intending to catch him by the hair of the head,
and to drag him round about their Mothers Tomb, till his brains were dashed
against the marble pauement, and his blood sprinkled upon her grave: but this
wicked enterprise so moved the Majesty of heaven, that ere they could
accomplish their intents, or stain their hands in his blood, they heard (as it
were) ye noise of dead men's bones rattling in the ground. And thereupon (looking
fearfully about) the Toombe seemed of it self to open, and thereout to appear
a most terrible and ghastly shap^, pale, like unto ashes, in countenance
resembling their Mother with her breast besmeard in blood, and her body
wounded with a hundred scarres: and so with a dismal and rufull look she
spoke unto her desperate Sons in this manner.

Oh you degenerate from Natures kind, why do you seek to make a murder of
your sel^es? can you endure to see my body rent in twain, my heart split in
sunder, and my womb dismembered? Abate this fury, stain not your hands with
your own bloods, nor make my Tomb a spectacle of more death. Unite your
selves in concord, that my discontented soul may sleep in peace, and never
more be troubled with your unbridled humors. Make have I say, and arm your
selves in steeled corslets, and follow your valiant Father to Jerusalem, for he
is there in danger and distress of life. Away I say, or else my angry ghost
shall never leave this world, but haunt you up and down with ghastly visions.

This being said, she vanished from their sight, like to the brictl^ air,
whereat for a time they stood amazed and almost distraught of their wits,
thorough the terror of her words: but at last recovering their former senses
they all vowed by the eternal Majesty of Heaven, never to proffer the like
injury again, but to live in brotherly concord and unity till the
dissolution of their earthly bodies. So in all have they went unto the King,
and certefied him of all things that had happened: and falling upon their knees
before his Majesty, requested at his hands the honor of Knighthood, and leave
to depart in the pursuit of their Father and the other Champions, that were
fallen in great distress.

The King purposing to accomplish their desires, and to fulfill their requests,
presently condiscended, and not only gave them the honor of Knighthood, but
furnished them with rich abiliments of war, answerable to their magnanimious
minds. First he frankly bestowed upon them three stately Palphryes, bred upon
the bright mountains of Sardinia: in color like to an Irone gray, bewtifyed
with silver hayres, and in pace more swifter then the Spanish Ginets, which be
a kind of horse engendered by the winds upon the Alps, that be certain craged
mountains that divide the Kingdoms of Italy and Spain: in bouldnes and
courage, they were like to Beucephalus the horse of Macedonian Alexander, or to
Caesar's steedes that never daunted in the field, for they were trapped with
rich trappings of gold after the Moroco fashion with Saddels framed like unto
Irone chaires with backs of Steel, and their foreheads were beautified with
spangled plumbes of purple feathers, whereon hung many golden pendants: the
king likewise bestowed upon them three costly swoords wrought of purest Lidian
steel, with Lances bound about with plates of brass, at the tops thereof
hung silken Streamers beautified with the English Cross, being the crimson
b^dge of Knight hood and honor of aduenterous champions: Thus in this Royal
manner rode these three young Knights from the City of London in company of
the King with a train of Knights and gallant Gentlemen which conducted them
unto the Sea side, where they left them unto their future fortunes and returned
back to the English Count.

Now is Saint Georges sons noting (...) of the Seas, making their first
adventures in the world, that after ^ges might aplaude their atchiuement, and
inrole their fames in the records of honor, heaven prosper them succesfully,
and gentle fortune smile upon their travails, for three brauer knight^ did
never cross the seas, nor make their adventures into strange Countries.

CHAP. III.
How Saint Georges sons after they were knighted by the English King,
travailed toward Barbary, and how they redeemed the Dukes Daughter of
Normandy from rauishment, that was assailed in a vvood by three tavvnie
Negroes: and also of the tragical tale of the Virgins strange misery, with
other acdents that happened.

MAny days had not these three magnanimous knights endured ye dangers of the
swelling waves, but with a prosperous and succesfull wind, they arrived upon
the territories of France: where being no sooner safely set on shore, but
they bountifully rewarded their Mariners, and betook themselves to their
intended trauells.

Now began their costly trapped S^eeds to pace it like the scudding Winds and
^ith their warlike hooues to thunder on the beaten passages: now began true
honor to flourish in their princely breasts, and the renown of their Fathers
atchieuements to encourage their desires. Although but tender youth sat
bunding on their cheeks, yet portly manhood triumphed in their hearts; and
although their childish arms as yet never tried the painful adventures of
Knighthood, yet b^re they high and princely cogitations in as great est^eme, as
when their Father ^lewe the burning Dragon in Egypt, for preservation of their
mothers life.

Thus traveled they to the further Parts of the Kingdom of France (guided
only by the direction of fortune) without any adventure worth the noting,
till at last ryding through a mighty Forest standing on the Borders of
Lusitania, they heard (a far off as it were) the rufull cries of a distressed
woman: which in this manner filled the air with the Echo of her moanes.

Oh heavens (said she) be kind and pitiful unto a Maiden in distress, and
send some happy passengers that may deliver me from these inhumans monsters.

This woeful and unexpected noise, caused the Knights to alight from their
horses, and to see the event of this accident. So after they had tied their
Steeds to the body of a Pine tree by the reins of their bridles, they walked
on foot into the thickest of the Forest with their weapons drawn, reaeie to
withstand any assailment whatsoever: and as they drew nearer to the distressed
Uirgin, they heard her breathe forth this pity moving lamentation the
second time.

Come, come, some courteous Knight, or else I must forgo that precious Jewel,
which all the world can never again recover.

These words caused them to make the more speed, and to run the nearest way for
the Maidens succor. At last, they approached her presence, where they found
her tied by the locks of her own hair to the trunk of an orange tree, and
three cruel and inhumane Negroes standing ready to despoyle her of her
chastity, and with their lusts to blast the blooming bud of her sw^ete and
unspotted Uirginitie.

But when Saint Georges Sons beheld her louelye countenance besmeare^ in
dust, that before was as beautiful as roses in milk, and he^ crystal eyes
the perfed patterns of the Lamps of heaven, inbrewd in floods of tears, at
one instance they ran upon the Negroes, and sheathed their angry weapons in
their loathsome bowels, the leachers being slain, their bloods sprinkled
about the Forest, and their bodies cast out as a pray for ravenous beasts to
feed upon: they unbound the Maiden and like courteous Knights demanded the
cause of her captivity, and by what means she came into that solitary
Forest? Most Noble Knights quoth she, and true renounded men at arms, to
tell the cause of my passed miseries were a prick unto my soul, and the
discourse thereof will burst my heart with grief, but considering your
Nobilities the which I perceive by your Princely behauiours, and your kind
courtesies extended toward me, being a Uirgin in distress, under the hands of
these lustful Negroes, whom you have justly murdered, shall imbolden me, though
unto my hearts great grief, to discourse the first cause of my miserable
fortune.

My Father (quoth she) whilst gentle fortune smilde upon him, was a Duke and
sole commander of the state of Normandy, a country now situated in the
kingdom of France, whose lands and revenues in his prosperity was so great
that he continually kept as stately a train, both of Knights and gallant
gentlemen as any Prince in Europe, whereat the King of France greatly envied,
and by bloody wars deposed my Father from his princely dignity, who for
sauegard of his life in company of me his only heir and daughter, betook us
to these solletarie woods, where ever since we have secretly remained in a
poor ^ell or hermitage ye which by our industrious pains has been builded
with plants of Uines and taken bows, and covered over head with cloddes of
earth, and turffes of grass, seven years we have continued in great
extreamitie sustaining our hungers with the fruits of trees, and quenching our
thirstes with the dew of heaven, that falls nightly upon fragrant flowers
here in steed of Princely attire, imbrothered garments and damask vestures,
we have been constrained to cladde our selves in flowers, the which we have
cunningly wouen up together.

Here insteade of music, that had wont each morning to delight our ears; we
have the whistling winds resounding in the woods: our clockes to tell the
minutes of the wandering nights, are snakes and toades that sleep in roots of
rotten trees, our cannopeies to cover us, are not wrought of Median silk, the
which the Indian Uirgins weaue upon their silver loombes, but the sable
clouds of heaven, when as the cheerful day has closed her crystal windows
^p.

Thus in this manner continued we in this soletary wilderness, making both
birds and beasts our chief companions, till these merciless Moors (whose
hateful be^sts you have made like watery fountains to water the parched earth
with streams of blood:) who came into our cell, or simple cabinet, thinking to
have found some store of treasure. But casting their gazing eyes upon my
beutie, they were presently inchaunted with a lustful desire, only to crop
the sweet bud of my virginity. Then with a furious and dismal countenance,
more black than than the sable garments of sad Melpomine, when with her
strawberie quill she writes of bloody tragedies: or with a heart more
crueller, than was Neroes the tyrannous Roman Emperor when he beheld the
entrails of his natural Mother laid open by his inhumane and merciless
commandment: or when he stood upon the highest top of a mighty mountain
to see that famous and Imperial City of Room set on fire by the
remorselesse hands of his unrelenting Ministers, that added unhallowed flames
to his unholy fury.

These merciless and wicked minded Negroes with violent hands took my aged
Father, and most cruellye bound him to the blasted body of a wythered oak,
standing before the entry of his Cell: where, neither the reverent honor of
his silver hairs, that glistered like the frozen ysicles upon the Northern
Mountains, nor the strayned sighs of his breast, wherein the pledge of
wisdom was inthronized, nor all my tears or exclamations could any whit
abate their cruelties, but like grim dogs of Barbary, they left my Father fast
bound unto the tree, and like egregious vipers took me by the tramells of my
golden hair, and dragd me like a silly Lamb unto this slaughtering place,
intending to satisfy their lusts with the flower of my chastity.

Here I made my humble supplication to the Majesty of Heaven, to be revenged
upon their cruelties: I reported to them the rewards of bloody rauishments by
the example of Tereus that lustful King of Thrace, and his furious Wife, that
in revenge of her Sisters rauishment caused her Husband to eat the flesh of
his own Son. Likewise (to preserve my undefiled honor) I told them, that for
the Rape of Lucrece the Roman Matron, Tarquinius and his name was for ever
banished out of Rome: with many other examples, like the Nightingale, whose
doleful tunes as yet records nothing but rape and murder. Yet neither the
frowns of heaven, nor the terrible threats of hell, could mollify their
bloody minds: but they protested to persevere in that wickedness, and vowed that
if all the leaves of the Trees that grew within the Wood were turned into
Indian Pearl, and made as wealthy as the golden Streams of pactolus, where
Mydas washed his golden Wish away: yet should they not redeem my chastity from
the stain of their insatiable and lustful desires.

This being said, they bound me with the tramells of mine own hair to this
Orange tree, and at the very instant they proffered to defile my unspotted
body, but by the merciful working of God, you happily approached, and not
only redeemed me from their tyrannous desires, but quit the world from three of
the wickedest creatures that ever nature framed. For which (most noble and
invincible Knights) if ever Uirgins prayers may obtain favor at the Majesty
of Heaven, humbly will I make my supplications, that you may prove as valiant
champions, as ever put on helmet: and that your fames may ring to every
Princes ear, as far as bright Hiperion shows his golden face.

This tragical tale was no sooner ended, but the three Knights (whose
remorcefull hearts sobbed with sighs) embraced the sorrowful Maiden betwixt
their arms, and earnestlye requested her to conduct them unto the place,
whereas she left her father bound unto the withered oak. To which she
willingly consented, and thanked them highly for their kindness: but before they
approached to the old man's presence, what for the grief of his banishment and
the violent usage of his Daughter, he was forced to yield up his miserable life
to the mercies of unavoidable death.

When Saint Georges valiant Sons (in company of this sorrowful Maiden) came
to the tree, and (contrary to their expectations) found her Father cold and
stiff, both deuoyd of sense and feeling, also finding his hands and face
covered with green moss, which they supposed to be done by the Roben
red-breast and other little birds, who naturally cover the bare parts of any
body which they find dead in the (...), they fell into a new confused
extremity of grief.

But especially his Daughter seeming to have lost all joy and comfort in this
World, made both heaven and earth to resound with her exceeding lamentations,
and mourned without comfort like weeping Niobe, that was turned into a rock of
stone, her grief so abounded for the loss of her children: but when the three
young Knights perceived the comfortless sorrow of the Uirgin, and how she had
vowed never to depart from those solitary groves, but to spend the remnant of
her days in company of his deadly body, they courteously assisted her to bury
him under a ches-nut tree, where they left her continually bathing his senceles
grave with her tears and returned back to their horses, where they left them
at the entry of the Forest tied unto a lofty pine, and so departed on their
Journey.

There we will leave them for a time, and speak of the seven Champions of
Christendom, that were gone on Pilgrimage to the City of Jerusalem, and what
strange adventures happened to them in their travels.

CHA. IIII.
Of the Adventure of the Golden Fountain in Damasco: how six of the Christian
Champions were taken prisoners by a mighty Giant, and after how they were
delivered by Saint George: and also how he redeemed fourteen Jews out of
prison: with diverse other strange accidents that happened.

LET us now speak of the favorable clemency that smiling Fortune showed to ye
Christian Champions in their trauells to Jerusalem. For after they were
departed from England, and had iourneied in their Pilgrims attire thorough
many strange Countries, at last they arrived upon the Confines of Damasco,
which is a Country not only beautefied with sumptuous and costly buildings
framed by the curious Architecturie of man's device, but also furnished with all
the precious gifts that Nature in her greatest liberality could bestow.

In this fruitful Dominion long time the Christian Champions rested their
weary steps, and made their abode in the house of a rich and courteous Jew, a
man that spent his wealth chiefly for the succor and comfort of travelers,
and wandering Pilgrims, his house was not curiously errected up of carved timber
work, but framed with quarries of blewstones, and supported by many stately
pillo^s of the purest marble: The gates and entry of his house were
continually kept open in sign of his bountiful mind, ever the portall
thereof hung a brazen table, whereon was most curiously engraven the picture of
Ceres the Goddess of plenty decked with garlands of wheat, wre^thes of Oliu^s,
bunches of Uines, and with all manner of fruitful things, the chamber wherein
these Champions took their nightly reposes and golden sleeps, was garnished
with as many windows of Crystal glass, as there were days in the year, and
the walls painted with as many stories as there were years since the world
began: it was likewise built four square, after the manner of piramides in
Greece, at the east end whereof was most lively portraied, bright Phoebus
rising from Auroras golden bed, whose gli^^ering countenance at his departure,
distaind the ellements with a purple color. At the west side was likewise
portraied how Thetis trippes upon the silver sands when as Hiperious carre
drives to the watrie Ocean, and takes his nights repose upon his lovers bosom:
on the North side was painted mountains of snow whose ^ops did seem to reach
to heaven, and mighty woods over hung with silver Isickles, which is the
nature of the Northern Climate.

Lastly upon the west side of the chamber satte the God of the seas riding upon
a Dolphins back, with an hundred Mermaides following him, with their golden
tramels floting upon the silver waves, there the Tritons seemed to dance above
the Crystal streams with a number of other silver scaled fishes that made the
sea delightful in pleasure.

Over the roof of the Chamber was most perfectly portraied the four ages of
the World, which seemed to ouerspred the rest of the curious works.

First the golden age was pendant over the East: the second being the silver a
mettle somewhat hazer than the first, seemed to ouerspred the freezing North.
The third, which was the brazen age, beautifyed the western parts: The fourth
and last being of Irone, being the basest of them all, seemed to be p^ndant
over the Southern clymate.

Thus in this curious Chamber rested these weary Champions a long season,
where their food was not delicious but wholesome, and their services were not
curious, but comely: answerable to the brave minds of such Heroycal Champions:
the courteous Jew their friendly host whom nature had honored with seven
comely Sons daily kept them company, and not only showed them the curiosity
of this habitation, but also discribed the pleasant situation of his Country,
how the towns and Cities were ornefied with all manner of delights, that they
seemed like the immortal Palaces of heaven, where celestial Angels do
record their Hermonies, and the fields and flowring meadows so beautified with
natures gladsome ornaments, that they seemed for pleasure to exceed the
paradise of Eliizum, where crowned souls do live in cudles glory.

The days were spent away in such manner discourses to the exceeding pleasure
of the Christian Knights, and evermore when dark night approached, and the
wonted time of sleep sommoned them to their silent and quiet restes, the Jews
children being seven of the brauest and comlyest boys that ever dame nature
framed, tired the Christian Champions ears with such sweet inspiring
Melodies which they strayned from their Iuory Lutes, that not Arion (when all
the Art of music consented with his tune, voice, and han^, when he won
mercy of the Dolphin, being forsaken of men) was comparable thereto. Whereby
the Christian Champions were inchaunted with such delights, that their golden
sleeps seemed to be as pleasant as the sweet joys of Paradise.

But upon a time, after the courteous Jew had intelligence how they were
Christian Knights, and those admired martial Champions, whom fame had
canonized to be the Wonders of the world for martial discipline and Knightly
adventures: finding a fit opportunity as he walked in their companies upon an
evening under an arbor of vine branches, he revealed to them the secrets of
his soul, and the cause of his so sad and solitary dwelling. So standing
bareheaded in the middle of the Champions, with his white hairs hanging down
to his shoulders in color like to the silver Swanne, and more softer than the
down of thistles, or Median silk untwisted, he began with a sober countenance
and gallant demeanor to speak as follows unto them, that settled them
attentively to hear.

I am sure (quoth he) you invincible Knights, that ye marvel at my solitary
course of living, and that you greatly muse wherefore I exempt my self from
the company of all worldlings, except my seven Sons, whose sights be my
chiefest comfort, and the only prolongers of my life. Therefore prepare your
ears to entertain the strangest Discourse that ever tung pronounced, or
ouerwearied aged man in the height of his extremity delivered.

I was in my former years (whilst Fortune smilde upon my happiness) the
principal Commander and chief Owner of a certain Fountain, of such a
wonderful and precious virtue, that it was valued to be worth the Kingdom of
Judea: the water thereof was so strange in operation, that in four and twenty
hours it would convert any metal, as of brass, copper, iron, lead or tin,
into rich refined gold: the stony flint it would turn into pure silver, and
any kind of earth into excellent metal. By the virtue thereof I have made
the leaves of Trees more richer than Indian Pearl, and the blades of grass of
more value than the Jewels that be found in the country of America.

The richness thereof was no sooner bruted through the world, but it caused
many foreign Knights to try the adventure, and by force of arms to bereave
me of the honor of this Fountain. But at that time Nature graced me with one
and twenty Sons, whereof seven be yet living, and the only comfort of mine
age: but the other fourteen (whom frowning Fortune has bereaved me of) many
a day by their valiant prowess and matchles fortitudes defended the Fountain
from many furious assaylers: for there was no Knight in all the world that was
found so hardy nor of such invincible courage, that if they once attempted to
encounter with any of my valiant Sons, but they were either taken
prisoners, or slain in the combat.

The fame of their valors, and the riches of the Fountain rung through many
strange Countries, and lastly came to the ears of a furious Giant, dwelling
upon the Borders of Arabia: who at the report thereof came armed in his steely
coat with a mighty bat of iron on his neck, like to the furious Hercules
that burst the brazen gates of Cerberus in twain, and in state and bigness like
the Son of Jove that bore the mighty mountain Atlas upon his shoulders: he
was the conqueror of my sons, and the first causer of my sudden downfall.
But when I had intelligence of the overthrow of fourteen of my sons, and that
he had made conquest of the wealthy fountain, I with the rest of my Children,
thinking all hope of recovery to be past, betook our selves to this solitary
course of life, where ever since in this mansion or hermitage we have made our
abode and residence, spending our wealth to the relief of traveling Knights
and wandering Pilgrims* hoping once again that smiling Fortune would advance
us to some better hap: and to be plain right worthy Champions my hope was
never at the height of full perfection till this present time, wherein your
excellent presences almost assure me that the hideous monster shall be conquered,
my fountain restored, my Sons deaths (for dead sure they are) revenged.

The Champions with great admiration gave ear to the strange discourse of this
reverent Jew, and intended in requital of his extraordinary kindness to
undertake this adventure. And the more to encourage the other, Saint George
began in this manner to deliver his mind, speaking both to the Jew their host,
and his valiant fellow Champions.

I have not without great wonder (most reverent and courteous old man) heard
the strange discourse of thy admirable fountain, and do not a little lament
that one of so kind and liberal a disposition should be dispossessed of so
exceeding riches, for that wealth to a liberal nature is alone convenient:
neither am I less sorry, that so inhumane a monster and known enemy to all
courtesy and kind should have the fruition of so exceeding great Treasure: for
to the wicked, wealth is the cause of their more wickedness But that which most
grieueth me, is: that having so many valiant Knights to thy Sons, they all
were so unfortunate to fall into the hands of that relentlesse Monster. But be
comforted kind old man, for I have hope by the power of heaven we were
directed hither to punish that hateful Giant, revenge the injuries offered to
thine age, satisfy with his death the death of thy children if they be dead,
and restore to thy bounteous possession that admirable rich fountain.

And now to you my valiant Companions I speak, that with me through many
dangers have adventured: let us courageously attempt this rare adventure,
wherein such honor to our names, such happiness to our friends, such glory to God
consistes, in recovering right to the wronged, and punishing rightfully the
wrongers of the righteous. And that there be no contention among us who shall
begin this adventure, for that I know all of you thirty after honor, let lots
be made, and to whom soever the thief lot falls let him be foremost in
assailing the Giant, and God and all good fortune be our guides.

The exceeding joy which the old Jew conceived, at the speeches of Saint
George, had near hand bereft him of the use of sense, so above measure was he
ouerioyed. But at length recovering use of speech, he thus thankfully brake
forth.

How infinitely I find my self bound unto you, you famous and undoubted
Christian Champions, all my ablenes is not able to express: only thankfulness
from the exchequer of a true heart shall to you be rendered.

The Champions without more words disrobing themselves from their Pilgrims
attire, every one selected forth an armor fitting to their portely bodies,
and in steed of their Ebone staves tipped with silver, they welded in their
hands the steeled blades, and their feet that had wont to endure a paineful
pilgrimage upon the bare ground, were now ready pressed to mount the golden
stirrup, but as I said, they purposed not generally to assail the Giant, but
singly every one to try his own fortune thereby to obtain the greater
honor, and their deeds to merit the higher fame, therefore the lots being cast
amongst themselves which of them should begin the adventure. The lot fell
first to Saint Denis the Noble Champion of France, who greatly rejoiced at his
fortune, and so departed for that night to get things in readiness, but the next
morning no sooner had the golden Sun displaide his bewty in the East, but
Saint Denis arose from his sluggish bed, and attyred himself in costly armor,
and mounted upon a steed of Irone gray with a spangled Plumbe of purple
feathers on his burgonet, spangled with stars of gold, resembling the azure
firmament beautifyed with stars.

After he had taken leave of the other Champions, and had demanded of the Jew
where the Giant had his residence, he departed forward on his journey: and
before the Sun had mounted to the top of heaven, he approached to the Giants
presence, which as then sat upon a block of steel directly before the golden
Fountain, satisfying his hunger with raw flesh, and quenching his thirst with
the juice of ripe grapes.

The first sight of his ugly and deformed proportion almost daunted the valor
of the French Champion, so as he stood in a maze, whether it were better to
try the adventure, or to return with dishonor back to his other fellow
Knights. But having a heart furnished with true magnanimity, he chose rather
to dye in the encounter, than to return with infamy: so committing his trust
to the unconstant Queen of chance, he spurred forth his horse, and assailed
the Giant so furiously, that the strokes of his sword sounded like weighty
blows hammered upon an anuyle.

But so smally regarded the Giant the puissant force of this single Knight,
that he would scarce rise from the place where he sat: but yet remembering a
vision that a little before appeared unto him in his sleep, which reueald unto
him, how that a Knight should come from the Northern clymates of the earth,
which should alone ^nde the adventure of the Fountain, and vanquish him by
fortitude: therefore not minding to be taken at advantage, he suddenly started
up, and with a grim and furious countenance he ran upon Saint Denis, and took
him horse, armor, furniture and all under his left arm, as lightly as a
strong man would take a sucking infant from his cradle, and bore him to a
hollow rock of stone, bound about with bars of iron, standing near unto the
Fountain, in a valley betwixt two mighty mountains. In which prison he
closed the French Champion, amongst fourteen other Knights, that were al Sons
to the courteous Jew as you heard before discourse^, and being proud of this
attempt he returned back to his block of steel, where we will leave him
sitting, glorying in his own conceit, and speak of the other champions
remaining in the Jews house, expecting the French knights fortunate return:
but when the sable Curtains of darkness were drawn before the crystal
windows of the day, and night had taken possession of the elements, and no
news was heard of the Champions success, they judged presently that either
he was slain in the adventure, or discomfited and taken prisoner.

Therefore they cast lots again which of them, the next morning should try
his fortune, and revenge the French knights quarrel, but the lot fell to Saint
James the Noble champion of Spain, where at his Princely heart more rejoiced,
then if he had been made King of the Western UUorld.

So upon the next morning by the break of day, he attyred himself in rich and
costly armor like the other Champion, and mounted upon a Spanish Ginnet, in
pace more swifter then the wind, and in portly state like to Beucephalus the
proud steed of Macedonian Alexander: his caparison was in color like to the
waves of the Sea, his Burgonet was beautified with a spangled plumbe of sable
feathers: and upon his breast he bore the arms of Spain.

Thus in this gallant manner departed he from the Jews habitation, leaving the
other Champions at their divine contemplations for his happy success, but his
fortune chanced contrary to his wishes, for at the Giants first encounter he
was likewise born to the rock of stone, to accompany Saint Denis.

This Giant was the strongest and hardiest knight at arms that ever set foot
upon the confines of Damasko, his strength was so invincible, that at one time
he durst encounter with a hundred knights: but now return we again to the
other champions, whom when night approached, and likewise missing the company
of Saint James they cast lots the third time, and it fell to the Noble champion
of Italy Saint Anthony, whom on the next morning attyred himself in costly
habiliments of war, and mounted upon a Barbarian Palfrie as richly as did the
valiant Jason when he adventured into the I Will of Colcas, for the golden fleece:
and for Medeas love, his Helmet glistered like an Isie mountain, decked with a
plumbe of ginger colored feathers, and beautified with many silver pendants.
But his shining glory was soon blemished with a cloud of mischance, although
he was as valiant a knight as ever brandisht weapon in the fields of Mars, yet
he found a disabilitie in his fortitude, to withstand the furious blows of
the Giant, that he was forced to yield himself prisoner like the former
Champions.

The next lot that was cast, chanced to Saint Andrew of Scotland, a Knight as
highly honored for martial discipline as any of the rest, his steed was of
the breed of the Flemish Mares, clad with a caparison after the manner of the
Brecians, his Armor varnished with green oils, like the color of the Somer
fields upon his breast he bore a cross of purple silk, and on his burgonet a
plumb of green feathers: but yet fortune so frowned upon his enterprise, that
he nothing prevailed, but committed his life to the mercy of the Giant, who
likewise imprisoned him with the other Knights.

The fifth lot fell to Saint Pattricke of Ireland, as brave a knight as ever
nature created, and as aduenterous in his atchiuements: I fever Hector upon the
Phrigian steed Praunst it up and down the streets of Troy, and made that age
admire his fortitude: this Irish knight might counter-uaile his valor.

For no sooner had the silver Moon forsook the Azure Firmament, and had
committed her charge to the golden burnisht Sun: But Saint Pattricke
approached the sight of the Giant, mounted upon his Irish hobby, cladde in a
corselet of prooffe, beautified with silver nails: his plumbe of feathers, was
of the color of Uirgins hair, his horse covered with a vale of Orange tawny
silk, and his saddle bound about with plates of Steel, like to an Iron chair.

The sight of this valliant Champion so daunted the courage of the Giant, that
he thought him to be the knight that the vission had revealed, by whom the
adventure should be accomplished: therefore with no cowardly fortitude he
assailed the Irish knight, who with as Princely valor endured the encounter:
but the unkind destinies not intending to give him the honor of the victory,
ecompelled the Champion to yield to the Giants forces, and like a Captive to
accompany the other imprisoned Champions.

The next lot fell to Saint David of Wales, who nothing discouraged at the
discomfiture of the other Christian knights, but at the mornings Suns vpryse
into the azure firmament, glistered in his silver Armor before the fountain,
with a golden Griffon shyning on his breast, where he endured long and
dangerous combat with the Giant, making the skies to resound with echoes of
their strokes, but at last when the Giant perceived that Saint David began
to grow almost breathless, in defending the huge and mighty blows of his
steeled batte, and chiefly through the long encounter, the Giant renewed his
strength, and so redoubled his strokes that Saint David was constrayed like
the other Christian Champions to yield to the Giants mercies.

But now the inuinsible and heroyecall Champyon of England Saint George, he
that is fames true knight, the map of Honor, and the worlds wonder,
remaining in the Jews pauilion, and pondring in his mind of the bad success
of the six Champions, and that it was his turn to try his fortune the next
morning in the adventure: he fell upon his knees and made this humble
supplycation to the Majesty of God. O thou creator of this worldly Globe (quoth
he,) O thou that have fought for thy christian Knights in fields of purple
blood, and made the enemies of heaven to swim in streams of Crimson gore, O
thou that have given me still the victory, grant that I may confound this
bloody and vnhumaine monster, that has discomfited six of the brauest knights
that ever nature framed, even as thou wast my aid when I slew the burning
Dragon in Egypt: and when I conquered the terrible Giant that kept the
inchaunted Castle amongst the Amazonians, even so let me accomplish this
dangerous adventure, that all christians and christian Knights may applaude
thy name, and in thy defense and just quarrel, may still be honored with the
golden pledge of knighthood.

In this manner spent he away the night in making his divine orations to
heaven, for the happy success of the next days enterprise, whereon he vowed
by the honor of his golden Garter, either to return a worthy conqueror, or to
dye a faithful Martyr. And when the day began to beautify the Eastern
Elements with a purple color, he repaired to the Jews armory, and clad
himself in a black Corselet, and mounted upon a pitchy colored steed,
adorned with a blood* red caparison, in sign of a bloody and tragical
adventure, his plume of feathers was like a flame of fire quenched in blood as a
token of speedy revenge, he armed himself not with a sturdy Lance, bound
about with plates of brass, but took a Iauelin made of steel, the one end
far more sharper then the point of a needle, the other end a ball of Iron in
fashion of a mace of or club.

Being thus armd according to his wished desires, he took leave of the Jew
and his seven Sons, who sat attyred in black and mournful ornaments,
praying for his happy and fortunate success: and so departed speedily to the
golden Fountain, where he found the Giaunt sleeping carelessly upon his block
of steel, dreading no ensuing dangers.

But when the valiant Champion Saint George was alighted from his horse, and
had sufficiently beheld the deformed proportion of the Giant: how the hair of
his head stood staring upright like to the bristles of a wild Boar, his eyes
gazing open like two blazing Comets, his teeth long and sharp like to spikes
of steel, the nails of his hands like the tallants of an Eagle, yet over them
was drawn a pair of iron gloves: and every other limme huge and strongly
proportioned like to the body of some mighty Oak, the worthy Champion
awakened him in this order.

Arise (said he) thou unreasonable deformed Monster, and either make delivery
of the captive Knights, whom thou wrongfully detainest, or prepare thy ugly
self to abide the uttermost force of my warlike arm and death-prepared weapon.

At which words the furious Giant started up, as one suddenly amazed or
affrighted from his sleep: and without making any reply at all, taking his
iron Mace fast in both his hands, he did with great terror let drive at the
most worthy English Champion, who with exceeding cunning nimblenes defended
himself from certain danger by speedy avoiding the blows violence, and
withal returned on his adversary a mighty thrust with the pointed or sharp
end of his Iauelin, which rebounded from the Giants body, as if it had been
run against an Adamantine pillar.

The which the invincible Saint George perceiving, he turned the heavy round
ball end of his massy iaueline, and so mightily assailed the Giant,
redoubling his heavy blows with such courageous fortitude, that at last he
beat his brains out of his deformed head: whereby the Giant was constrained
to yield up his ghost, and to give such a hideous roar, as though the whole
frame of the Earth had been shaken with the violence of some storm of thunder.

This being done, Saint George cast his loathsome carcass as a pray for the
fowls and ravenous beasts to seize upon: and after very diligently searched
up and down, till he found the Rock wherein all the Knights and Champions
were imprisoned: the which with his steely Iauelin he burst in sunder, and
delivered them presently from their seruitudes, and after returned most
triumphantly back to the Jews Pauilion, in as great majesty and roialtie as
Vaspasian with his Roman Nobles and Peers returned into the confines of
flourishing Italy* from the admired and glorious conquest of Jerusalem and
Judea.

But when the reverend old Jew saw the English champion returned with
victory, together with his other six fellow champions, and likewise beheld
his fourteen Sons safely delivered, his joy so mightily exceeded the bounds
of reason, that he suddenly swonded, and lay for a time in a dead trance, with
the exceedingnes of pleasure he conceived.

But having a little recovered his decayed senses, he gladly conducted them
into their several Lodgings, and there they were presently unarmed, and their
wounds washed in white wine and new milk, and after banqueted them in the
best manner he could devise. At which Banquet there wanted not all the
excellency of music that the Jews seven younger Sons could devise,
extolling in their sweet Sonnets the excellent fortitude of the English
champion, that had not only delivered their captiued Brethren, but restored
by that ugly Giants deserved death their aged Father to the repossession of his
golden Fountain.

Thus after Saint George with the other six Champions had soiourned there for
the space of thirty days, having placed the Jew with his Sons in their
former desired dignities, that is in the government of the Golden Fountain,
they clothed themselves again in their Pilgrims attire, and so departed
forward on their intended Journey to visit the holy Sepulcher of our Savior
Christ.

Of whose noble Adventures you shall hear more in the Chapter following.

CHAP. V.
Of the Champions return from Jerusalem from the Sepulcher of Christ, and
after how they were almost famished in a wood: and and how saint George
obtained them food by his valor in a Giaunts House with other things that
happened.

THe Champions after this never rested traveling till they arrived at the holy
Hill of Mount Sion, and had visited the blessed Sepulcher of Christ, the which
they found most richly built of ye purest marble, garnished curiously by
cunning Architecturie, with many ^arbuncles of Jasper, and pillors of ieate.
The Temple wherein it was erected, stood seven degrees of stairs within the
ground, the gates whereof were of burnisht gold, and the portalles of refined
silver, cut as it did seem out of a most excellent nature beautefied
Alablaster Rock.

By it continually burned a sweet smelling Taper, always maintained by twelve
of the Noblest Uirgines dwelling in all Judea, attending still upon that
blessed Sepulcher, clad in silken ornaments in color like the Lillyes in the
flourishing pride of Summer: the which costly attire, they continually wear,
as an evident sign of their unspotted virginities: many days offered up these
worthy Champions these ceremonious devotions, to the sacred Tomb of Christ,
washing the marble pauement with their unfeigned tears, and witnessing their
true and hearty zeales, with their continual vollyes of discharged sighs.

But at last upon an Evening, when Titans golden beams began to descend the
Western Elements, as those Princely minded Champions in company of those
twelve admyred Maidens, kneeled before the Sepulcher offering up their Evening
Orizons, an unseen voice (to the amazement of them all) from a hollow vault in
the Temple uttered these words.

You magnanimous Knights of Christendom, whose true nobilities has circled
the earth upon the wings of fame, whose bare feet for the love of (...) sweet
Savior, has set more weary steps upon the parched earth, then there be stars
within the golden Cannopy of heaven: return, return into the bloody fields
of war, and spend not the honor of your times in this ceremonious manner: for
great things by you must be accomplished, such as in time to come shall fill
large Chronicles, and cause babes as yet unborn to speak of your honorable
atchiuements.

And you chaste Maidens that spend your lives in service of your God, even by
the plighted promise you have made to true Uirginitie, I charge you to furnish
forth these warlike Champions with such approved furniture as has been
offered to this blessed Sepulcher, by those traveling Knights, which have
fought under the Banner of Christ. This is the pleasure of the Heavens great
Guider, and this for the redress of wronged Innocents in earth must be with
all immediate dispatch forthwith accomplished.

This unexpected voice had no sooner ended, but the Temple (in their conceits)
seemed full strangely to resound like the melody of celestial Angels* or the
holy harmony of the heavenly Rubens, as a sign that the Gods were pleased at
their proceedings: then the twelve Uirgins arose from their divine
contemplations and conducted the seven Champions to the farther side of mount
Syon, and there bestowed frankly upon them, seven of the brauest Steedes
that ever they beheld, with Martial furniture answerable thereunto, befitting
knights of such esteem: then the christian Champions being proud of their
good fortunes, attyred them selves in rich and sumptious corselets, and after
mounted upon their warlike coursers, kindly bidding the Ladies adieu: they
betook them to the worlds wide journey. This travel began at that time of the
year, when the Summers queen began to spread her beauteous mantles amongst
the green and fresh boughs of the hye and mighty Cedars, when as all kind
of small birds flewe round about, recreating themselves in the beauty of the
day, and with their well tuned notes, making a sweet and heavenly melodye: at
that time I say, these mighty and well esteemed knights the seven Champions
of Christendom, took the way from Jerusalem, which they thought to be most
used: in which they had not many days traveled through the deserts and ever
many a mountain top, but they were meruailously troubled for lack of their
accustomed and daily victuals, and could not hide nor dissemble their great
hunger, so that the war which they sustained with hunger, was far greater
then the battles that they had fought against the enemies of Christ, as you
heard discoursed in the first part of this Historye.

So upon a Summers evening, when they had spent the day in great extreamitie,
and night grew on, being in a thicket of mighty trees, where as the silver
Moon with her bright beams glistred most clearly, yet to them it seemed to
be as dark as pitch, for they were very sore troubled for lack of that which
should sustain them: and their faces did show and declare the perplexities
of their stomachs.

So they sat them down upon the green and fresh herbs, very pensive of
their extreme necessity, procuring to take their rests that night: but all
was in vain, for that their corporal necessities would not consent thereunto:
but without sleeping they walked up and down for that night, till the next day
in the morning that they turned to their accustomed travel and journey,
thinking to find some food for the cherishing of their stomachs, and had
their eyes always gazing about, to espy some Uillage or house, wherein they
might satisfye their hunger and take their restes.

Thus in this helpless manner spent they away the next day, till the closing
in of the euenings light, by which time they grew so faint, that they fell to
the ground with feebleness: Oh what a sorrow was it to Saint George, not only
for him self, but to see the rest of the Champions in such a miserable case,
being not able to help themselves, and so parting a little from them, he
lamented in this manner following.

Thou God of Judea: in whose hands both life and death remains, and at whose
frowns the low foundation of the fastened will tremble and quake: the
outrageous Seas swell and rise above their bounds, the woods and wilderness
rose with tempestious guses, and the fruitful earth grow barren. Oh pity me
thou most gracious God: thou mightiest amongst the powers of heaven: thou that
have given me so many victories: thou that have made me conqueror of Kings and
kingdoms: and thou by whose inuinsible power I have tamed the black-faste
furyes of dark Cositus that maskte abroad the world in human shapes: look
down I say from thy Imperial seat, even by my Pilgrimage unto thy Sacred
shrine: show me some fouor, and do not consent that I and my company perish
for hunger and want of victuals: make no delay to remedy our great
necessity: let us not be meat for birds houering in the air, nor our bodies
cast as a pray for ravenous beasts ranging in th^se woods: but rather if we
must needs perish, let us die by the hands of the strongest warriers in the
universal world, and not ^asely to loose our lives with cowardlye hunger.

These and such like reasons uttered this valiant Champion of England, till
such time as the day appeared and the sable curtains of coal black night
were withdrawn. Then returned he to the rest of his Company, where he found
them very weak and feeble: but he encouraged them in the best manner he could
devise to take their horses, and to try the chance of their utmost unkind
fortune.

Although Saint George as they traveled was ready to dye by the way, and in
great confusion of mind: yet rode he first to one then to another, comforting
them, and making them ride apace: which they might very well do, for that
their horses were not so unprovided as their Masters, by reason of the goodly
grass that grew in those Woods, wherewith at pleasure they filled themselves
every night.

The golden Sun had almost mounted to the top of heaven, and the glorious
prime of the day began to approach, when they came into a great field very
plain, and in the midst of it was a little Mountain, out of the which there
appeared a great smoke which gave them to understand that there should be some
habitation in that place.

Then the Princely minded Saint George said to the other Champions: Take
comfort with your selves, and by little and little come forward with an easy
pace: for I will ride before to see who shall be our host this ensuing night.
And of this brave Knights and Companions, be all assured, whether he be
pleased or no, yet shall he give us lodging and entertayne us like to
traveling Knights, and therewithal he set spurs to his horse, and swiftly
scowred away like to a ship with swelling sails upon the marble colored
Ocean: his have was so speedy that in a short time he approached the mountain,
where at the fury and rushing of his horse in running, there arose from the
ground a mighty and terrible Giant, of so great height, that he seemed to be
a big grown tree, and for hugenes like to a rock of stone: but when he cast
his staring eyes upon the English knight: which seemed like two brazen plates
or two torches ever flaming, he laid hand upon a mighty club of Iron which
lay by him, and came with great lightness to meet Saint George, but when he
approached his presence, he thought him to be a Knight but of small valor and
fortitude, he threw away his Iron bat, and came toward the champion, intending
with his fistes and buffets to beat out his brains, but the courage of the
English champion so exceeded, that he forgot the extremity of hunger, for like
a courageous knight he raised himself in his stirrops, otherwise he could
not reach his head, and gave him such a blow upon the forehead with his keen
edged fauchion, that he cut his head half in sunder, and his brains in great
abundance ran down his deformed body: so that amazed he fell to the ground
and presently dyed. His fall seemed to make the ground to shake, as though a
stony tower had been ouerturnd, for as he lay upon the earth, he seemed to be
a great oak blown up by the roots with a tempestious whirlwinde.

At that instant the rest of the champions came to that place, with as much joy
at that present, as before they were sad and sorrowful.

But when Saint Denis with the other knights, did see the greatness of the
Giant, and the deformity of his body, they advanced his valor beyond
immagination, and deemed him the fortunatest Champion that ever nature framed,
holding that adventure in as high honor, as the Grecians held Iasons prize
when he turned from Colchos with Medeas golden Fleese: and with as great
danger accomplished as the twelve fearful labors of Hercules: but after some
few speeches passed, Saint George desired the rest of the Champions to go and
see what store of victuals the Giant had prepared for them.

Upon this they concluded, and so generally entered the Giants house, which was
in the manner of a great Barn cut out of the hard stone, and wrought out of the
Rock: therein they found a mighty copper Chauldron standing upon a treauet
of steel, the feet and supporters thereof, were as big as great Iron
pillars: under the same burned such a huge flaming fire, that it sparkeled like
the fierye Furnace in burning Acharon:

Within the Chaldron were boiling the flesh of two f^tte Bullockes, prepared
only for the Giants dinner: the sight of this ensuing banquet gave them such
comfort, that eueryone fell to work, hoping for their travel to eat part of
the meat: one turned the beef in the Chaldron, another increased the fire,
and some pulled out the coals, so that there was not any idle in hope of the
benefit to come.

The hunger they had, and their desire to eat, caused them to fall to their
meat before it was half ready as though that it had been ouer-sodden; but
the two knights of Wales and Ireland, not intending to dine without bread and
drink, searched in a secret hollow cave, whereas they found two great loaves of
bread, as big in compass as the circle of a well, and two great Flagons full
of the best Beer that ever they tasted, the which with great joy and
pleasure, they brought from the cave, to the great and exceeding contentment of
the other Champions.

In stead of a knife to cut their victuals, Saint George used his Curtulaxe
which lately had been stained with the hateful Giants de^ested blood, and
that had been imbrewed with his loathsome brains.

Thus and after this manner qualified they the pinching pains and torments of
hunger, whereof they took as joyful a repast as if they had banqueted in the
richest Kings Palace in the world.

So giving thanks to heaven for their good and happy fortunes, Saint George
requested the Chompiens to take horse, and mounted himself upon his palfrey,
and so traveled from thence through a narrow path, which seemed to be used by
the Giant: and so with great diligence they traveled all the rest of that day,
till night had closed in the beautye of the heavens: at which time they had got
to the top of a high mountain, from whence a little before night they did
discover meruaylous great and playnes, the which were inhabited with fair
Cities and towns, at which sight these Christian Champions receiu^d great
contentment and joy, and so without any staying, they made have onwards on
their journey till such time as they came to a low valley lying betwixt two
running rivers: where in the midst of the way they found an Image of fine
Cristall, the picture and lively form of a beautiful Uirgin, which seemed to
be wrought by the hands of some most excellent worke-man, all to be spotted
with blood.

And it appeared by the wounds that were cunningly formed in the same picture,
that it was the image of some Lady that had suffered torments, as well with
terrible cuf^ings of yrons, as with cruel whippings: the Ladies legs and arms
did seem as though they had been martyred and wrunge with cords: and about
the neck, as though she had been forceablye strangled with a napkin or
towell: the cristall Picture lay upon a rich adorned bed of black clothes
under an arbor of purple Roses: by the curious fair formed Image, sat a
goodly aged man in a chair of cipresse wood, his attire was after the manner
of the Arcadian sheap-heards not curious but comely, yet of a black and s^ble
color, as a sure sign of some deadly discontent* his hair hung down below
his shoulders, like untwisted silk, in whitenes like down of thistles, his
beard over grown dangling down, as it were frozen Isickles upon a hauthorne
tree, his face wrinkled and ouerworn with age and his eyes almost blind in
bewraying the greefes and sorrows of his heart.

Which strange and woeful spectacle, when the christian champions vigilantly
beheld, they could not by any manner of means refrain from shedding some
sorrowful tears, in seeing before them that a woman of such excellent
beauty should be oppressed with cruelty. But the pitiful English Knight had
the greatest compassion, when he beheld the counterfeit of this tormented
creature, who taking truce with his sorrowful heart, he courteously desired the
old Father, sitting by this spectacle, the cause of his sorrow, and the true
discourse of that maidens passed fortunes: for whose sake he seemed to spend
his days in that solitary order, to whom the old man with a number of sighs
thus kindly replied, brave knights, for so you seem by your courtesies and
behauiours, to tell the story of my bitter woes, and the causer of my endless
sorrows, will constrain a spring of tears to trickle from the Conduits of my
aged eyes, and make the mansion of my heart to riue in twain, in remembering of
my undeserved miseries: as many drops of blood has fallen from my heart as
there be silver hairs upon my head, and as many sighs have I strained from my
breast as there be minutes in a year, for thrice seven hundred times the
mornings dew has wet my silver hayres, and thrice seven hundred times the
winters frosts has nipt the mountain tops since first I made these ruful
lamentations, during all which time I have set before this crystal Image,
howerly praying that some courteous Knight would be so kind, as to aid me in
my vowed revenge, and now fortune I see has smild upon me, in sending you
hither to work a just ceuenge for the inhumane murder of my daughter, whose
perfect Image lies here carved in fine Crystal, as the continual obiecte of
my grief: and because you shall understand the true discourse of her timeles
Tragidie, I have writ that down in a paper book with mine own blood, the
which my faintfull tongue is not able to reveal, and thereupon he pulled from
his bossome a golden covered book with silver claspes, and requested Saint
George to read it to the rest of the kinghts, to which he willingly
condescended, so sitting down amongst the other Champions upon the green
springing grass, he opened the bloody written book and read over the
contents, which contained these sorrowful words following.

CHAP. VI.
What happened to the Champions, after they ha^ found an Image of fine Crista^l,
in the form of a murdered Maiden: where Saint G^orge had a golden Book given
him, wherein was written in blood, the true Traged^es of two Sisters: and
likewise how the Champions intended a speedy revenge upon the Knight of the
black Castle, for the deaths of the two Ladies.

IN former times whilste Fortune smilde upon me, I was a welthye Shepherd,
dwelling in this unhappy Country, not only held in great estimation for my
wealth, but also for two fair Daughters which nature had mad most excellent in
beauty: in whom I took such exceeding joy and delight, that I accounted them
my chiefest happiness: but yet in the end, that which I thought should most
content me, was the occasion of this my endless sorrows.

My two Daughters (as I said before) were endued with wonderful beauty, and
accompanied with no less honesty: the fame of whose virtues was so blazed
into many parts of the world: by reason whereof, there repaired to my
Sheepheards Cottage, diverse strange and worthy Knights, with great desire to
marry with my Daughters. But above them all, there was one named Leoger, the
knight of the black Castle (wherein he now remains) being in distance from
this place some two hundredth leagues, in an Island encompassed with the sea.

This Leoger I say, being so entrapped with the beautye of my Daughters, that
he desired me to give him one of them in marriage: but ^ little mistrusting his
treason and cruelty that after followed, but rather considering the great
honor that might r^dounde thereof, for that he was a worthy knight and of much
fortitude: I quickly fulfilled his desire, and granted to him my eldest
Daughter in marriage: where after that H^meus holy rites were solemnized, in
great pomp and state she was conducted in company of her new wedded Lord, to
the black Castle, more li^^r a Princ^sse in estate then a sheepheards daughter
of such degree:

But yet still I retained in my company the youngest, being of far more
beauty then her elder Sister: of which, this traiterous and unnatural knight
was informed and her surpassing beauty so extolled, that in a small time he
forgot his new married wife, and sweet companion, and wholly surrendered himself
to her love, without consideration that he had married her other sister So this
disordinate and lustful love, kindled and increased in him every day more and
more, and he was so troubled with this new desire, that he daily devised with
himself by what means he might obtain her, and keep her in dispite of all
the World: in the end he used this policy and deceit to get her home into his
Castle, for when the time grew on that my eldest daughter his wife, should be
delivered, he came in great pomp with a stately train of followers to my
cottage, and certified me that his wife was delivered of a goodly ^oy, and
thereupon requestest me with very fair and loving words, that I would let my
daughter go unto her sister, to give her that contentment which she desired,
for she did love her more deer (...) then her own soul: Thus his crafty and
subtle perswations so much prevailed, that I could not frame any excuse to the
contrary, but must needs consent to his demand, so straight way when he
had in his power, that which his soul so much desired, he presently departed,
giving me to understand that he would carry her to his wife, for whose sight
she had so much desired, and at whose coming she would receive great joy and
contentment, her sudden departure bred such sorrow in my heart (^eing the
only comfort and stay of my declyned age) that the fountains of my eyes
rained down a shewer of Salt tears upon my aged breast, so dear is the love
of a father unto his child: but to be short, when this lustful minded catiffe
with his pompious train came in sight of his Castle, he commanded his
company to ride forwards that with my daughter he might secretly confer of
serious matters, and so staide lingering behind, till he saw his company
almost out of sight* and they two alone together, he found opportunity to
accomplish his lustful desires, and so rode into a little grove, which was hard
at hand, close by a rivers side, where without any more tarying he carried her
into the thickest part thereof, where he thought it most convenient to perform
so wicked a deed.

When he beheld the branches of the thick trees to withholde the light of
heaven from them, and that it seemed a place ouerspred with the sable mantles
of night, he alighted from his horse, and willed my well-beloved daughter that
she should likewise alight: she in whose heart reigned no kind of suspicion,
presently alighted, and sat her down by the rivers side, and washed her fair
white hands in the streams, and refreshed her mouth with the crystal waters.

Then this dessembling Traitor could no longer refrain, but with a
countenance like the lustful King of Thrace when he intended the rauishment
of Progne, or like Tarquinius of Roame when he defloured Lucrecia, he let her
understand by some outward shows, and dark sentences the kindled fire of love
that burned in his heart: and in the end he did wholly declare his deuilish
pretense and determined purpose.

So my loving daughter being troubled in mind with his lustful assaylements
began in manner to reprehend him, will you (said she defile my sisters bed,
and stain the honor of your house with lust: will you bereave me of that
precious Jewel, the which I hold more deerer then my life, and blot my true
Uirginitie with your false desires: brought you me from the comfortable sight
of my Father, to be a joy unto my Sister, and will you flourish in the spoil
of my true chastity? look, look, imoderate Knight, (I will not call thee
brother) look I say how the heavens do blush at thy attempts, and see how
chaste Diana sits upon the winged firmaments, and threatens vengeance for her
Uirgins sake: wash from thy heart these lustful thoughts with shewers of thy
repentant tears and seek not thus to wrong thy marriage bed, the which thou
oughst not to violate for all the kingdoms in the World.

Then this accursed Knight, seeing the chaste and virtuous maiden, to stand so
boldly in the defense of her Uirginitie, with his rigorus hand he took fast
hold by her neck, and with a wrathful countenance he delivered these words:
do not think stubbern damsel to preserve thy honor from the stain of my
desires, for I swear by the crystal Towers of Heaven, either to accomplish
my intent, or put thee unto the cruel^est death that ever was devised for any
damsel or maid: at which words, the most sorrowful and disstressed Uirgin,
with a shewer of Pearled tears, trickling down her seemly blushing cheeks,
replied in this order. Think not false Traitor (quoth she) that fear of death
shall cause me to yield to thy filthy desires: no, no, I will account that
stroke ten times happy, and more welcome to my soul, then the joys of
wedlock: then might I walk in the Elizian fields amongst those dames that
dyed true virgins, and live to behold the budde of my maidens glory, withered
with the nypping frostes of thy unnatural desires.

These words being well understood by the lustful knight, who with a
countenance more furious then the savage Lions in the Deserts of Libia, took
her by the slender waste, and rigorously dashed her body against the ground, and
therewithal spoke these words. Understand s^id he, and be well persuaded, thou
unrelenting damsel, that either living or dead, I will perform my will and
pretended purpose for in my heart there burns a fire that all the water in the
Seas can never quench, nor all the dri^^ing clouds of heaven, if they should
drop eternal shewers of rain: but it is the water of thy sweet Uirginity that
must quench my furious burning love: and thereupon in a madness he cut off a
great part of the train of her gown, and bound it very fast to the hair of
her head, which glistered like to golden wyers, and drag^d her up and down the
grove till the green grass turned to a purple color, with the blood that
issued from her body: by which cruelty he thought to enforce her to his
pleasure, but she respecting not his wicked cruelty, and the more he procured
to torment her, the more earnestly she defended her honor.

When this cruel and inhumaine monster, saw that neither his flattering
speeches, nor his cruel threats were of sufficiency to prevail, he began
to forget all faith and loyalty he ought unto the honor of Knighthood, and the
respect he should bear unto women kind, but bl^sphemed against heaven, and
tearing her clothes al to pieces, he stripped her stark naked, and with the
haynes of the bridle of his horse, he cruelly whipped and scurged her white and
tender bac^e, that it was full of blewe spo^tes, and horrible circles of black
and settled blood, with such extreme cruelty that it was a very grievous and
sorrowful sight to behold. And yet this did profit him nothing at all, for
she continued in her former r^solution.

He seeing that she still perseuerd in the defense of her honor, he straight
ways like a bloody monster, heaped cruelty upon c^u^ltie: then he took and
bound her well pr^portioned legs and christeline arms* grievously unto a
withered tree (saying). Oh cruel and more cruel, then any woman in all the
world has ever been: why do then suffer thy self to be thus tormented,
and not g^ue cons^nt to procure my ease? Do thou think it better to endure
this marterdome, then to live a most loving, sweet and contented life: and
therewithal his anger so increased that he stood staring on her face with his
accu^sed eyes, fixed in such sort that he could not withdraw them back.

The which being perceived by this distressed Uirgin, as one far more
desirous of death then of life, with a furious voice she said: Oh thou traitor,
thou wicked monster, thou utter enemy to all humanity, thou shameless
creature more cruel then the Lions in the deserts of Hercania: thou stain of
Knighthood and the blondiest wretch that ever nature framed in the world,
wherein do thou contemplate thus thy self? thou fleshly butcher, thou
v^mercifull Tiger, thou letcherous hog, and dishonorer of thy progen^e: make
an end (I say) of these my torments, for it is now too late to repent thee,
gore my unspotted breast with thy bloody weapon, and send my soul into the
bossome of Di^na, whom I behold sitting in the celestial palace of heaven,
accompanied with numberles troops of vestal Uirgins, ready to entertain my
bleeding goast into her glorious Mansion.

This vnpitifull knight seeing the steadfastness that she had in the defense of
her honor, with a cruel and infernal heart he took a silken scarf which the
Damsel had girded at her waste, and with a brutall anger doubled it about her
neck, and pinched it so straight that her soul departed from her teresticall
body.

O you valiant Knights that by your Prowes comes to the reading of this dismal
Tragidy, and comes to the hearing of these bloody lines, contained in this
golden book: consider the great constancy and chastity of this unfortunate
maiden, and let the grief thereof move you to take vengeance of this cruelty
showed without any desert.

So when this infernal minded Knight saw that she was dead, he took his
horse and rode after his company, and in a short time he over took them, and
looked with so furious and Irefull a countenance, that there was none durst be
so hardy to ask him where my daughter was, but one of his Squiers that bore me
great affection for the kindness and courtesy I ostended to him at his Ladies
and my daughters nuptials, having a suspicion by the great alteration that
appeared in his Master: and being very desirous to know what was become of the
damsel for that he came alone without bringing the Damsel with him, neither
could he have any sight of her: he then presently withdraw himself back, and
followed the footings of the horse, he ceased not until he came to the place
where this cruelty was wrought, whereas he found the maiden dead, at the vewe
whereof he remained almost beside himself, in such sort that he had almost
fallen to the ground: The sorrowful Squire remained a good while before he
could speak, but at last when he came again to himself, he began with a
dolorous complaint, crying out against the gods and fortune, because they had
suffered so great a cruelty to be committed upon this damsel.

And making this sorrowful lamentation, he unloosed her from the tree, and
laid her naked body upon part of her apparel, the which he found lying by,
all besmeared in blood, and afterward complained in this pitiful sort.

O cruel Knight (quoth he) what an infernal heart remained in thy breast, or
what hellish fury did bear thee company that thy hands has committed this
inhumane sacrifice? was it not sufficient that this her surmounted beauty might
have moved thee to pity, when it is of power to move the bloody Camibal to
remorse, and constrain the savage monsters to relent? so with these and other
like sorrowful words that the woeful Squire spoke unto the dead corpse, he cut
down branches from the trees, and gathered grass from the ground for to cover
the body, and left it lying so, that it seemed to be a mountain of green
grass, or a thicket of springing trees, and then determined with himself in
the best manner that he could, to dissemble the knowledge of the bloody fact,
he took his horse and went the way toward the Castle, in which he rode so
fast that he ouertooke the Knight and his company at the entering of the gates,
whereas the lustful tyrant alighted, and without speaking to any person, he
entered into his closset, by reason whereof, this kind and courteous Squire had
time to declare all things he had seen to the new married Lady, and the
dolorous end of the constant Damsel her Sister. This soddaine and unlooked for
sorrow mixed with anger and wrath, was such in the Lady that she caused the
Squire not to depart from the Castle, until such time as more occasion served,
and to keep all things in secret that he had seen, and she her self
remained, making marvelous and great lamentations to her self all in secret,
for that she would not be perceived, yet with a soft voice she said.

Oh unfortunate Lady* borne in a sorrowful hour, when some blazing and
unlucky Comette reigned: oh unhappy Destenies, that made me wife unto so
cruel a knight, whose foul mis^deedes has made the very Elements to blush,
but yet I know that Fortune will not be so far unkind, but that she will
procure to take a strange revenge upon his purple-stayned soul: oh you
immortal Gods, revenge me on this wicked Homicide: if not, I do swear that I
will with mine own hands put in practice such an enterprise, and so stain my
unspotted heart with wilful murder, that all the Gods above and all the bright
celestial powers of heaven, shall look from their immortal Palace and
tremble at the terror of my hate.

This being said, she took in her hand a Dagger of the knights, and in her
arms her young son, being but of the age of forty days (saying) now do I
wish so much evil unto the world, that I will not leave the son of so
wicked a father alive, but I will wash my hands in their accurssed bloodes, if
they were in number to King Priams children: and so in this irefull order
entered she the chamber where the knight her husband was, and finding him
tumbling upon his bed from the one side to the other, with out taking any rest,
but in his furye renting and tearing the silken Ornaments, with a sorrowful
weeping and terrible voice she called him Traitor: and like a fierce Tigresse,
with the Dagger that she brought in her hand, before his face she cut the
throat of the innocent Babe, and threw it to him on the bed, and therewithal
said: take there (thou cruel Traitor) the fruit that thy wicked seed created
in my body, and then threw she the Dagger after him in hope to have killed
him: but Fortune would not that it should take effect, for it struck against
the testerne of the bed, and rebounded back unto her hands, which when the
Lady saw that it nothing prevailed, she returned upon her self her
outrageous fury: so taking the bloodye Dagger she thrust it to her heart, in
such sort, that it parted it in two pieces, and so she fell down dead betwixt
his arms, that was the occasion of all this bloody cruelty.

The great sorrow that this false and unhappy knight received was so strange,
that he knew not what counsel to take: but thinking upon a severe vengeance
that might succeed these cruel acts, he straight ways procured that the
body of the Lady, should be sec^^ely buried, which being done by him self in
the saddest time of the night, in a solitary garden under his castle-wall,
where he heard a hollows voice breath from the ^^epest vawltes of the earth,
these manner of speeches fol^^wing.

That for the bloody fact which he so lately had committed, his life drew
near to a shameful end: and that his Castle with all his treasure therein,
should be destroyed or fall into the hands of him whose Daughters he had so
cruelly murdered.

After this, he determined to use a secret policy: which was,, to set watch
and ward in every passage near unto his Castle, and to arrest all such
travelers, as by adventure landed upon that Island, not suffering them to
pass until such time as they had promised him by oath to aid and assist him
even unto death, against all his enemies:

In the mean time, the aforenamed Squire which had seen and heard all the
tragical dealings that has been here declared, in the best wise he could,
returned again unto my cottage and told me all that you have heard, which was
unto me very sorrowful and heavy news: judge here then gentle knights and ye
beholders of this woeful tragedy, what sorrow I unfortunate wretch sustained, and
what angwish I received: for at the hearing thereof, I fell into a senceles
sound, and being come again unto my self, I all to besmeared my milk white
hair in dust, that before were as clear as the tried silver, and with my
tears being the true sings of sorrow, I bathed the bosom of my mother earth,
and sighs pressed with such abundance from my tormented heart, that they
staide the passage of my speech, and my tongue could not reveal the grief
that my woeful thoughts conceived.

In this dumb silence and sorrow of mind I remained three days and three
nights, numbering my silent passions with the minutes of the day, and my
mighty griefs, with the stars of heaven, when frostie bearded winter has
cladde the elements with twinkling Diamons: but at last, when my amazed griefs
were something abated, my eyes (almost blind with weeping) required some sleep
thereby to mitigate the sorrows of my heart: I made my repair into a pleasant
meddow adjoining near unto my cottage, where amongst the green springing
downs I purposed to take some rest, and to lock up the closets of my tearfull
eyes with golden slumbers, thinking it to be the greatest content my sobbing
heart required: But before I could settle my senses to a quiet sleep, I was
constrained to breath this woeful lamentation from my oppressed soul: O
unhappy chance (quoth I) O cruel fortune: why did thou not make me pass
this bitter and sorrowful life in my childhood, or why did not the heavens
permit and suffer me to be strangled in my mothers womb, or to have perished
in my cradle, or at my nursses pap? then had my heart never felt this sorrow,
my ears never heard the murder of my children, nor mine eyes never to have
wept so many helpless tears.

O you mountains, you untamed beasts: O you deep Seas, you lustful heavens,
and you powers of reuengefull hell: come all I say and willingly assist me in
this mortal Tragidie, that these my aged hands which never yet practist any
heinous crime, may now be stainde in his accursed blood, that has bereaved me
of the prop and stay of declined age, my daughters (I mean) whose bleeding
goastes will never be appeased, nor never sleep in quiet upon the joyful
banks of Elizian fields, but wander up and down the world, filling each
corner of the earth with fearful clamors of murder and revenge, nor never
shall the furies of my angry soul be pacified, until my eyes behold a
stream of purple gore run trickling from the detestable breast of that accursed
rauisher, and that the blood may issue from his guilty heart like a fountain
with a hundred springes, whereby the pauements of his Castle may be sprinkled
with the fame, and the walls of his Turrettes colored with a crimson hew, like
to the streets of Troy, when as her channels ran with bloud^ at the end of this
sorrowful lamentation, what for grief, and what for want of natural rest, my
eyes closed together and my senses fell into a heavy sleep.

But as I say: slumbring in the green meadows, I dreamed that there was a
great and fierce wild man, which stood before me with a sharp faushion in his
hand, making as though he would kill me, whereat me thought I was so frighted,
that I gave (in my troublesome dreams) many terrible shreekes, calling for
succor to the empty air. Then me thought there apperred before my face a
company of courteous Knights, which said unto me, fear not old man, for we
be come from the souls of thy daughters to aid and succor thee, but yet for
all this, the wild man vanished not away, but stroke with his faushion upon
my breast, whereat it s^^med to open, and how that the wild centaure put his
hand into the wound and pulled out my heart, so straight at the same instant
me thought that one of the Knights likewise laid hold upon my heart, and
strove together with much contention who should pull it from the others hands,
but in the end each of them remained with a piece in his hand, and my heart
parted in two.

Then the piece which remained in the wild man's power turned into a hard
stone, and the piece which remained in the power of the Knight, converted into red blood, and so they vanished away.

Then straight after this there appeared before my eyes the Image of my
murdered daughter in the self same manner and form as you behold her here
portrayed, who with a naked body all besmeared in blood, reported unto me the
true discourse of her unhappy fortunes, and told me in what place, and where
her body lay in the woods dishonored for want of burial: Also desiring me not
of my self to attempt the reuengement, for it was impossible, but to intombe
her corpse by her mother* and cause the picture of her body to be most lively
portraied and wrought of fine crystal in the same manner that I found it in
the woods, and after errect it near unto a common passage, where aduenterous
Knights do usually travail. Also assuring me that thither should come
certain christian Champions that should revenge my injuries and inhumane
murder.

Which words being finished, me thought she vanished away, with a grievous and
heavy groan, leaving behind her certain drops of blood sprinkled upon the
grass: Whereat with great perplexity and more sorrow I awaked out of my
dream, bearing it in my grievous mind, not revealing it, not so much as to
the brittle air, but with all expedition performing her bleeding souls
request.

Where ever since most courteous and noble Knights, I have here lamented her
untimely death and my unhappy fortune, spending the time in writing her
doleful Tragidy in blood red lines, the which I know to your great grief, you
have read in this book of gold.

Therefore most courteous Knights if ever honor encouraged you to fight in Noble
adventures, I now most earnestly entreat you with your magnanimious fortitudes
to assist me to take reuengement, for the great cruelty that has been used
against my unfortunate daughter. At the reading of this sorrowful history,
Saint George with the other Champions did shed many tears, wherewith there did
increase in the^ a further desire of reuengement, and being moved with great
compassion, they protested by their promises made to the honor of Knighthood,
to persevere speedily on their vowed revenge and determined purpose: also
calling heaven to be witness to their plighted oaths, protesting that sooner
should the lives of all the famous Romans be raised from death from the
time of Romulus to Caeser, and all the rest unto this time, then to be
persuaded to return from their promises, and never to travel back into
Christendom till they had performed their vows, and thus burning with desire,
to see the end of this sorrowful adventure: Saint George clapped up the bloody
written book, and gave it again to the Shepherd, and so they proceeded
forwards toward the Island where the Knight of the black Castle had his
residence, guided only by the direction of the old man, whose aged limbs
seemed so lusty in traueling that it prognosticated a luckie event: In which
journey we will leave the Champions for a time, with the wonderful provision
that the Knight of the black Castle made in his defense, the success whereof
will be the strangest that ever was reported, and return and speak of Saint
Georges three Sons in the persute of their Father where we left them (as you
heard before) traueling from the Confines of Barbary where they redeemed the
Normaine Lady from the Tawny Moors.

CHAP. VI.
A wonderful and strange adventure that happened to Saint George his Sons, in
the persute of their Father, by finding certain drops of blood, with Virgins
hair scattered in the fields, and how they were certified of the injurious
dealing of the Knight of the black Castle against the Queen of Armenia.

MAny and dangerous were the adventures of the three valiant Princes in the
persute of their father Saint George, and many were the Countries, Islands, and
Princes Courts, that they searched to obtain a wished sight of his martial
countenance, but all to small purpose, for fortune neither cast them happily
upon that coast, where he with his famous Champions had their residence, nor
luckily sounded in their ears the places of their arriuals.

In which persute I omit and pass over many Noble adventures that these three
Princes atchiued, as well upon the raging ocians as upon the firm Land, and
wholly discourse upon an accident that happened to them in an Island bordering
upon the confines of Armenia, near unto the Island where the Knight of the
black Castle remained as you heard in the last Chapter, upon which coast after
they were arrived, they traveled in a broad and straight path until such time
as they came to a very fair and delectable forest, where as sundry chirping
birds had gathered themselves together, to refreshe and shroud themselves from
the parching heat of the golden Sun: filling the air with the pleasures of
their silver tuned notes.

In this Forest they traveled almost two hours, and then they went up to a
small mountain which was at hand, from the which they discovered very fair
and well towered towns with Princely palaces very sumptuous to behold:
likewise they discovered from the Hill a fair fountain wrought all of marble
like unto a Pill^r, out of which did proceed four spoutes running with water,
which fell into a great Cesterne, and coming to it they washed their hands
and ref^eshed their faces, and so departed.

After they looked round about them on every side, and toward their right
hands they espied amongst a company of green trees, a small Tent of black
cloth, toward which these young Princes directed their courses with an easy
pace, but when they had entered the Tent, and saw no body therein, they
remained silent a while, harkning if they could hear any sturing, but they
could neither see nor hear any thing, but only they found the print of
certain little feet upon the same, which caused them more earnestly to desire
to know whose foot steps they were, for that they seemed to be of some Ladies
or Damsels: so finding the trace they followed the^* and the more the knights
followed, the more the Ladies seemed to have: so long they persued after the
trace, that at the end they approached a little mountain whereas they found
scattered about, certain locks of yellow hair, which seemed to be thrids of
gold, and stooping to gather them up, they perceived that some of them were
wet with spots of blood, whereby they well understood, that in great anger they
were pulled from some Ladies head: lik wise they saw in diverse places how the
earth was spotted with drops of crimson blood: then with a more desire then
they had before, they went up to the top of that little mountain, and having
lost the footesteps, they recovered it again by gathering up the hair, where
they had not traueled far up the mountain, but toward the waters side they
heard a grievous complaint, which seemed to be the voice of a woman in great
distress, and the words which the knights did understand were these: O love,
now shall thou no more rejoice nor have any longer dominion over me, for death
I see is ready to cut my third of life and finish these my sorrowful
lamentations how often have I asked reuengement at the powers of heaven against
that wicked wretch that has been the causer of my banishment, but yet they
will not hear my request: how often have I made my sad complaints to hell? yet
has the fatal furies stopped their ears against my woeful cries. And with this
she held her peace, giving a sorrowful sighe: which being done, the three
christian knights turned their eyes to the place from whence they heard this
complaint, and discovered amongst certain green trees a Lady who was endued
with singular beauty, being so excellent that it almost deprived them of their
hearts and captiuated their senses in the snares of love, which liberty as yet
they never lost: she had her hair about her ears, which hung defusedly down
her comely sholders, through the violence she used against her self, and
leaning her cheek upon her delicate white hand that was all to be spotted with
blood, which was constraind by the scratching of her nails upon her Rosy
colored face: by her stood another damsel which they coniectured to be her
daughter for she was clad in virgin colored silk mor whiter then the Lillyes of
the fields: and as pleasante to behold as the glistring Moon in a clear
winters freezing night: yet for all this delectable sight, the three princly
knights would not discover themselves but stood closely behind the three pine
trees which grew near unto the mountain to hear the event of this accident,
but as they stood cloaked in silence, they heard her thus to confer with her
beautiful daughter. Oh my Rosana (quoth she) the unhappy figure of him, that
without pity has wounded my heart and left me comfortles with the greatest
cruelty that ever knight or gentleman left Lady: how has it been possible that
I have had the force to bring up the child of such a father which has bereaud
me of my liberty? O you sovereign gods of heaven, grant yt I may establish in
my mind the remembrance of the love of thy adulterous father: oh girl borne
to a further grief, here do I desire the guider of thy fortunes, that thy
glistring beauty may have such force and power, whereby the shining beams
thereof may take reuengement of the dishonor of thy mother: give ear dear
child I say unto thy dying mother, thou that art born in the dishonor of thy
generation, by the loss of my virginity, here do I charge thee upon my
blessing, even at my hour of death, and swear thee by the omnipotent God of
heaven, never to suffer thy beauty to be enjoyed by any one, until thy disloyal
fathers head be offered up in a sacrifice unto my grave, thereby somewhat to
appease the fury of my discontented soul, and recover part of my former
glory.

These and such like words spoke this afflicted queen, to the wonderful
amazement of the three young Knights, which as yet intended not to discover
themselves, but to mark the event, for they coniectured that her woeful
complaints were the induction of some strange accedent: Thus as they stood
obscurely behind the trees, they saw the young and beautiful Damsel give
unto her dying mother, paper, pen and Ink, the which she pulled from her
Iuorie bosom, wherewith the grieved queen subscribed certain sorrowful lines
unto him yt was the causer of her banishment: and making an end of her writing,
they heard her (with a dying breath) speak unto her daughter these sorrowful
words following. Come daughter (quoth she) behold thy Mother at her latest
gasp, and imprint my dying request in thy heart as a table of brass, that it
never may be forgotten, time will not give me longer respit, that with words I
might show unto thee my deep affections, for that I feel my death
approaching and the fatal sisters ready to cut my third of life a sunder
between the edges of their shieres, insomuch that I most miserable creature
do feel my soul trembling in my flesh, and my heart quiuering at this my last
and fatal hour, but one thing (my sweet and tender child) do I desire of thee
before I dye: which is, that thou would procure that this letter may be
given to that cruel knight thy disloyal father, giving him to understand of
this my troublesome death, the occasion whereof was his unreasonable cruelty:
and making an end of saying this, the miserable Queen fell down, not having
any more strength to sit up, but let the letter fall out of her hand, the which
her sorrowful daughter presently took up, and falling upon her mothers breast,
she replied in this sorrowful manner. O my sweet mother tell me not that you
will dye, for it ads a torment more grievous unto my soul then the punishments
which Danaus daughters feel in hell, I would rather be torn in pieces by the
fury of some merciles monster, or to have my heart parted in twain by the
hands of him that is my greatest enemy, then to remain without your
company, sweet mother let these my youthful years, and this my green
budding beauty encourage you still to revive, and not to leave me comfortles
like an exile in the world, but if the gloomy fates do triumph in your death,
and abridge your breathing air of life, and that your soul must needs go
wander in the Elizian shades with Trufas shaddowe and with Didoes ghost, here
do I protest by the great and tender love I bear you, and by the due
obedience that I owe unto your age, either to deliver this your letter into the
hands of my unkind father, or with these my ruthful fingers rent my heart in
sunder, and before I will forget my vow, the silver streamed Tygris shall
forsake her course, the sea her tides, and the glistering Queen of night her
usual changes: neither shall any forgetfulness be an occasion to withdraw my
mind from performing your dying requests: Then this weak Queen whose power
and strength was wholly decayed, and that her hour of death drew near at
hand, with a feeble voice she said. O you sacred and immortal Gods, and all you
bright celestial powers of heaven, i^to your divine bosoms now do I commend
my dying soul, asking no other reuengme^t against ye causer of my death, but
that he may die like me, for want of love. After this the dead Queen never
spoke word more, for at that instant, the cruel destinies gave end unto her
life: but when Rosana perceived her to be dead and she left to the world
deuoide of comfort, she began to tear the golden tramels from her head, and
most furiouslye to beat her white and yuorie breast, filling the empty air
with clamors of her mones, and making the skies like an echo to resound her
lamentations, and at last taking her mothers letter in her hands, washing it
with floods of tears, and putting it next unto her naked breast, she said: here
lie thou near adioining to my bleeding heart, never to be removed until I have
performd my mothers dying testiment. O work and the last work of those her
white and yuorie hands: here do I swear by the honor of true Uirgins, not to
part it from my bleeding bosom until such time as love has rent the disloyal
heart of my unkind father, and in speaking this she kissed it a thousand
times, breathing forth millions of sighs and straight with a blushing
countenance as radient as Auroras glistring beams, she arose and said: what is
this Rosana, do thou think to recall thy mothers life with ceremonious
complaints and not perform that which by her was commanded thee, arise, arise
I say, gather unto thy self strength and courage, and wander up and down the
world till thou have found thy disloyal Father as thy true heart has promised
to do. These words being no sooner finished but Saint Georges Sons like men
whose hearts were almost overcome with grief, came from the pine trees and
discovered themselves to the Damsel, and courteously requested her to discourse
the story of all her passed mizeries, and as they were true christian knights
they promised her (if it lay in their powers) to release her sorrows, and to
give end unto her mizeries. This Rosana when she beheld these courteous and
well d^meanur'd knights* which in her conceit carried relenting minds and how
kindly they desired to be partners in her griefs, she stood not upon curious
terms, nor upon vain ^xceptions, but most willingly condescended to their
requests: so when they had prepared their ears to entertain her sad and
sorrowful discourse, with a sober countenance, she began in this manner:
Lately I was (quoth she whilst fortune smild upon me the only child and
daughter of this liueles Queen that you behold here lying dead, and she
before my birth whilst heaven granted her prosperity was the maiden Queen of
a Country called Armenia, adjoining near unto this unhappy Island whom in
her young years when her beauty began to flourish, and her high renown to
mount upon the wings of fame, she was intrapped with the golden bait of blind
Cupid, and so entangled with the love of a disloyal knight, called the Knight
of the black Castle, who after he had florisht in the spoil of her Uirginitie,
and had left his fruitful seed springing in her womb grew weary of his love,
and most discurteously left her as a shame unto her Country, and a stain unto
her kindred, and after gave himself to such lustful and lascivious manner of
life, that he unlawfully married a shepherds daughter in a foreign land, and
likewise ravished her own sister, and after committed her most in humane
slaughter in a solitary wood: this being done, he fortified himself in his
black Castle, only consorted with a cunning Nigromancer, whose skill in
magic is so excellent, that all the knights in the world can never conquer the
Castle, where ever since he has remained in despite of the whole earth.

But now speak I of the tragical story of my unhappy mother, when as I her
unfortunate babe began first to strugle in her womb, wherein I would I had been
strangled: she heard news of her knights ill demeanure, and how he had wholly
given himself to the spoil of virginity, and had for ever left her love,
never intending to return again, the grief whereof so troubled her mind, that
she could not in any wise desemble it, for upon a time being amongst her
Ladies, calling to remembrance her spotted Uirginitie, and the seed of
dishonor planted in her womb, she felt into a wonderful and strange trance,
as though she had been oppressed with sudden death, which when her Ladies and
damsels beheld, they presently determined to unbrace her rich ornaments, and to
carry her unto her bed, but she made signs with her hands that they should
depart and leave her alone, whose commandment they strait way obayed, not
without great sorrow of them all, their loves were so dear. This afflicted
Queen when she saw that she was alone, began to exclaim against her fortune,
revealing the fates with bitter exclamations, O unconstant Queen of chance
(said she) thou that have warped such strange webs in my kingdom, thou that
gave my honor to that tirants lust, which without al remorse has left me
comfortles, it is thou that did constrain me to set my life to sale, and to
sell my honor as it were with the crier, compelling me to do that which has
spotted my Princely estate, and stained my bright honor with black infamy:
woe is me for my virginity, yt which my parents gave me charge to have respect
unto: but I have carelessely kept it, and smally regarded i^: I will therefore
so chastise my body, for thus forgetting of my self, and be so revenged for
the little regard that I have made of my honor, that it shall be an example
to all noble Ladies and Princes of high estate.

Oh miserable Queen, oh fond and unhappy Lady: thy speeches be too too
foolish, for although thy desperate hand should pull out thy despised heart
from thy bleeding breast, yet can it not make satisfaction for thy dishonor.

Oh Heavens, why do you not cast some fiery thunderbolt down upon my head? or
why does not the earth gape and swallowe my infamous body? Oh false and
deceiving Lord, I would thy loving and amourous words had never been spoken:
nor thy quick sighted eyes, never gazde upon my beauty: then had I florisht
still with glory and renown, and lived a happy Uirgin of chaste Dianaes train.

With these and other like lamentations, this grieved Queen passed away the
time, till at last she felt her womb to grow big with child: at the which
she received dubble pain, for that it was impossible to cover or hide it, and
seeing her self in this case, like a woman hated and abhorred, she determined
to discover her self publicly unto her subjects, and deliver her body unto
them to be sacrificed unto their Gods: and with this determination, one day she
caused certain of her Nobles to be sent for, who straightway fulfilled her
commandment* but when she perceived her Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of
honor came altogether before her, she covered her self with a rich robe and
sat upon her bed in her private chamber, being so pale and lean, that all
them that saw her had great compassion upon her sorrow: being all set
round about her bed and keeping silence, she revealed to them the cause of her
grief in this manner.

My Lords (quoth she) I shame to intytle my self your Queen and S^ueraigne,
in that I have defamed the honor of my Country, and little regarded the
welfare of our Common wealth: my glistering crown me thinks is shadded with a
cloud of black disgrace, and my Princely attire converted into unchaste
habiliments, in which I have both lost the liberty of my heart, and withal my
wonted joy, and am now constrained to endure perpetual pain, and an ever
pining death: For I have lost my honor, and recovered shame and infamy.

To conclude, I have forgone the liberty of a Queen, and sold my self to a
slavish sin, only mine own is the fault, and mine own shall be the
punishment. Therefore without making any excuse, I here surrender up my body
into your powers, for that you may as an (evil queen) sacrifize me unto our
Gods: also that within my accursed womb, for now my Lords you shall
understand, that I am dishonored by the knight of the black Castle: he has
planted a Uine within my fruitful garden, and sown a seed that has made
Armenia infamouse: heit is that has committed so many evils in the world: he
it is that delights in virgins spoils, and he it is that has bereaved me of
my honor, but with my good will I must needs confess, and left me for a
testimony of this my evil deed, big with child, by which my virgins glory is
converted to a monstrous scandal: and with this she made an end of her
lamentable speech: And being grievously oppressed with the pain of her
burthenous womb, she sat her down upon her rich bed, and attended their
wills: but when these Earls, Lords and honorable personages that were present,
had understood all that the Queen had said unto them, like men greatly
amazed, they changed their colors from red to white, and from white to red, in
sign of anger, and looking one upon an other, without speaking any word, but
printing in their hearts the fault done by their Queen, to the great disgrace
of their country, and so without any further considerati^n, they deprived her
from all princely dignity, both of her Crown and regiment, and pronounced her
perpetual banishment from Armenia, like subjects not to be governed by such
a defamed Prince, that has grafted the fruit of of such a wicked tree within
her womb.

So at the time appointed like a woman forlorn and hated of all companies,
she stored her self sufficient with tre^sure, and betook her self to her
appointed banishment, after whose departure the Armenians, elected them selu^s
an other Prince, and left their lawful Queen w^ndring in unknown Islands, big
with child deuoide of succor and relief, where instead of her Princely bed
covered with Canopies of silk, she took her nightly reposes upon the green
grass, shadded with the sable curtains of heaven, and the nurses that were
provided against her delivery were Nymphs and Faieries dancing in the night
by Proserpines commandment: thus in great grief continued she many days
contenting her self with her appointed banishment, making her lamentations to
the whispring winds, which seemed in her conceit to reansweare her complaints:
at length the glistering moon had ten times borrowed light of the golden
Phoebus, and the nights clear candle were now almost extinguished, by which
time approached the hour of her laborsome travel, wherein only by the
assistance of heaven she was delivered of me her unhappy daughter, where ever
since I have been nourished by the divine powers of heaven, for many times
when I came to yeeree of discretion, my woeful mother would discourse unto me
this lamentable story of both our mizeries, the which I have most truly
delared unto you.

Likewise she told me that many times in my infancy, when she wanted milk in
her breasts to nourish me, there would come a Lioness, and sometimes a she
Bear and gently give me suck, and contrary to the nature of wild beasts,
they would many times sport with, where by she coniectured that the immortal
powers had preserved me for some strange fortune: likewise at my birth, nature
had pictured upon my breast, directly betwixt my tender Paps', the lively form
of a purple Rose, which as yet does beautify my bosom with a vermillion
color: and this was the cause that my mother named me Rosana, answerable to
natures mark.

After this we lived many a year in great distress, penury and want,
soliciting heaven to redress our woes, more oftener then we had lived hours:
the abundance of our tears might suffize to make a watery sea, and our sighs
in number to countervaile the stars of heaven: but at last the fatal sisters
listed to my mothers mones and to my great sorrow, deprived her of her life,
where now I am left a comfortles Orphant to the world, attending the time
until that heaven send some courteous Knight that may conduct me to that black
Castle where my disloyal father has his residence, that I might there perform
my mothers dying will: these words being finished, Rosana stood silent, for
that her extreme grief hindered the passage of her tongue, and her eyes rained
such a shewer of pearled tears upon the liueles body of her mother, that it
constrained Saint Georges Sons to express the like sorrow: but after they
had let fall a few salt tears down from their sad eyes, and had taken truce
for a time with ^riefe, they took Rosana by the hand, (which before that time
never touched the body of any man) and protested never to depart from her
company til they had safely delivered her into the black Castle.

After this when the Christian Knights had pitifully bewailed the mizerie and
untimely death of her mother, they took their daggers and dug a deep grave
under a Bay tree and buried her body, that hungry ravens might never seize upon
it, or furious beasts tear it in pieces, nor ravenous Harpies devour it: and
after with the point of their daggers they in graued this Epitaph in the rind
of the Bay tree, which words were these that follow.

The Epitaph over the grave of the unfortunate Queen of Armenia.
Here lies the body of a haples Queen,
Whose great goodwill to her, small love did bring:
Her faithful mind requited was with teene
Though she deserud for love a regal King.
And as her corpse enclosed here does lie,
Her lucklesse fate, and fame shall never dye.
So when they had made this Epitaph and covered her grave with green turues,
they departed forward on their journey toward the black Castle, where we will
leave them in their travels, and return to the disloyal Leager, and how he
fortified his Castle by magic art, according to the learned skill of a
cunning Nigromancer, and of the adventures that happened to Saint George with the
other Christian Champions in the same Castle, therefore grant you immortal
powers of heaven, that my pen may be dipped in the waters of that learned
fountain, where the nine sisters do inhabit, that by the help of that sweet
liquor my muse may have a delightful vain, so that mixing the speech of
Mercury with the prowess of Mars, I may discourse of the strangest accident
that ever happened to wandering Knights.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the preparation that the Knight of the black Castle made by magic art,
to withstand his enemies, and how the seven Champions entered the same Castle,
where they were inchaunted into a dead sleep, so long as seven Lamps burned,
which could not be quenched but by the water of an inchaunted Fountain.

THe wicked Leoger as you have read of before, being the knight of the black
Castle, and one that for wealth and treasure surpassed the mightiest potentate
of those countries, when he grew detested and abhorred in every company, as
well by noble Knights, as gallant Ladies, for the spoil and murder of those
three comely Damsels, whose pitiful stories you heard in the two passed
Chapters, and fearing a sudden vengeance to fall upon his head, he fortified
himself strongly in his Castle, and with his treasure hired many furious
Giants to defend it: likewise it they failed, and should chance to be overcome,
he consorted with a wicked Nigromancer that with charms and spells should work
wonders in his Castle, which magical accomplishments we will pass over till a
more convenient time, because I purpose to explain the history in good order
to the readers: first speak we of Saint George with the other christian
knights that came in revenge of the Shepherd and his unfortunate daughter, who
with good success arrived upon the shore of the Island, where this wicked
Leoger and the Magician had fortified their black Castle: In which country
the Christian Champions, like the inuinsible followers of Mars, fearing no
danger nor the frowns of unconstant fortune, but betook themselves the
readiest way toward the Castle, in which journey they were almost ravished with
the pleasures of the Island, for entering into a broad and straight lane,
garnished on both sides with trees of diverse sorts, wherein they heard how
the Summer birds recorded their pleasant melodies, and made their sweet and
accustomed songs without fear of any man to molest them, in which row of
pleasant trees that delighted them on both sides: there wanted not the green
laurel, so much exteemed of learned scholars: nor the sweet mertel tree, loved
by Ladies: nor the high Cipresse so much regarded of Lovers, nor the stately
pine, which for his flourishing height is called the prince of trees: whereby
they judged it to be a habitation for the Gods then any terestrial country, for
that the golden Sun with his glistering beams did pass through those green
and pleasant trees without any hindrance of black clouds: for the heavens were
as clear as tried silver, likewise the western winds did softly shake the
shiuering leaves, whereby it made as sweet a hermonie as the celestial
Cherubins of heaven: a thousand little streamed brooks ran upon the inamelled
ground, making sundry fine works by their crooked turnings, and joining one
water with another, with a very gentle meeting, making such silver music,
that the Champions with the pleasure thereof were almost ravished, and smally
regarded whither their horses went right or no: and traveling in this sort,
they rode forward till they came into a marvelous great and wide meddow,
being of so great fairenes, that I am not able with any pen to painte out the
excellency there of: where as were feeding both wild and tame Hearts, adorned
with great and cragged horns: likewise the furious wild Bore, the fierce Lion
and the simple Lambs were altog^th^^* feeding with so great friendship, as to
the contrary by nature they were enemies:

Whereat the noble Champions were almost overcome in their own conceits, and
amazed in their imaginations, to see so strange love clean contrary unto
nature, and that there was no difference betwixt the love of wild beasts and
tame: in this manner they traveled, till upon a sudden they arrived before
the buildinges of the black Castle: and casting their eyes toward the same,
they beheld near unto the principal Gate, right over the Castle, twelve
Marble Pinicles, of such an exceedinge height, that the Piramides of Egypt,
were very low, in comparison of them: in such sort, that whosoever would
look upon them, was scant able with his sight to comprehend the height
thereof: and they were all painted most gorgiouslye with several colors.

Down below under the Castle there was an Arche with a Gate, which seemed to
be of Diamondes, and all was compasse^ about with a great meat or ditch, being
of so great a depth, that they thought it to rea^h to the midst of the earth
and it was almost two hundredth paces broad, and every Gate had his Drawbridge,
all made of read boordes, which seemed as though they had been bathed all in
blood.

Then the Champions r^d to the other side of this goodly Castle, wondering at
the curious and sumpteous workmanship, where they espied a Pillar of beautiful
^^sper stone all wroughtfull of precious stones of strange work, the which
Pillar was of great value, and was garnished with chains of gold, that were
made fast unto it by Magicks art, at which Pillar likewise hung a very costlye
silver Trumpet, with certain letters carved about the same, the which
contained these words following.

If any dare attempt this place to see,
By sounding this, the Gate shall opened be.
A Trumpet here inchaind by magic art
To daunt with fear the proudest cha^pio^s heart
Look thou for blows that entrest in this gate
Return in time, repentance comes too late.
The which when Saint George beheld, and had understood the secrets of these
mystical words, without any more tarryinge, he set the silver Trumpet to
his mouth, and sounded such a vehiment blaste, that it thundered in the
elements, and seemed to shake the foundation of the Castle: whereat the
principal Gate presently opened, and the draw Bridge was let down, without
the help of any visible hand, which made the Champions to wonder, and to stand
amazed at the strange accident, but yet intending not to return like cowards
daunted with a puff of wind, they allighted from their warlike steedes, and
delivered them unto the old sheepheards h^nds, to be fed upon the fragrant and
green grass, till they had performed the adventure of the Castle, the which
they vowed either to accomplish or never to return: so locking down their
Beauers and drawing forth their k^ene edged fawchions, they entered the Gates,
and being safely within, the champi^^s looked round about them to see if they
could espy any body, but they saw nothing but a pair of winding stayres,
whereat they ascended, but they had not gone many (...) therein, when as there
was so great a darkness, that scarce they could see any light, so that it
rather seemed the similitude of hell, then any other worldly place, and so
groping by the walls, they kept their going down those narrow and turning
stairs, which were very long, and of such length, that they thought they
descended into the middle of the earth.

They spent a great time in descending those stayres, but in the end they came
into a very fair and large Court all compassed with Iron grates like unto a
prison, or a place provided to keep untamed Lions, wherein casting their eyes
up to the top of the Castle they beheld the wicked knight walking with the
Nigromancer* upon a large gallerie, supported by huge pillars of brass:
likewise there was attending upon them seven Giants, armed in mighty Iron
coats, holding in their hands bats of steel: to whom the bold and venterous
Champion of England spoke with a haughty courage and loud voice in this manner.

Come down thou wicked knight, thou spoil of virginity, thou that art
environed with those monstrous Giants, those the wondering work of nature,
whose daring looks seems to scale the heavens, like unto the pride of Nemrod
when he offered to build up Babels confused Tower.

Come down I say, from thy Brazen gallery, and take to thee thy armor, thou
that have a heart to commit a Uirgins rape, for whose revenge we come: now
likewise have a courage to make thy defense, for we vow never to return out of
thy Castle til we have confounded thee and all thy forces.

At which words he held his peace, and expected an answer. But the wicked
knight when he heard these heroyicall speeches of Saint George, began to fret
and fume like to the starued Lion* famished with hunger, or the ireful Tiger
musling in humane blood, with a great desire to satisfy his thirst: or like
the wrath of dogged Cerberus when as he feasted with Alcides flesh even so
raged Leoger the Knight of the black Castle, threatening forth fury from his
sparkling eyes: and in this vile manner he reanswered the noble Champio^ of
England: proud knight (said he) or peasant* whatsoever thou art, I pass not
the sm^llest hair of my head, for thus vpbrayding me with thy vn^uly tunge, I
will return thee speechless into hell, for the pauements of my Castle shall
all be sprinkled with thy accurssed blood, and the bones of those thy unhappy
followers shall be buried in the sinkes of my channelles: if thou had brought
the army of invincible Caesar, that made all lands to tremble where he came,
yet were they but a blast of wind unto my forces: See thou not my Giants
which stand like oaks upon this brazen gallery? they at my commaundment shall
take you from the places where you stand, and throw you over the walls of my
Castle, in such sort, that they shall make you fly into the air, more then
ten fathams high: and for that thou have vpbrayded me with the disgrace done
unto a virgin: I tell thee, if I had thy mother here, of whom thou tookst
first the air of life, my hand should split her womb, that thou might see
the bed of thy creation as Nero did in Rome: or if thy wife and children were
here present before thy face, I would abridge their lives that thy accurssed
eyes might be witnesses of their bloody murders: so much wrath and have now
rages in my heart, that all the blood in Asia cannot wash it thence.

At which words, the Giants which he had hired to defend him from his foes,
came unto him very strongly armed with sturdie weapons in their hands, and
requested him to be quiet, and to abate his insufferable anger, and they would
fetch unto his presence, all those brauing knights that were the occasion of
his disquietnesse and anger: and so without tarying for any answer, they
departed down into the Court, and left the knight of the Castle with the
Magitian, standing still upon the gallery to behold the following encounters:

But when the Giants approached the Champions presence, and saw them so well
proportioned and furnished, and knights of so mighty statures, they flourished
about their knotty clubbes, and purposed not to spend the time in words but in
blows.

Then one of the fiercest and cruellest Giants of them all (which was called
Brandamond) seeing Saint George to be the forwardest in the enterprise, and
judging him to be the Knight that had so braued his Lord, he began with asterne
countenance to speak unto him in this manner: Art thou that bold Knight (said
the Giant) that with thy witless words haste so angered the mighty Leoger the
Lord of this Castle? if thou be, I advise thee by submission, to seek to
appease his furious wrath before reuengement be taken upon thy person.

Also I do require thee (that if thou will remain with thy life) that thou
do leave thy armor, and yeilde thy self, with all these thy followers,
with their hands fast bound behind them, and go and ask forgiveness at his
feet: to which Saint George with a smiling countenance answered, Giant (said
he) thy council I do not like, nor his honor will I receive, but rather we
hope to send thee and all thy followers without tongues to the infernal King
of fiery Plegethon: and for that you shall not have any more time to speak
such folly and foolishnes, either return your ways from whence you came, and
repent you of this which you have said, or else prepare your selves to mortal
battle.

The Giants when they heard the Champions resolutions, and how slightly they
regarded their proffers, without any longer tar^ance they fell upon Saint
George and his company intending with their knotty bats of steel to beat them
as small as flesh unto the ^ot, but the Queen of chance so smyled upon the
christian Champions, that the Giants smally p^euailed, for betwixt them was
fought a long and terrible battle, in such danger that the victory hung
wavering on both sides not knowing to whom she should fall, the bats and
faushions made such a noise upon one another armors, that they sounded like to
the bl^wes of the Ciclops working upon their fiery Anuils: and at every blow
they gave, fire flew from their steeled Corselets, like sparkles from the
flaming furnaces in hell, the skies resounded back the echoes of their
strokes, and the ground shook as though it had been oppressed with an
earthquake: the pauements of the Court was ouerspred with an intermixed color
of blood and sweat, and the walls of the Castle was mightily battered with the
Giants clubs: but by the time that glistering Apollo the days bright Candle
began to declare from the top of heaven, when the Giants (wearied in fight)
began for to faint: whereat the Christian Knights with more courage, began to
increarse in strength and with such rigor assailed the Giants that before the
gold^n Sun had diued to the western world, all the Giants were quite
discomfited and stain, some lay with their heads dismembered from their bodies
weltering in purple gore, some had their brains sprinkled against the walls,
some lay in the channels with their intrals trayling down in streams of
blood, and some ioynteles with their bodies cut in pieces, so that there was
not one left alive to withstand the Christian Champions.

Whereat Saint George with the other six Knights fell upon their knees and
thanked the immortal Rector both of heaven and earth for their victory.

But when the knight of the black Castle which stood upon the gallerie during
all the time of the encounter and saw how all h^s Giants were slain by the
prow^sse of those strange Knights, he raged against heaven and earth, wishing
that the ground might gape and swallowe him, before he were delivered into the
hands of his enemies, and presently would have cast himself headlong from
the top of the gallery, to have dashed his brains against the stony pauements,
but that the Nigromancer which stood likewise by him beholding the event of
the encounter, intercepted him in his intended drift, and promised that he
would perform by art, what the Giants could not do by force.

So the Nigromancer fell to his magic spells and charms, by which the Chrstian
Champions were mightily troubled and molestled and brought in dang^r of their
lives, by a terrible and strange manner as shall be hereafter shown.

For as they stood after their long incounters vnbuckling their armors to take
the fresh air and to wash their bloody wounds received in their last
conflicte: the Magitian caused by his art and angry spirit in the likeness of a
Lady of a marualous and fair beauty, looking through an iron grate, who seemed
to leave her fair face upon her white hand very penciuely, and distilled from
her crystal eyes great abundance of tears, which when the Champions saw this
beautiful creature, they remained in great admiration, thinking with
themselves, that by some hard misfortune she was imprisoned in those iron
grates, with that this Lady did seem to open her fair and christeline eyes,
looking earnestly upon Saint George, and giving a grievous and sorrowful sigh*
she with drew her self from the grate, which sudden departure caused the
Christian Knights to have a great desire to know who it should be, suspecting
that by the force of some enchantment they should be overthrown: and casting
up their eyes again to see if they could see her, they could not, but they saw
in the very same place a woman of a great and princely stature, who was all
armed in silver plates, with a sword girded at her waste, sheathed in ^ golden
scabberd, and had hanging at her neck an Iuory bow and a gilt quiver, this
Lady was of so great beauty, that she seemed almost to excel the other, but
in the same sort as the other did, upon a sudden she vanished away, leaving
the Champions no less troubled in their thoughts then before they were.

The christian Knights had not long time bewailed the a^sence of the Lady, but
that without seeing any body they were stricken with such furious blows upon
their backs, that they were constrained to stoop with one knee upon the
ground, yet with a trice they arose again, and looking about them to see who
they were that struck them, they persuaded them to be the likeness of certain
knights which in great haste seemed to run into a door that was at one of
the corners of the Court, and with the great anger that the Champions
received, seeing them selves so hardly entreated, they followed with their
accustomed lightness after the knights, in at the same door: wherein they
had not entered three steps, but that they fell down into a deep cave, which
was covered over in such subtle sort, that whosoever did tread on it,
straight way fell into the cave, except he was advertised thereof before: with
in the cave it was as dark as the silent night, and no light at all apeared:
but when the Champions saw themselves so trecherously betrayed in the trap,
they greatly feared some further mischief would follow, to their utter
overthrows, so with their swords drawn, they stood ready charged to make
their defense, against what soever should after happen, but by reason of the
great darkness they could not see any thing, neither discover wherein they
were fallen, they determined to settle themselves against something, either
post, pillar or wall: and groaping about the cave, they searched in every
place for some other door that might bring them forth out of that darkesome
den, which they compared to the pit of hell.

And as they went groping and feeling up and down, they found that they troad
upon no other things but dead men's bones, which caused them to stand still:
and not long after, they espied a secret window, at the which entered much
cleerenesse, and gave a great light into the den where they were, by which they
espied a bed most richly furnished with curtains of silk, and golden
pendants which stood in a secret room of the cave, behung with rich tapestrie
of a sable color: which bed when the Champions beheld, and being somewhat
weary of their long fight which they had with the Giants in the Court of the
Castle, they required some rest and desired some sleep upon the bed, but not
all at one instant: for they feared some danger to be at hand, and therefore
Saint George as one most willing to be their watchman, and to keep senternell
in so dangerous a place, caused the other Champions to take their reposes
upon the bed, and he would be as wakefull as the cock against all dangerous
accidents: so the six Christian Knights repaired to the bed, whereon they were
no sooner laid, but presently they fell into a heavy and dead sleep, in such
sort that they could not be awaked by any manner of violence, not all the
warlike drums in Europe if they were sounded in their ears, nor the rattling
thunder claps of heaven were sufficient to recall them from their sleeps, for
indeed the bed was inchaunted by the Nigromancers charms, in such manner
that whosoever but sat upon the sides, or but the furniture of the bed, were
presently cast into as heavy a sleep as if they had drunk the joyce of dwaile
or the seed of Poppie, where we will leave them for a time like men cast into
a trance, and speak of the terrible adventure that happened to S. George in the
cave, who little mistrusting of their enchantments, stood like a careful
guard keeping the furious wolf from the spoil of the silly sheep: but upon a
sudden his heart began to throb, and his hair to stand upright upon his head,
yet having a heart fraught with inuinsible courage, he purposed not to awake ye
other knights, but of himself to withstand whatsoever happened, so being in his
princely cogitatio^, there appeered to him as he thought the shape of a
Magitian with a visage lean, pale and full of wrinckles, with locks of black
hair hanging down to his shoulders like to wreathes of invenomed Snakes, and
his body seemed to have nothing upon it but skin and bones, who spoke unto
Saint George in this dispitfull manner: in an evil hour (said the Magitian)
camst thou hither, and so shall thy lodging be, and thy entertainment worse,
for now thou art in a place whereas thou shall look for no other thing, but to
be meat unto some furious beast, and thy surmounted strength shall not be able
to make any defense.

The English Champion whose heart was oppressed with extreme wrath: answered,
O false and accursed charmer (said he) whom Gods confound for thy condemned
arts, and for whom the fiends has dig'd an everlasting tomb in hell, what
fury has inconst thee, that with thy false and deuelish charms thou do
practice so much evil against traveling and aduenterous Knights, I hope to
obtain my liberty in dispight of al thy mischief and with my strong arm to
break all thy bones in sunder.

All that thou do and wilt do will I suffer at thy hands replied the
Nigromancer, only for the reuengement that I will take of thee for the
slaughter of the seven Giants, which as yet lies murdered in the court, and
that very quickly* and therewithal he went inuisibly out of the Cave: so not
long after at his back he heard a sudden noise, and beheld as it were a
window opening by little and little, where as there appeared a clear light, by
the which Saint George plainly perceived that the walls of the Cave were washed
with blood, and likewise saw that the bones whereon they tread at their first
entry into the den were of humane bodies, which appeared not to be very long
since their flesh was torn off with hard and cruel teeth, but this
consideration could not long endure with him, for that he heard a great rumor*
and looking what it should be, he saw that there was coming forth out of an
other den, a mighty serpent with wings, as great in body as an Elephant, he
had only two feet which appeared out of that monstrous body but of a span
length, and each foot had three claws of three spannes in length, she came
with her mouth open of so monstrous and huge a bigne, and so deformed, that a
whole armed Knight horse and all, might enter in thereat, she had upon her
Jaws two tuskes which seemed to be as sharp as any needles, and al her body
was covered with hard scales of diverse colors, and with great fury she came
with her wings all abroad, Saint George although he had a valiant and an
undaunted mind, yet could he not choose but receive some fear in seeing so
monstrous a beast.

But considering with him self, that it was then time, and great need to have
courage, and to be expert and valliant for to make his defense, he took his
good cutting sword in his hand, and shrouded himself under his hard and
strong sheelde, and tarried the coming of that ugly monster.

But when the furious beast saw that there was a pray whereon she might employ
her sharp teeth, she stroke with her inuenomous wings, and with her pearcing
claws she griped, and laid fast hold upon Saint Georges hard shield,
pretending to have swallowed whole this coragious warrier, and fastening her
sharp tuskes upon his helmet, which when she found so hard, she let go her
hold and furiously pulled at his target, with such a strenght that she pulled
it from his arm: with that the English knight stroke at her head a most
mighty and strong blow with his sword, but in no wise it could hurt her, by
reason of the hard scales wherewith it was covered, and though he gave her no
wound, yet for all that she felt the blow in such sort that it made her to
recoile to the ground, and to fall upon her long and hideous tail, then this
oppressed Knight made great have to redouble his force to strike her another
blow: but all was in vain, for that upon a sudden she stretched her self so
high, that he could not reach her head: but yet kind Fortune so favored his
hand, that he stroke her upon the belly, whereas she had no defense with
scales, nor any other thing but feathers: whereout issued such abundance of
black blood, that it besprinkled all the den about.

This terrible and furious Serpent, when she felt her self so sore wounded,
stroke at Saint George such a terrible a blow with her tail, that if he had
not seen it coming it had been sufficient to have parted his body in pieces.
The Knight to clear himself from the blow, fell flat upon the ground, for he
had no time to make any other defense. But that terrible blow was no sooner
passed over him, but straight ways he recovered his feet, at such time as the
furious Serpent came toward him. Here Saint George having a great confidence
in his strength, performed such a valiant exployt, that all former Adventures
that has been ever done by any Knight, may be put in oblivion, and this kept
in perpetual memory: for that he threw his sword out of his hand, and ran
unto the Serpent, and embraced her betwixt his mighty arms, and did so
squeeze her, that the furious Beast could not help her self with her sharp
claws, but only with her wings she beat him on every side. This valiant
Champion and noble Warrier would never let her loose, but still remained
holding her betwixt his arms, continuing this perilous and dangerous fight,
till all his bright armor was imbrued with her bestiall blood, by which
occasion she lost a great part of her strength, and was not able long to
continue.

Long endured this great and dangerous encounter, and the infernal Serpent
remained fast unto the noble and valiant breast of the English Knight, till
such time as he plainly perceived that the Monster began to wexe faint, and to
loose her strength. Likewise it could not be otherwise, but Saint George wexed
somewhat weary, considering the former fight he had so lately with the Giants.
Notwithstanding when he saw the great weakness of the Serpent, he did animate
himself with courage, and having opportunity by reason of the quantity of
blood that issued from her wounds, he took his trusty sword and thrust it
into her heart with such violence, that he cloue it in two pieces: so this
infernal Monster fell down dead to the ground, and carried the Christian
Champion with her, for for that they were fast closed together, and by reason
that the Serpent lacked strength, he quickly cleared himself out of her
claws, and recovered his sword. But when he saw certainly that he was clear
from the Monster, and that she had yielded up her detested life into ye brittle
air, he kneeled down and gave thanks to the immortal majesty of God for his
safe delivery. The venom was so great that the Serpent threw out to infect
the knight, that if his armor had not been of a precious virtue, he had been
impoysoned to death.

After the victory was obtained and the Monster dead, he grew very weary and
unquiet, and was constrained to sit and cool himself by a Well which was full
of water, standing by in a corner of the Cave, from whence the monstrous
Serpent first appeared and came forth. And when he found himself refreshed,
he repaired to the Inchaunted bed whereupon the other six Champions lay
sleeping, dreaming of no such strange accident that had happened to him: to
whom he purposed to reveal the true discourse of all the dangers that had
befalne him in that accident.

But no sooner approached he unto that inchaunted bed and had set himself
down upon the one side thereof, and thinking to begin his discourse, but he
presently fell into a heavy and dead slumber.

There will we leave them sleeping and dreaming upon the inchaunted bed, not to
be wakened by any means, and return to the Nigr^om^ncer that was busied all
the time of the Serpents incounters, with Leoger in burying of the dead Giants:
But now he knew by his art, that the Serpent was slain, and likewise Saint
George oppressed with a charmed sleep, in company of the other Champions upon
the inchaunted bed, from whence he purposed that they never more should awake,
but spend their followed fortunes in eternal sleeps.

Then by his deuilish arts he caused seven Lamps to burn continually before
the entry of the Cave, the properties whereof were so strange, that so long as
the Lamps continued burning, the Champions should never be awaked and the
fires should never be quenched but by the water of an inchaunted fountain, the
which he likewise by magic art had erected in the middle of the court guarded
most strongely with fearful shapes, and the water should never be obtained
but by a Uirgin which at her birth should have the form of a Rose most lively
pictured upon her breast.

These things being performed by the secrets of the Magitians skill added suth
a pleasure to Leogers heart, that he thought himself elevated higher then
towers of heaven, for he accounted no joy so pleasing unto his soul as to see
his mortal enemies captiuated in his power, and that the Magitian had done
more by his arts, then all the Knights in Asia could perform by prowess: we
will not now only leave the Champions in their sleeps dreaming of no mishap,
but also the Magitian with Leoger in the black Castle, spending their time
securely, careless of all ensuing danger, and speak now of the old Shepherd
whom the Champions at their first entering in at the gates of the Castle, where
they left him to look unto their warlike palfries as they fed upon the green
grass: but when this old man could hear no news of the Champions return,
he greatly mistrusted their confusion, and that by some treachery they were
intercepted in their vowed reuengement, therefore he protested secretly with
his own soul, in that for his sake so many brave Champions had lost their
lives, never to depart out of those fields, but to spend his days in more
sorrow then did the hapless King of Babylon, that for seven parching Summers,
and as many freezing Winters was constrained to feed upon the flowers of the
fields, and to drink the dew of heaven, till the hairs of his head grew
so stiff as Egles feathers, and the nails of his fingers like unto birds
claws, the like extremity he vowed to endure, until he either reobtained a
wished fight of those invincible knights (the flowers of chiualry) or else were
constrained by course of nature to yield up his loathed life, to the fury of
those fatal sisters: In this deep distress will my weary muse likewise
leave this old shepherd mourning for the long absence of the English Champion
and the other Christian Knights, and return unto Saint Georges valiant Sons,
whom we left traveling from the Queen of Armenias grave, with her vnvappy
daughter Rosana: to take reuengement for her disloyal Lord, being the Knight of
this black Castle, of whose vilanies you have heard so much of before.

CHAP. IX.
How Saint Georges three sons after their departure from the Queen of
Armenias sepulcher, in company of her Daughter Rosana, met with a Wilde-man,
with whom there happened a strange Adventure: and after how they entered the
Black Castle, whereas they quenched the Lamps, and awakened the seven
Champions of Christendom, after they had slept seven days upon an
inchaunted bed, with other things that chanced in the same Castle.

THe budding Flowers of Chivalry the valiant Sons of S. George to perform
their Knightly promises, and to accomplish what they had protested to Rosana at
the Queen her Mothers grave, which was to deliver her safely into the Black
Castle, where her unkind father had his residence. First they bought her a
Palfray of a silk color of Spain traynd in that Country, with certain
chains and jewels that she wore about her neck and wrestes, which steed was
furnished with black Capparisons, in sign of her heavy and discontented
mind, and his forehead beautified with a spangled plume of feathers.

Thus travailed they day and night from the Confines of Armenia, with
succesfull fortune, till they happily arrived upon the Island of the Black
Castle: where they were constrained to rest themselves many nights under the
shadows of green leaued trees, where the melody of silver tuned birds
brought them to their sweet sleeps: and in steed of delicate fare, they were
forced to satisfye their hungers with sweet Orenges and ripe Pomegranades,
that grew very plentifully in that Island. But upon a morning, when the skies
appeared in their sightes very clear and pleasant, and at such time as when
the Sun began to spread his glistering beams upon the lofty mountains and
stately Cedars, they set forward on their journey, hoping before the cloasing
in of the Days bright countenance, to arrive at the Black Castle, being
their long wished for haven, and desired Port. But entering into an unknown way
and narrow path not much used, they were intercepted by a strange and
wonderful Adventure. For as they traveled in those untrodden passages,
spending the time in pleasant conference, without mistrusting of any thing
that should happen to them in that pleasant Island: upon a sudden (not knowing
the occasion) their horses started and rose up with their forefeet, and turned
backward into the air in such sort, that they had almost vnsadled their
Masters: whereat the valiant Knights upon a sudden looked round about them,
to see who or what it was that caused so much fear: but when they perceived
nothing, nor could conjecture what should be the occasion of such terror, they
grew wonderfullye troubled in mind. Then one began to encourage ye rest,
saying: Believe me Brethren, I muse what should be the cause of this
alteration in our horses? has some spirit glided by us, or lodges some devil
among these bushes? Whatsoever it be, let us by the power and favor of God
attempt to know, and with our warlike weapons revenge the frighting of our
horses, for our minds are undaunted by the porwes of men, nor feared with the
furye of devils.

These words being spoken with great courage and majesty, caused Rosana to
smile with a cheerful countenance, and to imbolden her heart against all
ensuing accidents: so presently they came unto a river which was both clear
and deep, the which they judged to run quite through the middle of the
Island: and so traveling along by the rivers side, where within a little while
their horses began again to stagger and to be wonderfully affraide, and
casting about their vigilant eyes, to see if they could perceive what it
should be that made their horses so timorous they espied espied a terrible
Monster in the shape and form of a Satyr or a wild man, which did cross
ouerthwarte the Island, of a wonderful great and strange making, who was as
big and broad as any Giant, for he was almost four squa^re: his face was
three foot in length and had but one eye, and that was in his forehead, which
glistred like unto a blazing Comet or a fierye Planet: his body was covered
all over with long and shagged hair, like to the impoysoned stinges of
Serpents: and in his breaste, there was as though it had been a glass, out of
the which there seemed a great and shining light to proceed.

This Monster directed his way toward certain Rocks of stone which stood in
the Island, and by reason of the straggling and great noise that the horses
made, he cast his head aside and espied the three Knights traveling in
company of the Lady: upon whom he had no sooner cast his blazing eye, but
with a deuilish furye he ran toward them, and in steed of a Club, he bare in
his hand a mighty great and knotted Maple tree.

These valiant Knights never dismaide at the sight of this deformed creature,
but against his coming, they cheered up their horses, and pricked their sides
with their golden spurs, giving a great shoute as a sign of encouragement,
and withal, drawinge forth their sharp cutting swords they stood attending
the fury of the Monster, who came roaring like a Bull, and discharged his
knotted tree amongst the magnanimous Knights, who with light leapes cleared
themselves from his violent blows, that his club fell down to the ground with
such a terrible fall, as though with the violence it would have overthrown a
Castle.

With that the Knights presently alighted from their horses, thinking thereby
more nimbler to defend themselves, and with more courage to assail the
Satyr. Many were the blows on both sides, and dangerous the encounter,
without sign of victory inclining unto either party.

During the Battle, Rosana (through the grief and fear that she received)
swounded upon her palfray, and had fallen beside his back, if she had not first
closed her hands about the pummell of the saddle: and being come a little unto
her self, she made her humble supplication unto the Gods, soliciting heaven,
that she might rather be buried in the Monsters bowels, thereby to satisfy
his wrath, than to see such noble Knights loose the least drop of blood, or to
have the smallest hair upon their heads diminished: such was the love and true
zeal she bore unto these three Knights.

But Sa. Georges Sons so manfully behaved themselves in the Encounter,
bearing the prowess of their fathers mind, that they made many deep wounds
in the Monsters flesh, and such terrible gashes in his body, that all the
green grass was covered with his black blood, and the ground all to
besmeared and strewed with his mangled flesh.

When the devilish Monster felt himself wounded, and saw how his blood stood
upon the earth like coniealed gore, he fled from them more swifter than a
whirlewinde, or like unto an arrow forced from a musket, and ran in great have
to the Rocks that stood thereby, where presently he threw himself into a
Cave, pulling down after him a Rock of stone, which did close up the entry,
the which was done with so great lightness, that the Knights had no time to
strike him, but after a while when they had blessed themselves to see such a
strainge and sudden thing they assayed by strength to remove the Rock, and to
clear the mouth of the Cave, the which they did without any difficultnes.

Yet for all that they could not find which way they might enter in thereat,
but like unto Lions fraughted with anger, fretting and chafing, they went
searching round about the Rock to see if they could epsy any entry, and at
last they found a great cliffe on the one side of the Rock, and looking in
thereat, they espied the monster, lying upon the floare licking of his bleeding
wounds with his purple tongue.

And seeing him, one of the Knights said: O thou traitor and distroyer by the
high ways, O thou infernal devil and enemy unto the world, thou that art the
deuourer of humane flesh, and drinker of man's blood, think not that this thy
strong and fast closing up of thy self in this Rock of stone shall avail
thee, or that thy deuelish body shall escape vnslaughtered out of our hands,
no, no our bloody weapons shall be sheathed in thy detested bowels, and riue thy
damned heart asunder, and therewithal they thrust their weapons through the
clift of the Rock, and pierced his throat in such sort that the monster
presently dyed, the which being done they returned in triumph like conquerers
to Rosana, where they found her half dead lying upon her palfrie.

But when she saw them return in safety like one new risen from death, with
a joyful and loud voice she said, O God how has it pleased thy divine
majesty, to furnish these Knights with more strength and prowess, then any
other in all the world, else could they not have choosd but have been
overcome by this remorceles monster, which seemed to be of force to destroy
kingdoms: therewithal she alighted in good state from her Palfray, and sat
her down under the shadow of a Pine Tree, where the three knights likewise
sat down, and laid their weary heads upon her soft lap to sleep, upon whose
faces she fanned a cool breathing air, and wiped their sweaty brows with her
handkercher, using all the means she could to move them contentment.

Long had they not reposed themselves upon Rosanaes lap, refreshing their
weary bodies with a golden sleep, but they awaked and mounted upon their
steedes, and the next morning by break of day, they approached the sight of
the black Castle, before whose walls they found seven portly steedes,
feeding within a green pasture, and by them an ancient father, bearing in his
face the true picture of sorrow, and caruing in the bark of trees the subject
of all his passed griefs: this man was the old sheapheard which the seven
Champions of christendom (before their inchaunted sleeps in the Castle) left
without the Gates to ouersee their horses, as you heard before in the last
Chapter.

But Saint Georges sons (after they had a while beheld the manner of the
sheapheards silent lamentations) demanded the causes of his grief and
wherefore he remained so near the danger of the Castle? to whose demaundes,
the courteous old man answered in this manner.

Brave Knights (said he) for you seem to be no less by your Princely
demeanures, within this Castle remains a bloody tirant and a wicked homicide,
called Leoger, whose tyranny and lust has not only ravished but murdered
two of my daughters, with whom I was honored in my young years, in whose
revenge there came with me seven christian knights of seven several
countries, that entered this accursed Castle about seven days since,
appointing me to stay without the gates, and to have a vigilent care of their
horses, till I heard either news of the Tyrants confusion, or their
overthrows: but never since by any means could I learn whether good or bad
were betided them.

These words struck such a terror to their hearts* that for a time they stoo^
speechless, imagining that those seven Knightss were the seven Champions of
Christendom, in whose pursutes they had traueled so many countries. But at
last when Saint Georges Sons had recovered their former speeches, one of them
(though not intending to reveal what they imagined) said unto ye old
Shepherd: that likewise they came to be revenged upon that accursed Knight,
for the spoil of a beauteous and worthy Uirgine Queen, done by the said lust
inflamed Tyrant.

Then the Lady and the three Knights alighted from their horses, and likewise
committed them to the keeping of the old Shepherd: who courteously received
them, and earnestly prayed for their prosperous proceedings. So the three
Knights buckled close their armours, laced on their helmets, and put their
shields upon their arms, and in company of Rosana they went to the Castle
gate, the which glistered against the Sun like burnisht gold: whereat hung a
mighty Copper King, wherewith they beat so vehemently against the Gate, that
it seemed to rattle like a violent tempestuous storm of thunder in the Element.

Then presently there appeared (looking out at a marble pillor^d window) the
Magitian, newly risen from his bed, in a wrought shirt of black silk, and
covered with a night gown of damask velvet: and seeing the Knights with the
Lady standing before the gate, he thus discurteously greeted them.

You Knights of strange Countries said he, for so does it appear by your
strange demeanours: if you desire to have the gates opened, and your bones
buried in the valts of our Castle, turn back unto the Jasper pillar behind
you* and sound the silver Trumpet that hangs upon it, so shall your entry be
easy, but your coming forth miraculous. And thereupon the Magitian left the
window.

Then one of the Knights went unto the Jasper pillar, and with a vehement
breath sounded the enchanted trumpet as S. George did before, whereat the gates
flew open in like manner: wherein (without any disturbance) they entered: and
coming into the same Court where ye champions had fought with the Giants, they
spied the enchanted Lamps, which hung burning before the entry of ye cave
where the Champions lay upon the enchanted bed. Under the Lamps hung a silver
tablet in an iron chain, in it was written these words following.

These fatal lamps with their enchanted lights,
In deaths sad sleep has shut 7. christian knights
Within this cave they ly with sloth co^fou^ded
Whose fame but late in eury place resou^ded.
Except these flaming lamps extinguished be,
Their golden thoughts shall sleep eternally.
A Fountain framde by furies raisd from hell,
About whose spring does fear and terror dwell:
No earthly water may suffice but this
To quench the lamp where art co^mander is.
No vvightaliue this water may procure,
But she that is a Virgin chaste and pure.
For Nature at her birth did so dispose,
Upon her breast to print a purple Rose.
These verses being perused by the three Knights, and finding them as it were
contrived in the manner of a mystical Oracle, they could not imagine what they
should signify: but Rosana being singularly well conceated, and of a quick
understanding, presently knew that by her the Adventure should be finished,
and therefore she encouraged them to a forwardnes, and to seek out the
inchaunted Fountain, that by the water thereof the lamps might be quenched,
and the seven Champions delivered out of captivity.

This importunate desire of Rosana, caused the three young Knights not to loose
any time, but to search in every corner of the Castle, till they had found the
place wherein the Fountain was: for as they went toward the North side of the
Court, they espied another little door standing in the wall, and when they
came to it, they saw that it was made all of very strong iron, with a portal
of steel, and in the key hole thereof there was a brazen key, with the which
they did open it, whereat pres^ntly (unto their wonderful amazements) they
heard a very sad and sorrowfu^l voice breath forth these words following.

Let no man be so foolish hardy, as to enter here, for it is a place of terror
and confusion.

Yet for all this they entered in thereat, and would not be daunted with any
ceremonious fear, but like knights of an heroycall estimation they went
forward: wherein they were no sooner entered, but they saw that it was
wonderfully dark, and it seemed unto them that it should be a very large
Hall, and therein they heard very fearful howlings, as though there had bin
a legion of helhounds, or that Plutoes Dog had been vice gerent of that
place. Yet for all this these valiant Knights did not loose any of their
accustomed courage, nor would the Lady leave their companies for any danger:
but they entered in further, and took off their gauntlets from their left
hands, whereon they wore marvelous great and fine Diamonds, which were set in
rings, that gave so much light, that they might plainly see all things that
were in the Hal, the which was very great and wide, and upon the walls were
painted the figures of many furious fiends and devils, with other strange
Uisions framed by Magic art, only to terrefie the beholders. But looking
very circumspectlye about them on every side, they espied the enchanted
fountain standing directly in the middle of the Hall, toward which they went
with their shieldes braced on their left arms, and their good swords charged
in their hands, ready to withstand any dangerous accident whatsoever should
happen.

But coming to the Fountain, and offering to fill their helmets with water,
there appeared before them a strange and terrible Griphon, which seemed to be
all of flaming fire who stroke all the three Knights one after another in such
sort, that they were forced to recoyle back a great way: yet notwithstanding
with great discretion they kept themselves upright, and with a wonderful
lightness, accompanied with no less anger, they threw their shields at their
backs, and taking their swords in both their hands, they began most fiercely
to assail the Griphon with mortal and strong blows. Then presentlye there
appeared before them a whole legion of devils with flesh-hookes in their hands,
spitting forth flames of fire, and breathing from their nosthrills smoking
sulphur and brimstone. In this terrible sort tormented they these three
valiant Knights, whose years although they were but young, yet with great wrath
and redoubled force aduentred they themselves amongst this hellish crew,
striking such terrible blows, that in spite of them they came unto ye
Fountain and proff^red to take of the water: but all in vain, for they were
not only put from it by this devilish company, but the water it self glided
from their hands.

Oh in what great travel and perplexity these Knights remained amongst this
wicked and devilish generation, for to defend themselves that they might
attain to the finishing of this Adventure, according to their knightlye
promise.

But during the time of all these dangerous encounters, Rosana stood like one
berest of sense, thorough ye terror of the same: but at last remembering her
self of ye prophecy written in the silver tablet, the which the knights
perused by the inchaunted Lamps: the signification of which was, that the
quenching of the lights should be accomplished by a pure Uirgin, that had the
lively form of a Rose naturally pictured upon her breast: all the which Rosana
knew most certainly to be comprehended in her self.

Therefore whilst they continued in their fight, she took up a helmet that was
pulled from one of the Knights heads by the furious force of the Griphon, and
ran unto the Fountain and filled it with water, wherewith she quenched the
inchaunted Lamps, with as much ease, as though one had dipped a waxen torch in
a mighty river of water.

This was no sooner done and finished to Rosanaes cheifest contentment, when
that the heavens began to wax dark, and the clear skies to be ouerspred with
a black and thick clowd, and it came with great thundrings and lightnings,
and with such a terrible noise, as though the earth would have sunk: and the
longer it endured, the more was the fury thereof, in such sort that the
Griphon with all that deluding generation of spirits vanished away, and the
Knights forsook their incounters, and fell upon their knees, and with great
humility they desired of God to be delivered from the fury of that exceeding
and terrible tempest.

By this sudden alteration of the heavens, the knight of the Castle knew that
the Lamps were extinguished, the Champions redeemed from their inchaunted
sleeps the Castle yielded to the pleasure of the three knights, and his own
life to the furies of their swords, except he preserved it by a sudden
flight, so presently he departed the Castle, and secretly fled out of the
Island unsuspected by any one: of whose after fortunes, miseries, and death,
you shall hear more hereafter in the course of the history following.

The Nigromancer by his Art likewise knew, that the Castle was yielded unto
his Enemies power, and that his charms and magic spells nothing prevailed:
therefore he caused two ayrie spirits in the likeness of two Dragons to carry
him swiftly through the air in an Ebonie Chariot.

Here we leave him in his wicked and devilish attempts and devilish
enterprises, which shall be discoursed hereafter more at large: because it
appertains to our History now to speak of the seven Champions of
Christendom, that by the quenching of the Lamps were awakened from their
inchauntments, wherein they had lain in obscurity for the space of seven
days. For when they were risen from their sleeps, and had rowsed up their
drowsy spirits, like men newly recovered from a trance, being ashamed of that
dishonorable enterprice, they long time gazed in each others faces, being not
able to express their minds, but by blushing looks, being the silent
speakers of their extreme sorrows. But at last Saint George began to express
the extremity of his grief in this manner.

What is become of you brave Europes Champions (said he) where is now your
wonted valors, that has bin so much renowned through the world? what is become
of your surmounting strengths, that has bruzed inchaunted helmets, and quaild
the power of mighty multitudes? what is become of your terrible blows, that
has subdued mountains, hewn in sunder diamond armours, and brought whole
kindomes under your subiections, now I see that all is forgotten and nothing
worth, for that we have buried all our honors, dignities, and fames in
slothful slumbers upon a silken bed.

And thereupon he fell upon his knees, and said: thou holy God, thou rector of
the riding racks of heaven, to thee I invoke and call, and desire thee to
help us, and do not permit us to have our fames taken away for this dishonor,
but let us meritte dignity by our victories, and that our bright renownes may
ride upon the glorious wings of fame, whereby that babes as yet unborn may
speak of us and in time to come fill whole v^lumes with our princely
atchiuements.

These and such like reasons pronounced this disconted Champion, till such time
as the elements cleared, and that golden faced Phoebus glistred with splendant
brightness into the cave through a secret hole, which seemed in their conceits
to dance about the vale of heaven, and to rejoice at their happy deliueries.

In this joyful manner returned they up into the court of the Castle, with
their armors buckled fast unto their bodies, which had not been unbraced in
seven days before, where they met with the three Knights coming to salute
them, and to give them the courtesies of Knighthood.

But when Saint George saw his Sons whom he had not seen in twice two
years before he was so ravished with joy, that he swounded in their bosoms,
and not able to give them his blessing, so great was the pleasure he took in
their fights.

Here I leave the joyful greeting betwixt the Father and his Sons, to those
that knows the secret love of parents to their children, and what dear
affection long absence breeds.

For when they had sufficiently ostended the integrity of their souls each to
other, and had at large explained how many dangers every Knight and Champion
had passed since their departures from England, where as they begun first their
intended pilgrimage to Jerusalem as you heard in the beginning of this book,
they determined to search the Castle, and to find out Leoger with his
assosiate the wicked inchaunter, that they might receive dew punishments for
their committed offenses, but they like wily foxes were fled from the hunters
traces, and had left the empty Castle to the spoil of the Christian
Champions: But when Rosana saw her self dismissed from her purpose, and that
she could not perform her mothers will, against her disloyal Father, she
protested by the mighty God of heaven, never to close up her careful eyes
with quiet slumbers, nor never rest her weary limbs in bed of Down, but
travel up and down the circled earth till she inioyd (...) of her disloiall
Father whom as yet her eyes did never see. Therefore she coniured the
Champions by the lou^ and honor that knights should bear unto Ladies in (...),
to grant her liberty to depart and not to hinder her from her intended
travel.

The Knights considered with themselves that she was a Lady of a divine
inspiration, borne unto some strange fortune, and one by the heau^n^
appointment which had redeemed them from a wonderful mizerie.

Therefore they condescended to her desires, and not only gave her leave to
depart, but furnished her with all things belonging to a Lady of so brave a
mind.

First they found within the Castle an armor fit for a woman, the which the
inchaunter had caused to be made by magic art of such a singular nature that
no weapon could pearce it, and so light in wearing, that it wayed no heuier
then a Lions s^in, it was contrived after the Amazonian fashion, plated before
with silver plates, like the scales of a Dolphin, and riuetted together with
golden nails: so that when she had it upon her back, she seem^d like to
Diana, hunting in the Forests of transformed Acteon.

Likewise they found (standing in a stable at the East side of the Castle) a
lusty limbed Steed, big of stat^r^, and of a very good hair, because the
half part forwards was of the color of a Wolf, and the other half was al
black, saving that here and there it was spotted with little white spots: his
feet were cloven, so that he needed not at any time to be shod: his neck was
somewhat long, having a little head, with great ears hanging down like a
hou^d: his pace was with great majesty, and he so doubled his neck, that his
mouth touched his breast: there came out of his mouth two great tuskes like
unto an Elephant, and he did exceed all horses in the world in lightness, and
did run with an exceeding good grace. This likewise bestowed they upon the
Lady, the which did more content her mind, than any thing that ever her eye
had seen before that time. Also the te^ christian Knights gave her at her
departure ten diamond rings, continually to wear upon her ten fingers, in
perpetual remembrance of their courtesies.

This being done, without any longer tarriance, but thanking them for their
great kindness showed unto her in distress, she leapt into the saddle without
help of stirrup or any other thing, and so rode speedely away from their
sights, as a shower of rain driven by a violent tempest.

After her departure, the Champions remembered the old Shepherd, whom they had
almost forgotten, thorough the joy that they took in their happy meetings: he
as yet remained without the Castle gates, carefully keeping their horses, whom
now they caused to come in* and not only gave him the honor due unto his age,
but bestowed frankly upon him the state and government of the Castle, with
store of jewels, pearls and treasure, only to be maintained and kept for the
relief of poor Trauailers.

This being performed with their general consents, they spent the remnant of
the day in banqueting and other pleasant conference of their passed
Adventures. And when that Night with her sable clouds had ouer-spred the Days
delightful countenance, they betook them to their rests: the seven
Champions in a chamber that had as many windows as there were days in the
year, the old Shepherd by himself in a rich furnished Parlour, and Saint
Georges three Sons in the greatest Hall in the Castle.

CHAP. X.
How after the Christian Knights were gone to bed in the black Castle: Saint
George was awaked from his sleep in the dead time of the night, after a most
fearful manner, and likewise how he found a Knight lying upon a tomb, that
stood over a flaming fire, with other things that happened upon the same.

MOst sweet were the sleeps that he s^ P^incely minded companies took in the
Castle all the first part of the night, without molestation either by disquiet
dreams or disturbing motions of their minds, till such time as the glistering
Queen of night had run half her weary Journey, and had spent the better
part of the night: for betwixt twelve and one, being the chiefest time of fear
and terror in the night such a strainge alteracion worked in Saint Georges
thought that he could not enjoy the benefit of sweet sleep, but was forced
to lie broad waking like one disquieted by some sudden fear: but as he lay
with wakefull eyes thinking upon his passed fortunes, and numbering the minutes
of the night with his cogitations, he heard as it were a cry of night Ravens,
which flew beating their fatal wings against the windows of his lodging, by
which he immagined that some direful accident were near at hand: yet being
not frighted with this fearful noise, nor daunted with the croking of these
Ravens, he lay silently not revealing it to any of the other Champions that lay
in the six several beds in the same chamber: but at last being betwixt waking
and sleeping, he heard as it were the voice of a sorrowful Knight that
constrained these bitter passions from his tormented soul, and they contained
these words following.

Oh thou invincible knight of England, thou that art not frighted with this
sorrowful dwelling, wherein thou can see nothing but torments, rise up I say,
from thy sluggish bed and with thy undaunted courage and strong arm, infringe
the charm of my inchauntment.

And therewithal he seemed to give a most terrible groan and so ceased: This
unexpected noise caused Saint George (without the knowledge of any of the other
Champions) to arise from his bed, and to buckle on his armor, and to search
about the Castle to see if he might find the place that harbored the Knight
that made such sorrowful lamentation.

So going up and down she by corners of the Castle, all the latter part of the
night, without finding the adventure of this strange voice, or disturbance by
any other means but that he was hindered from his natural and quiet sleeps,
but by the break of day, when the dark night b^gan to withdraw her sable
curtains, and to give Aurora liberty to explayne her purple brightness, he
entered into a four square parlor, hunge round about with black cloth, and
other mournful habiliments, where on the one side of the same he saw a tomb
all covered likewise with black, and upon it there lay a man with a pale
color, who at certain times, gave most marvelous and grievous sighs, caused
by the burning flames that proceeded from under the tomb, being such that it
seemed that his body therewith should be converted into coals: the flame
thereof was so stinking that it made Saint George somewhat to retire himself
from the place where he saw that horrible and fearful spectacle.

He which lay upon the tomb, casting his eyes aside, espied Saint George, and
knowing him to be a humane creature, with an inflicted voice he said: Who art
thou Sir Knight that art come into this place of sorrow, where nothing is heard
but clamors of fear and terror?

But tell me said Saint George, who art thou, that with so much grief dast
demand of me, that which I stand in doubt to reveal to thee

I am the King of Babylon (answered he) which without all consideration, with
my cruel hand did pearce through the white and dilicate breast of my beloved
daughter: woe be to me and woe unto my soul therefore: for she at once did
pay her offense by death, but I a most mizerable wretch with many torments do
dye living.

When this worthy Champion Saint George was about to answer him, he saw come
forth from under the tomb, a damsel who had her hair of a yellow and wan
color hanging down about her shoulders, and by her face she seemed that she
should be very strangely afflicted with torments, and with a sorrowful voice
she said.

Oh unfortunate Knight what do thou seek in this infernal lodging, where
cannot be given thee any other pleasure, but mortal torment, and there is but
one thing that can clear thee from them, and this cannot be told thee by any
other but by me: yet I will not express it except thou will grant me one
thing that I will ask of thee.

The English Champion that with a sad countenance stood beholding of the
sorrowful damsel, and being greatly amazed at the sight which he had seen,
answered and said: The Gods which are governors of my liberty, will do their
pleasures, but touching the grant of thy request I never denied any lawful
thing to either Lady or Gentle woman, but with all my power and strength I was
ready to fulfill the same, therefore demand what thy pleasure is, for I am
ready in all things that touches thy remedy.

And with that the damsel threw her self into that sepulcher, and with a
grievous voice she said. Now most courteous Knight perform thy promise:
strike but three strokes upon this fatal tomb, and thou shall deliver us
from a world of mizeries, and likewise make an end of our continual torments.

Then the invincible knight replied in this order, whether you be humane
creatures said he, pla^st in this sepulcher by inchauntment, or furies raisd
from fiery Acheron to work my confusion or no I know not, and there is so
little truth in this infernal Castle, that I stand in doubt whether I may
believe thy words or not: but yet discourse unto me the truth of all your
passed fortunes, and by what ^^anes you were brought into this place, and as I
am a true Christian Knight, and one that fights in the quarrel of Christ, I
vow to accomplish whatsoever lies in my power.

Then the Damsel began with a grievous and sorrowful lamentation, to declare
as strange a tragedy as ever was told. And lying in the fatal Sepulcher,
unseen of Saint George, that stood leaning his back against the wall to hear
her discourse and lamentable Story: with a hollow voice like a murdered
Lady, whose bleeding soul as yet did feel the terrible stroke at her death,
she repeated this pitiful tale following.

CHAP. XI.
Of a tragical Discourse pronounced by a Lady in a Toombe: and how her
Inchauntment was finished by saint George, with other strange accidents that
happened to the other Christian Knights.

IN famous Babylon sometimes reigned a King, although a Heathen, yet adorned
with noble and virtuous customs, and had only one Daughter that was very
fair, whose name was Angelica, humble, wise, and chaste: who was beloved of a
mighty Duke, and a man man wonderful cunning in the Black art. This
Magitian had a severe and grave countenance, and one that for wisdom better
deserved ye government than any other in the kingdom, and was very well
esteemed throughout all Babylon, almost equally with the king: for the which
there engendered in the kings heart a secret rancour and hatred toward him.
This Magitian cast his love upon the young Princess Angelica, and it was the
Gods will that she should repaye him with the same affection: so that both
their hearts being wounded with love the one to the other, in such sort that
the fire kindled daily more and more, and neither of them had any other
imagination but only to love: and not knowing how to manifest their griefs,
they endured sundry great passions.

Then love which continually seeks occasions, did on a time set before this
Magician a waiting maid of Angelicaes, named Fidela: the which thing seemed to
be wrought by the immortal power of the Goddess Venus: oh what fear this
Magitian was in to discover unto her all his heart, and to bewray the secrets
of his louesicke soul: but in the end, by the great industry and diligence of
the waighting Maid (whose name was answerable unto her mind) there was order
given that these two lovers should meet together.

This fair Angelica, for that she could not at her ease enjoy her true Lover,
she did determine to leave her own natural Country and Father: and with this
intention being one night with her Love, she cast her arms about his neck and
said.

Oh my sweet and well-beloved Friend, seeing that the sovereign Gods have been
so kind to me, as to have my heart linked in thy breast, let me not find in
thee ingratitude, for that I cannot pass my time, except continually I enjoy
thy sight: and do not muse (my Lord) at these my words, for the entyre love
that I bear to you, does constrain me to make it manifest. And this believe
of a certainty, that if thy sight be absent from me, it will be an occasion
that my heart will lack his vital recreation, and my soul forsake his
earthly habitation. You know (my Lord) how that the King my Father does
bear you no good will, but does hate you from his soul, which will be the
occasion that we cannot enjoy our hearts contentments: for the which I have
determined (if you think well thereof) to leave both my Father and my native
Country, and to go and live with you in a strange Land. And if you deny me
this, you shall very quickly see your well-beloved Lady without life: but I
know you will not deny me it, for thereon consists the benefit of my
welfare, and my cheifest prosperity. And therewithal shedding a few tears
from her crystal eyes, she held her peace.

The Magitian (as one half ravished with her earnest desires) answered and
said.

My Love and sweet Mistres, wherefore have you any doubt that I will not
fulfill and accomplish your desire in all things? therefore out of hand put all
things in a readiness that your pleasure is to have done: for what more benefit
and contentment can I receive, than to enjoy your sight continually, in such
sort that neither of us may depart from the others company, till the fatal
Destenies give end unto our lives. But if it so fall out that fortune frown
upon us, that we be espied and taken in our enterprise, and suffer death
together, what more glory can there be unto my soul, than to dye with thee,
and to leave my life betwixt thy arms? Therefore do not trouble your self my
sweet Lady and Mistres, but give me leave for to depart your presence, that I
may provide all things in a readiness for our departures. And so with this
conclusion they took leave one of the other, and departed away with as great
secrecy as might possibly be devised.

After this within a few days, the Magitian by his inchauntments caused a
Chariot to be made, that was governed by two flying Dragons into the which
without being espied by any one, they put themselves, in company of their
trusty waiting Maid: and so in great secret they departed out of the Kings
Palace, and took their journey toward the Country of Armenia: in the which
Country in a short time they arrived, and came without any misfortune unto a
place whereas deep rivers do continually strike upon a mighty rock, upon
the which stood an old and ancient building, wherein they intended to inhabit
as a most convenient place for their dwellinges, whereas they might without all
fear of being found, live peacefully in ioying in each others love.

Not far from that place there was a small Uillage, from whence they might
have necessary provision for the maintayning of their bodies: great joy and
pleasure th^se two Lovers received when they found themselves in such a place
whereas they might take their ease and enjoy their loves.

The Magitian delighted in no other thing but to go a hunting with certain
Country dwellers that inhabited in the next Uillage, leaving his sweet
Angellica accompanied with her trusty Fidela in that strong house, so in this
order they lived together four years, spending their days in great pleasure:
but in the end time (who never rests in one degree) did take from them their
rest and repayed them with sorrow and extreme mizerie. For when the King her
father found her missiing, the sorrow and grief was so much that he received,
that he kept his chamber a long time, and would not be comforted of any body.

Four years he passed away in great heaviness, filling the Court with
Echoes of his beloved daughter, and making the skies to resound his
lamentations: sorrow was his food, salt tears his drink, and grief his
chief companion.

But at last, upon a time as he sat in his Chair lamenting her absence with
great heaviness, and being ouercharged with grief, he chanst to fall into a
troublesome dream, for after quiet sleep had closed up the closets of his
eyes, he dreamd that he saw his daughter standing vppo a Rock by the sea side,
offering to cast her body into the waves before she would return to Babylon,
and that he beheld her Lover with an Army of Satyrs and wild men ready
furnished with habiliments of war to pull him from his Throane, and to
deprive him of his Kingdom.

Out of this vision he presently started from his chair, as though it had been
one frighted with a legion of spirits, and caused four of the cheifest Peers
of his Land to be sent for, to whom he committed the government of his
Country: certefying them that he intended a voyage to the Sepulcher at
Memphis, thereby to quallifie the fury of his Daughters ghost, whom he dreamed
to be drowned in the seas, and that except he sought by true submission to
appease the angry heavens, whom he had offended by his unnatural sorrows,
he should be deposed from his Kingdom.

None could withdraw him from this determination, though it was to the
prejudice of his whole Land, therefore within twenty days he furnished
himself with all necessaries as well of armor and martial furniture, as of
gold and treasure, and so departed from Babylon privately and alone, not
suffering any other (though many desired it humbly, and were very earnest) to
bear him company.

But he traveled not as he told his Lords after any ceremonious order, but
like a bloud-hound serching Country after Country, Nation by Nation, and
Kingdom by Kingdom, that after a barbarous manner he might be revenged upon
his Daughter for her disobedience. And as he traveled, there was no cave, den,
wood nor wilderness, but he furiously entered, and diligently searched for his
Angelica.

At last by strange fortune he happened into Armenia, near unto the place
whereas his Daughter had her residence: where, after he had intelligence by the
Commons of that Country, that she remained in an old ruynated Building on the
top of a rock near at hand, without any more tariance he traveled unto
that place, at such a time as ye Magitian her loving Husband was gone about his
accustomed hunting: where coming to the gate and finding it locked, he knocked
thereat so furiously, that he made the noise to resound all the house over,
with a redoubling Echo.

When Angelica heard one knock, she came unto the gate and with all speed did
open it. And when she thought to embrace him, thinking it to be her Lover, she
saw that it was her Father, and with a sudden alteration she gave a great
shrike, and ran with all the speed she could back into the house.

The King her Father being somewhat angry, like a furious Lion followed her,
saying: It does little avail thee Angelica to run away, for that thou shall
dye by this reuengefull hand, paying me with thy death the great dishonor that
my royal crown has now by thy flight received.

So he followed her till he came to the chamber where her waiting Maid Fidela
was, who likewise presentlye knew the King: upon whose wrathful countenance
appeared the image of pale death, and fearing the harm that should happen unto
her Lady, she put her self over her body, and gave most terrible, loud, and
lamentable shrikes.

The King as one kindled in wrath, and forgetting the natural love of a Father
toward his Child, he laid hand upon his sword, and said: It does not
profit thee Angelica to fly from thy death: for thy desert is such, that thou
can not escape from it: for here mine own arm shall be the killer of mine
own flesh: and I unnaturally hate that, which Nature it self commands me
especily to love.

Then Angelica with a countenance more red than scarlet, answered and said: Ah
my Lord and Father, will you be now as cruel unto me, as you had wont to be
kind and pitiful? appease your wrath, and withdraw your unmerciful sword,
and hearken unto this which I say in discharging my self in that you charge
me wthall, you shall understand my Lord and father, that I was overcome and
constrained by love for to love, forgetting all fatherly love and my duty
toward your Majesty: yet for all that, having power to accomplish the same,
it was not to your dishonor in that I live honorably with my husband: then
the King (with a visage fraught with terrible ire) more liker a dragon in the
woods of Hercania then a man of meek nature, answered and said:

Thou viperous brat, degenerate from natures kind, thou wicked Traitor to thy
generation, what reason have thou to make this false excuse, when as thou have
committed a crime that deserves more punishment then human nature can
inflicte? and in saying these words, he lift up his sword, intending to strike
her unto the heart and to bathe his weapon in his own daughters blood, whereat
Fidela being present, gave a terrible shrike and threw her self upon the body
of unhappy Ange^lica, offering her tender breast to the fury of his sharp
cutting sword only to set at liberty her dear Lady and Mistress.

But when the furious King saw her in this sort make her defense, he pulled
her off ^y the hair of the head, offering to trample her delicate body under his
feet, thereby to make a way that he might execute his denermined purpose
without resistance of any.

Fidela when she saw the King determined to kill his daughter, like unto a
Lioness she hung about his neck, and said: thou monstrous murderer, more
crueller then mad dogs in Egypt, why do thou determine to slaughter the most
chaste and loyallest Lady in the world? even she within whose lap untamed
Lions will come and sleep?

Thou art thy se^fe (I say) the occasion of all this evil, and thine only is
the fault, for that thy self were so malicious and so full of mischief, that
she durst not let thee understand of her sudden love.

These words and tears of Fidela did little profit to mollify the Kings
heart, but rather like a wild Boar in the Wilderness being compassed about
with a company of Dogs, does shake his members: even so did this King shake
himself, and threw Fidela from him in such sort, that he had almost dashed her
brains against the chamber walls, and with double wrath he did procure to
execute his fury. Yet for all this* Fidela with terrible shrikes sought to
hinder him, till such time as with his cruel hand he thrust the point of his
sword in at her breast, so that it appeared forth at her back, whereby her
soul was forced to leave her terrestrial habitation, and fly into Paradise
to those blessed souls, which dyed for true loves sake.

Thus this unhappy Angelica, when she was most at quiet, and content with her
prosperous life, then Fortune turned her unconstant Wheel, and cast her from a
glorious delight to a sudden death.

The yrefull King, when he beheld his daughters blood sprinkled about the
chamber, and that by his own hands it was committed, he repented himself of
the deed, and accursed the hour wherein ye first motion of such a crime
entered into his mind, wishing the hand that did it ever after might be lame,
and the heart that did contriue it to be plagued with more extremities, than
was miserable Oedipus: or to be terrified with her ghastly spirit, as was the
Macedonian Alexander with Clitus shadow, whom he causeles murdered.

In this manner the unfortunate King repented his Daughters bloody Tragedy,
with this determination, not to stay till the Magitian returned from his
Hunters exercise, but to exclude himself from the company of all men, and to
spend the remnant of his loathsome life among untamed beasts in some wild
wilderness. Upon this resolution he departed the chamber, and withal said:
Farewell thou liuelesse body of my Angelica, and may thy blood which I have
spilt, crave vengeance of the Gods against my guilty soul, for my earthly
body shall endure a miserable punishment. Likewise at his departure he writ
upon ye chamber walls these verses following in his daughters blood.

For now to hills, to dales, to rocks, to caves I go,
To spend my days in shameful sorrow, grief and woe.
Fidela (after the departure of the King) used such violent fury against her
self, both by rending the golden tramelles of her hair, and tearing her Rosy
colored face with her furious nails, that she rather seemed an infernal
Fury subject to wrath, than an earthly creature furnished with clemency.

She sat over Angelicaes body, wiping her bleeding bosom with a damask
scarffe, which she pulled from her waste, and bathing her dead body in
lukewarm tears, which forcibly ran down from her eyes like an ouerflowing
Fountain.

In this woeful manner spent ye sorrowful Fidela that unhappy day, till
bright Phoebus went into the western seas: at which time the Magitian
returned from his accustomed hunting, and finding the door open, he entered
into Angelicaes chamber, where when he found her body weltring in congealed
blood, and beheld how Fidela sat weeping over her bleeding wounds, he cursed
himself, for that he accounted his negligence ye occasion of her death, in
that he had not left her in more safety. But when Fidela had certefied him,
how that by the hands of her own Father she was slaughtered, he began like a
frantic tyrant to rage against heaven and earth, and to fill the air with
terrible exclamations.

Oh cruel murderer (said he) crept from the womb of some untamed Tiger: I
will be so revenged upon thee, O unnatural king, that all ages shall wonder at
thy misery.

And likewise thou unhappy Uirgin, shall endure like punishment, in that thy
accursed tung has bruted this fatal deed unto my ears: the one for
committing the crime and the other for reporting it. For I will cast such
deserved vengeance upon your heads, and place your bodies in such continual
torments, that you shall lament my Ladies death, leaving alive the fame of her
with your lamentations.

And in saying these words, he drew a Book out of his bosom, and in reading
certain charms and inchauntments that was therein contained, he made a great
and very black cloud appear in the skies, which was brought by terrible and
hasty winds, in the which he took them up both, and brought them into this
inchaunted Castle, where ever since they have remained in this Tomb, cruelly
tormented with unquenchable fire: and must eternally continue in the same
extremity, except some courteous Knight will vouchsafe to give but three blows
upon the Tomb, and break the inchauntment.

Thus have you heard you magnanimious Knights, the true discourse of my
unhappy fortunes. For the virgin which for the true love she bore unto her
Lady was committed to this torment is my self: and this pale body lying upon
the Tomb, is the unhappy Babylonian King which unnaturally murdered his own
Daughter: and the Magitian which committed al these villainies, is that accursed
wretch, which by his charms and devilish Enchauntments has so strangely
withstood your valiant incounters.

These words were no sooner finished, but Sa. George drew out his sharp
cutting sword, and gave three blows upon the inchaunted Tomb, whereat
presentlye appeared the Babylonian King standing before him, attyred in rich
robes, with an Imperial Diadem upon his head: and the Lady standing by him,
with a countenance more beutifull than the damask Rose.

When Saint George beheld them, he was not able to speak for joy, nor to utter
his mind, so exceeding was the pleasure that he took in their sights. So
without any long circumstance, he took them betwixt both his hands, and led
them into the chamber, whereas he found the other Knights newly risen from
their beds. To whom he revealed the true discourse of the passed Adventure,
and by what means he redeemed the King and the Lady from their inchauntments:
which to them was as great joy, as before it was to Saint George.

So, after they had for some six days refreshed themselves in the castle,
they generaly intended to accompany the Babilonian King into his Country, and
to place him again in his Regiment.

In which travel we will leave the Christian knights to the conduction of
Fortune, and return again unto Rosana, whom (as you heard before) departed
from the Castle in the pursuit of her disloyal father: of whose strange
accidents shall be spoken in this following Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
How the Knight of the Black Castle after the conquest of the same by the
christian cha^pions, wandered up and down the world in great terror of
conscience, and after how he was found in a wood by his own daughter, in whose
presence he desperately slew himself, with other accidents that after happened.

YOu do well remember when that that the Christian champions had slain the
seven Giants in the enchanted castle, and had made conquest thereof, disloyal
Leoger being lord of the same, secretly fled: not for any anger of the loss,
but for the preservation of his life. So in great grief and terror of
conscience he wandered like a fugitive up and down ye world: sometimes
remembering of his passed prosperity, other times thinking upon the rapes he
had committed, how disloyally in former times he had left the Queen of Armenia
big with Child, bearing in her womb the stain of her honor, and the
confusion of his reputation. Sometime his guilty mind imagined, that the
bleeding ghosts of the two Sisters (whom he both ravished and murdered)
followed him up and down, haunting his ghost with fearful exclamations, and
filling each corner of the earth with clamours of reuengement.

Such fear and terror raged in his soul, that he thought all places where he
traveled, were filled with multitudes of of Knights, and that the strength of
Countries pursued him, to heap vengeance upon his guiltye head for those
wronged Ladies.

Whereby he curssed the hour of his birth, and blamed the cause of his
creation, wishing the Heavens to consume his body with a flashe of fire, or
that the earth would gape and swallowe him: In this manner traveled he up and
down, filling all places with Echoes of his sorrows and grief, which
brought him into such a perplexity, that many times he would have slain
himself, and have rid his wretched soul from a world of mizeries.

But it happened that one morning very early, by the first light of Titans
golden toarch, he entered into a narow and straight path, which conducted him
into a very thick and solitary Forest, wherein with much sorrow he
traveled till such time as glistring Phoebus had passed the half part of
his journey.

And being wearye with the long way, and the great waighte of his Armor,
he was forced to take some rest and ease under certain fresh and green
Myrtle trees, whose leaves did bathe themselves in a fair and clear
Fountain, whose stream made a bubling murmr on the pebble.

Being set, he began a new to have in remembrance his former committed
cruelty, and complaining of Fortune he published his great grief, and although
he was weary of complaining, and seeing hinselfe without all remidy, he
resolved like unto the Swan to sing awhile before his death: and so thinking to
give some ease unto his tormented heart, he warbled forth these verses
following.

Mournful Melpomine approach with speed,
and show thy sacred face with tears bespre^t:
Let all thy sisters hearts with sorrovv bleed
To hear my plaints and rufull discontent.
And with your moanes svveet Muses all assist
My vvailfull song, that does on vvoe consist.
And then I may at large paint out my pain,
Within these desert groves and wilderness:
And after I have ended to complain,
They may record my vvoes and deep distres:
Except these myrtle trees relentles be,
They will with sobs assist the sighs of me.
Time wears out life, it is reported so,
And so it may I will it not deny:
Yet have I tried long time, and this do know,
Time gives no end to this my misery.
But rather fortune, time and heavens agree,
To plague my heart with vvoe eternally.
ye siluan nimphs that in these wods do shroud
To you my mournful sorrovves I declare:
You savage satyrs let your ears be bound
to heaare my woe, your sacred selves prepare:
Trees, herbs and flowrs, in rural fields that groe,
While thus I morn, do you some silence sho.
Sweet Philomel cease thou thy songs a while
And will thy mate their melodies to leave:
And all at once attend my mournful style,
which vvil of mirth yor sugared notes bereave
If you desire the burden of my Song:
I sigh and sob, for Ladies I did vvrong.
You furious Beasts that feed on montains hye,
And restless run with rage your pray to find:
Dravve nere to him whose brutish crueltye
Has cropped the bud of Virgins chaste and kind.
This only thing yet rests to comfort me:
Repentance comes a while before I dye.
Since heavens agree for to increase my care,
What hope have I for to enjoy delight?
Since fates and fortune do themselves prepare,
To work against my soul their full despite.
I know no means to yield my heart relief:
But only death, which can desolue my grief.
I muse and may my sorrovves being such,
That my poor heart can longer life sustain:
Since daily I do find my grief so much,
As every day I feel a dying pain.
But yet alas I live afflicted still:
And have no help to heal me of my ill.
When as I think upon my pleasures past,
Now turned to pain, it makes me rue my state
And since my joy with vvoe is ouercast,
O death give end to my unhappy fate.
For only death will lasting life provide:
Where living thus, I sundry deaths abide.
Wherefore all you that hear my mornful song
And tasted have the grief that I sustain:
All lustful rauishers that have done vvrong,
With teare-fild eyes assist me to complain.
All that have being, do my being hate:
Crying haste, haste, this vvretches dying state
This sorrowful song being done, he laid himself all along upon the green
grass closing up the closets of his eyes, in hope to repose him self in a
quiet sleep, and to abandon al discontented thoughts: in which silent
contemplation we will leave him for a while, and return to Rosana the Queens
daughter of Armenia that bold Amazonian Lady, whom you remember likewise
departed from the black Castle (clad with inch^unted armor) in the pursuit of
her disloyal Father, whom she never in her life beheld: this courteous Lady
(to perform her mothers will) traveled up and down strange countries, many a
wearye step, yet never could she meet with her unkind father, unto whom she
was commanded to give her mothers letter, neither could she bear in any place
wheresoever she came, where she might go to seek him: In which travel she
met with many strange adventures, the which with great honor to her name she
finished, yet for all this she wandered over hills and dales: mountains and
valleys, and through many solitary woods. But at last she happened by fortune
into the wilderness, whereas this discentented knight lay sleeping upon the
green grass, near to which place she likewise reposed her self under the
branches of a Chestnut tree, desiring to take some rest after her long travel.

But upon a sudden being betwixt waking and sleeping, she heard toward her
left hand, a very dolorous groan, as it were of some sorrowful knight, which
was so terrible, heavy, and bitter, that it made her to give an attentive ear
unto the sound, and to see if she could hear and understand what it
should be.

So with making the least noise that she could possibly, she arose up and went
toward the place whereas she might see what it was, and there she beheld a
Knight very well armed, lying upon the green grass, under certain fair and
green mirtie trees, is armor was all russet, and full of bars of black
steel, which showed to be a very sad, sorrowful and heavy inamelling,
agreeable to the inward sadness of his heart.

He was somewhat of a big stature of body, and well proportioned, and there
seemed by his disposition, to be in his heart great grief, where after she
had a while stood in secret beholding his sorrowful counteaunce, in a woeful
manner he tumbled his restless body upon the green grass, and with a sad
and heavy look he breathed forth this ruefull lamentation.

Oh heavy and peruersse Fortune (said he) why do thou consent that so vilde
and evil a wretch do breathe so long upon the earth, upon whose wicked head
the golden Sun disdaines to shine, and the glistering Elements denies their
cheerful lights?

Oh that some ravenous Harpey would welter from his den, and make his
loathsome bowelles my fatal Tomb, or that my eyes were sightes like the
mizerable King of Thebes, that I never might again behold this earth, whereon
I have long lived and committed many cruelties.

I am confounded with the curse of heaven for wronging that Maiden Queen of
Armenia, in the spoil of whose Uirginitie I made a triumphant conquest.

Oh Leoger Leoger, what furye did induce thee to commit so great a sin, in
leaving her staind with thy lust, and dishonored by thy disloyalty?

Oh cruel and without faith, thou were nurssed with the unkindly milk of
Tigers, and borne into the world for thine own torment: where was thy
understanding when thou forsookst that gracious Princess? whom not only
yielded to thee her liberty, love and honor, but therewith a Kingdom and a
golden Diadem, and therefore woe unto me Traitor, and more woes upon my
soul then there be hayres upon my head, and may the sorrows of old Priam be
my eternal punishment.

What does it profit me to all the air with lamentations, when that the crime
is already past, without all remedy or hope of comfort? this being said, he
gave a grievous and terrible sigh and so held his p^ace.

Rosana by those heavy and sorrowful lamentations, together with his reasons
which she heard, knew him to be her disloyal Father after whom she had so
long traveled to find out: but when she remembered how that his unkindness
was the death of her mother, her heart endured such extreme pain and sorrow,
that she was constrained (without any feeling) to fall down to the ground.

But yet her courageous heart would not remain long in that passion: but
straight ways she rose up again on her feet, with a desire to perform her
mothers will, but yet not intending to discover her name, nor to reveal unto
him that she was his daughter: so with this thought and determination, she
went unto the place where Leoger was, who when he heard the noyes of her
coming, straightway started bpon his feet.

Then Rosana did salute him with a voice some what heavy, and Leoger did
return his salutatio^ with no less show of grief.

Then the Amazonian Lady took forth the letter from her naked breast, where as
so long time she had kept it, and in delivering it into his hands, she said:

Is it possible that thou art that forgetful and disloyal Knight, the which
left the unfortunate Queen of Armenia (with so groat pain and sorrow) big
with Child amongste those unmerciful Tyrants her Countrymen, which banished
her out of her Country in revenge of thy committed crime, where ever since she
has been companion with wild beasts that in their natures has lamented her
banishment?

Leoger when he heard her to say these words began to behold her, and although
his eyes were all to be blubbered and weary of weeping, yet he most earnestly
gazed in her face and answered her in this manner.

I will not deny thee gentle Amazon (said he) that which the high heavens does
complain off and the low earth does mourn for. Thou shall understand that I
am the same Knight, whom thou have demanded after, tell me therefore what is
thy will.

My will is said she, thou most ungrateful Knight, that thou read here this
Letter, the last work of the white hand of the unhappy Armenian Queen.

At which words, the Knight was so troubled in thought and grieved in mind,
that it was almost the occasion to dissolve his soul from his body: and
therewithal putting forth his hand somewhat trembling, he took the Letter, and
set him very sorrowfully down upon the green grass: without any power to
the contrary, his grief so abounded the bounds of reason.

No sooner did he open the letter, but he presently knew it to be written by
the hands of his wronged Lady ye Armenian Queen, who with great alteration
both of heart and mind, he read the sorrowful lines, the which contained these
words following.

The Queen of Armenia her Letter.
TO thee thou disloyal Knight of the Black Castle, the unfortunate Queen of
Armenia, can neither send nor wish salutations: for having no health my self,
I cannot send it unto him, whose cruel mind has quite forgotten my true love,
I cannot but lament continuallye and complain unto the Gods incessantly,
considering that my fortune is converted from a crowned Queen to a miserable
and banished caytiue, where the savage beasts are my chief companions, and the
mournful bi^ds my best solliciters. Oh Leoger, Leoger, why did thou leave me
comfortless without all cause, as did Aeneas his unfortunate Dido? what second
love has bereaved me of thy sight, and made thee forget her, that ever shall
remember thee. Oh Leoger, remember the day when first I saw thy face, which day
be fatal evermore, and counted for a dismal day in time to come, both heavy,
black, and full of foul mischances, for it was unhappy unto me: for in
giving thee joy, I bereaved my self of all, and lost the possession of my
liberty and honor: although thou have not esteemed nor took care of my
sorrowful fortunes, yet thou should not have mocked my perfect love, and
disdained the fervent affection that I have borne thee, in that I have yielded
to thee that precious jewel, ye which has been denied to many a noble King.
Oh Love, cruel and spiteful Love, that so quickly did make me blind, and
depriuedst me of the knowledge that belonged unto my royal Highness.

Oh discourteous Knight, being blinded with thy love the Queen of Armenia
denied her honesty which she ought to have kept, and preserved it from the
biting canker of disloyal l^ue? Had thou pretended to mock me, thou
should not have suffered me to have lost so much as is forgone for thy sake.

Tell me, why did not thou suffer me to execute my will, that I might have
opened my white breast with a pearcing sword, and sent my soul to the shady
bank of sweet Elysium? Then had it been better for me to have died, than to
live still, and daily die.

Remember thy self Leoger, and behold the harm that will come hereof: have
thou a care unto the pawn which thou leftst sealed in my womb, and let it be
an occasion that thou do (after all thy violent wrongs) return to see me
sleeping in my tomb, that my child may not remain fatherless in the power
of wild beasts, whose hearts be fraughted with nothing but with cruelty. Do
not consent that this perfect love which I bear thee, should be counted
vain, but rather perform the promise the which thou have denied me.

O unkind Leoger, O cruel and heard heart, is alshoode the firm love that so
faindedly thou did profess to me? what is he that has been more
unmerciful then thou have been? There is no furious beast nor lurking Lion in
the deserts of Libia, whose unmerciful paws are all besmearde in blood, that
is so cruel hearted as thy self, else would thou not leave me comfortles,
spending my days in solitary woods, where as the Tigers mourn at my
distresses, and chirping birds in their kinds, grieve at my lamentations: the
unreasonable torments and sorrows of my soul are so many, that if my pen
were made of Lidian steel, and my Ink the purple Ocean, yet could not I write
the number of woes.

But now I determine to advertise thee of my desired death, for in writing
this my latest testament, the fates are cutting a sunder my third of life, and
I can give thee knowledge of no more, but yet I desire thee by the true love
which I bear thee, that thou will read with some sorrow these few lines: and
here of the powers of heaven, I do desire that thou may dye the like death
that for thee I now dye. And so I end.

By her which did yield unto thee her life, Love, Honor, Fame and Liberty.


WHen this sad and heavy knight had made an end of reading this dolorous
letter, he could not restrain his eyes from distilling salt tears, so great
was the grief that his heart sustaned: Rosana did likewise bear him company to
solemnize his heaviness, with as many tears trickling from the Conduite of her
eyes.

The great sorrow and lamentation was such and so much in both their hearts,
that in a great space the one could not speak unto the other: but
afterward, their griefs being somewhat appeased, Leoger began to say.

Oh Messenger, from her with the remembrance of whose wrong my soul is
wounded, being undeservedly of me evil rewarded: tell me (even by the nature
of true love) if thou do know where she is? show unto me her abiding place,
that I may go thither and give a discharge of this my great fault, by yiedling
unto death.

Oh cruel and without love (answered Rosana) what discharge can thou give
unto her, that already (through thy cruelty) is dead and buried? only by the
occasion of such a forsworn knight.

This penitent and payned knight, when he understood the certainty of her
death, with a sudden and hasty fury he struck him self on the (...) with
his fist, and lifting his eyes unto the heavens, in manner of exclamation
against the Gods, giving deep and sorrowful sighs, he threw him self to
the ground, tumbling and wallowing from the one part unto the other, without
taking any ease, or having any power or strength to declare his inward grief
which at that time he felt, but with lamentations which did torment his heart,
he called continually on the Armenian Queen, and in that deuilish furye wherein
he was, dre^ out his dagger and lifting up the skirt of his shirt of (...), he
thrust it into his body, and giving himself this unhappy death (with calling
upon his wro^ged Lady, he finished his life, and fell to the ground.

This sad and heavy Lady when she beheld him so desperately to gorge his
martial breast, and to fall liuelesse to the earth, she greatly repented her
self that she had not discovered her name, and revealed to him how that she
was his unfortunate Daugh^er, whose face before that time he never had beheld
and as a Lion, (though all too late) who seeing before her eyes her young
Lion^sse evil entreated of the Hu^ter, even so she ran unto her wel^eloued
Father, and with great speed pulled off his helm from his wounded head, and
unbraced his armor, the which was in color according to his passion, but as
strong as any Diamond, made by Magic art. Also she took away his sheeld,
which was of a russet field, and in ye midst thereof was portrayed the God of
Love with two faces, the one was very fair, and bound about with a cloth his
eyes, and the other was made marvelous fierce and furious.

This being done, with a fair linen cloth she wyped off the blood from his
mortal face. And when she was certain that it was him after whom she had
traueled so many weary steps, and that he was without life, with a furious
madness she tore her attire from her head, and all so rent her golden hair,
tearing it in pieces, and then returned again and wyped that infernal face
making such sorrowful lamentation, that whosoever had seen her, would have
been moved to compassion. Then she took his head betwixt her hands,
procuring to lift it up, and to lay it upon her lap, and seeing for all this
that there was no moving in him, she joined her face unto his pale and dead
chee^es, and with sorrowful words, she said.

Dear Father, open thine eyes, and behold me, open them sweet Father, and
look upon me thy sorrowful Daughter: if fortune be so favorable, let me
receive some contentment whilst life remains. (...) thy self to look upon
me, wherein such delight may come to me, that we may either accompany other. Oh
my Lord and only Father, s^^ing that in former times my vnfortunat^ Mothers
tears were not sufficien^ to reclaim thee, make me satisfaction for the great
travel which has been taken in seeking thee out. Come now in death, and joy
in the sight of thy unhappy Daughter, and dye not without seeing her: open
thine eyes, that she may gratefie thee in dying with thee.

This being said, Rosana began again to wipe his face, for that i^ was ag^^n
all to be bathed in blood, and with her white hands she felt his eyes and
mouth, and all his face and head till such time as she touched his breast, and
put her hand on the mortal wound where she held it still and looked upon him
whether he moved or no. But when she felt him without sense or feeling, she
began anew to complain, and crying out with most terrible exclamations, she
said.

Oh my hapless Father, how many troubles and great trauells has thy Daughter
passed in seeking thee, watering the earth with her tears, and always in
vain calling for thee? Oh how many times in naming thy name has she been
answered with an Echo, which was unto her great dolor and grief? and now
that Fortune has brought her where thou art, to rejoice her self in thy
presence, the same Fortune has converted her wishes into grief and do^or. Oh
cruel and unconstant Queen of Chance, has Rosana deserved this, to be most
afflicted when she expected most joy. Oh Leoger, if ever thou will open thine
eyes now open them, or let the glasses of my eyes be cloased eternally.

Herewith she perceived his dim eyes to open, and his senses now a little
gathered together: and when he saw himself in her arms, and understood by
her words, that she was his Daughter whom he had by the unfortunate Queen of
Armenia, he suddenly strove against weakness, and at last recovering some
strength, he cast his yielding arms about the milk white neck of the fair
Rosana, and they joined their faces the one with the other, distilling betwixt
them many salt and bitter tears, in such sort that it would have moved the
wild beasts unto compassion: and with a feeble and weak voice, the wounded
knight said:

Ah my daughter, unfortunate by my disloyalty, let me recreate and comfort my
self, in enjoying this thy mouth the time that I shall remain alive, and
before my silly soul does depart the company of my dying body: I do
confess that I have been pitiless unto thy mother and unkind to thee, in
making thee to travel with great sorrow in seeking me, and now thou have found
me I must leave thee alone in this sorrowful place with my dead body pale and
wanne: yet before my death sweet girl give me a thousand kisses: this only
delighte I crave, for the little time I have to tarry, and afterward I desire
thee to intombe my body in thy mothers grave though it be far in distance from
this unlucky Country.

O my dear Lord answered she, do thou request of me to give thy body a
Sepulcher? well I see that it is requisite, to seek some to give it unto us
both, for I know my life can not continue long, if the angry fates deprive me
of your living company: and without strength to proceed any further in
speeches, she kissed his face with great sobbing and sighs, making within her
self a terrible conflicte, tarying for the answer of her dying Father, who
with no less pain and anguish of death, said:

Oh my Child, how happy should I be, that thus embracing one in the others
arms, we might depart together? then should I be joyful in thy company, and
account my self happy in my death: and here upon I leave thee unto the
world: daughter farewell, the Gods preserve thee and take me to their mercies.
And when he had said these words, he enclyned his neck upon the face of
Rosana and dyed.

When this sorrowful Lady saw that the soul had got the victory and
departed from the body, she kissed his pale lips and giving ^eepe and
dolo^ous sighs, she began a merualous and heavy lamentation, calling her
self unhappy and unfortunate, and laid her self upon the dead body, cursing
her destinies, so that it was lamentable to hear.

O my dear father said she, what small benefit have I received for all my
travel and pain, the which I have suffered in seeking of thee, and now in
the finding of thee the more is my grief, for that I came to see thee dye? Oh
most unhappy that I am, where was my mind when I saw that fatal dagger
pearce thy tender breast? whereon was my thought? wherefore did I stand still,
and did not with great lightness make resistance against that terrible blow?

If my strength would not have served me, yet at the least I should have borne
thee company: you furious beasts that are hid in your dens and deep caves,
where are you now? why do you not come and take pity upon my grief in
taking away my life? in doing so you show your selves pitiful, for that I
do abhor this dolorous life, yet she did not forget the promise that she
made him, which was to give his body burial in her mothers tomb. This was the
occasion that she did somewhat cease her lamentation, and taking unto her self
more courage then her sorrowful grief would consent unto, she put the dead
body under a mighty pine Apple tree, and covered it with leaves of green
grass, and like wise hung his armor, upon the bows, in hope that the sight
thereof would cause some aduenturous knight to approach her presence, that in
kindenes would asist her to intombe him: here we will leave Rosana weeping
over her fathers body, and speak of the Nigromancer after his flight from the
black Castle.

CHAP. XII.
How the Magitian found Leogers armor hanging upon a pine tree, kept by Rosana
the Queens Daughter of Armenia, betwixt whom happened, a terrible battle: also
of the desperate death of the Lady: And (...) how the Magitian framed by magic
art an ^^chaunted Sepulcher, wherein he enclosed himself from the sight of all
humane creatures.

I Am sure you do well remember when the Christian Knights had conquered the
black Castle which was kept by inchauntment, how the furious Nigromancer to
preserve his life fled from the same, carried by his art through the air in an
iron Chariot, drawn by two flying Dragons: in which charmed Chariot he crossed
over many parts and plains of the earsterne climets.

At last being weary of his journey, he put himself in the thickest of the
forest, wherein traueling with his whirling Dragons, he n^uer rested till he
came unto a mighty and great river, the which seemed to ^ee an arm of the
purple Ocean, there he alighted from his chariot for to refresh himself, and
took water with his hands and drunk thereof, and washed his face: and as he
found him self all alone, there came into his ^inde (...) thoughts, amongst
all his passed life* and how he was vanquished by the Christian Knights* for
which with great anger he gave terrible sighs and began to curse, not only
the hour of his birth, but the whole world, and the generation of mankind.

Likewis^ he remembered the great sorrow and travel that ever since he
endured, and what toil traveling knights must endure: In these vari^ble
cogitations spent he the time away till golden (...) began to withdraw himself
into his ac^ustomed lodging and h^ding his ^^ght in the ^ccidentall (...) and
(...) drew on the dark and tenebrous night, which was the occasion that his
pain did the mo^e incre^se: a^ that night he passed away with such sorrowful
lamentations for his late disgraces, that all the woods and mountains did
resounde his woeful exclamations, till that Apollo with his glistering beams
began to cover the earth.

The which being seen by the Magitian, with a trice he arose up, and intended
to prosecute his journey, but lifting up his eyes toward the heavens he did
discover hanging upon a high and mighty pine apple tree the armor of Leoger.

Which was hung there in remembrance of his death by Rosana as you heard in the
last Chapter, the armor had alm^st lost his bright color and began to rus^e
through the great abundance of rain that fell thereon.

Yet for all that it seemed of great (...) and of a wonderful richness, so
without any further circumspection or regard, he took down the most bright
armor, and armed himself therewith, and when he lacked no more to put on but
the helmet, he heard a voice that said, be not so hardy thou knight as to
undo this Trophie, except thou prepare thy self to win it by thy sword.

The Magitian at this unexpected noise, cast his head on the one side, and
espied Rosana newly awaked from a heavy sleep, most richly armed with a strong
inchaunted armor after the manner of the Amazonians, but for all that he did not
let to make an end of arming himself, and having laced on his Burgonet, he
went toward the demaunder with his sword ready drawn in his hand, inuiting
her with mortal battle.

Rosana who saw his determination, did procure to defend her self, and offend
her enemy.

Oh my muse that I had such learned eloquence, for to set out and declare the
noble incounters of these two gallant warriors: Rosana although she was but a
Feminin nature, yet was she as bold^ in heroycall adventures as any Knight in
the world, except the Christian Champions.

But now to return we to our history, the valliant Amazonian when her enemy
came unto her, she stroke him so terrible a blow upon the visor of his helmet,
that with the fury thereof she made sparkles of fire to issue out with great
abundance, and bow down his head unto his breast.

The Magitian did return unto her his salutation, and stroke her such a blow
upon her helmet, that with the great noise thereof, it made a sound in all the
mountains. Now began between them a marvelous and fearful battle, fortune
not willing to vs^ her most extremity declined the foil to neither party, nor
giving the conquest as yet to any: all the time of the conflicte, the furious
Magitian and the valiant Amazonian thought on no other thing, but either of
them procured to bring his adversary to his overthrow, striking at each other
such terrible blows, and with so great fury, that many times it made either
of them to loose feeling: and both seeing the great force of one another, were
meruailously incensed with anger.

Then the valiant Lady threw her sheeld at her back, that with more force she
might strike and hurt her enemy: and therewithal gave him so strong a blow
upon the burgonet, that he fell astonished to the earth without any feeling.

But when the Magitian came again to himself, he returned Rosana such a
terrible blow, that if it had chanced to alight upon her, it would have cloven
her head in pieces, but with great discretion she cleared her self thereof in
such sort, that it was stricken in vain, and with great lightness she retired,
and stroke the Magitian so furiously, that she made him once again to fall to
the ground, al astonished, and there appeared at the visor of his helm the
abundance of blood that issued out of his mouth: but presently he revived, and
got up in a trice, with so great anger, that the smoke which came from his
mouth, seemed like a mist before his helm, so that almost it could not be
seen.

Then this furious devil (blaspheming against his Gods) having his mortal
sword very fast in his hand, he ran toward his enemy, who (without any
fear of his fury) went forth to receive him: and when they met together,
they discharged their blows at once, but it fortuned, that the Amazonians blow
did first fasten with so great strength, that for all the helmet of the
Magitian, which was wrought of the strongest steel, it was not sufficient to
make defense, but with the rigorous force wherewith it was charged, it ben^ed
(...) such sort that it brake all to pieces: and the Magitians head was so
greeuouslye wounded, that streams of blood ran down his armor, and he was
forced for want of strength to yield to the mercy of the valiant Lady, who
quickly condesended to his requests, upon this condition, that he would be
a mean to conuaye her fathers dead body to an Island nere adjoining to the
borders of Armenia, and there to intomb it in her mothers grave, as she
promised when that his air of life fleeted from his body.

The Magtion for safe guard of his life, presently agreed to perform her
desires, and protested to accomplish what soever she demanded.

Then presently by his Art he prepared his iron Chariot with his flying
dragons in a readiness, wherein they laid the murdered body of Leoger upon a
pillowe of mystle-toe, and likewise placed themselves therein, where in they
were no sooner entered, with necessaries belonging to their trauelles, but they
flewe through the air more swifter then a whirlwind, or a ship sailing on
the seas in a stormye tempest.

The wonders that he performed by the way, be so many and miraculous, that I
want an Orators eloquence to discribe them, and a Poets skill to express them.

But to be short, when Rosana was desirous to eat, and that her hunger
increased: by his charms he would procure birds (of their own accordes) to
fall out of the skies, and yield themselves unto their pleasures, with all
things necessary to suffice their wantes.

Thus was Rosana with her fathers dead body, carried through the air b^ Magic
art, over hills and dales, mountains and valleys, wooddes and forrestes,
towns and Cities, and through many both wonderful and strange places and
countries.

And at the last, they arrived near unto the confines of Armenia, being the
place of their long desired rest: But when they approached near unto the
Queen of Armenias grove, they descended from their inchaunted Chariot, and
bore Leogers body to his burying place, the which they found (since Rosanaes
departure) ouergrowne with moss and wythered brambles: yet for all that they
opened the Sepulcher, and laid his body (yet freshly bleeding) upon his Ladies
consuming carcass: which being done, the Magitian covered again the grave
with earth, and laid thereon green turues, which made it seem as though it
never had been opened.

All the time that the Magitian was perfourming the ceremonious Funeral,
Rosana watered the earth with her tears, never withdrawing her eyes from
looking upon the Grave: and when it was finished, she fell into this most
sorrowful and distresfull lamentation following.

Oh cruel Destinies (said she) since your rigours have bereaved me of both my
Parents, and left me to the world a comfortless Orphane, receive the sacrifice
of my chastity, in payment of your vengeance: and let my blood here shed upon
this Grave, show the singleness of my heart. And with the like solemnity may
all their hearts be broken in pieces, that seek the downfall and dishonor of
Ladies.

As she was uttering these and such like sorrows, she took forth a naked
sword, which she had ready for the same effect, and put the pummell to the
ground, and cast her breast upon the point. The which she did with such
furious violence and such exceeding have, that the Magitian although he was
there present could not succor her, nor prevent her from committing on her
self so bloody a fact.

This sudden mischaunce so amazed him, and so grieved his soul, that his
heart (for a time) would not consent that his tung should speak one word to
express his passion.

But at last, (having taken a truce with sorrow, and recovering his former
speech) he took up the dead body of Rosana, bathed all in blood, and likewise
buried her in her Parents Grave: and over the same he hung up an Epitaph that
did declare the occasion of all their deaths.

This being done to express the sorrows of his heart for the desperate death
of such a Magnaminious Lady, and the rather to exempt himself from the company
of all human creatures: he erected over the grave (by magic art) a very
stately Tomb, the which was in this order framed. First there was fixed four
pillors, every one of a very fine Rubie: upon the which was placed a Sepulcher
of Cristall: within the sepulcher there seemed to be two fair Ladies, the one
having her breast peirced through with a sword and the other with a Crown of
gold upon her head and so lean of body that she seemed to pine away: and upon
the sepulcher there lay a knight all along with his face looking up to the
heavens, and armed with a coarselet of fine steel, of a russet enamelling:
under the sepulcher there was spread abroad a great carpet of gold, and upon it
two pillors of the same, and upon them lay an old sheapheard with his sheep
hook lying at his feet: his eyes were shut, and out of them distilled many
pearled tears: at every pillor there was a gentlewoma^ without any
remembrance, the one of them seemed to be murdered, and the other ravished.

And near unto the sepulcher there lay a terrible great beast, headed like a
Lion: his breast and body like a wolf, and his tail like a scorpion, which
seemed to spitte continually flames of fire: the sepulcher was compassed about
with a wall of iron, with four gates for to enter in thereat: the gates were
after the manner and color of fine Diamonds and directly over the top of the
chiefest gate, stood a marble pillor whereon hung a table written with red
letters: the contents whereof were as follows.

So long shall breath upon this brittle earth,
The framer of this stately Monument,
Till that three children of a wondrous birth,
Out of the Northern climate shall be sent.
They shall obscure his name as fates agree:
And by his fall, the fiendes shall tamed be.
This Monument being no sooner framed by the assistance of Plutos legions, and
maintained by their deuillish powers, but the Nigromancer enclosed himself in
the walls, where he consorted chiefly with furyes and walking spirits, that
continually fed upon his blood, and left their damnable seals sticking unto
his left side, as a sure token and witness that he had given both his soul and
body to their gouerments after the date of his mortal life was finished.

In which inchaunted sepulcher we will leave him for a time conferring with his
damnable mates, and return to the christian knights, where we left them
traveling toward Babylon, to place the King again in his Kingdom.

CHAP. XIII.
How the seven Champions of Christendom restored the Babylonian King unto the
Kingdom: and after how honorably they were received at Rome, where Saint
George fell in love with the Emperors Daughter, being a professed Nun. Of
the mischief that insued thereby, and of the desperate end of young Lucius
Prince of Rome.

THe valiant Christian Champions having as you heard in the Chapter going
before, performed the Adventure of the inchaunted monument, accompanied the
Babylonian King home to his kingdom of Assiria, as they had all very solemnly
and faithfully promised to him.

But when they approached the Confines of Babylon, and made no question of
peaceful and princely entertainment, there was neither sign of peace, nor
likelihood of joyful or friendly welcome: for all the Country raged with
intestine war, four several Competitors unjustly striving for what to the
King properly and of right belonged.

The unnatural causers and stirrers up to this blood-deuouring controversy,
were the four Noblemen, unto whom the King unadvisedly committed the
government of his Realm, when he went in the tragical pursuit of his fair
daughter, after his dreaming illusion that caused him so cruelly to seek her
death. And the breaking out into this hurly burly, grew first to head in this
manner following.

Two years after the Kings departure, these Deputies governed the public State
in great peace, and with prudent policy, til after no tidings of the King
could be heard notwithstanding so many messengers as were in every quarter of
the world sent to enquire of him: and then did Ambition kindle in all their
hears, each striving to wrest into his hand the sole possession of the
Babylonian Kingdom.

To this end did they all make several friends: for this had they contended in
many Fights, and now lastly they intended to set all their hopes upon this
maine chance of war, intending to fight all till three fell, and one
remained victor over the rest, whose head should be beautifyed with a crown.

But of traitors and treason the end is sudden and shameful: for no sooner
had Saint George (placing himself between the Battles) in a brief Oration
showed ye adventures of the King, and he himself to the people discovered his
reverend face, but they all shouted for joy, and haled the Usurpers presently
to death, and reinsialled in his ancient dignity, their true, lawful and long
looked for King.

The King being thus restored married Fidela for her faithfulness: and after the
nuptial Feasts, the Champions (at the earnest request of Saint Anthony)
departed toward Italy: where in Rome the Emperor spared no cost honorably
and most sumptuously to entertain those never daunted Knights, the famous
Wonders of Christendom.

At that time of the year when the Summers Queen had beautefied the Earth with
interchaungeable ornaments, Saint George (in company of the Emperor) with the
rest of the Champions chanced to walk along by the side of the River Tyber,
and to delight themselves with the pleasurable meades, and beauteous prospect
of the Country.

Before they had walked half a mile from the City, they approached an
ancient Nunnerie, which was right fair and of a stately building, and likewise
encompassed about with crystal streams and green meddowes, furnished with
all manner of beauteous trees, and fragrant flowers.

This Nunnerie was consecrated to Diana the Queen of Chastity, and none were
suffered to live therein, but such chaste Ladies and Uirgins, as had vowed
themselves to a single life, and to keep their Uirginities for ever unspotted.

In this place the Emperors only Daughter lived a professed Nun, and
exempted her self from all company, except it were the fellowship of chaste
and Religious Uirgins.

This virtuous Lucina (for so was she called) having intelligence before by
the ouerseeers of the Nunnerie, how that the Emperor her Father with many
other Knights were coming to visit their religious Habitation, against their
approach she attyred her self in a gown of white satin, all laid over with
gold lace, also having her golden locks of hair somewhat laid forth: and
upon her head was knit a garland of sweet smelling flowers, which made her
seem celestial and of a divine creation.

Her b^autie was so excellent, that it might have quailed the heart of Cupide,
and her bravery exceeded the Paphian Queens. Never could Circes with all her
cunning frame so much beauty in any creature, as was upon her face: nor never
could the flattering Sirens more beguile the travelers, then did her bright
countenance inchant the English Champion for at his first entrance into the
Nunnerie, he was so ravished with her sight, that he was not able to withdraw
his eyes from her beauty, but stoodszigag upon her Rosy culloured cheeks,
like one bewitched with Me-dusaes shadows: but to be short, her beauty
seemed so Angellicall, and the burning flames of love so fieres his heart, that
he must either enjoy her company or give end to his life by some untimely
means.

Saint George being wounded thus with the darte of love, dissembled his grief
and not revealed it to any one, but departed with the Emperor back again to
the City, leaving his heart behind him cloased in the stonye Monastery with
his lovely Lucina.

All that ensuing night he could not enjoy the benifit of sleep, but did
contemplate upon the divine beautye of his Lady, and fraughted his mind with a
thousand several cogitations how he might attain to her love, being a
chaste virgin and a professed Nun.

In this manner spent he away the night, and no sooner appeered the mornings
brightness in at his chamber window, but he arose from his restless bed, and
attyred him self in watchet velvet, to signify his true love, and wandered all
alone unto the Monastery where he revealed his deep affection unto his Lady,
who was as far from granting to his requests, as heaven is from earth, or
the deepest seas from the highest Elements: for she protested while life
remained within her body, never to yield her love in the way of marriage to
any one, but to remain a pure virgin and one of Dianaes train.

No other resolution could Sa. George get of the chaste Nun, which caused him
to depart in great discontent, intending to seek by some other means to
obtain her love, so coming to the rest of the Christian Champions, he
revealed to them the truth of all things that had happened, who in this manner
counseled him, that he should provide a multitude of armed Knights, every
one bearing in their hands a sword ready drawn, and to enter the Monastery at
such a time as she little mistrusted, and first with fair promises and
flattering speeches, to entice her to love, then if she yielded not, to fill
her ears with cruel threatenings, protesting that if she will not grant to
requite his love with like affection, he would not leave standing one stone of
that Monastery upon an other, and likewise to make her a bloody offering up
to Diana.

This policy liked well Saint George, though he intended not to prosecute such
cruelty: so the next morning by break of day he went unto the nunnery in
company of no other but the christian champions armed in bright armor with
their glistering swords ready drawn, the which they carried under their side
cloakes to pr^uent suspicion.

But when they came to the Monastery, and had entered into the chamber of
Lucina (whom they found kneeling upon the bare ground at her ceremonious
orasons) Saint George first proffered kindness by fair promises, and afterward
made known his unmerciful pretended cruelty, and therewithal shaking their
bright swords against her virtuous breast, they protested (though contrary to
their minds) that except he would yield unto Saint George her unconquered
love, they would bathe their weapone in her dearest blood.

At which words the distressed Uirgin, being ouercharged with fear, sunk
down presently to the ground, and lay for a time in a dead agony, but in the
end, recovering her self, she lifted up her angelical face, shrouded under a
cloud of pale sorrow, and in this manner declared her mind.

Most renowned, and well approved Knights said she, it is as difficult to me,
to climb up to the highest top of heaven, as to persuade my mind to yield
to the fulfilling of your requests.

The pure and chaste Goddess Diana that sittes now crownde amongst the golden
stars in heaven, will revenge my perjured promise if I yield to your desires,
for I have long since deeply vowed to spend my days in this religious house,
in the honor of her diety, and not to yield the flower of my virginity to any
one, which vow I will not infringe for all the Majesty of Room: you know brave
champions, that in time the watery drops will mollify the hardest Diamond,
and time may weed out this deep root and impression from my heart.

Therefore I request of you by the honor of true knighthood, and by the loves
you bear unto your native countries, to grant me the liberty of seven
days, that I may at full consider with my heart, before I give an answer to
your demands, and to the intent that I may make some public sacrifice as well
to appease the wrath which the chaste Goddess Diana may conceive against me, as
to satisfy mine own soul, for not fulfilling my vow.

These words being no sooner ended, but the champions incontinently without
any more delay joyfully consented, and moreover proffered themselves to be all
present at the same sacrifice, and so departed from the Monastery with
exceeding great comfort.

The champions being gone, Lucina called together all the rest of the Nuns, and
declared to them the whole discourse of her assailment, where after amongst
this religious company, with the help of some other of their approved friends,
they devised a most strange sacrifice, which has since been the occasion that
so many inhumaine and bloody sacrifices has bin committed.

The next morning after six days were finished, no sooner did bright Phoebus
show his golden beams abroad, but the Nuns began to prepare all things in
readiness for the sacrifice: for directly before the door of the Monestary,
they hired cunning workmen to erect a scaffold, all very richly covered with
cloth of gold, and upon the scaffold (about the middle thereof) was placed a
fair table covered also with a Carpet of cloth of gold, and upon it a
chafingdish of coals burning: all this being set in good order, the Emperor
with the Christian Champions, and many other Roman knights being present to
behold the cerimonious sacrifice, who little mistrusting the doleful tragedy
that after happened.

The assembly being silent, there was straightwayes heard a sweet and
hermonious sound of Clarions and Trumpets and sundry other kind of
Instruments: these entered first upon the scaffolde, and next unto them were
brought seven Rams, all adorned with fine white woole, more soft in feeling
then Arabian silk, with huge and mighty cragged horns bound about with
garlands of flowers: after them followed a certain number of Nuns attyred in
black vestures, singing their accustomed songs in the honor of Diana: after
them followed an ancient Matrone drawn in a Chariot by four comely virgins,
bringing in her hands the Image of Diana: and on either side of her two
ancient Nuns of great estimation, each of them bearing in their hands rich
vessels of gold full of most precious and sweet wines: then after all this
came the beautiful Lucina apparelled with a rich Roabe of estate, being of a
great and inestimable value.

Thus cerimoniously they ascended the scaffold, where the Matrone placed the
Image of Diana behind the chafingdish of coals that was there burning: the
rest of the Nuns continued still singing their songs and drinking of the
precious wines that was brought in the golden vessel: this being done, they
all at once brought low the necks of the Rams by cutting their throats, whose
bloods they sprinkled round about the scaffold, and opened their bowelles and
burned their inward parts in the chafingdish of coals.

Thus with this slaughter, they made sacifice unto the Queen of Chastity: at
the sight whereof was present, the surfeiting Lover Saint George, with the
other six Christian Knights armed all in bright armor, and were all very
attentive to this that I ^eere have told you.

The sacrifice ended, this Lucina commanded silence to be made, and when all
the company were still she raised up her self upon her feet, and with a
heavy voice distilling many salt tears: she said.

O most excellent and chaste Diana, in whose blessed bosom we undefiled
Uirgins do recreate our selves: unto thy divine excellency do I now commend
this my last sacrifice, craving record of all the Gods, that I have done my
best to continue a spotles maiden of thy most beautiful train.

Oh heavens shall I consent to deliver my Uirginitie willingly to him whose
soul desires to have the use of it, or shall I my self commit my utter ruin
and sorrowful destruction, the which proceeds only by the means of my
flouring beauty, the which would it had been as black as the nightly
ravens, or like to the tawny tanned Moors in the furthest mountains of India.

O sacred Diana, thou blessed Queen of chastity, is it possible that thou
do consent that a Uirgin descended from so royal a race as I am, should
procure to spotte the worthiness of her predecessors, by yielding her Uirgins
honor to the conquest of love without respecting my beauty, or regarding my
chaste vow I have made unto thy diety?

Well seeing it is so that I must needs violate my self against all humane
nature, I beseech thee to receive the solempnitie of this my death, which I
offer up in sacrifice to thy divine excellency, for I am here constrained
with mine own trembling hand to cut off the flourishing branches of these my
days: for this I swear before the Majesty of heaven, that I had rather offer
up my soul into the s^cietie and sacred bosom of Diana, than to yield the
cas^le of my chastity, to the conquest of any Knight in the world.

And now to thee I speak thou valiant Knight of England, behold here I yield
unto thy hands my liuelesse body, to use according to thy will and pleasure,
requesting only this thing at thy hand, that as thou louedst me living, thou will love me dead, and like a merciful Champion suffer me to receive a
princely Funeral.

And last of all, to thee divine Diana do I speak, accept of this my bleeding
soul, that with so much blood is offered unto thee.

So in finishing this sorrowful speech she drew out a fair and bright shining
sword, which she had hidden secretly under her gown, and setting the hylt
against the Scaffold (little looked for of her Father and those yt were
present) she suddenly threw her self upon the point of that Sword, in such a
furious manner, that it ryued her bloody heart in sunder, and so rendered her
soul to the tuition of her, unto whom she offered her bloody and ruthful
sacrifice.

What shall I here declare the lamentable sorrows and pitiful lamentation
that was there made by her father and other Roman Knights that were present at
this unhappy mischance? so great it was, that the walls of the Monastery
ecchoed, and their pitiful shrikes ascended to the heavens.

But none was more greened in mind than the afflicted English Champion, who
(like a man distraught of sense) in great fury rushed amongst the people,
throwing them down on every side, till he ascended upon the scaffold: and
approaching the dead body of Lucina, he took her up in his arms, and with a
sorrowful and passionate voice he said. O my beloved joy, and late my only
hearts delight, is this the Sacrifice wherein (through thy desperatenes) thou
have deceived me, who loved thee more than my self? is this the respite that
thou requiredst for seven days, wherein thou have concluded thy own death and
my utter confusion?

Oh noble Lucina, and my beloved Lady, if this were thy intent, why did not
thou first sacrifice me thy Servant and Love, wholly subjected unto thy divine
beauty? Woe be unto me, and woe be unto my unhappy enterprise: for by it is
she lost, who was made sovereign Lady of my heart.

Oh Diana, accursed by this chance, because thou have consented to so bloody
a tragedy, by the eternal powers of heaven, that never more thou shall be
worshipped, but in every Country where the English Champion comes, Lucina
in thy stead shall be adored. For evermore will he seek to diminish thy name,
and blot it from the golroll of heaven, yea and utterly extinguish it in
eternity: so that there shall never more memory remain of thee, for this thy
bloody Tyranny, in suffering so lamentable a Sacrifice.

No sooner had he delivered these speeches, but incensed with fury he drew out
his sword, and parted the image of Diana in two pieces, protesting to ruinate
the Monastery, within whose walls the device of this bloody Sacrifice was
concluded.

The sorrow and extreme grief of the Roman Emperor so exceeded for the
murder of his Daughter, that he fell to the c^rth in a senseless sw^und, and
was carried half dead with grief by some of his knights home to his Palace,
where he remained speechles by the space of thirty days.

The Emperor had a Son, as valiant in arms as any borne Italian except
Saint Anthony. This young Prince whose name was Lucius, seeing his sisters
timeles death and by what means it was committed, he presently intended with a
train of a hundred armed Knights, which continually attended upon his person,
to assail the discontented Champions, and by force of arms to revenge his
sisters death.

This resolution so encouraged the Roman Knights, but especially the
Emperors son, that betwixt these two companies began as terrible a battle as
ever was fought by any knights, the fearcenes of their blows so exceeded the
one side against the other, that they did resounde echoes, and they yielded a
terrible noise in the great woods.

This battle did continue betwixt them both sharp and fierce for the space of
two hours, by which time the valor of the encensed Champions so prevailed,
that most of the Roman knights were discomfited and slain, some had their
hands pared from their shoulders, some had their arms and legs lopped off,
and some lay breathles w^ltring in their own bloods, in which encounter many a
Roman Lady lost her husband, many a widow was bereaud of her Son, and
many a child was left fatherles to the great sorrow of the whole country.

But when the valiant young Prince of Room saw his knights discomfited, and
he left alone to withstand so many noble Champions, he presently set spurs to
his horse, and fled from them like to a heap of oust forced by a whirlewinde.

After whom the Champions would not pursue, accountting it no glory to their
names to triumph in the overthrow of a single knig^^, but remained still by the
scaffolde, where they buried the sacrificed Uirgin, under a marble stone close
by the monastery wall. The which being done to their contentments, Saint
George ingraued this Epitaph upon the same stone with the point of his dagger,
which was in this wise following.

Under this marble stone interd does lie
Luckles Lucina, of beauty bright:
Who to maintain her spotles chastity
Against the assailment of an English Knight,
Upon a blade her tender breast she cast:
A bloody offering to Diana chaste.
SO when he had written this Epitaph, the Christian Champions mounted upon
their swift foot steedes, and bad adieu to the unhappy Confines of Italy,
hoping to find better fortune in other Countries. In which travel we will
leave them for a time, and speak of the Prince of Rome: who after the
discomfiture of the Roman knights, fled in such have from the furies of the
warlike Champions. After which, he like a starued Lion trauersed along by the
River of Tybris, filling all places with his melancholy passions, until such
time as he entered into a thick grove, wherein he purposed to rest his weary
limbs, and lament his misfortunes. After he had in this solitary place
unlaced his Helmet, and huried it scornfully against the ground, the infernal
Furies began to visit him, and to sting his breast with motions of fiery
revenge. In the end he cast up his wretched eyes unto heaven, and said. Oh you
fatal torches of the elements, why are you not clad in mourn^full abiliments,
to cloak my wandering steps in eternal darkness? shall I be made a scorn in
Rome for my cowardice? or shall I return and accompany my Roman friends in
death? whose bloodes me thinks I see sprinkled about the fields of Italy. Me
thinks I hear their bleeding souls fill each corner of the earth with my base
flight: therefore will I not live to be termed a fearful coward, but dye
courageously by mine own hands, whereby those accursed Champions shall not
obtain the conquest of my death, nor triumph in my fall. This being said, he
drew out his dagger, and ryued his heart in sunder. The news of whose
desperate death, after it was bruted to his Fathers ears, he interred his
body with his Sister Lucinaes, and erected over them a stately Chapel,
wherein the Nuns and ceremonious Monks during all their lives sung Dirges
for his Childrens souls.

After this the Emperor made proclamation through all his Dominions, that if
any Knight were so hardy as travel in pursuit after the English Champion,
and by force of arms bring him back, and deliver his head unto the Emperor,
he should not only be held in great estimation through the Land, but receive
the government of the Empire after his decease. Which rich proffer so
encouraged the minds of diverse aduenterous Knights, that they went from
sundry Provinces in the pursuit of Saint George, but their attempts were all in
vain.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the triumphs, tilts and tournaments that were solemnly held in
Constantinople by the Grecian Emperor, and of the honorable adventures that
were there atchiued by the christian champions, with other strange accidents
that happened.

IN the Eastern Parts of the world the fame and valiant deeds of the
Champions of Christendom was noysed, with their honorable victories,
heroycall acts, and feats of arms, naming them the myrrours of nobility,
and the types of bright honor. All Kings and Princes (to whose ears the
report of their valors was bruted) desired much to behold their noble
personages. But when the Emperor of Grecia (keeping then his Court in the
City of Constantinople) heard of their mighty and valiant deeds, he
thirsted after their sights, and his mind could never be satisfied with
content, until such time as he had devised a mean to train them unto his
Court, not only in that he might enjoy the benefit of their companies, but to
have his Court honored with the presence of such renowned Knights: and
therefore in this manner it was accomplished.

The Emperor dispatched Messengers into diverse parts of the world, giving them
in charge to publish thorough out every Country and Province as they went, of
an honorable Turnament that should be holden in the City of Constantinople
within six months following: thereby to accomplish his intent, and to bring
the Christian Champions (whose company he so desired) unto his Court.

This charge of the Grecian Emperor (as he commanded) was speedely performed,
with such diligence, that in a short time it came to the ears of ye Christian
knights, as they traveled betwixt the Provinces of Asia and Africa Who at the
time appointed came in great pomp and majesty to Constantinople, to furnish
forth the honorable Triumphs.

At the fame whereof likewise resorted thither a great number of Knights of
great valor and strength: among whom was the Prince of Argler, with a goodly
company of noble persons: and the prince of Fesse, with many well proportioned
Knights. Likewise came thither the King of Arabia in great state, and with no
less majesty came the King of Silicia and a Brother of his, who were both
Giants. Many other brave and valiant Knights (whose names I here omit) came
thither to honor the Grecian Emperor: for that he was very well esteemed of
them all. And as they came to honor the triumphs, so likewise they came to
prove their fortitudes, and to get fame and name, and the praise that
belongs to aduentrous knights. It was supposed of all the company, that the
King of Silicia would gain by his prowess the dignity from the rest, for that
he was a Giant of very big members, although his Brother were taken to be the
more furious Knight: who determined not to just, for that his Brother should
get the honor and praise from all Knights that came. But it fell out
otherwise, as hereafter you shall understand.

So when the day of turniment was come, all the Ladies and damsels put
themselves in places to behold the jesting, and attired themselves in the
greatest braue^e that they could devise, and the great court full of peoply
which came thither for to see the triumphant tourniment.

What should I say here of the Emperors Daughter, the fair Alcida, who was
of so great beauty that she seemed more liker a divine substance then an
earthly creature and sat glistering in her rich ornaments amongst the other
Ladies like unto Phoebe in the Crystal firmament, and was noted of all
behoulders to be the fairest Princes that ever mortal eye beheld: so when the
Emperor was seated upon his imperial throane under a tent of green velvet,
the Knights began to enter into the listes, and ^ee which was the first that
entered was the King of Arabia, mounted upon a very fair and well adorned
^ourser, he was armed with black armor, all to be spotted full of silver
knobs, and brought with him fifty Knights all apparelled with the same livery,
and thus with great Majesty he rode round about the place, making ^reat
obedience unto all the Ladies and damsels.

After him entered a Pagan Knight, who was Lord of Si^ia, and armed with armor
of a Lions color, accompanied with a hundred Knights all apparelled in velvet
of the same color, and passed round about the place, showing unto the Ladies
great friendship and cou^tesie as the other did.

Which being done, he beheld the King of Arabia, tarrying to receive him at the
Just: and the trumpets began to sound, giving them to understand that they must
prepare themselves ready to the encounter: whereat these Knights were nothing
unwilling but spurred their coursers with great fury and closed together with
courageous vallure.

The king of Arabia most strongly made his encounter, and stroke the Pagan
without missing upon the breast: but the Pagan at the next race, being heat
with fury stroke him so surely with his lance, in such sort that he heaued
him out of his saddle, and he fell presently to the ground, after which the
Pagan Knight rode up and down with great pride and gladness.

The Arabian king being thus overthrown, there entered into the listes the
king of Argier armed with no other furniture but with silver male and a
brestplate of bright steel before his breast, his pomp and pride exceeded all
the knights that were then present, but yet to small purpose his pride and
arrogance served, for at the first encounter he was overthrown to the ground:
in like sort did this Pagan use fifteen other knights of fifteen several
provinces, to the great wonder and amazement of the Emperor and all the
assembly.

During all these valiant encounters Saint George with the other christian
champions st^^d a far off upon a high gallery beholding them, intending not
as yet to be seen in the tilte.

But now this valiant Pagan after he had rode some six courses up and down
the place, and seeing none entering the tilt yard, he thought to hear all the
fame and honor away for that day.

But at that same instance there entered the noble minded Prince of Fesse, being
for courage the only pride of his country he was a merueilous well
proportioned knight and was armed all in white armor, wrought with excellent
knottes of gold, and he brought in his company a hundred Knights, all
attired in white satin, and riding about the place he showed his obedience
unto the Emperor and to all the Ladies, end thereupon the trumpets began to
sound.

At the noise whereof, the two Knights spurred their coursers and made their
encounter so strong and with such great fury that the proud Pagan was cast to
the ground and so departed the listes with great dishonor.

Straight way entered the brave King of Silicia, who was armed in a glistering
corslet of very fine steel, and was mounted upon a mighty and rich courser,
and brought in his company, two hundred knights, all apparelled with rich
cloth of gold, having every one a several instrument of music in their hands,
sounding thereon most heavenly melody.

And after the Silician king had made his accustomed compass and courtesy in
that place, he locked down his heuor and put himself in readiness to just.

So when the sign was given by the chief harrolde at arms, they spurred
their horses and made their encounters so valiant, that at the first race they
made their lances shiuer in the air and the pieces thereof to scatter
abroad, like aspen leaves in a whirlewinde.

At the second course the young Prince of Fesse was carried over his horse
buttockea, and the saddle with him betwixt his legs, which was a great grief
unto the Emperor, and all the company that did see him, for that he was well
beloved of them al, and held for a knight of great estimation.

The Silician king grew proud at the Prince of Fesses overthrow, and was so
encouraged and so furious that in a small time he l^ft not a knight remaining
on horseback in their saddles that durst attempt to just with him, but every
one of what Country and Nation soere avoided the attempt: so that there was no
question among either Nobles or the multitude but that unto him the undoubted
honor of the victory in triumph would be attributed.

And being in this arrogant pride, he heard a great noise in the manner of a
tumult drawing near, which was the occasion that he stood still, and to
expect some strange accident, and looking about what it should be, he beheld
Saint George entering the listes, who was armed with his rich and strong
armor, all of purple, full of golden stars, and before him road the
champions of France, Italy, Spain and Scotland, al on stately coursers,
bearing in their hands four silken streamers of fou^e several colors.

And the champion of Wales followed him carrying his shield whereon was
portraied a golden Lion in a sable field, and the champion of Ireland likewise
carried his spear being of knotty ash strongly bound about with plates of
steel, all which showed the highness of his descent, in that so many brave
Knights attended upon him.

So when Saint George had passed by the royal seat whereon the Emperor sat,
invested in whose company was many knights of great authority, he rode along by
the other side, whereas Alcida the Emperors fair Daughter sat amongst many
gallant Ladies and fair damsels richly apparelled with vestures of gold, to
whom he valed his bonnet showing the^ the courtesy of a knight and so passed
by Alcida, at the fight of this noble champion could not refrain her self,
but that with a high and bold voice she said unto the Emperor.

Most mighty Emperor and my royal father (said she) this is the Knight in
whose power and strength, all christendom does put their fortunes, and this is
he whom the whole world admires for chivalry.

Saint George although, he heard very well what the lovely Princess had said,
passed on, and dissembled as though he had heard nothing, and so when he came
before the face of his curious adversary, he took his shield and his spear
and prepared himseife in readiness to just, and so being both provided, the
trumpets began to sound, whereat with great fury, these two warlike knights
met together, and neither of them missed their blows at their encounter: but
yet by reason that Saint George had a desire to extol his fame, and to make
his name resounde thorough the world, he stroke the giant such a mighty blow
upon his breast, that he presently ouerthrewe him to the ground, and so with
great state and majesty he passed along without any show of disdain, whereat
the people gave a great shoute that it resounded like an echo in the air: and
in this manner said.

The great and mighty boaster is ouerthrown, and his furious strength has
little auailed him. After this many Princess proved their adventures against
this English champion, and every knight that were of any estimation iusted with
him.

But with great ease he overcame them al in less then the space of two hours:
so at such time as bright Phoebus began to make an end of his long journey, and
the day to draw to an end, there appeared to enter into the listes the brave
and mighty giant, being brother to the Scilician king with a mighty great
spear in his hand, whose glimmering point of steel glistered through all the
court, he brought with him but only one squire, attired in silver male
bringing in his hand another lance.

So this furious giant without any care of courtesy due unto the Emperor or
any of his knights there present entered the place, the which being done, the
squire that brought his other spear, went unto the English champion and said.
Sir Knight (quoth he) yonder brave and valiant giant, my Lord and Master does
send unto thee this warlike spear, and therewithal he wills thee to defend
thy self to the uttermost of thy power and strength, for he has vowed before
sun set, to be either Lord of thy fortunes or a vassell to thy prowess and
likewise says that he does not only defy thee in the turniment, but also
challenge thee to mortal battle.

This brauing message caused Saint George to smile, and bre ^ in his breast a
new desire of honor, and so returned him this answer, friend go thy ways and
tell the giant that sent thee, that I do accept his demand, although it does
grieve my very soul to hear his arrogant defiance to the great disturbance of
this royal company, and in the presence of so mighty an Emperor, but seeing
his stomach is gorged with so much pride, tell him that George of England is
ready to make his defense, and also that shortly he shall repent him by my
pledge of Knighthood.

In saying. these words he took the spear from the squire, and deliu^red him
his gauntlet from his hand to carry to his master, and so put himself to the
standing, awaighting for the encounter.

At that time he was very nie the place where the Emperor sat, who heard the
answer which the English knight made unto the squire, and was much displeased
that the giant in such sort should defy S. George without any occasion.

But it was no time as then to speak but to keep s^lence, and to pray unto
his Gods to take away his great pride and arrogancy.

All this time the two warriors (mounted upon their steedes) tarried the sign
to be made by the trumpets, which being given, they set forward their
coursers, with their spears in their restes, with so great fury and desire the
one to unhorse the other, that they both failed in their encounter.

The giant who was very strong and proud, when he saw that he had missed his
intent, he returned against Saint George, carrying his spear upon his
shoulder, and coming nie unto him, upon a sudden before he could clear
himself, h^ stroke him such a mighty blow upon his corslet, that his staff
broke in pieces, by reason of the finenesse of his armor, and mado the English
Knight to double his body backewardes upon his horse crupper.

But when he saw the great villainy that the giant used against him, his anger
increased very much and so taking his spear in the same sort, he went toward
the giant and said.

Thou furious and proud beast, thou scorn of nature and enemy of true
knighthood, think thou for to entrap me trecherously, and to gore me at
vnawar^s like to a savage boar: Now as I am a christian knight, if my knotty
spear have good success I will revenge me of thy cruelty.

And in saying this, he stroke him so furiously on the breast, that his spear
passed through the giants body, and appeared forth at his back, whereby he
fell presently down dead to the ground, and yielded his life to the conquest
of the fatal sisters.

All that were present were very much amazed thereat, and wondered greatly at
the strength and force of saint George, accompting him the fortunatest knight
that ever weelded lance, and the very pattern of true nobility.

At this time the golden sun had finished his course, having nothing above the
orizon but his glistering beams, whereby the Iudg^s of the turniments,
commanded with sound of trumpets that the Iustes should cease, and make an end
of the day.

So the Emperor descended from his imperial throne into the tilting place,
with all his knights and Gentlemen at arms, for to receive the noble champion
of England, and desired him that he would go with them into his palace, there
to receive al honors due unto a knight of such desert: to the which he could
not make any denial, but most unwillingly consented, after this the Emperors
daughter (in company of many courtly virgins) likewise descended their places,
where Alcida bestowed upon saint George her glove, the which he wore for her
favor many a day after in his burgonet.

The six other christian champions, although they merited no honor by this
turniment, because they did not try their adventures therein, yet obtained they
such good liking among the Grecian Ladies, that every one had his mistress,
and in their presence they long time fixed their chief delights: now must we
leave the champions in the Emperors court for a time surfeiting in pleasures
and return to Saint Georges sons traueiling the world, to seek out adventures.

CHAP. XV.
How a Knight with two heads tormented a beautiful Maiden, that had betroathed
her self to the Emperors Son of Constantinople: and how she was rescued by
Saint Georges Sons, and after how they were brought by a strange Adventure
into the company of the Christian Champions, with other things that happened in
the same trauells.

THis renowned Emperor (within whose Court ye Christian champions made their
aboades) of late years had a Son named Pollemus, in all virtues and
knightlye demeanours, equal with any living. This young prince in the spring
time of his youth, through the pearcing darts of blind Cu-,pide, fell in love
with a Maiden of a mean parentage-but in beauty and other precious gifts of
Nature most excellent.

This Dulcippa (for so was she called) being but daughter to a Country
Gentleman, was restrained from the Emperors Court, and denied the sight of her
beloved Pollemus, and he forbidden to set his affection so l^w, upon the
displeasure of the Emperor his Father: for he being the Son of so mighty a
Potentate, and she the daughter of so mean a Gentleman, was thought to be a
match unfit and disagreeable to the laws of the Country: and therefore they
could not be suffered to manifest their loves as they would, but were
constrained by stealth to enjoy each others most beloved and heartely desired
companies.

So upon a time these two Lovers concluded to meet together in a valley betwixt
two hills, in distance from the Emperors Court some three miles, whereas they
might in s^cret (deuoyd of all suspicion) unite and tie both their hearts in
one knot of true love, and to prevent the determination of their Parents, that
so vnkindlye sought to cross them.

But when the appointed day drew on, Dulcippa arose from her restless bed, and
attired her self in rich and costly apparel, as though she had been going to
perform her nuptial ceremonies.

In this manner entered she the Ualley, at such time as the Sun began to
appear out of his golden Horizon, and to show himself upon the face of the
Earth, glistering with his bright beams upon the silver floating Rivers.
Likewise the calmie western winds did very sweetly blow upon the green
leaves, and made a delicate harmony: at such time as the fairest Dulcippa
(accompanied with high thoughts) approached the place of their appointed meeting.

But when she found not Prince Pollimus present, she determined to spend ye
time away till he came in trimming of her golden hair, and decking her
delicate body, and such like delightful plesures for her contentment and
recreation.

So sitting down upon a green bank under the shadow of a myrtle tree, she
pulled a golden cawle from her head, wherein her hair was wrapped, letting it
fall and dispearse it self all abroad her back, and taking out from her
christalline breast an yuorie comb, she began to kemb her hair, her hands and
fingers seeming to be of white alablaster, her face staining the beauty of
roses and lyllies mixed together, and the rest of her body comparable to
Hyrens, upon whose love and beauty Mahomet did sometime doat.

But now mark (gentle Reader) how frowning Fortune crossed her desiros, and
changed her wished joys into unexpected sorrows. For as she sat in this
divine and angelical likeness, there fortuned to come wandering by an inhumane
tyrant, surnamed the Knight with 2. heads, who was a rauisher of virgins, an
oppressor of infants, and an utter enemy to virtuous Ladies, and strange
traveling Knights.

This tyrant was bodied like unto a man, but covered all over with locks of
hair. He had two heads, two mouths, and four eyes, but all as red as blood.
Which deformed creature presently ran unto the Uirgin, and caught her up
under his arm, and carried her away over the mountains into another Country,
where he intended to torment her, as you shall hear more at large hereafter.

But now return we to Prince Pollemus, who at the time appointed likewise
repaired to meet his betroathed Lover: but coming to the place, he found
nothing but a silken scarffe, the which Dulcippa had let fall through the
fearful frighting she took at the sight of the three headed Knight.

No sooner found he the scarffe, but he was oppressed extremely with sorrow,
fearing Dulcippa was murdered by some inhumane means, and had left her
scarffe as a token that she infringed not her promise, but performed ii to the
loss of her own life. Therefore taking it up, and putting it next his heart,
he breathd forth this woeful lamentation.

Here rest thou near unto my bleeding heart, thou precious token and
remembrance of my dearest Lady, never to be hence removed, till such time
as my eyes may either behold her body, or my ears hear perfect news of her
untimely death, that I may in death consort with her.

Frown you accursed Lamps of heaven, that gave first light unto this fatal
morning: for by your dismal light the pride of earthly women is dishonored.
Come, come, you wrathful planets, descend the lucklesse Horizon, and rain
upon my head eternal vengeance, oppress my body with continual misery, as
once you did the wo^ull King of Thebes: for by my slothful negligence and
ouer-long tariance, this bloody tragedy has been committed.

Yet for her sake I vow to travel through the world, as far as ever golden
Phoebus lendes his light, filling each corner of the earth with clamours of her
name, and making the Elements resound with Echoes of my lamentations.

In this resolution returned he home to the Emperor his Fathers palace,
dissembling his grief in such manner, that none did suspect his discontented
sorrows, nor the strange accident that unto beauteous Dulcippa had happened.

So upon a day as he was imagining with himself, seeing the small comfort that
he took in the Court, considering the want of her presence whom so much he
desired, he determined in great secret as soon as it was possible to depart
the Court.

This determination he straight ways put in practice, and took out of the
Emperors Armourie very secretly an exceeding good corslet, the which was all
russet, and enameled with black, and embrothered round about with a gilded
edge very curiously and artificially graven and curued.

Also he took a sheelde of the same making, saving that it was not graven as
the armor was, and commanded a young Gentleman, that was Son unto an
ancient Knight of Constantinople, of a good disposition and hardy that he
should keep them safely, and gave him to understand of his determined pretense.

Although it did grieve this young man very much, yet for all that seeing the
great freendship which he used toward him, in vttring his secret unto him
before any other, without replying to the contrary, he very diligently took
the armor, and hid it, till he found a convenient time to put it into a
Ship very secretly.

So likewise he put into the same Ship two of the best horses which the
Emperor had, and forthwith he gave the Prince understanding, that all things
were then in a readiness, and in good order. Pollimus d^ssembling with the
accustomed heaviness he used, withdrewe himself into his Chamber, till such
time as the dark night came.

Which when it was come he made himself ready with his apparel, and when all
the people of the Court were at their rest, and in their dead sleeps, he
alone with his page, who was named Mercurio, departed ye palace and went to
the Sea side. His page did call the Mariners of the Ship, who straight way
brought unto them their boat, into the which they entered and went straight
aboard.

And being therein for that the wind was very fair, he commanded to weigh
their Anckers and to hoyse up Sails, and to commit themselves to the mercy of
the waters: as he commanded all was done, and so in short time, they found
themselves ingulfed in the main Ocean, far from the sight of any land.

But when the Emperor his Father understood of his secret departure, the
lamentation which he made was very much: and he commanded his knights to go
unto the sea side, to know if there were any ship that departed that night.
And when it was told them that there was a B^rke that hayled anchor and hoysed
sail, they understood straight way that the prince was gone away in her.

I cannot here declare the great grief and sorrow which the Emperor felt in
his woeful heart for the absence of his Son, which a long time he always
suspected and feared.

But when the departure of Pollemus was bruted thorough all Constantinople, all
sports and feasts ceased, and all the vassalls of the Country were overcome
with a general sorrow.

So Pollemus sailed through the deep seas three days and three nights with a
very fair and prosperous forewinde.

The fourth day in the evening, being calm, and no Wind at all, the
Mariners went to take their restes, some on the poope, and some in the
foreship, for to ease their wearied bodies:

The prince (who sat upon the poope of the ship) asked his page for his Lute,
the which straight way was given him: and when he had it in his hands, he
playde and sung so sweetly, that it seemed to be a most heavenly melody, and
being in this sweet music, he heard a very lamentable cry, as it were of a
Woman: and leaving his delicate music he gave a listening and attentive ear
to hearken, what this sorrowful creature said, and by reason of the stilnes of
the night, he might easily hear the voice utter these words.

It will little profit thee thou cruel tyrant, this thy bold hardiness: for
that I am beloved of so worthy a Knight, as will undoubtedly revenge this thy
tirannous cruelty proffered me.

Then he heard another voice which seemed to answer.

Now I have thee in my power, there is no humane creature of power able enough
to deliver or redeem thee from the torments, that (in my determination) I
have purposed thou shall endure.

Pollemus could hear no more, by reason that the Bark wherein they were passed
by so swiftly: but he supposed that it was his Ladies voice which he heard,
and that she was carried by force away. So (laying down his Lute) he began to
fall into a great thought, and was very heavy and sorrowful, in that he knew
not how to adventure for her recovery.

Being in this cogitation, he returned to his page which was asleep, and
struck him with his foot, and awaked him, saying: What did not thou hear
the great lamentation which my Lady Dulcippa made (as to me it seemed) being
in a small Bark that is passed by, and gone forwards along the seas. To the
which his page Mercutio answered nothing, for that he was still in a soun^
sleep.

to whom the Prince called again, saying: arise I say, bring forth mine
armor, call up the Mariners that they may launch their boat into the Sea,
for by the omnipotent Jupiter I swear that I will not b^e called the Son of
my Father, if I do suffer such violence to be done against my love, and not
to procure with all my strength to revenge the same, Mercutio would have
replied unto him, but the furious countenance of the Prince would not give him
leave, no, not once to look upon his face: so he brought forth his armor
and buckled it on.

In the mean time the Mariners had launched their bo^te into the Sea, wherein
he leaped with a hasty fury, and carried with him his page, and four of the
Mariners for to towe the Bark, and he commanded them to take their way
toward the other company that passed by them.

So they labored all the night till such time as bright Phoebus with his
glistering beams gave unto them such light that they might discover and see
the other Bark, although somewhat a far off.

So labored they in great courage, till two parts of the day was spent, at
which time they saw come after them a Gallie which was governed with eight
oars upon a side, and it made so great way, that with a trice they were with
them, and he saw that there were in her three Knights in bright armor, to
whom Pollimus called with a loud voice saying. Most courteous Knights I
request you to take me into your Gallie, that being in her I may the better
accomplish my desire.

The Knights of the Gallie passed by the Prince without making return of any
aunsweare, but rather showed that they made but little account of him.

These three knights were the sons of the English champion which departed
from their father in his iourny toward Babylon, to set the King again in his
kingdom.

But now to follow our history, the Prince of Constantinople seeing the little
account they made of him, with the great anger and fury that he received, he
took an ore in one hand, and an other in the other hand, and with such
strength he stroke the water, that he made the slothful bark to fly, and
labored so much with his oars, that with a trice they were equal with the
gally.

So leaving the oars with a light leap he put himself in the gally with his
helm on, and his shield at his shoulder, and being within he said.

Now shall you do that by force, which before I using great courtesy you
would not yield unto.

This being said, one of Saint Georges sons took the encounter in hand,
thinking it a blemish to the honor of knighthoode by multitudes to assail him,
so the two brave knights without any advantage the one of the other made their
encou^ters so valiantly that it was a wonder to all the beholders.

The Prince of Constantinople stroke the English Knight such a furious blow
that he made him to decline his head to his breast, and forced him to recoile
backwards two or three steps, but he came quickly again to himself and
returned him so mighty a blow upon his helm, that he made all his teeth to
chatter in his head, which was pitiful to see.

Then began betwixt them a merueilous and well foughten battle that all that
beheld them greatly admired: with great policy and strength, they endured the
bickering all that day, and when they saw the dark and tenebrous night came
upon them, they did procure with more courage and strength for to finish their
battle.

The Prince of Constantinople, puffing and blowing like a bell lifting up his
sword with both his hands and discharged it so strongly upon his enemy that
perforce he made him to fall to the ground and therewithal offered to pull his
helmet from his head.

But when the English Knight saw himself in that sort, he threw his shield
from him, and very strongly caught the other about the neck and held him fast,
so that betwixt them began a mighty and terrible wrestling tumbling and
wallowing up and down the gally breaking their plankes and oars that it was
strange to behold.

At this time the night began to be very dark, whereby they called for
lights, which presently were brought them by the Mariners, in the mean time
these knights did somewhat breath themselves, although it was not much.

So when the Lights were brought, they returned to their late contention with
new force and strength.

O heavens said Pollimus, I cannot believe to the contrary but that this is
Mars the God of war that does contend in battle with me, and for the great envy
he bears against me, he goes about to dishonor me.

And with these words they thickened their blows with great desperateness.

And although this last assault continued more then two hours, yet neither of
them did faint, but at the last they both together lift up their swoordes, and
charged them together the one upon ye others helm with so great strength that
both of them fell down upon the hatches without any remembrance.

The rest that did look upon them, did believe verily that they were both
dead, by reason of the abundance of blood which came forth at their visors,
but quickly it was perceived that there was some hope of life in them.

Then presently there was an agreement made betwixt the Knights of the gally
and the Mariners of the bark that they should conioyne together and to
travel whither fortune would conduct the^ in this order as you have heard
carried they these two Knights without any remembrance.

But when the Prince of Constantinople came to himself with a loud voice he
said, Oh God is it possible to be true that I am overcome in this first
encounter and assault of my knighthood.

Here I curse the day of my creation and the hour when first I merited the
name of a knight, henceforth I Will bury all my honors with disgrace, and spend
the remnant of my life in base cowardice, and in speaking these words he cast
his eye aside and beheld the English knight as one newly risen from a trance,
who likewise breathed forth these discontented speeces. Oh unhappy son of S.
George, thou coward and of little valor, I know not how thou can name thy
self to be the son of the mightiest Knight in the world, for that thou have
lost thy honor in this last assault.

This being said, the two weary knights concluded a peace betwixt them, and
revealed each to the other their names and living and wherefore they adventured
to travel, the which when it was known they sailed forwards that way whereas
the dolorous woman went, so in this sort they traveled all the rest of the
night that remained, till such time as the day began to be clear, and
straightway they descried land, to which place with great have they rowed.

And coming a land they found no used way, but one narrow path, the which they
kept, wherein they had not traueiled long when that they met with a poor
simple country man, with a great hatchet in his hand, and he was going for to
cut some firewood from high and mighty trees, of whom they demanded what
country and land it was.

This country (said he) is called Armenia, but yet most courteous Knights you
must pardon me, for that I do request you to return again, and proceed no
farther if you do esteem of your lives, for in going this way there is
nothing to be had but death.

For that the Lord of this country is a furious monster called the two headed
Knight, and he is so furious in his tyranny, that never any stranger as yet
could escape out of his hand alive.

And for proof of his cruelty no longer then yesterday he brought hither a
Lady prisoner, who at her first coming on shore all to be whipped and beat her
in such sort that it would make the tyrannous tyrant to relent and pity her
distresses, swearing that eueryday he would so torment her, till such time as
her life and body did make their separation.

Pollimus the Prince of Constantinople was very attentive to the old man's
words, thinking the Lady to be his Dulcippa after whom he so long traueiled:
the grief he received at this report stroke such a terror to his heart that he
fell into a sound, and was not able to go any further.

But Saint Georges sons who knew him to be a Knight of much valor
encouraged him, and protested by the honor of their Knighthoodes never to
forsake his company, till they saw his Lady delivered from her torments and he
safely conducted home into his own country.

So traueiling with this resolution the night came on, and it was so dark,
that they were constrained to seek some place to take their restes, and laying
themselves down under a broad branched tree of Oak, they passed the night
pondering in their minds a thousand imaginations.

So when the morning was come and that the Diamond of heaven began to glister
with his beams upon the mountain tops, these martial Knights were not
slothful, but rose up and followed their iourneies.

After this they had not traueiled scarce half a mile, when that they heard a
pitiful lamentation of a woman, who by reason of her loud shrikes her voice
was very hoarse, so they staid to hear from whence that lamentable noise
should come.

And presently a far off, they beheld a high pillar of stone, out of the
which there came forth a spoute of fair and clear water, and thereat was
bound a woman all naked, her back fastened to the pillar, her arms backward
embracing it, with her arms fast bound behind her.

Her skin was so fare and white, that if it had not been, that they heard
her lamentation, they would have judged her to have been an image made
artificially of allablaster joined unto the pillar.

These warlike Knights laced on their helmets, and came unto the place where
she was, but when the prince of Constantinople saw her, he presenly knew her
to be his Lady and lovely mistress.

For by reason of the coldness of the dark night, and with her great
lamentation and weepings, she was so full of sorrow and affliction, that she
could scarce speak.

Likewise the Princes heart so yerned at the sight of his unhappy Lady, that
almost he could not look upon her for weeping.

But yet at last with a sorrowful sigh he said, Oh cruel hands is it possible
that there should remain in you so much mischief, that whereas there is such
great beauty and fairenes, you should use such baseness and villainy? she does
more deserve to be loved and served, than to be in this sort so evil
entreated.

This woeful Prince with much sorrow did behold her white skin and back all to
be spotted with her red blood, and taking a cloak from one of the mariners,
he threw it upon her and covered her body* and took her in his arms,
whilst the other knights unloosed her.

This unhappy Lady never felt nor knew what was done unto her, till such time
as she was unbound from those bands and in the arms of her lover.

Then giving a terrible sigh she thought that she had been in the arms of
the monstrous two headed knight s^ying, Oh Pollimus thou true betrothed husband
where art thou now that thou comst not to succor me? and therwithall ceased
her speeches.

This Prince hearing these words would have answered her, but he was disturbed
by hearing of a great noise of a horse, which s^emed to be in the woods
amongst the trees.

The rest of the Knights intending to see what it should be left the Lady lying
upon the green grass in the keeping of Prince Pollimus and the Mariners, and
so saint Georges sons went toward the place, whereas they heard that rushing
noise, and as they vigelently looked about them, they beheld the two headed
monster mounted upon a mighty and great palfrey, who returned to see if the
Lady were alive for to torment her anew.

But when he came to the pillar and saw not the Lady, with an ireful look he
cast his eyes, looking about him on every side, and at last he saw the three
knights, coming toward him with a reasonable and quiet pace, and how the
Lady was untied from the pillar where he left her and in the arms of another
Knight making her sorrowful complaint.

The two headed knight seeing them in this order, with great fury upon his
mighty horse he came toward them, and when he was near them, he staid, and
did behold the princely proportions, and gentle dispositions of ye knights that
without my leave has adventured to untie the Lady from the pillar where I left
her, or come you to offer up your bloods in sacrifice upon my fauchion, to
whom one of the three valiant brothers answered and said, we be knights of a
strange country, that at the sorrowful complant of this Lady arrived in this
place, and seeing her to be a fair and beautiful woman, and without any
desert to be thus so evil entreated, it moves us to put our persons in
adventure against them that will seem farther to misuse her.

In the mean time that the knight was speaking these words, the deformed
monster was beholding him very presizely, knitting his brows with the great
anger he received in hearing his speeches, and with great fury he spurred his
monstrous beast, that he made him to give so mighty a leap that he had almost
fallen upon the English knight: who with great lightness did deliver himself,
and so drawing forth his sword he would have stricken him, but the beast passed
by with so great fury that he could not reach him.

Here began as terrible a battle betwixt the two headed knight and saint
Georges sons, as ever was fought by any knights, their mighty blows seemed
to rattle in the elements like to a terrible thunder, and their swords to
strike sparkling fire, in such abundance as though it had been from a smithes
anuile.

During this conflict the English Knights were so grievously wounded, that all
their bright armours were stained with a bloody gore and their helmets bruised
with the terrible strokes of the monsters fauchion, whereat they grew more
enraged, and their strengthes began to increase in such sort that one of them
stroke an overthwart blow with his trusty sword upon his knee, and by reason
that his armor was not very good he cut it clean a sunder, so that leg and
all fell to the ground, and the two headed knight fell on the other side to the
earth, and with great roaring he began to stamp and stare like a beast, and to
blaspheme against the heavens for this his sudden mishap.

The other two brothers seeing this, presently cut off his two heads, whereby
he was forced to yield to the mercy of imperious death.

There was another knight that came with the monster, who when he saw all that
had passed, with great fear returned the way from whence he came.

These victorious conquerours, when they saw that with so great ease they were
delivered from the tyrants cruelty, with loud voices they said, oh thou God
whom we christians still do worship, we do give thee humble thanks, and do
acknowledge this our good success and victory both proceed from thee.

Therefore we do promise and vow before thy celestial Majesty, that once
coming to our father and the other Christian champions, generally to erect a
shrine, and consecrate it to thy blessed son, under whose banner we evermore
do fight.

This being said, they departed with conquest to the Prince of Constantinople,
where they left him comforting of his distressed Lady.

So when they were altogether, they commanded the mariners to provide them
somewhat to eat, for that they had great need thereof, who presently prepared
it, for that continual they bore their provision about them: of this banquet
the Knights were very glad, and rejoiced much at that which they had achieved
and commanded that the Lady should be very well looked unto and healed of her
harm received.

So at the end of three days when the Princess Lady had recovered her health,
they left the country of Armenia and departed back to the sea whereas they
had left their ships lying at road, and there tarried until their coming.

Wherein they were no sooner entered, but the Mariners hoysed sail, and took
their way toward Constantinople as the Knights commanded. The winds served
them so prosperously, that within a small time they arrived in Greece, and
landed within two days journey of the Court: which lay then at Peru, a mile
from Constantinople.

Being aland, the Prince Pollemus consulted with S. Georges three Sons, what
course were best to be taken for their proceeding to the Court. For says he,
unless I may with the Emperor my Fathers consent enjoy my dearest Dulcippa,
I will live unknown in her company, rather than delight in the heritage of
ten such Empyres.

At last they concluded, that the Lady should be covered in a black veyle
for being known* and Pollemus in black arms, and the other Knights all
suitable should ride together: which accordingly they did, and about ten in the
morning entered the Palace: where they found the Emperor, the seven Champions
with many other princes in the great hall: to whom one of Sa. Georges Sons
thus spoke.

Great Emperor and noble Knights, this Knight that leads the Lady has long
loved her, in their births there is great diff^rence, so that their Parents
cross their affections: for him she has endured much s^rrow, for her he will
and has suff^red many hazards. His coming thus to your Court is to this end,
to approve her the only desertfull Lady in the world, himself the
faithfulst Knight against all Knights whatsoever: which with your Imperial
leave* he* my self and these two my associates will maintain: desiring your
Majesty to give judgment as we shall deserve.

The Emperor condescended, and on the green before the Palace, those four
overthrew more than four hundred Knights: so that Sa. George and thr^^ other
of the Champions entered the lysts, and ran three violent courses against the
Black knights, without moving them: who never suffered the points of their
spears to toutch the armor of the Champions. Which the Emperor perceiving,
gessed them to be of acquaintance: wherefore gyuing judgment that the Knight
should possess his Lady, at his request they all discovered themselves.

To describe the delightful comfort that the English Champion took in the
presence of his Children, and the joy that the Emperor received at the return
of his lost Son, requires more art and eloquence, than my tired senses can
afford. I am therefore here forced to conclude this Part, leaving the Flowers
of Chivalry in the City of Constantinople. Of whose following Adventures I
will at large discourse hereafter: so that the gentle Reader (with a kind look
and a smiling countenance) will courteously accept of this which is already
finished.

FINIS.

