THE GALES OF GRACE; OR, The Spiritual Wind: Wherein the Mystery of
Sanctification is opened and handled. By THOMAS BARNES, Preacher of Gods word
at Much-Waltham in Essex.

Psalm. 147.18. He causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow.

LONDON Printed by H.L. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his shop
in Cornehil, near S. Peter's church. 1622.

To the right Worshipful, Sir JOHN ROVVSE, Knight; the Worshipful Mr. HVGH
EVERARD, Esquire; Mr. I. SORREL, and the rest of the Congregation of
Much-Waltham in Essex, grace, mercy, and peace.
TWo members has the Lord given Man (Right Worshipful, and Beloved) which are
very helpefull to the soul, the Eye, and the Ear. The Ear hears the word
preached: the Eye looks upon the word written. Variety of Objects of both
kinds have both these Senses in these times of knowledge in the multitude of
Sermons, and number of Books. So that for a man now to write, may happily seem
needless and but like the adding of water to the Ocean: And for such an one as
I am to write (whose years are but few, whose learning is but small, whose
judgment but weak, whose leisure but little, and employme^ts many) may seem
strange. But both Objections (I hope without offense) may easily be answered.
For the first: Of a good Subject, as too much cannot be spoken, so too much
cannot be written; and we are so backward in sailing toward heaven, that we
have need of all helps to further us thitherward. To the second, that I
should thrust in my farthing amongst the learned and godly Talents in these
days, I must ingenuously confess is strange presumption, if I had nothing to
speak for my enterprise But the weightinesse of the matter treated of may be
mine Apology for the publication: and the undeserved respect which I have had
amongst you since my first coming unto you, is the cause of the Dedication.
For, whom-to may I dedicate it, but to them that have most right unto it? And
who have more right unto it, and to the Author of it, then your selves, in
whose hearing it was first preached, for whose profit it was first intended,
for whose sakes it is now enlarged, and by whom the Author is maintained? I
desire, it may lie by you as a testimonial of my thankful heart unto you,
and of my unfeigned desire of your good as of mine own, though it be not so
good as I wish it were. It is a Doctrine of wind that I offer; yet of such
wind as comes from Heaven, which Gods treasury, the Storehouse of the
Scriptures does afford. And therefore, Aelian. var. hist. li. 1. cap. 32.
as Artaxerxes the Persian Monarch answered Sinaetas (when he presented unto
him an handful of water fetched from the River Cyrus) O man, (...).
I accept thy gift, and esteem it precious: First, because of all things,
water is the best. Secondly, because it comes from that River which bears
the name of Cyrus. So I have confidence you will answer me, We accept this
Present; first, because of all exhalant vapors the Wind is the purest:
secondly, because it is called the Wind of the Spirit, wherewithal whosoever
are breathed upon, happy they that ever they were borne.

And Howsoever in my manner of handling the Subject, I can-not so divinely
dress it, and deeply diue into it, as the food and fountain it self does
deserve: yet I doubt not but you will find more leisure (at your leisure) to
read it, then Antipater King of Macedon did a Treatise of Happiness, which
one Dedicated unto him. I confess, it is a Present too small for one of you,
being so little as it is: yet inasmuch as the GOD of Love has seated you
together in the same Congregation, made you Copartners of the same profession,
and has made some of you truly the same in spiritual communion, I cannot
separate you in the Dedication. I have been bold with some of your particular
names in the Inscription: under which as under a shade, this Manual seeks
for shelter for it self, and for authority amongst them to whose hands it
may come; and chiefly for entertainment amongst the rest of the Parish, whom
namelesse I subordinately after you send it unto.

Thus craving pardon for my boldness, I beseech the Father of Lights to bless
my Labors among you, so long as (with your, and your Pastors love and leave)
I shall have mine aboade with you, and to multiply his favors upon you, both
internal, external, and eternal, and take my leave, promising and purposing
to rest and remain

An earnest Petitioner to the God of heaven for your best welfare. THO. BARNES.

To the Christian Reader.
MAriners upon the Sea (good Reader) have need of the Wind to drive their
Ships to the haven; and men in this world have need of the Spirit to draw
their Souls to heaven. Which spirit the most carnal Libertines and secure
worldlings that are, imagine themselves to be endued withal, though they never
saw the want of it, knew the worth of it, nor felt the work of it in
themselves: which thing when I considerd, I made choice of that Theme, which
is the ground of this Treatise, to treat of; and took occasion from thence to
frame a Discourse of the Wind of the Spirit, that according to my model I
might give a little light to the mystical doctrine of Sanctification. This
discourse I fitted and framed for that particular Assembly where it has
pleased God to seat me (for how long I know not) for the exercise of my
Ministry. And where I preached it, there I thought to have buried it at the
first: but when I considered the necessity of the subject handled, and the
infirmity of the Author (being too swift in my delivery) I thought the things
might be let fall by the hearers, without that fruit which they desired,
without that good which I intended. Whereupon I was induced in my thoughts to
offer it (what-euer it be) to public view. This motion at the first I
strongly resisted, in regard so many worthy Treatises are extant upon the
Doctrine of Regeneration.

But when I called to mind that same charitable speech of divine Augustine,
Lib. 1. de Trinit. ca. 3
I would that in places infected with Heresy, all men would write that have
any faculty in writing, though it were but the same things in other words; to
the end that all sorts of people, amongst many Books might, light upon some,
and the enemy in all places might find some to encounter him: This holy wish
of that worthy Father, concurring with my desire of doing good, answered those
mental objections which I met withal in my thoughts, and qualified that
indisposition which I had to send it to the Press; and, like a strong
Commander, bade it venture abroad into the world. Being thus called forth, I
present it to thy view, I proffer it to thine use. If thy conscience being
drowsy may any whit be awakened by it; If thy spirit being heavy may be any
whit accheered by it; if thy judgment being erroneous may be any whit informed
by it; if thy mind, being doubtful, may be any whit resolved by it; if thy
desire to walk with God may be any whit sharpened by it, and thou directed to
leave the way of the flesh, and walk after the Spirit (which are the ends as
the great Searcher of all hearts knows, I chiefly aim at in making it
public) give the glory unto God, who gave the first motion, and last
resolution to set it forth: and for my recompense, let me have thy prayers to
God, that I may fulfill the course of my ministry with joy. If the inserting
here and there in the margin other Authors beside the Scriptures does
distaste thee that art a weak Christian; Reader, know that I have done it to
free my self from a calumny wherewithal some have charged me, that I should
be against the use of Fathers: and withal, for thy further satisfaction,
consider that I have done more at the Press then in the Pulpit, as mine
ordinary hearers can testify, whose ears it is not my wont to amaze (being
plain country hearers) with Augustine, Gregory, Barnard, Chrysostom, etc. On
the other side, if that because I am no more plentiful in quotation, does
displease thee that art a curious Reader, I would entreat thee to be satisfied
with this that I had rather incur the censure of a nice judgment
undeservedly, then have mine heart smite me, and my conscience tell me, that I
seek the praise of man more then of God. And what cumfort could I have, when
men should esteem me a well read Scholar in the Fathers (which cannot be in
respect of my years) and yet indeed I should be beholding to an Index
(prepared to my hand by the industry of another,) for such allegations. Well,
whatsoever affection thou read it withal, profit it is that I wish to thy
soul. I have divided the whole into Chapters, the Chapters into Sections, that
thou may read all as well as some, and not weary thy self with too much at
once, if tediousness shall seem to oppress thee: and indeed unless thou
read all, thou may mistake me in some things. Thine the Treatise is,
thine also my self am, in our common Savior; to whose grace I commend thee,

As a desirer of thy best good, T. B.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THe Entrance into the matter, by showing the occasion and Sum of
the Text. CHAP. II. The first general Conclusion from the nature and substance
of the words. CHAP. III. The second general Conclusion from the sum of the
Text. CHAP. IIII. The Logical Analysis of the Text, and the opening of the
first part of it. CHAP. V. The first Doctrine from the first part of the Text,
concerning the free liberty of the Spirit his working. CHAP. VI. The second
Doctrine from the first part of the Text, touching the Invincible force of the
breath of the Spirit. CHAP. VII. The words of the second part of the Text
interpreted, and the heads of the doctrines briefly propounded. CHAP. VIII. The
first Doctrine, from the second part of the Text, handled. CHAP. IX. The second
Doctrine handled, from the second part of the Text. CHAP. X. The third point
handled, from the second branch of the Text. CHAP. XI. The fourth and last
Doctrine obseruable in the second part of the Text. CHAP. XII. The third part
of the Text expounded: and the points of Divinity thence arising propounded.
CHAP. XIII. The first proposition handled out of the last part of the Text.
CHAP. XIIII. The second and last point from the last part of the Text.
The Gales of Grace: OR, The Wind of the Spirit.
John 3.8. The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: So is every
one that is borne of the Spirit.


CHAP. I. The entrance into the matter, by showing the occasion and sum of
the Text.
Sect. 1. The occasion, and coherence
THis third chapter of Saint John, from the first verse to the 22. is a
dialogue or conference betwixt the Savior of Israel, and a Master in Israel
(I mean) Christ Jesus and Nicodemus, concerning the causes of eternal
salvation: wherein our Savior amongst many other necessary doctrines (touching
the merits of his Verses 13.14.
obedience, v. 15.16.
faith in his blood, the v. 16.17.
love of the Father, in sending his Son out of his own bosom, to ransom and
redeem the world of Believers; which he handles here and there, within the
compass of those verses) falls in the first place, upon the point of
Regeneration, being occasioned thereunto, by the speech which Nicodemus put
forth to him in the second verse; Rabbi, we know thou art a teacher come from
God: that is, Not only the vulgar sort of people, but also we Pharisees are
persuaded, and do confess, that thou art a Teacher and Doctor, not assuming
the office of instructing by an unlawful usurpation, but sent by an
extraordinary and immediate calling from God himself, whose presence and power
does manifest it self in thy Doctrine, by the miracles which he enableth thee
to do for the ratifying and confirming of that which thou teach. By which
speech Christ, perceiving a secret desire in this Doctor to be taught in the
way of God, begins somewhat obscurely to tell him of a certain second or
new birth, making entrance thereinto with a vehement asseueration or
protestation in the third verse; Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God: as if he should have said;
Say thou so, Nicodemus, that I am an extraordinary teacher sent from God,
not called after an ordinary manner? thou speak true, and such an one shall
thou now find me; for I can instruct thee in such a mystical piece of
Divinity, as by all the humane learning thou have, thou shall never be able to
gage the depth, nor fadome the bottom of it: And wottest thou what it is? A
man must be borne again, Nicodemus. And that thou may not think that I
speak more then I can justify, I protest unto thee, Verily, verily, a man
must of necessity be borne again: what say thou to this? Did thou ever
hear the like Divinity? Truly no (says he, in the fourth verse) and though
I hear it now, I can scarce believe it, it is the strangest Doctrine that ever
I heard; to me thou seem to preach impossibilities, and to make that
absolutely needful, which I can no way conceive to be possible: How can a man
be borne when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mothers womb,
and be borne? Nicodemus, having thus bewrayed his gross ignorance, and that he
was driven into a maze by that which Christ spoke, Christ replieth upon him
again, as willing to reach him, and opens his mind and his mouth a little
more plainly about the matter, in the fifth verse, Except a man be borne of the
(...).
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. q. d. I thought (Nicodemus)
I should make thee wonder, I told thee I should gravel thee: well, perceiving
thee thus plunged, I will help thee: the second or new birth which I nowspeake
of, is not natural, but spiritual; I discourse not of a reentring into the
mothers womb the second time naturally (for I know that to be impossible) but
of an entering of the holy Ghost into the soul by grace spiritually, and in
this sense would I have thee to understand me: and for a man thus to be borne
again, is so far from being impossible, that it is most necessary and
needful, if he mind ever to enter into the Kingdom of God, either of grace
here, or of glory hereafter. Verse 7.
Marvel not therefore, that I said unto thee, Ye must be borne again. Now our
Savior having by this occasion entered upon so worthy a subject, as the
doctrine of Regeneration is; in handling the same, he does amplify it from a
three-folde particular: first, from the effect of it: secondly, from the
contrary: thirdly, from the efficient cause of it. First, the effect of
regeneration is the reward that follows it, viz. the inheritance of an
heavenly kingdom, in the later end both of the third and fifth verses, Except a
man be borne again; or, of the Spirit, he can not see, nor enter into the
Kingdom of God: giving us to understand, that if a man be regenerate, he shall
possess the Kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, the contrary unto this work of the
new birth, is the corruption of the flesh, and the power of the same, expressed
in the sixth verse; That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: but that which
is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Thirdly, the efficient cause, or immediate
agent of this work, is the Spirit of God or the holy Ghost, set out by a
two-folde metaphor or similitude: first, likened to Water in the fifth verse,
Except a man be borne of water, and the spirit, etc. i. of the spirit, which is
like unto water: and secondly resembled to Wind, in the present Text.

The Wind blows where it lists: and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every one that is
borne of the spirit. Sect. 2. The sum.
Which words (as we see) for the sum and substance of them are nothing else
but a Comparison used by our Savior, in conference with Nicodemus, to express
the operation of the most blessed Spirit of God, in effecting and contriuing
that excellent work of Regeneration in the hearts of the Elect: which
Comparison is taken from the liberty to breathe, from the noise and sound, that
are in the wind, when it moves the air; and this for the coherence and
substance. From whence what we may gather in general for our learning (before
we come to divide and vnbowel the Text more particularly) we shall see by that
which follows in two conclusions.

CHAP. II. The first general Conclusion from the nature and substance of the
words.
Sect. 1.
THis metaphorical or rather comparatiue form of speech our Savior does not
use in vain; but that his Church may learn something, even from the very
manner of speaking. For in that from the consideration of an earthly creature
(such as the Wind is) he does take occasion to discourse with Nicodemus of an
heavenly matter; Doctr. 1.
hence we may observe thus much, that from the consideration of natural things,
we should be led to the contemplation and communication of heavenly. Saint
John from the noise of the Reu. 4.5. cap. 14.2.
thunder which he heard in his Revelations, is led to the meditation of the
power of Christ his voice in the preaching of the Gospel against Antichrist
and his heretical kingdom. Isa. 44.19
The Prophet Esaias from the consideration of the immovable strength and
stability of the earth, takes occasion to speak of the undoubted certainty of
Gods vnaltetable truth, both in his promises and threatenings. And how full of
such heavenly meditations, and divine speeches, the mind and mouth of David
the Father, and Solomon the Son were, upon the consideration and sight of the
works of God, he shall perceive, that does at his leisure peruse the first
psalm, the nineteenth, the hundred and nineteenth, and many other places in
the Psalms, and the whole Book of the Canticles.

Sect. 2. Use.
And wherefore serves this, but to provoke and stir up every Christian to
read to himself a profitable Lecture out of the Book of the creatures? and
not to content himself with a mere gazing and looking upon the works of God,
in the heavens, the earth, the waters, fruitlesly, and unprofitably, as the
greatest number do; but to be led by the same, to set his heart on work, by
divine meditation, and his tongue in spiritual conference, according to what
he sees or considers in those works. Motive 1. from gods glory.
Does not the appearance of Gods glory, in these creaturs, call for this duty
at our hands? Serve not the variety, the beauty, the proportion, the form, and
the ornament of these creatures, to set forth and declare the praise of his
wisdom, the glory of his power, the honor of his goodness? and according to
that of Paul Romans 1.20.
Are not the visible things of God seen clearly, and his glory shown
conspicuously, in, and from the creation of the world? Are not we guilty then
of dishonouring him, when we shall but merely look upon these things, as
upon a piece of paper that has no letters? and from them draw nothing to our
meditations for the good of our souls, and the benefit of others? 2. Note:
otherwise we show our selves fruitless.
See we the Sun so often? blows the wind so often? sounds the thunder so
often? bursteth forth the lightning so often? falls down the rain so often?
Behold we the Canopie of the Clouds, the luster of the heavens, the beauty of
the earth, and yet learn we nothing from hence? Oh how barren hearts have we?
How unprofitable Scholars are we? It is much, that having been set to School
so long, even ever since our years of discretion, we have not yet taken forth
one good lesson out of this great book, the use whereof, the looking whereon
we do so daily and continually enjoy? What are they but Droans that fly about
the fields, and gaze upon the flowers, and gather no honey from them? And what
show we our selves but a sluggish cattle, a fruitless people, when we can
bring no honey to our Hiues, no holy thoughts to our hearts from the great
Universe, to profit our selves, and sweeten others withal? Philosophers,
Physicians, Astrologians have all learned some thing from hence, though but
heathen: and shall we, that profess our selves Christians, only remain
unprofitable? The duty urged.
Oh that we could imitate the Be which gathers from the herbs of the
fields, and flowers of the gardens, food for herself, and honny for others:
then shall we make use of every creature of God; and from the same, gather such
Spiritual instruction, that we shall lay up store of wisdom for our selves,
and store of counsel for others. Still therefore from the works of creation,
from the works of providence, let us meditate upon something of an high and
heavenly nature. From the works of creation meditate thus.
Let the Sun in the air put us in mind of the Sun of Righteousness, that
came down from heaven: when we behold the light of it, let us think upon the
light of grace in the work of illumination: when we feel the heat of it,
let us think of the warmth of love, zeal, and other graces in the work of
Sanctification: when a cloud covers it, and dimmeth the light of it, let us
think how the clouds of sin do cause the Lord to withdraw the light of his
amiable countenance sometimes away from us. Look we up to the heavens? let the
thought of the beautiful outside of them lead us to contemplate upon the
glorious beauty of the inside of that third Heaven, the seat of the blessed.
Look we upon the earth? let the growth of the Plants that be upon it, the
fairness of the fading flowers that do adorn it, the withering of the
grass, that in time is cut away from it, occasion us to meditate of the growth
of grace in the hearts of Gods children, of the fading prosperity of the men of
this world, and of the unavoidable mortality of all mankind. Behold we the
lightning to break forth with violence out of the cloud? meditate we upon the
falling of Satan out of the hearts of the chosen, by the power of the Spirit,
and the preaching of the word. Is it the wind that we think upon? let the
consideration of the lightness of it bring to our thoughts the windy vanity of
humane things, which was Job 7.7.
Jobs meditation: let the boisterous violence of it, bring to our minds, the
sudden calamity of Gods enemies, which was Ier. 18.17
Ieremies meditation: let the swift passage of it draw us to think upon the
swift celerity of Gods Angels, which was Zac. 6.5
Zacharies meditation; and let the consideration of other circumstances
obseruable in the wind move us to meditate upon some of those things
concerning the breathings of grace handled in this From the works of providence
mediate in some such wise.
Again, let the Mariner upon the Sea in his calmes think of the peace and
tranquillity in his tempests upon the troubles and adversity of the ship of
the Church on the Sea of this world. Let the citizen in the enioyment of his
freedom, think how happy a thing it is to be made a free-denizen of the new
Jerusalem. Let the husbandman, from the tillage of his ground, take occasion to
meditate upon the spiritual manuring of his heart; from reaping his crop in
the appointed season, upon the great harvest at the day of Judgment, when
every one shall reap the fruit of his doings, whether good or ill. Let the
rich man, upon the thought of his full bags, upon the sight of his fair
buildings, be led to contemplate upon the durable treasures of spiritual
graces, upon the unspeakable pleasures in heavenly places, in the possession
whereof is joy, and life for evermore. Let the poor man, when he considers
the coursenesse of his diet, the meandness of his clothing, the hardness of
his lodging, the penury that he suffers in in his state, the contempt that he
meets with in the world, divert his mind from discouraging thoughts, which
from thence may easily arise; and ponder with himself, how happy a thing it is
(if he be a Saint) to share with his Savior, in the poverty of outward
condition, and how much he does excel (if he be poor in spirit) a great
number of great ones in the world, in that whereas they have but their portion
in this life, he has an incorruptible crown, an immortal weight of glory,
laid up for him in the heavens, etc. If in this wise our minds be well busied,
our meditations well inured to an holy comparing of heavenly things with
earthly, we shall make a religious use of the natural created and wise
disposed works of God, to the edification of our own souls; and our tongues
will be the fitter to speak of heavenly matters, to the capacity and commodity
of our brethren, when we have occasion offered unto us to confer with them
(as Christ did with Nicodemus) about things of that nature.

CHAP. III. The second general conclusion from the sum of the Text.
Sect. 1.
ANd is there nothing else to be generally concluded from this kind of
comparatiue speaking, but that which has been delivered in the former chapter?
Questionless, yes: for a second thing, of nearer affinity with the comparison
then the former, comes necessarily to be observed, and this it is; 2. Doctr.
general.
That the Wind is a fit similitude to set out the heavenly breath of Gods
gracious Spirit; the wisdom of Christ himself saw it a fitting resemblance:
for himself, being in speech with Nicodemus about the doctrine of Regeneration,
uses this very metaphor of the wind, to inform him in that mystery, and to
take away those carnal cauills, which he brought in against that doctrine.
And very well may this be a truth. Reason.
For why? the Wind is a sign both of the presence and power of God; according
to that of the Psalmist, Ps. 18.10.
He came flying upon the wings of the wind: but wheresoever the Spirit of
grace breaths, there the Lord his gracious presence and heavenly power is
manifested; therefore fitly may the wind resemble the work of Regeneration,
which is wrought by the Spirit of God.

Sect. 2. Use 1.
The consideration of which point serves in the first place, to teach us to
wonder at the depth of Gods counsels, at the vnsearchablenesse of his
wisdom, that such a creature which bears the representation of so many
diverse things should be found fitting to resemble the spiritual renouation,
and new birth of a Christian; that that which is a Prou. 11 29 Hos. 12.2
symbol of vanity, should resemble that work which is most contrary to vanity;
that that wind which is a Job 21.18.
sign of the irrecouerable misery of wicked men should signify those graces
which do free the Elect from eternal misery; that that wind which is a
shadow of the Isa. 41.16
violent force of wicked enemies against Gods people, should represent those
graces which are as Shieldes and Targets unto the Christians, against all
hostile attempts, and spiritual assaults of the enemies of their souls. Needs
must this cause us with the holy Apostle, in an holy admiration, to cry out and
say, Romans 11.33
Oh depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Sect. 3. Use 2.
Secondly, this may well afford us a rule of trial, by which we may come to
know, Examination.
whether ever the Gales of Grace have sauingly blown and breathed upon us,
yea, or no: for if the Wind be a fit similitude to express the mystery of
Regeneration, then from the properties of the Wind we may come to discern
the properties of Grace; and so the regenerating work of the Spirit of God, to
see whether we have it, or who have it. Take we a view therefore of the
properties of the Wind: and as we go along, let us compare withal, the
properties and effects of the Spirit; and we shall have marks and notes enough
to judge by of the work of Regeneration.

Signs of grace. Sign 1. Purification.
First of all, the Wind is of a purging property: even so the Spirit of God is
of a purifying quality, and the one does no less cleanse the heart, then the
other does purify the air and the water. For this cause the holy Ghost is
compared to fire; Mat. 3.11
He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire: that is, with the
holy Ghost which is like fire; and to Eze ^.1
Water that flowed out of the Sanctuary: which two Elements are of a purging
and purifying nature. The one serves to purge metalls from dross and
scurfinesse, and the other to cleanse clothes and vessels from dirt and
filthiness: which double resemblance, what does it signify, but that the
Spirit of God is a purger and purifier of the heart? which thing Paul gives his
believing Corinths to understand. For, writing to them of the work of
Sanctification, begun in them, he tells them 1. Cor. 6.11.
They were cleansed, purged, and washed by the Spirit of God. Wherewithal
accords a worthy saying of an ancient and eloquent Divine, Cypr. de S.
sancto, folio 32. abi gens inde quicquid tabidum est, etc.
That the Spirit of God does expel from the heart whatsoever is contagious,
whatsoever is infectious: now how the Spirit does purify it, will appear by
the like. The Wind does purge the water, by moving and troubling it, and by
stirring up wave after wave, until it has cast up the froth and superfluous
scumme of it upon the shore: and the Air, it does purge two ways; first, by
dispelling fogges and mists; How the Spirit purifieth. 3. ways, both
priuatiuely, and positiuely: Priuatiuely, 1 Ignorantiam fugando. 2
Impoenitentiam amouendo. 3 Concupiscentia^ subigendo.
2 Positiuely, 1 Mentem illuminando: 2 Poenite^tiam inserendo: 3 Sanctitatem
conferendo.


secondly, by drying up noisome puddles, and stinking quagmires. For those
things which do ordinarily infect the air, are one of these two; either misty
unwholesome vapors, or noisome and unsavory quagmires: by the remooueall of
which two, the Wind does clear and cleanse the air: even so the holy Ghost
does purge the soul three ways; first, by dispelling the spiritual fogges
and mists of ignorance and blindness, which darken the understanding:
secondly, by troubling the conscience for those sins which defile the whole
man: thirdly, by drying up that same stinking puddle of evil concupiscence,
and noisome lusts, which have their seat in the will and affections. The first
he does by the work of Illumination, enlightening the mind with saving
knowledge: the second, by the work of Humiliation, breaking the heart with
holy contrition: and the third, by the work of Mortification and
Sanctification, rectifying the will with sincere obedience, and the affections
with holy desires, heavenly love, joy, etc. So that, by all this we see, that
wheresoever the holy Ghost has breathed grace, there is the work of
Spiritual purification wrought. First, the mind is purged from ignorance, and
is spiritually enlightened: no sooner had the Spirit breathed upon Paul, but
the Act. 9.18
scales fell from his eyes: and the Lord begins the work of Conversion at
Illumination; and when he first blows with the blasts of Grace in us, he
bestows spiritual eyesight upon us; he enlighteneth us to see what
himself is in his justice against sin, in his mercy by Christ, to forgive
sin; he opens our eyes to see our misery by natute, to see the remedy of
our misery by grace. Upon this spiritual eyesight, in the second place the
conscience comes to be urged and purged, the soul so troubled with a
consideration of being overwhelmed with this misery, and (out of Christ)
altogether destitute and deprived of that mercy, that it cannot be at quiet;
one billow of sorrow, one wave of grief arises so upon the neck of an other,
that there is no rest that it can find, no easement it can have, no
contentment can be given it, until the scumme and froth of all the sins that
ever it was defiled with, be brought to the shore, and set upon the score of
Christ Jesus. Thou therefore, whosoever thou art, that never had the Lord
Jesus to anoint the eyes of thy soul, that never had thy mind enlightened,
but art still in Egypt, and please thy self in thy blind and ignorant
condition, that never saw so much of thy misery, as has made thee bewail
thy sinful and woeful estate, nor as yet have any care to seek after
knowledge, that thou may come to know thy self aright, and know Christ
crucified, to the end thou may come to repentance; dream not thou that the
gusts of grace are effectually infused into thy soul.

Again, as the mind and conscience is thus purged, where these gusts are, so
likewise is the will purified from rebellion; and that crooked and knotty piece
which before was so hard to be rectified and squared; that untamed, heifer,
which before was so untoward to be broken and brought into any right frame, to
yield unto any counsel, wholesome and good for the soul; when the Spirit
comes to blow upon it (though there be a kind of resisting power in it) is
made to bend which way the Spirit pleases to incline to the ways of life;
insomuch, that the creature shall with holy David say, I am content to do thy
will O God.

Lastly, as the Will from rebellion, the Conscience from impenitencie, and the
Understanding from ignorance; so if grace be wrought in thee, thy affections
will be purged from the dross of unbelief, from the love of earthly things, S.
sanctus carnaeles hebetat sensus, and conterit appetitus. Cypr.
from the vanity of carnal and sensual desires; and like a man mortified and
sanctified, dead will thou be to the lusts of the flesh, bringing them daily to
the slaughter, and alive to God through Jesus Christ our Lord: and those evils
which formerly were most delightsome to the flesh, will then become most
burdensome to the spirit. Thus I say where the holy Ghost has regenerated,
there is a purified soul: for do we think that so pure a guest as the
blessed Spirit is, will come and take up the lodging in a man or woman, and not
cast out the unclean and impure spirits that he finds there at his coming.
It is not possible, where that comes and abides, the blind devil must out,
the proud devil must out, the impenitent out, malicious out, covetous out,
and all the Lucifers and Beelzebubs must avoid the room which he enters into,
and give way unto his purifying blasts. Can the mists of ignorance, the puddle
of concupiscence, and that foul legion of lusts which fight against the soul
remain vndispelled, vndried up, vndriuen away, where this wind blows? No,
no: when grace comes, light comes, and it cannot but give light; purity
comes, and it cannot but cleanse; fire comes, and it cannot but consume and
burn up our corruptions. It pittieth my heart to think how people live in
their old sins, and wallow in that same polluted blood, which they drew from
their fathers which were Amorites, from their mothers which were Hittites: I
mean from persons stained with the guilt of Adams treason; whom they imitate
and follow also, in the trade of transgression, without the least part of
mortification, void of the meanest measure of Sanctification, and yet think
themselves to have a share in the work of Regeneration: whose eyes I pray God
open to see this delusion. A needful caveat.
I do not speak of such a purging as is every way perfect in this life, as if
none were breathed upon by the Spirit, but those that are purged fully from al
relics of ignorance, rebellion, corruption; for then none should be Saints,
but those that are in heaven: For howsoever this work be perfect, in regard of
the workman (the Spirit never doing any thing imperfectly) yet, in regard of
the persons, in whom it is wrought, it is imperfect, because mingled with
corruption: neither dare I say, that those are in no degree purified, that are
not in the same degree purified with others; but this I dare boldly affirm,
that that person, who has attained to no measure of this purging (yea, not to
so much of it as does cause him to long for, and strive after the perfection of
it) the Spirit of grace has not breathed upon his soul. Though the best
exercised wits can but know in part, the most faithful heart but believe in
part, the most penitent soul but repent in part, the most mortified and
sanctified person, but love God, godly men, godliness in part, desire Gods
glory in part, and but imperfectly set his heart upon the best things; yet he
that has no part of saving knowledge, no measure of sound faith, no degrees of
godly sorrow, spiritual love, heavenly joy, holy desires; he has received no
part of the Spirit: and though happily he may have some of the common gifts of
the Spirit, yet no portion has he of the regenerating breath of grace, until
the scales of ignorance, the crustinesse of conscience, the mire of
concupiscence, be driven away, and dried up in some measure or other, to the
making of him a purified creature: take this for the first note.

Secondly, Sign 2.
it is the property of the Wind, to make the earth fruitful; for we see by
experience, when it comes from the South, it does ordinarily bring rain with
it, which watreth the ground, and causes the grass, plants, and grain, to
spring up, and bring forth fruit in their kind: even so the Spirit of grace is
very fructiferous; and wheresoever it breaths, much fruit of holiness and
righteousness is brought forth: neither indeed can the man who is endued with
it, be altogether barren of good works, inasmuch as wheresoever the Spirit is,
there is faith, and faith shows it self by works. Hang a wet piece of
linen abroad in the air, and the faster the wind dries it, the whiter it
will appear: and the more the Spirit dries up the spiritual moisture of
filthiness in the soul, the more white and shining will the life be in holy
fruits, and in a blameless and unrebukable walking. The Ge. 5.22
uprightness of Enoch, the 2. Sam. 15.28
holiness of David, the Job 1 21
patience of Job, the Exo. 15.24.25
meekness of Moses, the Lu. 19.8
justice of Zaccheus, the Act. 10.2
alms and devotions of Cornelius, the Cap. 9.36.
good works of Dorcas, and the diligence of the Apostles: what do all these
show, but that, when Grace is sown in the heart, holy and righteous fruits will
sprout up and spread forth in the life. Wherefore, wheresoever the fruits are
like the vintage of Sodom (unsavory, ungodly) and the works, the
unprofitable works of darkness, the heart must needs be empty of saving
grace. And if any one be so vain as to think a gracious heart and an ungodly
life can stand together, I refer him to the judgment of that grave and
divine Apostle, Galat. 5. where he puts a Galat. 5.19.20.21.22.23.
BUT, a note of opposition betwixt adultery, fornication, lasciviousness,
idolatry, witchcraft, variance, drunkenness, reuellings, etc. which he calls
Works of the flesh; and betwixt Gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekness,
peaceablenesse, temperance, etc. which are works of the Spirit. Never flatter
thy self then: If thy conversation be irreligious, and thy carriage
unrighteous; thou proclaimest a total vacancie and absence of the regenerating
Spirit; the property whereof, is to fructify in an holy kind wheresoever he
blows: and that of Christ must needs be true, John 15.5.
He that abides in me, and I in him (as every regenerate one does) the same
brings forth much fruit.

Thirdly, 3 Sign of grace.
it is the property of the wind to drive forward. Let a ship sail with the
wind upon the sea, it speedeth the faster. Let a bird in the air flee with
the wind, her course is the swifter. Let a man upon the ground walk that way
which the wind drives, and he can tell what an help to hasten him forward it
is: so when the bark of our lives is sailing toward heaven (with the sail of
good) works) which is the place whither the spirit drives; this same wind of
heaven will speed this bark of ours forward swiftly, it will put life into our
actions; insomuch, that whatsoever good duty we take in hand, we shall go
about the same cheerfully and willingly, being ready to every good work of
piety toward God, of charity toward our brethren. Hence it is that the
Psalmist adjoyneth this Epithet Ps. 51.12 Vphould me with thy free spirit.
free, to the spirit of God: and we use to say in our vulgar Proverb of him
that is nimble, active, and full of metal, He is all spirit. When this wind
of grace had breathed upon the Macedonians, it made them so forward to minister
to the poor Saints, that (as the Apostle testifies of them) 2 Cor. 8.2.3.4
There was a willingness in them above their power. The people that contributed
toward the building of the Temple that David set up, 1 Chro. 9.6
offered willingly, and their hearts were to it, as the Text shows. And whence
was it that there was this alacrity in them to further so commendable an
action, but from this, that The holy Ghost had taken up his lodging in the
temple of their hearts? When these gusts of grace blow upon the heart of a
Minister, they will make him so nimble in his Embassady, that he will preach
the word of God 2 Cor. 8 17
willingly. When they breathe upon the heart of a Magistrate, he will Ier. 9.3
have courage for the truth; upon the heart of an hearer, he will be swift in
Iam 1.19
hearing the word of God. This wind did drive David forward so fast, that Ps.
119 32
he ran the way of Gods commandments; and Paul so swiftly, that he did
Phil. 3.14
follow hard, or press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. What shall we say then of those that go so murmuringly
and vncheerfully about any good and godly exercise [being as hardly drawn to
it, as a Bear to the stake; so hard to be brought to a sermon (especially if
it be upon any other day but the Sabbath, when the laws of the Land awe them)
so hard to be persuaded to entertain a good conceit of, to afford a good word,
or to stand up for the faithful ministers and servants of Christ Jesus; so
hard to be drawn to maintain the worship of God in the places where they live;
to relieve the wants of the needy; to break the bread of life diligently to
their people, if they be Ministers; to administer the rules of justice duly,
if they be Magistrates, and to execute the duties which belong to their
places] What (I say) can be thought of such? certainly they give shrewd
suspicion, that heavens blasts in the work of regeneration have not as yet
breathed upon them: for, if they had, there would be more spiritual agility,
more heavenly alacrity and readiness to do good in them, then there is. The
oyled door will open and shut without creaking: and the heart that is oyled
with grace will be enlarged to what good is, without grudging. Does a boat
that has a fair wind, and a full stream, stand in need of an haling line?
and does the wind of heaven (think thou) blow upon thee when thou must
have so many haling lines to draw thee, or else no good can be wrung from
thee? Will thou not worship God, but when the Sabbath comes; not give to the
poor, but when the rate comes; nor bring forth better fruits of amendment,
but when death comes or some extraordinary visitation, when thou think
there is no remedy but thou needs must, or else some inconvenience may overtake
thee, and whatsoever thou do is done unwillingly; and yet imagine that thou
art endued with the Spirit? How dare thou thus control the truth of Gods
word which cannot ly?

I confess indeed, A caution
that the best of Gods servants, into whom the Lord has breathed the greatest
measure of grace, do sometimes feel themselves more lumpish, drowsy and
vncheerfull in holy services then they were wont to be, as (no doubt) David did
after his fall: but yet it is but at some times, it is not always so with
them. And I know also, that the work of grace has need to be helped forward
by the use of means in those that excel in virtue in this vale of imperfection,
by reason of the remainder of corruption [as the boat (though having a fair
wind) by the help of oars, in regard of some heavy burden that it may carry]
yet go forward they do by the use of those holy means, and they bewail their
untowardness also. But that man that has no heart at any time unto that which
is good, that labors not to overcome his backwardnes, that laments it not,
that strives not, that voweth not, that prays not against it; upon whom the
preaching of the word, the persuasion of friends cannot preuail, to make him
do any more then that which perforce is extorted and haled from him, either
by the rigor of man's law, or the wind of vain glory; it cannot be truly said,
that the treasures of saving grace are bestowed upon him: for, those that are
borne of the Spirit will not only bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, but
also with cheerfulnes and alacrity; accounting it their felicity to be employed
in the services of their heavenly Master.

Again, 4. Sign of regeneration. The spiritual conflict.
the wind does not only drive forward, but also it resists those things that
stop the speedy passage of it: so the Spirit of grace does ordinarily resist
whatsoever is contrary to its own working in the soul which it regenerateth.
Which thing the Apostle evidently lays down, when he says, Gal.
The spirit lusts against the flesh. Insomuch that by this we see, that
another evidence for the work of grace must be fetched from the spiritual
combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit. For, it being so, that in the most
regenerate there is corruption as well as grace, there must needs be an holy
strife in that person. A Simile.
We see in the whirl-winde, where there are but circular blasts that are
indirectly contrary and laterally opposite to one another, what a stirring of
the dust, what a whirring of the stubble (or what ever else lies where those
blasts meet) there is, as if we should see two champions grappling and
wrestling in that place. How much more is it true, that there must be a strange
bickering and striving in that soul where two such spirits do meet as are not
indirectly opposite, but directly contrary to one another; viz. the Spirit of
God (coming from heaven) working grace, and the spirit of Satan (coming from
hell) hindering grace? Upon none of all the Apostles did this holy Spirit
breathe more then upon Paul, whether we consider the measure of his
humiliation at his first conversion, or the measure of his zeal after his
conversion: and yet he had this spiritual conflict in himself, as may be
gathered from his own complaint; To. 7.24
I see a law in my members warring against the law in my mind, and leading me
into captivity to the law of sin. And what dry bouts David (a man after Gods
own mind) had, sometimes with distrust of Gods providence, sometimes with
despair of Gods assistance, sometimes with carnal confidence, sometimes with
fretting at the prosperity of the wicked, and the like; the Book of the Psalms
is a plentiful witness. What breathings of grace then (trow we) have they
attained unto, that neither ever were, nor yet are, at war with their own
corruptions? but (in their own deluded opinion) all is well with them; at peace
with God, with the devil, the world, their own consciences and all. They
(they say) are never troubled nor disquieted, they find nothing to burden
them nor molest them, they thank God for it. What grace have they? It is to be
feared, none at all. And (poor souls) the spirit of Satan still breathes in
them, and corruption has them still in chains, and they are ready every hour
to be cut off, and popt over into the pit of destruction: and yet (ah woeful
case) they see it not, but applaude themselves, and solace themselves, as if
they were in no danger, and no aliants to the regenerate condition. Say thou
thou have nothing within thee to trouble thee, nothing to molest thee, nor ever
had, thou thankest God for it? Will thou take a word from me, and mark
what I shall say? I assure thee (whosoever thou be) I would not be in thine
estate for a thousand worlds, if there were so many. Thou art without grace,
and wilt not believe it. The God of heaven persuade thee of it: for if that be
true which our Savior speaks Lu. 11.21
While the strong man armed (that is, the Devil) keeps the house, all things
are in peace. Then if all things be thus at peace in thee; to harden thy heart,
and sear thy conscience, that evil one still holds thee in bonds, thou art
still bound in the fetters of sin, and art in fearful thraldom thereunto:
and until a stronger then all these comes (I mean the Lord Jesus) and set
thy own corruptions and the holy Ghost together at variance in thy soul,
miserable and lamentable must thy condition needs be. I tell thee, if the
Spirit of grace were in thee, there would be a spiritual whirlewinde in thy
soul, two contrary blasts meeting and grappling with one another, like the
twins in Genesis 25.22.
Rebeccahs womb: and they would make thee cry out, as she did Why am I thus,
why am I thus worldly? why am I thus lazy in my profession? why am I thus dead
hearted in the service of my God? thus proud, thus full of self-love, thus
passionate and tuchy, etc. and thou should find the Spirit of Faith
resisting the spirit of unbelief, distrust, doubting; the Spirit of truth,
resisting the spirit of error; the Spirit of love, resisting the spirit of
envy, malice, frowardness; the spirit of humility, the spirit of pride; the
spirit of zeal, the spirit of key-coldnesse, luke-warmenesse, carnal fear,
etc. Thus it would be with thee, if thou were regenerate.

Albeit this conflict of Contraries be not always alike, because grace
sometimes gets the foil, sometimes the conquest (though never the fall;)
yet the experienced Christian knows, with S. Paul, that whenever he
intends any good, evil is present with him, and in his best actions,
corruption troubles him, whi h he many times finds much ado to keep under.
And therefore I conclude, It is a vain thing for any man or woman, to imagine
that they are sanctified (...) Wherefore let those that refuse to pray in the
Temple, as Anabaptisticall and Papisticall Recusants do, suspect themselves to
be swollen rather with the blasts of heresy, and the wind of vaineglory, then
blown upon with the gales of Sanctity. Let those that care not to pray any
where but in the temple, neglecting this duty with their charges in their
houses, as carnal and common Protestants do, suspect themselves to be carried,
rather with the wind of custom and fashion, then of grace and heavenly
inspiration. Let those that use it in their families, and make no conscience of
it apart by themselves (whenas there are so many secret corruptions to be
acknowledged and bewailed in the best, which are to be kept from the dearest
friends in the family) fear themselves to be guided rather by the spirit of
hypocrisy, then possessed with the Spirit of grace. But such as care neither
for praying in the Temple, nor in the family, nor secretly, let them not only
suspect, but also, know themselves to be such as are altogether void of the
spiritual operation of Gods Spirit, in the work of Regeneration. For where
that work is, there is the Spirit of adoption: and where the Spirit of
adoption is, there is a crying, Abba Father: and such will have so familiar and
frequent communion with the Lord, that the Church, the family, the streets,
the highways, the walks, the chamber, the bed, the closet, the shop, yea the
prison it self, etc. shall be made witnesses of those heavenly ejaculations
which their hearts and lips dart up into the ears of the Almighty that great
hearer of prayers.

Secondly, as the spiritual man is heard of God, sending up prayers to the
high Court of Parliament in Heaven; so men shall hear the sound of his
sanctified tongue in holy and religious communication. I delight (says David)
to be talking of thy righteous judgments. Ps. 39.2
While I held my peace from good, my sorrow was stirred, yea my heart waxed hot
within me. Acts 22 1. etc
Paul must needs be telling and talking of his conversion before his very
enemies, and showing what notable things the Lord had wrought in him, and done
for him. Whence was it that Acts
Aquila and Priscilla did instruct Apollos in the way of God more perfectly?
that 2. Tim. 1.5. compared with chap. 3.14 6.
Eunica did teach Timothy? but because the Spirit had so breathed in their
hearts, that they could not hold their tongues, but they must be speaking of
the ways of God to strangers they never saw before, and to their domestical
inferiors, and home-dwellers. When grace has seasoned the heart, it will so
salt and powder the speech, that it will both eat out putrified and rotten
communication, and also make the tongue a fit instrument to minister grace to
the hearers. Take trial of thy self by this particular also; What is thy
speech? Speak thou the language of Ashdod, or the dialect of Canaan? Do
thou with David Ps. 39.1.
take such heed to thy ways, that thou may not offend with thy tongue, keeping
thy mouth as with a bridle? Nay, do thou with the same Prophet Psalm. 34.11.
call thy children unto thee, and teach them the fear of the Lord; and upon
all fitting occasions, the praises of God, and the statutes of God continually
in thy mouth? If they be, it is a good sign, that thou have a good stock of
grace in thy heart: but if thy tongue Iac. 3.6.
be set on fire with hell, as Saint James speaks, breathing out stinking,
blasphemous, filthy, frothy, false, slanderous, venomous, unsavory speeches,
it is a very strong evidence against thee, that the breath of Heaven has not
blown upon thee. For I never read in all the Scripture, that a regenerate
heart, and a reuiling tongue, an holy heart and a ribald tongue, a gracious
heart and a blasphemous periurious tongue, a spiritual heart and a
dissembling, backebiting, and scoffing tongue have stood together. I deny not,
but the tongue (being Iac. 3.8.
an unruly evil) for want of watchfulness at sometimes, may break foorrh
into speeches unseemly, unsavory, offensive and scandalous, though the heart
be never so well sanctified: yet this evil is bewailed when it is perceived,
and more care is taken by the Christian, to set lock and key upon his mouth
afterward. But, to make a common trade of swearing, cursing, lying, filthy
speaking, Ismaelitish scoffing, privy whispering, without any compunction or
remorse, without any reformation or amendment, is a plain argument of a
graceless disposition: which I do boldly affirm against the stoutest
loose-tongued speaker that is; because the Apostle joins with me, and is my
warrant, when he says, Iac. 1.26
If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this
man's religion is vain.

And this may I add also. If any man or woman would be accounted such an one
as in whose heart the Spirit of grace has breathed, and yet not able, or at
least, truly desirous and industrious to inure his mouth to blessing, as well
as to bridle it from cursing; and to set it on work with the matters of
heaven, as to refrain it from hellish discourses: that person is much deceived
also. If thou were regenerate, thou could not choose but (upon fit occasion
offered) be speaking and telling, either how God humbled thee, or how he
raised thee, or how he brought thee to Christ, how he tried thee since thou
came to Christ; and grace would make thee speak, either of the force of thy
corruptions, or the victory thou have gotten over them, of the rubbes that are
in the way of a Christian man's course, of the sweetness of a godly life, etc.
Thy wife, thy husband, thy children, servants, friends, familiars, neighbors,
should hear the sound of godly counsel mingled with love, the sound of holy
persuasion joined with wisdom, of religious instruction graced with gravity,
of wholesome advice seasoned with humility, to come from thee, and proceed out
of thy mouth, either more or less, according to thy measure, if the fountain
were but seasoned, and thy heart sanctified with the saving gales of the wind
of grace. Thy tongue would be moving questions to the aged in Christ, that are
stronger then thy self, thou would be willing to give direction unto those
that are younger then thy self, and that have not that experience which thou
have; and glad would thou be of any occasion to talk of the ways of God,
to the furtherance of thy self, to the edification of others. Insomuch, that
howsoever many can talk well, which are but hypocrites, never sanctified by
the power of the holy Ghost; yet all that are so sanctified and regenerate, can
speak of the things that concern the good of their souls, either more or
less, and that to some good purpose also; and the newest borne babe in Christ
that is (I speak of those that are come to years of discretion) though his
understanding be never so small, is able to put the laylors question to the
learnedest Paul, and profoundest Divine in the Land, Acts 16.
Sir, what shall I do to be saved? What must I do to come by such a grace,
the want whereof I see in my self; what course shall I take to overcome such a
corruption, the raging whereof I find against my soul?

I go not about (good Reader) to bring all Christians to one and the same
scantling in this matter of spiritual conference: A caveat.
for some speak lispingly, or stammeringly, for want of age, experience, help
of natural gifts, wherein other Christians go beyond them: and no further
then the Lord opens David's lips, can Psa. 51.
his mouth show forth Gods praise. But this is that which I chiefly intend; To
prove him to be destitute of grace, that has neither art nor heart, or art
without an heart, to confer and speak of the matters of salvation. The Lord
knows it is far from my purpose, to quench so much as the smoking flax, or
discourage the weakest scholar in Christ's School, that is scarce past his
Christ's Cross row: if he has but a true mind to learn, the Lord prosper
him in this business, and increase his skill more and more. I am not ignorant,
how many weak Christians complain of their unskillfulness this way, I can not
confer, I can not talk, as such an one can, I have not the gift, etc. Can
thou not? Thou can; thou can talk of thy corruptions, thou can complain
of thy weaknesses, thou can question about what way thou must walk in, to
come to salvation, seeing thy self to be out of the way naturally, though thou
be never so weak and unskillful: if thou have any whit of spiritual breath
in thee, thus thou can (I say) confer and speak: and by that time thou
come to have these questions thoroughly answered, according to thy hearts
desire, thou shall from thine own experience, grounded upon the word of GOD
in the Law and Gospel, come to that maturitie and ripeness, that thou shall
be able to put any mere Naturian or Politician to his non plus, in the points
of practical Divinity. And therefore once again I say, go on, the Lord
prosper thee. Though thou can but spell as yet, and thy understanding be but
small, yet if the Lord has enlarged thy heart to seek after Knowledge as for
Pearls; and like a diligent dutiful Scholar, to plie thy book hard, and to
cry and complain because thou can not get thy lesson so well as thou do
desire, entreating thy fellows to help thee, and to tell thee; I dare not say
but that the Spirit of Heaven has inspired grace into thee. Wherefore I aim
not (I say) at the discoragement of the weak, but at the discountenancing of
the careless; whose tongues are so unaccustomed to the points of Divinity,
that they can not so much as ask, which way they may come to salvation, or
enquire how to attain unto that measure of knowledge, that they may be fit to
commune with those that are under them, or that belong unto them, about the
things that concern their everlasting peace; that never complain of their
ignorance, and unskillfulness, nor labor after more knowledge; and yet for all
that think themselves to be regenerate: who, being tried by this rule, are
proved not to be the people they deem themselves to be. And so much of the
fifth property of the spirits breathing, to fit the Christian, (...) that may be
thrown against the one, and to ward the blows which may be offered against
the other. 1. The spirit vpholds his faith against temptation.
For when Satan labors by the rubbes which he casts, by the fearful
doubts which he suggesteth, to weaken his assurance of having right to the
heavenly Privileges (as pardon of sin, grace to persevere, freedom from
spiritual bondage, the kingdom of glory, etc.) He is able (blessed be God,
which teaches his hands to war, and his fingers to fight) to give him
therepulse (though sometimes more weakly, sometimes more strongly) and to
answer him as Naboth did Ahab, when he requested his Vineyard, 1 Ki. 21.2
God forbid that I should part with the inheritance of my father. God forbid I
should let go my anchor-hold in Christ; and by hearkening to thee Satan, throw
away the evidences that I have for those heavenly prerogatives, and that
inheritance which my Father has bequeathed me in the name of his Son. 1 His
godly life is defended.


Again, when either the Devil, world, or flesh, shall lay any siege against
his godly conversation, either by golden and honey arguments alluring him to
some evils, or by opposing and discouraging reasons to deter him from some
good, he can answer him (though not always alike) as Elisha did King Ioram, 2
Kin. 3.13.
What have I to do with thee? Or as Joseph his mistress, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against my God? Or as the man of
God did Jeroboam, 1 Ki. 13 8.9.
If thou will give me half thine house, I will not yield to thee: for it is
otherwise charged me by the Lord. And whatsoever the sin be which he is
suggested unto, this blessed wind blows a weapon, and brings a sword to
his hand to smite against it withal. As, against pride it gives this sword,
James.
God resists the proud: against lust, this; Heb. 13.2.
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge: against covetousness this, Ephesians. 5.5
no covetous person which is an idolater, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: against apostasy and backe-sliding this, 2 Pet. 2 21
It had been better never to have known the way of righteousness, then after
they have known it, to turn from the holy command- (...) rises troubled with
Christ, the Act. 17.6
heathens with Paul and Sylas, 1 Kings 18.17.
Ahab with Elias, 2 Samuel 6 16.20.
Michol with David, the Acts 7.
uncircumcised Jews with Steven, and the Infidells with the Christians under
the ten Persecutions. And why so? Only because the Spirit of God had
regenerated them, the spirit of zeal was upon them, and they were filled with
the holy Ghost. Not that the holy Ghost does of himself produce such an effect
as the hating of Gods Children, and the opposing of religion, amongst any (for
can God, who is unity it self be against himself?) but this comes to pass
accidentally (by occasion of the spirits working in the regenerate) from the
corruption of the unregenerate, who are always like the troubled and roaring
waters; and therefore can be no more still when the godly refuse to run to
the same excess of riot with them, or speak against, or dislike of their
enormious courses, then the sea can be still, when the wind blows upon it.
If thou therefore that art a Christian dooest meet with opposition for thy
holy profession, account it no strange thing; as if thou were alone in that
condition: and marvel not at it. For will the Mariner wonder to see the waves
rise, the waters swell, the Sea rage, when windy storms beat upon it? The
Scribes will quarrel with Christ for his innocence: and the wicked will quarrel
with his followers for their integrity: and for a man to bring forth the fruits
of the Spirit, is enough to breed deadly enmity in the hearts of the ungodly
against him. For the working of the Spirit is resembled to the Wind; and the
Wind is a fit metaphor to express the same.

CHAP. IIII. The logical analysis of the Text, and the opening of the first
part of it.
Sect. 1.
Having now done with the sum of the words, order requires that we should
anatomize the Text, and part it into several members. In this comparison two
branches are occurrent; first, the comparison or similitude it self in these
words, The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes. Secondly, the
application of the similitude in the words following: So is every one that is
borne of the Spirit. Each of these two members subdiuide and spread themselves
into 3. branches apeece; which, meeting together throughout the Text, do
constitute, and make three substantial parts for me to handle. The first
treats of the free liberty and irresistable efficacy of the working of the
holy Ghost: the second contains a discourse of the sense and feeling of that
holy work in the regenerate: the third comprehends the incomprehensiblenesse
of the measure of that work. The first laid down thus, The Wind blows
where it lists: So is every one that is borne of the Spirit. The second thus,
and thou hear the sound thereof; so is every one that is borne of the
Spirit. The third thus, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it
goes: So is every one that is borne of the Spirit: Still this clause (every
one that is borne of the Spirit) being applied to every branch in the
similitude.

Sect. 2. Part. 1.
The first of these must first be handled; The Wind blows where it lists:
So is every one that is borne of the Spirit. The words expounded.
First to interpret the words. [The Winde] August. as Chemnitius quoteth.
Some here by Wind do understand the person of the holy Ghost, or the third
person in the Trinity; for which opinion (I confess) there seems to be some
color in the Being rather translated (...) then (...).
Greek Text; which I dare not absolutely reject, lest I should be thought to
offer wrong to so worthy a Father as is the Author of it: yet in modesty let
me say thus much. In as much as the original word is of some general extent,
being derived of a (...) or (...).
word which signifies, to breathe or blow, I can not see any reason why that
term which in our Translations is englished wind, should for the Greeks
sake, so properly signify the third person in the Trinity; especially too,
sithence the epithet [holy] is here wanting, (...).
which usually we find joined with the word Spirit, when it notes out the
person of the holy Ghost: wherefore with others of the Chrysostom. Chimnit.
Calvin. Pisc. Beza, etc.
learned, I take to be meant the natural wind, which many times makes a
dinne and noise in the air. About which wind the curious brains of differing
Philosophers have weaued many knots, and framed many intricate and needelesse
questions: the loosing and discussing whereof, it is not my purpose to meddle
withal; being neither material to the Text, nor profitable to the Reader:
neither mind I to stuff these Papers with the diverse descriptions which diverse
As Seneca, one: Not. quaest. lib. 5. cap. 1 Aristot. an other: Meteor. lib. 2.
cap. 5. Peter de la Primand. 2 third: Franc. Acad. part. 3 page 196.
Writers give of the wind. To show what it is in one definition, is as much as
the Text requires. What the wind is.
The wind therefore is an exhalation, more dry then moist, bred of those cold
and A vapor is moist of it self, but dry by reason of the Sun.
dry vapors of the earth, which the Sun draws up into the middle region
of the air: in which region this exhalation meeting with a cold cloud, is of
hot made cold, and by the force of that cloud beaten down into the lower part
of the air: where (by reason of the subtle nature it has in it self) it
spreads it self laterally or broadwise, flowing sometimes to one corner of
the heavens, sometimes to another; sometime Eastward, sometime Southward, etc.
This wind, I say thus defined, is here to be understood. [Bloweth where it
lists:] this phrase where it lists, does not betoken any such will in the
Wind, as there is in the soul of man; (for the wind being an in animal
substance, and a creature without soul, how can there be any such power of the
soul in it, as the will is?) but it notes out the free and irresistable
agitation of the wind beating the air, and other flexible bodies, sometimes
one way, sometimes another, as the great Jehovah pleases. [So is every one
that is borne of the Spirit.].i. so is it with every elect person, in regard of
the regenerating work of the Spirit; that Spirit breathing sometimes in one,
sometimes in an other, as he pleases, freely, and irresistably.

CHAP. V. The first Doctrine from the first part of the Text, concerning the
free liberty of the Spirit his working.
Sect. 1.
FRom this fountain so opened (as it is in the former Chapter) two streams of
positive Divinity do flow, to water the garden of God. The first is this:
Doctr. 3. The Spirit of grace inspireth grace, when he pleases, and where he
pleases.
That the work of Regeneration proceeds from the will and pleasure of God,
to be effected and wrought in what persons he pleases, at what time he
pleases.

The wind has this liberty from the Creator, freely to spread it self,
sometimes in one part of the air, sometimes in another: And takes not the Lord
this prerogative royal to himself, to infuse the breath of his own grace,
sometimes in one, sometimes in another, as himself pleases? We should
attribute less liberty to the Lord, then to the Wind, if we should not yield
to this. In the old Testament did the Lord breathe thus. For, that Ge. 5.24.
Enoch, and 6.9
Noah, and 15.6
Abraham, Genesis 26.
Isaac, c. 32.24.
Jacob, Genesis 39
Joseph, and the rest of the Patriarchs in their ages and generations, were
culled out from the rest of mankind to receive the stamps of grace, and to be
made new Creatures; whence was it, but only from the will of the Almighty?
Did not the Spirit blow thus in the New Testament? freely working sometimes
upon a Mat 9.9
Matthew, sometimes upon a Lu. 19.9
Zaccheus, a Lu 7.48.
Mary Magdalen, a Ioh 1.41 42 Mat. 4.19
Peter, an Andrew, and a few believing Jews, amongst such a multitude of
Scribes and Pharisees, Publicans and sinners, that lived in the days of our
Savior; And that he did blow upon the heart of Acts 9.
Paul, amongst so many persecutours whom he might have converted as well as
him; that he Act. 16.14
opened the heart of Lydia, amongst so many women whom he might have
sanctified as well as she; that he breathed grace into the soul of the Acts
16 34.
Iaylour amongst so many cruel tyrants, whom he might have regenerated, as
well as he, if his will had been such: what does all this note out unto us, but
the liberty which the great Creator, Savior, and Sanctifier of the Church has
to inspire grace in whom he lists and pleases? Very pregna^t to this purpose
is that of Paul, which he writes to his Corinths. For, speaking of the diverse
gifts and operations of the spirit he says; 1 Cor. 12.11
Al these does one and the self-same Spirit work, dividing to every man as
(...). Reason.
he wills, or pleaseh.

The ground of all which is this; because Gods will toward his creatures is
otherwise then his will toward himself. The things which he wills concerning
himself, does he will of necessity (vt) he does will his own being and glory
necessarily (though not with a constrained, Quae Deus de seipso vult
necessario, vult necessitate naturae non coactionis Zanch. de Not. Dei.
yet with a natural necessity, his nature necessarily requiring that he should
will his own essence and glory:) but as for the things he wills toward the
creatures, his will is not necessary, but free.i. it is in his own pleasure,
either to will them, or not to will them; whether the gift be election,
justification, or sanctification. Now then the Lords will in willing the good
of his creaturs, being free, either to will, or not to will the same: and
Regeneration, or the gales of grace being one of those good things (as well as
election, justification, redemption) which he has liberty thus to will; it
must needs be a truth, that the wind of grace is at the Lords disposing, to
blow with it sauingly upon what sons and daughters of Adam he pleases.

Sect. 2. Use 1.
The consideration of which truth serves first of all, to lay flat on the
ground all opinion of proper power and strength in any man to work any grace
in himself, or so much as of him self to incline thereunto. For if the Spirit
breaths where he lists, and the Lord only sanctifies whom he pleases;
then no man (be he never so mighty, wise, wealthy) can have the breath of grace
in himself, or breath after grace for himself, or breathe grace into
himself, without the inspiration and operation of the Holy Ghost. Alas, how
can that man move spiritually to any thing that good is, from any thing that
evil is, who is held hard under the bands, and tied fast with the cords of
spiritual death, which cannot be loosed until the Spirit does spiritually
enliue him? How can he see spiritually the secrets of the Lord, whose
understanding is wholly darkened, and before the eyes of whose mind there are
such thick scales of ignorance drawn, as can not be removed, until the
Spirit does enlighten him? How can he elect and choose the paths of life to walk
in of his own free pleasure, whose will is so spiritually perverted, that it
cannot be reformed again, until the holy Ghost undertakes to rectify it? Now
if neither the mind of man can bring the least measure of illumination unto it
self, nor the will of man the least part of reformation to it self; what
power can there be in man toward the work of his own conversion! Can the
paper fix letters upon it self without the hand and pen of a writer? Can the
air give light unto it self, without the beams of the Sun? Can we write the
Law of God upon our own hearts, without the finger of the Spirit? Can we
receive the light of grace, without the spiritual sunshine of the Spirit?
it is not possible: it is God that works in us the will and the deed. Away
then with that freedom of will to regenerate our selves, which our Adversaries
do groundlesly hold, and maintain. Whereas they object Object.
that same speech of our Savior, John 5.6. to the sick man that lay at the
poole of Bethesda, Will thou be made whole; and conclude from thence, that that
man had a will to have his disease cured before his healing: So consequently a
sinner may have a will to the curing of his sick sinful soul, even while the
disease of sin lies upon him, and while he remains unregenerate; Who is of
so weak understanding, as not plainly to see the weakness of this argument?
Answer 1
For, what though it be granted, that the man which lay sick at the poole of
Bethesda, of a bodily infirmity, had a will (as no doubt he had) to be cured of
his malady, even while the disease did reign upon him; shall we therefore
conclude, that we have a power to will the healing of our spiritual wounds
before grace be breathed into us from heaven? God forbid. The poor Creeple
that lay at the poole of Bethesda, though he lay upon a bed, and could not
stir himself so nimbly and lively as others that were in better health then
himself, yet he had life in him, and a feeling of his disease; and therefore
well might he desire and have a will to be healed. But a man that lies in the
poole of Beth-auen, in the gulf of iniquity: so long as the disease of his
soul lies upon him uncured, he is stark dead, he has no more spiritual
life in him, then a block or a stone has natural life, he is utterly void
of any sense or feeling of his disease: and how can he then will the cure of
it, and wish the healing of it.

Answer 2.
Besides, when Christ begins to deal with the sinner about the cure of his
diseased soul, as he did with that sick man about the healing of his
diseased body: And when he asks the sinner by a secret voice, and by his
revealed will in the Word, Will thou be healed of thy spiritual malady; It
must be his Spirit must teach us to answer, Yea. And when he asks that
question effectually indeed, he does incline the heart to desire salvation.
Which desire therefore cannot be attributed to man's will willing it, but to the
inspiration of the holy ghost breathing this godly desire into the poor soul.
And therefore a dangerous and damnable opinion it is for any man to ascribe
that supernatural work of regeneration to the will of man, which proceeds
only and freely from the will of God, who with his Spirit breaths and
blows where he pleases.

Truly if this opinion should be given way unto, The danger of this error.
this mischief would ensue hereupon. A man might be bold to go on in sin as
far as he lists, and continue in sin as long as he lists, and easily
convert and turn him (...) tied then to poverty in estate? No, neither. For,
as there are few of the richer sort who are religious, but have their souls as
full of sin, as their chests are of silver: so, many of the meaner sort are
irreligious; being as miserable in their souls, as beggarly in their estates.
So that (I say) no person, place, conditton, can compel the Lord to sanctify
his creatures: his free pleasure is the ground of all: and out of every nation,
age, sex, condition, he draws some to himself to fear his Name, to call upon
him, to do him worship and service, according to his own blessed will. And
therefore let no man boast himself in the multitude of his riches, in the
number of his friends, in the depth of his humane policy, in the greatness of
his earthly pedigree, in the height of his dignity, nor in the seat of his
authority. For, that God, who makes the wind to blow upon a poor cotage when
he lets a Kings palace alone, can bestow grace upon the poor beggar, Stat pro
ratione voluntat.
when he denies it to the great potentate. And no marvel: his will is his
reason; and no outward privileges can constrain him to work but where he
pleases himself. Shall not he that is Lord of all, have the disposing of all
at his own pleasure? When therefore thou shall begin to question in thy
self, with the Lord, Lord why have thou received such a poor one, and rejected
such a great one; sanctified such a simple and despised one, and left such a
wise man, such a politician; converted such a young stripling, and not wrought
upon such an ancient father? why do thou impart thy gifts thus? why do
thou distribute thy graces thus? When (I say) thou shall fall thus (in
admiration of Gods wisdom) to make such an inquiry as this is; let this
doctrine be at hand in thy meditations, to answer thy self by. The God of
heaven, with his gales of grace, blows and breaths where he pleases.

Sect. 4. Use 3. Exhortation to two sorts.
Thirdly, here is matter of counsel and persuasion to be derived from this
doctrine, and that both to the regenerate and unregenerate.

1 To the regenerate in a twofold duty.
The regenerate are to be persuaded to a twofould duty; one to be practiced for
themselves, the other to be performed on the behalf of others.

1 Thankfulness for grace received.
That duty which concerns themselves, is thankfulness to GOD for breathing
grace so freely and liberally into them: for, the more free the gift is to the
creature, the more praise ought to be returned from him to the Creator, who is
the bestower of the same. A fit Simile.
Should a King bestow some Lordship or yearly pension upon one of his subjects
of base estate and badde desert: if that subject should not be thankful unto
his Soueraign for the same, he were worthy to be cried shame upon; especially
too, since the freedom of the Kings pleasure, without any worth in himself,
is the ground of the same. And shall the King of heaven, of his own free will,
for his own blessed pleasure, confer not only an annual pension of earthly
treasure for term of life, but an incorruptible possession of heavenly graces,
upon the sinful sons and daughters of Adam, whose richest estate was sin
and corruption, whose best desert was hell and damnation; and shall they that
have their share in this portion, be unmindful of this love, unthankful for
this favor? God forbid. If there had been any thing in themselves to have
compelled the Lord to deal thus with them, will he, nill he; then, though
they should be ungrateful, they were the more to be borne withal: but
seeing the Lords free will was the chiefest motive, and his mere love the
mainest reason, to induce him thus to breathe upon them; now to cut him short
of his praises, not to render, or at least, endeavor to render due thanks unto
his Majesty, it is a very heinous and intolerable offense, not to be suffered,
not to be endured. Wherefore thou that have thy mind enlightened with the
grace of illumination, thy heart softened with godly contrition, thy will
brought into an Evangelical subjection through the grace of mortification, thy
affections into a spiritual temper and frame through the work of
sanctification; thou that bring forth the fruits of obedience plentifully
and cheerfully, grieuing for and praying against the many slips thou take,
and the spiritual sloth which is sometimes in thee; thou that can stop thy
ear against the voice of temptation, that can speak to God by prayer and
supplication, that can speak to men in religious discourse, refraining thy
tongue from evil for conscience sake, which is one fruit of pure religion:
thou (I say) that have these evidences of the breathing of grace (which I spoke
of before chap. 3 Sect. 3.
) strive thou to have thy heart, lips and life, enlarged, opened and
replenished, with the praises of his holy Name. And the more thou consider'st
how freely these heavenly benefits come from himself, without any merit (yea,
notwithstanding so many demerits) of thine own; the more forward be thou to be
telling of his loving kindness from day to day, the more zealous for his glory
in his cause, and the more ravished with the serious meditation of his singular
bounty. And oh! consider: he might have left thee like a liue-lesse and
breathless creature, as he has many thousands, but that his will and his love
did provoke him to commiserate thy woeful condition. If twenty or thirty
malefactors should be in one and the self same dungeon, where they could
neither have the light of the Sun to accheer them, nor the benefit of the
sweet air to refresh them; and one or two of them amongst all the rest, by the
means of a friend (a stranger to them) should be redeemed from that bondage,
set at liberty, and brought forth to partake both of the light of the
glistering Sun, and the breath of the refreshing wind: Oh how thankful would
these poor wretches be to him that had procured them this liberty! what
orations and narrations would they make of his kindness! and no service would
they stick at to do him, when as he should require it at their hands. And
the more readily also would they do this, because they know it was his mere
pleasure to redeem them, rather then any of the other; whom he might have made
choice of as well as they, and left them in the dungeon still. Now thou that
have received grace, were once a prisoner to the devil, as well as the rest of
Adams posterity, and were chained with spiritual fetters in the dungeon of
sin, where thou had neither the Sun of Righteousness to shine upon thee,
nor the wind of grace to breathe into thee. The Father of his own free will
sent his Son: the Son came willingly himself, with the holy Ghost, to
dissolve the works of the devil in thee, to loosen the boltes of sin for
thee, to bring thee out of that same hideous and stinking dungeon, into the
fresh air, with the sunshine of grace to give light to thee, with the gales
of grace to blow on thee, when he might have taken others, and left thee a
prisoner still. Now was his love so great to thee, was his will such toward
thee rather then toward others, when as thou were in the same condemnation
with others? Oh let this strike into thy heart, and make so deep an impression
in thy soul, that it may never be forgotten, that it may ever be remembered:
and let it drive thee into such an ecstasy, that upon thy awaking thou may
with holy David, and patient Job (who had experience of the like mercy) break
out and say, Psalm. 8.4.
What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou do
thus visit him? Job 7.17
What is man that thou should magnify him, and that thou should set thy
heart upon him? Lord, what am I that thou should thus set thine heart upon
me, to visit me with the blasts of thine heavenly graces, and make my heart
(which was formerly a sly for unclean devils) a lodging and temple for the
holy Ghost to dwell in? Lord, this is love without parallel, this is mercy
without comparison; what? seemed it good in thine eyes (heavenly Father) to
turn me and blow me toward the Kingdom of Heaven, when (being blown
forward with the blasts of that wicked spirit) I was going, running, posting,
flying to the kingdom of darkness? Needs must I lose my self in the
admiration of this love,; and with the Psalmist say, Psalm. 18.49
Because thou have thus delivered me from the hand of the violent, therefore
will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) and sing praises unto thy holy name. Thus
(I say) let the praises of God be in thy mouth, when the work of his Spirit
is in thy heart. And this is the duty which thou that art a new creature in
Christ, art daily to practice on thine own behalf.

2 Carenes to beg grace for those that went it.
Again, as thou must thus be thankful for what thou thy self have thus freely
received; so thou must be a suter unto Gods majesty for the like mercy, on the
behalf of those that want it: for thou know that they are no more able to
work this grace in themselves then thou thy self were when thou were in the
same state with them; and thou understand by this doctrine, that it comes
from God alone: and the Philosophers axiom is true Aristot. de causis. res
recipient bonitatem in fluxam a prima causa.
Things receive their goodness from the first cause of that goodness. And the
soul that is empty of grace, must receive her preordained fullness of grace
from the Lord the first cause and fountain of grace: and from that fountain
must thy prayers be as a pitcher to fetch grace for thy brother; so far
forth as precedent election makes a possibility of speeding. A caution
Mis-take me not: I speak not this as though I were of opinion, that the
merit of thy prayers could deserve grace at Gods hands for thy elect brother:
but I only show thee, what the consideration of the freedom of Gods pleasure,
in breathing grace into his Church, ought to stir thee up unto; and what love
and pity to thy unregenerate brothers poor soul ought to move thee unto,
viz. to beseech God (who Act. 2.17
pours his Spirit upon all elect flesh) that he would be pleased as freely
to work graciously in him (if it be his will) as he did in thy self at thy
first conuersision. This is that which the Lord would have thee do; neither is
he any niggard of his grace unto those whom-to he has purposed it from all
eternity. He is not like man: men when they have done something for others,
they can not endure that the receivers should become beggars of the like
kindness for others; but they would have them satisfied with that which they
themselves have received, and let craving for others alone. But it is far
otherwise with the Lord: it is his delight when they that have been blown
upon freely with his grace, will become petitioners to the throne of grace for
others, as well as for themselves; and chiefly for those whom they have nearest
relation unto. It is that which he is pleased withal, when the sanctified
husband prays for the unsanctified wife, when the believing wife sueth for
the unsanctified husband; holy parents for unholy children, holy children for
unholy parents; sanctified master for ungodly servants, etc. Thou therefore,
that have any whit of heavens breath in thee, do not only crave the increase
of grace in thy self (which is thy duty too) but also beg hard for the
beginnings of grace in thy graceless brethren; and (seeing Gods grace is as
free from himself to other elect vessels of mercy as to thee) beseech thou the
Lord, to open the eyes of thine ignorant wife, to soften the heart of thine
impenitent husband, to convert the soul of thine ungracious child, to infuse
grace into thy unregenerate father, mother, brethren, friends, neighbors,
master, servant, whose hearts are as yet swollen with the breath of Satan, and
corruption: And as the Apostle his hearts To. 10.1
desire and prayer to God was, that Israel might be saved: So let it be thy
hearts desire and prayer to God, that they may be sanctified; and that with
his spiritual Cant. 4.16.
North and South wind, he would blow upon such dead Gardens; and that he
would open the bottells and spout-pots of his holy Spirit, to water such dry
and barren grounds, that those flowers may spring up there, which have their
root in Election, and that the sweet spices of grace may flow out as freely
from the holy Ghost to them, as to thy self. And these be the two duties
which the Saints have to learn from hence: First, to praise God for the graces
which they themselves have, and to pray to God for the like graces on the
behalf of them that want them. The second branch of the use of exhortation to
the unregenerate.
Secondly, here is a lesson for the unregenerate (who are altogether destitute
of sound grace) to learn: and that is, to give all diligence to be effectually
breathed upon with this wind from heaven; and with holy David to Psa. 132 4.5
give no sleep to their eyes, nor slumber to their eye-liddes, until their
hearts be a place for the God of Jacob to breathe in, and their souls an
habitation for the Ark of the Lords strength, and the work of the Lords Spirit
to rest and dwell in. For if Gods will be the ground of his work of
sanctification in any creature, then they that are still unsanctified, are
bound to an incessant use of those means which the Lord has appointed to serve
this free will of his in the effecting of grace in their hearts: and though we
cannot effect any part of that blessed wotke in our selves, nor so much as
naturally wish or will it; yet, in as much as the Lord has made no promise to
regenerate but by the use of means, we must use that means, if we would be
spiritually breathed upon. For that God who does reveal his will of election
by the work of Justification, and his will of justification by the work of
Sanctification, does also declare his will of sanctification by the prescribing
of helps to bring us to holiness: which helps we must diligently and
carefully use; or else, if the spirit never come to breathe upon us, the fault
will be our own, and our condemnation of our selves. Howsoever still (I say)
the work of grace be the Lords; so then (I say) the liberty which the Lord
has to infuse grace where he wills, urges a necessity of following those
rules which he has set up for his Church to attain unto grace by: which
rules and helps what they are, I will show in order.

The first is a diligent attendance unto the word of grace: 1 Help to get grace.
hence it is that the word is called the 2 Cor. 3 8.
ministration of the Spirit. We know that they which are left Executours to
other men's wills, they must take up Letters of Administration, by virtue of
which they must enter upon the goods of the deceased: so they that would take
up that Legacy of Graces, which Christ bequeathed to his Church in the promise
of sending his Spirit, must come to Gods Courts, and there take up the Letters
of Administration, by the means whereof they may take up that portion of
inheritance or grace, which Christ has left for them. Acts 1.2
When the Apostles were in an house at Jerusalem, where they heard a sound like
the rushing of a mighty wind: then did the holy Ghost sit upon them: So when
we are in the house of God to hear the found of his mighty voice, in the
preaching of the Word, may we expect the breathing of his Spirit. It was at
the preaching of Peter that the holy Ghost fell upon Cornelius and his
household. Act. 10.44.
It was at a Sermon of Paul's when the Spirit opened the heart of Lydia Acts 16
14
. When Ananias instructed Paul, the seals fell from his eyes, and he received
spiritual sight Acts 9.17.
. By the preaching of our Savior, many of the Jews came to believe on him:
with his word did he cleanse the Mark 1.42.
Leper, Ma k 5.42.
raise the dead, Mar. 10 52.
open the eyes of the blind, Mar 9.26. Chap. 5.8
cast devils out of the possessed with them, in the days of his flesh: and by
the means of his holy word, now published by his messengers does he cleanse,
with the water of grace, our leprous souls, quickening with the life of grace
our dead hearts, open with the light of grace our blind minds, and chase out
with the blasts of grace, those same evil spirits that do haunt and possess
our souls.

Their case therefore cannot be sufficiently lamented, nor enough bewailed, who
make no more reckoning of the Word, then of a trifle or toy; and who regard the
sound of the Lords voice in a powerful Ministry, no more then the creaking of
a lifelesse door: the estate of such persons (I say) can not be pitied too
much; for alas poor souls, by this contempt they debar themselves from the
breath of the spirit. For, if amongst those that hear the Word diligently,
when it is most soundly preached, there be but one sort amongst four that get
any more grace by it then the common gifts of the Spirit (which a reprobate may
possibly attain unto) then let them never look to obtain the Spirit
sauingly, that contemptuously reject preaching, as Papists do; that
negligently hear preaching, never but when themselves list, now and then, at
their own leisure, as profane Protestants do. And if such persons remain in
their unregenerate condition, until they come to reap the fruit of it in
eternal condemnation, whom can they blame but themselves? What can they find
fault withal, as the cause of such misery, but the turning away their ears
from hearing the Law? Suppose a man were in a close room, where through the
vnholesomnesse of the air, he were like to be smothered, and might have
liberty to go abroad into the air, where the wind might revive his spirits;
if he should wilfully refuse to come abroad, and partake of that refreshment,
and should rather choose to keep in that room, were not he worthy to be
smotherd and choked? Surely yes: how much more deserve they to be smothered
with their sins, and choked with the stinking air of their corruptions, who
have the word brought home, even to their doors, and yet stop their ears
against it? choosing rather to snort upon their couches, to sit in the chimney
corner, to prate by the fires side, to patch their clothes (as many of the
poorer sort make that their Saboths work) to play and game, to make bargains,
to travel about their worldly businesses, then to go to the house of God,
where in the preaching of the word, the Lord does offer the work of his
Spirit, for the distilling of grace into the hearts of the Elect. Wherefore,
whosoever thou art that have been either a contemptuous despiser, or a
negligent hearer of a powerful Ministry, when thou might have had it; be
humbled for this contempt, reform this negligence, and now at last gather up
thy (...) ceited in her own eyes: and thence it was that they were so full of
grace. Can the profane person get restraining grace, so long as in the pride of
his heart he thinks himself good enough? Can the civil person ever get saving
grace, so long as he is puffed up with a lofty conceit of his own
righteousness? Ca^ the hypocrit get sanctifying grace, so long as he prides
himself in those common gifts which he has already? It is not possible. For,
so long as men are swollen up with a self-conceit of their own excellency,
with an haughty opinion of their civil honesty, with a conceited thought of
supposed sanctity; they can see cause neither of complaining before God of
their native filthiness, nor cause of praying unto God for more holiness. And
if they see no cause to do thus, how can they long for grace: and if they
never long for it, they can never have it. Let the word therefore which thou
hear be effectual with thee to bring thee out of conceit with thine own
holiness, and learn thee to see and acknowledge, that thou have nothing in
thy self originally, but native pollution; otherwise (though thou be never
so well esteemed in the eyes of the world) Publicans and harlots shall sooner
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, and be blown upon with the wind of
heaven, then thou shall.

Thirdly, when the word has done this notable good with thee, 3 Help to
sanctification.
as to bring thee to a base esteem of thy self, in respect of the lack of
grace, then must thy heart be softened, and moistened with the tears of
contrition; and remorse of conscience must be the thing which thou must strive
for. The Prophet Ezekiel. 36 26.27
Ezechiel seems to intimate unto us, that the Lord, before he puts his
Spirit within us, he takes away the stony heart from us. Isa. 66.2
To this man will I look (says Jehovah himself by Isaiah) that is of a
contrite spirit. The more moist the earth is, the more vapors ascend out of
it; and the more vapors rise from it, the more winds blow upon it: even so,
the moyster our hearts are, the more tender our consciences are, the more
vapors of sin will the Sun of righteousness draw up to himself in regard
of guilt, by the grace of justification; and so the more way shall be made for
freedom from the reign of sin in the grace of sanctification. Why were the
Scribes and Pharisees so destitute of grace? but because hardness of heart did
possess them, and the spirit of slumber was upon them; whereas Peter's Acts 2
Conuerts, being pricked in their consciences, did believe and repent to the
remission of their sins, and sanctification of their souls. And truly this
must needs be an undeniable truth; because, that when the heart is tender and
soft, it is like wax, capable of the impression of every grace: then the
preaching of the Law will work upon it to the producing of the grace of
repentance, the preaching of the promises of the Gospel will work upon it to
the breeding of a lively faith, the revealing of the will of God concerning any
necessary duty to salvation will work upon it to the begetting of new
obedience, the experience of Gods mercies will work upon it, to the effecting
of the grace of love, the meditation of Gods justice and power will work upon
it to the engendring of an holy and sonne-like fear: but where this softness
and tenderness is not, neither Law nor Gospel, neither mercy nor justice, nor
any thing else will avail, to imprint the least stamp of any grace upon the
soul. And truly from the want of this it is, that so little grace is to be
found amongst the posterity of Adam in this last age of the world. Ask the
Philosopher why winds are not so common in the winter and summer quarters, as
they are in the spring and the Autumn; and he will answer, that the cause is
from the hardness of the earth, being more bound with extreamitie of frost
and cold in the winter then in the autumn, and more parched with vehemency
of heat, in the summer then in the spring: even so, ask the Divine, what is
the reason why the wind of grace does not blow as well upon the greater number
as the smaller; and he will answer you, The hardness of men's hearts is the
ground of it: their hearts are frozen with the dregs of coldness and security,
and they are parched and dried with the heat of their Iustes, which hinders
all spiritual moisture in them: and can heavens blasts blow, so long as all
such moisture is wanting unto them? I confess indeed, that when the Spirit
begins first to breathe, it finds the heart of the sinner hard and
impenitent: but yet I say that the Spirit never proceeds unto the vp-shot of
Sanctification, until it has prepared the heart by breaking and humbling it,
and taking away the flintinesse of it. Thou therefore, whose heart is stony,
whose conscience is crusty, bewail thy security, lament thine impenitencie,
and take thou no quiet until more remorse be wrought in thee: and every check
that thy conscience gives thee, for any good which thou have neglected, for
any evil which thou have committed, quench it not, choke it not, repel it
not. For if thou resistest when conscience does its office, thou indisposest
thy self to any remorse, and thou occasionest the powers of thy soul to be so
hide-bound, that no spiritual moisture of sorrow for the lack of grace can
bedeaw thee; and how then can the wind of grace blow upon thee? Wherefore,
until the word of Grace has thus far wrought upon thee, to bring thee to a
soft and broken heart; think thou, it has don thee little or no good: for whom
the Lord does freely work upon to sanctification, he does also bring to
mortification, the second step whereunto is a soft and tender spirit.

Lastly, The fourth help to sanctification.
prayer unto the Lord for grace, is a notable means to obtain it. For, as the
Lord Psalm. 105.
brings the wind out of his treasures, so he sends down his Spirit, and
every good gift of the same from heavenly places: not by any local mutation,
as though the third person in the Trinity did come from his throne of
majesty; but by a supernatural operation and working in the hearts of the
Elect; the will of the Father, in this work, goes first, the will of the Son
follows that, and the will of the Spirit proceeds from both: Non tempore
sed or dine.
and therefore, seeing grace does thus come down from heaven, as the wind
from the clouds, we must by Petitions send up to heaven for it. Unto this our
Savior Christ does encourage us when as he says, Luk 11.13.
Your heavenly father will give his Spirit to them that ask him. But, will some
object and say, Object.
How can we pray for the Spirit while we want it; when as we cannot pray
aright for any thing, until Answer 1
we have the Spirit? Whereunto I answer; First, it must be considered, unto
whom I speak, to wit, to such whom the Word has prevailed withal, to bring
them to a knowledge of the want of grace, and to remorse of conscience, because
of this want: now they that are brought thus far, they are disposed to pray
for it; and therefore, to such as these are very well may I speak, as the
Apostle does concerning Wisdom. Iac. 1.5.
If any man lack [that is, feels the lack of] wisdom, and so consequently
of grace, let him ask it of God: Yea, and desire God to give him grace to call
for it aright; and entreat others to beg the same thing for him. Again,
howsoever we cannot Answer 2
pray for the Spirit, until we have the Spirit, yet we must pray for it, that
we may ascertaine our selves, that we are in the way to attain it: for one of
the first steps to grace, is an earnest desire to be made a partner of
grace; yea such a desire as will not be satisfied until it has it. And never
let that man look to be breathed upon spiritually, that has not an heart to
send up sighs and suits earnestly to the God of heaven for his holy Spirit. As
Mariners therefore, when they would have a prosperous gale to drive them to the
haven, are wont to say, Blow wind, blow wind; so pray thou, Blow Lord,
breathe Spirit, oh breathe some heavenly blastes, some spiritual motions, some
holy inspirations into my graceless, barren and empty heart. And let that be
thy prayer which was the prayer of a Christian father, and constant Martyr;
Cypr. de S. sancto, folio 32. Adesto sancte spiritus, sanctifica templum
corporis nostri and consecram habitaculum tuum, dignam te habitatore, domum
compone, adorna thalamum tuum, and quietis tuae reclinatorium circundae
varietatibus virtutum: stern pauimenta pigmentis, nite at mansio tua
carbunculis flammeis, and gemmaru^ splendorib. etc.
Come thou holy Spirit, sanctify the temple of my body and soul, consecrate
it as an habitation for thy self, make it an house fit for so worthy a guest
to lodge in, beautify it as thy chamber, beset it as the Cabin of thy rest
round about with the variety of all virtues, let it glister as thy mansion with
spiritual carbuncles, and with the splendour of heavenly Pearls: cause the
odours of thy gracious ointments to perfume it within, and so regenerate and
renew my heart, that it may be established in grace for ever. If in some such
wise as this thou will but fervently, faithfully and feelingly make known thy
requests unto the Lord, thou shall find, that that Spirit which descended upon
Christ in the similitude of a Mat. 3.16.
Dove, and upon the Apostles in the likeness of cloven and fiery tongues Act.
2.3
at the feast of Pentecost, will come down upon thee, in the likeness of a
mighty wind, to purge and purify thee, to renew and sanctify thee, and to
infuse into thee innocence, wisdom, zeal, faith, fear, love and all graces
in measure, needful for thy salvation. And thus (Christian Reader) have I
pointed out unto thee, the helps which may further thee toward the attainment
of saving grace. The Word must be attended to, that it may teach thee
humility; humility must be attained unto, that (out of an acknowledgement of
thine own unworthiness and unholiness) thy heart may be softened: and a soft
heart must be endeavored, for that out of a broken and contrite spirit thou
may earnestly call upon God for the gales and graces of his holy Spirit; who
upon thy praying unto him aright, has made a gracious promise, freely and
liberally to vouchsafe them unto thee, without reproaching thee.

And that thou may be persuaded the more willingly to follow this direction,
Motives to stir up to the careful use of these means. Motive 1.
and be the more eagre thus in the pursuit of holiness, do but in the first
place consider the consolation that these graces will afford a man in the time
of affliction and trial. For, (...) endeuourest to be sanctified. Think we
(now) upon these two things seriously, meditate we upon them carefully, and
let them be as two goades in our sides, to make us industrious in using means
to be gracious. Would we have a comforter in the times of heaviness? would we
be partakers of everlasting happiness? then let us (as we have been exhorted)
follow the rules that have been prescribed us to attain to holiness, that
the blastes of heaven may inspire grace into us. Which grace the Lord grant us
for his mercies sake.

Sect. 5. Use 4. Admonition.
And so from my third Use, which was for exhortation, I proceed to a fourth;
which is the last I intend to make of this Doctrine: and that is for
admonition, to take heed that we do not pass final sentence against any man,
be his heart never so graceless, his life never so godless. For, if the great
God of heaven blows with his Spirit where he lists, and when he lists;
he may (for aught we know) in his eternal Decree, have his time to inspire
with the holy Ghost some of those that are most dissolute, profane and
licentious. Wherefore, for any man (now the gift of particular Revelation is
ceased) to pass final judgment against the foulest swearer, beastliest
rioter, greediest miser, profanest Saboth-breaker, vncleannest adulterer, etc.
is a thing not only unlawful, but also dangerous. Object.
What then? shall we confound Christ and Belial? shall we put no distinction
betwixt the holy and profane? shall we make no differences amongst men?
Nothing more. Answ.
The Lord (we know) denounces a woe against them Isa. 5.20 23.
that call evil good, and good evil: that put sour for sweet, and sweet for
sour, and that justify the wicked. By the fruits we come to know what the
tree is: if the fruits be graceless, the person cannot be commended as
gracious. Neither is it any more unlawful to say, a drunkard, a blasphemer, an
oppressor, etc. is a child of the devil, then to say, a toade is a toade, or
a dog a dog: yet for all this, we cannot say, that that person, be he never
so lewd, shall finally be damned, and is in a reprobate condition. Indeed we
may say of many a man, he is in the state of condemnation (for Ioh. 3.18
he that believes not, says Christ, is condemned already) but we cannot say
of any man, he is in the state of reprobation. For all men by nature, before
conversion, are in the state of damnation: but only some of them are in the
state of reprobation, whom, in his eternal Decree, the Lord has purposed to
cast away for evermore; and we can not say, that he which is now graceless,
shall live and die graceless: therefore let us take heed of passing a
determinate sentence against any man; considering that that God which
sanctifies freely, as his will is, of a Saul to day can make a Paul to morrow;
of a persecutor to day, can make a Preacher to morrow; of a Leper to day, can
make a clean person to morrow, etc. if it be his heavenly pleasure so to do.
And so an end of this point, the profit whereof I wish to thy soul, whosoever
thou art that read the same.

CHAP. VI. The second Doctrine from the first Part of the Text touching the
invincible force of the breath of the Spirit.
Sect. 1. Doctr. 4. The work of saving grace is unconquerable.
THe second point comes next to hand,which may be propounded in these terms;
That nothing can hinder the Lord from inspiring with his Spirit, that person
whom he has decreed sanctifying grace unto, when the time is come wherein he
has a purpose to regenerate him. Si ventum nemo cohibet quin quo vult feratur,
quaento magis spiritus operatione^ nulla natura leges nulli corporeae
generationis sines, nulla alia huiusmodi vis possunt cohibere, says
Chrysostom in Ioh. hom. 26.
The Wind blows as it lists: and who can hinder it, what mortal man can
let it? When it flows from the North Southward, from the South Northward;
when it blows from East to West, from West to East, what mortal power can
cause it to cease? What humane authority can command it to turn into a
contrary corner? Even so when the gales of grace begin to blow upon this
man, that woman, in the work of regeneration, no power of man can totally
frustrate, no malice of hell can utterly make void this work of the Spirit.
Howbeit the cursed spite of Satan, and the corrupted will of man, have a kind
of power to resist: yet they have no might to overcome the Lord, or overthrow
the efficacy of his grace, so as to make him cease whether he will or no from
regenerating the creature. Let this be taken for a truth from the Lord his
own mouth; Ezec. 36 27
I will put my Spirit into you, and will make you to walk in my statutes:
mark it well, I will. Now, if the Lord wills, if the Lord does any thing,
who can frustrate his will, who can hinder his work Zanch. 2. col. 146. Deo
autem aliquid volente, and faciente, quis ne illud ^at impedire potest?
? Wherewith accords that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 19. Who has resisted his
will? And our Savior Christ speaking of his sheep (who feed and abide upon
the Plains where the wind of grace has a strong gust) says thus, Ioh. 10.29.
No man is able to pluck them out of my hands. Now when grace is wrought in
our hearts, then may we be said to be put into Christ his hands: and if nothing
can pluck a Christian out of Christ his hands, Domino volenti saluum faecere,
nullum humanum resistit arbitrium. August. de Cor. et Gra. cap. 14.
Object.
Luke 13.34.
nothing can pluck grace out of a Christians heart, or hinder grace when the
Lord breaths thereinto.

But against this truth (perhaps) will some object that exclamation of Christ
against Jerusalem: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee
together, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye WOULD NOT. From
which words happily they will shape an exception thus; The will of the people of
Jerusalem did so strongly resist the will of Christ, that he could not convert
them, as his will was: therefore the work of grace which GOD wills to a
soul, may altogether be frustrate, and made of none effect; and so that can
be no good divinity which has now been delivered.

Amsw.
To this I answer, by a dinstinction: The will of God is twofold; first,
absolute and concealed: secondly, manifest and revealed. His absolute and
concealed will whereby he does whatsoever he pleases, cannot be resisted: but
his manifest and revealed will, laid open in his word and by his Ministers,
that has been, is, and will be resisted, which latter is meant in that
place: for this is that which Christ gives them to understand, that he had
opened his revealed will unto them, partly, by his own teaching, partly, by
the preaching of his Disciples, and they despised it, abused it, would not be
converted by it; and not that his absolute will was to convert them, but that
the corrupt resistance of their unregenerate will did altogether nullify and
make void the same: and therefore, whosoever shall object that place against
this point, does wrest that Scripture, and wrong this truth, that The work of
Regeneration is invincible, unconquerable.

Sect. 2. Use 1. Terror to those that oppose grace in others.
This point cannot be more fitly applied (in the first place) then as a
thunderbolt of terror, to those that go aabout to hinder the current of grace
in their brethren; and who by all means possible seek to discourage them, when
they are setting their faces toward the kingdom of heaven. It was the portion
of the Israelites, as they were iourneying toward that promised earthly
Canaan, to meet with many enemies, open, and secret, who endeavored to stop
them, and stay them from coming thither: but all was in vain; thither they
came at the last, and in Gods due season, there as many of them arrived as God
had purposed to bring thither. It fares just so with the Israel of God in
these days: when the blasts of grace are blowing them forward to the heavenly
Canaan which is above, what opposition shall they meet withal? not only from
native corruption within them, not only from the violence of professed enemies
to the truth, without them; but also they of their own household will lift up
the heel against them, the husband resisting the work of grace in the wife,
the wife in the husband, the parent resisting the work of grace in the child,
the master in the servant, one brother and sister in another, one servant and
neighbor in another, and that sometimes by flattery, and fair speeches,
sometimes by threats and menaces, sometimes (...) teousnesse and holiness?
Think thou, that thou shall ever prevail to cause those to forsake their
good beginnings in Christianity, for whom the Lord has broken in sunder the
cords of Satan and iniquity? If thou so imaginest, thou art much mistaken:
thou shall never be able to bring those whom the Son has made free indeed,
into bondage again, though thou temptest and striuest until thy heart ache
again. Thou may peradventure be a stumbling block unto them; and partly,
by authority, partly, by austerity, partly, by flattery, thou may be an
occasion unto them of trippes and foiles (that thou may laugh at them for
the same, and bring religion upon the Stage to scoff at it): but, who shall
have the worst of it at the end think thou? either thou, or they? Not thou?
Yes thou shall. For the Lord will correct them with the pricks of conscience,
that they may renew their repentance for their foyles which thou have caused,
and that they may rise again (because Gods work is unchangeable) but thou
(unless the Lord be the more merciful) shall be reserved for a future
judgment, even that judgment which shall light upon the pates of them by whom
offenses come; which, what it is, let Christ him self tell thee. Mat. 18.6
He that offends one of these little ones, better were it for him if a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the Sea.
Is any one therefore that lives in the same town with thee, that lies in the
same bed, that feeds at the same board, that harbors in the same house with
thee, but a little one of Christ, beginning now to step into the profession
of religion, beginning to hear Sermons more carefully, to read the Scriptures
more diligently, to pray more often, to frequent the company of the faithful,
to forsake the society of the wicked, to affect and seek after the best
things (whereas formerly he had no love to them, no delight in them) Woe to
thee, and a thousand woes, if thou go about any way, either by fair means,
or foul, to dishearten or seduce that person, thou will one day curse the time
that ever thou did it. Oh that this could sink into the thoughts of those
wicked parents, graceless masters, irreligious husbands, that deny their
wives, their children, their servants, that time and liberty for hearing the
Word, for prayer to God, for sanctifying the Saboth, and such like holy
Exercises which God does require, and they do desire. Oh that it could but
settle in the meditations of those governors, which abuse their authority, to
the praise of them that do ill, to the discouragement of them that do well.
And I could heartily wish it might effectually work upon the conscience of
every child of Belial, that scoffeth at, that raileth upon, that sets
against, that seeks to seduce any one, in whom the fruits of grace have
appeared already, or now at length begin to appear. Poor souls, they know
not what they do; foolish persons, they go about one of the vainest and
vilest things that can be; and the greatest fruit they shall reap of this
endeavor, is but wrath piled up for themselves against the day of wrath.
Howsoever they may be snares to hypocrites, who were never sound at the core,
to seduce them, and make them appear in their colors (the blood of which
hypocrites also shall be required at their hands) yet such as are rightly
sanctified, and soundly illuminated, shall they never be able to pluck out of
the hands of Christ. Now tell me, thou Doeg, thou Rabsh^kah, thou Ismael, thou
Saul, thou Herod, thou Fox; is it not a vanity of vanities, a frantic madness
to set against the Lords work in his own children; when thou may as soon
pull the Sun out of the firmament, as grace out of their hearts, and command
the wind to cease blowing in the air, as the Lord to cease breathing in the
soul which he has a purpose to save? Whosoever thou be then that have
done the Devil service in this kind, be amazed at thy folly, be humbled for
thy vanity, and learn to take heed of this Satanicall art of opposing: or
else, as now the word of terror does meet with thee; so at the last, the
thunderbolts of vengeance shall seize upon thee, to thine everlasting
overthrow and confusion.

Sect. 3. Use 2. Comfort to the faithful.
Secondly, here is a ground of comfort, to those that are Saints by calling; and
as to all of them in general, so especially to those in whom the inspirations
of grace have lately breathed: and to them do I principally intend this,
First, to weak Christians.
because they have the greatest need of it, being not so well able to defend
themselves (by reason of their infancy in grace) as stronger Christians are,
when they meet with such temptations, as they are usually set upon with at
their first conversion. I am not ignorant, how that in the first work of
humiliation, after the slavish terrors and fears of hell and torment are past
(which are as it were a preparatiue to true sorrow in the Elect, howsoever they
are otherwise to the reprobate) when I say they are past, and that same grace
of filial fear comes in, and when the Spirit of God, by the means of the Law,
lays open to the understanding, what sin is in its A reprobate may see sin
in the effect of it, which is punishment, as Ahab did: but only a true
penitent beholdes it in the nature of it, that is, as it is an anomy to the
Law of a loving God
nature, as well as in its effect (to wit) a breach of the righteous Law of a
gracious God, and has caused him more to sorrow for sin as it is sin, then
for sin as it procures punishment: I mean more, because he has grieved so
merciful a Father, then because he has deserved hell torment; and so
consequently has brought him earnestly to desire strength against his
corruptions (as, godly sorrow and an hearty desire to forsake sin go
together.) When (I say) the spiritual yongling is brought thus far, then
comes Satan upon him (as with many other) so with this temptation, of buzzing
into his ear an impossibility of ever getting victory over his lusts, and
strength to walk with God. Thou shall never overcome thy corruptions (says
he) thou shall never attain unto that faith, zeal, love, unto that measure of
holy care to walk in an holy course, that thou do desire, and therefore it is
in vain for thee to grieve so much it is to no purpose for thee to strive so
much, thou shall fall to thy old secure biasse again; and though now a
passionate and melancholy fit has possessed thee, thou shall grow to be as
secure and hard-hearted as ever thou were before. Thou can not shift it.
See thou not thine own deceitful heart against thee? see thou not the
world against thee? see thou not thy wife, thy husband, thy parents, thy
master, thy brethren, sisters, fellow servants, friends, enemies, and all in
the way to hinder thee? how can thou possibly get grace then, or keep it
when thou have it? Whereupon the poor Christian (being but a weakeling, and
too ready to entertain any hard conceit against himself) begins to droupe,
doubt and waver, and in a manner to subscribe to the temptation: by which
means the poor soul is brought into such a labyrinth of distress, that it
knows not which way to turn it self for ease and comfort, nor what to do
to rid it self out of this perplexity. As an help therefore in these
streights let this doctrine be thought upon by the fainting soul: and let it
take occasion from the same to accheere it self, as well it may, having right
so to do. Consider therefore (thou honest heart) that Gods graces are
unchangeable, his work of Regeneration is invincible: and where he begins
to breathe, he will breathe though the while world say nay to it; though all
the powers of darkness set against it. Does the devil tell thee thou shall
never get victory over thy corruptions; never be better then thou have been;
never walk better then thou have done? Believe him not: he has been a liar
from the beginning, and so he is still. I yield indeed thou have a corrupt and
deceitful heart that may easily out-reach thee, and ouer-reach thee; and
peradventure thou may be troubled with a bad yoakefellow, and the most of
thy kindred in the flesh may be but men of the flesh, and carnal persons and
can look for no encouragement, but rather discouragement from them: if thou
be in the condition of a child happily thy father may be against thee, or
thy mother, or both; if in the state of a servant, thy master and governor;
and thou shall have many snares laid in the way to catch thee, many blocks to
offend thee: I grant all this is true, and may be true. But what of all this?
will thou believe, that because of these rubbes and obstacles, the Lord must
needs leave half or the greatest part of his work undone in thee? It is the
Lords work to illuminate, to inspire, to sanctify, and nothing can make him
give over: let the Devil roar, let the flesh rebel, let Rabshekah revile,
let the world entice, let friends flatter, let enemies oppose (be thou but
watchful and stand wisely upon thy guard) they cannot, they shall not frustrate
nor nullify the breathing of the holy Ghost in thee. Wherefore, so long as
thou have this for thy refuge, yielde not to the tempter; but let it be thy
comfort, thy crown, thy rejoicing, maugre all the malicious suggestions that
Satan seeks to disquiet thy poor soul withal. Thou shall get victory over
thy lusts, be they never so strong: thou shall walk in the ways of new
obedience, by the grace of GOD enabling thee, though they be never so
difficult. Tell me, Is not the want of grace, the chief thing which thou
bewailest? Is not the possession of grace the principal treasure which thou
desire? I know it is, if thou be a true Christian: why, this is an
evidence that God has begun to blow upon thee, and he will perfect his own
work in thee, and nothing shall command him to stay inspiring, no more then
thou thy self can command the wind to leave blowing, when it makes a sound
in the air. Wherefore be of good comfort, and take heart unto thee, and
answer the Devil with this weapon, whenever with this assault he shall
seek to molest thee.

Again, 2. Comfort and incoragement to a stronger Christian
as the weak may fetch comfort from hence, so this may be propounded to the
refreshment and encouragement of the stronger sort of Christians; the work of
sanctification is unconquerable, nothing shall frustrate it, and thou that have
been trained up in the School of Christ, and in the trade of Christianity a
long time know this, and have proved it by experience, diverse and sundry
ways, at diverse and sundry times: well, use the meditation of this matter as a
sword and buckler in the times of thy temptation (for such times thou shall
see; even Paul himself must have a 1. Cor. 12 7.
prick in the flesh to buffet him:) and not only so, but joy in the Pearl
which thou have found. And seeing thou have so long a time been baptized with
the holy Ghost (which Hell it self cannot undo again,) do as the Acts 8.39.
Eunuch did whom Philip baptized, drive forward the Chariot of thy godly life
cheerfully, and go forward in thy way rejoicing, until thou come to a
perfect age in Christ Jesus. Let this suffice for the first part of the Text.

CHAP. VII. The words of the second part of the Text interpreted, and the heads
of the Doctrines briefly propounded.
Sect. 1.
I Pass on now to the second part of the Text, which treats of the sense and
feeling that accompanies the work of Regeneration in the regenerate, set
down in these words; And thou hear the sound thereof: Interpretation.
so is every one that is borne of the Spirit. Tolet. ad locum.
Some here by the sound of the Wind understand the voice of the Spirit of God
in the Scriptures; so that though the holy Ghost be invisible, in regard of
his substance, yet he is to be heard speaking in the written Word: and the
same Author says, it is even so with those that are borne of the Spirit; the
things that are within them, as their thoughts, motions, purposes, desires
cannot be seen with the eye, yet the fruits of their virtues may be heard of
amongst the children of men, and their gracious and wholesome speeches. But this
cannot be the meaning; because (as has been showed before) by Wind cannot
be understood the person of the holy Ghost: and so the comparison can not be
betwixt the Spirit, and those that are borne of the Spirit,; but betwixt the
Wind, and those that are borne of the Spirit. Following therefore still the
Metaphor of Wind, I fall to expound the words thus: [And thou] that is, thou
Nicodemus, thou that art so ignorant in the mystery of regeneration [hearest
the sound thereof] that is, the noise or sound of the wind when it blows in
the air: This sound thou hear with thy ears, though thou can not see it
with thine eyes, and so come to know there is wind. [So is every one that
is borne of the Spirit.].i. So stands the case with them that are regenerate,
in regard of the work of the Spirit in them: though it can not be seen and
comprehended with the eye of carnal reason, yet the spiritual sound that it
makes, and sense that it works inwardly in the soul of the regenerate, does
give testimony of the breathing of it.

Sect. 2. The reason of the interpretation.
That this is the meaning, it is plain, because it agrees with the scope of
this dialogue betwixt Christ and Nicodemus. For Nicodemus maruelling how it
could possibly be true, That a man should be borne again; our Savior bids him
leave wondering at it: for though by his fleshly reason he could not see a
possibility of the new birth; yet such a birth there is; perceived too by the
effect of the Spirit inwardly working in those that have it, even as the wind
is known to be, by the sound it makes in our ears, though the substance of
it cannot be seen with our eyes.

The words thus explained, are a foundation for four principles of positive
Divinity.

1. That to the eye of Reason, the work of the Spirit, and the doctrine of the
new birth, is invisible.

2. Where the Spirit breaths and regenerateth, there is a sense and feeling
of it.

is (I say) no matter of corruption in it, in respect of its own nature:
wherefore, it being so pure in it self, it cannot be comprehended by a
capacity and understanding so gross, as the carnal man's is.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the wind can not be seen, because it is not capable of color. For
color being the object of sight, things only are seen by their colors: so
the wind of grace cannot be seen by a carnal man, the doctrine of the breath
of it seems strange to him, because to his reason there is no pleasant nor
beautiful color in it: he beholds more luster and splendor, more beauty,
more cause of contentment in riches, honors, preferments, parentage, yea in
his bestial and Belial-like lusts, then in the things of the Spirit of God: and
hence it comes to pass that he is so blind in the matters of heaven.

Reason 3.
To these two I may add a third: that light which should help the judgment to
apprehend the things of God was extinguished by the fall of our first parents;
until which be restored again, there can be no conceiving the mystery of
Regeneration. But so long as a man is natural, that light is not restored: and
therefore no marvel, if the point of Regeneration be a dark sentence and
riddle unto him. For a man, to the end he may see things, must not only have
the power or virtue of seeing, in the sensitive soul, and eyes as fit organs
and instruments, for that seeing sense to use in the apprehension of colors;
but there must be light in the air, either by means of the Sun, or a candle or
fire. Which light if it be wanting all things are invisible to the creature,
though it has both the sense of seeing, and eyes to see withal: so in like
manner though there be (as there is) in the unregenerate person a faculty and
power to understand (because he has a reasonable soul, and differs from
brute creatures) and eyes to execute that faculty; that is, the act of
understanding because he has a mind in that soul: yet the light of Gods Image
is wanting, which Adam lost; by the means whereof he must see into heavenly
mysteries; and so long as that is wanting, he must needs be unable altogether
to diue into matters of that nature.

Sect. 2. Use 1.
The meditation of this truth ought (first of all) to be a Motive unto the
regenerate, to pity the miserable and wretched estate of all carnal and
unregenerate persons. For (alas blind creatures) the Doctrine of the wind of
grace, the manner of the work of grace is a riddle unto them: their mind is so
blinded, their understanding is so darkened, that such Principles as these are
Greek and Hebrew unto them. Yea, let the confluence of natural, moral, and
artificial gifts meet together in them to conspire their perfection; let the
motions of the celestial spears, the course of the Sun and Moon, the
influence of the Stars, the nature of beasts, the property of birds, the
quality of trees, the virtue of herbs and plants of the earth, be never so
visible unto them, never so well known of them, by their study and industry,
in searching into the secrets of Nature; Yea, let them have a speculatiue sight
of many things, which the Scripture opens and reuealeth: yet, so long as they
are but carnal, the Doctrine of the wind of Grace, will be strange to them;
yea, though they can talk and preach of it; and the efficacy of the work of
grace altogether mystical, and aenigmaticall unto them; no more by the wisdom
which they have to be perceived, then the wind, which is so thin a substance,
so vncolourable a creature to be visibly looked upon and apparent to the eye of
the body. And is not this a pitiful thing, a thing to be lamented, a case to
be pitied? Oh Christians, pity them: you that have any knowledge of the Lord
Jesus, mourn for them. Out of question, it went to the heart of Christ Jesus,
to consider the gross blindness of Nicodemus; that a Master in Israel, a man
of note and reckoning amongst the people, that such an one as Nicodemus was
(who had read, or should have read what the Scripture shows in the writings
of Psa. 51.7
David, Ezekiel. 11 19. Chap. 36.25.
Ezekiel, Zac. 13.1
Zachary and the rest of the Prophets concerning the force of corruption, the
fruit of conversion, the power of sanctification) that such an one (I say) as
had Moses and the Prophets to inform him in these matters, should be so
ignorant, so unlearned in the point of Regeneration, that he could not see a
possibility of being born again. This (no doubt) moved our Savior much to
compassionate his condition: for so much Chemn. in Harm. 357.
one affirms of Christ in expounding the tenth verse of this Chapter, Art thou
a master in Israel, and know not this? Which words (says that Author) are
not spoken by Christ, so much to vpbraid him for his ignorance as to pity his
blindness. Now, did the Lord Christ thus? Let the same mind be in us that
was in Christ Jesus: and that such a number should walk in the valley of
darkness; and should be so ignorant in this great mystery in these Halcyon
days of Light and Grace, when the point of regeneration is so opened and
insisted upon; and should be so unacquainted with it as if they had never heard
it discoursed upon all their lives; and that they who are able to talk of it
should be no better practicioners of the fruits of it (nay, be wholly to seek
in the power of it, notwithstanding their historical knowledge of it;) let it
move our hearts, pearce our souls, and stir up in us a pitying affection
to their ignorant condition: and the rather too, because such simple souls
(having nothing else but the corrupted eye of carnal reason to look upon
spiritual things withal) abuse holy treasures, are in a miserable case, and
neither see it nor bewail it.

Sect. 3. Use 2. Admonition.
Secondly, is the work of Sanctification, and the doctrine thereof invisible to
the natural man? let this serve as a caveat unto us, to take heed that we do
not fadome the counsels of God made known in his word, by the measure of our
own wisdom; and that we measure not that which is spoken of the Spirits
working, by the rule of our carnal reason. For if we do, it will prove a
rule that will mis-leade us, it will be an eye that will deceive us. If we
search into the nature of the breathings of Grace, with such a light as that
is, we shall but seek in the dark; and, like the Sodomites at Lots door,
groape, and not find. Let our reason therefore stoop to Gods rule, and our
wisdom submit it self to his word, even against reason; that so being
content to deny our own reason in the point of Regeneration, we may both
speculatiuely understand it in the doctrine, and experimentally see it in the
working. But alas, alas, this lesson lacks Scholars, this admonition is not
hearkened unto, and yet never more need of urging it then in these days; the
visible Church of Christ it self being so full of such persons, as will bring
all Divinity to their own scantling, and with incredulous John 20.
Thomas will believe no more then they see, and will yield to no more then they
can have reason for: and if anything be told them or taught them, which natural
judgment does not like of, it must be cashiered by them as false doctrine.
Tell them of spiritual purification, of sound humiliation, of forsaking all
sin, of embracing all virtue in the work of Regeneration; it is more then
needs (say they) I will believe my self, I will yielde to never a babbling
Preacher of them all. Will thou believe thy self? do so if thou think
good; but in the mean while, I must tell thee the mischief of it: If the
blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch. If thy blind reason leads
thee blindfolded from the truth of the Scriptures, because they are repugnant
to the wisdom of the flesh, thou shall be taken in thine own craftiness,
and be in the pit ere thou art aware: and if thou will needs believe thine
own light before Gods light, thou art worthy to reap the fruits of thy
foolishness. Touching the mystery of Regeneration, thou have many Treatises
extant, thou hear many sermons preached. The breathings of grace in the
work of Sanctification (thou see) is the subject of this Treatise: something
concerning it have I already spoken, and

CHAP. IX. The second Doctrine handled, from the second part of the Text.
Sect. 1. Doctr. 6. To the regenerate the work of grace is not insensible.
Having, in the former Chapter, handled the first point, In this I come to deal
with the next, which is the most coessentiall with the Text, above all the
rest, and thus it stands; That howsoever to the eye of Reason, the work of
Grace be invisible, yet in the soul of a regenerate man there is a sense and
feeling of it. Our Savior Christ tells Nicodemus here, that it is with the
breathing of grace in the heart, as it is with the blowing of the wind in the
air; and though the substance of it cannot be seen with the eye, yet the
sound of it is heard with the ear: even so, though man's wisdom as it is
carnal, can not conceive the mystery of Regeneration; yet the work it self
is perceived and felt by the regenerate person, by the effects it produces and
the spiritual sound it makes in the soul.

In the handling of this point, I will follow this method: first, I will prove
it from Scripture and Reason; secondly, I will show what this sense and feeling
is; thirdly, I will show how it is wrought; and lastly, make some Uses of it.

1. The doctrine proved.
For the first thing, the point is easily confirmed from examples in the Word.
In how many places of the Psalms does David speak of the joy and gladness,
of the satisfaction and fulness that God did put into his heart! as Psalm. 4.7.
Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn and
their wine increased, And Psa. 17.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with
thy likeness: Now can a man have joy of heart, and satisfaction with the
brightness of Gods gracious countenance, and have no feeling of it. And what
says the same Prophet in an other place, Psalm. 25.23.
where speaking of the righteous man that fears the Lord he says; His soul
shall dwell at ease: or as the Original has it, Shall lodge in goodness. Now,
can a man lodge in a (...) sent to and obey those heavenly motions.

3 Working grace, is an actual renewing and changing of the mind, will and
affections, from the power and dominion of sin, unbelief, ignorance,
hardness of heart, crookedness of will, etc. to the rule and command of
grace, in obtaining sound sorrow for sin past, true faith, Christian zeal,
holy love, and the like.

4 Coworking grace, is that same continued aid and strength which the Lord
gives us to work out, and make an end of our salvation with fear and
trembling.

5 And perfecting grace, is that will which the Lord gives us to stick
constantly unto him, and to persevere in our regenerate estate and condition.

This ground being thus laid, we must now understand, that suitable to these
several graces, is the feeling a Christian has. First therefore, when
preventing and preparing grace breathe together (for many have the preventing
grace, good motions to forsake such a sin, etc. which never have the
preparing grace, but quench those motions, and altogether resist them) when (I
say) therefore they breathe together, the soul has a two-folde sense and
feeling; first of the burden of sin, wherewithal it finds it self laden;
secondly, of the want, and excellency of grace, whereof it sees it self
destitute and void: for wherefore should the will and desires incline to those
spiritual motions, to leave that which is evil, and to cleave to that which
is good, but because it has a sense of the ugliness and burden of the one,
of the want and beauty of the other? The former feeling David had. Ps. 38.4.
My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up, and are
as an heavy burden, too heavy for me. The later the woman of Samaria had,
when she said; Ioh. 4.15
Lord give me of this water: this is excellent water indeed, I never drank of
such water.

Secondly, when working grace breaths an actual change in the soul; the
soul feels how miserable a thing it is to be out of Christ, how sweet a
thing it is to be in Christ, how hard a thing it is to learn the way of
obedience, and how good a thing to have an heart enlarged to keep Gods
Commandments, how weak a man is of himself, to shake off unbelief,
distrust, security, to resist evil, and what a blessed thing it is to be set
free from the slavery of his lusts, and from the bondage of those slavish
terrors of hell and torment which he was wont to be troubled withal. Some
such feeling as this is does (I say) accompany working grace.

Thirdly, when coworking grace breaths, there is a sense, and experience of
Gods hand holding him up in the time of temptation, preserving him mightily
against dangerous falls, strengthening him graciously to exercise the fruits of
mortification and sanctification, raising him up when temptation has foiled
him; whereupon he feels in the second place his love to be increased, his
zeal to be enflamed, his edge to go on in a righteous course to be sharpened,
as knowing the Lord is ever at hand, ready to help and assist him: and
whatsoever it be that is a quench-cole to his zeal, a cooler to his love, a
blunting to his edge, he is very sensible of it. The Apostle Paul would never
have broken out into this speech, and left it upon record in his own writings,
Through Christ I am able to do all things, and 2. Tim. 4 17
the Lord strengthened me, if he had not had a gracious sense and experience
of Gods cooperating and corroborating grace, strengthening him in the
performance of the general duties of Christianity, and the weighty work of his
Ministry.

Lastly, when perfecting grace does its office, he has a taste and sight of
the unchangeableness of Gods love, assuring his conscience that the Lord will
perfect the good work which he has begun in him. Neither is he insensible
of those rubbes which hinder perseverance, and he feels many bitter
conflicts with temptations, telling him, that he shall not persevere; which
when he ouercometh, he rejoices heartily, and persuades himself assuredly,
that nothing shall pluck him from his Savior Christ Jesus. For thus he
reasons, and this sound does the wind of grace make in his soul, Because
the Lord has given me a constant will, and an earnest desire to stand in the
grace whereunto by justifying faith I had access, Romans 5.1.
therefore Gods love will never fail me. Such a sound and sense, no doubt,
the Apostle heard and had, when he broke out into this speech, Rom 8.38.39.
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shallbe able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. And thus it is clear what this sense and feeling is
which the holy Ghost effects in the regenerate soul, when it blows and
works effectually in the same.

Sect. 3. How this sense is wrought.
The third circumstance in the Doctrine comes now to be considered of: viz.
how, or by what means this sense and sound is wrought and made? This will be
as manifest as the former, if we do but consider how the sound and noise of
the wind comes to be heard, and compare our present matter in hand with
that. How the sound of the wind comes to be heard by man.
The wind blows in the air, and makes a noise there: the air brings the
noise so made in it self to the ear: the ear having (by the curious skill of
the great Workemaister) an Hammer and an Anuile, as it were in it self,
conueyeth that sound unto the brain, where the original and seat of the
sense of hearing is; and by this means the sound is heard by the creature: The
comparison.
Even so the Spirit of grace breaths the mind and voice of God into the
writings of the Old and New Testaments (for all Scripture is given by
inspiration 2 Timothy 3.16
. The holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 2.21
) The Scriptures being truly opened, and wisely applied by Gods Ambassadors
and Ministers, bring this mind and voice of God, to the ear of the
understanding: the understanding (by the operation (...) she durst be bold) to
challenge Christ with his promise, of easing laden sinners, and of satisfying
Desires hunger, longing after righteousness. After this there is a certain
whispering noise heard (as it were afar off) that there is a possibility of
pardon for thee, as well as for an other: which sound at the first seems very
doubtful. Therefore faith (still harkening to the sound that the Spirit
brings to the understanding, through the air of the gospel) comes by
degrees (after many sharp conflicts which it finds in it self) to hear a
voice much like that of our Saviors to the man sick of the palsy, Mat. 9.2
Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. Or to the woman's that
came to him in the Phases house, Lu. 7.50
Thy faith has saved thee. Upon which (the Gospel still doing its office, in
informing the judgment) The Spirit of God witnesses with our spirit, that we
are the children of God To. 8.16.
Upon this also joy beginnneth to have a kind of spiritual life and feeling
in it self; and there is a great rauishment in the soul, and an admiration at
the unspeakable goodness of God to so wretched a creature as I was; and it
can not contain it self, but it must burst it self forth with the Song of
the Church: Cant. 1.2
Thy loves are better then wine. With this joy, next in order love (which is
another of the affections) apprehends that same sweet sound; and she falls to
bethink, how or which way she may show herself thankful for so great
kindness: then the soul burns with the fire of zeal, and wrastleth (the
Gospel and word of grace still directing it) with every thing that may be an
hinderance of obedience to the righteous Laws of this gracious Father, who
has done so great things for the poor sinner. And thus thou see also, how
this same sense and feeling of grace is wrought in the soul by the Law and
Gospel.

To come to the Uses.

Sect. 4. Use 1. Confutation.
In the first place, this Doctrine serves to discover and discountenance the
vanity of their conceit, who deem themselves to be such as have received the
breath of grace, and yet never had a spiritual ear to hear the spiritual
sound that it makes, nor an heart to perceive the inward sense which it
works in the powers of the soul. And thus three sorts of people do beguile
themselves; profane livers, civil gospellers, hypocritical professors.
First, 1. The opinion that profane persons have of themselves, confuted.
as touching profane persons, notwithstanding their courses be so vile and
notorious, that the heavens blush at their lewdness, that the earth can scarce
brook their wickedness; notwithstanding, some that have no more but Nature in
them, take notice of, and cry out against their outrageousnesse:
notwithstanding drunkenness, whoredom, profanation of the Lords holy Saboths,
lying, stealing, deceiving, monstrous pride, abominable cruelty, horrible
covetousness and all fruits of unholiness before God, and unrighteousness to
men, be their trade, yea sport, and pastime; yet (because their consciences are
seared, and their hearts hardened) they will not be beaten down but that they
have grace in them; and like saucy and proud boasters, they will not stick to
advance themselves into the Comparatiue degree with the best Christians, making
themselves equal with them; nay, place themselves in the Superlatiue degree
above them, accounting better of themselves then of these Saints, thinking
scorn that it should be said or thought, that any person does go beyond them:
These Professors (say they) what are they more then their neighbors? They are
called Men of the spirit, and we are told, that none have the spirit of grace,
but such as they are; but I would be sorry if I had not more grace in me then
the most of them, and as much as the best of them all. Would thou so? Well,
see thou be as good as thy word; be sorry then: for it is a most certain
thing, that thou have not as much of the Spirit as the meanest of them. I tell
thee, thou come behind civil persons in the portion of restraining grace,
and therefore much more behind sound Professors in the measure of saving
grace. If thou demandest (...) mercifulness to the poor, close-fistednesse in
good uses to be loathsome when the motion is to forsake covetousness? do
thou conceive swearing to be ugly, Saboth-breaking ugly, uncleanness,
idleness, etc. ugly, when the motion is to leave dishonoring Gods Name,
dis-hallowing Gods Saboths, defiling thy body, mis-spending thy precious time?
And when the Law of God does lay open before thee those heavy judgments which
the Lord has threatened against these and the like sins, does thy
understanding apprehend these terrible sounds, and send them to thy affections,
to stir up fear and sorrow in thee, and to make thee quake and tremble?
Again, do thou see the excellency of grace and goodness to be such, that
for it thou could find in thy heart, either to forgo, or undergo, any
thing that the Lord shall either take from thee, or lay upon thee, according to
his pleasure? See thou such beauty in sobriety, that for it thou will be
content to forsake both the hellish society and base familiarity of thy
pot-companions; and rather endure to be hated, reviled, poynted at, iested upon
by them, then still to associate them in that foul and enormious iniquity?
See thou such beauty in the virtue of Chastity, that thou will every way
endeavor to have the looseness of the flesh bridled, and curbed whatsoever it
costeth thee? Such beauty in the right hallowing of Gods Saboths, that thou
had rather part with thy profit, shake hands with thy pleasure, then
accustom thy self to those wanton courses of gaming and idleness, to those
worldly courses of travailing, working and worldliness upon the Lords day,
which formerly thou were addicted unto? Perceiuest thou compassion to the
needy, just dealing with thy brethren, and the like, to be so beautiful, so
needful, that with Matthew thou will rather come from the Seat of Custom,
with Zaccheus offer fourfold restitution, then still to continue hard-hearted
to the poor, then still to oppress, defraud, extort, put to unlawful use for
unlawful gain, cheat thy neighbor in contracts, covenants and bargains, which
has bin a trade thou have bin much given unto? The like demands might I make
in other instances: Does the urging of the necessity, and the laying open of
the excellency of these fruits of saving grace (out of the Word) make a noise
at the door of thy understanding? and by the means of thy understanding, are
they so conveyed to thy affections, that they do stir up in thee, an earnest
desire to partake of the graces, and a resolute purpose to practice the duty,
though it be with the undergoing of outward inconveniences, hazzards, and
hardships? Speak in the name of GOD, speak thou profane man; stands the
case thus with thee? Is such a kind of sense, and sight wrought in thee, as
does prohuce these notable effects? affirm it if thou can: say yea to it if
thou can. If thou should, thy lewd courses still lived in, would give thee
the lie. Thou art a swaggerer still, and have no purpose to be more temperate;
thou art a breaker of Gods Saboths, and have no purpose to keep them better; an
usurer still, and purposest to be no other; an idle unthrift, and have no
purpose to be more painful; proud, and have no purpose to learn humility; a
swearer, and have no desire to fear an oath. The Devil persuades thee they
are profitable and pleasurable: and thou do, and wilt still live in the same;
have thou this sense then which I now speak of? No, no. If thou had but a
sense and feeling of the burden and deformity of thine enormious evils, thou
would strive to forsake them, whatsoever it cost thee: If thou had but a
sight and taste of the goodness of those graces and virtues, whereof thou have
been so long empty, thou would follow after them, with the hardest terms
to flesh and blood. So long therefore as thou walk on thus in thy lewd,
proud, profane, unclean, malicious, covetous courses, thou give manifest
evidence against thy self, that thou art altogether void of the true sense of
grace: and wanting the sense of grace, thou art without the work of grace.
Cease thy bragging then of thine own goodness. Make no comparisons with the
Saints of God (such comparisons are odious) thou have no more part of the
saving Spirit of grace then the Devil himself has: and for all the good
motions which thou talkest of, thou have not one spark of the true feeling of
the Spirits working; because those motions are not so far cherished in thee,
as to work thee to a reformation of thine open lewdness and profaneness.

2. The civil persons self-conceit confuted.
And now ridding my hands of the profane person, I come to encounter with the
civil: whom I fear I shall find as strongly wedded to his own fancy as the
former. The Goliath of whose self conceit of having grace, if I may but beat
to the ground with this stone, this doctrine, I should think my self happy in
my slinging, and prosperous in confuting; And the more happy too, because I
know that it is easier to convince a profane and notorious rebel against the
God of heaven, then to remove a civil Iusticiarian from an high opinion of
himself, if he be once settled upon the lees of his own supposed
righteousness. Well then, in hope of some success from the Lord, I will heave
at this mountain of his conceit, as the Lord shall give me help, and the
point yield me leave. Hear him thus vanting of himself; I pay tithe of all
that I do possess. I never beguiled any man the value of a groate, I have
ever been faithful in my promises, just in my proceedings with men, a lover
of my Church, no drunkeard, no swearer, no whoremaister, no thief, etc. (so
that if the proud Lu. 18.11
Pharisie and he were standing together in the temple, you could not tell which
were the greatest boaster:) and what conclusion draws he from hence think
you? that Grace must needs be his inheritance, the Spirit must needs be his
portion; as though Father, Son and holy Ghost were all pinned to his sleeue:
and whosoever should say that he were not (...) bad; and that the subtle
serpent the devil, and thine own cousening heart do nothing else but play
the sophisticating impostors and deceivers with thee, when they would make thee
believe that thou art spiritually graced with inward sanctity, because thou art
restrayningly endued with outward ciuility. Shall I close a little with thee,
and like S. James in the case of faith, deal with thee in this case of grace:
Iac. 2.18
Show me thy faith by thy works (says he:) So say I, show me the breathing of
sound grace in thee, by the sense and feeling it effects in the faculties of
the soul. For, where the Spirit of grace is, there is a feeling of the work
of it, sometimes afflicting thy heart with a sorrow for thy falls, sometimes
affecting thy spiritual appetite with a vehement longing after the merits of
Christ Jesus, sometimes affecting thy taste with the sweetness of Gods
goodness, sometimes working thee to tremble as Habakkuk Haba. 3.16.
did. When the Law, through the ear of the understanding conueieth the
terrible sounds of judgment to the affections (sometimes causing thee to
rejoice when the Gospel brings the sweet Songs of salvation to the soul,
sometimes feelingly stirring thee up to be zealous in the ways of godliness,
to be jealous of the baits to wickedness that are laid in thy way) when the
word of spiritual exhortation, admonition, and counsel does convey the sound
of Gods Precepts and Commandments to thy understanding, either by means of
those Sermons which thou hear, those books which thou read, or that
conference which thou have with the servants of GOD; This kind of sense and
feeling should thou have (besides the hard and sharp conflicts with doubting
coldness, worldliness (which I have spoken of before) if ever the Spirit has
effectually breathed upon thee. Chap. 3. page 39.
Now answer me, have thou this sense and feeling? Thou have not, neither can
have, so long as thou art but merely civil. For, howsoever with profane ones
thou may have good motions now and then, and with hypocrites may have
certain flashes (the vanity whereof I shall discover by and by); yet with true
Christians, thou have no portion of true saving sense and feeling; and if no
spiritual sense, no grace: For, where grace is, there is life (as has been
showed); and if life, then sense as well as motion and action. But, if thou will not be born down, but that thou have spiritual life and sense; then I
must entreat thee to prove that those fruits of righteousness, which thou so
much braggest of, are grounded upon a sound knowledge of the needefulnes of
them; and upon an hearty desire of honoring God by them; and that they are
joined also with a conscionable care of yielding obedience to that which the
Lord requires in the Laws of the first Table, as well as in those of the
second Table, because that GOD which commands the one, does enjoin the
other also: but this I am sure thou can not prove. Thou art a good
Church-keeper, because thou would keep out of the Court, (though neither
Court nor Counsel can prevail with some) thou keepst thy word, because thou
would keep thy credit; thou live quietly with thy neighbors, because thou
think it is good sleeping in a safe skin, and otherwise thou might be
hated, and counted a troublesome fellow: thou fliest Stews, Tauernes, and the
like places, more to save thy body from diseases, thy estate from consuming,
thy name from stinking then for any thing else: these by-respects, and sinister
considerations rather sway thee in thy courses then the things which should
sway thee. Thou live ciuilly, and not so notoriously as the lewder sort do,
for these carnal respects, rather then because thou feel the Spirit of God
preparing thy will to yielde obedience unto Gods Commandment sounding in the
Word against open rebellion, and calling for outward reformation. Stop up thy
mouth then thou civil person, and blush thou to say, that thou art truly
gracious: do not think that thou have received any more of the spirit, then
an unregenerate person may possibly have. For, for all thy civil honesty, thou
art with Act. 8.23
Simon Magus in the bond of iniquity, until in some degree or other thou
come to feel grace work in thee, (through the good means which thou
enioyest) either to thy sound humiliation, solid consolation, zealous
reformation, for conscience sake abstayning from evil, and careful
confirmation for conscience sake inuring thy self to that which is good;
obeying heartily, readily, cheerfully, sincerely that which is commanded by
God, as well in the first Table, in hearing, reading, meditation, conference,
prayer with thy family, household instruction, etc. as in the second Table, in
living quietly, dealing equally, carrying thy self ciuilly toward thy
neighbor.

By this time I might have done confuting, 3. Hypocrites deceive themselves.
but that hypocrites and hollow-hearted professors stand in our way, whom I am
now to grapple withal: and why grapple with them? because they do not only
intrude themselves into the company of true Saints, but also lay claim,
without any right, to that very same possession of saving grace which is only
peculiar to the Saints. For, because (having a promptness of capacity, a
steady memory to conceive, and to keep the things which they hear, or read
out of the Word) they have gotten a few smacks of knowledge, and have attained
to an ability to discourse of the points of Religion: and because, with Judas
for gain, with Iehu for glory, with the Pharisees for praise, they do some
duties, which true Christians do, pray peradventure sometimes with their
family, give alms of their substance to the poor, afford (perhaps) some
countenance to the Ministers of the Word, and Professors of the Gospel; because
(I say) for by-respects they do these things, therefore they argue, that they
must needs be sound Christians. But how much they deceive themselves, God
knows, and this point shows. For alas, what are (...) have, perhaps, a
knowledge of the doctrine of faith, and therein of the object of faith, Christ
Jesus: but where is thy experience of the power of this faith; first, in
leading thee to Christ for reconciliation; secondly, in accheering thy heart
upon the finding of the Messiah; thirdly, in purifying thy heart from the
filthiness of the flesh; and fourthly, in provoking thee to lament, as the
Church did in the Canticles, when thou have lost the sight of him? Again, thou
have (it may be) by attendance upon the ordinance of God, gotten some skill to
discourse of the point of love to God and his Children, of hatred of sin,
etc. but do thou feel thy heart set on fire, with a desire of being
obedient to God in all his Commandments, resolving to 1 Kin 15.5
turn from nothing that he enioyneth thee, all the days of thy life? and
purposing with Job Job 9.4
to be content to receive evil at Gods hands as well as good? Art thou
enflamed with a love to all good things, as well as one, and to all the Saints
as well as one? (though I deny not that the neernes or the worthiness of the
person loved may occasion differing degrees in thy love): nay, find thou a
readiness to forgive and love thine enemies? feel thou in thy self a
dislike of sin in all persons; as well as in those that are near unto thee,
as in neighbors that have no alliance with thee? Are thy affections thus
moved? Is thy inner man thus affected? No, no, thou hypocrite: will thou dare
then to encroach upon the prerogative of Gods beloved ones, and lay challenge
to the portion of saving grace? take heed what thou do. The Devil is
subtle: thine own heart is deceitful. Either get some sure testimony to
prove the sense of grace in some sound manner to affect thy heart: or else I
must tell thee as I told the profane and civil person before thee, that thou
have no grounds that the gales of Grace have sauingly blown upon thee;
when as this must needs be granted for a truth, that in the Soul of the
regenerate, there is a feeling of the spirits working, as well as in the ear
of a man a sound of the wind, when it blows in the air. And thus (Christian
Reader) have I had a cast at this vain conceit of having grace, altogether
without the sense of grace (which is all one as if the Sun and light, life
and feeling, fire and heat should be separated) and I have (to my power) bent
the edge of this doctrine against it. And if in that which I have spoken, I
have seemed too harsh, I must crave pardon: for, pity to the souls of such
deluded creatures has stirred me up thereunto. And to speak truth, never
had Dion more cause of offering sacrifice to the gods (after the paganish
manner of the Heathens) when he freed the Syracusians from the tyranny of
Dionysius, Diod. Sic. libr. 16.
then I shall have of praising the God of heaven, if through the means of this
use of confutation, but one profane, civil, or hypocritical person may be
freed and delivered from the bondage and slavery of so vain and erroneous an
opinion.

Sect. 5. Use 2. Comfort to the tenderhearted.
Now, lest the children of the Bridechamber should through the malice of Satan
abuse themselves so much, as to place themselves in the rank of such
selfe-deceiuers, and so cast down themselves without cause by that which has
been spoken, I must bring in (as well I may from the point in hand) a word of
comfort for them. Is it so then, that where the holy Ghost infuseth grace,
there is a spiritual sense in the powers of that soul; then what singular
cause of rejoicing has that Christian that has this sense and feeling! for
he has even the witness in himself, that Christ is his, grace is his, and
the Spirit of the Almighty dwells in him. When therefore the word of GOD
does reveal unto thee the mind of God, either in the sounds of Judgment, or
the Songs of Mercy, out of the Law and the Gospel; feel thou thy heart
affected accordingly, sometimes with reverence, fear and trembling, sometimes
with rauishment, comfort, and rejoicing? Art thou sensible of those impure
thoughts that swarm in thy heart, of idle speeches that often issue forth thy
mouth, and

Text: yet I dare say, it is not violently forced against the mind of the
holy Ghost. For, seeing it has pleased our Savior, to compare the sense of
the Spirits working to the sound of the winds blowing, I may safely infer
thus much heerupon; If the sound of the wind be not always alike in the ear
of the same man, but sometimes louder, sometimes lower then the feeling which
grace effects in a Christian, must needs be sometimes more, sometimes less,
and not at all times alike. Very evidently does that same Psalm. 51.12.
prayer of David make this point good, Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation; as intimating unto us, that the spiritual joy which he was wont to
feel, was in a manner quite gone; yea so gone, that he craves the restoring
of it again. Do we think that the feeling of the burden of his two sins,
Murder and Adultery, was so great and vehement, before Nathan came unto him,
as it was after he had been with him? Certainly no: the Book of the Psalms
is plentiful in proofs of this kind. Had Peter (think we) who was a beloved
Disciple of Christ, always the same feeling of the Spirits working? When he
stood upon his own Mat. 16. ver. 33.35
strength, and denied his Master, when he vanted before Christ, Though all men
forsake thee, I will not; he had not that feeling of his own weakness,
which he had when he went out and Mat. 26.75
wept bitterly, after his fall; neither did his soul hear the Law telling
him how feeble he was in himself, at the one time, so strongly as he heard it
at the other. He had not such a taste of the love of Christ toward his soul,
when he was Mat. 26.72.73
denying of him, as he had when he made that good confession of his faith, We
know thou have the words of eternal life Mat. 16.16 Lu 9 20.
, thou art the Christ the Son of the living God Neither did he so distinctly
hear the sound of the Gospel, telling him of Christ his favor when he
fainted upon the water Mat 14.30
, as when he said, Verse 28
If it be thou Master, command me to walk unto thee upon the water. What
shall I speak of Solomon, a wise King, and a worthy Christian: can it be
imagined that he had the same sense of the stirring of grace in himself at
that time when his heart did turn after other gods, to work wickedness in
the sight of the Lord 1. Kin. 11
, which he had when he proclaimed so often the pleasures of the flesh, and the
profits of the world to be Vanity of vanities, all is vanity? Many the like
authorities could I allege, to ratify this truth, that the same Saints have
not at all times the same sense and spiritual feeling. Reason 1.
And why so? First, some grievous sin against conscience, may be the cause of
it. This was it which took away David's feeling; for by his grievous fall, he
weakened his joy in the Lords salvation, and by that his offense he deprived
himself of that sense of all his other graces which formerly he had. A Simile.
For it fares in this respect with the soul, as it fares in respect of the
Apoplexy with the body. The Apoplexy (which is a benumming of the senses in the
body) is sometimes occasioned by some violent fall or blow, which blow shakes
and bruiseth the brain, and causes noisome humors to flow thither, to hurt
the original of sense in the brain, so that it cannot convey sense to the
members of the body, as it was wont: so a spiritual Apoplexy in the soul, is
caused by some grievous fall and blow against conscience, which shakes
shrewdly the sanctified soul, and causes such vicious humors (for, sin
against conscience has many cursed attendants waiting upon it) to flow
thither, to fill the ventricles and powers of the same, as take away that
spiritual sense of corruption to keep the soul humble, that spiritual sense
of Gods love to keep the affections fervent, and zealous, and to make the
soul cheerful, which formerly it was wont to have.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is possible for a Christian to be cast into a spiritual slumber
and to be overtaken with some fits of security: and then no marvel if his
spiritual feeling be not the same at all seasons. It is very probable that
David was after a manner asleep in his sin, well-neere the space of a year;
all which while, he was not so sensible of his fall, as afterward he was, when
the Prophet Nathan had been with him. Let the wind blow never so loud, yet
so long as a man is asleep, he cannot hear it: and let the good Spirit of
Grace breathe in a man; yet if he be sleepy, and drowsy, making custom as
well as conscience, his rule (which a Christian may possibly do for a time) he
shall I warrant him (so long as that fit lies upon him) neither feel the
sweetness which he was wont to taste of in the exercises of Religion, nor be
so sensible of the oppositions which resist grace within him, as he was wont to
be.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, a man cannot hear the winds noise, so well at one time as at
another, because he may be more troubled with deafness, at one time, then
another: so there is not only a spiritual drowsinesse, but also a spiritual
deafness, that many times does oppress a Christian; A deafenes either
occasioned of spiritual choler, and distempered wrathful passions, or else of
flegmatike clammy humors, and sensual and worldly thoughts and desires; the
mind being many times taken up (when it should give all attention to the Word)
with thoughts of wrongs offered, or of some worldly profits, and fleshly
pleasures: and hence it may come to pass, that (even where grace uses to
breathe) the sense and feeling may be benumbed. For, (as we heard in the
former Chapter) the word of God is an instrument of begetting this feeling in
the soul: and therefore, if a Christian (when he is hearing of that) shall
suffer either Satan, or his own corruptions to hammer the sound of wrongs, of
profits, of pleasures upon the forge of his soul to hinder the entrance of the
Word, his understanding can not so conveniently and profitably carry the sound
of duty, comfort, promise, threatening and reproof, to his affections to work
upon them as they were wont to be wrought upon. And if the joy or sorrow,
love, fear, etc. be not so affected as they were wont to be; certainly, the
spiritual feeling cannot be the same that it was wont to be.

Sect. 2. Use 1. Admonition and comfort together to the children of God.
As the former point was directed against the frivolous conceit of those that
think themselves to have grace, though they never had one jot of the feeling
of it: so this may be applied as a comfort and a Caveat to those that have
gtace, that they take heed of obiecting against themselves as altogether
destitute of grace, because they have not ever, and at all times, the same
sense and feeling. For if there be sometimes ebbings, and sometimes flowings in
the best Christians; then there is no reason why they should wrong themselves,
by abbridging themselves in their own thoughts of all right to the breath of
heaven: nay, it is against reason they should so do.

A needful caution to prevent mistaking
I speak not this to dissuade any from renewing their repentance, when their
own folly and security has bin the cause of the restraint of that sense:
(nay rather, I persuade them to that) but to this end I speak it; first, that
they may not esteem their estate desperate, and that there is no hope left for
them to recover their former feeling again (which thing to make them believe,
is one of the cunning fetches of the tempter) and so they may have comfort. And
secondly, that they may not always measure Gods working by their present
feeling and apprehension: as to think that God had never wrought, because
always they are not so sensible of those joys which they were wont to have in
the meditation of Gods love; and evermore so sensible of their corruptions, as
they were wont to be. For the Lord withdraws sometimes the taste of the
sweetness of the spirit, to exercise the grace of the Spirit in the soul,
that he may bring it to further perfection, and to try whether faith will be
stirring in the time of danger to persuade the heart of the unchangeableness of
Gods love; and whether it will build upon his gracious promises, in the time of
the greatest unlikelihood of fulfilling the same: and therefore detrude not thy
self out of that possession of grace, which thou have, because at all times
thy sense is not the same, whenas God has such excellent ends in eclipsing thy
eyesight at sometimes; and happily thy self may be in fault of this. If
ever thou had the true sense of preventing, preparing, working, coworking and
perfitting grace, it shall never utterly and wholly be taken away from thee. Thy
folly may slake the degrees of it: but it thou be a Saint, thou shall ever have
enough to guide thee, and refresh thee in thy voyage to heaven. Why then will thou (O Christian) lay such heavy things to thy charge, as do not belong unto
thee. Sect 3.
Look thou into thy self, and see what cause is in thy self that has lost
thee this feeling, and endeavor to have that removed: which is a duty, that in
the second Use I may well persuade unto, as fitly streaming from this doctrine.
Use 2. Counsel and direction together.
For seeing it is possible for a Christian to lose his feeling, and not always
to baue it the same; I think there is none will judge it a needless task for
him that has lost it, to seek the recovery of it by the remouall of those
evils, which upon trial he finds to be the cause of the same; and to stand
upon his guard to keep it, while he has, and when he shall get it again.
Wherefore, Motive because there is a possibility to recover it.
let no conceit of an impossibility of recovering it, hinder the Christian
from this duty; for then the Devil has what he would have. For howsoever (as
Hypocrates Aphor. lib. 2. Aph. 24.
Physicians say) The corporal apoplexy, and loss of sense in the body, be
impossible to be cured, if it be strong, and has lien long upon the body: yet
the spiritual Apoplexy of thy soul may be cured, if the sin which has
caused it be taken away. And though (happily) thou shall not (as thou feign
would) attain unto that measure of heavenly sense that once thou had,
yet thou shall recover as much as shall be sweeter unto thy taste then the
honny and the honny comb.

Gird up thy loins then thou Christian, and play the man; sift, search,
ransacke, and try all the odd corners and holes of thy soul to find out
this Achan whatsoever it be, which is such an enemy to thy feeling. First of
all therefore Helps to recover lost feeling, or the spiritual apoplexy in
Christians.
find thou (upon inquiry) any grievous sin against conscience to be the
cause of it? bewail it heartily, confess it ingenuously before thy Sovereign
God, and gracious father, whom thou have offended by it, as holy David did; 1.
Help.
Psa. 51.4
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: and
withal, sue hard to the God of heaven, rap loud at the gate of heaven, and
let not that gracious Hearer of prayers alone, until he has restored thee to
thy former joys again, and put that life and feeling into thy soul, which
thou have robbed thy self of by thy fall.

2. Help.
Secondly, if thou find accustomed drowsinesse and fitts of security, or a
sleepy cold humor in going about Christian exercises, to be the cause of it;
entreat the Lord to direct the Physicians of the Word to deal with thee as
the Physicians for the body deal with their Patients in the cure of that same
soporiferous and sleepy disease called Coma; that they may administer sharp
clisters of the Law to purge thee, with the sharp goades and needles of
reprehension to prick thy conscience, and to pull thee violently as it were by
the hair and the heart, with the hand of sound Doctrine, to rowze and awaken
thee. And again, when thou art alone by thy self, use the most violent
frictions and rubbings of thy self thou can, by the private meditation and
application of the seuerest terrors and threats against spiritual
slothfulness, that thou can meet withal. And beseech the Lord himself,
that with the hand of his own Spirit, he would make whatsoever thou shall so
hear, and meditate upon, to fume up into thy brain, and to pearce to thy
heart, to cut insunder those tough humors of pride, idleness, love of fleshly
ease, and the like, which have been the causes of this slumbering and
sleepiness in thee.

Thirdly, 3. Help.
if spiritual deafness has been the means of the want of this feeling,
thy meditations having been taken up with thinking upon injuries that such and
such have offered, or the profits of the world, of the poverty of thy estate,
and such like trifles, when the Word has been preached unto thee; get the
Lord Jesus to open thine ears to his Word, to bridle the unruliness of thy
affections, to stop up thy ears from listening unto such charms, and
enchantments. And to remedy this deafness, it shall (besides) be good for thee
to hold thy ears over water wherein wormwood and maioram have been sodden
together, Simile.
that the vapor thereof may ascend up to the brain; I mean it shall be
excellent for thee to have thy heart seriously occupied in thinking upon the
bitter threatenings against fruitless hearers of the Word, and also upon the
sweet promises that are made to such as attend diligently, and hear
profitably; that so the meditation of these two particulars may make thee keep
narrow watch over thy heart against those ordinary, uncharitable, vain,
discontented and worldly motions which thou have found by woeful experience to
have caused thee to let slip many wholesome exhortations, admonitions,
consolations and threats, which might have wrought upon thy affections, to the
continuance of that spiritual feeling, which the Devil and thine own
traitorous heart have bereft thee of. Thus, I say, if that spiritual sense be
gone, which once thou had, get thy sin remedied (whether it be sin against
conscience, drowsinesse in thy profession, wandering of the mind, and dullness
of apprehension and attention in the hearing of the Word) which has been the
cause of the same.

And when thou have thus recouerd thy self, watch against all these evils,
and occasions: beseech the Lord to continue this feeling in thee: Let zeal,
wisdom and sincerity season all thy holy endeauours. Then thou shall find,
that though this sense be at times obscured in the ashes; by the special hand
and providence of God, yet it shall be rather in wisdom to prove thee, then
in wrath to punish thee. And still thou shall have experience, that God is thy
God, as well when thou feel Nature resisting grace, as when thou find
grace controlling the sauciness, and subduing the strength of nature and
corruption.

CHAP. XI. The fourth and last Doctrine obseruable in the second part of the
Text.
Sect. 1. Doctr. 8. There are diversity of degrees in the feeling of several
Christians.
NOw follows the fourth position (as the last from the middle of the verse) to
be discoursed upon. Which stands thus; That there is not the like feeling of
grace in all Christians. There is as good a ground for this point from the
Text, as for the former. It is with the feeling of Grace in the heart, as it is
with the hearing of the sound of the wind. Some hear not the wind so loud
as others, though it blows equally alike when both do hear it: so some
feel not the work of grace in the same measure that others do, though the
same spirit breaths upon both. I will trouble you with no more Scriptures for
this, then with that of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 12.4. There are diversity of gifts,
but the same spirit: and if diversity of gifts, why not diversity of feelings
according to the measure of those gifts. And there is very good reason for it.
For first, There shall not be the same fruition Reason 1.
of happiness in the kingdom of Glory. I know that there shall be enioyment
of the same felicity: but there shall not be the same enioyment of that
felicity, in regard of the degrees of it; According to that of the Apostle 1.
Cor. 15.41. One star differs from another in glory. Now if there be
differing degrees in the taste of Gods favor among the Saints triumphant in the
kingdom of glory; I see nothing against it, but that it is so, and may be
so, amongst the Saints militant upon the face of the earth in the kingdom of
grace.

Secondly, all are not of the same age Reason 2.
in Christ; but they stand in a threefold difference: Some are Infants and newborn Babes in in Christ, as Peter calls them 1 Pet. 2 3.
; or little Children, as John calls them 1. Ioh. 2.1.18.
. Some are of a middle growth, or young men, as the same 1. Ioh. 2.13.
Apostle styles them. And others again are strong Christians, old men in
piety, or Fathers in Christ, as he entitleth them 1. Ioh. 2.13.14
. Now these several ages have their several feelings, new Christians in one
measure, middle aged in another, Fathers in another. And amongst every one of
these kinds, one has his feeling in one degree, and another in another,
according to the measure which the Lord has allotted for him, and according to
that capabilitie which he has given them severally.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the Lord will have it thus, that Christians may see themselves to
stand in need of help from one another; which they would not take notice of,
if there were an equality of gifts, and equal feeling answerable thereunto.

Sect. 2. Use 1.
By this then in the first place we may see what answer may be made, what
satisfaction may be given to those Christians, who call their estate in doubt,
and make a question, Whether ever they had sound grace bestowed upon them,
because they never had the same feeling wrought in them, which they hear to
have been in others that are of the same profession, age, and standing with
themselves; questioning, Whether ever their repentance was sound, because their
humiliation was never so deep as theirs; Whether ever their faith was sound,
because they have not attained unto the same steadfastness of persuasion in
Gods love, that strength against doubting, and that measure of spiritual joy
in the holy Ghost, that their brethren have attained unto. To whom this is that
which I will say (for their resolution) As there are diversity of degrees in
the gifts of the Spirit, so there are differences in the measure of feeling
that accompany those gifts: and therefore they may have grace, though they
cannot remember that ever they have matched such and such (whom they (...)
suspicion, whether ever it were true, because it has not equalled thy brothers
feeling, that is but a copartner with thee of the same grace? I do not deny
but that it is good for thee to be jealous of thine own condition (and I would
to God the hypocrite would but fall to make such questions) but yet take heed
(thou that art a right Saint) that thou do not grudge at Gods wisdom in
dispensing his gifts of this nature: if he has given thee any measure of
humiliation, and consolation at all, it is his great mercy, if it be in truth.
And whether it be in truth thou shall easily find by these particulars. First,
for thy humiliation (whether the Law has been thy Scholemaister, or the
Gospel thy Tutor, to bring thee hereunto, for Romans 2.4 Gal. 3.24
both have an hand in leading to repentance): if that has been true, first,
thou have had a sight of sin, as it is sin; secondly, thou have seen thy self
a condemned person for sin; thirdly, thou have grieved for it; fourthly, thou
have grown to dislike it, and do daily more and more; and fifthly thou
forsakest it. Again, for thy faith, if that be true, then first thou have seen
no other name whereby thou can be saved, but the name of Jesus. Secondly,
thou have disclaimed, and renounced thine own righteousness. Thirdly, thou
have longed after Christ. Fourthly, thou have either found him to thy
spiritual comfort, or else thou have a resolution that thou will not be
satisfied until thou have found him, and do see thy sins pardoned in him;
And thou longest with all thy heart for that same joy of Gods chosen, so much,
and so often spoken of in the Scripture. If then thou have these things in
thee, in never so weak a measure, know thou that thy case is good, though thou
have not attained unto the same height and depth of them that other servants
of God have, perhaps no elder in respect of the new birth then thy self too.
Thou doubtest of thy humiliation: thou say, Why peradventure by the virtue
of education and example, thou have been trained up well (...) is lacking one
way, either in thy humiliation, or of faith, the Lord has made good another
way. Take that which thine is, and be thankful; knowing and persuading thy
self, that thou shall not miss of one inch of that measure of feeling which he
has laid out for thee. A Cautio^
This have I spoken, not with an intent to flesh any hypocrite, or other
person, that is frozen in the dregs of security; (for if any do so abuse it,
the offense is taken, not given); neither to sing a Song of fleshly ease to the
Christian himself, to make him slack his diligence in making his calling and
election sure; but only to give satisfaction unto his wavering heart, when he
shall doubt of the truth of his spiritual feeling when he compares it with
the feeling of others, whose measure in this thing is greater then his own.

Sect. 3. Use 2.
In the next place, this serves to condemn the uncharitableness of some in the
Church of Christ, which call into suspicion the soundness of their fellow
brethren, because (having bin as long trained up in the School of Christ as
themselves) they have not attained unto the same measure of feeling that
themselves have. Which Christians, if they would well advise themselves by this
doctrine, may plainly see, that they pass their bounds, and censure more
tartly then they warrantably may. For if the wind, when it blows, is not
heard by all alike that do hear it; why will thou measure another man's
hearing by thine own ear, another man's graces by thine own feeling? Is there
not diversity of gifts, and are there not different degrees in feeling? If
thou be a Christian, thou dare not deny it. If then that grace or those
graces which thou have, be wrought in thy brother (whether the measure of his
feeling be the same with thine, yea, or no) take heed that thou do not
entertayne such hard and uncharitable conceits of him. If the fruits of the
Spirit speak for him, do not thou speak against him, though the sense which
does accompany the work of mortification, and

goes: So is every one that is borne of the Spirit.

The words apart interpreted. (...)
The meaning of the words must first be enquired into. [But can not tell:] In
the Original this phrase is thus set down, [Thou know not.] Now to bring-in
the diverse acceptions and sundry significations that this word Know has in the
Scriptures, were but needelesly to spend Time, and fill Paper, in this Text.
This negative, Thou know not, or Can not tell, is as much as the
affirmative, Thou art ignorant. [Whence it comes;] there is some little
difficulty in this little word IT, whether it be to be referred to Wind,
Quest. Answ.
or Sound. And it may easily be answered, that it has relation unto Wind,
rather then Sound: and the reason is this; because Nicodemus could not but
know, even by mere hearing, whence the sound of the Wind came, viz. from the
Wind; though by mere hearing, he could not tell what corner the Wind it
self comes from. So that this phrase, Whence IT comes, may be turned thus,
Whence that Wind comes: yea, Object.
but will some object and say, The cause of the Wind may be known; and a man
may easily understand whence it comes, both in respect of the supernatural
cause of it, and natural. Is not the supernatural cause of it, God himself?
The sayings of Moses declare as much: Exd. 11.13
The LORD brought an East wind upon the Land, all that day, and all that
night: and in the nineteenth verse of the same chapter, JEHOVAH turned a mighty
strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and cast them into the red
Sea. And in another place he says, Number. 11 13.
There went forth a wind from the LORD, and brought Quails from the Sea. And
by the Prophet Amos Amos 4.17.
GOD is called the Creator of the winds. Secondly, as for the natural cause
of the wind, it is known to be a cold cloud meeting (in the middle region of
the air) with such vapors as arise from the earth, according to that of the
Psalmist Psalm. 135 7.
; He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he brings the
wind out of his treasuries, that is, out of the Caves and hidden places of the
earth, where the Lord holds the winds as in a storehouse, to bring them
forth thence according to his pleasure: So that, thus I say it may be known
whence the wind comes. True. Why then does Christ here charge Nicodemus
with such ignorance, that he did not know whence the wind came? Was he a
Doctor in Israel, and had he neither Philosophy to know the natural cause of
the wind, nor Divinity to know the supernatural? To this I answer, Answer to
this objection.
that the words are not to be understood of Nicodemus his ignorance in the
cause of the wind, and whence it arises, as from the supernatural and
natural original of it; but of his ignorance about the particular place,
angle and corner whence this wind, or that wind comes; implying, that he
could not know whether it came from East or West, or North or South, only by
hearing the sound of it: and so are the words to be understood. [Nor whither
it goeth]: that is, Nor into what corner it will turn, how strongly, or how
long it will blow, what a measure of sound it will rise to ere it cease. [So
is every one that is borne of the Spirit] This, at the first sight, seems to be
a strange speech, being so to be applied as it is, I mean to the immediate
foregoing sentence, Can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes.
For, what? Doubt.
can we not know whence the Spirit of regeneration comes, or what it
works? Does not the Scripture tell us, that the holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son: and that Iac. 1.17
every good and perfect gift comes down from the Father of Lights: and that
the fruits of the Spirit, and the effects which it produces are Galat. 5 22.23
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, etc.?
Yes: why then is it said here, that it is with the operation of the Spirit in
the regenerate, as it is with the wind in the air, not to be known whence it
comes, and whither it goes? I answer; Solution.
This phrase is here used, not to signify unto us, that the ways of
spiritual men are unknown to those that (...) where it will cease, or how it
will cease, how strong it will be, how long it will blow before it will fall.
So is it with the blowings of grace in the regenerate sometimes; though they
feel the Spirit working in them, they cannot distinctly and directly tell
whether the Spirit be the Author of it, yea, or no: and when they do know
whence it comes, and can tell that the Spirit is the original of it, they can
not tell what measure of it they shall receive.

From the words thus co^mented upon, two points of Doctrine do arise,.i. that
the Spirit is sometimes felt working, and yet is not discerned to be the
Spirit: secondly, That the measure of a Christians graces, is incomprehensible.

CHAP. XIII. The first proposition handled out of the last part of the Text.
Sect. 1. Doctr. 9.
THe former of these wants not proof. For, that the Spirit is sometimes felt
working by the regenerate in themselves; and yet is no more known by them
whence that work comes, then the wind by the bare sound of it can be known
from what particular corner (whether East or West, etc.) it comes, is as
clear a case in Divinity as can be. It was the Spirit (no doubt) that moved
Nicodemus to come to Christ; and it is very likely that he heard a certain
secret sound within him, telling him, that Christ was an extraordinary teacher,
sent from God, and that bade him come to Christ for instruction: yet Nicodemus
did not know that this motion came from the Spirit of God. For if he had, he
would never have wondered so much as he did at the speech of Christ, when he
discoursed with him of the working of the Spirit in the hearts of the
regenerate. Paul also (whose Story Saint Luke mentions Acts 9. Compare the 3,
4, 5, and 6. verses with the 18.
) when he was cast down with the hand of God, so suddenly and violently (as he
was traveling with Letters from the high Priest toward Damascus, against the
Saints) had a strong and a strange work and (...) himself into an Angel of
light, telling the Christian, there is a thing like repentance, which is not
repentance; like faith, which is no true faith? and by this means he drives
the poor soul into such a quandary, that it can not distinctly tell whether
the holy motions which it has be but mere flashes of joy, of sorrow, or
whether the holy Ghost be the author of them. Seeing then many saints are but
yonglings in piety, seeing the Devil seeks by all cunning fetches to blind
their eyes, that they may not so plainly see the truth of their graces: we
need not account it any strange point of Doctrine, To hold and affirm, that a
man may have the stirrings of grace in him, and yet not at all times know that
the holy Ghost is the breeder of them.

Sect. 2.
Before I come to the Use, a question must be answered, which is fitly
occasioned by the Doctrine; and this it is: Quest.
Whether a man may have the work of Conversion and not know of it at all? To
this I answer Answ.
negatiuely, A man cannot be converted, but he must needs know it, some way or
other. And my reason is this: because Conversion is a change; and can a man be
changed and not find an alteration in himself? Yea but then will some say, I
contradict my self; unsay that which I have now proved. Not so. For though I
say a man cannot be converted but he must needs know of an alteration in
himself, yet may he be ignorant of the truth of his conversion for a time:
to be turned he may find himself, but directly to know, and to say, I am
truly turned by the work of the Spirit, he may possibly, not for a time; and
herein he may doubt and waver: and though he has received the holy Ghost to
renew him; yet his condition may possibly be such, that he shall say, I am not
yet renewed. But to be altered, and find no alteration at all in a man's self; I
do not see what one Scripture does warrant it. Yes will some say, There is
Scripture for it. Object.
For it is said of some Acts 19.2.
that were in Ephesus, who were Disciples, and of the number of Believers, that
they had not so much as heard whether there were an holy Ghost, or no. For Paul
said unto them; Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed: and they
answered him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost.
Now if such as believed, never had heard whether there be an holy Ghost, then
it is likely that they never felt the working of the holy Ghost in their
conversion; neither one way nor other. Answer.
But to this I answer; first of all, that it is a bad consequent, to conclude,
that because the Disciples of Ephesus had not heard of the holy Ghost,
therefore a man can have no knowledge of his conversion, though he be converted.

Answer.
Again, besides this we must know that the holy Ghost is taken 3. ways in the
Scriptures. First, it signifies the substance it self, or the person, of the
holy Ghost, the third person in the Trinity; secondly, it signifies the
sanctifying and invisible gifts of the Spirit, which are conferred upon the
Elect at their conversion; and thirdly, the visible spiritual gifts, which
Christ bestowed upon the faithful or some of them, in the Primitive Church.
Now, in this place of the Acts is neither meant the person of the holy Ghost,
nor the invisible sanctifying gifts of the holy Ghost. For it had bin a most
absurd thing for Paul to have esteemed those as such as had never known
whether there were an holy Ghost or no, or regenerating gifts of that holy
Ghost yea or no, who were Disciples, who had received the Baptism of that John
which in his course of baptizing had made mention of such a Spirit and of such
gifts, when he said, Mat. 3.11.
I indeed baptize you with water to repentance, but there is one that comes
after me, who is stronger then me, he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost,
and with fire. It had been an absurd thing (I say) for Paul to have doubted
whether they had known of such a Spirit and such gifts: in neither of those
two senses is the place therefore to be understood; but it rather is to be
meant of the visible gifts which in those times Christ did power down upon
his Church. Concerning such gifts therefore Paul asks the Disciples of
Ephesus, whether they had received them, yea or no; as, the gifts of tongues,
and prophecy. And concerning such gifts, they answer Paul also, We know not
whether there be any holy Ghost: we never heard whether ever Christ gave any
such visible gifts unto his Church, as the gifts of tongues and prophesying
are. So that from that Scripture no such matter can be gathered, that it is
possible for a Christian never to find a change in himself, and yet be
changed. For if a man be converted by the Spirit of grace, he may know an
alteration in himself, though he cannot so presently understand that that
change in himself is the right change, and such as the holy Ghost produces and
causes; and though at sometimes (as the Doctrine shows) the spiritual
feeling which he has within him, cannot so directly be comprehended to come
from the Spirit, as at another time it is, and may be. The Use follows.

Sect. 3. Use.
To teach the children of God when they have any feeling in themselves, and know
not whence directly it is, to go and enquire at the word of God, at the Priests
lips which preserve knowledge, or at the mouth of some faithful brother; and
to compare their present sense with what that word reuealeth, and to open their
case plainly and faithfully to such a Minister or such a brother, telling them
how it has been with them, or how it is with them, either in case of sorrow,
joy, etc. entreating them to acquaint them with evidence from the Word, whether
the grief which they are sometimes overwhelmed withal, or the comforts that
they are at other times accheerd withal, be such as are fruits of Gods
sanctifying Spirit. For, seeing there may be such a feeling in a man, and not
known by him to come from heaven, nor whence indeed; I think that it is very
necessary for him to make such an enquiry as I am now persuading unto. Even as
a man therefore that hears the noise of the wind abroad, that he may know in
what corner it lies, from what Angle it comes, whether from the East or from
the West, etc. So when thou hear a kind of spiritual sound in thy self,
blowing, either roughly to humble thee, or pleasingly to accheere thee, or any
way else to affect thee; if thou would know whether it be Sibboleth, or
Shiboleth, whether a delusion of Satan, or a right blast from heaven; as Philip
said to Nathanael in another case, Ioh. 1.46
Come and see: So say I to thee in this, Go and see, search and try, consult
with the book of God, with the Ambassadors of God, with the Saints of God,
whether what is in thee be of that quality which the Scriptures declare to be
in the^ that are sanctified; and whether it has the regenerating Spirit for
the original and fountain of it.

1. Is it Desire that is set a work within thee, to request and seek after
the favor of God? Search and try whether some outward extremity that thou art
in, or some external casualty thou art like to fall into, does stir thee up
to this seeking: or whether the sweetness of Gods love accounted by thee
better then life it self, as it was by David, does allure thee to it, Psalm.
63.3
so that thou could be content to forgo all the pleasures of this life,
patiently to bear whatsoever the Lord inflicteth upon thee (if he sees it
meet) that thou may obtain the light of this his loving countenance.

2 Does grief seize upon thee, does sorrow smite thee for sin committed? See
and look, whether the punishment due, or the deed that is done against so good
a God, do most trouble thee.

3 Feel thou the affection of love to stir in thee toward the Almighty?
Look out and see whether it be not rather with Saul for the kingdom, with
Achitophel for honor, with Judas for an office amongst the twelve, with
Courtiers for advancement, with Scholars for preferment, then with David for
holiness which thou see in God deserving love at thy hands; then with a
dutiful child for the special and spiritual goodness of God in Christ
Jesus, resolving to love him though he whippeth thee, to trust in him though
he kills thee, to obey him though he takes away his outward benefits from
thee.

4 Is it joy and gladness that springs up in thy heart? Examine and try
whether acquaintance with worldly friends, countenance amongst great ones,
command amongst mean ones, credit amongst all, riches, authority, dignity, hope
of great posterity and the like, be the ground of that joy; or whether the
preaching of the Cross of Christ, thy sharing in the death of Christ, thy
partaking of the graces of Christ, be the fountain and occasion of it.

5 Again, art thou moved at sometimes to be a little suspicious and jealous of
the estate of thy soul; and whether it be with thee as it is and should be
with a sound Christian? Prove and try whether thou thus fear thy self only
because thou would fare well, and have thy soul happy that thou may
escape damnation (which a wicked man may attain unto;) or chiefly because thou
would do well, and have thy soul holy, that thou may be a sanctified
vessel to live to Gods glory, which none but the Elect can reach unto. In a
word, whatsoever the inward mouings and feelings be which arise and make a
noise in thy soul; that thou may not be doubtful, but understand with some
certainety whence they come, compare those feelings with the like in the
Scriptures: and if thou wauerest about the foundation and wel-head of them, and
can not be resolved and settled concerning that, acquaint such with them as
are fit to be thy teachers and directors in this case; and then thou shall
know in what corner the wind lies, from what Spirit the motion arises, and
so shall find cause of humiliation or consolation accordingly.

CHAP. XIII The second and last point from the last part of the Text.
Sect. 1.
TO draw to a conclusion, the last thing which I have to handle is (...) ctrine,
to encounter with that dangerous opinion of perfection in this life, first
broched by those ancient heretics called Cathari, and since maintained by the
Family of Love; as also with that gross absurdity of the monkish order, which
makes cloistering and contemplation the perfection of a man: as if a man when
he were got into a Cloister, had attained to know that, which this point is
against, even the height and top of his gifts and graces, not only what they
are, but also what they shall be. These errors I might stand to confute, but
that I had rather leave that to the Schools, and deal with thee (good Reader)
about certain duties whereunto I have a desire to persuade thee, with words of
exhortation.

Sect. 3. Use 1. Exhortation to a two-folde duty: first imitation of the Saints.
And first, that thou would endeavor to imitate, and follow the best of the
saints in the tradings of grace. For if no Christian knows what measure of
grace he shall attain unto, then what know thou but that thou may com
near (if not over take) Abraham in Faith, Iosuah in spirirual courage, Moses in
meeknes, David in holiness, Josiah in vprightnes, Mary Magdalen in repentance,
Paul in zeal, etc. only if thou will but imitate these holy Worthies in those
worthy steps which they have trod before thee. Thou wishest, Oh that I could
come near such an one, I would I could do as he does; he is full, and I am
barren: O how may I attain to some of that fulness which he has! Imitate thou,
but emulate not. Take heed that thou do not envy him, but endeavor to follow
him: thou know not what degrees thou may attain unto in time, thou may
peradventure overtake him. And though happily thou can not be AS he is for the
measure of piety, yet thou may be like him (for the manner of sanctity) if
thou set his godly example before thee for a pattern, following him as
Paul wished his 1. Cor. 12.1.
Corinths to follow himself, even so far forth as he was a follower of
Christ Jesus. And not only must one Christian learn thus to imitate an other,
that they may overtake one another; The second duty exhorted unto in the 2.
use, growth in grace.
but also all Christians must learn to thrive and grow in grace (upon the
meditation of this principle) not to go backward; for that is dangerous and
fearful: not to stand still or lie down as Balaams Numb.
ass did; for that is neither commodious nor gainful; but to be still running,
and hastening toward the mark (with Paul Philip. 3 14
) for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. The Lord does of
purpose keep secret to himself, and hidden from his servants, the measure of
their graces, that they may daily be growing, and continually endeavoring to
have their spiritual possessions ever mended, never payred; that they may get
strength by degrees, until they come to perfection: as the Sun from the
first rising does every minute increase, until it comes to the mid heaven.
Why do men of the world, from their first entering into worldly dealings,
strive by all manner of ways to increase in wealth and riches, but because
they will set no bounds to their estate, no period, which they resolve not to
pass; neither will they learn to know any measure, beyond which they purpose
not to go? And shall not men of the Spirit, from the first time of their
conversion seek to thrive in those spiritual riches no limits whereunto the
Lord has set, until their earthly tabernacle be dissolved, and death makes
a separation betwixt the soul and the body? How do they look for the
Garland, except they run forward? What hope can they have of the Crown of
life, except they be faithful unto the death? If I had but a persuading
faculty, I would vehemently urge this spiritual growth in the practice of
piety, in the life of Christianity in these declining times, in this decaying
barren age of the world. But Peter shall speak in stead of me; 2. Pet 3.18
Grow in grace: And so shall Saint Paul; Ephesians 4 15.
In all things grow up into him which is the head, that is, Christ, etc. Whose
counsel I would entreat thee to follow, to hold fast and to increase what
thou have already received. Quest.
But will some say, It is easier to say, Grow. then to show how to grow: bare
exhortation (...) berall Arts, that there was never a day passed over his head,
wherein he did not either read something, or write something, or declaime; and
out of doubt he was no loser by it: So if men and women would be more diligent
students in the Oracles of God, the book of the Scriptures, they should be
great gainers in the trade of godliness; and their daily incomes of heavens
blasts would be larger then now they are. Unto God therefore (my brethren) I
commend you, Acts 20.32.
and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you
an inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified; Phil. 1.9.
praying that you may more and more abound in knowledge and in all judgment.

Lu. 17.5
Lord increase our faith. And if their faith, then all the other graces which
are joined with faith, and attend upon her. Thus prayed Paul on the behalf of
the Philippians, that Phil. 1.9.
their love might abound. Thus prayed he also for the Ephesians, when he said;
Ephesians 3.14.16
For this cause do I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. And thus must thou pray
also that art a partner in the possessions of grace; and then thou shall find
that that God which has begun the good work, will perfect it: for the more
frequent and fervent thy suits are for the augmentations of Grace, the better
thou art sure to thrive in thy spiritual and holy courses.

Thirdly, to love the communion their times about things that tend not to
edification, neglecting faith, repentance, and such necessary and never to be
knowne-enough principles, they com at length to call their mother, whore, like
impudent children: though they first received the graces they make profession
to have, in her; yet they will not stick to slander her as a limme of the
Romish Synagogue. And therefore I say I persuade not to such meetings; but I
persuade to that which the Apostle does: Hebr. 10.24 25
Brethren, forsake not the assembling your selves together as some do; that ye
may consider one another to provoke unto love and good works, and to exhort
one another, in as much as ye see the day approaching. Children season
themselves in profaneness, by their playing together. Profane men strengthen
themselves in wickedness, by conuersing together in Alehouses, Tauerns,
Brothell-houses, Theaters, etc. Papists in heresies, by mutual society: and
shall Christians deprive themselves of this means to thrive and grow up in
grace, by neglecting the society and communion of one another? God forbid. If
they do, that which the Prophet speaks of the material temple, may be
verified of them; Hag. 2.3
Who is left amongst you that saw this house in her first glory? And how do
you see it now? Is it not now in comparison of it (that is, of what it was
before) as nothing?

Fourthly, it must be our care, not walk wisely and circumspectly, redeeming
the time, as the Apostle advises Ephesians. 5.15.16
; but also to be daily weeding our corruptions out of the ground of our
hearts, with the weeding-hooks of Examination, and renewed Repentance; searching
diligently what thistles grow at the bottom, what evils are most prone to
please our selves, in that we may daily grow into hatred with them, and
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, as the Apostle his counsel is 2. Cor. 7.1.
. For if day by day pass over our heads, and we seldom, or never search out
our hidden sins, and summon our selves for them before Gods Tribunal, we
may be so ouer-growne with security, lack of care, that our growth in
sanctity will be hindered, our gifts of grace (to our sense at least) much
impaired: even as land when it is sown, and corn when it is sprung up, for
want of looking to and weeding, may be ouer-growne with noisome weeds, and
unprofitable plants, to the great hinderance and grieuance of the poor
husbandman.

Simile.
is (if his markets be good, and the winds serve) to be continually in trading,
and still to have the maine stock going; Whereas, he which always spends of
the stock, and tradeth not withal, may go down the wind, and soon prove
a bankrupt. So for a man to have good gifts, good graces, and not occupy with
them, nor keep them in exercise, shall be so far from increasing his
spiritual store, that he shall rather diminish and wrong it. Use limbs and
have limbs, says the old Adage. Use knowledge and have knowledge, use faith
and have faith, use love and have love, use humility and have humility, etc.

1. Have thou the grace of knowledge? practice the things which thou know:
that only will make thee an happy man, as Christ intimates John 13 17.
: put thy knowledge to use, to glorify God withal, to inform thy self
withal, to instruct, resolve, comfort, direct, persuade and edify thy
neighbors withal. So shall thou grow up in knowledge, beyond Papists, whose
knowledge is all in contemplation; beyond hypocrites, whose knowledge is only
in speculation; beyond heretics, whose knowledge is only in broaching
dangerous opinions; beyond Sectaries and Schismatiques, whose knowledge is all
in raising contentions.

2. Have thou faith? Let not her be idle, but let her do her perfect work by
love; first, by meditating solitarily and seriously on Gods love in Christ
Jesus, on the privileges of Justification, sanctification, freedom from the
bondage of corruption, from the punishment of sin, from the hurt of
affliction, from the evil of temptation, share in the adoption and spiritual
Sonship, and eternal inheritance of the weight of glory: secondly, by
studying how to show thy self thankful to Gods Majesty, obedient to his holy
will, and serviceable to his people, and how to grow every day a more
victorious conqueror over thy lusts.

3 Again; have thou any spark of humility? put it to use also: how? first, by
meditating on Gods holiness, thine own vileness, another Christians goodness,
whom it shall be good for thee (whatsoever thy gifts be) to think thy self
inferior unto: secondly, by carrying thy self diligently in thy vocation,
considering the Sluggard is wiser in his own eyes, then ten men that can
render a reason: by behauing thy self lowlily in prosperity, patiently in
adversity, when losses, and crosses, and indignities are offered unto thee, and
do light upon thee.

4. Have thou received any measure of zeal? set it on work; first, by being
most severe against thy self, and strict against thine own sins, laying an
heavier burden upon thy self then upon others, being most censorious and
Eagle-eied at home: secondly, by disliking sin in thy dearest friend, making
Cockneys of never an Absolon and Adoniah of them all; hating evil in wife, in
husband, in children, in brethren, kinsfolks and nearest acquaintance that
thou have: thirdly, by opposing (if thy place, Gods honor, do call thee to it)
the sins of the mighty: fourthly, by seasoning thy tarte admonitions with the
spirit of compassion; that when thou do reprove, thou may rather fall-cut
with the sin in an holy indignation, then with the person in a furious and
unbridled passion.

5. Again, is it the grace of love which thou have? Let it be operative as
well as her fellows: set it a working, to the profit of thy brother, in body,
in soul, in goods and good name, showing most kindness where there is most
goodness; even for Gods Image sake, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake. In a
word (to shut up all) whatsoever the talent be which thou have, hide it not in
a napkin, as the unprofitable servant did: but occupy withal until thy Master
come to Judgment; and thou shall find that this holy Usury shall bring thee
daily a greater income of perfecting grace, then the Usurers hundreds (lent out
unlawfully, and sent abroad so theeuingly) can bring in to him yearly of
perishing trash. These rules have I laid down for thy direction how to thrive
and grow in grace; which is a duty that this point does urge upon thee. No
Saint militant upon earth can certainly tell what degrees of grace he shall
attain unto, then which neither more nor less he shall have. Which rules if
thou will improve, and carefully follow, thou shall (I assure thee) be no
loser. And though thou can not follow them without sometime, some pains,
some cost, some struggling with thy corruption, some denyalls of thy self in
things very pleasing and contenting to Nature: Yet the wages will recompense
the work; the gain will counteruayle, yea exceed the cost. For, by this
means thou shall (in despite of all the powers of darkness) still be
thriuing and growing to perfection, until thou come to that fullness of
measure which the Lord has laid out for thee; so as at the time of thy
dissolution thou shall be able with the Apostle (that worthy Proficient in the
School of CHRIST) confidently to say with a comfortable heart; 2. Tim. 4 7.8.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but
to them also that love his appearing.

To Father, Son, and holy Ghost the Fountain, Mediator and Inspirer of
Grace, be all honor, glory, and thanks for ever, Amen.


