THE FORTVNATE ISLES and THEIR UNION. celebrated in a MASQVE designed for the
Court, on the Twelfth night. 1624.

Hie choreae, cantus que vigent. THE FORTVNATE ISLES.
His Matie being set,

Enters in, running, IOHPHIEL, an aerie spirit, and (according to the Magi) the
Intelligence of Jupiters sphere: Attired in light silks of several colors,
with wings of the same, a bright yellow hair, a chaplet of flowers, blew silk
stockings, and pumps, and gloves, with a silver fan in his hand.

IOHPHIEL. Like a lightning from the sky,
or an arrow shot by Love,
Or a Bird of his let fly;
Be It a Sparrow, or a Dove:
With that winged have, come I,
loosed from the Sphere of Jove,
To wish goodnight
to your delight.

To him enters a Melancholique Student, in bare and worn clothes, shrouded
under an obscure cloak, and the eaues of an old hatt, fetching a deep sigh,
his name, Mr.

MERE-FOOLE. Oh, oh!

IOHPHIEL. In Saturn's name, the Father of my Lord!
What ouer-charged piece of Melancholy
Is this, breaks in between my wishes thus,
With bombing sighs?

MERE-FOOLE. No! no Intelligence!
Not yet! and all my vows now nine days old!
Blindness of fate! Puppies had seen by this time:
But I see nothing! that I should! or would see!
What mean the Brethren of the Rosie-Crosse
So to desert their votary!

IOHPHIEL. O! it is one
Has vowed himself unto that aerie order,
And now is gaping for the fly they promised him.
I Will mix a little with him for my sport.

MERE-FOOLE. Have I both in my lodging, and my diet,
My clothes, and every other solemn charge
Observed 'hem! made the naked bords my bed!
A faggot for my pillow! hungered sore!

IOHPHIEL. And thirsted after'hem!

MERE-FOOLE. To look gaunt, and lean!

IOHPHIEL. Which will not be.

MERE-FOOLE. (Who Is that?) yes, and outwatcht,
Yea, and out-walked any Ghost alive
In solitary circle, worn my boots,
Knees, arms, and elbowes out!

IOHPHIEL. Ran on the score!

MERE-FOOLE. That have I (who suggests that?) and for more
Then I will speak of, to abate this flesh,
And have not gaind the sight;

IOHPHIEL. Nay scarce the sense,

MERE-FOOLE. (Voice, thou art right) of any thing but a cold
Wind in my stomach.

IOHPHIEL. And a kind of whimsie.

MERE-FOOLE. Here in my head, that puts me to the staggers,
Whether there be that Brotherhood, or no.

IOHPHIEL. Believe frail man, they be: And thou shall see.

MERE-FOOLE. What shall I see?

IOHPHIEL. Me.

MERE-FOOLE. Thee? Where?

IOHPHIEL. Here. If you
Be Mr. Mere-Foole.

MERE-FOOLE. Sir, our name is Mery-Foole.
But by contraction Mere-Foole.

IOHPHIEL. Then are you
The wight I seek: and Sr. my name is Iohphiel,
Intelligence to the Sphere of Jupiter,
An aerie iocular spirit, employed to you
From Father OVTIS.

MERE-FOOLE. OVTIS? who is he?

IOHPHIEL. Know ye not OVTIS? Then know Nobody:
The good old Hermit, that was said to dwell
Here in the forest without trees, that built
The Castle in the air, where all the Brethren
Rhodostaurotick live. It flies with wings,
And runs on wheels: where Julian de Campis
Holds out the brandisht blade.

MERE-FOOLE. Is It possible
They think on me?

IOHPHIEL. Rise, be not lost in wonder,
But hear me, and be faithful. All the Brethren
Have heard your vows, salute you, and expect you,
By me, this next return. But the good Father
Has bin content to die for you.

MERE-FOOLE. For me?

IOHPHIEL. For you. Last New Years day, which some give out
Because it was his Birthday, and began
The year of Iubile, he would rest upon it,
Being his hundred five and twentieth year:
But the truth is, having observed your Genesis,
He would not live, because he might leave all
He had to you.

MERE-FOOLE. What had he?

IOHPHIEL. Had? An office,
Two, three, or four.

MERE-FOOLE. Where?

IOHPHIEL. In the upper Region:
And that you will find. The Farm of the great Customs,
Through all the Ports of the Aires Intelligences;
Then Constable of the Castle Rosy-Crosse:
Which you must be, and Keeper of the Keys
Of the whole Kaball, with the Seals; you shall be
Principal Secretary to the Stars;
Know all their signatures, and combinations,
The divine rods, and consecrated roots.
What not? Would you turn trees up like the wind,
To show your strength? march over heads of armies,
Or points of pikes, to show your lightness? force
All doors of arts, with the petarr, of your wit?
Read at one view all books? speak all the languages
Of several creatures? master all the learnings
Were, are, or shallbe? or, to show your wealth,
Open all treasures, hid by nature, from
The rock of Diamond, to the mine of Sea-coale?
Sir, you shall do it.

MERE-FOOLE. But how?

IOHPHIEL. Why, by his skill,
Of which he has left you the inheritance,
Here in a pot: this little gally pot,
Of tincture, high rose tincture. There Is your He gives him a Rose.
Order,
You will have your Collar sent you, er't be long.

MERE-FOOLE. I looked Sr. for a halter, I was desperate.

IOHPHIEL. Reach forth your hand:

MERE-FOOLE. O Sr. a broken sleeue
Keeps the arm back as'tis in the proverb.

IOHPHIEL. Nay,
For that I do commend you: you must be poor
With all your wealth, and learning. When you ha'made
Your glasses, gardens in the depth of winter,
Where you will walk invisible to Mankind,
Talked with all birds and beasts in their own language,
When you have penetrated hills like air,
Diu'd to the bottom of the Sea, like lead,
And riss'againe like cork, walked in the fire
An 'twere a Salamander, passed through all
The winding orbs, like an Intelligence,
Up to the Empyreum, when you have made
The World your gallery, can dispatch a business
In some three minutes, with the Antipodes,
And in five more, negotiate the Globe over;
You must be poor still.

MERE-FOOLE. By my place, I know it.

IOPHIEL. Where would you wish to be now? or what to see?
Without the fortunate purse to bear your charges,
Or wishing hat? I will but touch your temples,
The corners of your eyes, and tinct the tip,
The very tip of your nose, with this Collyrium
And you shall see in the air all the Ideas,
Spirits, and Atoms, Flies, that buz about
This way, and that way, and are rather admirable,
Then any way intelligible.

MERE-FOOLE. O, come, tinct me,
Tinct me: I long, save this great belly, I long.
But shall I only see?

IOHPHIEL. See, and command
As they were all your vallets, or your foot-boyes:
But first you must declare, (your Greatness must,
For that is now your style) what you would see,
Or whom.

MERE-FOOLE. Is that my style? My Greatness, then,
Would see King Zoroastres.

IOHPHIEL. Why you shall:
Or any one beside. Think whom you please?
Your thousand, Your ten thousand, to a million:
All Is one to me, if you could name a myriad.

MERE-FOOLE. I have named him.

IOHPHIEL. You'haue reason.

MERE-FOOLE. I, I have reason.
Because he is said to be the Father of coniurers,
And a cunning man in the stars.

IOHPHIEL. I, that is it troubles us.
A little for the present: For, at this time
He is confuting a French Almanac,
But he will straight have don, Have you but patience;
Or think but any other in mean time,
Any hard name.

MERE-FOOLE. Then, Hermes Trismegistus.

IOHPHIEL. O, (...) Why, you shall see him,
A fine hard name. Or him, or whom you will,
As I said to you before. Or what do you think
Of Howle-glasse, in stead of him?

MERE-FOOLE. No, him
I have a mind to.

IOHPHIEL. OF, but Vlen-spiegle
Were such a name! but you shall have your longing.
What luck is this, he should be busy to?
He is waighing water, but to fill three houreglasses,
And mark the day in pen'orths like a cheese,
And he has done. It Is strange you should name him
Of all the rest! there being Iamblicus,
Or Porphyrie, or Proclus, any name
That is not busy.

MERE-FOOLE. Let me see Pythagoras.

IOHPHIEL. Good.

MERE-FOOLE. or Plato,

IOHPHIEL. Plato, is framing some Idea's,
Are now bespoken, at a groat a dozen,
Three gross at least: And, for Pythagoras,
He 'has rashly run himself on an employment,
Of keeping Asses from a field of beans;
And cannot be stau'd off.

MERE-FOOLE. Then, Archimedes.

IOHPHIEL. Yes, Archimedes!

MERE-FOOLE. I, or Aesope.

IOHPHIEL. Nay,
Hold your first man, a good man, Archimedes,
And worthy to be seen; but he is now
Inventing a rare Mouse-trap with Owls wings
And a Catts-foote, to catch the Mise alone:
And Aesop, he is filing a Fox tongue,
For a new fable he has made of Court;
But you shall see 'hem all, stay but your time
And ask in season; Things asked out of season
A man denies himself. At such a time
As Christmas, when disguising is of foot,
To ask of the inventions, and the men,
The wits, and the ingines that move those Orbs!
Me thinks, you should enquire now, after Skeleton,
Or Mr. Scogan.

MERE-FOOLE. Scogan? what was he?

IOHPHIEL. OF a fine gentleman, and a Master of Arts,
Of Henry the fourth's times, that made disguises
For the Kings sons, and writ in ballad-royall
Daintily well.

MERE-FOOLE. But, wrote he like a Gentleman?

IOHPHIEL. In rhyme! fine tinckling rhyme! and flowand verse!
With now and then some sense! and he was paid for it,
Regarded, and rewarded: which few Poets
Are now adays.

MERE-FOOLE. And why.

IOHPHIEL. 'Cause every Dabler
In rhyme is thought the same. But you shall see him.
Hold up your nose.

MERE-FOOLE. I had rather see a Brathman,
Or a Gymnosophist yet.

IOHPHIEL. You shall see him, Sir.
Is worth them both. And with him Domine Skeleton,
The worshipful Poet Laureat to K. Harry
And Tytire tu of those times. Advance quick Scogan,
And quicker Skeleton, show your crafty heads,
Before this Heir of arts, this Lord of learning,
This Master of all knowledge in reuersion.

Enter SKOGAN, and SKELETON in like habits, as they lived. SCOGAN. Seems we
are called of a moral intent
If the words, that are spoken, as well now be meant.

IOHPHIEL. That Mr. Scogan I dare you ensure.

SCOGAN. Then, Son, our acquaintance is like to endure.

MERE-FOOLE. A pretty game! like Crambe. Mr. Scogan,
Give me thy hand. Thou'art very lean, me thinks.
Is It living by thy wits?

SCOGAN. If it had bin that,
My worshipful Son, thou had never bin so fatt.

IOHPHIEL. He tells you true Sr. Here Is a gentleman
(My pair of crafty Clearkes) of that high caract,
As hardly has the age produced his like.
Who not content with the wit of his own times,
Is curious to know yours, and what has bin,

MERE-FOOLE. Or is, or shall be.

IOHPHIEL. Note his Latitude!

SKELETON. O, vir amplissimus!
(Vt scholis dicimus)
Et gentilissimus!

IOHPHIEL. The question-issimus
Is, should he ask a sight now, for his life;
I mean, a person, he would have restored,
To memory of these times, for a Play-fellow,
Whether you would present him, with an Hermes,
Or, with an Howle-glas?

SKELETON. An Howleglasse
To come, to pass
On his Fathers Ass;
There never was,
By day, nor night,
A finer sight.
With feathers upright
In his horned cap,
And crooked shape,
Much like an Ape.
With Owl on sist,
And Glass at his wrist.

SKOGAN. Except the sour Knaves entertained for the guards,
Of the Kings, and ye Queens that triumph in ye cards.

IOHPHIEL. I, that were a sight and a half, I confess,
To see 'hem come skipping in, all at a mess!

SKELETON. With Elinor Rumming.
To make up the mumming;
That comely Gill,
That dwelt on a hill,
But she is not grill:
Her face all bowsy,
Droopie, and drowsy,
Scuruy, and lousy,
Comely crinkled,
Wondersly wrinkled,
Like a roast pigs ear,
Bristled with hair.

SCOGAN. Or, what do you say to Ruffian Fitz-Ale?

IOHPHIEL. An excellent sight, if he be not too stale.
But then, we can mix him with modern Vapors,
The Child of Tobacco, his pipes, and his papers.

MERE-FOOLE. You talked of Elinor Rumming, I had rather
See Ellen of Troy.

IOHPHIEL. Her you shall see.
But credit me,
That Marie Ambree
(Who marched so free.
To the siege of Gaunt,
And death could not daunt,
As the Ballad does vaunt)
Were a brauer wight,
And a better sight.

SKELETON. Or Westmister Meg,
With her long leg,
As long as a Crane;
And feet like a plane:
With a pair of heels,
As broad as two wheels;
To drive down the dew,
As she goes to the stew:
And turns home metry,
By Lambeth ferry.
Or you may have come
In, Thomas Thumb,
In a pudding fatt
With Doctor Ratt.

IOHPHIEL. I, that! that! that!
We Will haue'em all,
To fill the Hall.

The Antimasque follows.
Consisting of these twelve persons, Owleglas, the four Knaves, two Ruffians
Fitzale, and Vapors; Elnor Rumming, Mary Ambree, Long=Meg of Westminster, Tom
Thumb, and Doctor Ratt.

Which done,

MERE-FOOLE. What! are they vanished! where is skipping Skeleton?
Or moral Scogan? I do like their show
And would have thankt'hem, being the first grace
The Company of the Rosie-Crosse has done me.

IOHPHIEL. The company of the Rosie-crosse! you wigion,
The company of Players. Go, you are,
And will be still your self, a Mere-foole, In;
And take your pot of honey here, and hogs grease,
See, who has guld you, and make one. Great King,
Your pardon, if desire to please have trespassed.
This fool should have bin sent to Antycira,
(The I Will of Ellebore,) there to have purged,
Not hoped a happy seat within your waters.
Hear now the message of the Fates, and Jove,
On whom those Fates depend, to you, as Neptune
The great Commander of the Seas, and Isles.
That point of Revolution being come
When all the Fortunate Islands should be joined,
MACARIA, one, and thought a Principal,
That hitherto has floted, as uncertain
Where she would fix her blessings, is to night
Instructed to adhere to your BRITANNIA:
That where the happy spirits live, hereafter
Might be no question made, by the most curious,
Since the Macarij come to do you homage,
And join their cradle to your continent.

Here the Scene opens, and the Masquers are discovered sitting in their
several seiges. The air opens above, and APOLLO with Harmony, and the spirits
of Music sing, the while the Island moves forward, Proteus sitting below, and
harkening.

Song. Look forth the Shepherd of the Seas,
And of the Ports that keep the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
MACARIA, Prince of all the Isles,
Wherein there nothing grows, but smiles,
Does here put in, to dwell.
The winds are sweet, and gently blow,
But Zephirus, no breath they know,
The Father of the flowers:
By him the virgin violets live,
And every plant does odours give,
As new, as are the hours.
CHORUS. Then, think it not a common cause,
That to it so much wonder draws,
And all the heavens consent,
With Harmony to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes,
That for it up were sent.

By this time, the Island having joined it self to the shore; PROTEVS,
PORTVNVS, and SARON come forth, and go up singing to the State, while the
Masquers take time to rank themselves.

Song. PROTEVS. I, now, the heights of Neptunes honors shine,
And all the glories of his greater style
Are read, reflected in this happiest I Will.

PORTVNVS. How both the air, the soil, the seat combine
To speak it blessed!

SARON. These are the true groves,
Where joys are borne,

PROTEVS. Where longings,

PORTVNVS. and where loves!

SARON. That live!

PROTEVS. That last!

PORTVNVS. No intermitted wind
Blows here, but what leaves flowers, or fruit behind

CHORUS. It Is odor all, that comes!
And every tree does give his gummes.

PROTEVS. There is no sickness, nor no old age known
To man, nor any grief that he dares own.
There is no hunger there, nor envy of state.
Nor least ambition in the Magistrate.
But all are euen-harted, open, free,
And what one is, another strives to be.

PORTVNVS. Here all the day, they feast, they sport, and spring;
Now dance the Graces Hay, now Venus Ring:
To which the old Musicians play, and sing.

SARON. There is ARION, tuning his bold Harp,
from flat to sharp.

PORTVNVS. And light Anacreon,
He still is one!

PROTEVS. Stesichorus there, too,
That Linus, and old Orpheus does out-doe
To wonder.

SARON. And Amphion! he is there.

PORTVNVS. Nor is Apollo dainty to appear
In such a quire, although the trees be thick,

PROTEVS. He will look in, and see the aires be quick,
And that the times be true.

PORTVNVS. Then, chanting,

PROTEVS. Then,
Up, with their notes, they raise the Prince of Men.

SARON. And sing the present Prophecy that goes
Of joining the bright LILLY, and the ROSE.

CHORUS. See! all the flowers

PROTEVS. That spring the banks along,
Do move their heads unto that vnder-song.

CHORUS. SARON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS, help to bring
Our Primrose in, the glory of the spring!
And tell the Daffadill, against that day,
That we prepare new Gyrlands fresh as May.
And enterweaue the Myrtle, and the Bay.

This sung, the Island goes back, whilst the upper Chorus takes it from them,
and the Masquers prepare for their figure.

CHORUS. Spring all the Graces of the age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rhyme:
Add all the softnesses of Courts,
The looks, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
Thai none may say, the Triumph halts.

The Masquers dance their Entry or first dance.

Which done, the first Prospectiue, a Maritime Palace, or the house of Oceanus
is discovered to loud Music.

The other above is no more seen.

IOHPHIEL. Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hayle Reverend structure! Boast no more to us
Thy being able, all the Gods to feast;
We saw enough: when ALBION was thy guest.

The measures.

After which, the second Prospectiue, a Sea is shown, to the former Music.

IOHPHIEL. Now turn; and view the wonders of the deep,
Where Proteus herds, and Neptunes Orkes do keep,
Where all is plough'd, yet still the pastures green
New ways are found, and yet no paths are seen.

Here Proteus, Portunus, Saron go up to the Ladies with this Song. PROTEVS.
Come noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:

SARON. If not to mingle with the Men,
What do you here? Go home again.

PORTVNVS. Your dressings do confess,
By what we see, so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.

PROTEVS. Why do you wear the silke-wormes toils.
Or glory in the shellfish spoils;
Or strive to show the grains of Ore
That you have gathered on the shore,
whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on,
Or any better watered stone,

SARON. Or Rubie of the rock?

PROTEVS. Why do you smell of Amber-gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Neice,
The Queen of Love: unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a Man?

SARON. Try, put your selves vnto't.

CHORUS. Your looks, your smiles, and thoughts that meet.
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
Do promise you will do it.

The Revels follow.

Which ended, the Fleet is discovered, while the three Corners play.

IOHPHIEL. It Is time, your eyes should be refresht at length
With something new, a patt of NEPTVNES strength,
See, yond', his Fleet, ready to go or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him, both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.

Then the last Song. PROTEVS. Although we wish the glory still might last
Of such a night, and for the causes past:
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles.

PORTVNVS. And, whilst young ALBION does thy labors ease,
Dispatch Portunus to thy Ports,

SARON. And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Indus laden home with pearls,
And Orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.

CHORUS. And may thy subjects hearts be all one flame.
Whilst thou do keep the earth in firm estate,
And amongst the winds, do suffer no debate,
But both at Sea, and Land, our powers increase,
With health, and all the golden gifts of Peace.

After which, their last Dance. The End.

