The Comicall Satyr of EVERY MAN OVT OF HIS HVMOR.

AS IT WAS FIRST COMPOSED by the AUTHOR B. I.

Containing more than has been Publickely Spoken or Acted.

With the several Character of every Person.

Non aliena meo pressipede * si propius stes
Te capient magis * and decies repetita placebunt.
LONDON, Printed for William Holme, and are to be sold at his Shop at Sarjeants
Inn gate in Fleetstreet. 1600.

The names of the Actors.
ASPER, The Presenter. MACILENTE. SAVIOLINA. PUNTARVOLO His Lady. waiting
Gent. Huntsman. Seruingmen 2. Dog and Cat.
CARLO BUFFONE. FASTID. BRISK. Cine^do his Page.
DELIRO. FALLACE. Fido their Servant. Musicians.
SORDIDO. His Hind. FUNGOSO Tailor. Haberdasher. Shomaker.
SOGLIARDO. SHIFT. CLOVE. Rustici. A Groom. Drawers. Constable, and Officers.
ORANGE. GREX. Cordatus. MITIS.

ASPER his Character.
HE is of an ingenious and free spirit, eager and constant in reproof, without
fear controuling the worlds abuses; One whom no servile hope of Gain, or
frostie apprehension of Danger, can make to be a Parasite, either to Time,
Place, or Opinion.

MACILENTE.
A Man well parted, a sufficient Scholar, and travailed; who (wanting that
place in the worlds account, which he thinks his merit ^apable of) falls into
such an envious Apoplexy, with which his judgment is so dazeled and
distasted, that he grows violently impatient of any opposite happiness in
another.

PUNTARVOLO.
A Vainglorious Knight, ouer-Englishing his travels, and wholly consecrated
to Singularity; the very Jacobs staff of Complement: a Sir that has lived to
see the revolution of Time in most of his apparel. Of presence good enough,
but so palpably affected to his own praise, that (for want of flatterers) he
commends himself to the floutage of his own Family. He deals upon returns,
and strange performances, resolving (in despite of public derision) to
stick to his own particular fashion, phrase, and gesture.

CARLO BUFFONE.
A Public scurrulous, and profane Iester; that (more swift than Circe) with
absurd Simile's will transform any person into Deformity. A good Feast-hound
or Banket-beagell, that will sent you out a supper some three mile off, and
swear to his Patrons (God dam me) he came in Oars when he was but wasted over
in a Sculler. A slave that has an extraordinary gift in pleasing his Pallat,
and will swill up more Sack at a sitting, than would make all the Guard a
Posset. His Religion is railing, and his discou^se Ribaldrie. They stand
highest in his respect, whom he studies most to reproach.

FASTIDIUS BRISK.
A Neat, spruce, affecting Courtier, one that wears clothes well, and in
Fashion; practices by his glass how to salute; speaks good Remnants
(notwithstanding the Base-violl and Tobacco:) swears tersely, and with
variety, cares not what Ladies favor he belies, or great man's familiarity: a
good property to perfume the boot of a Coach. He will borrow another man's
Horse to praise, and backs him as his own. Or for a need on foot can post
himself into credit with his Merchant, only with the Gingle of his spur,
and the Ierke of his Wand.

DELIRO.
A Good doting Citizen, who (it is thought) might be of the Common Counsel for
his wealth: a fellow sincerely besotted on his own wife, and so rapt with a
conceit of her perfections, that he simply holds himself unworthy of her.
And in that hood-winkt Humor, lives more like a Suter than a husband; standing
in as true dread of her displeasure, as when he first made love to her. He
does sacrifice twopence in Juniper to her every morning before sherises, and
wakes her with villanous-out-of-tune Music, which she out of her Contempt
(though not out of her judgment) is sure to dislike.

FALLACE.
DEliro's Wise and Idol, a proud mincing Peat, and as perverse as he is
officious, she dotes as perfectly upon the Courtier, as her husband does (...)
her, and only wants the Face to be dishonest.

SAVIOLINA.
A Court Lady, whose weightiest praise is a light wit, admired by her self
and one more, her servant Brisk.

SORDIDO.
A Wretched Hobnail'd Chuffe, whose recreation, is reading of Almanacks; and
selicitie, foul weather. One that never prayed, but for a lean Dearth, and
ever wept in a fat Harvest.

FUNGOSO.
THe son of Sordido, and a student: one that has revel'd in his time, and
follows the Fashion a far off like a Spy. He makes it the whole bent of his
endeavors to wring sufficient means from his wretched father, to put him in
the Courtiers Cut: at which he earnestly aims, but so unluckily, that he still
lights short a Suit.

SOGLIARDO.
AN essential clown, brother to Sordido, yet so enamored of the name of a
Gentleman, that he will hau^ it though be buys it. He comes up every. Term
to learn to take Tobacco and see new Motions. He is in his Kingdom when he
can get himself into compani^, where he may be well laughed at.

SHIFT.
A Thredbare Sharke. One that never was Soldior, yet lives upon lendings. His
profession is skeldring and odling, his Bank Poules, and his Warehouse
Pict-hatch. Takes up single Testons upon Oths till dooms day. Falls under
Executions of three shillings, and enters into five groat Bonds. He way-layes
the reports of services, and cons them without book, damming himself be came
new from them, when all the while he was taking the diet in a bawdie house, or
lay pawned in his chamber for rent and victuals. He is of that admirable and
happy Memory, that be will salute one for an old acquaintance, that he
never saw in his life before. He vsurps upon Cheats, Quarrels, and Robberies,
which he never did, only to get ^un a name. His cheef exercises are taking the
VVhiffe, squiring a Cocatrice, and making privy searches for Imparters.

CLOVE AND ORANGE.
AN inseparable Case of Coxcombs, citie-born; The Gemini or Twins of (...) of
better rank (to avoid the suspect of insufficiency) will enforce their
Ignorance most desperately, to set upon the understanding of any thing. Orange
is the more humorous of the two (whose small portion of juice (being squeezed
out) Cloue serves to stick him with Commendations.

CORDATUS.
THe Authors friend; A man inly acquainted with the Scope and Drift of his
Plot: Of a discreet and understanding Judgment; and has the place of a
Moderator.

MITIS.
IS a person of no Action, and therefore we have REASON to affourd him no
Character.

IT was not near his thoughts that has published this, either to traduce the
Author; or to make vulgar and cheap, any the peculiar and sufficient deserts
of the Actors; but rather (whereas many Censures fluttered about it) to give
all leave, and leisure, to judge with Distinction.

Every man out of his Humor.
Inductio, sono secundo. GREX.
Asper, Cordatus, Mitis. Cord. NAy my dear Asper,

Mit. Stay your mind,

Asp. Away.
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can check his spirit, or reine his tongue?
Or who has such a dead unfeeling sense,
That heavens horride thunders cannot wake?
To see the earth, cracked with the weight of sin,
Hell gaping under us, and over our heads
Black rau'nous Ruin with her saile-stretcht wings,
Ready to sink us down and cover us.
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And have his lips sealed up? not I: my soul
Was never ground into such oily colors,
To flatter Vice and daube Iniquity:
But (with an armed, and resolved hand)
I Will strip the ragged follies of the time
Naked as at their birth:

Cord. Be not too bold,

Asp. You trouble me, and with a whip of steel
Print wounding lashes in their iron ribs.
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased t'vnmaske a public vice.
I fear no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries;
No brokers, usurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I disposed to say, they are all corrupt.
I fear no courtiers frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hammes:
Tut, these are so innate and popular,
That drunken Custom would not shame to laugh
(In scorn) at him, that should but dare to tax 'hem:
And yet, not one of these but knows his Works,
Knows what Damnation is, the Devil, and Hell,
Yet howerly they persist, grow rank in sin,
Puffing their souls away in perj'rous air,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.

Mit. Forbear good Asper, be not like your name.

Asp. O, but to such, whose faces are all zeal,
And (with the words of Hercules) invade
Such crimes as these; that will not smell of sin,
But seem as they were made of Sanctity;
Religion in their garments, and their hair
Cut shorter than their eie-browes; when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and deuours
More wretches than the Counters.

Mit. Gentle Asper,

Contain your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.
Cord. Unless your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new again,
It is in vain to spend it in these moods.

Asp. I not observed this thronged round till now:
Gracious, and kind Spectators, you are welcome,
Apollo, and the Muses feast your eyes
With graceful objects; and may our Minerva
Answer your hopes, unto their largest strain.
Yet here, mistake me not judicious friends:
I do not this to beg your patience,
Or servilely to fawn on your applause,
Like some dry brain, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censured, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want art, or judgment, tax me freely:
Let envious Critickes with their broadest eyes
Look through and through me; I pursue no favor:
Only vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will give you music worth your ears.
O how I hate the monstrousness of time,
Where every servile imitating spirit,
(Plagued with an itching leprosy of wit)
In a mere halting fury, strives to fling
His vlc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And straight leap's forth a Poet; but as lame
As Vulcane, or the founder of Criplegate.

Mit. In faith this Humor will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.

Asp. This Humor? good; and why this Humor, Mitis?
Nay do not turn, but answer.

Mit. Answer? what?

Asp. I will not stir your patience, pardon me,
I urged it for some reasons, and the rather
To give these ignorant well-spoken days
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humor.

Cor. O do not let your purpose fall, good Asper,
It cannot but arrive most acceptable,
Cheefely to such as have the happiness
Daily to see how the poor innocent word
Is rackt, and tortured.

Mit. I; I pray you proceed.

Asp. Ha? what? what is 't?

Cord. For the abuse of Humor.

Asp. O, I crave pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humor (as it is ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of air or water,
And in it self holds these two properties,
Moisture and Fluxure: As for demonstration,
Pour water on this floor, 'twill wet and run,
Likewise the air (forced through a horn or trumpet)
Flows instantly away, and leaves behind
A kind of dew; and hence we do conclude,
That what soever has fluxure and humiditie,
As wanting power to contain it self,
Is Humor: so in every humane body
The choler, melancholy, phlegm, and blood,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receive the name of Humors. Now thus far
It may by Metaphore apply it self
Unto the general disposition,
As when some one peculiar quality
Does so possess a man, that it does draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers
In their confluctions all to run one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humor,
But that a Rooke in wearing a pied feather,
The cable hatband, or the three-pild ruff,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humor,
O, it is more than most ridiculous.

Cord. He speaks pure truth: now if an Idiot
Have but an Apish or Phantasticke strain,
It is his Humor.

Asp. Well I will scourge those apes,
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirror
As large as is the stage whereon we act,
Where they shall see the times deformity,
Anatomized in every Nerve and sinew,
With constant courage, and contempt of fear.

Mit. Asper (I urge it as your friend) take heed,
The days are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are grown impatient of reproof.

Asp. Ha, ha:
You might as well have told me, yond' is heaven,
This earth, these men; and all had moved alike.
Do not I know the times condition?
Yes Mitis; and their souls, and who they be
That either will or can except against me:
None but a sort of fools, so sick in ta^t,
That they contemn all Physic of the mind,
And like gald Camels kick at every touch
Good men, and virtuous spirits, that loath their vices,
Will cherish my free labors, love my lines,
And with the fervor of their shining grace,
Make my brain fruitful to bring forth more objects
VVorthie their serious and intentive eyes.
But why enforce I this, as fainting? no:
If any here chance to behold himself,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For if he shame to have his follies known,
First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
Was made to ceaze on vice; and with a gripe
Crush out the Humor of such spongie souls,
As lick up every idle vanity.

Cord. Why this is right Furor Po^ticus:
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceive the best, or entertain
This supposition, That a madman speaks.

Asp. What? are you ready there? Mitis sit down;
And my Cordatus. Sound hoe, and begin:
I leave you two as Censors to sit here,
Observe what I present, and liberally
Speak your opinions, upon every Scene,
As it shall pass the view of these Spectators,
Nay now, you are tedious Sirs, for shame begin:
And Mitis, note me if in all this front,
You can epsy a gallant of this mark,
Who (to be thought one of the judicious)
Sits with his arms thus wreathed, his hat pulled here,
Cries meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will show more several motions in his face
Than the new London, Rome, or Nineueh,
And (now and then) breaks a dry biscuit jest,
Which that it may more easily be chewed,
He steeps in his own laughter.

Cord. Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallowed?

Asp. O, assure you:
Or if it did not, yet as Horace sings:
"Ieiunus rar stomachus vulgaria temnit,
"Mean cates are welcome still to hungry guests.

Cord. It Is true, but why should we observe 'hem Asper?

Asp. O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,

They Are more infectious than the Pestilence,
And therefore I would give them pills to purge,
And make 'hem fit for fair societies.
How monstrous and detested is 't to see
A fellow that has neither art nor brain,
Sit like an Aristarchus, or stark ass,
Taking men's lines with a Tobacco face
In snuff, still spitting, using his wried looks
(In nature of a vice) to wrest and turn
The good aspect of those that shall sit near him,
From what they do behold? O it is most vile.
Mit. Nay Asper.

Asp. Peace Mitis, I do know your thought:
You Will say, your audience will except at this?
Pish: you are too timorous, and full of doubt:
Then, he a patient, shall reject all Physic
'Cause the physician tells him you are sick:
Or, if I say That he is vicious,
You will not hear of virtue: come, you are fond.
Shall I be so extravagant to think
That happy judgments and composed spirits
Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
I am ashamed.

Cord. Nay, but good pardon us:
We must not bear this perempt orie sail,
But use our best endeavors how to please.

Asp. Why therein I commend your careful thoughts,
And I will mix with you in industry
To please; but whom? attentive auditors,
Such as will join their profit with their pleasure,
And come to feed their understanding parts:
For these, I Will prodigally spend my self,
And speak away my spirit into air;
For these, I Will melt my brain into invention,
Coin new conceits, and hang my richest words
As polisht jewels in their bounteous ears.
But stay, I loose my self, and wrong their patience;
If I dwell here, they 'le not begin, I see:
Friends sit you still, and entertain this troop
With some familiar and by-conference,
I Will have them sound: now gentlemen I go
To turn an Actor, and a Humorist,
Where (ere I do resume my present person)
We hope to make the circles of your eyes
Flow with distilled laughter: if we fail,
We must impute it to this only chance,
" Art has an enemy called Ignorance.
Exit.
Cord. How do you like his spirit, Mitis?

Mit. I should like it much better, if he were less confident.

Cord. Why, do you suspect his merit?

Mit. No, but I fear this will procure him much envy.

Cordatus. O, that sets the stronger seal on his desert, if he had no enemies,
I should esteem his fortunes most wretched at this instant.


Mit. You have seen his play Cordatus? pray you; how is it?


Cord. Faith sir, I must refrain to judge, only this I can say of it, it is
strange, and of a particular kind by it self, somewhat like Vetus Comoedia: a
work that has bounteously pleased me, how it will answer the general
expectation, I know not.


Mit. Does he observe all the laws of Comedy in it?


Cord. What laws mean you?


Mit. Why the equal division of it into Acts and Scenes, according to the
Terentian manner, his true number of Actors; the furnishing of the Scene with
Grex or Chorus, and that the whole Argument fall within compass of a days
efficiencie.


Cord. O no, these are too nice observations.


Mit. They are such as must be received by your favor, or it cannot be
Authentic.


Cord. Troth I can discern no such necessity.


Mit. No?


Cord. No, I assure you signior; if those laws you speak of, had been
delivered us, ab Initio; and in their present virtue and perfection, there had
been some reason of obeying their powers: but it is extant, that that which we
call Comoedia, was at first nothing but a simple and continued Satyr, sung by
one only person, till Susario invented a second, after him Epicharmus a third,
Phormus, and Chionides devised to have four actors, with a Prologue and
Chorus; to which Cratinus (long after) added a fifth and sixth; Eupolis more,
Aristophanes more than they: every man in the dignity of his spirit and
judgment, supplied something: and (though that in him this kind of Poem
appeared absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it changed
since, in Menander, Philemon, Cecilius, Plautus, and the rest; who have utterly
excluded the Chorus, altered the property of the persons, their names, and
natures, and augmented it with all liberty, according to the elegancie and
disposition of those times wherein they wrote? I see not then but we should
enjoy the same Licentia or free power, to illustrate and heighten our invention
as they did; and not be tied to those strict and regular forms, which the
niceness of a few (who are nothing but Form) would thrust upon us.


Mit. Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what is his Scene?


Cor. Mary Insula fortunata, Sir.


Mit. O, the fortunate Island? mass he has bound himself to a strict law
there.


Cor. Why so?


Mit. He cannot lightly alter the Scene without crossing the seas.


Cor. He needs not, having a whole Island to run through, I think.


Mit. No? how comes it then, that in some one play we see so many seas,
countries, and kingdoms, past over with such admirable dexterity?


Cor. O, that but shows how well the Authors can travail in their vocation,
and outrun the apprehension of their Auditorie. But leaving this, I would they
would begin once: this protraction is able to sower the best-setled patience in
the Theater.


Mit. They have answered your wish sir: they sound.


Sound the third time. ENTER PROLOGVE. Cord. O here comes the Prologue: Now
sir, if you had staid a little longer, I meant to have spoke your Prologue for
you, I faith.


Prol. Mary with all my heart sir, you shall do it yet, and I thank you.


Cord. Nay, nay, stay, stay, hear you?


Pro. You could not have studied to have done me a greater benefit at the
instant, for I protest to you, I am imperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of
necessity have been out.


Cor. Why but do you speak this seriously?


Pro. Seriously! I (God's my help do I) and esteem my self indebted to your
kindness for it.


Cor. For what?


Pro. Why for undertaking the Prologue for me.


Cor. How? did I undertake it for you?


Pro. Did you! I appeal to all these gentlemen whether you did or no? Come, it
pleases you to cast a strange look on it now; but 'twill not serve.


Cor. Fore God but it must serve: and therefore speak your Prologue.


Pro. And I do, let me die poisoned with some venomous hiss, and never live
to look as high as the two-pennie room again.

Exit.
Mit. He has put you to it, sir.


Cord. Sdeath, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good faith I can
speak no Prologue, howsoever his weak wit has had the fortune to make this
strong use of me here before you: but I protest;


Enter Carlo Buffone, with a boy. Carl. Come, come, leave these fustian
protestations: away, come, I cannot abide these gray headed ceremonies. Boy,
fetch me a glass, quickly, I may bid these gentlemen welcome; give 'hem a
health here: I marl'e whose wit 'twas to put a Prologue in you would sackbuts
mouth: they might well think hee'ld be out of tune, and yet you would play upon
him too.


Exit boy. Cord. Hang him dull block.


Carl. O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would have made a
good column and he had been thought on when the house was a building. O art
thou Enter boy with a glass. come? well said: give me; boy, fill, so: here is a
cup of wine sparkles like a diamond. Gentlewomen, (I am sworn to put them in
first) and Gentlemen, a round, in place of a bad Prologue, I drink this good
draught to your health here, Canarie, the very Elixi'r and spirit of (He
drinks.) wine: this is that our Poet calls Castalian liquor, when he comes
abroad (now and then) once in a fortnight, and makes a good meal among
Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary at home he keeps a good
Philosophical diet, beans and butter-milke: an honest pure rogue, he will take
you off three, four, five of these one after another, and look vilanously
when he has done, like a one-headed C^rb^rus (he do 'not hear me I hope) and
then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his brain rigged a little) he
sails away withal, as though he would work wonders when he comes home: he
has made a play here, and he calls it; Every man out of his Humor: Sblood and
he get me out of the humor he has put me in, I Will never trust none of his tribe
again, while I live: Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you are welcome. I
could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there is an old rule; No pledging
your own health: mary if any here be thirsty for it, their best way (that I
know) is, sit still, seal up their lips, and drink so much of the play in at
their ears.

Exit.
Mit. What may this fellow be, Cordatus?


Cord. Faith, if the time will suffer his description, I Will give it you: he is
one, the Author calls him Carlo Buffone, an impudent common jester, a violent
railer, and an incomprehensible Epicure: one, whose company is desired of all
men, but beloved of none; he will sooner loose his soul than a jest, and
profane even the most holy things, to excite laughter: no honorable or
reverend personage whatsoever, can come within the reach of his eye, but is
turned into all manner of variety, by his adult' rate simile's.


Mit. You paint forth a monster.


Cord. He will prefer all countries before his native, and thinks he can
never sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliver his affectionate conceit
of foreign Atheistical policies: but stay, observe these, he will appear
himself anon.


Enter Macilente, solus. Mit. O, this is your envious man (Macilente) I think.


Cor. The same, sir.


ACTVS PRIMVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Mac. Viriest, fortunae caecitatem facile far:
It Is true; but Stoique: where (in the vast world)
Does that man breath, that can so much command
His blood and his affection? well: I see,
I strive in vain to cure my wounded soul;
For every cordial that my thoughts apply
Turns to a cor'siue, and does eat it farther.
There is no taste in this Philosophy,
It Is like a Potion that a man should drink,
But turns his stomach with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to believe
That beggerie is the only happiness;
Or (with a number of these patient fools)
To sing: My mind to me a kingdom is,
When the lanke hungry belly barks for food:
I look into the world, and there I meet
With objects, that do strike my blood-shot eyes
Into my brain: where, when I view my self;
Having before observed: this man is great,
Mighty, and feared: that, loved and highly favored:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honored: a fifth, rarely featured:
A sixth, admired for his nuptial fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my self,
I wish my Optique instruments were cracked;
And that the engine of my grief could cast
Mine eye balls like two globes of wildfire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of Nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that have trans^ixt my heart,
And often (in the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand upon my face,
Like drops of sweat on a stiff cake of ice.

GREX.
Cor. This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, gemit, incutitque dentes,
Sudat frigidus, intuens quod odit.

Mit. O peace, you break the Scene.

Enter Sogliardo, with Carlo Buffone. SCENA SEC.
Mac. Soft, who be these?
I Will lay me down a while till they be past.

GREX.
Cor. Signior, note this gallant I pray you.


Mit. What is he?


Cor. A tame Rooke, you will take him presently: List.


Sog. Nay look you Carlo: this is my Humor now; I have land and money, my
friends left me well, and I will be a gentleman whatsoever it cost me.


Car. A most gentleman-like resolution.


Sog. Tut, and I take an humor of a thing once, I am like your tailors needle,
I go through: but, for my name Signior, how think you? will it not serve for a
gentleman's name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha?


Car. Let me hear: how is it?


Sog. Signior Insulso Sogliardo: me thinks it sounds well.


Car. O excellent: tut and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand
for a gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen.


Sog. Why and for my wealth I might be a Justice of peace.


Car. I, and a Constable for your wit.


Sog. All this is my lordship you see here, and those farms you came by.


Car. Good steps to gentilitie too, mary: but Sogliardo, if you affect to be a
gentleman indeed, you must observe all the rare qualities, humors, and
complements of a gentleman.


Sog. I know it signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to
learn, I Will assure you.


Car. Enough sir: I Will make admirable use in the proiection of my medicine upon
this lump of copper here. I Will bethink me for you sir.


Sog. Signior, I will both pay you and pray you, and thank you and think on
you.


GREX.
Cord. Is not this purely good?


Mac. God's Blood, why should such a prick-eard Hind as this
Be rich? Ha? a fool? such a transparent gull
That may be seen through? wherefore should he have land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eat my entrails,
And sink my soul into the earth with sorrow.

Car. First (to be an accomplished gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time)
you must give over housekeeping in the country, and live altogether in the
city amongst gallants; where, at your first appearance, 'twere good you turned
four or five hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunkes of
apparel; you may do it without going to a Coniurer: and be sure you mix your
self still, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least
popular; study their carriage and behauior in all: learn to play at Primero
and Passage, and (ever when you loose) have two or three peculiar oaths to
swear by, that no man else swears: but above all, protest in your play, and
affirm, Upon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at every cast:) you
may do it with a safe conscience, I warrant you.


Sog. O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that has these
excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you.


Car. You must endeavor to feed cleanly at your Ordinary, sit melancholy, and
pick your teeth when you cannot speak: and when you come to Plays, be
Humorous, look with a good starch't face, and ruffle your brow like a new
boot, laugh at nothing but your own jests, or else as the Noblemen laugh;
that is a special grace you must observe.


Sog. I warrant you, sir.


Car. I, and sit of the stage, and flout; provided, you have a good suit.


Sog. O I Will have a suit only for that sir.


Car. You must talk much of your kindred and allies.


Sog. Lies! no Signior, I shall not need to do so, I have kindred in the ^ittie
to talk of: I have a niece is a merchants wife; and a nephew, my brother
Sordidos son, of the Innes of court.


Car. O but you must pretend alliance with Courtiours and great persons: and
ever when you are to dine or ^uppe in any strange presence, hire a fellow with
a great chain (though it be copper it is no matter) to bring you letters,
feigned from such a noble man, or such a knight, or such a Lady, To their
worshipful, right rare, and noble qualified friend or kinsman, Signior Insulso
Sogliardo; give your self style enough. And there (while you intend
circumstances of news, or inquiry of their health, or so) one of your
familiars (whom you must carry about you still) breaks it up (as't were in a
jest) and reads it publicly at the table: at which, you must seem to take as
unpardonable offense as if he had torn your mistress colors, or breathed
upon her picture; and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would enforce a
challenge upon it presently.


Sog. Stay, I do not like that humor of challenge, it may be accepted: but
I Will tell you what is my humor now: I will do this, I will take occasion of
sending one of my suites to the Tailors to have the pocket repaired, or so; and
there such a letter as you talk of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the
Tailor will presently give out what I am upon the reading of it: worth twenty
of your Gallants.


Car. But then you must put on an extreme face of coffeehouse at your man's
negligence.


Sog. O, so I will, and beat him too: I Will have a man for the purpose.


Mac. You may; you have land and crowns: O partial Fate!


Car. Mass well remembered, you must keep your men gallant, at the first, fine
pied Liueries laid with good gold lace, there is no loss in it, they may rip't
off and pawn it, when they lack victuals.


Sog. Byr Lady that is chargeable Signior, 'twill bring a man in debt.


Car. Debt? why that is the more for your credit sir: it is an excellent policy
to owe much in these days, if you note it.


Sog. As how good Signior? I would feign be a Politician.


Car. O, look where you are indebted any great sum, your creditor observes
you with no less regard, than if he were bound to you for some huge benefit,
and will quake to give you the least cause of offense, least he loose his
money: I assure you (in these times) no man has his servant more obsequious and
pliant, than gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a
moiety or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, than if you gave 'hem a newy
ears gift.


Sog. I perceive you sir, I will take up, and bring my self in credit sure.


Car. Marry this; always beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poor
needy Ludgathians: they are impudent creatures, turbulent spirits, they care
not what violent tragedies they stir, nor how they play fast and loose with a
poor gentleman's fortunes to get their own: marry, these rich fellows (that
ha'the world, or the better part of it, sleeping in their countinghouses) they
are ten times more placable, they: either fear, hope, or modesti^, restraines
them from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you
shall not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your self.


Sog. No? how should I keep 'hem then?


Carl. Keep 'hem? God's Blood let them keep themselves, they are no sheep, are
they? What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparel, rewels, and
diverse other pretty commodities lie negligently scattered, and I would
ha'those Mercu^ies follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their
fingers for nothing.


Sog. That Is not so good me thinks.


Car. Why after you have kept 'hem a fornight or so, and showed 'hem enough to
the world, you may turn 'hem away, and keep no more but a boy, it 's enough.


Sog. Nay my humor is not for boys, I Will keep men, and I keep any; and I Will
give coats, that is my humor: but I lack a Cullisen.


Car. Why now you ride to the city, you may buy one, I Will bring you where you
shall have your choice for money.


Sog. Can you sir?


Car. O I: you shall have one take measure of you, and make you a Coat of arms
to fit you of what fashion you will.


Sog. By word of mouth I thank you Signior; I Will be once a little prodigal in a
Humor in faith, and have a most prodigious Coat.


Mac. Torment and death, break head and brain at once
To be delivered of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blind Fortune dote thus?
To be enamored on this dustie Turfe?
This clod? a horson Puckefist? O God, God, God, God, etc.
I could run wild with grief now to behold
The rankness of her bounties, that does breed
Such bullrushes; these Mushrompe Gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place and worship.

Car. Let him alone, some stray, some stray.


Sog. Nay I will examine him before I go sure.


Car. The Lord of the soil has all we^ts and straies here? has he not?


Sog. Yes sir.


Car. Faith then I pity the poor fellow, he is fallen into a fools hands.


Sog. Sirah, who gave you commission to lie in my Lordship?


Mac. Your Lordship?


Sog. How? my Lordship? do you know me sir?


Mac. I do know you sir.


Car. S'heart, he answers him like an Echo.


Sog. Why, who am I Sir?


Mac. One of those that fortune favors.


Car. The Periphrasis of a fool; I Will observe this better.


Sog. That fortune favors? how mean you that friend?


Mac. I mean simply; That you are one that lives not by your wits.


Sog. By my wits? No sir, I scorn to live by my wits, I; I have better means
I tell thee, than to take such base courses, as to live by my wits. God's Blood
do thou think I live by my wits?


Mac. Me thinks Iester, you should not relish this well.


Car. Ha? does he know me?


Mac. Though yours be the worst use a man can put his wit too of thousands, to
prostitute it at every Tavern and Ordinary; yet (me thinks) you should have
turned your broad side at this, and have been ready with an Apology, able to
sink this Hulke of Ignorance into the bottom, and depth of his Contempt.


Car. God's Blood it is Macilente: Signior, you are well encountered, how is it? O we
must not regard what he says man, a Trout, a shallow fool, he has no more
brain than a Butterfly, a mere stuffed suit, he looks like a mustie Bottle, new
wickerd, his head's the Cork, light, light. I am glad to see you so well
returned Signior.


Mac. You are? Gramercie good Ianus.


Sog. Is he one of your acquaintance? I love him the better for that.


Car. Gods precious, come away man, what do you mean? and you knew him as I do,
you would shun him, as you would do the plague?


Sog. Why sir?


Car. O, he is a black fellow, take heed on him.


Sog. Is he a Scholar or a Soldior?


Car. Both, both; a lean Mungrell, he looks as if he were chap-falne with
barking at other men's good fortunes: 'ware how you offend him, he carries Oil
and Fire in his pen, will scald where it drops, his Spirit's like Powder,
quick, violent: he will blow a man up with a jest: I fear him worse than a
rotten Wall does the Cannon, shake an hour after at the report: away, come
not near him.


Sog. For Gods sake let us be gone, and he be a Scholar, you know I cannot
abide him, I had as leeue see a Cocatrice, specially as Cocatrices go now.


Car. What, you will stay signior? this gentleman Sogliardo and I are to visit
the knight Punta^volo, and from thence to the City, we shall meet there.


Exeunt Car. and Sog. Mac. I, when I cannot shun you, we will meet.
It Is strange: of all the creatures I have seen,
I envy not this Buffon, for indeed
Neither his fortunes nor his parts deserve it;
But I do hate him as I hate the devil,
Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarism.
O, it is an open-throated, blacke-mouth'd curre,
That bites at all, but eats on those that feed him,
A slave, that to your face will ( Serpent-like)
Creep on the ground, as he would eat the dust;
And to your back will turn the tail and sting
More deadly than a Scorpion: stay, who is this?
Now for my soul, another minion
Of the old lady Chance's: I Will observe him.

Enter Sordido with a Prognostication. SCENA TER.
Sord. O rare, good, good, good, good, good, I thank my Christ, I thank my
Christ for it.


Mac. Said I not true? does not his passion speak
Out of my di^ination? O my senses,
Why loose you not your powers, and become
Dead, dull, and blunted with this Spectacle?
I know him, it is Sordido, the farmer,
A Boor^, and brother to that Swine was here.

Sor. Excellent, excellent, excellent, as I would wish, as I would wish.

Mac. See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
And makes him swoune with laughter, O, O, O.

Sord. Ha, ha, ha, I will not sow my grounds this year, Let me see, what
harvest shall we have? June, Iulie?


Mac. What is 't a Prognostication rap's him so?


Sord. The xx.xxi.xxij. days, rain and wind, O good, good; the xxiij. and
xxiiij. rain and some wind, good; the xxv. rain, good still;
xxvj.xxvij.xxviij, wind and some rain; would it had been rain and some wind:
well it is good (when it can be no better) xxix. inclining to rain: in clining
to rain that is not so good now. xxx. and xxxj. wind and no rain: no rain?
S'lid stay; this is worse and worse: what says he of S. Swithins? turn back,
look, S. Swithins: no rain?


Mac. O here is a precious filthy damned rogue,
That fats himself with expectation
Of rotten weather, and vnseason'd hours;
And he is rich for it, an elder brother,
His barnes are full, his reekes, and mowes well trod,
His garners crack with store. O, it is well; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee and thy house.

Sord. O here, S. Swithins, the xv. day, variable weather, for the most part
rain, good; for the most part rain: Why it should rain forty days after
now, more or less, it was a rule held before I was able to hold a plough, and
yet here are two days, no rain; ha? it makes me muse. We Will see how the next
month begins, if that be better. August: August, first, second, third, and
fourth days, rainie, and blustering; this is well now: fifth, sixth, seventh,
eight, and ninth, rain, with some thunder; I marry, this is excellent; the
other was false printed sure: the tenth and eleventh, great store of rain; O
good, good, good, good, good; the twelft, thirteenth, and fourteenth days,
rain; good still: fifteenth and sixteenth, rain; good still: seventeenth and
eighteenth, rain, good still; nineteenth and twentieth, Good still, good
still, good still, good still, good still; one and twentieth, some rain; some
rain? well, we must be patient, and attend the heavens pleasure, would it
were more though: the one and twentieth, two and twentieth, three and twentieth,
great tempest of rain, thunder, and lightning.

O good again, past expectation good:
I thank my blessed angel; never, never,
Laid I penny better out than this,
To purchase this dear book: not dear for price,
And yet of me as dearly prized as life,
Since in it is contained the very life,
Blood, strength, and sinews of my happiness:
Blessed be the hour wherein I bought this book,
His studies happy that composed the book,
And the man fortunate that sold the book:
Sleep with this charm, and be as true to me
As I am joy'd and confident in thee.

Enter a Hind to Sordido with a paper. Mac. Ha, ha, ha? I'not this good? Is 't
not pleasing this? ha, ha? Gods ha?
Is It possible that such a spacious villain
Should live and not be plagued? or lies he hid
Within the wrinckled bosom of the world,
Where heaven cannot see him? God's Blood (me thinks)
It Is rare and admirable, that he should breath, and walk.
Feed with disgestion, sleep, enjoy his health,
And (like a boisterous VVhale swallowing the poor)
Still swim in wealth and pleasure: is it not strange?
Unless his house and skin were thunder-proofe,
I wonder at it. Me thinks now, the Hecticke,
Gout, Leprosy, or some such loathed disease
Might light upon him; or that fire (from heaven)
Might fall upon his barnes; or mice and rats
Eat up his grain; or else that it might rot
Within the hoarie Reekes, e'ne as it stands:
Me thinks this might be well; and after all
The devil might come and fetch him: I, it is true.
Mean time he surfets in prosperity,
And thou (in envy of him) gnaw'st thy self,
Peace fool, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely look^ on merit.
Exit.
Sord. Who brought this same sir ha?


Hind. Marry sir one of the justices men, he says it is a precept, and all
their Hands be at it:


Sord. I, and the prints of them stick in my flesh
Deeper than in their letters: They have sent me
Pills wrapped in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
Would poison all the sweetness of my Book,
And turn my Honey into Hemlocke juice:
But I am wiser than to serve their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions: Here Is a devise,
To charge me bring my Grain unto the markets:
I, much, when I have neither Barn nor Garner,
Nor Earth to hide it in, I Will bring it; but till then,
Each corn I send shall be as big as Paul's.
O, but (say some) the poor are like to sterue.
Why let 'hem sterue, what is that to me? are Bees
Bound to keep life in Drones and idle Moaths? no:
Why such are these (that term themselves the poor*
Only because they would be pitied)
But are indeed a sort of lazy Beggars,
Licencious Rogues and sturdie Vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plenteous year)
Like snakes in heat of summer out of dung,
And this is all that these cheap times are good for:
Whereas a wholesome and penurious Dearth
Purges the soil of such vile excrements,
And kills the Vipers up.

Hind. O but master,
Take heed they hear you not.

Sord. Why so?

Hind. They will exclaim against you.

Sord. I, their exclaimes
Move me as much, as thy breath moves a Mountain;
Poor worms, they hiss at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to appl^^d my self,
To sit and clap my hands, and laugh and leap,
Knocking my head against my roof, with joy
To see how plumpe my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirah, go, hie you home, and bid your fellows
Get all their flailes ready again I come.

Hind. I will Sir.
Exit Hind.
Sord. I Will instantly set all my hinds to thrashing
Of a whole Reeke of corn, which I will hide
Under the ground; and with the straw thereof
I Will stuff the outsides of my other Mowes:
That done, I Will have 'hem empty all my Garners,
And in the friendly Earth bury my store,
That when the Searchers come they may suppose
All Is spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar Dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my door)
Each market day, I will be seen to buy
Part of the purest Wheat, as for my household:
Where when it comes, it shall increase my heaps,
Twill yield me treble gain at this dear time,
Promisd in this dear Book: I have cast all,
Till then I will not sell an care, I Will hang first.
O I shall make my prizes as I list,
My House and I can feed on Pease and Barley,
What though a world of VVretches sterue the while?
"He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.
Exit.
GREX.
Cord. Now signior, how approve you this? have the Humorists expressed themselves
truly or no?


Mit. Yes (if it be well prosecuted) it is hitherto happy enough: but me thinks
Macilente went hence too soon, he might have been made to stay and speak
somewhat in reproof of Sordido's wretchedness, now at the last*


Cor. O no, that had bin extremely improper, besides he had continued the Scene
too long with him as't was, being in no more actio^.


Mit. You may enforce the length as a necessary reason; but for propriety the
Scene would very well have born it, in my judgeme^t.


Cor. O worst of both: why you mistake his Humor utterly the^.


Mit. How? do I mistake it? is it not Envy?


Cord. Yes, but you must understand Signior, he enuies him not as he is a
villain, a wolf in the commonwealth, but as he is rich and fortunate; for the
true condition of envy, is Dolor alien^ felicitatis, to have our eyes
continually fixed upon another man's prosperity, that is his chief happiness,
and to grieve at that. Where as if we make his monstrous and abhord actions,
our object, the grief (we take then) comes nearer the nature of Hate than
Envy, as being bred out of a kind of contempt and lothing in our selves.


Mit. So you (...) infer it had been Hate, not Envy in him, to reprehend the
humor of Sordido?


Cord. Right, for what a man truly enuies in another, he could always love,
and cherish in himself; but no man truly reprehends in another what he loves
in himself, therefore Reprehension is out of his Hate. And this distinction
has he himself made in a speech there (if you marked it) where he says, I
envy not this Buffon, but I hate him.


Mit. Stay sir: I envy not this Buffon, but I hate him: why might he not as
well have hated Sordido as him?


Cord. No sir, there was subject for his envy in Sordido; his wealth: So was
there not in the other, he stood possessed of no one eminent gift, but a most
odious and fiend-like disposition, that would turn Charity it self into
Hate, much more Envy for the present.


Ent^r Carlo Buffone, Sogliardo, Fastidius Brisk, Cinedo. ACTUS SECUNDUS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Mit. You have satisfied me sir, O here comes the Fool and the Iester again
me thinks.


Cord. 'Twere pity they should be parted sir.


Mit. What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?


Cord. No sir, this is one Monsieur Fastidius Brisk, otherwise called the fresh
Frenchefied courtier.


Mit. A humorist too?


Cord. As humorous as quickesiluer, do but observe him, the Scene is the
country still, remember.


Fast. Cinedo, watch when the knight comes, andgiue us word.


Cine. I will sir.

Exit.
Fast. How like thou my boy, Carlo?


Car. O well, well, he looks like a colonel of the Pigmies horse, or one of these
motions in a great antique clock: he would show well upon a Habberdashers
stall, at a corner shop rarely.


Fast. S'heart, what a damned witty rogue's this? how he confounds with his
simile's?


Car. Better with simile's than smiles: and whither were you riding now Signior?


Fast. Who I? what a silly jest's that? whither should I ride but to the Court?


Car. O pardon me sir, twenty places more: your hot-house, or your --


Fast. By the virtue of my soul this knight dwells in Elysium here.


Carl. He Is gone now, I thought he would fly out presently. These be our
nimble-sprighted Catso's that have there euasions at pleasure, will run over a
bog like your wild Irish; no sooner started, but they will leap from one thing
to another like a squirrell, heigh; Dance, and do tricks in their discourse,
from Fire to Water, from Water to Air, from Air to Earth, as if their
tongues did but even lick the four Elements over, and away.


Fast. Sir Carlo, thou never saw my gray Hobbie yet, did thou?


Carl. No: have you such a one?


Fast. The best in Europe (my good villain) thou wilt say, when thou see him.


Car. But when shall I see him?


Fast. There was a Noble man in the Court offered me 100 pound for him by this
light: a fine little fiery slave, he runs like a (O) excellent, excellent,
with the very sound of the spur.


Carl. How? the sound of the spur?


Fast. O, it is your only humor now extant sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.


Carl. God's Blood you shall see him turn morrisedancer, he has got him bells, a
good suit, and a Hobbie-horse.


Sog. Signior, now you talk of a Hobbyhorse, I know where one is, will not be
given for a brace of angels.


Fast. How is that Sir?


Sog. Mary sir I am telling this gentleman of a Hobbyhorse, it was my fathers
indeed, and (though I say it


Carl. That should not say it) on, on.


Sog. He did dance in it with as good humor and as good regard as any man of
his degree whatsoever, being no Gentleman: I have daunc't in it my self too.


Car. Not since the Humor of gentilitie was upon you? did you?


Sog. Yes once; marry, that was but to show what a gentleman might do in a
Humor.


Carl. O very good.


GREX.
Mit. Why this fellows discourse were nothing but for the word Humor.


Cord. O bear with him, and he should lack matter and words too, 'twere
pitiful.


Sog. Nay look you Sir, there is never a Gentleman in the country has the like
humors for the Hobbyhorse as I have; I have the Method for the threeding of
the needle, the --


Carl. How the Method.


Sog. I, the Leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the
nose, and the travels of the egg from finger to finger, all the humors
incident to the quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlor, I Will keep it
for a monument, as long as I live sure.


Carl. Do so; and when you die, 'twill be an excellent Trophee to hang over
your tomb^.


Sog. Mass, and I Will have a tomb (now I think on it) it is but so much charges.


Carl. Best build it in your life time then, your heirs may hap to forget it
else.


Sog. Nay I mean so, I Will not trust to them.


Carl. No, for heirs and executors are grown damnably careless, specially
since the ghosts of Testators left walking: how like you him Signior?


Fast. Before heavens his Humor arrides me exceedingly.


Car. Arrides you?


Fast. I, pleases me (a pox on 't) I am so haunted at the court and at my
lodging with your refined choice spirits, that it makes me clean of another
Garb, another strain, I know not how; I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar
phrase, it is against my Genius.


Sog. Signior Carlo.


GREX.
Cord. This is right to that of Horace, Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria
currunt: so this gallant laboring to avoid Popularitie, falls into a habit of
Affectatio^ ten thousand times more hateful than the former.


Car. Who he? a gull? a fool? no salt in him in the earth man: he looks like
a fresh Salmon kept in a tub; he will be spent shortly, his braine's lighter
than his feather already, and his tongue more subject to lie, than that is to
wag: he sleeps with a muske-cat every night, and walks all day hanged in
Pomander chains for penance: he has his skin tan'd in ciuet, to make his
complexion strong, and the sweetness of his youth lasting in the sense of his
sweet lady. A good empty Puff, he loves you well Signior.


Sog. There shall be no love lost Sir, I Will assure you.


Fast. Nay Carlo, I am not happy in thy love I see, pr'y thee suffer me to
enjoy thy company a little (sweet mischief) by this air, I shall envy this
gentleman's place in thy affections, if you be thus private I faith: how now? is
the knight arrived?


Enter Cinedo. Cine. No sir, but it is gest he will arrive presently, by his
forerunners.


Fast. His hounds! by Min^rua an excellent Figure; a good boy.


Carl. You should give him a French crown for it: the boy would find two
better Figures in that, and a good Figure of your bounty beside.


Fast. Tut, the boy wants no crowns.


Carl. No crown: speak in the singular number, and we will believe you.


Fast. Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now: Sir (Damnation) I have
heard this knight Puntarvolo, reported to be a gentleman of exceeding good
humor: thou know him; pr'ythee, how is his disposition? I never was so
favored of my stars as to see him yet. Boy, do you look to the Hobbie?


Cin. I sir, the groom has set him up.


Fast. It Is well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take
knowledge of his: Nay good Wickedness, his humor, his humor.


Carl. Why he loves dogs, and hawks, and his wife well: he has a good
riding face, and he can sit a great horse; he will taint a staff well at
tilt: when he is mounted, he looks like the sign of the George, that is all I
know; save that in stead of a Dragon he will brandish against a tree, and
break his sword as confidently upon the knottie bark, as the other did upon
the skales of the beast.


Fast. O, but this is nothing to that is deliuerd of him: they say he has
dialogues, and discourses between his horse, himself, and his dog; and that
he will court his own Lady, as she were a strang^r never encountered before,


Car. I, that he will, and make fresh love to her every morning: this
Gentleman has been a Spectator of it, Signior Insulso.


Sog. I am resolute to keep a Page* say you sir?


Carl. You have seen Signior Puntarvolo accost his Lady?


Sog. O, I sir.


Fast. And how is the manner of it pr'ythee good Signior?


Sog. Faith ^^r in very good sort; he has his humors for it sir* as first,
(supp^se he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet
to sound, and then the waiting Gentlewoman, she looks out; and then he
speaks, and then she speaks: very pretty I faith Gentlemen.


Fast. Why, but do you remember no particulars, Signior?


Sog. O, yes sir: first, the Gentlewoman she looks out at the window.


Carl. After the trumpet has summoned a parle? not before?


Sog. No sir, not before: and then says he; ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


Car. What says he? be not rapt so.


Sog. Says he; ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


Fast. Nay speak, speak.


Sog. Ha, ha, ha, Says he: God save you, ha, ha, etc.


Car. Was this the ridiculous motive to all this passion?


Sog. Nay that, that comes after is: ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


Car. Doubtless he apprehends more than he vtters, this fellow: or else.


Sog. Lift, lift, they are come from hunting: A cry of hounds within. stand
by, close under this Tarras, and you shall see it done better than I can show
it.


Car. So it had need, 'twill scarce poize the observation else.


Sog. Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.


Fast. O withdraw, withdraw, it cannot be but a most pleasing object.


Enter Puntarvolo, a Huntsman with a greyhound. Pun. Forrester, give wind to
thy Horn. Enough; by this the sound has touched the ears of the enclosed:
Depart, leave the dog, and take with thee what thou have deserved; the Horn,
and thanks.


Carl. I mary, there is some taste in this.


Fast. It Is not good?


Sog. Ah peace, now above, now above.


The waiting Gentlewoman appears at the window. Punt. Stay: mine eye has (on
the instant) through the bounty of the window, received the form of a Nymph.
I will step forward three paces: of the which, I will barely retire one; and
(after some little flexure of the knee) with an erected grace salute her: 1, 2,
and 3. Sweet Lady, God save you.


Gent. No forsooth: I am but the waiting Gentlewoman.


Carl. He knew that before.


Punt. Pardon me: Humanum est ^rrare.


Carl. He learned that of a Puritan.


Punt. To the perfection of Complement (which is the dyall of the thought, and
guided by the Sun of your beauties) are required these three Projects: the
Gnomon, the Puntilio's, and the Superficies: the Superficies, is that we call
Place; the Puntilio's, Circumstance; and the Gnomon, Ceremonic: in either of
which, for a stranger to err, it is easy and facile; and such am I.


Carl. True, not knowing her Horizon, he must needs err: which I fear, he
knows too well.


Punt. What call you the Lord of the castle? sweet Face.


Gent. The Lord of the castle is a knight sir; Signior Puntarvolo.


Punt. Puntarvolo? O.


Car. Now must he ruminate.


Fast. Does the wench know him all this while then?


Carl. O, do you know me man? why therein lies the sirrup of the jest; it is a
Project, a designment of his own, a thing studied, and rehearst as ordinarily
at his coming from hawking or hunting, as a jigge after a Play.


Sog. I, even like your jigge sir.


Punt. It Is a most sumptuous and stately edifice; what years is the knight,
fair Damsel?


Gent. Faith much about your years sir.


Punt. What complexion, or what stature bears he?


Genesis Of your stature, and very nere upon your complexion.


Punt. Mine is Melancholy:


Carl. So is the dogs, just.


Pun. And does argue constancy, chiefly in love. What are his endowments? Is
he courteous?


Gent. O the most courteous Knight upon Gods earth sir.


Punt. Is he magnanimous?


Gent. As the skin between your brows sir.


Pun. Is he bountiful?


Carl. God's Blood, he takes an Inventory of his own good parts.


Gent. Bountiful? I sir I would you should know it; the poor are served at
his gate early and late sir.


Punt. Is he learned?


Genesis O, I sir, he can speak the French and Italian.


Punt. Then he is trauail'd?


Genesis I forsooth, he has been beyond sea once or twice.


Carl. As far as Paris, to fetch over a fashion and come back again.


Punt. Is he religious?


Gent. Religious? I know not what you call Religious, but he goes to Church I
am sure.


Fast. S^^d me thinks these answers should offend him.


Carl. Tut no; he knows they are excellent, and to her capacity that speaks
'hem.


Punt. Would I might see his face.


Carl. She should let down a glass from the window at that word, and request
him to look in it.


Punt. Doubtless, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qualified? does
the castle contain him?


Genesis No Sir, he is from home, but his Lady is within.


P^nt. His Lady? what is she fair? splendidious? and amiable?


Gent. O Jesus sir!


Punt. Pr'y thee dear Nymph, entreat her beauties to shine on this side of the
building.


Exit Gent. from the window. Carl. That he may erect a new dyall of complement,
with his Gnomons, and his Puntilio's.


Fast. Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walk uprightly
before thee.


Carl. Heart, can any man walk more upright than he does? Look, look; as if
he went in a frame, or had a suit of wanescot on: and the dog watching him
least he should leap out on it.


Fast. O villain!


Carl. Well, and ever I meet him in the city, I Will have him joynted, I Will
pawn him in East-cheape among butchers else.


Fast. Peace, who be these, Carlo?


Enter Sordido, with his son Fungoso. Sord. Yonder Is your godfather; do your
duty to him son.


Sog. This sir? a poor elder brother of mine sir, a yeoman, may dispend some
seven or eight hundred a year: that is his son, my nephew there.


Punt. You are not ill-come neighbor Sordido, though I have not yet said
welcome: what, my god-sonne is grown a great Proficient by this?


Sord. I hope he will grow great one day, sir.


Fast. What does he study? the law?


Sog. I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.


Car. What call you your nephew, Signior?


Sog. Mary his name is Fungoso.


Car. Fungoso? O, he look^ somewhat like a sponge in that pinckt doublet me
thought: well, make much of him; I see he was never borne to ride upon a moile.


Genesis My Lady will come presently sir.


Enter Gent. about. Sog. O now, now.


Punt. Stand by, retire your selves a space: nay, pray you, forget not the use
of your hat; the air is piercing.


Sordido and Fungoso withdraw at the other part of the stage, mean time the
Lady is come to the window. Fast. What? will not their presence prevail
against the current of his humor?


Carl. O no: it is a mere flood, a Torrent, carries all before it.


Punt. What more than heavenly pulchritude is this?
What Magazine, or treasury of bliss?
Dazzle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O I am planet-strooke, and in yond Sphere,
A brighter star than Venus does appea^^.

Fast. How? in verse?


Carl. ^n Ecstasy, an Ecstasy, man.


Lady. Is your desire to speak with me, sir Knight?


Carl. He will tell you that anon; neither his Bra^^e, nor his Body, are yet
molded for an answer.


Punt. Most debonaire, and Luculent Lady, I decline me as l^w as the Basis of
your Altitude.


GREX.
Cord. He makes congies to ^is wife in Geometrical proportions.


Mit. Is It possible there should be any such Humorist?


Cor. Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.


Punt. I have ^^arse collected my spirits, but lately scattered in the
admiration of your Form; to which (if the bounties of your mind be any way
respo^sible) I doubt not but my desires shall find a s^ooth and secure passage.
I am a poor Knight^rrant (Lady) that hunting in the adjacent Forest, was by
adventure in the pursuit of a Heart, brought to this place; which Heart (dear
Madame) escaped by enchantment: the evening approaching (my self and servant
wear^ed) my suit is, to enter your fair Castle, and refr^sh me.


Lady. Sir Knight, albeit it be not usual with me (chiefly in the absence of a
husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those
i^nate^ virtues, and fair parts which so strive to express themselves in you;
I am resolved to enterteine you to the best of my unworthy power; which I
acknowledge to be nothing, valew'd with what so worthy a person may deserve.
Please you but stay, while I descend.


She departs: and Puntarvolo fall^ in with Sordido, and his (...). Punt. Most
admired Lady, you astonish me.


Car. What? with spe^king a speech of your own penning?


Fast. Nay look; pr^y thee peac^.


Carl. Pox on it: I am impatient of such ^opperie.


Fast. O lets hear the rest.


Carl. What? a tedious Chapter of Courtship, after sir Lan^^lot, and Queen
Guevener? away: I mar'le in what dull cold nooke he found ^his Lady out? that
(being a woman) she was blessed with no more Copy of wit, but to serve his Humor
thus. Sblood, I think he feeds her with Porridge, I: she could never have such
a thick brain else.


Sog. Why is Porridge so hurtful, Signior?


Carl. O, nothing under heaven more prejudicial to those ascending subtle
powers, or does sooner abate that which we call, Acumen Ingenij, than your
gross fare: why I Will make you an Instance: your City wives, but observe
'hem, you have not more perfect true fools in the world bred than they are
generally; and yet you see (by the finenesse and delicacie of their Diet,
di^ing into the fat Capons, drinking your rich wines, feeding on Larkes,
Sparrows, Potato pyes, and such good unctuous meats) how their wits are refi^'d
and rare^i'd: and sometimes a very Quintessence of conceit ^^ows from 'hem,
able to drown a weak Apprehension.


Fast. Peace, here comes the Lady.


Enter Lady with her Gent. and seeing them, turns in again. Lady. Gods me,
here is company: turn in again.


Fast. S'light, our presence has cut off the convoy of the jest.


Car. All the better; I am glad on it: for the issue was very perspicuous.
Come, let us discover, and salute the knight.


Carlo and the other two, step forth to Punt. Punt. Stay: who be these that
address themselves toward us? what Carlo? now by the Sincerity of my Soul,
welcome; welcome Gentlemen: and how do thou, thou Grand Scourge; or, Second
Untruss of the time?


Carl. Faith spending my metal in this Reeling world (here and there) as the
sway of my Affection carries me, and perhaps stumble upon a yeoman Pheuterer,
as I do now; or one of Fortunes Moyles laden with treasure, and an empty
Clokebagge following him, gaping when a bag will untie.


Punt. Peace you Bandogge peace: what brisk Nim^adoro is that in the white
virgin boot there?


Carl. Mary sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowled^e
of, and with more than ordinary respect: Monsieur Fastid^^^.


Punt. Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsaft abiding here, and
more Real entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my
Orchards were those of the Hesperide's.


Fast. I possess as much in your wish sir, as if I were made Lord of the
Indies; and I pray you believe it.


Carl. I have a better opinion of his Faith, than to think it will be so
corrupted.


Sog. Come brother, I Will bring you acquainted with Gentlemen, and good fellows,
such as shall do you more grace, than --


Sord. Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance: Do you take heed, least: --


Carlo is coming toward them. Sog. Hushed: my Brother sir, for want of
education sir, somewhat nodding to the Boore, the Clown; but I request you in
private sir.


Fung. By Jesus, it is a very fine suit of clothes.


GREX.
Cor. Do you observe that, Signior? there is another Humor has new cracked the
shell.


Mit. What? he is enamored of the Fashion, is he?


Cor. O you forestall the jest.


Fun. I mar'le what it might stand him in?


Sog. Nephew?


Fun. Before God it is an excellent S^te, and as neatly becomes him. What said
you Uncle?


Sog. When saw you my Niece?


Fun. Mary yesternight I supt there. That kind of Boot does very rare too.


Sog. And what news hear you?


Fun. The guilt Spur and all: would I were hanged, but it is exceeding good.
Say you?


Sog. Your mind is carried away with somewhat else: I ask what news you hear?


Fung. Troth we hear none: in good faith I was never so pleased with a
fashion days of my life; O^ (and I might have but my wish) I Would ask no more
of God no^^ but such a Suit, such a Hat, such a Band, such a Doublet, such a
Hose, such a Boot, and such a --


Sog. They say there is a new Motion of the city of Nineueh, with Jonas and the
VVhale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge? you can tell cousin?


Fung. Here Is such a world of question with him now: Yes, I think there be
such a thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfied. Let me see,
the Doublet, say fifty shillings the Doublet, and between three or four pound
the Hose; then Boots, the Hat, and Band: some ten or eleven pound would do it
all, and suit me for the heavens.


Sog. I Will see all those devises, and I come to London once.


Fung. Gods s'lid, and I could compass it, 'twere rare: hark you Uncle.


Sog. What says my Nephew?


Fung. Faith Uncle, I Would have desired you to have made a motion for me to my
father in a thing, that; walk aside and I Will tell you sir, no more but this:
there is a parcel of Law books, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place
for little more than half the money they cost; and I think for some twelve
pound or twenty mark, I could go near to redeem 'hem: there is Plowden,
Diar, Brook, and Fitz-Herbert; diverse such as I must have ere long: and you
know I were as good save five or six pound as not, Uncle: I pray you move it
for me.


Sog. That I will: when would you have me do it? presently?


Fung. O I, I pray you good Uncle: God send me good luck; Lord (and't be thy
will) prosper it: O Jesus; now, now, if it take (O Christ) I am made for ever.


Fast. Shall I tell you sir: by this air I am the most beholding to that Lord,
of any Gentleman living; he does use me the most honorably, and with the
greatest respect, more indeed, than can be vtter'd with any opinion of truth.


Punt. Then have you, the Count Gratiato?


Fast. As true noble a Gentleman too as any breaths; I am exceedingly endeared
to his love: by Jesus, (I protest to you Signior, I speak it not gloriously,
nor out of affectation, but) there is he, and the Count Frugale, Signior
Illustre, Signior Luculento, and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at the Court)
they do share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enjoy me most private; I do
wish my self sometime an Vbiquitarie for their love, in good faith.


Carl: There Is never a one of these but might lie a week on the rack, ere
they could bring forth his name; and yet he powers them out as familiarly as
if he had seen 'hem stand by the firc in the Presence, or taken Tobacco with
them over the stage in the Lords room.


Punt. Then you must of necessity know our Court-starre there? that Planet of
wit, Maddona Saviolina?


Fast. O Lord Sir! my mistress.


Punt. Is she your mistress?


Fast. Faith, here be some slight favors of hers sir, that do speak it, She
is; as this Scarf sir, or this Ribband in mine ear, or so; this Fether grew
in her sweet Fan sometimes, though now it be my poor fortunes to wear it as
you see sir; slight, slight; a foolish toy.


Punt. Well, she is the Lady of a most exalted, and ingenous spirit.


Fast. Did you ever hear any woman speak like her? or enricht with a more
plentiful discourse?


Carl. O vilanous! nothing but Sound, Sound, a mere Echo; she speaks as she
goes tired, in Cobweb lawne, light, thin: good enough to catch flies withal.


Punt. O, manage your affections.


Fast. Well, if thou be not plagued for this blasphemy one day: --


Punt. Come, regard not a jeaster; it is in the power of my purse to make him
speak well or ill of me.


Fast. Sir, I affirm it to you (upon my Credit and Judgment) she has the
most Harmonious and Musical strain of Wit, that ever tempted a true ear;
and yet to see, a rude tongue will profane Heaven.


Punt. I am not ignorant of it sir.


Fast. Oh, it flows from her like Nectar, and she does give it, that sweet,
quick grace, and exornation in the composure, that ( By this good Heaven) she
does observe as pure a Phrase, and use as choice Figures in her ordinary
conferences, as any be in the Arcadia.


Carl. Or rather in Greenes works, whence she may steal with more security.


Sord. Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall have it, but I Will part
with no more.


Fun. I Will try what that will do, if you please.


Sord. Do so: and when you have 'hem, study hard.


Fun. Yes sir: and I could study to get forty shillings more now: well, I
will put my self into the Fashion, as far as this will go presently.


Sord. I wonder it raines not! the Almanac says we should have store of rain
to day.


Pun. Why sir, to morrow I will associate you to the Court my self; and from
thence to the City, about a Business, a Project I have: I will expose it to
you sir: Carlo I am sure has heard of it.


Car. What Is that sir?


Punt. I do entend this year of Iubile to travail: and (because I will not
altogether go upon expense) I am determined to put forth some five thousand
pound, to be paid me five for one, upon the return of my self, my Wife, and
my Dog, from the Turks Court in Constantinople. If all, or either of us
miscarrie in the journey, it is gone: if we be successful, why, there will be
xxv. thousand pound to entertain time withal. Nay, go not neighbor S^dido;
stay to night, and help to make our society the fuller* Gentlemen, frolic:
Carlo? what? dull now?


Carl. I was thinking on your Project sir, and you call it so: is this the Dog
goes with you?


Punt. This is the Dog sir.


Carl. He do'not go barefoot, does he?


Punt. Away you traitor, away.


Carl. Nay before God, I speak simply; he may prick his foot with a thorn, and
be as much as the whole venture is worth. Besides, for a Dog that never
trauail'd before, it is huge journey to Constantinople: I Will tell you now (and
he were mine) I Would have some present conference with a Phisician, what
Antidotes were good to give him, and Preservatives against poison: for (assure
you) if once your money be out, there'll be diverse attempts made against the
life of the poor Animal.


Punt. Thou art still dangerous.


Fast. Is Signior D^liros wife your kinswoman?


Sog. I sir, she is my Niece, my brothers daughter here, and my Nephews sister.


Sord. Do you know her sir?


Fast. O God sir, Signior Deliro her husband is my Merchant.


Fung. I, I have seen this Gentleman there, often.


Fast. I cry you mercy sir: let me crave your name, pray you.


Fun. Fungoso sir.


Fast. Good Signior Fungoso, I shall request to know you better sir.


Fun. I am her brother Sir.


Fast. In fair time sir.


Pun. Come Gentlemen, I will be your Conduct.


Fast. Nay pray you sir; we shall meet at Signior Deliro's often.


Sog. You shall ha'me at the Heralds office sir, for some week or so, at my
first coming up. Come Carlo.


Exeunt. GREX.
Mit. Me thinks Cordatus, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung
in the hand.


Cord. I see not where he could have insisted less, and to have made the Humors
perspicuous enough.


Mit. True, as his Subject lies: but he might have altered the shape of
Argument, and explicated 'hem better in single Scenes.


Cord. That had been Single indeed: why? be they not the same persons in this,
as they would have been in those? and is it not an object of more State, to
behold the Scene full, and relieved with variety of Speakers to the end, than
to see a vast empty stage, and the Actors come in (one by one) as if they were
dropped down with a feather into the eye of the Audience?


Mit. Nay, you are better traded with these things than I, and therefore I Will
subscribe to your judgment; mary you shall give me leave to make objections.


Cord. O what else? it is the special intent of the Author you should do so:
for thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily
would object the same you do.


Mit. So sir, but when appears Macilente again?


Enter Macilente, Deliro, Fido, with herbs and persumes. Cord. Mary he stays
but till our silence give him leave: here he comes, and with him Signior Deliro
a merchant, at whose house he is come to sojourne: Make your own obscruation
now; only transfer your thoughts to the City with the Scene; where,
suppose they speak.


SCENA TERTIA.
Deliro. I Will tell you by and by sir.
VVelcome (good Macilente) to my house,
To sojourne even for ever; if my best
In cates, and every sort of good entreaty
May moou^ you stay with me.

Deliro turns to his boy, and falls a strowing of flowers. Mac. I thank you
sir:
And yet the muffled Fates (had it pleased them)
Might have supplied me from their own full store
Without this word ( I thank you) to a fool.
I see no reason why that Dog (^all'd Chance)
Should fawn upon this fellow more than me:
I am a man, and I have Limbs, Flesh, Blood,
Bones, Sinews, and a Soul as well as he:
My parts are every way as good as his,
If I said better? why I did not lie,
Nath'lesse his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and cry: I thank you Sir.

Deli. Dispatch, take heed your mistress see you not.


Fido. I warrant you sir.

Exit Fido.
Deli. Nay gentle friend be merry, raise your looks
Out of your bosom, I protest (by heaven)
You are the man most welcome in the world.

Mac. I thank you Sir, I know my cue I think.


Enter Fido with two Censors. Fido. Where will you have 'hem burn Sir?


Deli. Here good Fido:
What? she did not see thee?

Fido. No Sir.


Deli. That Is well:
Strew, strew, good Fido, the freshest flowers, so.

Mac. What means this Signior Deliro?


Deli. Cast in more Frankincence, yet more, well said.
O Macilente, I have such a wife,
So passing fair, so passing fair unkind,
And of such worth and right to be unkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindness.)

Mac. What can there not?

Deli. No, that is sure as death,
No man alive: I do not say is not,
But cannot possibly be worth her kindness^.
Nay that is certain, let me do her Right:
How said I? do her Right? as though I could,
As though this dull gross tongue of mine could utter
The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite Rights
That sit (as high as I can look) within her.

Mac. This is such dotage as was never heard.

Deli. Well, this must needs be granted.

Maci. Granted quoth you?

Deli. Nay Macilente; do not so discredit
The goodness of your judgment to deny it,
For I do speak the very least of her.
And I would crave and beg no more of heaven
For all my fortunes here, but to be able
To utter first in fit terms, what she is,
And then the true joies I conceive in her.

Maci. Is It possible she should deserve so well
As you pretend?

Deli. I, and she knows so well
Her own deserts that (when I strive to enjoy them)
She ways the things I do, with what she merits:
And (seeing my worth outwai'd so in her graces)
She is so solemn, so precise, so froward,
That no observance I can do to her,
Can make her kind to me: if she find fault,
I mend that fault, and then she says I faulted
That I did mend it. Now good Friend advise me
How I may temper this strange Spleen in her.

Mac. You are too amorous, too obsequious,
And make her, too assured she may command you.
When women doubt most of their husbands loves,
They are most loving. Husbands must take heed
They give no gluts of kindness to their wives,
But use them like their Horses, whom they feed
Not with a manger-full of meat together,
But half a pecke at once, and keep them so
Still with an appetite to that they give them.
He that desires to have a loving wife,
Must bridle all the show of that desire:
Be kind, not amorous, nor bewraying kindness,
As if Love wrought it, but considerate Duty:
"Offer no loue-rites, but let wives still seek them,
"For when they come unsought, they seldom like them.

Deli. Believe me Macilente, this is Gospel.
O that a man were his own man so much,
To rule himself thus; I will strive in faith
To be more strange and careless: yet I hope
I have now taken such a perfect course,
To make her kind to me, and live contented,
That I shall find my kindness well returned,
And have no need to fight with my affections.
She (late) has found much fault with every room
Within my house; One was too big (she said)
Another was not furnished to her mind,
And so through all: All which I have altered.
Then here she has a place (on my backeside)
Wherein she loves to walk; and that (she said)
Had some ill smells about it. Now this walk
Have I (before she knows it) thus perfumed
With herbs and flowers, and laid in diverse places
(As 'twere on Altars consecrate to her)
Perfumed Gloves, and delicate chains of Amber,
To keep the air in awe of her sweet nosthrils:
This have I done, and this I think will please her.
Behold she comes.

Enter Fallace. Fall. Here Is a sweet stink indeed:
What, shall I ever be thus crossed and plagued?
And sick of Husband? O my head does ache
As it would cleave asunder with these sauors,
All my Room's altered, and but one poor Walk
That I delighted in, and that is made
So fulsome with perfumes, that I am feared
(My brain does sweat so) I have caught the Plague.

Deli. Why (gentle wife) is now thy Walk too sweet?
Thou said of late it had sower aires about it,
And found'st much fault, that I did not correct it.

Fall. Why, and I did find fault Sir?


Deli. Nay dear wife;
I know thou have said thou have loved perfumes,
No woman better.

Fall. I, long since perhaps,
But now that Sense is alterd: you would have me
(Like to a puddle or a standing poole)
To have no motion, nor no spirit within me.
No, I am like a pure and sprightly River,
That moves for ever, and yet still the same;
Or fire that burns much wood, yet still one flame.

Deli. But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden
Smelling on Roses and on purple flowers,
And since I hope the Humor of thy Sense
Is nothing changed.

Fall. Why those were growing flowers,
And these within my walk are cut and strewn.

Deli. But yet they have one sent.

Fall. I, have they so?
In your gross judgment: if you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowers and cut ones,
You have a sense to taste Lampe-oyle, in faith.
And with such judgment have you changed the chambers,
Leaving no room that I can joy to be in
In all your house: and now my Walk and all
You smoke me from, as if I were a Fox,
And long belike to drive me quite away:
Well walk you there, and I Will walk where I list.

Deli. What shall I do? oh I shall never please her.

Mic. Out on thee dotard, what star ruled his birth?
That brought him such a Star? blind Fortune still
Bestows her gifts on such as cannot use them:
How long shall I live, ere I be so happy,
To have a wife of this exceeding Form?
Away with 'hem, would I had broke a joint,
When I devised this that should so dislike her,
Away, be are all away.

Fid^ bears all away. Fall. I do: for fear.
Ought that is there should like her. O this man
How cunningly he can conceal himself,
As though he loved? loved? nay honored and adored?

Deli. Why, my sweet heart?


Fall. Sweet heart? oh, better still:
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you are simple, you: you cannot change,
Look pale at pleasure, and then red with VVonder:
No, no, not you: I did but cast an amorous eye e'ennow
Upon a pair of Gloves that somewhat likt me,
And straight he noted it, and gave command
All should be taken away.

Deli. Be they my bane then:
What sir, Fido, bring in those Gloves again
You took from hence.

Enter Fido. Fall. S'body sir, but do not:
Bring in no Gloves to spite me: if you do --

Deli. Ay me, most wretched; how am I misconstru'd?

Mac. O, how she tempts my heart strings with her eye,
To knit them to her Beauties, or to break?
What moved the heavens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man; a Beast,
That has no bliss like to others. Would to God
(In wreake of my misfortunes) I were turned
To some fair water-Nymph, that set upon
The deepest whirlepit of the rau'nous Seas,
My Adamantine eyes might headlong hale
This Iron world to me, and drown it all.

Enter Fungoso in Briskes suit. GREX.
Cord. Behold, behold, the translated Gallant.


Mit. O, he is welcome.


Fung. God save you Brother, and Sister, God save you sir; I have commendations
for you out in the country: (I wonder they take no knowledge of my Suit:) mine
Uncle Soghardo is in town; Sister, me thinks you are Melancholy: why are you
so sad? I think you took me for Master Fastidius Brisk (Sister) did you not?


Fall. Why should I take you for him?


Fung. Nay nothing, I was lately in Master Fastidius his company, and me
thinks we are very like.


Deli. You have a fair suit Brother, God give you joy on it.


Fung. Faith good enough to ride in Brother, I made it to ride in.


Fall. O, now I see the cause of his idle demand was his new suit.


Deli. Pray you good Brother; try if you can change her mood.


Fung. I warrant you, let me alone. I Will put her out of her dumpes. Sister,
how like you my suit?


Fall. O you are a gallant in print now Brother.


Fung. Faith, how like you the fashion? it is the last Edition I assure you.


Fall. I cannot but like it to the desert.


Fung. Troth sister, I was feign to borrow these Spurs, I have left my gown
in gage for 'hem, pray you lend me an angel.


Fall. Now beshrow my heart then.


Fung. Good truth I Will pay you again at my next exhibitior: I had but bare
ten pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me wholly into the
fashion.


Fall. I care not.


Fung. I had Spurs of mine own before, but they were no^ Ginglers. Monsieur
Fastidius will be here anon Sister.


Fall. You jest?


Fung. Never lend me penny more (while you live then) and that I Would be loath to
say, in truth.


Fall. When did you see him?


Fung. Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at Sir Puntar^olo's: nay sweet
Sister.


Mac. I feign would know of heaven now, why yond fool
Should wear a suit of Satin? he? that Rooke?
That painted Iay with such a deal of outside?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good Heaven give me patience,
A number of these Popenjayes there are,
Whom if a man confer, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, Lord, what things they are!

Fall. Come, when will you pay me again now?


Fung. O God Sister.


Enter Fastidius Brisk in a new suit. Mac. Here comes another.


Fast. Save you Signior Deliro: how do' st thou sweet Lady? Let me kiss thee.


Fung. How? a new suit? Ay me.


Deli. And how does Master Fastidius Brisk?


Fast. Faith live in court Signior Deliro, in grace I thank God, both of the
noble Masculine and Feminine. I must speak with you in private by and by.


Deli. When you please Sir.


Fall. Why look you so pale brother?


Fung. S'lid all this money is cast away now.


Mac. I, there is a newer Edition come forth.


Fung. It Is but my hard fortune: well, I Will have my suit cha^g'd, I Will go fetch
my tailor presently, but first I Will devise a letter to my father. Have you any
pen and ink Sister?


Fall. What would you do withal?


Fung. I would use it. S'light and it had come but four days sooner the
Fashion.

Exit.
Fast. There was a Countess gave me her hand to kiss to day in the presence:
'did me more good by Jesus, then, and yesternight sent her Coach twice to my
lodging, to intre at me accompany her, and my sweet mistress, with some two
or three namelesse Ladies more: O, I have been graced by 'hem beyond all aim
of affection: this' her garter my dagger hangs in: and they do so commend and
approve my apparel, with my judicious wearing of it, it is above wonder.


Fall. Indeed Sir, it is a most excellent suit, and you do wear it as
extraordinary.


Fast. Why I Will tell you now (in good faith) and by this Chair, which (by the
grace of God) I entend presently to sit in, I had three Suits in one year,
made three great Ladies in love with me: I had other three, undid three
Gentlemen in imitation: and other three, gat three other Gentlemen, Widows
of three thousand pound a year.


Deli. Is It possible?


Fast. O believe it sir; your good Face is the VVitch, and your Apparel the
Spells, that bring all the pleasures of the world into their Circle.


Fall. Ah, the sweet Grace of a Courtier!


Mac. Well, would my father had left me but a good Face for my portion yet;
though I had shared the unfortunate Wit that goes with it, I had not cared: I
might have past for somewhat in the world then.


Fast. Why, assure you Signior, rich apparel has strange virtues: it makes
him that has it without means, esteemed for an excellent Wit: he that
enjoyes it with means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps
the deformities of Nature, and gives Luster to her beauties; makes continual
Holiday where it shines; sets the wits of Ladies at work, that otherwise would
be idle: furnishes your two-shilling Ordinary; takes possession of your Stage
at your new Play; and enricheth your Oars, as scorning to go with your Scull.


Mac. Pray you sir, add this; it gives Respect to your fools, makes many
Thieves, as many Strumpets, and no fewer Bankrupts.


Fall. Out, out, unworthy to speak where he breaths.


Fast. What Is he, Signior?


Deli. A friend of mine, sir.


Fast. By heaven, I wonder at you Citizens, what kind of Creatures you are?


Deli. Why sir?


Fast. That you can consort your selves with such poor seame-rent fellows.


Fall. He says true.


Deli. Sir I will assure you (how ever you esteem of him) he is a man worthy
of regard.


Fast. Why? what has he in him of such virtue to be reguarded? ha?


Deli. Marry he is a Scholar Sir.


Fast. Nothing else?


Deli. And he is well trauail'd.


Fast. He should get him cloths: I would cherish those good parts of travel in
him, and prefer him to some Nobleman of good place.


Deli. Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for ever (in my friends right)
and I doubt not but his desert shall more than answer my praise.


Fast. Why, and he had good cloths, I Would carry him to the Court with me to
morrow.


Deli. He shall not want for those Sir, if Gold and the whole City will
furnish him.


Fast. You say well Sir: faith Signior Deliro, I am come to have you play the
Alchymi^^^ with me, and change the Species of my land, into that metal you
talk of.


Deli. With all my heart Sir, what sum will serve you?


Fast. Faith some three or fourscore pound.


Deli. Troth Sir I have promised to meet a Gentleman this morning in Paul's, but
upon my return I Will dispatch you.


Fast. I Will accompany you thither.


Deli. As you please Sir; but I go not thither directly.


Fast. It Is no matter, I have no other designem^^^^ in hand, and therefore as
good go along.


Deli. I were as good have a Quartane fever follow me now, for I shall never
be rid of him: (bring me a Cloak there one) Still upon his grace at the Court
am I sure to be visited; I was a beast to give him any hope. Well, would I were
in that I am out with him once, and -- Come Signior ^^^^lente, I must co^ferre
with you as we go. Nay de^re wife, I beseech the^ forsake these moods: look
not like winter thus. Here take my keres, open my counting houses, spread all
my wealth before thee, choose any object that delights thee: If thou will eat
the spirit of Gold, and drink dissolved Pearl in wine, it is for thee.


Fall. So Sir.


Deli. Nay my sweet wife.


Fall. Good Lord! how you are perfumed in your terms and all: pray you leave
us.


Deli. Come Gentlemen.


Fast. Adieu, sweet Lady.


Exeunt all but Fallace. Fall. I, I, Let thy words ever sound in mine ears,
and thy Graces disperse contentment through all my senses: O, how happy is
that Lady above other Ladies, that enjoyes so absolute a Gentleman to her
Servant! A Countess give him her hand to kiss! a^^foolish Countess; he e's a
man worthy (if a woman may speak of a man's worth) to kiss the lips of an
Empress.


Enter Eungoso, with his Tailor. Fun. What Is Master Fastidius gone, Sister?


Fall. I brother: he has a Face like a Cherubin.


Fun. Gods me, what lucke's this? I have fetched my Tailor and all: which way
went he Sister? can you tell?


Fall. Not I, in good faith: and he has a Body like an Angel.


Fun. How long is it since he went?


Fall. Why but even now: did you not meet him? and a Tongue able to ravish any
woman in the earth.


Fun. O, for Gods sake (I Will please you for your pains:) but even now, say
you? Come good sir: S'lid I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body ask for
mine Uncle Sogliardo, they shall have him at the Heralds Office yonder by Paul's.


Exit, with his Tailor. Fall. Well, I will not altogether despair: I have
heard of a Citizens wife has been beloved of a Courtier; and why not I? heigh
ho: well, I will into my private Chamber, lock the door to me, and think over
all his good parts one after another.

Exit.
GREX.
Mit. Well, I doubt this last Scene will endure some grievous Torture.


Cord. How? you fear 'twill be rackt by some hard Construction*


Mit. Do not you?


Cord. No in good faith: unless mine eyes could light me beyond Sense, I see
no reason why this should be more Liable to the Rack than the rest: you will say
perhaps the City will not take it well, that the Merchant is made here to dote
so perfectly upon his wife; and she again, to be so Fastidiously affected, as
she is?


Mit. You have vtter'd my thought sir, indeed.


Cord. Why (by that proportion) the Court might as well take offense at him we
call the Courtier, and with much more Pretext, by how much the place transcends
and goes before in dignity and virtue: but can you imagine that any Noble or
true spirit in the Court (whose Sinewie, and altogether unaffected graces, very
worthily express him a Courtier) will make any exception at the opening of
such an empty Trunk as this Brisk is? or think his own worth empeacht by
beholding his motley inside?


Mit. No Sir, I do not.


Cord. No more, assure you, will any grave wise Citizen, or modest Matron,
take the object of this Folly in Deliro and his Wife; but rather apply it as
the foil to their own virtues: For that were to affirm, that a man writing
of Nero, should mean all Emperors: or speaking of Machiavell, comprehend all
Statesmen; or in our Sordido, all Farmars; and so of the rest: than which,
nothing can be vtter'd more malicious and absurd. Indeed there are a sort of
these narrow-ey'd Decipherers, I confess, that will extort strange and
abstruse meanings out of any Subject, be it never so Conspicuous and
Innocently deliuerd. But to such (where e're they sit conceald) let them know,
the Author defies them, and their writing-Tables; and hopes, no sound or safe
judgment will infect it self with their contagious Comments, who (indeed)
come here only to pervert and poison the sense of what they hear, and for
naught else.


Mit. Stay, what new Mute is this that walks so suspiciously?


ACTUS TERTIUS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Cavalier Shift, with two Siquisses in his hand. Cord. O, marry this is
one, for whose better Illustration; we must desire you to presuppose the Stage,
the middle Isle in Paul's; and that, the West end of it.


Mit. So Sir: and what follows?


Cord. Faith a whole volume of Humor, and worthy the vnclasping


Mit. As how? what name do you give him first?


Cord. He has shift of names Sir: some call him Apple John, some Signior
Whiffe, marry his maine standing name is Cavalier Shift: the rest are but as
clean shirts to his Natures


Mit. And what makes he in Paul's now?


Cord. Troth as you see, for the advancement of a Siquis or two; wherein he has
so varied himself, that if any one of 'hem take, he may hul up and down in the
Hu^orous world a little longer:


Mit. It seems then, he bears a very changing sail*


Cord. O, as the wind Sir: here comes More.


Enter Orange. Shift. This is rare, I have set up my bills without discovery.


Oren. What? Signior Whiffe? what ^ortune has brought you into these West
parts?


Shift. Troth Signior, nothing but your Rheum; I have been taking an ounce of
Tobacco hard by here with a gentleman, and I am come to spit private in Paul's.
God save you Sir.


Oren. A dieu good Signior Whiffe.


Enter Cloue. Cloue. Master Apple John? you are well met: when shall we sup
together, and laugh and be fat with those good wenches? ha?


Shift. Faith Sir, I must now leave you, upon a few Humors and occasions: but
when you please Sir.

Exit.
Cloue. Farewell sweet Apple John: I wonder there are no more store of Gallants
here*


GREX.
Mit. What be these two, Signior?


Cor. Mary a couple sir, that are mere strangers to the whole scope of our
Play; only come to walk a turn or two i'this Scene of Paul's by chance.


They walk together. Oren. Save you, good Master Clouc.


Cloue. Sweet Master Orange.


GREX.
Mit. How? Cloue, and Orange?


Cor. I, and they are well met, for it is as dry an Orange as ever Grew: nothing
but Salutation, and O God sir, and It pleases you to say so Sir; one that can
laugh at a jest for company with a most plausible, and extemporall grace; and
some hour after in private ask you what it was: the other, Monsieur Cloue, is
a more spic't youth: he will sit you a whole afternoon sometimes, in a
booksellers shop, reading the Greek, Italian, and Spanish; when he
understands not a word of either: if he had the Tongues to his Suits, he were
an excellent Linguist.


Cloue. Do you hear this reported for certeintie?


Oreng. O good sir.


Enter Puntarvolo, Carlo: two serving men following, one leading the Dog.
Punt. Sirrah, take my Cloak: and you sir knave, follow me closer: if thou
loosest my Dog, thou shall die a Dogs death; I will hang thee.


Carl. Tut, fear him not, he is a good lean slave, he loves a Dog well I
warrant him; I see by his looks, I: mass he is somewhat like him. Sblood
poison him, make him away with a crooked pin, or somewhat man; thou may have
more security of thy life: and so Sir, what? you have not put out your whole
venture yet? have you?


Punt. No, I do want yet some fifteen or sixteen hundred pounds: but my
Lady (my wife) is out of her Humor; she does not now go.


Carl. No? how then?


Punt. Mary, I am now enforced to give it out, upon the return of my self, my
Dog, and my Cat.


Carl. Your Cat? where is she?


Punt. My Squire has her there in the Bag: Sirrah, look to her: How like
thou my change, Carlo?


Car. Oh, for the better sir; your Cat has nine lives, and your wife have but
one.


Punt. Besides, she will never be Sea-sicke, which will save me so much in
Conserues: when saw you Signior Sogliardo?


Car. I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds Office yonder: he
requested me to go before and take up a man or two for him in Paul's, against
his Cognizance was ready.


Punt. What? has he purchased arms then?


Car. I, and rare ones too: of as many Colors, as e're you saw any fools coat
in your life* I Will go look among yond' Bills, and I can ^it him with Legs to
his Arms.


Punt. With Legs to his Arms! Good: I will go with you sir.


They go to look upon the Bills. Enter ^astidius, Deliro, and Macilente.
Fast. Come, lets walk in the Mediterraneum: I assure you sir I am not the
least respected among Ladies; but let that pass: do you know how to go into
the Presence Sir?


Mac. Why, on my feet sir.


Fast. No, on your head sir: for it is that must bear you out, I assure you: as
thus sir: You must first have an especial care so to wear your Hat, that it
oppress not confusedly this your Predominant or Fore-top; because (when you
come at the Presence door) you may with once or twice stroking up your Forehead
thus, enter with your Predominant perfect: that is, standing up stiff.


Mac. As if one were frighted?


Fast. I sir.


Mac. Which indeed, a true fear of your (...) should do, rather than Gum
water, or whites of Eggs: is it not so Sir?


Fast. An Ingenious observation: give me leave to crave your name sir.


Deli. His name is Macilente sir.


Fast. Good Signior Macilente: if this Gentleman, Signior D^liro, furnish you
(as he says he will) with clothes, I will bring you to morrow by this time
into the Presence of the most Divine and Acute Lady of the Court: you shall
see sweet Silent Rhetorique, and Dumb Eloquence speaking in her eye; but when
she speaks her self, such an Anatomy of Wit, so Sinewiz'd and Arteriz'd,
that it is the goodliest Model of pleasure that ever was, to behold. Oh, she
strikes the world into Admiration of her; (O, O, O) I cannot express 'hem
believe me.


Mac. O, your only Admiration, is your silence, sir.


Punt. Before God Carlo, this is good; let us read 'hem again: If there be any
Lady, or Gentlewoman of good carriage, that is desirous to entertain^ (to her
private ^ses) a young, straight, and upright Gentleman, of the age of five, or
six and twenty at the most: who can serve in the nature of a Gentleman Usher,
and has little legs of purpose, and a black Satin Suit of his own to go
before her in: which Suit (for the more sweetning) now lies in Lauander: and
can hide his face with her Fan, if need require: or sit in the cold at the
stayre foot for her as well as an other Gentleman: Let her subscribe her Name
and Place, and diligent respect shall be given. This is above measure
excellent: ha?


Carl. No this, this: here is a fine slave.


Punt. If this City, or the Sub-urbs of the same, do affourd any young
Gentleman, of the first, second, or third head, more or less, whose friends
are but lately deceased, and whose lands are but new come to his hands, that
(to be as exactly qualified as the best of our Ordinaric Gallants are) is
affected to entertain the most Gentlemanlike use of Tobacco: as first, to give
it the most exquisite Persume: then, to know all the delicate sweet Forms for
the Assumption of it: as also the rare Corollarie and practice of the ^^ban
Ebolition, EVRIPVS, and Whiffe; which ^ee shall receive or take in here at
London, and evaporate at Vxbridge, or farther, if it please him. If there be any
such Generous spirit, that is truly enamored of these good faculties: May it
please him, but (by a note of his hand) to specify the place, or Ordinari^
where he uses to ^at and Lie, and most sweet attendance with Tobacco, and
Pipes of the best sort shall be ministered: STET QVAESO CANDIDE LECTOR* why this
is without Parallel, this!


Carlo Well, I Will mark this fellow for Sogliardo's use presently.


Punt. Or rather, Sogliardo for his use.


Carlo. Faith either of 'hem will serve, they are both good Properties: I Will
design the other a place too, that we may see him.


Punt. No better place than the Mitre, that we may be Spectators with you
Carlo. Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior Sogliardo! God save you.


Enter Sog. Sog. Save you good sir Punt arvolo; your Dogge's in health sir I
see: how now Carlo?


Carl. We have taken simple pains to choose you out followers here.


Punt. Come hither Signior.


They show him the Bills. Cloue. Monsieur Orange, yond' Gallants observes us;
pr'y thee let us talk Fustian a little and gull 'hem: make 'hem believe we are
great Scholars.


Oreng. O Lord sir.


Cloue. Nay, pr'y thee let us, by Jesus; you have an excellent habit in discourse.


Oreng. It pleases you to say so sir.


Cloue. By this Church you have la: nay come, begin: Aristotle in his
Daemonologia approoues Scaliger for the best Nauigator in his time: and in his
Hypercritiques, ^ee reports him to be H^autontimorumenos: you understand the
Greek sir?


Oreng. O God sir.


Mac. For societies sake he does. O here be a couple of fine tame Parrats.


Cloue. Now Sir, Whereas the Ingenuiti^ of the time, and the souls Synderisis
are but Embrions in Nature, added to the panch of Esquiline, and the
Inter-vallum of the Zodiac, besides the Eclipticke line being Opticke, and not
Mental, but by the contemplatine and Theoricke part there of, does demonstrate
to us the vegetable circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks, and
whereas our intellectual or mincing capreall, (according to the Metaphisickes)
as you may read in Plato's Histriomastix. You conceive me Sir?


Oren. O Lord Sir.


Cloue. Then coming to the pretty Animal, as Reason long since is fled to
Animals you know, or indeed for the more modellizing or enam^lling, or rather
diamondizing of your subject, you shall perceive the Hipothersis or Galaxia,
(where of the Meteors long since had their Initiall inceptions and Notions) to
be merely Pithagoricall, Mathematical, and Aristocraticall: for look you
Sir, there is ever a kind of Concinnitie and Species. Let us turn to our
former discourse, for they mark us not.


Fast. Mass, yonder is the knight Puntarvolo.


Deli. And my cousin Sogliardo me thinks.


Mac. I, and his familiar that haunts him, the Devil with a shining face.


Deli. Let 'hem alone, obscrue 'hem not.


Sogliardo, Punt. Car* walk. Sog. Nay I will have him, I am resolute for that,
by this Parchment Gentlemen, I have been so toiled among the Harrots yonder, you
will not believe, they do speak in the straungest language, and give a man the
hardest terms for his money, that ever you knew.


Carl. But have you arms? have your arms?


Sog. In Faith, I thank God I can write my self Gentleman now, here is my
Pattent, it cost me thirty pound by this breath.


Punt. A very fair Coat, ^ell charged and full of Armorie.


Sog. Nay, it has as much variety of colors in it, as you have seen a Coat
have, how like you the Crest Sir?


Punt. I understand it not well, what is it?


Sog. Marry Sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.


Punt. A Bore without a head, that is very rare.


Carl. I, and Rampant too: troth I commend the Heralds wit, he has deciphered
him well: A Swine without a head, without brain, wit, any thing indeed,
Ramping to Gentilitie. You can blazon the rest signior? can you not?


Sog. OI, I have it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shillings the
tricking.


Carl. Let Us hear, Let Us hear.


Punt. It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, and ridiculous
Escutch^on that ever this eye survis'd. Save you good Mounsieur Fastidius.


They salute as they meet in the walk. Carl. Silence good knight: on, on.


Sog. GYRONY of eight pieces, AZVRE and GVLES, between three plates a CHEV'RON
engrailed checkey, OR, VERT and ERMINES; on a chief ARGENT between two
ANN'LETS, ^ables a Bores head PROPE^^


Carl. How Is that? on a chief ARGENT?


Sog. On a Chief ARGENT, a Bores head PROPER between two ANN'LETS ^ables.


Carl. S'lud, it is a Hogs Cheek and Puddings in a Peuter field this


Sog. How like you them signior?


Punt. Let the word be, Not without mustard, your Crest is very rare sir.


Here they Shift, Fast^mixes with Punt. Carl. and Sogli. Deliro and Macilente,
Cloue and Orange, four couple. Carl. A frying pan to the Crest had had no
fellow.


Fast. Entreat your poor friend to walk off a little Signior, I will salute
the knight.


Carl. Come, lap't up, lap't up.


Fast. You are right well encou^tred sir, how does your fair Dog?


Punt. In reasonable state sir, what Citizen is that you were consorted with?
a merchant of any worth?


Fast. It Is Signior Deliro sir.


Punt. Is it he? Save you sir.


Deli. Good sir Puntarvolo.


Salute. Mac. O what Copy of fool would this place minister to one endew'd
with Patience to observe it?


Car. Nay look you sir, now you are a Gentleman, you must carry a more exalted
presence, change your mood and habit to a more austere form, be exceeding
proud, stand upon your Gentilitie, and scorn every man* Speak nothing humbly,
never discourse under a Nobleman, though you never saw him but riding to the
Star Chamber, it is all one. Love no man, Trust no man, Speak ill of no man
to his face, nor well of any man behind his back. Salute fairly on the front,
and wish 'hem hanged upon the turn. Spread your self upon his bosom
publickely, whose heart you would eat in private. These be principles, think on
'hem, I Will come to you again presently.


Exit Car. S^gliardo mixes with Punt. and Fast. Pun. Sirah, keep close, yet not
so close, thy breath will thaw my ruff.


Sog. O good cousin, I am a little busy, how does my niece, I am to walk with
a knight here.


Enter Fung. with his Ta^lor. Fung. (...) is here, look you sir, that is the
Gentleman:


Tail. What he in the blush-colour'd Satin?


Fun. I, he sir, though his Suit blush, he blushes not: look you, that is the
Suit sir: I would have mine, such a Suit without difference, such Stuff, such
a VVing, such a Sleeue, such a Skirt, Belly and all; therefore, pray you observe
it. Have you a pair of Tables?


Fast. Why do you see sir? they say I am Fantastical: why true, I know it,
and I pursue my Humor still in contempt of this censor^ous age: S'light and a
man should do nothing but what a sort of stale judgments about this town will
approve in him, he were a sweet Ass, Il'd beg him in faith: I never knew any
more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put themselves
into it. For mine own part, so I please mine own appetite, I am careless what
the fusti^ World speaks of me, puh:


Fung. Do you mark how it hangs at the knee there?


Tail. I warrant you sir.


Fung. For Gods sake do, note all: do you see the Collar sir*


Tail. Fear nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch sir.


Fun. Pray God it do not, you will make these linings serve? and help me to a
Chapman for the outside, will you?


Tail. I Will do my best sir: you 'le put it off presently:


Fung. I, go with me to my chamber you shall have it, but make have of it, for
the love of Christ, for I Will sit ^ my old suit, or else lie a bed and read the
Arcadia, till you have done.


Exit with tailor. Enter Car. Carl. O, if ever you were struck with a jest,
gallants, now, now* I do usher the most strange piece of Military Profession,
that ever was discovered in Insula Paulina.


Fast. Where? where?


Punt. What is he for a Creature?


Car. A Pimpe, a Pimpe, that I have observed yonder, the rarest Superficies of
a Humor; he comes every morning to empty his lungs in Paul's here, and offers
up some five or six Hecatomb's of faces and sighs, and away again. Here he
comes; nay walk, walk, be not seen to note him, and we shall have excellent
sport.


Enter Shift: Walks by, and uses action to his-Rapier. Punt. S'lid he vented a
sigh e'ne now, I thought he would have blown up the church.


Carl. O you shall have him give a number of those false fires ere he depart.


Fast. See now he is expostulating with his Rapier, Look, Look.


Carl. Did you ever in your days observe better passion over a hilt?


Punt. Except it were in the person of a Cutlers boy, or that the fellow were
nothing but Vapor, I should think it impossible.


Carl. See, again, he claps his sword of the head, as who should say, Well, go
to.


Fast. O violence, I wonder the blade can contain it self, being so prouokt.


Carl. With that, the moodie Squire thumpt his breast,
And reared his eyes to Heaven for Revenge.

Sog. Troth, and you be Gentlemen, Let Us make 'hem friends, and take up the
matter between his Rapier and he.


Car. Nay, if you intend that, you must lay down the matter, for this Rapier
(it seems) is in the nature of a Hanger on* and the good Gentleman would
happily be rid of him.


Fast. By my faith, and it is to be suspected, I Will ask him.


Mac. O here 's rich stuff, for Christ sake, let us go,
A man would wish himself a senseless pillar,
Rather than view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habet in s^elix Paupert as durius inse,
Quam quod Ridiculos ^omines facit.

Exit, with Deliro^ Fast. Signior.


Shift. At your service.


Fast. Will you ^ell your Rapier?


Carl. Sbl^^d he is turned wild upon the question, he looks as he had seen a
Sergeant.


Shift. Sell my Rapier? now God bless me.


Punt. Amen.


Shift. You ask't me, if I would sell my Rapier Sir?


Fast. I did indeed.


Shift. Now Lord have mercy upon me.


Punt. Amen I say still.


Shift. S'lud Sir, what should you behold in my face Sir, that should move you
(as they say Sir) to ask me Sir, if I would sell my Rapier?


Fast. Nay (let me pray you Sir) be not moved: I protest I would rather ^aue
been silent than any way offensive, had I known your nature.


Shift. Sell my Rapier? Gods lid: Nay Sir (for mine own part) as I am a man
that has served in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any Gentleman in
the degree of falling foul, but: sell my Rapier* I will tell you Sir, I have
served with this foolish Rapier, where some of us dare not appear in have, I
name no man: but let that pass; Sell my Rapier? Death to my Lungs. This Rapier
Sir, has trauail'd by my side Sir, the best part of France and the low
Country: I have seen Vlishing, Brill, and the Haghe with this Rapier sir, in
my Lord of Leysters time: and (by Gods will) he that should offer to disrapier
me now, I would. -- Look you sir, you presume to be a Gentleman of good sort,
and so likewise your friends here, if you have any disposition to travel, for
the sight of service or so, One, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to
diverse Officers and Commanders in the Low Countries, that shall for my cause
do you all the good offices that shall pertain or belong to Gentlemen of your
-- Please you to show the Bounty of your mind Sir, to impart some ten groates
or half a Crown to our use, till our abilitle be of grow'th to return it,
and we shall think our self. -- God's Blood, sell my Rapier?


Sog. I pray you what said he Signior, he is a proper man.


Fast. Mary he tells me, If I please to show the bounty of my mind, to impart
some ten groats to his use or so.


Punt. Break his head, and give it him.


Carl. I thought he had been playing on the Jews Trump I.


Shift. My Rapier? no Sir: my Rapier is my Guard, my Defense, my Reuenew, my
Honor: (if you cannot impart be secret I beseech you) and I will maintain
it, where there is a grain of dust or a drop of water: (hard is the choice
when the valiant must eat their Arms or clem:) Sell my Rapier? no my Dear, I
will not be diuor^'t from thee yet, I have ever found thee true as Steel: and
(you cannot impart Sir) God save you Gentlemen: (nevertheless if you hauie a
fancy to it sir.)


Fast. Pr'y thee away: is Signior Deliro departed?


Car. Have you seen a Pimpe outface his own wants better.


Sog. I commend him, that can dissemble them so well.


Punt. True, and having no better a cloak for it than he has neither.


Fast. Gods precious, what mischievous luck is this: adiew^ Gentlemen.


Punt. VVhither? in such have, Monsie ur Fastidius?


Fast. After my Merchant, Signior Deliro sir.


Carl. O hinder him not, he may hap loose his Tide, a good Flounder in faith.

Exit.
Oren. Hark you Sig. Whiffe, a word with you.


Carl. How? Signior Whiffe?


Oren. and Clou^ call Shift aside. Oren. What was the difference between
thast young Gallant that is gone, and you sir.


Shift. No difference: he would have given me sieve pound for my Rapier, and I
refused it; that is all.


Clou. O, was it no otherwise? we thought you had been upon some terms.


Shift. No other than you saw sir.


Clou. Adieu good Master Apple John.


Exeu^t Oren* and Cloue. Carl. How? Whiffe, and Apple Joan too? Heart, what'll
you say if this be the Appendix, or Labell to both yond' Indentures?


Punt. It may be.


Car. Resolve us of it Ianus, thou that lookst every way; or thou Hercules,
that have trauail'd all Countries.


Pun. Nay Carlo, spend not time in Inuocations now; it is late.


Car. Signior, here is a Gentleman desirous of your name sir.


Shift. Sir, my name is Caualier Shift: I am known sufficiently in this walk
sir.


Carl. Shift? I heard your name varied even now, as I take it.


Shift. True sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tabacconist) to
give me the Style of Signior Whiffe: as I am a poor Esquire about the town
here, they call me Master Apple John: variety of good names does well sir.


Carl. I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine
yond' Bills to be yours.


Shift. Sir, if I should deny the Scriptures, I were worthy to be banished the
middle I Will for ever.


Carl. I take your word Sir: this Gentleman has subscribed to 'hem, and is most
desirous to become your Pupil; mary yo^ must use expedition: Signior Insulso
Sogliardo, this is the Professor.


Sog. In good time sir, nay good sir house your head, do your profess these
sleights in Tobacco?


Shift. I do more than profess sir, and (if you please to be a practioner) I
will undertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shall take it plausibly
in any Ordinary, Theater, or the Tilt-yard if need be; the most popular
assembly that is.


Punt. But you cannot bring him to the Whiffe so soon?


Shift. Yes as soon sir; he shall receive the 1, 2, and 3 Whiffe, if it please
him, and (upon the receipt) take his horse, drink his three cups of Canarie,
and expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stanes, and a third at Bagshot.


Carl. Baw-waw.


Sog. You will not serve me sir, will you^* I Will give you more tha^ Countenance.


Shift. Pardon me sir, I do scorn to serve any man.


Carl. Who? he serve? God's Blood he keeps High men, and Low men, he; he has a
fair living at Fullam.


Shift. But in the nature of a fellow, I Will be your follower if you please.


Sog. Sir you shall stay and dine with me, and if we can agree, we will not part
in have: I am very bountiful to men of quality. Where shall we go Signior.


Punt. Your Miter is your best house.


Shift. I can make this dog take as many whiffes as I list, and he shall
retain or e^ume them at my pleasure.


Punt. By your patience, follow me fellows.


Sog. Sir Puntarvolo.


Punt. Pardon me, my Dog shall not eat in his company for a Million.

Exit Puntarvolo with his followers.
Carl. Nay be not you amazed signior Whiffe, what e're that stiffeneckt
Gentleman says.


Sog. No, for you do not know the Humor of the dog as we do: whereshall we
dine Carlo? I would feign go to one of these Ordinaries now I am a Gentleman.


Carl. So you may, were you never at none yet?


Sog. No faith, but they say there resorts your most choice gallants.


Car. True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in amongst 'hem, they
all stand up and stare at him, as he were some unknown beast brought out of
Affricke, but that'll be helped with a good adventurous face, you must be
impudent enough, sit down and use no respect, when any thing's propounded
above your capacity, smile at it, make two or three faces, and it is excellent,
they 'le think you have trauail'd: though you argue a whole day in Silence
thus, and discourse in nothing but Laughter, 'twill pass. Only (now and then)
give fire, Discharge a good full Oath, and offer a great Wager, 'twill be
admirable.


Sog. I warrant you, I am resolute, come good Signior, there is a poor French
crown for your Ordenarie.


Shift. It comes well, for I had not so much as the least Port^ullice of come
before.


Exeunt. GREX.
Mit. I travel with another objection Signior, which I fear will be enforced
against the Author, ere I can be delivered of it


Cord. What Is that sir?


Mit. That the argument of his Comedy might have been of some other nature, as
of a Duke to be in love with a Countess, and that Countess to be in love with
the Dukes son, and the son to love the Ladies waiting maid: some such cross
woing, with a Clown to their seruingman, better than to be thus near and
familiarly allied to the time.


Cord. You say well, but I would feign hear one of these Autumn- judgments
define once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himself with
Ciceros definition (till he have strength to propose to himself a better) who
would have a Comedy to be ^mitatio vitae, Speculum Consuetudinis, Imago
veritatis, a thing throughout pleasant and ridiculous, and accommodated to the
correction of manners: if the maker have failed in any particle of this, they
may worthily tax him, but if not, why; be you (that are for them) silent, as I
will be for him; and give way to the Actors.


SCENA SECUNDA
Enter Sordido with a halter about his neck. Sord. Nay Gods-pretious, if the
weather and the Season be so respectlesse, that Beggars shall live as well as
their betters; and that my hunger and thirst for Riches, shall not make them
hunger and thirst with Poverty; that my sleeps shall be broken, and their
hearts not broken; that my coffers shall be full, and yet care; theirs empty,
and yet merry: It Is time that a Cross should bear flesh and blood, since flesh
and blood cannot bear this cross.


GREX.
Mit. What will he hang himself?


Cor. Faith I, it seems his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and
that makes him despair.


Mit. Be shrow me, he will be out of his Humor then indeed.


Sord. Tut, these star-monger knaves, who would trust 'hem? one says, dark
and rainie, when it is as clear as Crystal; another says, tempestuous
blasts, and storms, and 'twas as calm as a Milk bowl; here be sweet rascals
for a man to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring Cocks combs
you: you fat brains, out upon you; you are good for nothing but to sweat
night-caps and make rug-gownes dear: you learned men, and have not a Legion of
Devils, a vostr^ service: a vostre service? By heaven I think I shall die a
better scholar than they, but soft, how now sirah.


Enter a Hind with a letter. Hind. Here Is a letter come from your Son sir.


Sord. From my Son sir? what would my Son sir? some good news no doubt.
The letter.
Sweet and dear father, (desiring you first to send me your blessing, which
is more worth to me than Gold or Silver) I desire you likewise to be
advertised, that this Shrouctide (contrary to custom) we use always to have
Revels; which is indeed Dancing, and makes an excellent show in truth;
especially if we Gentlemen be well attired, which our Seniors note, and
think the better of our fathers, the better we are maintained, and that they
shall know if they come up, and have any thing to do in the Law: therefore
good Father, these are (for your own sake as well as mine) to re-desire you,
that you let me not want that which is fit for the setting up of our name in
the honorable volume of Gentilitie, that I may say to our Calumnators with
Tullie, EGO SVM ORTVS DOMVS MEAE, TV OCCASVSTVAE. And thus (not doubting of
your fatherly Benevolence) ^^umbly ask you blessing, and pray God to bless you.

Yours, if his own.

How Is this; Yours, if his own? is he not my Son, except he be his own
Son. Belike this is some new kind of subscription the Gallants use. Well,
wherefore do thou stay knave? Away: go.


Exit Hind. Here Is a letter indeed; Reu^ls? and benevolence? is this a weather
to send benevolence? or is this a season to revel in? Slid the Devil and all
takes part to vex me I think: this letter would never have come now else,
now, now, when the sun shines, and the air thus clear. Soul if this hold,
we shall shortly have an excellent crop of Corn spring out of the high ways,
the Streets, and Houses of the town will be hid with the rankenesse of the
fruits that grow there in spite of good Husbandry. Go to I Will prevent the
sight of it, come as quickly as it can, I will prevent the sight of it. I have
this remedy Heaven: stay; I Will try the pain thus a little, O, nothing,
nothing. Well now: shall my son gain a benevolence by my death* or any
body be the better for my Gold or so forth: No Alive, I kept it from 'hem, and
(dead) my ghost shall walk about it and preserve it, my Son and Daughter
shalsterue ere they touch it, I have hid it as deep as Hell from the ^ight of
Heaven, and to it I go now.

Falls off. Enter Rustici, 5 or 6, one after another. Rust. 1 Aye me, what
pitiful sight is this? help, help, help*


Rust. 2 How now? what is the matter?


Rust. 1 O here is a man has hanged himself, help to get him again.


Rust. 2 Hanged himself? Slid carry him before a Justice, it is chance medley on
my word.


Rust. 3 How now, what is here to do?


Rust. 4 How comes this?


Rust. 2 One has executed himself contrary to the order of Law, and by my
consent he shall answer't.


Rust. 5 Would he were in case to answer it.


Rust. 1 Stand by, he recouers, give him breath.


Sord. Oh.


Rust. 5 Mass, 'twas well you went the footway neighbor.


Rust. 1 I, and I had not cut the halter.


Sord. How? cut the halter? Aye me, I am undone, I am undone.


Rust. 2 Marry if you had not been undone, you had been hanged I can tell you.


Sord. You thredbare horse-bread eating rascals, if you would needs have been
meddling, could you not have untied it, but you must cut it? and in the midst
too? Aye me.


Rust. 1 Out on me, it is the Caterpiller Sordido; how cursed are the poor,
that the viper was blessed with this good fortune?


Rust. 2 Nay how accursed are thou, that art cause to the curse of the poor?


Rust. 3 I, and to save so wretched a Caytife.


Rust. 4 Cursed be thy fingers that loosed him.


Rust. 2 Some desperate fury possess thee, that thou may hang thy self too.


Rust. 5 Never may thou be saved, that saved so damned a monster.


Sord. What curses breath these men? how have my deeds
Made my looks differ from another man's,
That they should thus detest, and loath my life?
Out on my wretched Humor, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I Will make fair mends
For my foul errors past and twentie-fold
Restore to all men, what with wrong I robbed them:
My Barnes and Garners shall stand open still
To all the poor that come, and my best grain
Be made almes-bread to feed halfe-famisht mouths.
Though hitherto amongst you I have lived
Like an unsavory Muck hill to my self,
Yet now my gathered heaps being spread abroad,
Shall turn to better, and more fruitful uses.
Bles^e then this man, curse him no more for saving
My life and soul together. O how deeply
The bitter curses or the poor do pierce!
I am by wonder changed; come in with me
And witness my repentance: now I prove,
"No life is blessed, that is not graced with Love.

Rust. 2 O miracle! see when a man has grace.


Rust. 3 Had't not been pity so good a man should have been cast away?


Rust. 2 Well, I Will get our Clarke put his conversion in the Chronicle.


Rust. 4 Do, for I warrant him he is a virtuous man.


Rust. O god how he wept if you marked it: did you see how the tears trill'd?


Rust. 5 Yes believe me; like master Vicars bowls upon the green, for all
the world.


3 or 4 O neighbor, god's blessing your heart neighbor, 'twas a good
grateful deed.


Exeunt. GREX.
Cord. How now Mitis? what is that you consider so seriously?


Mit. Troth, that which does essentially please me: the warping condition of
this green and soggie multitude: but in good faith Signior, your Author has
largely outstript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberally confess it.
For when I saw Sordido so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of
him then.


Cord. What? you supposed he should have hung himself indeed?


Mit. I did; and had framed my objection to it ready, which may yet be very
fitly urged, and with some necessity: for though his purposed violence lost
the effect, and extended not to death, yet the Intent and Horror of the object
was more than the nature of a Come die will in any sort allow.


Cord. I? what think you of Plautus in his Come die called Cistellaria there?
where he brings in Alcesimarchus with a drawn sword ready to kill himself,
and as he is e'ne fixing his breast upon it, to be restrained from his
resolved outrage by Silenium and the Bawd: is not his authority of power to
give our Scene approbation?


Mit. Sir, I have this (your only) evasion leftmee, to say, (...) think it be
so indeed, your memory is happier than mine: but I wonder what engine he will
use to bring the rest out of their Humors?


Cord. That will appear anon, never preoccupie your imagination withal. Let
your mind keep company with the Scene still, which now remoues it self from
the Country to the Court. Here comes Macilente and Signior Brisk freshly
suited, loose not your self, for now the Epitasis or busy part of our Subject
is in Action.


SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Macilente, Brisk, Cinedo, with Tobacco. Fast. Well now Signior
Macilente, you are not only welcome to the Court, but also to my mistress
with drawing chamber: Boy get me some Tobacco, I Will but go in, and show I am
here, and come to you presently sir.

Exit.
Mac. What Is that he said? by heaven I marked him not,
My thoughts, and I were of another world;
I was admiring mine own outside here,
To think what privilege and palm it bears
Here in the court: Be a man never so vile
In wit, in judgment, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a Silken cover,
He shall not only pass, but pass regarded:
Whereas let him be poor and meanly clad,
Though never so richly parted; you shall have
A fellow (that knows nothing but his Beef
Or how to rince his clammie guts in beer)
Will take him by the shoulders or the throat,
And kick him down the stairs, Such is the state
Of virtue in bad Cloths, ha, ha, ha, ha,
That Raiment should be in such high request?
How long should I be ere I should put off
To my Lord Chancelors tomb, or the Shriues posts?
By heaven (I think) a thousand thousand year,
His Grauiti^, his wisdom, and his faith,
To my dread Sovereign (graces that survive him)
These I could well endure to reverence,
But not his Tomb, no more than I Will commend
The Chapel Organ for the guilt without,
Or this bace Violl for the varnisht face.

Enter Fast. Fast. In faith I have made you stay somewhat long sir, but is my
Tobacco ready boy?


Cinc. I Sir.


Fast. Give me, my mistress is upon coming, you shall see her presently sir,
(Tab.) you will say you never accosted a more piercing wit. This Tobacco is not
dried Boy, or else the Pipe's defective. Oh, your wits of Italy are nothing
comparable to her, her braine's a very Quiver of jests, and she does dart them
abroad with that sweet loose and judicial aim that you would -- here she
comes sir.


Enter Sauiolina, and goes in again. Mac. 'Twas time, his invention had been
bogd else.


Saui. Give me my fan there.


Mac. How now Mounsieur Brisk?


Fast. A kind of affectionate reverence strikes me with a cold shiuering (me
thinks.)


Mac. I like such tempers well, as stand before their Mistresses with fear and
trembling, and before their Maker like impudent mountains.


Fast. By Jesus, I Would spend twenty pound my vauting Horse stood here now, she
might see me do but one trick?


Mac. Why does she love actiuitie*


Cine. Or if you had but your long stockings on to be dancing a Galliard, as
she comes by.


Fast. I either. O these stirring humors make Ladies mad with desire, she
comes. My good Genius embolden me, Boy the Pipe quickly.


Enter Sauiolina. Mac. What? will he give her music?


Fast. A second good morrow to my fair mistress.


Saui. Fair servant, I Will thank you a day hence, when the date of your
salutation comes forth.


Fast. How like you that answer? is it not admirable?


Mac. I were a simple Courtier, if I could not admire tri^^^es sir.


Fast. Troth sweet Lady I shall (Tab.) be prepared to give you thanks for
those thanks, and (Tab.) study more officious and obsequous regards (Tab.) to
your fair beauties: (Tab.) mend the pipe boy.


Mac. I never knew Tobacco taken as a parenthesis before.


Fast. Fore God (sweet Lady) believe it, I do honor the meanest rush in this
chamber for your love.


Saui. I, you need not tell me that sir, I do think you do prize a rush before
my love.


Mac. Is this the wonder of nations?


Fast. O, by Jesus pardon me, I said for your love, by this light; but it is the
accustomed sharpness of your Ingenuitie sweet Mistress to -- Mass your
Violl's new str^ng me thinks.


Takes down the Violl. Mac. Ingenuitic; I see his ignorance will not suffer
him to stander her; which he had done most notably, if he had said Wit for
Ingenuiti^, as he meant it.


Fast. By the soul of Music Lady (hum, hum.)


Saui. Would we might hear it once.


Fast. I do more adore and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections than
(hum, hum) ever I shall have power and faculty to express (hum.)


Saui. Upon the Violl de Gambo you mean?


Fast. It Is miserably out of tune, by this hand.


Saui. Nay rather by the fingers.


Mac. It makes good Harmoni^ with her wit.


Fast. Sweet Lady tune it. Boy some Tobacco.


Mac. Tobacco again? he does court his mistress with very exceeding good
changes.


Fast. Signior Macilente, you take none sir? (Tab.)


Mac. No, unless I had a mistress Signior, it were a great Indecorum for me
to take Tobacco.


Fast. How like you her wit? (Tab.)


Mac. Her ing^nuitie is excellent sir.


Fast. You see the subject of her sweet fingers there? (Tab.) *Oh she tickles
it so, that (Tab.) she makes it laugh most Divinely; ( Tab.) I Will tell you a
good jest now, and your self shall say it is a good one: I have wished my self
to be that Instrument (I think) a thousand times, and not so few, by Heavens (
Tab.)


Maci. Not unlike Sir: but how? to be cased up and hung by on the wall?


Fast. O, no Sir, to be in use I assure you; as your judicious eyes may
testify. (Tab.)


Saui. Here Servant, if you will play, come.


Fast. Instantly sweet Lady (Tab.) In good faith here is most Divine Tobacco.


Saui. Nay, I cannot stay to Dance after your Pipe.


Fast. Good, nay dear Lady stay: by this sweet Smoke, I think your wit be
all fire: (Tab.)


Mac. And he is the Salamander that lives by it.


Saui. Is your Tobacco perfumed Sir? that you swear by the sweet Smoke?


Fast. Still more excellent: (before God, and these bright Heavens) I think
(Tab.) you are made of Ingenuitie, I (Tab.)


Maci. True, as your discourse is: O abominable!


Fast. Will your Ladyship take any?


Saui. O, peace I pray you; I love not the breath of a Woodcocks head.


Fast. Meaning my head, Lady?


Saui. Not altogether so Sir; but (as it were Fatal to their follies that
think to grace themselves with taking Tobacco, when they want better
entertainment) you see your Pipe bears the true form of a Woodcocks head.


Fast. O Admirable Simil^!


Saui. It Is best leaving of you in Admiration, Sir*

Exit Sauiolina.
Mac. Are these the admired Ladie-wits, that having so good a Plaine-song, can
run no better Division upon it. S'heart, all her jests are of the stamp
March was fifteen years ago. Is this the Com^t Monsieur Fastidius, that your
Gallants wonder at so?


Fast. Heart of a Gentleman to neglect me before presence thus: Sweet sir, I
bese^ch you be silent in my disgrace, By Jesus, I never was in so vile a Humor
in my life, and her wit was at the ^loud too, Report it not for a million good
sir; let me be so far endeared to your love.


Exeunt. GREX.
Mit. What follows next Signior Cordatus? this Gallants Humor is almost spent
me thinks, it ^bbes apace, with this contrary breath of his mistress.


Cord. O, but it will flow again for all this, till there come a general
drought of Humor among all our Actors, and then I fear not but his will fall
as low as any. See who presents himself here:


Mit. What, in the old case?


Cord. In Faith, which makes it the more pitiful, you understand where the
Scene is?


ACTUS QUARTUS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Fungoso, Fallace following him. Fall. Why are you so melancholy Brother?


Fun. I am not melancholy I thank you Sister.


Fall. Why are you not merry then? there are but two of us in all the world,
and if we should not be comforts to one another, God help us.


Fung. Faith, I cannot tell Sister, but if a man had any true Melancholy in
him, it would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his
neighbors throats to make his son a Gentleman: and yet when he has cut 'hem,
he will see his sons throat cut too, ere he make him a true Gentleman
indeed, before Death cut his own throat* I must be the first Head of our
house, and yet he will not give me the head, till I be made so. Is any man
termed a Gentleman that is not always in the fashion? I would know but that.


Fall. If you be melancholy for that Brother, I think I have as much cause to
be melancholy, as one; for I Will be sworn I live as little in the fashion, as
any woman in London. By the Bible of heaven (beast that I am to say it) I have
not one friend in the world besides my husband. When saw you Master Fastidius
Brisk, Brother?


Fung. But a while since Sister, I think, I know not well in truth. By Gods
lid I could sight with all my heart me thinks.


Fall. Nay good Brother, be not resolute.


Fung. I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answer neither.


Fall. Oh sweet Fastidius Brisk, O fine Courtier, thou a^ he make me sigh
and say, How blessed is that woman that has a Courtier to her husband? and how
miserable a dame she is that has neither husband nor friend in the Court: O
sweet Fastidius, O fine Courtier. How comely he bows him in his courtesy?
how full he hits a woman betwixt the lips when he kisses? how upright he
sits at the Table? how daintily he carues? how sweetly he talks, and tells
news of this Lord, and of that Lady? how cleanely he wipes his spoon at
every spoonful of any whit-meat he eats, and what a near case of picketooths
he carries about him still? Oh sweet Fastidius, O sine Courtier!


Enter Deliro with Musicians. Deli. See yonder she is Gentlemen, now (as ever
you will bear the name of Musicians) touch your instruments sweetly, she has a
delicate ear, I tell you, play not a false note I beseech you.


Music. Fear^ not Signior Deliro.


Deli. O begin, begin, some sprightly thing; Lord, how my imagination labors
with the success of it: well said, good in faith, heaven grant it please her,
I Will not be seen, for then she will be sure to dislike it.


Fall. Hey da, this is excellent, I Will lay my life this is my husbands dotage,
I thought so, nay never play peeke-boe with me, I know you do nothing but
study how to anger me sir.


Deli. Anger thee, sweet wife? why did thou not send for Musicians to supper
last night thy self?


Fall. To Supper sir? now come up to Supper I beseech you: as though there were
no difference between Supper time when folks should be merry, and this time
when they would be Melancholy? I would never take upon me to take a wife, if I
had no more Judgment to please her.


Deli Be pleased sweet wife, and they shall have done: and would to Christ my
life were done, if I can never please thee.


Exit Musicians. Enter Macilente. Mac. God save you Lady; where is Master
Deliro?


Deli. Here, Master Macilente: you are welcome from the Court Sir; no doubt you
have been graced exceedingly of Master Briskes Mistress, and the rest of the
Ladies for his sake?


Mac^. Alas, the poor Phantasticke, he is scarce known
To any Lady there: and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
Deride, and play upon his amorous Humors,
Though he but Apishly does imitate
The gallan't Courtiers, kissing ladies Pumps,
Holding the Cloth for them, praising their Wits,
And seruilely observing every one,
May do them pleasure: Fearful to be seen
With any man (though he be never so worthy)
That Is not in grace with some that are the greatest.
Thus Courtiers do, and these he counterfeits,
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Upon their vanities, as they themselves;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
He Is like a Zani to a Tumbler,
That tries tricks after him to make men laugh.

Fall. Here Is an unthankful spiteful wretch: the good Gentleman vouchsaft to
make him his companion (because my husband put him into a few Rags) and now see
how the vnrude Rascal backbites him.


Deli. Is he no more graced amongst'hem then? say you?


Mac. Faith like a pawn at Chesse, fills up a room, that is all.


Fall. O monster of men! can the Earth bear such an envious Caitiffe?


Deli. Well, I repent me I e're credited him so much: but (now I see what he
is, and that his masking viz or is of) I Will forbear him no longer: all his
lands are morgag'd to me, and forfeited: besides, I have Bonds of his in my
hand for the receipt of now xx pound, now xxx, now xxv: still as he has had a
Fan but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new Suit. Well, I Will salute him by a
Sergeant, the next time I see him in faith, I Will Suit him.


Mac. Why, you may soon see him Sir, for he is to meet Signior Puntarvolo at
a Notaries by the Exchange presently, where he means to take up upon return.


Fall. Now out upon thee Judas; can thou not be content to backbite thy
friend, but thou must betray him? will thou seek the undoing of any man? and
of such a man too? and will you Sir get your living by the counsel of Traitors?


Deli. Dear wife, have patience.


Fall. The house wilfal, the ground will open, and swallow us: I Will not bide
here for all the Gold an Silver in Heaven.


Exit. Deli. O good Macilente, let us follow and appease her, or the Peace of my
life is at an end.

Exit.
Maci. Now Pease, and not Peace feed that life, whose head hangs so heavily
over a woman's Manger.

Exit.
Enter Fallacerunning, at another door, and claps it too. Fall. Help me
brother: Gods body and you come here, I Will do my self a mischief.


Deli. Nay, hear me sweet wife, unless thou will have mec go, I will not go.


Within* Fall. Tut, you shall never have that vantage of me, to say you are
undone by me: I Will not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here is four
Angels, I Will give you toward your Suit; for the love of Jesus, and as ever you
came of Christen creature, make have to the water side (you know where Master
Fastidius uses to land) and give him warning of my husbands intent; and tell
him of that lean Rascals treachery: O Jesus, how my flesh rises at him? nay,
sweet brother make have; you may say I would have writ to him, but that the
necessity of the time would not suffer it: He cannot choose but take it
extraordinarily from me: and Commend me to him, good brother: say I sent you.

Exit.
Fung. Let me see; these four Angels: and then forty shillings more I can
borrow on my Gown in Fetter-lane: well, I will go presently, say on my Suit,
pay as much money as I have, and swear my self into Credit with my Tailor for
the rest.

Exit.
SCENA SECUNDA.
Enter Deliro, with Macilente, speaking as they pass over the Stage. Deli. O,
on my Soul you wrong her, (...), Though she be froward, yet I know she is
honest.


Mac. Well, then have I no Judgment; would nay woman (but one that were wild
in her affections) have broke out into that immodest and violent Passion
against her husband? or is it possible --


Deli. If you love me, forbear; all the Arguments in the world shall never
wrest my heart to believe it.


Exeunt. GREX.
Cord. How like you the Deciphering of his Dotage?


Mit. O, strangely; and of the others Envy too, that labors so seriously to
set debate betwixt a man and his wife, Stay, here comes the Knight Aduenturer.


Cord. I, and his Scriuener with him.


SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Puntarvolo, Notarie, with Serving-men. Punt. I wonder Monsieur Fastidius
comes not! but Notarie, if thou please to draw the Indentures the while, I will
give thee the Theorie.


Not. With all my heart Sir; and I Will fall in hand with 'hem presently.


Punt. Well then, first; the Sum is to be understood.


Not. Good sir.


Punt. Next, our several Appellations, and Character of my Dog and Cat must be
known: show him the Cat Sirrah.


Not. So sir.


Punt. Then, that the intended Point, is the Turks Court in Constantinople:
the Time limited for our Return, a year: and that if either of us miscarrie,
the whole Venture is lost. These are General; conceiu'st thou? or if either of
us turn Turque.


Not. I Sir.


Punt. Now for Particulars: that I may make my trauails by Sea or Land, to my
best liking: and that (hiring a Coach for my self) it shall be lawful for my
Dog and Cat to ride with me in the said Coach.


Not. Very good sir.


Punt. That I may choose to give my Dog or Cat Fish, for fear of Bones, or any
other Nutriment, that (by the judgment of the most Autenticall Physicians
where I travail) shall be thought dangerous.


Not. Well sir.


Punt. That (after the receipt of his money) he shall neither in his own
person, nor any other, either by direct or indirect means; as Magique,
Witchcraft, or other such Exoticke Arts, attempt, practice, or complot any
thing, to the prejudice of Me, my Dog, or my Cat: Neither shall I use the
help of any such Sorceries or Enchantments; as Unctions, to make our skins
impenetrable, or to travail invisible by virtue of a Powder, or a Ring, or to
hang any three-forked Charm about my Dogs neck, secretly conuey'd into his
Collar: understand you? but that all be performed, sincerely, without fraud or
Imposture.


Not. So sir.


Punt. That (for testimony of the Performance) my self am to bring thence a
Turks Mustachio, my Dog a Hares lip, and my Cat the train or tail of a Rat.


Not. It Is done sir.


Punt. It Is said Sir, not done sir, but forward. That upon my return and
landing on the Tower wharfe with the aforesaid Testimony, I am to receive five
for one, according to the proportion of the sums putforth.


Not. Well Sir.


Pu^^. Provided, That if before our departure or setting forth, either my
self, or these be visited with sickness, or any other casual event, so that
the whole course of the Adventure be hindered thereby; that then, He is to
return, and I am to receive the prenominated Proportion, upon fair and equal
terms.


Not. Very good sir; is this all?


Punt. It is all Sir: and dispatch them good Notarie.


Not. As fast as is possible Sir.

Exit
Enter Carlo. Punt. O Carlo, welcome: saw you Monsieur Brisk?


Car. Not I: did he appoint you to meet here?


Punt. I, and I muse he should be so tardie: he is to take an hundred pounds
of me in venture, if he maintain his promise.


Car. Is his hour past?


Punt. Not yet, but it comes on apace.


Carl. Tut, be not jealous of him; he will sooner break all the ten
Commandments, than his Hour; upon my life in such a case trust him.


Punt. Me thinks Carlo, you look very smooth? ha?


Carl. Why I come but now from a Hothouse, I must needs look smooth.


Punt. From a Hothouse?


Car. I, do you make a wonder on it? why it is your only Physic. Let a man
sweat once a week in a Hothouse, and be well rubd and froted with a good
plumpe juicie wench, and sweet linen, he shall never ha'the Pox.


Punt. What? the French Pox?


Car. The French Pox! our Pox: S'blood we have 'hem in as good form as then
man: what?


Punt. Let me perish, but thou art a Villain: was your new-created Gallant
there with you? Sogliardo?


Carl. O Porpuse, hang him, no: he is a Lieger at Horns Ordinary yonder: his
villainous Ganimede and he ha'been droning a Tobacco Pipe there, ever sin'
yesterday noone.


Punt. Who? Signior Tripartite, that would give my Dog the Whiffse?


Car. I, he: they have hired a chamber and all private to practice in, for the
making of the Patoun, the Receipt Reciprocal, and a number of other mysteries,
not yet extant* I brought some dosen or twenty Gallants this morning to
view'hem (as you would do a piece of Perspectiue) in at a keyhole; and there we
might see Sogliardo sit in a Chair, holding his snowt up like a Sow under an
Apple Tree, while the other opened his Nostrills with a Poking-sticke, to give
the smoke a more free delivery. They had spit some three or fourscore ounces
between 'hem, before we came away.


Punt. How! spit three or fourscore ounces?


Carl. I, and preserved it in Porrengers, as a Barber does his Blood when he
pricks a vein.


Punt. Out Pagan; how do thou prick the Vain of thy friend?


Carl. Friend? Is there any such foolish thing in the world? ha? S'lid I never
rellisht it yet.


Punt. Thy Humor is the more dangerous.


Carl. No not a whit Signior: Tut, a man must keep time in all: I can oil my
tongue when I meet him next, and look with a good slicke forehead; 'twill take
away all soil of Suspicion, and that is enough: what Lynceus can see my heart?
Pish, the title of a Friend, it is a vain idle thing, only venerable among
fools: you shall not have one that has any opinion of wit affect it.


Enter Deliro, and Macilente. Deli. Save you good Sir Puntarvolo.


Punt. Signior Deliro! Welcome.


Deli. Pray you sir, did you see Master Fastidius Brisk? I heard he was to
meet your Worship here.


Punt. You heard no Figment s^^, I do expect him every minute my VVatch
strikes.


Deli. In good time sir.


Carl. There Is a fellow now, looks like one of the Patricians of Sparta, mary
his wit's after ten in the hundred. A good Bloudhound, a close mouthed Dog, he
follows the sent well, marry he is at a fault now me thinks.


Punt. I should wonder at that Creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.


Carl. O I cannot abide these limbs of Satin, or rather Satan indeed, that
'll walk (like the children of darkness) all day in a melancholy shop, with
their pockets full of Blankes, ready to swallow up as many poor unthrifts, as
come within the verge.


Punt. So: and what have thou for him that is with him now?


Carl. O (Damn me) Immortality, I Will not meddle with him, the pure Element of
Fire, all Spirit, Extraction.


Punt. How Carlo? ha, what is he man?


Car. A scholar, Macilente, do you not know him? a lanke rawbon'd Anatomy,
he walks up and down like a charged Musket, no man dares encounter him: that is
his Rest there.


Punt. His Rest? why has he a forked head?


Carl. Pardon me, that is to be suspended, you are too quick, too apprehensiue.


Deli. Troth (now I think on it) I Will defer it til some other time.


Mac. Gods-pretious, not by any means Signior, you shall not loose this
opportunity, he will be here presently now.


Deli. Yes faith Macilente, it is best. For look you sir, I shall so
exceedingly offend my wife in it, that --


Mac. Your wife? now for shame loose these thoughts, and become the master of
your own spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my self to be thus
passionatly carried (to and for) with the stream of her Humort and neglect my
deepest affairs, to serve her affections? God's Blood I would geld my self first.


Deli. O but Signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would --


Mac. Such a wife: Now God hate me sir, if ever I discerned any wonder in your
wife yet, with all the Speculation I have: I have seen some that ha'beene
thought fairer than she, in my time; and I have seen those, have not been
altogether so tall, esteemed proper women; and I have seen less Noses grow
upon sweeteer Faces, that have done very well too in my judgemment: but in good
faith Signior for all this, the Gentlewoman is a good pretty proud
hard-fauour'd thing, mary not so peerlessely to be doted upon, I must confess:
nay be not angry.


Deli. Well sir (how ever you please to forget your self) I have not deserved
to be thus played upon, but henceforth, pray you forbear my house, for I can
but faintly endure the savor of his breath at my table, that shall thus jade me
for my courtesies.


Mac. Nay then Signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper woman by Jesus,
and I suspect her honesty, that is more, which you may likewise suspect (if you
please:) do you see? I Will urge you to nothing against your appetite, but if you
please, you may suspect it.


Deli. Good Sir.

Exit.
Mac. Good sir? Now Horn upon Horn pursue thee, thou blind egregious Dotard.


Carl. O you shall hear him speak like Envy. Signior Macilente, you saw
Mounsieur Brisk lately? I heard you were with him at the Court.


Mac. I Buffone, I was with him.


Carl. And how is he respected there? (I know you will deal ingeniously with us)
is he made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants?


Mac. Faith I, his Ciuet and his casting glass,
Have helped him to a place amongst the rest,
And there his Seniors give him good slight looks,
After their Garb, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.

Carl. What is this all?


Mac. Why say, that they should show the frothie fool,
Such grace as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mighty wind-fall out of doubt.
Why all their Graces are not to do Grace
To virtue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt Spurs quite breathless from them^elues.
It Is now esteemed Precisianisme in wit;
And a Disease in Nature to be kind
Toward Desert, to Love, or seek good Names:
Who feeds with a Good name? who thriues with loving?
Who can provide feast for his own desires,
With serving others? ha, ha, ha:
It Is folly by our wisest worldlings proved
(If not to gain by love) to be beloved.

Carl. How like you him? is it not a good spiteful slave? ha?


Punt. Shrewd, shrewd.


Carl. Damme me, I could eat his flesh now: Divine sweet villain.


Maci. Nay, pr'y thee leave: what is he there?


Carl. Who? this in the starcht Beard? it is the dull stiff Knight Puntarvolo
man; he is to travail now presently: he has a good knottie wit, marry he
carries little on it out of the land with him.


Maci. How then?


Carl. He puts it forth in venture, as he does his money; upon the return of a
Dog and Cat.


Maci. Is this he?


Carl. I, this is he; a good tough Gentleman: he looks like a Chine of Brawne
at Shrouetide, out of date, and ready to take his leave: or a dry Poule of
Ling upon Easter-eue, that has furnished the Table all Lent, as he has done the
City this last Vacation.


Maci. Come, you will never leave your stabbing Simil^'s: I shall have you aiming
at me with 'hem by and by, but --


Carl. O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good Devil, I love thee above the
love of women; I could even melt in Admiration of thee now: Gods so, look here
man; Sir Dagonet and his Squire.


Enter Sog. and Shift. Sog. Save you my dear Gallanto's. nay, come approach,
good Caualier: pr'y thee (sweet Knight) know this Gentleman, he is one that it
pleases me to use as my good friend and companion; and therefore do him good
offices: I beseech you Gentles, know him.


Punt. Sir (for Signior Sogliardos sake) let it suffice, I know you.


Sog. Why by Jesus, I thank you Knight, and it shall suffice. Hark you Sir
Puntarvolo, you would little think it; he is as resolute a piece of flesh as
any's in the world.


Punt. Indeed sir?


Sog. Upon my Gentilitie sir: Carlo, a word with you; Do you see that same
fellow there?


Carl. What? Caualier Shift?


Sog. O, you know him; cry you mercy: before God, I think him the tallest man
living within the walls of Europe.


Carl. The walls of Europe! take heed what you say Signior, Europe's a huge
thing within the walls.


Sog. Tut, (and 'twere as huge again) I Would justify what I speak. S'lid he
swagger'd even now in a place where we were: I never saw a man do it more
resolute.


Carl. Nay indeed swaggering is a good Argument of Resolution. Do you hear
this, Signior?


Mac. I, to my grief. O that such muddie Flags
For every drunken flourish, should atchieue
The name of Manhood; whilst true perfect Valor
(Hating to show it self) goes by despised.
God's Blood, I doc know now (in afaire just cause)
I dare do more than he; a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And give my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger. Now the Pox
Light on your Pickt-Hatch prowess.

Sog. Why I tell you Sir, he has been the only Bid-stand that ever was, kept
New Market, Salisburie Plain, Hockley in the hole, Gads-Hill; all the high
plac^s of any Request: he has had his Mares and his Geldings he, have been
worth forty, threescore, a hundred pound a Horse, would have sprung you over
hedge and ditch like your Greyhound: he has done five hundred Robberies in his
time, more or less, I assure you.


Punt. What? and escaped?


Sog. Escaped! in faith I: he has broken the jayle when he has been in yrons, and
yrons; and been out, and in again; and out, and in; forty times and not so
few, he.


Mac. A fit Trumpet to proclaim such a person.


Carl. But can this be possible?


Shift. why' it is nothing sir, when a man gives his Affections to it.


Sog. Good Pylades discourse a Robbery or two, to satisfy these Gentlemen of
thy worth.


Shift. Pardon me my dear Orestes: Causes have their Quiddits, and it is ill
jesting with Bell-ropes.


Carl. How? Pylades and Orestes?


Sog. I, he is my Pylades, and I am his Orestes: how like you the conceit?


Carl. O, it is an old stale Interlude devise: No, I Will give you Names my self:
look you, he shall be your Judas, and you shall be his Elder tree to hang on.


Maci. Nay rather, let him be Captain Pod, and this his Motion; for he does
nothing but Show him.


Car. Excellent: or thus; you shall be Holden, and he your camel.


Shift. You do not mean to ride Gentlemen?


Punt. Faith let me end it for you Gallants: you shall be his Countenance, and
he your Resolution.


Sog. Troth that is pretty: how say you Caualier, shall be so?


Carl. I, I, most voices.


Shift. Faith I am easily yielding to any good Impressions:


Sog. Then give hands good Resolution.


Car. Mass he cannot say good Countenance now (properly) to him again.


Punt. Yes, by an Ironie.


Mac. O sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as he is altogether grim and
unpleasant.


Enter Brisk. Fast. Good hours make Music with your mirth Gentlemen, and
keep time to your humors: how now Carlo?


Punt. Monsieur Brisk! many a long look have I extended for you sir.


Fast. Good faith I must crave pardon; I was invited this morning ere I was out
of my bed, by a Beuie of Ladies, to a Banquet: whence it was almost one of
Hercules Labors for me to come away, but that the respect of my promise did so
prevail with me: I know they will take it very ill, especially one that gave me
this Bracelet of her Hair but over night, and this Pearl another gave me from
her forehead, Mary she -- what? are the VVritings ready?


Punt. I will send my man to know. Sirrah, go you to the Notaries, and learn
if he be ready: leave the Dog sir.


Exit Seruing-man. Fast. And how does my rare qualified friend Sogliardo? oh
Signior Macilente! by these eyes I saw you not, I had saluted you sooner else
on my troth: I hope sir I may presume upon you that you will not divulge my
late cheek, or disgrace indeed sir.


Mac. You may sir.


Carl. S'heart he knows some notorious jest by this Gull, that he has him so
obsequious.


Sog. Monsieur Fastidius, do you see this fellow there? does he not look
like a Clown? would you think there is any thing in him?


Fast. Any thing in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow has a good ingenious face.


Sog. By this Element, he is an ingenious tall man as ever swaggerd about
London: he and I call Countenance and Resolution, but his name is Caualier
Shift.


Punt. Caualier, you knew Signior Clog, that was hanged for the robbery at
Harrow on the hill?


Sog. Knew him Sir! why 'twas he gave all the directions for the Action.


Punt. How? was it your Project sir?


Shift. Pardon me Countenance, you do me some wrong to make that public,
which I imparted to you in private.


Sog. Gods will, here are none but friends Resolution.


Shift. That Is all one; things of Consequence must have their respects, where,
how, and to whom. Yes sir, he showed himself a true Clogge in the Coherence
of that affair sir; for if he had managed matters as they were corroborated to
him, it had been better for him by a forty or fifty score of pounds sir, and
he himself might have lived (in despite of Fate) to have fed on Woodcockes
with the rest: but it was his heavy fortunes to sink poor Clogge, and
therefore talk no more of him.


Punt. why, had he more Agents then?


Sog. O God sir; I, there were some present there, that were the nine Worthies
to him in faith.


Shift. I sir, I can satisfy you at more convenient conference: but (for mine
own part) I have now reconciled my self to other courses, and profess a
living out of my other qualities.


Sog. Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to live like a
Gentleman by his Quality. By this Dog, he has the most rare gift in Tobacco
that ever you knew.


Carl. S'heart, he keeps more ado with this Monster, than ever Banks did
with his Horse, or the Fellow with the Elephant.


Mac. He will hang out his Picture shortly in a cloth, you shall see.


Sog. O, he does manage a quarrel the best that ever you saw, for Terms and
Circumstances.


Fast. Good faith Signior (now you speak of a quarrel) I Will acquaint you with
a difference that happened between a Gallant and my self: sir Puntarvolo, you
know him if I should name him; Signior Luculento.


Punt. Luculento! what inauspicious chance interposed it self betwixt your
two loves?


Fast. Faith sir, the same that sundred Agamemnon and great Thetis son; but let
the cause escape Sir: He sent me a challenge (mixed with some few braues) which
I restored, and in fine we met. Now indeed Sir (I must tell you) he did offer
at first very desperately, but without judgment: for look you sir. I cast my
self into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withal advancing his
Rapier to strike, I thought to have took his arm (for he had left his whole
body to my election, and I was sure he could not recover his guard) Sir, I mist
my purpose in his arm, rasht his doublet sleeue, ran him close by the left
cheek, and through his hair: He again lights me here, I had a gold Cable
hatband then new come up, (which I wore about a murrey French Hat I had) cuts
my Hatband (and yet it was Massy, gold-Smithes work) cuts my brimmes, which
by good fortune (being thick embrodered with gold twist, and Spangles)
disapointed the force of the blow: Nevertheless it grazed on my shoulder,
takes me away six purles of an Italian cut-worke Band I wore, cost me three
pounds in the exchange but three days before.


Punt. This was a strange encounter.


Fastid. Nay you shall hear sir, with this we both fell out and breathed: Now
(upon the second ^igne of his assault) I betook me to the former manner of my
defense; he (on the other side) abandoned his body to the same danger as
before, and follows me still with blows. But I (being loath to take the
deadly advauntage that lay before me of his left side) made a kind of
stramazoun, ran him up to the hilts, through the Doublet, through the Shirt,
and yet mist the skin. He (making a reuerse blow) falls upon my embossed girdle
(I had thrown off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a thick
lac't Satin Doublet I had (lined with some four Taffataes) cuts of two panes
embrodered with Pearl, rents through the drawings out of Tyss^w, enters the
linings, and skips the flesh.


Carl. I wonder he speaks not of his wrought Shirt.


Fast. Here (in the opinion of mutual damage) we paused: but (ere I proceed)
I must tell you Signior, that (in this last encounter) not having leisure to
put off my silver Spurs, one of the rowels caught hold of the ruffle of my
Boot, and (being Spanish leather, and subject to tear) overthrows me, rends
me two pair of silk stockings (that I put on being somewhat a raw morning, a
Peach color and another) and strikes me some half inch d^epe into the side of
the Calfe; He (seeing the blood come) presently takes horse and away. I (having
bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought Shirt)


Car. O comes it there?


Fast. Rid after him, and (lighting at the court gate both together) embraced
and marched hand in hand up into the Presence.


Mac. Well, by this we can guess what apparel the Gentleman wore.


Punt. Before God it was a designment begun with much resolution, maintained
with as much prowess, and ended with more humanity. How now, what says he?


His Seruingman enters. Serving. The Notari^ says he is ready sir, he stays
but your Worships pleasure.


Punt. Come we will go to him Mounsieur. Gentlemen shall we entreat you to
be witnesses.


Sog. You shall entreat me sir, come Resolution.


Shift. I follow you good Countenance.


Carl. Come Signior, come, come.


Maci. O, that there should be fortune
To cloth these men, so naked in desert,
And that the just Storm of a wretched life,
Beats'hem not ragged for their wretched souls,
And since as fruitless, even as black as coals.

Exeunt. GREX.
Mitis. Why but Signior, how comes it that Fungoso appeared not with his
sisters intelligence to Brisk.


Cord. Mary long of the evil Angels that she gave him, who have indeed
tempted the good simple youth to follow the tail of the Fashion, and neglect
the imposition of his friends. Behold here he comes, very VVorshipfully
attended, and with good variety.


SCENA QUARTA.
Enter Fungoso with Tailor, Shoemaker, and Haberdasher. Fung. Gramercie good
Shoemaker, I Will put too strings my self.
Exit Shoemaker. Now Sir, let me see, what must you have for this Hat?

Haber. Here Is the bill, sir.


Fung. How do become me, well?


Tailor. Excellent Sir, as ever you had any Hat in your life.


Haber. Nay faith Sir, the Hat's as good as any man in this town can serve
you. And will maintain Fashion as long, never trust me for a groat else.


Fung. Does it apply well to my suit?


Tay. Exceeding well sir.


Fung. How like thou my suit Haberdasher?


Hab. By my troth sir it is very rarely well made, I never saw a suit sit better
I can tell on.


Tay. Nay, we have no Art to please our friends, we.


Fung. Here Haberdasher tell this same.


Haberdasher. Good faith sir, it makes you have an excellent body.


Fung. Nay (believe me) I think I have as good a body in cloths as another.


Tailor. You lack points to bring your apparel together.


Fung. I Will have points anon: how now? is it right?


Hab. Faith sir it is too little, but upon farther hopes. Good morrow to you sir.

Exit Haberdasher.
Fung. Farewell good Haberdasher, well now master Smp let me see your bill.


GREX.
Mit. Cord. Me thinks he discharges his followers too thick, O therein he
faucily imitates some Great man. I warrant you though he turns off them, he
keeps this Tailor in place of a Page to follow him still.


Fung. This Bill is very reasonable in faith, hark you master Snip. Troth sir
I am not altogether so well furnished at this present, as I could wish I were:
but -- If you will do me the favor to take part in hand, you shall have all I
have by Jesus.


Tay. Sir --


Fung. And but give me credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next
Term.


Tay. O lord sir --


Fung. Before God and by this light I Will pay you to the utmost, and acknowledge
my self very deeply engaged to you by this hand.


Tay. Why how much have you there Sir?


Fung. Marry I have here four Angels, and fifteen shillings of White money,
it is all I have as'hope to be saved.


Tay. You will not fail me at the next Term with the rest.


Fung. No and I do, pray God I be hanged. Let me never breath again upon
this mortal Stage, as the Philosopher calls it. By this air, and (as I am a
Gentleman) I Will hold.


GREX.
Cord. He were an yron-hearted fellow in my judgment, that would not credit
him upon these monstrous others.


Tay. Well sir, I Will not stick with any Gentleman for a trifle: you know what
it is remains?


Fung. I sir, and I give you thanks in good faith, O God how happy am I made
in this good fortune. Well, now I Will go seek out Mounsieur Brisk. Gods so,
I have forgot Ribband for my shoes; and points. S'lid what lucke's this? how
shall I do? Master Snippe, pray let me reduct some two or three shillings for
points and Ribband, by Jesus I have utterly disfurnisht my self in the default
of memory, pray, le' me be beholding to you, it shall come home in the bill
believe me.


Tay. Faith sir, I can hardly depart with money, but I Will take up and send you
by my boy presently. What colored Ribband would you have?


Fung. What you shall think meet in your judgment Sir to my suit.


Tail. Well, I Will send you some presently.


Fung. And points too sir?


Tail. And points too sir.

Exit Tailor.
Fung. Good Lord how shall I study to deserve this kindness of you sir. Pray
let your youth make have, for I should have done a business an hour since,
that I doubt I shall come too late. Now in good truth I am exceeding proud of
my fute.

Exit.
GREX.
Cord. Do you observe the plunges that this poor Gallant is put too (Signior)
to purchase the Fashion.


Mit. I, and to be still a Fashion behind with the world, that is the sport.


Cord. Stay: O here they come from sealed and delivered.


SCENA QUINTA.
Enter Puntarvolo, Fastidius Brisk, serving men with the Dog. Punt. Well now
my whole venture is forth, I will resolve to depart shortly.


Fast. Faith sir Puntaruolo go to the Court, and take lea^e of the Ladies
first.


Punt. I care not if it be this afternoones labor. Where is Carlo?


Fast. Here he comes.


Enter Carlo, Sogliardo, Shift, and Macilente. Carl. Faith Gallants, I am
persuading this Gentleman to turn Courtier, he is a man of fair Revenue, and
his estate will bear the charge well, besides for his other gifts of the mind,
or so, why, they are as Nature lent him 'hem, pure, simple, without any
Artificial drug or mixture of these two thredbare beggarly qualities, Learning
and Knowledge, and therefore the more accommodate and Gen^ine. Now for the life
it self --


Fasti. O, the most Celestial, and full of wonder and delight that can be
imagined Signior, beyond all thought and apprehension of Pleasure. A man lives
there in that divine Rapture, that he will think himself in the third Heaven
for the time, and loose all sense of Mortality whatsoever; when he shall
behold such glorious (and almost immortal) beauties, hear such Angelical and
Harmonious voices, discourse with such flowing and Ambrosian spirits, whose
wits as sudden as Lightning, and humorous as Nectar; Oh: it makes a man all
Quintessence and Flame, and lifts him up (in a moment) to the very Crystal
Crown of the sky, where (houering in the strength of his Imagin^tion) he shall
behold all the delights of the Hesperides, the Insulae Fortunatae, Adonis
gardens, Tempe, or what else (confined within the amplest verge of Poesy) to
be mere Vmbrae, and imperfect Figures, conferred with the most essential
felicity of your Court.


Mac. Well this ENCOMION was not extemporall, it came too perfectly off.


Car. Besides Sir, you shall never need to go to a hothouse, you shall sweat
there with courting your mistress, or loosing your money at Primero, as well
as in all the Stoues in Flaunders. Mary this sir, you must ever be sure to
carry a good strong perfume about you, that your mistress Dog may smell you
out amongst the rest; and (in making love to her) never fear to be out: for
you may have a pipe of Tobacco, or a base Violl shall hang of the wall of
purpose, will put you in presently. The Tricks your Resolution has taught you
in Tobacco, (the VVhiffe, and those sleights) will stand you in very good
Ornament there?


Fasti. I, to some perhaps: but, and he should come to my Mistress with
Tobacco (this Gentleman knows) she 'ld reply upon him in faith. Oh (by this
bright sun) she has the most acute, ready, and facetious wit, that -- tut
there is no spirit able to stand her. You can report it Signior, you have seen
her?


Punt. Then can he report no less out of his judgment, I assure him.


Maci. Troth I like her well enough, but she is too selfe-conceited me thinks.


Fast. I indeed, she is a little too selfe-conceited, and 'twere not for that
Humor, she were the most to be admired Lady in the world.


Punt. Indeed it is a Humor that takes from her other excellencies.


Maci. Why it may easily be made to forsake her in my thought.


Fasti. Easily Sir? then are all impossibilities easy.


Maci. You conclude too quick upon me Signior, what will you say if I make it
so perspicuously appear now, that your self shall confess nothing more
possible.


Fasti. Marry I will say, I will both applaud you, and admire you for it.


Punt. And I will second him.


Mac. Why I Will show you Gentlemen, Carlo come hither.


Macilente, Carlo, Puntarvolo, and Brisk, whisper. Sog. Good faith I have a
great Humor to the Court, what thinks my Resolutions? shall I adventure?


Shift. Troth Countenance, as you please; the Place is a place of good
Reputation and Capacity.


Sog. O, my tricks in Tobacco (as Carlo says) will show excellent there.


Shift. Why you may go with these Gentlemen now, and see fashions; and after,
as you shall see Correspondence.


Sog. You say true. You will go with me Resolution?


Shift. I will meet you Countenance, about three or four of Clock, but, to
say to go with you I cannot, for (as I am Apple John) I am to go before the
Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray, present me excused good
Countenance.


Sog. Farewell good Resolution, but fail not to meet.


Shift. As I live.

Exit Shift.
They break silence: P^nt. Admirably excellent.


Mac. If you can but persuade Sogliardo to the Court, there is all now.


Carl. O let me alone, that is my task:


Fast. Now by Jesus Macilente, it 's above measure excellent: 'twill be the
only courtly exploit that ever proved Courtier ingenious.


Punt. Upon my soul it puts the Lady quite out of her Humor, and we shall
laugh with judgment.


Carl. Come, the Gentleman was of himself resolved to go with you, before I
moved it.


Mac. Why then Gallants, you two and Carlo go before to prepare the jest:
Sogliardo and I will come some while after you.


Carl. Pardon me, I am not for the Court.


Punt. That Is true: Carlo comes not at the Court indeed well, you shall leave
it to the faculty of Mounsieur Brisk, and my self; upon our lives we will
manage it happily. Carlo shall bespeake supper at the Miter against we come
back: where we will meet, and dimple our cheeks with laughter at the success.


Carl. I, but will you all promise to come.


Punt. My self shall manfrede it for them: he that fails, let his Reputation
lie under the lash of thy tongue.


Carl. Gods so', look who comes here.


Enter Fungoso. Sog. What, Nephew?


Fun. Uncle, God save you; did you see a Gentleman, one Monsieur Brisk? a
Courtier, he goes in such a Suit as I do.


Sog. Here is the Gentleman Nephew, but not in such a Suit.


Fung. Another Suit!


He Swounes. Sog. How now Nephew?


Fast. Would you speak to me Sir?


Carl. I, when he has recovered himself: poor Poll.


Punt. Some Rosa-^olis.


Maci. How now Signior?


Fun. I am not well Sir.


Mac. Why this it is, to dog the Fashion.


Carl. Nay come Gentlemen, remember your affairs; his disease is nothing but
the Flux of Apparel.


Punt. Sirs, return to the lodging, keep the Cat safe; I Will be the Dogs
Guardian my self.


Exeunt Seruingmen. Sog. Nephew, will you go to the Court with us; these
Gentlemen and I are for the Court: nay be not so Melancholy.


Fung. By Gods lid I think no man in Christendom has that rescally fortune
that I have.


Maci. Faith your Suit is well enough Signior.


Fun. Nay, not for that I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur Fastidius,
and I have forgot it.


Maci. Why go along to the Court with us, and remember it, come. Gentlemen,
you three take one Boat, and Sogliardo and I will take another: we shall be
there instantly.


Fast. Content: good Sir vouchsafe us your pleasance.


Punt. Farewell Carlo; remember.


Carl. I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shoes to throw after you.


Punt. Good Fortune will close the eyes of our jest, fear not: and we shall
frollicke.


Exeunt. GREX.
Mit. This Macilente Signior begins to be more sociable on a sudden me
thinks, than he was before, there 's some Portent in it, I believe.


Cord. O he is a fellow of a strange Nature. Now does he (in this calm of his
Humor) plot and store up a world of malicious thoughts in his brain, till he
is so full with 'hem, that you shall see the very Torrent of his Envy break
forth, and against the course of all their affections oppose it self so
violently, that you will almost have wonder to think how it is possible the
current of their Dispositions shall receive so quick and strong an alteration.


Mit. I marry sir, this is that on which my Expectation has dwelt all this
while: for I must tell you Signior (though I was loath to interrupt the Scene)
yet I made it a question in mine own private discourse, how he should
properly call it, Every man out of his Humor, when I saw all his Actors so
strongly pursue and continue their Humors?


Cord. Why therein his Art appears most full oflustre, and approaches nearest
the life, especially when in the flame and height of their Humors they are laid
flat, it fills the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a sight
were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopt and cut down by degrees, when it
might be feld in a moment? and to set the Axe to it, before it came to that
pride and fullness, were as not it have it grow.


Mit. Well I shall long till I see this fall you talk of.


Cord. To help your longing, Signior, let your imagination be swifter than a
pair of Oars, and by this, suppose Puntarvolo, Brisk, Fungoso, and the Dog,
arrived at the court gate, and going up to the great chamber. Macilente and
Sogliardo, we 'le leave them on the water till Possibility and Natural
means may land 'hem. Here come the Gallants, now prepare your Expectation.


ACTUS QUINTUS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Puntarvolo, Fastidius Brisk, Fungoso, and the Dog. Punt. Come Lordings.
Signior you are sufficiently instructed.


Fast. Who I sir?


Punt. No, this Gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to bestow my dog, he is
no competent atte^dant for the Presence.


Fast. Mass that 's true in deed knight, you must not carry him into the
Presence.


Punt. I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my
Cormorants to attend me.


Fast. Why you're best leave him at the Porters lodge.


Punt. Not so: his worth is too well known amongst them, to be forth-comming.


Fast. Slight, how'll you do then?


Punt. I must leave him with one that is ignorant of his quality, if I will
have him to be safe. And see; Here comes one that will carry coals, Ergo,
will hold my Dog. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this Dog to
thy prudent care?


Enter a Groom with a basket. Groom. You may if you please sir.


Punt. Pray thee let me find thee here at my return: it shall not be long,
till I will Ease thee of thy emploiment, and Please thee. Forth Gentles.


Fast. Why, but will you leave him with so slight command, and infuse no more
charge upon the fellow?


Punt. Charge? no, there wear no policy in that; that were to let him know
the value of the Gem he holds, and so, to ^emp frail nature against her
disposition. No, pray thee let thy Honesty be sweet and short.


Groom. Yes sir.


Punt. But hark you Gallants, and cheefely Monsieur Brisk^ When we come in
eye-shot or presence of this Lady, let not other matters carry us from our
Project: but (if we can) single her forth to some place.


Fast. I warrant you.


Punt. And be not too sudden, but let the devise induce it self with good
Circumstance: on.


Fun. Is this the way? good truth here be fine hangings.


Exeunt Puntarvolo, Brisk, Fungoso. Groom. Honesty, Sweet and Short? mary it
shall sir, doubt you not: for even at this instant if one would give me twenty
pounds, I would not deliver him; there is for the Sweet: but now, if any man
come offer me but twopence, he shall have him; there is for the Short now.
God's Blood, what a mad Humorous Gentleman is this to leave his Dog with me: I
could run away with him now and he were worth any thing: well, I pray God
send him quickly again.


Enter Macilente and Sogliardo. Maci. Come on Signior, now prepare to Court
this All-witted Lady, most Naturally and like your self.


Sog. Faith and you say the word, I Will begin to her in Tobacco.


Maci. O, fie on it. no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet Lady; or, Why
are you so melancholy Madame? though she be very merry, it is all one: be sure
to kiss your hand often enough; pray for her health, and tell her, how more
than most fair she is: Screw your face at' one side thus, and Protest; let her
fleere and look a skaunce, and hide her Teeth with her Fan, when she
laughes a fit, to bring her into more matter; that is nothing: you must talk
forward (though it be without sense, so it be without blushing) it is most
Courtlike and well.


Sog. But shall I not use Tobacco at all?


Mac. O, by no means, 'twill but make your breath suspected; and that you use
it only to confound the rankenesse of that.


Sog. Nay, I Will be advised sir by my friends.


Maci. Gods my life, see where sir Puntars Dog is.


Groom. I would the Gentleman would return for his follower here, I Will leave
him to his fortunes else.


Maci. S'heart, 'twere the only true jest in the world to poison him now: ha?
by Gods will I Will do it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior
Sogliardo, walk aside, and think upon some devise to entertain the Lady
with.


Sog. So I do sir.


Sog. walks off, meditating. Mac. How now mine honest friend? whose Dog-keeper
art thou?


Groom. Dog-keeper sir? I hope I scorn that in faith.


Mac. Why? do thou not keep a Dog?


Groom. Sir, now I do, and now I do not: I think this be Sweet and Short:
make me his Dog-keeper?


Throws off the Dog, and Exit. Maci. This is excellent above expectation:
nay stay sir, you would be travailing; but I Will give you a Dram shall shorten
your voyage: here: so sir, I Will be bold to take my leave of you: now to the
Turks Court in the Devils name, for you shall never go on Gods name. [Kicks him
out.] Sogliardo, come.


Sog. I have 't in faith now, will sting it.


Maci. Take heed you leese it not Signior, ere you come there: preserve it.


Exeunt. GREX.
Cor. How like you this first exploit of his?


Mit. O, a piece of true Envy, but I expect the issue of the other devise.


Cor. Here they come, will make it appear.


SCENA SECUNDA.
Enter Puntarvolo, Sauiolina, Fastidius Brisk, Fungoso. Saui. Why I thought
Sir Puntarvolo, you had been gone your Voyage?


Punt. Dear, and most Amiable Lady, your Divine Beauties do bind me to those
Offices, that I cannot depart when I would.


Saui. It Is most Courtlike spoken sir; but how might we do to have a sight of
your Dog and Cat?


Fast. His Dogge's in the Court, Lady.


Saui. And not your Cat? how dare you trust her behind you Sir?


Punt. Troth Madame she has sore eyes, and she does keep her Chamber: marry
I have left her under sufficient guard: there are two of my Hinds to attend her.


Saui. I Will give you some Water for her eyes: when do you go sir?


Punt. Certes sweet Lady, I know not.


Fast. He does stay the rather Madame, to present your Acute judgment with so
Courtly, and well-Parted a Gentleman, as yet your Ladyship has never seen.


Saui. What Is he, gentle Monsieur Brisk? not that Gentleman?


Fast. No Lady, this is a Kinsman of Justice Silence.


Punt. Pray' sir, give me leave to report him: he is a Gentleman (Lady) of
that rare and admirable ^acultie, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe:
he is exceedingly Valiant, an excellent Scholar, and so exactly trauail'd,
that he is able in discourse, to deliver you a Model of any Princes Court in
the world: 'speakes the Languages with that purity of Phrase, and facility of
Accent, that it breeds astonishment: his Wit, the most Exuberant, and (above
wonder) pleasant, of all that ever entered the concaue of this care.


Fast. It Is most true Lady; mary he is no such excellent proper man.


Punt. His Travails have changed his complexion, Madam.


Saui. O Sir Puntarvolo, you must think every man was not borne to have my
Servant Briskes feature.


Punt. But that which transcends all, Lady; he does so Peerlessely imitate any
manner of person for Gesture, Action, Passion, or what ever --


Fast. I, especially a Rusticke or a Clown Madam, that it is not possible for
the sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discern any sparks of the
Gentleman in him, when he does it.


Saui. O Monsieur Brisk, be not so Tyranous to confine all Wits within the
compass of your own: Not find the sparks of a Gentleman in him, if he be a
Gentleman?


Fun. No in truth (sweet Lady) I believe you cannot.


Saui. Do you believe so? Why I can find sparks of a Gentleman in you Sir.


Punt. I, he is a Gentleman Madam, and a Reueller.


Fung. Indeed I think I have seen your Ladyship at our Revels.


Saui. Like enough sir: but would I might see this wonder you talk of: may one
have a sight of him for any reasonable sum?


Punt. Yes Madam, he will arrive presently.


Saui. What, and shall we see him Clown it?


Fast. I faith (sweet Lady) that you shall: see here he comes.


Enter Macilente with Sogliardo. Punt. This is he; pray observe him Lady.


Saui. Beshrew me, he Clownes it properly indeed.


Punt. Nay, mark his Courtship.


Sog. How does my sweet Lady; hot and moist? Beautiful and lusty? ha?


Saui. Beautiful and it please you sir, but not lusty.


Sog. O ho Lady; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet
Lady; in health? Bonaroba, quaeso? que Novelles? que Novelles? Sweet creature.


Saui. O excellent: why Gallants, is this he cannot be Deciphered? they were
very bleare-witted in faith that could not discern the Gentleman in him.


Punt. But do you, in earnest Lady?


Saui. Do I sir? why if you had any true Court-judgement in the carriage of
his eye, and that inward power that forms his countenance, you might perceive
his counterfaiting as clear as the noone day: Alas; Nay if you would have
tried my Wit indeed, you should never have told me he was a Gentleman, but
presented him for a true Clown indeed; and then have seen if I could have
Deciphered him.


Fast. Before God, her Ladyship says true (Knight:) but does he not affect the
Clown most naturally, Mistress?


Punt. O, she cannot but affirm that, out of the Bounty of her Judgment.


Saui. Nay out of doubt he does well, for a Gentleman to imitate; but I
warrant you, he becomes his Natural carriage of the Gentleman, much better
than his Clownerie.


Fast. It Is strange in truth, her Ladyship should see so far into him.


Punt. I, is it not.


Saui. Faith as easily as may be: not Decipher him, quoth you?


Fun. Good sadness, I wonder at it.


Mac. Why, has she Deciphered him, Gentlemen?


Punt. O most miraculously, and beyond Admiration.


Mac. Is It possible?


Fast. She has given most infallible signs of the Gentleman in him, that is
certain.


Saui. Why Gallants, let me laugh at you a little: was this your device, to
try my judgment in a Gentleman?


Maci. Nay Lady, do not scorn us, though you have this gift of Perspicacie
above others: What if he should be no Gentleman now, but a Clown indeed Lady?


Punt. How think you of that? would not your Ladyship be out of your Humor?


Fast. O, but she knows it is not so.


Saui. What if he were not a man, ye may as well say? nay if your Worships
could Gull me so indeed, you were wiser than you are taken for.


Maci. In good faith Lady, he is a very perfect Clown, both by Father and
Mother: that I Will assure you.


Saui. O Sir, you are very pleasurable.


Maci. Nay, do but look on his Hand, and that shall resolve you: Look you
Lady, what a Palm here is.


Sog. Tut, that was with holding the Plough.


Maci. The Plough! did you discern any such thing in him Madame?


Fast. Faith no, she saw the Gentleman as bright as at noonday she: she
deciphered him at first.


Maci. Troth I am sorry your Ladyships sight should be so suddenly struck.


Saui. O, you're goodly Beagles!


Fast. What, is she gone?


Sog. Nay stay sweet Lady; Que Novelles, Que Novelles.


Saui. Out, you fool you.

Exit Saui.
Fung. She Is out of her Humor in faith.


Fast. Nay, let us follow it while it is hot Gentlemen.


Punt. Come, on mine Honor we will make her blush in the Presence: my spleen is
great with laughter.


Maci. Your laughter will be a child of a feeble life I believe sir. Come
Signior, your looks are too dejected me thinks: why mix you not mirth with
the rest?


Fun. By Gods will this Suit frets me at the Soul. I Will have it altered to
morrow sure.


Exeunt. Enter Shift. Shift. I am come to the Court to meet with my Countenance
Sogliardo: poor men must be glad of such Countenance, when they can get no
better. Well, Need may insult upon a man, but it shall never make him despair
of Consequence: The world will say, it is base; tush, base! it is base to live
under the earth, not base to live above it, by any means.


Enter Puntarvolo, Fastidius, Sogliardo, Fungoso, Macilente. Fast. The poor
Lady is most miserably out of her Humor in faith.


Punt. There was never so witty a jest broken at the Tilt, of all the Court
wits christened.


Maci. O, this applause taints it fowly.


Sog. I think I did my part in Courting. O Resolution!


Punt. Aye me, my Dog.


Maci. Where is he?


Fast. Gods precious, go seek for the fellow, good Signior.


Sends away Fungoso. Punt. Here, here I left him.


Maci. Why none was here when we came in now, but Caualier Shift, enquire of
him.


Fast. Did you see Sir Puntarvolos Dog here Cavalier, since you came?


Shift. His Dog sir? he may look his Dog sir; I see none of his Dog sir.


Maci. Upon my life he has stol'ne your Dog sir, and been hired to it by some
that have ventured with you; you may guess by his peremptory answers.


Pun. Not unlike; for he has been a notorious thief by his own confession.
Sirrah, where is my Dog?


Shift. Charge me with your Dog sir? I have none of your Dog Sir.


Punt. Villain, thou lie.


Shift. Lie sir? S'blood you are but a man sir.


Punt. Rogue and Thief, restore him.


Sog. Take heed sir Puntarvolo what you do; he will bear no coals I can tell
you (of my word.)


Maci. This is rare.


Sog. It Is mar'le he stabs you not: by this Light, he has stabbed forty for
forty times less matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge.


Punt. I will make thee stoop, thou Abject.


Sog. Make him stoop sir! Gentlemen pacify him or he will be killed.


Maci. Is he so tall a man?


Sog. Tall a man? if you love his life stand betwixt 'hem* make him stoop!


Punt. My Dog Villain, or I will hang thee: thou have confessed robberies, and
other Fellonious acts to this Gentleman thy Countenance.


Sog. I Will bear no witness.


Punt. And without my Dog I will hang thee, for them.


Shift kneeles. Sog. What? kneel to thine enemy?


Shift. Pardon me good sir; God is my Judge I never did Robbery in all my life.


Enter Fungoso. Fung. O sir Puntarvolo, your Dog lies giving up the ghost in
the wood-yard.


Maci. S'blood is he not dead yet?


Punt. O, my Dog borne to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me sir.


Exit Punt: with Fung. Sog. How? did you never do any robbery in your life?


Maci. O this is good: so he swore sir.


Sog. I, I heard him. And did you swear true sir?


Shift. I (as God shall have part of my soul Sir) I never robbed any man I;
never stood by the high way side sir, but only said so, because I would get my
self a name and be counted a tall man.


Sog. Now out base Viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Countenance? By this
light Gentlemen, he has confessed to me the most inexorable company of
Robberies, and damned himself that he did 'hem; you never heard the like: out
skoundrell out, follow me no more I command thee: out of my ^ight, go, hence,
speak not: I will not hear thee; away Camouccio.


Mac. O, how I do feed upon this now, and fat my self? here were a couple
unexpectedly dishumor'd: well, by this time I hope sir Puntarvolo and his Dog
are both out of Humor to travail: nay Gentlemen, why do you not seek out the
Knight, and comfort him? our Supper at the Mitre must of necessity hold to
night, if you love your Reputations.


Fast. Before God I am so Melancholy for his Dogs disaster, but I Will go.


Sog. Faith and I may go too, but I know I shall be so Melancholy.


Mac. Tush, Melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the
mercy of a Fury: Carlo will rack your sinews asunder, and rail you to dust
if you come not.


Exeu^t. GREX.
Mit. O then their fear of Carlo be like, makes them hold their meeting.


Cor. I, here he comes: conceive him but to b^e entered the Mitre, and it is
enough.


SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Carlo. Carl. Holla: where be these Shot-sharkes?


Enter Drawer. Draw. By and by: you're welcome good Master Buffone.


Carl. Where Is George? call me George hither quickly.


Draw. What wine please you have Sir? I Will draw you that is neat Master Buffone.


Carl. Away Neophite, do as I bid; bring my dear George to me: Mass here he
comes.


Enter George. Georg. VVelcome Master Carlo.


Carl. What Is Supper ready, George?


Georg. I sir, almost: will you have the cloth laid, Master Carlo?


Carl. O, what else: are none of the Gallants come yet?


Georg. None yet sir.


Carl. Stay, take me with you George: let me have a good fat Loyne of Porke
laid to the fire presently.


Georg. It shall sir.


Carl. And withal, hear you? draw me the biggest shaft you have out of the
But you wot of: away, you know my meaning George, quick.


George. Done sir.

Exit.
Carl. God's Blood, I never hungered so much for thing in my life, as I do to know
our Gallants success at the Court: now is that lean Bald-rib Macilente, that
salt Villain, plotting some mischievous devise, and lies a soaking in their
frothy Humors like a dry crust, till ^e has drunk 'hem all up: could the Ke^ks
but hold vp's eyes at other men's happiness in any reasonable proportion, S'lid
the ^laue were to be loved next Heaven, above Honor, Wealth, rich Fare,
Apparel, Wenches, all the delights of the Belly, and the Groine, whateuer.


Enter Geor. Geor. Here Master Carlo.


Carl. Is^t right, Boy?


Geor. I sir, I assure you it is right.


Carl. Well said my dear George, depart: Come, my small Gymblet, you in the
false scabberd, away; so: Now to you sir Burgomaster, let us taste of your
Bounty.


Puts forth the Drawer and shuts the door. GREX.
Mit. What, will he deal upon such quantities of Wine alone.


Cor. You shall perceive that sir.


He drinks. Car. I marry sir, here is purity* O George, I could bite off thy
nose for this now: Sweet Rogue, he has drawn Nectar, the very Soul of the
Grape: I Will wash my temples with some on it presently, and drink some half a
score draughts; 'twill heat the Brame, kindle my Imagination, I shall talk
nothing but Crackers and Fire-worke to night. So sir; Please you to be here
sir, and I here: So.


He sets the two cups asunder, and first drinks with the one, and pledges with
the other. GREX.
Cord. This is worth the observation, Signior.


Carl. 1 cup. Now sir, here is to you; and I present you with so much of my love.


2 Cup. I take it kindly from you Sir. (Drinks) And will return you the like
proportion: but withal sir, remembering the merry night we had at the
Countesses; you know where sir.


1 Cup. By Jesus you ^^ce put me in mind now of a very necessary office, which
I will propose in your pledge sir: The health of that Honorable Countess, and
the sweet Lady that sat by her sir.


2 I do vail to it with reverence. (Drinks.)


2. And now Signior, with these Ladies, I Will be bold to mix the health of your
Divine Mistress.


1. ^ Do you know her sir?


2 O Lord sir, I, and in the respectfull memory and mention of her, I could
wish this Wine were the most (...) is drugge in the world.


1 Good faith sir, you do honor me (...) exceedingly.


(Drinks) GREX.
Mit. Whom should he personate in this, Signior?


Cor. Faith I know not sir, observe, observe him.


2 If it were the basest filth or mudde that runs in the channel, I am bound
to pledge it by God sir. (Drinks.) And now sir, here is again a replenisht
bowl sir, which I will reciprocally return upon you to the health of the
Count Frugale.


1 The Count Frugales health sir? I Will pledge it on my knees by Jesus.


2 Will you sir? I Will drink it on my knees then, by the Lord.

(Drinks.)
GREX.
Mit. Why this is strange.


Cor. Have you heard a better drunken Dialogue?


2 Nay, do me right Sir.


1 So I do in good faith.


2 Good faith you do not; mine was fuller.


1 Why by Jesus it was not.


2 By Jesus it was, and you do lie.


1 Lie sir.


2 I Sir.


1 S'wounds you Rascal.


2 O, come, stabbe if you have a mind to it.


1 Stabbe? do thou think I dare not? [In his own person.] Nay, I beseech
you Gentlemen, what means this; nay look, for shame respect your Reputations.


Ouer-turnes Wine, Pot, Cups, and all. Enter Macilente. Mac. Why how now
Carlo; what Humor's this?


Carl. O my good Mischief, art thou come? where are the ^est? where are the
rest?


Mac. Faith three of our Ordinance are burst.


Carl. Burst? how comes that?


Mac. Faith ouer-charg'd, ouer-charg'd.


Carl. But did not the train hold?


Mac. O yes, and the poor Lady is irrecouerably blown up.


Carl. Why, but which of the Munition is miscarried? ha?


Maci. Imprimis, Sir Puntarvolo: next, the Countenance, and Resolution.


Carl. How? how for these love of God?


Mac. Troth the Resolution is proou'd Recreant; the Countenance has changed
his Coppie; and the Passionate Knight, is shedding Funeral tears over his
departed Dog.


Carl. What Is his Dog dead?


Mac. Poisoned it is thought: mary how, or by whom, that is left for some Cunning
woman he^re of the Banke-side to resolve: For my part, I know nothing, more
than that we are like to have an exceeding Melancholy Supper of it.


Carl. S'life, and I had purposed to be extraordinarily merry: I had drunk off
a good Preparatiue of old Sack here: but will they come, will they come?


Mac. They will assuredly come: marry Carlo (as thoulou'st me) run over 'hem
all freely to night, and especially the Knight; spare no Sulphurous jest that
may come out of that sweatie Forge of thine, but ply 'hem with all manner of
Shot, Minion, Saker, Culverine, or any thing what thou will.


Car. I warrant thee my dear Case of Petrionels, so I stand not in dread of
thee, but that thou wilt second me.


Maci. Why my good Germane Tapster, I will.


Car. What George. Lomtero, Lomtero, etc.


Daunc^th. Georg. Did you call, Master Carlo?


Carl. More N^ctar, George: Lomtero, etc.


Geor. Your meat's ready sir and your company were come.


Carl. Is the Loine a Porke enough?


Georg. I Sir, it is enough?


Maci. Porke? S'heart what do thou with such a greasy Dish; I think thou
do Varnish thy face with the fat on it, it looks so like a Glew-pot.


Carl. True, my Raw-bon'd Rogue: and if thou would farce thy lean Ribs with
it too, they would not (like ragged Lathes) rub out so many Dublets as they do:
but thou know not a good Dish, thou. O, it is the only nourishing meat in the
world: No marvel though that saucie stubb^rne Generation the Jews, were
forbidden it: for what would they have done, well pampered with fat Porke, that^
durst murmr at their maker out of Garli^ke and Onions. S^lood fed with it,
the (...) strummell pa^cht, Goggle-ey'd Grumble doryes, would have
Gigantomachiz'd. Well said my sweet George, fill, fill.


GREX.
Mit. This savors too much of Profanation.


Cor. O servetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, and sibo constet. The
necessity of his vain compels a tolleratio^: for, bar this, and dash him
out of Humor before his time.


Carl. It Is an Axiom in Natural Philosophy, What comes nearest the Nature of
that it feeds, conuerts quicker to nourishment, and does sooner essentiate. Now
nothing in Flesh and Entrails, assimulates or resembles Man more, than a Hog
or Swine.


(Drinks.) Mac. True; and he (to requite their courtesy) oftentimes d'offeth
off his own Nature, and puts on theirs; as when he becomes as churlish as a
Hog, or as drunk as a Sow: but to your conclusion.


(Drinks.) Carl. Marry I say, nothing resembling Man more than a Swine, it
follows, nothing can be more nourishing: for indeed (but that it abhorres from
our nice Nature) if we fed one upon another, we should shoot up a great deal
faster, and thri^e much better: I refer me to your Long-la^e Cannibals, or
such like: but since it is so contrary; Porke, Porke; is your only feed.


Maci. I take it your Devil be of the same Diet; he would never have desired
to been incorporated into Swine else. O here comes the Melancholy mess: upon
'hem Carlo, charge, charge.


Enter Puntarvolo, Fastidius, Sogliardo, Fungoso. Carl. Before God sir
Puntarvolo, I am sorry for your heaviness; Body a me, a shrewd mischaunce:
why had you no Unicorn horn, nor B^zars stone about you? ha?


Punt. Sir, I would request you be silent.


Maci. Nay, to him again.


Carl. Take comfort good Knight, if your Cat ha'recouered her Cataract, fear
nothing; your Dogs mischaunce may be helped.


Fast. Say how (sweet Carlo) for so God mend me, the poor Knights mones draw
me into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discouraged good sir
Puntarvolo, I am content your adventure shall be performed upon your Cat.


Maci. I believe you Musk-cod, I believe you, for rather than thou would
make present repaime^t, thou would take it upon his own bare return from
Callice.


Carl. Nay Gods life, hee'ld be content (so he were well ^id out of his
company) to pay him five for one at his next meeting him in Paul's. But for
your Dog, sir Puntar, if he be not outright dead, there is a friend of mine
a Quack-saluer, shall put life in him again, that is certain.


Fung. O no, that comes too late.


Maci. Gods precious Knight, will you suffer this?


Punt. Drawer; get me a Candle and hard wax presently.


Sog. I, and bring up Supper; for I am so Melancholy.


Car. Ah Signior, where is your Resolution?


Sog. Resolution! hang him Rascal: O Carlo, if you love me do not mention him.


Carl. Why, how so? how so?


Sog. O the arrant'st Crocodile that ever Christian was acquainted with. By
Jesus, I shall think the worse of Tobacco while I live for his sake: I did
think him to be as tall a man --


Maci. Nay Buffone, the Knight, the Knight.


Car. Sblood, he looks like an Image carved out of Box, full of knots: his
Face is (for all the world) like a Dutch purse with the mouth downward; his
beard's the Tassels: and he walks (let me see) as Melancholy as one of the
Masters side in the Counter. Do you hear sir Puntar?


Punt. Sir, I do en^reat you no more, but enjoyne you to silence, as you
affect your peace.


C^^. Nay but dear Knight understand (here are none but friends, and such as
wish you well) I would have you do this now; Fleame your Dog presently (but in
any case keep the head) and stuff his skin well with straw, as you see these
dead monsters at Bartholmew fair.


Punt. I shall be sudden I tell you.


Car. Or if you like not that sir, get me somewhat a less dog and clap into
the skin; here 's a slave about the town here, a Jew, one Yohan; or a fellow
that makes Periwigs will glue it on artificially, it shall never be discerned;
besides, 'twill be so much the warmer for the Hound to travel in you know.


Maci. Sir Puntarvolo, Sdeath can you be so patient?


Carl. Or thus Sir: you may have (as you come through Germany) a Familiar for
little or nothing shall turn it self into the shape of your Dog, or any thing
(what you will) for certain hours: Gods my life knight, what do you mean?
you will offer no violence, will you? Hold, hold.


Punt. God's Blood you slave, you Bandog you.


Carlo. As you love God, stay the enraged knight, Gentlemen.


Punt. By my knighthood, he that stirs in his rescue, dies. Drawer be gone.


Carl. Murder, murder, murder.


Punt. I, are you houling, you Wolf? Gentlemen, as you tender your lives,
suffer no man to enter, till my revenge be perfect. Sirrah Buffone, lie down;
make no exclamations, but down; down you Curre, or I will make thy blood flow
on my Rapier hilts:


Carl. Sweet knight hold in thy fury, and before God I Will honor thee more than
the Turk does Mahomet.


Pun. Down (I say.) Whose there?


Constable. Here Is the Constable, open the doors.


Within. Carl. Good Macilente.


Punt. Open no door, if the Adalantado of Spain were here, he should not
enter: On, help me with the light, Gentlemen: you knock in vain sir officer.


Carl. Et tu Brute.


Punt. Sirrah close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heaven.


Carl. O, O.


They seal up his lips. Constable. Open the door, or I will break it open.


Maci. Nay good Constable have patience a little, you shall come in presently,
we have almost done.


Punt. So; now, are you out of your humor sir. Shift Gentlemen.


They all draw and Exeunt. Enter Constable with Officers, and stay Brisk.
Constable. Lay hold upon this gallant, and pursue the rest.


Fast. Lay hold on me sir! for what?


Constable. Mary for your riot here sir, with the rest of your companions.


Fast. My riot! God's my judge, take heed what you do; Carlo did I offer any
violence?


Constable. O sir, you see he is not in case to answer you, and that makes you so
paramptorie.


Fast. Peremptory, Shife I appeal to the Drawers, if I did him any hard
measure.


Enter George. Georg. They are all gone, there is none of them will be laid any
hold on.


Constable. Well sir, you are like to answer till the rest can be found out.


Fast. God's Blood I appeal to George here.


Constable. Tut George was not here: away with him to the Counter sirs. Come sir
you were best get your self dressed somewhere.


Exeunt. Manent two Drawers. Geor. Good Lord that master Carlo could not take
heed, and knowing what a Gentleman the knight is if he be angry.


Drawer. A pox on 'hem, they have left all the meat on our hands, would they
were choakt with it for me.


Enter Macilente. Mac. What are they gone sirs.


Georg. O here is master Macilente.


Mac. Sirrah George do'you see that concealment there? that Napkin under the
Table?


Geor. Gods so', Signior Fungoso!


Maci. He Is a good pawn for the reckoning; be sure you keep him here, and
let him not go away till I come again, though he offer to discharge all; I Will
return presently.


Geor. Sirrah, we have a pawn for the Reckoning.


Draw. What? of Macilente?


Geor. No; look under the Table.


Fung. I hope all be quiet now; if I can get but forth of this street, I care
not. Masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone?


Looks out under the Table. Georg. What? Master Fungoso?


Fun. VVas't not a good devise the same of me Sirs?


Geor. Yes faith; have you been here all this while?


Fun. O God I: good sirs look and the coast be clear, I Would feign be going.


Geor. All Is clear Sir, but the Reckoning; and that you must clear and pay
before you go, I assure you.


Fung. I pay? S'light, I eat not a bit since I came into the house yet.


Draw. Why you may when you please sir, it is all ready below that was bespoken.


Fung. Bespoken? not by me, I hope?


Geor. By you Sir? I know not that: but 'twas for you and your company, I am
sure.


Fun. My company? S'lid I was an invited guest, so I was.


Draw. Faith we have nothing to do with that Sir, they are all gone but you,
and we must be answered; that is the short and the long on it.


Fung. Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my Masters, then would this Pot,
Cup, and all were in my belly, if I have a cross about me.


Geor. What, and have such Apparel? Do not say so, Signior, that mightily
discredits your clothes.


Fung. By Jesus the Taylour had all my money this morning, and yet I must be
feign to alter my Suit too: good sirs, let me go, it is Friday night; and in
good truth I have no stomach in the world to eat any thing.


Draw. That Is no matter so you pay sir.


Fung. Pay? Gods light, with what conscience can you ask me to pay that I
never drank for?


Geor. Yes sir, I did see you drink once.


Fung. By this Cup (which is silver) but you did not, you do me infinite
wrong, I looked in the pot once indeed, but I did not drink.


Draw. Well sir, if you can satisfy my Master, it shall be all one to us. By
and by.


One calls George within. Exeunt. GREX.
Cord. Loose not your self now Signior.


Enter Macilente and Deliro. Maci. Tut sir, you did bear too hard a conceit of
me in that, but I will now make my love to you most transparent, in spite of
any dust of suspicion, that may be raised to dim it: and henceforth since I
see it is so against your Humor, I will never labor to persuade you.


Deli. Why I thank you Signior, but what is that you tell me may concern my
peace so much?


Mac. Faith sir it is thus. Your wives brother Signior Fungoso, being at supper
to night at a Tavern with a sort of Gallants: there happened some division
amongst'hem, and he is left in pawn for the Reckoning: now if ever you look
that time shall present you with a happy occasion to do your wife some
gracious and acceptable service, take hold of this Opportunity, and presently
go and redeem him; for being her brother, and his credit so amply engaged as
no^^ it is, when she shall hear (as he cannot himself, but he must out of
extremity report it) that you came and offered your self so kindly, and with
that respect of his Reputation, Slud the benefit cannot but make her dote, and
grow mad of your affections.


Deli. Now by heaven Macilente, I acknowledge my self exceedingly indebted to
you, by this kind tender of your love; and I am sorry to remember that I was
ever so rude to neglect a friend of your worth, bring me shoes and a cloak
there, I was going to bed if you had not come, what Tavern is it?


Maci. The Miter sir.


Deli. O; why Fido, my shoes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.


Enter Fallace. Fall. Come, I mar'le what piece of nightworke you have in hand
no^, that you call for your cloak and your shoes: what, is this your Pandor?


Deli. O sweet wife speak lower, I would not he should hear thee for a world
--


Fall. Hang him rascal, I cannot abide him for his treachery, with his wild
quicke-set beard there. Whether go you now with him?


Deli. No whether with him dear wife, I go alone to a place, from whence I
will return instantly. Good Macilente acquaint not her with it by any means,
it may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answer, I Will come
back immediately.

Exit Deliro.
Fall. Nay, and I be not worthy to know whether you go, stay till I take
knowledge of your coming back.


Mac. Hear you mistres Deliro.


Fall. So Sir, and what say you?


Mac. Faith Lady, my intents will not deserve this slight respect, when you
shall know'hem.


Fall. Your intents? why, what may your intents be for Gods sake?


Mac. Troth the time allows no circumstance Lady, therefore know, this was but
a devise to remove your Husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilst (with
more conueniencie) I might report to you a misfortune that has happened to
Mounsieur Brisk; nay comfort sweet Lady. This night (being at supper) a sort
of young Gallants committed a Riot, for the which he (only) is apprehended
and cari^d to the Counter, where if your Husband and other Creditors should but
have knowledge of him, the poor Gentleman were undone for ever.


Fall. Aye me, that he were.


Maci. Now therefore, if you can think upon any present means for his
delivery, do not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that committed him, will
do it.


Fall. O God Sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me
to him, and say I Will visit him presently.


Mac. No Lady, I shall do you better service in protracting your husbands
return, that you may go with more safety?

Exit.
Fall. Good truth so you may; farewell good Sir* Lord how a woman may be
mistaken in a man? I would have sworn upon all the Testaments in the world he
had not loved master Brisk. Bring me my keys there maid: Alas good
Gentleman, if all I have in this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be
at his service.

Exit.
GREX.
Mitis. How Macilente sweats in this business, if you mark him?


Cord. I, you shall see the true picture of Spite anon, here comes the Pawn
and his Redeemer.


Enter Deliro, Fungoso, Drawer following them. Deli. Come Brother, be not
discouraged for this man, what?


Drawer. No truly, I am not discouraged, but I protest to you Brother I have
done imitating any more Gallants either in purse or apparel, but as shall
become a Gentleman for good carriage or so.


Deli. You say well. This is all in the bill here? is it not?


Georg. I Sir.


Deli. There Is your money, tell it: and Brother, I am glad I met with so good
occasion to show my love to you.


Fung. I will study to deserve it in good truth, and I live.


Deli. What is it right?


Geor. I Sir, and I thank you.


Fung. Let me have a Capons leg saved, now the reckoning is paid.


Geor. You shall Sir:

Exit.
Enter Macilente. Mac. Where Is Signior Deliro?


Deli. Here Macilente.


Maci. Hark you sir, have you dispatched this same?


Deli. I marry have I.


Maci. Well then, I can tell you news, Brisk is in the Cloun^er.


Deli. IN the Counter?


Mac. It Is true Sir, committed for the stir here to night. Now would I have
you send your brother home before, with the report of this your kindness done
him to his sister, which will so pleasingly possess her, and out of his mouth
too, that in the mean time you may clap your Action on Brisk, and your wife
(being in so happy a mood) cannot entertain it ill by any means.


Deli. It Is very true, she cannot indeed, I think.


Mac. Think? why 'ts past thought, you shall never meet the like opportunity,
I assure you.


Deli. I will do it. Brother pray you go home before, this Gent. and I have
some private business; and tell my sweet wife, I Will come presently.


Fung. I will Brother.


Maci. And Signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his bounty,
you brother has used you. (Do you see?) made you a man of good Reckoning;
redeemed that you never were possessed of, Credit; gave you as Gentlemanlike
terms as might be; found no fault with your coming behind the fashion; nor
nothing.


Fung. Nay I am out of those Humors now.


Maci. Well, if you be out, keep your distance, and be not made a Shot-clog
no more. Come Signior, let us make have.


Exeunt. Enter Brisk and Fallace. Fallace. O master Fastidius, what pity
is it to see so sweet a man as you are, in so sour a place?


and kisses him. GREX.
Cord. As upon her lips does she mean?


Mit. O, this is to be imagined the Counter belike?


Fast. Troth fair Lady, it is first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the
Constable to have it so, but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in
your kind visitation.


Fall. Nay, you shall be comforted in me more than this, if you please Sir. I
sent you word by my Brother Sir, that my husband laid to rest you this morning,
I know not whether you received it, or no?


Fast. No believe it, sweet Creature, your Brother gave me no such
intelligence.


Fall. O the Lord!


Fast. But has your husband any such purpose?


Fall. O God Master Brisk, yes: and therefore be presently discharged; for
if he come with his Actions upon you (Lord deliver you) you are in for one
half a score year; he kept a poor man in Ludgate once, twelve year for
sixteen shillings. Where Is your keeper, for Gods love call him, let him take
a bribe, and dispatch you, Lord how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are
there?


Fast. No sweet mistress, why are you in this passion?


Fall. O Christ Master Fastidius, if you knew how I took up my husband to
day, when he said he would arrest you; and how I railed at him that persuaded
him to it, the Scholar there, (who on my conscience loves you now) and what
care I took to send you intelligence by my Brother; and how I gave him four
Sovereigns for his pains; and now, how I came running out hither without man
or boy with me, so soon as I heard on it; you would say, I were in a Passion
indeed: your keeper for Gods sake. O Master Brisk (as it is in Euphues) Hard
is the choice, when one is compelled either by silence to die with gree^e, or
by speaking to live with shame.


Fast. Fair Lady I conceive you, and may this kiss assure you, that where
Adversity has (as it were) contracted, Prosperity shall not -- Gods light
your Husband.


Fall. O me!


Enter Deliro, Macilente. Deli. I? is it thus!


Maci. Why how now Signior Deliro? has the Wolf seen you? ha? has Gorgons
head made marble on you?


Deli. Some Planet strike me dead.

Maci. Why look you Sir, I told you, you might have suspected this long
before, had you pleased; and ha'sau'd this labor of Admiration now, and Passion,
and such extremities as this frail lump of Flesh is subject unto. Nay, why
do you not dote now Signior? Me thinks you should say it were some
Enchantment, Deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could persuade your self it
were a dream now, 'twere excellent: faith try what you can do Signior; it
may be your Imagination will be brought to it in time, there is nothing
impossible.


Fall. Sweet Husband?


Deli. Out lascivious Strumpet.

Exit Deliro.
Maci. What? did you see how ill that stale vain became him before, of Sweet
Wife, and Dear heart? and are you fallen just into the same now? with Sweet
Husband. Away, follow him, go, keep state, what? Remember you are a woman:
turn impudent: gi' him not the head, though you gi 'him the horns, Away. Exit
Fallace. And yet me thinks you should take your leave of Infans-perdus here,
your forlorn hope. How now Mounsieur Brisk: what? Friday at night? and in
affliction too? and yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate Morsels: I perceive the
affection of Ladies and Gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoever you go Mounsieur.


Fast. Now in good faith (and as I am Gentle) there could not have come a thing
in this world to have distracted me more than the wrinckled fortunes of this
poor Dame.


Maci. O yes Sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much better, believe
it. Signior Deliro has entered three Actions against you, three Actions
Mounsieur: mary one of them (I Will put you in comfort) is but three thousand
mark, and the other two some five thousand pound together, trifles, trifles.


Fast. O God, I am undone.


Maci. Nay not altogether so Sir, the Knight must have his hundred pound
repai'd, that'll help too, and then sixescore pound for a Diamond: you know
where? these be things will weigh Mounsieur; they will weigh.


Fast. O Jesus!


Maci. What do you sigh? this it is to kiss the hand of a Countess, to have
her Coach sent for you, to hang Poinards in Ladies garters, to wear Bracelets
of their hair, and for every one of these great ^^uours to give some slight
Jewel of five hundred cro^nes, or so, why it is nothing. Now Mounsieur, you see
the plague that treads of the heels of your fopperie, well, go your ways in;
Remove your self to the two-penny ward quickly to save charges, and there set
up your rest to spend Sir Puntars hundred pound for him. Away good Pomander,
go.


Exit Brisk. Why here is a change: Now is my soul at peace,
I am as empty of all Envy now,
As they of Merit to be envied at,
My Humor (like a ^lame) no longer lasts
Than it has stuff to feed it, and their virtue,
Being now raked up in embers of their Folly,
Affords no ampler Subject to my Spirit;
I am so far from malicing their states,
That I begin to pity 'hem: it greeues me
To think they have a being; I could wish
They might turn wise upon it, and be saved now,
So Heaven were pleased: but let them vanish Vapors.
And now with Aspers tongue (though not his shape)
Kind Patrons of our spo^^s (you that can judge,
And with discerning thoughts measure the pace
Of our strange Muse in this her Maze of Humor,
You, whose true Notions do confine the former
And nature of sweet Poesi^) to you
I tender solemn and most duteous thanks,
For your stretched patience and attentive grace.
We know (and we are pleased to know so much)
The Cates that you have tasted were not seasoned
For every vulgar Pallat, but prepared
To banquet pure and apprehensiue ears:
Let then their Voices speak for our desert;
Be their Applause the Trumpet to proclaim
Defiance to rebelling Ignorance,
And the green spirits of some tainted Few,
That (spite of pity) betray themselves
To Scorn and Laughter; and like guilty Children,
Publish their infancy before their time,
By their own fond exception: Such as these
We pawn 'hem to your censure, till Time, Wit,
Or Observation, set some stronger seal
Of judgment on their indgements; and entreat
The happier spirits in this faire-fild Globe,
(So many as have sweet minds in their breasts,
And are too wife to think themselves are taxt
In any general Figure, or too virtuous
To need that wisdoms imputation:)
That with their bounteous Hands they would confirm
This, as their pleasures Pattent: which so signed,
Our lean and spent Endeavors shall renew
Their Beauties with the Spring to sinile on you.
FINIS.
IT had another Catastrophe or Conclusion, at the first Playing: which ((...))
many seemed not to relish it; and therefore 'twas since altered: yet that a
right-^i'd and solid Reader may perceiu^ it was not so great a part of the
Heaven awry, as they would make it; we request him but to look down upon
these following Reasons.

1 There has been President of the like Presentation in diverse Plays: and is
yearly in our City Pageants or shows of Triumph.

2 It is to be conceived, that Macilente being so strongly possessed with Envy,
(as the Poet here makes him) it must be no slight or common Object, that
should effect so sudden and strange a cure upon him, as the putting him
clean Out of his Humor.

3 If his Imagination had discours't the whole world over for an Object, it
could not have met with a more Proper, Emiment, or worthy Figure, than that of
her Majesty's: which his Election (though boldly, yet respectively) used to a
Moral and Mysterious end.

4 His greediness to catch at any Occasion, that might express his affection
to his Sovereign, may worthily plead for him.

5 There was nothing (in his examined Opinion) that could more near or truly
exemplify the power and strength of her Inualuable Virtues, than the working
of so perfect a Miracle on so opposed a Spirit, who not only persisted in his
Humor, but was now come to the Court with a purposed resolution (his Soul as
it were new dressed in Envy) to malign at any thing that should front him; when
suddenly (against expectation, and all steel of his Malice) the very wonder
of her Presence strikes him to the earth dumb, and astonished. From whence
rising and recovering heart, his Passion thus ^vtters it self.

Maci. Blessed, Divine, Unblemished, Sacred, Pure,
Glorious, Immortal, and indeed Immense;
O that I had a world of Attributes,
To lend or add to this high Majesty:
Never till now did Object greet mine eyes
With any light Content: but in her Graces
All my malicious Powers have lost their stings:
Envy is fled my Soul at sight of her,
And she has chased all black thoughts from my bosom,
Like as the Sun does darkness from the world.
My stream of Humor is run out of me:
And as our Cities Torrent (bent t'infect
The hallowed bowels of the silver Thames)
Is checked by strength and clearenesse of the River,
Till it has spent it self e'ene at the shore;
So in the ample and vnmeasur'd Flood
Of her Perfections, are my Passions drowned:
And I have now a Spirit as sweet and clear,
As the most rarefi'd and subtle Air;
With which, and with a heart as pure as Fire,
(Yet humble as the Earth) do I implore,
He Kneeles. O Heaven: that She (whose Figure has effected
This change in me) may never suffer Change
In her Admired and happy Government:
May still this Island be called Fortunate,
And Rugged Treason tremble at the sound
When Fame shall speak it with an Emphasis.
Let foreign Policy be dull as Lead,
And pale Invasion come with half a heart
When he but looks upon her blessed Soil:
The Throat of War be stopped within her Land,
And Turtle-footed Peace dance fairie Rings
About her Court; where never may there come
Suspect or Danger, but all Trust and Safety:
Let Flattery be dumb, and Envy blind
In her dread Presence: Death himself admire her:
And may her Virtues make him to forget
The use of his inevitable hand.
Fly from her Age; Sleep Time before her Throne,
Our strongest wall falls down when she is gone.

Here the Trumpets sound a flourish, in which time Macilente conuerts himself
to them that supply the place of GREX, and speaks. GREX.
Maci. How now Sirs? how like you it? has't not bentedious?


Cor. Nay, we have done censuring, now.


Mit. Yes faith.


Maci. How so?


Cor. Mary because we will imitate your Actors, and be out of our Humors.
Besides, here are those (round about you) of more ability in Censure than we,
whose Judgments can give it a more satisfying Allowance: we will refer you to
them.


Mac. I? is it even so? Well, Gentlemen, I should have gone in, and returned to
you as I was Asper at the first: but (by reason the Shift would have been
somewhat long, and we are loath to draw your Patience any farther) we will entreat
you to imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of Humor for
company) I stand wholly to your kind Approbation, and (indeed) am nothing so
peremptory as I was in the beginning: Mary I will not do as Plautus in his
Amphitryo for all this ( Summi Iouis causa, Plaudite:) beg a Plaudite for
Gods sake; but if you (out of the Bounty of your good liking) will bestow it;
why, you may (in time) make lean Macilente as fat as Sir John Fallstaffe.


Exeunt. Non ego ventosoe plebis suffragia venor.

