CATILINE his CONSPIRACY.

Written by BEN: IONSON.

-- His non Plebecula gaudet.
Verum Equitis quoque, iam migrauit ab aure voluptas,
Omnis, ad incertos ^culos, and gaudia vana.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Burre. 1611.

TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HONOR, AND VERTVE, THE MOST NOBLE WILLIAM EARL OF
PENBROOKE, etc.
MY LORD,
IN so thick, and dark an ignorance, as now almost couers the Age, I crave
leave to stand near your light: and, by that, to be read. Posterity may pay
your benefit the honor, and thanks; when it shall know, that you dare, in these
Iig-giuen times, to countenance a legitimate Poem. I must call it so, against
all noise of opinion: from whose crude, and ay^y reports, I appeal, to that
great and singular faculty of Judgment in your Lordship, able to vindicate
truth from error. It is the first (of this race) that ever I dedicated to any
Person, and had I not thought it the best, it should have been taught a less
ambition. Now, it appr^cheth your censure chearefully, and with the same
assurance, that Innocence would appear before a Magistrate.

Your Lo. most faithful Honorer. Ben. Ionson.

TO THE READER IN ORDINARY.
THE Muses forbid, that I should restrain you^ meddling, whom I see alread^e
busy with the Title, (...) over the leaves: It is your own. I departed with
my right, when I let it first abroad. And, now, so secure an Interpreter I am
of my chance, that neither praise, nor dispraise from you can affect me.
Though you commend the two first Acts, with the people, because they are the
worst; and dislike the Oration of Cicero, in regard you read some pieces of it,
at School^, and understand them not yet; I shall find the way to forgive you.
Be any thing you will be, at your own charge. Would I had deserved but half
so well of it in translation, as that ought to deserve of you in judgment, if
you have any. I know you will pretend (whosoever you are) to have that, and
more. But all pretenses are not just claymes. The commendation of good things
may fall within a many, their approbation but in a few* for the most commend
out of affection, self tickling, an easiness, or imitation: but men judge
only out of knowledge. That is the trying faculty. And, to those works that
will bear a Judge, nothing is more dangerous then a foolish praise. You will
say I shall not have yours, therefore; but rather the contrary, all vexation of
Censure. If I were not above such molestations now, I had great cause to think
unworthily of my studies, or they had so of me. But I leave you to your
exercise. Begin.

To the Reader extraordinary.
YOu I would understand to be the better Man, though P^aces in Court go
otherwise: to you I submit my self, and work. Farewell.

BEN: IONSON.

To my ^riend Mr. Ben: Ionson, upon his Catiline.
IF thou had itch'd after the wild applause
Of common people, and had made thy Laws.
In writing, such, as caught at present voice,
I should commend the thing, but not thy choice.
But thou have squared thy rules, by what is good;
And art, three Ages yet, from understood:
And (I dare say) in it, there lies much Wit
Lost, till thy Readers can grow up to it.
Which they can nere outgrow, to find it ill,
But must fall back again, or like it still.
Franc: Beaumont.

To his worthy friend Mr. Ben. Ionson.
HE, that dares wrong this Play, it should appear
Dares utter more, then other men dare hear,
That have their wits about 'hem: yet such men,
Dear friend, must see your Book, and read; and then,
Out of their learned ignorance, c^ie ill,
And lay you by, calling for mad Pasquill,
Or Greene's dear Groatsworth, or Tom Coryate,
The new Lexicon, with the errant Pate;
And pick away, from all these seuera^l ends,
And durtie ones, to make their as-wise friends
Beleeeue they are transslaters. Of this, pity,
There is a great plague hanging over the City:
Unless she purge her judgment presently.
But, O thou happy man, that must not die
As these things shall: leaving no more behind
But a thin memory (like a passing wind)
That blows, and is forgotten, ere they are cold.
Thy labors shall out live thee; and, like gold
Stamped for continuance, shall be current, where
There is a Sun, a People, or a Year.
John Fletcher.

To his worthy beloved friend Mr. BEN. IONSON.
HAD the great thoughts of Catiline been good,
The memory of his name, stream of his blood,
His plots past into acts, (which would have turned
His Infamy to Fame, though Rome had burned)
Had not begot him equal grace with men,
As this, that he is writ by such a Pen:
Whose inspirations, if great Rome had had,
Her good things had been bettered, and her bad
Undone; the first for joy, the last for fear,
That such a Muse should spread them, to our Year.
But woe to us then: for thy laureat brow
If Rome enjoyed had, we had wanted now.
But, in this Age, where Iigs and Dances move,
How few there are, that this pure work approve!
Yet, better then I rail at, thou can scorn
Censures, that die, ere they be thoroughly borne.
Each Subject thou, still thee each Subject rayses.
And whosoever thy Book, himself disprayses:
Not. Field.

The names of the Actors.
SYLLA'S GHOST. CATILINE. LENTVLVS. CETHEGVS. CVRIVS. AVTRONIVS. VARGVNTEIVS.
LONGINVS. LECCA. FVLVIVS. BESTIA. GABINIVS. STATILIVS. CEPARIVS. CORNELIUS.
VOLTVRTIVS. AVRELIA. FVLVIA. SEMPRONIA: GALLA. CLCERO. ANTONIUS. CATO. CATVLVS.
CRASSVS. CA^SAR. QV. CICERO. SYLLANVS. FLACCVS. POMTINIVS. SANGA. SENATORS.
ALLOBROGES. PETREIVS. SOLDIERS. PORTER. LICTORS. SERVANTS. PAGES. CHORUS.
CATILINE.
ACT. j.
SYLLA'S Ghost. Do thou not feel me, Rome? Not yet? Is night
So heavy on thee, and my weight so light?
Can Sylla's Ghost arise within thy walls,
Less threatening, then an earthquake, the quick falls
Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads
Of thy steep towers? or shrink to their first beds?
Or, as their ruin the large Tyber fills,
Make that swell up, and drown thy seven proud hills?
What sleep is this does seize thee, so like death,
And is not it? Wake, feel her, in my breath.
Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian Sound,
As a dire Vapor, that had cleft the ground,
T'ingender with the night, and blast the day;
Or like a Pestilence, that should display
Infection through the world: which, thus, I do.
Pluto be at thy councels; and into
Thy darker bosom enter Sylla's spirit:
All, that was mine, and bad, thy breast inherit.
Alas, how weak is that, for Catiline!
Did I but say (vain voice) all that was mine?
All, that the Gracchi, Cinna, Marius would;
What now, had I a body again, I could,
Coming from hell; what Fiendes would wish should be;
And Hannibal could not have wished to see:
Think thou, and practice. Let the long-hid seeds
Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds,
Ranker then horror; and thy former facts
Not fall in mention, but to urge new acts:
Conscience of them provoke thee on to more.
Be still thy Inc^sts, Murders, Rapes before
Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestall Nun;
Thy parricide, late, on thine own natural Son,
After his Mo^her, to make empty way
For thy last wicked Nuptials; worse, then they,
That fame that act of thy incestuous life,
Which got thee, at once, a Daughter, and a Wife.
I leave the slaughters, that thou did for me,
Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee
Thy murder of thy Brother, (being so bribed)
And writ him in the list of my proscribed
After thy fact, to save thy little shame:
Thy incest, with thy Sister, I not name.
These are too light. Fate will have thee pursue
Deeds, after which no Mischief can be new;
The ruin of thy Country: Thou were built
For such a work, and borne for no less guilt:
What though defeated once thou have been, and known,
Tempt it again; That is thy act, or none.
What all the several Ills, that visit earth,
(Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth)
Plagues, Famine, Fire could not reach unto,
The Sword, nor Surfets; let thy fury do:
Make all past, present, future ill thine own;
And conquer all example, in thy one.
Nor let thy thought find any vacant time
To hate an old, but still a fresher crime
Drown the remembrance; Let not mischief cease,
But, while it is in punishing, increase.
Conscience, and care die in thee; And be free
Not Heaven it self from thy impiety:
Let Night grow blacker with thy plots; and Day,
At showing but thy head forth, start away
From this half- Sphere: and leave Romes blinded walls
To Embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funerals,
And not recover sight, till their own flames
Do light them to their ruins. All the names
Of thy Confederates, too, be no less great
In hell, then here; That, when we would repeat
Our strengths in Muster, we may name you all,
And Furies, upon you, for Furies, call.
Whilst, what you do, does strike them into fears,
Or make them grieve, and wish your mischief theirs.

CATILINE. IT is decreed. Nor shall thy Fate, o Rome,
Resist my vow. Though Hills were set on Hills,
And Seas met Seas, to guarde thee; I would through:
I, plough up rocks, steep as the Alps, in dust;
And laue the Tyrrhene waters, into clouds;
But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud City:
The ills, that I have done, cannot be safe
But by attempting greater; and I feel
A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish hands.
And says, they have been innocent too long.
Was I a Man, bred great, as Rome her self?
One, formed for all her honors, all her glories?
Equal to all her titles? That could stand
Close up, with Atlas; and sustain her name
As strong, as he does Heaven? And, was I,
Of all her brood, marked out for the repulse
By her no voice, when I stood Candidate,
To be Commander in the Ponticke war?
I will, hereafter, call her Stepdame, ever.
If she can loose her nature, I can loose
My piety; and in her stony entrails
Dig me a seat: where, I will live, again,
The labor of her womb, and be a burden
Weightier then all the Prodigies, and Monsters,
That she has teemed with, since she first knew Mars.

CATILINE, AVRELIA. Who Is there?

AVR. It Is I.

CAT. Aurelia?

AVR. Yes.

AVR. Appear,
And break, like day, my beauty, to this circle:
Vpbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long
In mounting to that point, which should give thee
Thy pr^per splendor. Wherefore frowns my sweet?
Have I too long been absent from these lips,
This cheek, these eyes? what is my trepas^e? speak.

AVR. It seems, you know, that can accuse your self.

CAT. I will redeem it.

AVR. Still, you say so. When?

CAT. When Orestilla by her bearing well
These my retirements, and stolen times for thought
Shall give their effects leave to call her Queen
Or all the world, in place of humbled Rome.

AVR. You court me, now.

CAT. As I would always, Love,
By (...) Ambrosiacke kis^e, and this of Nectar,
Would thou but hear as gladly, as I speak.
Could my Aurelia think, I meant her less;
When, wooing her, I first removed a Wife,
And then a Son, to make my bed, and house
Spacious, and sir to embrace her? These were deeds
Not to have begun with, but to end with more,
And great^r: " He that, building, stays at one
" Floor, or the second, has erected none.
'Twas how to raise thee, I was meditating;
To make some act of mine answer thy love:
That love, that, when my state was now quite sunk,
Came with thy wealth, and weighd it up again,
And made my 'emergent Fortune once more look
Above the maine; which, now, shall hit the stars,
And stick my Orestilla, there, amongst 'hem,
If any tempest can but make the billow,
And any billow can but lift her greatness.
But, I must pray my love, she will put on
Like habites with my self. I have to do
With many men, and many natures. Some,
That must be blown, and soothed; as Lentulus,
Whom I have heau'd, with magnifying his blood,
And a vain dream, out of the Sybill's books,
That a third man, of that great family
Whereof he is descended, the Cornelij,
Should be a King in Rome: which I have hired
The flattering Augures to interpret him,
Cinna, and Sylla dead. Then, bold Cethegus,
Whose valor I have turned into his poison,
And praised so into daring, as he would
Go on upon the Gods, kis^e lightning, wrest
The engine from the Cyclop's, and give fire
At face of a full cloud, and stand his ire,
When I would bid him move. Others there are
Whom envy to the state draws, and pu^s on,
For contumelies received, (and such are sure ones)
As Curious, and the fore-nam'd Lentulus,
Both which have been degraded, in the Senate,
And must have their disgraces, still, new rubbed,
To make 'hem smart, and labor of revenge.
Others, whom mere ambition fires, and dole
Of Provinces abroad, which they have faind
To their crude hopes, and I as amply promised:
The^e, Lecca* Vargunteius, Bestia, Autronius,
Some, whom their wants oppress, as th'idle Captains
Of Sylla's troops; and diverse Roman Knights
(The profuse wasters of their patrimonies)
So threatened with debts, as they will, now,
Run any desperate fortune, for a change.
These, for a time, we must r^lieue, Aurelia,
And make our house their saue-gard. Like, for those,
That fear the law, or stand within her gripe,
For any act past, or to come. Such will
From their own crimes, be factious, as from ours.
Some more there be flight Ayrelings, will be won,
With dogs, and horses; or, perhaps, a whore;
Which must be had: And, if they venture lives,
For us* Aurelia, we must hazard honors
A little. Get thee store, and change of women,
As I have boys; and give 'hem time, and place,
And all conniuence: Be thy self, too, courtly;
And entertain, and feast, sit up, and revel;
Call all the great, the fair, and spirited Dames
Of Rome about thee, and begin a fashion
Of freedom, and community. Some will thank thee,
Though the sour Senate frown, whose heads must ache
In fear, and feeling too. We must not spare
Or cost, or modesty. It can but show
Like one of Juno's, or of Ioue's disguises
In either thee, or me; and will as soon,
When things succeed, be thrown by, or let fall;
As is a veil put of, a visor changed,
Or the Scene shifted, in our Theaters.
Who Is that? It is the voice of Lentulus.

AVR. Or of Cethegus.

CAT. In, my fair Aurelia,
And think upon these arts: They must not see,
How far you are trusted with these priuacies;
Though, by their shoulders, necks, and heads you rise.

LENTVLVS. CETHEGVS. CATILINE. IT is, me thinks, a Morning, full of Fate.
It rises slowly, as her sollen carre
Had all the weights of sleep, and death hung at it.
She is not rosy-fingerd, but swollen black.
Her face is like a water, turned to blood,
And her sick head is bound about with clouds,
As if she threatened night, ere noone of day.
It does not look, as it would have a Hayle
Or Health, wished in it, as on other Mornes.

CET. Why, all the fitter, Lentulus: Our coming
Is not for salutation, we have business.

CAT. Said nobly, brave Cethegus. Where Is Autronius?

CET. Is he not come?

CAT. Not here.

CET. Nor Vargunteius?

CAT. Neither.

CET. A fire in their beds, and bosoms,
That so will serve their sloth, rather then virtue.
They are no Romans, and at such high need
As now.

LEN. Both they, Longinus, Lecca, Curious,
Fuluius, Gabinius, gave me word, last night,
By Lucius Bestia, they would all be here,
And early.

CET. Yes. As you, had I not called you.
Come, we all sleep, and are mere Dormice; Flies,
A little less then dead: More dullness hangs
On us, then on the Morn. We Are spirit-bound,
In ribs of ice; our whole bloods are one stone;
And Honor cannot thaw us; nor our wants,
Though they burn, hot as fevers, to our states.

CAT. I muse they would be tardy, at an hour
Of so great purpose.

CET. If the Gods had called
Them, to a purpose, they would just have come
With the same Tortoyse speed, that are thus slo^
To such an action, which the Gods will envy.
As asking no less means, then all their powers
Conioyn'd, to effect. I would have seen Rome burned,
By this time; and her ashes in an Vrne:
The Kingdom of the Senate, rent asunder;
And the degenerate, talking Gown, run frighted,
Out of the air of Italy.

CAT. Spirit of men!
Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much
I lou^ these voices in thee!

CET. O the days
Of Sylla's sway, when the free sword took leave
To act all that it would!

CAT. And was familiar
With entrails, as our Augures!

CET. Sons killed Fathers,
Brothers their Brothers.

CAT. And had price and praise.
All hate had license given it; all rage raynes.

CET. Slaughter bestrid the streets, and stretched himself
To seem more huge; whilst to his stained thighs
The gore he drew flowed up: and carried down
Whole heaps of limbs, and bodies, through his arch.
No Age was spared, no Sex.

CAT. Nay, no Degree.

CET. Not Infants, in the po^ch of life were free.
The Sick, the Old, that could but hope a day
Longer, by natures bounty, not let stay.
Virgins, and Widows, Matrons, prognant Wives,
All dyed.

CAT. 'Twas crime enough, that they had lives.
To strike but only those, that could do hurt,
Was dull, and poor. Some fel^ to make the number
As some the prey.

CET. The rugged Charon fainted,
And asked a nau^e, rather then a boat,
To ferry over the sad world that came:
The mawes, and dens of beasts could not receive
The bodies, that those souls were frighted from;
And even the graves were filled with men yet living,
Whose flight, and fear had mixed them, with the dead.

CAT. And this shall be again, and more, and more,
Now Lentulus, the third Cornelius,
Is to stand up in Rome.

LEN. Nay, urge not that
Is so uncertain.

CAT. How!

LEN. I mean, not cleared.
And, therefore, not to be reflected on.

CAT. The Sybill's leaves uncertain? or the Comments
Of our grave, deep, divining men no^ clear?

LEN. All Prophecies, you know, suffer the torture.

CAT. But this, already, has confessed without.
And so been weighed, examined, and compared,
As 't were malicious ignorance in him,
Wou^d ^aint in the belief.

LEN. Do you believe it?

CAT. Do I love Lentulus? or pray to see it?

LEN. The Augures all are constant, I am meant.

CAT. They had lost their science else.

LEN. They count from Cinna.

CAT. And Sylla nex^, and so make you the third;
All that can say the Sun is risen, must think it.

LEN. Men mark me more, of late, as I come forth.

CAT. Why, what can they do less? Cinna, and Sylla
Are set, and gone: And we must turn our eyes
On him that is, and shines. Noble Cethegus,
But view him with me, here: He looks, already,
As if he shook a Scepter, over the Senate,
And the awed purple dropped their rods, and axes.
The Statues melt again; and household Gods
In groans confess the travail of the City;
The very walls sweat blood before the change;
And stones start out to ruin, ere it comes.

CET. But he, and we, and all are idle still.

LEN. I am your creature, Sergius: And what ere
The great Cornelian Name shall win to be,
It is not Augury, nor the Sybils Books,
But Catiline that makes it.

CAT. I am shadow
To honored Lentulus, and Cethegus here,
Who are the heirs of Mars.

CET. By Mars himself,
Catiline is more my parent: For whose virtue
Earth cannot make a shadow great enough,
Though Envy should come too. O, there they'are.
Now we shall talk more, though we yet do nothing.

AVTRONIVS, VARGVNTEIVS, LONGINVS, CVRIVS, LECCA, BESTIA, FVLVIVS, GABINIVS,
etc. Hail Lucius Catiline.

VAR. Hail noble Sergius.

LON. Hail Publius Lentulus.

CVR. Hail the third Cornelius.

LEC. Caius Cethegus hail.

CET. Hail sloth, and words,
In steed of Men, and Spirits.

CAT. Nay, dear Caius;

CET, Are your eyes yet vn^eel'd? Dare they look day
In the dull face?

CAT. He Is zealous, for the'affaire;
And blames your tardy coming, Gentlemen.

CET. Unless, we had sold our selves to sleep, and ease,
And would be our slaves slaves.

CAT. Pray you forbear.

CET. The North is not so stark, and cold.

CAT. Cethegus.

BES. We shall redeem all, if your fire will let us.

CAT. You are too full of lightning, noble Caius.
Boy, see all doors be shut, that none approach us,
On this part of the house. Go you, and bid
The Priest, he kill the slave I marked last night;
And bring me of his blood, when I shall call him:
Till then, wait all without.

VAR. How is it, Autronius!

AVT. Longinus?

LON. Curious?

CVR. Lecca?

VAR. Feel you nothing?

LON. A strange, unwonted horror does invade me,
I know not what it is!

LEC. The day goes back,
Or else my senses!

CVR. As at Atreus feast!

FVL. Darkness grows more and more!

LEN. The Vest all flame,
I think, be out.

GAB. What groan was that?

CET. Our phant'sies.
Strike fire, out of our selves, and force a day.

AVT. Again it sounds! BES. As all the City gave it!

CET. We fear what our selves feign.

VAR. What light is this?

CVR. Look forth. Len. It still grows greater.

LEC. From whence comes it?

LON. A Bloody arm it is, that holds a pine
Lighted, above the Capitol: And, now,
It waves unto us.

CAT. Brave, and omenous!
Our enterprise is sealed.

CET. In spite of darkness,
That would discountenance it. Look no more;
We loose time, and our selves: To what we came for,
Speak Lucius, we attend you.

CAT. Noblest Romans,
If you were less, or, that your faith, and virtue
Did not hold good that title, with your blood,
I should not, now, unprofitably spend
My self in words, or catch at empty hopes,
By ayrie ways, for solid certainties.
But since in many, and the greatest dangers,
I still have known you no less true, then valiant,
And that I taste, in you, the same affections,
To will, or nill, to think things good, or bad,
Alike with me: (which argues your firm friendship)
I dare the boldlier, with you, set on foot,
Or lead, unto this great, and goodliest action.
What I have thought of it before, you all
Have heard apart; I then expressed my zeal
Unto the glory; Now, the need enflames me^:
When I fore-thinke the hard conditions,
Our states must undergo, except, in time,
We do redeem our selves to liberty,
And break the iron yoke, forged for our necks.
For, what less can we call it? when we see
The commonwealth engrossed so by a few,
The Giants of the state, that do, by turns,
Enjoy her, and defile her. All the Earth,
Her Kings, and Tetrarchs, are their tributaries;
People, and Nations pay them hourly stipends:
The riches of the world flows to their coffers,
And not, to Romes. While (but those few) the rest,
How ever great we are, honest, and valiant,
Are hearded with the vulgar; and so kept,
As we were only bred, to consume corn,
Or wear out wool, to drink the Cities water:
Vngrac'd, without authority, or mark,
Trembling beneath their rods, to whom, (if all
Were well in Rome) we should come forth bright axes.
All Places, Honors, Offices are theirs;
Or where they will confer 'hem: They leave us
The dangers, the repulses, judgments, wants;
Which how long will you bear most valiant spirits?
Were we not better to fall, once, with virtue,
Then draw a wretched, and dishonored breath
To loose with shame, when these men's pride will laugh?
I call the faith of Gods, and Men to question;
The power is in our hands; our bodies able;
Our minds as strong; Of The contrary, in them,
All things grown aged, with their wealth, and years.
There wants, but only to begin the business,
The issue is certain.

CET. LON. On, Let us go on.

CVR. BES. Go on, brave Sergius.

CAT. It does strike my soul,
(And, who can escape the stroke, that has a soul,
Or, but the smallest air of Man within him?)
To see them swell with treasure; which they pour
Out i'their riots, eating, drinking, building,
I, in the sea: planing of Hills with Valleys;
And raising Valleys above Hills, whilst we
Have not, to give our Bodies Necessaries.
They have their change of Houses, Manors, Lordships;
We scarce a fire, or poor household Lar.
They buy rare Atticke statues, Tyrian hangings,
Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate,
Attalicke garments, and, now newfound, Gemmes
Since Pompey went for Asia; which they purchase
At price of Provinces. The River Phasis
Cannot affourd 'hem Foul; nor Lucrine Lake
Oysters enough: Circei, too, is searched
To please the witty Gluttony of a meal.
Their ancient Habitations they neglect,
And set up new; Then, if the Echo like not
In such a room, they pluck down those; build newer,
Alter them too; and, by all frantic ways,
Vex their wild wealth, as they molest the people,
From whom they force it; Yet, they cannot tame,
Or overcome their riches: Not, by making,
Bathes, Orchards, Fish-pooles, letting in of seas,
Here; and, then there, forcing 'hem out again,
With mountaynous heaps; for which the Earth has lost
Most of her ribs, as entrayles, being now
Wounded no less for Marble, then for gold.
We, all this while, like calm, benumbed Spectators,
Sit, till our seats do crack; and do not hear
The thundering ruins, whilst, at home, our wants,
Abroad, our debts do urge us, our states daily
Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: And, what
Is left, but to be crushed? Wake, wake brave Friends,
And meet the liberty you often have wished for.
Behold, renown, riches, and glory court you.
Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
Me thinks (though I were dumb) th'affaire it self
The opportunity, your needs, and dangers,
With the brave spoil the war brings, should inuit you.
Use me your General, or Soldier: Neither,
My Mind, nor Body shall be wanting to you.
And, being Consul, I not doubt to effect,
All that you wish: If Trust not flatter me,
And you had, rather, still be slaves, then free.

CET. Free, free.

LON. It Is freedom.

CVR. Freedom we all stand for.

CAT. Why, these are noble voices. Nothing wants then,
But that we take a solemn Sacrament,
To strengthen our design.

CET. And so to act it.
Differring hurts, where powers are most prepared.

AVT. Yet, ere we enter into open act,
(With favor) 't were no loss, if it might be inquired
What the Condition of these Arms would be?

VAR. I, and the means, to carry us through.

CAT. How, Friends!
Think you, that I would bid you, graspe the wind?
Or call you to th'embracing of a cloud?
Put your known valures on so dear a business,
And have no other second then the Danger,
Nor other Gyrlond then the loss? Become
Your own assurances. And, for the means,
Consider, first, the stark security
The common wealth is in, now; the whole Senate
Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow;
Their forces all abroad; of which the greatest,
That might annoy us most, is fardest off,
In Asia, under Pompey: Those, near hand,
Commanded, by our friends; one Army' in Spain,
By Cneus Piso; the other in Mauritania,
By Nucerin^s; both which I have firm,
And fast unto our Plot. My self, then, standing
Now to be Consul; with my hoped Colleague
Caius Antonius, one, no less engaged
By his wants then we: And whom I'haue power to melt,
And cast in any mould. Beside, some others
That will not yet be named, (both sure, and Great ones)
Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselves,
Strong, for our party; so, that no resistance
In nature can be thought. For our reward, then;
First, all our Debts are paid; Dangers of Law,
Actions, Decrees, Judgments against us quitted;
The rich Men, as in Sylla's times, proscribed,
And Publication made of all their goods;
That House is yours; That Land is his; Those Waters,
Orchards, and wa^kes a third's: He'has that Honor,
And he that Office. Such a Province falls
To Vargunleius: This to' Autronius: That
To bold Cethegus: Rome to Lentulus:
You share the World, her Magistracies, Priest-hoods,
Wealth, and Felicity amongst you, Friends;
And Catiline your servant. Would you, Curious,
Revenge the Contumely stuck upon you,
In being removed from the Senate? Now,
Now, is your time. Would Publius Lentulus
Strike, for the like disgrace? Now, is his time.
Would stout Longinus walk the streets of Rome,
Facing the Praetor? Now, has he a time
To spurn, and tread the Fasces, into dirt
Made of the Usurers, and the Lictors brains.
Is there a Beauty, here in Rome, you love?
An Enemy you would kill? What Head's not yours?
Whose Wife, which Boy, whose Daughter, of what race,
That th'Husband, or glad Parents shall not bring you,
And boasting of the office? Only, spare
Your selves, and you have all the earth beside,
A field, to exercise your longings in.
I see you raised, and read your forward minds
High, in your faces. Bring the wine, and blood
You have prepared there.

LON. How!

CAT. I have killed a slave,
And of his blood caused to be mixed with wine.
Fill every man his bowl. There cannot be
A fitter drink, to make this Sanction in.
Here, I begin the Sacrament to all.
O, for a clap of thunder now, as loud,
As to be heard through-out the Universe,
To tell the world the fact, and to applaude it.
Be firm, my hand; not shed a drop: but pour
Fiercenes^e into me, with it; and fell thirst
Of more, and more: Till Rome be left as blood-lesse,
As ever her fears made her, or the sword.
And, when I leave to wish this to thee, Stepdame
Or stop, to effect it, with my powers fainting;
So may my blood be drawn, and so drunk up
As is this slaves.

LON. And so be mine.

LEN. And mine.

AVT. And mine.

VAR. And mine.

CET. C^owne me my bowl yet fuller.
Here, I do drink this, as I would do Cato's,
Or the new fellow Cicero's: with that vow
Which Catiline has given.

CVR. So do I.

LEC. And I.

BES. And I.

FVL. And I.

GAB. And all of us.

CAT. Why, now is the business safe, and each man strengthened.
Sirah, what aile you?

PAGE Nothing.

BES. Somewhat modest.

CAT. Slave, I will strike your soul out, with my foot,
Let me but find you again with such a face:
You Whelpe.

BES. Nay Lucius.

CAT. Are you coying it,
When I command you to be free, and general
To all?

BES. You Will be observed.

CAT. Arise, and show
But any least auersion in your look
To him that bourdes you next, and your throat opens.
Noble Confederates, thus far is perfect.
Only your suffrages I will expect,
At the assembly for the choosing Consuls,
And all the voices you can make by friends
To my election. Then let me work out
Your fortunes, and mine own. Mean while, all rest
Sealed up, and silent, as when rigid frosts
Have bound up Brooks, and Rivers, forced wild beasts
Unto their caves, and birds into the woods,
Clownes to their houses, and the Country sleeps;
That, when the sudden thaw comes, we may break
Upon 'hem like a deluge, bearing down
Half Rome before us, and invade the rest
With cries, and noise able to wake the Vrnes
Of those are dead, and make their ashes f^are.
" The horrors, that do strike the world, should come
" Loud, and unlooked for; Till they strike, be dumb.

CET. Oraculous Sergius.

LEN. God-like Catiline.

CHORUS. CAn nothing great, and at the height
Remain so long? but it is own weight
Will ruin it? Or, is it blind Chance,
That still desires new States t'aduance,
And quit the old? Else, why must Rome
Be by it self; now, overcome?
Has she not foes inow of those,
Whom she has made such, and enclose
Her round about? Or, are they none,
Except she first become her own?
O wretchedness of greatest States,
To be obnoxious to these Fates:
That cannot keep, what they do gain;
And what they raise so ill sustain.
Rome, now, is Mistress of the whole
World, Sea, and Land, to either Pole;
And even that Fortune will destroy
The power that made it. She does joy
So (...) plenty, wealth, and ease,
As, now, the excess is her disease.
She builds in gold; And, to the Stars:
As, if she threatened Heaven with wars;
And seeks for Hell, in quarries deep,
Giving the fiends, that there do keep,
A hope of day. Her Women wear
The spoils of Nations, in an ear,
Changed for the treasure of a shell;
And, in their loose attires, do swell
More light then sails, when all winds play:
Yet, are the men more loose then they,
More kemb'd, and bathed, and rubbed, and trimmed,
More sleek'd, more soft, and slacker limm'd;
As prostitute: so much, that kind
May seek it self there, and not find.
They eat on beds of silk, and gold;
At yuorie tables; or, wood sold
Dearer then it: and, leaving plate,
Do drink in stone of higher rate.
They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas;
Foul every brook, and bush; to please
Their wanton tastes: and, in request
Have new, and rare things; not the best.
Hence comes that wild, and vast expense,
That has enforced Romes virtue, thence,
Which simple poverty first made;
And, now, ambition does invade
Her state, with eating avarice,
Riot, and every other vice.
Decrees are bought, and Laws are sold,
Honors, and Offices for gold;
The peoples voices: And the free
Tongues, in the Senate, bribed be.
Such ruin of her manners Rome
Does suffer now, as she is become
(Without the Gods it soon gainsay)
Both her own spoiler, and own pray.
So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly even.
With us, for all the blows thee given;
When we, whose virtue conquered thee,
Thus, by thy vices, ruined be.

ACT. ij.
FVLVIA, GALLA, SERVANT. THose Romes do smell extremely; Bring my glass,
And table hither, Galla.

GAL. Madame.

FVL. Look
Within, i'my blew Cabinet, for the pearl
I'had sent me last, and bring it.

GAL. That from Clodius?

FVL. From Caius Caesar. You'are for Clodius, still.
Or Curious. Sirrah, if Quintus Curious come,
I am not in fit mood; I keep my Chamber:
Give warning so, without.

GAL. Is this it? Madame.

FVL. Yes, help to hang it in mine ear.

GAL. Believe me,
It is a rich one, Madame.

FVL. I hope so:
It should not be worn there else. Make an end,
And bind my hair up.

GAL. As 'twas yesterday?

FVL. No, nor the the other day. When knew you me
Appear, two days together, in one dressing?

GAL. Will you have it in the globe, or spire?

FVL. How thou will;
Any way, so thou will do it, good Impertinence.
Thy company, if I slept not very well
A nights, would make me, an errant fool, with questions.

GAL. Alas Madam.

FVL. Nay gentle half of the Dialogue, cease.

GAL. I do it, indeed, but for your exercise,
As your Physician bids me.

FVL. How! Does he bid you
To anger me for exercise?

GAL. Not to anger you,
But stir your blood a little: There Is difference
Between lukewarm, and boiling, Madame.

FVL. Jove!
She means to cook me, I think? Pray you, ha'done.

GAL. I mean to dress you, Madame.

FVL. O my Juno,
Be friend to me! Offering at wit, too? Why, Galla!
Where have thou been?

GAL. Why, Madame?

FVL. What have thou done
With thy poor innocent self?

GAL. Wherefore, sweet Madam?

FVL. Thus to come forth, so suddenly, a wit-worme?

GAL. It pleases you to flout one. I did dream
Of Lady Sempronia.

FVL. O, the wonder is out.
That did infect thee? Well, and how?

GAL. Me thought,
She did discourse the best.

FVL. That ever thou heard'st?

GAL. Yes.

FVL. IN thy sleep? Of what was her discourse?

GAL. OF the Republicke, Madame, and the State,
And how she was in debt, and where she meant
To raise fresh sums: She Is a great States-woman.

FVL. Thou dreamp'tst all this?

GAL. No, but you know she is Madame,
And both a Mistress of the Latin tongue,
And of the Greek.

FVL. I, but I never dreampt it, Galla,
As thou have done, and therefore you must pardon me.

GAL. Indeed, you mock me, Madame.

FVL. Indeed, no.
Forth with your learned Lady: She has a wit, too?

GAL. A very masculine one.

FVL. A she- Critic, Galla?
And can compose, in verse, and make quick jests,
Modest, or otherwise?

GAL. Yes Madame.

FVL. She can sing, too?
And play on Instruments?

GAL. Of all kinds, they say.

FVL. And does dance rarely?

GAL. Excellent. So well,
As a bald Senator made a jest, and said,
'Twas better, then an honest woman need.

GVL. Tut, she may bear that. Few wise women's honesties
Will do their courtship hurt.

GAL. She Is liberal too, Madam.

FVL. What of her money, or her hono^r, pray thee?

GAL. Of both, you know not which she does spare least.

FVL. A comely commendation.

GAL. Troth, it is pity
She is in years.

FVL. Why Galla?

GA^. For it is.

FVL. O, is that all? I thought thou' had had a reason.

GAL. Why so I have. She has been a fine Lady,
And, yet, she dresses herself, (except you Madame)
One of the best in Rome: and paints, and hides
Her decays very well.

FVL. They say, it is
Rather a visor, then a face she wears.

GAL. They wrong her verily Madame, she does sleeke
With crumbs of bread, and milk, and lies a nights
In as neat gloves. But she is feign of late
To seek, more then she is sought to (the same is)
And so spends that way.

FVL. Thou know all. But Galla,
What say you to Catilines Lady, Orestilla?
There is the Gallant.

GAL. She does well. She has
Very good suits, and very rich: but, then,
She cannot put 'hem on. She knows not, how
To wear a garment. You shall have her all
Jewels, and gold sometimes, so that her self
Appears the least part of her self. No' in troth,
As I live, Madame, you put 'hem all down
With your mere strength of judgment; and do draw, too,
The world of Rome to follow you: you attire
Your self so diversely, and with that spirit,
Still to the noblest humors. They could make
Love to your dress, although your face were away, they say.

FVL. And body too, and have the better match on it?
Say they not so too, Galla? Now! What news
Travails your countenance with?

SER. If It please you, Mada^
The Lady Sempronia is lighted at the gate;

GAL. Castor, my dream, my dream.

SER. And comes to see yo^

GAL. For Venus sake, good Madame see her.

FVL. Peac^
The fool is wild, I think.

GAL. And hear her talk,
Sweet Madame, of State-matters, and the Senate.

SEMPRONIA, FVLVIA, GALLA. FVluia, good wench, how do thou?

FVL. Well, Sempronia*
Whither are you thus early addressed?

SEM. To see
Aurelia Orestilla. She sent for me.
I came to call thee, with me; will thou go?

FVL. I cannot now, in troth, I have some letters
To write, and send away.

SEM. Alas, I pity thee.
I ha'bene writing all this night, (and am
So very weary) unto all the Tribes,
And Centuries, for their voices, to help Catiline,
In his election. We shall make him Consul
I hope, amongst us. Crassus, I, and Caesar
Will carry it for him.

FVL. Does he stand for it?

SEM. H'is the chief Candidate.

FVL. Who stands beside?
Give me some wine, and poulder for my teeth.

SEM. Here Is a good pearl in troth.

FVL. A pretty one.

SEM. A very orient one. There are Competitors,
Caius Antonius, Publius Galbe, Lucius
Cassius Longinus, Quintus Cornificiu^,
Caius Licinius, and that talker, Cicero.
But Catiline, and Antonius will be chosen.
For four of the other, Lincinius, Longinus,
Galba, and Cornificius will give way.
And Cicero they will not choose.

FVL. No? Why*

SEM. It will be crossed, by the Nobility.

GAL. How she does understand the common business!

SEM. Nor, were it fit. He is but a new fellow,
An In-mate here in Rome (as Catiline calls him)
And, the Patricians should do very ill,
To let the Consul-ship be so defiled
As't would be, if he obtained it? A mere vpstarr,
That has no pedigree, no house, no coat,
No ensigns of a family?

FVL. He 'has virtue.

SEM. Hang virtue, where there is no blood: it is vice
And, in him, fawcinesse. Why should he presume
To be more learned, or more eloquent,
Then the Nobility? or boast any quality
Worthy a Noble man, himself not noble?

FVL. 'Twas virtue only, at first, made all men noble.

SEM. I yield you, it might, at first, in Romes poor age;
When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough,
Or garden'd well* But, now, we have no need,
To dig, or loose our sweat for it. We have wealth,
Fortune and ease, and then their stock, to spend on,
Of Name, for Virtue, which will bear us out
Against all new comers: and can never fail us,
While the succession stays. And, we must glorify,
A Mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker?
'Cause he has sucked at Athens? and advance him,
To our own loss? No Fuluia. There are they
Can speak Greek too, if need were. Caesar and I
Have sat upon him; so has Grassus, too;
And others. We have all decreed his rest,
For rising farther.

GAL. Excellent rare Lady!

FVL. Sempronia, you are beholden to my woman, here*
She does admire you.

SEM. O good Galla, how do thou?

GAL. The better, for your learned Ladyship.

SEM. Is this gray poulder, a good Dentifrice?

FVL. You see I use it.

SEM. I have one is whiter.

FVL. It may be so.

SEM. Yet this smells well.

GAL. And clenses
Very well, Madam, and resists the crudities.

SEM. Fuluia, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now?
Which of our great Patricians?

FVL. Faith, I keep
No Catalogue of 'hem. Sometimes I have one,
Sometimes another, as the toy takes their bloods.

SEM. Thou have them all. Faith, when was Quintus Curious,
Thy special servant, here?

FVL. My special servant?

SEM. Yes, thy Idolater, I call him.

FVL. He may be yours,
If you do like him.

SEM. How!

FVL. He comes, not, here,
I have forbid him, hence.

SEM. Venus forbid!

FVL. Why?

SEM. Your so constant Lover.

FVL. So much the rather.
I would have change. So would you too, I am sure.
And now, you may have him.

SEM. He Is fresh yet, Fuluia:
Beware, how you do tempt me.

FVL. Faith, for me,
He' is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone,
That gave him season. His good gifts are done.
He does not yield the crop that he was wont.
And, for the act, I can have secret fellows,
With backs worth ten of him, and shall pl^^se me
(Now that the Land is fled) a myriade better.

SEM. And those one may command.

FVL. It Is true, These Lordings,
Your noble Faunes, they are so imperious, saucy,
Rude, and as boystrous as Centaures; leaping
A Lady, at first sight.

SEM. And must be borne
Both with, and out, they think.

FVL. Tut, I Will obferue
None of 'hem all: nor humor 'hem a jot
Longer, then they come laden in the hand,
And say, here is tone, for th'tother.

SEM. Does Caesar give well?

FVV. They shall all give, and pay well, that come here
If they will have it; and that jewels, pearl,
Plate, or round sums, to buy these. I Am not taken
With a Cob-Swan, or a high-mounting Bull,
As foolish Leda, and Europa were,
But the bright gold, with Danae. For such price,
I would endure, a rough, harsh Jupiter,
Or ten such thundering Gamsters, and refrain
To laugh at 'hem, till they are gone, with my much suffering.

SEM. Thou Art a most happy wench, that thus can make
Use of they youth, and freshness, in the season:
And have it to make use of.

FVL. (Which is the happiness.)

SEM. I am, now, feign to give to them, and keep
Music, and a continual Table, to inuit 'hem;

FVL. Yes, and they study your kitchen, more then you:

SEM. Eat my self out with usury, and my Lord, too,
And all my officers, and friends beside,
To procure moneys, for the needful charge
I must be at, to have 'hem: And, yet, scarce
Can I atchieue 'hem, so.

FVL. Why, that is because
You affect young faces only, and smooth chinnes,
Sempronia. If youl'd love beards, and bristles,
(One with another, as others do) or wrinkles --
Who Is that? Look Galla.

GAL. It Is the party, Madame.

FVL. What party? Has he no name?

GAL. It Is Quintus Curious.

FVL. Did I not bid 'hem, say, I kept may chamber?

GAL. Why, so they do.

SEM. I Will leave you, Fuluia.

FVL. Nay, good Sempronia, stay.

SEM. In faith, I will not.

FVL. By Juno, I would not see him.

SEM. I Will not hinder you.

GAL. You know, he will not be kept out, Madam.

SEM. No,
Nor shall not, careful Galla, by my means.

FVL. As I do live, Sempronia.

SEM. What needs this?

FVL. Go, say, I am asleep, and ill at ease.

SEM. By Castor, no; I Will tell him, you are awake;
And very well. Stay Galla. Farewell Fuluia:
I know my manners. Why do you labor, thus,
With action, against purpose? Quintus Curious,
She is, in faith, here, and in disposition:

FVL. Spite, with your courtesy. How shall I be tortured!

CVRIVS, FVLVIA, GALLA. WHere are you, fair one, that conceal your self;
And keep your beauty, within locks, and bars, here,
Like a fools treasure?

FVL. True, she was a fool,
When, first she showed it to a thief.

CVR. How pretty Solennesse!
So harsh, and short?

FVL. The fools Artillery, sir.

CVR. Then, make my gown off, for the'encounter.

FVL. Stay sir.
I am not in the mood.

CVR. I Will put you into it.

FVL. Best, put your self, in your case again, and keep
Your furious appetite warm, against you have place for it.

CVR. What! do you coy it?

FVL. No sir. I Am not proud.

CVR. I would you were. You think, this state becomes you?
By Hercules, it does not. Look in your glass, now,
And see, how sciruely that countenance shows;
You would be loath to own it.

FVL. I shall not change it.

CVR. Faith, but you must; and slack this bended brow;
And shoot less scorn: There is a Fortune coming
Toward you, Dainty, that will take thee, thus,
And set thee aloft, to tread upon the head
Of her own statue here in Rome.

FVL. I wonder,
Who let this Promiser in! Did you, good Diligence?
Give him his bribe, again. Or if you had none,
Pray you demand him, why he is so ventrous,
To press, thus, to my chamber, being for bidden
Both, by my self, and servants?

CVR. How! This's handsome!
And somewhat a new strain!

FVL. It Is not strained, Sir.
It Is very natural.

CVR. I have known it otherwise,
Between the parties, though.

FVL. For your foreknowledge,
Thank that, which made it. It will not be so,
Hereafter, I assure you.

CVR. No, my Mistress?

FVL. No though you bring the same materials.

CVR. Hear me,
You over act when you should vnderdoe.
A little call your self again, and think.
If you do this to practice on me' or find
At what forced distance you can hold your servant;
That' it be an artificial trick, to inflame,
And fire me more, fearing my love may need it,
As, heretofore, you have done; why, proceed.

FVL. As I have done heretofore?

CVR. Yes, when you would feign
Your husbands jealousy, your servants watches,
Speak softly, and run often to the door,
Or to the windore, form strange fears that were not;
As if the pleasure were less accomptable,
That were secure.

FVL. You are an impudent fellow.

CVR. And, when you might better have done it, at the gate,
To take me in at the casement.

FVL. I take you in?

CVR. Yes, you my Lady. And, then, being abed with you,
To have your well taught wayter, here, come running,
And cry, her Lord, and hide me without cause,
Crushed in a chest, or thrust up in a chimney.
When he, tame, Crow, was winking at his Farm;
Or, had he been here, and present, would have kept
Both eyes, and beak sealed up, for six sesterces.

FVL. You have a slanderous, beastly, vnwash'd tongue,
IN your rude mouth, and sauouring your self,
Vn-manner'd Lord.

CVR. How now!

FVL. It is your title, Sir.
Who (since you have lost your own good name, and know not
What to loose more) care not, whose honor you wound,
Or fame' you poison with it. You should go,
And vent your self, in the region, where you live,
Among the Suburbe-Brothels, Baudes, and Brokers,
Whither your broken fortunes have designed you.

CVR. Nay, then I must stop your fury, I see; and pluck
The tragic visor off. Come, Lady Cypris,
Know your own virtues, quickly. I Will not be
Put to the woing of you thus, afresh,
At every turn, for all the Venus in you.
Yield, and be pliant; or by Pollux -- How now?
Will Lais turn a Lucrece?

FVL. No, but by Castor,
Hold off your Rauishers hands, I pierce your heart, else.
I Will not be put to kill my self, as she did
For you, sweet Tarquine. What? do you fall off?
Nay, it becomes you graciously. Put not up.
You Will sooner draw your weapon on me, I think it,
Then on the Senate, who have cast you forth
Disgracefully, to be the common tale
Of the whole City; base, infamous Man:
For, were you other, you would there employ
Your desperate dagger.

CVR. Fuluia, you do know
The strengths you have upon me; Do not use
Your power too like a Tyran: I can bear,
Almost until you break me.

FVL. I do know, Sir,
So does the Senate, too, know, you can bear.

CVR. By all the Gods, that Senate will smart deep
For your vpbraidings. I should be right sorry
To have the means so to be veng'd on you,
(At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them.
But, go you on still: Fare you well, dear Lady;
You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud.
You will repent these moodes, and ere't be long, too.
I shall have you come about, again.

FVL. Do you think so?

CVR. Yes, and I know so.

FVL. By what Augury?

CVR. By the fair Entrails of the Matrons chests,
Gold, Pearl, and Jewels, here in Rome, which Fuluia,
Will then (but late) say that she might have shared.
And, grieuing, miss.

FVL. Tut, all your promised Mountains,
And Seas, I am so stalely acquainted with --.

CVR. But, when you see the universal flood
Run by your coffers; that my Lords, the Senators,
Are sold for slaves, their Wives for bond-women,
Their Houses, and fine Gardens given away,
And all their goods, under the Spear, at outcry,
And you have none of this; but are still Fuluia,
Or perhaps less, while you are thinking of it:
You will advise then, Coyness, with your cushion,
And look of your fingers; say, how you were wished;
And so, he left, you.

FVL. Call him again, Galla:
This is not usual, something hangs on this
That I must win out of him.

CVR. How now, melt you?

FVL. Come, you will laugh, now, at my easiness?
But, it is no miracle; Doves, they say, will bill,
After their pecking, and their murmuring.

CVR. Yes,
And then it is kindly. I would have my Love
Angry, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest
Of her behavior.

FVL. You do see, I study
How I may please you, then. But you think, Curious
It Is couetise has wrought me; If you love me
Change that unkind conceit.

CVR. By my loved soul,
I love thee, like to it; and it is my study,
More then mine own revenge, to make thee happy.

FVL. And'tis that just revenge does make me happy
To hear you prosequute: and which, indeed,
Has won me, to you, more, then all the hope
Of what can else be promised. I love valor
Better, then any Lady loves her face,
Or dressing: then my self does. Let me grow
Still, where I do embrace. But what good means
Have you to effect it? Shall I know your project?

CVR. Thou shall, if thou wilt be gracious.

FVL. As I can be.

CVR. And will thou kiss me, then?

FVL. As close as shells
Of Cockles meet.

CVR. And print 'hem deep?

FVL. Quite through
Our subtle lips.

CVR. And often?

FVL. I will sow 'hem.
Faster then you can reap. What is your plot?

CVR. Why, now my Fuluia looks, like her bright name,
And is her self.

FVL. Nay, answer me, your plot:
I pray thee tell me, Quintus.

CVR. I, these sounds
Become a Mistress. Here is harmony.
When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you
Is not with violence, but service. Cruel,
A Lady is a fire, gentle, a light.

FVL. Will you not tell me, what I ask you?

CVR. All,
That I can think, sweet Love, or my breast holds,
I Will pour into thee.

FVL. What is your design, then?

CVR. I Will tell thee; Catiline shall now be Consul:
But, you will hear more, shortly.

FVL. Nay, dear Love.

CVR. I Will speak it, in thine arms; Let us go in.
Rome will be sacked, her wealth will be our prize;
By public ruin, private spirits must rise.

CHORUS. GReat Father Mars, and greater Jove,
By whose high auspice, Rome has stood
So long; and, first, was built in blood
Of your great Nephew, that then strove
Not with his brother, but your Rites:
Be present to her now, as then,
And let not proud, and factious Men
Against your wills oppose their mights.
Our Consuls, now, are to be made;
O, put it in the public voice
To make a free, and worthy choice;
Excluding such as would invade
The Common wealth. Let whom we name
Have wisdom, foresight, fortitude,
Be more with faith, then face endu'd,
And study conscience, above ^ame.
Such, as not seek to get the start
In State, by power, parts, or bribes,
Ambition's baudes; but move the Tribes
By Virtue, modesty, desert.
Such, as to justice will adhaere,
What ever great one it offend,
And from the' embraced truth not bend
For envy, hatred, gifts, or fear.
That, by their deeds, will make it known,
Whose dignity they do sustain;
And life, state, glory, all they gain,
Count the Republiques, not their own.
Such the old Bruti, Decij were,
The Cipi, Curtij, who did give
Themselves for Rome: And would not live,
As men, good, only for a year.
Such were the great Camilli, too;
The Fabij, Seipio's; that still thought
No work, at price enough, was bought,
That for their Country they could do.
And, to her honor, so did knit;
As all their acts were understood
The sinews of the Public good:
And they themselves, o^e soul, with it.
These men were truly Magistrates;
These neither practiced force, nor forms;
Nor did they leave the helm, in storms:
And such they are make happy States.

ACT. iij.
CICERO, CATO, CATVLVS, ANTONIUS, CRASSVS, CAESAR, CHORUS, LICTORS. GReat
Honors are great burdens: But, on whom
They'are cast with envy, he does bear two loades.
His cares must still be double to his joys,
In any Dignity; where, if he err
He finds no pardon: and, for doing well
A most small praise, and that wrung out, by force.
I speak this, Romans, knowing what the weight
Of the high charge, you 'haue trusted to me, is.
Not, that thereby I would with art decline
The good, or greatness of your benefit;
For, I ascribe it to your singular grace
And vow, to owe it to no title else,
Except the Gods, that Cicero'is your Consul.
I have no vrnes; no dustie moniments;
No broken images of ancestors,
Wanting an ear, or nose; no forged tables
Of long descents, to boast false honors from;
Or be my undertakers to your trust.
But a new Man (as I am styled in Rome)
Whom you have dignified; and more, in whom
Yo'haue cut a way, and left it open for virtue
Hereafter, to that place, which our Great men
Held shut up, with all rampires, for themselves.
Nor have but few of them, in time been made
Your Consuls so; New men, before me, none:
At my first suite; In my just year; Preferred
To all competitors; and some the noblest.

CRA. Now the vain swells.

CAES. Up glory.

CIC. And to have
Your loud consents, from your own vtter'd voices;
Not silent books: nor from the meaner tribes,
But first, and last, the universal concourse.
This is my joy, my gladness. But my care,
My industry, and vigilance now must work,
That still your counsel of me be approved;
Both, by your selves, and those, to whom you have,
With grudge, preferred me: Two things I must labor,
That neither they vpbraid, nor you repent you.
For every lapse of mine will, now, be called
Your error; if I make such: But, my hope is,
So to bear through, and out, the Consulship,
As spite shall never wound you, though it may me.
And, for my self, I have prepared this strength,
To do so well; as, if there happen ill
Unto me, it shall make the Gods to blush,
And be their crime, not mine, that I am enui'd;

CAES. O confidence! more new, then is the Man!

CIC. I know well, in what terms I do receive
The Common wealth, how vexed, how perplexed:
In which, there is not that mischief, or ill fate,
That good men fear not, wicked men expect not.
I know, beside, some turbulent practices
Already on foot, and rumors of more dangers,

CRA. Or you will make them, if there be none.

CIC. Last,
I know, 'twas this, which made the envy, and pride
Of the Great Roman blood bate, and give way
To my election.

CAT. Marcus Tullius, true;
Our need made thee our Consul, and thy virtue.

CAES. Cato, you will undo him, with your praise.

CAT. Caesar will hurt himself, with his own envy.

CHO. The voice of Cato is the voice of Rome.

CAT. The voice of Rome is the consent of Heaven;
And that has placed thee, Cicero, at the helm,
Where thou must render, now, thy self a Man,
And Master of thy art. Each petty hand
Can steer a ship becalmed; but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
His tides, his currents; how to shift his sails;
What she will be are in foul, what in fair weathers;
Where her springs are, her leaks; and how to stop 'hem;
What sands, what shelues, what rocks to threate^ her;
The forces, and the natures of all winds,
Gusts, storms, and tempests; when her keele ploughs hell
And deck knocks heaven: then, to manage her
Becomes the name, and office of a Pilot.

CIC. Which I Will perform, with all the diligence,
And fortitude I have; not for my year,
But for my life; except my life be less,
And that my year conclude it: If it must,
Your will, loved Gods. This heart shall yet employ
A day, an hour is left me, so, for Rome.
As it shall spring a life, out of my death,
To shine, for ever glorious in my facts:
" The vicious count their years, virtuous their acts.

CHO. Most noble Consul! Let us wait him home.

CAES. Most popular Consul he is grown, me thinks.

CRA. How the rout cling to him!

CAES. And Cato leads 'hem!

CRA. You, his colleague, Antonius, are not looked on.

ANT. Not I, nor do I care.

CAES, He enioyes rest,
And ease, the while: Let the others spirit toil,
And wake it out, that was inspired for turmoyle.

CATV. If all reports be true, yet, Caius Caesar,
The time has need of such a watch, and spirit:

CAES. Reports? Do you believe 'hem Catulus,
Why, he does make, and breed 'hem for the people;
TO endeare his service to 'hem. Do you not taste
An art, that is so common? Popular men,
They must create strange Monsters, and then quell 'hem;
To make their arts seeeme something. Would you have
Such an Herculean Actor in the Scene,
And not his Hydra? They must sweat no less
To fit their properties, then to express their parts.

CRA. " Treasons, and guilty men are made in States
" Too often, to dignifie the Magistrates.

CATV. " Those States be wretched, that are forced to buy
" Their Rulers fame, with their own infamy.

CRA. We therefore, should provide that ours do not.

CAES. That will Antonius make his care.

ANT. I shall.

CAES. And watch the watcher.

CATV. Here comes Catiline.
How does he brook his late repulse?

CAES. I know not.
But hardly sure.

CAT. Longinus, too, did stand?

CAES. At first: But he gave way unto his friend.

CATV. Who Is that come? Lentulus?

CAES. Yes, He is again
Taken into the Senate.

ANT. And made Praetor.

CAT. I know it. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls;

CAES. True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then.

CATILINE, ANTONIUS, CATVLVS, CAESAR. CRASSVS, LONGINVS, LENTVLVS. HAyle
noblest Romans. The most worthy Consul,
I gratulate your Honor.

ANT. I could wish
It had been happier, by your fellowship,
Most noble Sergius, had it pleased the people.

CATI. It did not please the Gods; who'instruct the people.
And their vnquestion'd pleasures must be served.
They know what is fitter for us, then our selves;
And 'twere impiety, to think against them.

CATV. You bear it rightly, Lucius; and, it glads, me,
To find your thoughts so even.

CATI. I shall still
Study to make them such to Rome, and Heaven.
I would withdraw with you, a little, Julius.

CAES. I Will come home to you: Crassus would not have you
To speak to him, before Quintus Catulus.

CATI. I apprehend you. No, when they shall judge
Honors convenient for me, I shall have 'hem,
With a full hand: I know it. In mean time,
They are no less part of the Commonwealth,
That do obey, then those, that do command.

CATV. O, let me kiss your forehead, Lucius.
How are you wronged!

CATI. By whom?

CATV. Public report.
That gives you out, to stomach your repulse;
And brook it deadly.

CAT^. Sir: she brooks not me.
Believe me rather, and your self, now, of me;
It is a kind of slander, to trust rumor.

CATV. I know it. And I could be angry with it.

CATI. So may not I. Where it concerns himself,
Who Is angry at a slander, makes it true.

CATV. Most noble Sergius! This your temper melts me.

CRA. Will you do office to the Consul, Quintus?

CAES. That Cato, and the Rout have done the other?

CATV. I wait, when he will go. Be still your self.
He wants no state, or honors, that has virtue,

CATI. Did I appear so tame, as this man thinks me?
Looked I so poor, so dead? So like that nothing,
Which he calls virtuous? O my breast, break quickly;
And show my friends my in-parts, least they think
I have betrayed 'hem.

LON. Where Is Gabinius?

LEN. Gone.

LON. And Vargunteius?

LEN. Slipped away; all shrunk:
Now that he mist the Consul-ship.

CATI. I am
The scorn of bondmen; who are next to beasts.
What can I worse pronounce my self, that is fitter?
The Owl of Rome, whom Boys, and Girls will hout;
That were I set up, for that wooden God,
That keeps our gardens, could not fright the crows,
Or the least Bird from muting on my head.

LON. It Is strange how he should miss it.

LEN. Is It not stranger,
The vpstart Cicero should carry it so,
By all consents, from men so much his Masters?

LON. It Is true.

CATI. To what a shadow, am I melted!

LON. Antonius wan it but by some few voices.

CATI. Struck through, like air, and feel it not. My wounds
Close faster, then they are made.

LEN. The whole design,
And enterprise is lost by it. All hands quit it,
Upon his fail.

CATI. I grow mad at my patience.
It is a Visor that has poisoned me.
Would it had burnt me up, and I died inward:
My heart first turned to ashes.

LON. Here Is Cethegus yet.

CATILINE, CETHEGVS, LENTVLVS, LONGINVS, CATO. REpulse upon repulse? An
In-mate, Consul?
That I could reach the axell, where the pinnes are,
Which bolt this frame; that I might pull 'hem out,
And pluck all into Chaos, with my self.

CET. What, are we wishing now?

CATI. Yes, my Cethegus.
Who would not fall with all the world about him?

CET. Not I, that would stand on it, when it falls;
And force new Nature out, to make another.
These wishings taste of woman, not of Roman.
Let us seek other arms.

CATI. What should we do?

CET. Do, and not wish; something, that wishes take not:
So sudden, as the Gods should not prevent,
Nor scarce have time, to fear.

CATI. O noble Caius!

CET. It likes me better, that you are not Consul.
I would not go through open doors, but break 'hem;
Swim to my ends, through blood; or build a bridge
Of carcasses; make on, upon the heads
Of men, struck down, like piles; to reach the lives
Of those remain, and stand: Then is it a pray,
When Danger stoppes, and Ruin makes the way.

CATI. How thou do utter me, brave soul, that may not,
At all times, show such as I am; but bend
Unto occasion? Lentulus, this man,
If all our fire were out, would fetch down new,
Out of the hand of Jove; and riuet him
To Caucasus, should he but frown: and let
His own gaunt Eagle fly at him, to tire.

LEN. Peace, here comes Cato.

CAT. Let him come, and hear.
I will no more dissemble. Quit us all;
I, and my loved Cethegus here, alone
Will undertake this Giants war, and carry it.

LEN. What needs this, Lucius?

LON. Sergius be more wary.

CATI. Now, Marcus Cato, our new Consuls spy,
What is your sour austerity sent to explore.

CATO. Nothing in thee, licentious Catiline:
Halters, and racks cannot express from thee
More, then thy deeds. It Is only judgment waits thee.

CATI. Whose? Cato's? shall he judge me?

CAT. No, the Gods*
" Who, ever, follow those, they go not with:
And Senate; who, with fire, must purge sick Rome
Of noisome Citizens, whereof thou art one.
Be gone, or else let me. It Is bane to draw
The same air with thee.

CET. Strike him.

LEN. Hold good Caius;

CET, Fearst thou not, Cato?

CATO. Rash Cethegus, no.
Twere wrong with Rome, when Catiline and thou
Do threat, if Cato feared.

CATI. The fire you speak of
If any flame of it approach my fortunes,
I Will quench it, not with water, but with ruin.

CATO. You hear this, Romans.

CATI. Bear it to the Consul.

CET. I would have sent away his soul, before him.
You are too heavy, Lentulus, and remis^e;
It is for you we labor, and the Kingdom
Promised you by the Sibyll's.

CATI. Which his Praetorship,
And some small flattery of the Senate more,
Will make him to forget.

LEN. You wrong me, Lucius.

LON. He will not need these spurs.

CET. The action needs 'hem.
" These things, when they proceed not, they go backward.

LEN. Let us consult then.

CET, Let us, first, take arms.
They that deny us just things, now, will give
All that we ask; if once they see our swords.

CAT. Our objects must be sought with wounds, not words.

CICERO, FVLVIA. IS there a Heaven? and Gods? and can it be
They should so slowly hear, so slowly see?
Has Jove no thunder? or is Jove become
Stupide as thou art? o neare-wretched Rome,
When both thy Senate, and thy Gods do sleep,
And neither thine, not their own States do keep!
What will awake thee, Heaven? what can excite
Thine anger, if this practice be too light?
His former drifts partake of former times,
But this last plot was only Catilines.
O, that it were his last. But he, before
Has safely done so much, he will still dare more.
Ambition, like a torrent, nere looks back;
And is a swelling, and the last affection
A high mind can put off: being both a Rebel
Unto the soul, and reason, and enforces
All laws, all conscience, treades upon religion,
And offers violence to Natures self.
But here, is that transcends it. A black purpose
To confound Nature: and to ruin that,
Which never Age, nor Mankind can repair.
Sit down, good Lady; Cicero is lost
In this your fable: for, to think it true
Tempts my reason. It so far exceedes
All insolent fictions of the tragic Scene.
The Commonwealth, yet panting, underneath
The stripes, and wounds of a late civil war,
Gasping for life, and scarce restored to hope;
To seek t'oppresse her, with new cruelty,
And utterly extinguish her long name,
With so prodigious, and unheard of fierceness*
What sink of Monsters, wretches of lost minds,
Mad after change, and desperate in their states,
Wearied, and galled with their necessities,
(For all this I allow them) durst have thought it?
Would not the barbarous deeds have been believed,
Of Marius, and Sylla, by our Children,
Without, this fact had rise forth greater, for them?
All, that they did, was piety, to this.
They, yet, but murdered Kinsfolk, Brothers, Parents,
Ravished the Virgins, and, perhaps, some Matrons;
They left the City standing, and the Temples:
The Gods, and Majesty of Rome were safe yet.
These purpose to fire it, to dispoile them,
(Beyond the other evils,) and lay wast
The farre-triumphed world: For, unto whom
Rome is too little, what can be enough?

FVL. It Is true, my Lord, I had the same discourse.

CIC. And, then, to take a horride Sacrament
In humane blood, for execution
Of this their dire design; which might be called
The height of wickedness: but that, that was higher,
For which they did it.

FVL. I assure your Lordship,
The extreme horror of it almost turned me
To air, when first I heard it; I was all
A vapor, when 't was told me; And I longed
To vent it any where; 'Twas such a secret,
I thought, it would have burnt me up.

CIC. Good Fuluia,
Fear not your act; and less repent you of it.

FVL. I do not, my good Lord. I know to whom
I have vtter'd it.

CIC. You have discharged it, safely.
Should Rome, for whom you have done the happy service,
Turn most ingrate; yet were your virtue paid
In conscience of the fact: so much good deeds
Reward themselves.

FVL. My Lord, I did it not
To any other aim, but for it self.
To no ambition.

CIC. You have learned the difference
Of doing office to the public weal,
And private friendship, and have shown it, Lady.
Be still your self. I have sent for Quintus Curious,
And (for your virtuous sake) i^ I can win him,
Yet, to the common wealth; He shall be safe too.

FVL I Will undertake, my Lord, he will be won.

CIC. Pray you, join with me, then: And help to work him.

CICERO, LICTOR, FVLVIA, CVRIVS. HOw now? Is he come?

LIC. He'is here, my Lord.

CIC. Go presently,
Pray my Colleague Antonius, I may speak with him,
About some present business of the State;
And (as you go) call on my brother Quintus,
And pray him, with the Tribunes to come to me.
Bid Curious enter. Ful^ia, you will aid me?

FVL. It is my duty.

CIC. O, my noble Lord!
I have to chide you, in faith. Give me your hand.
Nay, be not troubled; 't shallbe gently, Curious.
You look upon this Lady? What? Do you guess
My business, yet? Come, If you frown, I thunder:
Therefore, put on your better looks, and thoughts.
There Is naught but fair, and good intended to you*
And I would make those your complexion.
Would you, of whom the Senate had that hope,
As, on my knowledge, it was in their purpose,
Next sitting, to restore you: as they have done
The stupide, and ungrateful Lentulus;
(Excuse me, that I name you thus, together,
For, yet, you are not such) would you, I say,
A person both of Blood and Honor, stock't
In a long race of virtuous Ancestors,
Embarke your self for such a hellish action,
With Parricides, and Traitors, men turned Furies,
Out of the wast, and ruin of their fortunes;
(For it is despair, that is the mother of madness)
Such as want (that, which all Conspirators,
But they, have first) mere color for their mischief?
O, I must blush with you. Come, you shall not labor
To extenuate your guilt, but quit it clean;
" Bad men excuse their faults, good men will leave 'hem.
" He acts the third crime, that defends the first.
Here is a Lady, that has got the start,
I^ piety, of us all; and, for whose virtue,
I could almost turn Lover, again: but that
Terentia would be i^alous. What an honor
Has she achieved to her self! What voices,
Titles, and loud applauses will pursue her,
Through every street! What windores will be filled,
To shoot eyes at her! What envy, and grief in Matrons,
They are not she! when this her act shall seem
Worthier a Chariot, then if Pompey came,
With Asia chained! All this is while she lives.
But dead, her very name will be a Statue,
Not wrought for time, but rooted in the minds
Of all posterity; when Brass, and Marble,
I, and the Capitol it self is dust.

FVL. Your Honor thinks too highly of me.

CIC. No:
I cannot think enough. And I would have
Him emulate you. It Is no shame, to follow
The better precedent. She shows you, Curious,
What claim your Country lays to you; and what duty
You owe to it: Be not afraid, to break
With Murderers, and Traitors, for the saving
A life, so near, and necessary to you,
As is your Countries. Think but on her right.
" No Child can be too natural to his Parent.
She is our common Mother, and does challenge
The prime part of us; Do not stop, but give it:
" He, that is void of fear, may soon be just,
" And no Religion binds men to be Traitors.

FVL. My Lord, he understands it; and will follow
Your saving counsel. But his shame, yet, stays him.
I know, that he is coming.

CVR. Do you know it?

FVL. Yes, let me speak with you.

CVR. O you are^.

FVL. What a^ I?

CVR. Speak not so loud.

FVL. I am, what you should be,
Come, do you think, I Would walk in any plot,
Where Madame Sempronia should take place of me,
And Fuluia come in the rere, or on the by?
That I would be her second, in a business,
Though it might vantage me all the Sun sees?
It was a seely phant'sie of yours. Apply
Your self to me, and the Consul, and be wife;
Follow the fortune I have put you into:
You may be some thing this way, and with safety.

CIC. Nay, I must tolerate no whisperings, Lady.

FVL. Sir, you may hear. I tell him, in the way,
Wherein he was, how hazardous his course was.

CIC. How hazardous? how certain to all ruin.
Did he, or do, yet, any of them imagine
The Gods would sleep, to such a Stygian practice,
Against that Commonwealth, which they have founded
With so much labor, and like care have kept,
Now near seven hundred years? It is a madness,
Wherewith Heaven blinds 'hem, when it would confound 'hem,
That they should think it. Come, my Curious,
I see your nature's right; you shall no more
Be mentioned with them: I will call you mine,
And trouble this good shame, no farther. Stand
Firm for your Country; and become a man
Honored, and loved. It were a noble life,
To be found dead, embracing her. Know you,
What thanks, what titles, what rewards the Senate
Will heap upon you, certain, for your service?
Let not a desperate action more engage you,
Then safety should; and wicked friendship force
What honesty, and virtue cannot work.

FVL. He tells you right, sweet friend: It Is saving counsel.

CVR. Most noble Consul, I am yours, and ^ers;
I mean my Countries: you' have formed me new.
Inspiring me, wi^h what I should be, truly.
And I entreat, my faith may not seem cheaper
For springing out of penitence.

CIC. Good Curious,
It shall be dearer rather, and because
Il'd make it such, hear how I trust you more.
Keep still your former face; and mix again
With th^se lost spirits. Run all their mazes with'hem;
For such are treasons. Find their windings out,
And subtle turnings, watch their snaky ways,
Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkness,
Where they are feign to creep upon their breasts
In paths nere trod by Men, but Wolves, and Panthers.
^earne, beside Catiline, Lentulus, and those,
Whose names I have, what new ones they draw in;
Who else are likely; what those Great ones are,
They do not name; what ways they mean to take;
And whither their hopes point; to war: or ruin,
By some surprise. Explore all their intents,
And what you find may profit the Republique,
Acquaint me with it, either, by your self,
Or this your virtuous friend, on whom I lay
The care of urging you; I Will see, that Rome
Shall prove a thankful, and a bounteous Mother:
Be secret as the night.

CVR. And constant Sir.

CIC. I do not doubt it. Though the time cut off
All vows. " The dignity of truth is lost,
With much protesting* Who is there! This way,
Least you be seen, and met. And when you come,
Be this your token; to this fellow. Light 'hem.
O Rome, in what a sickness art thou fallen!
How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head
Is drowned in sleep, and all thy body feu'ry!
No noise, n^ pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
Thy Lethargy is such: or if, by chance,
Thou heau'st thy eyelids up, thou do forget
Sooner, then thou were told, thy proper danger.
I did vnreuerendly, to blame the Gods,
Who wake for thee, though thou snore to thy self.
Is it not strange, thou should be so diseased,
And so secure? But more, that the first symptoms
Of such a malady, should not rise out
From any worthy member, but a base
And common strumpet, worthless to be named
A hair, or part of thee? Think, think, hereafter,
What thy needs were, when thou must use such means:
And lay it to thy breast, how much the Gods
Vpbraid thy foul neglect of them; by making
So vile a thing, the Author of thy safety.
They could have wrought by nobler ways: have struck
Thy foes with forked lightning; or ramm'd thunder;
Thrown hills upon 'hem, in the act; have sent
Death, like a dampe, to all their families;
Or caused their consciences to burst 'hem. But,
When they will show thee what thou art, and make
A scornful difference 'twixt their power, and thee,
They help thee by such aides, as Geese, and Harlots.
How now? What answer? Is he come?

LIC. Your Brother,
Will straight be here; and your Colleague Antonius
Said, coldly, he would follow me.

CIC. I, that
Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my fear;
He is a man, against whom I must provide,
That (as he will do no good) he do no harm;
He, though he be not of the plot, will like it,
And wish it should proceed; for, unto men,
Pressed with their wants, all change is ever welcome.
I must with offices, and patience win him;
Make him, by art, that which he is not borne,
A friend unto the public; and bestow
The Province on him; which is by the Senate
Decreed to me: That benefit will bind him.
It Is well, if some men will do well, for price;
" So few are virtuous, when the reward's away:
Nor must I be unmindful of my private;
For which I have called my Brother, and the Tribunes,
My Kins-folke, and my Clients to be near me;
" He that stands up against Traitors, and their ends,
" Shall need a double guard, of law, and friends:
" Especially, in such an envious State,
" That sooner will accuse the Magistrate,
" Then the Delinquent; and will rather grieve
" The Treason is not acted, then believe.

CAESAR, CATILINE. THe night grows on; and you are for your meeting:
I Will therefore end in few. Be resolute,
And put your enterprise in act: The more
" Actions of depth, and danger are considered,
" The less assuredly they are performed.
And thence it happens, that the brauest plots
(Not executed straight) have been discovered.
Say, you are constant, or another, a third,
Or more; there may be yet one wretched spirit,
With whom the fear of punishment shall work
Above all the thoughts of honor, and revenge.
You are not, now, to think what is best to do,
As in beginnings; but, what must be done,
Being thus entered: and slip no advantage
That may secure you. Let 'hem call it mischief;
" When it is past, and prosper'd, 't will be virtue.
" They Are petty crimes are punished, great rewarded.
Nor must you think of peril; since, " Attempts,
Begun with danger, still do end with glory:
" And, when need spurs, despair will be called wisdom.
Less ought the care of men, or fame to fright you;
" For they, that win, do seldom receive shame
" Of victory: how ere it be atchiu'd;
And vengeance, least. For who, besieged with wants,
Would stop at death, or any thing beyond it?
Come, there was never any great thing thing, yet,
Aspired, but by violence, or fraud:
And he that sticks (for folly of a conscience)
To reach it --.

CAT. Is a good religious fool.

CAES. A superstitious slave, and will die beast.
Good night. You know what Crassus thinks, and I,
By this: Prepare you wings, as large as sails,
To cut through air, and leave no print behind you.
A Serpent, ere he comes to be a Dragon,
Does eat a Bat: and so must you a Consul,
That watches. What you do, do quickly Sergius.
You shall not stir for me.

CAT. Excuse me, lights there.

CAES. By no means.

CAT. Stay then. All good thoughts to Caesar.
And like to Crassus.

CAES. Mind but your friends counsels.

CATILINE, AVRELIA, LECCA. OR, I will bear no mind. How now, Aurelia?
Are your confederates come? the Ladies?

AVR. Yes.

CAT. And is Simpronia there?

AVR. She is.

CAT. That Is well.
She has a sulphurous spirit, and will take
Light at a spark. Break with them, gentle love,
About the drawing as many of their Husbands,
Into the plot, as can: If not, to rid 'hem.
That 'll be the easier practice, unto some,
Who have been tired with 'hem long. Solicit
Their aids, for money; and their Servants help,
In firing of the City, at the time
Shall be designed. Promise 'hem States, and Empires,
And men, for Lovers, made of better clay,
Then ever the old Potter Titan knew.
Who Is that? O, Porcius Lecca! are they met?

LEC. They are all, here.

CAT. Love, you have your instructions:
I Will trust you with the stuff you have to work on.
You Will form it? Porcius, fetch the silver Eagle
I ga' you in charge. And pray 'hem, they will enter.

CATILINE, CETHEGVS, CVRIVS, LENTVLVS, VARGVNTEIVS, LONGINVS, GABINIVS,
CEPARIVS, AVTRONIVS. andC. O Friends, your faces glad me. This will be
Our last, I hope, of consultation.

CAT. So, it had need.

CVR. We loose occasion, daily.

CAT. I, and our means: whereof one wounds me most,
That was the fairest. Piso is dead, in Spain.

CET. As we are, here.

LON. And, as it is thought, by envy
Of Pompey's followers.

LEN. He too's coming back,
Now, out of Asia.

CAT. Therefore, what we 'intend
We must be swift in. Take your seats, and hear.
I have, already, sent Septimius
Into the Picene territory; and Julius,
To raise force, for us, in Apulia:
Manlius at Fesulae is (by this time) up,
With the old needy troops, that followed Sylla;
And all do but expect, when we will give
The blow at home. Behold this silver Eagle,
Was Marius standard, in the Cimbrian war,
Fatal to Rome; and, as our Augures tell me,
Shall still be so: For which one omenous cause,
I^ have kept it safe, and done it sacred rites,
As to a Godhead; in a Chapel built
Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands,
To follow it, with vows of death, and ruin,
Struck silently, and home. So waters speak
When they run deepest. Now Is the time, this year,
The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
As fatal too, to Rome, by all predictions;
And, in which, honored Lentulus must rise
A King, if he pursue it.

CVR. If he do not,
He is not worthy the great destiny.

LEN. It is too great for me, but what the Gods,
And their great loves decree me, I must not
Seem careless of.

CAT. No nor we envious.
We have enough beside, all Gallia, Belgia,
Greece* Spain, and Afric.

CVR. ^and Asia too,
Now Pompey is returning.

CAT. Noblest Romans,
Me thinks our looks, are not so quick and high,
As they were wont.

CVR. No? whose is not?

CAT. We have
No anger in our eyes* no storm, no lightning:
Our hate is spent, and fumed away in vapor,
Before our hands be'at work. I can accuse
Not any one, but all of slacknesse.

CET. Yes,
And be your self such, while you do it.

CAT. Ha?
It Is sharply answered, Caius,

CET. Truly, truly.

LEN. Come, let us each one know his part to do,
And then be accused. Leave these untimely quarrels.

CVR. I would there were more Romes then one, to ruin.

CET. More Romes? More Worlds.

CVR. Nay then mo^e Gods, and Natures*
If they took part.

LEN. When shall the time be, first?

CAT. I think the Saturnals.

CET. 'Twill be too long.

CAT. They are not now far off, it is not a month.

CET. A week, a day, an hour is too far off,
Now, were the fittest time.

CAT. We have not laid
All things so safe, and ready.

CET. While we'are laying,
We shall all lie; and grow to earth. Would I
Were nothing ^n it, if not now. These things
They should be done, e're thought.

CAT. Nay, now your reason
Forsakes you, Caius. Think, but what commodity
That time will minister; the Cities custom
Of being, then, i^ mirth, and feast.

LEN. Loosed whole
In pleasure and security.

AVL. Each house
Resolved in freedom.

CVR. Every slave a master.

LON. And they too no mean aides.

CVR. Made from their hope
Of liberty.

LEN. Or hate unto their Lords.

VAR. It Is sure, there cannot be a time found out
More apt, and natural.

LEN. Nay, good Cethegus,
Why do your passions, now, disturb our hopes?

CET. Why do your hopes delude your certainties?

CAT. You must lend him his way. Think, for the order,
And process of it.

LON. Yes.

LEN. I like not fire:
'Twill too much wast my City.

CAT. Were it embers*
There will be wealth enough, raked out of them,
To spring a new: It must be fire, or nothing.

LON. What else should fright, or terrefie 'hem?

VAR. True.
In that confusion, must be the chief slaughter.

CVR. Then we shall kill 'hem brauest.

CEP. And in heaps.

AVT. Strew Sacrifices.

CVR. Make the Earth an Altar.

LON, And Rome the fire.

LEC. 'Twill be a noble night.

VAR. And worth all Sylla's days.

CVR. When Husbands, Wives,
Grandfires, and Nephews, Servants, and their Lords,
Virgins, and Priests, the Infant, and the Nurse
Go all to hell, together, in a fleet.

CAT. I would have you, Longinus, and Statilius,
To take the charge of the firing, which must be,
At a sign given with a trumpet, done
In twelve chief places of the City, at once.
The flax, and sulphur, are already laid
In, at Cethegus house. So are the weapons.
Gabinius, you, with other force, shall stop
The pipes, and conduits: And kill those that come
For water.

CVR. What shall I do?

CAT. All will have
Employment, fear not: Ply the execution.

CVR. For that, trust me, and Cethegus.

CAT. I will be
At hand, with the army, to meet those that escape.
And Lentulus, begirt you Pompey's house,
To seize his sons alive: for they are they
Must make our peace with him. All else cut off,
As Tarqu^ did the Poppey heads; or mowers
A field of thistles; or else, up, as ploughes
Do barren lands; and strike together flints,
And clods; th'ungratefull Senate, and the People:
Till no rage, gone before, or coming after
May weigh with yours, though Horror leapt her self
Into the scale: but, in your violent acts,
The fall of torrents, and the noise of tempests,
The boiling of Charybdis, the Seas wildness*
The eating force of flames, and wings of winds,
Be all outwrought, by your transcendent furies.
It had been done, ere this, had I been Consul;
We'had had no stop, n^ let.

LEN. How find you Antonius?

CAT. The'other has won him lost, that Cicero
Was borne to be my opposition,
And stands in all our ways.

CVR. Remove him first.

C^T. May that, yet, be done sooner?

CAT. Would it were done.

CVR. VAR. I Will do it.

CET. It is my province; none usurp it.

LEN. What are your means?

CET. Enquire not. He shall die.
Shall, was too slowly said. He'is dying. That
Is, yet, too slow. He'is dead.

CAT. Brave, only Roman,
Whose soul might be the worlds soul, were that dying;
Refuse not, yet, the aids of these your friends:

LEN. Here Is Vargunteius holds good quarter with him.

CAT. And under the pretext of clientele
And visitation, with the morning Hayle,
Will be admitted.

CET. What is that to me?

VAR. Yes, we may kill him in his bed, and safely.

CET. Safe is your way, then; take it. Mine Is mine own.

CAT. Follow him, Vargunteius, and persuade,
The morning is the fittest time.

LON. The night
Will turn all into tumult.

LEN. And perhaps
Miss of him too.

CAT. Entreat, and conjure him.
In all our names.

LEN. By all our vows, and friendships.

SEMPRONIA, AVRELIA, F^LVIA, to them. WHat! is our Council broke up first?

AVR. You say,
Women are greatest talkers.

SEM. We have done;
And are now fit for action.

LON. Which is passion.
There Is your best actiuity, Lady.

SEM. How
Kno^es your wise fatness that?

LON. Your Mothers daughter
Did teach me, Madame.

CET. Come Sempronia, leave him:
He is a Giber. And our present business
Is of more serious consequence. Aurelia
Tells me, you 'haue done most masculinely within,
And played the Orator.

SEM. But we must hasten
To our design as well, and execute:
Not hang still, in the fever of an accident.

CAT. You say well, Lady.

SEM. I do like our plot
Exceeding well, it is sure; and we shall leave
Little to fortune, in it.

CAT. Your banquet stays.
Aurelia take her in. Where Is Ful^ia?

SEM. O the two Lovers are coupling.

CVR. In good faith,
She Is very ill, with sitting up.

SEM. Youl'd have her
Laugh, and lie down.

FVL. No, faith, Sempronia,
I am not well; I Will take my leave, it draws
Toward the morning. Curious shall stay with you.
Madam, I pray you pardon me, my health
I must respect.

AVR. Farewell, good Fuluia.

CVR. Make have, and bid him get his guards about him.
For Vargunteius, and Cornelius
Have vndertane it, should Cethegus miss:
Their reason, that they think his open rash^esse
Will suffer easier discovery,
Then their attempt; so veiled under friendship.
I Will bring you to your Coach. Tell him, beside,
Of Caesar's coming forth, here.

CAT. My sweet Madam,
Will you be gone?

FVL. I am, my Lord, in truth,
In some indisposition.

CAT. I do wish
You had all your health, sweet Lady. Lentulus,
You Will do her service.

LEN. To her coach, and duty.

CATILINE. WHat ministers men must, for practice, use!
The rash, the ambitious, needy, desperate,
Foolish, and wretched, even the dregs of Mankind,
To whores, and women! Still, it must be so.
Each have their proper place; and, in their rooms.
They are the best. Grooms fittest kindle fires*
Slaves carry burdens, Butchers are for slaughters,
Apothecaries, Butlers, Cooks for poisons;
As these for me: Dull, stupide Lentulus,
My stale, with whom I stalk; the rash Cethegus,
My executioner; and ^at Longinus,
Statilius, Curious, Ceparius, Cimber.
My laborers, pioners, and incendiaries;
With these domesticke traitors, bosom thieves,
Whom custom has called Wives; the readiest helps,
To strangle headstrong Husbands; rob the easy;
And lend the moneys, on returns of lust.
Shall Catiline not do, now, with these aides,
So sought, so sorted, something shall be called
Their labor, but his profit? and make Caesar
Repent his ventring counsels, to a spirit,
So much his Lord in mischief? when all these*
Shall, like the Brethren sprung of Dragons teeth*
Ruin each other; and he fall amongst 'hem:
With Crassus, Pompey, or who else appears,
But like, or near a great one. May my brain
Resolve to water, and my blood turn phlegm,
My hands, drop off, unworthy of my sword,
And that b' inspired, of it self, to rip
My breast, for my lost entrails; when I leave
A soul, that will not serve. And who will, are
The same with slaves; such clay I dare not fear.
The cruelty, I mean to act, I wish
Should be called mine, and tarry in my name;
Whilst after Ages do toil out themselves
In thinking for the like, but do it less:
And, were the power of all the fiends let loose,
With Fate to boot, it should be, still, example.
When, what the Gaul, or Moore could not effect,
Nor aemulous Carthage, with their length of spite,
Shall be the work of one, and that my night.

CICERO, FVLVIA, QVINTVS. I Thank your vigilance. Where Is my brother, Quintus?
Call all my servants up. Tell noble Curious,
And say it to your self, you are my Sau^^s;
But that is too little for you, you are Rome's:
What could I then, hope less? O brother! now,
The engines I told you of, are working;
The machine 'gin's to move. Where are your weapons?
Arm all my household presently. And charge
The Porter, he let no man in, till day.

QVI. Not Clients, and your friends?

CIC. They wear those names,
That come to murder me. Yet send for Cato,
And Quintus Catulus; those I dare trust;
And Flaccus, and Pomtinius, the Praetors,
By the back way.

QVI. Take care, good brother Marcus,
Your fears be not formed greater, then they should;
And make your friends g^ieue, while your enemies laugh.

CIC. It Is brothers counsel, and worth thanks, But do
As I entreat you. I provide, not fear.
Was Caesar there, say you?

FVL. Curious says, he met him,
Coming from thence.

CIC. O, so. And, had you a counsel
Of Ladies too? Who was your Speaker, Madam?

FVL. She that would be, had there been forty more;
Sempronia, who had both her Greek, and Figures;
And, ever and anon, would ask us, if
The witty Consul could have mended that?
Or Orator Cicero could have said it better?

CIC. She Is my gentle enemy. Would Cethegus
Had no more danger in him. But, my guards
Are you, great powers; and the vnbated strengths
Of a firm conscience, which shall arm each step
Taken for the State; and teach me slack no pace
For fear of malice. How now, Brother?

QVI. Cato*
And Qu^^tus Catulus were coming to you,
And Crassus with 'hem. I have let 'hem in,
By the garden.

CIC. What would Cr^ssus have?

QVI. I hear
Some whispering 'bout the gate; and making doubt,
Whither it be not yet too early, or no?
But I do think, they are your friends, and Clients,
Are fearful to disturb you.

CIC. You will change
To 'another thought, anon. Have you given the Porter
The charge, I willed you?

QVI. Yes.

CIC. Withdraw, and hearken.

VARGVNTEIVS, CORNELIUS, PORTER, CICERO, CATO, CATVLVS, CRASSVS. THe dore's not
open, yet.

COR. You' were best to knock.

VAR. Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in,
Rush after us.

COR. But where is Cethegus?

VAR. He
Has left it, since he might not do it his way.

POR. Who Is there?

VAR. A friend, or more.

POR. I may not let
Any man in, till day.

VAR. No? why?

COR. Thy reason?

POR. I am commanded so.

VAR. By whom?

COR. I hope
We are not discovered.

VAR. Yes, by revelation.
Pray thee good slave, who has commanded thee?

POR. He that may best, the Consul.

VAR. We are his friends.

POR. All Is one.

COR. Best give your name.

VAR. Do thou hear, fellow?
I have some instant business with the Consul.
My name is Vargunteius.

CIC. True, he knows it;
And for what friendly office you are sent.
Cornelius, too, is there?

VAR. We are betrayed.

CIC. And desperate Cethegus, is he not?

VAR. Speak you, he knows my voice.

CIC. What say you to it?

COR. You are deceau'd Sir.

CIC. No, it is you are so*
Poor, misled men. Your states are yet worth pity,
If you would hear, and change your savage minds.
Leave to be mad; forsake your purposes
Of Treason, Rapine, Murder, Fire, and Horror:
The common wealth has eyes, that wake as sharply
Over her life, as yours do for her ruin.
Be not deceived, to think her lenity
Will be perpetual; or, if Men be wanting,
The Gods will be, to such a calling cause.
Consider your attempts, and while there is time,
Repent you of 'hem. It does make me tremble
There should those spirits yet breath, that when they cannot
Live honestly, would rather perish basely.

CATO. You talk to much to 'hem, Marcus, They'are lost.
Go forth, and apprehend 'hem.

CATV. If you prove
This practice; what should let the Commonwealth
To take due vengeance?

VAR. Let us shift, away.
The darkness has concealed us, yet: We Will say
Some have abused our names.

COR. Deny it all.

CATO. Quintus, what guards have you? Call the Tribunes aid*
And raise the City. Consul, you are too mild,
" The foulness of some facts takes thence all mercy:
Report it to the Senate. Hear: The Gods
Grow angry with your patience. " It Is their care,
" And must be yours, that guilty men escape not.
" As crimes do grow, Justice should rouse it self.

CHORUS. WHat is it, Heavens, you prepare
With so much swiftness, and so sudden rising?
There are no Sons of earth, that dare,
Again, rebellion: or the Gods surprising?
The World does shake, and Nature fears,
Yet is the tumult, and the horror greater
Within our minds, then in our ears,
So much Romes faults (now grown her Fate) do threat her.
The Priests, and People run about,
Each Order, Age, and Sex amazed at other;
And, at the ports, all thronging out,
As if their safety were to quit their Mother:
Yet find they the same dangers there,
From which they make such have to be preserved;
For guilty States do ever bear
The plagues about them, which they have deserved.
And, till those plagues do get above
The mountain of our faults, and there do sit;
We see 'hem not. Thus, still we love
The'euill we do, until we suffer it.
But, most, ambition, that near vice
To virtue, has the fate of Rome provoked;
And made, that now Rome's self no price,
To free her from the death, wherewith she is yoked.
That restless Ill, that still does build
Upon success; and ends not in aspiring:
But there begins. And nere is filled,
While ought remains that seems but worth desiring.
Where in the Thought, unlike the Eye,
To which things far, seem smaller then they are,
Deemes all contentment placed on high:
And thinks there is nothing great, but what is far.
O, that in time, Rome did not cast
Her errors up, this fortune to prevent;
To Have seen her crimes'ere they were past:
And felt her faults, before her punishment.

Act. iii^.
ALLOBROGES. CAn these men fear? who are not only ours,
But the worlds masters? Then I see, the Gods
Vpbraid our sufferings, or would humble them;
By sending these affrights, while we are here:
That we might laugh at their ridiculous fear,
Whose names, we trembled at, beyond the Alps.
Of all that pass, I do not see a face
Worthy a man, that dares look up, and stand
One thunder out; but downward all, like beasts,
Running away from every flash is made.
The falling world could not deserve such baseness.
Are we emploid here, by our miseries,
Like superstitious fools (or rather slaves)
To plain our griefs, wrongs, and oppressions,
To a mere clothed Senate, whom our folly
Has made, and still intends to keep our Tyrannes?
It is our base petitionary breath
That blows 'hem to this greatness; which this prick
Would soon let out, if we were bold, and wretched.
When they have taken all we have; our goods,
Crop, lands, and houses, they will leave us this:
A weapon, and an arm will still be found,
Though naked left, and lower then the ground.

CATO, CATVLVS, CICERO. Do; urge thine anger, still; good Heaven, and just.
Tell guilty men, what powers are above them.
In such a confidence of wickedness,
'Twas time, they should know something fit to fear.

CATV. I never saw a morn more full of horror.

CATO. To Catiline, and his: But, to just men,
Though Heaven should speak, with all his wrath at once,
That, with his breath, the hinges of the world
Did crack; we should stand upright, and vnfear'd.

CIC. Why, so we do, good Cato. Who be these?

CATV. Ambassadors, from the Allobroges,
I take 'hem, by their habits.

ALL. I, these men
Seem of another race; Let Us sue to these
There Is hope of justice, with their fortitude.

CIC. Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day
We pray you to forbear us: on the morrow
What suit you have, let us, by Fabius Sanga,
(Whose Patronage your State does use) but know it,
And, on the Consull's word, you shall receive
Dispatch, or else an answer, worth your patience.

ALL. We could not hope for more, most worthy Consul.
This Magistrate has struck an awe into me,
And, by his sweetness, won a more reguard
Unto his place, then all the boistrous moodes
That ignorant Greatness practices, to fill
The large, unfit authority it wears.
How easy is a noble spirit discerned
From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out
In contumelies, makes a noise, and stinkes.
May we find good, and great men, that know how
To stoop to wants, and meet necessities,
And will not turn from any equal suites.
" Such men, they do not succor more the cause,
" They undertake, with favor, and success;
" Then, by it, their own i^dgments they do raise,
" In turning just men's needs, into their praise.

THE SENATE. PRAE. Room for the Consuls. Fathers* take your places.
Here, in the house of Jupiter, the STAYER,
By edict from the Consul, Marcus Tullius,
You'are met, a frequent Senate. Hear him speak.

CIC. Which may be happy, and auspicious still
To Rome, and hers. Hono^'d and Conscript Fathers,
If I were silent, and that all the dangers
Threatening the State, and you, were yet so hid
In night, or darkness, thicker in their breasts,
That are the black contriuers; so, that no
Be^me of the light could pierce 'hem: Yet the voice
Of Heaven, this morning, has spoke loud enough,
T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror;
And wake you from a sleep, as dead, as death.
I have, of late, spoke often in this Senate,
Touching this argument, but still have wanted
Either your ears, or ^aith: so' incredible
Their plots have seemed, or I so vain, to make
These things for mine own glory, and false greatness,
As has been given out. But be it so:
When they break forth, and shall declare themselves,
By their too foul effects, then, then, the envy
Of my just cares will find another name.
For me, I am but one: And this poor life,
So lately aimed at, not an hour yet since,
They cannot with more eagerness pursue,
Th^n I with gladness would lay down, and loose,
To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it.
But when I see, they'ld make it but the step
To more, and greater; unto yours, Romes, all:
I would with those preserve it, or then fall.

CA^S. I, I, let you alone, cunning Artificer!
See, how his gorget peers above his gown;
To tell the people, in what danger he was.
It was absu^dly done of Vargunteius,
To name himself, before he was got in.

CRA. It matters not, so they deny it all:
And can but carry the lie constantly.
Will Catiline be here?

CAES. IN have sent for him.

CRA. And have you bid him to be confident?

CAES. To that his own necessity will prompt him.

CRA. Seem to believe nothing at all, that Cicero
Relates us.

CAES. It will mad him.

CRA. O, and h^^pe
The other party. Who is that? His Brother?
What new intelligence has he brought him now?

CAES. Some cautions from his Wife, how to behave him.

CIC. Place some of them without, and some bring in.
Thank their kind loves. It is a comfort yet,
That all depart not from their Countries cause.

CAES. How now, what (...) this M^^ter? Consul, A^tonius?

ANT. I do not know, ask my Colleague, he will tell you.
There is some reason in state, that I must yield to;
And I have promised him: Indeed he has bought it,
With g^^ing me the Province.

CIC. I profess,
It grieves me* Fathers, that I am compelled
To draw these arms, and aides for your defense;
And, more, against a Citizen of Rome,
Borne here amongst you, a Patrician,
A man, I must confess, of no mean house,
Nor no small virtue, if he had employed
Those excellent gifts of Fortune, and of Nature,
Unto the good, not ruin of the State.
But being bred in's fathers needy fortunes,
B^ought up in's ^isters prostitution,
Confirmed in civil slaughter, entering first
The Commonwealth, with murder of the gentry;
Since, both by study, and custom, conversant
With all lice^tio^snesse: what could be hoped
In such a field of riot, but a course
Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest,
I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes,
Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine
Before they touched, at my suspicion.

CAES. What are his mischiefs, Consul? you declame
Against his manners, and corrupt your own;
" No wise man should, for hate of guilty men,
" Loose his own innocence.

CIC. The noble Caesar
Speaks Godlike truth. But, when he hears, I can
Convince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs,
He might be silent: And not cast away
His sentences in vain, where they scarce look.
Toward his subject.

CAT. Here he comes himself.
If he be woe thy any good man's voice,
That good man sit down, by him: Cato will not.

CATV. If Cato leave him. I Will not keep aside.

CATI. What face is this, the Senate here puts on,
Against me, Fathers! Give my modesty
Leave, to demand the cause of so much strangeness.

CAES. It is reported here, you are the head
To a strange faction, Lucius.

CIC. I, and will
Be proved against him.

CAT. Let it be. Why, Consul,
If in the Commonwealth, there be two bodies,
One lean, weak, rotten, and that has a head;
The other strong, and healthful, but has none:
If I do give it one, do I offend?
Restore your selves, unto your temper, Fathers;
And, without perturbation, hear me speak:
Remember who I am, and of what place,
What petty fellow this is, that opposes;
One, that has exercised his eloquence,
S^ill to the bane of the Nobility:
A boasting, insolent tongue-man.

CATO. Peace lewd Traitor,
Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man
And loves his Country; would thou did so, too.

CATI. Cato, you are too zealous for him.

CATO. No,
Thou art too impudent.

CATV. Catiline be silent.

CATI. Nay then, I easily fear, my just defense
Will come too late, to so much prejudice.

CAES. Will he ^it down?

CATI. Yet, let the world forsake me,
My innocence must not.

CATO. Thou innocent?
So are the Furies.

CIC. Yes, and Ate, too.
Do thou not blush, pernicious Catiline?
Or, has the palenesse of thy guilt drunk up
Thy blood, and drawn thy veins, as dry of that,
As is thy heart of truth, thy breast of virtue?
Whither at length will thou abuse our patience?
Still shall thy fury mock us? To what license
Dares thy unbridled boldness run it self?
Do all the nightly guards, kept on the Palace,
The Cities watches, with the Peoples fears,
The concourse of all Good men, this so strong
And fortified seat here of the Senate,
The pr^sent looks upon thee, strike thee nothing?
Do thou not feel thy Councels all laid open?
And see thy wild Conspiracy bound in
With each man's knowledge? which of all this Order
Can thou think ignorant (if they will but utter
Their conscience to the right) of what thou did
Last night, what on the former, where thou went,
Whom thou did call together, what your plots were?
O Age, and Manners! This the Consul fees,
The Senate understands, yet this man lives*
Lives? I, and comes here into Council with us;
Partakes the public cares: and with his eye
Marks, and points out each man of us to slaughter.
And we, good men, do satisfy the State,
If we can shun but this man's sword, and madness.
There was that virtue, once, in Rome, when good men
Would, with more sharp coercion, have restrained
A wicked Citizen, then the deadliest Foe.
We have that law still, Catiline, for thee;
An a^t as grave, as sh^rpe: The State's not wanting*
Nor the authority of this Senate; we,
We, that are Consuls, only fail our selves.
This twenty days, the edge of that decree
We have let d^ll, and rust; kept it shut up,
As in a sheath, which drawn should take thy head.
Yet still thou li^'st: and li^'st not to lay by
Thy wicked confidence, but to confirm it.
I could desire, Fathers, to be found
Still merciful, to seem in these maine perils,
Grasping the state, a man remiss, and slack;
But then, I should condemn my self of sloth,
And treachery. Their Campe's in Italy,
Pitched in the jaws, here, of He^ruria;
Their numbers daily increasing, and their General
Within our walls: nay in our Council, plotting
Howerly some fatal misch^efe to the Public.
If, Catiline, I should command thee, now,
Here, to be taken, killed; I make just doubt,
Whether all good men wo^ld not think it done
Rather too late, then any man too cruel.

CATO. Except he were of the same meal, and batch.

CIC. But that, which ought to have been done long since*
I will, and (for good reason) yet forbear.
Then will I take thee, when no man is found
So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy self,
But shall profess, it is done of need, and right.
While there is one, that dares befend thee, live;
Thou shall have leave; but so, as now thou live:
Watched at a hand, besieged, and oppressed
From working least commotion to the State.
I have those eyes, and ears, shall still keep guard,
And sp^all on thee, as they have ever done,
And thou not feel it. What, th^n, can thou hope?
If neither N^ght can, with her darkness, hide
Thy wicked meeti^gs; not a private House
Can, in her walls, contain the guilty whispers
Of thy conspiracy: If all break out,
All be discovered, change thy mind at last,
And loose thy thoughts of ruin, flame, and slaughter.
Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate,
That such a day, thy Lictor, Caius Manlius,
Would be in arms. Was I deceived, Catiline,
Or in the fact, or in the time? the hour?
I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose
Was, on the fifth, the Kalends of November,
TO have slaughterd this whole Order: which my caution
Made many leave the City. Canft thou here
Deny, but this thy black design was hindered,
That very day, by me, thy self closed in
Within my strengths, so that thou could not move
Against a public reed? when thou were heard
To say, upon the parting of the rest,
Thou would content thee, with the murder of us,
That did remain. Had thou not hope, beside,
By a surprise, by night, to take Praeneste?
Where when thou came, did thou not find the place
Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches?
My Garrisons fortified it. Thou do nothing, Sergius,
Thou can endeavor nothing, nay not think,
But I both see, and hear it; and am with thee,
By, and before, about, and in thee, too.
Call but to mind thy last nights business. Come,
I Will use no circumstance: at Lecca's house,
The shop, and mint of your conspiracy,
Among your Swordmen, where so many associates
Both of thy mischief, and thy madness, met.
Dare thou deny this? wherefore art thou silent?
Speak, and this shall convince thee: Here they are,
I see 'hem, in this Senate, that were with thee.
O you immortal Gods! in what clime are we?
What region do we live in? in what air?
What Commonwealth, or State is this we have?
Here, here, amongst us, our own number, Fathers,
In this most holy Council of the world,
They are, that seek the spoil of me, of you,
Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow:
Follow the Sun, and find not their ambition.
These I behold, being Consul; Nay, I ask
Their counsels of the State, as from good Patriots:
Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces,
I not so much as wound, yet, with my voice.
Thou wast, last night, with Lecca, Catiline,
Your shares* of Italy, you there divided;
Appointed who, and whither, each should go;
What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen;
Your offices set down; the parts marked out,
And places of the City, for the fire;
Thy self (thou' affirmd'st) want ready to depart,
Only, a little let there was, that stayed thee,
That I yet lived: Upon the word, stepped forth
Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care;
Two undertook this morning, before day,
To kill me in my bed. All this I knew,
Your convent scarce dismissed, armed all my servants,
Called both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients,
You sent to visit me; whose names I told
To some there, of good place, before they came.

CATO. Yes, I, and Quintus Catulus can affirm it.

CAES. He Is lost, and gone. His spirits have forsook him.

CIC. If this be so, why, Catiline, do thou stay?
Go, where thou meanst: The Ports are open; forth.
The Camp abroad wants thee, their Chief, too long.
Lead with thee all thy troops out. Purge the City.
Draw dry that noisome, and pernicious sink,
Which left, behind thee, would infect the world.
Thou will free me of all my fears, at once,
To see a wall between us. Do thou stop
To do that now, commanded; which before,
Of thine own choice, you are prone to? Go. The Consul
Bids thee, an enemy, to depart the City.
Whither, thou wilt ask? to exile? I not bid
Thee that. But ask my counsel, I persuade it.
What is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee?
Where not a soul, without thine own foul knot,
But fears, and hates thee. What domesticke note
Of private filthiness, but is burnt in
Into thy life? What close, and secret shame,
But is grown one, with thy known infamy?
What lust was ever absent from thine eyes?
What lewd fact from thy hands? what wickedness
From thy whole body? where is that youth drawn in
Within thy nets, or caught up with thy baytes,
Before whose rage, thou have not borne a sword,
And to whose lusts thou have not 'held a torch?
Thy latter Nuptials I let pass in silence;
Where sins incredible, on sins, were heapt:
Which I not name, lest, in a civil State,
So monstrous facts should either appear to be,
Or not to be revenged. Thy Fortunes, too,
I glance not at, which hang but till next Ides.
I come to that, which is more known, more public;
The life, and safety of us all, by thee
Threatened, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field,
When Lepidus, and Tullus were our Consuls,
Upon the day of choice, armed, and with forces,
To take their lives, and our chief Citizens;
When, not thy fear, nor conscience changed thy mind,
But the mere fortune of the Commonwealth
Withstood thy active malice? Speak but right.
How often have thou made attempt on me?
How many of thy assaults have I declined
With shifting but my body, (as wee'ld say)
Wrested thy dagger from thy hand, how o^t?
Ho^ often ^a^h i^ fallen, or slip't by chance?
Yet can ^hy ^ide not want it: which, how vowed,
Or with what rites, it is ^acred of thee, I know not,
That still thou make it a necessity,
To fix it in the body of a Consul.
But let me loose this way, and speak to thee,
Not as one moved with hatred, which I ought,
But pity, of which none is owing thee.

CAT. No more then unto Tantalus, or Tityus.

CIC. Thou came, ere while, into this Senate. Who
Of such a frequency, so many friends,
And kindred thou have here, saluted thee?
Were not the seats made bare, upon thy entrance?
R^ss' not the Consular men? and left their places,
So soon as thou sat'st down? and fled thy side,
Like to a plague, or ruin; knowing, how often
They had been, by thee, marked out ^or the Shambles?
How do thou bear this? Surely, if my Slaves
At home feared me, with half the affright, and horror,
That, ^ere, thy fellow Citizens do thee,
I should soon quit my house, and think it need too.
Yet thou dare ^ary here? Go forth, at last;
Condemn thy self to flight, and solitude.
Discharge the Commonwealth, of her deep fear.
Go; into ba^ishment, if thou wait'st the word.
Why do thou look? They all consent unto it.
Do thou expect the authority of their voices,
Whose silent wills condemn thee? While they sit,
They approve it; while they suffer it, they decree it;
And while they' are silent to it, they proclaim it.
Prove thou there honest, I^e endure the envy.
But there is no thought, thou should be ever he,
Whom either shame should call from filthiness,
Terror from danger, or discourse from fury.
Go; I entreat thee: yet, why do I so?
When I already know, they'are sent before,
That tarry for thee'in arms, and do expect thee
On the Aurelian way. I know the day
Set down* twixt thee, and Manlius; unto whom
The silver Eagle too is sent, before:
Which I do hope shall prove, to thee as banefull,
As thou conceiu'^t it to the Commonwealth.
But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say,
What mean thou Marcus Tull^s? If thou know
That Catiline be looked for, to be Chief
Of an intestine war; that ^e'is the Author
Of such a wickedness; the Ca^ler out
Of men of mark in mischief^, to an action
Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason;
Why do thou send him forth? why let him escape?
This is to give him liberty, and power:
Rather, thou should lay hold upon him, send him
To deserved death, and a just punishment.
To these so holy voices, thus I answer.
If I did think it timely, Conscript Fathers,
To punish him with death, I would not give
The Fencer use of one short hour, to breath;
But when there are in this grave Order, some,
Who, with soft censures, still do nource his hopes;
Some, that with not believing, have confirmed
His designs more, and whose authority
The weaker, as the worst men, too, have follow^d:
I would now send him, where they all should see
Clear, as the light, his heart shine; where no man
Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupide,
But should cry o^t he saw, touched, felt, and grasp 't it.
Then, when he has run out himself; led forth
His desperate party with him; blown together
Aids of all kinds, both shipwrack^d minds and fortunes:
Not only the grown evil, that now is sprung,
And sprouted forth, would be plucked up, and weeded;
But the stock, root, and seed of all the mischiefs,
Choking the Commonwealth. Where, should we take
Of such a swarm of traitors, only him,
Our cares, and fears might seem a while relieved,
But the maine peril would bide still enclosed
Deep, in the veins, and bowels of the State.
As humane bodies, laboring with fevers,
While they are tossed with heat, if they do take
Cold water, seem for that short space much eased,
But afterward, are ten times more afflicted.
Wherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew
Depart, divide themselves from good men, gather
Their forces to one head; as I said often,
Let 'hem be seuer'd from us with a wall;
Let 'hem leave off attempts, upon the Consul,
In his own house; to circle in the Praetor;
To girt the Court with weapons; to prepare
Fire, and balls, swords, torches, sulphur, brands:
In short, let it be writ in each man's forehead
What thoughts he bears the Public. I here promise,
Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my self,
That diligence in us Consulls, for my honored
Colleague, abroad, and for my self, at home;
So great authority in you; so much
Virtue, in these, the Gentlemen of Rome;
Whom I could scarce restrain to day, in zeal,
From seeking out the Parricide, to slaughter;
So much consent in all good men, and minds,
As, on the going out of this one Catiline*
All shall be clear, made plain, oppressed, revenged.
And, with this omen, go, pernicious plague,
Out of the City, to the wished destruction
Of thee, and those, that, to the ruin of her,
Have taken that bloody, and black sacrament.
Thou Jupiter, whom we do call the STAYER
Both of this City, and this Empire, wilt
(With the same auspice thou did raise it first)
Drive from thy Altars, and all other Temples,
And Buildings of this City; from our Walls;
Lives, states, and fortunes of our Citizens;
This fiend, this fury, with his accomplices.
And all the' offense of good men (these known traitors
Unto their country, thieves of Italy,
Joined in so damned a league of mischief) thou Will with perpetual plagues, alive, and dead,
Punish for Rome, and save her innocent head.

CATI. If an Oration, or high language, Fathers,
Could make me guilty, here is one, has done it:
H' has strove to aemulate this mornings thunder,
With his prodigious rhetoric. But I hope,
This Senate is more grave, then to give credit
Rashly to all he vomits, against a man
Of your own Order, a Patrician;
And one, whose ancestors have more deserved
Of Rome, then this man's eloquence could utter,
Turned the best way, as still, it is the worst.

CATO. His eloquence has more deserved to day,
Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors
Did, in their good: And that the State will find,
Which he has saved.

CATI. How he? were I that enemy,
That he would make me: Il'd not wish the State
More wretched, then to need his preservation.
What do you make him, Cato, such a Hercules?
An Atlas? A poor petty In- mate.

CATO. Traitor.

CATI. He save the State? A Burgesse^ son of Arpinum.
The Gods would rather twenty Romes should perish,
Then have that contumely stuck upon 'hem,
That he should share with them, in the preserving
A shed, or signe-post.

CATO. Peace, thou prodigy.

CATI. They would be run themselves, again, and lost
In the first, rude, and indigested heap;
Ere such a wretched name, as Cicero,
Should sound with theirs.

CATV. Away, thou impudent head.

CATI. Do you all back him? are you silent too?
Well, I will leave you Fathers; I will go.
But -- my fine dainty speaker. --

CIC. What now Fury?
Will thou assault me here?

CHO. Help, aid the Consul.

CATI. See Fathers, laugh you not? who threatened him?
In vain thou do conceive, ambitious Orator,
Hope of so brave a death, as by this hand.

CATO. Out, of the Court, with the pernicious traitor.

CATI. There is no title, that this flattering Senate,
Nor honor, the base multitude can give thee,
Shall make thee worthy Catilines anger.

CATO. Stop,
Stop that portentous mouth.

CATI. Or, when it shall,
I Will look thee dead.

CATO. Will none restrain the Monster?

CATV. Parricide.

QVI. Butcher, Traitor, leave the Senate.

CATI. IN am gone, to banishment, to please you Fathers.
Thrust headlong forth?

CATO. Still, do thou murmr, Monster?

CATI. Since, I am thus put out, and made a. --

CIC. What?

CATV. Not guiltier then thou art.

CATI. I will not burn
Without my funeral pile.

CATO. What says the Fiend?

CATI. I will have matter, timber.

CATO. Sing out Scrich-owle.

CATI. It shall be in^

CATV. Speak thy imperfect thoughts.

CATI. The common fire, rather then mine own.
For fall I will with all, ere fall alone.

CRA. H'is lost, there is no hope of him.

CAES. Unless
He presently take arms; and give a blow,
Before the Consuls forces can be leuie'd.

CIC. What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?

CATV. See, that the Commonwealth receive no loss.

CATO. Commit the care thereof unto the Consuls.

CRA. It Is time.

CAES. And need.

CIC. Thanks to this frequent Senate.
But what decree they, unto Curious,
And Fuluia?

CATV. What the Consul shall think meet.

CIC. They m^st receive reward, though it be not known;
(...) when a State need^s ministers, they have none.

CATO. Yet, Marcus Tullius, do not I believe,
Bu^ Crassus, and this Caesar here ring hollow.

CIC. And would appear so, if that we durst prove 'hem.

CATO. Why dare we not? What honest act is that,
The Roman Senate should not dare, and do?

CIC. Not an unprofitable, dangerous act,
To stir too many Serpents up at once.
Caesar, and Crassus, if they be ill men,
Are mighty ones; and, we must so provide,
That, while we take one head, from this foul Hydra,
There spring not twenty more.

CATO. IN prove your Counsel.

CIC. They shall be watched, and looked too. Till they do
Declare themselves, I will not put 'hem out
By any question. There they stand. I Will make
My self no enemies, nor the State, no traitors.

CATILINE, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, CVRIVS, GABINIVS, LONGINVS, STATILIVS. FAlse to
our selves? All our designs discovered
To this State-Cat?

CET. I, had I had my way,
He' had mewed in flames, at home, not in the Senate:
IN had singed his furs, by this time.

CAT. Well, there is, now,
No time of calling back, or standing still.
Friends, be your selves; keep the same Roman hearts,
And ready minds, you' had yesternight: Prepare
To execute, what we resolved. And let not
Labor, or danger, or discovery fright you.
I Will to the army: you (the while) mature
Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides,
That you think fit, of men of all conditions,
Or any fortunes, that may help a war.
I Will bleed a life, or win an Empire for you.
Within these few days, look to see my ensigns,
Here, at the walls: Be you but firm within.
Mean time, to draw an envy on the Consul,
And give a less suspicion of our course,
Let it be given out, here in the City,
That I am gone, an innocent man, to exile,
Into Massilia, willing to give way
To fortune, and the times; being unable
To stand so great a faction, without troubling
The Commonwealth: whose peace I rather seek,
Then all the glory of contention,
Or the support of mine own innocence.
Farewell the noble Lentulus, Longinus,
Curious, the rest; and thou, my better Genius,
The brave Cethegus: when we meet again,
We Will sacrifice to Liberty.

CET. And Revenge.
That we may praise our hands once.

LEN. O you Fates,
Give Fortune now her eyes, to see with whom
She goes along, that she may nere forsake him.

CVR. He needs not her, nor them. Go but on, Sergius.
" A valiant man is his own Fate, and Fortune.

LON. The Fate, and Fortune of us all go with him.

GAB. STA. And ever guard him.

CAT. I am all your Creature.

LEN. Now friends, it is left with us. I have already
Dealt, by Vmbrenus, with the Allobroges,
Here resiant in Rome; whose State, I hear,
Is discontent with the great vsuries,
They are oppressed with: and have made complaints
Diverse, unto the Senate, but all vain.
These men, I'haue thought, both for their own oppressions,
As also that, by nature, they'are a people
Warlike, and fierce, still watching after change,
And now, in present hatred with our State,
The fittest, and the ^asiest to be drawn
To our society, and to aid the war.
The rather, for their seat: being next bordrers
On Italy: and that they' abound with horse,
Of which one want our Camp does only labor.
And I have found 'hem coming. They will meet
Soon at Sempronia's house, where I would pray you
All to be present, to confirm 'hem more.
The sight of such spirits hurt not, nor the store.

GAB. I will not fail.

STA. Nor I.

CVR. Nor I.

CET. Would I
Had some what by my self, apart, to do.
I have no genius to these many counsels.
Let me kill all the Senate, for my share,
I Will do it at next sitting.

LEN. Worthy Caius,
Your presence will add much.

CET. I shall mar more.

CICERO. SANGA. ALLOBROGES. THe State's beholden to you, Fabius Sanga,
For this great care: And those Allobroges
Are more then wretched, if they lend a listening
To such persuasion.

SAN. They, most worthy Consul,
As men employed here, from a grieved State,
Groaning beneath a multitude of wrongs,
And being ^old, there was small hope of ease
To be expected, to their evils, from hence,
Were willing, at the first to give an ear
To any thing, that sounded liberty:
But since, on better thoughts, and my urged reasons,
They' are come about, and won, to the true side.
The fortune of the Commonwealth has conquered.

CIC. What is that same Vmbrenus, was the Agent?

SAN. One that has had negotiation
In Gallia often, and known unto their State.

CIC. Are the' Ambassadors come with you?

SAN. Yes.

CIC. Well, bring 'hem in, if they be firm, and honest,
Never had men the means so to deserve
Of Rome, as they. A happy, wished occasion,
And thrust into my hands, for the discovery,
And manifest conviction of these traitors.
Be thanked; o Jupiter. My worthy Lords,
Confederates of the Senate, you are welcome.
I understand by Quintus Fabius Sanga,
Your careful Patron here, you have been lately
Solicited against the Commonwealth,
By one Vmbrenus (take a seat, I pray you)
From Publius Lentulus, to be associates
In their intended war. I could advise,
That men, whose fortunes are yet flourishing,
And are Romes friends, would not, without a cause,
Become her enemies; and mix themselves
And their estates, ^ith the lost hopes of Catiline,
O^ Lentulus, whose mere despair does arm 'hem:
That were to hazard certainties, for air,
And undergo all danger, for a voice.
Believe me, friends: " ^ oud tumu^ts are not laid
"With half the easiness* that they are raised.
"All may begin a war, but few can end it.
The Senate have decreed, that my Colleague
Shall lead their army, against Catiline,
And have declared both him, and Manlius traitors.
Metellus Celer has already given
Part of their troops defeat. Honors are promised
To all, will quit'hem; and rewards proposed
Even to slaves, that can detect their courses.
Here, in the City, I have by the Praetors,
And Tribunes, placed my guards, and watches so,
That not a foot can tread, a breath can whisper,
But I have knowledge. And be sure, the Senate,
And People of Rome, of their accustomed greatness,
Will sharply, and severely vindicate,
Not only any fact, but any practice
Or purpose, against the State. Therefore, my Lords,
Consult of your own ways, and think which hand
Is best to take. You, now, are present ^uters
For some redress of wrongs; I Will undertake
Not only that shall be as^ur'd you, but
What grace or privilege else, Senate, or People
Can cast upon you, worthy such a service,
As you have now the way, and means, to do 'hem;
If but your wills consent, with my designs.

ALL. We covet nothing more, most worthy Consul.
And how so ere we have been tempted lately,
To a defection, that not makes us guilty:
We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes,
Nor in our wills so lost, as to abandon
A friendship, prodigally, of that price,
As is the Senate, and the People of Romes,
For hopes, that do praecipitate themselves.

CIC. You then are wise, and honest. Do but this, then:
When shall you speak with Lentulus, and the rest?

ALL. We are to meet anon, at Brutus house.

CIC. Who? D^cius Brutus? He is not in Rome.

SAN. O, but his wife Sempronia.

CIC. You instruct me,
She is a Chief. Well, fail not you to meet 'hem*
And to express the best affection
You can put on, to all that they intend.
Like it, applaud it, give the Commonwealth
And Senate, lost to 'hem. Promise any aides
By arms, or counsel. What they can desire
I would have you prevent. Only, say this,
You' have had dispatch, in private, by the Consul
Of your affairs, and for the many fears
The State's now in, you are willed by him, this evening,
To depart Rome: which you, by all sought means,
Will do, of reason to decline suspicion.
Now, for the more authority of the business
They' have trusted to you, and to give it credit
With your own State, at home, you would desire
Their letters to your Senate, and your People,
Which shown, you durst engage both life, and honor,
The rest should every way answer their hopes.
Those had, pretend sudden departure you,
And, as you give me notice, at what Port
You will go out, I Will have you intercepted,
And all the letters taken with you: So
As you shall be redeemed in all opinions,
And they convicted of their manifest treason.
" Ill deeds are well turned back, upon their Authors:
" And against an Iniurer, the revenge is just.
This must be done, now.

ALL. Cheerfully, and firmly.
We 'are they, would rather have to undertake it,
Then stay, to say so.

CIC. With that confidence, go:
Make your selves happy, while you make Rome so.
By Sanga, let me have notice from you.

ALL. Yes.

SEMPRONIA, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, GABINIVS, STATILIVS, LONGINVS, VOLTVRTIVS,
ALLOBROGES. WHen come these Creatures, the Ambassad^rs?
I would feign see 'hem. Are they any Scholars?

LEN. I think not, Madame.

SEM. Have they no Greek?

LEN. No surely.

SEM. Fie, what do I here, waiting on 'hem then?
If they be nothing but mere Statesmen.

LEN. Yes,
Your Ladyship shall observe their gravity,
And their reservedness, their many cautions,
Fitting their persons.

SEM. I do wonder much,
That States, and Commonwealths employ not women,
To be Ambassadors, sometimes: we should*
Do as good public service, and could make
As honorable Spies (for so Thucidides
Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, Cethegus?

CET. Do you ask me? Am I your scout, or baud?

LEN. O Caius, it is no such business.

CET. No?
What does a woman at it then?

SEM. Good Sir,
There are of us can be as exquisite Traitors,
As ere a male-Conspirator of you all.

CET. I, at smock-treason, Matron, I believe you;
And if I were your husband; But when I
Trust to your cobweb-bosomes any other
Let me there die a Fly; and feast you, Spider.

LEN. You are too sour, and harsh Cethegus.

CET. You
Are kind, and courtly. Il'd be torn in pieces,
With wild Hippolytus, nay prove the death,
Every limb over, ere I Would trust a woman,
With wind, could I retain it.

SEM. Sir. They Will be trusted
With as good secrets, yet, as you have any,
And carry 'hem too, as close, and as conceald,
As you shall for your heart.

CET. I Will not contend with you
Either in tongue, or carriage, good Calipso:

LON. The Ambas^adors are come.

CET. Thanks to thee Mercury,
That so have rescued me.

LEN. How now, Volturtius?

VOL. They do desire some speech with you, in private.

LEN, O! it is about the prophecy, belike,
And promise of the Sibylls;

GAB. it may be.

SEM. Shun they, to treat with me, too?

GAB. No, good Lady,
You may partake: I have told 'hem, who you are.

SEM. I should be loath to be left out, and here too.

CET. Can these, or such, be any aids, to us?
Look they, as they were built to shake the world,
Or be a moment to our enterprise?
A thousand, such as they are, could not make
One Atome of our souls. They should be men
VVorth Heavens fear, that looking up, but thus,
Would make Jove stand upon his guard, and draw
Himself within his Thonder; which, amazed,
He should discharge in vain, and they unhurt.
Or, if they were, like Capaneus, at Thebes,
They should hang dead, upon the highest spires,
And ask the second charge, to be thrown down.
Why, Lentulus, talk you so long? This time
Had been enough, to have scattered all the Stars,
To Have quenched the Sun, and Moon, and made the World
Despair of day, or any light, but ours.

LEN. How do you like this spirit? In such men,
Mankind does live. They are such souls, as these,
That move the world.

SEN. I, though he bear me hard,
I, yet, must do him right. He is a spirit.
Of the right Martian breed.

ALL. He is a Mars.
Would we had time to live here, and admire him.

LEN. Well, I do see you would prevent the Consul.
And I commend your care: It was but reason,
To ask our Letters, and we had prepared them.
Go in, and we will take an oath, and ^eale 'hem.
You shall have Letters, too, to Catiline,
To visit him in the way, and to confirm
The association. This our friend, Volturtius,
Shall go along with you. Tell our great General,
That we are ready here; that Lucius Bestia
The Tribune, is provided of a speech,
To lay the envy of the war on Cicero;
That all but long for his approach, and person:
And then, you are made Freemen, as our selves.

CICERO. FLACCVS. POMTINIVS. SANGA. I Cannot fear the war but to succeed
well,
Both for the honor of the cause, and worth
Of him that does command. For my Colleague,
Being so ill affected with the gout,
Will not be able to be there in person;
And then Petreius, his Lieutenant, must
Of need take charge of the army: who is much
The better soldier, having been a Tribune,
Prefect, Lieutenant, Praetor in the war,
These thirty years, so conversant in the army,
As he knows all the soldiers, by their names.

FLA. They Will fight then, bravely, with him.

POM. I, and he
Will lead 'hem on, as bravely.

CIC. They'haue a foe
Will ask their braueries, whose necessities
Will arm him like a fury. But, how ever,
I Will trust it to the manage, and the fortune
Of good Petreius, who is a worthy Patriot.
Metellus Celer, with three Legions, too,
Will stop their course, for Gallia. How now, Fabius?

SAN. The train has taken. You must instantly
Dispose your guards upon the Miluian bridge:
For, by that way, they mean to come.

CIC. Then, thither
Pomtinius, and Flaccus, I must pray you
To lead that force you have; and seize them all:
Let not a person escape. Th'Ambassadours
Will yield themselves. If there be any tumult
I Will send you aid. I, in mean time will call
Lentulus to me, Gabinius, and Cethegus,
Statilius, Ceparius, and all these
By several messengers: who no doubt will come,
Without sense, or suspicion. " Prodigal men
" Feel not their own stock wasting. When I have 'hem,
I Will place those guards, upon 'hem, that they start not,

SAN. But what'll you do with Sempronia?

CIC. " A State
" Should not take knowledge either of Fools, or Women.
I do not know whether my joy or care
Ought to be greater; that I have discovered
So foul a treason: or must undergo
The envy of so many great men's fate.
But, happen what there can, I will be just,
My fortune may forsake me, not my virtue:
That shall go with me, and before me, still,
And glad me, doing well, though I hear ill.

PRAETORS, ALLOBROGES, VOLTVRTIVS. FLA. Stand, who goes there?

ALL. We are the Allobroges,
And friends of Rome.

POM. If you be so, then yield
Your selves unto the Praetors, who in name
Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
Yet, till you clear you selves, charge you of practice
Against the State.

VOL. Die friends, and be not taken.

FLA. What voice is that? Down with 'hem all.

ALL. We yield.

POM. What Is he stands out? Kill him there.

VOL. Hold, hold, hold.
I yield upon conditions.

FLA. We give none
To traitors, strike him down.

VOL. My name's Volturtius:
I know Pomtinius.

POM. But he knows not you,
While you stand out upon these traiterous terms.

VOL. I Will yield upon the safety of my life.

POM. If it be forfeyted, we cannot save it.

VOL. Promise to do your best. I Am not so guilty,
As many others, I can name; and will:
If you will grant me favor.

POM. All we can
Is to deliver you to the Consul. Take him,
And thank the Gods, that thus have saved Rome.

CHORUS. NOw, do our ears, before our eyes,
Like men in mistes,
Discover, who'ld the State surprise,
And who resists?
And, as these clouds do yield to light,
Now, do we see,
Our thoughts of things, how they did fight,
Which seemed t'agree?
Of what strange pieces are we made,
Who nothing know;
But, as new Airs our ears invade,
Still censure so?
That now do hope, and now do fear,
And now envy;
And then do hate, and then love dear,
But know not, why:
Or, if we do, it is so late,
As our best mood,
Though true, is then thought out of date,
And empty of good.
How have we changed, and come about
In every doom,
Since wicked Catiline went out,
And quitted Rome?
One while, we thought him innocent;
And, then, w' accused
The Consul, for his malice spent;
And power abused.
Since, that we hear, he is in Arms,
We think not so:
Yet charge the Consul, with our harms,
That let him go.
So, in our censure of the State,
We still do wander;
And make the careful Magistrate
The mark of slander.
What age is this, where honest men*
Placed at the helm,
A Sea of some foul mouth, or pen,
Shall ouerwhelme?
And call their diligence, deceit;
Their virtue, vice;
Their watchfulness, but lying in wait*
And blood, the price.
O, let us pluck this evil ^eede
Out of our spirits;
And give, to every noble deed,
The name it merits.
Least we seem fallen (if this endures)
Into those times,
To love disease: and brook the cures
Worse, then the crimes.

Act. V.
PETREIVS. THE ARMY. IT is my fortune, and my glory, Soldiers,
This day, to lead you on; the worthy Consul
Kept from the honor of it, by disease:
And I am proud, to have so brave a cause
To exercise your arms in. We not, now,
Fight for how long, how broad, how great, and large
The Extent, and bounds of the people of Rome shall be;
But to retain what our great Ancestors,
With all their labors, counsels, arts, and actions,
For us, were purchasing so many years.
The quarrel is not, now, of fame, of tribute,
Or of wrongs, done unto Confederates,
For which, the Army of the people of Rome
Was wont to move: but for your own Republique,
For the raised Temples of the immortal Gods,
For all your Fortunes, Altars, and your Fires,
For the dear souls of your loved Wives, and Children,
Your Parents tombs, your Rites, Laws, Liberty,
And, briefly, for the safety of the World:
Against such men, as only by their crimes
Are known; thrust out by riot, want, or rashness.
One sort, Sylla's old troops, left here in Fesulae,
Who suddenly made rich, in those dire times,
Are since, by their unbounded, vast expense,
Grown needy, and poor, and have but left t'expect,
From Catiline, new Bills, and new Proscriptions.
These men (they say) are valiant; yet, I think 'hem
Not worth your pause: For either their old virtue
Is, in their sloth, and pleasures lost; or, if
It tarry with 'hem, so ill match to yours,
As they are short in number, or in cause.
The second sort are of those (Citty-beasts,
Rather then Citizens) who whilst they reach
After our fortunes, have let fly their own;
These, whelmed in wine, swelled up with meats, and weakened
With hourly whoredoms, never left the side
Of Catiline, in Rome; nor, here, are loosed
From his embraces: Such, as (trust me) never
In riding, or in using well their arms,
Watching, or other military labor,
Did exercise their youth; but learned to love,
Drink, dance, and sing, make feasts, and be fine gamsters.
And these will wish more hurt to' you, then they bring you.
The rest are a mixed kind, all sorts of furies*
Adulterers, Dicers, Fencers, Outlawes, Thieves,
The Murderers of their Parents, all the sink,
And plague of Italy, met in one torrent,
To take, to day, from us the punishment,
Due to their mischiefs, for so many years.
And who, in such a cause, and against such fiends,
Would not now wish himself all arm, and weapon?
To cut such poisons from the earth, and let
Their blood out, to be drawn away in clouds,
And poured, on some inhabitable place,
Where the hot Sun, and Slime breeds naught but Monsters?
Chiefly, when this sure joy shall crown our side,
That the least man, that falls upon our party
This day (as some must give their happy names
To fate, and that eternal memory
Of the best death, writ with it, for their Country)
Shall walk at pleasure, in the tents of rest;
And see far off, beneath him, all their host
Tormented after life: and Catiline, there,
VValking a wretched, and less Ghost, then he.
I Will urge no more: Move forward, with your Eagles,
And trust the Senates, and Romes cause to Heaven.

ARM. To thee, great Father Mars, and greater Jove.

CAESAR, CRASSVS. I Ever looked for this of Lentulus,
When Catiline was gone.
CRA. I gave 'hem lost,
Many days since.

CAES. But, wherefore did you bear
Their letter to the Consul, that they sent you,
To warn you from the City?

CRA. Did I know
Whether he made it? It might come from him,
For ought I could assure me: if they meant,
I should be safe, among so many, they might
Have come, as well as writ.

CAES. There is no loss
In being secure. I have, of late, too, plied him,
Thick, with intelligences, but they' have been
Of things he knew before.

CRA. A little serves
To keep a man upright, on these State-bridges,
Although the passage were more dangerous.
Let us now take the standing part.

CAES. We must,
And be as zealous ^or't, as Cato. Yet
I would feign help these wretched men.

CRA. You cannot*
Who would save them, that have betrayed themselves?

CICERO, QVINTVS, CATO. I Will not be wrought to it, Brother Quintus.
There Is no man's private enmity shall make
Me violate the dignity of another.
If there were proof against Caesar, or who ever,
To speak him guilty, I would so declare him.
But Quintus Catulus, and Piso both,
Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge,
Have any man accused, or named falsely.

QVI. Not falsely, but if any circumstance,
By the Allobroges, or from Volturtius,
Would carry it.

CIC. That shall not be sought by me*
If it reveal it self, I would not spare
You, Brother, if it pointed at you, trust me.

CATO. Good Marcus Tullius (which is more, then great)
Thou had thy education, with the Gods.

CIC. Send Lentulus, forth, and bring away the rest.
This office, I am sorry, Sir, to do you.

THE SENATE. WHat may be happy still, and fortunate,
To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers,
To break these letters, and to view them round.
If that be not found in them, which I fear,
I, yet, entreat, at such a time, as this,
My diligence be not contemned. Have you brought
The weapons hither, from Cethegus house?

PRAE. They are without.

CIC. Be ready, with Volturtins*
To bring him, when the Senate calls; And see
None of the rest, confer together. Fathers,
What do you read? Is it yet worth your care,
If not your fear, what you find practiced there?

CAES. It has a face of horror.

CRA. I Am amazed.

CATO. Look there.

SYL. Gods! Can such men draw common air?

CIC. Although the greatness of the mischief, Fathers,
Has often made my faith small, in this Senate,
Yet, since my casting Catiline out (for now
I do not fear the envy of the word,
Unless the deed be rather to be feared,
That he went hence alive; when those I meant
Should follow him, did not) I have spent both days,
And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage
Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought:
And that I might but take 'hem in that light,
Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes,
Your minds, at length, would think for your own safety.
And, now, it is done. There are their hands, and seals.
Their persons, too, are safe, thanks to the Gods.
Bring in Volturtius, and the' Allobroges.
These be the men, were trusted with their letters.

VOL. Fathers, believe me, I knew nothing: I
Was travailing for Gallia, and am sorry. --

CIC. Quake not Volturtius, speak the truth, and hope
Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word.

VOL. Then, I knew all. But truely' I was drawn in
But the other day.

CAES. Say, what thou know, and fear not.
Thou have the Senates faith, and Consuls word,
To fortify thee.

VOL. I was sent with letters --
And had a message too -- from Lentulus --
To Catiline -- that he should use all aides --
Servants, or others -- and come with his army,
As Soon, unto the City as he could --
For they were ready, and but staid for him --
To intercept those, that should flee the fire --
These Men, the Allobroges, did hear it too.

ALL. Yes Fathers, and they took an oath, to us.
Besides their letters, that we should be free;
And urged us, for some present aid of horse.

CIC. Nay, here be other testimonies, Fathers,
Cethegus Armoury.

CRA. What, not all these?

CIC. Here Is not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer,
That we may know the arms to all these weapons.
Come, my brave Sword-player, to what active use,
Was all this steel provided?

CET. Had you asked
In Syllas days, it had been to cut throtes;
But, now, it was to look on, only: I loved
To see good blades, and feel their edge, and points.
To put a helm upon a block, and cleave it,
And, now and then, to stabbe an armor through.

CIC. Know you that paper? That will stabbe you through.
Is it your hand? Hold, save the pieces. Traitor,
Has thy guilt waked thy fury?

CET. I did write,
I know not what; nor care not: That Fool Lentulus
Did dictate* and I the other Fool, did ^igne it.

CIC. Bring in Statilius: Does he know his hand too?
And Lentulus. Reach him that letter.

STA. I
Confess it all.

CIC. Know you that seal yet, Publius?

LEN. Yes, it is mine.

CIC. Whose image is that, on it?

LEN. My Grandfathers.

CIC. What, that renowm'd good man,
That did so only' embrace his Countrey', and loved
His fellow Citizens! Was not his picture,
Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact,
So foul. --

LEN. As what, impetuous Cicero?

CIC. As thou art, for I do not know what is fouler.
Look upon these. Do not these faces argue
Thy guilt, and impudence?

LEN. What are these to me?
I know 'hem not.

ALL. No Publius? we were with you,
At Brutus house.

VOL. Last night.

LEN. What did you there?
Who sent for you?

ALL. Your self did. We had letters
From you, Cethegus, this Statilius here,
Gabinius Cimber, all, but from Longinus,
Who would not write, because he was to come
Shortly, in person, after us (he said)
To take the charge of the horse, which we should leuy.

CIC. And he is fled, to Catiline, I hear.

LEN. Spies? spies?

ALL. You told us too, of the Sibylls books*
And how you were to be a King, this year,
The twentieth, from the burning of the Capitol.
That three Cornelij were to reign, in Rome,
Of which you were the last: and praised Cethegus,
And the great spirits, were with you, in the action.

CET. These are your honorable Ambassadors,
My Sovereign Lord.

CAT. Peace, that too bold Cethegus.

ALL. Besides Gabinius, your Agent, named
Autronius, Seruius Sulla, Vargunteius,
And diverse others.

VOL. I had letters from you,
To Catiline, and a message, which IN have told
Unto the Senate, truly, word for word:
For which, I hope, they will be gracious to me.
I was drawn in, by that same wicked Cimber,
And thought no hurt at all.

CIC. Volturtius, peace.
Where is thy visor, or thy voice, now, Lentulus?
Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak thou not?
Is all so clear, so plain, so manifest,
That both thy eloquence, and impudence,
And thy ill nature, too, have left thee, at once?
Take him aside. There Is yet one more. Gabinius,
The Enginer of all. Show him that paper,
If he do know it?

GAB. I know nothing.

CIC. No?

GAB. No. Nor I will not know.

CAT. Impudent head?
Stick it into his throat; were I the Consul,
Il'd make thee eat the mischief, thou haft vented.

GAB. Is there a Law for it, Cato?

CAT. Do thou ask
After a Law, that would have broke all laws,
Of Nature, Manhood, Conscience, and Religion.

GAB. Yes, I may ask for it.

CAT. No, pernicious Cimber,
" Th'inquiring after good, does not belong
" Unto a wicked person.

GAB. I, but Cato
Does nothing, but by law.

CRA. Take him aside.
There Is proof enough, though he confess not.

GAB. Stay
I will confess. All Is true, your spies have told you.
Make much of'hem.

CET. Yes, and reward 'hem well,
For fear you get no more such, See, they do not
Die in a ditch, and stink, now you have done with 'hem;
Or beg, of the bridges, here in Rome, whose Arches
Their active industry has saved.

CIC. Se^, Fathers,
What minds, and spirits these are, that, being convicted
Of such a treason, and by such a cloud
Of witnesses, dare yet retain their boldness?
What would their rage have done, if they had conquered?
I thought, when I had thrust out Catiline,
Neither the State, nor I, should need to have feared
Lentulus sleep here, or Longinus fat,
Or this Cethegus rashness; It was he,
I only watched, while he was in our walls,
As one, that had the brain, the hand, the heart.
Bnt now, we find the contrary. Where was there
A People grieved, or a State discontent,
Able to make, or help a war against Rome,
But these, the Allobroges, and those they found?
Whom had not the just Gods been pleased to make
More friends unto our safety, then their own,
As it then seemed, neglecting these men's offers,
Where had we been? or where the Commonwealth?
When their great Chief had been called home; This man,
Their absolute King, (whose noble Grandfather,
Armed in pursuit of the seditious Gracchus,
Took a brave wound, for dear defense of that,
Which he would spoil) had gathered all his aides
Of Ruffins, Slaves, and other Slaughter-men;
Given us up for murder, to Cethegus;
The' other rank of Citizens, to Gabinius;
The City, to be fir^d by Cassius;
And Italy, nay the world, to be laid wast
By cursed Catiline, and his accomplices.
Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers,
Think but with me you saw this glorious City,
The Light of all the earth, Tower of all Nations,
Suddenly falling in one flame. Imagine,
You viewed your Country buried with the heaps
Of slaughtered Citizens, that had no grave;
This Lentulus here, reigning, (as he dreamp't)
And those his purple Senate; Catiline come
With his fierce army; and the cries of Matrons,
The flight of Children, and the rape of Virgins,
Shriekes of the living, with the dying groans
On every side to invade your sense; until
The blood of Rome, were mixed with her ashes.
This was the Spectacle these fiends intended
To please their malice.

CET. I, and it would
Have been a brave one, Consul. But your part
Had not then been so long, as now it is:
I should have quite defeated your Oration;
And slit that fine rhetorical pipe of yours,
IN the first Scene.

CAT. Insolent Monster!

CIC. Fathers,
Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed
Unto some safe, but a free custody,
Until the Senate can determine farther?

SEN. It pleases well.

CIC. Then, Marcus Crassus,
Take you charge of Gabinius: send him home
Unto your house. You Caesar, of Statilius.
Cethegus shall be sent to Cornificius;
And Lentulus, to Publius Lentulus Spinther,
Who now is Aedile.

CAT. It were best, the Praetors
Carried 'hem to their houses, and delivered 'hem.

CIC. Let it be so. Take 'hem from hence.

CAES. But, first,
Let Lentulus put off his Praetorship.

LEN. I do resign it here unto the Senate.

CAES. So, now, there is no offense done to ^^ligion.

CAT. Caesar, 'twas piously, and timely urged.

CIC. What do you decree to the Allobroges?
That were the lights to this discovery?

CRA. A free grant from the State, of all their suites.

CAES. And a reward, out of the public treasure.

CAT. I, and the title of honest men, to crown 'hem*

CIC. What to Volturtius?

CAES. Life, and fauor's well.

VOL. I ask no more.

CAT. Yes, yes, some money, thou need'st it.
'Twill keep thee honest: Want made thee a knave.

SYL. Let Flaccus, and Pomtinius, the Praetors,
Have public thanks, and Quintus Fabius Sanga,
For their good service.

CRA. They deserve it all.

CAT. But what do we decree unto the Consul,
Whose virtue, counsel, watchfulness, and wisdom,
Has freed the Commonwealth, and without tumult,
Slaughter, or blood, or scarce raising a force,
Rescued us all out of the jaws of Fate?

CRA. We owe our Lives unto him, and our Fortunes.

CAES. Our Wives, our Children, Parents, and our Gods.

SYL. We all are saved, by his fortitude.

CAT. The Commonwealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland.
He is the only Father of his Country.

CAES. Let there be public prayer, to all the Gods,
Made in that name, for him.

CRA. And in these words.
For that he has, by his vigilance, preserved
Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword,
And all her Citizens from massacre.

CIC. How are my labors more then paid, grave Fathers,
In these great titles, and decreed honors!
Such, as to me, first, of the civil robe,
Of any man, since Rome was Rome, have happened;
And from this frequent Senate: which more glads me,
That I now see, you' have sense of your own safety.
If those good days come no less grateful to us,
Wherein we are preserved from some great danger,
Then those, wherein we are borne, and brought, to light,
Because the gladness of our safety is certain,
But the condition of our birth not so;
And that we are saved with pleasure, but are borne
Without the sense of joy: why should not, then,
This day, to us, and all posterity
Of ours, be had in equal fame, and honor,
With that, when Romulus first reard these walls,
When so much more is saved, then he built?

CAES. It ought.

CRA. Let it be added to our Fasti.

CIC. What tumult's that?

FLA. Here Is one Tarquinius taken,
Going to Catiline; and says he was sent
By Marcus Crassus: whom he names, to be
Guilty of the conspiracy.

CIC. Some lying varlet.
Take him away, to prison.

CRA. Bring him in,
And let me see him.

CIC. He is not worth it, Crassus.
Keep him up close, and hungry, till he tell,
By whose pernicious counsel, he durst slander
So great, and good a Citizen.

CRA. By yours
I fear, 'twill prove.

SYL. Some of the Traitors, sure,
To give their action the more credit, bid him
Name you, or any man.

CIC. I know my self,
By all the tracts, and courses of this business,
Crassus is noble, just, and loves his Country.

FLA. Here is a Libell too, accus^ng Caesar,
From Lucius Vectius, and confirmed by Curious.

CIC. Away with all, throw'it out of the Court.

CAES. A trick on me, too?

CIC. It is some men's malice.
I said to Curious, I did not believe him.

CAES. Was not that Curious your spy, that had
Reward decreed unto him, the last Senate,
With Fuluia, upon your private motion?

CIC. Yes.

CAES. But he has not that reward, yet?

CIC. No.
Let not this trouble you, Caesar, none believes it.

CAES. It shall not, if that he have no reward.
But if he have, sure I shall think my self
Very untimely, and vnsafely h^^est,
Where such, as he is, may have pay t'accuse me.

CIC. You shall have no wrong done you, noble Caesar,
But all contentment.

CAES. Consul, I am silent.

CATILINE. THE ARMY. I Never yet knew, Soldiers, that, in fight,
Words added virtue unto valiant men;
Or, that a Generals oration made
An Army fall, or stand: But how much prowess
Habitual, or natural each man's breast
Was owner of, so much in act it showed.
" Whom neither glory' or danger can excite
" It Is vain t'attempt with speech: For the minds fear
" Keeps all brave sounds from entering at that ear.
I, yet, would warn you some few things, my Friends,
And give you reason of my present counsels.
You know, no less then I, what state, what point
Our affair^^ stand in; And you all have heard,
What a calamitous misery the sloth,
And sleepiness of Lentulus, has plucked
Both on himself, and us: How, whilst our aides
There, in the City looked for, are defeated,
Our entrance into Gallia, too, is stopped.
Two Armies wait us: One from Rome, the other
From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are,
(Although I most desire it) the great want
Of corn, and victual, forbids longer stay.
So that, of need, we must remove, but whither
The sword must both direct, and cut the passage.
I only, therefore, wish you, when you strike,
To have your valors, and your souls, about you;
And think, you carry in your laboring hands
The things, you seek, glory, and liberty,
Your Country, which you want now, with the Fates,
That are to be instructed, by our swords.
If we can give the blow, all will be safe to'vs.
We shall not want provision, nor supplies.
The Colonies, and free Towns will lie open.
Where, if we yield to fear, expect no place,
Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their own Fortune,
And ill used Arms have left without protection.
You might have lived in servitude, or exile,
Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones;
But that you thought those things unfit for men.
And, in that thought, you then were valiant.
For no man ever yet changed peace for war,
But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose.
There Is more necessity, you should be such,
In fighting for your selves, then they for others.
" He Is base, that trusts his feet, whose hands are armed.
Me thinks, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
What we will do; and all the Heaven 'at leisure
For the great Spectacle. Draw, then, your swords:
And, if our desteny envy our virtue
The honor of the day, yet let us care
To fell our selves, at such a price, as may
Undo the world to buy us: and make Fate,
While she tempts ours, fear her own estate.

THE SENATE. SEN. What means this hasty calling of the Senate?

SEN. We shall know straight. Wait, till the Consul speaks.

POM. Fathers Conscript, bethink you of your safeties,
And what to do, with these Conspirators;
Some of their Clients, their Freed men, and Slaves
'Ginne to make head: There is one of Lentulus Bauds
Runs up and down the shops, through every street,
With money to corrupt, the poor artificers,
And needy tradesmen, to their aid. Cethegus
Has sent, too, to his servants; who are many,
Chosen, and exercised in bold attemptings,
That forthwith they should arm themselves, and prove
His rescue: All will be in instant vproare,
If you prevent it not, with present counsels.
We have done what we can, to meet the fury,
And will do more. Be you good to your selves.

CIC. What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
Syllanus, you are Consul next designed.
Your sentence, of these men.

SYL. It Is short, and this.
Since they have sought to blot the name of Rome,
Out of the world; and raze this glorious Empire
With her own hands, and arms, turned on her self:
I think it fit they die. And, could my breath
Now execute 'hem, they should not enjoy
An article of time, or eye of light,
Longer, to poison this our common air.

SEN. I think so too.

SEN. And I.

SEN. And I.

SEN. And I.

CIC. Your sentence, Caius Caesar.

CAES. Conscript Fathers,
In great affairs, and doubtful, it behooues
Men, that are asked their sentence, to be free
From either hate, or love, anger, or pity:
For, where the least of these do hinder, there
The mind not easily discernes the truth.
I speak this to you, in the name of Rome,
For whom you stand; and to the present cause:
That this foul fact of Lentulus, and the rest,
Weigh not more with you, then your dignity;
And you be more indulgent to your passion,
Then to your honor. If there could be found
A pain, or punishment, equal to their crimes,
I would devise, and help: But if the greatness
Of what they have done, exceed all man's invention,
I think it fit, to stay, where our laws do.
Poor petty States may alter, upon humor,
Where, if they' offend with anger, few do know it,
Because they are obscure; their Fame, and Fortune
Is equal, and the same: But they, that are
Head of the world, and live in that seen height,
All Mankind knows their actions. So we see
The greater fortune has the lesser license.
They must nor favor, hate, and least be angry:
For what with others is called anger, there,
Is cruelty, and pride. I know Syllanus,
Who spoke before me, a just, valiant Man,
A lover of the State, and one that would not,
In such a business, use or grace, or hatred;
I know, too, well his manners, and his modesty:
Nor do I think his sentence cruel (for
Against such delinquents, what can be too bloody?)
But that it is abhorring from our state;
Since to a Citizen of Rome, offending,
Our Laws give exile, and not death. Why then
Decrees he that? 'Twere vain to think, for fear;
When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul,
All is made safe, and certain. Is It for punishment?
Why Death's the end of evils, and a rest,
Rather then torment: It dissolues all griefs.
And beyond that, is neither care, nor joy.
You hear, my sentence would not have 'hem die.
How then? set free, and increase Catilines Army?
So will they, being but banished. No, grave Fathers,
I judge 'hem, first, to have their states confiscate,
Then, that their persons remain prisoners
IN the free towns, far off from Rome, and seuerd':
Where they might neither have relation,
Hereafter, to the Senate, or the People.
Or, if they had, those towns, then to be mulcted.
As enemies to the State, that had their guard.

SEN. It Is good, and honorable, Caesar, has vtterd.

CIC. Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes
All bent on me, to note of these two censures
Which I incline to. Either of them are grave,
And answering the dignity of the speakers,
The greatness of th'affaire, and both severe.
One urges death: And he may well remember
This State has punished wicked Citizens so.
The other bonds: and those perpetual, which
He thinks found out for the more singular plague.
Decree which you shall please. You have a Consul
Not readier to obey, then to defend
What ever you shall act, for the Republique;
And meet with willing shoulders any burden,
Or any fortune, with an even face,
Though it were death: which to a valiant man
Can never happen foul, nor to a Consul
Be immature, or to a wise man wretched.

SYL. Fathers, I spoke, but as I thought: the needs
Of The Commonwealth required.

CAT. Excuse it not.

CIC. Cato, speak you your sentence.

CAT. This it is.
You here dispute, on kinds of punishment,
And stand consulting, what you should decree
Against those, of whom, you rather should beware.
This mischief is not like those common facts,
Which, when they are done, the laws may prosequute.
But this, if you provide not, ere it happen,
When it is happened, will not wait your judgment.
Good Caius Caesar, here, has very well,
And subtly discoursed of life, and death,
As if he thought those things, a pretty fable,
That are delivered us of Hell, and Furies,
Or of the diverse way, that ill men go
From good, to filthy, dark, and ougly places.
And therefore he would have these live; and long too;
But far from Rome, and in the small free Towns,
Lest, here, they might have rescue: As if Men,
Fit for such acts, were only in the City,
And not throughout all Italy? or that boldness
Could not do more, where it found least resistance?
It Is a vain Counsel, if he think them dangerous.
Which, if he do not, but that he alone
In so great fear of all men, stand vnfrighted,
He giu^s me cause, and you, more to fear him.
I am plain, Fathers. Here you look about,
One at another, doubting what to do:
With faces, as you trusted to the Gods,
That still have saved you; and they can do it: But
They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers
Can draw their aides: but vigilance, counsel, action:
Which they will be ashamed to forsake*
It Is sloth they hate, and cowardice. Here you have
The Traitors in your houses, yet you stand
Fearing what to do with 'hem; Let 'hem loose,
And send 'hem hence with arms too; that your Mercy
May turn your misery, as soon as't can.
O, but, they, are great men, and have offended
But through ambition. We would spare their honor:
I, if themselves had spared it, or their fame,
Or modesty, or either God, or Man:
Then I would spare 'hem. But, as things now stand,
Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit
A greater wickedness, then you would revenge.
If there had been but time, and place for you,
To have repaired this fault, you should have made it;
It should have been your punishment, to'haue felt
Your tardie error: But necessity,
Now, bids me say let 'hem not live an hour,
If you mean Rome should live a day. I have done.

SEN. Cato has spoken like an Oracle,

CRA. Let it be so decreed.

SEN. We all were fearful.

SYL. And had been base, had not his virtue raised us.

SEN. Go forth, most worthy Consul, we will assist you.

CAES. I Am not yet changd in my sentence, Fathers.

CAT. No matter. What be those?

SER. Letters, for Caesar.

CAT. From whom? let'hem be read, in open Senate;
Fathers, they come from the Conspirators.
I crave to have 'hem read, for the Republique.

CAES. Cato, read you it. It Is a Loue-letter,
From your dear sister, to me: though you hate me.
Do not discover it.

CAT. Hold thee dronkard. Consul.
Go forth, and confidently.

CAES. You Will repent
This rashness, Cicero.

PRAE. Caesar shall repent it.

CIC. Hold friends.

PRAE. He Is scarce a friend unto the Public.

CIC. No violence. Caesar be safe. Lead on:
Where are the public Executioners?
Bid 'hem wait on us. On to Spinthers house.
Bring Lentulus forth. Here, you, the sad reuengers
Of capital crimes, against the Public, take
This man unto your justice: strangle him.

LEN. Thou do well, Consul. It Was a cast at dice
In Fortunes hand, not long since, that thy self
Should have heard these, or other words as fatal.

CIC. Lead on to Quintus Cornificius house;
Bring forth Cethegus. Take him to the due
Death, that he has deserved: and let it be
Said, He was once.

CET. A beast, or, what is worse,
A slave, Cethegus. Let that be the name
For all that is base hereafter: That would let
This worm pronounce on him: and not have trampled
His body into -- Ha! Art thou not moved?

CIC. " Justice is never angry: Take him hence.

CET. O the whore Fortune! and her bauds the Fates!
That put these tricks on men, which knew the way
To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleep:
I shall grow angry with the Gods, else.

CIC. Lead
To Caius Caesar's, for Statilius.
Bring him, and rude Gabinius, out. Here, take 'hem
To your cold hands, and let 'hem feel death from you:

GAB. I thank you, you do me a pleasure.

STA. And me too.

CAT. So, Marcus Tullius, thou may now stand up,
And call it happy Rome, thou being Consul.
Great Parent of thy Country, go, and let
The Old men of the City, ere they die,
Kiss thee; the Matrons dwell about thy neck;
The Youths, and Maids lay up, against they are old
What kind of man thou were, to tell their Nephews,
When, such a year, they read, within our Fasti,
Thy Consulship. Who Is this? Petreius?

CIC. Welcome,
VVelcome renowned Soldier. What Is the news?
This face can bring no ill with it, unto Rome.
How does the worthy Consul, my Colleague?

PET. As well as victory can make him, Sir.
He greetes the Fathers, and to me has trusted
The sad relation of the Civil strife,
For, in such war, the conquest still is black.

CIC. Shall we withdraw into the House of Concord?

CAT. No, happy Consul, here; let all ears take
The benefit of this tale. If he had voice,
To spread unto the Poles, and strike it through
The Center, to the Antipodes; It would ask it.

PET. The streights, and needs of Catiline being such,
As he must fight, with one of the two Armies,
That then had near enclosed him; It pleased Fate,
To make us the object of his desperate choice,
Wherein the danger almost paiz'd the honor:
And as he riss', the day grew black with him;
And Fate descended nearer to the earth,
As if she meant to hide the name of things
Vnde^ her wings, and make the world her quarry.
At this we roused, least one small minutes stay
Had left it to be' inquired, what Rome was.
And (as we ought) armed in the confidence
Of our great cause, in form of battle, stood.
Whilst Catiline came on, not with the face
Of any man, but of a public ruin:
His Countenance was a civil war it self.
And all his host had standing in their looks
The palenesse of the death, that was to come.
Yet cried they out like Vultures, and urged on*
As if they would praecipitate our fates.
Nor staid we longer for 'hem; But himself
Struck the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life.
Which cut, it seemed a narrow neck of land
Had broke between two mighty Seas; and either
Flowed into other; for so did the slaughter:
And whirled about, as when two violent Tides
Meet, and not yield. The Furies stood, on hills
Circling the place, and trembled to see men
Do more, then they: whilst Piety left the field,
Grieved for that side, that, in so bad a cause,
They knew not, what a crime their valor was.
The Sun stood still, and was, behind the cloud
The battle made, seen sweating, to drive up
His frighted Horse, whom still the noise drove backward.
And now had fierce Enyo, like a flame,
Consumed all it could reach, and then it self;
Had not the Fortune of the Commonwealth
Come Pallas-like, to every Roman thought.
Which Catiline seeing, and that now his Troops.
Covered that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunkes,
Ambitious of great fame, to crown his ill,
Collected all his fury, and ran in
(Armed with a glory, high as his despair)
Into our battle, like a Lybian Lion,
Upon his hunters, scornful of our weapons,
Careless of wounds, plucking down lives about him,
Till he had circled in himself with death:
Then fell he too, to embrace it where it lay.
And as, in that rebellion against the Gods,
Minerua holding forth Medusa's head,
One of the Giant Brethren felt himself
Grow marble at the killing sight, and now,
Almost made stone, began t'inquire, what flint,
What rock it was, that crept through all his limbs,
And, ere he could think more, was that he feared;
So Catiline, at the ^ight of Rome in us,
Became his Tomb: yet did his look retain
Some of his fierceness, and his hands still moved,
As if he labored, yet, to graspe the State,
With those rebellious parts.

CAT. A brave bad death.
Had this been honest now, and for his Country,
As 'twas against it, who had ere fallen greater?

CIC. Honored Petreius, Rome, not I must thank you.
How modestly has he spoken of himself!

CAT. He did the more.

CIC. Thanks to the'immortall Gods,
Romans, I now am paid for all my labors,
My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude
Your praises, triumphs, honors, and rewards
Decreed to me: only the memory
Of this glad day, if I may know it live
Within your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience,
Which I must always study before fame.
" Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
" And ever is ill got, without the first.

The end.

