Ben: Ionson's Execration against VVLCAN. With diverse Epigrams by the same
Author to several Noble Personages in this Kingdom. Never Published before.

LONDON: Printed by I. O. for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop at
St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete. 1640.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Lord WINDSOR, etc.
My LORD:
THE assurance the Author of these Poems received of his Worth from your
Honor, in his life time, was not rather a mark of his desert, than a perfect
demonstration of your Noble love to him: Which consideration, has raised my
bold desire to assume presumption, to present these to your Honor, in the
person of one deceased; the form whereof somewhat dispersed, yet carry with
them the Prerogative of truth to be Mr. Ben: Ionsons; and will so appear to
all, whose Eyes, and Spirits are rightly placed. You are (my Lord) a Person who
is able to give value and true esteem to things of themselves no less
deserving: such were his, strong, and as far transcendent ordinary
imagination, as they are conformable to the sense of such who are of sound
judgment: his Strenuous Lines, and sinewey Labors have raised such Piramydes
to his lasting name, as shall out-last Time. And that these may, without any
diminution to the glory of his greater Works, enjoy the possession of public
favor, (by your Honors permission) I shall be glad by this small Testimony
account it a fit opportunity to assure your Honor, my Lord, that I am

Your most humble and affectionate Servant, JOHN BENSON.

Imprimatur

Matthew. Clay.
December. 14. 1639.
Ben: Ionson's Execration against Vulcan.
ANd why to me this; (thou lame god of fire)
What have I done that mght call on thine ire?
Or urge thy greedy flames, thus to devour
So many my years labors in one hour!
I never attempted ought against thy life,
Nor made less line of Love to thy loose wife:
Or in remembrance of thy affront and scorn,
With clowns and tradesmen kept thee close in horn:
'Twas Jupiter that hurld thee headlong down,
And Mars that gave thee a Lantern for a Crown.
Was it because thou were of old denied,
By Jove, to have Minerva for thy Bride.
That since thou take all envious care and pain,
To ruin every issue of her Brain?
Had I wrote Treason there, or Heresy,
Impostures, Witchcraft, Charms, or Blasphemy,
I had deserved then thy consuming looks,
Perhaps to have been burned with my books:
But on thy Malice tell me, did thou spy
Any least loose, or scurrill paper lie
Concealed, or kept there; that was fit to be,
By thy own vote, a Sacrifice to thee?
Did I there wound the honor of the Crown?
Or tax the glory of the Church, or Gown?
Itch to defame the state, or brand the Times,
And my self most in leaud selfe-boasting Rimes?
If none of these, why then this fire? or find
A cause before, or leave me one behind.
Had I compiled from Amadis de Gaul
The Esplandians, Arthurs, Palmerins, and all
The learned Library of Don Quixot,
And so some goodlier Monster had begot:
Or spunne out Riddles, or weaved fifty Tomes
Of Logogriphes, or curious Pallindromes;
Or pumped for those hard trifles, Anagrams,
Or Ecrosticks, or your finer flames
Of Eggs, and Halberds, Cradles and a Hearse,
A pair of sizers and a Comb in verse
Acrosticks, and Tellesticks, or iumpe names,
Thou then had had some color for thy flames,
On such my serious follies: But thou wilt say,
There were some pieces of as base a Lay,
And as false stamp there: parcells of a play
Fitter to see the fire-light, than the day:
Adulterate Monyes, such as would not go,
Thou should have staid, till public fame said so.
She is the Judge, thou Executioner:
Or if thou needs will trench upon her power,
Thou might have yet enjoyed thy cruelty,
With some more thirst and more variety!
Thou might have had me perish piece by piece,
To light Tobacco, or save roasted Geese,
Singe Capon, or crispe Pigge, dropping their eyes*
Condemned them to the Ovens with the Pies;
And so have kept me dying a whole age,
Not ravished all hence in a minuits rage:
But that's the mark whereof thy right does boast,
To sow Consumption every where thou go.
Had I fore-knowne of this thy least desire,
To Have held a triumph, or a feast of fire;
Especially in paper, that that steame
Had tickled thy large Nostrills, many a Reame,
To redeem mine I had sent in; enough
Thou should have cried, and all bin proper stuff.
The Talmond and the Alcaron had come
With pieces of the Legend: the whole sum
Of Errant Knighthood, with their Dames and Dwarffs,
The charmed Boats, and their enchanted Wharfes:
The Tristeams, Lancelots, Turpins, and the Peers,
All the mad Rowlands, and sweet Olivers,
With Merlins Marvailes, and his Caballs Loss,
With the Chimera of the Rosy Cross,
Their Charms, their Characters, Hermetticke Rings,
Their Iems of Riches, and bright stone that brings
Invisibility, and Strength, and Tongues,
The art of kindling the true Cole by Lungs.
With Nicholas Pasquills, meddle with your match,
And the strong Lines that do the times so catch:
On Captain Pamphlets Horse and Foot that salley,
Upon the Exchange still out of Popes head Alley,
The weekly Currants, with Paul's Seal, and all
The admired Discourses of the Prophet Baal,
These (had thou pleased either to dine or sup)
Had made a meat for Vulcan to lick up.
But in my Deske, what was there to excite
So ravenous and vast an appetite?
I dare not say a Body, but some parts
There were of search and mystery in the Arts:
And the old Venusine in Poetry,
And lighted by the Staggerite could spy,
Was there made English, with a Grammar too,
To teach some that, their Nurses could not do;
The purity of Language; and (among
The rest) my journey into Scotland Sung,
With all the adventures: three Books not afraid
To speak the Fate of the Sycilian Maid
For our own Ladies: And in story there
Of our fifth Henry, eight of his nine year.
In which was Oil, besides the succors spent,
Which Noble Cotton, Carew, Seldom sent.
And twice twelve years Stor'd-up-Humanity,
And humble gleanings in Divinity,
After the Fathers; and those wiser guides,
Whom Factiou had not drawn to study sides.
How in these ruins Vulcan do thou lurk:
All Soot and Embers, odious, as thy work?
I now begin to doubt, if ever grace,
Or goddess could be patient at thy face.
Thou woe Minerva, or to wit aspire,
'Cause thou can halt with us in Art and Fire.
Son of the Wind; for so thy Mother gone
With Lust conceived thee, Father thou had none:
When thou were born, and that thou lookst at best:
She durst not kiss, but flung thee from her breast.
And so did Jove, when near meant thee his cup:
No mar'le the Clowns of Lemnos took thee up.
For none but Smiths would have made thee a god,
Some Alchimist there may be yet, or odd:
Squire of the Squibs against the Pageant day,
May to thy Name a Vulcanale say,
And for it lose his eyes by Gunpowder,
As the other may his brains by Quicksilver:
Well fare the wise men yet on the Banks-side,
(Our friends the VVatermen) they could provide
Against thy fury, when to serve their needs,
They made a Vulcan on a sheafe of Reeds.
Whom they durst handle in their holy day coats,
And safely trust to dress, not burn their boats:
But oh these Reeds, thy mere disdain of them,
Made thee beget that cruel stratagem:
(Which some are pleased to style but thy mad prank)
Against the Globe, the glory of the bank,
Which though it were the Fort of the whole parish,
Fenced with a Ditch and forkt out of a Marish:
I saw with two poor Chambers taken in,
And raised ere thought could urge: this might have bin.
See the worlds ruins, nothing but the piles.
Left, and wit since to covet it with tiles
The Brethren they straight noised it out for news,
'Twas verily some Relic of the Stews:
And this a sparkle of that fire let loose,
That was raked up: the Winchestrian Goose
Bred on the Bank in time of Popery,
When Venus there maintained the mystery:
But others fell with that conceit by the ears,
It Was verily a threatening to the Bears;
And that accursed ground, the Paris Garden:
Nay, (sighed a sister) 'twas the Nun Kate Arden
Kindled the fire: but then did one return;
No fool would his own Harvest spoil, or burn;
If that were so, thou rather would advance
The place that was thy wives inheritance.
O no, cried all, Fortune for being a whore,
Escaped not his Justice any jot the more.
He burnt that Idol of the Revells too:
Nay let Whit^-hall with Revells have to do,
Though but in Dances) it shall know thy power,
There was a judgment too showed in an hour;
He was right Vulcan still, he did not spare
Troy, though it were so much thy Venus care:
Fool will thou let that in example come?
Did she not save from thence to build a Rome?
And what have thou done in these petty spights,
More then advanced the horses and their Rites,
I will not argue thee from them of guilt,
For they were burnt but to be better built:
It Is true, that in thy wish they were destroyed,
Which thou have only vented, not enjoyed.
So would the have run upon the Roles by stealth,
And did invade part of the Commonwealth:
In those Records (which were our Chroniclers gone)
Would be remembered by six Clerks to one.
But say all six good men, what answer ye,
Lies there no Writ out of the Chancerie
Against this Vulcan? no Iniunction?
No Orders? no Decree? though we be gone
At Common Law, me thinks in his dispight,
A Court of Equity should do us right.
But to confine him to the Brew-houses,
The Glasse-house, Die-fates, and their Furnaces:
To live in Sea-coale, and go out in Smoke,
Or least that vapor might the City choke,
Confine him to some Brickhills, or some Hill-
Foot out in Sussex to an Iron-Mill:
Or in small Faggots have him blaze about,
Vile Tavernes, and the Drunkards piss him out:
Or in the Bell-mans Lantern, like a spy,
Waste to a snuff, and then stink out and dye.
I could invent a sentence yet more worse,
But i will conclude all in a civil curse:
Pox on your flame-ship (Vulcan) if it be
To all as fatal as t'hath been to me;
And to Paul's Steeple, which had been to us
'Bove all your fire-workes: had not Ephesus,
Or Alexandria, which though a Divine
Loss yet remains as unrepaird as mine:
Would you had kept your forge at Aetna still,
And there made swords, bills, glaves, and arms your fill;
Maintained a trade at Bilbo, or elsewhere,
Struck in at Millane with the Cutlers there:
Or stayed where the Friar and you first met,
That from the Devils Ars did Gunnes beget:
Or fixed in the Low Countries, where you might
On both sides do your mischiefs with delight:
Blow up and ruin, Mine, and Counter-mine,
Use your Petarres, and Granats, all your fine
Engines of Murder, and enjoy the praise
Of massacring Mankind so many ways:
We ask your absence here, we all love peace,
And pray the fruits thereof and the increase,
So does the King, and most of the Kings men,
That have good places: therefore once again
Pox on thee Vulcan; thy Pandora's Pox,
And all the ills that flew out of her Box
Light on thee: or if those plagues will not do,
Thy wives pox take thee, and Bess Braughtons too.
Ben: Ionson.

Upon King CHARLES his Birthday.
THis is King Charles his birth day, speak it the Tower
Unto the Ships, and they from Tire to Tire,
Discharging 'bout the Island in an hour,
As loud as Thunder, and as swift as fire.
Let Ireland meet it out at Sea half way,
Repeating all Great Britains joy and more,
Adding her own glad accents to this day,
Like echo playing from another shore.
What Drums, or Trumpets, or great Ordnance can,
The Poetry of Steeples with the Bells.
Three Kingdoms mirth in light and ayery man,
Made loftier by the winds all noyses else.
At Bone-fires, Squibs, and mirth, with all their shouts,
That cry the gladness which their hearts would pray
If they had leisure, at these lawful routs,
The often coming of this Holy day:
And then noise forth the burden of their song.
Still to have such a Charles, but this Charles long.
B. Jonson.

To the Queen on her Birthday.
UP public joy, remember
The sixeteenth of November
Some brave uncommmon way.
And though the parish Steeple
Be silent to the people,
Ring thou it Holy day.
What though the thirsty Tower,
And Guns there spare to power
Their noyses out in thunder:
As fearful to awake
The City, as to shake
Their guarded Gates asunder.
Yet let the Trumpets sound,
And shake both air and ground
With beating of their Drums:
Let every Lire be strung,
Harp, Lute, Theorbo sprung
With touch of learned thumbs,
That when the Quire is full,
The harmony may pull
The Angels from their Spheres:
And each intelligence,
May wish it self a sense,
Whilst it the Ditty hears.
Behold the royal Mary,
The daughter of great Harry,
And sister to just Lewis,
Comes in the pomp and glory
Of all her Fathers story,
And of her brothers Prowis.
She shows so far above
The feigned Queen of Love;
This Sea-girt ground upon,
As here no Venus were
But that she reigning here,
Had put the Ceston on.
See, see our active King,
Has taken twice the Ring
Upon the poynted Lance,
Whilst all the ravished rout
Do mingle in a shout,
Hey for the flower of France.
This day the Court does measure
Her joy in state and pleasure:
And with a reverend fear,
The revells and the play
Make up this Crowned day
Her one and twenty year.
B. Ionson.

On the Princes Birthday. An Epigram.
ANd art thou borne, brave Babe, blessed be thy birth,
That so has crowned our hopes, our spring on earth;
The bed of the chaste Lilly and the Rose,
What month than May was fitter to disclose
This Prince of flowers? soon shoot thou up, and grow
The same that thou art promised; but be slow,
And long in changing: let our Nephews see
Thee quickly come, the gardens eye to be,
And still to stand so: Haste now envious Moon,
And interpose thy self, care not how soon,
And threat the great Eclips two hours but run,
Sol will reshine, if not, Charles has a Son.
Non Displicuisse meretur
Festinat Caesar, qui placuisse tibi.
B. Ionson.

Another on the Birth of the Prince.
ANother Phoenix, though the first is dead,
A second's flowne from his immortal bed,
To make this our Arabia to be
The nest of an eternal progeny.
Choice Nature framed the former but to find
What error might be mended in Mankind:
Like some industrious workman, which affect
Their first endeavors only to correct:
So this the building, that the model was,
The type of all that now is come to pass:
That but the shadow, this the substance is,
All that was but the prophecy of this:
And when it did this after birth fore-runne,
'Twas but the morning star unto this Sun;
The dawning of this day, when Sol did think
We having such a light, that he might wink,
And we never miss his luster: nay so soon
As Charles was borne, he and the pale-faced Moon
With envy then did copulate, to try
If such a Birth might be produced in the sky.
What Heavenly favor made a star appear,
To bid wise Kings to do their homage here,
And prove him truly Christian? long remain
On Earth, sweet Prince, that when great Charles shall reign
In Heaven above, our little Charles may be
As great on Earth, because as good as he.
B. Ionson.

A Parallel of the Prince to the King.
SO Peleus when he fair Thetis got,
As thou thy Sea-Queene; so to him she brought
A blessed Babe, as thine has done to thee:
His worthiest proved of those times, ours may be
Of these; his had a Pallas for his guide,
Thy wisdom will as well for ours provide:
His Conquered Countries, Cities, Castles, Towers,
A worthy foe; hereafter so may ours.
His all his time, but once Patroclus finds,
But this of ours a world of faithful friends:
He Is vulnerable in no place but one,
And this of ours (we hope) be hurt of none.
His had his Phoenix, ours no teacher needs,
But the example of thy Life and Deeds.
His Nestor knew, in Arms his fellow was,
But not in years, (too soon run out his Glass)
Ours, though not Nestor knew, we trust, shall be
As wise in Arms, as old in years as he.
His after Death had Homer his reviver:
And ours may better merit to live ever,
By Deeds farre-passing: but (oh sad despair)
No hope of Homer, his wit left no heir.
B. Jonson.

An Elegy on the Lady Jane Paulet, Marchioness of Winchester.
What goodly Ghost besprint with April dew,
Halls me so solemnly to yonder Yeugh?
And beckoning wooes me from the fatal tree,
To pluck a Garland for her self, or me.
I do obey you beauty; for in death
You seem a fair one; O that I had breath
To give your shade a name! stay! stay! I feel
A horror in me, all my blood is steel
Stiff stark; my joints against one another knock:
Whose daughter? ha? great Savage of the Rock!
He Is good, as great! I am almost a stone,
And ere I can ask more of her she is gone!
Alas I am all Marble: write the rest,
Thou would have written fame upon my breast,
It is a large fair Table, and a true,
And the disposure will be somewhat new:
When I who would her Poet have become,
At least may bear th'inscription to her Tomb:
She was the Lady Jane, and Marchioness
Of Winchester, the Heralds can tell this:
Earl Rivers grandchild, serve not titles, Fame
Sound thou her virtues, give her soul a name.
Had I a thousand mouths, as many tongues,
And voice to raise them from my brazen Lungs,
I durst not aim at, the Dotes thereof were such,
No Nation can express how much
Their Charact was: I or my trump must break,
But rather I, should I of that part speak,
It is too near of kin to God the soul
To be described, Fames fingers are too foul
To touch those mysteries; we may admire
The heat and splendour, but not handle fire:
What she did by great example well,
T'inlive posterity, her fame may tell;
And calling truth to witness, make it good
From the inherint graces in her blood.
Else who does prayle a person by a new,
But a feigned way does spoil it of the true:
Her sweetness, softness, her fair courtesy,
Her wary guards, her wise simplicity,
Were like a ring of virtues 'bout her set,
And Piety the center where all met:
A reverend state she had, an awful eye,
A darling, yet inviting Majesty;
What Nature, Fortune, Institution, Fact,
Could heap to a perfection, was her act:
How did she leave the world, with what contempt?
Just as she in it lived, and so exempt
From all affection: when they urged the Cure
Of her disease, how did her soul assure
Her sufferings, as the Body had bin away:
And to the torturers her Doctors say,
Stick on your Cupping-glasses, fear not, put
Your hottest Causticks to burn, lance, or cut:
It Is but a body which you can torment,
And I into the world, with my soul was sent.
Then comforted her Lord, and blessed her son,
Cheered her fair sisters in her race to run.
Which gladness tempered her sad parents tears,
Made her friends joys to get above their fears.
And in her last act taught the standers by,
With admiration and applause to dye:
Let Angels sing her glories, who did call
Her spirit home to her original,
That saw the way was made it, and were sent
To carry and conduct the complement
'Twixt death and life: where her mortality
Became her birthday to eternity!
And now through circumfused lights she looks
On Natures secrets there as her own books;
Speaks heavens language, and discourses free
To every Order, every Hierarchy.
Beholds her Maker, and in him does see
What the beginning of all beauties be,
And all beatitudes that thence does flow,
Which the Elect of God are sure to know.
Go now her happy parents and be sad,
If ye not understand what child you had;
If you dare quarrel heaven, and repent
To have paid again a blessing was but lent,
And trusted so as it deposited lay
At pleasure to be called for every day.
If you can envy your own daughters bliss;
And wish her state less happy than it is;
If you can cast about your either eye,
And see all dead here, or about to dye.
The Stars that are the jewels of the night,
The day deceasing with the Prince of light
The Sun. Great Kings and mightiest kingdoms fall,
Whole nations; nay, mankind, the world, and all
That ever had beginning to have end;
With what injustice can one soul pretend
T'escape this common known necessity,
When we were all borne we began to dye:
And but for that brave contention and strife,
The Christian has t'enioy a future life;
He were the wretched'st of the race of men,
But as he soars at that, he bruiseth then
The Serpents head; gets above Death and Sin*
And sure of heaven rides triumphing in.
B. Jonson.

ODE PINDARICK On the the Death of Sir Hen. Morison.
BRave Infant of Saguntum clear,
Thy coming forth in that great year,
When the prodigious Hanibal did Crown
His rage, with razing your immortal Town.
Thou looking then about,
Ere thou were half got out:
Wise Child did hastily return,
And madst thy Mothers womb thine Vrne,
How sum'd a Circle did thou leave mankind,
Of deepest lore could we the center find.
The Counter-turne.
Did wiser Nature draw thee back,
From out the horror of that sack?
Where shame, faith, honor, and regard of right
Lay trampled on the deeds of death and night.
Urged, hurried forth, and hurld
Upon the affrighted world:
Sword, fire, famine, with full fury met,
And all on utmost ruin set:
As could they but lives miseries foresee,
No doubt all Infants would return like thee.
The Stand.
For what is Life, if measured by the space,
Not by the Act?
Or masked man, if valued by his face,
Above his Fact?
Here Is one outlived his Peers,
And told forth fourscore years,
He vexed time, and busied the whole State,
Troubled both foes and friends,
But ever to no ends:
What did this stirrer but dye late?
How well at twenty had he fallen or stood,
For three of his fourscore he did no good.
The Turn.
He entered well by virtuous parts,
Got up and thrived with honest Arts,
He purchased friends, and fame, and honors then,
And had his Noble Name advanced with men.
But weary of that flight,
He stooped in all men's sight
To sordid flatteries, acts of strife,
And sunk in that dead Sea of life
Too deep: as he did then Deaths waters sup,
But that the Cork of Title Boy'd him up.
The Counter-turne.
Alas but Morison fell young;
He never fell, thou tripst my tongue:
He stood a Soldier to the last night end,
A perfect Patriot, and a noble friend.
But most a virtuous Son,
All offices were done
By him so ample, full, and round,
In weight, and measure, number sound,
As though his Age imperfect might appear,
His life was of Humanity the Sphere.
The Stand.
Go now and tell out days, sum'd up with fears,
And make them years:
Produce thy mass of miseries on the Stage,
To swell thine Age,
Repeat of things a throng,
To show thou have been long,
Not lived: for life does her great actions spell,
By what was done, and wrought
In season, and so brought
To light: her measures are how well:
Each sillib' answered, and was formed how fair;
These make the lines of life, and that is her air.
The Turn.
It is not growing, like a Tree,
In bulk, does make man better be,
Or standing long an Oak, three hundued year,
To fall a log at last, dry, bald, and sear:
A Lilly of a day,
Is fairer far in May,
Although it fall and dye at night,
It was the plant and flower of light;
In small proportions we just beauty see,
And in short measures life may perfect be.
The Counter-turne.
Call Noble Lucius then for wine,
And let thy looks with gladness shine,
Accept this Garland, plant it on thy head,
And think, nay know thy Morison's not dead.
He leaped the present age,
Possessed with holy rage,
To see the bright eternal day,
Of which we Priests and Poets say
Such truths as we expect for happy men,
And there he lives with memory: and Ben
The Stand.
Ionson! who sung this of him e're he went
Himself to rest,
Or taste a part of that full joy he meant
To have expressed,
In this bright Asterisme,
Where it was friendships schism,
Were not his Lucius long with us to tarry,
To separate these twi-
Lights, the Dioscuri,
And keep the one half from his Harry;
But Fate does so alternate the design,
Whilst that in heaven, this light on earth must shine.
The Turn.
And shine as you exalted are,
Two names of friendship, but one star
Of hearts the union: and those not by chance,
Made or indentur'd, or leas'd out to advance
The profits for a time,
No pleasures vain did chime
Of Rimes, or ryots at your feasts,
Argues of Drink, or feigned protests,
But simple Love, of greatness and of good,
That knits brave minds, and manners more than blood.
The Counter-turne.
This made you first to know the why
You liked: then after to apply
That likening; and approach so one to the other,
Till either grew a portion of the other,
Each styled by his end,
The copy of his friend;
You lived to be the great sirnames,
And titles by which all made claims
Unto the virtue: nothing perfect done,
But as a Carry or a Morison.
The Stand.
And such a force the fair example had,
As they that saw
The good, and durst not practice it, were glad
That such a Law
Was left yet to mankind,
Where they might read, and find
Friendship indeed was written not in words:
And with the Heart, not Pen,
Of two so early men,
Whose Lines her Rowles were, and records
Who e're the first down; bloomed on the Chin,
Had sowed these fruits, and got the harvest in.
B. Jonson.

To Hierome Lord Weston upon his returue from his Embassy.
SVch pleasures as the teeming earth
Does take in easy Natures birth,
When she puts forth the life of every thing,
And in a dew of sweetest rain,
She lies delivered without pain,
Of the prime beauty of the year and spring.
That Rivers in their shores do run,
The Clouds rack clear before the Sun,
The rudest winds obey the calmest air;
Rare plants from every bank do rise,
And every plant the sense surprise,
Because the order of the whole is fair.
The very verdure of her nest,
Wherein she sits so richly dressed,
As all the wealth of season there were spread,
Have showed the graces and the hours,
Have multiplied their arts and powers,
In making soft her stromaticke bed.
Such joys, such sweets does your return,
Bring all your friends, fair Lord, that burn
With joy to hear your modesty relate
The business of your blooming wit,
With all the fruits that follow it,
Both to the honor of the King and state.
O how will the Court be pleased,
To see great CHARLES of travel eased,
When he beholds a graft of his own hand,
Spring up an Olive, fruitful, fair,
To be a shadow of the Air;
And both a strength and beauty to the Land.
B. I.

To the right Honorable the L. Treasurer. An Epigram.
IF to my mind, great Lord, I had a state,
I would present you with some curious Plate
Of Norimberg, or Turkey hang your rooms,
Not from the Arras, but the Persian Looms.
I would (if price or prayer) could them get
Send in what or Romano, Tintaret,
Titian, or Raphaell, Michaell Angelo,
Have left in Fame to equal, or out-goe
The old Greek hands, in picture, or in stone,
This would I do, could I think Weston one
Caught with these Arts, wherein the Judge is wife,
As far as sense, and only by his eyes.
But you I know, my Lord, and know you can
Discern between a Statue, and a man:
Can do the things that Statue do deserve,
And act the business which these paint or carve.
What you have studied are the Arts of Life,
To compose men and manners, stint the strife
Of froward Citizens; make Nations know,
What world of Blessings to good Kings they owe;
And mightiest Monarchs feel what large increase
Of Fame and Honor you possess by peace.
These I look up at with a measuring eye,
And strike Religion in the standers by.
Which, though I cannot, like as an Architect,
In glorious Piles and Pyramides erect
Unto your Honor; I can voice in song
Aloud; and (happily) it may last as long.
B. Ionson.

To Mr. Ionson upon these Verses.
YOur Verses were commended, as it is true,
That they were very good, I mean to you:
For they returned you Ben I have been told,
The seld seen sum of forty pound in gold.
These Verses then, being rightly understood,
His Lordship, not Ben: Ionson, made them good.
I. E.

To my Detractor.
MY Verses were commended, thou did say,
And they were very good; yet thou think nay.
For thou obiectest, as thou have been told,
Th'envy'd return of forty pound in gold.
Fool do not rate my rimes, I have found thy vice
Is to make cheap the Lord, the Lines the Price:
But bark thou on; I pity thee poor Cur,
That thou should lose thy noise, thy foame, thy stur,
To be known what thou art, thou blatent beast;
But writing against me, thou think at least
I now would write on thee: no wretch, thy name
Cannot work out unto it such a Fame:
No man will tarry by thee as he goes
To ask thy name, if he have half a nose;
But fly thee like the Pest. Walk not the street
Out in the Dog-dayes, least the Killer meet
Thy Noddle with his Club; and dashing forth
Thy dirty brains, men see thy want of worth.
B. Ionson.

To William Earl of New Castle on the Backing of his Horse.
When first, my Lord, I saw you back your Horse,
Provoke his mettle, and command his force
To all the uses of the field and race,
Me thought I read the ancient Art of Thrace,
And saw a Centaure past those tales of Greece;
So seemed your Horse and You, both of a piece:
You showed like Perseus upon Pegasus,
Or Castor mounted on his Cillarus:
Or what we hear our home-borne Legend tell,
Of bold Sir Bevis, and his Arundell,
And so your seat his beauties did endorse,
As I began to wish my self a horse.
And surely had I but your Stable seen
Before, I think my wish absolved had been:
For never saw I yet the Muses dwell,
Nor any of their Household half so well.
So well! as when I saw the floor and room,
I looked for Hercules to be the Groom.
And cried away with the Caesarian Bread,
At these immortal Mangers Virgil fed.
B. Jonson.

To William Earl of New Castle. An Epigram on his Fencing.
THey talk of Fencing, and the use of Arms,
The Art of urging, and avoiding harms;
The Noble Science, and the Mastring skill,
Of making just approaches, how to kill,
To hit in Angles, and to clash with time,
As all defense, or offense, were a chime.
I hate this measured: give me metled fire,
That trembls i'th'blaze, but then mounts higher,
A swift and darling motion, when a pair
Of men do meet like rarefied air:
Their weapons darted with that flame and force,
As they out-did the lightning in the course:
This were a spectacle, a sight to draw
Wonder to valor: no, it is a Law
Of daring, not to do a wrong: it is true,
Next to despise it being done to you:
To know all heads of danger; where it is fit
To bend, to break, provoke, or suffer it:
And this my Lord is valor: this is yours,
And was your Fathers, and your Ancestors;
Who durst live great, when death appeared, or bands,
And valiant were with, or without, their hands.
B. Jonson.

To Sir Kenelme Digby. An Epigram.
THough happy Muse thou know my Digby well,
Yet take him in these Lines: he does excel
In Honors, Courtesy, and all the parts
Court can call hers, or man would call his Arts:
He Is prudent, valiant, just, and temperate,
In him all action is beheld in state.
And he is built, like some Imperial room,
For those to dwell in, and be still at home.
His breast is a brave Palace, a broad street,
Where all Heroicke ample thoughts do meet;
Where Nature such a large surveigh has taken,
As others souls, to his, dwell in a lane:
Witness his birthday, the eleventh of June,
And his great action done at Scanderoone.
That day; which I predestined am to sing,
For Britains honor, and to Charles, my King:
Go Muse in, and salute him, say he be
Busy, or frown at first, when he sees thee,
He will cheer up his forehead, think thou bring'st
Good Fortune to him in the Note thou sing'st:
For he does love my Verses, and will look
Upon them, next to Spencers Noble Book;
And praise them too: O what a Fame 'twill be?
What reputation to my Lines and me,
When he does read them at the Treasurers board,
The knowing Weston, and that learned Lord
Allows them? then what Coppies will be had?
What transcripts made? how cried up, and how glad
VVilt thou be Muse, when this shall then befall,
Being sent to one, they will be read of all.
B. Ionson.

His Mistress Drawn.
SItting, and ready to be drawn,
What make these Velvets, Silks, and Lawne?
Imbroderies, Feathers, Fringe, and Lace,
When every Limb takes like a face?
Send these suspected helps to aid,
Some form defective, and decai'd:
This beauty without falsehood fair,
Needs naught to cloth it but the Air:
Yet something to the Painters view,
Were fitly interposed, so new
He shall (if he can understand)
Work by my fancy with his hand.
Draw first a Cloud, all save her neck,
And out of that make day to break:
Till like her face it do appear,
And men may think all light rose there.
Then let the beams of that disperse
The Cloud, and show the Universe:
But at such distance, as the eye
May rather it adore than spy:
The Heavens designed, draw next a Spring,
With all that youth, or it may bring:
Four Rivers, branching forth like seas,
And Paradise confined in these.
Last draw the Circle of this Globe,
And let there be a starry Robe
Of Constillations 'bout her hurled,
And thou have painted beauties world.
But Painter see you do not sell
A Copy of this Piece, nor tell
Whose it is: but if it favor find,
Next sitting we will draw her mind.
B. Jonson.

Her Mind.
PAynter you are come, but may be gone,
Now I have better thought thereon,
This work I can perform alone,
And give you reasons more than one,
Not that your Art I do refuse,
But here I may no Colors use;
Besides your hand will never hit
To draw the thing that cannot sit.
You could make shift to paint an eye,
An Eagle towering in the sky,
A Sun, a Sea, a Sandlesse pit,
And these are like a Mind, not it.
No, to express this Mind to sense,
Would ask a heavens intelligence,
Since that nothing can report that flame,
But what is of kin to whence it came:
Sweet mind, then speak your self, and say
As you go on, by what brave way,
Our sense you do with knowledge fill,
And yet remain our wonder still.
I call you Muse, now make it true,
Hence forth may every line be you,
That all may say that see the frame,
This is no Picture, but the same:
A mind so pure, so perfect fine,
As it is not radiant, but divine,
And so disdaining any tire,
It Is got where it can try the fire.
There (high exalted in the Sphere,
As it another Nature were)
It moves all, and makes a flight,
As circular as infinite,
Whose Notions when it would express
In speech, it is with that excess,
Of grace and music to the ear,
As what it spoke it planted there.
The voice so sweet, the words so fair,
As some soft chime had strok'd the air,
And though the sound were parted thence,
Still left an Echo in the sense,
But that a mind so rapt so high,
So swift, so pure should yet apply
It self to us, and come so nigh
Earths grossness, there is the how, and why?
Is it because it sees us dull
And stuck in Clay here, it would pull
Us forth by some Celestial slight,
Up to her own sublimed height?
Or has she here upon the ground,
Some Paradise or Palace found
In all the bounds of Beauty fit
For her t'inhabite? there is it.
Thrice happy house that have receite,
For this so softly form, so strait,
So polished, perfect, and so even,
As it slid molded out of Heaven.
Not swelling like the Ocean proud,
But stooping gently as a Cloud,
As smooth as Oil powered forth, and calm
As showers, and sweet as drops of Balm,
Smooth, soft, and sweet, and all a flood,
Where it may run to any good,
And where it stays it there becomes,
A nest of odours, spice, and gummes.
In action winged as the Wind*
In rest like spirits left behind,
Upon a Bank or field of flowers,
Begotten by the wind and showers,
In the fair mansion let it rest,
Yet know with what thou art possessed,
Thou entertaining in thy breast,
But such a mind make God a Guest.
B. Ionson.

Sir WILLIAM BVRLASE The Painter, to the Poet.
TO Paint thy worth, if rightly I did know it,
And were but Painter, half like thee a Poet,
Ben: I would show it.
But in this Art, my unskilful Pen will tire;
Thou, and thy worth, will still be found far higher,
And I a liar.
Then what a Painter's here? and what an eater
Of great attempts? whereas his skill's no greater,
And he a Cheater.
Then what a Poet's here, whom by Confession
Of all with me, to Paint without digression,
There Is no expression.
An Epigram to the Queens Health.
HAyle MARY, full of grace, it once was said,
And by an Angel, to the Blessed Maid,
The Mother of our Lord: why may not I,
Without prophannesse, as a Poet, cry
Hail Marry full of Honors, to my Queen,
The Mother of our Prince? when was there seen
(Except the joy that the first Mary brought,
Whereby the safety of the world was wrought)
So general a gladness to an Isle,
To make the hearts of a whole Nation smile,
As in this Prince? let it be lawful so
To compare small with great, as still we owe
Our thanks to God: then hail to Mary, spring
Of so much health, both to our Land and King.
Ben. Ionson.

ODE To himself.
I.
COme leave the loathed Stage,
And the more loathsome Age,
Where pride and impudence in faction knit,
Usurp the Chair of wit:
Inditing and arraigning every day,
Something they call a Play.
Let their fastidious vain
Commission of the brain,
Run on, and rage, sweat, censure, and condemn,
They were not made for thee, less thou for them.
II.
Say that pour'st 'hem wheat,
And they would Akornes eat:
Twere simple fury, still thy self to wast
On such as have no taste:
To offer them a surfeit of pure bread,
Whose appetites are dead:
No give them Grains their fill,
Husks, Draffe to drink, and swill:
If they love Lees, and leave the lusty Wine,
Envy them not, their pallat's with the Swine,
III.
No doubt a moldy Tale,
Like Pericles, and Stale
As the Shrives crusts, and nasty as his Fish,
Scraps out of every Dish,
Thrown forth and raked into the common Tub,
May keep up the play Club.
Broomes sweepings do as well
There, as his Masters meal:
For who the relish of these guests will fit,
Needs set them but the Almes-basket of wit.
IV.
And much good do it ye then,
Brave Plush and Velvet men
Can feed on Orts; and safe in your scoene clothes,
Dare quit upon your Oaths
The Stagers, and the stage-writes too; your Peers,
Of stuffing your large ears
With rage of Commicke socks,
Wrought upon twenty Blocks;
Which if they are torn, and foul, and patched enough,
The Gamsters share your gilt, and you their stuff.
V.
Leave things so prostitute,
And take the Alcaike Lute;
Or thine own Horace, or Anacreons Lyre;
VVarme thee by Pindars fire:
And though thy Nerves be shrunk, and blood be cold,
Ere years have made thee old,
Strike that disdainful heat
Throughout, to their defeat:
As curious fools, and envious of thy strain,
May blushing swear, no Palsi's in thy brain.
VI.
But when they hear thee sing
The glories of thy King;
His zeal to God, and his just awe of men,
They may be blood-shaken, then
Feel such a flesh-quake to possess their powers,
That no tuned Harp like ours,
In sound of Peace or VVarres,
Shall truly hit the Stars:
When they shall read the Acts of Charles his Reign,
And see his Chariot triumph 'bove his VVaine.
B J.

BEN: JONSON The Poet, to the Painter.
Why though I seem of a prodigious waste,
I am not so voluminous and vast,
But there are lines wherewith I might b'embrast.
It Is true; as my womb swells, so my back stoops,
And the whole part grows round, deformed and droops,
But yet the Tun at Heidleberg had hoops.
You were not tied by any Painters Law,
To square my Circle, (I confess) but draw
My Superficies, that was all you saw.
Which if in compass of no Art it came,
To be discrib'd by a Monogram,
With one great Blot you had formed me as I am.
But since you curious were to have it be
An Archetipe for all the World to see,
You made it a brave piece, but not like me.
O had I now your Manner, Majesty, Might,
Your power of handling, shadow, air, and sprite,
How I could draw, and take hold, and delight!
But you are he can Paint, I can but write,
A Poet has no more than black and white,
Ne knows he flattering Colors, or false Light.
But when of friendship I would draw the face,
A lettered mind, and a large heart would place,
To all posterity, I would write Burlase.
B. Ionson.

Upon my Picture left in Scotland.
I Now think Love is rather deaf than blind,
For else it could not be
That she
Whom I adore so much, should so slight me,
And cast my suit behind.
I Am sure my Language to her was as sweet,
And every close did meet,
In sentence of as subtle feet,
As has the wisest he,
That sits in shadow of Apollo's tree.
O but my conscious fears, that fly my thoughts between,
Tells me that she has seen
My hundreds of gray hairs,
Told six and forty years,
Read so much wast, as she could not embrace
My Mountain belly, and my Rocky face.
And all these through her eyes have stopped her ears.
B. Jonson.

On a Gentlewoman, working by an Houre-Glasse.
Do but consider this small dust,
Here running in the Glass,
By Atoms moved:
Would you believe that it the body was
Of one that loved?
And in his Mistress flames, playing like a Fly,
Was turned into Cynders by her eye?
Yes; as in life, so in their deaths unblest:
A Lovers ashes never can find rest.
B. I.

To the Ladies of the Court. An Ode.
COme Noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys for which you so provide;
If not, to mingle with us men
What do you here? go home again:
Your dressings do confess,
By what we see, so curious Arts,
Of Pallas, and Arachnes Arts,
That you could mean no less.
Why do you wear the Silke-wormes toils?
Or glory in the Shellfish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of Ore,
That you have gathered long before,
Whereof to make a stock,
To graft the green Emrald on,
Or any better watered Stone,
Or Ruby of the Rock?
Why do you smell of Ambergreece?
Whereof was formed Neptunes Niece,
The Queen of Love, unless you can,
Like Sea-borne Venus, love a man?
Try, put your selves unto't:
Your looks, your smiles, and thoughts that meet:
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
Do promise you will do it.
B. J.

A Sonnet.
THough I am young, and cannot tell
Either what Death, or Love is well,
Yet I have heard they both bear Darts,
And both do aim at humane hearts.
And then again I have been told,
Love wounds with heat, and death with cold,
So that I fear they do but bring
Extremes, to touch and mean one thing.
As in a ruin we it call,
One thing to be blown up and fall,
Or to our end like way may have
By a flash of lightning, or a wave:
So Loves inflamed shaft, or band,
Will kill as soon as Deaths cold hand:
Except Loves fires the virtue have
To Mr. Ionson.
BEn: the world is much in debt, and though it may
Some petty reck'nings to small Poets pay:
Pardon if at thy glories Sum they stick,
Being too large for their Arithmaticke.
If they could prize the genius of a Scene,
The learned sweat that makes a language clean,
Or understand the faith of ancient skill,
Drawn from the Tragic, Comoecke, Lyricke, quill:
The Greek and Roman denison'd by thee,
And both made richer in thy Poetry.
This they may know, and knowing this still grudge
That yet they are not fit of thee to judge.
I prophecy more strength to after time,
Whose joy shall call this Isle the Poets clime,
Because 'twas thine, and unto thee return
The borrowed flames, with which thy Muse shall burn.
Then when the stock of others Fame is spent,
Thy Poetry shall keep its own old rent.
Zouch Tounley.

FINIS.
COurteous Reader, some litterall faults are escaped, by oversight of the
Correcter to the Press, which I entreat thee to mend with thy Pen as thou
espyest them, which are these.

PAge 1: read might for mght, and least for less. P. 4. r. Tristrams for
Tristeams. P. 5. r. who for when. P. 7. r. houses for horses. P. 16. r. hales
for hals. P. 19. l. ult. r. Aromaticke for stromaticke.


