LOVES TRIVMPH THROVGH CALLIPOLIS.

Performed in a Masque at Court 1630. By his Majesty with the Lords, and
Gentlemen assisting.

The Inuentors. Ben. Ionson. Jnigo Jones.

Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos?
LONDON, Printed by I. N. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Eagle and Child in Brittains-burse. 1630.

To make the Spectators understanders.
WHereas all Repraesentations, especially those of this nature in court,
public Spectacles, either have been, or ought to be the mirrors of man's life,
whose ends, for the excellence of their exhibiters (as being the donatiues, of
great Princes, to their people) ought always to carry a mixture of profit,
with them, no less then delight; We, the Inuentors, being commanded from the
King, to think on some thing worthy of his Majesty's putting in act, with a
selected company of his Lords, and Gentlemen, called to the assistance: For the
honor of his Court, and the dignity of that heroique love, and regal respect
borne by him to his unmatchable Lady, and Spouse, the Queens Majesty, after
some debate of cogitation with our selves, resolved on this following argument.

First, that a Person, boni ominis, of a good character, as Euphemus, sent
down from Heaven to Callipolis, which is understood the City of Beauty or
Goodness, should come in; and, finding her Majesty there enthroned, declare unto
her, that Love who was wont to be respected as a special Deity in Court, and
Tutelar God of the place, had of late received an advertisement, that in the
suburbs, or skirtes of Callipolis, were crept in certain Sectaries, or
deprau'd Lovers, who neither knew the name, or nature of love rightly, yet
boasted themselves his followers, when they were fitter to be called his
Furies: their whole life being a continew'd vertigo, or rather a torture on the
wheel of Love, then any motion either of order or measure. When suddenly they
leap forth below, a Mistress leading them, and with anticke gesticulation,
and action, after the manner of the old Pantomimi, they dance over a distracted
comoedy of Love, expressing their confused affections, in the Scenicall
persons, and habits, of the four prime European Nations.

A glorious boasting Lover.
A whining ballading Lover.
An aduenturous Romance Lover.
A phantasticke vmbrageous Lover.
A bribing corrupt Lover.
A froward jealous Lover.
A sordid illiberall Lover.
A proud skorne-full Lover.
An angry quarrelling Lover.
A melancholique despairing Lover.
An envious unquiet Lover.
A sensual brute Lover.
All which, in varied, intricateturnes, and involu'd mazes, expressed, make the
Antimasque: and conclude the exit, in a circle. EVPHEMVS descends singing. Joy,
joy to mortals, the rejoicing fires
Of gladness, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Love presents a world of chaste defires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the mind,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of union with the thing designed,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want, Porus, and Penia.

Plenty the beauty, which it wants, draws;
Want yields it self: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the vnion's cause.
But, rest not here. For Love has larger scopes,
New joys, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those he can perpetuate. (...)re he (...)es up to (...) State.

To you that are by excellence a Queen!
The top of beauty! but, of such an air,
As, only by the minds eye, may be seen
Your enter-wouen lines of good, and fair!
Vouchsafe to grace Loves triumph here, to night,
Through all the streets of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendour of your rays made bright
The seat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longs to appear
But prays, of favor, he be not called on,
Till all the suburbs, and the skirts be clear
Of perturbations, and the infection gone.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting music, that shall not consume
Within the ear, but run the mazes round.
Here the Chorus walk about with their censers. CHORUS. Mean time, we make
lustration of the place,
And with our solemn fires, and waters prove
To Have frighted, hence, the weak diseased race
Of those were tortured on the wheel of love.
1 The glorious,2 whining,3 the aduenturous fool,
4 Phantastique,5 bribing, and the6 jealous ass
1 The sordid,2 scornful,3 and the angry mule
4 The melancholique,5 dull, and envious mass,
Chorus With all the rest, that in the sensual school
Of lust, for their degree of brute may pass.
All which are vapor'd hence. The prospect of a Sea appears.

No loves, but slaves to sense:
Mere cattle, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our joys again,
Who had the power, and vertueto remove
Such monsters from the labyrinth of love.

The Triumph is first seen a far of, and led in by Amphitrite, the wife of
Oceanus, with four Seagods attending her. NEREVS, PROTEVS, GLAVCVS, PALAeMON.
It consists of fifteen Lovers, and as many Cupids, who rank themselves
seven, and seven on a side, with each a Cupid before him, with a lighted
torch, and the middle person (which is his Majesty,) placed in the center. 1.
The provident. 2. The judicious. 3. The secret. 4. The valiant. 5. The witty.
6. The iouiall. 7. The secure. 15. The Heroical, 8. The substantial. 9. The
modest. 10. The candid. 11. The courteous. 12. The elegant. 13. The rational.
14. The magnificent.

AMPHITRITE. Here, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you must pay
First Fruits; and on these altars lay
(The Ladies breast's) your ample vows,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty best allows!

Cho. For Love, without his object, soon is gone:
Love must have answering love, to look upon.

AMPHITRITE. To you, best Judge then, of perfection!

EVPHEMVS. The Queen, of what is wonder, in the place!

AMPHITRITE. Pure object, of Heroique Love, alone!

EVPHEMVS. The center of proportion --!

AMPHITRITE. Sweetness.

EVPHEMVS. Grace.?

AMPHITRITE, Daigne to receive all lines of love in one.

EVPHEMVS. And by reflecting of them fill this space.

Cho. Till it a circle of those glories prove,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Love.

Semi-cho. Where Love is mutual, still
All things in order move,

Semi-cho. The circle of the will
Is the true sphere of Love.

Cho. Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And show your just perfections in your dance.
The Cupids dance their dance.
And the Masquers their-entry.

Which done, Euclia, or a fair Glory appears in the heavens, singing an
applausiue song, or Poean of the whole, which she takes occasion to ingeminate
in the second Chorus, upon the sight of a work of Neptunes, being a hollow
rock, filling part of the Sea-prospect, whereon the Muses sit. EVCLIAS So
love, emergent out of Chaos brought the world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought all form to fight!
Loves appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the air,
Those signatures of good, and fair,

CHO. Which since have flowed, flowed forth upon the sense,
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!

The ingemination. EVCLIAS And Neptune too
Shows what his waves can do:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus day,

CHO. Which from the Sea flowed, forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!

Here follow the Revels. Which ended, the Scene changes to a Garden, and the
heavens opening, there appear four new persons, in form of a Constellation
sitting, or a new Afterisme, expecting Venus, whom they call upon with this
song. IVPITER. IVNO. GENIUS. HYMEN. IVP. Have daughter Venus have, and come
away:

IVN. All powers, that govern marriage, pray That you will lend your light

GENESIS Unto the constellation of this night.

HIM. Hymen.

IVN. And Juno.

GENESIS And the Genius call,

IVP. Your father Jupiter,

CHO. And all
That bless, or honor holy nuptial.

VENUS here appears in a cloud, and pasthrough the constellation, descends
to the earth, when presently the cloud vanishes, and she is seen sitting in a
throane. VENUS. Here, here I present ame
Both in my g^rdle, and my flame:
Wherein are wouen all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Hours
(My nources once) with all the arts
Of gayning, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I go to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauties sake!

Her song ended, and she rising to go up to the Queen, the Throane
disappeares: in place of which there (...) up a Palm tree (...) imperial
crown on the top, from the root whereof, Lillies and Roses, twining together
and embracing the stem, flourish through the crown, which she in the song,
with the Chorus describes. Beauty and Love, whose story is mysteriall,
In yonder Palm Tree, and the Crown imperial,
Do from the Rose, and Lilly so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdoms. But to Britains Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then these, who so united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queen would well historify,
Need only speak their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES, with his MARY, named are
And all the rest of Loves, or Princes famed are.
After this they dance their going out, and end. The Masquers Names.
The King. The Marquess Hammilton. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Holland. Earl
of Carnaruan. Earl of Newport. Vicount Doncaster. Lord Strange. Sir William
Howard. Sir Robert Stanley. Sir William Brook. (...) M^ister Ralegh. (...)
(...)


