THE TEMPLE OF LOVE. A Masque. Presented by the QVEENES Majesty, and her
Ladies, at White Hall on Shrove-Tuesday, 1634. By Inigo Jones, Surveyor of his
Maties. Works, and William Davenant, her Maties. Servant.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop near
White Hall. 1634.

The Argument.
DIvine Poesy (the Secretary of Nature) is sent by Fate to Indamora, Queen of
Narsinga, to signify the time prefixed was come, when by the influence of her
beauty (attended with those lesser lights, her Contributary Ladies) the Temple
of Chaste Love should be re-established in this Island; which Temple being long
sought for by certain Magicians (enemies to chaste Love) intending to use it to
their intemperate ends, was by Divine Poesy hidden in mists and clouds; so as
the Magicians being frustrate of their hopes, sought by enchantments to hinder
all others from finding it; and by this imposture many Nohle Knights and Ladies
had been tempted and misled. The fame of this Temple of Love being quickly
spread over all the Eastern world, enflamed a company of noble Persian youths,
borderers on India to travel in quest of it; who arriving, were by the
illusions of the Magicians, and their spirits of several Regions, almost
seduced, as others had been: But Divine Poesy appearing, discovered unto them
some part of the Temple unshadow'd, and prophesied of the time when Indamora
and her train should arrive to effect this miracle; which though it seems
somewhat hard Doctrine to most young men, yet these being spirits of the
highest rank, forsaking the false Magicians and their allurements, were
resolved to entertain themselves to contemplate on this Apparision until the
coming of the glorious Indian Queen. At whose sight they being inspired with
chaste flames might be permitted by their faithful observance and legitimate
affections to enter and enjoy the privileges of that sacred Temple. Then Divine
Poesy sends Orpheus her chief Priest in a Barque (assisted by the Brachman^
and Priests of the Temple, who meet him on the shores) to calm the Seas with
his Harp, that a maritime Chariot prepared by the Indian Sea-gods, might
safer, and more swiftly convay them to atchieve this Noble ^dventure; after
whose landing having paid their Ceremonies by moving in harmonicall and
numerous figures, Sunesis and Thelema (which intimate the understanding and the
will) joining together, the true Temple appears, and Chaste Love descends to
invoke the last and living Hero ( Indamora's royal Lover) that he may help
and witness the Consecration of it.

THE TEMPLE OF LOVE.
AT the lower end of the Banqueting House, opposite to the State, was a Stage
of six foot high, and on that was raised an Ornament of a new Invention
agreeable to the Subject; consisting of Indian Trophies: on the one side upon a
basement sat a naked Indian on a whitish Elephant, his legs shortning
toward the neck of the beast, his tire and bases of several colored
feathers, representing the Indian Monarchy: On the other side an Asiatique in
the habit of an Indian borderer, riding on a Camel; his Turbant and Coat
differing from that of the Turks, figured for the Asian Monarchy: over these
hung shield like Compartiments: In that over the Indian was painted a Sun
rising, and in the other an half Moon; these had for finishing the Capital
of a great pillaster, which served as a ground to stick them of, and bore up a
large freeze or border with a Coronice. In this over the Indian lay the figure
of an old man, with a long white hair and beard, representing the flood
Tigris; on his head a wreath of Canes and Seage, and leaning upon a great Vrne,
out of which run water, by him in an extravagant posture stood a Tiger.

At the other end of this freeze lay another naked man, representing Meander,
the famous River of Asia, who likewise had a great silver urne, and by him lay
an Unicorn.

In the midst of this border was fixed a rich Compartiment, behind which was a
crimson Drapery part of it borne up by naked Children tacked up in several
pleats, and the rest was at each end of the Freeze tied with a great knot, and
from thence hung down in foulds to the bottom of the pedestalls: In the midst
of this Compartiment in an Ovall was written TEMPLVMAMORIS: all these figures
were in their natural colors bigger than the life, and the Compartiments of
Gold.

A Curtain flying up the first Scene was discovered, in which appeared a
spacious grove of shady trees; and a far off on a mount with a winding way to
the top was seated a pleasant bower environed with young trees, and in the
lower part walks planted with Cypress, representing the place where the
Souls of the Ancient Poets are fained to reside: the delight of this prospect
was quickly diverted to the fight of a more strange apparision; for, out of the
heaven by little and little broke forth a great Cloud of a Rosy Color, which
being come down some little way began to open, and in it was seen sitting a
beautiful woman; her garment was Sky-colour set all with Stars of gold, her
head was crowned with Laurel, with a spangled veil hanging down behind, and
her hair in artificial curles graciously dressed, representing Divine Poesy,
and by her a milk white Swanne, as she descends singing out of those venerable
shades came forth a company of ancient Greek Poets, as Demodicus, Foemius,
Homer, Hesiod, Terpander, and Sapho a Poetesse in habits varied and of several
colors, with laurel wreaths on their heads. Divine Poesy sung this:

Divine Poesy. (1.)
AS cheerful as the Mornings light,
Comes Indamora from above,
To guide those Lovers that want sight,
To see and know what they should love.
(2.)
Her beams into each breast will steal,
And search what every Heart does mean,
The sadly wounded she will heal,
And make the foully tainted clean.
(3.)
Rise you, from your dark shades below,
That first gave words an harmony,
And made false Love in Numbers flow,
'Till vice became a mystery.
(4.)
And when I Have purified that Air
To which Death turned you long ago,
Help with your voices to declare
What Indamora comes to show.

The Poets. Soul of our Science! how inspired we come?
By thee restored to voices that lay dumb,
Awd lost in many a forgotten Tomb.

D. Poesy. You Are spirits all; and have so long
From flesh, and frailty absent bin,
That sure though Love should fill your song,
It could not relish now of sin.

The Poets. Vex not our sad remembrance with our shame!
We have bin punished for ill-gotten fame,
For each loose verse, tormented with a flame.

D. Poesy. Descend then, and become with me,
The happy Organs to make known
In an harmonious Embassy,
Our great affair to yonder Throne.

She being descended to the ground in a Majesticke pace, goes up to the State,
attended by the forenamed Poets; and the Cloud that brought her down, closes
as it ascends.

D. Poesy. Thou Monarch of men's hearts rejoice!
So much thou art beloved in heaven,
That Fate has made thy reign her choice,
In which Love's blessings shall be given.

The Poets. Truth shall appear, and rule 'till she resists
Those subtle charms, and melts those darker mists,
In which Love's Temple's hid from Exorcists.
(Whom forsooth Divine Poesy they style)
This morn proclaimed it from a falling Cloud.

(2.) Who? Divine Poesy?

(3.) I know her well.
She Is one that makes the holy Jigges,
And sacred Catches for the gods, when they
Are merry with mis-takes of men, and laugh
To see us careless of their punishment.

(1.) But who shall bring this mischief to our Art?

(3.) Indamora, the delight of Destiny!
She, and the beauties of her Train: who sure
Though they discover Summer in their looks,
Still carry frozen Winter in their blood.
They raise strange doctrines, and new sects of Love:
Which must not woo or court the Person, but
The Mind; and practice generation not
Of Bodies but of Souls.

(2.) Believe me, my Magical friends,
They must bring bodies with 'em that worship
In our pleasant Temple: I have an odd
Fantastic faith persuades me there will be
Little pastime upon earth without Bodies.
Your Spirit's a cold Companion at midnight.

(1.) Have we so long misse-led and entertained
The youthful of the world, (I mean their bodies)
And now do they betake themselves unto
The dull imaginary pleasures of
Their souls? This humor cannot last.

(2.) If it should, we may rid our Temple
Of all our Persian Quilts, imbroyder'd Couches,
And our standing Beds; these (I take it) are
Bodily implements; our souls need 'em not.
But where shall this new Sect be planted first?

(3.) In a dull Northern I Will, they call Britain.

(2.) Indeed it is a cold Northerly opinion;
And I Will lay my life begot since their late
Great Frosts. It will be long enough e're it
Shall spread, and prosper in the South! Or if
The Spaniard or Italian ever be
Persuaded out of the use of their bodies,
I Will give mine to a Raven for his Supper.

(3.) The Miracle is more increased, in that
It first takes birth and nourishment in Court.

(2.) But my good damned friend tell me? Is there not
One Courtier will resent the cause, and give
Some countenance to the affairs of the body?

(3) Certain young Lords at first disliked the Philosophy
As most uncomfortable, sad, and new;
But soon inclined to a superior vote,
And are grown as good Platonicall Lovers
As are to be found in an Hermitage, where he
That was borne last, reckons above fourscore.

To these come forth in have another Magician, in shape and habit differing
from the other, and spoke as follows.

(1.) Here comes a brother of our misticke Tribe!

(3.) He knows the occasion of our grief, and by
His have imports discoveries more strange!

(4.) News! news! my sad companions of the shade!
There Is lately landed on our fatal shore
Nine Persian youths, their habit and their looks
So smooth, that from the pleasures in the Elisian fields
Each female ghost will come, and enter in
Their flesh again, to make embraces warm.

(2.) I hope these are no Platonicall Lovers,
No such Carthusian Poets as do write
Madrigals to the mind? more of thy news!

(4.) The rest inferres small joy, and little hope:
For though at first their youth and eager thoughts
Directed them where our gay Altar stood,
And they were ready too for sacrifice,
I cannot tell what lucklesse light informed
Their eyes, but Loves true Temple straight they spied
Through the ascending mists, and would have enterd it
To read grave frosty Homilies,
And Anticke ^awes of Chastity, but that
(As my swift Spirit brought me word) a voice
Sent from within bad them with reverence
Desist till Indamora did appear, for then
The gates would open, and the mists dry up
That thus concealed it from the general view,
Which now their expectation does attend.

(3.) It Is time to wake our drowsy Art, and try
If we have power to hinder Destiny.
Mount! mount! our charms! fetch me, whilst you aspire,
A Spirit of the Element of fire!

(2.) Me one of Air!

(1.) The water me supplies!

(4.) Mine from the center of the earth shall rise!

(3.) These shall infuse their several qualities
In men; if not t'uphold the faction of
The flesh, yet to infect the queasie age
With blacker sins: If we (now we have joined
The force of all the Elements t'assist
The horror of our will) shall not prevail
Against this hum'rous virtue of the Time,
Nature, our weakness must be thought thy crime.

(2.) To these I Will add a seet of modern Devils;
Fine precise Fiends, that hear the devout close
At every virtue but their own, that claim
Chambers and Tenements in heaven, as they
Had purchased there, and all the Angels were
Their harbingers. With these I Will vex the world.

(3.) It Is well designed! Thanks to thy courteous Art!
Let Us murmr softly in each others ear,
And those we first invoked, will straight appear!
Enough! they come! to the woods let us take our flight,
We have more dismal business yet e're night.

The Antimasque of the Spirits.
1. Entry
The fiery Spirits all in flames, and their vizards of a Choleric Complexion.

The Airy Spirits with sanguine vizards, their garments and Caps all of
feathers.

The Watery Spirits were all over wrought with scales, and had fishes heads and
finnes.

The Earthy Spirits had their garments wrought all over with leavelesse trees
and bushes, with Serpents and other little Animals here and there about them,
and on their heads barren rocks.

2. Entry
Brought in by the fiery Spirits, were debosht and quarrelling men with a loose
Wench amongst them.

3. and 4. Entry
Brought in by the Spirits of Air, were of amorous men and women in ridiculous
habits and Alchimists.

5. Entry
Brought in by the Spirits of Water, were drunken Dutch skippers.

6. Entry
Brought in by the Spirits of Earth, were Witches, Usurers, and Fools.

7. Entry
Was of a Modern Devil, a sworn enemy of Poesy, Music, and all ingenious
Arts, but a great friend to murmuring, libelling, and all seeds of discord,
attended by his factious followers; all which was expressed by their habits and
dance.

After these was an entry of three Indians of quality, of Indamora's train in
several strange habits, and their dance as strange.

A Persian Page comes leaping in. Hey! hey! how light I am? all soul within?
As my dull flesh, were melted through my skin?
And though a Page, when landed on this shore,
I now am grown a brisk Ambassador!
From Persian Princes too, and each as fierce
A Lover, as did ever sigh in verse!
Give audience then, you Ladies of this I Will!
Lord how you lift your fannes up now, and smile!
To think (forsooth) they are so fond to take
So long a journey for your beauties sake!
For know, they are come! but sure, e're they return,
Will give your femallships some cause to mourn!
For I must tell you, that about them all
There Is not one grain, but what is Platonicall!
So bashful that I think they might be drawn
(Like you) to wear close Hoods, or vailes of Lawne.
My Master is the chief that does protect,
Or (as some say) misse-lead this precise sect:
One heretofore that wisely could confute
A Lady at her window with his Lute.
There devoutly in a cold morning stand
Two hours, praising the snow of her white hand,
So long, till's words were frozen 'tweene his lips,
And's Lute-strings learnt their quav'ring from his hips.
And when he could not rule her to's intent,
Like Tarquin he would proffer ravishment.
But now, no fear of Rapes, until he find
A maydenhead belonging to the mind.
The rest are all so modest too, and pure,
So virginly, so coy, and so demure,
That they retreat at kissing, and but name
Hymen, or Love, they blush for very shame!
Ladies! I must needs laugh! you will give me leave
I hope; and it is to think how you deceive
Your selves with all this precious art, and care
Taken in your glass to dress your looks, and hair!
When (in good faith!) they heed no outward merit,
But fervently resolve to woo the Spirit!
Hah! do you all look melancholy uow?
And cast a Cloud of anger over the brow?
It Is time to fly, and my best swiftness use,
Lest killed with pinnes, and Bodkins for my news.

The Page retires, and the Noble Persian youths make their entry, apparelled in
Asian Coats of Sea-greene embroidered that reached down above their knees,
with buttons and loops before and cut up square to their hips, and returned
down with two short skirts; the sleeves of this Coat were large without seame,
and cut short to the bending of the Arm, and hanging down long behind,
trimmed with buttons as those of the breast; out of this came a sleeve of white
Satin embroidered, and the Basis answerable to the sleeve, hung down in
gathering underneath the shortest part of their Coat; on their heads they wore
Persian Turbants silvered underneath, and wound about with white Cypress, and
one fall of a white feather before.

Their Dance ended, the mist and Clouds at an instant disappeare, and the
Scene is all changed into a Sea somewhat calm, where the billows moving
sometimes whole, and sometimes breaking, beat gently on the land, which
represented a new and strange prospect; the nearest part was broken grounds and
Rocks, with a mountainous Country, but of a pleasant Aspect, in which were
trees of strange form and Color, and here and there were placed in the
bottom several Arbors like Cottages, and strange beasts and birds, far
unlike the Country of these parts, expressing an Indian Landschape* In the Sea
were several Islands, and a far off a Continent terminating with the Horrizon.

Out of a Creek came waving forth a Barque of a gracious Antique design,
adorned with Scupture finishing in Scrowles, that on the poope had for Ornament
a great Masque head of a Sea-god; and all the rest enriched with embost work
touched with silver and gold. In the midst of this Barque sat Orpheus with his
Harp, he wore a white robe girt, on his shoulders was (tied with a knot) a
mantle of Carnation, and his head crowned with a laurel garland: with him,
other persons in habits of Seamen as pilots and guiders of the Barque, he
playing one strain was answered with the voices and instruments of the
Brachmani joined with the Priests of the Temple of Love, in extravagant habits
sorting to their titles: whilst this Barque moved gently on the Sea, heaving
and setting, and sometimes rolling, arrived near to the further shore, it
turned and returned to the port from whence it came.

The Song of the Brachmani, in answer to Orpheus his Harp,
1.
Hark! Orpheus is a Seaman grown,
No winds of late have rudely blown,
Nor waves their troubled heads advance!
His Harp has made the winds so mild,
They whisper now as reconciled,
The waves are soothed into a dance.
2.
See how the listening Dolphins play!
And willingly mistake their way,
As when they heard Arions strains!
Whom once their scaly Ancestor,
Convay'd upon his back to shore,
And took his music for his pains.
3.
We Priests that burn Loves Sacrifice,
Our Orpheus greet with ravished eyes;
For by this calmness we are sure,
His Harp does now prepare the way,
That Indamora's voyage may
Be more delightful, and secure.
4.
And now th'inchanted mists shall clear,
And Loves true Temple straight appear,
(Long hid from men by sacred power,)
Where Noble Virgins still shall meet,
And breath their Orizons, more sweet
Than is the Springs ungather'd flower.
The Barque having taken port, the Masquers appear in a Maritime Chariot made
of a spungie Rockstuffe mixed with Shells, Sea-weeds, Coral, and Pearl, borne
upon an Axletree with golden wheels without a rimme with flat spokes like the
blade of an Ore coming out of the Naves. This Chariot was drawn by
Seamonsters, and floated with a sweet motion in the Sea: Indamora Queen of
Narsinga sat enthroned in the highest part of this Chariot, in a rich seat,
the back of which was a great Skallop Shell. The habit of the Masquers was of
Isabella Color, and Watchet, with Bases in large pains cut through, all over
richly embroidered with silver, and the dressing of their heads was of silver,
with small falls of white feathers tipp'd with Watchet. This sight thus moving
on the water, was accompanied with the music and voices of the Chorus.

(1.)
SHe comes! each Princess in her train has all
That wise enamored Poets, beauty call!
So fit and ready to subdue:
That had they not kind hearts which take a care
To free, and counsel, whom their eyes ensuare,
Poor Lovers would have cause to rue.
(2.)
More welcome than the wandering Sea-mans star,
When in the Night the Winds make causeless war,
Until his Barque so long is tossed,
That Is sails toragges are blown, the Maine-yard bears
Not sheet enough to wipe, and dry those tears
He shed to see his Rudder lost.
The Song ended, all the forepart of the Sea was in an instant turned to dry
land, and Indamora with her Contributary Ladies descended into the room, and
made their entry. Then for enter medium the Music began again, and sung this
Song.

The Song.
(1.)
THe Planets though they move so fast,
Have power to make their swiftness last,
But see, your strength is quickly gone!
Yet move by sense and rules of Art,
And each has an immortal part,
Which cannot tire, but they have none*
(2.)
Let then your soft, and nimble feet
Lead and in various figures meet
Those stranger Knights, who though they came
Seduced at first by false desire,
You Will kindle in their breasts a fire
Shall keep Love warm, yet not inflame.
(3.)
At first they were your beauties prize,
Now offer willing sacrifice
Unto the Virtues of the mind,
And each shall wear when they depart,
A lawful though a loving heart,
And wish you still both strict and kind.
The Masquers having a while reposed, danced their second Dance, which ended,
and the Queen being seated under the State by the King, the Scene was changed
into the true Temple of Chaste Love; this Temple instead of Columns had terms
of young Satyrs bearing up the returns of Architrane Freeze and Coronice, all
enriched of Goldsmiths work, the further part of the Temple running far
from the eye was designed of another kind of Architecture, with Pillasters,
Neeches, and Statues; and in the midst a stately gate adorned with Colomns and
their Ornaments, and a Frontispice on the top, all which seemed to be of
burnished gold. Into this Temple enters Sunesis and Thelema; Sunesis a man of a
noble Aspect, and richly attired; his garment of Cloth of gold reaching down
below his knees, and girt with a tucke at the wast, with wide sleeves turned
up; his mantle of Watchet fastened on both shoulders, and hanging down long
behind, a garland of Sinope on his head, with a flame of fire issuing out of
it, his Buskins were yellow, wrought with gold. Thelema a young woman in a Robe
of changeable silk girt with several tuckes, under her breast, and beneath
her wast, and great leaves of silver about her shoulders hanging down to the
midst of her Arm; upon her head a garland of great Marigolds, and puffs of
silvered Lawne between. And at her shoulders were Angels wings, these sung
this Dialogue, assisted by the Chori.

The Song.
Sunesis and Thelema. Sunesis. COme melt thy soul in mine, that when unite,
We may become one virtuous appetite.

Thelema. First breath thine into me, thine is the part
More heavenly, and does more adorn the heart.

Both. Thus mixed, our love will ever be discreet,
And all our thoughts and actions pure,
When perfect Will, and strengthened Reason meet,
Then Love's created to endure.

Chorus. Were Heaven more distant from us, we would strive
To reached with Prayers to make this Union thrive.

Whilst this Song continued, there came softly down from the highest part of
the heaven a bright and transparent Cloud, which being come to the middle part
of the Air it opened, and out of it came Amianteros, or Chaste Love flying
down, clad all in Carnation and White, and two garlands of Laurel in one
hand, and crowned with another of the same; whilst he descended the Cloud
closes again and returns upwards, and is hidden in the heavens; Chaste Love
being come down to the earth, was accompanied by Sunesis and Thelema, Divine
Poesy, Orpheus, and the rest of the Poets up to the State, the great Chorus
following at a distance, where they sung this Song.

The Song.
Amianteros, or Chaste Love. (1.)
Whilst by a mixture thus made one,
You Are the Emblem of my Deity,
And now you may in yonder Throne,
The pattern of your Union see.
(2.)
Softly as fruitful showeres I fall,
And th'undiscern'd increase I bring,
Is of more precious worth than all
A plenteous Summer pays a Spring.
(3.)
The benefit it does impart,
Will not the barren earth improve,
But fructify each barren heart,
And give eternal* growth to Love.
Sunesis. To CHARLES the mightiest and the best,
And to the Darling of his breast,
(Who rule b' example as by power)
May youthful blessings still increase,
And in their Offspring never cease,
Till Time's too old to last an hour.

Chorus. These wishes are so well deserved by thee,
And thought so modest too by Destiny,
That heaven has sealed the grant as a Decree.

After which they all retire to the Scene, and Indamora and her Ladies begin
the Revels with the King and the Lords, which continue the most part of the
night. Thus ended this Masque which for the newness of the invention, variety
of Scenes, Apparitions, and richness of habits was generally approved to be
one of the most magnificent that has been done in England.

The Masquers Names.
The Queens Majesty.
Lady Marquess Hamilton. Lady Mary Herbert. Countess of Oxford. Countess of
Berkshire. Countess of Carnarvan. Countess of Newport. Lady Herbert. Lady
Katherine Howard Lady Anne Carre. Lady Elizabeth Fielding Lady Thimbleby.
Mistress Dorothy Savage. Mistress Victory Carry. Mistress Nevill.
The Lords and others that presented the Noble Persian Youths.
The Duke of Lenox. Earl of Newport. Earl of Desmond. Viscount Grandeson.
Lord Russell. Lord Doncaster. Master Thomas Weston. Master George Goring.
Master Henry Murrey.
FINIS.

