Chere after follows a treatise taken out of a book which sometime Theodosius
the Emperor found in Iherusalem in the pretorye of Pylate of Joseph of
Armathy.
Ihesus nazarenus rex iudeorum.

Ihesus nazarenus rex iudeorum.

FOr asmoche as oftentimes great doubts and doubtefull things deceyueth the
reders / therefore all doubts set a part ye shall se diverse things extracte
of the very true and probate assercyons of hystoryal men touching and
concerning thantyquytes of thonourable monastery of our lady in Glastenburye.
After the time that our savior Ihesu christ was put unto death by passion of
the cross and all things were fully complete which were written and spoken of
hy^ by holy prophecye. That holy man Joseph of Armathy came unto Pylate and
asked of him the body of our savior Ihesu christ / when ye body was granted
to him he wrapped it in a fair white clothe and interyd it in a tomb newely
made where never man was buried in / what time the Jews had parfyte knowledge
that this Joseph had so worshypfully brought the body of christ in earth / they
thought utterly in their minds and kest so also the means how they might set
hands upon him / and one named Nychodemus and many diverse other ye which were
the very true lovers and just advocates of our savior fled and kept them
secret / except only the said Joseph and Nychodemus which full boldly
presented them self and made rehersall unto ye Jews under these words / what
should move you to be dyspleased with us for asmoche as we have buried ye body of
Ihesu christ / know ye full well said Joseph and Nychodemus to ye Jews yt ye
have mysdone against ye ryghtfull man / ye cast ne thy^ke not in your minds
the great benefytes he has done and showed to you ye have for his great
goodness crucyfyed him and with a sharp spear wounded him. The Jews herynge
those words set hand on Joseph and closed him in an house where was no
wyndowe / and annas and cayphas sealed the door upon the lock and assygned and
deputed cretayne men to keep him and watch him and his fellow Nychodemus was
let goo at lyberte. They entreated Joseph so ungoodly for as much that he was
the man that desired the body of Ihesu christ / and was the pryncypall mouer and
begynner that ye body was so worshypfully interyd and buryed-after this was
done upon their sabbat day they gaderyd them in a company ye chief rulers of
the temple and cast their minds together how and by what manner of death they
might destroy Joseph and when they were all in fere Annas and Cayphas were
commanded by them to present Joseph for as much as they had sealed ye door
where he was enclosed in and when their seals were broken and the door opened
Joseph was gone. Than they sent out spies to seek him and fynably he was found
in his own cite called Aramathya / and when they had ready tidings and perfyte
knowledge of it / both chief rulers and all the comynalte of the Jews inioyed
gretely and thanked ye verray god of Israel yt it was known where Joseph was
become which was thus enclosed under kepy^ge ward and custodye. Then they
gadred in a multitude and they the which were pryncypalles and heedes
preposynge this questyon and said what means might we find that we might
craftily have Joseph unto us and so for to speak with him. Then they
concluded generally that an epistle should be written unto him / and this was
the effect of the lettre. Joseph peace be with the and with all thy company.
Now we know full well that we have full grievously offended god and the /
therefore we pray the vouch save too come unto us that we may comen with the
for we meruaylle gretely how thou was taken out of the place in ye which thou
was put / we knowledge ourselfe unto the that we have malygned sore again the
/ wherefore almighty god has delivered ye that our wicked counseyll and
unhappy mind might not hurt the / therefore worshyppefull Joseph which art
well beloved among all people / peace be with the. Then this epistle made and
written they chose seven persons among them all which were the best and
most synguler friends that Joseph had and said unto them / when ye go forth
take your way in to Aramathia unto Joseph and great him well in our behalue and
take unto him this our epistle / when ye seven persons elect and chosen had
their full answer with their lettre delivered anon they came to ye cite of
Aramathya where Joseph was and full louyngely salued him showing their coming
and the cause gyuy^ge unto him ye epistle which received them full curteysly /
and when he had ouerloked the lettre and knew the effect then he said these
words. Blessed be my lord god of Israel which has delivered and saved me
that my blood has not be shed nor I destroyed blessed be my lord god the
which has kept me under his wings. Then Joseph in token of love and
peace kyssed the.vii. persons which were sent in message unto him and full
kyndely had them into his house. And upon the next day after he took his
ass and walking kept them company unto Iherusalem. And when the Jews herd
of his coming they went against him and in their metynge said with one voice
peace be in thy coming fader Joseph / and he resaluted them under this manner
and said. Peace be with you and among you all and there they kyssed him all /
then Nychodemus received him into his house and made him a great dinner / upon
a day when the Jews were gadered together Annas and Cayphas said unto Joseph /
show thou now before ye god of Israel and openly declare unto us such
things as we shall examyn the of for as much as it is not unknown that we
were sore grieved for by cause thou let bury the body of Ihesu christ and
thereupon we enclosed the in a preuy house and the morrow we sent to have spoken
with the and might not find the / wherefore we meruaylled gretely and were sore
affrayed of it how this might be unto this time that we se the now / therefore
whiles thou art present certefye us verily how this matter was brought that
thou was thus secretly conveyed away. Joseph dysdayned not to give them
answer but said unto them boldly. What time ye closed me in that house on
godefrydaye the morrow upon which is the sabbate day in the mydnyghte when I
was besy in my prayers to desire god to be my help and socour / suddenly in ye
mean time ye house that I was in was taken up by ye four angles. And I saw
Ihesus bryghter then any light that ever I saw before and for great fere I
fell down to the earth / then he took me by the hand from the ground and
wyped my face with a rose and kyssed me and said unto me be not aferde Joseph
look upon me and know thou full well that I am he. Then looked I up and
called him master Helyas supposing that he had been Hely the prophet /
then he spoke unto me and said I am not Hely but I am Ihesus whose boody thou
letest be buried / then for by cause I was somdele doubtful of it I said
unto him if thou be he show me ye tomb wherein I laid the. Then he took me
by ye hand and brought me unto the place where I interyd him. Furthermore he
showed me the clothe in ye which I wrapped his body and also the sudarye that
I bound his head withal. Then these things seen I knew well that it was
Ihesus and I honored him as my duty was recytynge these words. Blessed be he
that is come in the name of god. Then he took me by the hand and so led
me in mine house in the Cite of Aramathya and said unto me rest thou here
peacybly these fortye days go not forth from thy house. And I shall goo unto
my dyscyples that has great lust for to seem. And this said and done. Ihesus
vanysshed away. Then after these fortye days were hole and fullye complete
Joseph of Aramathya above reherced steadfastly fyxed his mind in the feruente
love of the faith / gave him self to the dyscyplyne and doctrine of saint
Phylyp the appostle of our blessed lord Ihesu Christ. And when that he was
suffycyently instruct in his lore and techynge / both he and his sone
Iosephes received of saint Phylyp the holy sacrament of baptysme / and after
that Joseph was sent upon a message from saint Johan the appostle and
euangelyst from ephesye unto the glorious mother of Ihesu christ our lady and
also after that was present with saint Phylyp and other dyscyples what time
that / that glorious vyrgyn was assumpte in to heaven. And as many things as
ever he herd and saw of our lord Ihesu christ and of his blessed mother our
lady saint Mary / he showed them and preched them in diverse regyons and
places and converted much people unto the christian faith and baptized them. And
at the last. xv. year after the glorious assumpcyon of our blessed lady he took
his sone Iosephes with him and went to saint Phylyp in to France and
consequently as it is written in a book called Graall Joseph of Aramathia which
buried the body of our lord Ihesu christ after yt he was baptized of the holy
man saint Phylyp the appostle came in to great Brytayn which was promised to
him and his issue and he brought with him his wife and his sone Iosephes whom
our sauyoure before that time had made a bishop and consecrate him in a Cite
called Sara / and there came with him six houdred persons of men and women
and mo / and the men made a solemn vow for to live chastely from their
wives unto the time they had entered in to great Brytayne and all the nombre
brake this vow except. xxxvii. which were commanded by our savior to pass
over ye se saylynge upon the shyrte of Iosephes and so came to land upon
Ester even in the mornyn^ge / ye resydue of them for as much as they were
penytent and sorry for the transgressyon of their vow at thynstau^ce and prayer
also of Joseph were brought over in a vessel which king Salamon crafrely had
made to co^tynue and dure unto crystes time / and ye same day that their
company came unto land upon Joseph's shyrte they applied unto land in ye same
vessel which god had provided for them which were gyded by a duke of Medor
named Natianiis whom Joseph baptized before in the cite of Sara / and with
them came also the king of the same cite called Mordrams to whom almighty
god after that appeared and showed to him his side hands and feet perysshed
with the spear and nails / and when the king Mordrams saw that he was moved
with compassyon and said. O my lord god what man was so bold and so
presumptuous thus to dele with ye / our savior answered to him again and
said. The false king of Northwales has this wise done with me which has
put my servant Joseph of Aramathya with his company in prison and full
vnky^dly denies them their lyuy^ge for by cause they showed and preched my
name in his realm / therefore said almighty god unto mordrams / gyrde the with
thy sword about thy myddell and goo with all have possible unto that parties
and take vengeance upon the tyrant and deliver my servants out of prison
and danger / when ye king a woke of his sleep he was full glade of that
vysyon showed unto him and so set his realm and his household in good way and
took a great company with him and took his Journey and as god was his guide he
came unto the place where the king of Northwales the tyrant was and
commanded him he should promytte and suffer the servants of almighty god to
pass out of prison and to be at lyberte / the tyrant would not in no wise
condescende unto king Mordrams commandment / but with great indygnacyon
charged him shortly without delay to void out of his land when king
Mordrams herd this langage he came fyersly upon him with his company and with
and duke Naciamis above said and with condygne and Just vengeance slew him /
then this done king Mordrams went unto the prison where that unhappy king
had Joseph and his company in hold / and with great Joy brought them forth
and showed unto them the vysyon made unto him of god and their delyuerynge
then all they in great myrthe thanked god hertely. Then king Mordradms
gave the realm and king dome of Northwales with the appertenence unto one
called Celydomus sone unto duke Nacyanus and gave him also to be his wife
Labell the ky^ges daughter of Persye which Labell the said Celydomus with
help and socoure of his fader had before with great dyffyculte converted
unto Crystes says whose doubt and meruaylous acts be written in ye books
named Grall above reherced.

Thus ends the life of Joseph of Armathy Enpryted at London in Fleet street
at the sign of the son by me Wynkyn de Word.

Wynkyn de Word
W printer's device of Wynkyn de Word C




