A BRIEF EXHORTATION TO ALL MEN TO set their houses in order.

By WILLIAM JONES B. of D. Preacher to the Isle of Wight.

1 COR. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order. LONDON, Printed
by WILLIAM JONES, dwelling in Red-crosse-streete. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RICHARD LORD WESTON, LORD HIGH TREASVRER OF ENGLAND,
CAPTAIN OF THE ISLE OF WIGHT: AND TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE BARONETS,
KNIGHTS AND GENTLEMEN: AND TO HIS LOVING BRETHREN THE MINISTERS: AND TO ALL THE
INHABITANTS OF THE ISLE OF WIGHT.
WILLIAM JONES THEIR DEVOTED SERVANT WISHES VVELL-ORDERED FAMILIES ON EARTH,
AND EVERLASTING HAPPINESS IN HEAVEN.

To the Christian Reader:
WHEN thou read this small Treatise, take thy pen and blot out what is
superfluous, and amend what is amiss, and supply what wants: And if any thing
be judged profitable, forthwith begin to put it in practice thy self, and to
persuade others to do the like. So shall we all have better families, and the
King better subjects, and God better servants.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, W. J.

A BRIEF EXHORTATION TO all men to set their houses in order.
ISAY 38. 1. Set thine house in order.
MVsing with my self what might be the cause of so many evils and calamities
as have violently assaulted our Land within these few years, I could impute
all to nothing more than to the great disorder that is in all orders from the
highest to the lowest: And inquiring further how such disorder might happily
arise, notwithstanding we have many good orders daily established by the care
of our Superiors, both in the Church and Commonwealth, for all estates and
Degrees; I perceived the occasion of all mischief to be the want of good
Household Government.

Wherefore I resolved with all my might to press the Doctrine of Household
Government upon the consciences of all that shall hear or read this short
meditation.

I have chosen for the ground of all that I shall say, those words, I say 38.
1. Set thine house in order.

These are the words of the Lord of heaven and earth, which he commanded Isaiah
the Prophet to speak unto Ezechiah the King.

This King was a great and mighty Prince, and abounded with wealth, as you may
see at large, 2 Chronicles. 32. 27. And therefore there is no man so great, but may
vouchsafe to bearken unto that which is said unto him. This Ezechiah was as
good as great: For 2 Kings 18. 3. He did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, so that after him was none like him of all the Kings of Judah, nor
any that were before him. And therefore who is so good and well-ordered, that
may not vouchsafe to hearken unto these words? Wherefore I beseech you all to
whom these words shall come, hearken with reverence and good conscience unto
the same. Thus says the LORD, Set thine house in order. Thus they are read in
our last Translation, and in some former Translations; and in the margent here
and elsewhere, it is noted that the Hebrew phrase is, Give charge concerning thy
house: this comes all to one reckoning. For when God says, Genesis 18. 19. that
Abraham will command his children and his household after him, it is, that they
keep the way of the Lord, and do justice and judgment. And this is to set
his house in order. Some Interpreters, both here and 2. King. 20. take these
words to be a Direction to the King, to make his last will and testament. But
considering that it is evident, that when the Patriarks made their last wills,
they did not only dispose of their goods, but also gave charge concerning the
well ordering of their houses after them, this need not interrupt us.

For my part, at this time I will follow the general meaning of the words, as
they are translated, and do my best endeavor, 1. To show the necessity of
setting every man's house in order.

2. I will declare the best way how our houses may be set in order.

3. I will conclude with exhortation.

Touching the first. That it is necessary that every house be set in order,
may appear:

1. Because, else the Commonwealth cannot be well ordered. For the
Commonwealth consists of several houses, and if the several houses which are
so many members, be not well ruled, how can the whole body be well ordered?

The body of a Commonwealth may not unfitly be compared to the body of a great
Army. Now concerning an Army, it consists of many Regiments, and every
Regiment of sundry Companies, which have their several Captains to train
them and teach them due order: And ^f these private Captains do not teach
their several bands due order, it is not possible on a sudden to cast the whole
Army into a great orderly body: Even so in the Commonwealth, if every Master
of a family, (who is as it were a Captain of a Company of soldiers in the
Church Militant, do not well order the several persons committed to his
charge, how can they observe order when they are called out to serve publickely
in the Church or Commonwealth? A few bands in an Army disranked, may trouble,
nay confound the whole Army: Even so a few disorderly families may bring much
hurt upon the whole Commonwealth.

Wherefore as we tender the good of the whole Land, let us every one in his
place be careful to order those that are committed to our charge in our
particular families.

Again, the necessity of setting in order our several families will appear,
if we observe how diligent the men of God, I mean the Patriarks, Prophets,
and Apostles, yea and the Kings of Israel and Judah have been to set in order
their own houses.

Concerning Abraham, the Lord himself says, Genesis 18. 19. I know him, that he
will command his children and his household to keep the way of the Lord.
Pererius gives this note, that by this it seems to have bin the godly practice
of the Fathers, to catechize and instruct their families; and that this is a
worthy piece of service performed unto the Lord, may appear, because God
alleges this as one reason why he reveals the destruction of Sodom unto
Abraham, and a motive to bring upon Abraham that which he had spoken of him
before.

The like course in ordering their families it seems Isaac the son, and
Jacob the Grandchild took: For though Isaac had a reprobate son Esau; and
Jacob diverse lewd sons; yet it was not for want of instruction. For whence
did Joseph (who was sold into Egypt when he was young) learn his religious
conversation, but in the family of his father Jacob.

But to pass by uncertainties, and to hold me to that which is certain. Josh.
24. 15. Joshua makes this protestation, As for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord. Here you see this great man Joshua promises not only for himself,
but also for his house. And do you think he did more than he needed to do?
Doubtless he was of another mind than Cain, who said, Am Imy brothers keeper?
He knew and acknowledged it was his duty to look to the well ordering of his
whole family, though they were many in number.

From Joshua I descend to David, whose behavior touching the well ordering of
his house, ye may see, Psalm. 101. 2. There he professes to God, that he will
behave himself wisely. I will walk within my house with a perfect heart,
says he. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with me. He that walks in a perfect way shall serve me. He that
works deceit shall not dwell in my house. He that tells lies shall not
tarry in my sight. I will destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cast
off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. Here it is remarkable, that
David the King, intending the reformation of his Kingdom, begins first with
his own family, because he well knew, except order be kept in private
families, there can be no good order in the Commonwealth.

To Joshua and David we may add Cornelius, who as ye may see Acts 10. was
very careful to keep his servants in order.

Now behold that which Abraham, Joshua, David, and Cornelius did is recorded
for our instruction; Every commended ensample in Scripture is propounded for
the instruction of all that hear the same. Take we therefore from hence
special notice, that it is our duty to set our several houses in order.

Will you say unto me, these four were great Commanders, and had authority in
their hands to compel the refractary, but we which are private men, for want
of authority can never hope to compass this main business?

I answer; The Scripture affords examples of private men and women which have
well ordered their families. Among these I give pre-eminence to Ionadab the
son of Recab, who so well ordered his family, that after his death a long
time it remained an excellent order. And therefore the Lord himself propounds
that family as a pattern to all the people of Israel, and gives a blessing to
the same, Ierem. 35.

In the second place I note Aquila and Priscilla his wife, whom, being but
craftsmen, S. Paul commends very highly, not only for instructing their own
families, but also for directing their neighbors, Romans 16.

In the third place come Timothies Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice, who
as S. Paul records, 2 Timothy 1. 5. were so careful in ordering young Timothy,
that when he was a very young man, he was admitted to be the great Apostles
Companion, Act. 16. 1. Neither may we think that these godly women bestowed
all their pains upon one Timothy, but upon the rest of their family.

In the fourth place I name the Elect Lady to whom S. John dedicates his second
Epistle; and the beloved Gains to whom he writes his third Epistle: Together
with Nymphas, Col 4 15. and Philemon v. 2. who had as it were Churches in their
private families, as the Scripture says. The meaning is, they so well ordered
their families, that they might rightly be called little Churches or holy
Congregations, It is the Note of learned Zanchius upon Col. 4. concerning
Nymphas his house: There is said to be a Church in his house, says he;
because, Erat tota familia been et Christian instituta, sicut solent esse
Ecclesiae, Quia ibi legebatur verbum Dei, coarguebantur peccata, ad
paenitentiam excitabantur singuli, fiducia in Christum afflictis conscientiis
inculcabatur, adhibebantur consolationes, ad studium sanctae vitae
incitabantur, preces habebantur, canebantur Psalmi, etc. That is, the whole
family was well and Christianly ordered, as Churches use to be: Because there
the word of God was read, sin was reproved, all were exhorted to repent, they
which were afflicted in mind were counseled to be confident of Gods mercy in
Christ, all were stirred up to holiness of life, prayers were used, and
Psalms were sung, etc.

By these examples which I have propounded out of Gods word ye may easily see,
that heretofore all believers were careful to order their own families,
though they were never so mean: and hereupon it came to pass, that the Church
of God, the number of believers did so mightily increase in those primative
times: And verily the reason why iniquity does so abound in these days is,
because Governors of families do as it were cast the reigns in the neck of
those that are committed to their charge, and even suffer them to do what they
will in regard of religion without controlment. For who can bring a
wel-governed Commonwealth out of a rabble of disordered families?

Wherefore, if the examples of the Patriarks and men after Gods own heart be
able to prevail with us any thing, let the same mind be in every one of us
which was in them: Let us all with one accord bend our selves to set our
several families in order.

Thus much for the second reason enforcing the well ordering of private
families, namely the example of holy men from the beginning.

The third reason is the commandment of God, not only in my Text, but also in
other places: If there were but this one commandment in all the Scripture,
were it not sufficient? But behold diverse others tending to the same purpose:
Deuteronomy. 6. 6. etc. This commandment is given to every Master of a family; The
words that I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach
them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in
thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. What is here enjoined but the well ordering of all
families according to Gods word? First, the Master of the family must hide
Gods words in his heart, but not as the sloathfull servant that hid his talent
in a napkin, but he must lay them up there, that he may have them in a
readiness to teach and instruct his wife, children, servants, and neighbors,
and he must so whet Gods words upon them, that they may understand them, and
keep them, and do them.

The practice of Abraham mentioned by God himself, Genesis 18. 19. may serve to
explain this place. And does not Solomon tell us, Prove. 4. 4. that when he
was tender, his father taught him and said unto him, Let thine heart retain my
words, keep my commandments and live, etc.

And that it was an usual custom among Gods people to instruct their families
according to the forenamed commandment, appears Prove. 31. where King Lemuel
sets down the Prophecy that his mother taught him, that is, the holy and
wholesome Doctrine which she instilled into him concerning the wellordering of
his conversation. Let these therefore be examples and motives to all
Christians, by godly instruction to order their families; yea seeing S. Paul,
which was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and spoke by inspiration, says, Romans
15. 4. Whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our
instruction; Let us believe that the Lord says unto every one of us as well as
he did to King Ezechiah, Set thine house in order.

This being so, what can be more necessary than to inquire in the next place,
how and after what manner a family may be well ordered?

Now, without all question, the best Rule whereby to order a family is the
word of the only wise God, which is contained in the holy Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament. Hereby have holy men in all ages ordered their houses:
Wherefore let us also take direction from the word of God how we may well
order our several families.

Now if ye search the Scriptures, ye shall find that to the well-ordering of
a family two duties are required:

The first concerns God:

The second our selves which are members.

The duty which we owe to God, even in our private houses, in plain terms,
is holy worship and godly service. 1 Timothy 2. 8. S. Paul, who was sent by Christ
to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, says, I will that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands. If every where, then in the family as well as in the
Church: And under invocation is comprehended all holy worship and service.

Again, Joshua says when he doubted what the rest of the Israelites would
do, I and my house will serve the Lord: Josh. 24. 15. Here is intimated not
only public, but also private worship and service.

Besides, we all desire the blessing of the Lord as well in our private
families as abroad, and therefore it is requisite that we serve God as well at
home as abroad. For the blessing of the Lord is promised only to those that
serve him.

Godliness, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 8. has the promise of the life that now
is, and the life to come. Now that is true godliness, when a man is addicted
to serve God at all times, in all places, as well privately as publicly.

But what is this holy service which we are commanded to perform in our
families?

Answ. It stands in Institution, Invocation, and Discipline.

1. Household Institution is a plain and familiar kind of instruction, which
the Governor of the family uses for the building up of all the members of
the family in the truth which is according to godliness.

The means hereof are either daily, or such as concern the public Ministry.

The daily means are either the continual use of Gods word, or the
observation and application of the works of God.

The continual use of Gods word requisite in private houses is this; That the
Master of the family daily read, or cause to be read some part of Gods word,
and for those things which are plain, or which he has learned by the public
Ministry or Orthodox Expositours, that he whet them upon his family, and
urge them by way of catechizing to meditation and practice. This is plain by
that forecited text, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, etc.

The application of Gods works is, when the Master calls his house to the
daily observation of all Gods works whether of mercy or judgment; that thereby
he may beget in their hearts godly fear, humility, patience, thankfulness,
contentment, confidence for the time to come, and all such other graces as the
due consideration of Gods works will bring forth.

The means of Institution which concern the public Ministry are,

1. That the Master prepare his family by prayer and admonition, and take such
order that they may all resort unto the public assembly in due time, and there
behave themselves as becomes Christians.

2. That when they return he examine them concerning the points delivered,
and help them forward in the meditation of the Word and Sacraments.

Neither is it sufficient cursorily or superficially to do all this, but it
must be done by way of authority, and with great reverence and conscience.

And therefore they are in a wretched estate that take upon them to be
Governors of families, and yet never offer to speak one word of instruction
to their household, nor take order that others may. Ignorance in this case will
not excuse. Besides, if every Master would daily use in his family the Church
Catechism, wherein are contained all the fundamental points of religion, he
would greatly profit both himself and his family, and hinder much idleness
and wickedness.

The second thing wherein household service stands is daily invocation of the
name of God in prayer and thanksgiving.

The Scripture calls us to pray continually, and in all things to give thanks,
1 These. 5. 17, 18. And if we look into the practice of holy men, we shall
find that it was usual with them to pray in their houses two or three times a
day. David says, Psalm. 55. 18. Evening and morning, and at noone will I pray.
And of Daniel it is said, That he prayed and gave thanks three times a day
before his God, Dan. 6. And of Job it is recorded, that he offered up burnt
offerings continually for his children, Job 1. 5.

Now what better patterns can Masters of families propound unto themselves
than David, Job, and Daniel? Wherefore as they have done and have been praised
throughout all generations; so let every Master of an house take order that it
may be done in his family. In the morning when we have been kept in the
dark and dangerous night: And when we are to go forth to our labor, what
more fit than to go forth in the name of the Lord? Thou desire that the Lord
would bless thy business in the hands of thy servants, therefore let them
join with thee in prayer. This family prayer ought to be made early in the
morning, when all the family which are in health ought to arise after the
example of Christ Jesus.

I have often thought of that saying of S. Augustine, Indecens est Christiano
ut eum radius solis inveniat in lecto: that is, It is unbeseeming a Christian
that the Sun rising should find him in bed. This long lying in bed is that
which hinders many Masters that they cannot pray with their families.

Another set time of prayer ought to be the evening, when the family return
from their labor, and are going to sleep, which is the elder sister of death:
then is a fit time to praise God for all the benefits of the day, and to pray
for protection in the night. Many have gone well to their beds, and been found
dead in the morning: therefore me thinks none should be so presumptuous as to
go to sleep without calling upon the Lord, and pouring out his soul before
him.

Besides morning and evening, there be other times for prayer and praise every
day; namely, as often as we betake our selves to eat and drink. 1 Timothy 4. 4.
Every creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is
sanctified by the word and prayer. Whosoever therefore shall enter upon any of
Gods creatures without prayer and thanksgiving, has not the creatures
sanctified unto him.

I wonder then that some should be so profane and impudent as to scoff at
those that solemnly praise God at meals, and pray for a blessing, especially
if their Grace be a little longer than ordinary. Doubtless this is an evident
token of graceless men. Neither is it any marvel though many use Gods
creatures to surfeiting and drunkenness, when they make no conscience to have
them sanctified by prayer.

With ordinary prayer in the family, we must sometimes join singing of
Psalms. The chief exercise of the Saints in heaven is said to be giving of
thanks, and singing praise unto God: why then should this exercise on earth
seem tedious to any man that hopes to see God as he is in the heaven, and
bear a part in that celcstiall Queere?

Moreover, besides ordinary prayer every day, perhaps sometimes it shall be
found requisite for the Master of the family to call to extraordinary prayer,
which is commonly joined with fasting. This may be done in a common or private
calamity, or when some extraordinary blessing is requested, as Nehem. 1. 4.
Acts 10 30. Ester 4. 16.

Now concerning this blessed service of prayer to be used daily in every
family, me thinks I should not need to use motives, considering that God
does so greatly delight in it, and the whole world is not worth this one
prerogative of believers, that they may at all times and in all places make
their requests known unto the Almighty, and ask any thing of him in the
name of Christ, and have a promise to be heard.

If the Lord had commanded us every day with great cost to offer unto him
sacrifices morning and evening, would we not do it? How much more, when he
says unto us, only, Ask and have.

The third part of holy service to be used in private families is wholesome
Discipline. This must not exceed the bounds. A Master of a family may
proceed neither to excommunication, nor execution of any of his family never
so wicked. The course that Governors of several houses may take, is this.

First, if their children or servants be unrulie, they must tell them of their
faults in the spirit of meekness.

Secondly, if they do not amend, they must rebuke them sharply.

Thirdly, if that will not prevail, they must correct them.

Fourthlie, if private admonition and correction will not bring them into
order, the Master must require the aid of the public Magistrate. As it is,
Deuteronomy. 21. 18. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not
obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that when they
have chastened him will not hearken unto them; Then shall his father and his
mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City, and they
shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice, he is a glutton and a drunkard: And
all the men of the City shall stone him with stones that he dye. So shall thou
put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear.

Thus it should be. But alas! how has foolish pity thrust out wholesome
household Discipline? Fathers and Mothers are so far from correcting and
rebuking their unrulie children, that they are angry if any neighbor speak
unto them by way of admonition. Therefore have we just cause to fear lest the
Lord deal with us as he did with old Ely, because he was too favorable to
his lewd sons.

So also for evil servants, what Master now adays will take any pains by
wholesome admonition and due correction to bring them into order? Some Masters
indeed behave themselves like lions in their houses toward those that will
not do their work according to their mind: but if they will follow their
business, they regard not how lewd and wicked they be otherwise. If they will
not presenttly serve their turn, they will not labor to make them better, but
turn them away: And so it comes to pass that they which are filthy, or
lazy, or ignorant, remain so still, and the Land swarms with a generation of
deboshed servants; so that it is hard to find a faithful servant, and all for
want of execution of wholesome Discipline in private families.

Thus much for the former duty concerning God.

The second concerns ourselves.

For the better performing of this duty, note that there are three
combinations or couplements in the family. First, there are the husband and
the wife. Secondly, Parents and children. Thirdly, Master and servants.

That a family may be well-ordered, it is requisite that these three
couplements which stand in relation each to other, do keep their rank.

The duty of the husband is that he dwell with his wife as a man of
understanding, giving honor unto her as the weaker vessel, and loving her as
his own flesh, and be not bitter unto her.

The Wifes duty is to submit her self unto her husband, and to do him good
and not evil all the days of her life.

The duty of Parents is to bring up their children in the knowledge of Gods
will, and in some lawful calling, wherein they may further the Commonweal.

The duty of Children is to obey their Parents.

The duty of Masters is to provide for their servants food and raiment, and
sufficient employment: they must also take order that they may be instructed,
and if need be, corrected.

The duty of Servants is to honor their Masters, though they be but mean
men, and to obey them with fear and trembling, not answering again, but doing
service to them in singleness of heart as unto Christ.

All these points are so plainly set down in the holy Scriptures, that they
need not explanation but execution. And where any of these couplements keep
not their rank, or neglect the forenamed duties, the family cannot be well
ordered.

Wherefore as we love order, and reverence the God of order, let us set our
selves from this day forward every one of us to keep his own order, that so
every several family being well ordered, the whole Commonwealth may come
into good order, and consequently that God may be moved to remove from us his
judgments of plague, famine, and unseasonable weather, which our manifold
disorders have brought upon us.

There is none of us but now and then cries out upon the disorder in the Land,
and prays for reformation: But assuredly in vain do we look for public
reformation, unless we will every one reform our own families.

As long then as we live disorderly our selves, or keep any disordered person
in our houses, whether son or daughter, manservant, or maidservant, yea or
any kinseman or stranger, we are enemies to our own desires, and which is
more, adversaries to the Commonweal.

Which imputation if we do justly abhor, then let us with all our might
endeavor every one of us from the highest to the lowest according to the holy
commandment of the Lord of Lords, to set our houses in order.

Deo Patri, Filio, et Spiritui sancto, sit omnis laus, honor and gloria in
aeternum:

AMEN.
FINIS.

