THE FAMOVS AND MEMORABLE WORKS OF JOSEPHUS, A MAN OF MVCH HONOR AND LEARNING
AMONG THE JEWS. Faithfully translated out of the Latin, and French, by Tho.
Lodge Doctor in Physic. Bernardus Epistola ad Suggerium.

Tune recentia incundius bona clarescunt, cum fuerint malis comparata
prioribus.

Printed at the charges of G. Bishop, S. Waterson, P. Short, and Tho. Adams,
1602.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FATHER OF ARTS AND ARMS CHARLES LORD HOVV^RD, BARON
OF EFFINGHAM, EARL of Nottingham, High Constable of the Castle and Forest of
Windsore, Lord chief Justice in Air of England, Governor and Captain
general of all her Majesty's maritime Forts and Castles, High Admiral of
England and Ireland, Lieutenant of Sussex and Surrey, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council.
RIght Honorable, there is a saying in Zenophon most worthy the citing and
insight, that matters of worth and consequence are both to be committed and
commended to their trust and protection, who know the weight and value thereof,
and both can and will defend the same by authority and reason: For this cause
and upon this ground, I have chosen your Honor out for a most noble patron of
this most famous and accomplished History of the Jews, which (for dignity
and antiquity of the subject, the elegancie and purity of the style, the
choice propriety and copy of words, the gravity and variety of sentences,
the alterations and memorable events; and lastly for the birth and dignity of
the Author) requires a spirit of no less wisdom, courage, and nobility
then your self, who have power to defend, and knowledge to discern the worth
thereof. Uouchsafe therefore to level the eye of your esteem upon the Center
of this happy History: and as Themistocles was animated to noble actions by
beholding Miltiades Trophies, and Alexander in seeing Achilles tomb, did
grievously sigh with an honorable emulation: so let the zeal, magnanimity,
and admirable constancy which every where affronteth you in this book (and
rauisheth the best minds from the boundless troubles of this world, and
draws them into the contemplation of true perfection) so settle your
honorable love and affection to emulate the same, that as for glory in arms;
so for preserving and protecting arts, you may outstrip your competitors, and
amaisse to curious expectation. And in mine opinion the time challenges no
less at your hands: for as your transcendent dignity and courage has
returned us a happy harvest in our expected and long possessed peace, as by
your second care and diligence next under her sacred Majesty we all reap the
fruit and felicity of blessea abundance; so by your example in reading and
respecting both learning and the learned, you shall pull down that Babel,
which confused ignorance has raised to ouerreach industry; yea you shall
strengthen the weakened ability of learning which (alas the while) is now
adays like acommoditie without request scarce saileable by the hands of a
cunning broker, nothing is more worth money, and less in request: only the
worlds blind creatures (as S. Ierom terms them) the unlettered take delight
in their errors, whose writings (as Plutarch speaks of Aristophanes poems)
are written for no moderate man's pleasure. Let therefore your upright
estimation of this work (most noble Earl) awaken the dead devotion of such as
contemn Arts, and let no such corrupt drones (as make sale of sinful
thoughts for good merchandise) buz about the hiue of true science: But as
Emperors, Kings, and Princes have ever in their Greek, Italian, and French
with a respective acceptance, and bountiful hand entertained this History; so
let this translation of Josephus which courteth you now in English, be accepted
at your hands, and countenanced by your honor, for whose vnconfined felicity
both I and other of my name have ever prayed, and will never cease to study.

Your Honors unfeignedly devoted, THOMAS LODGE.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER As touching the use and abuse of History.
IF History were as easily conceited and made use of, as (according to Baldus)
it has true proportion and documents for the government of man's life, I should
hold it no sin so precisely to prescribe a limitation and bound, to such as
should enter the List, and consult with example. For what more pleasing to our
selves; or profitable for societies could ever befall us, then in this theater
of man's life, (wherein History affords all sorts of actors) to sit and
learn prevention by other men's perils, and to grow amply wise by foreign
wreckes; al which being traduced to our private uses; we may either as partners
in what we have past, or obseruers of future casualties; by presedent events,
tie ages to our memories: and prevent our escapes, by suruew of other men's
repentance, briefly beget experience by sight, or foresight of worldly
casualties, and form a mirror of forepassed errors, to foreiudge our future
calamities. But for that it behooves us to enter this worldly Academie, the
more prepared, the more that History is fraught and fulfilled with plentiful
fruit, and whereas the difficulty and difference is a like, to yield an
upright verdict both of a man's own, and other men's life, neither may any man
rightly examine another (how wise so ever he be) except in equal balance he
weigh his own imperfections; it must necessarily follow on both sides, that
with the more wisdom, and the greater observation we ought to entertain
History, least our mind like the wind should wander uncertainly, and our
devotion should prevent our resolution; our esteem our knowledge. For as in an
ample and well furnished and affluent banquet, although some things, (and they
to few men) seem pleasant, othersome to other are without taste and seem
tart, and every one judges his meat not by proof, but by the palate; yet
notwithstanding there is a certain mean, which either natures ordinary, or
the defined kind of nutriment (being simple and incorrupt) has fashioned and
fixed for most aptest for the body; from which whosoever varieth, or either
beyond measure, or without judgment, follows his foolish appetite, and
glutting himself beyond discretion, reapeth more in commodity then pleasure
by these pleasures: So in the diversity of man's life, although a thousand
forms, a thousand similitudes be offered, and that every man fashioneth
other men's manners to his mind, yet is their but one true path that virtue
walks in, which whosoever tracketh with judgment, does truly know the use of
life; whereas they that sit in a plentiful banquet, in affecting all things,
can make use of nothing. Now how many are there, I pray you, that in respect
either of their own, or other men's acts and words (according to the rule of
virtue) can be more choice in judging minds, as meats, and that in this matter
seems not sufficiently instructed? wherein I wonder that men epsy not their
errors, whereas they imagine that History is the instructor of such as read
the same, whereas it only yields matter of instruction, even as the banquet
ministers meat according to every man's affection. Some therefore are seduced
with the sweetness of the style, and in seeking their pleasure, lose their
profit; who reap no other fruit of History, then to beguile time, and beget
officious idleness, laughing away hours, and nourish repent: others in reading
glory, hunt it in a shadow, where if they could make use of it in proportion,
they could not fall to repent it. And whereas no man can aspire to true glory
without true virtue, neither no wise man will hope further, yet see we many
men, that because they have read many excellent works, will be Capricious and
pretend wisdom; resembling those tragedians, who will after they have
discharged themselves of their parts, and apparel wherein they counterfaited
the Emperor, yet retain his royal and princely manners: Some triuiall and
light witted, that make an Eclipse of a shadow, make more of the emblem, then
the work; the habit then the Doctor: So admirable effects works history in
men's mind. Now whereas it is the most exact and chiefest intent of history to
awaken man's idleness, and arm them against casualties, and the whole bent of
example has no other issue, it falls out through men's security (who suppose
that their neighbors perils concerns them not) that whatsoever is of note,
is ouerslipt with a deaf and sleeping judgment, and things that memory
should best love, are lost in her. To conclude, there are some that will have
every man's shoe fitted on their own last, and tie all men's pens to their own
pleasures: For which cause partly by reason of this secret, partly through this
ill ordered, confused, and rash method of reading, as of corrupt humors, so is
there grown a certain (...) of judgment and resolution: and as in
intemperate bodies, meat yields very little profit; so reap they no fruit
or benefit by their reading. By this good reader thou may easily conceive,
how a history ought to be read: how men's lives ought in them selves be
examined: finally how equal a proportion is required in both. And truly in my
opinion the chiefest ground of this difficulty, is the perverseness of our
judgments, which is the cause we the rather respect our own inclinations what
they are, then the true life and force of example. Furthermore this is no less
misery then the former, that such as write set down such things as are acted,
not only for their profit sake, but to feed their own humors: and like to
certain Architects (by interposing their judgments) do vainly praise some
things, supposing that our imitation should betied to their pleasure; where if
they performed what they ought to do, the reader should encounter with no such
distractions: but now in like manner as Cooks who rather expect their masters
pleasurable taste, then his profit; would God the Historiographer did not
affect flattery. It therefore appears that in two sorts (first in our own
judgment; and next to the prejudice of those that write) we are circumuented;
in that they set not down such events as pass, in their own nature and as
they are. For he that writes an History is the interpretor of those things
that are past, whose judgment being depraved, it fares with him as with the
purest and most richest wine, which waxes mustie by reason of that vessel
wherein it is enclosed, or is by sophistication corrupted, which is the
greatest folly, and most intolerable deceit that may befall men. They therefore,
who neglige^tly undertake a historiy, (or suppose that life were to be past
rashly, and without an exact observance of all offices) are no less deceived
then certain country pesants in the last troubles of France (of whose folly I
drew some example) who attempting and entering upon a city not far off from
them, and lighting into an Apothecaries shop furnished with all kind of drugs
and dainties, and being allured by the pleasure, odors and delight of the
confections they tasted; and supposing all to be of the same kind, devoured,
tasted, and swallowed down every thing: whereupon some fell sick of feauers,
some grew frenzy, and many lost their lives to please their appetites, at
leastwise he that escaped best, gave occasion of laughter to the lookers on. For
as life, so History (the image of life) is fraught with pleasure, and
displeasure; and only in the use of life, the wisdom of life consists.
Fare well, use this, and my self as two twins borne for thy profit.

Thine Thomas Lodge.

THE TITLES OF ALL SVCH BOOKS AS ARE CONTAINED IN THIS HISTORY
1. A History in twenty books, wherein the Antiquity of the Jews is
discovered. 2. Seven books of the Wars of the Jews. 3. Two books against
Apion the Gramarian, in Justification of the Antiquity of the Jews. 4. A
book as touching the memorable martyrdom of the Machabees. 5. Josephus Life.
Written by himself all.
A brief computation of time, very profitable and necessary in the
understanding of this History.
FRom- Adam until the Deluge, there were -- 1656 From the Deluge until
Abraham's time -- 292 From Abraham until the departure out of Egypt -- 500
From the departure out of Egypt, until the building of the temple by Solomon
-- 480 From the building of the temple, until the captivity in Babylon -- 410
From the return from the captivity, until the Machabees time -- 432 From the
Machabees time, until Herod's -- 134 From Herod's time, until the final and
fatal destruction of Jerusalem -- 103
The Jews have two sorts of years: the Politic sort which begins in
September, and the Sacred or Ecclesiastique which begins in March.

They have twelve Months or Moons, every third year has a thirteenth
Month of 22. days, and the fourth year has a thirteenth month of 23. days.

Before the captivity of Babylon, they accounted the months successively by
1. 2. 3. etc. since their return they have named them rather after the manner
of the Chaldees then Hebrews.

The Hebrew. The English. The Greek. Nisan March Andimen Ziu or Iar April
Leritien Sluan May Distre Tamaz June Xantique Ab July Arthemisien E^ul August
Desien Ethanin or Tisrij September Paneme Bull or Markesuan October Loie Casleu
November Gorpian Thebet December Hiperberet^ Sebath January Dien Adar.
February. Apelleen.

This nation in their beginning, was governed by Judges.
Moses Iosuah Othoniel Aod Baruc and Debora Gedeon Abimelech Thola Iair Ieptha
Absan Elon Abdon Sampson Eli Samuel.
After them, they had these King^.
Saul David Solomon Roboam Abia Asa Iosaphat Ioram Ochozias Athalia Ioas
Amasias Ozias Ioathan Achaz Ezechias Manasses Amon Josias Ioachas Eliachim
Ioachin Sedechias.
The Captivity of Babylon continued 70. years. Governors after the Captivity.
Zorobabel Rhesa Iehan Ben Resa Judas Hyrcanus Joseph Abner Heli Mahat Nagge
Haga^eli Naum Amos Mat^hathias Joseph Arses Iannes Hyrcan^ Mattathias.
The Machabees, who have been ^oth Gouernor^ and Priests.
Judas Ionatha^ Simon John Hyrcanus.
These following have been both Kings and Priests.
Aristobulus 1. John Alexander Alexandra Aristobulus 2. Hyrcanus. Aristobul^
the son of Arist. Aristobulus 3. Hyrca^us.
The race of Herod.
Antipater Herod the great Archelaus the great Agrippa the son of Agrippa
The names of such as were high Priests, from the time of their departure out
of Egypt, until the building of the temple which was made by Solomon.
Aaron Eleaz^ Phinees Abi^a Busqui Oses Heli Achitob Achimelech Ab a^ ha^ Sadoc
Achimaas Azarias.
From the building of the temple, until the Captiu^tie of Babylon.
Iora^ Ioses Axioram Sudeas Ioathan Urias Nerias Odeas Sellum Helcias.
From their return out of Babylon, until the Machabees time.
Sar^ia Iosedech Ios^ Ioacim Eliasib Eleazar Manasses Onias 2. Simon 2. Onias
3. Ioiada Ionatha^ Iadus Onias 1. Simon 1. Jason Onias 4. Lysimachus Alcimus.
High Priests since the Machabees time, until the last destruction and
overthrow of that City and nation.
Simon B^thus Joseph 1. Joseph 2. Ioazar Eleazar Iosuah the son of Sias Ioazar
A^us (...) Theoph^ S^ Mattathias Elion Joseph 3. Ananias Ismael Joseph Annas
Eleazar Simon Joseph Caiphas Jonathan Iosuah the son of Da^eus Iosuah the son
of G^liel Matthias Phinees or Pa^s.
King^ of Israel, otherwise called kings of the ten tribes or of Samaria.
Jeroboam 1. Nadab Baasa Ela Zamri Amri Achab Ioram Iehu Ioacha^. Ioas Jeroboam
2. Zachary Manahem Pecha the son of Manahem Pecha the son of Romelia Oseas
Kings of Assyria and Babylon.
Phulhelechus Phulassar Salmanassar Sennacherib Assaradon Berodach Benmerodach
Nabuchodonosor 1. Nabuchodonosor the great Euilmerodach Neriglossorar
Labosardach Baltassar.
Kings of Persia.
Cyrus Cambyses Smerdes Magus. Darius the son of Hystaspis Zerxes the son of
Darius Artabanus the tyrant Artaxerxes with a long hand Zerxes Sogdianus Darius
the bastard Artaxerxes Mnemo^ Artaxerxes Ochus Arsames Darius the son of
Arsames
Kings of Syria after the death of Alexander the great.
Seleucus Nicanor Antiochus Soter Antiochus surnamed God Seleucus Callinicus
Seleucus Cerau^s Antiochus the great Seleucus Philopator. Antiochus Epiphanes
Antiochus Eupator Demetrius Soter Alexander Epiphanes Demetrius Nic^nor
Antiochus Sedetes Demetrius Nicanor Alexander Zebina Antiochus Gryphus
Antiochus Cyzicen^ Seleucus Gryphius Antiochus Pius.
The kings of Egypt after the death of Alexander the great.
Ptolomey Soter Philadelphus Euergetes Philopator Epiphanes Philometor
Euergetes Phiscon. Lathyrus Alexander Auletes Cleopatra.
Kings of the Tyrians.
Abibalus Hiram Belastartus Abdastartus Astartus Astarimus Phelletes Ithoballus
Badezor Mett^ Pigm^lion.
For the better understanding of the Coins and measures, whereof there is some
mention made in this History; observe I pray you that which follows.
Sath was a measure containing about some seven pintes French.

The Epha contained three Saths.

The Core or Homer contained ten Ephas, that is to say thirty Saths, and was
the same measure both in dry and liquid things.

The Log contained a French pint in measure.

The Hin contained twelve Logs.

The Bath contained as much as the Epha.

The Cad was a kind of pitcher containing such a quantity as a young maiden
might well carry.

The common Sicle contained the weight of four ounces, whether it were of
gold, silver, or of any other metal.

The sacred or holy Sicle waied half an ounce of any metal whatsoever.

The common Sicle of silver was valued at about some shilling of our money.

The holy Si^e of silver was valued at about some two sh^llings.

The common Drachme was the eight part of an ounce.

The sacred Diachme was the fou^th part of an ounce.

The Pound waied twelve ounces.

The ordinary Tale^ contained fifty four pounds, eight ounces, and a quarter
of Troy weight in any metal: yet was it not current money, but a mass made
up after the manner of an ingot.

The sacred Talent contained one hundredth pounds.

Furthermore note this for your better knowledge, that when as Josephus quoteth
the Olympiades without any specification of the years therein contained, he
orderly comprehends the space of four years complete.

Furthermore, where the Latin word Stadium has diverse Significations amongst
both Greeks and Latins (as the (...) between P^ie and Diodorus Siculus may
well testify) and for that diverse of our English translators have somenmes
called it a Stade, other while a Stound, and otherwhiles improperly, a Fu^long;
I pray you in reading this History whereas any of these words occur, suppose
them for one and the same measure of ground, and according to the Greeks
account (which I suppose Josephus most respected in this History) conclude it
to be either of 600. foot as the Olympique, that is of 120. paces, or as the
Pyr^hique, which contained 1000. foot, that is 200. paces. As for the furlong,
either multiply him 8. times to make him a Stade, or as an oversight in the
printing, let it pass with the Errata.

The names of those Authors which are alleged in this History.
A
Acusilaus Agatharcid^s Alexander Andrew Apio^ Apollonius Molo Apollodorus
Ariphanes Aristaeus Aristotle.
B
Berosus.
C
Cadmus Castor Chaeremon Chaerilus Clearcus Conon.
D
Demetrius Phalereus Dius.
E
Ephorus Euhemerus Eupolen^us.
H
Hecataeus Hellanicus Hermippus Hermogenes Herodotus Hesiodus Hestiaeus. Hier^m
of Egypt Homer Hy^rochides.
I
Isidor^.
L
Titus Liuius Lysimachus.
M
Manethon Menander Mnaseas Mochus.
N
Nicholas of Damas.
P
Pherecydes Philon Philostratu^ Polybi^ Polycratet Posidonius Pythagoras.
S
Strabo.
T
Thales Theodotus Theophilus Theopompus. Theophrastus Thucydides Timaeus.
Z
Zopyrion.
Francis. Patritius de Regno, lib. 2. cap. 10. Historiarum cognitio Regibus,
Ducibus, Imperatoribus et omnibus principibus perquam necessaria habenda est:
quam Cicero appellat testem temporum, vitae Magistram, veram memoriae et
veritatis nunciam. GEntle reader, let it stand with thy patience I beseech
thee, to correct those errors that shall occur in this history, as
favorably as we have ouerslipt them unwillingly; and count it no less
virtue in thee to wincke at them with discretion, as for me to let them pass
through ouer-sight: if thou do this, hope better: for thy sufferance shall
make me circumspect, if not according to that in Plautus: Quod dedi non datum
vellem; quod reliquum est non dabo.

Errata.
Fol. 4. line 3. for who, read which. f. 21. l. 14. for s^aightes read
straightes. Ibidem l. 50. for Sara read Rebecca. f. 37. l. 42. for thou read
you. f. co^. l. 45. for thou read you. f. 134. l. 51. for deliver them from
those, read deliver those f. 261. l. 40. for Babylon read Jerusalem. f. 274. l.
39. for be began read beg^n. f. 279.l. 38. for compassion read composition. f.
299. l.57. read for old old years, old years. f. 361. l. 36. read for
I^dea, Iudaea. f. ^80. l. 40. for 15 read 50. f. 63^. l. 1. for aid read war.

THE FIRST BOOK
WRITTEN BY JOSEPH THE SON OF MATTHIAS.
A most excellent Preface, containing the causes which induced the Author to
write this History, together with the contents and intents of the same.
CHAP. I.
THEY that endeavor themselves to write Histories, seem not (in my opinion) to
have one and the same intent and motive, but diverse and very different causes
of their labors: for some of them are addicted to this study, under pretense
to exemplify their eloquence, and under hope to purchase glory thereby; other
some to the end to give them content, whose worthy actions they couch and
commend action; and especially Epaphroditus, a man enamoured of all learning,
and who in especial, took Ptolomey king of Egypt the second of the name,
(highly affectioned to good letters, and desirous to store and gather books)
was earnestly desirous, that our law and the rules thereof, and the prescript
form of ou^ living should be translated into the Greek tongue. And as
touching the hie Priest Eleazar (who has not been second in virtue to any
other whatsoever) he refused not to make the said King partaker of the effect
of his desire: to which he had wholly contradicted, had it not been the
ordinary course of our ancestors, not to conceal from other men, what thing
soever was honest. For which cause I have held it a matter no ways indecent
for me, to follow the virtuous courage of that same great sacrificer, and the
rather for that at this day (only in as much as concerned learning) I supposed
many also to be no less affected to good letters then the king: for he
undertook not to have all the writings Moses; It is necessary before all
other things, that I speak somewhat of himself, least perhaps any man should
wonder how this labor having been enterprised, to discover the words and
works of certain persons, is also employed for the greatest part in
describing and discovering things that are natural. We ought therefore to
know, that Moses thought it most especially necessary, either for him that
will rightly dispose his life, or impose laws to other men, that first and in
especial he have the knowledge of the nature of God; to the end that
conceiving in his mind the greatness of his works; he might as much as in him
lies, imitate his most unequal example; and follow him with all diligence.
For it is impossible, that a lawmakers being void of this contemplation,
should Moses therefore intending to instruct his Citizens in this doctrine,
began not his ordinances with the treatise of contracts, and couenaunts, which
we practice one with another, as other lawmakers were accustomed to do: but
he has lifted their spirits on high, to the end Moses has spoken

CHAP. II.
The Creation of the world.

IN the beginning, God created heaven and earth: now the earth, not being
subject to A^ (...), 1. before the (...) of Christ, 3963. Gen^sis 1. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 1. The creation of the world* The first day.
sight, but covered with thick darkness, and trauersed with an air coming
from high: God commanded that there should be light; and after the light was
made having considered the universal matter, he separated the light from the
darkness, and named the darkness The second day.
world, and having separated it from other things, he thought good to give it a
place apart; and making it firm by the means of a Christalline matter, he
endowed it with a quality moist and rainy, and did harmoniously accord the
earth with it, to the end the increase thereof should be watered by dewes. The
third day, he firmly established the earth, spreading the sea round about The
third day.
the same; and the same day, he with a word caused all plants and seeds to
spring upon the face of The fourth day.
ordaining them their motions and cou^ses by which the seasons orderly ensuing,
might be distinguished. In the fifth day, he made all kind of living creatures
which dwell upon the face of the The fifth day.
earth, as well they that swim in the deepest waters, as those that fly in
the air; uniting them together by couples and paires, to the end that each in
their kind, might increase and multiply. The sixth day, he made all four-footed
beasts, and distinguished them into male and female: and in the The sixth day
same day, he formed man. So that Moses says, that the world and all that is
therein was made in six whole days, and that on the seventh day, God took
rest and ceased from his labors. By reason whereof we likewise desist from
travel on that day which we call Sabath, which is to say, Repose. Sabbat^.


After the seventh day, Moses began to describe the original of man and the
manner of his Adam, an Hebrew word signifying ruddie, because he Hedio and
Ru^finus, chap G^es. (...) ^entor ^sicke.
was made of e^, tempered with read or yeallow: for the earth which is rightly
called a virgin, that is to say, earth not removed but elementarie, is of that
color. Then brought God all kind of living creatures before Adam, showing him
as well the male as the female: on w^m Adam bestowed those names, which to this
present time they retain. And seeing that Adam had female to accompany and
live with him (for as yet there was no woman) and for that he thought The year
of the world. 1. before Christis Natiuit^e 3963.
it strange that all other living creatures had their companions: God took one
of his ribs from him at such time as he slept, and of the same he formed a
woman; who being brought before Adam, he did acknowledge that she was made for
him. Now in Hebrew a woman is called Isha, (...) the mo^ o^ all uing ^ures.
Pa^acice.
but this was called Eua, which is as much to say, as the mother of all living
creatures. He declares also, that God planted in the East a garden, flourished
and adorned with all sorts of plants; amongst which was the tree of life, and
an other the tree of intelligence, by which was known both good and evil. And
after he had brought Adam and his wife into this garden, he commanded them to
keep and cherish the plants. Now this garden is watered by a river that
inuironeth The (...). slouds of Paradise The^ P^ison or Gan^, (...), Head. Seth.
2. Eph^tes. 3. Tygris. 4. Geh^n, Nilus. Hedio Ruffinus, cap. 3.
the whole earth, which divides it self into 4. channels or rivers. That which
is called Phison (which name signifies abundance or multitude) flows by the
land of India, and enters into Ganges. As touching Euphrates and Tygris, they
flow into the red sea. Euphrates is called Phora (that is to say dispersion
or flower.) Tygris is called Diglat (which signifies straight and swift.)
Gehon runs by the country of Egypt, and signifies as much as coming from
the East: the Greeks call it Nilus. Now God commanded Adam and his wife to
eat of the fruits of all other plants, and that they should abstain from
that of science; telling them, that at what time soever they should taste of
the same, they should die the death. Whereas then at that time, all living
creatures were at accord one with another; the Serpent conuersing with Adam and
his wife, was inflamed with envy, for that he saw they The subtilty of the
Serpent.
should be happy if they continued in the observation of Gods commandments:
and that contrariwise, they should cast themselves headlong into ruin and
destruction, if they should disobey Adam and E^ahs fall.
to quicken the thought.) Then covered they themselves with fig leaves, which
they put before their priuities, esteeming themselves more happy then they were
before, in that they had found out that which they wanted. But when as God came
into the garden, Adam (who before Adam knowing that he had transgressed the
ordinances and commandments of God, God speaks. unto Adam.
answered him not a word, but God spoke unto him after this manner: I had
provided for you the means whereby you might have led your life without
sufferance of any evil, or sense of any misery: so that all whatsoever was
requisite for necessity or pleasure, might happen of it self unto you, by my
only providence, without any travel or care on your parts, which if you had
well used, age had not so soon overtaken you, but that you might have lived
many years: but thou have scorned this mine ordinance, and broken my
commandment. For in Adam excused his sin, and required at Gods hands, that
he would Adam asks pardon.
not be incensed against him, laying the fault of that which had happened on
his wife, alleging that he had offended by reason he was suborned by her: and
the woman accused the Serpent. Adams punishment. Eu^s punishment. The seed of
the woman (that is Christ) shall br^ise the ^rpents head. Genes. 3. (...)
^pents (...)
But at that time God punished him, because he had suffered himself to be
overcome by the counsel of a woman; that the earth thence forward never more
of her own accord should bring forth fruit: but that when they had travailed
and almost devoured themselves in labor, it should sometimes give them food,
and at other times refuse to sustain them. And as touching Eve, he chastised
her with childbearing, and throws in travel, for that being Adam, and he put
venom on his tongue, declaring him an enemy both to man and woman, whom he
commanded to bruise the head of the Serpent, as well for that the evil which
chanced unto men consisted in the head, as also ^at being assaulted in that
part he is most easily done to death. Moreover having deprived him of his
feet, he condemned him to slide and traile himself along the earth. And after
The year of the world. (...). before Christ's birth. 3963.
Adam and Eve out of the garden into another place.

CHAP. III.
Of the Posterity of Adam: and of the ten ages even unto the Deluge.

But Adam and Eve had two male children, the first whereof was called Cain
(which signifies Hedio and Ruf^nus. chap. 4. Genef 4. Of Cain and Abel
brethren.
acquisition) and the second was called Abel (which is as much to say as
mourning) they had also daughters. These brothers addicted themselves each one
of them to their particular exercises: Abel the younger honored justice, and
(supposing that God was present in all his actions) he always and wholly fixed
his thoughts on virtue: and his exercise Cain (being the wickedest man amongst
men, and addicted to In the year of the world. 70. before the birth of Christ.
3894.
insatiable desire of profit) was he that first found out the use of the
Plough, and who killed his brother for the cause which ensues. Having
concluded among themselves to sacrifice unto God, Cain offered the fruits of
his labor, and planting; Abell presented milk, and the firstlings of his
fold: which sacrifice of his, was more acceptable to God, in that it rather
consisted The sacrifice o^ Cain and Abel.
of things produced of themselves by the order of nature, then that which a
covetous man had forcibly in a manner extorted from nature. Hereupon Cain
(being wroth because his Weak reason in Joseph. Cain slew his brother Abel.
The talk twixt God and Cain.
brother Abell was more honored by God then himself) slew his brother; and
having hidden his body out of sight, he thought that such a murder should be
concealed. But God knowing well this fact; appeared to Cain, and questioned
with him as concerning his brother, Cain (being troubled, and ignorant what
answer he should make unto God) said first that he wondered what was the
cause his brother was so long time absent: and finally aggreeued in that God
continued the quest, and did more exactly seek after him; he said he was ^ot
his brothers keeper, or bound to take care of his affairs. Then God reproved
and convicted Cain of murdering his brother, and spoke unto him after this
manner, saying, that he wondered he should deny the knowledge of his brothers
death, whereas he himself had slain him: notwithstanding he acquitted him of
the punishment deserved for this murder, by reason that Cain had done
sacrifice, and made request unto God, that it might please him, to remit
somewhat of the severity of his justice against him: Cains banishment.
did he drive him and his wife out of that country, whereat being affrighted
(for fear he should be encountered and taken by some savage beast, and that he
should perish after that sort) God commanded him to suspect no dangerous event
for that cause, assuring him that he might safely travail through all regions
without being either assaulted or seized by savage beasts: and having set his
mark upon him, by which he might be known; he commanded him to depart the
country. After that Cain (accompanied with his wife) had travailed through
diverse regions, Cain is not bettered by Gods Cha^sements.
he builded: Nais (it was a place so named) and made his abode therein, and in
that place had children: But he received not this chasticement for his better
amendment, but rather became worse and worse: for he abandoned himself to all
pleasures of the body, making it Measures and waights found out by Cain.
the ignorance whereof was the cause that the life of man was estranged from
deceit: but in steed and place of free and ancient courage he introduced
fraud and deceit. He it was that first bounded the fields; and builded the
first City, and made a wall and rampire, enforcing his followers to dwell
therein. This City was named Enosa, by the n^me of Enos his first begotten
Enosa the first City.
son. But Iared was the son of Enos, of Iared issued Malehel, whose son
was Mathusala, who begotte Lamech, who had 77. children by his two wives Sella
and Ada: amongst whom Iobel the son of Ada was the first that made Tents, and
took delight to lead a pastoral li^ contenting himself with the same. Iubal
his brother german exercised music, and invented Iubal inuentor of music.
the Psalterie, and the Harp. And as touching Thobell one of his sons, by
his other wife, he surpassed all other his brethren in force; and bravely
managed the affairs of war, by which ways he got more ample riches, and
means to maintain his life with more pleasure. He it was that first invented
the art of forging, and the shop also: and was father to a daughter named
Naama. But Lamech being well exercised in Gods law, and foreseeing that he
should suffer punishment In the yea^e of the world. ^o. be. fore Christ^ birth
3894. Cain the father of hipocrites and cuill men.
for the fratricide of Cain, told it to his wives.

So it was that during the life of Adam himself, the successors of Cain were
most wicked, teaching and imitating one an others wickedness, the last of them
proving always the worst: so that they were strangely inflamed to follow war
and theft: and if perhaps some of them were more remiss then the other in
murders, and committing outrages; yet notwithstanding were they bold enough
to spoil and possess the goods and heritage of other men.

But Adam the first man made of earth (for the History requires that I should
return to speak of him) after the death of Abel, and the flight of Cain,
betook himself to beget children, highly affecting succession and posterity,
being about the age of two hundredth and thirty years: besides which, after he
had lived some seven hundredth more, at last he died: amongst whose Adams
years. 930. Seth the son of Adam a virtuous man.
children (which were many) he had Seth. And for that it were too long to
speak of all of them, I will only touch that which concerns Seth: He being
nourished and trained up by his father to the years of discretion; studied
virtue, and left his succession heirs, and followers, of his sanctity: who
being all of them well borne, remained in the world free from all contention,
and lived happily: so that it never happened that any of them in any sort did
injury to any man. These invented the science of the celestial bodies, and all
that which concerns the beauty and order of the same. And to the end that
their inventions should not be defaced out of the memories of men, neither
should perish before they were perfectly known: (insomuch as Adam had foretold
them of the general destruction of all things after two sorts, the one by the
force of fire, and the other by the violence and abundance of waters) they made
two pillars; the one Two pillars raised.
of brick, and the other of stone; and ingraued in each of them such things as
they had invented, to the end that if that of brick should be abolished by the
ouerflowes and rage of waters, that other of stone should remain, and express
unto men that which was imprinted therein for their instructions. That of
brick then was consecrated by them, and is in the country of Licia even at
this present day.

CHAP. IIII.
The Deluge from which Noe and his family escaped and dwelt in the field of
Senaar.

IN this manner perseuered they during the course of seven ages, honoring one
God, the Lord of all things, having always a respect of virtue. But afterward
in process of Hedi^ and Ruffinus. chap. 6. Ge^es 5. 6. Those whom Josephus
names in this place Angels Moses calls the sons of God. Genes. 6.
before time industriously exercised themselves in virtue, afterward with twice
as zealous study followed wickedness; and grew at last to that height of
impiety, that they provoked Gods heavy displeasure against them. For diverse
Angels of God accompanying themselves with women engendered outrageous infants,
and contemners of all good, by reason of that trust they had in their forces,
whose heinous actions were not much unlike those which the Greeks have in
their fables fained of the Giants. But Noah perplexed and extreemely displeased
with such their misdemeanors, exhorted them to change their thoughts, and
amend their misdeeds, and (seeing them mollified by no admonitions; but that
they were wholly possessed with the pleasure Noa^ departs into an other
country.
Then God (delighting in the justice of the man) not only condemned the men of
that age of extreme malice, but also concluded to destroy all whatsoever
creatures were in the world, and to produce an other new race, deuoid, and
repurged from all impiety: he abridged also the life of them, so that they
lived not any more so long time as they were wont, but only attained the term
of six score years: and he covered the land with waters, and by this means
all of them were destroyed. Only Noah escaped by the means and way which God
had taught him in such manner as follows: He builded an Arc of four stages,
in length, three hundredth cubits: in breadth fifty; and in height thirty:
into this he entered with his mother, his wife and Noah's Arc.
his children and their wives, purueying himself of all things requisite both
for their sustenance and use: he closed also therein all sorts of living
creatures, two and two, male and female, for the conservation of every kind,
and of some of them seven couples. The sides of this Arc were strong, and the
cover also; so that no water could pearce the same, and whatsoever storm might
come it was able to resist it. Thus was Noe (by succession of nature the tenth
Noah's genealogy. The Deluge.
from Adam) saved with all his household; for he was the son of Lamech whose
father was Methusala the son of Enos, the son of Iared, the son of
Maleel, who with diverse other brethren The year of the world. 1656. before the
Na^tie of Christ. 2308.
Cainan by Enos: who was the son of Seth, the son of Adam. This destruction
happened, the six hundredth year of Noah's age (and the second month which was
called Dius by the Macedons, and by the Hebrews Marsomane) for so have the
Egyptians distinguished the year (but Moses set down Nisan for the first
month in his Chronicles, which is Zanthicus among the Macedons, for that in
this month he brought the Israelites out of the Nisan or Zanthicus is April to
us.
thraldom of the Egyptians.) He made this law therefore, that all things
which appertain to divine service, should take their beginning and reckoning
from this month, but in respect of the times and terms of buying and selling,
and all other traffic, he observed the first policy of the year, beginning
in December: Moses wrote that the Deluge began the seven and twentieth day of
the above named month which was the year two thousand six hundredth fifty
Adam (which time is carefully calculated in holy writ, in which the birth and
death of great personages of that time are most exactly set down.) At such
time then as Adam was 230. years old, his son Seth was borne unto him, and
the said Adam lived 930. years; Seth about the age of 250. years, begat Enos,
who after he had lived 905. years, left the government of his affairs to his
son Cainan, whom he had begotten about the 190. year of his age. After that
Cainan had lived 910. years, he had his son Maleel, This comparison does not
exactly agree with the Hebrews, and the 70. interpreters.
begotten by him the 170. year of his age. The said Maleel having lived 195.
years died, leaving his son Iared: who about the age of 162. years,
engendered Enoch, who lived 962. years: After Enoch, succeeded his son
Mathusala, begotten about the age of 162. years, at such time as the said
Enochs father was yet alive: and after that Enoch had lived 365. years, he was
taken up Mathusala the son of Enoch, in the year of (...) ^ge 187. years,
ha^ Lamech for his son who Enochs death is not written in holy scriptures.
lived 782. years, to whom he left the soueraintie, having he^d the same 969.
years. And Lamech after he had governed 707. years, declared his son Noe
for governor, at such time as the said Lamech had lived 182. years, which Noe
governed for the space of 900. years.

All these years calculated into one son, accomplish the time above written.
Yet to perfect this account, we ought not to seek out the decease of these
personages (for they lived in the same time that their children and successors
did:) but the only thing we are to observe is their birthes. As soon then as
God had given the sign, and that it began to rain for the Genesis 7. 8. In the
Greek copy and Mose^ ar^ 40. days. The Latin Joseph 90.
space of whole forty days, the water fell and ouerflowed the whole earth
fourteen cubits hie, Noe perceiving then that the Arc was on ground upon the
top of a certain mountain of the country of Armenia; he opened the same, and
seeing the earth did a little discover it self round about the same, he
conceived some better hope and held himself satisfied: Some few days Noe
sends a crow out of the Ar^.
after, when the water was ebbed somewhat more; he sent out a Crow (desiring to
know if the rest of the earth were delivered from the waters, and whether
without danger he might issue out of the Arc:) but the Crow finding the earth
bebayned in water, returned unto Noe: who the seventh day after sent out a
Pigeon to find out the estate of the earth, which returned bemired Noe
perceived that the earth was delivered from the Deluge; and having as yet
expected seven days more, he ^et at liberty all Noe Forsaken the Arc, and
sacrifices to God.
living creatures that were in the Arc. But as soon as himself, his wife,
and his family, forsook it, he offered sacrifice unto God, and feasted and
rejoiced both he and al his household. The Armenians in their language have
called the place where Noe descended, by a name Aprobaterion (which signifies
as much as descent) and in that place even at this present the inhabitants of
that country show some remnants and memories of the same. All those that have
written strange histories, have made mention of this Deluge, and of the Arc:
among the number of whom is Berosus the Chaldean, who setting down occurrences
of this Deluge writes after this manner: Some say likewise that a certain
part of this Arc is in Armenia, near to the Hierome the Egyptian also (who
has written the antiquity of the Phenicians) has made mention of this
m^tter: as also Mnaseus with diverse other: Nicholas Nicholas Damascene of Noah's Ark.
of Damas likewise in his nintie six book speaks hereof after this manner.
Above the Region of Mineans there is a great mountain in Armenia called Baris,
in which it is reported that diverse retired themselves for safety during the
time of the Deluge, and there Th^yeare of the ^ld. 1687. before the Nativity
of Christ. 1307. Hodio and Ruffinus the 6. chapter
escaped they: and that a certain man borne on an Arc arrived upon the
highest top of that mountain, and that certain timbers of that bottom had
been kept a long while: and it may be that this is that whereof Moses the
lawmakers of the Jews makes mention. But Noe fearing least God (having
condemned all men to a general perdition) should every year ouerflow the
earth after this manner; offered burnt sacrifice unto God: beseeching him, that
hereafter he would entertain the ancient order, and that no so great
calamity might succeed, by which all Noe prays God that he will drown the
carth no mo^e.
living creatures should come in danger to be utterly extinct and
exterm^nated: but that inflicting deserved punishment on the reprobate, he
would spare the innocent, whom in his mercy he had preserved from danger;
otherwise they should be more miserable and condemned by a harder censure, if
they were not wholly warranted, but should be reserved to be swallowed up by

Noe having in this sort finished his requests, God (who loved him for the
vprightnes of his God hears Noes prayer. No^. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 7.
heart) granted him his request, denying himself to be the author of their
deaths who were drowned, but that they themselves by their own malice had
procured those pnuishments due unto them. For had he desired that they should
be extinguished, he would not have Man is the author of his death, not God
thou have given it. But (says God) through (...) ^ntempt of my service and
graces, they have enforced me to humble them under the rigor^ vengeance:
hereafter I will not so exactly pursue and examine their iniquities, to the
end to chastise them in my displeasure; especially for thy sake: And if
hereafter at any time I shall send any tempest, fear not (how huge and Gods
covenant with Noe. In the ^eare of the world. 2007. before Christ's Na^ty. 1959.
hideous soever the storms be) for there shall be no more Deluge of water upon
the earth. In the mean time I command you to keep your hands innocent from
murders, and all manslaughter, and to punish those that commit wickedness. I
leave the use of all other living creatures to your sustenance or service; in
as much as I have made you Lord over all, as well those that breath upon the
face of the earth, as those that swim in the waters, and such as inhabit The
Rainbowe the sign of atonement between God and Noe. Hedio and Ru^fin. 8.
chap. Noes age. 950. years.
their opinion is the bow of God. And after that God had pronounced these words
and made these promises, he departed.

Noe lived after the Deluge three hundredth and fifty years, and having spent
all this time of his life in happiness, he died after he had lived in the world
nine hundredth and fi^ie years. Neither is there cause why any man (comparing
this our present age, and the shortness of the years thereof, with the long
life of the ancients) should think that false which I have said: neither
follows it consequently, that because our present life extends not to such
a term Why they in times past lived longer then we do.
using also a kind of nutriment agreeing with their natures, and proper to
multiply their years, it is no absurd thing to suppose that their years were
of that continuance: Considering that God gave them long life, to the end they
should teach virtue, and should conveniently practice those things which they
had invented in Astronomy, and by Geometry: the demonstrations whereof they
never had attainde except, they had lived at the least six hundredth years.
For the great year is accomplished by that number of years: whereof all they
bear The great year.
me witness, who (either Greeks or Barbarians) have written ancient
histories. For both Manethon (who has written the history of Egypt) and
Berosus (who has registered the acts Mochus Hestiaeus, Hierome of Egypt (who
historified the state of the Phaenicians) with others accord with me in that
which I have said. Hesi^dus also, Hecataeus, Hellanicus, and Acusilaus, Ephorus
and Nicolaus do declare, that they of the first world lived one thousand
years. Notwithstanding let every man judge of these things, as best likes him.

CHAP. V.
Of the tower of Babylon, and the c^unge of tongues.

NOe had three sons Sem, Iaphet, and Cham, borne one hundredth years before
the The year of the world, 1790. before (...) Nati^ie 2174. (...). 10 Noes
three sons.
Deluge. These first descended from the mountains into the plains, and there
made they their habitation, which when other men perceived (who for fear of
the Deluge had fled the plains, and for that cause were loath to forsake the
mountains) they gathered courage and persuaded themselves to do the like: and
the plain where they all dwelt was called Senaar. And whereas they were
commanded by God that (by reason of the increase and multitude of men) they
should send certain distinct Colonies to inhabit diverse countries of God
commanded (...) po^e or Not (...) inha^ the earth.
Nemrod incited them in this sort to mock and contemn God. He was the nephew
of Cham, the son of Noe; a man valian^ and apt for Nemrod, supposing it to be
pusillanimitie in themselves, Gen, 11^
if they should obey God. For which cause they began to build the tower with
their uttermost industry, neither was there any one idle in all that work:
yea so great a number of laborers

But God seeing their madness, condemned them not to a general extermination
(by reason that they had made no profit by their example, who perished in the
first Deluge) but made The confusion of tongues.
them mutine the one against the other by changing of their tongues; so that
by reason of their diversities of language, they could not understand one
another. The plac^ where this tower was builded, is at this present called
Babylon (by reason of the confusion of tongues that first began in that place)
for Babell in Hebrew signifies confusion. Of this tower and the diversity of
languages Sibilla has made mention in these words. At such time as men used
Sibils prophecy of the tower of Babel.
one kind of language, they builded a most high tower, as if they meant by the
same to mount up into heaven: but the gods sent down winds and overthrew the
tower, and gave every one his distinct and several language, whence sprung the
cause that their City was called Babylon. But as touching that place which is
called Senaar in Babylon, Hestiaeus testifies after this manner. It is said of
those sacrificers that being escaped, they took the sacred relics of Jupiter
Enyelius, and came into Senaar in Babylon.

CHAP. VI.
How Noes posterity dispersed themselves through the whole world.

FRom that time forward (by reason of the diversity of tongues) they dispersed
themselves Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 10.
passing the sea in ships and vessels, first peopled the Islands. And there are
some nations likewise, who at this day retain the names which in times past
were imposed on them: some other have changed them. Others are altered into a
more familiar and known name, to neighbors, T^ year of the world, 1790.
before Christ's Na^iuitie, 1174. The names of Regions and Nations.
deriuing them from the Greeks the authors of such titles. For they in these
latter times having grown to great name and power, have appropriated the
ancient glory to themselves, in giving names unto nations derived from the
Greeks, and policying them, as if they had taken their original from them.

CHAP. VII.
That every Nation derived his name from his Author.

NOw they in honor of whom the Nations received their first names were the
children Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11. Genesis 10.
of the sons of Noe. Iaphet the son of Noe had seven children who began to
make Gomar was the founder of the Gomarians, Magog dwelt amongst those (who
according The Galatians descended from Gomar. The progeny of Iaphet. Noes
first begotten son.
to his name) were called Magogins, and by the Greeks Scithes. Of Madus (the
first begotten son of Iaphet) issued the Madians, whom the greeks have named
Medes: and of Iauan his other son, the Ionians and Greeks took their
original: Thobelus gave name likewise to the Theobelians, who at this day are
called Iberians. Meschus was the author of them that were called Meschates, who
are lately named Capadocians: for they show even at this day a token of their
ancient name; to wit, the City of Masaca, which testifies to those There Is
named them Therians: who were under his government whom the Greeks called
Thracians: and thus many The progeny of the sons of Gomar.
nations took their original from the sons of Iaphet: but of the three
sons which Gomar had, Aschanaxes gave original to the Aschanaxians (at this
day termed Rhegians by the Greeks) Rhiphates ingendered the Rhiphateans called
at this day Paphlagonians. Tygranes ingendered the Tygraneans, who by the
Greeks are called Phrigians. As touching Iauan The progeny of the sons of
Iauam. Tharsus Saint Paul's country. ^ctes. 9.
the son of Iaphet, he had three sons, of whom Abisus gave name to the
Abisians, who at this present are the Aetolians, over whom he commanded:
Tharsus engendered the Tharsians, which was the ancient name of the Cilicians,
as it appears by the name of their renowned and Metropolitan City Tharsis;
whose first letter is. in steed of Th. Chetinus obtained the Iaphet. But I will
first publish that which perhaps is unknown to the Greeks, and then Whence
grew the change of names.
prosecute my purposed narration which I have omitted, that is, that these
names are formed after the manner of the Greeks, to the end they should be more
sweet and pleasant to them that should over read them. For this termination
is not proper to our Nation, which has but one form, and no variation of
termination, for whereas the Greeks pronounce (...) we say Adam, Noches, the
Hebrews say Noe, and keep this termination inall things.

But the sons of Cham possessed Siria and all the region that abutteth on the
mountains Of the sons o^ Cham and their progeny.
of Amanus and Libanus; extruding their Empire toward the sea, and
signiorizing all whatsoever even unto the sea. Whose names are partly wholly
abolished, and partly changed, and applied to others; so as they are very hard
to be understood: for of the four sons of Cham, the name of Chus has not
been changed by time: for the Egyptians (over whom they extended their
Dominion) have been named Chuseans by them, and by all, the Asians: the name
of Misraim has continued also in the memory of men: for we that bound upon
Egypt, call that country, the country of Misraim, and the Aethiopians,
Misramites. Phut likewise firmed the colonies of Libia, and called the
inhabitants thereof according to his name Phutians; Libis one of the sons of
Misraim; (but why it is called Africa, I will heareafter signify Libia or
Africa The progeny of the Chananeans.
unto you). As touching Canaan the fourth son of Cham, he dwelled in the
country at this day called Iudaea, and called it the country of Canaan
according to his name. They also had children: for Chus had six, amongst whom
Sabas established the Sabians, and Euilas the Euileans, The year of the world.
1790. before the Nativity of Christ. 1174.
Sabathes engendered the Sabatheans, whom the Greeks name Astracrabians.
Sabactes peopled the Sabactians: and the Romans were founded by Romus who also
had two sons, of whom Indos, dwelt in the country of the Indians, amongst
those that are called Hesperians in Aethiopia and Sabaeus founded the S^beans.

Nimrod the son of Chus, settled his Colonie upon the confines of Babylon, and
tyrannized Nabrodes or Nembroth.
there as heretofore I have declared:

All the eight sons of Misraim, occupied all the country from Gaza unto
Egypt: Only Palestine so named of Philest^ne.
the country where Philistius governed, has conserved his name: for the
Greeks call Palestine a part thereof. As touching the rest, Lom, Enam and
Labim (who only inhabited Libia and called the country by his name) likewise
as touching Nethom, Phetrosim Chreseen and Chepthom, we know neither of their
countries, nor of their names. For the Ethiopian war (whereof hereafter we
will make mention) has overthrown their Cities. Chanaan also had The children
of Chanaan,
sons, amongst whom Sidonius builded and named Sidon (a city in Phaenicia)
and Amathus builded Amate, which at this day the inhabitants call Amatha: but
the Macedonians have named it Epiphania (which is as much to say as famous) by
reason of some that descended from Epiphanes. Arudeus possessed the Isles of
Aradus, and Araceus builded the city of Arce, situate in Libanus. And as
touching the other seven, the Eueans, Chetteans, Iebusaeans, Eudaeans,
Semaeans, Samarians, and Gergesaeans; there is no memory remaining in sacred
scriptures but only their names: for the Hebrews raced their cities upon these
occasions.

After the Deluge, when the earth was established in his former estate, Noe
gave himself to Hedio and Ru^finus. cap. (...) Genes. 9.
Noe is made drunk, lies naked and is scorned, and curses him that derideth
him.
and ouerpressed with sleep, he lay discovered in a most unseemly and
shameful fashion; which when his younger son beheld, he scornefully
discovered it to his brothers, who being ashamed; covered their fathers shame
with reverence. Which fact of his, coming at last to light, and the knowledge
of Noe, he wished all felicity to the two other, and as touching Cham (by
reason he was his allie in blood) he cursed him not, but his posterity after
him. But although Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 14. Genesis 7. 2. Of the sons of Sem
the third son of Noe and of the^rs and Abraham's progeny.
the others escaped this malediction, yet God inflicted it on the successors of
Chanaan, whereof we will speak more hereafter. But Sem the third son of Noe
had five sons, who inhabited the country of Asia, beginning at Euphrates,
and extending to the Indian Ocean Elymis left the Elemians or Elamites for his
successors, whence proceeded the Persians. Assure made his abode in Niniue, and
imposed on his subjects the name of Assirians (who were rich amongst all the
rest.) Arphaxad named those of his command Arphaxadians; who at this day are
called Chaldeans. Aram had the Arameans (whom the Greeks called Sirians) and
they that are now called Lidi, and in times past Ludi took their descent from
Ludas. Of those four sons which Aram had, Uses dwelt in Trachonite, and in
the country of Damasco (situate between Palestine and Siria, surnamed Caelen
or hallow.) Otrus obtained Armenia: Gether Bactria. Misas was father to the
Misureans (who dwelt in a fort which is called at this day Prasine.) Sale,
Arphaxads son was Hebers father, by whose name in times past the Hebrews
were called: Heber begot Loctan and Phaleg, who was so called, for that he was
borne at such The original of the Hebrews.
Phaleg in Hebrew signifies partage. They that follow were sons of Loctan:
Elmodad, Saleph, Azermoth, Erais, Edoram, Vzalis, Dallis, Ebal, Ebimarl,
Saphas, Ophir, Euilus, and Iobel: who occupied some parcel of that which was
about Cophen a river of India, and the hither Siria. Hitherto have we spoken of
the progeny of Sem, hereafter will I speak of the Hebrews; Of Phaleg the
son of Heber Ragaus, by whom was begot Seruch, whence Nachor is descended,
and of Nachor, Thares, who was Abraham's father, the tenth Abraham's genealogy.
in account from Noe, and borne in the year 292. after the Deluge. For Thares
being seventy years old begot Abraham. Nachor at six score years of his age,
begot Thares. Nachor was borne to Seruch, when he was about the years of 132.
of his life. And Ragaus begot Seruch when he was thirty two years old, and
about those years Phaleg begot Ragaus. But Heber in Phaleg: (himself begotten
by Sela, when he was one hundredth thirty and five years old:) which Sela was
begotten by Arphaxad, when he was 135. years of age. And Arphaxad was the
son of Sem, whom he begat some two years after the Deluge. Abraham had two
brothers, Nachor and Aram, of whom Aram left Lot for his son, and Sara and
Melcha for his daughters, and afterward died in the land of Canaan in a city
called Vr, of the Chaldies, where his sepulcher is to be seen even at this
day. His daughters were married, Melcha to Nachor; and Sara to Abraham. But
Thares growing weary of Chaldaea, after the funerals The year of the world,
1950. be^re Christ's Nativity, 2014.
Aram, they all of them transported themselves into Charan a city of
Mesapotamia, in which place they buried Thares, when he had lived the space of
250. years. For about this time the life of man was abridged, and grew more
short until the time of Moses: when as the space of man's life limited by God
himself was 120. years old, to which term of years Moses had attained.
Nachor had eight children by Melcha his wife; Vx, Barux, Mauel, Zacham, Azam,
Pheldus, Ladelphus and Bathuel, (who were the legitimate sons of Nachor.) But
Tabaeus and The term of man's life about this term, 120
Gadan, Taucus and Macham were begotten by him on his concubine Ruma. To
Bathuel one of the legitimate sons of Nachor, was borne a daughter named
Rebecca, and a son called Laban.

CHAP. VIII.
How Abraham the Author of our nation departed from the land of the Chaldeans,
and dwelt in a certain country of the Chanaanites, which is now called Iudaea.

ABraham having no issue, adopted Lot the son of Aram his brother, and
brother to The year of the world 2024. before Christ's birth. 1940. Hedio and
Ruffinus chap. 15. Genes 11. 12. The w^edome or Abraham.
Sara his wife: he departed out of the country of the Chaldeis, when he was 75
years old (having had commandment from God to depart thence into Canaan) in
which country he remained, and left the same to his posterity after him. He
was a man accomplished in all things, full of understanding, and apt to
persuade those that gave ear unto him, without any default in his foresight
and providence. For this cause he was supposed to surmount Abraham the first
preacher of the word.
if any thing conferred or furthered our felicity, it happened unto us not by
our own workings, but his holy will. And this observed and approved he by
that, which chances both in the earth and the sea, as also those things, which
he saw daily occur by the influences of the sun, the moon, and other
stars: namely, that there was a certain power that disposed them, and
decently administered all things, without whose assistance, nothing would be
profitable unto us; whereas nothing of himself has any virtue, but all things
are obedient to his omnipotent will, and for that cause, that honor and
thanksgiving should wholly be ascribed to him. For which Berosus amongst other
things makes mention of our father Abraham, although he names him not, when
he speaks after this manner. After the Deluge, and during the tenth Berosus.
generation, there dwelt among the Chaldeans, a most just, excellent, and
upright man, and exercised in the knowledge of the celestial bodies. But
Hecataeus made more then a mention of him: for he Hecataeus. Nicholaus
Damascenus.
has left a volume which he has written of him. And as touching Nicholaus
Damascenus, hear what he says of him in the fourth book of his Histories.
Abraham reigned in Damasco (where he was a stranger) whether he arrived with
his army from a country situate above Babylon called Chaldaea, who a little
while after (departing out of that region) went and dwelt with his people in a
country at that time called Chanaan, and at this day Judea, and his posterity
multiplied therein. In an other treatise I will recite that which is reported
of him. The name of Abraham even at this day, is honorable in the country of
Damasco, and there is a village to be seen which bears his name, and is
called Abraham's house. Abraham's house.


CHAP. IX.
Abraham oppressed by famine, departs into Egypt, where staying a while, at
last he returned back again.

AFter this (when famine had invaded the land of Chanaan, Abraham had
intelligence The year of the the world. 2026. before the birth of Christ.
1938. Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 16. Genesis 12. 13
that the Egyptians abounded in all plenty, and decreed with himself to
retire himself toward them: as well to confer with their priest (and
discourse with them of divine things, and their knowledge as touching God) as
also to follow them, if they were more grounded in understanding, or reconcile
them, if his judgment were more assured then theirs: he led with him his wife
Sara, and understanding that the Egyptians were much addicted unto women (to
the end the King should not put him to death of purpose, that he might enjoy
his wife The year of the world. 2026. before the birth of Christ. 1938. The
lu^ of the Egyptia^.
Sara, who was very beautiful) he devised this excuse, to say that she was his
sister, charging her that if the matter came in question, she should not fail
but confirm the like. But no sooner came he into Egypt, but the like fortune
encountered t^m, as Abraham had before time suspected: for the beawtie of his
wife was suddenly published in every place. For which cause Pharao the King of
that Nation (desirous to see that with his eyes, (...) which he had heard with
his ears) he sought for, sent, and lusted after her: but God withstood this
his unbridled lust by afflicting the Kings subjects with a plague, and his
affairs by sedition. Whereupon taking counsel of the Priests what remedy
might be used, and means might be sought to appease the divine majesty, they
answered him, that this was the cause of their afflictions, for that he thought
to have done violence to the strangers wife: whereat being much affrighted,
the King first questioneth with Abraham, saving, he supposed her to be his
sister, not his wife, and that his purpose was not to offer injury but seek
alliance: so giving him a great sum of money, hegaue him leave to confer
with the most excellentest and learnedest Priests among the Egyptians. Whence
Abraham taught the Egyptians religion and arts.
it came to pass, that he grew into great estimation in regard of his virtues:
for whereas that Nation was divided into different sects and opinions, and
through mutual contempt and division were incensed the one against the other;
he declared that their opinions (different and confuted by themselves) in
respect of religion, were most vain and deuoide of all truth. For these his
disputations he was held in great regard amongst them, and esteemed for a man
most wise, and a personage most exccellent; not only in well conceiving, but
also in expressing and persuading Abraham came into Egypt, the Abraham an
excellent Astronomer.
Egyptians were altogether ignorant of those sciences: but he transported
them from Chaldaea into Egypt, and from thence are they derived to the
Greeks. As soon as he returned into Chanaan, he divided the country with
Lot: and for that there grew a contention betwixt The division of the fields
between Abraham and Lot.
their shepherds (as touching the bounding of those pastures where they fed
their cattle) he gave Lot the choice and election of the country which best
pleased him, re^aining unto himself that which was left. Thus pitching his
tents near the mountain in a City called Hebron (which is by seven years
more ancient then Tanis in Egypt) he dwelled there. But Lot chose the plain
near to the flood of Iordane, not far from Sodom; which in those days
was a goodly

CHAP. X.
The overthrow of the Sodomites by the Syrians.

AT that time when the Assyrians were Lords over all Asia, the estate of Sodom
flourished Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 17. Genes. 14. Five kings of Sodom.
in all affluence, increased in great riches, and mul^itude of gallant youths,
and the country was governed by five Kings: these were Ballas, Bareas,
Senabarus, Symoborus Balin (each one particularly seized of his province and
kingdom.) Against these the Assyrians encamped themselves, and having divided
their army into four parts (under the conduct of four governors) they waged
battle with them; in which the Assyrians attayning the day, they imposed a
tribute on the Kings of Sodom; who (after they had for twelve years space
performed their duty and paid their tribute) in the thirteenth year revolted
from them. Whereby it came to pass that the Assyrians levied a new army
against them, under the conduct and command of Marphad, Arioch, Chodollogomor,
and Thargal, who sacked all Syria, and extinguished The year of the world
2031. before Christ's nativity, 1933.
the posterity of the Giants. And drawing near to Sodom, they encamped near
to the bituminous pits (for at that time there were pits in that place) but as
soon as Sodom was destroyed, there arose a lake in that place, which (by
reason of the bituminous matter that The lake of Alphaltites.
skirmish fought, wherein many perished on both sides; and the most were either
stain or taken, amongst whom was Lot led away captive, who came thither to
assist the Sodomites.

CHAP. XI. The year of the world 2031. before Christ's Nativity. 1933.

Abraham pursues the Assyrians, and returns victorious.

ABraham hearing of these things, and moved (both with the surprisall of his
cosen Lot, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 18. Genesis 1^5.
as also with the slaughter of his friends and neighbors) presently addressed
himself with all his followers to give them succors: and such diligence
showed he in pursuit of them; that the fifth night after he incountred the
Assyrians near to Dan, which is one of the sources of Iordaine.

Where surprising them on the sudden (vnsuspitious and disarmed) he killed
those that were asleep without suspicion of his coming, and they that were
not yet asleep, and lay wallowing On what victory depends.
consists not in the multitude of those that manage their arms, but rather
in the courage of those that fight; and that a few generous hearts are more
worth always, then a faint-hearted multitude. For he had not with him above
three hundredth and eighteen of his househould servants, and three of his
friends, to defeat this huge army; so that whatsoever they were that escaped
out of this slaughter by flight, returned unto their houses with ignominy.

As soon as Abraham had rescewed those prisoners of Sodom which were taken by
the Syrians, Abraham brings back both Lot and the Sodomites that were
prisoners. The kings field. Solima was afterward called Jerusalem. Melchisedech
the just King.
and his nephew Lot; he returned into his country, and met in his way with the
King of Sodom (in a place called the Kings field) where also he was
entertained by the King of Solyma called Melchisedech (which is as much to say
as the just King:) for in truth he was no less; but was held worthy by reason
of his justice in all men's opinion to sacrifice as the high Priest of Almighty
God. This Solyma in process of time was called Jerusalem. This Melchisedech
did friendly entertain all the fellowers of Abraham, not suffering them to
want any thing that was fit for their sustenance, but intertaining him also at
his own table he highly praised him, and sung due hymns of praise to the
great God, for that by his favor he had vouchsafed to grant him victory.
Abraham on the other side presented him with the tenths of his spoils: but the
King of Sodom remitted all the pray that was taken, and only required to be
possessed of those Captives which were of his country: which condition he
accepted not, answering that he would receive no profit of that pray, but that
which he must needly have for the entertainment of his servants. Eschol, and
the two other Ennerus and Mambres. For this cause God praised Abraham saying;
thou shall not want the reward which is due unto thee for thy valiant acts. To
which he replied, and Genesis 15.
what good shall I reap of this recompense, if I have no: an heir to possess
it after my decease? for as yet he had no issue. Then did God promise him a
son, whose posterity should God promises Abraham a son.
be so multiplied, that they might in number equal the stars of heaven;
which when he understood, he offered sacrifice unto God, following that
commandment which he had received: he took therefore a Heifer of three
years old, a Goat of three years, and a Ram of three years, and a Turtle,
and a Pigeon: all which he divided in twain as he was commanded, the birds
only excepted. But before the Altar was prepared (at such time as the fowls
houered God promises Abraham a progeny that should many years have ill
neighbors of the Egyptians.
hundredth years, and that after they had suffered an insupportable servitude,
they should at last obtain the victory over their enemies. And after that
they had by strong hand conquered the Chananites, they should be Lords and
possessors of their countries and Cities. Abraham at that time dwelt near to
the Oak that was called Ogis, in the country of Chanaan near to the City of
Hebron. There being much grieved that his wife conceived not, he besought God
to give him an issue male: God commanded him to be of good cheer in all
things, and that being come from Mesopotamia upon good occasions, he also
should have children. At that time Sara by the commandment of God caused one
of her handmaids which was an Egyptian Gen 16. Sara brings Hagar her
handmaid to Abraham's bed. Agar contemns Sara.
borne to enter in unto her husband, to the end he might have issue by her; now
Agar as soon as she perceived that she had conceived, began to contemn Sara,
aspiring to principality, and supposing that her issue should succeed in the
kingdom. For which cause Abraham delivered her unto his wife, to the end she
should punish her: which she perceiving, she decreed to fly, in that she was
afraid of punishment; beseeching God to have mercy on her: and as she travailed
on her way through the desert, the Angel of God appeared unto her, commanding
her that she should return unto her master and mistress, assuring her that if
hereafter she would be more modest, The year of the world. 2034. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1930.
The promise of Ismael.


To this commandment of God Agar submitted her self with all obedience, and
returning back again to her master and mistress, she obtained pardon at their
hands, and after a while brought forth Ismael, which is as much to say as,
Heard of God, because God had heard the mothers prayers. Ismael was borne to
Abraham when he was fourscore and six years old: but in the fourscore and
nineteenth year of his age God appeared unto him, and told him that he Isaac
promised Genesis 17.
Sara, charging him to call him Isaac; giving him to understand, that great
nations and kings shoud issue from his loins, who by force of arms should
conquer all the country of Chanaan, from Sidon even unto Egypt. Commanding
him, that his posterity should be circumcised in their priuities, and that
this circumcision should be done the viij. day after their birth, by reason
that he would not that Abraham's posterity should be intermedled with other
nations. But hereafter will I declare the cause of our circumcision. Abraham
also asked counsel of God as touching Ismael, whether he should live or no?
who told him that he should flourish many years, and that he should become a
father of many worthy nations. Then gave Abraham thanks unto God, and presently
circumcised himself, his son Ismael, with all his family: and Ismael at that
time was thirteen years old, but Abraham about fourscore

CHAP. XII.
The punishment of Sodom.

ABout that time the inhabitants of Sodom became immeasurably proud, by reason
Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 19. The sins of the Sodomites
of their affluence, prosperity, and great riches; and committed outrages
against men, and impieties against God: in such manner as they had forgotten
the benefits which they had received at his hands, hating strangers, and
disdaining to converse the one with the other, but in disordinate and
abominable incests. Whereat God being displeased Abraham (as he sat under the
Oak at Mambres before the door of his tent) beheld three Angels, and supposing
them to be men and strangers, he arose and saluted Abraham entertaineth Angels.
them; and approaching near unto them, he desired them that they would accept
of his entertainment, and lodge with him. Whereunto when they had condescended,
he commanded his servants to bake them bread of the finest flower, and having
killed and roasted a calfe, he set it before them (as they sat under the Oak)
supposing they would ear: but they inquired of him where Sara his wife was, to
whom he answered that she was within in the tent. They told him The year of
the world. 2048. before Christ's birth 1916. The Angels promised Abraham that he
shall have a son, and foretell the destruction of Sodom.
Abraham heard, he was sorry for the Sodon ites, and arising, besought God that
he would not destroy both the just and the unjust to gither. To whom God gave
this answer, that there was not one just man among the Sodomites, and that if
he might but find ten, he would spare the city from punishment. Whereupon
Abraham held his peace, and the Angels entered into Sodom: where no sooner were
they arrived, but Lot invited them to take their lodging in his house (for he
was a man The Angels enter Lots house.
Abraham's scholar.) But the Sodomites perceiving that those young men which
were entered Lots house, were of excellent beauty, began to offer outrage and
villainy to their persons: notwithstanding that Lot exhorted them to moderate
themselves, and not to offer villainy to his guests, but in some sort to have a
respect to his house; telling them, that rather then they should continue in
that intemperance, that he would give them his daughters to use at their
pleasure. But he prevailed nothing with them: whereupon God was in such wise
provoked by their iniquity, that he blinded their eyes The year of the world,
1948. before Chri^s Nati^tie, 1916. The Sodomits are blinded. Let and his
family are saved.
in such sort, as they could not find the gate to enter into Lots house, and
condemned the Sodomites to a general perdition. But Lot foremonished by him of
their future ruin, departed from them, and took with him his wife and his two
daughters as yet unmarried: (for their betrothed husbands, although they were
forewarned by him, contemned and held him for a dotard.) Then did God shoot
his arrow upon the city, burning it, and all the inhabitants therein: and
desolating by the same fire all the countries round about; in such sort as it
has already been declared by me in the History I wrote of the wars of the
Jews. But Lots wife, as they retired thence, looking back toward the City,
and more curiously beholding the destruction thereof, contrary to the
commandment of God, was transformed into a pillar of salt, which I have seen,
for it remains even until this day. As touching Lot he and his daughters
fled and Lot fled to Zoar.
little:) In this place (which was void of men, and scant of victuals) Lot
dwelled a long time, leading a solitary and poor life: and his daughters
supposing that all mankind was extinguished upon the earth, subtily
circumuenting their father, they lay with him when he least suspected it, and
the reason that drew them thereunto was, for that they feared least mankind
should be utterly exterminated. By this their approchment, they bare him two
sons, the elder Moab (which is as much to say as of my father) and this is he
that was the father of the Moabites, which even The interpretation of the names
of Moab and Ammon. Hedio and Ruffi^us chap. 20. Genes 19.
at this day are yet a great nation: and of the yoonger sister, came Ammon
(which signifies the son of Race or kind) and both these two nations
inhabit the country of Coelesyria. In this sort departed Lot from the
Sodomites.

As touching Abraham, he went and dwelt in Gerar, in the country of Palestine;
leading with him his wife Sara in manner of his sister; (using the same
subtlety which before time he had practiced for fear of the Egyptians:) for
he feared Abimelech the king of that country, who surprised with the love of
Sara, would have ravished her, had he not been hindered by a most Abimele^h
surprised with the love of Sara.
grievous sickness, which God inflicted upon him: so that being out of all
hope of recovery, at such time as he slept, there appeared unto him a vision,
which told him that he should take heed, least he offered any outrage to the
strangers wife, who was come into his country: and after he was somewhat
recovered, he told his friends how God had sent him that sickness to
warrantise the right of the stranger, and to preserve his wife from violence;
for that she was not his sister but his lawful wife; willing Abraham thence
forward to be of good cheer, promising him that Abraham by the counsel of
his friends; and told him that he needed not to suspect his wife, by reason
she had suffered no villainy. Assuring him that God had care of her, and that
he delivered her in safety to him (being to that end protected by his mighty
power) and in confirmation thereof he called God to record, and the vvomans
conscience, vowing that he would not have required her, if he had known she
had been married: moreover he required him to be at peace with him, and by his
prayers to appease Gods wrath, which was kindled against him. And that if
thenceforward he would stay with him, he should want nothing: or if he
listed to depart, he promised him guides, and all other things, for which he
came unto him. Abraham answered him, that he had in no sort dissembled with
him as touching the alliance of his wife; but that she was his brothers
Abimelech imparted unto him both lands and money, and accorded to converse
with him in all uprightness, and without offer of offense, and made a
covenant and swear unto him by a certain pit which was called Bersabe (that
is to say the pit of swearing or covenant) Bersabe the pit of swearing.
which name that place retains until this day. Not long time after Abraham
had a son by Sara his wife according as God had promised him, and he called
his name Isaac (which in the Isiac, laughter.
Hebrew tongue signifies laughter) because Sara laughed at such time as God
said unto her she should bear a son, having in her self no likelihood of
conceiving, by reason she was stricken Abraham one hundredth when the child was
borne, and incontinently the eight day after was he circumcised; which custom
is yet continued amongst the Jews, who circumcise on the eight day.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Ismael Abraham's son, and of the Arabians his posterity. The year of the
world. 2048. before the birth of Christ. 1916. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 21.
Genes 21. The Jews were wont to circumcise on the eight day. The Arabian^ not
before 13. years.


But the Arabians celebrate it in the thirteenth year. For Ismael the author
thereof, and Abraham's son by his concubine, was circumcised in the thirteenth
year after he was borne. Of which Ismael it behooves we speak more exactly
in this place. Sara loved Ismael (begotten on her servant Agar) from the
beginning with no less affection then as if he had been her own son, for he
was brought up as Abraham's heir. But after she had brought forth Isaac, she
thought it no more requisite that Ismael should be brought up with her son,
in that he was the elder, and for fear least after his fathers decease,
Abraham therefore to send both him and his mother to some other place: but at
the first he gave no ear to Saraes request, thinking it to be more then
barbarous cruelty, to drive away a tender child and his mother destitute of
all necessaries. At length by the commandment of God he listened to his wives
counsel, and Abraham banisheth Ismael and Agar.
committed the child unto his mother (being of himself as yet unapt to travel)
and giving them a pitcher of water and bread, he commanded them to go ^ither,
whither their necessity should drive them. And when their victuals failed
them, and their water was consumed, she laid the child being faint and weak,
under an Oak; and to ^e end that in her presence he should not breath his
last, she went far away from him. At that time an Angel of God appeared Th
Angel of God meets with Agar.
unto her, showing her a fountain hard by that place, and charging her to
look to the careful Ismael, she was to exspect great happiness. Upon these
promises she took comfort, and falling into the company of sheepheards, she
by their bounty escaped from misery.

Afterward, when he attained man's estate, he married a wife of the nation of
the Egyptians (from whence his mother had her original) by whom Ismael had
twelve sons: namely, Nabaioth, Cedarus, Abdeel, Edumas, Massamus, Memassus,
Masmesus, Chodamus, Themanus, Ieturus, The twelve sons of Ismael. Genes 25.
The Region of Nabathaea.
Naphaesus, Calmasus (all which inhabit the lands which are between Euphrates
and the red sea; the name of which country is Nabathaea.) These are they
that began and made famous the nation of the Arabians, as well in respect of
their prowess, as also of the dignity of Abraham.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Isaac, Abraham's legitimate son.

AS touching Isaac, Abraham loved him with an entire and fatherly affection, as
his only The year of the world, 2074. before Chri^s nativity, 1890.
begotten son engendered in his age by the bounty of God. The child also
addicting himself unto all virtue, careful to honor his father and mother,
and studious of the service of God, invited both his parents the rather to
affect and love him. So that Abraham was very desirous to forsake this present
life: provided, that he might leave behind him all the goods which he had, unto
his son; which through the mercy of God he happily effected. Whereupon
Isaac, commanding him that he should conduct him to the mountain of Morea, and
there to sacrifice him. In doing whereof, he should manifest the desire he had
to serve him (in preferring that which was agreeable to God before the life of
his son.) Abraham (supposing that it was no ways lawful to Abraham^
obedience.
disobey God, but that he ought to submit himself to his will, as to him by
whose providence all things had their being) said nothing to his wife, as
concerning that which God had commanded him, neither how he had determined the
death of his son.

Moreover, he made it known to no one of his household servants, because (as
he supposed) they might have hindered him from the service of God. He therefore
took his son Isaac with two servants (loading an Ass with such things as
were requisite for sacrifice) and travailed toward the mountain, his
servants attending him for two days space; and on the third day following,
as soon as he perceived the mountain, he left the rest of those that
accompanied him in the plain, and attended only by his son and himself, he
came up unto the mountain (upon which afterward king David appointed The
year of the world 2074. before Christ's Nativity. 1890.
Isaac was five and twenty years old, and did himself prepare the Altar,
and inquired of his father what he should offer, considering that as yet they
had no sheep for sacrifice. Abraham Isaac was 25. years old when he should
have been sacrificed.
answered him, that God would furnish them, who was of power sufficient, to
give men that in abundance whereof they had need, and to deprive them of that
they had, and whereof they held themselves thoroughly possessed: and that it was
he, would give them wherewith to sacrifice (if it should please him to show
himself favorable, and propitious to that sacrifice of his) now as soon as
the Altar was made ready, and the wood prepared and laid upon the same, and
all things were in a readiness, he addressed his speech unto his son and said
thus.

My son, I have oftentimes demanded at Gods hands that he should give thee
life, by my Abrahamsoration at such time as his son should have been
sacrificed.
infinite intercessions and prayers, and ever since thou were borne into this
world, I have intermitted no care and diligence in thine education, neither
have I thought that in any thing I might be made more happy, then that
departing out of this world, I might see thee at man's estate, and leave thee
the heir and Lord of all my substance: but since it has pleased God, that I
should be thy father, and that the same God likewise now thinks good that I
should forsake thee, put upon thee a constant mind, and take in good part that
thus thou must be sacrifiecd: for in so doing I fulfill the comm^dements of
God, who requires at our hands that we do him this honor, for the favors
which he has bestowed upon me, in assisting me, and in familier manner
conuersing, and associating me both in war and peace. Since therefore that
being Then Isaac with a noble heart, (like the gracious son of so godly a
father) Isaach^ answer.
heard all that which his father said with great contentment, and answered,
that he would rather never have been borne, then that he should once neglect
the ordinance of God and of Abraham by his name, commanding him that he should
not kill his son, auerring that he had not given him that commandment,
because he took pleasure in humane blood, neither for that by such impiety he
would deprive him of that son, of whom it was his pleasure to make him the
father, but that by this act he intended to prove his affection, to see whether
being commanded such a thing, he would be obedient, and for that he had made
trial of his faith and readiness, and his unspeakable piety, he did not repent
him of that good he had done God offers a Ram to Abraham to sacrifice in
steed of Isaac.
their expectations, after they had heard so many promises of so many
blessings) they embraced Sara in safety, and past the remnant of their lives
in happiness, God giving them his blessing in whatsoever they undertook.

CHAP. XV.
The death of Sara Abraham's wife.

NOt long time after this, Sara died, after she had lived one hundredth twenty
and seven The year of the world. 2087. before the Nativity of Christ. 1877.
Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 23. Genes. 23. The age of Sara. 127.
years; and was buried in Hebron: (for the Chananeans freely offered them free
burial) yet Abraham chose rather to buy a place to bury in, of Ephrem a
certain Cittisen of Hebron, for four hundredth sickles, where the monuments
both of him and his posterity are builded.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Nation of the Troglodytes came of Chetura the wife of Abraham.

AFter this, Abraham married Chetura, by whom he had six children, strong in
travel, and Genesis 7. 25. 1. The original of Troglodytes
excellent in wisdom: namely Zembranes, Iazar, Madar, Madian, Lousoubac,
Suus, who likewise had sons, Suus, had Sabacan and Dadanes. Of Dadanes issued
Latusimus, Assurus, Luures. The children of Madan were Epha, Ophres, Anochus,
Ebidas, Eldas. Of all these children and their successors Abraham gathered and
established the Colonies which possessed the country of the Troglodytes, and
all the country of Arabia the happy, whose confi^es extend even unto the red
sea. Some report that this Ophres conducted an army into Libia and possessed
Libia called Africa. Alexander Polyhistor.
the same: and that his successors (making their abode in that country) called
it by the name of Aphrica. And this my opinion is confirmed by Alexander
Polyhistor who writes after this Cleodemus the Prophet who is also called
Malchus, and has written the acts of the Jews, according as Moses their
lawmaker has compiled the same in writing) says, that of Chetura there were
diverse children borne unto Abraham, and he names three by their names, to wit,
Apher, Surim and Iapher; and that of Surem the Assyrians took their name: of
the two others Apher and Iapher the City of Affricke and the country of
Africa take their names. That they warred with Hercules against Lybia and
Antaeus, and how Hercules having taken Ophra his daughter to his wife, had
begotten of her Dedor who was father to Sophon, from whom those Barbarians that
are called Sophaces have taken their name.

But Abraham knowing that he should provide a wife for Isaac his son, being
almost forty Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 24. Isaac marieth Rebecca. The manner
of swearing among the ancient jews.
years old, sent the oldest servant of his famely to betroth and entreat for
Rebecca the daughter Nachor his brother for Isaac, and bound him to the
performance thereof (with great oaths celebrated according to these ceremonies,
which were that laying their two hands one ore another theighes, they should
call God to witness of there intent) he sent also strange presents unto them,
such as were seldom seen in those parts: he then departing from him was long
time upon the way (because that in winter time it is troblesome to travel
through In the year of the world. 2089. before Christ's Nativity. 1875.
Mesopotamia, by reason of the deep bogs, and in summer for want of water)
besides the robberies of the country, which strangers and travelers could not
possibly escape, except they stood upon their guard, and h^d conuoy. Hereupon
at length he arrived and entered a City called Carras, and being in the
suburbs of the same, he encountered with diverse damsels that went to fetch
water, whereupon he inwardly besought God, that if the marriage were pleasing in
his sight, he might find Rebecca Abraham had sent him thither to require her in
marriage for his son: and that he might know her by this sign, that asking
all the rest for water, they should refuse him, and she only should satisfy
him. Tormented and tossed with these thoughts, he approached the well, and
required those virgins that they would gi^e him drink, which they denied him,
saying that they could not get water but with great labor, which they must
bear into their howses, and not lauishly bestow on others: whereupon one
amongst them reproved the rest for that discourtesie, which they used toward
the stranger, saying, that they had never been conversant amongst men, that
refused to give him water that requested it, whereupon she gave him drink with
an amiable countenance, and he conceiving good hope of all his business, yet
being further desirous to know the event of the matter, he praised the honesty
and courtesy of Rebecca who had Rebecca made no difficulty to tell him the
names of her parents, (the better to gratefie him) neither concealed she her
own name, but answered in this sort. I am called said she Rebecca, my father
was named Bathuel, who is long since dead. Laban is our brother, who together
with my mother has care of The year of the world, 2089. before Christ's
Nativity, 1875. Rebecca grows acquainted with Abraham's servant.
all our family, and has the charge and protection of my virginity. Which
when he understood he reioiced at all that which had happened unto him, and was
comforted with those things which he had heard, perceiving manifestly how God
had prospered his journey. Whereupon drawing out a Jewel (with certain other
ornaments, such as virgins take delight to wear) he offered them unto the maid,
telling her that he gave her these presents in requital of that kindness she
had offered him in satisfying his thirst, for that she amongst so many other
virgins had only showed her self affable and gracious, requiring her that he
might be entertained in her brothers house, (by reason that night had deprived
him of the means from traveling any further) and that he was charged with
certain Jewels of an espoused of great price, which in no place (as he said)
might be in more safety then in their custody, whom in effect he had found so
courteous and honest: assuring The talk which Abraham's servant had with Rebecca.
mother and brother, who would not (as he supposed) take it in ill part if he
were entertained: to conclude, that he would in no ways be chargeable unto
them, but would pay for his lodging and expenses.

To this Rebecca answered, that he had reason to conceive a good opinion of her
parents humanity, but yet did in some sort prejudice them in suspecting their
liberality, assuring him that his entertainment should in no sort be
mercenary but voluntary, and free and according to heir affection. Yet first
(said she) I will certify my brother Laban hereof, and afterward guide and
intertaine you in our house: which done, she conducted him into their tent
commaund^g her brother Labans servants to take care of his Camels, as for
himself she entertained and feasted Labans table.

When supper was past, he spoke both to the brother and mother of the virgin
after this manner. Abraham the son of Thares is your cosen. For Nachor (good
mistres) the grandfather of your children was Abraham's brother of one and the
same father and mother. He now sends me unto you, requiring you to give this
Damsel for wife to his legitimate and only son, educated and brought up to
be heir of all his substance: whom although he might have In the year of the
world. 2124 before Chri^ Nativity. 1840.
matched with the richest maidens of his country, yet has he refused all of
them, desiring rather to impart this honor to one of his kindred and nation:
set not light therefore his good affection and desire. For besides all other
blessings and good fortunes, which have happily befallen me in this my journey,
I have by Gods especial providence, found out both the maid, and Abraham Hedio
and Ruffinus, chap. 28. Genes. 24.
in granting your consent by this your daughters marriage, whom I am sent to
request at your hands, with most entire affection. Now they in that they both
allowed a thing so behoofull, and perceived also that it was conformable to the
will of God, they sent their sister unto him under the conditions demanded:
and Isaac then married her at such time as he had the managing of Abraham's
affairs, by reason that the other sons of Abraham were already departed to
take possession of their Colonies.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Abraham's death.

AFew days after this Abraham deceased (a man full of virtue until his last
end) and Abraham died after he had lived 175. years.
honored by God (according to that entire love he had to virtue) with great
affection. All the days of his life contained one hundredth seventy and five
years, and he was buried in Hebron with his wife Sara, and by his sons Isaac
and Ismael.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Isaacs sons Esau and Jacob, and of their Nativity and education.

AFter the death of Abraham, Rebecca (Isaacs wife) waxed big with child, and
the Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 26. Genesis 25.
time of her reckoning being near at hand, Isaac was sore troubled, and sought
counsel at Gods hands: who answered him, that Rebecca should bring forth two
twins, and that of those two sons, two nations should be derived, both which
should be called by their names, and that he who seemed to be the least of
them, should grow to be the greatest: not long time after (according as God had
foretold him) she was brought a bed of two twins, the eldest of The year of
the world. 2124. before the birth of Christ. 1840.
Esau and Seir by reason of his hair, (which the Hebrews call Seir in their
language) but the younger who was called Jacob, was dearly beloved by his
mother.

Now for that a great famine reigned in that country, Isaac (having resolved
to retire himself to Egypt, by reason of the abundance and plen^ie of that
country) he went and dwelt at Gerat, according as God had commanded: In which
place king Abimelech received and entertained Isaac came unto Gerat. Genesis 26.
him (according to the law of hospitality, and the league of friendship which
was betwixt Abraham his father and him.) In the beginning therefore, he showed
unto him great signs of Isaac, and had an especial care over him, he drove
Abimelech expels Isaac being moved the^ eunto by envy. Fauc^.
him out of his country: but he perceiving well that envy had altered him,
and that Abimelech began to be changed, he retired himself not far from
Gerar into a place called the S^aights; and as he there dug to find out a
watering, Abimelechs sheepheards came and set upon him, and hindered him in
such sort as he could not finish his purpose: and for that he purposely retired
from them, they verily supposed they had gotten the victory: Anon after, when
he began to dig in an other place, other sheepheards of Abimelech, outraged
him anew, as at the first: for which cause he left this fountain imperfect
also; exspecting with ripe judgment a more convenient opportunity, which was
afterward offered him by reason that the king gave him leave large. And as
touching the other two, he called the first of them Es^on, which is as much to
say as strife: and the other Sienna, which signifies hostility.

Thus increased he daily more and more both in power and riches. But Abimelech
supposing that his affluence would be many ways hurtful unto him, and
remembering himself that he had not faithfully entertained friendship with him,
but in some sort given occasion of suspicion, by means of some hard measure:
fearing least hereafter the injuries fresh in memory, should more distract him
then their old and ancient plighted friendship; and misdoubting his revenge,
he repaired unto him, and contracted a new league of amity with him, leading
with him one of his A^imelech ^eneweth friendship with Isaac.
chiefest captains, as an arbiter between them, by whose means he obtained
whatsoever he Isaac, and so ready in memory of his fathers old covenant to
forgive new injuries. And so Abimelech having obtained his purpose, returned to
his house. Esau one of the two sons of Isaac (whom the father especially
beloved above all the rest) having attained the age of forty years, took to
wives Ada the daughter of Edom, and Alibama Esau his wives.
the daughter of Esebeon, two princes of the Chanaanites (and that of his own
^uthoritie, without his fathers advise or priuitie) (who would not have
consented, had the matter been remitted unto him, because he held it
inconvenient to mix and join him, or his, in affinity with any dwellers or
inhabitants of the country. (This notwithstanding, he would not displease his
son by commanding him to give over his wives: but determined with himself to
conceal and keep the matter silent.

When Isaac was waxen old and wholly deprived of his sight; he called for Esau
his son and Genes. 27.
said unto him: That although he had not any default or blindness in him, yet
his age would hinder him to deny that service, which he both ought and wished
to do: and therefore he willed him to go on hunting, and that he should make
ready some meat for him, that he might eat, Isaac sends Esau on hunting.
The year of the world, 2186. before Christ's nativity, 1778.
and after his repast, he might pray unto God that it would please him to be
assistant unto him all his life time, and be a comforter and aid unto him:
protesting moreover, that si^ce he was uncertain of the hour of his death, he
thought good to bless him, and by his prayers to procure Gods mercy toward
him, before he slept with the dead. Hereupon Esau went on hunting: but (...) in
the mean time (desirous that Isaacs blessing should light upon her son
Jacob) contrary to her husbands intent and mind, commanded him to go, and kill
two kiddes, and prepare a Jacob being obsequious and obedient to his mother in
all things, fulfilled her command, and as soon as the meat was ready, he
wrapped his arms and covered his Jacob by his mother^ counsel steals his
brothers blessing.
hands with the Goats skins, hoping by the hairinesse thereof, to make his
father believe that he was Esau. For being his brother at one and the same
birth, he resembled him in all things except in this thing only: but fearing
least he should be surprised in his subtlety before his father Isaac had
finished his prayers, and in steed of his blessings he might be laden with his
curses, he presented the meat unto his father. But Isaac perceiving some
alteration in his voice, calls his The year of the ^ld 2186. before Christ's
Nati^itie. 1778.
son, who stretching out his hands unto him covered with the kids skins*
Thou art (says he) more like unto Jacob in thy voice, but by thy hairinesse,
thou seem unto me to be Esau. Thus suspecting no deceit, and having already
eaten, he addressed himself to pray, and called upon God saying. O Lord of all
ages, and maker of all creatures, thou have promised great blessings unto my
father, and have given me many and present felicities, and have vowed that thou
would be merciful unto my posterity, and plentifully power upon them more
and more ample benefits: let this thy favor, I beseech thee, be continued
toward me; neither despise thou me by reason of this my present weakness,
which is the cause that I have more need of thy help. Save and keep this my
son by thy clemency, warrantize him from all evil, give him a happy life,
and possession of all blessings and benefits which are in thy power to bestow
upon him: make him fearful Esau. Scarce had he finished his prayers, but Esau
returned from hunting, which though Isaac perceived, he was no ways moved with
displeasure, but held himself silent. Esau besought him Esau required a
blessing.
that he might obtain as much as he had vouchsafed his brother: but Isaac
denied him, in that he ha^ bestowed all his blessings upon Jacob: for which
cause Esau lamented and wept. His father (a^ted and moved by his tears)
foretold him that he should excel in hunting, in force of body, in arms, and
other such exercises, whereby he should purchase immortal glory both to
himself and his posterity, yet notwithstanding that he should be his brothers
vassal. But for that Jacob Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 27.
feared least his brother should seek to be revenged of him for robbing him of
his fathers blessing, he was by his mothers means delivered from this peril.
For she persuaded her husband to Jacob a wife near allied unto her out of
Mesopotamia. Esau at that time had married an other wife called Bassemath the
daughter of Ismaell: for neither Isaac nor his were well affectioned toward
the Chanaanites: but were offended by reason of his former espousals. For which
cause Esau to give them contentment married Bassemath, whom afterward he loved
more entirely then all the rest.

CHAP. XIX.
How Jacob fled into Mesopotamia for fear of his brother.

But Jacob being sent into Mesopotamia by his mother, under hope to marry the
daughter Genesis 28.
of Laban her brother (whereunto Isaac consented through the counsel of his
wife) passed through the country of Chanaan. And for that there was a
conceived and open hatred betwixt Isaacs people and the inhabitants of Chanaan;
he would not take up his lodging amongst any of them, but lay abroad in the
fields, resting his head upon stones, which he had heaped together in steed of
a pill^v: and during the time of his rest, this vision following was presented
unto him. It seemed vn^ him, that he saw a ladder, that extending it self from
the Jacobs ladder.
earth, reached up unto heaven, along the steps whereof there descended
certain resemblances more excellent to look on, then the ordinary port of
humane nature could impart; and on the top thereof God manifestly appeared, and
calling him by his name, spoke unto him after this manner. Jacob, sure thou art
the son of a good father, and descended from a grandfather renowned God
speaks unto Jacob.
and famous for his great virtue: thou must not be daunted, or appauled by thy
present travels; but rather be confirmed in hope of future good hap. For by
mine assistance thou shall be blessed, and endowed with many benefits. For I
am he that brought Abraham hither, from the country of Mesopotamia, at such
time as he was pursued by his kinsmen: I have also made thy father happy, and
will be no less gracious and favorable unto thy self.

Be confident therefore, and prosecute thy journey under mine assistance. The
marriage which thou pursuest shall have a happy issue, and thou shall have good
children, who in number shall grow infinite, and shall likewise leave after
them a plentiful and famous posterity, and I will give them the sovereignty
over this country, both to them and their successors, and they shall people
and replenish both the earth and the sea, as far as the sun enlighteneth
the world. Let not Jacob, who very highly rejoicing at that which he had
seen, and that which had been denounced unto Jacob voweth a sacrifice unto God
and calls the place Bethel which is ye house of God.
him, anointed the stones on which the promises of so many blessings had been
made, and vowed to offer sacrifice unto God on the same, if at such time as he
had attained the good he sought, he should grant him the grace to return in
health and safety into his country: which as soon as he returned back he
performed, offering unto God the tenth of all that which he The year^ of the
world. 2186. before the Nativity of Christ. 1778. Gen 29. Jacob arriueth at
Charran in Mesopotamia among his mothers kindred.
Laban, and whether he were yet alive. All of them answered that they knew him
well, and that he was a man of that reputation that his name could not be
concealed, that his daughter was accustomed to feed her flock with them, and
that they wondered that she was not as yet arrived: of whom (said they) thou
may perfectly understand all that which Jacob was inquisitiue after her
father; who, rejoicing after the manner of young maidens, asked him what he
was, and whence he came, and what necessity had driven him thither? wishing
she had the means to supply whatsoever his necessities required. Jacob being
overcome, not by the force of affinity, Jacobs talk with Rachel. Rachels
excellent beauty.
or by her good behavior and courtesy, but with the love of the maiden was
inflamed seeing her so fair and matchless in beauty, said unto her. If thou
art the daughter of Laban there is a greater and more ancient conjunction
betwixt both thy father, thy self and me, then either thy years, or my birth
can attain unto. For Abraham, Aran and Nachor were Thare^ sons; Bathuel thy
grandfather was Nachors son, Isaac my father was the son of Abraham, and
Sara Aran: there is yet a nearer and deerer bond of friendship wherewith we are
linked one unto another. For Rebecca my mother is sister unto Laban thy father,
borne of one father and mother; so that you and I are cosens: and therefore now
am I come at this present to salute you, and renew that ancient love which
our alliance requires at our hands. But she remembering her of all those things
which her father was wont to report and discourse of Rebecca, and knowing that
her parents were desirous to hear some news from her, she wept for joy,
remembering her of the love of her father, and hung about his neck, and
embraced the young man, and after she had saluted him she said unto him. Thou
bring a most desired and great pleasure to my father and al his family, who
never forgets thy mother, but often times makes mention of her: and would
esteem it a great felicity to hear tidings from her. Then desired she him
presently to Laban, where being acknowledged by his uncle, he both by that
means liused securely amongst his friends, as also brought him great
contentment, by his unexpected access unto them. Some few days after this
Laban told him that he took so much contentment in Jacobs talk with Laban.
The year of ^he world. 2193. before Christ's birth 1771.
his presence, that he could not express it in words, yet required he him to
manifest the cause that had induced him to leave his father and mother in their
extreme age, at such time as they had most need of him, to find him out;
moreover he promised him all assistance and favor in whatsoever cause he had
to make use of him. Whereupon Jacob discoursed unto him the whole matter, that
Isaac had two sons, himself and Esau, that his brother (in that by his
mothers devise and counsel, he had defrauded him of his fathers blessing)
sought and desired to kill him, as Laban promising unto him whatsoever
humanity he could imagine (as well in respect of their common ancestors, as
for the love he bare unto his mother, toward whom although she were absent, he
would express his good affection, in showing himself well affected toward
him that was there present:) he told him then that he would give him the charge
of his flock, and make him master over all his shepherds, and that when he
should think good to return back again to his friends, he Jacob
understood, he answered that he would willingly endure any sort of labor in
Labans service, and that his deuoire toward him would be a delight to
himself, Jacob for recompense requires. Rachel for his wise.
but that in lieu of his labors he required Rachel to wife, who deserved to be
honored by him with no less title for many causes, but in especial for that
she had brought him thither: auowing that the love which he bare unto her was
the cause why he used those speeches. Laban (being highly delighted and
contented with this his discourse) granted him his consent in the The year of
the world, 2193. before Christ's Nativity, 1771.
marriage, telling him that he could not have wished for a better son in law:
and that if he would soiourne a while with him, he would make him Lord of all
that his heart desired, especially for that he was no ways minded to send his
daughter among the Chananites; and that it repented him that (by reason of
marriage) his sister had been drawn thither. Jacob co^descended upon these
conditions, and couenanted to abide with him for the space of seven years (for
he determined to serve his father in law during that term of years, to the
end that having made proof of his virtue, it might the better appear what he
was.) Now the time which was couenanted between them being expired, and Jacob
expecting the contented possession of his love which was promised him, Laban
prepared a nuptial feast, and when the night drew on and Jacob least
suspected, lacob in steed of Rachel lies with Lea.
he brings his daughter less fair in face, and more elder in years, and
lays her by Laban and accused him, who asked him pardon, alleging the
necessity which enforced him to do that which he did. For he had not brought
in Lea under intent to deceive him, but that the custom of the country
compelled him thereunto, yet that the same should no ways hinder him, but that
he should enjoy Rachel, and receive, see, and have use of her after seven
years more were fully expired. Herewith Jacob grew pacified, and suffered
himself to be persuaded (in that the love which he bare unto Rachel suffered
him to do no other ways) and when the other seven years were expired, he
married Rachel. Now both of these had two chambermaids which their father had
given them, Leas maid was called Zelpha, and Rachels Bala, who were no slaves
but only subjects. Lea was Jacob bare greater affection to her sister then to
her self, bethinking her oftentimes, that if she might have children, she
should be better esteemed and beloved by her husband: for which cause she
continually besought Almighty God that it might please him to give her issue:
whereupon it happened that God gave her a son, and Jacobs affection was
turned toward her, for which cause she called him Ruben: that is to say, the
son of Vision, because she had obtained him through the mercy of God.

After him she bare three children, Simeon (whose name signifies that, God had
heard her) The explication and names of Jacobs sons. Genesis 30. Rachel bringes in
Jacob to Bala.
Leui, (which is as much to say, as the firmenes of society) and last of all
Judah, (which signifies thanksgiving.) At that time Rachel fearing least she
should lose the better part of her husbands love, by reason of the fertility
and fruitfulriesse of her sister, caused her chambermaide Bala to lie with him,
by whom he had a son called Dan, that is to say, the judgment of God: and
after him Nepthalim (which signifies ingenious) (by reason that she had used
subtlety to requite her sisters subtlety.) In like sort of Zelpha he begat
Gad (which signifies aduenturous) Lea brings in Zelpha.
and after him Aser (that is to say, good hap bringer) because that Lea was
more honored by the multitude of her progeny.

Ruben, the eldest of all the sons of Lea, brought his mother apples of
Mandragora, which The year of the world. 2206. before Christ's birth 1758.
when Rachel had perceived, she desired her to give her a part thereof in that
she longed to taste of the same: whereunto Lea would yield no consent, replying
that she ought to contenthe^ self, in that she had the prerogative in love in
respect of both their beloved, which was Jacob. Rachel mollifying the heart of
her sister with kind words said unto her, that she would be content that Jacob
Genesis 31.
should lie with her for that night: which Jacob performed for the love of
Rachel, and Lea once more had children, namely Isachar which signifies, Come
by hire, and Zabulon, which imports a pledge of good will; besides whom she
had a daughter also called Dina. Not long after this; Rachel lay with Jacob,
and brought forth a son who was called Joseph, which name signifies an
addition. During all this time (which was for the space of twenty years)
Jacob had the government of his father in laws flocks: but afterward he
thought good (accompanied with his wives) to return to his own inheritance;
which when his father in law apperceiued, he would Jacob with his wives,
children and flocks fly without his fathers priuity. Rachel bears away with
her, her fathers household gods. Labon pursues Jacob, but God delivers him
from his purpose.
in no sort give his consent thereunto, for which cause he covertly determined
to forsake him. To this intent he made trial of his wives to see how theywere
affected toward his flight, who hartned him by their consents, insomuch as
Rachel having surprised all the Images of those Gods Jacob also drove away the
moitie of the cattle without the witting or will of Laban. Rachel also bare
with her the Images of the Gods, althongh she had been taught by Jacob to
contemn them and yield them no honor: but she supposed that if Laban pursued
and ouertooke them, in having recourse to them she might obtain pardon. But
Laban a day after the departure of Jacob and his wives had notice thereof; and
being therewith sore aggreeued, he pursued after them, intending to The year
of the world. 22^. before the Na^itie of Christ. 1758.
Jacob: assuring him that if in contempt of Jacobs weaken esse he should lift
up his arm to assail him, that he himself would join with Jacob to yield
him succors.

The next day, after that Laban had received this Oracle from the mouth of God,
as soon as it was day he called Jacob unto him, to the end they might
confer together (hiding nothing from him which the night before he had beheld
in his dream.) As soon as Jacob was come unto him under safe conduct, he
began to accuse him; alleging that he had received him into his Labans
accusation against Jacob.
given him great abundance of goods. I have (says he) given thee my
daughters in marriage, hoping by that means to increase thy love toward me
more and more; but thou have had neither respect of thy mother, neither of the
acquaintance or parentage betwixt thee and me, neither of the wives which thou
have espoused, neither of thy children whose grandfather I am; but have dealt
with me after an injurious and hostile manner, driving away that which
appertained unto me, seducing my daughters to abandon him that begat them, and
carry away my household gods with them, which both I and my predecessors have
served and honored; and even as much as men of war would not have done unto
their enemies, that have thou done unto me: yea thou that art my kinsman, my
sisters son, the husband of my daughters, my pledge Jacobs answer: to Labans
objection.
Jacob alleged for himself, that God had not only made impression in his
heart, but that all men also are wholly addicted to the love of their country;
and that after so long space of time, it seemed good unto him to visit his
native soil. And as concerning that crime (says he) which thou obiectest
against me, as touching the pray, if any other but thy self be judge, thou
shall be convicted to have dealt iniustly with me: for whereas thou ought to
have rewarded me, for the maintenance and increase I have made of thy goods,
have thou not done us great wrong to envy us a little part and portion
thereof? And as concerning thy daughters, know this that they have not followed
me, by reason they have been conveyed away by subtlety, but under that love
and duty which married wives bear unto their husbands: they do not therefore
only follow me, but they come Laban, because that being his mothers brother,
and having given his daughters to wife, he Jacobs accusation against Laban.
had notwithstanding bitterly vexed him by his severe commandments, under
which he had been obedient during the space of twenty years, that the
troubles he had endured under color of marriage with Rachel had been
combersome unto him; yet notwithstanding that it was but a trifle in respect of
that which he suffered afterward, which, had he borne him an envious affection
or hostile hatred, he could very well have escaped. In effect Laban had dealt
most Labans subtle dealing with Jacob.
maliciously with Jacob. For seeing that God assisted him in all that he
enterprised, Laban promised to give him all the cattle that were borne white,
and sometime that which was brought forth black: and when as that which Jacob
had named and chosen did increase, then did not Laban perform his promise unto
him, but deferred him over to the next years increase, by reason he had
always a respect of the greater flock, and promised that which he hoped would
Labans covenant with Jacob. Genes. 32.
not come to pass, and which if it fell contrary, he was ready to infringe.
And as touching the gods, he told him that he might make search for them.

This condition did Laban accept, but Rachel understanding thereof, thrus^ the
said gods into a sack, and made them to be carried on a Camels back, and she
sat upon them, saying, that she was indisposed, by reason at that time she had
her natural purgations. And for this cause Laban desisted from searching any
further, supposing his daughter being so affected would not conceal or set
herself so near things that were so sacred: and he made a covenant with Jacob,
that none of them should call to remembrance the interchangeable unkindness
that had Laban returned back again into his own country.

But as Jacob travailed toward the country of Chanaan, he encountered many
visions, which The year of the world. 2206. before Christ's Natiu^. 1758.
presaged unto him good hope and fortunes to come; and he called the place
where this thing happened, the Field of God. And being desirous to know how his
brother ^sau was affected toward him, he sent messengers before him to sound
and gather the exact truth thereof, by reason he stood in fear least the
memone of his old discontent should be renewed: charging his Jacob sends
messengers to his brother Esau.
messengers to signify unto Esau, that Jacob (deeming it to be a thing
inconvenient to live with his brother, who was displeased with him) had of his
own freewill forsaken: the country, and that at this present he was upon his
return, thinking that the length of time were sufficient to proo^e a
reconcili^tion between them. He therefore led with him his wives and children,
with all those riches which God had given him; offering himself unto Esau with
all that of most esteem which he had, by reason that he thought it the
greatest benefit that might happen to Esau, who reioiced very much thereat,
and went forth to meet his brother, accompanied with four hundred armed men.
But Jacob hearing that he Genesis 38.
marched forward to meet him, attended by so many men at arms, was very much
afraid: yet fixing his confidence in God, he provided for the time, least any
detriment should happen unto him, studying every way to defend both him, and
his from invasion. Whereupon dividing his ^oupes, he caused some to march
before, and the rest to follow speedily after: so that if any did assault the
first, they might retire themselves to the troop that followed.

After this manner having ordered all things about him, he sent certain with
presents to his brother, namely with beasts of charge, and a great number of
diverse kinds of foure-footed beasts, Esau, these presents might serve to
mitigate the same. He commanded them also that marched foremost; that they
should use courteous salutation Jacob reconcileth his brother with rewards.
Jacob wrastleth with an Angel and is called Israel.
toward Esau. Having thus all the day disposed his troops, as soon as the
night was come, he caused all his companies to march, who passed the river of
Iaboch: but Jacob, who was left hind most, was encountered with a vision, in
which he wrastled with an apparition, and he became victor.

Now this vision spoke unto him, exhorting him to rejoice at that which had
happened unto him, Israel, that is to say according to the Hebrews, a resister
of an Angel. These things were foretold unto Jacob upon his request, who
perceiving also that he was an Angel of God, prayed him to inform him of that
which should happen unto him: which the vision did, and afterward vanished.
Jacob took great pleasure thereat, and called the place Phanuel, that is to
say, the face of God: and for that in w^astling he had hurt his broad nerve, he
afterward abstained from eating of the same, and by reason thereof our nation
do never feed thereon.

Now when he had intelligence that his brother nearly approached him, he
commanded his wives that they should march forward every one with their
handmaidens, to the end that they might from a far behold the fight of the
men, if so be that his brother should assail them. But Jacob saluteth his
brother Esau.
himself he humbled in reuerencing his brother, who drew near unto him,
without intent of circumuention: and Esau saluted him, and enquired of him as
touching the companies of women and children, and after he understood how all
went, he was desirous to lead them to his father. But Jacob excused himself,
by reason of the wearines of his cattle, and Esau retired to Sa^r where Genesis
34.
he made his aboade, and had imposed that name on that country, by reason of
his thick hair. Jacob also retired himself to a place, which at this day
also is called the Tents, and from thence Jacob comes to Scenas. The history
of Dina, Jacobs daughter.
into Sichem, a city of the Chanaanites.

Now at such time as the Sichemites celebrated their feast, Dina which was
Jacobs only daughter, went into the City to see the bravery of the women of
that country. But Sichem the son of king Emmor ravished her, and deflowred
her: and being surprised with her love, he besought his father that he might
take her to wife: who listening there unto, went unto Jacob, praying him to
join Dina his daughter, in lawful marriage, with his son Sichem. Jacob (nor
daring to contradict him by reason of his authority and quality) and on the
other side, not thinking it to be either a thing lawful, or convenient to
match his daughter with a stranger, required at his The year of the world.
2206. before Christ's birth 17^.
Jacob would listen to the marriage. But Jacob having discovered unto his sons
the rauishment of their sister, and the request of Emmor, desired them to
deliberate amongst themselves what thing was to be done ^n the matter:
whereupon some held their peace, not knowing what to say; but Simeon and Leui
(the brothers of the same womb, with their sister) complotted together this
practice. In as much as it was a festival, and that the Sichemites intended
naught but pleasure and banqueting, they issued by night upon their first
guards, and killed them that were a bed; and from thence entering into the
City, they killed all the males (and with them the king and his son) Simeon
and Leui kill the S^chemites. Genes 35.
but to the women they offered no violence. Which being executed without the
knowledge of their father, they brought their sister back again. Jacob was
very much astonished at this accident Rachel had stolen, and hid them in
Sichem in the earth under an Oak. Jacob digging up Labans god^, goes and
sacrifices at Bethel. Rachel dies in childbed. Hedio and Ru^finus. chap. 28.


Afterward departing from thence, he sacrificed in Bethel, where he had seen
the vision; at such time as he first of all took his journey into Mesopotamia:
and as he travailed in the land of Ephrata, Rachel died in childbed, and was
buried there: (and she only has not enjoyed the honor, which is done in
Hebron to those of her parentage.) After he had made great lamentation,
Benjamin, (by reason of the dolours which happened unto his mother). These are
all the children of Jacob, twelve males and one daughter, of whom eight were
begotten on his lawful wives, six of Lea, and two of Rachel, and on their
chamber-maides, four; two of each of them, whose names I have heretofore
recorded. From thence went Jacob to Hebron a City of Chanaan, where Isaac made
his aboade, and they lived but a small time together, because Rachel was dead
and departed from him.

CHAP. XX.
Isaac dies and is buried in Hebron.

ISaac died a little time after the arrival of his son, and was buried with
his wife by his The year of the world, 2230. before Christ's birth, 1734. Isaac
dies 185 years old. Genesis 35.
Isaac was a man beloved of God; and guided by his especial providence. After
the decease of Abraham, he lived a long time: and after he had passed his life
in all virtue for the space of 185. years, he deceased.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 2. book.
1 How Esau and Jacob, Isaacs sons, divided their habitations, and how
Idumaea fell to Esaus lot, and Chanaan to Jacobs. 2 How Joseph the youngest of
Jacobs sons, by reason of his dreams which foretold his future felicity
incurred his brothers envy. 3 How Joseph was sold by his brethren into Egypt,
and grew in great authority in that country, 4 How Jacob with all his
progeny came unto his son. 5 Of the affliction of the Hebrews in Egypt, for
the space of 400. years. 6 How under the conduct of Moses, they forsook
Egypt. 7 How the red sea divided it self, and gave the Hebrews a passage at
such time as they fled out of Egypt.
CHAP. I.
How Esau and Jacob, Isaacs sons, divided their inheritance: and how Idumaea
fell to Esaues lot, and Chanaan to Jacobs. The year of the world, 2230. before
Christ's Nativity, 1734. Isaacs sons departed their habitations.


BUT when Isaac was dead, the sons divided their habitations among
themselves, and were neither of them content with that which they inherited by
their father: but Esau leaving the City of Hebron to his brother, went and
dwelt in Seir; and was Lord of the country of Idumaea, which he named by his
name (for it was surnamed Edom) for the occasion which follows. He being
very young, returned one day sore wearied, travailed, and hungry Esaues
hunger, constrained him to forsake his birthright, and to sell him the same,
on condition, he should give him what to eat. Esau then transported with
famine, surrendered Esau the first begotten, s^lleth his birth right. Esau
called Edom. Genesis 36. Esaus sons and posterity.
unto him his birthright, and confirmed it with a solemn oath. And thereupon,
his equals in age, in way of mockery, called him Edom, by reason of this read
meat: for Edom in Hebrew, signifies Red. His country likewise was called
Edom: but the Greeks, to the end they might make the name more current,
called it Idumea. He became the father of five children, of whom he had three
by his wife Alibamma, whose names were Iaus, Iolamus, and Choraeus: Aliphaces
was the son of Aza, and Raguel of Mosametha: these children had Esan.
Aliphaces had five legitimate children, Theman, Omar, Ophus, Iotham, Ocauaxes
(for Amelech was illegitimate, borne by one of his concubines, whose name was
Themana.) The^e dwelled in that part of Idumaea, which is called Gobolitus; and
in that part, which by reason of Amelech, is called Amelechitis. For Idumaea
being in times past a land of great extent, continued the name of Idumaea
thorough the whole country: and the particular p^ouinces of the same, kept the
names of those that first inhabited the same.

CHAP. II.
Joseph the youngest of Jacobs children, is envied by his brothers.

But Jacob attained to that felicity, that scarcely any other has been so
happy; for he The year of the world. 2206. before Christ's birth 1658.
surpassed all the inhabitants of that country in riches: and by reason of the
virtues of his children, he was both envied, and regarded. For they were
accomplished in all perfections, animated and endowed with stout hearts;
prepared to execute any work of the hand, and to endure all sorts of travel:
finally, all of them were furnished with knowledge and providence. But God had
such care of him, and so diligently procured and furthered Gen 37. Hedio and
Ruffinus. cap. 2.
his good fortunes, that that which seemed unto him to be griefefull and
contrary, he brought to an issue prosperous for him; and increasefull for his
riches: and brought to pass, that both he and his children were the first
motive to our ancestors to forsake the land of Egypt, Jacob having begotten
Joseph of Rachel, loved him entirely, both in respect of the beauty of his
body, as also of the ornaments and virtues of his spirit: and besides both
these, his prudence, wherein he outstripped all his other brothers. This
cordial affection Jacobs sons hated their brother Joseph.
of his father, moved envy and hatred amongst his brothers toward him. And
besides these, the dreams which he had seen, and told both to his father and
brethren; which foreprophecied unto him a singular felicity. For it is the
common custom of men to be jealous of their prosperity, with whom they are
familiar.

Now the visions which Joseph saw in his dream, were these. Being sent by his
father in the company of his brothers, to reap come in the time of harvest,
he saw a vision (far different Joseph's dream.
from those which accustomably happen in sleep) which (as soon as he awoake)
he told unto his Joseph, making show that they could in no sort interpret the
dream: but being by themselves apart, they breathed forth contrary
imprecations; wishing that nothing of that which they interpreted as touching
his dream, might take effect, but perseuering The year of the world. 2206.
before the birth of Christ. 1758. Joseph's dream of the Son, Moon and
Stars.
more and more in envy and hatred toward him. But God (opposing his power
against their envy) sent Joseph a second and more strange vision. For he
dreamed that the sun, the moon, and eleven of the stars descended down to
the earth, and humbled themselves before him. Which vision he revealed to his
father in the presence of his brethren (without suspicion of any hatred in them
toward him) and besought him to interpret unto him the meaning thereof. Now as
touching Jacob, he greatly reioiced at this dream, by The interpretation of
Joseph's dream.
reason he conceived in his mind the interpretation thereof, and (in comparing
and alluding his conjectures not rashly, but with prudence) he reioiced at
those great matters which were signified by that dream: which foretold, that
his son Joseph should be highly fortunate, and happy; and that the time
should come in which his father, mother, and brethren should honor him, Jacob
without judgment and consideration so interpret this vision. But Joseph's
brothers were highly aggrieued at this presage, conceiving as hainously and
hatefully thereof, as if this felicity had been portended to a stranger, and
not to their brother, with whom they might equally partake his good fortunes
Joseph's brothers complot his death.
whatsoever, being as well allied in felicity unto him as in consanguinitie.
Whereupon they resolved on his death and destruction, and having complotted
these counsels amongst themselves, and gathered in their harvest, they
retired themselves with their flocks toward Sichem Sicima a fit place to
grase in.
Joseph to the flocks, to understand how they did, and how their affairs
prospered.

CHAP. III.
How Joseph was sold into Egypt by his brethren, and grew in great credit in
that country: and how his brethren at length were under his subjection.

But as soon as they saw their brother coming toward them, they reioiced,
not as at Joseph comes unto his brothers, who resolve to murder him.
Ruben the eldest amongst them seeing their disposition and conspiracy to kill
him, endeavored Ruben dissw^deth his brothers death.
to dissuade them; setting before their eyes how heinous and wicked the
enterprise was, and what hatred they might incur thereby. For (said he) if
before God and before men it be a wicked and detestable thing to lay hands on,
and to murder a stranger: how much more heinous a crime will it be held for
us, to be convicted to be the murderers of our brother? whose death will heap
sorrow on our fathers head: and draw our mother into great grief and The year
of the world, 2217. before Christ's natiui^, 1747.
repentance and reconcilement; but if they proceeded in their enterprise, he
assured them that he would punish them like fratricides; since nothing is
hidden from his providence, whether it be committed in the desert, or attempted
in the City. For wheresoever men are, there is it always to be thought, that
God likewise is. Further, that when they should have perpetrated this fact,
Joseph had done them no wrong, whose tender years rather required care and
compassion at their hands, then hate and tyranny. Besides that, the cause of
his slaughter would aggrauate their offense, The year of the world 2217.
before Christ's Naetiuitie. 1747.
if it should be known that for envy of his future felicity they should take
away his life; all which good hap they likewise might participate by reason
of consanguinitie, and that it was their duty to think, that whatsoever
blessing God imparted to, Joseph was theirs; and that for that cause they were
to imagine, that God would be more displeased against them, if they should
endeavor to deprive him of his life, whom he had esteemed and adjudged worthy
of prosperity to come. Ruben alleging these and many other things, besought
them and labored to divert them from shedding their brothers blood, but seeing
that all these his motives could in no sort mollify them, but that they
hastened the rather to commit and perpetrate the murder; he counseled them
that at least wise they should allot him some milder kind of death. Telling
them that he endeavored all what in him lay at the first to dissuade them, but
since it Ruben persuades them to cast Joseph into a pit. Hedio and Ruffinus.
chap. 3.
temper their hands, and keep them immaculate, by casting him into the next
pit, and there leaving him in the hands of death: to this counsel all of them
agreed. So Ruben took Joseph and bound him with cords, and let him down
easily into a pit which was dry, which done, he departed to seek out a more
convenient place for pasture.

But when Ruben was gone, Judah one of Jacobs sons (espying certain merchants
of Arabia, Genes 37. 39.
of the country of the Ismaelites, who from the country of Galadena carried
Spicerie and Syrian merchandise into Egypt) he counseled his brothers to draw
up Joseph out of the well, and Joseph by Judas counsel is sold to the Arabian
merchants.
to sell him to those Arabians, assuring them that by that means it would come
to pass that Joseph should die, the farther off from them amongst strangers;
and as touching themselves, they should be exempt from that pollution: which
counsel of his being commended by them all, they drew Joseph out of the pit,
and sold him to the Arabians for the sum of twenty siluerlings, at such time
as he was seventeen years of age. Now had Ruben resolved in himself to save
Joseph without his brothers priuitie, for which cause coming by night unto the
pit, he called him with a loud voice, and seeing that he gave him no answer, he
began to conjecture with himself Ruben by night comes to the pit.
that his brethren had done him to death, he reproved them therefore very
bitterly; but after they had told him what was become of him, he gave over his
mourning. After these things were thus brought to pass, the brethren consulted
amongst themselves in what sort they might Joseph was attired, at such time as
he came unto them, and which they had taken from him, when they cast him into
the well, to the end that having defiled it in the blood of a Goat, they might
afterward bear it unto their father and show it him, to the end he might
suppose that Joseph was slain by wild beasts; which done, they came unto the
old man (not altogether ignorant of his sons misfortunes) and told him that
they had not seen their brother Joseph, neither could they assure him what
mishappe had befallen him; but that notwithstanding they had found his Ierkin
altogether bebloudied and torn, which made them suspect that he was slain by
some wild beasts, if so be he were sent unto them attired in that coat.

But Jacob (that hitherto expected and hoped for more succesfull tidings, in
that he supposed Joseph's brothers persuade his father that he is devoured by
wild beasts.
and hoped that Joseph had only been captive) gave over this opinion, and
took the coat for a most assured testimony of his sons death; for he knew
that he was apparelled therewith at such time as he sent him to his brothers,
for which cause he lamented Joseph, from that time forward as being dead, and
as if he had not any more sons. And such was the grief of his heart, that he
conceived no consolation in the rest, but suffered himself to be persuaded by
the brothers, that Joseph had been slain by savage beasts: he therefore sat
him down being clothed in sackcloth, and charged with sorrow; and neither
could his sons by their Jacob be waileth Joseph for dead. Joseph is sold in
Egypt to Putifar.
counsels mittigate his moanes, nor he himself remit the rigor of his
Iamentation.

Now Joseph was sold by the merchants and bought by Putiphar (an Egyptian
Lord, and a steward of King Pharaos household) who held him in high estimation,
and trained him up Putifars wife soliciteth Joseph to lie with her.


It fortuned not long after, that his masters wife was enamoured with him, both
in respect of his beauty, as also of his dexterity and diligence, supposing
that if she opened her mind The year of the world. 2217. before the Nativity
of Christ. 1747.
Joseph should not deny her: and her disordinate affections increasing daily,
she devised and complotted a new means in hope to bring Putifars wife
complotteth a second subtilty to allure Joseph.
her love to her desired issue.

Whereas therefore a solemn and public feast was at hand, wherein according
to custom, the Ladies were wont to dignifie the solemnity by their
assistance: she fained a sickness, persuading her husband thereunto, hoping by
that means she might have the better opportunity (in being solitary and
alone) to solicit Joseph, which falling out accordingly (as she had her self
desired) Putifars ears then thine. But neither by these words, nor her tears
the witnesses of her vows, could Joseph be perverted, neither could remorse
ouerworke him, nor terror compel Joseph once more repulseth the assaults of
her lust.
him to forsake his purposed chastity, but that he constantly resisted against
those iniust afflictions, wherewith she threatened him: choosing rather to
suffer any misery whatsoever, then to be prisoned with the possession of her
offered adulteries, being well assured that he was worthy Joseph (unable to
endure any longer the intemperancy of the woman, leaving his garment Joseph
leaving his raiment behind him fled from the adulteress.
behind him whereby she held him) brake suddenly out of the chamber. She partly
impelled by the grief of repulse, partly affrighted with fear, least her
lasciuiousnes should be made known to her husband, decreed first of all
falsely to accuse Joseph, and by this means to take revenge The year of the
world, 2217. before Christ's Nativity, 1747.
upon him; holding it to be a craft worthy a woman's wit, to anticipate and
first of all accuse her accuser. She therefore sat her down sad and perplexed,
coloring the grief of her defrauded lust under the cloak of indignation for
her attempted honor, and violated chastity. Now when her husband came home,
and (being troubled in mind to behold these her agonies) demanded the cause
thereof: Live thou no longer (said she) my husband, except thou The adulteress
accusation against Joseph.
rigorously punish that wretched slave, who attempted to violate thy bed,
forgetting both what he was when he came into thy house, and with how great
benevolence thou have entertained him, yea who was to be esteemed more ingrate
then ingratitude, except every way he approved himself faithful unto thee:
yet has he not forborne to offer injury, no not to thine own wife; and that
which is more, on a holy day, and in thine absence; whereby it manifestly
appears that the moderation Putiphar entangled by the words and tears of a
woman, and attributing too much to his wives dissembling love, omitting the
further and faithful inquisition of the truth, after he had first of all
praised his wives faith and loyalty, he cast Joseph thus condemned of heinous
wickedness into the prison of malefactors, esteeming his wives chastity, and
commending it the more, in that he was now made a witness Joseph is cast into
prison. Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 4. Genesis 39.


But Joseph committing his innocence unto God, neither took care how to excuse
himself, neither to express how the matter fell out: but silently suffering
the necessity of his bonds, he was only comforted with this one hope, namely
that God was more powerful, then they that had imprisoned him: whose
providence he presently experimented. For the keeper of the prison Joseph's
patience in bonds. The keeper of the prison deals friendly wi^ Joseph.
considering both his faith and diligence in all that wherein he employed him,
as also the dignity of his form, loosed him out of bonds, and by that means
in some sort lesned his misery, giving him also an allowance more liberal then
the rest of the prisoners had. Now when they that were in the prison (as often
as they had intermission from their labor) conferred together (as men in misery
are wont to do) and questioned among themselves of the cause of their
damnation: Joseph; and for that he accounted him to be a prudent and provident
man, he told him his dream, praying him that if any presage might be gathered
thereby, that he would expound it unto him, lamenting his misfortune, who not
only was persecuted by the kings displeasure, but also when he should take his
rest, troubled from heaven by dreams. For he said that in his sleep he beheld
three great clusters of grapes, hanging on three several branches of a vine,
which were all ripe and ready to be gathered, and that him thought he pressed
them into a cup which the king held, and that afterward having strained the
must, he offered it to the King, and that he willingly drank thereof: now when
he had showed him his dream, he desired him that if he had any knowledge given
him from God, he would vouchsafe to interpret his Joseph answered him that he
should be of good courage, willing him to expect, The butlers dream expounded.
The year of the world. 2238. before Christ's birth 1736.
for that within three days he should be delivered from his bonds, and be
admitted again to the kings service, and restored to his former credit. For he
interpreted that the vine brings forth a fruit very good and profitable for
man's use, for that by the mediation thereof faith and friendship is fixed and
confirmed amongst them, and discords dissolved: furthermore that troubles and
sorrows were assuaged by the use thereof, in stead of which pleasures
succeeded. This said he, as thou tellest me that the king received being
pressed out by thy hands. Know therefore that thou have a good dream offered
thee, and that it signifies thy deliverance from misery within three days,
according to the number of those clusters which thou gatheredst in thy dream.
Remember me therefore I pray thee, as soon as the event has approved this my
prediction ^n the year of the world. 2228. before Christ's Nativity. 1726.
prison, then mine own pleasure. And thus the butler as it became him,
rejoiced at the interterpretation of his dream, and expected the event. Now a
certain other servant, who had the command of the kings bakers, and living in
the same prison with the butler, conceiving some The year of the world. 2228.
before the birth of Christ. 1736. The Bakers dream.
Joseph's so happy interpretation (for that he likewise had seen a vision)
desired him to expound unto him what interpretation was to be had of a dream,
which he had the night past, which he expressed in these words. Me thought
(said he) that I carried three baskets on my head, of which, two were
replenished with bread, and the other with flesh (and diverse other kinds of
acares, such as are prepared for kings.) But the birds of the air houering
round about me, devoured all the victuals, being nothing appauled by me,
although I drove them from thence. Which said, he expected a presage no less
fortunate then the former.

But Joseph (after he had coniectured upon the circumstances of the dream, and
foretold him The exposition of the Bakers dream.
that he would rather have informed him of more succesfull fortunes, then his
dream did intend:) told him that he had only two days left him, wherein he
was to live. For these were designated Joseph had foretold: For upon the
prefixed day, the king (celebrating the feast of his nativity) commanded that
the baker should be hanged: but as touching the butler, he delivered him from
his bonds, and restored him to his former office. But God delivered Joseph
(after he had Genes. 41.
for the space of two years spent his time in the misery of the prison: and
was in the mean space no ways assisted by the ungrateful butler) by
preordinating this means and manner of his liberty. Whereas king Pharao had
that night in his sleep seen two visions, and had also received the
interpretation thereof, forgetting the one, he only remembered him of the
dreams, which Pharao the King of Egypts dream.
in his opinion had no fortunate signification. Whereupon early in the morning
(calling before Joseph, and of his wisdom and prudence in these sorts of
conjectures; and repairing unto the king told him of Joseph and of his vision,
and the event thereof, which he had whilst he was in prison, together with
Joseph's interpretation; and how the same day, the master of the bakers
condemned to the gallows, gave greater credit to his predictions: how he was
kept prisoner as a slave by Putifar the master of his household, and that he
said how amongst the Hebrews he was descended of good and honorable parents.
Command him therefore (said he) to be sent for, neither despise the man for his
present misery, for thou may manifestly understand by him, the
signification of thy dreams. Whereupon Joseph is delivered from bonds
this manner: Good young man, in that I understand by the report of my servant,
that thou art prudent; show me the interpretation of my dreams in such manner
as thou discoueredst his unto him, and thou shall do me a hie pleasure: but
beware thou neither conceal any thing for fear, or speak ought for
flattery, or to feed me with falsehoods, but tell me all things truly,
although they shall in a sort breed my discontent to hear them. Me seemed that
I walked by a Pharaos dream of the seven kine.
river side, and that I saw seven well fed and very fat kine, which retired
themselves from the flood into the pasture: and again, me thought that seven
others came from the pasture to encounter them, who were very lean and ugly
to behold, who when they had devoured the seven others The year of the world,
2231. before Christ's nativity, 1733.
that were fat and great, yet never the more increased, but were all of them
miserably vexed with The year of the world. 2238. before Christ's birth 1726.
which does likewise trouble and terrify me the more. For I saw seven ears
sprung out of one root, that hung down and bowed their heads, because they
were laden with grain ready to be reapt: after which, there appeared seven
other, weak, and languishing for want of dew, who devouring those other great
and full ears, left me highly astonished. Hereunto Joseph answered: This
dream (O king) although it has been seen in two figures, yet so it is that
it imports The interpretation of Pharaos dream.
one and the same accident, which is to ensue. For both those oxen (which are
creatures borne and bred up for the plough and labor) which you saw devoured
by the leaner, and those ears be terrified and affrighted; but that being
forewarned, they might provide for themselves, to The year of the world, 2238.
before Christ's birth 1726. By Joseph's counsel the succeeding scarcity is made
more tolerable.
the end they might more easily prevent the imminent danger If therefore thou
shall lay up and store the abundance of the plentiful years, Egypt shall not
feel the penury that shall follow. And when as the king (admiring at Joseph's
prudence and wisdom) demanded after what manner he might provide in the time
of plenty, how to prevent and redress, the future sterilitie: he warned and
counseled him, that the Egyptians should use parcimony, and that that which
remained of those years superfluity, might be reserved for future
necessities. He counseled him also to bind the husbandmen, that they should
hoard up their corn in their barnes, and only to distribute to the people as
much as was sufficient, and no more. Hereupon the king (not only praising
Joseph's counsel, but also his interpretation of his dreams) made him Lord and
commissarie of all the store; and commanded him to provide whatsoever he
thought necessary in Joseph is entitled by Pharao to great honors.
this authority given him by the king to use his own signet, and to be
clothed in purple, he was conducted through all the country upon a chariot:
and he assembled the laborers of corn, and distributed to every one by
measure, that which they wanted for seed corn, and for their nourishment,
without letting any man understand for what cause he did it. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 5.


About this time had he already attained to thirty years old, being held in
great honor by the king, and was for his incredible prudence, surnamed by him
Psontom phanechus, which signifies the discouerer of hidden things: he was
also honored with a wife of great dignity, for by Joseph marieth a wife in
Egypt on whom he begat Manasses and Ephraim
the procuratio^ of the king, he took to wife a virgin, daughter to Putifar
the Heliopolitan priest, Asaneth, by whom he begat children also, before the
famine began in Egypt. The elder of whom was called Manasses, which signifies
Oblivion (because attaining better fortune, he grew in oblivion of his former
misery:) but the younger was called Ephraim (which signifies return, for that
he was restored to the liberty of his ancestors.) Now when as according to
Joseph's interpretation, the seven years of plenty and affluence were
ouerpassed in Egypt; the eight year of famine began to infest the land: and
for that the evil was unexpected, The famine in Egypt.
the headlong multitude grievously travailed with hunger and misery, began to
flock about the kings gates and garners. Hereon the king called for Joseph,
who presently distributing grain to those that wanted it, became without
controversy, the father and conseruer of the co^minaltie. Neither did he only
make merchandise with those that inhabited that country: but with strangers
Jacob also sent all his sons into Egypt to fetch come; (as soon as he
understood that Jacob sends his sons into Egypt to buy wheat.
strangers also had liberty to traffic in that place) only with himself he
retained Benjamin, whom he begat on Rachel, and who was brother german unto
Joseph: who as soon as they arrived in Egypt, repaired unto Joseph, beseeching
him that they might be permitted to buy come, (for nothing was done without his
express command) for even then found each man fit occasion Genesis 42.
to honor the king, when they bethought themselves how to honor Joseph. He
taking knowledge of his brothers, who thought on nothing less then of him (by
reason that in his Joseph sou^deth his brothers to the end he might understand
his fathers and Beniamins estate. Rubens answer unto Joseph, both for himself
and his brothers.
father, and in what estate he lived, during the time of his absence; and what
was become of Benjamin his brother: for he was sore afraid, least they had
offered the same hard measure to the lad, which they had inflicted on him. But
they were stricken with a mighty fear, bethinking Ruben the eldest of them,
began after this manner to plead their common cause. Neither are we come hither
(said he) as spies, neither under pretense to indomage the king; but dire
famine (whose fury we seek to prevent) has compelled us to come into this
country, grounding our selves on your humanity; who (as we have heard) have
not only made offer of sale of come, and means of sustenance to your
citizens: but also unto all strangers. And that we are brothers and borne of
the same father, our very countenances The year of the world. 2238. before
the Nativity of Christ. 1726.
testify no less, in that they vary not very much the one from the other. Our
father by name, is Jacob; by nation, an Hebrew: who begat us his twelve sons
on four women, who while they all were in safety, our affairs were fortunate
and prosperous: but one of them being dead, whose name was Joseph, our
domestical fortunes began to grow to ruin. Our father languisheth in
continual lamentations, whose tears do no less afflict us, then in times
past the untimely death of our dearest brother did affect us. Now are we come
to buy corn, having left in our fathers custody the youngest of our brothers
called Benjamin: That thus it is, if so thou please to send any one unto our
house, thou may be assured. Thus spoke Ruben both on his own and his
brothers behalf, whereby he might exempt from Joseph his sinister opinion of
them, who knowing that both his father and brother were in health, commanded
them to be shut in prison, under pretense Joseph commands his brothers to
prison.
to call them to further examination upon his better leisure. Some three days
after (calling them before him) he began thus: Since (says he) you protest
that you came not hither into this kingdom on purpose, either to prejudice the
King, or work treasons toward the state; and that you pretend your selves to
be the sons of one father: you shall induce me to believe that your
allegations be true, if leaving some one with me as pledge of your loyalties
(who shall be well entertained) you bear hence your desired corn unto your
father, and return again unto me, bringing with you your brother, whom (as
you say) you left behind you for this shall be an argument that you feign not.
Amassed at these words, and supposing that their extreme calamity was at hand,
they lamented their fortunes, oftentimes expostulating amongst themselves, that
the dire revenge of their brother oppressed with indecent tyranny, was fallen
upon them. Ruben reprehended their too late and unprofitable penitencie,
saying, that those afflictions Joseph's brothers repent them of that evil they
had done unto him
which God (the just revenger of innocence) had inflicted on his impious
brothers, were constantly to be borne. After this manner spoke they one unto
another, supposing that no man was present who understood the Hebrew tongue:
and they all lamented being inwardly touched with the words of Ruben, and
condemned their perpetrated wickedness, as if they had not been the authors of
the fact, for which at that time they thought that God did most justly punish
them. Joseph beholding them in this perplexity, unable to dissemble any longer
his brotherly love, in that the tears already began to burst out of his eyes,
which at that time he desired to conceal, he departed from among them.

Not long after returning again unto them, he retained Simeon with him, who in
the mean Joseph sends away his brothers, and only retains Simeon.
Jacobs sons returning into Chanaan told their father all that which had
happened unto them in Egypt, and how they were attached for spies, and
traitors to that country; and that when they protested that they were
brethren, and that the eleventh was left at home with their father, they would
not believe them: moreover that Simeon was left pledge with the governor,
until Benjamin came thither to give testimony of their truth: whereupon they
desired their father, that without contradiction or sinister conceit, to send
their younger brother with them. But Jacob was displeased Jacob is sore grieved
for Simeons absence, and because Benjamin should depart from him. Genes 39.
Simeon was left behind, he thought it worse then death also to be deprived of
Benjamin; and neither could Ruben with his prayers (offering his sons for
pledges, that if any sinister fortune should fall upon Benjamin by the way, the
Grandfather might revenge him on his children) persuade Jacob to yield consent:
but they uncertain what to do, were more and more terrified, in that they
found their money enclosed in their sackes of corn. Now when corn began
already to fail them, Jacob being compelled by force of famine, determined to
send Benjamin with his other brothers: for it was unlawful for them to return
into Egypt, except they kept their covenant. And whereas necessity pressed
them daily more and more, and his sons ceased not instantly to call upon him;
yet as yet was he doubtful and unresolved: at last Judah a man vehement by
nature, Jacobs sons but in especial Judah urge their father to send Benjamin
with them.
nothing might happen without the will of God, whether it were abroad or at
home: and that without reason he had care of his son Benjamin, in such sort
as it was not possible for them to get ought out of Pharaos country which was
necessary for their nourishment; that he ought also to have care of the life
of Simeon, least whilst he dallied and delayed to send Benjamin on the
journey, Simeon in the mean time should be slain by the Egyptians. Moreover
he exhorted him to commit the care of his son unto God, promising to bring
him back again in safety, The year of the world. 2238. before Christ's
Nativity. 1726. Jacob sends his sons with presents into Egypt.
or else to die together with him: Moreover he said, that certain gifts
gathered from the profits of Chanaan, as the juice of Mirabolans, Stacte,
Terebinth, and Honey, should be sent as presents unto Joseph, together with the
double price of their come. Thu^ shedding tears on both sides, they depart
from their father, leaving him miserably tormented for the health of his
sons, and contrariwise suspecting with themselves, least through his absence
their father should be slain with sorrow. In this perplexity spent they a
whole day. At last the old man remained in his house wholly afflicted, and they
travailing into Egypt, did mitigate their present grief with the hope of
better fortune; where no sooner were they atriued, but they repaired unto
Joseph, being sore afraid least it should be laid to their charge, that under
color of fraud and deceit they had carried away with them the price of their
former come; which presently before Joseph's steward they Simeon was suddenly
set at liberty to converse among his brethren. Now when Joseph was returned
from the service of the King they offer him presents, and requiring of them
Jacobs sons arrive in Egypt, and Simeon is set at liberty.
how their father did, they answered that he was in health: then perceiving
that Benjamin was yet alive, whom he saw among them, he asked whether that were
their younger brother, and hearing that it was he, he only uttered these
words, that God had the providence of all things, and departed from them being
unwilling that any of them should see him shed tears, which he could not any
longer contain. Inuiting them afterward unto a banquet, he commanded Joseph
unknown to his brethren saluteth both them and Benjamin.
and whereas he kindly entertained all of them; he honored Benjamin with a
double share. After the banquet, at such time as they were all laid down to
rest, he commanded the Steward to measure out the wheat, which every one
should bear away with him, and to hide the price thereof again in their
sacks; but in Beniamins sack he commanded him to shut his cup wherein he most
delighted: which he therefore did, with intent to make trial of their loves
toward Benjamin, and whether they would stick unto him being accused of
theft, or leaving him behind as a malefactor, return unto their father, as if
the matter no ways touched them. Which being done according as he had
commanded it, early in the morning all Jacobs sons arose, and taking with
them Simeon, departed onwards of their journey, rejoicing as well at his
restitution, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 6. Genesis 44. Joseph temp^eth Beniamins
brothers, whether they would assist him. Joseph's brethren are staid in their
iourny. Jacobs sons are accused of theft.
Beniamins return, whom they both promised and protested to bring back again
to their father; when behold suddenly a troop of horsemen roundly beset them,
amongst whom was that servant who had hid the cup in the sack. Now they being
troubled by this sudden incursion, and asking them why they set upon them whom
they so lately had both invited and entertained so honorably? the Egyptians
answered and exclaimed against them, calling them wicked men, who forgetting
their late benefits received, and Joseph's gentleness and humanity, were so
wicked as to return him injuries for his courtesies, threatening them that they
should be punished for their theft: and telling them that although for a time
they had deceived the minister of the table, yet could they not deceive God;
and again, asking them whether they were well in their wits, in supposing that
for this offense they should not be incontinently punished. Beniamins, not for
that they were ignorant that the cup lay hid in Benjamin; they hoped also that
he would not be found guilty of falsehood, for which cause they more freely
vpbraided their persecuters, obiecting unto them how through their importunity
they had been hindered the better part of their journey. Now as they searched
Beniamins sack, they found the cup, whereupon all the brothers began to mourn
and lament, both bewayling their brothers fortune, who was like presently to
suffer death for the theft; and their own mishap, who having The year of
(...) world. 2238. before the (...) of Christ. 1726.
Beniamins safe return, were compelled to falsify the same through this
present accident. And that which further increased their grief, was, that when
as they most of all hoped to be free from dangers, they were by fortunes envy
thrust into so great calamity: confessing themselves to be the authors both of
their fathers, and this their brothers misfortune; who never ceased to
importune and compel their father (although he were unwilling and resisted) to
send the child with them.

Now the ho^semen having la^d hands on Benjamin, led him unto Joseph; whom his
brothers presently followed. Who beholding his brother thrust into prison, and
the rest bemoaning Benjamin is attached for the^.
them round about him in mourning habits: Have you, said he (o most wicked men)
either so contemned my humanity, or Gods providence, as that you durst attempt
and offer such an heinous Benjamin, calling again to their remembrance Joseph's
iniu^ies, saying that he was happy, who delivered by death from life was exempt
from all calamities; and that (if he lived) God inflicted that plague on them
for his sake. They said also, that they were the plague and great misfortune of
their father, because that (to his former sorrow, which he had conceived even
until that time of Joseph's death) they had also annexed this new misery:
neither did Ruben desist to reprehend them in bitter manner of that wickedness
which they had committed. But Joseph told them that he dismissed them all
(saying that their innocence was approved unto him) and that he only would be
contented with the lads punishment: For (said he) neither is it reasonable that
he should be delivered for the love of

Whilst al of the^ were grievously wounded with these words (so that scarcely
one of the^ could speak for sorrow) Judah (who had persuaded his father to send
Benjamin with them, and who amongst the rest was a man of confidence) purposed
to expose himself to all danger, under resolution to deliver his brother from
peril: whereupon he addressed himself to Joseph and spoke Judas oration un to
Joseph for Benjamin.
thus. Dread Lord (quoth he) we confess that we are all ready to suffer
punishment (although we have not all of us committed the offense, but only the
youngest amongst us) and although we suppose his life to be almost desperate,
yet our only hope as yet rests in your goodness and clemency. For which cause
we beseech you, that you will not only have compassion of us, but of Joseph's
death, how grievously my father digesteth the want of his children, I would not
so earnestly entreat for his safety, but so far forth and no otherwise, but
as it might redound to the praise of thy clemency; and were there not some to
whom our death would bring both grief and discontent, we were willing all of
us to suffer punishment. But now whereas we have not so much commiseration of
our selves (although as yet we be but young, and have not much tasted the
pleasures and fruit of this life) as of our wretched parents being drowned in
years and cares, we offer up The year of the world, 2238. bef^e Christ's birth
1726.
unto thee these our prayers in his name also, and beseech thee to grant us
life, though at this day we are under thy justice for our offenses. Assuredly
he is a good man, and begat us, that we should be like unto him: worthy is he
never to taste or to be tried by any such calamity, who now through our absence
is discruciate with care and sorrow. Now if so be he should receive any tidings
either of our death, or the cause thereof; he will not endure any more to live:
the infamy of our deaths will shorten his days; and make his death by this
means more unhappy, who rather then he should hear the rumors of our shame,
would hasten his death in supposing them. All these well considered, (although
thou art justly moved by this offense;) remit the revenge unto our father, and
rather let thy pity toward him, then our iniquity toward thee, prevail with
thee. Impart this honor to his old age, which if it be deprived of our
presence, neither Power given to save.
thou extendest toward many, the more honor thou redoublest on thy head: now
it lies in thy power by for giving our brothers error to give us all life.
For neither can we be safe, except he be saved; neither may we return home
unto our father, except he return: but here must we suffer whatsoever our
brother suffers. Neither do we crave any other mercy at thy hand (dread
prince) if we be repulsed in this, but that thou will inflict one and the same
punishment on us, in no other manner, then as if we had been partakers of the
felony: for this were more better for us, then that we our selves through
sorrow, should offer violence to our own souls. I will not allege or urge
his youth, or judgment as yet vnripened, neither will I infer that pardon is
usually granted unto such: but here will I make an end, that whether we be
condemned in that I have not sufficiently pleaded his cause, or whether we be
absolved; we may wholly ascribe this When Judah had spoken thus, he humbled
himself at Joseph's feet, indeuouring as much as in him lay, to mollify Genesis
40.
and appease his ire; in like sort also all the other brothers prostrated
themselves, offering themselves to die for Benjamin.

But Joseph conquered with pity, and unable any longer to personate a
displeased man, sent away Joseph makes himself known to his brethren
all those that were present, and being alone with them, discovered himself
unto his brothers: and in this sort to them only he disclosed himself and
said. I cannot but commend the piety and love which you bear unto your
brother, which I find to be greater then I did expect, gathering my conjectures
from those things which in times past have happened unto me. For to this end have
I done all this, that I might make trial of your brotherly benevolence:
whereof since you have given me a notable proof, I will not ascribe that which
you have done unto me to your natures, but rather wholly to the will of God, who
has at this present furnished you with all things which are profitable for
you, and will hereafter give you greater things, if he withdraw not his
favorable hand from us. When as therefore I understood of my fathers rather
desired then hoped health, and found you to be such as I desired you should be
toward your brother, past you pronounced against me, any ways trouble you,
since you perceive i^ has wanted effect In the year of the world. 2^38.
before Christ's Nativity. 1726.
but rejoice ye at these works of God, and go^ and tell your father that which
you have seen, for fear least he being consumed with immoderate care of you,
I my self be deprived of the chiefest fruit of my feliciti; before he come to
my presence and be made partaker of those benefits. Wherefore depart you, and
bringing with you him, your wives, and children, and all your kindred, come
back unto me: for it were inconvenient (my dear brethren) that you should not
be partakers of my felicity, especially since this famine is as yet to
continue for the come of five years. This said, ^eph embraced his brethren:
but they were wholly confounded in tears and sorrow, and the grea^er was their
repentance, in that they had sinned against so kind a brother. After all this,
there followed a banquet. And the king understanding that Joseph's brethren were
arrived, (as if some good fortune had befallen him) right heartily rejoiced, and
he gave them chariots The king rejoices to know that Joseph's brother^ were
arrived. Hedio and Ru^nus, chapter 7. al. 4, Jacob rejoices to hear the
promotions and honors of Joseph.
Benjamin) they returned home into their country. But after that Jacob
understood by his sons in what estate his son Joseph was, that he had not
only escaped from death (which he had so long time bewailed) but also that he
lived in high prosperity, and ministered to the king of Egypt, and had welnie
the whole government of the kingdom under his hands: he easily believed all
things that were told him, and acknowledged the great works of God, and his
goodness showed unto him, although for a time it seemed to be intermitted. And
a little time after, he addressed himself to go and visit his son Joseph.

CHAP. IIII.
How Jacob with all his progeny departed unto his son.

But when he arrived near the fountain of Covenant; he offered in that place
a sacrifice unto God; and fearing least his children should inhabit Egypt, by
reason of The year of the world. 2239. before the birth of Christ. 1725.
the fertility of the place, and that his posterity by not returning back
into the land of Chanaan, should leese the possession of that which God had
promised them; and furthermore, doubting least that his journey into Egypt,
being by him enterprised against the will of God, should be ominous unto his
children; and suspecting likewise least he should die before he came to Joseph's
presence: he was wonderfully perplexed in mind. Whilst thus he rumina Genes.
46. God appears to Jacob about the fountain of covenant.
time God appeared unto him and called him twice by his name: who asking who it
was that called him, God answered: Do thou not acknowledge (O Jacob) that
God, who has both protected thee and thine ancestors, and succored you all
in your necessities? who contrary to thy fathers purpose made thee Lord of his
family, and when as by thy self thou did travel into Mesopotamia, I
brought to pass, that being matched in wedlock very happily, thou returnedst
into thy country back again, being blessed with many children, and stored
with much riches. I also kept thy progeny in safety, and when it seemed thou
had lost Joseph, I raised him to that high step of dignity wherein now he
lives; and made him the next in person to the king of Egypt. And now also am I
come unto thee unto this end, that I may guide thee in this thy journey,
Joseph, and that thy posterity shall be mighty and famous for many ages, and
shall posses^e that land, the empire whereof I have promised them.Assured and
made confident by this dream, he more willingly ^astened, both he, his sons,
with all their progeny into Egypt, whose number amounted Jacob with his ^onnes
and nephews depart into Egypt.
to the sum of 70. Their names in that they are somewhat hard, I had not
written down, except it were to satisfy some, who contend that we are
Egyptians and not Mesopotamians, The sons of Jacob therefore were twelve in
number, of whom Joseph came thither long before them. Now are the rest to be
reckoned up, with every one of their progenies. Ruben had four sons, Jacobs
progeny.
Anoches, Phalles, Essaron, and Char^sus. Simeon had six, Iumilus, Iaminus,
Puthodus, Iachenus, G^r, Saar, Leui also had three, ^lsemis, Caathus, and
Mararis. Judah had likewise three, Sala, Phar^s, Zara; with two sons of
Phares, Esrom and Amyrus. Issachar had four, Thulas, Phruras, Iobus, and
Samaron. Zabulon had three, Saradus, Elon, and Ianel. And these were the
children ^e had by Lea, who also led with her Dina her daughter: the number of
whom amounts to 33. But Rachel had two sons, of which the elder who was
called Joseph, had likewise two, Manasses and Ephraim. But Benjamin had ten,
Bolossus, Baccharis, Asabel, G^a, Naemanes, Ises, Aros, Nomphthis, Optais, and
Sarodus. These fourteen added to those abouenamed, make up the number of
forty seven. And this was the legitimate issue of Jacob. But on Bala Rachels
handmaid The year of the world, 1293. before Christ's birth 1725.
Dan and Nephthalim, who was attended by four sons, Eleinus, Gunes, Sares
and Hellimus. But Dan had only one son called Vsis. Now if those be added to
the above named, they make up the number of 54. But Gad and Asser were borne by
Zelpha Leas handmaid, of these Gad was attended by seven sons: Zophonias,
Vgis, Sunis, Zabros, Erines, Erodes and Ariel. Asser had one daughter and six
male children, whose names were Iomnes, Essus, Iubes, Baris, Abarus, Melmiel.
These fifteen being added to the foresaid fifty four, make up the number
abouenamed, together with Jacob. But Joseph understanding that his father was
at hand (for Judah posted before to give him notice thereof) he went out to
meet him, and incountered him near to a town called Heroes, who was seized
with such extreme and unexpected joy, that he had almost expired; Jacob almost
dec^ased for joy.
but Joseph reco^forced him, being himself almost endangered through extreme
joy, yet not in such Joseph in what studies Joseph with his five brethren
re^orteth to Pi^arao.
he took delight: who answered him that his exercise was keeping of cattle,
and that he had no other trade. And this answer made he to the intent they
might not be divided one from another, but that living altogether, they might
take care of their father another reason was, least emulation should happen
betwixt them and the Egyptians, if so be they should be conversant in the same
studies; for it was not lawful for that nation to exercise the shepherds
trade. Now when Jacob was brought into the Kings presence, and after he had
done him reverence, and prayed God G^sis 47. Jacob talks with Pharao and is
appointed to inhabit Heliopolis.
for the prosperity both of him and his Realm; Pharao asked him how long he
had lived: and The famine in Egypt.
did not ouerflow the earth, neither extended his arms over the same: on the
other side God ra^ned not upon the earth: moreover in that the evil was
unsuspected; it was more grievous especially to the communaltie, who had laid
up nothing, neither did Joseph give them come without ready money; which when
they began to want, they exchaunged their cattle and slaves for come; but they
that had lands, sold a certain portion thereof unto the king for their
provision. The year of the world, 2245. before Christ's birth 1719.
And when as by this means al these possessions ca^e into the kings hands,
they went to inhabit A great p^ redounded to the king by this famine.
Finally, this necessity reduced both the bod^ and minds of the wholenation
into servitude after such a manner, that they esteemed no labor or means
unseemly, that might serve them toward the maintenance of their sustenance.
But when the famine ceased, and the earth watered by the ouerflow of the flood,
began to regather her former fertility; Joseph visiting every city of the
kingdom, and assembling the multitude in every one of them, restored them the
profits of th^se lands which they had sold unto the king, and exhorted the^ to
manure the same in no worse manner the^ they would do their own; commanding
them to pay the fifth part unto the King, which was due unto him by his
prerogative and kingly right. Who rejoicing at this unexpected restitution
earnestly intended Joseph commanded them to pay the fifth part of their profits
to the king.
and prosecuted their tillage, and by this means not only Joseph's authority,
but also the p^oples hearts were not a little tied unto the King: and the
inheritance of the fifth part of the pro^s remained with the Kings that
succeeded and all their posteri^e.

But Jacob after he had lived seuentene years in Egypt, ended his life
betwixt the hands of his sons, having first besought God to give them
prosperity and abundance, and prophesied that every one of their posterity
should attain to the possession of a part of the land of Chanaan, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 8.
all which not long after came to pass. Besides, praising his son Joseph for
that forgetting the injuries done unto him, he had bestowed diverse bene^s on
his brethren, yea and such as well beseemed his benefactors; he commanded his
sons, that they should admit Joseph sons Ephraim and Manasses into their
number, at such time as they should divide the land of Chanaan, Jacob died when
^e was 147. years old.
at such time as he had lived one hundredth and fifty years wa^ing three,
being second to none of his ancestors in piety, and obtained the reward which
he ought justly to possess, in that he was a man adorned with so many virtues.
But Joseph by the Kings permission went and transported his fathers body into
Hebron, and there buried it very magnificently. But his brothers Jacob is
buried in Hebron.
fearing to return with him, and refusing to follow him, in that they
suspected their father being dead, that he would be revenged on them in that
they had not any friend left alive, under whose The year of the world. 2311.
before the Na^uitie of Christ. (...). Joseph dies when he was 110. years old.
Ioseph^ ho^es translated into Chana^n.
spent their lives in happiness, died in Egypt, whose bodies their sons and
nephews transported and buried in Hebron: but Joseph's bones were afterward
translated by the Hebrews into Chanaan, at such time as they departed out of
Egypt into Chanaan: for hereunto had he bound

CHAP. V.
Of the affliction which the Hebrews endured in Egypt, for the space of four
hundredth years.

THe Egyptians are a Nation addicted unto delicacy, and impatient of labor,
subject The history of the book of Exodus. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9. Exodus
1. The envy of the Egyptians toward the Hebrews. The year of the world,
2353. before Christ's natiuit^. 1611. The Hebrews insupportable servitude.
only to their pleasures, and affecting gain: whence it came to pass, that
bearing hatred toward the Hebrews, and envying their happiness, they were very
euilly disposed toward them. For seeing the race of the Israelites flourish
and to abound in riches, which they Joseph had done unto them: and after the
royalty was transported into an other family, they committed diverse outrages
against the Israelites, and complotted against them in what manner they might
more grievously afflict them. For they were enjoined by them to cut Nilus into
diverse trenches, and to e^iron their Cit^es with walls, and to build
fortifications and banks, whereby the inundations of the flood might be
diuerted. They also vexed our nation in building their hie and vain Pyramides,
compelling them to learn diverse arts, and to accustom themselves to endure
labor; and in such afflictions led they their lives for the space of 400.
years, the Egyptians studying naught else but to tire the Israelites with The
prophecy as touching Moses.
time to come should grievously afflict the estate of the Egyptians, and
wonderously enhance the good hap of the Israelites; who should su^passe all
other in virtue, and purchase to himself immortal glory, if so be he should
attain to ^ns estate. Wherewith the King being greatly terrified, he published
an edict by the advice of this secretary, that whatsoever male child should be
borne amongst the Israelites, he should be cast into the flood to be drowned:
he commanded Pharao commanded that all the male children of the Israelites
should be done to death.
with child, carefully to keep and mark their children at such time as they
were delivered, For it was enjoined the^ that they should be brought to bed by
such midwiues, who by reason of consanguinitie with that Nation, should not
transgress the king^ commandment. He enacted also a law with a penalty,
that if any should be so bold to conceal their children, both they and all
their family should be done to death. Great was this their calamity, not only
in that respect, because they were deprived of their children, and for that the
parents themselves were made the ministers to murder their own children, but
foreseeing also the future time they were intolerably dismayed, expecting
naught else but the certain and fatal ex^pation of their wholenation, by
reason that when the children were s^ine, the parents themselves not long after
were ass^ed to Exodus 2.
both the child, of whom the sacred secretary had fore prophesied, was secretly
brought up undiscovered by the kings spies, and approved by the events of his
life, that he was no false Prophet. Amarames an Hebrew borne and a noble man
amongst his Nation, fearing both the pub like peril, least the wholenation
should be brought to nothing through the want of issue, and his own private
misfortune, whose wife at home was big with child and ready to lie down; was
The year of the world, 2373. before Christ's Nativity, 1591. Amarames Moses
father prays God to be merciful to the Hebrews.
troubled in his mind, and uncertain what to do. For which cause he made his
recourse unto God, beseeching him that at the length he would have mercy on
those men of whom only he had been perpetually honored; and that it would
please him to bring to end the present affliction which threatened the whole
nation with utter ruin and destruction. But God being moved unto mercy by his
most humble prayer appeared to him in a dream, and recomforted him,
commanding him to be confident: telling him that he had in memory the piety
of his auncecestors, and that he would for ever remunerate them, even as in
times past he had been gracious to their forefathers. For it was he that had
increased their posterity, and multiplied them to so mighty a nation, that by
his favor Abraham departing alone out of Mesopotamia into Chanaan, besides
other felicities, had issue by his wife that was before time barren, and left
ample possessions Ismael, Arabia; to Chaeturas children Troglottida, and to
Isaac Chanaan. Neither can you ever forget without note of impiety and
ingratitude, the attempts also which were happily achieved in war by my
means: but Jacobs name also is renowned amongst foreign nations, both in
respect of the felicity wherein he lived, and also for that prosperity which
by hereditarie right happened unto his posterity, who taking their original
from 70. men that accompanied their father into Egypt, are now increased to the
number of six hundredth thousand: know therefore now also, that I inwardly and
heartily affect your public security, and privately thy glory. For this
child, for fear of whose nativity the Egyptians have condemned all your
children unto death, shall be borne unto thee: he neither shall be discovered
by the constituted spies, and after he has escaped beyond all expectation,
shall he be brought up, and in his time shall Amram, he awaked and told it to
his wife Iochabel, and by reason of the prediction of this dream, their
suspicion and fear the rather increased more and more: for they were not only
pensive in respect of their child, but also by reason of the future great good
fortune that was promised them. But anon after Moses birth.
the woman being brought a bed, gave credit to the Oracle; who had so easy and
gentle a labor, that she beguiled the overseers and spies, in that she felt
none of those throws which do commonly Amram fearing to be surprised, and sore
doubting least he should incur the kings displeasure, if the matter were
discovered, whereby both he and the child should be made away, and Gods
promises should be frustrate; he had rather wholly commit the safety of his
son to his providence: supposing that if the boy were hidden, which
notwithstanding would be hard to effect, yet that it would be troublesome unto
him to live in continual peril both of his own and his sons safety:
moreover, he thought that God would puruey some means of assurance, to the
intent that nothing of that which he had foretold might be proved false.
Grounding himself on this resolution, they prepared and made a cradle of
sedge, after the manner of a couch, so great as it was sufficient to lay the
child in at ease, and having pitched Moses ^ast into the flood.
it was borne down by the stream. Mariam, the sister of the young infant, by
her mothers command went along the bank on the other side of the river,
observing whither at length the basket would be carried, and where it did ariue.
At that time God manifestly declared, that nothing is achieved by man's
wisdom, but that all things are brought to pass by his omnipotent bounty,
and that they who for their profit and particular security seek the ruin and
destruction of others with never so much subtlety, care, and diligence; yet
are they often times deceived in their expectations: again, that they that
submit their wills unto Gods will, are warranted from all wrongs by such means
as were never thought on; which may most manifestly be perceived

Thermuthis the kings daughter walking along the river side, espied this basket
carried away by the Thermuthis Pharaos daugh ter causes Moses to be taken out
of the ^uer.
course of the stream, and presently commanded certain swimmers to draw the
cradle on dry land, and bring it before her: who executing her command, she
opened the basket and beheld the child, who in that he was fair and well
featured did greatly delight her. For God so loved and favored Moses, that he
caused him both to be nourished and brought up by them, who for fear least he
should be borne, had decreed to destroy all the rest of the race of the
Hebrews. The year of the world. 2273. before the birth of Christ. 1591.
Thermuthis therefore commanded them to fetch her some one nurse, who might
give the child suck; who refusing the same, and all other nurses whatsoever
that were sent for to suckle him: Mariam as if by good fortune and not of set
purpose, she had light into their company, began to speak thus unto Termuthis.
In vain (said she) O Queen, do thou endeavor whilst thou striuest to give
this babe suck by any but an Hebrewe nurse, for he will not accept it: but if
thou call unto thee a nurse of the same nation, and agreeable with his nature,
doubtless he will take the nipple. This speech of hers being both heard and
plausibly accepted; the Queen commanded her to execute the same, and to bring
her an Hebrew woman that gave suck: which she diligently performing, returned
and brought her mother with her, whom none of the assistants knew, who
presenting her breast unto the child he willingly took the dugge; so that upon
the The year of the world, 2376. before Christ's nativity, 1588. Moses whence
he received his name. Moses the seventh after Abraham.
Moses; for the Egyptians call water Mo, and saved, yses; so this name composed
of these two, was imposed on this child, who afterward without exceptions
became the wisest man among the Hebrews, according as God had before
prophecled. For he was the seventh after Abraham; for he was Amrams son, and
Amram son unto Cathus, and he to Leui, and Leui to Jacob; who took his
original from Isaac the son of Abraham. He had a iudgementriper then became
his age, for even amongst his childish delights he showed himself more
discreet then all his equals, and in whatsoever he did, it gave testimony that
at such time as he should attain to man's estate, he would manage mighty
things. When he was but only three years old, God adorned and endowed him
with an Thermuthis in that she had no other issue, adopted him for her heir,
Moses the adopted son of Thermuthis daughter unto Pharao.
and conducting him unto her father, she presented him before him, saying, that
she was careful of a successor, by reason God had not vouchsafed him to have
any issue. For (says she) I have brought up this infant no less excellent in
wit then divine in beauty, and have received him miraculously by the bounty
and grace of Nilus, whom I have decreed to adopt my child, and to establish
Moses pulling it from his head after a childish manner, cast it on the ground,
and spurned it with his feet; which act of his was supposed ominous to the
Realm, and dangerous for the King. Whereupon the sacred secretary (who had
foretold that his nativity would be the destruction of the Egyptians) wills
them to kill the child, and enforced himself to enact it, crying out with a
loud voice and speaking unto the King after this manner: O King, this child by
whose death God promises us securirie, has already confirmed the presage,
insulting over thy kingdom and spurning at thy Diadem. Take from the
Egyptians that fear which they have conceived through him, by his death: and
from Thermuthis hastily conveyed and snatched him thence, and the King was not
over forward to lay hands on him, by reason that Moses delivered from death.
God dispensed all things in that sort, in that he had a care of Moses
preservation. He was therefore very carefully brought up, and in respect of him
the Hebrews in general were replenished with good hope; but to the Egyptians
his education both was suspected and grudged at: but by reason that if the lad
should have been slain, there was not any one either a kin or adopted, or
otherwise whatsoever, that had regard of the estate of the Egyptians, they
abstained from his slaughter. Being therefore thus borne and after this manner
brought up, at such time as he increased in years, he evidently by his virtue
made it known unto the Egyptians, that he was borne Hedio and Ruffinus chap.
10. al. 7.
to abase their pride, and to exalt the Hebrews by this occasion which
ensues: The Aethiopians, The Egyptians war against the Ethiopians.
disgrace which their enemies had offered them: but in the battle they were
all put to flight, so that some of them were slain; and the rest shamefully
flying, returned with ignominy worse then death, into their own country. The
Ethiopian made proud with this good fortune, instantly pursued them; and
supposing it a cowa^dly part in them, not to take the benefit of The year of
the ^ld 2376. before Christ's Nati^ 1588.
their present good fortune, and conceiving an assured hope of conquering
Egypt, they generally wasted the same: and having tasted of the sweetness of
pillage, without any temper or moderation in their victory, they were
incensed to attempt greater matters. And whereas they perceived, that having
wasted all their neighbor regions, no man durst sally out to encounter them in
arms, they marched forward toward Memphis, even unto the sea, arriving near
no City that either had the heart, or durst make head against them. By which
calamities the Egyptians being ouersore oppressed, they send one to take
counsel of the Oracle, in what manner they might prevent their miseries; and
when as an answer was given them, that they should choose an Hebrew to assist
them in the wars: the king commanded his daughter to give them Moses, who The
Egyptians require Moses to be their Captain.
together with the Empire, might govern the whole army. She taking an oath of
the king, Moses, that he was called to the succors of her country: and
contrariwise she blamed the Sacrificers, who were not ashamed to demand his
aid and assistance, whom they had foreiudged, and adjudged to be slain as
their common enemy. But Moses exhorted by Thermuthis and the king, willingly
took the charge upon him. Whereat the Priests of both nations were very
joyful; for the Egyptians hoped, that when by his virtue and valou^ he had
overcome their enemies, they afterward might more easily dispatch and murder
him, by some treason and sinister means: and the Hebrews conceived a hope,
that they might depart out of Egypt, by reason that Moses was the General of
the army. Moses therefore making haste, before such time as the enemies had
any notice that he was dislodged, he levied his army, Moses marches against
the Ethiopia^s
he made manifest his most admirable prudence. For the journey by land being
very dangerous, by reason of the multitude of serpents (for the country
thereabouts breeds up al sorts of the^, and some of that kind, as the like
thereof are not seen in any place else, all different in propriety,
malignitie, and horrible form: and amongst these likewise there are some
winged, and apt to fly, who not only offend those that they encounter on the
earth very privily, but also tower very high in the air, who houer about to
hurt those that are not aware of them) he for the security of his army, and
to the end he might march without any inconvenience, invented this marvelous
and admirable stratageme. For he caused two paniers of sedge to be made, in
form of cofers, and filled them with certain birds which were called Ibes,
who are mortal enemies to

When as therefore he arrived in the country of serpents, he let fly his Ibes
against the venomous beasts, and made use of them to encounter the other; and
when he had marched in this sort, he attained and surprised the Ethiopians,
before they suspected him; and suddenly c^arging them, he overcame them in
battle, spoiling them of the hope they had to conquer Egypt; The victory
which Moses and the Egyptions had against the Ethiopians.
and entering the towns of Ethiopia, he rased them, and made a great slaughter
of the inhabitants. The Egyptian army having tasted the happy success that
happened unto them under Moses, intermitted not their occasion, especially for
that they saw that the Ethiopians were welnigh conquered, or rather wholly
destroyed: and in the end having driven them even unto Saba, the chief city
of Ethiopia (which Cambyses called Meroe, for the love which he bore unto his
sister, who was so called) they besieged them. The City was strong, and very
hard Saba their chief city besieged.
to be assailed, by reason of the river Nilus, which environed it round about:
on the other side, the rivers of Astapus and Astaborra did flow in so freshly,
as they could neither break the course of the water, nor wade over the
stream: for the city is builded in an Island, environed with a strong wall
round about, having great rampires betwixt the rivers and the walls built, to
resist the inundations of the waters; which are the cause that the City may be
very hardly taken, although the opposite army had found means to pass the
water. Now when Moses was very Tharbis the daughter of the king of Ethiopia
Tharbis the (...). of Ethiops daughter requires love and marriage at Moses
hands.
beholding Moses, at such time as he approached with his army near unto the
walls of the City, and seeing how valiantly he fought and behaved himself,
and wondering at the exploits and enterprises which he made (which was the
cause that the Egyptians, almost despairing of their estates and liberty, were
grown so forward; and how the Ethiopians, not long before esteemed the
conquere^s, and happy in their warlike exploits and fortunate executions, were
in the The year of the world. 2376. before Christ's birth 1588.
Moses accomplished The year of the world. 2400. before the birth of Christ.
156^.
the marriage, and sent the Egyptians back again into their country. Who
conceived an occasion of hatred against Moses, because he had been the cause
of their safety; and began seriously to consult and devise amongst themselves,
how they might betray him, s^pecting The Egyptian^ seek to betray Moses.
of himself had him in suspicion, as well in respect of this hatred he bare
him for his noble carriage and courage, during such time as he was general; as
also for the fear he had conceived of the destruction of Egypt foretold by his
priests; who incessantly incited him against Moses, so that the King was upon
the point to lay hands on him and m^rther him.

But he having intelligence of those his practices, escaped and fled secretly,
flying from his presence Exodus 2. The year of the world. 2413. before Christ's
birth 1551. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 11. ^l. 8. Moses flies to the City of
Mad^n.
through the desert, by which the enemies least suspected that he should have
fled: and although at no place in his journey he found victuals to sustain
him, yet overcame he his penury by his patience. And arriving near a City of
the Madians, situate upon the snoare of the Abraham and Chaeturas sons) he
sat him down near unto a fountain refreshing himself, and taking his ease
after his laborious journey: for it was abo^ noonested, and the City already
appeared in his sight. In this place there befell an occasion unto him, derived
from the manners and custom of living among the inhabitants of the country;
by which he both expressed his virtue, and found an opportunity to better his
estate. For whereas that Region is sore travailed with want of water, the
shepherds had a custom to strive which of them should first possess the
pits, for fear least the water should be quite consumed by others, before that
they and their cattle had quenched the^ thirst. To the ^taine therefore there
cam^ seven virgins, which were sisters and daughters of Raguel (...) ^st, whom
the inhabitants of that place held in great estimation, who had the charge to
attend their fathers Moses ass^teth (...) daughte^ against the shephea^ds.
and drove away the virgins, to the end they might be masters of the water:
Moses suppos^ng it a matter unworthy his honor, to suffer this o^rage, and to
endure that by violence men should deprive virgins of their right and interest;
he drove away the shepherds, who would have enjoyed that which appertained not
unto them, and gave necessary succors to the dismayed maidens. Who as soon
as they were returned into their fathers presence, told him the outrage that
was done them by the shepherds, and the succors that they found by the hands
of a str^nger, beseeching him that the courtesy which he had shown unto them,
should not be Moses into his presence, to the end he might remunerate him
according as he deserved. As soon as he came into his presence, Raguel told
him how his daughters had given him to understand, how kindly he had assisted
the^, and having his virtue in admiration; he said that he had not adventured
himself, not done kindness to those that were without sense of the courtesies
that were showed unto them, but unto those who were capable to give him
thanks, yea so ready to requi^e him, that the greatness of their requital
should far surpass the measure of his humanity. He therefore adopted him
for his son, and gave him one of his daughters to wife, and made him Raguel
marieth one of his daughters to Moses. He^o and Ru^nus, chapter 12. ^l. 9
^tendent and master of ^s flocks (in which in times past ^e wealth and riches
of for^ Moses having obtained this good fortune at Ietheglaeus hands (for such
was Raguel^ su^ame) he abode there with him and attended his flocks. But not
long after he led his ^attell to grase near to the mountain S^, which is the
highest of all those that are in that quarter, and good for pasturage, by
reason of the wholesome herbs that grow there abouts, which no^standing was not
fed upon before that time, because the shepherds durst not frequent there
abouts, by reason of their opinion that dwelt in that country, who said that
God inhabited that mountain: there happened there unto him a maruailous
prodigy, which was, that The year of the world, 1454. before Christ's
Nativity, 1510. Exodus 3. God appears to Moses in the bush. God conuinceth
Moses and the Israelites by miracles, to the end they might put trust in his
promises.
a flame of fire seemed round about him in a bush, without offensing either the
green herbs, or the flowers, or the bows charged with fruit, although the
flame were both great and vehement. He not a little amassed at this unexpected
spectacle, at last grew more and more amassed when as he heard a voice issuing
out of the fire, which called him by his name; taxing and accusing him of
boldness, in that he was not afraid to tread upon that ground, which hitherto
was inaccessible, and religiously reverenced, and vnhanted by men; counselling
him that he should depart a far off from the flame, and content himself with
that vision: for although that he were a virtuous man, and descended from great
personages, yet that he ought not to be curious to make further search into the
same. The same voice also told him, that the honor and glory which he obtained
amongst men, was by the assistance of God; charging him to be of good courage,
Abraham has dwelt; and they shall enjoy all sorts of blessings under the
conduct of thee and thy prudence. Moreover it commanded him, that having
brought the Hebrews out of Egypt, he should offer sacrifice of thanksgiving,
at such time, as he should arrive again in that place. And such was the Oracle
which he received from out of the flame. Moses altogether ravished at that
which he had both heard and seen, spoke thus: O Lord, it were madness in me,
and no prudence, if I should distrust thy power the which I reverence, and
which as I know has been manifested unto my predecessors: notwithstanding I
stand in doubt how I, who am a man of no Pharao to permit them to depart from
thence, by whose labors and travels, the Egyptians are daily increased in
goods and riches? Whereupon God gave him to understand, that he should take
unto him a good courage, and promised him, that he himself would assist him,
and that if he had need of eloquence, he would bestow upon him the faculty of
persuasion; or if he were driven to act any thing, that he would redoible his
forces; commanding that in confirmation of those promises he had made Moses rod
is turned into a serpent.
him, he should le^ f^ll his staff upon the ground: which having done, a
Dragon began to creep upon the ground, and in turning and rouling himself,
lifted up his crest on high; making semblance Moses hand is made white.
sooner had he obeyed, but that he drew it out altogether white, and in color
resembling chalk: and a little while after it recovered his ordinary form.
Moreover, he further willed him to draw Moses cowreth water on the earth, and
it turns to blood.
water out of the next well, and to power it on the ground, and he saw it
turned into a bloody color. Amassed at these accidents, he was commanded to
be of good courage, and assured that he should have great assistance. Moreover,
that he should use these signs before all men, to the end (said God) that all
may believe that being sent by me, thou do all this according to my
commandments. Furthermore I enjoin thee, that without any further delay,
thou haste Moses is sent into Egypt, to deliver the Israelites.
thee into Egypt; and that thou ^ell day and night, without leesing time,
without delaying any Moses having no cause to distrust that which God had
promised him, and being confirmed by these things whereof he was both an eye
witness, and auditor; he required God, that if there were any occasion to
express the like power in Egypt, he would vouchsafe to further the effect;
beseeching him further that he would not conceal his name from him, to whom he
had participated the hearing of his voice, and the sight of his presence; that
it might please him therefore to declare unto him his name, to the end that
when he should offer sacrifice unto him, he might call upon the same, God
declared unto him his name, which before time had been concealed amongst men,
and of which also it is not lawful for me to speak. Moses wrought these
signs not only at that time, but also when or wheresoever he thought it
requisite: by all which he gave further credit to the fire Pharao King of Egypt
was dead (during whose life he Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. ^3. al. 10.
fled from thence) he requested Raguel that he would give him leave to depart
into Egypt, for the profit of those of his nation; and taking with him Sephora
(who was Raguel daughter and his married wife) and Gerson and Eleazar his
children which he had by her, he departed to go into Egypt. Now this name of
Gerson in the Hebrew tongue signifies, Foreign; and Eleazar The year of the
world. 2454 before Christ's birth 1^10. Moses departs from Madian to go into
Egypt. Moses two sons Gerson and Eleazar. Moses intertayned by the Hebrews
shows them his miracles.
signifies, favored by God, in memory that Moses had escaped from amongst the
Egyptians, by the assistance of the God of his fathers. And as he approached
near the mountains, Aaron his brother by the commandment of God came forth
to meet him, to whom he declared all that which had happened unto him in the
mountain, and that which God had given him in charge. And as they passed
onward of their way, the men of greatest estimation amongst the Hebrews
(having intelligence of his coming) came out to meet him, to whom Moses
presented the abouenamed tokens, by reason that he could not persuade them by
words: and they being astonished at that which they had seen him do, beyond
their expectation; waxed confident, and conceived a good hope of all things,
seeing that God had a care of their safety. When he perceived that the
Hebrews were ready to obey him, and that they protested to follow him Exodus
5. 7. Moses persuades the king of Egypt to dis miss the Israelits.
and the talk which God had in that place with him; and the signs in
particular which had been showed unto him, in confirmation of those things
whereunto he was enjoined; exhorting the King not to mistrust or impeach the
ordinance of God. The King hearing this, began to mock Moses made him see in
effect the signs, which were showed unto him near to the mountain of Sinai.
But the King waxed wroth, and grievously reviled him, accusing him for that in
Moses shows Pharao his miracles.
times past he fled away for fear to be slain in Egypt, and at this present
returned thither under a subtle pretext, cloaking his craft with magike, and
enchantment the more to afright him. And at the same instant he called into his
presence the priests of Egypt, to let them see those signs, and to make it
manifest that the Egyptians were exercised in those sciences: and that he only
was not master in those things, the which he boasted to perform by Gods power,
but that they were but deceits and shadows of meruailes to deceive the
multitude: whereupon the priests cast down their rods, and they became
serpents. Moses being nothing moved herewith, said: O King, I despise not the
wisdom of the Egyptians, but I protest that that which I have done, This
said, he cast his rod upon the ground, commanding it to change it self into a
serpent, whereunto it obeyed, and wandering here and there, it devoured all the
rods of the Egyptians which seemed to be serpents, until they were all of them
consumed; and that done, Moses took his staff into his hand again, Moses ^od
deuoureth the rods of the Egyptians.
and it reassumed his pristine form. But the King being never the more
astonished, (but the rather incensed at that which was done) said, that this
wisdom and subtilty of Moses should profit him nothing, which he used in
disgrace of the Egyptians. He commanded therefore the ouerseer of the works,
who had the government over the Hebrews, that he should remit nothing Pharao
enioyneth the Hebrews to more grievous taskes.
of their labor, but that he should oppress them with more tedious and
grievous taskes, then they were wont to be put unto: whereupon (where he was
wont to allow them straw to make their tile with) he forbear after that time
to give them that allowance, and taxing them in the day time to follow their
work, he appointed them by night to find and bring in their straw, doubling
thereby the weight of their former labor. Notwithstanding all this, Moses
would neither desist from his purpose, in regard of the kings threatening, nor
the continual cry of his countrymen, neither was in any sort appauled thereat;
but with a confident and vnappauled mind (in regard of both) he wholly intended
this, to restore his countrymen to their desired liberty. He therefore once
again accosted the King, persuading him to dismiss the Hebrews, to the end
they might repair unto the mountain Sinai, and sacrifice unto God in that
place: for no less Exodus 6. Moses once more persuades the king to dismiss
the Hebrews.
their children are not begotten according to nature; but all things oppose
themselves as enemies The year of the world 2454. before Christ's Natiutie,
1510.
Moses, and would not be converted, most grievous plagues fell upon the land of
Egypt. (The which I will particularly set down, by reason that at that time
the Egyptians suffered those things, which never before that time happened to
any other people; and for that cause likewise that I may testify and declare,
that Moses has not falsified or erred in any thing that he has done: and
besides, for that it is expedient for men to learn and do those things which
are agreeable to gods will, for fear least he being provoked and incensed
against them, should punish them for their injustice.) For first of all by the
commandment of God, the rivers ouerflowed with blood, neither was it possible
for The first plague of the Egyptians, water turned into blood. Exodus 7.
only colored like blood, but when as likewise any one drank thereof, it
engendered and procured in him diverse dolors, and grievous gripings. Such was
the water to the Egyptians, but to the Hebrews it seemed good and sweet in
taste, without any ways changing the nature thereof. Hereupon the King (not
knowing what to do, and seeing this strange accident, and being afraid by
reason of the Egyptians) permitted the Hebrews to depart: but no sooner was
this plague ceased, but he presently changed his mind, and would not permit
them liberty to depart: for which cause God (seeing his ingratitude, and that
he would not be warned, notwithstanding he had delivered him from the former
calamity) he inflicted an other plague upon Exodus 8. 9. An other plague of
frogs.
the Egyptians. He therefore sent an infinite number of frogs upon them, that
covered and infected Moses that he should take the Hebrews, and that he should
depart: and as soon as he had spoken this, the multitude of frogs vanished and
appeared no more, neither on the earth nor in the water, but that they retained
their accustomed nature. No sooner was the earth delivered from this curse, but
Pharao forgot The third plague, lice.
whence the wretched men perished wretchedly; neither could they exterminate
that race, either by bathings or inunctions. The king troubled with this
calamity, and fearing the ruin of his people, and bethinking him of the
shameful end thereof, he was constrained to remit the better part of his
malignitie. For as touching the Hebrews he permitted them to depart, but
(after the plague was appeased) he required at their hands that they would
leave their wives and children behind them for pledges till their return: and
by this means he provoked Gods Moses that had plagued the Egyptians. For God
filled their country with many and diverse sorts of beasts, (the like whereof
before that time had not been seen in that country) which killed them up, so
that the earth became desolate and unmanured, and if any one amongst them
escaped from death, they were The fourth plague, venomous beasts.
afterward destroyed by sickness. But notwithstanding all these, the King still
continuing obstinate in his wickedness, and disobedient unto God, permitting
only that the women and men should depart, and that their children should be
left behind them: but God desisted not to punish his wickedness by diverse and
most grievous plagues, far more tedious then the former, yea The fifth plague,
the plague.
such as were dispersed over all the people.

For their bodies were grievously tormented with ulcers, and corrupted
inwardly; and after this sort the greater part of the Egyptians perished: but
whenas the King was neither moderated, The six plague, borches. The seventh
plague, hail.
nor mollified by this plague, God rained down hail upon them (which never
before that time was engendered in the air of Egypt, and further so great, or
rather greater then that, which falls to the Northward, near to the Pole
Attique in the midst of the spring) and spoiled all their The eight plague,
Grasshoppers.
fruit. After which an army of grasshoppers devoured all those buds and fruits
which were vnoffenced by the hayle; so that all the hope which the Egyptians
had of their harvest or fruit, The year of the world. 2454. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1510.
Pharao knowing the causes of the same, enforced himself to resist God, not
only through imprudence, but for malice; so that voluntarily he betrayed his
commonweal. He therefore commanded Moses, that he should lead away the
Hebrews with their wives; but that they should leave their substance behind
them for a pray, in that they complained, that after all these calamities they
had nothing left them. To whom Moses answered, that he demanded an unlawful
matter, by reason that they were to offer sacrifice unto God of their pray or
booty. Now whilst the time was spent in these consultations, darkness
altogether deuoyd of light ouerspred the land of Egypt, where through they
died miserably in closing The ninth plague, darkness.
choke them: which being dispersed, after three days and so many nights,
Moses seeing that Pharao would not repent nor let the people of Israel depart,
he came unto him and spoke after this manner. As long as you shall resist the
ordinance of God (who commands you to suffer the Hebrews to depart) there
is no means, whereby you may be exempted from these mischiefs in doing that
which you do. The King enraged at these words, threatened him to cut off his
head, if once more he durst appear in his presence, to motion unto him any
such matter. Moses answered him, that he would no more speak unto him as
touching this matter; Pharao drives away Moses. Exodus 10. 11. 12.
but that both himself and the chiefest among the Egyptians would exhort
the Hebrews to depart: which said, he forsook his presence. But God intending
to express that he Moses to declare unto the people, that they should have
their sacrifice in a readiness, and having prepared it the thirteenth day of
the month Xanthicus, to celebrate the same the 14. of the said month (by the
Egyptians called Pharmuth, and by the Hebrews Xanthicus amongst the Macedons
is April, as Suidas testifies.
Nisan, and Xanthicus by the Macedonians) and that he should lead forth all the
Hebrews, bearing with them all their goods. Whereupon he who had the Hebrews
already in a readiness to depart, and had distributed them by families, kept
them in one place, and in the same order: but when the fourteenth day was come,
all of them addressed to depart, made sacrifice, and with the blood of the
lamb purged their houses, besprinkling them with branches of Isope. And after
they had supped, they burned the flesh that remained, as being on the point The
Hebrews passover signi fieth, a passage.
sacrifice in like sort; and do call this solemnity Pascha, which is as much
to say, as the passage, by reason that on that day God leaving and ouerpassing
the Hebrews without harm, stroke the Egyptians with sickness: for that plague
in the night time cut off all the first begotten in Egypt, so that by
multitudes they that dwelt round about the palace assembled them in the
presence of the King, and besought him to let the Hebrews go: for which cause
Pharao calling for Moses, The tenth plague the first begotten amongst the
Egyptians, both man and beasts die. The Israelites depart out of Egypt.
gave order that they should depart the country, supposing that as soon as
they were gone, Egypt should no more be afflicted with such like plagues.
Moreover, they honored the Hebrews with presents, partly to the end they
should depart with the more expedition, partly for the neighborhood and
acquaintance sake which they had one with another. And as they departed
Cambyses destroyed Egypt. The third day they came unto Beelzephon near unto
the red sea, and for that they vvanted victuals, by reason of the desert, they
tempered their meal with water, and hardened it with a little heat, and made
cakes, with which they sustained themselves for the space of thirty days:
for they had not brought any more victual out of Egypt, but as much as would
serve them for that time, and that which they had they dispensed The feast of
the Azymes.
very sparingly, rather feeding for necessity, then eating with sacietie. For
which cause in memory of that want, we celebrate a feast for the space of
eight days, which we call the feast of Azymes, that is to say, of unleavened
bread. But it is not easy to number the multitude of them The number of the
children of Israel.


CHAP. VI. The year of the world, 2454. before Christ's birth 1510.

The Hebrews depart out of Egypt under the conduct of Moses.

THey therefere forsook Egypt the fourteenth day of the month Xanthicus,
four hundredth and thirty years after Abraham our father came into Chanaan,
and in the The time of their departure out of Egypt. Ex^d. 12. Joseph's bones.
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 14. al. 11. The Egyptians pursue the Hebrews.
two hundredth and fifteenth year after Jacob was transported into Egypt, the
eightith year of Moses age, who had Aaron to his brother three years elder
than himself. They carried also with them the bones of Joseph, according as he
had commanded his sons. But the Egyptians repented themselves, because they
had suffered the Hebrews to depart: the King also was very sore moved,
supposing that which was fallen upon them had happened by Moses Moses conduct
them this way, to the end that if the Egyptians should repent them of their
dismission, and should haste them to pursue them, they might receive the reward
of their Why Moses conducted them through Palestine.
of an ancient grudge which they bare them. Now does Palestine confine and
border upon Egypt, and therefore led he them not by the way that directly
leads thither: but he intended to bring them into Chanaan, by conducting them
far about, and through many calamities, to the end that afterward he might
lead them to the mountain of Sinai, where they might offer sacrifice,
according to Gods commandment. As soon as the Egyptians ouertooke the
Israelites, they prepared themselves to fight, trusting themselves to the
number which they had, and shut themselves into a place of security. For with
them there served six hundredth chariots, with fifty thousand horsemen, and
two hundredth thousand armed footmen. The Israelites are encompassed by the
Egyptian multitudes, and depart to the red sea. Exodus 14.
enclosing them betwixt inaccessible rocks, and the sea; on which place there
abutteth a mountain, unfrequented by reason of the daungerousnes of the way,
and by this means they excluded them from all hope of escape or flight. For on
the one side they were shut in by the mountain that extended it self even
unto the sea, and on the other side by their camp pitched and embattailed
before their faces, to cut them off from the champion, if so be they intended
to fly that ways. Seeing therefore that they were in no security, but were
hemmed in by the importunity of the place, and by the reason of their want
could not endure the siege, and The perplexity of the I^raelites being enclosed
by the Egyptians.
for that they could not find any issue to fly from their enemies; neither
although they greatly desired to fight had they means to defend themselves,
because they were disarmed; finally, Moses, forgetting those prodigies, whereby
God had fore-promised them their liberty; and so far forgot they themselves,
that after having stoned the prophet, and through incredulity contemned Gods
promises, they were resolved to yield themselves subject to their former
thraldom. For they were exasperated by the tears of their wives and children,
who expected nothing but death, seeing themselves begirt with rocks, seas, and
soldiers; and left destitute of all hope of flight. But although the multitude
were exasperated against Moses, yet ceased he not to take care of them, and to
think on God; laying before Moses exhorts the people to put their trust in
God.
their eyes that which he had said in times past, as touching their
deliverance, and assuring them that God would not suffer them to be subjected
or overthrown by their enemies, and standing If your affairs had hitherto
been managed by men only, it were not amiss in you to distrust them, least
hereafter they should not bring them to their determined and your desired
issue. But in that at this time you distrust the providence of God, this
shows you to be without sense or understanding, considering it is he that
has made you see all those things which he has promised you by me, tending to
your salvation and deliverance; yea even at that time when you yourselues
expected it not: you rather ought to hope that God will help and assist you in
these difficulties, who has brought to pass, that you are now in this In the
year of the world. 2454. before Christ's Nativity. 1510.
When God is most ready to help us.
hope is void and exhausted. Therefore repose your selves and stay your
fortunes upon such a helper, who can make great things of small, and makes the
strongest feeble. Fear not the force and power of the Egyptians; neither, for
that you have the sea and mountains before you, which permit you not to fly
from them, despair of your lives: for God (if he please) can turn the
mountains into plains, and change the sea into dry land.

CHAP. VII.
The Hebrews are pursued by the Egyptians, the sea deuideth it self, and
gives passage to the Hebrews.

THis said, he conducted the Hebrews toward the sea in the sight of the
Egyptians. For they were within sight of them, being very much wearied with
pursuit and travel, and made their account that it should be best for them to
remit the combat until the next day.

But when Moses was arrived upon the bank of the sea, he took his rod and
called upon God, and implored his aid and succors in these words. O Lord,
thou too well know Moses prayer unto God.
The red sea divides it self.
Moses seeing how God had made himself known, and how the sea had forsaken
the land, and left his native channel; he first of all marched through the
same, and commanded the Hebrews to follow him, marching through that way
which God had in his divine power provided for them, willing them to rejoice at
the danger which attended their enemies, and to The Hebrewe^ pass through the
red sea, the Egyptians are drowned therein.
give God thanks for the vriexpected succors he had sent them: who were not
negligent, but marched boldly forward. At the first the Egyptians supposed them
to be mad, and that they did headlong cast themselves into manifest perdition:
but when they perceived that they were this their unexpected deliverance, and
the total ruin of their enemies: so that they assuredly The year of the
world, 2454. before Christ^ b^th 2510.
persuaded themselves that they were delivered; by reason that they, who had
made them slaves unto them perforce, were exterminated; and for that they had
God so visibly assistant unto them. When then they had escaped this danger,
and perceiving likewise that their enemies were in this sort punished, yea and
after such a manner as the like punishment has never been heard of amongst
men; they all of them during the whole night sung hymns and songs of rejoice.
Moses likewise composed an Ode in Hexameter verse, containing the praises of
God, and a thanksgiving for the favor he had done unto them. All these things
have I particularly Exodus 15. The Israelites with Moses sing songs for their
deliverance. The sea of Pamphilia divided it self for Alexanders soldiers to
pass there through, The wind and tide drive the Egyptia^ arms into the
Hebrews camp.
declared, according as I have found them written in holy scriptures. Neither
ought any man to marvel at this so wonderful a discourse, that through the sea
there should a passage be found to save so many persons in times past, and
they rude and simple, whether it were Alexander King of Macedons soldiers,
having no other passage to destroy the empire of the Persians. The next day the
Egyptians arms transported by the force of the stream, were cast a shore
into the army of the Hebrews: which when Moses perceived that it was done by
the providence of God, to the intent they might not be disarmed; he gathered
them together, and furnished the Hebrews therewith, who afterward led them
to the mountain of Sinai to sacrifice unto God, and he offered him
thanksgiving for their deliverance in the behalf of the people, according as
he himself had before time commanded him.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE JEWS,
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 3. book.
1 How Moses conducted the people out of Egypt to the mountain of Sinai. 2 Of
the slaughter of the Amalechites and their confederates, and of the pray which
the Israelites attained thereby. 3 Raguels counsel unto his son in law
Moses. 4 Moses ascending the mountain of Sinai, brings down the Tables of
the ten commandments, which he had received at Gods hands, to the people. 5
Of the Tabernacle made by Moses in the desert, resembling a portable Temple. 6
Of the Arc wherein Moses enclosed the Tables of the Law. 7 Of the golden Table
and Candlestick, and of the Altars of the Tabernacle. 8 Of the apparel both
of the high Priests and the inferiors. 9 Of Aarons Priesthood, and of that
which was ordained as touching the foastes and Sacrifices. 10 The Laws of
Sacrifices, and Purifications. 11 The laws and customs of war. 12 Sedition
against Moses, by reason of the want of victualles, and the punishment of the
seditious. 13 Of the spies who having seen and searched the country of
Chanaan, and returning back again to the Israelites, amated them with fear.
CHAP. I. The years of the world. 2454. before the Nativity of Christ. 2510.

How Moses conducted the people out of Egypt to the Mountain of Sinai.

THis new and unexpected deliverance of the Hebrews from their danger, was
not alittle obscured by the wearines and tediousnes of their journey, The
Israelites in the desert are distressed for want of water.
which they endured in their travel toward the mountain of Sinai: by reason
that the country was desert and inhabitable, destitute of victuals, and wholly
deprived of waters; and not only barren of that which served for the
sustenance of men, but also every ways destitute of pasturage and provision
Mara signifies bitterness. Exodus 15.
so that they resolved to stay in that place; and the rather in that they found
a certain pit there, which although it were insufficient to satisfy so great
an army, yet for that they found it in that country, it yielded them no little
consolation. For they were given to understand, that if they traveled onwards
they should find no water; and as touching the water of that pit; it was so
bitter and unfit for their drinking, that it neither was agreeable with men's
taste, nor supportable by their very cattle likewise. Whereupon Moses seeing
them so discomforted, neither knowing in what sort to satisfy them, in that he
had not to deal with an opposite army or enemy to the end to enforce, and to
repel them with valor; and for that he manifestly perceived that not only a
troop of valiant men, but also a multitude of women and children were like to
perish: Moses beseeches God to change the bitter waters into sweet.
in most humble manner to beseech almighty God, that it might please him to
convert the evil quality of the water, and to make it potable: which grace
and favor he no sooner obtained, but he took the end of his staff, and cast
it at his feet, and afterward brake it in the midst, and cleft it long-waies,
and cast it into the pit; giving the Hebrews to understand, that God had heard
their prayers, and that he had promised them to give them that water they
desired, if so The Israelites came to Elim where they began to murmr against
Moses for want of sustenance.
that it was planted with Palm trees; but the nearer they approached it, the
more tedious they found it (for there were no more then seventy palm trees in
that place, and they not very tall their guide, ascribing all the cause of
their calamities and miseries unto him. For having marched The year of the
world, 1454. before Christ's Nativity, 1510. Exodus 16.
Moses had made them both see and partake, they conceived hatred against him,
and were ready to stone him to death, as if he had been the author of that
calamity which oppressed them. But he perceiving the multitude so enraged and
incensed against him, strengthened himself in God, and warranted by the
testimony of a good conscience, and the uprightness of his actions, ^hee came
out into the midst of them; who reviled him, and had gathered stones to cast
at him. And for that he was adorned with a singular grace and alluring
countenance, and endued with Moses exhorts the people to re member those
benefits they had received at Gods hands.
of God, who (as it was very likely) made trial of their virtue, to see what
perseverance they had, or whether they kept in their remembrance those things
which had happened unto them; or whether forgetting their forepassed pleasures,
they would suffer themselves to be swallowed with their present misery: he
willed them therefore to take heed, least through their impatiencie and
ingratitude, they should be found unworthy of Gods favor, who both Moses
reckons up unto the people all the bene^ts which God had done unto them.
afflicted, whilst contrary to Gods will they endeavored to detain them; how
the same river which to them was bloody and unprofitable to drink of, to
themselves became both sweet and po^able: likewise how the sea retired it
self, and furthered both their flight and passage, wherein they saw themselves
secure and free from danger. And contrariwise, their enemies destroyed,
overthrown and drowned; and how even until that day being disarmed, they were
by Gods providence both furnished and fortified abundantly. Again, how often
God Moses imploreth Gods help.
whose hands only the sa^ation of the people consisted, beseeching him in mercy
to forgive the people being exasperated with extreme miseries, and by reason
thereof distracted and withdrawn from their duty: whereupon God promised him
to have care of the people, assuring him to send them a speedy and present
deliverance. Which when Moses understood, he came down unto to the ground, came
and fell amidst the camp of the Hebrews: who caught them as a provision In
the year of the world. 2454. before Christ's Nativity. 1510. God sends
quails into the Hebewes army.
prepared for them by God, and ordained to extinguish their famine. Whereupon
Moses once more addressed himself to call upon God, yielding him thanks for
the present and the future good he had promised him. Who being after this
manner fed and refreshed, were presently supplied with a new kind of food: for
at such the as Moses stretched out his hand and prayed v^o God, a dew
descended from heaven that thickened betwixt his hands, which for that he
supposed it, to be an otlier kind of sustenance sent them by God, he tasted the
same; and taking pleasure for that the peop^ knew not what it was, but thought
God feeds the Israelites with Mann^.
it to be snow which fell in that place, according to the season of the year,
he taught them that it was no dew falling from heaven as they supposed, but
that God had sent them that grace ^e conservation and nouriture of their
bodies; and having eaten thereof, he gave them of it, A commandment how much
Manna should be gathered.
to the end that no one should be scant^ed of this food: which was done to
that end, least the weaker should want, whilst the stronger through avarice
should gather more then sufficed them. And if any one contrary to the
prescript command, had ga^hered more then was permitted him, although he
toyled and traveled more then any of them, yet was his portion ^o ways
increased by that means. For whatsoever (beside the appointed measure of the
Assaron) remained Moses sent for the peoples sustenance. The Hebrews call it
Manna, for in our tongue Man is an interrogation, signifying what is that? Thus
lived they then ioifully, being sustained by this kind of meat sent the^ Manna
what it signifies. Exodus 17. The Israelites fed 40. years space on Manna. The
Israelites arrive at Raphidim, and are travailed with* thirst.
from heaven, and used the same for the space of forty years; during that
time which they lived in the desert. But afterward when they were dislodged
from that place, and encamped near to Raphidim, they were extremely travailed
with thirst: where upon their first arrival they found some few springs, but
afterward they found the land wholly destitute of water. They therefore Moses:
but he withdrawing himself apart from the fury of the people, converted
himself unto God in prayer, beseeching him that as he had given them food in
their necessity, he would now also give them drink at that present, wherein
they were well nie choked with thirst, praying him to provide them of drink
also, or otherwise that their meat was unprofitable to them: whereon God
presently granted his prayer, promising Moses that he would give him a
fountain and abundance of water from that place from whence he least expected
it. Hereon he commanded him, that striking upon the rock with his rod, which
was thereby hard at hand, he should from thence seek that which they demanded
and wanted, assuring him that every one without travel or labor should have
sufficient therefro: which counsel when Moses had received from Gods hands,
he returned unto the people who expected him, and Moses stroke the same in such
sort with his rod, that he divided it in sunder, and delivered out most clear
and pure water in great abundance. The people were very sore astonished at
this so strange accident, so that beholding the water, their Moses strikes the
rock with his rod, and there issues water.
thirst was quenched. They afterward drunk of the water, and found it very
sweet and pleasant, resembling in the goodness of it, the divine bounty and
power of the giver thereof. For this cause Moses, seeing that God had honored
him in this sort, and they acknowledged Gods providence and their thanksgiving
by their sacrifices, humbly thanking him for the care he had over them. The
sacred scriptures likewise, which are kept and consecrated in the Temple,
testify that God had foretold Moses also that water should in this sort issue
from the rock.

CHAP. II. The year of the world 2454. before Christ's Nati^tie. 1510.

How the Amalechites and their associates were overcome, and how great a pray
the Israelites obtained thereby.

But when the renown of the Hebrews waxed great, and was spread in the ears
of all men (so as the brute thereof was heard in every part) it came to pass
that the inhabitants Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2.
of that country were in very great fear: whereupon (sending embassages the
one unto the other) they mutually incited themselves to expel and utterly
ruinate the whole nation.

Amongst the rest those of the country of Gobol; and the City Petra (who are
called Amalechites, a nation very warlike, and more active then the rest) were
the chief agents in this Exodus 17. The Amalechites war against the
Israelites.
to the Israelites destruction; telling them that a foreign army, flying from
the thraldom of the Egyptians, had invaded their country, whose increases
were not a little to be suspected: counse^ng them (before they had gathered
head, and ^couered more means, and a country to dwell in, and withal waxed
more confident by reason of their forbearance) to charge them first; rather
then to expect their increases, and so to oppress them: esteeming it to a
better point of wisdom to repress their insolency and forwardnes in the
desert, then to expect whilst they were possessed of strong Cities, and rich
means. For this (said they) is the part of wise men, to resist the vprisings
and power o^ their adversaries; and not to expect, whilst by daily exploites
they more and more increase; and rather to provide to prevent, then deliver
themselves from peril. After Moses very much, for that he expected no
hostility. When therefore he perceived that the people were affrighted, and
amassed to see themselves (being wholly unprovided) to be charged by so strong
and well furnished an army; he recomforted them, and willed them to bethink
themselves of Gods promises, who by his power had set them at liberty;
assuring them that they should overcome all those that made party and head
against them to destroy them: wishing them to think, that though they were
inferior unto their enemies in weapons, wealth, money, and munition, and such
like; yet since they had God to friend, and ready to fight for them against
Moses encourages the people to expect nothing else but victory.
their enemies, that they ought to conceive such courage, as if they were
furnished with far more Moses thus having encouraged the people by his words,
he called unto him the chiefest of the tribes, and every one of them that had
the charge of them, both in private and public assembly; commanding the
younger to obey the elder, and the elders to be obedient to their General. But
they Moses to lead them forth against the enemy, praying him not to dull the
alacrity of the soldiers, by any untimely delay. Whereupon (choosing out
amongst the whole multitude, such as were most fit for war) he chose Jesus
the son of Naueus the Ephraimite to lead them, a man valiant in arms, and
provident in Iosuah made captain over the Israelites.
counsel, and exceeding in piety, and not degenerating in that respect from
Moses his master. He also in such sort disposed certain bands that he might
not in any sort be cut off from water; he left also so many as might guard the
multitude, and keep the camp and weak company. Thus stood they all the night
long in a readiness to take arms, such as they had fitted for them, expecting
their captains, who should lead them out to fight as soon as Moses should
command them. Moses slept not, but instructed Iosuah how he should conduct the
army. And as soon as the day appeared, he encouraged Iosuah to show himself
such a one in that battle, as both the place where with he was honored, and
the cause for which they fought, required; wishing him by his prowess and good
deserts to give life and courage to his soldiers that followed him. He likewise
exhorted the chiefest of the Hebrews in particular, and in general heartned
and emboldened all other that entered the battle.

And as touching himself (after he had thus disposed the army, by words and
effect) he retired The year of the world. 2454. before Christ's birth 1510.
himself unto a mountain, committing the army to Gods protection, and
Iosuahs conduct. Then encountered the armies on both sides, and euerieone foug^t
most valiantly, neither wanted there encouragements on either sides; and as
long as Moses lifted up his hands, the Hebrews had the better against the
Amalekites. B^ for that he was unable continually to support the same, (and
because he thoroughly perceived: and observed, that as often as he held down
his hands, so long the enemies drove the Israelites to re^eat) he willed his
brother Aaron, and Vron (his sister Mary's husband) to stand on each side of
him, and sustain his hands and succor him, for fear his forces should fail
him. Which when they had performed, the Hebrews by maine force overcame the
Amalechites, so that all of them had been slain, if so be the chase had
continued, and had not been cut off by the approach of the night. At The
Israelites recover a great pray in the camp of the Amalec^es.
harness, and horses, and generally the whole provision of an arranged battle
became their pray. Then after also they became more virtuous, and industrious
then before; supposing that the end of all actions was obtained by industry.
Thus ended this battle. The next day Moses caused the enemies that were slain
to be rifled, and gathered the scattered arms of those that fled. The
distribution of the ^poiles and pray.
He honored them also that had bravely demeaned themselves in the battle, and
praised the Captain Iosuah in public, whose honor was confirmed by the
applause of the whole army. There was not one Hebrew that perished that day,
and so many of the enemies were there put to the sword, as their number cannot
be expressed. He offered likewise a sacrifice of thanks giving unto God, and
erected an altar unto him; and dedicated it to God the victor. He prophesied
The prediction of the utter ruin of the Amalechites.
should be left alive, in that they had assaulted the Hebrews, and that in the
desert, and at such time as they were in affliction. He feasted the General in
like sort. This issue had this battle, which was the first that was levied
against them, or dur^t assault them, since their departure out of Egypt. But as
soon as Moses had celebrated a fe^st in memory of the victory, to the end he
might give the Hebrews some repose after the battle abouenamed, he caused
them to march in array; for now at that time they had many armed soldiers.
Thus passing onwards by The Israelites come to the mountain of Sinai.
little and little, they arrived the third month after their departure out of
Egypt, near to the mountain of Sinai, where (as before time it has been
declared) Moses saw the vision in the bush, and other such like wonders.

CHAP. III.
What counsel Raguell gave to his son in law.

WHen Raguel Moses father in law understood of this his good success, he came
with great He^o and Ruffinu^. chap. 3. Exodus 10. Raguel comes to Moses to the
desert of Sinai.
joy unto Moses, under purpose to salute him, his daughter Zephorah, and her
children; who (greatly reiovcing at his arrival) prepared a sacrifice, and
feasted the people near unto the bush which could not be consumed by fire; and
in the banquet time the people was distinguished, according to the order and
place of every family. But Aaron with the assistance Raguel, and they sung
praises unto God, ascrib^g to him both the means and manne^ of their liberty.
They also spoke much in honor of their General, by whose virtue all things
had had so fortunate an issue. Raguel on his side highly praised the people,
and dignified Moses their Governor, by whose prudence so many good and valiant
men were g^ded. But on Hedio and Ruffinus. chapter 4.
the next day Raguel seeing Moses oppressed with the multitude of business (by
reason that he decided all their debates that appealed unto him, who were thus
persuaded of him, that at Raguel, otherwise called
that time they were only rightly censured, when Moses gave the sentence; and
they that were Iethro, Moses father in law, counsels him to choose Judges
amongst the Israelites. The year of the world, 2454. before Christ's Nativity,
1510.
condemned by him, endured the verdict patiently, knowing that their cause was
by him decided rather by the rule of justice, then the instinct of amerce) he
for that time kept silence (in that he was loath to hinder them, who any ways
pretended to receive any fruit of the virtue of his son in law.) But when
he found him at convenient leisure, he withdrew him apart, and told him betwixt
them twain, that which he ought to do; counselling him that he should
discharge himself of that pain, concerning affairs of so little consequence,
and reserve only to himself those affairs which were of the greatest
importance, and concerned the public estate of them all. For that there were
diverse persons amongst the Hebrews to be found, who would be capable and
sufficient to hear and determine the pleas; but touching the care of so many
thousand souls, no man could undertake it, except he were another Moses.
Knowing therefore (said he) thy virtue, and how worthily thou have be haued thy
self toward the people, being the Minister of God, as concerning their
safety: suffer them to comprimit amongst themselves those actions and quarrels
that fall amongst them; and reserve this interest to thy self, that thou may
wholly intend the service of God, whereby thou may more easily exempt the
people from their present necessities. If therefore thou give credit to my
counsails in humane affairs, thou shall make diligent search and musters of
thy whole army, and thou shall establish Chieftaines that shall govern over
ten thousands, and thousands, and five hundreths, and over fifties, and shall
ordain Governors over them, who dividing them by thirties, twenties, and
tennes, may conduct and govern them: and let some be appointed amongst them,
who may receive their titles, according to the number and names of those

This coun^sell of Raguel highly contented Moses, so that he fulfilled all that
whereunto he Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. Moses allows his father in laws
advice.
had suggested him, not concealing the invention of this policy, neither
attributing it to himself, but declaring publicly unto all men, that his
father in law was the inuenter thereof. He has likewise written in his books,
that Raguel was the author of this government; accounting Moses afterward
assembling all the people, told them that he would ascend the mountain of
Sinai to talk with God, to the end that he might afterward return unto
them, and impart unto them whatsoever profitable thing he had received from
him in their behalf. He likewise commanded them to pitch their tents about
the mountain, and to have it in reverence, by reason of the Proximitie of God.

CHAP. IIII.
Moses ascends the mountain, and receives the Tables of the ten
Commandments

THis said, he ascended the mountain Sinai (which is the highest beyond
comparison of Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 6. Moses ascends the mountain of
Sinai.
all that country, and which, by reason of his strange height, and for his
steep and inaccessible ragged rocks, is not only unfrequented by men, but
also may not be beheld, by reason it trauelleth the eye.) Further, for that it
is reported, that God conuerseth and dwells on the same, it is held sacred by
the inhabitants, and dreadful and inaccessible to all that behold it. But the
Hebrews, according to the commandment of the Prophet, removing their tents,
pitched them at the foot of the hill, suspending their judgments, and
expecting the execution of the promises of those goods which Moses had
foreprophesied unto them, at such Moses had commanded them. They besought God
also that he would be favorable and assist Moses, and by his means to bless
them with some favor, that might make their life good and happy. They
banquetted also in great pomp, and their wives and children were richly
attired: Now after they had feasted forty days space, on the third day before
sun rising, a cloud covered all the Hebrews The year of the world. 2454
before Christ's birth 1510. Horrible lightnings about the mountain of Sunai.
Moses (with good success, and for their profit) had conferred with him. Let
those that read this judge thereof, as it shall please them: but as touching my
self, it is not any ways lawful for me to depart in any sort from that which
is written in holy scriptures.That which the Hebrews both heard and saw, in
that it was strange and unaccustomed unto them, troubled them greatly
Furthermore, the report that was published as touching that mountain, that God
repaired and dwelt on the same, marueilously amated their spirits: they
therefore sad Moses was destroyed through the wrath of God, and expecting no
less misery themselves. But whilst they were thus troubled in thought, Moses
presented himself unto them (with a countenance full fraught with a pleasing
majesty, and looks so contented, as they testified the inward consolation of
his mind) whom they no sooner beheld, but so dainly all their fear vanished,
and in place thereof a hope of some great good hap succeeded, and withal the
air upon his arrival recovered his former cleerenesse and serenitie. Hereupon
he summoned the people to a solemn and general assembly; to the end he might
report, and they hear, what commandments God had given Moses oration to the
Israelites.
them by him: no sooner were they assembled, but he (from an upper place, to
the end that all the people might both see and hear him) stood up and spoke
after this manner. Know (says he) Moses the son of Amram and of Iochabel,
but he it is that constrained Nilus to flow with blood, and that through diverse
plagues has tamed the pride of the Adam had the possession and fruition both
of the fruit of the earth, and the fishes of the sea: By him Noe escaped from
the Deluge; by him our ancient father Abraham of a wandering pilgrim, became
an inhabiter of the land of Chanaan: by him Isaac was borne at such time as his
father and mother were old: by him Iocob has been ennobled by the virtue of
his twelve sons: by him Joseph became Lord over all the forces of the
Egyptians: He it is that graciously imparteth these words unto you by me his
messenger; let therefore these wholesome laws of his be holy and inviolable
amongst you, and more dear This said, he conducted the people (both men, women
and children) to the end they might hear God talk unto them, and teach them
what to do (for fear the law should have been in lesser regard, if it had
been presented to their understandings The people of Israel hears. God
speaking unto the^ from the mountain of Sinai.
by a humane tongue) they all of them therefore heard his voice descending from
the mountain, so that every one understood the same. But these precepts which
Moses left registered in two Tables, it is not lawful for me to express in so
many words, and therefore I will

First of all that there is one God, who is only to be worshipped. The Ten
commandments. Exodus 20. Deuter. 5.
Secondly, that no Image of any creature is to be adored. Thirdly, that no man
ought to swear rashly. Fourthly, that the seventh day is not to be profaned
by any work. Fifthly, that father and mother should be honored. Sixthly, that
we should abstain from murder. The year of the world 2454. before Christ's
Nativity. 1510.
Seventhly, that adultery is not to be committed. Eighthly, that no man ought to
steal. Ninthly, that false witness must not be borne. Tenthly, that no man
ought to covet his neighbors goods.
When the multitude with great joy had heard God himself speak unto them
(according Exodus 21.
as Moses had foretold them) he dismissed them, and each one departed to his
tent. But some few days after they presented themselves before his pauilion,
beseeching him that he would bring them those laws, which he had received at
Gods hands: He^o the intent to gratify them, opened the laws, and prescribed
unto each of them what they ought to do at the same time (as in due place it
shall be expressed.) But the greater part of the laws I defer till an other
time, meaning Moses once more ascended the mountain of Sinai (having
premonished the people thereof) and ascended the same in Exodus 24.
their sights: but when the time seemed tedious unto them (for he was
sequestered from them for Moses remained on the mountain forty days and
forty nights.
the space of forty days) they were in great fear, least some inconvenient
had happened unto him; neither were they so much aggrieued at that which had
chanced unto them, as for that they were persuaded of the death of Moses. For
there fell a contention amongst them, the one affirming that he was dead and
devoured by wild beasts (which was their opinion, who conceived a hatred
against him) the other said that he was ravished up unto God: But they of the
wiser sort among them, who took no pleasure to hear any one of these them
suspicions, contained themselves; being equally affected in respect of both the
opinions; for that the one seemed not to be estranged Moses fasted forty days
and nights.
returned unto them; having (during that time) tasted no mortal sustenance:
and by his arrival the whole host was replenished with great joy; whom he
certified that Gods providence was always assisting them, and that during the
term of those days, he had learned the means how they should live ciuilly,
orderly, and blessedly: telling them that God commanded them to Moses two
Tables. Exodus 35.
them five: now were these written by the hand of God. They all of them
(rejoicing at that which they had heard and seen) ceased not to employ
themselves to their uttermost: so that they brought in silver, gold, brass,
and store of wood fit for building, and which would not be worm eaten, the
hairs of goats, and the skins of sheep, the one died azure, and the other
white; The Israelites with great joy address themselves to the building of the
Tabernacle. Exodus 36. Beseleel and Eliab are workmasters of the Tabernacle The
people are restrained byedict, from brin ^ing any more offerings toward the
building of the Tabernacle.
collected with so great affection (according to each man's utmost ability) he
appointed work-masters according to the commandment of God, but such as the
like might not have been chosen, although the matter had been committed to the
peoples suffrages: their names are now likewise extant in the volumes of the
sacred scriptures. Beseleel of the tribe of Judah, the son of Vron of the
tribe of Judah, and Mary Moses sister: and Eliab the son of Isamach of the
tribe of Dan. The people showed themselves so forward in the finishing of this
work, that Moses was compelled to restrain them, causing it to be proclaimed,
that they had sufficiently gathered for the work already: Moses of the
measure and greatness thereof, and how many vessels they ought to have,
according to the modle which god had proposed to Moses. The women also strove
with emulation to exceed each other in the making of the vestures of the
priests, and other things which were convenient for that work, to the end to
honor the service of God.

CHAP. V. The year of the world. 2455. before the Nativity of Christ. 1509.

Of the Tabernacle made by Moses in the desert, resembling a portable Temple.

NOw when all things were prepared for this work, as gold, brass, and wouen
work, Moses commanded them to feast and sacrifice each one according to his
ability, and set forward the building of the Tabernacle. First of all
therefore he measured the outward Exodus 36. Hedio and Ruffinus chap 7. Moses
crecteth a Tabernacle in the desert.
court, which in breadth contained fifty, and in length one hundredth cubits,
in such manner as follows. He raised pales of five cubits high, and twenty
in length from the one side to the other, and ten in breadth; in the hindside
to every one of these pales or posts there were fastened rings, the chapters
whereof were silver, and the bases thereof of gold, and the lower parts of The
first court of the Temple.
there passed certain cords of five cubits length, which on the one side
fastened in the ground with brazen nails of a cubits length, did fasten each of
the pales, and defended the Tabernacle against the force of winds. Then was
there a most fine silken curtain drawn about the Iame, which hanging from the
chapters of the bases and enclosing all that place, seemed to differ in nothing
from a wall. And after this manner were the three sides of the enclosure
arounded. But the fourth side, being of fifty cubits, was the front of the
whole frame; the door whereof was twenty cubits wide, having on both sides
double bars in stead of posts; and these also were of silver, except the
bases which were of brass; and on both sides there stood three bars well
fastened, which were also hung round about with a curtain of wouen silk: but
at the gate there hung The Tabernacle.
was situate beyond the four pillars, it was called the Sanctum sanctorum, or
holy of holiest: and The year of the world, 2455. before Christ's Nativity,
1509.
this curtain or veil was pictured with all sorts of flowers which the earth
brings forth, and diuersified with all that which might give it ornament: but
that there were no figures of living creatures to be found therein. The second
veil equalled the first in greatness, workmanship, and color; and
encompassed the five pillars of the entry, which reaching from the top to the
midst of them, and fastened to each of them by a certain ring, gave access
to the Priests that entered the same: To this almost was there annexed on the
outside another veil of like bigness and wouen of linen, drawn upon cords
from the one side to the other, by means of certain rings; which was
sometimes spread, and other times (especially on the holy days) vnspred, least
it should hinder the peoples sight: on the other days (especially such as were
cloudie) it was spread, and served for a couerture to defend the painted veil
from the weather. The Sanctuary
to the earth within the compass of a foot. Moreover there were eleven other
hangings of equal breadth, but longer, namely, every one of them of thirty
cubits, wouen with as great art of hairs, as the other out of wool: which
covering all the rest extending to the earth, resembled the form of a bed
chamber, one of them covered and extended from the front, which being the
eleventh, was annexed to this use: these also were covered with certain
skins sowed The signification of the division of the Tabernacle.
together, which protected the fame against the storm and injury of rain:
for which cause, to them that beheld it from far, it seemed a thing most
worthy of admiration. For the colors of the Tabernacle did in no other sort
shine, then as if a man should have beheld the heavens. But the vailes of hair
and skins hung after such a manner, as that did about the entrance of the
Tabernacle, set to resist the force and outrage of storms and tempests.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Arc, wherein Moses placed the Tables of the Law.

AFter that the Tabernacle was after this manner builded, they erected also an
Arc, which Exodus 37. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8.
permanent and resisted corruption. This in our native tongue is called Heoron,
framed after this manner. The length thereof was of five handfuls, and the
breadth and height of three handfuls; and both within and without it was covered
with golden plates, and it had a cover fitted with golden hinges, egall on
every side. And to every side in length there were fastened two rings of
gold, driven and riueted through the whole wood, and through them certain
bars of gold were thrust, that whenever there were any need, it might be
carried any ways: for neither was it borne on beasts backs, but the Priests
bare it on their shoulders. On the cover thereof there were two semblances
planted, which the Hebrews call Cherubins (which are winged Cherubin.
creatures, of a strange form, the like whereof were never seen by any man)
which Moses saw figured The Tables of the law placed in the Arc.
in every one five, and in every page two and a half: and this Arc hid he
within the Sanctuary.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Table and Candlestick of gold, and of the Altars of the Tabernacle.

IN the Tabernacle he placed a Table not unlike to that at Delphos, two cubits
in length, and one in breadth, and of the height of three handfuls: the feet
thereof, from the Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9. The Table.
midst downwards were like those feet which the Doriens set unto their beds;
but that required. This was wont to be placed in the Temple toward the North
wall, not far from The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's birth 1509.
Assars of the purest wheat, which measure of the Hebrews contained seven
Cotylas of the Athenians; and above these loaves two golden pots filled with
frankincense; but after seven days other loaves were set in their place on
that festival day, which we call the Sabbath. The cause of which ceremony
shall hereafter be declared by us. Hard Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10. The
golden candlestick.
by this Table near the South wall, was placed a Candlestick of molten gold
(but not solid) of one hundred pound weight (this weight the Hebrews call
Cinchares, the Grecians frame it a Talent in their tongue) and it was wrought
with bowls, lillies, pomgranats, and little cups; then arising upwards from
one base, it was divided into seven branches, according to the number of the
Sun and the rest of the Planets: it stretched out likewise into seven The
Altar of incense.
a solid plate, being a cubite broad from every corner, and twice as high, on
which there stood a little hearth environed with a golden crown on every
side, in which were rings with their bars and staves, whereby it might be
borne by the Priests in the way. There was another Altar of wood also before
the door of the Tabernacle, covered with plates of brass, five cubits Exodus
38.
square, and three high, decked with gold in like sort, and plated with brass,
the hearth whereof was made after the manner of a grate: for the earth received
whatsoever fire fell from above by

CHAP. VIII.
Of the vestment, of the Priest, and of the high Priest,

SVch was the Tabernacle with all that belonged thereunto. Now remains it for
me Hedio and Ruffinus, chapter 11. Exodus 39. The Priests vestures.
to discourse as well of the vestme^ts of the other Priests, which they call
Chaneas, as of the Priest, whom they name Sar-Hazabachin, signifying thereby
the high Priest. And first of all as touching the ordinary Priests. When as
the Sacrificer (purified according to the purification Manachasses (which is as
much to say, a trusse or restrainer, which is a kind of breech, Manacasses.
or slop, covering the priuities, made of wouen silk) wherethrough he thrusts
his feet, as in a pair of upper breeches, and fastens the same about his
loins: On this he casts a linen shirt or surplice, made of double linen
(which we call Chetomene) and that word signifies a linen garment or
surplice: for we call linen Cheton (that kind of garment is a coat Chetomene.
coming down to the anckles, bound to the body (having narrow sleeves about
the arms) which is tied upon the breast a little beneath the armeholes, with a
girdle four fingers broad, inwardly void, so wrought as it seemed to be like a
serpents skin.) It is likewise pictured with red, purple, Hyacinthine and
silken flowers, but the ground is only silk; which being twice doubled Moses
calls Abaneth, and we by a word borrowed from the Babylonians, name it Emian
(for so call they it.) This coat was in no manner pleited, and in the neck has
a broad opening, Abaneth.
fastened about the two shoulders with claspes, from the edge of the collar to
the breast and the midst of the back: This call they Massabassanes. But on
his head he wears a hat (not made with a high crown, neither comprehending
the whole head, but somewhat more then Massabassanes.
the half:) this is called Masnaemphthes; which is decked and dight after such
a rate, that it seemed a Chaplet made of thick Riban, or of wouen linen often
times doubled and sowed, Masnaempthes


The high priest also uses the very same (omitting none of those things
which we have The high priests ornaments. Methir.
reckoned up) but beside the ^est he put on a Hyacinthine colored coat,
extending in length to his hammes (which our country call Methir) this girdeth
he unto him with a girdle of diverse colors (not unlike the former) but that it
is studded with gold: but the skirt of the vesture is The year of the world
2455. before Christ's Nativity. 1509.
bordered with fringes, sowed together, to which are tied certain counterfeit
pomgranates with certain golden bells, properly disposed; so that between two
Pomgranates, there is placed a bell, and between two bells one Pomgranate. This
coat is not made of two pieces (as having seames on the shoulders, and on the
sides) but a long veil wouen and left open in the collar, not a thwart but
long-waies, from the breast to the midst of the back. To it is a riban or
hemme fastened, least the opening should be perceived: it is likewise open in
that place where the hands should be put out. Besides these vestures, he has a
third called an Ephod (resembling Ephod.
a Grecian frocke, that is made after this manner.) It is wouen of diverse
colors, intermixed with gold; in the midst of the breast there is a space left
open: the sleeves are made in such a manner, and all the rest in such sort
composed, that it seems to be a coat: in this void space thereis a piece
Essen seu Logion.
with the Ephod, and to every corner thereof with buckles of gold, which are
tied with a lace of Hyacinth applied to tie them together with these buckles.
And to the end the space between the buckles be not slack, they filled the
future with a Hyacinthine thread: but on either shoulder two Sardonix stones
enchased in gold (in stead of buttons) do tie the hood or Ephod; in these are
engraven the names of Jacobs sons in Hebrewe Characters in either stone six:
so that the elder of them were placed on the right shoulder. Moreover twelve
precious stones distinguish the Essen or Rational it self, of excellent
greatness and beauty, which for their inestimable price Jacobs sons engraven,
whom we esteem for the first authors of our tribes (every stone being honored
with a several name, according to the order of their birth.) But whereas these
rings (whereof before we have spoken) are weak and cannot sustain the weight
of the precious stones, they made other two greater in the top of the Rational
inclining toward the neck ward, being eminent above the texture, which might
receive the golden chains that were made, which met at the top of the
shoulders to be fastened with the little The high priests triple golden crown.
end it should neither sway this ways nor that ways. To the same Rational
also was there a girdle sowed, distinguished with the said colors and gold,
which comprehending the whole, and again knit upon the seame was suffered to
hang downwards. And as touching the fringes, they were shut in hollow loops of
gold from the one end unto the other. Now his hat was such as the other priests
used, on which there stood an other sowed thereto, and flourished with
Hyacinthine: this after a triple order was environed with a golden crown, in
which there were diverse vessels of gold made after such a sort as may be seen
in that herb which we call Daccharus, and amongst the Grecian herbalists,
Henbane. And least any man that has heretofore seen the same, should
Sideritis.
about the neck and the two Temples, for these cups came not near the front
or brow. For on the same there was as it were a bend of gold, on which the name
of God was engraven. Such In the year of the world. 2455. before Christ's
Nativity. 1509.


I cannot therefore but greatly wonder at the strange and causeless malice,
which other nations have conceived against us, as if we were injurious against
the divine majesty, which (they say) they so much honor. For if a man mark
the composition of the Tabernacle, and examine the habit of the high priest,
and consider all the necessaries which we use in celebrating the divine
service; they shall find that our lawmaker was a man of a divine spirit, and
that we without any desert are iniuried by other nations. For if without
partiality a man will duly examine it, he shall find that all things have
been done to represent and figure the world. For the Tabernacle The
signification of the fabrike of the Tabernacle, and the priests ornament.
is of thirty cubits, divided into three parts, whereof two are left for the
sacrificers as a place profaned and common, signifying the land and sea
wherein all sorts of creatures are conversant.

CHAP. IX.
Of Aarons priesthood, and the laws which appertain to the feasts and
sacrifices.

AFter these things abouesaid were finished and left as yet unconsecrated, God
appeared unto Moses, commanding him to establish Aaron his brother in the
priesthood (who Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 12. Exodus 28. 29. 30. 40. God elected
Aaron. Moses brother for high priest.
Moses (assembling the congregation) discoursed unto them his virtues, and
discovered his good affection, and reckoned up unto them how many dangers he
had suffered in their behalf, (whereof each of them gave ample testimony,
declaring the forward zeal and love they always bare unto him) whereupon he
spoke unto them after this manner. The work is now brought to such an end as
it has pleased God, and has been possible for us: and for that you know we
are to receive him into this Tabernacle, we ought above all things to have an
especial care in the election of such a one, who shall make sacrifice and
supplication for us. Touching my self, if the matter depended on my private
choice, I should esteem no man more worthy then my self to execute this
function, both for that naturally men love themselves, and for that I am well
Aaron worthy of this honor, and has chosen him for his high priest and
sacrificer, in that he excels all other of us in equity and justice:
commanding that he should be invested with the robe consecrated to God, and
that he should take charge of the altars and sacrifices. He shall make prayers
for you unto God, who will hear them willingly, by reason that he has care of
your race, and will receive them proceeding from a personage whom he himself
had elected. These words of his were grateful unto the people, and they all of
them approved the The year of the world, 2455. before Christ's birth 1509.
election which God had made. For Aaron was more capable of that honor then
any other, both by reason of his race, as also in regard of the prophecing
spirit and virtue of his brother: he had at that time four sons, Nadab,
Abihu, Eleasar, and Ithamar. But whatsoever remained of those things which were
gathered for the building of the Tabernacle, was employed to Aarons sons
make vailes to cover the Tabernacle, Candlestick, Altar, and the other
instruments, to the end that in their travail they should not be soiled,
either by rain or dust. And having once more Exodus 36.
assembled the people together, he commanded them to offer every one of them
half a sicle; (now the sicle is a kind of Hebrew coin, that is as much in
value as four Athenian drammes) whereunto they obeyed willingly, so that the
number of them that offered was six times one Sicle. The number of the
Israelites betwixt 20. and 50. years of age.
hundredth thousand, five hundredth and fifty: and they that brought this money
were such The holy ointment.
odoriferous drugge) the half of the said weight; and he caused all these to
be beaten and infused in a Hin of oil of olive, others write palm (this Hin
is one of our measures containing two Choas of Athens) all which he mixed and
boiled together, according to the art of perfumers, and he made thereof a most
odoriferous ointment: which he took and anointed the priest The sacrifices.
withal, and all that which belonged to the Tabernacle, to the intent to
purify them; offering many and sundry sorts of beasts of great price to
sacrifice within the Temple upon the Altar of Beseleel and Eliab were the most
excellent and expertest workmen: for whatsoever had been enterprised by
others, they in their art polished and perfected; Beseleel.
and they of themselves found many new things of their own invention (yet was
Beseleel judged the most excellent of them two.)

All the time employed in this work, was seven months, and at that time was
the year accomplished, which began at their departure out of Egypt. In the
beginning of the second year, Exodus 45 The Tabernacle was dedicated on the
first day of April, the second year after their departure out of Egypt, the
year after the creation of the world. 1455 before Christ's birth. 1509.
made mention.) And God presently testified that both their gifts were gracious
in his eyes, and the Hebrews labors fruitful and pleasant in his sight,
testifying his presence in that Temple after this manner: Whereas the heaven
was otherways clear and fair, over the Tabernacle only there was a cloud,
not wholly thick like a winter storm, nor obscure; and yet not so thin as a
man could see through the same, from whence there descended a dew that gave
testimony of Gods presence unto them that had will, and belief. Moses
honored the workemasters that made the work, with such rewards as appertained
unto them by desert; and sacrificed according as God had commanded him in the
door or porch of the Tabernacle, a Bull, a Ram, and a Kid Aaron, and
purified both him and his children with fountain water and the precious oynt^
(...) to the end they might be sanctified to God. And for seven days space he
consecrated both themselves, The dedicatio^ of the Tabernacle and the Priests.
Leuit. 8.
and their vestments and the Tabernacle, with those things which appertained
thereunto, with that oil whereof I have before time foretold you, with the
blood of Bulls, and Rams slain every other day after their kind. But on the
eight day he proclaimed a holy day and festival to all the people, and decreed
that every one of them should particularly sacrifice according to his ability,
and they with emulation (striving to exceed one another) obeyed him, and
offered up

Whilst thus the sacrifices were upon the Altar, suddenly there issued a fire
from them, which kindled of it self, the flame whereof resembled the light or
brightness of lightning; and consumed Leuit. 9. The sacrifice is consumed of it
self. Leuit. 10.
all that which was upon the Altar. At that time there happened an
inconvenient to Aaron, which although it somewhat moved and amated his fatherly
patience, yet digested he it with a constant and generous mind: for he was a
man of much constancy, and such a one as knew that nothing could befall him
without the prescience and providence of God. For of those four sons The year
of the world. 2455. before Christ's birth 1509.
Nadab and Abihu, bringing sacrifices unto the Altar (not such as were
appointed by Moses, but of that sort they were accustomed to offer before
times) were burned by the violent flame that issued from the Altar, seasing
both their breasts and faces, in such a sort, as by no means possible that
might be extinguished; so Nadab and Abihu Aarons sons burned.
that at length they died. Moses commanded both their father and brothers to
take their bodies, and carry them out of the host, and bury them sumptuously:
all the people wept and were amassed very much at this their death, so strange
and unsuspected. But Moses ordained that neither the father, nor his sons
should lament; but that they should rather make estimate of Gods honor, then
of their own misfortune: for Aaron was already invested in the sacred robe.
But as touching Moses, he refused all honors which were offered him by the
people, neither applied

Besides these, he reduced under writing both the laws and ordinances as
touching Policy, in due performance whereof if they should live, they should
be both agreeable to God, and live without cause of controversy the one
against the other. And all this established he, following A miracle of the
stones in the high priests vestment.
shoulders (which were Sardonixs, whose nature is so notorious to all men, that
it were unnecessary to reveal it) the one shined at such times as there was
any offering, and that other which The sacrifices and gifts of the Princes of
the tribes. Number. 7.
far from them all suspicion of evil, and from whom they expected in time
to come far better and more prosperous things; and both in general and in
particular they offered gifts cofer and vial were filled with meal steeped
and molded in oil, which they were wont to The year of the world, 2455.
before Christ's Nativity, 1509.
use at the Altar, at such time as they offered sacrifice. They offered
likewise a Calfe, and a Ram, with a Lamb of one year old, for a burnt
sacrifice; and a Goat for a sin offering. All the other governors likewise
brought every one of them their sacrifice called Salutarie, for every day two
Oxen and five Rams, with a Lamb and a Goat of a year old, and sacrificed them
during the term of twelve days every day one. But Moses ascended no more the
mountain of Sinai, but entered into the Tabernacle, where he was instructed by
God of that which he had to do, and what laws he ought to make, which are so
good and laudable as they ought not to be attributed to humane wisdom: They
have been faithfully observed likewise always, because they are supposed to
be received from God. So that not any one of his laws have been transgressed
by the Hebrews, neither in peace (at such time as they lived to their content)
neither Moses asks counsel of God in the Tabernacle.


CHAP. X.
The ordinances of Sacrifices and Purifications.

NOw will I only reckon up a few things as touching the purifications and
sacrifices (in that we have begun to talk of sacrifices.) The sacrifices are
of two sorts, the one of them is Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 13. al. 12. Two
kinds of sacrifices.
made for a private person; the other for the people in general: and these are
made in two manners; for in the one, all is consumed which is upon the Altar,
which for that cause Holocautoma. Leuit. 1.
person that offered a burnt offering, killed an Ox, a Lamb, and a Goat of
one year old, (yet is it lawful to kill oxen more elder.) But all those
creatures which must be consumed by fire, ought to be males; and after their
throats are cut, the priests besprinkle the Altar round about with the blood;
then dress they the beast, and cut it in pieces, and powder it with salt, and
lay it on the Altar already charged with cleft wood, and flaming fire: then
after they have well cleansed the feet and intrails, they lay them with the
rest; and the priests take the skins. Such is the manner of a burnt offering or
Holocaust. They that offer sacrifices of thanksgiving, kill likewise such sorts
of beasts without spot, and more then a year old; both male and female: and A
sacrifice of thanksgiving.
after they have cut their throats, they sprinkle the blood on the Altar: then
take they the raynes the caull, and all the fat; with the lobe of the liver,
and the tail of the mutton, and lay it on the Leuit. 4. 5.
Altar; but the breast, and the left leg is left to the priests: and as
touching the rest of the flesh, the priests banquet therewith for the space of
two days; and if then there remaineany thing thereof it is burned. The same
custom and ceremony likewise is observed in the sacrifice for sins: but those
that are not of ability to offer the greater offerings, offer up two Pigeons,
or two Turtles, the one of which the priests have to feast vvithall, and the
other is consumed with fire. We will entreat more expressly of the sacrifices of
such beasts, at such time as we shall discourse upon sacrifices. For he that
has sinned upon ignorance offers a Lamb, and a she Goat at the same The
sacrifice for sin.
time. The priest besprinkleth the Altar with the blood thereof, not in such
manner as it is said The sacrifice of him that has sinned wirtingly. Leuit. 4.
9.
priuity of any other man) offers a Lamb according as the law commands,
the flesh whereof is in like sort devoured by the priests the same day: but if
the governors offer for their sins, they sacrifice in like manner as private
men do, and are different from them in that they bring a Bull, or a male Kid.
The law also ordains, that in sacrifices both private and common, there
should be fine flower brought, for a Lamb, the measure of an Assar; for a
Ram, The custom observed in sacrifices.
the measure of two; with a Bull, three; which flower is first of all mingled
and wrought (for they are kneaded in oil) or with loaves made thereof: but
whatsoever the priest offers, The year of the world. 2455. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1509. Leuit. 2.
Number. 28. 29.
up of the evening: and on the seventh day, which is called the Sabbath, that
two should be offered in that manner as has been declared. And on the new
moon besides their daily offerings they sacrifice two Oxen, seven yearling
Lambs, and a Wether and a Kid, for the abolition The sacrifice of the month of
October.
they fast till the evening, and on the same day they sacrifice a Bull, two
Muttons, seven Lambs, and a Goat for a sin offering: besides which they
bring two Kids, one of which is sent alive out of the limits of the camp into
the desert (on whom all the evil may fall, if so be any be threatened to the
people) the other is borne without the camp into a clean place, where it is
burned with the skin, being not any ways purged: with this they burn a Bull
which is not allowed out of the common charge, but by the proper costs of the
priest. This Bull being opened and slain, and the blood thereof (with that of
the goat) being carried into the Tabernacle, he besprinkleth The feast of
Tabernacles. Exodus 29. Leuit. 23. Deuteronomy. 21. 31.
family against the instant cold weather which the increasing year was wont to
bring, and that when they should enjoy their country, and should enter that
City which they should hold for their Metropolitan (by reason of the Temple
which should be there builded) they might celebrate a feast during eight days
space in offering burnt offerings and sacrifices unto God: and that in witness
of their thanksgiving, they should bear in their hands a branch of Myrtle,
and of Willow Exodus 12. 13. 23 Leuit 23. Deuteronomy. 16. The Easter was the 14. of
April.
fifteenth day the feast of unleavened bread follows the sole^nity of the
Passover, and during those seven days, it is unlawful to eat any le^ened
bread, and every day are slain two Bulls, one Ram, and seven Lambs, which
are all consumed with fire, to which there is added a Kid for a sin
offering, for a several days banquet to feast the priests with. The second
day of this feast of unleavened bread (which is the sixteenth of the month)
they begin to enjoy the fruits that are mowed, and before that time untouched:
and for that it is very convenient that God should be honored with the first
fruits thereof, from whom they receive such abundance, they offer the first
fruits of Barley after this manner. After they have dried a handful of the
ears, Leuit. 2. The first fruits.
for the priests use: and from that time forward it is lawful for them to
reap as well in public as in particular. With these first fruits they
sacrifice unto God a Lamb for a burnt offering. Seven weeks after the feast
of the Passover (that is forty nine days) on the fiftieth (which the
Hebrews by reason of the number, call Asartha) they offer unto God a leauened
bread made of The sacrifice of Pentecost.
wheat flower of the quantity of two Assars, and sacrifice two Lambs, which
are only offered The year of the world, 2455. before Christ's birth 1509. What
is observed in every feast and sacrifice. The bread of proposition.
Assars of flower; and those loaves they baked two by two the day before the
Sabbath, and the day of the Sabbath in the morning they bring it, and set it on
the sacred Table, opposing six to six, the one against the other; and upon
them are imposed two platters full of incense; and these things remain after
this manner till the next Sabbath; Leuit. 8. Number. 3.
fire half an Assar of flower in the morning, and the other half in the
evening. But I will entreat hereof more expressly hereafter, and for the present
me thinks I have sufficiently spoken already.

Moses separated the tribe of Leui, and exempted them from the other people, to
the end they might be consecrated unto God; and he purified them with living
fountain water, and purged The tribe of Leui sacred to God.
them with solemn sacrifice, and committed the Tabernacle to their charge,
with all the holy things pertaining thereunto, and all the rest which had bin
made for the cover of the Tabemacle, Unclean things. Leuit. 12. 13. 14 and 15.
offered us, and will bring proofs; and the reason which induced him to
ordain, that some were proper to feed upon, and for what cause he would that
we should abstain from other some) He has generally interdicted all use of
blood in meats, esteeming the blood to be the soul and spirit of beasts. He
has also generally prohibited to eat the flesh of those beasts that died by
themselves: likewise the caul and fat of goats, of sheep and oxen. He thrust
them likewise out of the company and conversation of men, who were leprous, and
such as were troubled with the flux of What men are unclean.
their seed. And as touching women that have their sickness, he sequestered
them for the space Gonorrliaea.
himself in cold water. The like must they offer that have use of their
lawful wives. He altogether drove the leprous out of the city, not
permitting them to frequent any man's company, Of Lepers.
but esteeming them as men little differing from the dead. And if any one by
his prayers made unto God, was delivered from this disease, and his skin
reduced to his native color, such a one Moses fled out of Egypt, because he
was a leper, and that he conducted with him other such as were traveled with
that Against them that object against Moses and his followers, that they fled
out of Egypt for leprosy.
disease, and brought them into the land of Canaan. For if that were true,
Moses had not made these ordinances to his own prejudice, which if other had
proposed, it behooued him to have opposed himself against them: especially
since amongst diverse other nations there are lepers^ who are held in great
honor, and who are so far from disdain and contempt, as that they have been
made Generals of most notable armies, and elected for Governors of
commonweals, having liberty to enter the Temples, and to be present at the
sacrifices. What therefore hindered Moses (if he had been polluted with the
like hateful sickness) to make such laws, and ordain Moses being clean
from such sickness, and conuersing amongst his countrymen which were
untainted, made these ordinances for them that were sick, having regard to the
honor of God. But of these things, let each man censure as best likes him.

He forbad that women should enter into the Temple after their deliverance, or
to assist the In the year of the world. 2455. before Christ's Nativity 1509.
He ^o and Ruffinus, chap. 14. The laws of women that are brought a bed
Number. 5. The laws of adultery and jealousy.
the bounds of chastity, that her right thigh might be put out of joint, her
womb might rot, and that death might follow thereupon: but if (through entire
love and jealousy proceeding Of adultery and incest.
and forsworn herself before God, then dies she a shameful death; for her
thigh is nummed, and her womb grows full of water. See here how Moses has
provided for these sacrifices at the purifying of a woman. He furthermore made
these laws which ensue. He generally forbad adultery, Exodus 22 Deutero. 17.
Leuit. 18. 20. 21 29.
judging it to be a great good hap, if men demeaned themselves honestly in
mariage^: and that

The law also forbids a man to have the use of his mother (for that it is a
thing most abominable) and likewise prohibiteth him to keep unlawful company
with his fathers wife, his Ant, and his sister, or his sons wife: and
detesteth it as a most heinous and hideous offense. It prohibiteth also the use
of a woman when she has her monthly sickness; the use of beasts also,
especially the male, by reason that such affections are abominable: and against
the transgressors of these laws he established most strict and mortal
punishments. He willed also that the Priests should be twice more chaste then
the rest, for he not only forbad them that which he prohibited others; but
moreover he enjoined them not to marie those that had bin aba^doned, or Leuit.
21.
What wife the high Priest might mary with.
of him that was dead (although it were made lawful for the other Priests) and
granted him only liberty to take a virgin to his wife, and to keep her. The
said high Priest is also forbidden to approach a dead man (although the other
Priests are not scantled of that liberty to approach their brothers, fathers
and mothers, and children deceased) Willing that they should be simple in all
kind of simplicity.

He likewise ordained, that the Priest which should not be sound in body,
should be maintained by the other Priests, but in the mean time that he should
not approach the Altar, neither enter into the Temple: willing that not only
they should be neat in that which concerned the Moses decree, and make during
his life time. And afterward he devised others also, at such time as he
remained in the desert; which both the people might practice in that place; and
then also when they had possessed the land of Canaan. He gave Leuit. 25. The
law of every seventh year.
rest unto the earth the seventh year; so that it was neither tilled nor
planted (in like manner as he had commanded them to rest from their labors on
the seventh day of the week) and he ordained, that the fruits which the earth
of it self brought forth, should be common to all those Iubile, in which the
debtors are acquitted by their creditors, and the bondmen made free, who being
of the people (and for that they had forfeited against some one law) had been
punished, being handled after the manner ofslaues, and not put to death; and to
those, who from the beginning had been possessours of lands, they were
restored unto the^ in this manner following. The Iubile being at hand (which
word The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's Nativity. 1509. The year of
Iubile.
signifies liberty) both he that sold, and he that bought the land, meet
together, and cast up the account of the profits and expenses that have been
reaped and bestowed on the land; and if it be found that the profits do amount,
he that sold the land repossesseth it: but if the charges exceed the value of
the profits, he restores the surplusage to the buier that is due unto him, and
retains the land to him self. And if the profits and expenses are answerable
the one unto the other, the restitution is made to him that had the ancient
inheritance. He ratified likewise the same law in houses that were bought in
Villages or Cities. For if he that sold, counted down the money he had received
before the year were finished; he compelled the purchaser to restore him his
house: and if he stayed till the year were fully finished, the possession and
free purchase remained unto him that bought it. Moses received this disposition
of his laws from

CHAP. XI.
The laws and customs of war.

AFter that these laws had been after this manner digested, Moses addressed
himself to the affairs and laws of war (for thinking him of those battles
which should follow.) Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 15. al. 12. Number. 1. Moses
numbreth the people.
He therefore commanded the governors of the tribes (the tribe of Leui only
excepted) to take a precise view and musters of those men that were capable and
able to Leui he chose Manasses the son of Joseph; and Ephraim for his father
Joseph: for so much had Jacob entreated at Joseph's hands that he would give him
his sons, that he might adopt them (as it has been aforetime declared.)
Number. 2. 3. 4
When they pitched the Tabernacle, it was planted in the midst of the camp,
guarded and defenced with the tribes which were encamped three by three on
every side. There were certain ways or paths likewise laid out between them,
and a market place was quarteraed out, and shops The dispofitio^ of the army.
for all sorts of merchandise disposed by order, and workmen and artizans of
all occupations, travailing in their shops; so that to look upon it, it
resembled a City that marched and

The Priests first were planted next unto the Tabernacle, and after them
followed all the community of the Levites (for there was a view also made of
them, accounting all the males exceeding the age of thirty days, and they
were counted to be twenty and three thousand, eight hundredth and eighty.) And
when it chanced that a cloud descended upon the Tabernacle, then rested they,
as if God thought good to rest in that place; and if it departed from the same,
then A cloud on the Tabernacles.
removed they likewise. He invented also a certain kind of Cornet made of
silver, and framed after this manner. In length it was almost a cubit, and it
was like the narrow whistle of a Fife, Number. 9.
but a little more thicker, yet naithelesse it was wide enough for the space of
the mouth, to the end to receive the breath, and the end thereof was made like
a little Bell, in form of a Trumpet. They Number. 10. Two trumpets made of silver.
call it in the Hebrew tongue Asosra. There were two of them, whereof the one
of them served to assemble and call the people to public assemblies; and the
other to conuocate the governors when they were to consult upon affairs of
estate: and if both of them were sounded, then all of them in general gathered
together: When the Tabernacle was removed, this manner was observed. As Soon as
the first charge was sounded, they that were encamped toward the East, The
order of the army with the Tabernacle.
first of all dislodged: at the second charge, they to the southward
disincamped; then was the Tabernacle vnpitched, and carried in the midst, six
of the tribes marching before, and six of them after: the Levites were all
about the Tabernacle. And when they sounded the third time, the quarter toward
the Westward removed: and the fourth was that to the Northward. They made use
also of these Cornets in the divine service, with which they ordered the
sacrifices on the

CHAP. XII. The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's birth 1509.

Sedition against Moses through the scarcity of victuals, and the punishment
of the Rebellious.

NOt long after this they removed their camp from the mountain of Sinai; and
after Hedio and Ruffinus, chapter 16. al. 13. Number. 11. Sedition against Moses.
certain encampings (of which we will speak) they came to a place which is
called Iseremoth, where the people once more began to ruminate and revive their
seditions, and lay the fault of their laborious pilgrimage upon Moses,
obiecting that by his persuasion they had left a fertile country, and now not
only that they were destitute of the plenty thereof, but also in stead of
hoped felicity, forced to wander here and there in extreme misery, and
traveled Moses) counseled them to be of good courage; assuring them that at
that time they should not be frustrate either of that hope or help, which they
expected at Gods hands. But the people were the rather ince^sed against him by
these words, and more and more whetted their spleanes against the prophet; who
seeing them so desperate, willed them to be of a good courage; promising them,
that although by injurious speeches he had undeservedly been offenced by them,
yet that he would give them store of flesh, not for one day The Israelites
obtain quails in the desert. The graves of concupiscence
Hebrews, by the death of no small number; for at this day the place retayneth
his name, which for that cause was imposed thereon, and it is called
Cabrothaba, as if you should say, the monuments of concupiscence.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the spies that were sent to search the land of Chanaan, and how returning
to the Israelites, they amated them with fear.

But after that Moses had led them out of that place, and had brought them into
a country Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 17. al. 14. Number. 13. 14.
not so apt for habitation (not far from the borders of the Chanaanites,
which is called the Jaws) he called the people to a council, and standing up
in the midst of them, he spoke after this manner. God (says he) having decreed
to grant you two great benefits, namely the liberty and possession of a happy
country, has granted you already the possession of the one, and will shortly
make you partakers of the other. For we are upon the borders of Chanaan, from
whence both the Cities and Kings are so far from driving Moses sends spies
to search the land of Chanaan.
resign the title of their country unto us; neither without great conflicts
may we obtain the palm of victory. Let us therefore send out certain spies
to search into the secrets of the country, and such as may conjecture how
great their power is: but above all things, let us be at unity one with
another, and let us honor God, who assisteth us in all dangers, and fights
for us. After that Moses had spoken after this manner, the people (applauding
his counsels) chose twelve out of the most noblest families of the tribes, to
go and search the country, out of every tribe one; who beginning from the
parts extending toward Egypt, visited all the country of the Chanaanites
until they came to the City of Amathe, and the mountain of Libanus: and
having and Cities fortified both with walls and bulwarks: moreover they told
them, that in Hebron they The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's
Nativity. 1509.
found a race of Giants. And thus these spies (when as they had found all
things far greater amongst the Chanaanites, then to that day they had seen
since their departure out of Egypt) they of set purpose by their fear brought
the rest of the multitude into a dangerous suspicion and perplexity. Who
coniecturing by their discourse that it was impossible to conquer the land,
dissoluing The spies drive fear into the Israelites.
the assembly returned each one to their houses, lamenting with their wives and
children, saying that God had only in words promised many things, but that in
effect he gave them no assistance: moreover they blamed Moses, and reviled both
him and his brother Aaron the high priest. The murmur of the people against
Moles.
And thus spent they all the night in disquiet, urging their discontents, both
against the one and the other: but on the morrow they reassembled their
council under this pretense, that stoning Moses and his brother, they might
return back again to Egypt from whence they came. Which Naue of the tribe of
Ephraim, and Caleb of the tribe of Judah) they went into the midst of them,
and appeased the Iosuah and Caleb appease the people.
multitude, praying them to be of good hope, and not to challenge Almighty God
of deceit, by yielding certain slight belief to some, who by spreading vain
rumors of the affairs of Chanaan, had terrified the credulous multitude; but
rather that they should follow them, who both would be the actors and
conductors also of them in the conquest of the country: and that neither the
greatness of the mountains, nor the depth of the rivers could hinder them, that
like valiant men were prepared to attempt, especially God being their guide,
and ready to fight for them in that battle. March forward therefore (said
they) and laying aside all fear (and being assured of the divine succors)
follow us with a bold courage whither soever we lead you. With Moses and Aaron
falling prostrate on their faces, besought God (not for their own safety) but
that it would Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 18. al. 14.
please him to restore the despairing multitude to a better mind, who were
troubled with so many present and instant necessities. Whereupon suddenly a
cloud appeared on the Tabernacle, and gave testimony that God was there
present: which when Moses perceived (drawing his spirits unto him) he pressed
into the presence of the multitude, and told them how God was incited and
whetted to take punishment of the outrage which they had committed against him;
yet not so severely as the iniquity of their sins deserved, but in that
discipline which fathers are accustomed to use for the instruction of their
children. For at such time as he stood before God in the Tabernacle, and
besought him with tears for the safety of the multitude, God had The
Israelites should wander in the desert 40. years.
bring to pass that they should live in the desert without house or City for
the space of forty years, for punishment of their transgression. Yet has he
promised (said he) to give the country to your successors, whom he will make
Lords of their goods, and heirs of those possessions which you have envied
your selves.

After that Moses had discoursed these things after this manner, according to
the ordinance of God, the people were in great sorrow and calamity, and
besought Moses that he would appease The repentance of the people.
Gods wrath conceived against them; beseeching him that forgetting their faults
that were past in the desert, he would make them Lords of their enemies Cities
Moses answered them, that God was not incited against the^ according to the
manner of humane weakness, but that he had given a just sentence against them. In
this place it is not to be supposed, that Moses (who was but a man only) did
appease so many multitudes of displeased men, but that God assisted him, and
brought to pass that the people were conquered with his words (having by
diverse disobediences, and by the calamities whereinto they were fallen, known
that obedience was both good and commendable.) Furthermore, for that Moses was
admirable for his virtue, and the force proceeding Moses were now here present
to Moses a man of great authority.
chastise him) if he ran astray, would not obey the ordinances made by him,
although he might make breach of them in secret.

There are besides diverse great and evident signs of the more then humane
virtue which was in him, and amongst the rest this was not the least, that
certain strangers travailing out of the Regions beyond Euphrates a four
months journey, to their great charges and with no less peril The year of
the world. 2455. before the Nativity of Christ. 1509.
to honor our Temple, and offer sacrifice; yet could they not obtain license
or permission to offer, in that by our laws it was not lawful for them to do
it: and some other without sacrificing (other some the sacrifice half
finished, the rest not permitted to enter the Temple) have returned back
again to their own homes, without finishing their purposes, chosing rather to
obey Moses law, then their own wills: yet being reproved therein by none but
their own consciences. So much did the opinion once conceived of this man
prevail, that he is esteemed more then a man, who is supposed to have received
laws from God, and to have delivered them to men. Of late also (not long
before the wars of the Jews, during the Empire of Claudius, and Ismael being
high priest amongst us) when as so great a famine oppressed our nation, The
great scarcity during the Empire of Claudius.
that an Assar was sold for four drams, and there was brought to the feasts of
Azymes the quantity Moses are in such force, even at this day, that they
themselves, who hate us, confess that he that has instituted our government
is God, by the means and ministry of Moses and his virtue. But of these
things let every man think, as it pleases him.

THE FOVRTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 4 book.
1 The fight of the Hebrews with the Chanaanites, and their overthrow by them,
without Moses knowledge. 2 The sedition raised by Chore against Moses and his
brother for the Priesthood. 3 How the authors of the sedition were slain by
Gods judgment, and the Priesthood confirmed to Aaron and his sons. 4 What
chanced to the Hebrews in the desert for the space of 38. years. 5 How Moses
overcame Schon, and Og Kings of the Amorites, and ouerthrewe their armies. 6 Of
the prophet Balaam. 7 The victory of the Hebrews against the Madianites, and
how the country of the Amorites was granted by Moses to two and a half of the
Tribes. 8 Moses laws, and how he was taken out of the world.
CHAP. I. The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's Nativity. 1509.

The fight of the Hebrews with the Chanaanites, and their overthrow by them
without Moses knowledge.

Whilst thus the Hebrews passed their life in great penury and perplexity
in the desert, groaning under the burden of their grievous Number. 14. The
Israelites without Gods or Moses command devise how to assail the enemies.
afflictions; there was nothing that more distracted and distempered them than
this, that God had forbidden them to hazard or enter battle against the
Chanaanites: neither would they now any longer give ear unto Moses (who
persuaded them to peace) but waxed confident Moses; but also for that he had a
general care of their nation, ever since the time of their forefathers, whom he
had always held under his protection; and by reason of whose virtues he had
already granted them liberty. They said likewise, that if they would take the
pains at that time and endeavor themselves, that God would always fight with
them: protesting that they were able to ouerrunne the nations, although they
were but themselves; yea although Moses would endeavor to Moses to tyrannize
over them, or to conform their lives to his will, under this vain belief,
that God had only discovered to Moses that which was behoouefull for them, by
reason of the affection which he bare him: As if all of them were not derived
from the loins of Abraham, and that he only were the motive of all, in
foreknowing the things that should happen unto them, by particular instruction
from God? That even then they should seem to be wise, if (condemning his
pride, and fixing their trust upon God) they would take possession of the
country which he had promised them, in spite of Moses contradiction; who for
this cause hindered them, setting the name of God before them: that therefore
putting before their eyes their necessity The Chanaanites put the Hebrews to
flight.
of the Hebrews being slain) they pursued the rest (enforced shamefully to
turn their backs) even unto their camp. This overthrow (happening beside all
men's opinion) wonderously dejected the minds of the multitude, that they grew
desperate of all future good fortune, concluding that God had sent and
inflicted that plague upon them, because without his counsel Moses perceived
that both his own countrymen were dismayed with the overthrow which they had,
and the enemy was waxen proud with their late victory, fearing likewise least
(not content with their present success) they should attempt further; he
determined to retire his forces back again into the desert. And whereas the
people promised thereafter to be obedient to him (being taught by their own
misery, that nothing would fall out prosperously unto them without the
counsel and conduct of their guide) they disincamping themselves, retired into
the desert under this resolution, that they would no Moses retyreth the people
into the desert
more attempt the battle against the Chanaanites, before they received a sign
of their good success from heaven. But even as in a great army it accustomably
falls out (especially in time of trouble) that the common multitude wax
headstrong and disobedient to their governors; so did Moses (forgetting the
injury he had received, Sedition against Moses.
which was no less then a pretense to stone him to death) had succored and
relieved their distressed The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's birth
1509.
fortunes. Neither did God utterly abandon the care of them, but although they
were contumelious against their lawmakers, and transgressed also against the
laws which he had delivered them by Moses; yet delivered he them out of that
dangerous sedition, of which (without his especial providence) there could be
expected no other but a lamentable issue. This sedition, as also how Moses
governed the estate when the troubles were ended, we will now declare, having
first expressed the cause thereof.

CHAP. II.
The sedition raised by Chore against Moses and his brother for the Priesthood.

CHores (a man noble in birth, and famous for his wealth amongst the Hebrews,
and endowed Numb 16. Chore endeavors to persuade the multitude to mutine
against Moles.
with a certain kind of popular eloquence) seeing Moses placed in the highest
estate of dignity, was sore troubled and oppressed with envy. For although he
were of the same Tribe and kindred; yet thought he it to be a great indignity
in himself to be held his inferior, being both more enabled in riches, and
nothing inferior in parentage: For which cause he began to mutine and murmr
amongst the Levites (which were of the same Tribe with him, and his kinsmen)
telling them (in vehement discourse) that it was not to be suffered nor
permitted, that Moses, under a pretext of certain divinity, should by
ambitious policy (to other men's prejudice) only study his own glory:
showing them how of late without all law Aaron, and distributed other dignities
at his own pleasure like a king, without the allowance and approbation of the
people: That this injury done by him was not to be endured, by reason that so
covertly he had insinuated himself into the government, that before he might
be espied, the people should be brought under servitude. For he that knows
himself to be worthy of a government, strives to obtain the same by kind
persuasions and consent of the people, and not by force and violence: but they
that despair by good means to attain thereunto, do notwithstanding abstain
from force, least they should lose the opinion of their goodness and honesty;
yet endeavor they by malicious subtilties to attain thereunto. That it
concerned the commonweal to extinguish and root out the subtle insinuations
of such men, least of private, they should at last grow public enemies. Moses
yield, why he has bestowed the Priesthood on Aaron and his sons? For if that
God had decreed that this honor should be bestowed on one of the tribe of
Leui, there were more reason that I should have it, who am of the same kindred
with Moses, and who surpass him both in riches and age: And if this honor
appertained to the most ancient of the Tribes, that those of Rubens loins
ought by right to enjoy it, namely Dathan, and Abiram and Phalal, who are the
most ancient of that Tribe, and the most powerful in riches. These things
Alias Balas.
spoke Chores (under color and pretense of the weal of the commonweal, but
in effect only to raise a tumult amongst the multitude, and intrude into the
office of the high Priest. This Discourse of his passing by little and little
from one ear to another amongst the multitude, and multiplied by the envious,
and such as maligned Aaron, at last brought the whole Tribes into Two hundred
and fifty men follow Chores faction. They cry out to stone Moses
Chores conspiracy, and all of these enforced themselves to take away the
Priesthood from Moses brother, and to transfer it to him. The people likewise
were in such sort incensed, as that they sought to stone Moses; and ran all
of them by confused heaps with noise and uproar, crying out before the
Tabernacle of God, that the tyra^t was to be cut off, and the people delivered
from thraldom, who under pretext of religion, had insupportable thraldom
imposed on them: For if it were God that had chosen him to be high Priest, he
would have preferred such a one to the dignity who had been worthy, and would
not have departed it to those who were far inferior to others; that if he
had decreed to bestow it on Aaron, he had remitted the commission of his
election to the people, and not left the disposition thereof to his brother.
Moses, Chores treacherous slander, and saw the people very sore incensed; was
notwithstanding nothing at all abashed thereat: but being resolved in his
conscience that he had governed the estate uprightly, and well assured that his
brother obtained the Priesthood (not by his favor but Gods election) he came
into the congregation, where he uttered Moses oration to seditious Chore.
no one word against the people, but addressing himself to Chore, he
expostulated with him, and accused him in as much as was for him possible;
being (besides his other qualities) fashioned and composed by nature,
eloquently to speak in public assemblies. I think (says he) The year of
the world, 1455. before Christ's Nativity, 1509.
Chore, that both thou and every one of these (pointing with his finger at the
two hundred and fifty men of his faction) are worthy of honor: yea I contemn
not the rest of this assembly, (although they are not to be compared with you
in riches, and other endowments.) For neither does Aaron therefore possess the
Priesthood because he is richer (for thou have more ample possessions then
either of us) neither because he is more noble (for God has equally imparted
the same unto us all, having given us one and the same Grandfather) neither
have I been moved thereunto by brotherly affection, to bestow that on him
which was due unto others. For had I not respected God and right in disposing
of this dignity, I had not forgotten my self, to further and prefer
another, since there is no man more near my self then my self, or whom I had
rather wish well to, then to my self: for what wisdom had it been for me, to
expose my Aaron has obtained this degree (not by my favor, but by Gods own
appointment) yet notwithstanding he refers and remitteth the matter to the
public disposition and order of you all, neither requiring he any prerogative
(for that he has already exercised the charge, or for that at this present it
is granted him to entermeddle with the same) but esteems it to be the Chore
should have power to desire a dignity, and that God should be deprived of that
authority to dispose the same as best liked him.

Cease therefore to mutine amongst your selves, and to be troubled upon these
occasions: and let every one of you that desire the Priesthood, to morrow
bring each of you his censor with perfumes, and fire from his house. But thou o
Chore, give place unto God, and expect his election, neither arrogate to thy
self a greater authority then God has, but come thou also amongst the rest
thy competitors in this honor, to hear his judgment. Neither see I cause why
Aaron should not be there also present to be judged with thee, in that hitherto
he has virtuously and uprightly behaved himself in the execution of that
office, and is likewise of the same tribe and race that thou art of. You shall
likewise offer incense in the presence of all the people, and when the perfume
shall be past, let him whose sacrifice shall be most acceptable in Gods sight,
be declared and published for the high Priest: so shall I be acquit of that
slander After that Moses had spoken in this manner the people gave over
murmuring, and forbear to suspect Moses, allowing in themselves all that which
had been spoken, as being profitable for the common weal: so that hereupon
they dismissed the assembly.

CHAP. III.
How the authors of the sedition were slain by Gods judgment, and the
Priesthood confirmed to Aaron and his sons.

THe next day the people reassembled themselves together to assist the
sacrifice, and to Rufin. chap. 1. Numb. 16.
hear the strife decided amongst the Competitors; neither was this assembly
without tumult: For the whole multitude were in suspense in expectation of the
event, and some of them were desirous that Moses might be convicted of deceit.
But such as were of the wiser sort amongst them, desired an end of the
sedition: for they feared least the common weal should be utterly ruinated, if
the tumult should proceed any further. The multitude likewise (being naturally
desirous of novelty, and prone to speak evil of their Magistrates) were
diversely disposed The year of the world. 2455. before Christ's Nativity. 1509.
Moses also sent his servants to Abiram and Dathan, to summon them to appear
(according to the covenants and accord) to attend the issue of the sacrifice.
But their answer was, that they would not obey him, neither that they would
any longer permit that Moses by his subtle and sinister devices, should
signiorize over the people. Which when Moses understood, he took diverse of the
Elders amongst the people with him, and being no ways moved with Dathan and
his contumacie, he came unto him (being willingly attended by those who were
drawn to accompany him.) Now when Dathan and his friends understood that
Dathan and Abiram rebellious.
Moses with the Nobles came unto them, both they, their wives and children
assembled themselves before the Tabernacle, expecting that which would ensue.
They came likewise guarded with their servants, who were armed to oppose
themselves against Moses, if so be he should offer O God (said he) thou Lord
ouerall that which either heaven, earth, or sea contains, Moses prayer unto
God.
thou art a sufficient witness with me of all mine actions for that I have
managed all things by thy will; and thou art he who have given me power to
execute my purposes: thou that always in commiseration of the Hebrews have
been my perpetual help and assistance: hear this my prayer. For nothing
that is either done, or thought, is hidden from thee: for which cause I hope
thou will not disdain to testify and justify my truth, and manifest the
ingratitude of these men. Thou do exactly know the antiquity of my race,
not for that thou have heard it, but for that thou have seen and assisted it;
in effect, now also testify the truth for me in those things which Raguels
favor, I had sufficient to live upon; I forsook the possession of my goods,
and the fruit on of my peace, to engage my self in these miseries, which I
have suffered for these men: and first of all for their liberty, and now
likewise for their safety, I have most readily undertaken grievous travels.
Now therefore since I am grown into suspicion amongst those men, who by my
care and providence have escaped so many mischiefs and miseries; thou that
appearedst unto me in that fire on the mountain of Sinai, and vouchsafedst
both to speak unto me, and to confirm Pharaoes power and army inferior to
my fortunes, that when we were ignorant of our way gauedst us a passage through
the sea, in whose bottom and womb afterward the Egyptians were drowned; that
gauedst us arms, when we were unweaponed; that made the bitter water sauoury
and fit to be drunk of; and in our scarcity of water enforcedst drink for us
out of the bowels of the hard rock; when we found no meat on the land, did
send it us from the sea; moreover (as a thing never before heard of)
affoordedst us meat from heaven, and have established our estate with laws and
customs: Be thou, o Lord, my Judge in all things, and my impartial witness,
that neither I have been corrupted by any bribe of any particular Hebrew,
Dathan and Abiram, who accuse thee to be insensible and boast that thou art
circumuented by my subtilties. But thou shall make thy revenge more notorious
against the unbridled detractors of thy glory, if they perish after no common
manner, least any man should suspect that they suffer nothing inhumane: but let
the earth which wicked men, for that it is contrary to thy justice, that the
innocent multitude of the Israelites The year of the world, 2455. before
Christ's birth 1509.
should answer their misdeeds, and suffer their punishments. Whilst he spoke
these words, and intermixed them with tears, the earth instantly trembled, and
shaking began to remove (after such a manner, as when by the violence of the
wind a great billow of the sea floateth and waltereth.) Hereat were all the
people amassed. But after that, a horrible and shattering noise was made about
their tents, the earth opened, and swallowed up both them and all that which
they esteemed dear, which was after a manner so exterminate, as nothing
remained of theirs to be beheld. Dathan and Abiram swallowed up.
Whereupon in a moment the earth closed again, and the vast gaping was fast
shut, so as there appeared not any sign of that which had happened. Thus
perished they all, leaving behind them an example of Gods power and judgments.
And this accident was the more miserable, in that there were no one, no not of
their kinsfolk or allies that had compassion of them: so that all the Dathan
with his family was extinguished, Moses assembled all those that contended for
the Priesthood together, committing again the election of the priesthood unto
God, concluding that the estate should be ratified to him, whose sacrifice was
most acceptable in Gods sight. For which cause the two hundred and fifty men
assembled themselves, who were both honored for the virtue of their ancestors,
and for their own abilities far greater then theirs: with these also stood
Aaron and Chore, and all of them offered with their censors before the
Tabernacle, with perfumes such as they brought with them, when suddenly so
great a fire shone, as neither the like was ever kindled by man's hand, nor
usually breaks from the bowels Chore with two hundredth and fifty men is
consumed with fire.
Chore) were so consumed, that there scarce appeared any relics of their
carcasses: Only Aaron remained untouched, to the end it might appear that this
fire came from heaven. These things thus brought to pass, Moses (intending to
leave a perpetual memory to posterity of that punishment) to the end they
should not be ignorant thereof, commanded Eleazar the son of Aaron to
consecrate their censors affixed to the brazen Altar, that by reason of this
monument, all men might be terrified, who think that the divine power can be
circumuented by humane policy.

CHAP. IIII.
What things happened in 38. years space to the Hebrews in the desert.

AFter that by so evident an argument it appeared very sufficiently, that Aaron
neither by sinister insinuations, neither by the favor of his brother, but
only by Gods election had obtained the Priesthood; he ever afterward held it
without any contradiction: yet Number. 17.
for all this, the sedition was not sufficiently ceased, but that it brake out
with a more urgent fury then at first: for it took his original from such
causes that it might easily appear that it would be of long continuance. For
whereas this persuasion had once taken root in the hearts of men, Another
sedition against Moses.
that nothing is brought to pass without Gods will, they imagined that God
wrought these things in favor of Moses; to him therefore imputed they all these
things, as if God had not punished those men through the hate he bare against
their sins, but only on Moses solicitation: and they were sore aggrieued
that Moses (having given this mayme unto the people, by the loss of so many
noble men, that only perished through the zeal they bare to Gods service) not
only had done them open wrong; but that which was more, had assured the
Priesthood to his brother after such a manner, that thereafter no man durst
oppose himself to purchase the same; seeing how unfortunately those others
were overthrown by a violent death. Moreover the kinsmen of those that were
slain, solicited and stirred the people, praying them to restrain the pride
and ouergreat power of Moses, in that it lay in their power easily to perform
the same. But Moses perceiving that the people was incensed, and fearing least
once more they should bethink them on some innovation; by all men, both they,
and Aaron brought theirs with their inscriptions; and Aaron had The year of
the world. 2455. before the Nativity of Christ. 1509. Aarons rod fructifieth.
Leui. These Moses took from them, and laid them in Gods Tabernacle: the next
day he brought them forth every one of them (which were easily known to be
those which the Princes brought, and the rest of the people had marked) and
they saw that al theirs remained in the same form which the day before they
retained, when Moses took them; but out of Aarons rod there grew branches and
buds: and that which is more to be wondered at, it bare ripe Almonds, which in a
rod of that kind of wood was admirable and miraculous. The people amated at the
novelty of this spectacle (dismissing their hatreds wherewith they both
prosecuted Moses and Aaron) became wholly amassed and drawn into admiration of
Gods judgment, and forbear any more to repugne against God, or to oppose
themselves against Aarons Priesthood. And thus three times confirmed by the
approbation of God, by all men's consent he Moses had made the tribe of Leui
(which He^o and Ruffinus. chap. 3. 4 Number. 18. 35. Leuit. 14. 18. 28.
was dedicate to Gods service) free and exempt from warfare (for fear least
being occupied in providing themselves necessaries for their maintenance, they
should grow negligent in executing their duties in sacrifice) he ordained that
after the land of Chanaan was conquered by their forces and Gods favor, that
of the Cities they should conquer, they should distribute forty The revenues
of the Priests.
eight of the best and fairest on the Levites, and certain lands abutting on
their Cities, to the quantity and space of two thousand cubits. Moreover, he
commanded that the tenths of all the yearly fruit that was gathered by the
whole people, should be given and bestowed on the Levites and Priests; and ever
after this tribe had their solemn revenues. Now must I declare what things
Number. 6. Of the Nazarites.
wine) when as they consecrate their hair, were bound to offer it unto the
Priests. They likewise who call themselves Corban, which is called the gift of
God, if they desire to be dismissed from that ministry (whereunto by
voluntary vow they bound themselves) must pay money to the Priests, for a
woman thirty sicles, for a man fifty; and that those that had not so much
money should be left to the discretion of the Priests. And if any man should
kill (for his private feast) The year of the world. 2493. before the birth of
Christ. 1471.
any beast, and not for Gods service, yet that he ought to offer unto the
Priest the breast and leg of the beast. This is that allowance which Moses
ratified to the Priests, and besides this, whatsoever the people offered for
sins (as we declared in the next precedent volume.) And what soever was
contributed by the people to the order of the Priests, he commanded that both
Moses, and that the Number. 20. Moses Embassage to the Idumaeans.
mutiny was appeased, he removed his camp, and with all his forces came to
the borders of Idumaea, where he sent Ambassadors to the King thereof,
requiring him to grant him and his free passage (and offering him such and so
sufficient pledges, as he should esteem and reckon of, to assure him that no
violence or injury should be offered; assuring him to make payment for
whatsoever victual or drink, either he or his army should receive) But he
setting light by their Embassage, denied them passage, and with a well
furnished army marched forth against Moses to withstand him, if contrary to
his will he should attempt to pass through his country. Moses to begin the
combat, if he were enforced by the enemy, he retired back again,
determining to seek his passage athwart the desert. At that Mariam Moses
sister Number. 19. dies. The manner of purification.
time died his sister Mary, the fortith year after their departure out of
Egypt, and the first Moon of the month Xantique: she was magnifically
entombed at the common charge, on a certain mountain called Sein: and after
the people had mourned for her forty days, he purified them after this
manner. The Priest taking a young heifer (which had never as yet borne yoke
nor labored) in color wholly red, led him a little apart from the camp, in a
most clean place, The year of the world. 2493. before Christ's Nativity. 1471.
and there cut his throat, and with the blood thereof taken on his finger, he
seven times besprinkled the Tabernacle of God; and after he had consumed in
fire the whole heifer, with his skin and entrails, he cast a branch of Cedar
into the fire with a little Hysope, and red woole, and wholly gathered up the
ashes thereof. A man that is cleansed puts it in a clean place, and they
that are unclean by means of one that is dead, put a little of these ashes
into a fountain with Hysope, and after they have mixed the ashes in the
fountain, they besprinkle themselves three times, and on the seventh day, and
after that are they purified. He likewise ordained that the like purification
should be used, when a man should take possession of his inheritance.

But after the army (that had so long mourned the dead sister of the general)
were thus purified, he led them through the desert into Arabia; and arriving in
a place (which the Arabians Number. 20.
account for their Metropolitan city, in times past called Arce, and at this
present Petra) which is environed with a high mountain; Aaron ascended the
said mountain, and Moses showed him the place, where he should yield up his
soul unto God; and in the sight of all the army standing on a high place, he
put off his stoale, and gave it to his son Eleazar, to whom by eldership the
succession appertained: and thus (in the sight of the people) he died in that
very year wherein he lost his sister; and in the hundredth, twenty and third
year of his age: he departed on the new moon, in the month of August
(called by the Athenians Hecatombeon, by the Macedonians Ious, and Sabba by the
Hebrews.) The people mourned for him for the space of forty days, Ruffinus.
chapter 4. Hedio. chap. 5. Number. 21.
and then desisted. Moses displaced his camp from thence, and pitched his
tents near unto a river called Arnon (which springs from the mountains of
Arabia, and runs along the Sehon King of this country Moses sent
Ambassadors, requiring passage through his kingdom, under such assurance as
should best please him, that no wrong should be offered, Moses sent Ambassadors
to Sehon, king of the Amorits.
neither to his country, nor the inhabitants thereof, assuring him to pay the
price of what soever his soldiers took either in victuals or water. But Sehon
refused him, and arming his people, pitched his tents on the banks of Arnon,
being ready to repulse the Hebrews if they presumed to pass the river.

CHAP. V.
Moses overcomes Sehon and Og, Kings of the Amorites, and distributeth their
country by Lot unto two Tribes, and a half of the Hebrews

But when Moses perceived that the Amorites were disposed to hostility, for
which cause supposing that the injury and contempt was not to be endured, and
seeing the Hebrews were an intractable kind of men (and such as either by
idleness or want, might be easily Number. 21. The Hebrews address themselves to
fight against the Amorites.
persuaded to renew their former seditions and tumults, and being willing to
prevent all these occasions) he asked counsel at Gods hands, whether he would
permit him to enforce his passage by the sword. Now when God had allowed his
purpose, and besides that promised him the victory, The Hebrews overthrow the
Amorites, and put them to flight.
did naught at al avail them.) For no sooner did the Hebrews perceive that
their enemies enemies, and with their shafts and bows shot at those which were
a far off, and might not be The year of the world, 2493. before Christ's
Nativity, 1571.
Sehon himself also was slain in this fight. And the Hebrews spoiled those
that were slain, and carried away great store of pillage. They had likewise
Sehon king of the Amorites slain.
great foison and abundance of all kinds of fruits (in that the harvest was not
as yet gathered.) Thus passed the Army through the whole country, foraging
and spoiling the same without any resist; by reason that the enemy was
discomfited, and that all his forces in war were defeated. This was the
destruction which happened to the Amorites, who neither used their counsel The
Hebrews possess the land of the Amorites.
Arnon do terminate the Southern coasts thereof, and Iobacchus the Northern,
which flowing into Jordan, leeseth his name: now the Western coast is watered
by the river of Jordan. Amidst this prosperous estate The situation of the land
of the Amorites. Og king of Basan is slain with his army.
of the Israelites, there arose a new enemy against them, called Og king of
Galadine, and of the countries of Gaulanitis, who came as a friend and
companion to assist Sehon; who seeing his fortunes and estate so desolate and
desperate, yet in hope to obtain the victory, determined to make trial both
of his own men's virtue, and his enemies valor: which hope of his failed him,
for he both died in the battle, and his whole host was likewise discomfited.
But Moses no sooner ouerpassed the flood of Iobacchus, but that entering Ogs
kingdom, he overthrew one city after Og also was a man of a most heroicke and
high stature, and nothing inferior thereunto either in strength or virtue; the
argument of whose strength and stature was extant in the sack of the chief
city and palace of the country of the Ammonites, called Rabatha, where there
was an Iron bed found of four cubits breadth, and nine in length. The fall of
this man did not only further the present felicity of the Hebrews, but also
became the cause of many their future and more fortunate successes: for they
took sixty well fortified cities which were under his government; and what
with their privy prays and public pillage, they were all enriched. After
this Moses removed his camp toward Jordan, and pitched it in a broad plain
near unto the city of Jericho (which is rich and fruitful, and abounds
with palm trees and Ruffin. cap. 5. Hedio cap. 6.
more then war and battle; and Moses thinking good to make use of this their
forwardness, (having sacrificed to God in way of thanksgiving, and feasted the
people) he sent part of them Hierico.
armed to destroy the country of the Madianites, and to spoil the cities of
that region, the cause of which war had this original.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Prophet Balaam.

WHen Balac king of the Moabites (who was both an old friend and confederate
with Number. 22. 23. 24
of his own fortune and estate: for he knew not that God had inhibited the
Hebrews to cover to possess any other country but the land of Canaan, and
therefore more rashly then prudently he bethought him of new matters; and for
that he durst not assail them in battle, whom he knew to be puffed up with
the success of many victories (yet desirous to hinder them from proceeding
any further) he sends Ambassadors to the Madianites to consult with them, as
concerning their common profit. They knowing that beyond Euphrates there was a
famous Divine called Balaam (who was their especial friend) sent some of their
most honorable princes together with Balacs Ambassadors, beseeching him that
he would come unto Balacs king of the Moabites embass. ge to the Madianite.
Balacs and the Madianits embassage to Balaam.
them and curse the Israelites. The Prophet entertaining the Ambassadors with
great humanity, them under whatsoever conditions: which said, he dismissed the
Ambassadors. But the Madianites The year of the world, 2493 before Christ's
birth 1471. The second Embassage to Balaam. The Angel resists Balaam. The
Ass speaks to Balaa. Balaam is reproved by the Angel.
Balac) once more sent their Ambassadors unto Balaam to that purpose; who
desirous to satisfy them in their demands, consulted with God. But God
(offended with him) commanded him to assent to the Ambassadors: and he
supposing that God had indeed licensed him therein, departed onward with the
Ambassadors. But as he traveled upon the way, the Angel of God came and met
him in a certain narrow way, between two mounds or walls made of stones; which
when the Ass perceived whereon Balaam was mounted, he started out of the way
and thrust Balaam, and crushed him against one of the walls; and neither by the
strokes which his rider gave him (being sore grieved by his bruise) nor by any
other means might he be drawn forward. And when as neither the Angel
forsook the way, neither the Prophet gave over tormenting the Ass, at length
the beast falling down by the will of God, spoke Balaam in a humane and
articulate voice; blaming him, for that having never before that time received
damage by him, he had so cruelly tormented and beaten him; considering that he
understood not that God did prohibit him from the performance of that which he
desired. Whilst thus he was troubled with the prodigious speech of the Ass,
an Angel appeared unto him, blaming Balaam, and telling him that the Ass was
not in the fault, but that he hindered his journey, by reason he attempted it
against Gods will. Hereat the Prophet terrified, addressed himself to return
back again: but God commanded him to prosecute that journey which he had
intended, charging him to declare and do that which he should advise and
instruct him in.

After that God had given him this charge, he went unto Balac, who entertained
him honorably, Balaam comes to Balac.
Hebrews camp. Balac also himself being royally attended, accompanied the
Prophet, conducting him honorably unto a certain mountain, which ouerhung
the Israelites, being threescore furlongs from their camp. Which when he
perceived, he caused the King to build seven Altars, on which he laid seven
Bulls, and seven Rams. All which being readily executed by the Balaams
prophecy of the people of Israel.
King, he offered a burnt sacrifice, to the end he might presage and
foreprophecie the victory: which done, he spoke after this manner. Happy are
you, on whom God bestows so large a blessing and abundance of riches, and
vouchsafes you his providence for your perpetual guide and assistance.
Because there is not any sort of men, before whom in innocence of manners and
study of honesty and virtue, you are not to be preferred: your successors
also shall have a more famous Balac being displeased reprehendeth Balaam.
spirit, being transported beyond himself, and ravished with a supernatural
fury. But Balac was sore incensed against him, exclaiming that he had not kept
covenant, although by great rewards he had been by his Confederate drawn
thither to curse them, urging it against him, that in steed of execrations
against them, he had published their piety and praises. To whom the Prophet
Balaams answer.
to be discovered, to speak or conceal what we list, at such time, as God
speaks in our mouths? No, he himself utters those words which him
lists, and publishes those oracles by us, which neither we know, nor ever
thought upon. Verily I sufficiently remember whereunto I was persuaded by the
solicitation of the Madianites, and for that cause came I hither, to execute
that which they extorted from my hands; but God is more powerful then my will,
who contrary to the will of God, and for the particular favor of men, had
purposed to speak otherwise: but as soon The year of the world, 2493. before
Christ's Nativity, 1471.
Hereunto Balac gave his consent, yet did not God ratify those his
imprecations made against the Israelites, notwithstanding he had sacrificed
twice; so that falling on his face, he declared the occurrences Number. 25.
Balaams prophecy of things to come.
of their kingdoms and commonweales, of most esteem (of which some one were
not as yet Balac being sore displeased because the Israelites could not be
cursed, sent Balaam back again without honor: who returning homewards (at
such time as he came unto Euphrates) called Balac Balaams counsel against the
Hebrews.
and the Princes of the Madianites, and spoke thus unto them. Balac and you
Princes of Madian, it behooves me to gratify you (although it be against the
will of God) for which cause give ear unto me: All the sorts of death that may
be to the uttermost, cannot extinguish the race of the Hebrews, neither by
war or pestilence, or famine, or any other chance may they be ruinated: for
God has care to preserve that nation from all evil, so that no slaughter can
fall upon them, Send me the fairest of your daughters, as trimly decked and
beautified as is possible, who by their beauty may conquer, and by their love
allure their hearts; let these wander about their camp, and offer themselves
to entertain a familiar embrace, if by the young men they shall be solicited
thereunto: and as soon as they shall epsy them to be surprised with desire,
let them suddenly break from them, and when as they shall be required by them
to stay, let them not yield, except they will be persuaded to forsake their
country laws, and the service of God from whom The daughters of the
Madianites come to the camp of the Hebrews.
growing in talk with them, they prayed them that they would not envy them
the opportunity to reap the pleasure and enioyment of their beauty, neither
that they would disdain their intercourse: they willingly both admit the
words, and the embraces of the young men, and having well hette them with
dalliance, they addressed themselves to leave them in the heat of their
desires. Whereupon they discomforted at the women's departure did instantly
entreat them, that they should not in that sort forsake them, but that in hope
of future marriage and possession of Valiant young men, we want not at home
neither ample faculties, or the affections of our, parents, and domestical
friends; neither edme we hither unto you for want of these things; neither
admit will your prayers, in that we mean to make sale of our beauties but
being persuaded that you are honest men, we have not disdained to entertain
you with this gracious hospitality, in that we see ye had need thereof, and
for that cause have we showed our selves courteous unto you: now therefore
because you say you love us, and that you are sore aggrieued at this our
departure, we have thought good not and that you have manners so different from
others, that you also use your proper meats according The year of the world.
2493. before Christ's Nativity. 1471. The daughters of Madia^ allure the
Israelites to idolatry.


The Hebrews blinded with the love which they bare unto the virgins, conceived
well of their The Hebrews blinded with the love of the women, revolt from the
laws of their fathers
words, and consented to that which they said, suffering themselves to be
seduced according as they Zambrias also of the tribe of Simeon (and one of the
Princes among them) marying Chosby the Madianite (daughter Zambrias and Chosbi.
Moses accuses the Israelites of idolatry and voluptuousnes
unto Vri a governor of that country) at the commandment of his wife, and in
contempt of Moses laws, for her sake did sacrifice after a foreign manner, and
contrary to the law disported with his foreign wife which was a stranger.
During this estate of affairs, Moses being afraid least some more grievous
mischief should succeed, called the people together, accusing no man in
particular, (for that he was unwilling to draw them into desperatio^, who
whilst they think they lie hidden, may be reduced to a better mind) but he
told them that it was a thing unworthy and ill beseeming themselves or their
elders, that they should set more by their pleasures, then by God and their
religion. That it behooued them whilst they had time, to repent themselves,
and that they showed themselves to be valiant men, not by contempt of laws,
but by appeasing their disordinate desires. Besides he told them that it was an
absurd thing, that whereas in the desert they lived modestly, Zambrias rising
up, spoke after this manner. Moses (says he) use thou thine own laws
(whereunto by long use thou have added Zambrias oration against Moses.
strength and confirmation) which had thou not done, often times ere this had
thou suffered punishment, and learnt (to thine own misery) that the Hebrews
were not to be deluded: for my self thou shall never tie me to thy tyrannical
decrees, for hitherto have thou endeavored naught else, but under pretext of
law and religion to bring us into servitude and subjection; and thy self by
thy subtle and sinister means, to honor and soueraintie; taking from us the
pleasures and liberty of our lives (things that belong to free men, and such
as appertain or live not under any Whilst Zambrias alleged this both for
himself, and other of his faction; the people silently expected the issue of
this audacious boldness, especially for that they saw their lawmaker would not
contend any longer, least he should make an insolent man more outrageous; for
he feared least diverse such in imitation of him growing impudent in their
speeches, should stir up tumults amongst the people: so that the assembly for
this time was after this manner dissolved, and perhaps this mischief had taken
further head, except Zambrias had been suddenly cut off, by such a means as
ensues. Phinees (both The year of the world, 2493. before Christ's Na^itie,
1571.
Eleazar the high Priest, whose great uncle Moses was) was grievously
discontented with Zambrias contumacy, and least by his impunitie the law might
grow into contempt, he resolved to be revenged upon the transgressors, being
well assured how ^uch the example of great men prevails on both parts: and
whereas he was of so much strength of mind and of body, as that he would not
attempt any thing rashly which he would not bring to issue, he repaired to
Zambrias tent, and at one stroke slew both him and Chosbi his wife. By whose
example the rest Phinees thrusts Zambri, and Chosbi through at one time.
of the youth (being exasperated by this his worthy act) enforced themselves
to do justice on those that had committed the like offense; so that they slew a
great part of them by the sword, and the rest by the pestilence (which was
inflicted by Gods judgment on them) were utterly rooted out. Moses (being
incensed against the Madianites) Otherwise. 240^0. Moses sends forces against
the Madianites.
sent out an army to destroy that nation (of which expeditio^ we will presently
discourse, after that we have annexed that which was omitted in this history.)
For reason would that we should not pretermit to praise the deseigne of our law
maker in this behalf. For in regard of Balaam, (sought out by the Madianites
under the intent to curse the Hebrews, although he could not do it, being
hindered therefro by the providence of God, who notwithstanding gave that
counsel to the enemy, by means whereof within a little space a great
multitude of the Hebrews were Balaam, he has greatly honored him in
chronicling his predictions in his writings. And although it had been easy
for him to have deprived him of the glory, and to have appropriated it to
himself, by reason that there was not any witness that might contradict him;
yet neglected he not to give testimony of him, and to make mention of him in
his writings: Yet let every one think of this according as it shall seem
good unto him. But Moses (as I began to say) sent an army of twelve thousand
men against the Madianites, chosing out of every tribe one thousand soldiers,
and appointed Phinees captain over these forces, by whose industry (as a
little before I have declared) both the laws were satisfied, and Zambri (that
brake the same) was punished.

CHAP. VII.
The Hebrews fight against the Madianites, and overcome them.

But the Madianites (having intelligence that their enemies drew near unto
them, and that they were not far o^f from their borders) gathered their
forces together, and beset Hedio cap. 9. Ruffinus. chapter 5.
all those passages of their country, by which they thought their enemy might
break in, addressing themselves to repulse them with force and valor: but no
sooner did Phinees with his forces charge them and set upon them, but that
(upon the first encounter) so great a multitude Five kings of the Madianit^
slain. Otherwise Areceme or Arcae.
neither were their kings in like sort saved from the sword. These were Og,
Sures, Robeas, Vbes and the fifth Recemus (from whom the chiefest City of the
Arabians deriueth his name, and at this day retayneth the same, and is called
Receme, which the Graecians had rather call Petra.) The Hebrews having thus
put their enemies to flight, foraged the whole Region, and carried and drove
away with them a great pray; and killing all the inhabitants threof both men
and women, they only spared the virgins (for this command had Phinees received
from Moses hand^) who returning home with his army in safety, brought with
him a memorable and mighty pray of Oxen, fifty A great pray gotten from the
Madianites.
and two thousand, sixty and seven: of Asses, sixty thousand: of golden and
silver vessels a great number (which those of that country were wont to use in
their domestical affairs.) For by Moses (dividing the pray) gave the fiftith
part thereof to Eleazar and the Priests, and to the Levites another fifty: as
for the remainder he distributed it N^. 27. Deuteronomy. 3. Moses appoints Iosuah
for his successor.
amongst the people. Whence i^ came to pass, that ever afterward they lived
in great security, having gotten riches by their ver^ue, and peace also to
enjoy the same. Now for that Moses was well stricken in years, he appointed
Jesus (who if need were might succeed him in the offices, both The year of the
world. 2493. before Christ's Nativity. 1471.
of a Prophet and a Prince and governor; for God had so commanded that he
should make choice of him) to be his successor in the principality. For he was
most expert in all divine and humane knowledge; being therein instructed by his
master Moses. About that time the two tribes of ^d and Ruben, with the half
tribe of Manasses (being abundantly stored with cattle, and all other manner
of riches) by common consent besought Moses, that he would give and assign to
them in particular the country of the Amorites, which not long since they had
conquered by the sword, for that it was full of rich pastures. But he
(suspecting least surprised with fear, they did detract and withdraw
themselves from the battle of the Chanaanites, and that under pretext of the
care of their cattle, they covered their sloth) highly taunted and controuled
them, saying, that they were fearful dissemblers: Number. 32. The tribes of
Ruben, G^d, and the half of Manasses, require the l^d of the Amorites.
He accused them likewise, that their desire was to possess that land which
was conquered by the common valor of the people, to the end they might lead
their lives in idleness and pleasure; and that bearing arms with the rest of
the host, they would not help to possess the land beyond Iordane which God
had promised them, by ouercomming those nations which he commanded them to
account for their enemies. Who perceiving that he was displeased (least he
should seem to be deservedly incensed against them) answered, that neither
through fear they fled danger, neither by reason of sloth esteemed labor, but
only shot at this, that leaving their pray in commodious places, they might be
more fit to enter conflict: saying, that they were ready (if so be they might
receive Cities for the defense and receipt of their wives, children, and
substance) to follow the rest of the army whither soever Moses (allowing their
forwardnes, and assembling Eleazar the high Priest, and Jesus, with the rest of
the Magistrates) granted them the land of the Amorites, with this condition,
that (together with the people joined unto them in c^nsanguinitie) they should
warfare against their common enemy, till all things were accomplished
according to their desires: and by this means having received that which they
demanded, and building them walled Cities, they left their children, wives,
and substance in the same. Moses also builded ten Cities in that Region (which
are to be reckoned in the number of those forty and eight) Number. 35. Deuteronomy. 4.
43. Ios. 20.
in three whereof he appointed sanctuaries and places of refuge, which they
only might take benefit of, who fled thither for chaunce-medlie; and he
appointed them their term of The Cities of refuge.
such time as he found him without the City of refuge, and that right he only
ratified to those that were akinne, but not unto others. Now the Cities of
refuge were these: in the confines of Arabia Bosora: in the Region of Galadena,
Arimanum: in the country of Bataneades, Gauladeaman: And after the conquest of
Chanaan so many Cities of the Levites (by the commandment of Moses) were
appointed to that end that they might give refuge and habitatior to such sort
of offenders. At that time when one of the Magistrates called Salpades, of the
tribe of Manasses, was dead (and had only left behind him children of the
worser sex) the Moses, and asked his counsel, whether in the distribution
Number. 27. 36 The daughters of Salpades have their inheritance in their fathers
place.
of the lands, they should levy out any part of portion for them: who
answered them, that if they married within their tribe, they should have their
dowry; but if they made choice to handfast themselves in an other tribe, that
then they should leese their patrimony in their own: and for this cause made
he this ordinance, to the end that every tribe should continually possess
his proper inheritance. But whereas now there remained but thirty days
only, to fulfill the number of those forty years since their departure The
history of Deuteronomy.
out of Egypt, he (sommoning an assembly in that place near to Jordan, where
now the City of Abila is situate, environed with a field beset with Palm
trees) as soon as he Ruffin, cha. 5. Hedio. chap. 8. Deuteronomy. 4.
saw the people addressed to hear him, spoke unto them after this manner.

CHAP. VIII. The year of the world. 2493. before Christ's birth 1471.

Moses Laws, and how he was taken out of this world from the company of men.

MY dear friends and fellow soldiers, companions in my long travel, since it
is so thought requisite by God, and mine age (attayning to the full number of
one hundredth and twenty years) requires no less, but that I must depart out
of this life; and since Moses oration unto the people before his death.
it seems not good in Gods sight, that either I should be agent; or assistant
in your affairs beyond Jordan: I have thought it requisite that (in as much as
appertains to your felicity) I should not now also fail or default in my
duty toward you; but that according to the grace that is given me, I should
provide, that by laying open the way unto you that leads to the same, I may
Moses exhorts the people to be obedient to Gods will.
selves any other laws then those I have given you, neither through contempt
innouate any thing in your religion. Which if you shall perform, you shall
excel all other nations in war, and grow invincible against your enemies:
for by Gods assistance all threats are easily contemned. Moreover there are
great rewards (in all the course of life) proposed unto virtue, and she her
self to her self is a chief and especial reward: besides, by her all other
blessings are easily obtained, which if you intertaine amongst your selves, you
shall both lead a blessed life and obtain immortal The promise of Gods
assistance.
are set down unto you, neither suffer any other to violate the same, but in
your selves continually meditate upon the understanding and use thereof. As for
my self, I depart this life in fulness of joy, rejoicing at these your good
fortunes, and commending you all to the laws of piety and prudence, and the
virtue of your guides and magistrates, who hereafter are to take care of your
safe^ie and felicity. God likewise, under whose conduct you have lived (and to
whose favor you owe whatsoever profit you have received by me) will not fail
to take care of you, but (as long Obedience to the Magistrates.
as you shall honor both him and piety, so long shall you remain in
security under his protection: neither shall you want such men, who shall give
you ghostly instructions, whose counsels if Eleazar the high priest, and Jesus,
with the Senate and Magistrates of the tribes) toward whom beware that you
grow stifnecked, knowing and remembering this, that he that is instructed to
obey well (when he shall attain unto dignity) will govern well. Neither
suppose you that liberty consists herein, if you mutine against the
commandments of your Princes: for hitherto have you reposed your liberty in
your contumacie toward your benefactors; from which sin if hereafter you
shall bless your selves, you shall see your estate wax still more
flourishing, and fortunate: And God forbid that you should ever be so
exasperated against these, as you have been sometimes incensed against me. For
if you remember your selves, I have been more oftentimes in hazard of my life
by your means, then by the enemy: Which I speak not therefore unto you to
vpb^aid you therewith; by these blessings you fall into contumacie and contempt
of virtue, Gods favor will never The year of the world. 2493. before Christ's
Nativity. 1471.
The Israelites are commanded to kill their enemies, and destroy their idols.
and deprave your country laws and institutions. Moreover, I command you to
destroy their woods, their altars, and temples, as many soever as you shall
meet with, and so to race them both When he had spoken these things, he
delivered them a book, containing in writing their laws, Moses delivers the
I^raelites a book wherein their laws and manner of life was written.
and customs of good life: which when they had heard and received, they melted
in tears, and now lamented they both for the loss of their Captain, as also
for that they remembered them how many perils he had suffered, and how
diligently he had procured their safety and security: and they grew careful
of the time to come, for that they were not like to recover so good Moses to
pray for them. Besides, they repented them of those things which (through
fury) they committed against him in the desert, and were grievously sorry; so
that all the people (breaking out into tears) would admit no consolation. But
Moses recomforted them, and prayed them to give over weeping, and encouraged
them to receive their laws: and so for this time dissolved the assembly. But
now before I address my self to manifest the rest, I have thought it meet to
insert in this place the laws of this lawgiuer, worthy both his majesty and
virtue: ^awes made by Moses. Ru^finus. chapter 7. The excuse of the Writer of this
History why he innouated the order of the laws.
whereby the Reader may know what our laws have been, even from the first
time, and institution of our common weal. For all those things are extant
which this man wrote, for that we need not feign or affixe any thing in way
of ornament: we have only renewed the order, Moses. Now will I reckon up those
laws in especial, which appertain to the public institution and rites of
our Nation: but those things that concern private customs and contracts,
either betwixt our selves or foreign nations, I have deferred to be
discoursed of in that commentary, wherein (by Gods assistance) I intend to
debate of our manners and method in sacred causes.

After that you have gotten the land of Canaan, built your cities, and have
begun in security Item the Israelites shall live in the land of Canaan. A
sacred city and Temple in Canaan.
to reap the fruit thereof; in observation of these commandments, you shall
gratify God Blasphemy against God.
and obscurely buried.

Let all the Hebrews from their several provinces assemble themselves thrice
in the year Leuit. 4. Deuteronomy. 16. Thrice in the year the Hebrews ought to
meet.
have received, and that they may by their prayers demerit his graces in future
time; and that by their conversation and mutual entertainments, they may
increase their benevolence and love the one toward the other. For it is
behoouefull that they should know one another, who are of the same stock, and
are delighted in the same studies. And this very fitly falls out by their
meetings after this kind of manner, whilst both the countenance and discourse
as yet takes deep root in men's minds; as contrariwise, they that never meet,
it behooves them to be strangers The year of the world, 2493. before Chri^s
Na^tie, 1571. Tenths. De^. 18.
the one unto the other.

Besides, let the tenth part of the fruits (besides them that are due to the
Priests and Levites) which you are accustomed to sell in your markets (being
reduced into ready money) be spent on sacrifices and banquets in the sacred
City. For it is requisite to celebrate feasts in Gods honor of the fruits of
the earth, which we have received from his hands.

Let no sacrifice be made of the hire of an harlot: for neither does any thing
delight God which is annexed with injury; neither is there greater uncleanness,
then the shameful and unlawful The hire of a harlot.
mixture of our bodies.

Likewise, if any man take reward for covering a bitch (whether she be for the
chase, or for the flock) it is not lawful to make sacrifice unto God thereof.
Let no man speak ill of those Other gods. Deuteronomy. 22. Linen and woollen. Deuteronomy.
11. The book of the law is to be read on the fea^t of the Tabernacles.
Temple, nor take that which is dedicated to any god. Let no man wear a
garment wouen of linen and woollen, for it belongs only to the Priests.

Every seventh year, when the people shall be assembled together in the
sacred City to sacrifice upon the feast of Tabernacles, at such time as the
feast approaches, the high Priest from a high pulpit (from whence he may be
heard by the whole multitude) shall read the law unto all of them: so that
neither women nor children shall be exempted from the hearing of the same, no
not the very slaves and bondmen. For it is requisite that they retain the
perpetual memory thereof always imprinted in their minds: for so shall they
sin the less, in that they understand what is decreed in the law. The laws
likewise shall be of more force in the consciences of those Children shall
learn the law. Deuteronomy. 6.
more conducible unto felicity. Twice in the day, in the morning, and in the
evening about bed time, let God be honored for his benefit of our deliverance
out of Egypt. For it is a thing in ^ture reasonable, to give thanks unto God as
well in acknowledgement of the goods which we have before time received, as in
expectation of his future mercies. The chief of these also are to be written
over our doors, and worn on our arms: and those things which declare his The
signs of the law.
power and beneficence, are to be borne about written on the head and arms,
that every way The seven P^dents. Honor to the Magistrate.
have two ministers of the tribe of Leui. Let those that are appointed Judges
in the Cities be held in high reputation: so that in their presence no man
presume either to urge contumelies, or injurious speeches: for so shall it come
to pass that men accustomed to do reverence, shall also exercise themselves
in piety, and grow so much the farther from contempt of God and his power.
Whatsoever seems good to the Judges to decree, let that be held inviolable;
except it be apparent that they be corrupted with money, or that they may be
manifestly convicted of a wrongful judgment. They ought likewise to judge
without respect of lucre or dignity, and prefer justice before all other
things: for this injury sorteth out to Gods contumely, as if it were The
office of Judges.
law contrary to equity: for Gods power is justice; he therefore that gives
judgment in favor and partiality of great men, he makes them greater then
God himself. And if the Judges cannot Justice is Gods power.
determine of the matter in question (as it oftentimes falls out) let them
refer the cause to the sacred City, and then shall the high Priest and the
Prophet, with the assistance of the Senate, determine that which shall be
convenient.

The testimony of one witness shall not be received, but of three, or at
leastwise of two, whose testimony shall be made good by the examination of
their behavior and life. As for women, it Deuteronomy. 19.
is not lawful for them to bear any witness; by reason of the leuitie and
temeritie of that sex. Neither is it lawful for a man servant to bring in
testimony, by reason of his degenerate and ignoble The punishment of a fall
witness. Deuteronomy. 21.
mind: for it is to be suspected, that either for lucre sake, or for fear, he
will depose an untrue testimony. And if any false witness shall fortune to be
believed, and he afterward be convicted of perjury, let him be subject to
that penalty, which he should have endured that should have been cast by his
false accusation. If manslaughter be committed in any place, and the offender
may not be found out, neither there appear any likelihood, that the man is
slain of malice, Of homicide committed.
let there be a diligent and careful inquisition made (with rewards prefixed
to the discouerer) but if no probabilities or conjectures may be gathered, then
let the magistrates of the The year of the world, 2493. before Christ's birth
1471.
next Cities (that adioyne the place where the slaughter is committed) and the
ancients of the same, assemble together, and measure from the place where the
dead body lies: and let the township that is found to be nearest, and the
inhabitants thereof, buy a Heifer which they shall bring into a place
unlabored and unplanted, where they shall (after they have cut the nerves of
the neck) kill it, and the Priests, the Levites and ancients of the City
shall wash their hands in the blood: then shall they lift up their hands over
the head of the said Heifer, and cry out with a loud voice, that they have
their hands clean from that homicide, the which they have not done, neither
were they present at such time as it was perpetrated; and they shall call upon
the mercy of God, beseeching him not to permit that any such grievous accident
ever fall out in their country.

The government of the Peers is the best kind of regiment of all other sorts
of government, take you therefore heed that you desire no other form of
policy, but retain and continue the Aristocracie the best kind of government.
Deus. 17
same, having no other superiors but the laws; and managing your affairs by
your selves. For it suffices you that God is your Prince.

Yet notwithstanding if you shall grow in desire to have a King, see that you
elect one of your own nation, that he in all things be studious to procure
justice and all other virtues, persuading Of the election of a king.
himself that God and the laws are most upright: Let him not undertake any
thing without the advice of the high Priest, and the counsel of the elders.
Let him not have diverse wives, neither let him hunt after huge treasures, nor
multitudes of horse: for fear least possessing them, he become so insolent, as
that he raise his power and will above the laws: and if you see him
affectioned

It is not lawful for any man to remove the land marks, neither of his own
land, or any other man's whatsoever; for by this means is the peace conserved:
Let each one therefore forbear Deus 19. The bounds of lands are not to be
removed
to remove them, because they are as the voice of God, assured for ever. For
wars and soldiers are raised thereby, when such as would augment their
inheritance, strive always to enlarge the bounds of their dominion: And they
that are so hardy to remove the same, are not far from contempt of the
laws.

He that shall plant a piece of ground, and the trees begin to fructify before
the fourth year, the first fruits thereof shall not be offered unto God,
neither shall any man eat thereof, by reason Leui^. 25. The plants that are
not of four years grouth are prohibited.
that the time is inconvenient, and permits not that the trees should
fructify as yet; and nature

Sow not a field that is planted with vines, for it suffices that it
nourishes one sort of plants: so that it needs not to be labored and
manured with the plough. The land is to be plowed Vines to (...) planted. The
law of the plough.
with Oxen: neither are any other sorts of beasts to be yoaked with them, but
the tillage must always be performed by beasts of the same kind.

The seeds also ought to be clean and without any mixture; so that two or
three sorts ought not to be sowed together: for nature allows not a
commixtion of things that are different.

It is not lawful also to cover the female with a male of an other kind: for
it is to be feared that this filthiness should draw men to forget themselves;
and grow in contempt of that sex which is appropriate unto them: for it often
falls out, that from small beginnings things wax worser and worser. For
nothing ought to be admitted, by the imitation whereof, there might chance to
grow any maime in policy: for which cause the laws dissemble not (no not the
lightest) things, to the end they may no way seem to be deficient in their
nature.

They that mow and reap corn, ought not to gleane, but to leave some ears
for those that are in necessity, to the end to succor them. They likewise
that plant vines, ought to leave some Some gleanings are to be left for the
poor in the field.
which the poor shall reap by their gleaning: for God will bring to pass
that their land (who regard not their particular profit, but shall have care of
the nourishment of those that are in necessity, shall be far more fat and
fertile to bring forth and nourish her fruit.

Neither is the mouth of the Ox to be mouzled, at such time as he treads the
corn in the The year of the world. 2493. before the Nativity of Christ.
1571. De^. 25. Oxen ^eading or g^inding. Trauelle^s a^e not to be d^uen away
from ripe fruits.


Neither ought the trauailer also in his journey to be denied to gather and
taste the fruits of Autumn; but he is to be permitted to take his fill, as if
they were his own, whether he be of the country or a stranger, who shall
depart joyfully, in that they have been made partakers of such fruit; but it
is not lawful for them to carry any away with them.

They likewise that gather grapes, ought not to forbid any man to taste of them
as they bear them to the press: for it is an unjust thing, that the goods
which are given by the will of God for the sustenance of man, should be denied
them that desire to taste the fruit which God

They likewise are to be invited, that through shame make nice to touch the
same, yea and to be entreated to take part (if they be Israelites) for such are
companions and masters, in that they are of the same race; and if they travel
into any place they ought to be entreated to take part of those benefits
which God presented unto them according to the season. For it is not to be
supposed, that that is ill employed, which in way of courtesy a man permits
another man to take, since it is God that furnishes and gives the abundance
and fo^son of all things, not to the end to enjoy them in private, but also to
bestow them willingly; and he it is that by this means would declare unto other
people, the good will he bears to the people of Israel, and the felicity
whereof he makes them partakers, by reason that in that abundance which they
have, his will is Thirty nin^ stripes.
for this his dishonestie, and in public receive thirty nine stripes (if he
be a free man) for that making himself a slave unto his gain, he has
dishonored his excellent quality.

It shall very well become you (said Moses) since you have tasted miseries
both in Egypt and the desert; that you have care of those who are in like
estate; and for that you are made rich by Gods mercy and providence, it
behooves and becomes you to impart somewhat to the indigent, who at the
present are in that estate in which you were.

Besides the two tenthes which I commanded you yearly to pay (the one to the
Levites, and The tenth for the poo^e. The first fruits Deu^. 26.
the other for your festiuals) you shall for every year annexe a third, to be
distributed amongst the poor, to women, widows and orphans.

Incontinently after a man has gathered his first fruits, he shall bring them
to the Temple; and after he has given thanks unto God (for that the land which
he has given him in possession has brought forth fruit) and as soon as he
has accomplished that sacrifice (which the law commands him to make) he
shall give the first portion to the Priests. And after he has done all that
which concerns him to do (as well the tenths unto the Levites, as also those
other things which were ordained for the feasts, and first fruits) being ready
to return unto his home, let him stand upright near unto the Temple, and
above all things, give thanks unto God, that having delivered them from the
grievous servitude of Egypt, he has given them a plentiful and ample land to
enjoy: and making protestation that he has paid the tenths according to Moses
law, let him beseech God that he will be favorable both to himself in
private, and the Hebrews in

Let those that are of full years to be married, match themselves with
virtuous virgins, and Of marriage.
such as are borne of honest parents. And he that will not take a virgin to
wife, let him not abuse himself with one that is married to another man, least
he breed discontent and sorrow in her first husband. Let not free men match
themselves with such as are servants, no not although they be Free men ought
not to marry servants.
thereunto moved by love. For it is a thing worthy and besitting honor, to
surmount a man's affections. Let no man meddle with an Harlot (whose sacrifice
God refuses, by reason of the filthiness The marriage of an harlot.
of her body.) For the children shall be of a free heart, and addressed in
virtue, not if they be engendered in villainous and unlawful concupiscence; but
if they be begotten and borne The penalty of a woman married for a virgin, and
not found so.
and let the new married wives cause be defended by her father, or brother, or
by them who next unto them shall seem to be her next in blood; and if the
Damsel be found to have committed no crime, let her return and dwell with
him that has accused her, who cannot any more refuse her, except she give him
great occasions, whereunto she cannot contradict. But he that Deu^. 24.
without cause and rashly shall accuse and slander his wife, he shall be
punished with thirty nine The year of the world. 2493. before Christ's
Nativity. 1471.
stripes; and in way of amends shall pay fifty sicles to her father. But if it
be proved that she has been defloured; and has been common, then shall she
be stoned to death, for that she has not chastely conserved her virginity,
till the time of her lawful marriage; and if she be of the race of the
Priests, she shall be burned alive.

If any man have two wives, the one of which he holds in great honor and
amity, either for love, or by reason of her beauty; and that the other be not
in the like condition and estimate; Deuteronomy 21. The first begotten should hold his
right.
if the son of her that is better beloved, demands to have the prerogative
of the elder, which is two portions of that which comes to all the rest by
his fathers patrimony (for so much import our ordinances) and challenges the
same by reason that his father more dearly loves his mother then the other,
let it not be granted him. For it is an act against justice,

Whosoever shall violate a maiden being betrothed to another man (if by
persuasion she has consented to lie with him) let her die with him. For they
are both of them equally guilty The punishment of adultery, or rather
rauishing, Deuteronomy. 22.
of sin: the man, because he has persuaded the maiden to suffer an
insufferable dishonor, and to prefer her lust before an honest marriage: and
the maid, for suffering her self to be overcome, and abandoning her body to
villainy either for lust or lucres sake: But if meeting her alone he enforce
her, and she have none to succor her hard by, let him die alone.

He that shall defloure the virgin that is unmarried, he shall take her to
wife: but if he condescend not to the father to entertain her in wedlock, he
shall pay fifty sicles for amends of The deflouring of a virgin
the injury.

If any man pretend to separate himself from his wife for certain causes,
such as ordinarily happen amongst married couples: let him confirm it in
writing, that he will never more entertain her again, and so may she marry
again unto another, and refuse the former husband: And if it happened that she
were evil entreated by the second, or that he being dead, the first would take
her again in marriage, it is not lawful for the wife to return unto him.

If the brother of him that is deceased without issue, take to wife her whom
his deceased brother had married; and that the son which was borne by this
second wedlock, bears his name: let Leuit. 25. The wife of the dead brother
married.
him be brought up as the successor of his inheritance (which thing is granted
for public profit sake

If any man take a virgin prisoner, or such a one as has been already
married, and be desirous to take her to his wife, it is not lawful for him to
touch or approach her before such time as Marriage with a bondsman. Deuteronomy. 21.
she has been shaven, and (having put on her mourning apparel) has
bewailed her parents, or friends slain in battle: but after she has in this
sort assuaged her sorrow, she may afterward addict her self to mirth and
marriage. For it is a matter both honest and just, that he that entertaineth
her to have issue by her, should condescend unto her will in all that wherein he
might gratify her, and that he should not only addict himself to the pursuit
of his pleasure: when as then The lamentation and mour ning of thirty days.
the thirty days of mourning shall be expired (for that time is sufficient
for the wife to bewail

All those young men that shall make no reckoning of their fathers and mothers,
and that shall not do them that honor which belongs unto them (whether the
same proceed of shame, or Deuteronomy. 21. Disobedience. (...).
spring from folly, by which means they grow to neglect their duty) these
first of all shall be admonished by discreet counsel of their parents (who are
by nature appointed sufficient judges The year of the world. 2493. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1571.


Let the enemy also be enterred after the same manner, and let no dead man lie
unburied after such time as he has been judged, and has satisfied the laws.
Enemies to be buried. Deuteronomy. 23.


It is not lawful for any Hebrewe to lend upon usury, whether it be meat or
drink: for it is an unjust thing to make profit of the forumes of the tribes;
but it is better to succor their necessities; and impute their thanksgiving
and Gods retribution, to be a gain unto them, which are wont to follow such
kind of benefits. But they that have borrowed either money or any fruit, either
dry or moist; when as by the favor and assistance of God, they shall reap
their own That which is borrowed must be paid. Deuteronomy. 24. A pledge.
harvest and gather their fruit, let them make a willing restitution to those
that have lent them, Theft.
their houses to rob them, or they that break their walls, let not such a one
be punished. Who so shall steal a beast shall restore four for it, except it
be an Ox, for which one shall satisfy fiuefolde and if the thief want means
to pay this penalty, let him be their slave against whom they have trespassed,
and at whose suit they are condemned. If any one be sold unto one of his own
tribe, let him serve him seven years, and at the seven years end, he shall
depart with liberty: An Hebrew slave is to be set at liberty after seven
years.
but if during the time that he remains with the buyer, he beget any child
upon a female fellow slave, and that he be willing to serve by reason of the
good affection and great amity that he bears unto the house, in the year of
lubile (which happens every fiftith year) let him be set Goods that are
sound.
found it, to the intent he may restore it, knowing that the profit is not
good, which comes and accrueth by an other man's injury. The like is to be
done with beasts, for if any man find them straied in the desert, if he find
not out the owner, let him presently keep it by him, taking God to witness
that he will not detain with him an other man's goods. If any man find an other
man's beasts bemired or bebogd, let him not pass further, but succor them: or
if he find them The year of the world. 2493. before Christ's Nativity. 1471.
travailed with foul weather, let him endeavor himself to save the same, and
help him that is the owner, not sparing or making nice of any labor.

Let each man direct the ignorant trauailer in his way, and set him in the
right path if he wander, without deluding him, or hindering him in his
necessities, or misleading him in his journey. Let no man speak ill of him
that is either absent or deaf. If any man be stricken in a quarrel, and it be
not with a weapon, let him that stroke him be presently punished in receiving
the like Deuteronomy. 22 The law of violence.
outrage, as he has offered him. But if he be carried into his house, and lie
sick upon it diverse days, and in the end die thereof, he shall be exempt of
the penalty. But if he escapes, and during the time of his sickness has been
greatly hindered and charged; then let him that stroke him pay all the charges
he has been at during the time he kept his bed, and satisfy the Physicians.

Let not any one among the Israelites use any mortal poison, nor any drugge
that may do hurt unto any man: and if any man be found with such things about
him, let him die, dying that death Poison.
which he determined they should suffer, for who^ he had prepared the poison.
Who so has maimed any man, or pulled out his eye, let him in like manner be
maimed and blinded, being deprived Talions law.
Of an Ox striking with his horn.
man in the field, or mow, let him be stoned to death, and let no man eat the
flesh thereof. And if it be approved that the master which owes the same has
heretofore known the quality of the beast, and has not taken order he should
do no harm, let him also he put to death, as being the author of the murder
committed by the Ox. But if the said Ox kill a slave, either male or female,
he shall be stoned; and the owner thereof shall pay thirty fieles to the
master of the slave that is slain. If one Ox be strooken by another, so as he
die thereof, let both of them (both Deuteronomy. 21. A pit.
but least any man by misfortune should fall into the same. And if any man's
beast shall fall into the same (and it vndefenced) the owner of the pit must
pay to the owner of the beast the price thereof: and ever after let it be
conered as it were with a wall; for fear least any thereafter fall into the
same. Let him that receives any thing in trust keep it carefully, as a thing
sacred and Deuteronomy. 24.
divine; and let neither man nor woman attempt to alien that which is committed
to his custody, although thereby he might gain an infinite sum of gold; and
although there were not any man that could convince him thereof. For since that
generally the conscience knows the same, every In the same place.
he shall be condemned to restore all that which was committed to his keeping.
As it has been ordained in respect of matters in trust, the like is decreed
as touching hire which is due unto the Hire.
God gave him his hands in stead of lands and other possessions. For which
cause the payment of hire ought not to be deferred, but satisfied the same day,
by reason that God permits not that the labourer should lose the fruit of
his travel. The children shall not be punished for the misdeeds Children are
not to be punished for their parents offenses.
of their parents, but if they be virtuous and are begotten by lewd fathers,
they rather merit that men should have compassion of them, then that they
should hate them: neither are the offenses of the children to be imputed to the
parents, by reason that youth oftentimes engages The year of the world, 2493.
before Christ's Nativity, 1471. Eunuchs.
it self in those follies, which he neither learned by examples, nor for which
he endures not to be reproved. Eunuchs are to be detested, and their
companies to be fled, because they deprive themselves of manhood, and the gift
of begetting children, which God has given unto men for the increase of
mankind. Such people therefore are to be driven far from us, and esteemed
wholly inexcusable, who kill their children before they be borne. For it is a
matter very manifest, that their spirits being effeminate, their bodies also
are degenerate. Each thing also that is monstrous to behold, is to be driven
away: neither is it lawful to geld either men or beasts. Let this be the
disposition of those laws, wherewith you shall be pollicied and governed in
time of peace, and God be favorable unto you, and give you grace to use them
in good order, and without confusion. And since it cannot otherwise be but that
humane affairs must sometimes

God grant that you may enjoy the country (which he has given you) in
contempt of travels, and in exercise of virtues: and that you may possess the
same in security and peace, and that strangers may not levy armies to
overthrow you, and that no civil mutiny may be raised amongst you, which may
bring to pass that that, which has been well ordered and decreed by your
ancestors, do come to naught, when you shall happen to commit the contrary.
Live The laws of war. Deuteronomy., 20. Heralds to be sent.
the confines of your country: But if the matter must needs be tried out by
the sword, you shall send certain heralds to your destinated enemies. For
before you enter battle, it shall be requisite first of all to parlee with
them, and to declare unto them that you have a great army, and horses, and
weapons, and (besides all these) that you have Gods favor and assistance: who
shall require them therefore that you may not be enforced to war against
them, nor to make booty of their goods, and to carry them away in spite of
their resist. If they condescend unto any reasonable conditions, then
entertain peace; making your account that they are stronger

But when you have brought your army into the field, take heed you commit no
outrage: and when you shall assault any Cities, if you fortune to have any need
of matter to make engines of; grub not the land, neither see you cut down the
fruitful trees, but spare them, remembering you Fruitful trees are not to be
cut down.
that they are planted for the good of men, and that if they could speak they
would accuse you, alleging that without cause of war they are ill entreated
against all right: and that if they had the power to depart from thence, they
would dislodge and remove into another country.

But when the battle is ended, and the day is yours, kill all those enemies
that resisted you in The Chanaanites are wholly to be extinguished. Deuteronomy 30. 31.
32 33. 34. Moses song and blessing.
they with all their families are to be ruinated.) Beware also (but especially
in war) that neither a woman use a man's apparel, neither a man a woman's
raiment. These are the laws which Moses left. He gave them likewise certain
institutions (which he had written forty years before that time) whereof we
will speak in an other treatise. Some few days after (for he assembled the
people six days one after the other) he gave them his blessing, and
pronounced his maledictions against those which should not live according to
his laws, but should transgress the determinations The year of the world,
2493 before Christ's birth 1471.
The Amalechites to be punished.
they had done them, at such time, as they were in the desert. And commanded
them that as soon as they had taken the country of Chanaan, they should
exterminate and extinguish all

He willed them also to erect an Altar toward the rising of the sun (not
far from the city of Sichem, between two mountains, the one Garizim, on
the right hand; and the other called Gebal, on the left) and that distributing
the people into two parts (six tribes in every part) they should plant them on
the mountains. And he commanded that the Levites and Priests should be with
them, to the intent that they first of all that were upon the mountain of
Garizim, should beseech God that he would multiply his blessings upon them that
should be zealous of his service, and careful of the conservation of his
laws, without diuerting from that which Moses had commanded. The six other
also were appointed to answer the like: and when as likewise these six last
had prayed the six first were to answer them, and confirm that which they
had pronounced. Moses establish, Deuteronomy. 29.
and these the Hebrewe nation observe continually and vnuiolably, even unto
this day.

On the next morrow, he reassembled all the people, themselves, their wives,
and children: he likewise commanded that the slaves should be there present,
binding them by an oath that they Moses binds the Hebrews by an oath to keep
the law.
should maintain and keep the laws, and that diligently tying themselves to
the will of God, they should not so much esteem either their kindred, or means
of perils, or any other cause whatsoever, as that thereby they should be driven
to neglect their laws, or depart from the ordinances thereof: but whether it
were any one of their kindred, or any City whatsoever, that would seek to
alter and disturb the same, or strive to weaken the estate thereof, that both
in particular and in public, they should expose themselves and endeavor to
punish them: and if they should fortune to take such a City, that they should
race and utterly deface the same; and if it were possible not to leave one
stone upon another, but to destroy the foundation. But if they were too feeble
to take such a revenge, yet that they should make it known that they were not
consenting to their impiety. Hereunto the whole people subscribed and sealed
it with an oath.

Iosuah likewise, during the life and in the presence of Moses, foreprophecied
whatsoever he intended to perform for the profit of the people, either abroad
in the administration of war, or home in prescribing laws; and preparing
them to an order of life (which was newly prescribed them) he told them that by
instructions from God he foreprophecied, that if they violated their country
religion, they should not escape their destruction; for that both their country
should be filled with foreign arms, and their Cities sacked, and their Temple
burnt, and that they themselves should be sold under the spear, and that they
should serve a nation which would not be moved Moses also exhort Jesus that he
should lead his army against the Chanaanits, promising him that God would be
assistant in his actions, prophesying besides much good hap unto the people.
Moses exhorts Iosuah.


Since that (says he) I go unto mine ancestors, and that God has prefixed
this day and time The year of the world. 2493. before the Nativity of Christ.
1471. Deuteronomy 31. Deuteronomy. 33. 34.


Whilst Moses pronounced these his last words, and discoursed unto the tribes
their several The Hebrews lamentation at Moses death.
destinies, the whole multitude brake into tears; and the women beating their
breasts, showed and expressed the sorrow they had conceived at his death. The
children likewise lamented, making it known that they could not be masters of
their own sorrow, because that in their tender years they had understood the
virtue and famous acts of Moses; and betwixt the elder Moses (beckening with
his hand) warn Eleazar the high Priest, and the chiefetaine Jesus. And when he
was arrived upon the mountain called Abarim (which is very hie, and situate
near unto Jericho, and from whence he might discover the greater part of the
land of Chanaan) he dismissed the elders: and whilst with mutual embraces he
took his last leave of Eleazar and Jesus, and discoursed with them, a cloud
suddenly environed him, and he was taken away into a certain valley: but in
the scripture he writes that he died, fearing least for the excellency of his
virtue, they might report that he was ravished and taken away by God. The whole
time of his life was one Moses when he died was 120, years old.
exempted.) He died the last month of the year, and the first day of that
month which the Macedonians call Dystrus, and our countrymen Adar. Of all men
the wisest that ever was, and who in execution of his good counsels had no man
to equal him. Moreover in eloquence he was incomparable, Amongst the Hebrews
Adar is the 12. month, but amongst us it is called March.
and in dexterity and grace to intertaine and persuade the people, he had no
second: and so were his affections always leuelled and limited by his
wisdom, that he seemed utterly to want them, and that only he knew the names
of those passions which he perceived to be too active in other men. In his
government he was matchless, in his prophecies peerlesse, so that all the
orations that he made seemed to be Oracles. For which cause the whole multitude
mourned for him during the term of thirty days: neither were the Hebrews
ever seized with so extreme Moses was a good governor, and a great prophet.
him a present desire of him, but a great estimation amongst all men, who have
ever chanced to read and examine his writings, whilst by them they make
estimate of his virtues. And these are those things which I thought good to be
spoken of the death of Moses.

THE FIFTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 5. book.
1 How Jesus General of the Hebrews, having overcome and slain the
Chanaanites, divided their land amongst the Tribes by Lot. 2 How after the
death of the General, the Israelites (neglecting the ordinances of their
forefathers) fell into extreme calamities, and through a civil war that was
raised amongst them, there were but 300. of the tribe of Benjamin left alive. 3
How for their impiety the people of Israel were delivered by God into
captivity under the Assyrians. 4 Their liberty by Cenizus. 5 How the people
once more were overcome by the Moabites, and exempt from servitude by Iodes
Ehud. 6 How they were brought under the subjection of the Chanaanites, and
restored to their liberty by Barac. 7 How the Amalechites (having entered the
country of the Israelites, and conquered them) possessed and spoiled the same
for the space of seven years. 8 How Gedeon delivered the people. 9 How some
successors of Gedeon waged war against the neighbor nations round about
them. 10 Of Sampsons strength, and what mischiefs he did in Palestine. 11 How
the sons of Eli the Prophet were slain in battle by the Palestines. 12 How
Eli (hearing of the death of his sons, and the loss of the Arc) fell down
from his
CHAP. I.
How Jesus General of the Hebrews, having overcome and slain the
Chanaanites, divided their land amongst the tribes by Lot.

AFter that Moses had bin taken from amongst men (after the manner as I have
The year of the world. 2494. before Christ's Nativity. 1470.
declared) and that all whatsoever he had ordained, was duly performed, and
his funeral obsequies were at an end: Jesus commanded the people to prepare
themselves, and to march forward into battle. He sent espials likewise into
Jericho, who might both sound their minds, and discover their forces: Jesus
sends spies into Jericho.
presently after he dislodged, and encamped in the open field, intending with
all expedition to pass the river of Jordan, as soon as any opportunity
offered it self. Then assembled he together the Princes of the tribes of Ruben
and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses (for to this half tribe the country
of the Amorites was given for an habitation, which was the seventh part of
Chanaan) and remembered them of that which they had promised unto Moses,
entreating them (in memory and favor of him, who in the last period of his
life was not wearied to take care of their commonweal, and public profit)
speedily and willingly to Jesus calls to memory and reckons up what the
tribes of Gad. Ruben, and Manasses had promised Moses. Number 13.
perform that which they had promised unto him: who showing themselves ready
and willing, to perform that which he commanded them, he armed and arranged
fifty thousand men, that were his followers, and afterward (departing from
the City of Abila) he drew toward Jordan, The spies suruay Jericho.
them were more or less defensed, and which of the gates were easiest or
hardest to assault; neither did any of those that met them, offer any offense
unto them: Whilst they thus pried into, and viewed every place, the Citizens
interpreted their diligence to be The year of the world. 2494. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1470.
Rahabs house, where they supposed to conceal themselves til they might gain
them opportunity to depart. Whereupon the King sent a speedy commandment and
officers to apprehend them, to the end that being brought before him, he might
by torture extort from them the cause and reason why they came into his City.
Of whose approach, when Rahab had gotten some private intelligence, she hid the
Spies under certain Rachab hides the spies.
packes of linen, which she dried near unto the walls, and told them that were
sent by the King, that certain strange guests a little before Sunne-set had
supt in her house, but that they were departed; who if they were suspected by
the King, as such as intended any detriment to the common weal, they might
with little labor and pursuit be easily surprised in their way. They hearing
the woman speak after this manner, and imagining no subtlety or deceit in her,
returned back again without searching the hostrie. But after they were busied
and traveled in the pursuit and search after them every way, and tracting of
every path, whereby they might be suspected to travel toward Jordan, and
perceiving no sign of their flight, they desisted any further to pursue them.
No sooner was the tumult appeased, but Rahab called forth the Spies, and told
them the dangers to which she had exposed her self for their security sake
(for had she Iosuah hereupon declared unto Eleazar the high Priest and the rest
Iosuh. 3. Jesus passes Jordan with his army.
of the Elders, what oath his Spies had sworn unto Rahab, who all of them
ratified the promise they had made. But the General was pensive and sore
troubled, for that he knew not which way he might pass the river of Jordan, by
reason that for the present it was very deep and without bridges. For before
that time there was not any bridge built thereupon; and if they would have
built one, the enemy would have interrupted them: and further besides that,
there were not any places convenient to stay in. But God made him a promise
that he would make the waters fall, and give them passage therethrough. Iosuah
therefore encamped his host for the term of two days (to the end he might
pass over his whole Army, and the rest of the people, after Iosuah. 4. 3
whole multitude, distinguished in their Tribes, having enclosed within their
battles the women and children, whereby they might be the more secure from the
force of the flood. But when as the Priests had marched foremost, and found the
river passible, and that the water was decreased, and that the current thereof
was not so violent, neither the billows so incensed, but that in the bottom
there was good footing (for that the gravel and sand was not quick but
settled) The year of the world, 2494. before Christ's birth 1470.
then all of them without fear passed over the foord, finding all things
assuredly performed unto them, which God had both foreprophesied, and promised
unto them: but the Priests kept them in the midst of the channel until the
multitude were past over, and were in security, and when as every one had
go^en the other bank, the priests issued out, permitting the river to flow
according to his free and ordinary course: which pleasantly flowing grew to
that greatness and swiftnes which it retained at the first. Now when the
Hebrews had marched fifty furlongs, they encamped themselves some ten
furlongs from Hiericho. But Jesus building an Altar of stones (which every one
of the Princes of the tribes had gathered out of the channel of Jesus builds
an Altar on the other side of Jordan. The Israelites celebrate Easter, enjoy
the fruits of the earth, and cease to feed on Manna.
Jordan, according as the Prophet had commanded) to the end it might be a
monument of the prodigious restrainment of the flood, and on the same he
sacrificed unto God, and the solemnity Iosuah. 6. Jesus with his army walks
about the city.
sounding their seven horns: and exhorting their soldiers to behave themselves
manfully, they walked about and environed the walls round about, being
attended both by the Senate and Iosuah assembled the army and all the people,
bringing them joyful news of the City, which that day should be surprised
without labor (the walls falling down of their own accord, and without man's
hand, and yielding them free passage and entrance into the City) and he
encouraged them to kill all those whom they met withal, and not to give over
the slaughter of their enemies, although they were weary, neither to be moved
with compassion, nor allured from the slaughter and execution by desire of
pray, or to permit the enemy in any sort to fly, but that they should
extinguish and root out all that which breathed and had life, reserving
nothing for pray or private profit. He commanded likewise that all that which
was found (either of gold or silver) should be Rahab with her kindred should be
saved, by reason of the oaths which the spies had sworn unto her. This said, he
arranged his host, and made them approach Jesus comma^deth that none but Rahab
and hirs should be saved.
the City, then did they once more walk round about the City, the Arc
marching before them, and encouraging the army to valor by the sound of their
Cornets. And after they had environed the walls seven times, and had a little
reposed themselves, the walls fell (whereas then neither the Hebrews had
enforced any engine against them, or used any other violence.) So that they
entering into the City slew all those that were therein, who were already
discomforted by the sudden The walls of Jericho fall down of themselves.
and unexpected overthrow of their walls, and through their sudden fear made
unapt to fight, so that they were slain amidst their streets, finding neither
refuge nor relief to succor Jericho is taken the men slain, the city
destroyed, and burnt: Rahab and hers reserved.
filled the City with dead carcasses, which at length being set on fire,
served them for a funeral flame to consume them in, and with equal fury
rauaged and burnt the fields. Only Rahab and her household (who kept themselves
within her hostrie) were saved by the spies, who brought to Iosuahs presence,
he gave her thanks for saving his spies, and promised her that he would reward
her courtesies, and anon after gave her possessions, and ever after held her
in great honor. All that of the City which the fire spared, the sword
consumed. And Iosuah pronounced curses against those, who should afterward
endeavor to erect that which he had ruinated: namely that he that should lay
the first foundation, should be deprived of his first begotten son, and he
that should finish the work might lose his youngest son; neither pleased it
God that this imprecation Achar the son of Zebed of the tribe of Judah, having
gotten a royal pall altogether embrodered with gold, with an ingot of gold of
three hundredth sicles in weight, and thinking in himself that it were a very
fond thing, that the profit he had made by the hazard of his life, should be
taken The year of the world. 2494. before Christ's birth 1470. Ios. 7. 8. Achar
hides certain parts of the pray contrary to Gods commandment. Galgal
signifies liberty. Iosuah. 5. The Israelites are put to flight by the Ainites.
from him and presented unto God, who had no need thereof, dug a deep pit
in his tent, and buried his spoils therein, thinking by this means to defraud
God, and deceive his companions. At that time their tents were pitched in a
place which was called Galgal (which signifies Enfranchized, because that
having past the river Jordan they knew that they should be delmered from the
affliction of Egypt, and the penury of the desert.) But some few days after
the destruction of Jericho, Iosuah sent out three thousand armed men against
Ainan (a City situate a little above lericho) who encountering with the
Ainites in battle, and by them put to flight, lost thirty and six of their
company. The news of which disaster being brought into the camp, the
Israelites were seized with exceeding grief, not only for the men they had
lost (which were all of them valiant men and worthy of honor) but also by
reason of the despair they conceived Iosuah perceiving the army discomfited
after this manner, Iosuahs prayer unto God.
and conceiving some sinister hope of their estates, boldly addressed himself
unto God saying. We have not been induced by our own temerity to attempt the
conquest of this land by force, but we have been hereunto encouraged by thy
servant Moses, to whom thou have promised by diverse signs that thou would
give us this country to inhabit in, and that our army should have Moses, we
both abstain from war, and (after so many enterprises and entrances of
war) we cannot hope of any fortunate or succesful proceedings. Be thou
therefore assistant unto us, O Lord (for it lies in thy power) and by thy
mercy relieve our present sorrow with a largess of victory, and take from us
the thought of despair wherein we are too far plunged. Iosuah lying
prostrate on his face made this prayer unto God, who presently answered him,
that he should arise; comma^ding him to purge the army Gods answer to losuahs
prayer.
of that pollution that had happened therein, and of a theft committed by one of
the multitude, who was so hardy as to violate and conceal those things which
were ^onsecrated unto him, Iosuah declared unto the people, and calling for the
high Priest and the Magistrates, he cast lots upon the tribes, and when as the
lot had fallen on the tribe of Judah, it was again cast by kinreds; and when
again the sacrilege was found to be committed in Zacharias kindred, they
examined the same once more man by man, and found out Achar: who having no
means to deny the same, and being discovered by God himself, confessed the
fact, and Achar found out by Lot and punished.
brought forth those things, which he had concealed: Whereupon being presently
put to death, he was by night buried after an ignominious manner, according as
he deserved it. But Iosuah having purified the people, led them forth against
Ainan, and laying an Ambuscado by night Iosuah making a show of retreat, drew
them farther off from their City (forming in them an imaginary hope that the
Israelites fled, and that they should gain a second victory over them.) But
when Iosuah suddenly made a stand, and freshly charged them, and gave a signal
unto those that lay in ambush, they were incontinently addressed Ainan sacked
and burnt.
and encouraged to fight, and with all expedition entered the gates of the
City, on the walls whereof there stood diverse of the inhabitants, being eye
witnesses (as they thought) of their achieved victory. In this manner was the
City taken, and all they that were therein, were slain: and Iosuah on the
other side enforced those in such manner (with whom he maintained skirmish)
that they turned their backs, and fled toward the City, as if it had been in
The pray distributed amongst the people.
a great quantity of silver (for the country was rich.) All which Iosuah
(upon his returue to Galgal) distributed amongst the soldiers. But the
Gabeonites (who dwelt not far off from Jerusalem) The year of the world.
2494. before Christ's Nativity. 1470. Joshua. 9.
Iosuah, supposing they should find no tolerable conditions at his hands
because they knew that he warred under that resolution, utterly to root out
and extinguish the nation of the Canaanites from off the earth. They therefore
made a league with the Cepherites, and Cathierimites their neighbors, telling
them that they should not escape the danger if so be it so fell out that the
Gabeonites were first taken by the Israelites: but that if they were united
together, they might both resist the greatness, and avoid the dangers of them.
Which counsel of theirs being accepted, they sent Ambassadors unto Iosuah
(such men as they thought The Gabeonites send Embassors to Jesus
to be both most capable and wisest amongst them in the affairs of
commonweal) to the intent Iosuah that (being incited by his fame) they had
undertaken a long journey, the truth whereof he might conjecture by their
habits: for upon their setting forth their garments were new, and now by their
long journey quite worn (for they had purposely put upon them old raiment, to
the end it might be suitable to their subtle insinuation.) Standing up
therefore in the midst of the multitude (attired after this manner) they told
them The Gabeonites oration to the Hebrews.
that they were sent by the Gabeonites, and the neighboring Cities thereabouts
(far disioyned from that country) to articulate and ratify a peace between
them, according as they have bin Jesus makes a covenant with the Gabeonits.
Priest Eleazar with the council of the Elders swear unto them, that they
should be reputed for friends and allies, and that no unjust action should be
enterprised against them; the people likewise approved their oaths. But Iosuah
encamping with his Army upon their confines, and understanding that the
Gabeonites dwelt not far off from Jerusalem, and that they likewise were of the
race of the Canaanites, he sent for the principal and princes amongst them,
and complained Eleazar the high Priest and the council of the Elders, who told
him that he might not infringe the oath which they had made The Gabeonites are
appointed to public ministeries. Iosuah. 10. The king of Jerusalem moves
war against the Gabeonites.
unto them, but that he might depute them to serve the public ministeries.
Whereupon they were adjudged to attend on these services: and by this means
delivered they themselves from their imminent peril. But for that the king of
Jerusalem was sore incensed against the Gabeonites (for that they had revolted,
and submitted to Jesus) he assembled together the Kings of his neighbor
nations, to make war against them. The Gabeonites perceiving the danger they
were in, and how the enemy was prepared to assault them (and how to that
intent they had pitched Jesus to assist and defend them. For their affairs
were in that estate, that they expected death from the hands of their friends:
and contrariwise hoped for help to be warranted by those Hebrews, with who^
they had contracted amity (notwithstanding that they arrived in that country
to destroy the whole nation of the Cananites) Iosuah therefore (hastening onward
with his whole army to give Jesus drives them of Jerusalem to flight.
them assistance, and marching both day and night) early in the morning charged
the enemy (at such time as he intended his assault) and having put them to
flight, he pursued them by a steepy tract, which place is called Bethora, where
he knew that God had fought for him (as it appeared manifestly by the thunder,
lightening and hail that fell at that time, far bigger then was accustomed.)
The day likewise (the like whereof was never heard of before) was lengthened,
least by The Sun stood still.
to pass that Jesus took all those five Kings in a certain cave near
Makkedah, where they were hidden, and condemned them all to the death. And that
the day at that time increased above common custom it is extant and registered
in the sacred volumes, which are reserved in the Temple. When after this manner
the Kings that invaded the Gabeonites were slain and conquered, Five kings
slain. Iosuah 11.
Jesus led his Army into the mountains of Canaan, where having made a great
slaughter of men, and taken a rich booty, he brought back his army into
Galgal. Now when The year of the world, 2494. before Christ's Nativity, 1470.
The kings of the Chanaanites move war against the Hebrews.
The huge army of the Chanaanites.
thousand chariots. This great multitude of the enemy astonished Iosuah, and
the Israelites, and (by reason of the assured fear wherewith they were seized)
they conceived but little hope of obtaining the upper hand: but God reproched
him, and up braided him of that his timiditie; and Iosuah therefore was
emboldened by these promises from God, and marched out against his enemies,
whom he surprised on the fifth day. The encounter was strong, and the slaughter
so great, that they who should but hear the same would scarcely believe it:
many also were slain in the pursuit; so that (a few only excepted) the whole
army was put to the sword. The Kings also were all of them slain, and of
their men there remained not any All the kings of the Chanaanites slain, Iosuah
spoyleth the whole land of Chanaan.
one alive. Iosuah also commanded that their horses should be slain, and he
burned their chariots, and securely marched through the whole country: so that
no man durst sallie out, or make head against him. He besieged likewise their
strong places, and killed all those whom he might Iosuah once more retired his
camp toward the mountains, and placed the sacred Tabernacle in the City of
Siloe (which seemed to be a very convenient place, by reason of the beauty of
the same, where the arc might remain til such time as their affairs of
estate permitted them to build a Temple.) From thence he departed with all the
people to repair unto Sichem, and there builded he an Altar in that place
(according as before time Moses had commanded and enjoined) and having divided
his army, he planted the half of them on the mountain of Garizim, and the
other Iosuah deuideth his army into parts.
half on the mountain of Gebal (on which also there is an Altar) with the
Levites and the Priests, and after they had sacrificed and done their
execrations, and engraven them on the Altars, they Iosuah was well strooken in
years, and very well perceived that the cities of the Chanaanits were hardly
to be assaulted (both in respect of the places wherein they were situate, as
also for the munitions, wherewith (besides other advantages of nature) their The
year of the world. 2499. before the birth of Christ. 1465. Hedio and Ruffinus.
chapter 3. Ios. 13. 14. 18.
walls were strengthened and fortified: for the Chanaanites having intelligence
of the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, and how they hastened
thitherward, to the intent utterly to extinguish and overthrow that nation,
spent all that time in defencing and fortifying their Cities) he assembled all
the people in Siloe, where when (with mutual and frequent concourse) they were
assembled, he declared unto them the happy success (which till that time) had
befallen them; and the brave executions worthy in their events to challenge God
for their author; furthermore the excellency of the ordinances under which they
lived, alleging that the thirty one kings Iosuah commands the dividing of
the country, and counsels that the two tribes and a half should be
dismissed.
made themselves copartners and companions in their perils) should be sent
back into their own country with all complement of thanks, and gratuitie.
Afterward, that some one of each tribe of approved vprightnes and loyalty;
should be picked out, who leuying out and suruaying the country, might
faithfully and without fraud report the greatness thereof. This sentence Iosuah
sends certain men, to measure and divide the land.
Chanaan is such, that there are great plains very fruitful, and which (being
compared with other places) might be esteemed happy and fruitful in all sorts
of fruit: but if they be compared with the other countries of Jericho, and the
land about Jerusalem, they seem to be nothing worth: for although in
generality the whole country be small, and for the greater part mountainous,
The year of the world. 2499. before Christ's Nativity. 1465. Iosuah. 9.


Then Iosuah (taking unto him Eleazar with the Elders, and Princes of the
tribes) divided the Region amongst nine tribes, and the half part of the tribe
of Manasses (having an impartial Iosuah deuideth the Region of Chanaa^to
thenine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasses.
respect of the greatness of every tribe) and when as each man's lot was cast,
there fell to Iudahs part all the higher Iudaea (which extends it self in
length even unto Jerusalem, and in Simeon (which was the second) obtained a
part of Idumaea, confining upon Egypt and Arabia. The Beniamites had that
country which extends from Jordan unto the sea in Joshua. 16. 17. 18
length, and in breadth unto Jerusalem and Bethel: and this portion was very
small (by reason that the country was good) for it contained the Cities of
Jericho and Jerusalem. The tribe of Ephraim was allotted his portion in length,
from Jordan unto Gadera; and in breadth from Bethel unto the great plain. The
half tribe of the Manassites was valued from Jordan to the city of Dor in
length, and in breadth unto Bethsan (which is at this day called Scythopolis.)
After them Isachar had the mount of Carmel, and the flood of Jordan, for their
limits and terms of his length, and the mountain Itabir for the bounds of his
breadth. The Zabulonites were allowed that Supra lib. 4. chap. 7.
Cities of Azoth and Dor, that contains all the country of Iamnia and Gitta,
from Abaron even unto that mountain where begins the tribe of Judah. After
this manner did Jesus divide the country of the six nations (bearing the name
of Chanaan) and gave it in possession to Number. 32. Iosuah. 13.
already taken by Moses, and assigned by him to two tribes and a half, as I
have already heretofore declared. But all the quarter of Sidon, of the
Aruceans, Amatheans and Aritheans were not comprised in this division, neither
was it tilled. But Jesus seeing himself ouerburdned with years, and unfit to
execute in his own person those counsels, which he had concluded upon; and
foreseeing that the Gouemours of the people which should succeed after him,
would be negligent in procuring the common profit) commanded every several
tribe in particular, that Jesus severally commands euerl tribe to root out
the race of the Chanaanites.
(when they should possess the country thus distributed amongst them) they
should not suffer any one of the race of the Chanaanites to live. For Moses had
before time told and persuaded them, that their security and the maintenance
of the customs of their forefathers consisted in Moses had commanded them) of
the tribe of Judah Hebron; of that of Ephraim, Sichem; and of Nepthali, Cedesa:
which is a place in higher Galilee. Moreover he distributed unto them the
surplusage of the pray which was very great, so that not only in public, but
in private, they got no small The eities of refuge. Number. 35. Deuteronomy 4. Iosuah.
20. The distribution of the pray. Iosuahs oration to those that dwelt on the
other side of lordan, and had served with the rest.
quantity of substance, for there was so much gold and raiment, and household
stuff, and so great store of cattle and horses, as the number may not be
comprehended. After which he assembled the whole army, and to those that were
planted on the other side of Jordan (who had borne

Since God (the father and master of our Hebrew nation) has given this
country into our possession, and has promised (that at such time as it shall
be conquered) that he will continue and conserve the same in our possession,
and since likewise you have willingly and forwardly asassisted us in all our
necessities and dangers (according to Gods command and direction) it is
requisite at this present (since there remains not any further matter wherein
we have need The year of the world. 2499. before Christ's birth 1465.
We therefore yield you hearty thanks for that you have vouchsafed to be
companions in our perils: and we require you, that you will persevere in this
your mutual benevolence, remembering you of your friends, and how you have
gotten your possessions by our help, as we (by Gods favor and your
assistance) have attained to this our present felicite. Neither hau you
adventured without some reward of your travels: for in this your warfare you
are enriched, and shall bear away with you a great pray both of gold and
silver: and besides all these, our benevolence and love, tied ynto you with all
alacrity and readiness when soever you shall have cause to use us. For you have
neither forgot nor set light by Moses command before he departed out of this
life, and have spared no endeavor, whereby you might allie and tie our
affections to you: we therefore dismiss you to your own possessions in
complete fulness of your delight, praying you to remember your selves only of
these things, that you will suppose that no term can terminate our kindred:
Neither (by reason of the intercourse of the river Jordan betwixt you and us)
suppose you us to be any others then Hebrews. For all of us (both those that
dwell on this side, and on the other side of Jordan) are the posterity of
Abraham: and one and the same God has brought to light both yours and our
progenitors, whose laws and religion (instituted by Moses) are diligently to
be observed: for by this means, he will become our helper and favorer; as on
the contrary side (if we shall degenerate from his statutes) he will be an
enemy against us.After he had spoken unto Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4. Iosuah.
22 The Israelites after they had past over lordan builded an Altar on the bank
thereof.
them onward with tears, and they departed the one from the other with great
grief and remorse. But after that the tribe of Ruben and of Gad, and the rest
of the Manassites had passed over Jordan, they builded an Altar upon the bank
of the river, that might serve for a memorial to posterity, and a token for
the present of the conjunction, which they had with those that dwelt on the
other side of Jordan. But when the tidings hereof came unto their ears that
dwelt on the further side of the river, and that they knew that they had
builded an Altar, but notwithstanding were ignorant of the respect and cause
they had in building it, they supposed that seeking to innouate their religion,
they would introduce the service of foreign and false gods; and being Iosuah
and the high Priest Eleazar, with the rest of the Elders restrained them,
counselling them first of all to sound their deliberation, and afterward (if it
should be apparent unto them that they did it under a sinister intent) at that
time they might lawfully invade them by the sword. The embassage of the ten
tribes to the rest of the Israelites.
Hereupon they sent Phinees the son of Eleazar, and ten other of the most
noblest amongst the

Now when these Ambassadors had past the flood, and were come amongst them,
they summoned Phinees oration to the Rubonites.
an assembly, and Phinees standing up in the midst of them, spoke after this
manner. You have committed so heinous an offense (says he) as there is no
question either to reprove or punish the same hence forward in words: yet
notwithstanding we have not upon the instant taken arms, neither assaulted you
in battle, or had reference or regard to the heinousness of your crime, to
the intent to punish you, but we have bin sent unto you as Ambassadors (in
considera tion of our alliance) and for that (as we suppose) you may be drawn
by good persuasions to the acknowledgement and detestation of your misdeeds, to
the end that when we are informed of the in your own patrimony (which you
have obtained by lot by the means of his grace, and peaceably The year of the
world. 2499. before Christ's Nativity. 1565.


After that Phinees had finished this his oration, they that were the Peers
and principals of The Rubenites answer.
the assembly, gave this answer in defense of the common cause. Men and
brethren, neither will we neglect our kindred, neither innouate any thing in
that religion, of which we make a reverend account: we know that there is one
God common unto all the nation of the Hebrews, and acknowledge also his brazen
Altar which is before the Tabernacle, and no other but that shall receive our
sacrifices. As for that which we have now erected, and that breeds in you at
this present a cause of suspicion, we built it not to the intent to pacific God
by sacrifices, but that it might remain as a perpetual argument of our
friendship, and might admonish us of our country religion, not to the end you
should suspect it were an induction toward the violating of religion: Abraham's
posterity is guilty, and whosoever shall degenerate from the manners and
customs of his forefathers, may not expiate that crime without a capital
punishment. As soon as Phinees had heard these things, and praised their
constancy; he returned unto Jesus, and declared all those things unto the
people, who rejoicing (in that they had no occasion to levy men, nor cause of
civil war or bloodshed) offered unto God their sacrifices of thankgiuing,
and presently dissoluing the assembly, each man returned unto his own home,
but Jesus chose his habitation in Iosuah dwelt in Sichama.
Sichama. Twenty years after, Iosuah being extremely old (calling unto him
the most honorable Iosuahs exhortation at his death, to the magistrates and
Elders amongst the Hebrews.
remembrance the diverse benefits which God had bestowed upon them, by means
whereof from their poor and afflicted estates, they had attained to so great
riches and glory: then exhorted he them, that they should endeavor themselves
hereafter in such sort as God might hold and continue his merciful hand over
them; since they knew, that his benevolence could be allied unto them by no
other means, but by their good endeavors he further alleged, that it was his
duty before he departed out of this life to admonish them of their duty; last
of all he required them that they should accept of that his good admonition,
and should be perpetually mindful of the same. After this his oration he paid
the due of nature, and died in the hundredth and tenth Moses their magistrate,
and after his Iosuh, 23. 24. Iosuahs death.
death, governed the commonweal twenty five years: a man of incomparable
both prudence and eloquence. Moreover strong and expedite in matter of
government, and both good and profitable in affairs of peace; finally most
exact in all sorts of virtue: he was buried in a City called Thamna belonging
to the Tribe of the Ephraimites. About the same time likewise died Eleazar the
high Priest (leaving the inheritance of the Priesthood to Phinees) the monument
Eleazars death
laid on his sepulcher is extant in the City Gabatha. After their deaths
Phinees being demanded The year of the world. 24^. before the Nativity of
Christ. 14^5. Judge. 1.
by the people what Gods pleasure was, and to whose charge the affairs and
wars against the Chanaanites should be committed, answered them that God
commanded them to give the government to the tribe of Judah, which by election
chosing Simeon and his, they for their associates undertook the war under
this condition, that when they had utterly rooted out the remnant of the
Chanaanites out of their own dition, they should likewise employ themselves to
extinguish all the relics of that race amongst the other tribes.

CHAP. II.
How the Israelites after the death of their Emperor, forgetting the religion
of their forefathers, fell into extreme calamities: and how through a civil

But the Chanaanites (whose estate at that time was in sufficient security)
expected them with a great host about the City of Bezeca, having their army
conducted by the Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. al. 2.
king of that place called Adoni-Bezec, which name signifies Lord of the
Bezecenites: (for Adoni in the Hebrewe tongue is as much to say as Lord) now
these men promised unto themselves the upper hand, by reason that Iosuah was
deceased. Against these (of whom I have forespoken) the two tribes sought very
valiantly, and slaying ten thousand of them (whilst they pursued the rest)
they took Adoni-Bezec captive, who having his hands and feet cut off,
acknowledged Ten thousand Chanaanites flame, and Adoni-Bezec taken. The year
of the world. 2525. before the birth of Christ. 1439. Ios. 11.
times after the same manner. In this plight they conducted him near unto
Jerusalem, where departing out of this life they buried him. Then ouerranne
they the country, sacking and taking the Cities, and after they had diverse of
them in their possession they besieged Jerusalem, and entering the lower City
thereof, they put all the inhabitants to the sword. But the higher town was
very hard to be assaulted (by reason of the fortresses and strength of the
walls, and the natural and strong situation of the place) which was the
cause that they levied their camp to go and besiege Hebron, which they took,
and slew all those that were therein. In that time there were some remainder of
the race of Giants, who in that they were greater in stature, and unlike unto
other me^, were horrible to behold, and terrible to be heard. Their bones are
to be seen as yet at this day, Caleb, according as Moses had commanded it
(this was one of those spies which Moses sent to ouerlooke the land of
Chanaan.) They gave lands and possessions Iethroes posterity who was the
father of Moses possested of lands.
likewise to Iethro the Madianites posterity (who was father in law to Moses)
for that they had forsaken their own territories, and annexed themselves to
the Israelites, and had been with them in the desert. The tribe of Judah and
Simeon took those Cities of the mountainous country of Chanaan, and those
that were in the plain near unto the sea coast (namely Ascalon and Azoth.)
But as touching Gaza and Accaron, they escaped: for these Cities being in the
plain, and defenced with a great number of chariots, repulsed those that
assaulted the same to their disadvantage.

As touching the Beniamites to whom Jerusalem appertained, they received the
inhabitants The Israelites overcame (...) the Chanaanites at one time.
thereof as their tributaries, so that all of them being in peace, and the one
ceasing from slaughter, and the other assured from danger, both of them
employed themselves in manuring the country. The rest of the tribes did the
like, conforming themselves according to the example of the Beniamites; and
contenting themselves to receive their tributes, they suffered the Chanaanites
to live in peace. The tribe of Ephraim (besieging the City of Bethel) could
not see such an end of their desseigne, as the length of time and the travels
they had taken in the siege required: and The Ephraimites recover Bethel by a
stratageme.
although they were very much toyled and wearied with the same, yet desisted
they not the continuance them in tillage of their lands, and husbanding their
fruits: and being grown in riches The year of the world, 2525. before Christ's
birth 1439. Hedio and Ruffinus, chapter 6. al 3. The Israelites omit war.
they followed the delights and pleasures of the world, yea in such sort grew
they dissolute, that they had no mind neither of their policy, nor the laws
of their forefathers. Whereupon God was grievously incensed against them, who
gave them to understand first of all, that contrary to his command they had
spared the Chanaanites: and afterward, that those Chanaanites in time to come
should exercise great cruelties against them. And although they were astonished
at that which was declared unto them, yet notwithstanding they took no
pleasure in feats of arms, both for that they had received many profits by the
Chanaanits, as also for that (being effeminate through delights) they were unapt
for labor. It happened the^ at such time as their Aristocratical government was
corrupted, and that they respected not their elders, or any other magistrates
before time ordained, and were extremly addicted unto gain, and infinitely
took pleasure therein; that amidst

A certain Leuite and one of them of the common sort, that dwelt within the
dominions of the Ephraimites, took a wife that was borne in the City of
Bethleem, which pertains to the Judge. 19. The history of the Levites wife.
tribe of Judah, whom (by reason of her incomparable beauty) he most entirely
loved; and found himself much aggrieued, for that he found not her affection
answerable to his love: at last his passion so much prevailed with him, as they
grew at ods, and fell into contentious mislikes, whence at last it fell out
that the woman (tired with disquiet) forsook her husband, and went and dwelt
with her father: The husband sore aggrieued thereat (by reason of the love
which he bare her) came unto her fathers house and appeased the differents, and
was reconciled unto her: The year of the world. 2526. before Christ's birth
1438. Thirty stadia are four Italian miles. Two Italian miles and a half
late travel they might fall into some disaster, the rather for that they were
not far from the enemies country, and that the present time was such, as
might make those things that were most assured, suspected. But this opinion of
his pleased not his master, who would not lodge amongst Beniemin, when it was
late: and whereas they found no man in the market place that might lodge them;
at length a certain old man, returning out of the country to his house (who
was by birth an Ephraimite, and dwelt in that City) meeting with him, asked
him what he was, and for what cause so late as it was he sought for his
supper? He answered, that he was a Leuite, and that he brought his wife with
him from her father and mother, and was returning to his house, which was
amongst the Tribe of Ephraim. The old man having regard unto parentage (by
reason that he was of the same tribe, and that by good hap they had after that
manner met the one with the other) lodged him in his The horrible wickedness of
the Gabeonites.
own house. But certain young men amongst the Gabeonites, perceiving the woman
in that place, were ravished in admiration of her beauty and good graces, and
getting some notice afterward that she had been brought thither as a guest,
they set light by him (by reason of his weakness and age, and the small retinue
that he had in his house) and came and knocked at his door. The old man
required them to depart, and that they should offer him no violence, nor to her
outrage. But contrariwise they importuned him to deliver them his guest, and
that done they promised him in no sort to procure his further molestation. But
although that the old man alleged that she was of his parentage, and that her
husband was a Leuite, and that they should commit an heinous offense, in
sinning for their corrupt pleasures sake against the laws: yet had they no
regard of equity, but mocked him, menacing him likewise to murder him,
because he ince^nsed in unbridled lust toward her.) Contrariwise he besought
them that they would not be so The year of the world, 2526. before Christ's
Nativity, 1438.
The Leuite deuideth the body of his wife into 12. parts, and sent them to the
12. tribes, Judge. 20.
every tribe, who they were that were the authors of the death of his wife,
and what villainy they had practiced against her. The tribes were very much
discontented at that which they both saw, and heard (having never before that
time heard of any the like adventure) and incensed with extreme displeasure
(and yet just) they assembled themselves in Siloe, and being arraunged before
the Arc, they resolved suddenly to take arms, and to assail the Gabeonites
as their capital and mortal enemies. But the elders withheld them, declaring
unto them that they ought The Israelites send Embassa. dours to the Gabeonites
to require those at their hands that had committed the rape. They deny to
yield the^ up, hereupon the Israelites make an oath never to match their
daughters with any one of the^ tribe of Benjamin, and they leuy and lead out
against the^ an army of four hundredth thousand men. Twenty two thousand
Israelites slain in battle. Eighteen thousand Israelites more slain. The
Israelites place one half of their battle in ambush, and as if they fought
with disadvantage they retired by little and little.
sent certain messengers to the Gabeonites to accuse those young men that had
perpetrated that Phinees the high Priest) that it would please him to appease
his wrath against them, and that contenting himself with the two overthrows
which he had sent them, he would now at last both give them victory and valor
to encounter their enemies. All which God promised them by the prophecy of
Phinees. Whereupon they divided their army into two parts, and laid the one
thereof in ambush near unto the City. In the mean time (whilst the other
half that made head against the Beniamites retired themselves, to the intent
their enemies should assault The year of the world. 2526. before Christ's
Nativity. 1438.
them) the Beniamites suddenly issued, and set upon them that orderly retired,
and the more they retired (under purpose to draw them the further from the
town) the more eagerly the enemy insisted: so that all they likewise, who
through age and weakness were left in the City, sallied out as companions and
sharers in the future pray. But when as they were drawn far enough from the
City, the Hebrews stayed, made head and fought against them. Then gave they a
sign to those that were in ambush, in such sort as was accorded amongst them:
who suddenly issuing out together, rushed in upon their enemies with a huge
cry. Who seeing themselves so suddenly surprised knew not what to do, but
retiring themselves into certain Baricadoes, they defended themselves with
arrows, but all of them were slain (except it were six hundredth) who making
head, and closely filletted and embattailed together, thrust themselves
desperately into Five and twenty thousand Beniamites slain, and only six
hundredth escapealiue. labes and other Cities of the Beniamites burned. Iud. 21.
they encamped. All the rest to the number of twenty five thousand or
thereabouts were slain. And the Israelites burned Gaba utterly, and slew both
the women and children. They exercised no less justice on the other cities of
Benjamin (so much were they fleshed and transported with fury) And for that
Iabes (a City of Galaad) would not join with them in battle against the
Beniamites, they sent twelve thousand chosen men out of their companies to
destroy the same, who slew all those that might bear arms, with their wives
and children, except four hundredth virgins. So much grief and fury had they
conceived through the accident that chanced to this woman, and the despite
they had conceived against the Beniamites for provoking them unto arms: which
fury when it was somewhat appeased, they repented themselves, reputing
themselves The Israelites revoke the six hundredth that were fled.
of the dead. They sent Ambassadors also, and revoked those six hundredth that
were fled, and held a certain rock in the desert which was call Rhoa. The
Ambassadors complained not only for that the war had extinguished them, but
also for that the Israelites had lost their parents: and by these persuasions
they prevailed so much, that they bare their cross and loss with less grief;
and they came unto them and besought them that they would not give sentence of
the total extinctio^ of the tribe of Benjamin. We grant you (said they) the
revenues of your whole tribe, and as much booty as you may drive away. But
they acknowledging their injustice, and that they were condemned by the
iustiudgement of God, returned into the possessions of their tribe, Iabes: and
for the rest The Israelites gave the Beniamites the four hundredth virgins of
labes in marriage
(which were two hundredth) they deliberated with themselves how they might
provide them of wives, to the intent they might have issue. And when as before
time in the beginning of their war it was decreed by an oath, that none of
them might match his daughter with any of the tribe of Benjamin; there were
some of them that thought good that the oath might be despensed withal (by
reason it was grounded upon wrath, and not on judgment) alleging further,
that they should do nothing contrary to the will of God, if they might save a
tribe which was in danger When and how an oath ought to be kept.
utterly to be extinct. That periuries were dangerous and noisome, not at such
time as they are enforced by constraint, but when they are practiced with an
intent to do evil. But when as the Elders reclaimed hereagainst (abhorring the
mention of perjury) there arose up a certain The Beniamites are permitted to
ravish them wives.
man amongst them, that said he had a policy, whereby without breach of oath
the Beniamites might light upon wives. And being commanded by the Senate to
express the same, we have a custom every year (said he) to assemble and
keep a feast at Siloe, and for companions in those our congregations we have
both our wives and daughters: as many of these as they can ravish, let the
Beniamites lay hold of, without reproof (neither being inhibited nor
encouraged by us) and if their fathers shall be displeased therewith, and shall
require revenge, we will say that they are in the fault who have negligently
kept their daughters, and that we ought not too much to whet our wrath against
the Beniamites, for that we had too much already used and abused the same
toward them. This sentence was allowed by all of them, and it was decreed,
that it was lawful for the Beniamites to ravish and violently take to
themselves wives amongst them. anew how to recover their former good hap. Thus
the tribe of Benjamin (which was welny utterly The year of the world. 2526.
before the Nativity of Christ. 1438.


The like accident happened to the Tribe of Dan, which fell into the like
incombrance for this Hedio and Rufsinus, chap. 7. al. 4.
cause which ensues.

The Israelites about this time having forgotten the exercise of arms, and
being only occupied in tilling, and trimming their land: the Chanaanites (in
contempt of that nation) raised forces, Judge. 18. The tribe of Dan oppressed by
the Chanaanites.
not for that they were afraid of their own estates, but to the intent that
ouerlopping the Hebrews with some memorable overthrow, they might more
securely inhabit their Cities thereafter: and conspiring together (and arming
a great number of footmen; and joining to Ascalon and Accharon (two cities
within the Lot of Judah) into their confederacy, and diverse other cities of the
Champion country: so as they of Dan were driven into the mountains, having no
place in the champion where they might peaceably inhabit; who (for that
neither in war they were able to confront them, neither had sufficient
habitation for the number of men, which they had) sent five men of their tribe
into the Champion country and Midland, to spy if they could find any place
that were fit and convenient for them to establish and fix their Colonies in.
These traveled a days journey not far from the mountain of Libanus, and
more lower then are the sources of Jordan, bordering upon the They of Dan seek
out a place to inhabit.
great plain of the City of Sidon. In which place (having observed that the
land was good and fertile in all sorts of fruits) they made it known unto
their people, who travailing thither Jacob so called, and in honor of the
tribe of Dan.) Many adversities befell the Israelites from that time forwards,
both for that they were unexercised in travail, and for that they contemned
piety. For having once forsaken the observation of their ordinances, they
suffered themselves to be devoured in pleasures, living according to their own
appetites: so that they gorged and glutted themselves with those vices, which
were most of all accustomed and usual amongst the Chanaanites.

CHAP. III.
How the people of Israel by reason of their wickedness, were by God
delivered to the

FOr this cause the wrath of God was kindled against them in such sort, as
(through their negligence) they lost the good which they had gotten by infinite
travail. For Schisart Judge. 3. The Israelites oppressed by Schisar.
king of the Assyrians levied an army against them, who killed a great number
of their men in the fight, and either by force, or composition, took diverse of
them prisoners; and brought their city under his subjection. Diverse also
willingly submitted themselves unto him, (through the fear they had conceived)
and they paid tributes exceeding their powers, enduring all kind of outrage
for the space of eight years, after which they were delivered by these means
following.

CHAP. IIII.
Their liberty restored by Cenizus.

A Certain man of the Tribe of Judah called Cenizus, a man of execution and of
brave Ibidem. Cenizus or as the holy scripture speaks, his son Athniel
reigned eight years.
courage, was advertised by a voice from heaven, that he should not permit the
Israelites in that sort to be reduced into so extreme necessity, without
taking care for them, but that he ought to adventure himself to set them at
liberty. For which cause, calling unto him some few companions of his perils,
who were discontented with their present estate, and desired a change, he first
of all discomfited the garrison which Schisart had placed over them: and so
much was he furthered with his first success, that the number of his followers
increased Cenizus had by this effect given proof of his valor, he received
the government at the peoples hands, and exercised the office of judge forty
years, at the end whereof he died.

CHAP. V. The year of the world, 2526 before Christ's birth 1438.

How the people were again made subject to the Moabites, and how by Iodes they
were exempt from servitude.

AFter whose death (the government and seat being void) the affairs of the
Israelites began again to fall to ruin, and the rather for that they neither
yielded due honor unto Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8. Judge. 3. Eglon king of the
Moabites co^quereth the Israelites.
God, neither obedience to the laws: whence it came to pass, that Eglon king
of the Moabites (seeing the disorder of their policy) set them at naught, so
that he waged war against them, and overcame them many times. And for that he
was a prince of greater forecast then any of his predecessors, he fought
against them and weakened their forces, and constrained them to

This man (translating his court to Jericho, and proud in his victories)
omitted no means whereby he might vex and molest the people: so that they
lived for the space of 18. years in great misery. But God (being moved with
their calamities, and supplications) delivered them The year of the world.
2534. before Christ's birth 1430. Iodes or Ehud insinuates himself into Eglons
familiarity.
from their intolerable thraldom after this manner. Iodes the son of Gera of
the tribe of Benjamin (a young man, both addressed by valor of mind, and
strength of hand to attempt any worthy action) dwelt at Jericho. This man
insinuated himself into Eglons familiarity, and by presents and gifts
entertained and courted him in such sort, as he was well beloved and esteemed
amongst all those courtiers that were nearest about the king. It chanced one
day, that bearing certain presents unto the king (attended by two of his
household servants) he secretly girt a Eglon (who at that time disported
himself in a certain summer chamber) began to discourse with him. Now they
were both alone (by reason that the king resolving to talk familiarlie with
Iodes, had sent away his guard, and sat him down in a seat:) but Iodes
fearing, least failing to stab home enough, he should not give him a fatal and
deadly wound, required him to rise, telling him that he had a dream to report
unto him by the commandment of God. Whereat he reioicing very much, leapt from
his seat; whereupon Iodes stabd him to the heart: and leaving the poiniard
sticking in his wound, he escaped and locked Iodes kills Eglon.
Iodes giving private notice hereof to them of Jericho, offered himself to be
their leader in the recovery of their former liberty: who (willingly
accepting thereof) presently took arms, and sent trumpets to publish the same
through the whole country: (for after that manner were they wont to assemble
the people.) They that were about Eglon were wholly ignorant of that which had
happened: but about the eeuen-tide (fearing least some mishap had befallen him)
they entered into the place where he was, and found him dead; whereat they were
greatly astonished, so as they knew not what to do. For before they had
assembled their forces together, the Israelites fiercely charged them, and some
they killed instantly; the rest that were ten thousand The Moabites put to
flight and slain by the Israelites.
Moab: but the Israelites (having before that, laid and fortified the passages
of Jordan) pursued them and slew them: so that diverse of them perished in the
Ferrie, and not one of them remained that escaped their hands. By this means
the Israelites were delivered from the servitude of the Moabites: and for this
cause Iodes was advanced to the government of the people. Finally, after he had
lived for the space of fourscore years, he died. A man (besides the act of
late rehearsed) worthy of praise in all other things. After him Sanagar the
son of Anath was elected governor, The year of the world. 2614. before the
birth of Christ. 1350.
and in the first year of his reign, he left this life to partake the
fruition of another.

CHAP. VI.
How the Israelites were brought under the subjection of the Chanaanites, and
raunsomed Barac.

But the Israelites (in no sort reclaimed or reconciled by their forepassed
calamities) fell Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9. Judge. 4. Iabin king of the
Chanaanites, subdueth the Israelites.
again into their former impiety and disobedlence: and before they had
sufficiently shaken off the servitude of the Moabites, were subjected unto
Iabin king of the Chanaanites. This man kept his residence imperial at Asor (a
City situate on the lake of Sachonites) he had in pay thirty thousand foore,
and ten thousand horse: and besides these, he had three The year of the world
2614. before Christ's birth 1350. Sylares or Sylara the captain of the host
Sisares (an especial man amongst the kings favorites) who encountering with
the Israelites, brought their affairs into so desperate an estate, that they
willingly (for their own security sake) accepted servitude, and paid tribute
(whereunto they were enforced through the austeritie of their subjection,
almost for the space of twenty years, not daring to lift up their heads) all
which fell upon them by the will of God, to the end he might punish the too
great contumacie and ingratitude of that nation. Who at length repenting
themselves, and acknowledging the cause of their calamities (namely that it
proceeded from the contempt of their laws) they repaired to a certain
Prophetess called Debora (which name in the Hebrew tongue signifies a Be)
beseeching her that by Debora the Prophetess.
her prayers she would endeavor to provoke God unto mercy (to the intent he
should not suffer Barac to be their governor (a man of the Barac appointed
Emperor against the enemy.
tribe of Nephthali, whose name signifies lightning.) Debora therefore sending
for Barac commands him to pick out, and muster ten thousand chosen men, and
lead them forth against the enemy: alleging that they were sufficient to
obtain the victory which God had promised by his Oracle. But Barac denying to
undertake the government, except she also would administer the same with him,
she moved therewith, spoke these: Will thou (said she) surrender the dignity
which God has given thee to a woman? well I will not refuse it.Whereupon
leuying ten thousand men, they pitched their tents near to the mountain of
Itabyr. Sisara at that time (according as the king had commanded him) presently
marched out to meet them, and Barac and the rest of the Israelites (being
terrified with the multitude of the enemies) was encouraged by Debora, who
commanded them Debora and Barac charge the enemy.
that very day to enter and undertake the battle, assuring them that the
victory should be theirs, and that God would both assist and help them:
whereupon they charged the enemy, and there suddenly fell a storm of rain
mixed with hail, which the wind drove against the faces of the Chanaanites,
and took away their sight, making those that carried darts, and such as
served with the sling, unprofitable in their service: the Targetiers likewise
having their hands benumbed with cold, could scarcely wield their swords. But
the tempest beating on the backs of the Israelites, not only wrought them
less offense, but made them also more forward (being whetted thereunto by the
manifest sign of Gods favor and presence:) Whereupon disarraying Sisara also
as soon as he saw his soldiers turn their backs (leaping from his chariot)
Sisara slain with his host.
fled away hastily, till at last he arrived in the tent of a woman of Cenetis
called Iael, who being desired by him to conceal and hide him, entertained
him: and whereas he required drink she gave him sour milk, which when he had
ouergreedily drunk, he fell a sleep: and whilst he so lay buried in his
slumbers, Iael took a mallet and drove an iron nail through his temples, Iael
kills Sysara with an iron nail.
and fastened him to the pauement: and anon after, when Baracs soldiers came
unto her, she showed him unto them, in such manner as he was nailed. And thus a
woman (according as Debora had foretold) was the author of this victory. But
Barac leading his army to Asor, slew Iabin Barac governed the Israelites 40.
years.
that came out against him: and having slain the king, and leuelled the city
with the ground, he governed the Israelites for the space of forty years.

CHAP. VII.
How the Amalechites over coming the Israelites, destroyed their country for
the The year of the world, 2654. before Christ's birth 1310. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 10. Judge. 6. The Madianites confederate with the Amelechites
overcome the Israelites in a great battle.
space of seven years.

But when Barac and Debora were dead, about the very same time and hard after,
the Madianites (accompanied with the Amalechites and Arabians) armed themselves
against the men of Israel; and encountering them in open field overcame them in
a great battle, and (destroying their fruits and harvest) led away a great
pray, and when as they continued these their incursions for the space of seven
years, they compelled the Israelites to forsake the Champion, and fly unto
the mountains: who digging them dens and houses under the earth, kept all that
secretly hidden which they had reserved and conveyed from the surie of the
enemy. For the Madianites inuading them in the summer time, permitted the
Israelites to plie their husbandry in the winter, to the intent they might
spoil and depopulate their country the more. Thus lived they in perpetual
famine and want: neither was there any other The year of the world. 2654.
before Christ's Nativity. 1310.
hope or succors left them, but only by prayers and supplications unto God.

CHAP. VIII.
How Gedeon delivered the Israelites.

ABout that time, Gedeon (the son of Iasus, one of the chiefest of the tribe
of Manasses) ground certain sheaues of corn which he had secretly conveyed
into his press: for he durst not bring them openly, for fear the enemy should
have espied him. To him appeared God commands Gedeon to deliver the
Israelites from the Madianites Judge. 7.
there a vision in the form of a young man, which said unto him, that he was
happy and Gedeon answered, that it was impossible, by reason that the tribe
whereof he was descended, had very few men in it; and that he was too young
and feeble to think on affairs of so great consequence: but God promised him
to supply his necessities in whatsoever he held himself deficient; and assured
him (under his conduct) that he would give the Israelites the victory. These
things Gedeon communicated with certain young men, who willingly believing the
Oracle, answered, that for the present they had ten thousand soldiers in a
readiness, most ready to attempt any thing in regard of their liberty. But
God appeared to Gedeon in a dream, and told him that men naturally were lovers
of themselves, and haters God commands Gedeon to choose a few men. The
victory is to be attributed to God.
of those who were excellent in virtues: so that if there grow any question of
victory they forget God, and appropriate the same unto themselves, saying;
that they are many, and all valiant men at arms. To the end therefore that
they may conceive his handie work in their deliverance, he counseled him that
about the mid-time of the day, at such time as the heat was most vehement, he
should conduct his army to the river; and that being there, he should
diligently observe those that bowed themselves to drink, which he might
esteem for men of valor: but all those that drank hastily and with noise,
should be marked as men fearful and afraid of the enemy. Gedeon did
according as God had commanded him, and there were found three hundredth men
that lifted water to their mouths with their hands, with fear and trouble:
God willed him that he should assail the enemy with those three hundred,
promising Gedeon was sore troubled, by reason that God had before times told
him that he should assail the enemy by night: but God willing to deliver him
of this fear, commanded him to take one of his soldiers with him, and enter
the Gedeon repaireth to the enemies tents, and by them in confirmed by a dream.
camp of the Madianites, assuring him that he should be both advised and
encouraged by themselves: whereunto he obeyed, and for his better assurance, he
took with him one of his servants: Now as he drew nie a certain tent, he
perceived that they that were within the same were awake, and that one of them
with a loud voice, told his companion the dream which that night he had had;
which Gedeon ouer-heard, and thus it was. Him seemed that he saw a barley cake
(so loathsome as no man would feed upon the same) which rolled through the camp,
which Gedeon, and the army that is with him: and whereas this cake turned to
overthrow our tents, I fear me least God has given some sign of victory
unto Gedeon. Gedeon (having ouerheard all these things) conceived good hope,
and attempted with a valiant heart, and presently commanded his domestical
servants to arm themselves, discoursing unto them the vision which appeared to
their enemy: whereupon they speedily prepared themselves Gedeon led forth his
army, and divided them into three bands, and in every band he put a hundredth
men: all of these bare in their hands empty pots, in which were hidden burning
torches, in such sort as the enemy might not discover them when they sallied
out: moreover they bare rams horns in their Gedeon with three hundredth
attempteth the fight.
right hands, which they used in steed of trumpets. The adverse army took up
much ground (by reason that they had a great number of Camels, and were
distributed by nations) yet notwithstanding The year of the world, 2054.
before Christ Nativity, 1310.
were all of them comprehended in one enclosure.

The Hebrews having had instructions from their captain what they ought to
do, at such time as they approached near unto their enemies, and the sign of
battle was given, they sounded their horns, and brake their pots, and with
their flaming lights brake into the enemies camp; crying victory, victory,
by the assistance of God, and the strength of Gedeon. Hereupon such a trouble
and fear surprised the enemy, as they lay a sleep (for this accident fell
out in the night time, and God disposed all things to this issue) that few of
them fell by the Hebrews sword, but they themselves slew one another in great
numbers (by reason that they were different The Madianites and their
confederates kill one another.
in language.) For confusedly encountering one another, they massacred all those
that encountered them, supposing them to be enemies. When the rumor of this
slaughter, and Gedeons victory Oreb and Zeb. The rest of the chieftaines
trouping onward with their soldiers to the number of eighteen thousand or
thereabouts, encamped not far from The Israelites pursue their enemies, and
kill Oreb and Zeb. Judge. 8. Gedeon takes Zeeb and Ezarbon. One hundredth and
twenty thousand Madianites with their confederates slain.
the Israelites: but Gedeon was no ways astonished hereat, but pursuing them
valiantly with his whole army, and charging them desperately, he discomfited
all the rest of the enemies, and led away captives those chieftaines which
remained, namely Zeeb and Ezarbon. There died in this battle of the Madianites
and Arabians their allies to the number almost of six score thousand: besides
that the Hebrews took an inestimable pray of gold, silver, apparel, Camels,
and other horses. But Gedeon Ephraim slew the rest of the kings of the
Madianites: naitheles the tribe of Ephraim being displeased with his happy
execution, resolved to make war against him, accusing him for that he had not
made them privy of his stratageme intended against the enemy. But Gedeon being
a temperate man, and endowed with all kind of virtue, gave them this modest
answer, that it was not he that by his own direction had set upon the enemy,
but that it was Gods only handie work: notwithstaning that the victory was
no less theirs, then his or those his followers that achieved the enterprise.
And with these his words appeasing their wrath, he no less profited the
Hebrews thereby, then by his valiant actions, by reason that he delivered them
from a civil war, whereunto they had fallen, if his discretion had not
prevented it. This tribe was punished for this outrage offered to so noble a
personage, as we will declare Gedeon laboring to dismiss himself of the
government, was forced to The year of the world, 2292. before Christ's
nativity, 1270. Gedeon reigned 40. years.
continue the same, and ruled the Israelites for the space of forty years,
doing justice to every one that required the same at his hands, and deciding
their controversies (so irreuocable and certain was that esteemed which he had
decreed.) Finally he died when he was very old, and was buried in the country
of Ephraim.

CHAP. IX.
How some of Gedeons successors made war with the nations round about them.

GEdeon had seventy lawful sons begotten on diverse lawful wives: he had
likewise one Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 1. Judge. 69. Abimelech kills 69. of his
brethren.
bastard by his concubine Druma, which he called Abimelech, who after the
decease of his father, retired himself to Sichem (where his mother was borne)
there (assisted with money by his mothers kindred, and backed by the^ who were
men resolute and addressed to all facinorous actions) he returned unto his
fathers house, where he slew all his brethren (except Iothan, who by good hap
saved himself by flight) now when as Abimelech had once obtained the tyranny,
he ruled all things according to his lust, and neglected the ordinances and
prescript of law, hating all those that in any sort were maintainers of
equity. One day therefore whilst there was a solemn feast held at Sichem
(whereunto the whole people were usually wont to resort) Iothan his brother
(who as we said, saved himself by flight) climing the mountain of Garizim,
which Iothan by an allusion vpbraideth the Sichemites of their ingratitude
toward Gedeon. The counsel, of the trees in choice of a king.
and pleaded in his own behalf that he was contented with that honor which
he reaped by the The year of the world. 1694. before Christ's Nativity. 1270.
means of the fruit which he bare, and sought not further. The trees surceased
not to seek an other prince, resolving with themselves to ascribe that honor
to the Vine, which in as many words as the Fig tree refused the same: and no
less did the Olive tree: At last they preferred their humble protestation of
election to the great Bramble (whose wood is good for firing) he answered if
you do unfeignedly require me for your king, repose your selves under my shadow;
but if you intend treasons against me, there shall a fire issue from me and
consume you. These things, said Iothan, I report unto you not to move you to
laughter, but for that you (having received many benefits at the hands of
Gedeon) suffer Abimelech, who in spirit differs nothing from the fire to
usurp the Princedome after the slaughter of my brethren. When he had spoken
after this manner he departed, and for three years space lived hidden amongst
the mountains, flying the Abimelech. Neither did there many days ouerpasse,
but that the Sichemites (being The Sichemites banish Abimelech.
moved with compassion and just revenge in respect of the murder which was
committed upon the sons of Gedeon) banished Abimelech out of their City, and
the whole tribe. Whereupon he resolved to do some mischief to both the City
and Citizens: and for that their vintage was at hand, and they durst not gather
the fruit, fearing least they should receive some injury at the hands of
Abimelech. By good hap about that time a certain Prince called Gaal retired
thither with a troop of soldiers and his kindred, him did the Sichemites
beseech that he would grant them a conuoy, whilst they had gathered in their
harvest: which request of theirs being accepted by Gaal, they issued out with
their forces, being seconded by him and his, and securely brought in their
fruits, and feasting one with another in companies, they were so bold as to
scoff at Abimelech, Abimelechs people and slew them. But Zebel one of the
Sichemites and Abimeleches host signified unto him by a messenger, how Gaal
incited the people against him, inuiting him to lie in wait for him near about
the Abimelechs practice against the Sichemits.
City, promising him that he would bring Gaal thither, to the end that he
might easily revenge him of that injury which his enemy had offered him.
Which done, he promised to work so wisely that he would reconcile him to the
peoples favor again, and whenas Abimelech had chosen a place fit to lie in
ambush, and Gaal with Zebel too carelessly lived and walked in the suburbs, at
length he suddenly espying certain armed men, cried out to Zebel, that he had
discovered the enemy, whereunto Zebel replied that they were the shadows of
rocks: but Gaal drawing more Zebel, that they were no shadows, but ambushes of
men. Whereunto Zebel replied, do not thou object cowardice to Abimelech, why
therefore show thou not thy great valor in fighting with him? Gaal
confusedly amazed, assailed the soldiers of Abimelech, in which conflict
certain of his followers were slain, and he himself fled into the City
(giving example unto the rest to follow him.) Hereupon Zebel labored that Gaal
might be expulsed out of the City, accusing him of his cowardly Gaal put to
flight by Abimelech, is banished out of Sichem.
encountry with the soldiers of Abimelech. Now when as the same Abimelech had
afterward gotten certain intelligence, that the Sichemites would issue anew
to gather to their vintage, he laid an ambush near unto the City. And no
sooner were they issued, but that the third part of his troops surprised and
seized the gates to cut them off from their return, that thought Sichem taken
and sacked and rased to the ground.
and had avoided the danger, assembled and fortified themselves upon a strong
rock, and there encamped and began to defense the same. But as soon as
Abimelech had notice of their intention, he hasted thither with his forces, and
environed the place with fagots of dry wood (carrying them thither in his own
person, and encouraging thereby those of his army to do the like) so that the
rock was incontinently compassed with wood. Whereunto he set fire round about,
and The Sichemites flying are burned upon a rock.
in an instant it flamed and burned vehemently, so as none of them were saved,
but all of them Abimelech alaid the courage of the Israelites by this encounter
and conquest of the Sichemites, and gave sufficient testimony that he aspired
more higher, and that he would never terminate his violence until he had
utterly extinguished them. He therefore led forth his army The year of the
world 2694. before Christis birth 1270. Abimelech takes Tebe^.
Abimelech called at that time for his squier, commanding him to dispatch him,
to the intent it might not be reported that he died by the hands of a woman.
His squier did according as he had commanded him, and revenged A woman woudeth
Abimelech and his squier kills him.
on Abimelech (by putting him to death) the cruelty he had committed against
his brethren, and the tyranny executed upon the Sichemites; on whom all these
misfortunes fell according as Iothan had foretold them. As soon as Abimelech
was slain, all the army was dispersed, and every one returned unto his
dwelling place: and Iair the Galeadite of the tribe of Manasses Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 12. al. 19. Judge. 10.
The year of the world. 2697. before Christ's birth 1267. Thola reigned 23.
years. After him lair 22. years.
more and more disordered, and the laws began to be neglected: Whence it came
to pass that the Ammonites and Philistines (setting light by them) destroyed
all their country with a great army, during which time they occupied all the
land on this side Jordan, and so much were they heartned, as that they pressed
further, and possessed the better part on the other side of the river, and
conquered the same. Whereupon the Hebrews being brought to more moderation by
these Ieptha, of great estimation, The year of the world. 2719. before the
birth of Christ. 1245. The Israelites oppressed by the Ammonites and Palestines.
as well for the virtue of his ancestors, as his own particular valor (the
rather for that he had been trained and maintained in warlike service.) To him
they sent a messenger, requiring him that he would assist them; promising him,
that he should continue in the government during the term of his life. But he
was nothing mollified with this their request, but reprochfully objected The
year of the world. 2742, be Christ's birth. 1222. Ieptha is created the Judge
of Israel.
he became their general in war, and speedily (providing and foreseeing
whatsoever was necessary) he encamped himself near unto Maspha, and sent
Ambassadors to the Ammonites, accusing them for inuading a country that
belonged not unto them. They contrariwise blamed the Israelites, for that they
were fled like fugitives from Egypt, and commanded Ieptha answered that they
had no reason to accuse their ancestors, in respect of Amorrhaea: but rather
that they ought to give them thanks, for that they hac permitted them to enjoy
the country of Ammon, by reason it was in Moses power to have commanded the
same. In a word, they were The year of the world, 2760 before Christ's birth
1204.
resolved not to forsake the country which God had both given and purchased
for them, and which they had held in their possession for the space of three
hundredth years, alleging that he would defend the same against them by dint
of sword: with these words dismissed he the Ambassadors of the Ammonites. Then
besought he God that it might please him to grant him victotie: Ieptha makes a
vow.
and he made a vow, that if he returned unto his house whole and in safety, he
would offer up in sacrifice, that of his which he should first meet withal in
his return: whereupon incountring He overcomes the Ammonites.
Cities, and led away a great pray, and delivered and ransomed diverse slaves of
that nation, who had endured that servitude for the space of eighteen years.
But as he returned homeward, he fell into such an inconvenient, as was no ways
answerable to his noble actions. For his only daughter (of the age of
eighteen years) came out to meet him: whereupon resolving and melting
himself into tears, he began to check her for that so hastily she had issued
forth to meet The year of the world 2760. before Christ's Nativity. 1204.
him, by reason he had consecrated the first thing he met withal to God. But
this accident was no ways displeasant unto the Damsel, but that she willingly
died, both for the victory of her father, and the deliverance of her brethren:
she therefore besought her father that it would please him to grant her two
months before she should be sacrificed, to the end she might lament her youth
with her companions: and that after that term, her father might acquit
himself of that vow which he had made. Ieptha granted her the term and time
she had limited, which being expired, he sacrificed his daughter for a burnt
offering: which oblation of his was neither conformable to the law, nor
agreeable unto God (by reason he examined not in his understanding Ieptha
sacrifices his daughter.
before ^ee committed the act, how it would be taken by those that should hear
the report thereof.)

The tribe of Ephraim hearing of his victories, would have sent out men of
war against The Ephaimites are incensed against Ieptha. Iud. 12.
him (by reason he had not communicated his enterprise against the Ammonites
with them, but had only reserved the pray, and usurped the honor of the
execution to himself) whereunto he answered first of all, that being of his
kindred, they could not be ignorant that both he and his were assailed by
war; and had besides that also been required to give them their assistance,
whereunto they had answered very faintly, and being requested would not be
present. Secondly, he told them that that which they undertook was both
unlawful and most wicked, in that (not daring to confront or assail the
enemy) they made no bones to set upon and assault their own brothers and
familiars, threatening them that if they governed not themselves, he would (by
the assistance of God) be revenged on them. But these words of his were both
neglected and Galaad, he made a great slaughter, partly in pursuing those that
fled, partly also in preventing Almost forty thousand of the Ephraimites
slain. Ieptha dies. Apsan was for seven years space the Judge in Israel.
Elon reigned ten years.
their passage who fled unto Jordan, and the number of those that were slain
amounted to forty thousand or thereabouts. But after that Ieptha had governed
six years he deceased, and was buried in Sebei, in the place where he was
borne, and in the country of Galaad. After his decease, Apsan took upon him
the government. He was of the tribe of Judah, of the City of Bethleem, and had
sixty children, thirty males and thirty females, which he left all alive and
married: he died when he was very old, without performing any thing worthy
either recital or memory, during the space of his seven years government: he
was buried in his country. Elon a Zabulonite his successor differed nothing
from him in the same, and during the term of ten years wherein he governed,
The year of the world, 27^3. before Christ's nativity, 1191. Abdon Judge.
Abdon the son of Elon (of the tribe of Ephraim of the City of Pharathon)
was declared sovereign Judge after Elon, and is renowned only for his
felicity in his children (by reason that the estate was in peace and
security, and that he exployted nothing worthy glory) he had forty sons,
who had thirty other children, and he rode accompanied with these seventy,
who were all of them expert on horseback. He left them all alive, and died
when he was very old, and was magnifically buried in Pharathon.

CHAP. X.
Of Sampsons valor, and how many mischiefs he did unto the Philistines.

AFter his death, the Philistines had the upper hand over the Israelites, and
exacted tribute from them for the space of forty years. From that misery
were they ransomed after this manner: Manoach (an excellent man, and one of the
chiefest of the tribe of The Israelites are overcome by the Palestines.
Dan, recounted without exception for the only esteemed Prince amongst them)
had a wife most famous for her beauty, and excellent amongst all other of that
time; yet had he no children by her: whereat he was very sore displeased: and
for this cause he made his continual Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 13. al. 10.
prayers unto God (departing with his wife to his country farm) beseeching
him that it might please his majesty, to grant him some lawful heir and
successor (now the place whither they resorted was situate in a broad
plain.) Furthermore he loved his wife so exceedingly, that he The year of the
world. 2783. before Christ's birth 1181. The Angel foretells Sampsons birth.
her a goodly, fair and puissant son, who denounced unto her the pleasant
message of the birth of her child, which God by his providence would bestow
upon her, who should be goodly and admirable in his forces, and under whom also
as soon (as he should attain to man's estate) the Philistines should endure
many overthrows: exhorting her not to cut his hair, commanding likewise that
he should taste no other drink but water (because that God had so commanded
it:) The year of the world 2783. before the Nativity of Christ. 1181.
Manoach was almost spent with jealousy and suspicion (which such a passion is
wont to engender.) But she desirous to mitigate his discontent, and that
distrust which he had vainly and unadvisedly conceived; besought God that it
might please him once more to send his Angel unto her, to the intent that her
husband might see him. Whilst therefore they lived in this sort out of town,
the Angel presented himself again (through the grace of God) and appeared
unto the woman (being apart from her husband.) But she besought him The Angel
appears once more unto Manoach.
to abide until such time as she had called her husband: which when she had
obtained, she went Manoach, who notwithstanding was not delivered of his
suspicion: but required him that he would relate again unto him all that which
he had signified to his wife. The Angel answered him, that it sufficed that
she only knew it: whereupon he asked him what he was, to the end that when his
son should be borne, he might both give him presents, and present him thanks.
The Angel answered, that he had no need thereof, by reason that he had not
brought that good news of the birth of his son for any necessity that he
had: Manoach besought him to stay and receive some token of kindness: but he
would not consent. Finally, being instantly pressed to abide and receive some
gift: Manoach killed a kid, and commanded his wife to roast the same. And when
as all things were in readiness, the Angel commanded them to lay the bread
and flesh upon a rock without dishes: which being done, he touched the flesh
with a wand Manoach was afraid least some inconvenient should happen unto him,
by reason that they had in that sort seen God: but his wife recomforted him,
by reason that God had appeared unto them for their profit sake. Anon after she
became big with child, and observed all that which had been commanded her, and
when the infant was borne she called his name Sampson (which is as much to say,
as strong) who presently endowed with an excellent beauty both of mind and
body, using Sampsons birth. Judge. 14.
his hair unshorn, and sobriety in his diet, he seemed to make show in
himself of some prophetical, and more then humane forwardness.

It happened one day that there was a solemnity celebrated in Thamna a City
of the Philistines, Sampson resorted with his father and mother, and was
surprised with the love of one of the damsels of that place, requiring his
father and mother that this maiden might be given him in marriage: which they
refused to do; alleging that she was not of the same lineage that he was of,
and that God would provide him of a match to the good and profit of those of
his nation: but in the end he prevailed so much, that he espoused the maiden.
Now as he ordinarily walked to her parents, it happened one day, that being
disarmed, he met with a Lion upon the way, whom he grasped and strangled with
his hands; and having slain him, he cast the body of the beast into a wood
not far distant from the hie way. An other day, and at another Sampsons
teareth a lion in pieces with his hands.
time, returning in like sort to the damsel, he found a swarm of Bees which
went and made their honey and habitation in the breast of the same beast, and he
took three honey combs which he Sampson marries one of the daughters of the
Palestines.
of his marriage, who (for that they suspected his forces) under color to do
him honor, chose out thirty of their strongest and valiantest young men, whom
in words they assigned for his companions, but in effect appointed for his
guardians; to the end he might not attempt any commotion at such time as he had
drunk deeply: and there was nothing intended but sport, according as it is
the custom in other such like occasions. To whom Sampson said, I will propose
a question unto you, which if any one of you can resolve, I will give each of
you a fine linen shirt, and other vestments in reward of your prudence. They
being very desirous both to be reputed wise, as also to gain the reward which
was proposed, willed him to propound his question: which he did in these
terms. He that deuoureth all, and that of himself is unpleasant Sampson
propounds a riddle to the Thamnites.
Sampsons best beloved, that she would sound the secrets thereof, and disclose
the same unto them; which if she failed to perform, they threatened to burn
her to death. Sampson at the first (notwithstanding all her flatteries and
solicitations) denied to tell it her: at last she urged him so instantly, and
shed so many tears (telling him that if he did not expound the question unto
her, that she would take it for a certain sign that he hated her) that at
last he told her what happened The year of the world, 2791. before Christ's birth
1173. Sampsons wife discovers the riddle to the Thamnites
with the Lion which he had slain, and how in him he had the three honey combs
which he brought unto her: and (suspectlesse of either fraud or guile) he
disciphered the whole story unto her, and she afterward reported the same to
those that had besought her in that behalf. When as therefore the seventh day
was come wherein the question was to be decided, they assembled themselves
together about sun set, and said: There is nothing more irksome to meet
withal then a Lion, neither any thing more pleasant to taste, then honey:
Whereunto Sampson replied, that there was not any thing more fraudulent then a
woman, for she it is that has reported my Sampson kills certain Ascalonites
and his wife marieth with an other. Judge. 15.
words unto you. Notwithstanding all this, he delivered that which he had
promised them out of that booty, which he had taken from certain Ascalonites,
whom he encountered upon the way. From that time forward he forsook this
marriage, and the woman (the more to despite him) Sampson (being the more
incensed by this injury) resolved to revenge himself both on her, and the
whole nation: For which cause in the summer season (when the corn was ready
to be reapt) he took Sampson burns the Palestines fruit.
three hundredth foxes, to whose tails he fastened flaming torches, and drove
them into the Philistines fields of corn, consuming by this means all their
harvest hope. The Philistines understanding that Sampson had done this, and
conceiving the reason that induced him to execute this action, sent their
garrison of Thamna, and burnt this woman alive with all her kindred, as the
authors of that loss that had happened unto them. After that Sampson had slain
diverse Philistines in the country, he went and dwelt at Etam (which is a
strong rock in the tribe of Judah.) For which cause the Philistines assailed
that tribe, who certified them that there was no reason Sampson, and that in
especial, because they paid them tribute. The Philistines replied, that
except they would not be maintainers of this act of injustice, they should
deliver Sampson unto them. They therefore (desirous that the Philistines should
have no cause of quarrel against them) came unto the rock to the number of
three thousand men, or thereabouts, and blamed Sampson for those actions which
he dared to commit against the Philistines (a people that might endomage all
the nation of the Hebrews) alleging further, that they came to the end to
take, surprise, and deliver him into the Philistines hands, praying him to
submit himself voluntarily to that their resolution. Sampson made them swear
that they would do him no further injury, but deliver him only unto their
enemies, and that done he descended from the rock, surrendering himself to the
hands of those Sampson is delivered to the Palestines.
is called the Maxilla, that is to say, a Iawe (by reason of the valor which
Sampson showed in that place) and approaching near the Philistines camp,
shouting and rejoicing in their presence, (by reason that they had faithfully
executed that which they willed them) Sampson brake his bonds, and catching up
the iawe of an Ass which he found at his feet, and marching forth against
Sampson with the lawbone of an Ass kills a thousand men.
the Philistines, he slew and beat down to the number almost of two thousand
of them, putting all the rest to flight and confusion. Sampson (becoming more
elate after this execution then he ought to have been, and confessing not that
it was done by the assistance of God, but attributing the same to his own
virtue) gloried, that with the iawe of an Ass he had partly Sampson by his
prayers causes a fountain to break out of a rock.
thirst, he reknowledged and confessed that man's force is of no force, and
protested that all ought to be ascribed to God, whom he besought that he would
not be displeased with that which he had spoken, but that it might be remitted,
and himself delivered from the present danger. Whereupon God heard his
prayers, and caused a pleasant and abundant fountain to issue and spring from
the foot of a rock: for which cause Sampson called the place Maxilla or Iaw,
which name continues even unto this day. After this battle Sampson set light
by the Philistines, and went to Gaza where he soiourned in an Inn. The
governors of the City understanding of his arrival, set men to keep the
gates, to the end he might not depart without their knowledge. But Sampson
(being no ways ignorant of that which they intended against him) arose about
Sampson bears away the gates of Gaza.
and laying them on his shoulders, carried and cast them on the mountain
Hebron. Not long after that he transgressed the ordinance of his fathers, and
corrupted his domestical manner of living, conforming himself to the fashions
of the Gentiles, which was the source and offspring of all his ruin. For he was
surprised and entangled with the love of one that was called Dalila (which was
a common strumpet amongst the Philistines.) To her resorted the governors of
the Philistines, and by promises wrought so much with her, that they wrought
her to work out of The year of the world, 2791. before Christ's Nativity,
1171. Dalila the strumpet sounds Sampson to find our wherein his strength
consisted and is dcluded.
Sampson (that as yet was subtle, stayed and well governed) in counter check
of her craft answered her: that if he were tied with seven vine branches that
were young and pliant, he should become the most feeblest amongst men.
Whereupon for that time she contented her self; and having given notice
thereof to the governors of the Philistines, she had in her house certain men
of war; then when he was drunk and a sleep, she bound him as strongly fast
as might be possible, and suddenly waking him told him that certain soldiers
were at hand to assail him: but Sampson brake his bonds of the vine branches,
Sampson conuersed continually) began grievously to complain against him, for
that distrusting her love and constancy, he had concealed that from her which
she most of all desired to know, as if she had been insufficient to conceal
that which might any ways concern the fortune and safety of her beloved: But
he deceived her the second time, and said unto her, that if he were tied with
seven cords, he should lose his force. Which when she had done, and found a
contrary issue to her expectation, the third time Sampson told her, that if
she plighted his hair with a fillet, he should be weakened: and having
experimented that also, she found that it was false. Finally (for that a great
misfortune attended upon him) she besought him so Sampson discovers to Dalila
wherein his strength consisted, his eyes are pulled out and he is led away
prisoner. The year of the world, 2811. before Christ's birth 1153.
nourish this hair, for that God has commanded me not to cut the same,
because my force shall endure and augment as long as these locks shall endure
and grow. Which when she understood, she shaued off his hair and betrayed him
to his enemies, whose forces at that time he was too feeble to resist, who
plucked out his eyes, and led him away bound. But in space of time his hair
grew again, and at such time as the Philistines celebrated a public feast
(wherein the princes and peers banquetted and entertained one another in one
place, which was a house, the cover whereof was sustained with two pillars)
Sampson was sent for, and brought to the feast, to the end they might mock at
him in the midst of their feasts and drunkenness. But he taking it Sampson
with three thousand Palestines is slain. Sampson ruled twenty years.
were therein, who died to the number of three thousand men: with these also
died Sampson, who finished his days in this sort, after he had commanded over
Israel for the space of twenty years. He was a man of great virtue, force,
and magnanimity: and especially in that which concerns his end, he meriteth
to be admired at, because that even unto his latter hour he was animated
against the Philistines. And whereas he was allured and besotted by a woman, it
ought to be

CHAP. XI.
How the sons of Eli the high Priest, were slain in battle by the
Palestines.

AFter the decease of Sampson, Eli the high Priest took upon him the
government over Ruth. 1. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14. A famine in the days of
Eli.
the Israelites. During his time there was a great famine, and Elimelech unable
to endure the misery thereof, came from Bethleem a City of the tribe of Judah
to inhabit in the Naomi his wife, and Chelion and Maalon his sons, whom he had
by her. Now when as his affairs had fallen out with as fortunate success as
might be desired, he married his sons to certain daughters of the Moabites,
Chelion unto Orpha, and Maalon to Ruth. Some ten years after, Elimelech and
his sons died, the one after the other. By which mishappe Naomi being cast
into great sorrow and destitute of their company, whose dear familiarity
she had preferred before the love of her country: changing her resolution
(according to those occurrences that had happened her) she determined to
return unto her The year of the world. 2811. before Christ's Nativity. 1153.
friends, by reason she had received intelligence that her country at that
time was in good estate. But her daughter in laws could no ways endure to be
separated from her, and will she nill she, they would needs accompany her:
but she wishing them a more happy marriage then that which they enjoyed with
her sons, and in all other things prosperity, and protesting unto them that
there was no ability in her to do them good; she besought them that they
would stay in that place, and not (desiring to follow their wretched mother in
law in an uncertain event) to lose the certain pleasure and peaceable
fruition of their country. These her persuasions took effect with Orpha: but
Ruth (resolved in no sort to forsake her) attended on her mother Naomi after
the decease of her husband and sons departs with Ruth into her own
country. Ruth goes into Bethleem. Ruth 2.
in law (as an assured and future companion of whatsoever fortune should fall
upon her.) Now when as both of them were arrived in Bethleem, Boos (Abimelechs
kinsman) entertained them in Naamis, she said unto them, that it was more
seemly for them to call her Mara (for Naomi in the Hebrew tongue signifies
good hap, and Mara is as much to say as bitterness.) Whereas then it was
harvest time, Ruth by the permission of her mother, went out into the fields to
glean, and gather corn for her sustenance: and it fortuned that she met by
good hap in the fields with Boos, who came thither likewise not Boos friend to
Naomi and Ruth.
long after; who beholding her, enquired and questioned with the chief reaper
as touching the woman. Now had he a little before that time understood by her,
her whole estate, which he declared unto his master, who gave her thanks for
the good affection which she bare unto her mother in law, and of the care she
had of her deceased son, whom Ruth had married, wishing her in effect all
good fortune, and not suffering her to gleane, he permitted her to reap and to
Ruth had received grain at their hands, she reserved it for her mother in
law, and came home at night and brought her the sheaues. In like manner Naomi
had reserved a portion of certain victuals for her, which in way of honor her
neighbors had sent her. Upon her return Ruth reported unto her all those
words that Boos had said unto her: and Naomi gave her to understand that Boos
was of her kin, and that it might be that he was moved by devotion toward God
to have care of her. Some other days after, Ruth issued again with Boos
handmaides to gather her gleanings. And certain days Ruth 3.
after (and about that time that they threshed barley) Boos came and slept on
the floor: which Naomi understood, she bethought her self of some subtle
practice, whereby she might make Ruth lie with him (presuming that it would be
a very good fortune for the young woman Ruth by her mother in laws persuasion
lies at Boos feet.
if they might grow in acquaintance together) for which cause she sent her to
sleep at his feeto. Ruth (that made it a conscience to contradict her mother
in law in whatsoever she commanded her) repaired thither, and upon her first
arrival Boos perceived nothing (because he was fast asleep:) but when he
awaked about midnight, and felt that there was some body that lay fast by him,
he demanded what she was: whereupon she told him her name, requesting him as
her master, that he would permit her to repose in that place for that time. But
early in the morning before the servants began to fall to their work, he
commanded her to arise, and to take as much barley with her as she could bear,
to the end she might return unto her mother in law, before Ruth 4.
news unto her mother in law, she gathered courage and conceived hope that
Boos would take care of her. Thereupon Boos came into the City about
noone-daies, and called a council of the Elders, and sent for Ruth and his
kinsman, to whom in person he spoke thus: Do thou possess the heritage of
Abimelech and his successors? Who when he had publicly declared that Boos
replied. Thou must not (says he) only observe the laws in part; but thou
must precisely execute them according as they are. For behold here a young
woman, whom it behooves thee to marry according to the law, if thou will be
inheritor of his possessions. But he surrendered Boos exhorts his kinsman to
marry Ruth.
unto Boos, not only the possessions, but also the woman; by reason that Boos
was allied also to those that were dead, and especially for that the said
kinsman had already both wife and children. Boos therefore (having first of all
taken witness of all the council) called for the woman, The year of the
world. 28^1. before the Nativity of Christ. 1153.
Boos espoused Ruth, by whom (about a year after) he had a son which Naomi
brought up, and by the advice of the women she called his name Obed (because
she had nourished him in her age: for Obed in the Hebrew tongue signifies a
slave.) Obed begat Iesse, and Iesse David, who was king, and Boos begets
Obed David's grandfather upon Ruth. 1 King. 2.
who left the Realm unto his successors for one and twenty generations of
men. I have been enforced to declare these things as touching Ruth, because I
have an intent to declare the power of God, to whom it is possible to raise men
from obscurity to the highest tip and tittle of dignity, as he has chosen
David, who descended from these of whom I have spoken.

The affairs of the Hebrews were at this time in very poor estate, and they
armed themselves Ophni and Phinees the wicked sons (...) Eli the high Priest.
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 15. al. 12.
anew against the Philistines upon this occasion. The high Priest Eli had two
sons Ophni and Phinees. They against all right and law (offering outrages to
men, and urging impieties against God) suffered no sin to ouerslip them which
they committed not: for they took presents (partly in way of honor, partly
ravished by force and rapine.) And as touching those women that came unto the
Tabernacle in way of devotion, they abused them, and rauishing some against
their wills, and corrupting some other by presents, they so lewdly lived, that
their life seemed to be a true and licentious tyranny: for this cause their
father was sore displeased with them, but the people were so much the more
ouerburdened with grief, because as yet they perceived not that Gods
punishment should so suddenly fall upon them. But incontinently after that God
had Eli and the Prophet Samuel (who about that time was very young) what
mishappe should fall upon Elies children, he mourned over them, as if they had
been already dead. (But I will first of all declare somewhat unto you as
concerning the Prophet Samuel, and afterward will I speak of the children of
Eli, and what inconuenie^t fell upon all the Hebrew nation.) Elcana was a
Leuite of base condition, living in Ramatha a part of Ephraim: he had married
two wives, the one called Anna, the other Phenanna: by Phenanna he had
children; yet notwithstanding loved he Anna very entirely, although she were
barren. Now as Elcana with his wives repaired to Silo, Anna the wife of Elcana
requires a son at Gods hands. The year of the world. 2818. before Christ's
birth 1146.
where the Tabernacle of God was resident (as we have before declared) to the
intent to offer sacrifice in that place: whilst I say, during the festival he
distributed the portion of his meat to his wives and children, Anna (beholding
the children of his other wife sitting round about their Eli, who sat before
the Tabernacle, commanded her to depart from thence, supposing that she had
tasted too much wine: but after that she had told him that she drunk nothing
but water, and that (being oppressed with grief) she was come into the
Tabernacle to beseech God that it might please him to grant her children; he
exhorted her to be of good courage, promising her that God had heard her
prayers: Samuel (that is to say, Requested at Gods hands.) Afterward they
returned to offer sacrifice and give thanks unto God for the birth of the
child, which God had given them, and to bring their tenths: whereupon the woman
(remembering her of the vow she had made in his behalf) delivered him into the
hands of Eli, and consecrated him unto God to be his Prophet. For which cause
they suffered his hair to grow, and he drank nothing but water, and Samuel
was nourished and brought up in the Anna bare Samuel to Elcana her husband.
Temple: Elcana had by Anna other sons and three daughters. But as touching
Samuel (incontinently after he attained to the age of twelve years) he
prophesied. On a certain night Eli being fore amassed, he said unto him,
Samuel, I neither now at this present, nor before this time have spoken unto
thee, but it is God that calls 1. King. 3.
thee, answer him therefore, and say here I am. Now it chanced that he heard
the voice of God once more; and he required him that it might please him to
speak, and he would answer, not failing any ways to do him service in that
wherein he should command him. Whereunto God The year of the world, 2818
before Christ's birth 1146. God foreshewed Samuel of the death of Eli and his
sons Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16. 1. Reg. 4.
answered saying: since (says he) thou art here, know that so great a
calamity shall fall upon the Israelites, that there is not any tongue that may
express the same, or man that may believe it. The sons of Eli shall die, and
the Priesthood shall be transported into the family of Eleazar: For Eli has
more loved his children then my service, and more then was expedient for them.

Eli enforced the Prophet by imprecations to declare unto him that, which he
had heard. But Samuel (for fear he should discomfort him) would not disclose
the same unto him, which made him the more assured of the intended and imminent
death of his sons. And because that which Samuel prophesied in effect proved
true, his reputation increased daily more and more.

In that time the Philistines (leading out their army against the Israelites)
encamped near The Palestines kill four thousand of the Israelites. The year
of the world, 2850. before Christ's birth 1114.
unto the City of Amphec, and for that the Hebrews were negligent to
withstand them, they passed further into the countries thereabout: so that in
fighting with their enemies, the Philistines at last got the upper hand, and
slew the Hebrews, and had them in chase for the space of four miles, pursuing
the rest of those that fled even unto their own tents. Whereupon the Hebrews
grew jealous and afraid of their whole estate: and therefore sent they to the
council of the Elders and the high Priest, praying them to bring the Ark of God with them, to the end that (having it in presence with them) they might
strike the battle and overcome their enemies. But they bethought them not that
he, that had pronounced the sentence of their calamity against The Hebrews
bring the Arc into the battle
them, was greater then the Arc which was made for him. The Arc then was
brought, and Eli attended it, whom their father had expressly commanded, that
if it so fell out that the Arc were taken, they should never more come before
his presence, except they would die. Now Phinees executed the office of the
high Priest, by the permission of his father, by reason he was very aged.

The Hebrews (because of the presence of the Arc) conceived very great hope
and assurance, that they should have the upper hand of their enemies. The
Philistines likewise were sore amazed, fearing the presence of the same: but
the issues were not answerable according to the one or the others expectation.
For when they joined battle, the victory which the Hebrews hoped should be
theirs, fell unto the Philistines; and the loss which the Philistines feared,
fell upon Ophni and Phinees with thirty thousand are slain. and the Arc is
surprised by the enemy.
the Hebrews, who at last perceived that they had reposed their confidence on
the Arc all in

CHAP. XII.
Eli understanding of the loss of his sons, fell from his seat and died.

AS soon as the news of this overthrow was brought into Silo, and that it was
certainly known that the Arc was taken (for a young Beniamite, who was at the
execution, Eli the high Eli understands of the loss of his sons, and the
surprisall of the Arc.
Priest (who sat in one of the gates on a high throne) understanding the
lamentation, and judging that some desaster had befallen his people; sent to
seek out this young messenger, by whom he was advertised of that which had
happened. This accident of his sons and the army he bare with great moderation,
because that before that time he had understood by God what should happen (for
those adversities which are least suspected do more grievously oppress us, at
such time as they happen:) But when he knew that the Arc was surprised, and in
the enemies hands, by reason that it happened beyond his expectation, he was in
such sort attainted with grief, that Eli hearing of the loss of the Arc died.
he suffered himself to fall from his throne upon the ground where he died: he
lived ninety and eight years in all, and had spent forty of them in the
government of the people.

The same day died the wife of Phinees the son of Eli, who had no more power
to live when she understood of the misfortune of her husband: for she was with
child at such time as the message of this his death was brought unto her, and
she brought forth a son in the seventh month, which lived and was called
Ichabod (which signifies ignominy) by reason of the infamy Phinees wife bare
Ichabod and died.
received at that time by the army.

Eli was the first that governed among the successors of Ithamar, one of the
sons of Aaron: for before that time the house of Eleazar was possessed of the
Priesthood (the son receiving The year of the world. 2850. before Christ's
birth 1114. The genealogy and progeny of Eli the high priest.
Eli transferred it to Phinees, after him Abiezar his son occupied the place,
and left it to his son Boci, whose son called Ozes received it, after whom
Eli (of whom we speak at this present) took the same, whose posterity
retained that dignity till the time of the reign of Solomon: for at that time
the posterity of Eleazar were reinstalled.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 6. book.
1 How the Palestines compelled by pestilence and famine, sent the Ark of God
back again unto the Hebrews. 2 The victory of the Hebrews under the
conduct of Samuel. 3 How Samuel when his strength failed him through age,
committed the administration of the affairs 4 How the people being offended
with the manners of Samuels sons, required a King that might rule over them.
5 Saul by Gods commandment was anointed King. 6 Saul's victory against the
Ammonites. 7 The Palestines assailing the Hebrews, are overcome by them in
battle. 8 The victory of Saul against the Amalechites. 9 Samuel translateth
the Royal dignity unto David. 10 The expedition of the Palestines against the
Hebrews. 11 David's single fight with Golias, and the slaughter of the
Palestines that succeeded. 12 Saul admiring David's fortitude, gives him his
daughter in marriage. 13 How the King sought David's death. 14 How David
oftentimes hardly escaped from the kings treasons, yet having him twice in his
power how he would not hurt him. 15 The Hebrews are overcome in a great
battle by the Palestines, wherein Saul the king, and his sons fighting
valiantly are slain.
CHAP. I.
How the Palestines compelled by pestilence and famine, sent back the Arc of
covenant unto the Hebrews.

AFter that the Philistines had gotten the victory over the Hebrews, and
taken the sacred Arc (as we have before this declared) they brought it with
other their spoils unto the City of Azot, and placed it in manner of a trophee
in the Temple of Dagon their Idol. But on the next day after (when early in
the morning they came and entered into the Temple to adore their god) 1. King.
5. Hedio and Ruffinus. chapter 1. The sacred Arc is carried into the Temple of
Dagon. They of Azot are horribly plagued for taking away the Arc. Mice devour
the fruit of the country of Azot.
they found him fallen from that base or pillar that sustained him, and lay
along upon the ground, his face upward before the Arc; whereat being fore
moved, they took and fastened him in his former place: and whenas they came
very oftentimes thither, and always found him prostrate, and adoring before
the Arc, a great fear understood that the Arc was the the cause thereof, and
that neither the victory, neither the surprisall Thereare of the world. 2350.
before Christ's Nativity. 1^4.
1. King. 6.
left them but to find out some good means to rid themselves of the same.
Whenas therefore the Princes of the five Cities, of Geth, Accaron, Ascalon,
Gaza, and Azot were assembled, they consulted amongst themselves what were best
to be done, and first of all they resolved to send Consultation about the Arc.
back the Arc unto those to whom it appertained, whose captivity God did
revenge in that with it many plagues entered into the same Region, and ceased
not to wast both their men and their country. There were some that said that
this resolution was unseemly to be executed, denying that these things should
be imputed to the captivity of the Arc (whose power if it were so great as
they intended, or if God had any ways care of the same; he would never have
permitted it to have fallen into the hands of men of a contrary religion)
persuading them to digest these The conclusion of the counsel as touching the
sacred Arc.
by every one of the assembly, and presently effected: so having prepared all
those things

CHAP. II.
The victory of the Hebrews under the conduct of Samuel.

NOw when the kine entered and kept the right beaten way, and travailed therein
no otherways then if some men had led them, the governors of the Philistines
followed after The year of the world. 2851. before the birth of Christ. 1113.
The sacred Arc comes to Bethsama The gratulatio^ of the Bethsamites upon the
artiuall of the Arc.
them, desirous to understand whither they would travel, and in what place they
would rest in hand, and ran presently unto the chariot. Then taking down the
Arc and the Cofer (wherein The year of the world, 285^. before Christ's
Nativity, 11 13.
Ruffinus writes that God struck 70. of the greatest, and 50000 of the common
sort as it is, 1. Kin. 6, 1 Kin. 7.
whetted against the Bethsamites: so that seventy of them were slain, by
reason they had touched the Arc, and with profane hands (not being Priests)
attempted to sustain it. For which cause the inhabitants thereabouts lamented
their loss, and mourned for that their countrymen were extinguished by no
fatal death, but by a punishment and plague sent from God, lamenting in
particular every one of their alliance. And supposing that they were unworthy
that the Arc should remain with them, they sent messengers to the governors
and the rest of the Hebrews, The Arc is transferred into Cariathiarim.
Aminadab (who had the honor and reputation of a good man, and was renowned
for his good and godly life) to his house directed they the Arc, as to a place
agreeable unto God, because there dwelled in the same a man of so much virtue.
His sons had the charge of the Arc, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 2. I he
punishment of the Israelites.
and continued in that service for the space of twenty years, during which
time it remained in Cariathiarim, after it had only remained 4. months with
the Philistines. During the time that the Arc was in the City of
Cariathiarim, all the people converted themselves unto God with prayers and
sacrifices, showing great devotion and forwardness in his service. The Prophet
Samuel perceiving this their readiness in courage, and supposing he had got a
fit occasion to exhort Samuels oration to the people.
them unto liberty, and those profits which consequently follow the same; and
applying his speech unto the opportunity, time, and affairs, spoke unto them
such words as sounded to this effect. Ye men of Israel, since at this present
the Philistines cease not to molest you, and God begins to show himself
merciful and favorable unto you: it behooves you, not only to be touched
with a desire to recover your liberty, but also to endeavor your selves to
purchase the same in effect. Beware therefore least through your own manners
you make your selves unworthy thereof, and let each one of you endeavor to
follow justice; and expulsing all sin out of your minds, convert your selves
in all purity unto God, and persevere constantly in his service. For Samuels
exhortation to the people, as touching their repentance.
in doing these things, you shall shortly obtain all felicity, and especially
purchase unto your When he had spoken after this manner, all the people
testified their consent in good words, showing the pleasure they had conceived
by his discourse; promising to do that which should be well liking and
agreeable unto God. Whereupon Samuel assembled them the second time in the
city of Maspha (which word signifies conspicuous) there erected they an altar
and sacrificed unto God, and after they had fasted for a days space, they
publicly addressed them to call upon the The year of the world, 2871. before
Christ's nativity, 1093. The prayers, supplications and fasts of the Israelites
in Maspha.
name of God. The Philistines in the mean space, who were assembled together in
the same place, Samuel, told him that their hearts failed them through fear,
and their minds were troubled through the remembrance of those precedent losses
which they had received: For which cause they ought to hold themselves in
quiet, for fear least the enemy should enforce his power against them. Whilst
(said they) thou have led us hither to pray, acrifice, and offer up our vows
unto God, they are encamped nere unto us, being ready to surprise What things
in warfare are to be opposed against the enemy. Samuel comforted the people
us that are naked and disarmed: we have no other hope therefore of our
security, but that proceeds from thee and God; who being moved by thy prayer,
may give us means to escape from Samuel in way of answer wished them to be of
good cheer, promising them that God would yield them some testimony of his
assistance: whereupon sacrificing a sucking lamb for the people, he besought
God that it might please him to stretch forth his right hand for them in this
battle against the Philistines, and that he would not permit them to fall this
second time into the enemies hands. To these prayers of his God listened with
intentive ears, and accepted Samuels sacrifice and prayer.
their humble hearts and dutiful observance, smiling upon their offering, and
promising them both force, and victory. But before the sacrifice was wholly
consumed with flame, and the ceremonies The year of the world. 2871. before
Christ's Nativity. 1093. The sacrifice devoured by caelestial firm a token of
Gods assistance. A horrible earthquake among the enemies.
Samuel seeing them in this sort dismayed, suddenly set upon them, Samuels
victory over the enemy.
and killing many of them, he ceased not to pursue the rest as far as a place
called Corraeus, where he fixed and erected a stone or trophee, as a mark both
of his own victory, and the enemies flight, and called the same the strong
rock; as a witness of the force that God had given him against the
Philistines; who after they received this overthrow, sallied not out any more
against the Israelites. But remembering themselves of their fear and those
accidents that fell upon them, they remained in peace, offering no further
invasion: for the confidence which the Philistines had before that time
conceived and gotten against the Hebrews, translated it self and remained
with the Hebrews ever after this victory. And Samuel led forth his army
against Samuel recouereth those lands which the Israelites had lost.
them, and slew a great number of them, and for ever abased their pride, taking
from them that country which before times they by conquest had cut off from
the inheritance of the Jews,

CHAP. III.
Samuel weakened by reason of his old age cannot any longer govern the estate,
and commits it to the administration of his sons.

NOw when the Prophet Samuel had reduced and brought the people to a good form
of government, he assigned them a City whither they might appeal and decide
those differents Samuel prescribes laws and disposes the judgment seat in
several cities.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3. 1. King. 8. Samuel commits the government and
care of the commonweal to his two sons locl and Abia.
of the people to his sons, the elder of whom was called Joel and the younger
Abia; and he commanded that the one of them should make his seat of justice in
Bethel, and that the other should give audience at Bersabe, dividing the
people, and attributing each part to his particular Judge. In these was there a
manifest example and infallible testimony, that children are not always borne
like unto their fathers: but that sometimes of evil parents there are good
children bred, as contrariwise at that time of a good father there were evil
sons begotten. For

CHAP. IIII.
How the people being displeased with the manners and government of the sons
of Samuel demanded a King.

WHen as therefore the people perceived, that the sons of the Prophet had
committed The Israelites report unto Samuel the lewd behavior of his sons and
beseech him to nominate a king that may reign over them.
so many outrages against their laws and policy, they were very sore
displeased, and had recourse unto their father where he dwelled in the City
of Ramatha; where reckoning up unto him the misdemeanors of his sons, and how
through the multitude of his years, he was unfit according to his accustomed
manner to administer the affairs of the common weal, they earnestly entreated
and besought him, that he would nominate and elect some King over them, who
might both command their nation and Empire, and exact due punishment on the
Palestines, for their many and too oftentimes offered injuries. This resolution
of The year of the world 2871. before Christ's birth 1093.
Samuels mind, who by reason of his innated and upright justice misliked of
the kingly authority, as a style and state too imperious: for he greatly
delighted himself in the Aristocracie or government of the elders, deeming no
estate more conducible, or available for the security and prosperity of the
people, then that was. And so did this matter Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4.
Samuel is discomforted through the peoples demand. Samuel is comforted by God.
distemper and distract this man, as by reason of his care he could neither
taste food, nor entertain sleep: but all the night long tossed and tumbled in
his bed, during those tmies complotting and imagining many things in his mind.
Whilst these his indispositions continued, God appeared unto him, and
comforted him, willing him not to be agrieued at that which the people had
required: but that he should suppose that this injury, not only concerned
him, but God himself, whom they disclaimed also for their king and sole
governor over them. The effect God commands Samuel to create a king.
(after thou have advertised them what evils they shall endure, at such time as
they shall have a King) and have publicly declared unto them, what
inconuenients follow the change which so vehemently and unhappily they pursue.
When Samuel understood these sayings, he assembled the people about the break
of day, and protested publicly unto them, that he would establish them a King.
But says he, before I shall effect that which you request, I must expose and
declare Samuel expresses unto the Israelites those inconveniences they shall
suffer under a king.
and grievous evils you shall be pressed withal, by those Kings that shall
govern you. Know therefore first of all, that they will take your children from
you, and make some of them coachmen, and other some their horsemen and archers
of their guard others their posts, and tribunes and centurions; some likewise
their handicraftsmen, and armorers, and chariot-makers, and smithes, and
forgers of other sorts of weapons, besides husbandmen of his fields, and
plowes, and diggers of his vineyards: neither is there any thing which they
shall not be compelled to do after the manner of bondslaues, that are bought
with money. They shall take your daughters also, and make them their perfumers,
cooks and bakers; and they shall employ them in all servile offices, whereunto
their chambermaides are to be employed either by stripes or torture. They shall
take from you Although these future inconveniences were foretold them, yet did
the people neglect and set light by them: and not suffering that sinister
opinion which before that time they had conceived in their minds, to be altered
or frustrated in them, they insisted with all obstinacy; requiring (without
any care of future The people obstinarely perseuereth in craving a king.
enemies, and repress their adversaries forces, and that there was no
absurdity in it, but that they might be governed in the same sort as their
neighbors were. Samuel perceiving that his persuasions could prevail nothing
at all with them, and that they could not be diuerted from that resolution
wherein they persisted, he spoke thus: Go your ways for this time every one
of you unto your houses, and I will cause you to be assembled when the cause
requires, and when God shall have informed me what king he will give you.

CHAP. V.
Saul by the commandment of God is declared King.

THere was a certain man of the tribe of Benjamin, noble in birth, and
commendable The year of the world, 2880. before Christ's nativity, 1084. 1.
King. 9.
in manners called Cis, who had a young son fair in face, great in body;
having a spirit and judgment far more excellent then were the lineaments and
perfections of his body, whose name was Saul. This Cis having fair Asses,
wherein he took more pleasure then in any other kind of cattle, had lost
certain of them which were straied from the rest of his The year of the
world. 2880. before Christ's Nativity. 1084. Saul seeks the Asses that were
lost.
flock: whereupon he sent his son accompanied with a servant to search and
seek them out; who having trauersed and travailed in quest of them through all
his fathers tribe, iourneied through the rest of the tribes, without any hope or
inckling of them: for which cause he determined to return home again, for
fear least his father should conceive some care and grief in his absence.
Whilst then he arrived near unto the City of Ramatha, the servant that
followed him, certified him that there dwelt a Prophet in that place, to whose
foresight the knowledge of the truth was subject, toward whom he counseled
him to address himself, with assurance and confidence, that by him he should
understand what was become of his Asses. Saul replied, that he had no means
lest to recompense the Prophet, by reason they had consumed all the money they
had brought forth with them in their journey. His servant told him that he had
as yet the Saul asks where the Prophet dwells.
they demanded where the Prophet dwelt: who gave them directions, telling them
that they were to make haste before that he were set down to supper, by reason
he at that time entertained diverse guests, and he himself was first wont to
sit down at the upper end of the table. Samuel had invited this company, by
reason that all the day long he had instantly besought God, that he would
declare unto him, who it was that should be established king, and God also gave
him to understand that he would inform him the next day after, and that about
the same hour he would send a young man unto him of the tribe of Benjamin. For
this cause Samuel God certifieth Samuel whom he should create king.
go to supper, and in the way he met with Saul. At that very instant God
signified unto Samuel, that it was he whom he should elect Prince and governor
over the people.

Saul addressing himself unto Samuel, besought him that he would show him the
Prophets lodging, by reason that he was a stranger and knew it not. Samuel told
him that himself was the Saul comes unto Samuel. Samuel certifieth Saul how
he shall enjoy the kingdom. Samuel conducteth Saul unto the banquet.
man to whom he spoke, and led him to the banquet; assuring him that his Asses
(in search of whom he had travailed so long) were in safety, and that all men's
goods were at his command. Saul answered: My Lord, I am too base to hope or
expect so much; and further, my family is the least of all the families: you
therefore jest and mock at me, in speaking of such things as surpass my
condition. The Prophet took him by the hand, and brought both him and his
servant Samuel commanded that the royal portion should be set before Saul: and
when the hour of bed time came, all the rest arose and departed to their
houses, but Saul and his servant lodged that night with the Prophet: and as
soon as it was day, Samuel awaked Saul, and departing with him out of town,
he commanded him to send his servant before, and to remain himself with him
behind, because he had certain things to impart unto him in private. Hereupon
Saul sent away his servant, and Samuel taking a cruet with oil, poured the
same upon the young man's head, and embracing him said: Be thou King elected by
God against the Philistines, and 1. King. 10. Samuel anointed Saul king.
for the defense of the Hebrews. Thou shall have this sign which I now shall
inform thee of, of thy future honor. When thou shall be parted from hence,
thou shall overtake three men Samuel in way of confirmation tells Saul what
shall befortune him in his journey.
see bearing three loaves, the second shall bear a goat, and the third shall
follow carrying a glass of wine. These shall embrace thee and caresse thee:
they shall give thee two loaves, and thou shall receive them. And from thence
shall thou depart unto that monument that bears the name of Rachel, where
thou shall meet with a messenger, that shall certify thee that the Asses are
found. From thence coming unto Gabatha, thou shall find the Prophets
assembled in their congregation, and being ravished by the spirit of God, thou
shall prophecy amongst them: so that whosoever shall behold thee, shall be
ravished in admiration, and shall say: whence comes it to pass, that the
son of Cis has attained to so good fortune? and when thou have had these
signs, know that God shall be with thee: salute thy Father and thy kinsmen in
my behalf. Saul, according as the Prophet Samuel had prophesied unto him. When
Saul was arrived at Abenars house, who was his uncle, whom he loved above all
the rest of his other familiars: Abner questioned with him about his voyage,
and as touching those things which had chanced unto him: and Saul hid nothing
from him, but point by point informed him of all that which had happened unto
him, during his being and abode The year of the world. 2880. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1084. Saul concealed his royal dignity. The inconstancy
of man's love.
with the Prophet Samuel, and how he had declared unto him the recovery of his
Asles: but as touching the royalty and those things that concerned the same,
he concealed them; supposing that if it should be made known, it would not be
believed; but that he should reap hate thereby. For although he were both his
friend and cosen; yet thought he it more secure and convenient for him to
bury the same in silence, reputing (as I suppose) in himself the infirmity
of man's nature, that no man is constant in love, but although by manifest
assistance from God felicity fall upon any man, yet other men do grieve and
repine that any one should be preferred before them.

After this, Samuel assembled the people in the City of Maspha, where he
framed his speech in such sort as he certified them of those things which he
had received from God, namely, that he Samuels oration to the people as
concerning Saul.
they were forgetful of so many benefits, and had degraded God of his
royalty; as if they were ignorant, that the greatest good that might happen
unto men, is to be governed by him that is the sovereign good; how they had
determined to have a man to their King, who according to his pleasure and
appetite, or according to the unbridled bent of his passion, would use them
like slaves made subject unto him, and would usurp upon their goods without
forbearing any thing whatsoever; that men are not so studious to maintain
their handie works and labors, as God, who has an inestimable care of those
whom he has created. Notwithstanding (says he) since you have thus
determined, and are after this manner resolved, and that the outrage which you
have enterprised against God, prevails with you, set your selves all of you
in order according Benjamin, which being cast the second time light on the
family of Lots cast through every tribe and family.
Metri, and afterward being approved by the people it fell to Saul's lot, who
was the son of Cis, to have the kingdom. The young man, who before that time
knew what should happen, had stepped aside, to the intent (as I suppose) that it
might not seem that he had desired this dignity: and such moderation and
temperance showed he in this matter, that although it so fell out that diverse
cannot conceal the joy they conceive, if any face of felicity smile upon
them, bur manifest Saul's modesty and tempera^ce in undertaking the government.
Saul hides himself from the presence of the people.
the same unto all men; yet notwithstanding he not only was void of vain
appearance (although he were to be King and Lord of so many worthy people) but
that which is more, he stole away from the presence of those men over whom he
should command, and so handled all things Saul, the Prophet prayed God that he
would show them where he was, and that he would bring him into their presence:
whenas therefore he was informed by God in what place he remained; Samuel sent
out certain messengers to conduct him thither, and as soon as he came amongst
them Samuel set and placed him in the midst of the people: now Saul of a high
slature.
was he more higher then any of the company by the shoulders; and had a kingly
and goodly shape and appearence: then spoke the Prophet after this manner. God
has given you this man to be your King, behold how he surpasses you al, and
shows himself worthy to be your Prince. Saul saluted by the people for their
king.
But as soon as the people had cried God save the King; the Prophet, who had
reduced into writings all those mischiefs that should befall them, red the
same unto them in the hearing of the Samuel dismissed the people and returned
to the City of Ramath, which was his country. Diverse attend on Saul, other
some co^temn^ him.
But Saul departing unto Gabatha, diverse worthy men gave their attendance on
him, and did him the honor that appertained unto a king. But diverse seditious
and loose companions, who set him at noughts, both mocked them and those things
which they did, neither brought they any presents unto Saul, neither seemed
they either in affection or in word, any ways to respect their King. A month
after his instalment there fell a war betwixt him and Naas King of the
Ammonites, which was the original of that honor which was generally
attributed unto him by the Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 5. 1. King. (...).
whole multitude: this Naas had offered diverse outrages unto those Jews that
dwell on the other should defend themselves, they should have their left eyes
covered with their bucklers, and by The year of the world, 2880. before
Christ's birth 1084. Saul's war against the Ammonites.
that means be made unapt to enter battle. The King of the Ammonites having
after this manner dealt with those on the other side of Jordan, he led his army
toward the Galaadites, and encamped near unto their chief City called
Iabes, to which he sent heralds to sommon the inhabitants to surrender the
same under these conditions: Either to suffer their right eyes to be pulled
out, or else by enduring the siege, to see the final overthrow both of
themselves and of their City: wishing them to make choice of which they list,
whether they would lose a little part of their body, or hazard both their
fortunes and lives at once. The Galaadites, terrified with this so doubtful
and dreadful an election, neither durst return an hostile or peaceable
answer, but asked truce for seven days, to the end, that sending their
messenger to their kinsfolk, they might crave their aid: which if they could
obtain they would war; and otherwise they promised Naas, that neither cared
for the Galaadites, neither for their answer, granted them that Naas king of
the Ammonits offers unjust conditions of peace to the Galaadites. The
Ambassadors of the Galaadites to the Israelites.
time of truce which they demanded, and permitted them likewise to crave
assistance at all their hands, who were their associates. Whereupon they
presently sent messengers from city to City, and certified the Israelites of
all that which Naas had done unto them, and the extremity whereunto they were
reduced. The Israelites having before time understood in what estate they of
Iabes were, had grievously lamented and conceived great displeasure thereat;
but the fear that afflicted them, suffered them to assist their friends in no
other manner then by commiseration: yet as soon as their messengers arrived in
the City where Saul was, and that they had recounted unto him the dangers
wherewith the Iabasites were oppressed; the people were as in times past Saul,
he returning from the fields into the City, perceived the inhabitants drowned
in their tears, and enquiring of them for what cause they were so confused and
abashed, he was certified of that, which the messengers had reported: and on
the instant he was ravished by a divine motion, and sent the Ambassadors back
again to those that sent them, promising that within three days he would come
and succor them, and that he would have the upper hand of the enemy before
Saul promises assistance to the Iabasites.
sun rise, to the end that the rising sun might behold them victorious, and
delivered from all fear. Mean while he commanded some of them to make stay
with him, to the intent they might guide and direct him in his way.

CHAP. VI.
The combat and victory of Saul against the Ammonites.

SAul desirous to incite the people to issue out and make war upon the
Ammonites, to the intent under a penalty he might assemble them with more
readiness, he houghed his Saul's serious exhortation and command for war.
own oxen, and threatened all those whom he met withal to do the like unto
theirs, except the next day they presented themselves with their arms upon the
bank of Jordan to follow the King and the Prophet Samuel, and march unto the
place whither by them they should be conducted.

The fear of this penalty published among the tribes made them gather to head
about the 1. Reg. 12.
besides those of the tribe of Judah, there were numbered seven hundredth thousand
men, and of the tribe of Judah in particular there were seventy thousand.
Having therefore passed Jordan, and marched some ten cables length of Nilus
(which is about some three leagues) all the night Ten Schaeni or cables length
of Nilus so-called by the cords that drew the ships up Nilus, make 37. Italian
miles. Saul kills the Ammonites, and Naas their king. Saul made his name
famous amongst the Hebrews. Saul is praised by the people.
time, before the sun rise he attained the place whither he intended to
conduct them, and dividing his army into three parts, he assailed the enemy on
every side that expected no such encountry, and fighting valiantly against
them, he slew diverse, and amongst the rest Nahas king of the Ammonites. This
victory made Saul's name famous amongst all the Hebrews, so that he was
wonderfully praised and honored for his valor: so that if before that time
any one had contemned him, at that time they changed their opinions, and
honored him, and accounted Iabes, but he entered the country of the Ammonites
also, and forraged the same with his army, and utterly overthrew them: and
after he had obtained a great booty and pray, both he and his victoriously and
magnifically returned to their dwelling places. The people highly pleased with
this noble action achieved by Saul, rejoiced because they had chosen them so
noble a King, and exclaimed against those that said, that it would be
discommodious and unprofitable for their commonweal, saying, where are now
these murmurers, let them be put to death: with other The year of the world,
2880. before Christ's Nativity, 1084. Saul's lenity against his adversaries.
Saul received great content and comfort through this good liking and allowance
of the people: yet notwithstanding he swore that no one of their tribe should
be put to death that day, because it would not seem convenient nor agreeable,
that the victory which was given them by God should be mixed with the blood of
their brethren; but rather that it was more decent and comely, that the time
should be spent in feast and iollitie. Hereupon Samuel told them, that it
behooued them to confirm the kingdom to Saul by a second election, and to
that end, they assembled together in the City of Galgal, according as he had
commanded them: and there in the sight of all the people Samuel anointed Saul
the second time with the consecrated oil, and proclaimed him king ar^ew. Thus
Saul once more anointed king by Samuel. The distinct governments of the
Hebrews.
Monarchy. For under Moses and his disciple Jesus, who governed the Empire and
army at that time, the nobility and elected worthy men ruled the state.
After whose death for the space of 18. whole years, the people was without
government, the commonweal not long after reassumed her pristine policy,
and the government was given unto him, which was esteemed the most valiant in
war, and the most upright in doing of Justice. All which time for this cause
has been called the time of the Judges.

After this the Prophet Samuel assembled the people, and spoke unto them after
this manner: I conjure you by that great God that has given life to those two
brothers (I mean Moses and Samuels justification of him self in the presence
of the people.
Aaron) and that has delivered your forefathers from the Egyptians, and their
tyranny, that without After that the people had thus publicly testified in the
behalf of Samuel, he said unto them: Since you have liberally and freely
protested, that you have no cause of wrong to urge or enforce against me,
hear, Jacob accompanied only with his 70. sons came into Egypt, constrained
Samuel expostulateth with the people, and obiecteth their sins and
ingratitude.
thereunto by famine, and that in that country diverse thousands of persons
issued from his loins, whom the Egyptians kept in captivity, offering them
extreme outrages: And whenas your fathers called upon God, how he wonderfully
delivered the^ from the necessities wherein they were, without giving them any
king, contenting themselves with two brothers Moses and Aaron, who brought and
conducted you into this country which you possess at this present. And
although you participated these benefits by the hands of God, yet
notwithstanding you have not forborne both to forget religion, and neglect
piety. This notwithstanding, at such time as you Ieptha and Gedeon, what folly
therefore has bewirched you to make you fly from God, and to seek to live
under the subjection of a king? But I have named such a one unto you, whom God
has chosen to be your governor. Notwithstanding to the intent that I may give
you a manifest testimony, that Gods wrath is whetted against you, because you
have desired to have a king; I will strive to express it unto you, by visible
signs done by God himself. I will therefore require of God that he will make
you see in this place, and in the heart of summer such a storm, that there is
not any one of you that has ever seen the Scarce had he spoken the words, but
that so dainly there fell great store of lightning, thunder and hail, in
approbation of that which the Prophet had said: so that amassed and transported
with fear, all of them confessed that they had offended. They notwithstanding
professed A huge tempest falls upon Samuels prayer.
that their error was of ignorance, not of obstinacy, and besought the
Prophet that with a good and fatherly affection, he would beseech God to
appease his wrath toward them, and forgive them their offenses at that
present, which to their other grievous negligences they had annexed, and
whereby they had transgressed his holy will. All which Samuel promised them to
The year of the world. 2880. before Christ's Nativity. 1084.
do, and besought God that it would please him to pardon them the error which
they had committed in that behalf, and that it would please him to be appeased
by his prayers. Besides this, he exhorted them to live uprightly, and to keep
in their continual remembrance what evils had happened unto them, for that they
had forsaken the way of virtue; and what wonders God had done, and what laws
he had given by Moses, all which they ought to meditate on, if they desired to
be in safety, and live happily with their king. But if they should contemn
the same, he An exhortation to the consideration of Gods assistance and
benefits bestowed on the Israelites.
foretold them that both themselves and their kings should be grievously
punished. Samuel having prophesied these things unto the Hebrews, dismissed
them to their own dwellings, after he had confirmed the kingdom to Saul the
second time.

CHAP. VII.
The Palestines assailing the Hebrews, are overcome in battle.

But when the king had mustered his men, and chosen out three thousand of the
choicest soldiers, he appointed two thousand of the^ for the guard of his
person, and with them went Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. Saul elected two
thousand for his own guard, and one thousand for Ionathans. Saul overcomes
the Philistines.
and dwelt at Bethel. The rest he gave in charge to his son Jonathan, and sent
them into Gaba to attend and guard him there, who followed by them valiantly
overcame a garrison of the Philistines near unto Gebal. For the Philistines of
Gaba having gotten the upper hand over the Jews, had taken their arms from
them, and seized and fortified both with men and munition

Now when the Philistines had gotten some intelligence that their garrison was
after this manner defeated, they were wonderfully moved, and supposing amongst
themselves that the injury The Philistines prepare to invade the Israelites.
and outrage was in no sort to be suffered, they armed themselves against the
Jews, and went out embattailed with three hundredth thousand footmen, thirty
thousand chariots, and six thousand horse, encamping with their whole host
near unto the City of Machmas. Which when Saul the Saul's soldiers were
certified of the true number of their enemies, they were wholly discomforted, so
that some of them hid themselves in dens and places under The Israelites
dismayed at the report of the army of the Philistines.
the earth, othersome fled on the other side of Jordan into the country of the
Gadites and Rubenites. But Saul sent for the Prophet, resolving to consult with
him upon the estate of the war, who gave him answer that he should attend in
the same place where he was, and that he should prepare beasts for sacrifice,
because that within seven days he would come unto him and sacrifice on Samuel
had enjoined him. For when he perceived that he was somewhat slack in coming,
and that his soldiers waxed weary, he took the beasts that were prepared for
the sacrifice, and offered a burnt offering: but afterward Saul sacrifices
contrary to God and the Prophets direction. Samuel accuses Saul.
understanding that Samuel was arrived, he went out to meet him, and do him
honor. Samuel told him, that he had done amiss, by reason he had neglected
that which was commanded him, presuming before his arrival (who was sent
thither by the conduct and will of God) to offer prayers and sacrifice for the
people: in which action of his, he both discovered his rashness, and disorder in
sacrificing. Saul excused himself, alleging that he had stayed during the
term of seven days which were appointed him: urging further that necessity,
and the depart of his Samuel was gone to Galgal, had induced him to offer
sacrifice: Samuel replied saying. Thou had done more advisedly, if thou had
obeyed, and not contemned God by thine ouerhaste, whose minister and Prophet I
am: for by thine obedience thou might both have gotten an assurance and
continuance of thy kingdom to thy self, and succession to thy posterity.
This said, being displeased with that which had happened, he retired back to his
own house, and Saul with six hundredth soldiers (only accompanied with his
son Jonathan) The year of the world. 2880. before the Nativity of Christ.
1084. Hedio and Ruffinus. Galgala. The Palestines spoil the country of the
Hebrews.
came unto the City of Gabeon. The greater part of these men were disarmed, by
reason that the country was entirely destitute of iron, and workmen that were
expert and skillful in forging and making armor: for the Philistines permitted
them not to have any, as we have declared a little before. These dividing their
army into three battles, invaded the country of the Hebrews by so many ways,
destroying and foraging all things both in the sight of king Saul, and of his
son, who neither could inhibite their incursions, nor by reason of their
multitudes make head against them. Both he therefore and his son and Achias
the high Priest, sat them down upon a hillocke, and seeing the country
spoiled round about them, they were much dismayed. But Saul's son conspired
and concluded with his esquire and harnesse-bearer, to enter secretly into the
enemies camp, and raise an uproar and allarum in the same; who willingly
promising 1. Reg 14. Jonathan with his harnes bearer do privily enter the
enemies camp.
Jonathan encouraged his companion, and animated him to assail the enemy after
this manner. If (says he) they epsy us and will us ascend, let us take this
sommons of theirs for an assured token of victory: but if they hold their
peace and call us not, let us return back again.

As therefore they approached the enemies host about the beginning and brie of
day, the Philistines said the one unto the other: the Hebrews creep out of
their caves and dens. Then cried they out to Jonathan and his harnesse-bearer,
saying: Come hither, come hither unto us, to the end we may plague you
according to your audacious enterprise. Saul's son quickly taking hold of
these their words, and esteeming them for an ominous and assured token of
victory, departed with his esquire from the place where they were first
discovered; answering them that he would shortly visit them. So withdrawing
himself on the other side of the rock, which by reason of the situation
thereof was left unguarded, ouercomming the difficulty of the place with great
labor; at last they attained the place where the enemy was, whom they found
asleep, and assailing Jonathan slays a certain number in the enemies camp,
the rest invade one another, and are put to flight.
them slew twenty of them, and filled the whole army with terror and
amasednesse: so that Saul demanded whether any of his company were absent,
and hearing that his son and his harnesse-bearer were missing, he commanded
the high Priest, that attired in his pontifical ornamens, he should prophecy
that which should Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7. Saul hearing that there was a
tumult in the Palestines camp, sallieth out upon the^.
succeed, who assuring him that he should obtain the victory over his
enemies, he sallied out and assaulted the Philistines, and ran upon them, who
were thus confused and disordered, and Saul's side: so that gathering together
to the number often thousand Hebrews, he pursued his scattered enemies through
all the country. But afterward, a great inconvenient happened unto Saul,
proceeding from the joy he had conceived by this victory (for commonly such as
are blessed by such good fortunes, are not masters of their own affections and
reasons) or rather proceeding from his ignorance. For intending to saciate
himself with revenge for all those injuries he had received from the
Philistines, he published an imprecation or curse amongst the Hebrews against
any one whomsoever, that intermitting the chase and slaughter should take
sustenance before night, purposing until dark night neither to give over
pursuit or slaughter. Saul, it chanced that his son that had not as yet heard
of the imprecation of his father, nor the general ratification and allowance
of the same by the people, Saul's edict unwittingly broken by Jonathan.
falling into a certain grove belonging to the tribe of Ephraim, wherein were
many swarms of bees, he by chance light upon a honey comb, and pressing the
honey thereout, afterward did eat the same. Afterward having intelligence that
his father had under a grievous penalty of execration, forbidden any man to
taste any sort of meat before sun set, he gave over eating further: yet said
he, that his father had done amiss therein in publishing that prohibition, by
reason The year of the world, 2880 before Christ's birth 1084.
The Hebrews feed on bloody flesh.
slaughtering the beasts and eating the flesh of them, before it was either
washed or purified from the blood: Saul commanded that a great stone should be
rolled into the midst of the place, and commanded the people to kill and
sacrifice their beasts upon the same: and that they should forbear to eat the
flesh with the blood, because it was not agreeable unto God. All which was Saul
erected an altar in that place, on which he offered a burnt sacrifice unto God.
This was the first altar that he erected. But Saul being desirous incontinently
to assail the enemies camp, and sack all that was therein before the day
spring, whilst his men of war diligently followed him, and showed great
forwardnes in the execution of his command: the king asked counsel of the
high Priest Achitob, whether God would give him the victory, and permit those
that should enter the enemies camp, to return from thence with victory. The
high Priest certified him that God returned him no answer: which when he
understood; It is not without cause, said he, that God is thus silent, who
heretofore was wont to give a willing answer in that which we ought to do:
but there must needs be some hidden sin in us, that breeding an offense in
him, procures him to be silent. But I swear Jonathan has committed that
sin, to the end I may appease God, I will with no less severity execute
him, then any one stranger that is neither by alliance nor affinity tied unto
me. Now when the people cried out and encouraged him to the performance of that
he had spoken, he presently assembled them in one place, and he standing Saul
tries by lot who has displeased God.
with his son apart, began by casting lots to find out him that was faulty.
Now when the lot fell on Jonathan, he asked him what he had committed, and what
crime in his own conscience he was guilty of. To whom he answered, I know no
other thing, but that yesterday being in pursuit of the enemy, and ignorant of
thine edict, I tasted of a honey comb: but Saul swore that he would slay him,
setting more by his oath, then either by kindred, nature, or affection. He Saul
intends to kill his own son, being prepared and resolute to die.
nothing astonished with his present peril, with a generous and dreadlesse
mind presented himself Jonathan, who was the author of so famous a victory,
should be slain: The Israelites rescue Jonathan from his displeased father.
and therefore rescued they the young man from his displeased father, and made
vows unto God to the end he might pardon him that fault. Saul after he had
slain about sixty thousand of his enemies, returned with victory to his own
home, and reigned afterward very happily, and overcame by force the Ammonites,
Philistines, Moabites, Idumeans, Amalechites, and king Oba Jonathan, Iosuah and
Melchi; and two daughters, Merob and Michal. The general of his army was
Abner, the son of his uncle called Ner: Oba or Soba.
for Ner and Cis Saul's father, were brothers and sons of Abiel. He was very
rich both in horse and chariots, and against whatsoever enemy he marched forth,
he always returned with victory: so that he reduced the affairs of the
Hebrews to a happy estate, and so much increased Saul always conqueror.
their power that they wear feared by all those nations that neighboured upon
them. But the chiefest of the youth, that either prevailed in strength, or
exceeded in beauty, he chose to be of his guarde.

CHAP. VIII.
Saul's victory against the Amalechites.

But Samuel coming unto Saul, told him that he was sent unto him by God, to
admonish him how he had chosen him above the rest, and preferred him to the
kingdom: Hedio and Ruffinus. chapter 8. 1. Reg. 15.
and for that cause that it behooued him to be obedient unto him in all things,
because he ruled the people; but God both kings, kingdoms, and all things.
Thus therefore (said he) does God command thee. Since the Amalechites offered
many injuries unto the Hebrews in The year of the world 2883. before Christ's
birth 1081. Samuel by Gods commandment addresseth Saul to make war upon the
Amalechites. Saul mustring his people, finds in the tribe of Judah only
thirty thousand men
Moses commanded it, deface the name of the Amalechites from of the earth. All
these things did Saul promise to perform, and supposing obedience consisted in
this, not only in the acting, but also the speedy execution of that which was
enjoined him, he presently assembled all his forces together, and mustring his
soldiers at Galgal, he found about forty thousand besides the tribe of Judah,
which of it self affoorded and allowed thirty thousand chosen men: with these
did Saul enter the country of the Amalechites, and laid diverse ambushes near
unto a river, not only to afflict them with open and hostile war, but also
to enclose and surprise them at unawares, and kill them amidst their hie ways:
He charged them therefore and put them to flight, and discomfited Saul raseth
the cities of the Amalechites.
their whole army, pursuing them that fled. Which execution of his, having that
answerable success (according as God had promised him before) he marched
onwards, and besieged the Cities of the Amalechites, and overcame some of them
by battery, some by mines and countermures raised on the outside: other some
by famine and thirst, and diverse other ways. And in those Cities which he
overcame, he neither spared women nor children, neither supposing their murder
to be cruel, neither inhumane: first for that he executed it upon his enemy;
next Agag prisoner also, who was the king Saul takes Agag the king of the
Amalechites prisoner, and keeps him alive contrary to Gods commandment.
of the Amalechites, whose beauty and personage seemed unto him so well
proportioned and perfect, that he wondered thereat and thought him worthy to be
kept alive; and that not by Gods commandment, but overcome by his own
affection, usurping upon an vngranted privilege of mercy to his own
prejudice: For God so hated the Amalechites, that he spared not their infants,
who ought in natural compassion to have been more pitied then the rest. But
Saul kept alive the king of his enemies and the author of all the Hebrews
evils, setting more by his beauty then Gods commandment. This sin of his the
people presently imitated: for they spared both horse and other kind of
cattle, and made pray of them, notwithstanding that God had The people
contrary to that which god had ordained drive away the horse and cattle of
the Amalechites.
and only consumed those things which were of smalest value by fire. This
victory had Saul over those people that dwell betwixt Pelusium, which is a
City on the borders of Egypt, unto the red sea. But he meddled not with the
Sichemites, which inhabit in the midst of the Madianites, whom before the
battle he had commanded to retire themselves, least they should partake the
calamities of the Amalechites: for in that they were allied unto them, by
reason of Raguel Moses father in law; the Hebrews had cause to procure their
safety. Saul having obtained this victory and rejoicing at his good success,
returned to his own home as full of content, as if he had pretermitted nothing
of that, which God had commanded him by the Prophet Samuel before his war
with the Amalechites, but as if he had precisely observed all that which was
enjoined Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9. God displeased with Saul's disobdience.
were expressly against Gods permission. For it was not to be tolerated no not
in a mortal king, that they should neglect and contemn his laws and decrees,
by whose only means they were furthered and favored in their victory. For
which cause God told the Prophet Samuel, that he repented him in that he had
chosen Saul for their king, considering that he infringed his commandments,
and governed himself according to his own appetites. When Samuel heard these
words, he was sore troubled, and besought God all the night long, that he would
appease his wrath and displeasure conceived against Saul: but notwithstanding
all the importunities and Samuel strives to reconcile Saul unto God.
prayers which the Prophet made for him, God would in no sort be reconciled,
because it was Saul, should be remitted by Samuels submission and intercession.
For sin never more augmenteth and increases, then when such as are offenced
are too remiss in their punishments: for whilst they would be reputed both
for Too much indulgence and lenity confirms the wicked in their ungodliness.
good and merciful, they themselves both unawares and unwitting become the
authors of sin. When as therefore God had denied the Prophet his request, and
it manifestly appeared that no prayers or supplication might appease him; as
soon as it was day, Samuel repaired to Saul, who at that time remained in
Galgal. Now as soon as the king apperceiued him, he ran unto him The year
of the world. 2883. before Christ's Nativity. 1081.
and embraced him, saying: I give God thanks for the victory; and all those
things which he commanded me, I have performed. But Samuel replied and said:
How comes it then to pass, that I hear this bleating of sheep, and
bellowing of beasts through the army? Saul answered, that the people had
reserved that cattle for sacrifice; and that besides them, all the nation of
the Amalechites was exterminated according as God had commanded, and that there
was not any one remaining, but that he only had reserved the king, whom he
would cause to be presented before him, to the end they might consult together
what should be done with him. Hereunto the Prophet answered: That God took no
pleasure in sacrifices, but such as were good and just, and such (said he) are
they that are according to his will and commandment; since no action Samuel
chideth Saul.
may be reputed good, but in respect of the reference it has to Gods will: for
God refuses, The contempt of God wherein it consists A pleasing and
acceptable sacrifice unto God.
and bring him sundry Jewels of gold and silver, but rejects such things,
and respects them not as pledges of piety, but testimonies of wickedness:
But he takes pleasure in those only that observe that which he has
pronounced and commanded, making choice rather to die, then any ways to
infringe the same: not seeking that sacrifices should be offered unto him; but
if they be offered, although of small and no value, yet are they more
acceptable unto him in poverty and obedience, then all those which the richest
hand, or strongest fortune can afford him any ways. Know thou therefore (said
he) that thou have incurd Gods displeasure, in that thou have Samuel tells
Saul of Gods displeasure, and the loss of his kingdom. Saul confesses his
sin, and craves pardon, which not withstanding is denied him.
has in such sort transported thee, that thou have contemned God, who bestowed
the same upon thee. But Saul confessed that he had sinned and done amiss, in
that he had not obeyed the words of the Prophet; yet alleged he that he was
compelled to do the same, in that he durst not restrain the soldier, who was
whet and kindled upon the pray: but, said he, be favorable and merciful unto
me, for her after I will take heed least I fall into the like sin: and he
besought him that he would stay with him so long whilst he might offer a peace
offering in his

CHAP. IX.
Samuel proclaimed David King.

But Saul willing to retain Samuel, took hold of his garment, and for that
the Prophet Saul striving to stay Samuel rent^th his garment.
hastily withdrew himself, he tore away a part thereof, by reason that Samuel
violently withdrew himself from him. To whom the Prophet said, that in like
sort his kingdom should be rent from him, and that another who was more honest
and Saul answered, that he had grievously sinned, but that it was impossible
for him to recall that which was done: he notwithstanding besought him, that in
the presence of the people he would as yet do him honor, at such time as he
should walk with him, and cast himself before the presence of God: which
Samuel condescended unto, and went with him to adore God. After this, Agag the
king of the Amalechites was brought before Samuel, who heard him lament and
complain that death was very bitter and tedious; to whom he answered in this
manner following. As thou have caused Hedio and Ruffinus. chapter 10. The king of
the Amalechites is slain by Samuels command. 1. Reg. 16. God sends Samuel
to Bethleem to anoint David king.
diverse mothers amongst the Hebrews to weep and lament the loss of their
children; so shall thou cause thy mothers sorrow and torment for thy death,
which said, he presently commanded Samuels presence, who was heartily sorry for
his fall: But God commanded him to give over his care, and that taking with him
the sacred oil he should repair to the city of Bethleem to Iesse the son of
Obed, and that there he should anoint one of his sons for king according as he
had commanded him: and when as the Prophet The year of the world, 2883. before
Christ's Nativity, 1081.
said that he was afraid, lest Saul getting notice thereof, should either by
treason or open force seek to slay him, being encouraged and assured in his
attempt, he came to the forenamed town. In that place was he saluted with great
concourse of people, and each of the^ inquired of him to what intent he
repaired thither: who answered them that he came to offer sacrifice unto God.
Now when the oblations were performed, he invited Iesse and his sons to
banquet with him, and beholding the eldest of them to be fair and well
proportioned, he coniectured by his stature and seemelines, that it should be
he that was to be elected king; but in this matter he attained not the scope of
Gods providence. For demanding whether he should anoint that young man, God
respects not the beauties of the body, but the perfections of the mind.
whom in admiration he thought so worthy of the kingdom: it was answered him
that men saw not in such manner as God does. For thou (said he) beholding the
beauty of the young man, Samuel commanded Iesse to bring all his other sons
into his presence, who presented him with five others, the eldest of which was
called Eliab, the second Aminadab, the third Sala, the fourth Nathaneel, the
fifth Rael, and the sixth Asam. Now when the Prophet beheld these Iesses sons
being goodly in personage, were not to be perferred to the souerainty
likewise no less beautiful men then was the eldest, he asked of God which of
them he should choose for king; he answered him that he should choose neither
of them: for which cause he enquired of Iesse whether he had any other sons
besides them, who told him that he had one which was called David, who had the
care and custody of his flocks. Him did the Prophet suddenly David was
arrived according as his father had commanded him, Samuel seeing him fair in
color, quick in eye, and otherways answerable to his natural ornaments:
This is he (said he in private to himself) who is accepted and elected by God
to be our king. This said, he sat down at the table, and made the young man
sit above him, and both Iesse his father and his other brethren. Afterward
taking the cruet of oil in the presence Samuel annointeth David king.
of the said David, he anointed him and told him in his ear, how God had
chosen him to be king, and exhorted him to study justice, and to be obedient
to that which should be commanded him, assuring him by that means, that his
kingdom should be of long continuance, his family and stock should be famous
and renowned, and that he should overcome the Philistines, and Samuel having
made this exhortation departed from him, and the spirit of God abandoned Saul,
and entered into David, so as he began Gods spirit forsaking Saul, descends on
David, who begins to prophecy.
to prophecy, by means of a divine spirit whereiwth he was seized: whereas on
the other side Saul was tormented with strange passions of the evil spirit,
whereby he fell into strange suffocations, and straunglings: so as his
Physicians could not invent any remedy for him, but gave counsel that search
should be made, if a man might be found that were expert and cunning in singing
and playing on the harp, to the end that when the evil spirit should assault
and trouble him, he might stand at his head, and both with voice and instrument
sing sacred hymns before him. And when as the king had given present and
speedy command, that such a one should be sought Iesses, a young man of
excellent feature; and besides his other good parts and bringing up, very
cunning both in song and playing on the harp: and besides that, addressed enough
and toward in feats of arms. He therefore sent messengers to Iesse to
command him to withdraw David from the folds, and to send him unto him,
because that having heard report of his beauty and valor, he was desirous to
see him. This command of his did Iesse obey, and sent his son with presents
unto Saul the king, who greatly rejoiced upon his arrival, and made him his
pentioner, and honored Saul makes David one of his pentioner, or guard.
him diverse ways. For he was refreshed by him, and was his only physician
against the vexation of evil spirits, at such time as they seized and
possessed him: for by reciting and singing Psalms upon his Harp, he restored
the king to his right mind: he therefore requested Iesse that

CHAP. X. The year of the world. 2883. before Christ's Nativity. 1081.

A second expedition of the Palestines against the Hebrews.

NOt long time after this, the Philistines assembled themselves, and gathered
together Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 11. 1. Reg. 17. Another expedition of the
Palestines against the Hebrews. Goliath a man of prodigious statute amongst the
Palestines.
great companies of men of war, with whom they assailed the Israelites, and
subdued all that which is between Sucoth and Azeca, where they encamped. Saul
on the other side led forth his army against them, and encamping himself upon
a certain mountain, he constrained the Philistines to dislodge from their
first camp, and entrench themselves upon an other mountain right over against
that where he pitched his tents. The camps being thus separated the one from
the other, there was a valley that extended it self between both the Goliath,
a Gittite, of huge stature, being four cubits and a span length in height,
having his limbs covered with huge and mighty armor: for his curets which he
bare on his back waighed five thousand sicles; his helmet and pouldrons were
of brass, made fit to cover his massy members; his spear which he bare in
his hand was no light lance, but he bare it on his shoulder, and the head
thereof waighed 600. sicles, and after him there followed diverse men bearing
arms. Now when he came betwixt both the armies, he stood up and cried with a
loud voice, addressing his speech to Saul and the Hebrews in these terms:
Hebrews, Goliath challe^geth a single combat at the Hebrews hands.
what need you to hazard the doubtful fortune of war, single me out an
adversary, and let us determine by our two hazards on whose side the victory
and conquest shall fall: so that whosoeuers soldiour shall be over come, let his
party be adjudged subject to their sides who have Saul and all his army were
displeased, and kept themselves always ready and arraunged in battle,
although the fight was begun on neither side. During the time that Saul
addressed himself to this expedition, he sent David back again to Iesse his
father (contenting himself with his other three brothers, who at that time
served under his royal standard) whereas he intended his intermitted care of
Saul sends David back again to his father.
keeping his flocks: But whilst the war was rather protracted then performed,
whether his father had sent him to carry victuals to his brothers, and to know
how their affairs went in the army; David deuized with his brothers as
touching those things which his father had committed to his charge, he heard
the Philistine blaspheming and railing upon the Hebrew army, and was therewith
so greatly moved that turning himself unto his brothers, he told them David
desires to fight with Goliath.
that he was ready and addressed to fight hand to hand against that enemy. But
Eliab the elder brother reproved him for so speaking, telling him that he was
more hardy then became his age, and that he knew not what concerned those
matters, willing him to return unto his father and intend his flocks. David
for the reverence he bare unto his brother departed from thence, and meeting
with certain soldiers said unto them, that he had a will to encounter that
proud challenger: which they presently signified unto Saul, who incontinently
sent to seek him out. Now when he came before his presence, he asked him what
he intended to do: O king (said he) let not thy Saul amassed at his hardines
and great courage; yet notwithstanding suspecting him by reason of his years;
told him that he was too feeble, to encounter a man so expert in feats of
arms, whereunto David made this answer. That which I promise you my
sovereign, is under the assurance which I have in God, which heretofore I have
proved, and the succors which at other times I have received at his hands. For
whilst I fed my fathers flocks, I redeemed David redeemed a lamb from the
laws of a lion, and slew him, David killed a bear.
a lamb that was ravished out of my fold, out of the lions jaws; and catching
the wild beast by the tail, that with open mouth assaulted and sought to
deuou^ me, I bet him to the ground, and slew him. Neither with less success
invaded I a bear that set upon my flock; and as light do I set by this
monster also: who vomiting out his slanderous raylings both against God and
men, shall neither escape the divine arm of justice which he so wickedly
provoke, neither fly from my hands, who am prepared to ^counter him.

So much prevailed this forward readiness in the young man, that the king
beseeching Gods The year of the world 1883. before Christ's birth 1081. David
laying aside those arms wherewith he was furnished to fight with Goliath,
marches forward with his sling against the enemy.
David feeling the weight of his armor, and seeming rather to be loaded then
defenced with the same, said unto him: Let these arms (O king) serve to
enclose and defense thy body, who art able to bear them, and suffer me I
beseech thee, who am thy servant, to fight according to mine own fantasy. He
therefore laid-by his armor, and took a staff in his hand, and five stones
which he gathered on the banks of the torrent, which he put in his scrip, his
sling he bore in his right hand: and being thus armed, he marched forward to
encounter his enemy. Now when the Barbarian saw him thus furnished, he so much
contemned him, that in way of scorn he asked him, whether he thought him to be
a dog, that he thus came forth to fight with him, with weapons fit to scarre
dogs. Nay (said David) I esteem Goliahs patience, that he cursed the name of
his God, thundering out threats, that he would cast out his carcass to be
devoured by the beasts David drawing near his enemy is contemned.
of the field and the birds of the air. But David answered, Thou come
against me with thy sword, thy iauelin and curets: but contrariwise, I march
out against thee under the warrantise and protection of God, who shall destroy
thee by my hand; and with thee, thy whole army: for David's talk with Goliath
before the combat.
this day will I take thy head from thy shoulders, and cast the rest of thy
body to the dogs whom thou resemblest, and all men shall know that God is the
Prince of the Hebrews, and that our arms and forces are the cares that it
pleases him to have of us, and that all other furniture of war is
unprofitable, except it be assisted by God. The weight of the Philistines arms
hindered him from marching readily: so that he marched foot by foot toward
David, contemning him,

CHAP. XI.
The single combat betwixt David and Goliath, and the slaughter of the
Palestines that followed after.

David set forward to make head against his enemy, being assisted by a
companion whom he saw not, which was God; drawing therefore one of the stones,
which he had gathered on the banks of the torrent, out of his scrip, and
having fitted it in his sling, he forced David's victory against Goliath The I
alestines fly and are discomfited.
it against Goliath; and gave him such a stroke on the forehead, that he pierced
him to the very brain: so that Goliath fell down suddenly dead, and he
running upon him as he lay sprawling on the earth, cut off his head with his
own sword: for he himself ^ad none. As soon as he was stricken down,
discomfiture and flight seized all the army of the Philistines: for seeing the
most esteemed warrior amongst them overthrown and slain, they began to
suspect the general issue of their war, and resolved to retire from thence;
so took they their flight in disorder and confusion, supposing by that means
to deliver themselves out of dangers. But Saul and the whole army of the
Hebrews sallied out against them, with great shoutes and cries, and in the
pursuit made a great slaughter of them, and drove them to the borders of Geth
and the gates of Ascalon. In this battle there died on the Philistines side
above thirty thousand, and Thirty thousand of the Palestines slain.
Saul returning back into his camp pillaged and burnt their tents: but David
bore Goliahs head into his pauillion, and hung his sword in the tabernacle, and
consecrated the same unto God. But Saul afterward conceived a privy hatred
against David, upon this occasion which ensues: For whereas he returned
triumphant like a conqueror with the army, and the women and maidens singing
and dancing to their cymbals and timbrels, in way of honor came out to meet
him. The women sung, that 1. Reg. 18. Saul privily hates David.
Saul had slain diverse thousands of the Philistines; and the virgins answered,
that David had slain diverse ten thousands. Which when Saul understood, and saw
that the lesser testimony of thousands was referred to him, and that the ten
thousands were attributed to David, he supposed that after so glorious a
renowm, there wanted nothing for David, except to be king. For which cause Saul
from one of his chief nobles makes David a tribune, to the end that being
often drawn out by the enemy he might be slain.
David having in all places the assistance of almighty God, returned always
with good success and happy issue: so that for the excellency of his valor,
the people entirely The year of the world. 2883. before Christ's Nativity.
1081. Saul's daughter in love with David. Saul subtly obiecteth David to
slaughter under a colorable co^ditio^ of slaughtering the Palestines, Saul
under covenant of 600. Philistines heads promises David his daughter.
loved him: And Saul's daughter also, that was about that time mariageable,
began to be enamoured with him, and so great and apparent was her affection
toward David, as the certain notice thereof came unto her fathers ears, who
was sore displeased therewith; yet hoping by that means the sooner to entrap
him, he gave ear thereto with some show of allowance, and told them who
discovered their loves unto him, that he would willingly give him his daughter
to wife, under pretense that the enjoying of her might be the means of his
utter overthrow. For (said he) I am content to give him my daughter in marriage,
under that condition, that he bring me six hundredth enemies heads; and he
desirous to get so high and famous a reward, and in like sort to obtain
honor by an act both so dangerous and admirable, will undertake the execution
thereof, and shall be slain by the hands of the Philistines, and that
intention which I David's resolution, and how he was affectioned toward
marriage: who began to deuize with him, telling him that the king bare him a
most entire favor, and that the people admired him, and how they would procure
him the marriage of the kings daughter. Whereunto David replied: Think you it
to be a small matter to be son in law unto the king? for my self I esteem
otherwise, considering in especial mine own base condition, who have neither
reputation nor any honorable quality. When Saul's servants had related unto him
what answer David had made them: Tell him (said he) that I neither want goods
nor presents (for that were to expose my daughter to sale, and not to match her
with a

When these words were reported unto David, he was very joyful, thinking that
Saul spoke sincerely of this affinity, and without delay or taking counsel
or deliberation, whether the thing were easy or impossible for him to execute,
he incontinently departed with his company David: for after he had slain
diverse of them, and cut off six hundredth of their heads, he returned and
presented them to the king, and in consideration thereof, required the
performance of his marriage.

CHAP. XII.
Saul admiring David's fortitude, gives him his daughter to wife.

But Saul that could not fly from his promise (for fear least it should be a
great dishonor 1. Reg. 19. Saul marieth Michol to David. Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. (...). Saul resolves to kill David. Ionatha^ loves David, and shows
him his fathers determination, and counsels him to have care of his safety,
and stand on his guard.
David his daughter under color, either to murder him, or to draw him to the
execution of things that were impossible) delivered his daughter Michol unto
him. But his intention was not to continue long in that mind. For perceiving
that David was gracious in Gods sight, and in good reputation amongst the
people, he was afraid of him: and being unable to conceal his fear he had
conceived, to be deprived of two things of such consequence, as were his
kingdom and life, he resolved to kill David; giving commission to his son
Jonathan and diverse other of his servants to execute the same. But Jonathan
amassed to see this change in his father in steed of the singular good liking he
had of David in times past, sought to hurt David not in any slight sort, but by
indangering his life: and on the other side being singularly affected toward
him, and respecting of his virtue, friend: yea in respect of his former merits,
although he were found guilty of many heinous offenses, The year of the
world. 2883. before the Nativity of Christ. 1081.
yet ought he to obtain a deserved pardon. I will tell thee afterward (said
he) what my fathers resolution is. David gave credit to his wholesome counsel,
and retired himself from the presence of the king.

CHAP. XIII.
How the King practiced to murder David.

THe next day after, Jonathan came unto Saul, and finding him merry and well
disposed, Jonathan reckons up unto his father the good deserts of David,
praying him to pacific his displeasure conceived against him.
he began to speak unto him to this effect, as concerning David. In what fault
(O Father) either great or small have you found David guilty, that you have
ordained and commanded With these words was Saul pacified, so that he swore
unto his son that he would Jonathan certifieth David how he has pacified his
father.
not iniure David: for his just persuasions and arguments were more stronger,
then the choler and fear of the king. Jonathan sent to seek out David, and
told him these good and happy tidings from his father, and brought him unto
him, where he lived and remained in sort as he did before time.

CHAP. XIIII.
How hardly David escaped the ambushes that were often laid for him by the
king, yet having him twice at advantage and in his power, would not murder him.

ABout the same time, whilst the Philistines led forth their army anew against
the Hebrews, David has a great victory against the Palestines.
Saul sent out David against them accompanied with his forces, who encountering
them slew a great number of them, and returned unto the king with a great
victory. But Saul entertained him not, both as he deserved, and the happy
exploit achieved by him did David's happy success had bin Saul's disadvantage
and prejudice. But at such time as the evil spirit returned anew and both
seized and vexed him, he lodged him in his own chamber where he lay, and
having at that time a iauelin in his hand, he commanded him to play on his harp
and to sing hymns. Now whilst David executed that his commandment, Saul
stretching out his arm threw his dart at him: but David foreseeing it, avoided
the stroke, and fled into his own house, where he soiourned all Saul darteth
his Iauclin at David.
the day long. Now when the night was come, the king sent out certain of his
servants to watch his house for fear least he should escape, to the end that
the next day being drawn and appearing in judgment, he might be condemned and
put to death. But Michol David's wife and Saul's daughter, having intelligence of
her fathers intention, ran unto her husband, telling him in how therein, and
under the covering thereof, she laid the liver of a new slanghtered Kid: and
when The year of the world, 2883 before Christ's birth 1081. Michol persuades
the kings servants that David is sick.
her father had sent the next morning to apprehend David, she answered that he
had been sick all the night long: then discovering the bed that was covered,
she gave them to understand that David was laid therein, making them touch the
couerlet under which the liver stirred, and made them believe that the liver
that lay there was David, who panted and breathed very hardly. Which being
signified unto Saul, he commanded that he should be brought unto him in that
estate wherein he was, because he was resolved to put him to death. But when
Saul's messengers were arrived and returned thither, and had discovered the bed,
they perceived Michols subtlety, and went and certified the king thereof: who
reproved her very grievously for that she had saved his adversary, and
deceived her father. But she defended her self with words full of good
appearance, saying, that David had threatened to kill her, and how for that
cause, and by the impulsion Michol excufeth her self for delivering David.
I think that you seek not so greedily after the death of your enemy, as you
prefer the same before the safety and security of your daughter. On these
persuasions Saul pardoned his daughter.

David delivered from this peril came unto the Prophet Samuel to Ramatha, and
told him what ambushes the king had laid for him, and how hardly he had escaped
death by the stroke of his David expresses to Samuel how the ^ing was affected
toward him.
Iauelin; whereas in all things that concerned Saul, he had always showed
himself obedient: again how he had never ceased to war upon his enemies,
and had by Gods assistance been fortunate in all things, which was the cause
that Saul was so displeased with him. The Prophet Saul's injustice forsook the
City of Ramath, and led David to a certain place called Saul sent armed
soldiers to apprehend David, who began to prophecy, and he himself likewise
coming thither prophecieth. (...). Reg. 20.
Galbaath where he remained with him. But as soon as Saul was informed that
David was retired and accompanied with the Prophet, he sent out certain
soldiers to lay hands on him, and bring him unto him: who repairing to Samuel,
and finding the congregation of the Prophets, were seized with the spirit of
God and began to prophecy. Which when Saul understood, he sent out others, who
had the like encounter with the first. For which cause he sent out others, and
seeing the third company prophecy likewise, he was in the end so much
despited, that he came thither in his own person. And when he drew near the
place before that Samuel saw him, he made him prophecy so that Saul coming
toward him, was seized by abundance of the spirit: so that he was ravished
out of himself, and having despoyled himself of his raiment, he lay David
complains unto Jonathan of his fathers injuries, Ionatha^ exculeth his father.
prostrate all the day and the night long in the presence both of Samuel and
David. David departed from thence, and went unto Jonathan, to whom he
complained of those ambushes which his father had laid to entrap him, in
telling him that notwithstanding he had never committed either injury or fault
against his father, yet did he earnestly pursue him to put him to death.
Jonathan persuaded him that he should neither rashly suspect these things, nor
be ouer-credulous in those reports which perhaps might be brought unto him, but
that he should trust him only, who was assured that his father intended no
evil against him: For if he had, he would have told him, who is never wont to
act any thing without his counsel. But David swear unto him that it was so,
and besought him that he would believe his unfeigned assertio^s, whereby he might
the more easily procure his security, least contemning his words, and
supposing them to be fained and frivolous, he Jonathan sore aggrieued, that
David was so persuaded, David desired Jonathan to sound his father how he was
affected toward him.
and Saul's intention was such, asked him what he desired at his hands, or
wherein he might show him friendship? David said unto him, I know that thou will further me in what thou may, and refuse me in nothing. Now to morrow is
the first day of the month, in which I was accustomed to dine at the kings
table, and if thou think good I will depart out of the City into the field,
where I will lie hidden: if he ask for me, thou shall say I am gone into the
country of Bethleem where my tribe solemnizeth a feast; thou shall certify
him also that thou have given me leave. And if he say God speed him, which is
an ordinary wish that friends use to such as go a journey, grievously stroke
Jonathan to the heart, that he promised him to accomplish his request, assuring
The year of the world, 2883. before Christ's Nativity, 1081.
him to certify him if he any ways could perceive that his father was ill
affected toward him; and to the intent he might the better be believed, he
caused him to walk forth with him into the clear and open air, and there
swear unto him that he would not pretermit any thing that might tend to the
conservation of David. For (said he) that God that fills and moderateth
Jonathan confirms his friendship toward David with an oath.
all things in this wide spread Universe, and who, before I speak, knows my
mind: he I say, shall bear witness of that accord which shall be ratified
between thee and me, that I will not cease to sound my father till such ^ime
as I know and have conceived his intention, and that I have entered into his
secrets to know what sickness his soul is seized with; and that when as I shall
apprehend the same, I will not conceal it from thee, but give thee notice
thereof, be it that he be appeased or displeased against thee. The same God
knows how incessantly I beseech him to be David; willing him to conceal
himself in a certain place of the plain, Ionatha^ gives David certain
signs whereby he should know whether his father were displeased with him.
where he ordinarily exercised himself: For that as soon as he understood his
fathers mind, he would return thither with his Page, and if (says he) having
shot three shafts at the mark, I shall command my Page to gather them, and
bring them back again to me, for that they are right before him, know thou
that thou art to expect no evil from my father: but if thou hear me speak
to the contrary, think thou that my father is incensed and misaffected
toward thee; David being confirmed by Ionathans promises, retired himself to
the appointed place. The next day after, which was the solemnity of the new
moon, after the king was purified according to the custom, he sat down to
take his repast: Now when his son Jonathan was set on his right side, and
Abner the General of his Army on the left, Saul perceived David's place was
void, and spoke not a word, supposing that he was absent from that company by
reason he was not purified since he had the company of his wife; but seeing
the second day of the new Moon that he was absent likewise, he asked his son
Jonathan why Iesses son both the day before, and at that instant, was not
present at that fast; Saul questioneth about David's absence, Jonathan by his
answer as^eth to know his fathers mind.
Jonathan the displeasure his father had conceived against David, and perceived
most apparently how hainously he was affected: for Saul could not conceal his
choler, but began to rail upon his son, calling him rebel and his enemy,
and companion and confederate with David, telling Saul discovers his (...)
hate against David.
him that he showed reverence neither to him, nor to his mother, since he was
so minded: and that he would not believe, but that, as long as David lived,
their royal estate should be always in continual disturbance: He commanded
him therefore to bring him before him, to Jonathan replied, What evil has
David committed, for which he should be punished? Hereupon Saul not only
expressed his choler in words and Jonathan ^cusing David to his father is
almost slain with a Iauelin by him. Jonathan flies from the banquet.
disgraces, but taking hold of a iauelin, he assaulted him, and would have
slain him: but he missed his purpose, by reason he was retained by his
friends. At that time did Jonathan clearly discover the hatred that Saul bare
toward David, and how instantly and furiously he sought his ruin, since welny
for David's sake he had slain his own and eldest son. Then did Jonathan
withdraw himself from the banquet, seeing with how little profit he had
pleaded, and so much was he grieved that he ceased not to weep, and the rather
since welny his father had unkindly slain him: And seeing that David was
adjudged to die, he passed all the night long without sleep, and about the day
spring he departed out of the City to the appointed field, making a show that
he walked out Jonathan had done that which he had promised, and sending back
his Page into the city, he came unto David both to see and speak with Jonathan
and David meet in the field. He dio and Ruffinus. chap. 13. 1. Reg 21.
him in private: who as soon as he perceived him, cast himself prostrate at
Ionathans feet, calling him the conseruer and maintainer of his life. But
Jonathan lifted him up from the earth, so that both of them embracing one
another, and intermixing their mutual kisses for a long time, lamented their
years with warm tears, and their unfortunate friendship with bitter
sighs: The year of the world. 1883 before Christ's Nativity. 108^.
they bewailed likewise their future separation no less grievous unto them,
then death it self. Finally, scarcely giving any truce to their abundant
tears, and exhorting one another to have in perpetual remembrance their
plighted faiths and promises, they departed the one from the other.

David flying from the king and the war which he made against him, retired
himself to the city of Nob to Achimelech the priest, who seeing David come
alone unto him without either friend David comes to Naban or Nob to
Achimelech the high Priest,
or servant, was amassed; and desired to know the cause why he thus wandered
without any attendance. David told him that the king had sent him about some
secret execution, which might not be communicated unto him, although he were
desirous to know it: and as touching my servants (said he) I have commanded
them to attend me in this place. He further required him, Saul's servants that
was called Doeg, a Syrian by nation, and the pastor of the kings mulets.) The
Priest answered him, that he had no such David receiving Goliahs sword, flies
to Geth, to Achis king of the Palestines.
thing by him except it were Goliahs sword, which he himself had hanged in the
Tabernacle and dedicated unto God, at such time as he slew the Philistine.
David having gotten it, fled out of the country of the Hebrews, and went unto
Geth, a country of the Philistines, wherein Achis was king. There being known
by the kings servants, he was discovered and noted to be that David, that had
slain many thousand Philistines. David fearing to be put to death by him,
David cou^terseits madness to escape the fury of Achis. 1. Reg. 22.
Saul, counterfeited himself to be foolish and mad: so that the some frothed
and issued out of his mouth; and counterfeited in all things so cunningly, that
he made the king of Geth believe most steadfastly that he was besotted and
frenzy in his sickness. For which cause the king was wroth with his servants
in that they had brought him a madman, and commanded them with all expedition
that might be, to drive him out of his country. Having in this sort escaped
out of the country of the Geths, he transported himself into the tribe of
Judah, and being in the cave of Adullam, he sent unto his brothers to let them
understand that he was there, who came unto him with all their lineage, and
diverse others that either were in need or stood in fear of Saul, resorted unto
him, saying, that they were ready to perform whatsoever he should command
them: David therefore being thus assured, by reason of the succors and forces
that come unto him, dislodged from thence and went to the king of the Moabites,
beseeching him that he would be pleased to entertain his father and mother in
that country, until such time as he understood what should be the issue or
end David repairing to the king of the Moabits, commits his father and
mother to his protection. David comes to Saro^. Saul fears David.
of his affairs. The king vouchsafed him this favor, and did them great
honor all the time they were in his country. And as touching David, he having
received instructions by the commandment of the Prophet to abandon the desert,
and to soiourne in the tribe of Judah: he obeyed him, so that coming to Saron,
he made his aboade in that place. But when Saul had understood that David had
been seen with a number of men, he fell into an extraordinary fear and
trouble of mind: for knowing both the understanding and courage of the man, he
thought Beloved friends, I know that you can bear witness of my bounty, and
how I have advanced some of you to honors, signiories and possessions, and
have preferred you to the chiefest dignities and prerogatives amongst the
people. Now would I know of Saul's oration to his captains, friends and estates
against David.
you whether you hope or expect from the son of Iesse greater bounty and
larger benefits, then I have bestowed upon you: I know that all of you are
confederated with him, and that Jonathan likewise is of the same faction, and
has persuaded you to follow and favor him. For I am not ignorant both of the
oaths and covenants that are past twixt him and David, and am well assured that
he is both a counselor and assister unto him in whatsoever he undertakes
against me: yet are none of you touched with these cares, but intending your
own quiet, you expect the event of these matters.

When the king had spoken thus, there were none of the assistants that replied:
only Doeg the Syrian master of the kings mulets, arose and said: That he had
seen David in the City of The year of the world. 2883. before the Nativity
of Christ. 1081. Doeg tells Saul how he saw David in Noba with Achimelech.
Saul reproves Achimelech for furnishing David with victuals and arms.
Achimelech^ Apology to Saul's accusation of treason.
Achimelech, to ask counsel of him as touching his assaires; that there he had
received those things that were needful to furnish him in his voyage, and
Goliahs sword likewise; and how he was safely conducted toward the place
whither he pretended. to go. Hereupon Saul sent for the high Priest and all his
kindred, and spoke thus unto him. What wrong or displeasure have I done thee,
that thou have entertained the son of Iesse? and have delivered him victuals
and arms; to him, I say, that seeks but the means to possess himself of
my kingdom? What answer have thou made him as touching those demands he
presented thee, in regard of his future fortunes? for thou have not been
ignorant that he fled from me, and what hatred he bears against both me and
my family. The high priest denied none of these things, but freely confessed
that he had delivered him such things as were reported, but not with an intent
David, but the king: for I entertained him (said he) not as thine enemy, but as
thy faithful minister and tribune; nay which is more, as thy son in law, and
such a one as was tied unto thee by near alliance. For who would have thought,
that he, who was entitled to so much honor by thee, should be thine enemy:
nay rather, who would not esteem him for thy sauourite and nearest friend? And
where as he asked counsel of me as touching Gods will, this is not the first
time, I have answered him, but often and many other times have I advised him. And
where as he said, that he was sent by thee about some hasty and secret
business, should I have refused him those supplies which he required at my
hands, I might have bin judged rather to have done injury to thy majesty then
to him. For which cause thou art not to suspect or think evil of me, or if
thou have received any advertisement, that David at this time intends some
trouble and innovation The unjust slaughter of Achimelech with his whole
family. Noba the city of the priests it burnt, and all the inahbitants slain.
Sup li. 5. ca. 11. 1. Reg. 2. and 3.
thee. Notwithstanding all these just allegations, yet could Saul be no ways
induced to believe them: but contrariwise, his vehement fear made him suspect
the true iustifications of Achimelech: so that he commanded certain armed men
that were about him, that they should put both him and all his family to the
sword, But when they held it no less then sacrilege, to violate by violent
death such as were men consecrated unto God: Saul commanded Doeg the Syrian to
perpetrate the slaughter, who joining to himself certain other sacrilegious
and impious men, he murdered Achimelech and all his race, who were in number
three hundredth, thirty and five Achimelech escaped, who was called Abiathar.
All which befortuned according as God had foretold the high priest Eli, saying,
that by reason of the transgression of his two sons, his posterity should be
extinguished. A manifest exemplification of that proves. Honors changes
manners.


This cruel and malicious act perpetrated by king Saul (in extinguishing all
the race of the sacerdotall order, without compassion either of infants, or
reverence of old age: this destruction of his of that City, which God had
chosen to be the country and common nurse of the Priests and Prophets, and
which he elected to be a receptacle and refuge of all that sort of men)
manifestly expresses and declares unto all men, how depraved and corrupt the
minds of men Note di^gerly.
but through slander also do oftentimes oppress them, not considering how
deservedly they oppress, but only giving credit without The year of the
world, 2883 before Christ's birth 1081.
proof to rash and scandalous detractions, executing and satiating their rage,
not on those they ought to punish, but those that may most easily be depressed
and ouerthrown. The manifest example hereof appears unto us in Saul the son
of Cis, who after the government of the nobility was extinct, and the supreme
magistracy of judges was disanulled, being the first created king of the
Hebrews, only for that he suspected Achimelech, he slew three hundredth
priests and prophets, and after he had slain them destroyed their city with
fire; and as much as in him lay, deprived the high temple of God, not only of
priests but sacred ministers; and after so hideous a slaughter, neither spared
their country nor any one of their offspring to be left alive. But Abiathar
Achimelechs son, who only escaped with life amidst all his slaughtered
family, flying Abiathar escaping from Saul's hands, tells David of the
slaughter of Achimelech his father and of the priests.
unto David, declared unto him both the overthrow of his family and the death
of his father. David answered him, that he expected no less then that which
happened, at such time as he espied Doeg there, who as his mind gave him would
not fail to reprove and scandale Achimelech to Saul, yet took he it on him
that the misfortune happened unto his friend by his means: he therefore prayed
him to remain with him, because he could not be concealed or secured in any
place better then with himself.

About the same time, David understanding that the Philistines made a road into
the country of Cilla, and prayed the same, determined to assault them, if
after the Prophet had asked counsel David defends Cilla against the
incursions of the Palestines. 1. Reg 23.
of God, he should be by the oracle animated to the performance thereof: which
accordingly falling out, he sallied out accompanied with his friends, and set
upon the Philistines, and made a great slaughter of them, and recovered a very
rich pray, and gave conuoy to the Cillans, till Saul: for this noble act and
happy execution was not only not shut within the limits of the place wherein it
was performed, but the renown thereof was dispersed every where both in other
men's ears as also in the kings, and both the action and the author thereof
were highly commended. Saul was very joyful to hear that David was in Cilla,
and said thus: God has delivered him into my hands, by enforcing Saul seeks
to besiege David in Cilla.
him to shut up himself within a city enclosed with walls, gates, and bars:
whereupon he suddenly gave commandment that all the people should march
against Cilla, and besiege the same and surprise or kill David.

But David having intelligence hereof, and advertised by God that if he stayed
among the Saul, he took with him his four hundredth men, and retired himself
from the City into the desert, and encamped on a defenced David admonished by
God flies from his danger. David came with his army to Caena or Ziphia, where
Jonathan comes unto him comforts him and renueth his covenant.
hill called Engaddi: so that the king being advertised that he was fled from
the Cillans, ceased to issue out in arms against him. From thence David
departed to a certain place of the Ziphians, where Jonathan Saul's son met
with him, and after he had embraced him, he exhorted him to be of good cheer,
and to conceive an assured hope of future good fortune, and not to give place
to his present miseries, by reason that he should obtain the kingdom, and
should have the whole power of the Hebrews subjected unto him, but that such
things were not-wont to happen, except they were accompanied with great
travails: and after they had once more renewed the oath of mutual and lasting
amity and faith between them, during all the time of their Jonathan left
David somewhat eased in heart, and disburdned of his conceived fear, and that
done, returned to his own home. But the Ziphians intending to gratify Saul,
told him that David was amongst them, and promised him to deliver him The
Ziphians certify Saul of David's abode in their country.
prisoner into his hands, if so be he would issue out against him: in so much
as if he would seize all the streights of the country, it should be
impossible for him to fly into any other place. The king praised their
forwardness and promised them to requite their loyalty, and to remunerate them
shortly for this their good affection, and withal sent out certain men to
seek out David and to beak over the forest, promising them that shortly he
would follow after them. Thus did the governors and princes of the Ziphians
offer themselves unto the king to search out David hearing of the kings
coming, flies to save himself.
avarice, a man that was both virtuous and wrongfully persecuted to death by
his enemies. For David being made privy to their malice, and ascertained of
the Kings approach, leaving those narrow streights wherein they then encamped,
escaped to a certain rock which is situate in The year of the world. 2883.
before Christ's birth 1081. Saul pursues David, and having circumue^ted him had
taken him, had not he received news that renoked him.
Saul to pursue him, for knowing by the way that he had overcome the streights,
he came to the other side of the rock, and David had surely both bin taken and
circumuented, had not the king been revoked by fearful tidings, which assured
him that the Palestines had forcibly entered and spoiled his kingdom. For he
thought it more convenient to revenge himself on those his hostile and sworn
enemies, and to give succor to his country and people, being ready to be
spoiled and wasted, then under desire to lay hands on a private enemy, to
betray both his country and subjects to their swords; and thus was David saved
beyond all expectation, and retired himself to the streights of Engaddi. But
after that Saul had repulsed the Palestines, certain news was brought him
that David dwelt in the streights of Engaddi: whereupon presently taking with
him three thousand of the choicest men in all his army, heled David with his
four hundredth men might be hidden, and descended himself alone into the cave
to disburthen the necessities of nature. This was presently discovered by one
of David's followers, who told him that God had presented him a fit opportunity
to revenge him on his enemy, and counseled him to cut off Saul's head, and
discharge himself thereby of much trouble, and torment; who arising and
finding him out, only cut off the lap of the vesture wherewith Saul was
attired, and presently thereupon repented himself, saying, that it were a
wicked deed in him to kill his lord, whom God by election had raised to the
estate of Majesty and Empire. For (said he) although he be unjust toward me,
yet ought I not to be injurious toward him. But when Saul was issued out of
the David went out after, and cried with a loud voice, beseeching Saul that he
would give him audience: who turning back unto him, he cast himself prostrate
before his feet, and humbled David cut off the lap of Saul's garment. David
vpbraideth Saul for his subtilties to seek his death who was innocent.
him on his face according to the custom, and spoke after this manner. How
unworthy is it for thee O King, that opening thy ears to scandalous
backbiters, and giving trust and credit to vain and loose men, thou suspectest
thy most tried friends, whom thou rather ought to judge by their sincere and
upright actions: for words may be either false or true, but the mind may be
discovered by none more apparent arguments then by men's actions: as at this
present thou may judge whether thou have rashly believed them, that make me
guilty before thy Majesty of that crime, that was never yet so much as
thought upon, and have so much exasperated thee against me, that day and night
thou think on nothing more then my destruction. See thou not now how But
God shall bear witness hereof, and shall approve which of us Saul
acknowledges his malice and David's innocence, and requesteth him that when he
has obtained the kingdom, he would be favorable to his family.
both are of more peaceable behauiours. Saul amassed to see how straungely his
life had been preserved, and ravished to consider the natural mildnes and
moderation in David, began to weep, and David wept also: but Saul said that he
had greater cause to lament then he. For (said he) David swear unto him
according as he had required, and suffered him to return into his Realm, and
both he and his companies retired themselves to the streights of Maspha. About
the same time died Samuel the Prophet, a man who by his merit was in great
estimation amongst the Hebrews, Samuels death and burial. 1. Reg. 25.
expressed in this, in that they celebrated his funeral, and set out his
sepulcher with great pomp, and when they had performed his rites, they buried
him in Ramath his country, and lamented him many days, not after the manner
of a common or foreign misery, but as if each one of them had in particular a
prejudice and loss to lament for. For he was a man that was naturally framed
to all justice and goodness, and for these his virtues most acceptable unto God.
He governed the people after the death of Eli the high Priest, first in his
own person for the space The year of the world. 2883. before Christ's
Nativity. 1081.
of twelve years, and afterward during the reign of Saul eighteen years,
whose death happened (as I said) about this time. But in those places where David
at that time remained, there was a certain Ziphian in a town called Emma, a
man very rich, and Lord of much cattle. For he had a troop of three thousand
sheep, and a heard of a thousand Goats. On these did David command his people
to commit no waste, neither through desire, nor necessity, nor hope of
concealment, they should do him any hurt. Charging them moreover that they
should offer Nabals flocks spared by David.
no wrong unto any man, because that to violate and take another man's goods was
both unlawful and wicked, and contrary to Gods commandment. He instructed
them in this sort, imagining with himself that he should gratify a good man,
and such a one as deserved to be in like sort favored: but Nabal (for such was
his name) was a rude and currish person, leading his

To this Nabal did David send ten of his servants about the time of his
sheepe-shearing David's embassage to Nabal to require relief, and his currish
answer.
both to salute him, as also to wish him all good, and to beseech God that for
diverse years, he would grant him grace to do the like. Mean while he
requested him that he would impart unto him somewhat of that which was in his
power, when as his shepherds could inform him, that having long time remained
in the desert, we have (said they) been so far off from doing your flocks
any harm, as we have rather seemed to be their shepherds and keepers: they
promised him likewise, that whatsoever courtesy he should show unto David, he
should bestow it on a mindful and thankful personage. Thus spoke the
messengers unto Nabal: but he answered them very discourteously, and rudely
demanding of them what that David was, and being Iesse: Now (said he) these
fugitives and slaves forsaking their masters, live proudly and insolently.
David hearing of this report was grievously displeased, and commanded four
hundredth of his men to take up their weapons and follow him, commanding two
hundredth to keep the baggage (for at that time he had six hundredth) and in
this equipage marched he forward against Nabal, swearing that that very night
he would utterly exterminate and David sallieth out against Nabal with 400.
armed men.
root out all his race, and ransacke all his riches. Neither was he only
displeased for that Nabal was ungrateful toward them, without respect of that
humanity which they had showed toward him and his, but also for that without
any cause or injury offered, he had injured and outraged him in words.

In the mean while certain shepherds that attended Nabals cattle, told
their mistress David having sent unto her husband to require some small
courtesy, had not only obtained nothing, but also received insupportable
injuries, whereas till that day he had suffered his flocks to be untouched:
telling her that that insolency of their Lord might breed them all much woe
and misery. Which when Abigal heard (for so was the woman called) she loded
diverse Asses with all sorts of presents (without making any motion to her
husband, who Abigal Nabals wife appeaseth David with presents.
was so drunk that he was insensible) and went toward David. As therefore she
descended the streights of the mountain, David encountered her, marching
toward Nabal, accompanied with four hundredth men: As soon as Abigal
perceived him, she leaped from her Steed, and falling upon her face, she
prostrated her self before him, beseeching him to forget Nabals words, knowing
that Nabals nature was answerable to his name. For in the Hebrew tongue Nabal
signifies Nabla signifies a ^oole.
that by my means he has hindered you from polluting your hands in innocent
blood: for if thou remain pure and innocent from bloodshed, he shall exact a
punishment at their hands that have hurt thee. For those misfortunes that
attend on Nabal, shall fall on the heads of thine enemies: only be thou
favorable unto me in accepting these my humble presents, and for my sake remit
that wrath which thou have justly conceived against my husband: for clemency
and humanity becomes him whom the fates have destinated a kingdom. David
accepting her presents, gave her an answer after this manner. Women (said he)
God of his goodness has this day brought thee hither, otherwise thou had
not lived or seen the next morning. For I

As touching Nabal, although at this present he be exempted by thy means from
punishment, David's prophecy of Nabal
yet shall he not escape, but he shall lose his life: for his manners upon an
other occasion shall be the cause of his ruin. This said, he dismissed Abigal,
who returning to her house, and finding her husband amidst his other
companions, laden and overwhelmed in wine, told him nothing The year of the
world, 2889. before Christ's Nativity, 1075. Nabal conceiueth so much sorrow
and fea^e for his immodesty against David that he dies Apoplec^ique. An
example of Gods providence that no sin can escape unpunished. David marieth
Abigal Nabals wife. Saul marieth his daughter Michol to an other husband 1. R^.
26. The Ziphians once more labor to betray David in their country. David once
more attended by two entering into Saul's camp, stole away his dart and his
pitcher of water.
at that time of that which had happened: but the next day when he was sober,
certifying him thereof, he lost all his forces, and his body became mortified
through the grief he conceived at her words: so that some ten days after and
no more, he departed out of this life. Which when David understood, he said
that he was deservedly punished by God, because that his own wickedness was
the cause of his punishment, and that he was afflicted, and yet his hands who
received the injury were vndistained with blood: and by this example he learnt
that no wicked man can escape Gods judgment, and that all humane affairs are
not rashly disposed, as if neglected by God, but that the good are rewarded
with goodness, and the wicked punished according to their wickedness. He
afterward sent messengers to his wife, and caused her to come unto him, to the
intent he might marry her, and take her to his wife. She answered the
messengers, David, having obtained that degree of honor, both in that she was
modest and just, as also for that she was beautiful. Now David had a wife
before her, whom he had married out of the City of Abesar.

As touching Michol the daughter of Saul, and other-whiles his wife, Saul gave
her to wife at Lissa to the son of Phalti of the City of Gethla. After this,
certain Ziphians coming unto Saul, told him that David was returned again
into their country, and that if it pleased him to assist them, they might
easily apprehend him. Whereupon Saul issued with three thousand armed men, and
being surprised by night, he encamped in a certain place called Sicelleg.

When David was certified that Saul was issued forth against him, he sent out
certain spies, Saul was retired, who ascertaining him that he was at Sicelleg;
he watched all that night without the knowledge of any of his followers, and
went into Saul's camp, attended only by Abisai his sister Saruias son and
Achimelech the Chittite.

Now whilst Saul was a sleep, and both his general Abner with all his
soldiers wholly devoured in drowsinesse, David entered into the kings camp, and
although he knew the kings pauilion, by reason of his Iauelin that stood at the
door thereof, yet slew he him not, neither permitted he Abisai, who was both
willing and addressed to execute the slaughter, to perform it. But this he
said, that although the king were evil, yet notwithstanding it were a strange
and indecent thing for him, to slay him who was Gods elected: for that it was
Gods right to take revenge Saul whilst he slept, without the witting or
knowledge of any of the camp; so much were they devoured and ouerhaled with
sleep. He therefore departed thence in all assurance, having executed all that
which either the time or his courage would permit him to do. But after he had
passed the river, and had attained the top of a mountain, from whence he might
be easily heard, he cried out to Saul's soldiers and their general Abner so
strongly, that he awaked them from their sleep, and calling upon Abner as well
as the common sort of soldiers, the general asked who it was David vp^deth
^ner (...) Sau^ general for suffering his kings Iauelin and pitcher of water to
be taken from him.
that called him? to whom David answered, It is I, the son of Iesse, your
fugitive: but, said he, Saul perceiving that it was David's voice, and conceived
how that being in his hands (whom he had surprised in the depth of sleep,
through the negligence of his guard) he had not slain him, but pardoned Saul
praises David, and wills him to be of good courage, and exhorts him to
return to his own house.
him his life, although it justly lay in his power to take his head from him:
he said, that he gave him thanks, and acknowledged his life from him,
exhorting him to be assured, and without David: notwithstanding that he had
pursued him, and for a long time past had chased him like a fugitive,
constraining him also by diverse afflictions and great torments of spirit, to be
abandoned from his nearest parents and friends: yea from David himself, who
might have preserved him, and who had given him diverse demonstrations of his
good will toward him, and by whom he had been often times preserved; whom
notwithstanding he ceased not to pursue unto the death, who contrariwise
desired nothing more The year of the world. 2889. before Christ's Nativity
1075. David declares his innocence to Saul.
then his life. Hereupon David willed him to send some one of his servants to
bring back his Iauelin and pitcher of water: protesting that God should be
judge of both their natures, manners and actions, who knew that that day also
he had spared his enemy, whom if he had so thought good he might have
extinguished. Saul having this second time escaped from David's hands, returned
to his royal house. But David fearing least if he soiourned in that place he
should be intrapped by Saul, thought good to retire himself into the country
of the Philistines and soiourne there. So that accompanied with six hundredth
men which he had with him he transported himself to Achis king of Geth, one of
their five Cities, who received him with all his people 1. Reg. 27. Saul
desisteth to persecute David. David with six hundredth men and his two wines
went into Palestine to Achis king of Gitta. David requires a certain place at
the kings hands to make his habitation in. The king gives him Siceleg. David
spoiled the Sarr^es and Amalechites, and gives part of the pray to the king,
persuading him that he took it from the Jews that inhabited the South plain.
and gave him a place to dwell in: so that he abode in Geth, having with him
his two wives Achimaas and Abigal. Which when Saul understood, he made no more
account to send or sallie David held it not convenient to remain in the City
of Geth, and therefore requested the king of the Philistines, that since he had
courteously entertained him, it might please him likewise to do him the favor
to assign him a certain place in his country, where he might make his
habitation, because he feared to be chargeable to him, if so be he remained in
the City. Achis assigned him a village called Siceleg, which David after he
obtained the kingdom, loved and honored, holding that for his own demaine,
as his own children and heirs did after him. But hereof will we speak in an
other place. The time that David lived amongst the Philistines and in the town
of Siceleg, were four months and twenty days, during which time by several
and secret excursions against the bordering Sarrites and Amalechites, Achis by
their means should have intelligence of his enterprise. He sent likewise a
part of the pray unto the king, and when he demanded from whom he had taken
the same, he answered that he had taken it from the Jews that dwelt Southward
and in the plain, persuading him that he had done no loss: so that Achis
conceived an opinion, that since David warred against his own nation all the
time of his abode with him, he would be a faithful servant unto him. About
the same time the Philistines, having determined to lead forth their army
against the Israelites, sent out to their allies, requiring them to assist them
in that war, and to make their Rendeuous at Renga, to the intent that being
there assembled they might dislodge and assail the Israelites. Amongst their
other auxiliarie companies, Achis David to assist him, with his six hundredth
soldiers, which he promised him willingly to perform, telling him that the
opportunity was now come wherein he might requite his courtesy, and the
hospitality he had showed him. Achis promised him that after the victory, when
as all things had succeeded according as he desired, he would prefer David to
the guard of his person, thinking by the promise of this honor and trust, he
might augment David's forwardnes and affection toward him.

CHAP. XV.
The Philistines renew their war against the Hebrews, and obtain the Saul
with his sons are slain in the battle.

But Saul about this time had banished all diuiners and inchanters, and in
general all such as were tellers of fortunes, reserving none within his
country, but the Prophets. The year of the world, 2890. before Christ's birth
1074. Saul banisheth all diuiners and enchanters out of his kingdom. Saul
hearing the Philistines made head against him, asked counsel of God.
When as therefore he understood that the Palestines were already up in
arms, and strongly encamped near to the city of Sonna sciruate in the plain,
he marched forward and made head against them with all his forces. And as soon
as he drew near to the mountain of Gelboa, he encamped right over against the
enemy. Now when his army discovered their great forces, they were much
discomforted, and no sooner beheld it but were amassed. Being therefore sore
troubled herewith, he sought counsel at Gods hands as touching the event of the
battle, and seeing he when as by the report of a certain familiar friend of
his, he was advertised that there was such The year of the world. 2890. before
Christ's birth 1074. Saul repaireth to Endor to ask counsel of a (...).
Saul swore unto her, that no man should know thereof, and that he would not
discover her divination to others: briefly that she should incur no danger
thereby.

After then that by his oaths and protestations he had persuaded her, that she
should have no Samuel. She not knowing what Samuel Saul commands the witch to
raise Samuels ghost.
was, called him from hell, and he suddenly appeared. But when she perceived
that it was an honorable man and of divine semblance, she was sore troubled;
and being wholly discomforted with this vision, she turned and said unto the
king: art not thou Saul? for Samuel had certified her no less. Saul confessed
that it was he, and asked her for what cause she seemed to be so much troubled:
she answered, that she saw a man ascend that resembled God. Saul commanded her
to declare unto him his shape, habit and age: and she gave him to understand
that he was a reverend old man, attired in the vestment of a high priest. By
these marks Saul knew that it was Samuel: whereupon prostrating himself on
the earth, he adored and saluted him. The spirit of Samuel asked him for what
cause he had troubled and raised him? To whom he complained and Saul
complains him of his miseries to Samuel, and asks his advise.
Samuel foreseeing that the kings death was hard at hand, answered him that it
was in vain for him to question with him, as touching those things that should
happen, since thou know that thou art forsaken by God. Know therefore Samuels
ghost certifieth Saul of the event of his battle against the Philistines.
(said he) that David shall possess the kingdom, and that it is he that shall
establish the estate by arms: but as concerning thy self, thou shall lose
both thy kingdom and thy life, because thou have disobeyed God in thy war
against the Amalechites, and have not observed his commandments, according as
I foretold thee at such time as I was alive. Know therefore, that Saul
understood these things, he became speechless, through the sorrow wherewith he
was seized, and fell down on the pauement, either for that his forces failed
him through sudden grief, or for his want of meat; because that Saul through
sudden sorrow sell in a swoun. The enchantres entreats him to refresh himself
and take some refection.
neither that night, nor the day before, he had vouchsafed his body any
refection or sustenance. At length, hardly recovering himself out of his
swoun, the woman importuned him to receive some sustenance, beseeching him to
do her that favor in recompense of her unexpected divination; which though
interdicted, she had adventured to perform for his sake (before she were
ascertained that it was he that had forbidden them) in consideration whereof,
she prayed him that sitting down at the table, he would refresh himself with
some sustenance, to the end he might An example of courtesy and liberality in
the enchantresse.
which she bred up in her house with some particular care (for she was but a
poor woman and had no other riches) yet spared she not to kill it, and dress
the flesh for Saul and his servants. Thus refected, Saul returned back again
into his camp. The courtesy of this woman deserves to be praised: for
although she knew that the king had prohibited her art, whereby both she and
her family sufficiently maintained themselves: and although before that time
she had never seen Saul, yet so it is that without remembering her that it was
he by whom her art had bin condemned, she entertained him not as a stranger, or
like the man she had never seen before; but had Saul should shortly lose his
life) nor according to the ordinary course of men, that naturally honor those
that have bestowed some dignity upon them, and become serviceable to those
from whom they pretend to draw some profit hereafter. She therefore ought to be
imitated, and in her appears an excellent example of bounty, approving that
there is nothing more worthy praise, then to relieve The year of the world.
2890. before Christ's Nativity. 1074.
Saul the king of the Hebrews yields me matter most incident Josephus
praises Saul for a worthy and valiant king in that foreknowing his danger and
death, he exposed himself to assuredperil
to this purpose. For although he knew that which should befall him, and that
his death was at hand (according as it had been foretold him) yet resolved he
not to avoid the same, neither so loved he his life, that for the conservation
thereof, he would deliver up his people into the hands of their enemies, nor
dishonor his royal dignity: but himself, with his children and all his
household, exposed themselves to danger; thinking it more honorable to die
with them in fighting for his subjects, and far more expedient that his
children should die like valiant men, then to leave them alive in incertitude
of estate whereinto they might fall, supposing that he should have sufficient
successors of his race, if he left behind him a perpetual memory and praise
both of him and his. For which cause (in my opinion) he was both just, strong
and prudent, and if any one either is or has been like unto him, I suppose
that it becomes all men to give testimony Saul may deservedly be called just,
praise-worthie, courageous, hardy, and contemners of all dangers. For what
great thing is there in undertaking the common hazard of war, and tossing
twixt hope and fear to use fortunes favor if she fawn upon us? but
contrariwise, I count it an assured sign of a valiant man, when as without
conceit of hope of any goodness, and knowing his death at hand, and assured in
his conflict, is not afraid nor dismayed with such apprehensions, but seeks
out with an invincible courage his most assured hazard. This is the praise of
our Saul, who is an example to all true lovers of glory, that if they have
regard to leave an honest memory to their posterity, they Saul's valor, but
least I should seem too affectionate, I will return to our former 1. Reg. 29.
purpose.

After that the Philistines were thus encamped (according as has been
afore-spoken) and had numbered their forces according to their nations,
kingdoms, and governments, king Achis issued Achis leads out David with him
against the Hebrews, and is reproved by the chi^taines of the Palestines for
so doing.
in the rereward with his particular company, whom David followed accompanied
with his six hundredth soldiers: whom when the chieftaines of the Philistines
beheld, they asked the king whence those Hebrews came, and what their leaders
name was? Who answered the^ that it was David, who fled from Saul his master,
and how he had entertained him being fled from him: again how David in
recompense of the good he had received at his hand, and to revenge him on Saul,
was ready to fight for them against him. But the chieftaines blamed him,
because he had chosen an enemy for his associate, counselling him to dismiss
him, for fear least he should secretly perform some strange stratageme
against his confederates, because (said they) he has a fit opportunity to
reconcile himself to his master. They therefore willed him to send David back
with his six hundredth soldiers, unto the place which he had given him to
inhabit, because it was the same David of whom the damsels made songs, singing
in praise of him, that he had slain many thousand Philistines. When the king of
Geth understood these things, he thought their counsel to be laudable, for
which cause calling David unto, himhe said unto him. I protest David departed
unto Siceleg, Achis dismisseth David.
according as the king had commanded him.

But during the time that David was in camp, and attended on the Philistines
war, the Amalechites The year of the world. 2890. before the Nativity of
Christ. 1074. The Amalechites in David's absence spoil and burn Siceleg, and
carry away the pray,
arose and took Siceleg by force, and burned the City: and after they had
gathered a great booty both in that place, and in other villages of the
Philistines country, they retired back again. Now when David arrived at
Siceleg and found it wholly ruined and spoiled, and seeing likewise that his two
wives, and the wives of his companions were prisoners together with their
children: he presently rent his raiment, and began to weep and lament with his
companions; yea so much was he afflicted, that he had scarce any tears left
him to bemone himself: beside this, his companions amated with the captivity
of their wives and children, were ready to stone him to death; accusing him
that he was the cause of all that which had happened. But when as his grief was
after a manner aslaked, and he somewhat returned to himself, he lifted up his
heart unto God, and commanded the high Priest Abiathar to put on the Ephod,
and ask counsel David takes counsel of God whether he will assist him to
recover his wives and goods out of the hands of the Amalechites.
David taking this man for his guide ouertooke them, finding some of David
guided by an Egyptian slave ouertaketh the Amalechites. David assaileth the
Amalechites, and makes a great slaughter of them, and recouereth the whole
pray.
them lying on the earth; others banqueting and following drunkenness, and
almost senseless by ouerdrinking: so recovering both his booty and pillage,
and suddenly setting upon them, he made a great slaughter. For they being
naked, and suspecting no such inconvenient, and wholly addicted to frolic
drinking and feasting, were all of them easily defeated: diverse likewise
amongst them were slain as they sat at their meat; others likewise were
slaughtered whilst they carroused the one unto the other; and some of them
perished being laden with sleep, and gorged with wine.

They likewise that were completely armed, intending to make resistance were as
easily David's men abode with him from the first hour of the morning till the
evening, doing naught else but kill and murder, that that only four hundredth
of the Amalechites escaped, who likewise fled being mounted on their
Dromodaries. So recovered he all that which the enemy had ransackt, and
amongst other things he released both his own wives and those of his
companions. Whereupon they returned to the place where they had left the other
two hundredth, which might not follow them, because they were appointed to guard
the baggage: To these, the abouesaid four hundredth would not grant a part of
the booty and profit, because they had not (as they said) followed the enemy
with them, but showed themselves David comp^mitteth the debate betwixt those
that pursued the chase, and those that keptt he baggage touching the pillage.
1. Reg. 31.
slack in the pursuit; alleging that they ought to content themselves with
the recovery of their wives. But David said, that the sentence which was
pronounced by them, was both evil and David was returned to Siceleg, he sent
unto all his familiars and friends of the tribe of Judah, a several part of the
spoil: In this manner was Siceleg sacked and burned, and thus were the
Amalechites discomfited. But the Philistines assailed, and fought a bloody
battle with Saul and his followers, wherein the Philistines had the upper
hand, and slew a great number Saul and his sons seeing their army overcome by
the Philistines are desperately dismayed and slain.
of their enemies. Saul king of Israel with his sons fought therein very
valiantly, and with Saul's three sons Jonathan, Aminadab, and Melchi, who
being defeated, all the Hebrewe army turned their backs: so that being
instantly pursued by the enemy, there fell a great disorder, confusion and
slaughter amongst them. Saul fled also, although he The year of the world.
2890. before Christ's Nativity. 1074.
had about him a strong squadron of men. And although the Philistines
marshalled forth against him a multitude of archers, that shot many darts and
arrows at him; yet were they all but a very few repulsed: and although he
had fought very bravely, having received on him diverse wounds, yet being
unable to support the pain and grief of his wounds, and travailed with
shortness of breath, he commanded his esquier to draw his sword, and to
thrust it through his body before he should be surprised alive by his enemies:
which his esquire refused to do, not daring to lay hands upon his master. For
which cause Saul drew his own sword, and settled the point to his breast and
cast himself thereon: but unable to force it home Saul strives to kill
himself, and being unable uses the assistance of a young Amalechite.
enough, nor make it by goaring himself thereon to pierce quite through him, he
looked back and perceived a young man hard beside him, of whom he demanded
what he was, and hearing Saul dead, suddenly slew himself: Not one of all the
kings guard escaped, but all of them were slain near unto the mountain
Gelboa. When they that inhabited the valley on the other side of Jordan and in
the plain, had intelligence that Saul and his The Hebrews that inhabit the
valley beyond Jordan, leaving their towns fly to defenced cities
sons were dead, and with them a great number of their nation was slain,
they abandoned their Cities and fled to others that were more defenced. The
Philistines finding these Cities destitute of inhabitants, encamped therein.
The next day whilst the Philistines spoiled the Saul and his sons, which they
spoiled and beheaded; sending their heads round about the country, to make it
known that their enemies were defeated. They offered The Palestines hung up
the bodies of Saul and his sons.
up their arms also in the temple of Astaroth; and as for their bodies they
hung them on the walls of the City of Bethsan, at this day called Scythopolis.
When they of Iabes a City of Galaad understood how the Philistines had thus
cut off the heads of Saul and his sons, they were sore moved, and thought it
became them not to be so careless of them, but that they should be rescued.
For which cause the most valiant and hardy amongst them (for that City
brings up men both valiant in heart and strong in body) departed and marched
all night long, so as they attained Bethsan, and approaching near the walls
took down the body of Saul and his sons, and carried them unto Iabes,
without any resistance of the enemy, in that they The Citizens of Iabes rescue
the bodies of Saul and his sons, and both bury and lament them.
Arar. They mourned after this manner weeping both men, and women and children,
and beating their breasts, and lamenting the king and his sons, and tasting
neither meat nor drink. This was the end of Saul, according as Samuel had
foretold him, because he had disobeyed God in his war against the Amalechites,
and for that he had slain the race of Achimelech, and Achimelech himself
also, and destroyed the City of the Priests. He reigned during the life of
Samuel for the space of eighteen years, and twenty two years after his
death. Thus finished Saul his life.

THE SEVENTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 7. book.
1 David is created king of one tribe in Hebron, over the rest Saul's son
obtains the sovereignty. 2 Isboseth is slain by the treachery of his
domestical servants, and the whole kingdom comes unto David. 3 David having
surprised the City and cittadell of Jerusalem, drives the Chananites from
thence, and causes the Jews to inhabit the same. 4 David assailed by the
Philistines, obtains a famous victory against them near unto Jerusalem. 5
David ouercomming the neighboring nations, imposes tributes on them. 6 They
of Damasco are overcome by David. 7 How David overcame the Mesopotamians. 8 How
through the intestine wars of his family David was expulsed out of his
kingdom by his son. 9 Absolon marching out with his army against his father,
is overthrown. 10 The happy estate of David restored again into his kingdom.
11 David in his life time, annointeth and creates his son Solomon king. 12
The death of David, and how much he left his son toward the building of the
temple.
CHAP. I.
David is created King of one Tribe in Hebron, over the rest Saul's son
obtains the sovereignty.

THIs battle was fought on the same day that David returned conqueror The
year of the world. 2891. before Christ's birth 1073. 2. Reg. 1. An Amalechite
certifieth David of Saul's death, and in testimony thereof presents his
bracelets and crown.
Saul and had escaped from the battle, having his garment rent and ashes cast
upon his head, came and cast himself prostrate before David: and being
demanded from whence he came, he answered, from the battle of the Israelites;
and certified David of the unhappy issue thereof: telling him how diverse
thousands of the Hebrews were slain, and how Saul himself and his sons
were done to death in the conflict. He likewise gave him to understand, how he
himself retreated amongst the Hebrews, and was present at the flight of the
king: confessing likewise that he was the author of his death, under purpose to
redeem him Saul having cast himself upon the point of his sword, was so
weak, by reason of the agony of his wounds; that he could not dispatch
himself. Furthermore, he produced the testimonies of his death, the gold about
his arms, and the royal crown which he took and brought from him being
dead. David perceiving no cause whereby he should suspect his death, whereof he
had most evident and infallible testimonies, rent his David lamenteth Saul and
Ionathans death.
garments, and spent the day in weeping and lamenting with his companions. And
the more was he ouerpressed with sorrow, by reason of the loss of his most
dear friend Jonathan, whom he acknowledged to be the author and conseruer of
his life: And so virtuous and affectionate showed he himself toward Saul,
that although he had oftentimes been in danger to have been slain by him, yet
was he sore agrieued at his death: and not that alone, but he likewise executed
David commands the Amalechite to be slain that killed Saul.
death. He composed likewise lamentations and Epitaphs in praise of Saul and
Jonathan, which are as yet extant at this present time where in I live. After
that he had thus honouted the king, and performed his lamentation and
obsequies, he asked counsel of God by the means of the Prophet, what City
of the tribe of Judah he would give him to inhabit in: who answered him that he
would give him Hebron. For which cause he forsook Siceleg, and came and dwelt
in The year of the world, 2891 before Christ's birth 1073. David by Gods
commandment comes and dwells at Hebron, and is declared king of the tribe
of Judah. David praises the Iabesines for burying Saul and his sons. Abner
the son of Ne^ crowns Isboseth Saul's son. Abner leads out his army
against the tribe of Judah, Ioab with all David's army issues out to meet him.
Twelve soldiers fight, and kill one another, and Abners side are overthrown.
Azael Ioabs brother pursues Abner.
Hebron, and brought thither his wife and soldiers. All the people of the
aforesaid tribe resorted thither unto him, and proclaimed him king: where
understanding how the Iabesins had buried Saul and his sons, he sent
ambassadors unto them, both to praise and approve their actions, promising
them that both he allowed their act, and would remunerate their deuoire which
they had extended toward the dead: giving them likewise to understand, that the
tribe of Judah had chosen him for their king. But Abner the son of Ner General
of Saul's army, a man of execution, and of a noble disposition, understanding
that Saul and Jonathan and his two other brothers were dead, came into the
camp, and bringing with him the only son of Saul that was left, whose name
was Isboseth, he passed on the other side of Jordan, and proclaimed him king of
all the people except the tribe of Judah. He appointed likewise for his royal
seat and place of residence, Judah, in that he was displeased with them,
because they had made choice of David for their king. Against him marched out
Ioab the son of Suri and of Saruia David's sister, general of his army, to
encounter him, accompanied with his brothers Abisai and Azael, and all David's
soldiers: and arriving near a certain fountain of Gabaa, he arranged his
army in that place to enter battle. And when as Abner said unto him, that he
desired to make trial whether part had the better soldiers, it was accorded
between them, that twelve for either side should be chosen out to determine
the challenge, who marching out into a certain place betwixt both the hosts,
and having darted their Iauelins the one against the other, came at last to the
sword, where mutually Abner with his followers were discomfited: who speedily
flying were incessantly pursued by Ioab, who in his own person insisted and
exhorted his other soldiers to pursue them hastily, without suffering any of
them to escape. But amongst the rest, Ioabs brothers were hot upon the chase,
and the yoongest of them called Azael gave especial restimonie of his
forwardness, through that swiftness in running wherewith he was endowed: for he
ran not only more swifte then other men, but outstripped horses also in
their race. Whilst thus he pursued Abner with great vehemency and headlong
course, Abner in his flight kills Azael.
without turning either on the one side or on the other; Abner turned back upon
him, and intending Ioab: But perceiving that he made no account of his words,
but that Azael instantly insisted to pursue him, Abner flying and turning
himself back, stroke him with a Iauelin which he had in his hand, in such
sort as he presently died. But they that pursued Abner likewise arriving in the
place where Azaels body vnaduenturously fell dead, stayed round about him, and
surceased to pursue the enemy any further. But Ioab and his brother Abisai
outstripping the body with swift running, and conceiving a more mortal hatred
against Abner, for that he had in this sort slain their brother; they pursued
him until sunset, with admirable swiftness, Ioab and Abisai pursued Abner
till sun set.
Abner with the tribe of Benjamin flying from him; who began to cry out unto
him and say, that men of the same tribe should not be so whetted and incensed
the one against the other. That their brother Azael was in the fault, because
that although he had exhorted him to cease from running after him, yet could he
not persuade him, and that for the same cause he had both stricken and slain
him. Ioab wisely disgesting these his sayings, and accepting Ioab sounding a
retreat restrains his soldiers.
of them as of wholesome and friendly aduertisements and counsels; he
commanded the trumpet to sound retreat, and surceased to pursue them any more,
and encamped for that night in the same place: during which time, Abner
traveled without ceasing, and having past over Jordan, returned to his camp
to Isboseth Saul's son. The next day Ioab suruaied the dead, and Abners side
were about three hundredth and sixty men; and on David's side nineteen, over
and besides Azael, whose body Ioab and Abisai How many on each side died in the
battle. 2 Reg 3. The beginning of civil war amongst the Hebrews.
took with them, and carried it unto Bethleem, and after they had enterred it
in the toomb of their ancestors, they repaired to Hebron unto David. From that
time forward there arose a civil war amongst the Hebrews, that endured a
long time, in which David's followers had always the upper hand, and never
adventured the hazard of the field without returning with some aduentage;
whereas the son of Saul and his partakers had almost every day the worse.
David The year of the world. 2891. before the Nativity of Christ. 1073. David
had six sons borne in Hebron Abner bridled and governed the multitude so
that along time they were subject to Isboseth.
Ammon the son of Achimaas, the second was Daniel the son of Abigal, the
third was called Absolon the son of Machama the daughter of Ptolomey king of
Gessur; the fourth was Adomas the son of his wife called Aggite: the fifth and
the sixth were called Gerthessa and Gala. But after this civil war was
begun, and that the kings on both sides had oftentimes encountered and fought
together; Abner general of the army for king Saul's son, a prudentman, and
one that was beloved by the people, endeavored all that in him lay, that the
whole country might be commanded by Isboseth, and in effect they all submitted
unto him for a certain time: but when as it afterward fell out that Abner was
charged and accused to have kept company with Rispa Saul's concubine, the
daughter of Sibath, and that Isboseth likewise had reproved him for the same
cause, he conceived a great grief David, and to make him know, that it was
neither his virtue nor prudence that made him sovereign over the tribes on
that side Jordan, but that his faith and warlike conduct was the cause thereof.
For which cause he sent unto Hebron to David, requiring him by an oath to accept
of him as his confederate and friend, promising him to persuade the people to
forsake Saul's son, and Abner sends ambassadors to David in Hebron to ^e a
covenant with him. David requires his wife Michol at Abners hands. Abner
consulteth with the ^lders and gouerners of the army to revolt to David.
to proclaim him king of the whole region: David swear unto him, according as
he had required, and was very glad of that embassage that Abner had sent unto
him, and the rather for that under assured testimony of their accords, he had
preserved Michol David's wife (whom he had purchased Saul, to the end he might
enjoy her) which Michol Abner had sent him back, having taken her from Phalti,
who had since that time espoused her: whereunto Isboseth also was assistant, to
whom David had written that it was reason that he should recover his wife.
Abner therefore assembled all the elders and governors of the people, and told
them that at such time as heretofore they were ready to forsake Isboseth, and
to submit themselves to David, he had dissuaded them from that intent; but at
this present if they had the will, he would condescend unto them, because he
was assured that God had chosen David (by the mouth of Samuel the Prophet) to
be king over all the Hebrews: and had foretold that he should punish the
Philistines, and should overcome them, and bring them under his subjection.
Which when the elders and governors understood, and were assured likewise that
Abner would subscribe to their resolution as David. Abner seeing them thus
resolved, did afterward assemble all the tribe of Benjamin (out of which the
archers The elders and captains persuaded by Abner ^llow David. The Beniamites
accord with Abner (...) (...) to David and certifieth him there o^ Abner being
kindly entertained by David is friendly ly dismissed.
of Isboseths guard were chosen) and told them the like, and perceiving that
they contradicted him no ways, but submitted themselves unto his pleasure, he
gathered about twenty of his familiar friends, and resorted unto David to
receive in his own person David's oath: Both for that each man in his own
affairs reposeth greatest confidence in himself, as also to give him
intelligence what speech he had held with the elders and the whole tribe. David
received and entertained him very kindly, and magnificently and sumptuously
feasted him at his table for many days, praying him that he would depart, and
return and bring the people with him, to the end that in their presence and
sight, he might deliver him the government. When David had dismissed Abner,
some Ioab the general of David's army came to Hebron, and knowing that Abner
had been with David, and that but some little time before he was departed from
him, with accords and promises made unto him that he should be governor; he
feared least that if David should place him in honor and dignity, and should
make Abner (who was a man otherways exercised in affairs and politic to
prevent occasions) as it were his companion in the kingdom, that the said Ioab
should be degraded, and deprived of his office; he took upon him a cursed and
froward resolution. For first of all he labored to detract and make him odious
in the kings ear, counselling him to stand on his guard, and not to give ear
unto Abners promises, who under color and subtlety sought to establish the
kingdom unto Saul's son: alleging that he came unto him under color and
ca^tele, intending then to leave him, when David, and considering with himself
likewise that he moved him in no sort, he attempted a more perilous exploit
then the former. For resolving with himself to kill Abner, he sent out
certain men after him, whom he gave in commission that as soon as they should
overtake him, they should urge their interparlee in the name of David,
alleging that they had something to communicate with him as touching the
estate, which he had forgot to certify him of.

When Abner had heard the words of these messengers (who ouertooke him in a
place called The year of the ^orld. 2899. before Christ's Nativity. 1065.
Besira, some twenty furlongs off of Hebron) he struck out of the way without
suspicion of his future desaster; and Ioab going before him, embraced him with
great love, and like an affectionate friend (for such as enterprise any wicked
action do often and subtly dissemble and make show of honesty, to the end to
expel out of the innocents mind all jealousy or evil suspicion) where
singling him from his other company, and making a show to inform him of
certain secrets, and having drawn him into a by-way besides the wall,
accompanied only with his brother Abisai, he drew his rapier and thrust it into
his short ribs: Of which wound Abner died, surprised by the treason of Ioab;
who pretended and colored that act of his, with the revenge and death of his
brother Azael, whom Abner had slain upon the chase in the first war at
Hebron; but in truth it was but the suspicion of his greatness and honor,
fearing least he should be deprived, Abner inseated by obtaining the next
degree of honor unto David. Hereby may a man Men inclined to ambition and
avarice date al things.
conceive how many and how mighty things men attempt and hazard for their
avarice and ambition sake, and to the end they may not be inferior unto any
others in those matters. For when as they desire to attain riches and honors,
they atchieue it by ten thousand mischiefs; and at such time as they fear to
be dispossessed, they strive to continue their estates by means more pernicious,
because they think it to be the less sin, and that the calamity is less
active, rather not to have obtained to any greatness and power, then after the
possession thereof, to fall into disgrace. Thence it comes, that all of them
intend and practice many hazards and difficult encountries, through the fear
they have to lose their degree. But it suffices to have briefly touched this
point. David having notice of the murder of Abner conceived a great grief in
his Abner had been slain without his commandment or will. He likewise
uttered most grievous curses against the murderer, his house and accomplices,
by which he wished them to be subject to the fatal penalty of murder: for he
greatly suspected least he should be held in suspicion to be a party in that
which had happened unto Abner, contrary to his faith, oath and promise, which he
had past unto him. Moreover, he commanded David with the whole people bewail
Abner and honor his funerals:
that all the people should weep and lament for him, and that the funerals of
his body should be honored according to the accustomed fashion, in renting of
garments and putting on sackcloth: and that the same should be done the coffin
being carried before, which both he and the chiefest governors of the
Israelites followed, beating on their breasts, and shedding tears, and
testifying David himself, who setting himself on the tomb first of all
lamented, and gave others cause of lamentation. And so much was he confused at
the death of this Abner, that he swore to forbear all kind of meat until the
sunne-set, notwithstanding all the instances of his friends, who urged him to
take refection: which act of his purchased him much good will and love amongst
the people. For they that loved Abner were very glad to be witnesses of that
honor which he did him in his death, and that faith which he David salueth his
honor, and auoideth the suspicion of Abners death.
maintained in honoring him, every way according to the custom, as if he had
been his kinsman or friend, and not embasing him with a vilde and contemptible
tomb, as if he had been his enemy. David, that they esteemed in the like
case, that he would have the like estimate of them, as they saw him have of
deceased Abner. And by this means David happily maintained his credit, and
increased the peoples good opinion of him, escaping thereby the suspicion and
conceit that he might in some sort have bin accessarie to his death. He
protested also unto the people, that he conceived no small grief at the loss
of so good a man, declaring thereby that it was no small stain unto the state
of the Hebrews to be deprived of him, who had the means to maintain their
peace by his good advise, and to ratify the same by his executions and warlike
valor: But God (said he) who has care of all things shall not suffer him to
die unrevenged: And he it is that shall bear me witness, that it lies not in
my power to punish Ioab and Abisai, who have greater credit in the army Abner.

CHAP. II. The year of the world, 2899. before Christ's Nativity, 106 5.

Isboseth is slain through the treason of his friends and followers, the whole
kingdom descends to David.

WHen Isboseth Saul's son had notice of Abners death, he was sore displeased,
not only for that he perceiving himself to be deprived of his near kinsman,
but also of so great a Hedio and Ruffinus ^hap. (...), 2, Reg 4.
personage as had settled the crown on his head. Neither did he himself long
time remain alive after him: but by the sons of Ieremon Banaoth and Thannus,
he was traitorously done to death. These two being Beniamites, and of the
chiefest nobility amongst them, made their reckoning that they would make away
Isboseth, and thereby obtain great recompense at David's hands, Isboseth alone
in his house about midday laid on his bed and asleep, and vnassisted by any
of his guard, and perciuing likewise that the porter was fast, who through his
travail and other business (by reason of the extreme heat) was laid down to
rest: they entered into his lodging whereas Isboseth was a sleep, and slew him;
and having cut off his head, they traveled all the night and day long, as if
they fled from those whom they had offended, and sought their rescues from
them, who would succor and assure them from peril: and when they came to
Hebron, they presented David with Isboseths head, offering themselves as his
most dutiful liegemen to do him service, who had delivered him of an enemy,
and made away an adversary against his royalty. But David allowed not their
act in such sort as they hoped: but O cursed men, said he (on whom I intend
presently to execute justice) have Isboseth. hand is brought to David. David's
sharp inuectiue against then urtherers of Isboseth, and their punishment.
you not heard how I punished him that murdered Saul, and brought his royal
crown unto me? Yea although he slew him upon his own instant request, and to
the intent the enemy should not surprise him alive? Were you of that opinion
that I was changed, and that I am not the same that I was, but that I take
delight to be partakers with you in your mischiefs, or that I will countenance
them, as if these acts of yours (who are murderers of your Master) were
laudable in you; in you I say, who have slain a good man on his bed, that
injured no man, but was your benefactor, and who had both cherished and
honored you: nay rather assure your selves that you shall be punished in his
behalf, and shall yield me satisfaction by the loss of your lives, because
you have thought that Isboseths death would work my contentment: for you could
not in any sort dishonor Which said, he adjudged them to die by the most
cruel torments that might be imagined, and with all the honor that he might,
he caused Isboseths head to be interred in Abners tomb.

These murderers being thus done to death, all the chiefest of the people
repaired to David unto Hebron (both they that commanded over thousands, as such
also as were governors) and 2. Reg. 5. The nobles of the Hebrews retaire to
David to Hebron, and declate him king.
submitted themselves unto him, reckoning up the good affection they had borne
him, both during Saul's life time, as also the honor which they had never
discontinued to bear him since the first time that he was Coronell over a
thousand, especially for that he had been chosen by God through the mediation
of the Proph^ Samuel, to be their king, and his children after him; declaring
unto him that God had given him the country of the Hebrews, to defend the
same, and David accepted their promptitude and affection, exhorting them to
persist, assuring them that they should never repent themselves of their
obedience, and after he David entertained the nobles kindly. The armed soldiers
that came to David
had banquetted and entertained them, he sent them to assemble all the people.
Of the tribe of Judah there came together about six thousand eight hundredth men
of war, bearing for their arms a buckler and a iauelin, who before that time
had followed Saul's sons, and besides whom the tribe of Judah had assigned the
kingdom to David. Of the tribe of Simeon, seven thousand and a hundredth or
somewhat more: of that of Leui 4700. whose chiefetaine was Iodam, with whom was
Sadoc the high priest accompanied with 20. and two governors of the same
lineage. Of the tribe of Benjamin 4000. men of war: for this tribe were as yet
of opinion that some of the heirs of Saul should reign. Of that of Ephraim
20800. both strong and stout men. Of that of Manasses almost Issachar 200. who
were skillful in divination, and 20000. men of war. Of that of Zabulon 20000.
chosen fighting men: For only this entire tribe was wholly at David's command,
who were armed in like manner as they of Gad were. Of the tribe of Nepthali
there were 1000. chiefetaines, famous for their valor, and armed with shield
and iauelin, attended by an infinite number of their tribe. Of the tribe of Dan
there were 27000. chosen men. Of that of Aser 40000. Of the two tribes on the
other side of Jordan, and of the half tribe of Manasses six score thousand
armed men, with buckler, iauelin, murrion and sword: The rest of The year of
the world 1899. before Christ's Nativity. 1065.
the other tribes also wore swords. All this multitude was assembled together
in Hebron before David, with great provision of victuals and wine, sufficient
to sustain them all, who all of them with one consent appointed David to be
their King. Now when the people had mustred and banquetted for three days
space in Hebron, David dislodged from thence with his whole host, and Hedi^ and
Ruffinus, chap. 3.
repaired to Jerusalem. But the Iebusites, who at that time inhabited the
city, and were of the race of the Chanaanites, shutting up their gates against
his coming, and placing on their walls as many as were blind and lame, or
maimed in any other sort, in contempt of him, scoffingly iested and said, that
these were sufficient to keep out the enemy: so much trusted they to their
fortifications. Wherewith David being sore displeased, began to besiege
Jerusalem, and using all diligence The siege of Jerusalem undertaken by David
David surpriseth the lower town. David gett^th the v^per town. The valor of
David's soldiers and in especial of Ioab.
and industry to surprise the same, he incontinently expressed how strong he
was, checking Ioab the son of Saruia was the forwardest amongst the rest, and
having got upon the wall cried unto the king, requiring him to grant him the
general government.

CHAP. III.
David having taken Jerusalem by force, casts out all the Chanaanites from
thence, and delivers the City to be inhabited by the Jews.

AFter therefore he had cast out the Iebusites out of the higher City, and
repaired Jerusalem, he called it the City of David, and remained therein all
the time of his reign: so Da^id expels the Iebus^tes out of the town and
city of Jerusalem.
that the whole time that he ruled in Hebron over the sole tribe of Judah was
seven years and six months. But after he had establ^shed Jerusalem for his
royal City, his fortunes daily more and more increased, because God both
furthered, and bettered them. Hiram also King of Tire sent unto him, and made a
league of amity with him: he presented him likewise with presents of Cedar
wood, and workmen and masons, to build him a royal house in Jerusalem. Now
The league of ^hip betw^ ^iram and Da^id.
when the king had seized the higher City, he annexed the rock thereunto, and
made one body of twain; and having walled it in, he gave the government
thereof to Ioab. This king was the first that drove the Iebusites out of
Jerusalem, and called the same by his name. For from the How Jerusalem was
called Solyma, and what mention Hom^ made thereof.
time of Abraham our forefather, it was called Solyma: neither want there some
that infer that Homer under that name intended Jerusalem. For in the Hebrew
tongue, Solyma is, as much to say, as Security. All the time from the exploit
of war made by Iosuah against the Chanaanites, and since the division of the
country (during all which time the Israelites could not drive the Chanaanites
out of Jerusalem) until such time as David took the same by force, were five
The years since Io^ua^s conquest to this time 515. O^phon a Iebusite friend to
David. 2. Reg. 24. David's sons borne in Jerusalem.
hundredth and fifteen years. But in this place, I will not forget one Orphon,
a rich man amongst the Iebusites, who for that he was well affected toward the
Hebrews, was not put to death in David made of Jerusalem: but (as I will
shortly hereafter declare) was graced and greatly honored by the king. David
espoused other wives besides those which he had; besides many other concubines:
By them he had eleven sons, whose names are these which follow, Amnas, Emma,
Ebamatha, Solomon, Iebar, Eliel, Phalna, Ennapha, Ienaah, Eliphal: besides
these he had a daughter called Thamar. Nine of these were begotten on noble
mothers, but the two last (which were named by us) were the sons of
concubines. But Thamar was Absalons sister by the same father and mother.

CHAP. IIII.
David assailed by the Palestines, obtains a famous victory against them,

NOw when the Palestines knew that the Hebrews had created David king, they
led forth their army against him toward Jerusalem, where encamping themselves
in the valley of Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4.
the Giants (which is a place not far off from the City) they in that place
expected the encountrey. But the king of the Hebrews, who was wont to do
nothing inconsiderately without Gods advise, commanded the high priest to
prophecy and foretell, what success and event The year of the world. 2899.
before Christ^ ^rth 1065. The Palestines moving war against David are partly
stain or put to ^light. The Palestines invaded the Hebrews with a mighty
army gathered out of sundry nations.
David a new with thrice as much power as before, or to incampe in the same
place. For which cause David took counsel of God once more, what the issue of
this battle should be: and the high Priest told him, that he should encampe in
the forest called Tears, because it was not far off from the enemies camp,
and that he should not depart from thence, neither attempt them in battle,
before the trees did shake without any agitation or breath of wind. Whereupon
as soon as the trees shook, and the time which God had appointed was come,
without any delay, he issued out to enjoy a prepared and manifest victory. For
the squadrons of the enemy were disarrayed, and incontinently betook them to
flight, and were swiftly followed and slaughtered, until the City of Gerar
(which is a frontire town of their country) and their camp was thoroughly
ransacked, wherein there were The Palestines flight. 2. Reg. 6.
David (by the counsel of the Elders and Coronels over thousands) that all
the flower of their youth should be assembled from all the parts of the
country, every one according to his tribe: Secondly, that the Priests and
Levites should repair to Cariathiarim, and bring from thence the Ark of God,
and conueie it to Jerusalem; David's command as touching the tra^sportation of
the Arc.
to the end that when it should be there, the service of God might thereafter
be celebrated in that place, and other sacrifices and honors agreeable to the
divine majesty might be performed: And had the same been done during the life
of Saul, no inconvenient had fallen upon them. When as all the people were
assembled (according as it was decreed by him) the king came forth to
transfer the Arc, which the Priests carrying out of Aminadabs house, they
laid it Oza died, through Oza stretching out his hand to stay the Arc, is
suddenly stricken dead.
the wrath of God: for the oxen stumbling that drew the chariot; and the Arc
somewhat shaken, he stretched out his hand with intent to sustain the same; and
because he was no Priest, God stroke him till he died. The king and the people
were sore aggrieued at the death of Oza, and the place where he died is called
to this day Ozas Striking. David fearing, least if he should retire the Arc
with him into the City, the like hap should attend him that had befallen Oza
(who Obed, by descent a Leuite, and in behavior a man good and virtuous where
it remained for three months space, during which time his house was blessed
with all David places the Arc in Obed. Edomes house, who prospers there
through in all felicity. The Arc transported into David's house and placed in
a tabernacle. David is mocked by his wife Michol.
worldly goods and goodness. The king being ascertained what advantages had
befallen Obed, (who of a poor and needy man was suddenly become very rich,
so that all men had their eyes fixed on him, and they that heard speak of his
house envied him) he assured himself that no inconvenient would befall him:
for which cause he retired the Arc into his own house, which was carried by the
Priests, and seven quires of singing men disposed by the king went before the
same: The king himself likewise touched, and played upon the Harp, so that
Michol David's wife and Saul's daughter, seeing him entertaining himself after
that manner, mocked at him. The Arc then being thus carried, was placed in a
Tabernacle orected and dressed by David, who offered most magnificent
sacrifices of all sorts, and forgot not the sacrifices for prosperities: he
feasted all the people likewise both men, women and children, distributing unto
every one a cake, a morsel of roasted meat, a cake fried in the pan, and a
portion of the sacrifice: and after he had thus feasted the people, he
dismissed them, and retreated himself into his own house. But Michol his wife
(and daughter to king Saul) drawing near unto him upon his return, besought
God The ^re of the (...), (...) be^ Chri^ b^ 10^4.
for him, that it might please him in all other things she might express unto
her husband all that, which became her entire and vnequald love toward him:
but in this she blamed him, because that being so great and mighty a king as
he was, he had dishonored himself in dancing, despoiling himself, and
discovering partly that which became him not, doing all this in company of his
servants and handmaids. To whom David answered, that he was not ashamed in
performing a thing so acceptable unto God as that was, who had honored him
more then her father, and placed him above all others, assuring her that he
would play and dance oftentimes after that sort, without care whether his
demeanor pleased either her or her chambermaids. This Michol (of whom we
entreat) had no children by David, but being married again to another (to whom
her father had betrothed her after he had ravished her from David) she bare
five sons, of whom we will 2. Reg. 7. David decree. eth to build a tem^le unto
God.
for which cause he conceived a desire to build a Temple unto God, according as
Moses had foretold: and to this intent consulted he with the Prophet Nathan,
who willed him to perform all that which he was minded to accomplish, assuring
him that God would be each way assistant unto him: for which cause he was very
heartily affected toward the building of the Temple. But the same night God
appeared unto Nathan, commanding him to certify David, that he accepted his
will, and that his affection was agreeable unto him (considering in especial
that no one God certifieth David by Nathan that Solomon should build the temple
before him had a thought to perform the like:) yet notwithstanding (although
his deliberation Solomon (to whom he shall leave the kingdom after his death)
shall cause a Temple to be built unto him, promising him to assist and favor
the said Solomon (even as the father does his son) and that he would continue
the royalty in his heirs and their successors: And that if they shall happen
to offend him, he will only punish them with sickness and sterilitie. David
understanding these words which were delivered him by the Prophet, was very
joyful, by reason that the royalty was firmly D^uid gives G^d thanks ^or
the blessings which were promised him by Natha^.
assured to his heirs, and for that his house should be famous and renowned;
and presenting himself before the Arc, he prostrated himself and adored, and
gave God thanks for all the benefits

CHAP. V.
David ouercomming the neighboring nations, imposes tributes on them.

NOt long time after this, David thought it requisite to make war upon the
Philistines, Hedio and Ruff^us. chap. 5. David warreth against the Palestines,
and ^keth a great part of the in^eritance from them. 2. Reg 8. A great
slaughter of the Moabites, David overcomes the king of Sophona.
(according as God had foretold) discomfited his enemies, he might leave a
peaceable kingdom to his posterity after him. He therefore assembled his army
anew, commanding the^ to be in a readiness to march forward to the war: whenas
therefore he supposed that the army was addressed, he departed out of
Jerusalem, and made a road upon the Philistines, whom he overcame in battle,
and took a great part of the country from them, by means whereof he enlarged
the frontires of the Hebrews, and translated the war, and led forth his
forces against the Moabites, whose army being divided into two parts, was by
him defeated and ouerthrown, and the rest were taken prisoners, and tributes
were imposed on them, which they were bound to satisfy every year. Afterward
he led out his host against Adarezer son of Ara, king of

CHAP. VI. The year of the world, 2904. before Christ's Nativity, 1064.

They of Damasco are overcome by David.

ADad king of Damasco and of Syria, understanding that David had made war on
Adarezer Adad king of Damasco and Syria is overcome by David in battle.
Nicholaus the historiographer makes mention of king Adads war with David.
(who was both his friend and confederate) issued forth with great forces to
be assistant unto him, and to deliver him from his enemies according as he
expected. But entering field, and waging battle with David near unto the river
of Euphrates, he was overcome and lost a great number of his soldiers: for in
that battle there were stain on his side by the Hebrew enemy, to the number
of twenty thousand, and the rest fled. Of this king, Nicholas the
Historiographer makes mention in the fourth book of his histories, in these
words. Sithence Adad governed in Damasco, and over the rest of Syria (except
Phoenicia) who making war against David king of Iudaea, and having oftentimes
fought with him, in his last encountrie (wherein he was overcome near unto the
flood Euphrates) he showed himself more resolute then all other kings in force
and valor. Moreover he speaks of his heirs, how after his death, they
succeeded him both in royalty and name, the one after the other, and says
thus. He being deceased, his sons reigned for ten generations after him, each
of them receiving from their father, the same name and the same kingdom, after
the manner of the Ptolomies of Egypt. The third of these being more mighty
then the rest, and desirous to revenge himself in war of these injuries,
which were offered Of an other king of Syria that spoiled Samaria. 3. King 20.
David imposes tribute on the Syrians whom he subdued. 2. Reg. 8. Jerusalem
spoiled by Sy^ac king of Egypt.
unto his grandfather, led forth his army against the Jews, and destroyed the
country Adad, that made war in Samatia, during the reign of Achab king of
Israel, of whom we will speak hereafter in his place. But when David had led
forth his camp against Damasco, and against the rest of the country of Syria,
he reduced them all under his obeisance, placing garrisons amidst their
country, and imposing tribute upon them, which they should pay unto him. He
dedicated also to God in the City of Jerusalem, the golden quiuers and armors
which Adads guard were wont to wear; which afterward Syssa king of Egypt
took at such time as he warred against Roboam his Nephew, and carried away
great riches out of the temple of Jerusalem, as it shall be declared hereafter,
when as we shall come to entreat of that matter. This king of the Hebrews
being inspired by God (who made him prosperous in all his Adarezer had, that is
to say, Betthea and Machon, which he besieged, took, and spoiled, where there
was found great store of gold and silver and 3. Reg. 14. The pray tha^ was made
in the war. 2. Reg. 8. The king of the Amathe^ requires a league at David's
hands.
of brass, which was of more estimation then gold, whereof Solomon made that
great vessel called the Sea, and other fair lauers, at such time as he
adorned and furnished the temple of God. When the king of Amath understood of
all that which had happened to Adarezer, and how his power and forces were
destroyed, he grew afraid of his own estate, and resolved with himself to
make a league and confederacy with David, before he might come out against
him, and to that intent he sent his son Adoram unto him, to testify and
express what contentment he had received, for that he had defeated Adarezer
his enemy, and to contract with him amity and confederation. He seht him
presents also, namely, vessels of antique work of gold, of silver, and of
David made a league with Thani (for so was the king of Amath called) and
received the presents that were sent unto him; and afterward dismissed his
son with convenient honor, both for the one and the other: and consecrated
that to God which he had sent him (together with the gold and silver, which he
had taken from other cities and nations that were subject unto him.) For God
did not only so far favor him, as to make him victorious and happy in his
own wars; but having also sent Abisai Ioabs brother the lieutenant of his army
against the Idumeans, he likewise granted him victory: for Abisai slew in the
battle about eighteen thousand David ^ompelled the Idumeans to pay tribute by
the pole. The distribution of offices. 2. Reg. 9.
of them, and filled all Idumaea with garrisons, challenging a tribute
throughout the country by the pole. This king loved justice of his own nature,
and exercised judgment according to verity. He had for his lieutenant
general in all his armies, Ioab, and appointed Iosaphat the son Achilles
chief over the Registers. After Abiathar, he established Sadoc of the house of
Phinees for high priest, who was his friend. Sisa was his secretary: Banaia
the son of Ioiada was captain over his guard, and all the elders were
ordinarily about him to guard and attend him. He remembering himself also of
the conuentions and oaths that were past twixt him and Jonathan the son of
Saul, and of (...) ^itie and affection that had been between them (for besides
all other graces which he had, he most freshly retained them in memory, from
whom in times past he had received any friendship.) He caused a search to be
made, if any one of the house and family The year of the world 2900. before
Christ's Nativity. 1064. David makes an inquiry if any of Ionathans kindred
were left alive.
Jonathan were left-aliue, to the intent he might remunerate the friendship
which he had received at Ionathans hands. Where upon a certain man was brought
unto him (who was enfranchised by Saul) that might inform him what one of his
race was alive: who asked him if he could name him any of Ionathans sons then
living, whom he might make partaker of those courteous favors and graces, which
in times past he had received by Jonathan. Who answered him, that he had one
son remaining, whose name was Mephiboseth, who was lame of his legs; for that
at such time as the news came that both his father and grandfather were slain
in the battle, his nurse fearfully snatching up the child and flying, suffered
him unfortunately to fall from her shoulders, and so hurt him. When as then he
was advertised where, and with whom he was brought up, he sent unto the city
of Labath to Machir, with whom Mephiboseth was kept, and commanded David's
presence, he cast himself prostrate on his face to do him reverence: but the
king exhorted him to be of good courage, and to hope hereafter for better
fortune, and gave him his fathers house with all the possessions that were
purchased by Saul his grandfather, appointing him to sit and feed with him at
his own table; yea to eat of his royal provision, not letting one day slip
wherein he accompanied him not at meals. David gives Mephiboseth his father
Ionat^ans house and Saul's inheritance.
The young man did him reverence, humbly thanking him for the gracious words,
and royal offers be had made unto him. At that time David called for Siba, and
certified him how he had given Mephiboseth his fathers house and all Saul's
purchases, commanding him to manure and husband his possessions, and to have
care of all things, and to return the reuenew to Jerusalem, for that
Mephiboseth was every day to take his refectio^ at his table, charging both him
and his 15. sons, Siba did him reverence, and after he had protested to
perform whatsoever he had given him in charge, he departed, David committeds
the disposing of Mephiboserhs lands to Siba, and commands him to make the
return of his revenues in Jerusalem. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. 2. Reg. 10.
David sends ambassadors to comfort the son of the king of the Ammonites,
who are basely abused.
and Ionathans son remained in Jerusalem, where he lived at the kings table,
and was entertained and tended as carefully, as if he had been his own son:
he had a son also called Micha. These were the honors that those children
which suruiued after Jonathan and Saul's death, receined at David's hands. About
the same time died Naas king of the Ammonites, who during his life time was
David's friend, and his son succeeded him in his kingdom, to whom David sent
ambassadors to comfort him, exhorting him to digest his fathers death with
patience, assuring him that he would express no less love toward him, then
he did unto his father. But the governors of the Ammonites entertained this
embassage very contumeliously, and not according David had kindly intended it,
and murmured against their king, telling him that they were but spies sent by
David to seek into his forces, and discover the strength of his country,
under a pretext of humanity, counselling him to stand upon his guard, and not
to give ear to his protestation, least being deceived, he should fall into
some remediless inconvenient.

Naas king of the Ammonites, supposing that his governors spoke nothing but
truth, outraged the ambassadors that were sent unto him with great injuries:
for causing the half of their beards to be shaven close by the chin, and
cutting away the half of their vestments, he sent them back again, returning
their answers not in words, but in deeds. Which when David saw, he was
grievously David is sore displeased with the injury offered to his ambassadors
intending revenge. The Ammonites hire their confederates and prepare for the
war against David.
displeased, and made it known that he would not suffer that mockery and
injury so easily to be disgested, but that he would make war on the
Ammonites, and revenge those indignities Naas considering how they had violated
and broken the peace, and how for that occasion they deserved to be punished;
prepared for the war, and sent one thousand talents to Syrus king of
Mesopotamia, requiring him that he would be their consederate in that war,
and receive their pay: they requested the like of Subas: these kings had 20000.
footmen in camp. They hired also with their money the king of the country
called Michas, and the fourth called Istob, which two had with them 12000.
thousand soldiers.

CHAP. VII.
How David overcame the Mesopotamians.

But David was no whit amated, neither with the confederacy, nor force of the
Ammonites, David sends out Ioab with the choicest flower of his army against
the Amalechites.
but trusting in God, resolved that the cause of his war was just: for which
cause he continued in revenge of those outrages which he had received by them.
Having therefore mustered under Ioab the flower of his whole army, he commanded
him to depart and make war upon them, who came and encamped himself before
their chiefest City called Aramath; which when the enemies perceived, they
issued forth and arranged themselves in battle not altogether, but in two
several parts.) For their confederates and allies were encamped apart The
year of the world. 2910. before the Nativity of Christ. 1054. Ioab and
Abisaies armies.
Ioab perceiving this, used this stratageme to counteruaile their complot: for
he chose out the ablest and stoutest of his men to serve under him against
Syrus, and the other kings confederates with him, and gave the rest unto his
brother Abisat, commanding him to oppose himself against the Ammonites
whilst he charged the rest: willing him, that if he perceived that the Syrians
were stro^er then he was, and did put him to the worst, to displace his
squadron, and to succor him; promising to do the like, if he perceived him to
be ouerpressed by the Ammonites. Whenas therefore he had exhorted his brother
to behave himself valiantly and virtuously, and to take heed least he should
light on some dishonor, he sent him before to charge the Ammonites; and he on
the other side assailed the Syrians, who valiantly resisted him Ioab slew many
of them, and finally constrained them to turn their backs. Which when the
Ammonites perceived (who were afraid of Abisai and his people) they retreated
likewise, and (conforming themselves according to the example of their allies)
they took their flight into the City. By which mean Ioab having obtained
Ioabs victory.
the upper hand over his enemies, returned in triumph, and with victory unto
the king to Jerusalem.

Yet were not the Ammonites wholly weakened by this loss, for although they had
by their lamentable experience a certain knowledge that the Hebrews were
stronger then themselves, yet would they by no means listen after peace. They
therefore sent unto Chalama king of the Syrians on the other side of Euphrates,
whose confederacy they attained by bribes and huge sums Sabecus, for his
lieutenant general, and under him The Syrians with the Ammonites assemble
themselves against David.
fourscore thousand footmen, and ten thousand horsemen. David understanding
that the Ammonites drew to head, and intended anew to bear arms against him,
he surceased to prosecute the war against them by his lieutenants, and himself
in person with all his forces passed over the river of Jordan, and went out
against them; and at last meeting and fighting with them, overcame them,
killing welny forty thousand of their footmen, and seven thousand of their
horsemen: he hurt Sabecus also Chalamas Lieutenant, who likewise died of that
wound. The issue of this combat being thus, the Mesopotamians yielded
themselves unto David, and gave him many great The Mesopotamians submit
themselves to David.
and magnificent presents. He therefore, by reason of the winter retired
himself for that time to Jerusalem, but incontinently upon the spring time he
sent out his Lieutenant Ioab once more to David (notwithstanding he were a just
man, and one that feared God, and an exact obseruer Aramatha besieged. Hedio
and Ruffinus. chap. 7. 2. Reg. 11.
of all the laws and ordinances of his forefathers) fell, and offended God
most grievously. For as he walked on the top of his royal palace; from the
time of midday until the evening (for betwixt these times he used
accustomably to walk) he perceived a woman of incomparable beauty, and
supassing perfection, whose name was Bethsabe, who in her house bathed her
self in a clear and pleasant fountain: and being devoured and ravished with
her beauty, he could not refrain his concupiscence, but sending for her,
took the spoil of her beauty and chastity: and David's adultery. Bethsabe
certifieth the king that she is with child. David sends for Vrias, and
wills him to repair home unto his wife, which he does not.
by that means got her with child. Which when she perceived, she sent unto the
king, beseeching Vrias (Bethsabes husband and one of Ioabs soldiers, who at
that time was at the siege of Aramath) and questioned with him upon his
arrival, as touching the estate of the siege and of the army: who answering
him that all things were fallen out according as he could wish; David took a
portion of his own supper and gave it him, willing him to repair unto his
own house, and repose him self with his wife. But Vrias did nothing less,
but slept amongst his fellow soldiers near unto the person of the king. Which
when David understood, he asked him wherefore he repaired not to his own
house, according to the custom of husbands that had been long time absent
upon a long voyage, and why he entertained not his wife from whom he had been
sequestered so Vrias replied, that it became him not either to repose or take
pleasure with his wife, whilst his companions and general lay upon the bare
ground in the enemies country. Which said, David commanded him to soiourne
there all the day long, to the end that on the next morrow, he might send him
back again to Ioab. That night the king invited him to supper, and although
he were made drunk through the abundance of wine he received (which the king
had purposely caused to be given him) yet notwithstanding he slept at the kings
gate without any desire to repair home unto his wife. Herewith the king was
much despited, so that he wrote The year of the world. 2910. before Christ's
Nativity 1054. David w^eth unto Ioab to puni^h Vrias.
unto Ioab, commanding him to punish Vrias, because he had offended him: and
to the end that this intent of his should not be discovered, he suggested him
both in the means and manner of the prosecution of his death, enioyning him to
place him in the rank of greatest danger, and in face of the enemy, to the
intent that in the fight his person might be endaungered, abandoned and left
alone, whilst they that fought next unto him retired when they saw him
charged. Whenas he had thus written and sealed up the letter with his own
seal, he delivered it to Vrias to bear unto Ioab, who receiving the same, and
conceiving the kings pleasure, placed Vrias in that quarter where he knew the
enemies would fight most desperately, appointing him Ioab sets Vrias in a
dangerous place to encounter with the enemy. Vrias i^ set with some
associates to attempt the siege, the Ammonites sallying out his company forsake
him.
out certain of his best soldiers to second him, with purpose, that he would
come and succor them with all his power, to the end he might break through the
wall and enter the City.

Vrias (who was a noble soldier, and for his valor had gotten great honor by
the king, and reputation amongst all those of his tribe, and took delight to
be employed in hazardous attempts, and refused no danger) valiantly accepted
the execution: But Ioab gave private intelligence to those that were ranked
next unto him, that when they should see the enemy sally out with greatest
fury, they should abandon Vrias. When as therefore the Hebrews drew near unto
the City, the Ammonites feared least the enemy should speedily scale and
enter the City on that side where Vrias was ranked: for which cause they
picked out a squadron of the most resolute men amongst them, and setting open
their gates, suddenly with swift course, force and violence, they cast
themselves upon their enemies. They that were near Vrias seeing them draw
near, retired back again, according as Ioab had before hand commanded them:
but Vrias being ashamed Ioab sent messengers unto the king to certify him,
that not enduring the delay of the siege, and assailing and scaling Vrias with
some others is slain, and the king is certified thereof.
the walls, he was compelled to return back into his camp, with loss of
some men, and repulse from the City; yet had he commanded the messengers,
that if they perceived the King to be displeased with the news, they should
g^ue him to understand that Vrias was dead.

The King hearing this discourse (according as Ioabs messengers had delivered
it) made a show to be displeased, saying, that it was a fault in him that he
had so nearly approached the wall, alleging David is displeased with the news
of his ouerthow.
way of example the act of Abimelech Gedeons son, who intending to surprise
by force a tower that was within the City of Tebez, was stricken with a stone
which was cast at him by an old woman: whereupon he that was a valiant man for
entering an action ouer^ash and dangerous, shamefully died. In remembrance of
whose desaster, they ought to have been more wary, and not to have approached
the wall of the enemy so nearly. For it is a very good point in war, to
have in memory both fatal and fortunate successes, to the end that when a man
is in the like dangers, he may follow the one, and fly the other. Whilst
thus he rebuked them, the messenger certified him of Vrias death, which did
somewhat appease him: So that he commanded them to tell Ioab, that it was but
an humane accident, and that such was the nature of David is appea^ed hearing
at Vrias death
should provide for the siege, and take care least hereafter they should
receive any further loss; counselling him by trenches and engines to ruinate
the wall, and commanding that all those that were in the town should be put
to the sword. The messenger thus dismissed, reported all these things unto
Ioab, according to the Kings commandment. But Vrias wife, having notice of
the death of her husband, wept and mourned for him diverse days: and when the
dule and lamentations were finished and performed to the dead; the king
espoused her incontinently, and David marieth Bathsaba, and bears him a Son.
she bare him a man child: yet God beheld not this marriage with a favorable
eye, but was wroth with David, and appearing to the Prophet Nathan in a dream,
he blamed the king very sore: Now Nathan who was a wise and experienced man,
knew well that when kings are displeased, David after this manner, requiring
the king that it would 2. Reg. 12.
please him to censure and deliver his opinion in the same. Two men (said he)
dwelt in one and the same City: the one of them was rich, having many troops
of great and small cattle; the other that was poor, had but one only sheep,
which he nourished with his children, sharing him out a part of that whereon he
fed, and loving her as tenderly as a man would do his only daughter. The
year of the world 2910. before Christ's birth 1054. Natha^ prophecieth (...)
David's punishment, and sharply rebukes him: he is condemned by his own mouth,
and (...) himself.
Nathans displeased the king very sore, in so much as he swore unto him, that
he that had been so bold to commit such an act, was a wicked man, and that
reason required that he should restore him fourefold, and that after he should
be put to death. Whereunto Nathan replied, saying, that it was he that deserved
this punishment, who had given sentence against himself, in that he had
presumed to commit so grievous a sin. Moreover, he certified him of Gods
displeasure, who notwithstanding he had made him king over all the Hebrews,
and Lord over all the nations round about, which were diverse and great; and who
besides these things had warranted Saul, and had given him wives, whom he had
espoused justly and lawfully, was so despised and dishonored by him, that he
had espoused and kept by him an other man's wife, and caused her husband to be
slain, and betrayed him unto his enemy. For which sins of his, he pronounced
that he should be punished by God, and his wives should be violated by one of
his own sons, who should likewise lay a snare for him: so that he should
suffer a manifest plague for the sin he had committed in secret. Moreover
(said he) the son which thou shall have by her, shall shortly die.

After the king had received this message, he was sore troubled; and being
confused, he powered David confesses his sin, and obtains pardon at Gods
hands.
forth tears and sighed for sorrows, confessing that he had done wickedly: for
undoubtedly before this time he had always feared God, and had never in his
life offended him, but in that act with Vrias wife. Whereupon after his
submission, God was appeased and took compassion of him, promising him to
continue both his life and kingdom, and that he would be no more displeased
with him, if so be that he repented him of the sin he had committed. After
that Nathan had declared these things unto David, he departed unto his own
house. But God inflicted a grievous sickness on the infant that was borne by
Bethsabe: for which cause the king was sore agrieued, and for seven days space
would take no refection: notwithstanding that he was earnestly instanted David
fasteth seven days lamenting and mourning for his son.
thereunto by his household servants. He put on likewise a mourning habit, and
laid himself on the ground upon a sack; beseeching him that it would please
him to grant him the childs life, toward whose mother he bare so exceeding
love and affection. But when the infant was deceased about the seventh day of
his sickness, his servants durst not certify him thereof, supposing David
being certified that the child was dead, ^eth and wa^ing takes sustena^ce
on a white garment, and presented himself before the tabernacle of God, and
commanded his dinner to be made ready. Whereat his friends and servants were
very sore amazed, and wondered why he having done none of these things during
the childs sickness, should now after his death do all these things at once;
they besought him therefore that it might be lawful for them David yields a
reason why during the child's life he sa^ed, and why being dead be took
refection. Salo^on was borne by Bethsabe, Ioab by letters solliciteth the king
to come to the surprisall of Rabatha David surprising Rabatha by force gives
it for a pray to his soldiers.
the child was alive, and I had hope of his recovery, I omitted no means
whereby I might move God unto mercy? but now after that he is dead, it were in
vain for me to spend my self with unnecessary grief. Which when they heard,
they praised the wisdom and consideration of the king. After this he knew
Bethsabe his wife, who became with child, and was brought a bed of a son,
who (by Nathans direction) was called Solomon. Meanewhile Ioab pressed the
Ammonites with a sore siege, and cut off their water and other commodities and
things necessary; so that they were welny famished for want of victual and
provision: for they drew their water from a little spring in such sort, that
they feared least if they should use it to their own contentment,

The king understanding that which Ioab had written, allowed of his readiness,
good will, and faith; and taking with him all the forces which he had, he came
to the taking in of Rabatha, which being by him forcibly surprised and given in
pillage unto his soldiers, he retained for himself the crown of the king of
the Ammonites waighing a talent of gold, in the midst vvherof was enchased The
year of the world, 2910. before Christ's birth 1054.
David wore upon his head. He found likewise in that city diverse spoils of
great price: but as touching the inhabitants, he put them to the sword, and did
the like in all the Cities of the Ammonites which he took by force. But after
that the king was returned unto Jerusalem, there fell a grievous accident in
his family upon this occasion. He had a daughter at that time which was a
virgin, fair and beautiful, and surpassed all other women Hedio and Ruf^s.
chap. 8. (...). Reg. 13.
in admirable perfections, whose name was Thamar, borne by the same mother that
Absalon was. Of her Amnon the eldest son of David became enamoured, and for
that he could not enjoy her at his pleasure (by reason of her virginity, and
the hand that was had of her) he grew so melancholy that his body dried up, and
his color changed through the very grief that consumed him. A certain cousin
and friend of his called Jonathan (a man of great reach and quick The year of
the world. 2912. be^ Christ birth ^052.
understanding) perceiving this his passion, and noting every day how Amnons
beauty and strength decayed and wasted, he came unto him and asked him the
cause thereof, alleging that that indisposition of his seemed to proceed
from some amorous affection. Which when Amnon confessed, and how he was grown
passionate through the love he bare unto his sister by the fathers Ionatha^
counseled Amnon how he might enjoy his love.
side, Jonathan suggested him both the means and invention to compass his
desires: for he persuaded him to counterfeit himself to be sick, and that if
his father came to visit him, he should desire him to send his sister to
minister unto him, by which means he should easily and speedily be delivered
of his sickness. This counsel of his was plausible in Amnons ears, who
presently counterfaited sickness, and laid him down on his bed (according as
Jonathan had advised him:) and when David was come to visit him, he required
him to send his sister unto him, Amnon persuades his sister to submit to his
lust. Amnon notwithstanding his sisters resist violateth her.
him her company. But the virgin exclaiming, said unto him: Forbear my
brother, forbear to offer me violence: for it is a heinous sin to perpetrate
so foul a fact. Give over this thy most Thamar: so that he commanded her to
arise and depart. She answered, that this second outrage was more heinous then
the former; for that having violated her, he would not suffer her to remain
there until night time, but thrust her out incontinently by day time, and
during the light, to the end she might meet with such as might testify her
dishonor: Notwithstanding all these just reasons of hers, he commanded Absalon
met, enquiring of her what evil hap had befallen her. To whom she reported all
the injury which her brother Amnon had done her: whereupon he exhorted her to
pacify her self, and to suffer moderately whatsoever had befallen her; and
not to suppose her Absalon comfort his sister Thamar.
self to be indignified by any act of their brother. Whereunto she
condescended, forbearing her exclaimes, and surceasing to publish the injuries
she had received in the ears of the people. And Absalon invited his father and
brethren to his sheepshearing, and commands his servants to kill Amnon, being
ouercharged with wine and sleep.
thus remained she a long time with her brother Absalon in the quality of a
widow.

David having intelligence of that which had happened, was sore displeased,
notwithstanding he loved Amnon very entirely who was his eldest son, and
would not disquiet him: but Absalon hated him extremely, expecting (without any
word speaking) for some fit opportunity, wherein he might revenge himself on
the rauisher. Now when as two years were expired since his sister was both
derided and deflowred, it chanced that Absalon intending a sheep-shearing in
Belsephon, a City of the tribe of Ephraim, invited his father and brethren to
come and banquet with him. But when the king refused to go, for fear least he
might be chargeable unto him: Absalon The year of the world. 2912. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1052.
Absalon commanded his servants, that when they should see Amnon charged with
wine and sleep, they should suddenly (upon a sign given by him unto them)
kill him without fear or regard of any person.

CHAP. VIII.
How through the domestical discord of his family, David was banished by his
son out of his kingdom.

AFter that Absolons servants had thus executed his commandment, a trouble and
fear David is certified that al his sons are slain by Absalon.
which cause mounting themselves on horseback, they posted in all ^te toward
their father. But a certain man outstripping them in the way, reported unto
David that Absalon had slain all his sons. Who surprised with a bitter and
mortal fear, in supposing that such a number of his children should be
slain, and that by their own brother, neither inquired the cause or any thing
else which might be sifted out in so grievous an inconvenient that had happened,
but gave himself over to extreme and strange discomforts, and renting his
garments laid him down on the earth, bewailing all his children, both those
that were slain; (...) him also than had slain them. But Jonathan the son
of Sama his brother, exhorted him to moderate and bridle his passion, Jonathan
comforts David contradicting his fear, in respect of all his sons, and only
upon just sur^e suspecting Amnons death
telling him that he could not be persuaded that the rest of his children were
slain, in that he Amnon there needed no question, for that it was very like
that Absalon (by reason of the injury which was offered unto his sister
Thamar) would hazard himself to kill him. Mean while a great trample of
horses, and a confused troop of men brake off their discourse. These were the
kings sons who returned in post from the banquet: Against these the father
issued out, accompanying their doleful tears with a heavy and sorrowful
countenance, and seeing (beyond all hope) how they, whom a little before he
supposed to be lost, returned in safety, they were all of them on every side
given over to tears and lamentations; the brothers bewailed their mangled
brother, the king his murdered David's sons re^ort unto their father, Absalon
f^ieth to his grandfather.
son. But Absalon fled unto Gessur (unto his grandfather on the mothers side,
and lord of that place) and soiourned with him three whole years: at the end
whereof David determined to send Absalon, not to the intent to punish him, but
to retire him unto him (by reason that the indignation he had conceived against
him, was at that time aslaked.) Ioab also furthered this his resolution by all
means that were to him possible: For he caused a certain old woman attired
in mourning habit to present her self before David, who said unto him, that
betwixt her two 2. Reg. 14. Absalon by the subtilty of a woman, and the se^ing
on or Ioab is renoked from banishment unto Ieru^ale^.
sons that lived in the country, there happened such a different, that falling
to handy-strokes they were so whet the one against the other, that not enduring
to be parted, the one of them in such sort wounded the other, that he died; and
for that the kinsmen were fore moved against the murderer, and sought without
mercy to deprive him of life, she humbly besought the king that he would give
her her sons life, and not deprive her of that hope that remained her to
sustain her old years with; which he should bring to pass, if so be he
prohibited those that would kill her son Upon these words the king began Ioab
had suborned this woman, and understanding no less by the old woman's report,
he sent for Ioab, and told him that he granted him that which he desired,
commanding him to send for Absalon, assuring him that his displeasure was
pacified, and choler assuaged. Ioab cast himself down prostrate before the
king, and reverently receiving his word of reconciliation, went-vnto Gessur and
set Absalon from thence with him, and brought him to Jerusalem. The king
understanding that his son drew near, sent out a messenger to meet him,
commanding that as yet he should not presume to press into his presence,
because he was not The year of the world. 2912 before Christ's Nativity. 1052.
Absalon revoked by his father, 11 commanded for a time to fly his presence.
disposed to behold him so suddenly. Who understanding the will of his father,
forbore to show himself unto him, and went and dwelt amongst his own familiars
and household servants: Neither was his beauty any ways interessed by the
sorrow he had conceived, nor for that his entertainment was far different
from the bringing up and nourishing of a princes son; but he rather excelled
and grew more famous thereby: so that for beauty and goodlinesse of personage
he exceeded all those that lived more deliciously and daintily: his glibband or
hair was so thick that it could scarcely be powled in eight days, and waied
two hundredth sicles which amount to five pound. He lived also two years in
Jerusalem, and was the father of three sons, and one fair daughter, which
Roboam the son of Solomon afterward took to wife, of whom he begat Absalons
children borne in Jerusalem. 2. Reg. 13. Ioab urged by the burning of his
houses reconcileth Absalon to his father. The year of the world, 2^. 16.
before Christ's birth 1048.
a son called Abia. In process of time he sent messengers unto Ioab, that
now at length he Ioab made small reckoning of these his motions, he sent of
his servants, and commanded them to burn and spoil Ioabs possessions that
abutted upon his: who hearing of that which had happened unto him, resorted unto
Absalon, accusing him and questioning with him for what cause he had done him
this injury. To whom Absalon answered: I have (said he) invented this
stratageme to make thee come unto me, seeing thou made small account of my
commissions, whereby I have charged thee to reconcile me unto my father. And at
this present I beseech thee that thou will move my father in my behalf;
otherwise I shall think my return more grievous then my banishment has been,
if so be my father shall as yet continue his displeasure. Ioab was persuaded
through the compassion he conceived of the necessity Absalon, that altering his
contrary disposition, he graciously and speedily sent and called for him. As
soon as he came unto his presence, Absalon cast himself prostrate on the
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9.
ground, demanding pardon for his offenses: But David raised and lifted him
up, and promised him that from thenceforth he would no more vpbraid him with
those misdeedes. After all things had thus fallen out, Absalon within a little
space assembled a great number of horses and chariots, and entertained fifty
men for his guard, and every day early in the morning presented himself
before the kings palace, and talked with those that resorted thither, about
the trial of their differents; and whereas some of them were condemned, he
talked with them according as he found the^ affected, alleging that his
father had no good counselors, and that perhaps he himself Absalon subtly
affects his fathers kingdom.
had in some things judged amiss: and by these means endeavored he to get the
goodwil of al me^, telling them that if he had the like authority, he would
make the^ know by proof what his equity was. Having by these plausible
persuasions drawn the hearts of the common people unto him, he thought
himself already seized of their services in whatsoever he intended. Some
four years The year of the world, 29^0. before Christ's nativity, 1044.
after his reconciliation, he came to his father David, requiring of him that
he might go to Hebron and sacrifice unto God; according as he had vowed at such
time as he fled from his presence. Which request of his when David had granted
him, he resorted thither being attended with great affluence and concourse of
all the people (by reason he had appointed diverse to meet him in that place,
amongst whom was Achitophel the Gelmonite, one of David's counnsellers, and 200.
others of Jerusalem, who altogether ignorant of his enterprise, assembled
themselves in Absalon proclaimed king.
had commanded them to do. When the news hereof came unto David's ears, and he
was thoroughly ascertained beyond all conceit, how his son had behaved
himself; he suspected and doubted his impiety and arrogancy, wondering that he
should so soon and so lewdly forget himself of the pardon, which he had
obtained for his enormous and heinous crimes; and contrary to all law plunge
himself and hazard his reputation in more grievous offenses, as first of all
to pervert the estate of the kingdom which God had established: and secondly,
in complotting to deprive and degrade his own father. For which cause he
determined to fly to the other side David departed out of Jerusalem.
of Jordan, conducting with him his most inward and hearty friends, to whom he
reported the unbridled fury of his son, remitting all things unto God who
judges all things; and leaving the David flying prohibiteth the hie Priests to
follow him, to the intent to give him telligence of that which did pass.
With him issued an affectionate and great number of people; besides those six
hundredth soldiers, who had followed him in his banishment during Saul's life
time. And although the hie priests Abiathar and Sadoc with all the Levites had
concluded to depart with him, yet persuaded he them to abide with the Arc,
assuring them that God would deliver them: yea although the Arc were unremoved
from his place. He commanded Abiathar likewise to send him private intelligence
of each occurrent that should happen, reserving with him for his entire and
inward The year of the world, 2920. before Christ's Nativity, 1044. Ethaeus
departs with David.
counselors Achimaas the son of Sadoc, and Jonathan the son of the
abousaid Abiathar.

But Ethaeus the Gittite by no persuasions of the king could be induced to
stay, but contrary to his command followed him, whereby he more manifestly
expressed his affection toward him. But as he mounted and ascended on his bare
feet upon the mountain of Oliuet, and all they of his train followed him
(intermixing their travel with bitter tears) a certain messenger came and
certified him that Achitophel was with Absalon, and held on his side. Which
report aggrauated Achitophel reuolteth from David, and follows Absalon, whose
counsails David strives by prayer to make frustrate. Chusai is persuaded to
submit to Absalon and to Achitophels counsels
and increased his grief: so that he besought God that it might please him to
alienate the affection of Absalon from Achitophel, for fear least if he should
give him some sinister counsel, he might easily be persuaded thereunto; because
that Achitophel was a man of ripe judgment and ready execution in all that
concerned him. As soon as he came unto the top of the mountain, Chusai his
sincere and unfeigned friend, whom when he beheld with his garments rent, with
ashes on his head, and lamenting the unhappy change which he then beheld:
David cheered him, and exhorted him to be no ways discomforted; and finally
besought him to return unto Absalon, as under a color that he had forsaken
his part, where diligently prying into his secrets, he might oppose himself
against Achitophels counsels, because he might not so much pleasure him in
keeping him company, as in staying with Absalon. Chusai being after this manner
persuaded by David, returned back to Jerusalem, where presently after he
encountered with Absalon, who repaired thither. In the mean time David marching
onward a little further, chanced to meet with Siba Mephiboseths servant, and
purueior of al those David had given him (for that he was Ionathans son, who
was the son of Saul) 2. Reg. 16. Siba accusing his master wrongfully is made
owner of his riches.
This man drove before him two Asses laden with victuals, which he presented
to David and his company, to refresh themselves with; and being demanded where
he had left Mephiboseth? in Jerusalem (said he) where he expects to be chosen
king through the occasion of those troubles that had happened, and in memory of
the benefits that diverse men had received at Saul's hands. David displeased with
that which he heard, gave Siba all those riches wherewith he had gratified
Mephiboseth in times past, deeming him more worthy of the same then
Mephiboseth. Wherewith Siba was very highly contented.

When David drew near unto a place which is called Choran, a certain cosen
of Saul's called Simei, the son of Gera, came out against him, and cast stones
at him, and reviled him; and David's friends environed and defended him, the
more obstinately perseuered he in his Semeies reuiling of David.
reproves and scandalous raylings: calling him murderer, and captain of the
wicked, charging him like an impure and execrable man to get him out of the
kingdom, giving God thanks for that he had deprived him of his kingdom by the
means of his own son, and in punishment of those crimes which he had
committed against his own master. This his so cruel and unbridled liberty,
moved all David's followers to displeasure; so that all of them were prepared to
revenge them on Simei; and amongst the rest Abisai would have slain him: but
David pacified his displeasure, willing him to forbear, for fear (said he)
least to our present miseries we annexe a further and new occasion. For in as
much as concerns my self, I set light by this mad dog, David forbids to
kill Simei.
and refer the matter unto God, who is the cause that he is thus desperately
bent against us: Neither He therefore walked onward on his way, not caring what
Simei said, who ran on the other side of the mountain, railing and reuiling
at him. When David was arrived on the bank of Jordan, he mustred and refreshed
his army, who were fore wearied: mean while Absalon entering Jerusalem with
Achitophel his counselor, was saluted and applauded by the whole concourse of
the people, and amongst the rest David's friend came unto them, who prostrating
himself before Absalons feet, wished him both prosperity and perpetuity in
his kingdom. Him did Absalon ask how it came to pass, that he who was
reputed to be one of David's most indeered friends, and esteemed always to be
most loyal and faithful Chusai under a color offreth his service to Absalon.
Chusai answered both readily and wisely, that it became him to follow God, and
the good will of the people.

Since therefore (said he, my sovereign) that both these are for you, it
concerns me to follow you, because you have received the kingdom from God:
If therefore you esteem me to be your faithful friend; I will approve unto
you my loyalty and true affection in like manner, as in your knowledge I have
testified in effect unto your father, who ought not to be displeased at The
year of the world 29^0. before (...) (...). 1044. Achitophel ^th Absalon to
lie with his fathers concubines.
that which had happened, since the kingdom is not transported into an other
house, but remains in his own family, because he who was his son received
the same. By such like words he reconciled himself to Absalon, whereas before
that time he was inwardly suspected. Hereupon Achitophel was sent for to
consult with him about their affairs in hand: who gave him counsel to abuse
all his fathers concubines, and make them his own. For (said he) from that
time forward the people will believe that you and he will never be reconciled;
and will be more ready to bear arms and invade your father for your sake.
For hitherto (said he) they have unwillingly professed themselves to be his
enemies, suspecting least a peace should ^e concluded betwixt the father and
the son. Absalon believing this advise of his, caused a Tent or royal
Pauilion to be pitched in the sight of all the people, whereinto he entered, and
had the company of his fathers Nathan had foretold, at such time as he
certified David, that his own son should make war against him.

CHAP. IX.
Absalons war against his father, his death, and the discomfiture of his
army.

WHen Absalon had done that which Achitophel had instructed him in, he
requested him once more to counsel him concerning that war which he had
enterprised against 2. Reg. 17. Achitophels counsel persuading Absalon to
pursue David Chusais opposition.
his father: who required ten thousand chosen men at his hand, promising him to
kill David, and to bring all the rest that were in his conduct under his
subjection: assuring him that Absalons kingdom would be then established, when
David's head were cut off from his shoulders. When this advise of his had highly
contented him, he sent for Chusai, who was the chiefest amongst David's friends
(for so David himself had termed him) to whom he discovered the advice which
Achitophel had given him, and required him to give his opinion what he thought
thereof: who knowing very well that if Achitophels counsel were followed,
David should be in danger to be apprehended and slain, enforced all his
arguments and counsails to the contrary. For (said he) my Liege, you are
sufficiently informed both what your fathers valor is, and their virtue that
accompany him; who has fought many battles, and has had the upper hand over
all his enemies. It is to be feared also least he at this present be encamped
in the field. For he is well exercised in leading Achitophel has given you.
Send me through all the country of the Hebrews, commanding every one to take
arms and march out against your father: and when you have gathered together
these forces, be you your self in person the general of the army, and commit
it not to an other man's charge, and assuredly expect to have an easy victory
over him, if you assail Chusais counsel accepted, Achitophels (...).
by many thousands, who at least wise if they love you and will show a good
affection toward you, may easily rid you of that enemy. And if so be your
father shut himself up in any City, we will and may subvert the same by mines
and engines. This advise of his seemed to be better then that of Achitophels,
so that Absalon preferred the same. For it was God that put this thought into
his heart, to neglect Achitophels, and respect Chusais counsel.

Now when Chusai had thus prevailed, he presently repaired to the high Priests
Sadoc and Abiathar, certifying them what Achitophel had complotted, and how he
had contradicted him: finally how his opinion had taken place, giving them in
charge to send private intelligence unto David thereof, and to inform him of
his sons resolution, wishing him with all speed to pass Absalon being
informed of his abode in that place should make haste and pursue him, and
overtake him before he might recover a place of security. Sadoc and Abiathars
sons sent unto David.
Now had the high Priests before hand provided that their sons should lie hid
without the City of set purpose, to the end they might be sent unto David to
inform him how matters went. They therefore sent a trusty servant unto these,
who brought them news of Absalons deliberations, with express commandment
to inform the King thereof with all speed, who presently upon this
intelligence like good and faithful ministers, posted with all speed to The
year of the world. 2920. before Christ birth 1044. ^he hie Priests so^ being
pursued are hidden by a woman in a pit.


But scarsely had they traveled two furlongs, when certain horsemen
discovered them, and brought news thereof unto Absalon, who presently sent out
scoutes to apprehend them: which when the children of the hie priest perceived,
they forsook the hie way, and incontinently retired themselves into a certain
village near unto Jerusalem, which is called Bocchura, where they besought a
certain woman to hide them and shut them in some place of security, who let
them down into a pit, and covered the mouth thereof with bundles of wool. She
being demanded by those that pursued them whether she saw them, denied the
same, saying, that as soon as she had given them drink, they departed from
her presently; assuring them that if they presently and speedily pursued them,
they might easily apprehend them: but after they had David informed of Absalons
deliberation passes himself and his whole army over Jordan by night.
Achitophel perceiving his counsel was despised hung himself.
perceiving that they were departed, and that there was no cause of fear,
least the young men should be surprised, she drew them out of the pit, and set
them onward of their way: who, with as great speed as was possible, resorted
unto David, and declared unto him exactly what Absalons deliberation was.
Hereupon David passed the flood Jordan presently with all his men, and although
it were night could not be withdrawn by reason of the darkness.

But Achitophel seeing that his opinion had been reproved, took his horse and
suddenly repaired unto his country of Gelmone, there calling together his
household servants before him, he discovered unto them what advise he had given
Absalon; which since he had not accepted, he told them that shortly they
should see him dead, alleging that David would have the upper David's
punishment for partaking with Absalon, and giving him counsel. This said, he
retired himself into the most secret part of his house, and hung himself,
being both his own judge and executioner: after which, his kinsmen cut him down
and buried him. But David (as we David comes to Mahanaim where he is royally
entertained by the peers.
said) having past Jordan, came and encamped in a strong City, the most
defenced in that country: there was he entertained with great benevolence by
all the noble men of that country, partly moved thereunto by the man's present
necessity, partly through the reverence of his former felicity. These were
Berzillai the Galaadite, Siphar the governor of the province of the Ammonites,
and Machir the chief of the country of Galaad, who gave David and his
whatsoever Absalon assembled a Hedio and Ruffnus chapter 10 2. Reg. 18. Absalon
passes over Jordan.
great multitude of people to make war upon his father, and after he had
passed Jordan, he pitched his tents near unto his fathers, within the country
of Galaad, and made Amasa general of his army, opposing him against Ioab his
chosen: For Amasas father was Iethar, and his sister was Abigail, sister to
Saruia mother to Ioab. When David had mustered and numbered his forces, and
found that he had forty thousand fighting men, it was thought fit presently to
hazard battle, and not to expect till Absalon should charge upon them.

He therefore ordained Coronels over thousands of his men, and divided them
into three Ioab; the second to Abisai his brother; and the The division of
David's ar^ie. David's ^e^ds dissuade his presence in the battle.
third to Ethaeus his familiar friend (who was of the City of Geth.) In this
battle his friends would not admit his presence (and that upon good and deep
consideration) for they said that if they should be defeated in his company,
they should utterly lose all good hope: but if one squadron should be overcome,
the rest might have their recourie unto him, who might assemble unto them and
strengthen them with greater force; the rather for that the enemies would
always think it likely, that he had some other army with him. This counsel
of theirs seemed pleasing unto him, for which cause he remained within the
City. But at such time as he sent out his friends unto the battle, he
besought them that (in remembrance of all the benefits and favors he had
bestowed on them) they would both show themselves courageous and faithful men
in the fight, and that having David commands the^ to spare his son. The
battle betwixt Ioab and Absalon.
battle. But when as Ioab had planted his army right over against the enemy,
and had extended them on the plain, having a wood upon their backs; Absalon
also drew out his army against him; so that encountering and valiantly fighting
the one against the other, they performed many notable exploits on both parts:
the one hazarding themselves in all dangers, and employing all their
affections, to the intent that David might recover his kingdom: the others The
year of the world, 2920 before Christ's birth 1044.
neither refusing to do or endure any thing, so that Absalon might not be
deprived, or exposed to his fathers punishment and displeasure for his insolent
attempt. Besides that, they held it an indignity for them, that being so great
in number as they were, they should be surmounted by such a handful of people
as followed Ioab: deeming it to be an utter disgrace unto them, that being so
many thousands of them in arms, they should be discomfited by David's
foullowers.

But Ioab and his men being more skilful and trained in feats of arms then
the rest, discomfited and brake Absalons army: so that they fled through woods
and steepie places. David's soldiers The f^ight and overthrow o^ Absalons (...).
pursuing after them took some, and slew other some; so that both in flight
and fight, a great number of them were put to the sword: For there fell that
day about twenty thousand men. But David's troops freshly set upon Absalon, who
was easily known by reason of his absolute beauty, and high stature: he
fearing to be surprised by his enemies, mounted upon the royal mule, and fled
in great haste. And for that by swift motion of his body, his locks were
scattered abroad, his bush of hair was entangled in a thick and branchie
tree, where he hung after a strange manner, and his mule ran onward with
great swiftness, as if she had as yet borne her master on her back: but he
hanging by the hair amidst the branches, suddenly fell into his enemies hands.
This when a certain soldier apperceiued, he brought news thereof unto Ioab,
who promised him to give him fifty sicles, if he would kill him. The soldier
answered, that if he would give him two thousand he would not commit such a
murder on the son of his sovereign, the rather for that in the presence of
them all, David had requested them to spare him. Ioab commanded him to show him
the place where he had seen Absalon hang, who no sooner discovered him, but
thrusting a iauelin to his heart, he slew him. That done, Ioabs Esquires Ioab
kills Absalon.
arrounding the tree took him down, and casting him into a deep and obscure
pit, they overwhelmed him with stones: so that in appearance it seemed to be a
toombe, or some great high and stately monument. After this when Ioab had
sounded the retreat, he withdrew his soldiers from pursuit, supposing it to be
an innaturall thing for one countreyman to flesh himself upon another. Absalon
had erected in the royal valley two furlongs distant from Jerusalem a marble
pillar, which he had entitled by the name of Absalons Hand, saying, that when
his children Absalons marble pillar.
should be dead, his name should remain in that pillar. Now he had three
sons, and a daughter which was called Thamar, as we have said heretofore, who
was married unto Roboam Dauid's Nephew, and had by him a son called Abia, who
succeeded his father in the kingdom: Of whom we will speak more conveniently
in his place.

CHAP. X.
The happy estate of David being restored unto his kingdom.

AFter that Absalon was slain, all the people returned privately to their own
houses: but Achimaas the son of the hie priest Sadoc drew near unto Ioab,
requiring his license Chusai sent to certify David of the victory.
to repair unto David, and to certify him of the victory, and how by Gods
help and providence he had obtained the victory. This did the general deny
him, telling him that it was Chusai to his presence, he gave him commission to
certify the king of that which he had seen. Achimaas requested him the second
time that he would suffer him to go, promising him that he would make no
mention but of the victory; and that as touching Absalons death, he would not
utter any thing: whereupon he dismissed him also, who choosing the shorter way
(which he only knew) outstripped Chusai. Now as David sat in the gate of the
City (expecting some messenger that might certify him of the success of the
battle) one of the Sentinels perceiving Achimaas that came running hastily,
and unable to discover who it was, told David that he saw a messenger coming
toward him, who answered that it was some one that brought joyful news. Anon
after he told David answered likewise, that it was one that brought glad
tidings. And when the watchman perceived that it was Achimaas Sadoc the high
priests son, and that he was near at hand, he ran first of all and
certified David, who was very glad thereof, saying that he brought some good
and desired news as touching the event of the battle: and no sooner had the
king spoken the word, but Achimaas entered and humbled himself upon his face
before David, to whom he reported that his army had the victory. Being
afterward demanded what was become of Absalon: He answered, that he
incontinently departed The year of the world, 2920. before Christ's Na^ie, 1044.
Absalon: and further then that he knew nothing, because by Ioabs commandment
he was speedily sent away to bring tidings of the victory. When Chusai was
come and had humbled himself before the king, and had declared unto him the
success of the battle, the question was asked how Absalon did? Whereunto he
answered, The like fortune happen to thine enemies (O King) as has happened to
Absalon. These words quite extinguished the delight David hearing of Absalons
death by Chusai grievously bewaileth him.
and joy that David conceived in the victory, and wholly amated his faithful
soldiers: for as touching the king, he ascending the highest part of the City
bewailed his son, beating his breast, tearing his hair, and afflicting
himself in all kinds, and after such a sort, as may not be expressed; and
crying out in a most mournful manner: My son (said he) would God my son
Absalon above all other most tenderly.

When the army and Ioab were informed that David lamented his son in this
sort, they had this respect, that they would not enter the City after a
triumphant and victorious manner: but they entered hanging their heads, and
weeping all of them most tenderly, as if they had returned 2. Reg* 19. Ioab and
his army enter the city in mournful manner.
from some discomfiture. But when as the king having his head covered,
perseuered in his desire to bewail his son, Ioab entered in unto him and
said: O King, you consider not that in this behavior of yours, you dishonor
your self: for it is to be thought that you hate those that love you, and
expose themselves to all perils for your love; yea that you hate your self and
your own succession: and that contrariwise you love your most mortal enemies
most entirely, since you bewail David is taxed for lamenting his Son, and upon
Ioabs persuasion (...) himself unto the people.
them that were no less, and who are justly deprived of their lives. For if
Absalon had had the victory, and had possessed the kingdom in assurance,
there had not any one of us been left alive that love you; but had all of us
suffered a most hated death; nay and in the first rank your self and your
own children: neither would they being our enemies have lamented, but laughed
at our deaths; yea they would punish them likewise who should have any
compassion of our miseries: Yet art thou not ashamed to lament after this
manner, for such a man as most extremely ha^ed thee, who notwithstanding he
were thine own son, was so ungrateful and ungracious toward thee. Desist
therefore from thy unjust lamentation, and offer thy self in presence to thy
weldeseruing soldiers, and give them thanks, that by their virtue have
obtained thee this victory: otherwise if thou continue as thou have began,
this day will I translate both the kingdom By these words Ioab pacified and
alayed the kings lamentations, and drew him to the care of his common weal:
For clothing himself in a royal habit, whereby he might seem more gracious
in the sight of his soldiers, he sat him down in Hedio and Ruffinus. chap.
11.
the gate: so that all the people hearing thereof, flocked out to salute him.
Whilst these things past after this manner, they that remained alive of
Absalons army returning home unto their houses, sent their messengers to every
corporation, aduertising them how many benefits they had received at David's
hands, and how after many and grievous wars he had brought them to a secure
liberty, and how iniustly expelling him, they had committed the kingdom unto
another. The kingdom of Israel is once more offered unto David.
For which cause it behooued them, that since he was dead whom they had chosen,
to make their David, that dismissing his wrath, he would receive the people
into his favor, and according as before time, so now also he would vouchsafe
them his pardon and protection. Of these things sundry intelligences came unto
the kings ears, so that by express letters he commanded Sadoc and Abiathar
the chief priests, that they should certify the princes of the tribe of Judah,
that it should be a great indignity for them that other tribes should prefer
David to the kingdom before them, especially since he was both of their tribe,
and their David not only gives Amasa his pardon, but makes him general also
of the whole army. The tribe of Judah comes as far as Jordan to meet with
David, and make a bridge over the flood.
kinsman also. In like manner he commanded them to speak with Amasa the
general, and expostulate with him, why he who was his Nephew by the sisters
side, did not persuade the army to recommend the kingdom to his hands: willing
them to assure him that he was not only to hope for pardon for that which had
happened, but also for the government of the whole army, Absalon had granted him.
Hereupon the high priests not only conferred with the princes aforesaid, but
also informing Amasa what the king had promised in his behalf, whereby they
drew him to their faction. And first of all those of his own tribe revoked
David very instantly into the kingdom; the rest of the Israelites by their
example and Amasas authority, did the like also; and these ambassadors flocked
unto him to receive him into Jerusalem. But wonderful and praiseworthy was the
diligence of the tribe of Judah, who went out as far as the bank of Jordan to
meet with him, with these came Simei the son of Gera, with a thousand men,
The year of the ^orld 29^0. before Christ's Nativity. 1044. Simei is pardoned.
which he had brought with him of the tribe of Benjamin. Siba likewise Saul's
freeman came thither with his fifteen sons, and twenty servants: who made a
bridge over Jordan, that the king might the more easily pass over both
himself and his army. As soon as he came unto Jordan, he was saluted by the
tribe of Judah: and Simei marching onward on the bridge, and prostrating
himself at the kings feet, asked pardon of his offenses, and besought him to
remit his displeasure: and that in recovering his authority, he would not
first of all do justice on him, but that he should remember this also, that he
being induced by the repentance of his error, did with the foremost march out
to meet him upon his return. Whilst thus he besought and lamented, Abisai
Ioabs brother spoke after this manner. Why should he not die that has thus
villanously outraged the King, whom God has established? But David turned
back unto him and said: ye sons of Seruia, Simei, and fear thou not that I
will seek thy blood. Whereupon he adored the King, and marched onward before
him. After this Mephiboseth Saul's nephew came out to meet him, clothed in a
desolate and sorry raiment, having his hairs hanging down in a neglected and
sorrowful manner. For since the time that David fled and fosooke the city, he
had in such sort been distressed, that he neither had trimmed his hair, nor
changed or cleansed his garment, supposing this calamity and deposition to
touch him as nearly, as it did the king: and further, in that by Siba his
steward, he had been unjustly detracted and accused Mephiboseth purges
himself of Sibas slanders.
to the king. After he had prostrated himself, and adored the king, David
asked him for what cause he forsook him in his troubles, and offered not
himself to accompany him in his flight? Who answered, that it was the
wickedness of Siba, who was the cause thereof: for he (said he) being commanded
to prepare my necessaries for that journey, neglected the execution thereof,
contemning both me and it, as if I had been some abject slave: Otherwise had I
had the use of my feet, and the means to have waited on thee in thy journey,
I had never endured to have forsaken thee. Neither was he contented (my liege)
to hinder my devout service toward thee, but furthermore he has maliciously
incensed your majesty against me: yet know I well that your wisdom will not
admit or give credence to his detractions, both for that you are just, as also
for that God and truth which you only aspire to, are only beloved by you. For
whereas during When David had heard these things, he neither thought good to
punish Mephiboseth, neither to examine whether Siba had wrongfully accused him,
but after he had certified him David pardons Mephiboseth, and restores him
to the half of his possessions Berzillai excuses himself, and will not
resort to ^erusalem.
that he had given Siba all his goods: yet did he pardon him, and promise him
the restitution of half his possessions: Whereunto Mephiboseth replied. Let
Siba (says he) possess the whole, it David invited Berzillai the Galaadite (a
virtuous man and of great authority, and by whose bounty during the time of
his war he was assisted, and who had attended him as far as Jordan) to
accompany him unto Jerusalem, promising him to make no less account of him
then of his father, and assuring him liberally to allow him in all things that
concerned his honor and age. But he being desirous to live in private,
besought his majesty to dismiss him from the court, because (as he said) his
age was so extreme as it made him unapt for courtly pleasures, considering that
he had attained to the age of fourscore years: alleging that it better
became him to think of death, and the departure out of this world. For which
cause he besought David to favor him so much as that he might govern himself
according to his own desire, because that by reason of his age David replied,
since (said he) thou do so instantly request me to give thee leave to
depart from me, I dismiss thee: but leave thou thy son Achimaas with me, who
shall be master of my many favors. Hereupon Berzillai left his son with him,
and taking leave of the king (with prayer that God would grant him the fulness
of all his desires) he returned to his own house. But David went The year of
the world. ^920. before the Nativity of Christ. 1044. The tribe of Iodaes
acculation, and excuse, for that without the knowledge of the other tribes they
had gone out to meet the king.
Judah.) Thither resorted then unto him the chief governors of that country,
attended by a great multitude of people, complaining upon the tribe of Judah,
for that unwitting to the rest they had resorted to him, when as by a mutual
consent they should all of them have met him together. But the Princes of the
tribe of Judah requested them in no sort to misconstrue their prevention of
them. For that by reason of alliance they had done this office, whereby being
tied unto him they were bound with more fervent study to do him service: for
neither in respect of that diligence of theirs received they any rewards,
whereby they that came after should think themselves preiudizde in profit.
This answer of theirs the Princes of the tribes took not in good part, but
thus they spoke unto their brethren: We wonder (said they) that you only
challenge 2. Reg. 20. Siba a seditious person incenseth the people to rebeil
against the king. David's concubines whom Absalon had disloured are sequestered
from him.
sort debated the matter with them, a certain wicked and seditious person
called Siba, the son of Bochri of the tribe of Benjamin, standing up in the
midst of the people began to cry out with a loud voice, and to exclaim after
this manner. We have no part with David, nor inheritance with the son of
Iesse. This said, he sounded a trumpet, and proclaimed war against the king;
so that all men followed him, and forsook David. Only the tribe of Judah
remained with him, and established him in the royal throne in Jerusalem: where
removing his concubines (which Absalon had known) out of his palace, he never
after that time had any company with them. After this he declared Amasa
general of the army, and placed him in the same degree which Ioab had, near
unto the person of the King: commanding him that he should assemble the
greatest forces that he might out of the tribe of Judah, and that within three
days he should return unto him, to the end that having delivered him both the
army and the place of general, he might send him to make war upon the son
of Bochri. After that Amasa was departed, and employed his time in gathering up
his army; the king seeing that he failed to return upon the third day, told
Ioab by reason of Amasaes delay is lent out against Siba by David.
Ioab that it was not good to permit Siba to gather a greater head by delay,
and thereby breed us more trouble and molestation then Absalon had done. For
which cause (said he) stay thou not but take unto thee those forces which thou
have in a readiness, and my six hundredth men with thy Abisai, and pursue thou
the enemy, and in what place soever thou meetest him, by all means endeavor
thy self to give him the battle. Have thee therefore, and overtake him, for
fear least he seize some of our strongest Cities, and thereby procure us much
travel and labor. Ioab with all expedition obeyed his commandment, and
took with him the aforesaid six hundredth, with his brother Abisai, and
commanded all the forces that were in Jerusalem to follow after him, and in
this array issued he after Siba. Now when he came unto Gabaon (a burrow some
forty furlongs distant from Jerusalem) Amasa came and met with him, and
brought with him great forces. Ioab having his sword girt by his side, and his
curets on his back, whilst Amasa came onward to salute him, subtly and of
set purpose let his sword slip out of his sheath, and taking it up from the
ground with one hand he drew near unto Amasa, under pretense Ioab kills
Amala.
to kiss him on the chin, and suddenly thrust the sword that was in his other
hand into his belly, and slew him. Which action of his was both heinous and
detestable, proceeding from a jealousy he had conceived against a good young
man and his cosen, who had in no sort offended him, and only by reason of the
estate of general, which the king had given him; and because David had
equalled him in honor with him, for which very cause before that he had
slain. Abner. Notwithstanding this act of his seemed in some sort pardonable,
by reason of the pretext which he pretended of the wrong done unto his brother
Azael, yet was not this a sufficient color to excuse the murder of Amasa.
When this was done, he pursued Siba, and left a certain man to wait upon the
body of Amasa, who had commandment given him to proclaim with a loud voice
through the whole army, that he was justly and deservedly slain, commanding
Ioab and his brother Abisai. Now whilst his body lay thus in the way, and all the multitude (as it is usual in such like accide^ts) flocked round about it,
he that had the charge of the body took it up, and bare it into a certain
place far out of the way, and covered it with a garment: which done, all the
people followed Ioab. Now whilst he pursued Siba through all the region of the
Israelites, a certain man told him that he had retired himself into a certain
strong city called Abelmacha; where he no sooner arrived, but that he begirt
the City, and entrenched it round about; commanding his soldiers to undermine
The year of the world. 2920. before Christ's Nativity 1044. Ioab besieges and
shuts up Siba within Abelmac^ea. A woman rebukes Ioab for seeking the
subversion of the city which he rather ought to protect. Ioabs conditions of
peace proposed to the besieged.
Ioab and his soldiers to a parlee, who coming forth to confer with him,
she spoke after this manner: God (says she) ordained kings and generals of
armies, to the end they might destroy the enemies of the Hebrews, and plant
amongst them an universal and perpetual peace; but you enforce your selves to
destroy one of the mother Cities of Israel, that has in no sort offended you.
Ioab prayed God to be favorable unto them, and said that for his own part it
was not his meaning that any one of the City should die, neither his pretense
to race and deface so famous a City; his intent was only, that if Siba the
son of Bochri, and the kings adversary were delivered into his hands to do
justice on him, to leuy the siege, and to Ioab had said, she prayed him to stay
a little while, promising him incontinently to cast his head over unto him.
Whereupon she came down amongst the assembly of the Citizens, to whom she spoke
after this manner: Wretched men that you are, will you miserably suffer your
wives and children to be slain for a wicked man's cause, and a stranger whom ye
know not? will you admit him in place of David your king, from whose hands you
have received so many benefits? think you that one only City can resist so
huge an army? After this manner persuaded she them to cut off Sibas head, The
punishment of Siba.
and to cast it into Ioabs camp: which done, Ioab commanded the retreat to be
sounded, and levied the siege, and returning back into Jerusalem, was once
more declared general of all the people. The king also appointed Banaia
captain of his guards, and of six hundredth soldiers. Adoram was made
treasurer to gather in the tributes. Sabath and Achilaus had the charge of
remembrancers. Offices distributed by David
Susa was made secretary. Sadoc and Abiathar were made the high priests. After
this it happened that the conntrey was afflicted with a famine: For which cause
David besought God that he would have compassion on his people, and that it
might please him to manifest not Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 12.
only the cause, but also the remedy of that malady. The Prophets answered
him, that God 2. Reg. 21. A famine inflicted on the Israelites for breach of
oath.
would be revenged of the wrong done unto the Gabeonites, whom king Saul had
deceived and traitorously slain, without respect of the oath, which the
governor Iosuah and the elders made unto them. If therefore he would suffer the
Gabeonites to revenge the death of their slaughtered friends according to their
desire, God had promised to be appeased, and to deliver the people from their
imminent and presenteuils. As soon as he understood by the prophets what God
required, Saul's sons to take their revenge on them: whereupon the king made
search after them, only sparing and protecting Mephiboseth the son of
Jonathan. When the Gabeonites had laid hold on these seven, they executed them
according to Seven ^en of Saul's kindred delivered to the Gabeonits to be
punished.
their pleasures: and thereupon God incontinently sent down rain and disposed
the earth to bear fruit; moistning and alaying the drouth forepassed, so that
the land of the Hebrews recovered again his pristine fruitfulness. Not long
after the king made war upon the Philistines, and at such time as the battle
was stricken, and the enemies turned their backs, it chanced that the king
hotly pursuing the chase was left alone; and discovered in his weariness by
one of the enemies called Acmon, the son of Araph of the race of the Giants,
who beside his sword David in hazard of his life is delivered by Abisai.
who returning back charged David very violently, with an intent to kill the
king of his enemies, by reason that he saw him spent with travel. But about
the same instant Abisai Ioabs brother arrived in the place, who stepped between
them and rescued the king, and slew his enemy. The whole army for a little
space were grievously discomforted, in regard of the danger wherein David
persuaded to abstain from war.
the king had been, and the governors swore that he should never afterward
enter into battle with them, for fear least he might fall into some distaster,
by reason of his readiness and valor, and by that means should deprive the
people of those gifts which were in him, which he had already made them feel,
and whereof hereafter they should be made partakers, if God should vouchsafe
him a long and blessed life. The king having intelligence that the Philistines
were assembled David's valiant captains. Sabach.
in the city of Gazara, sent out an army against them, in which Sabach the
Hittite, one of David's redoubted and picked soldiers behaved himself very
valiantly, and gate great reputation: for he slew diverse of them that vaunted
themselves to be of the race of the Giants, and that were very proud and
puffed up with presumption of their valor, and was chief author of that
victory which the Hebrews had.

After this last received loss, the Philistines once more hazarded their
fortunes in war, against who^ when David had sent out an army, Nephanus his
kinsman showed himself very valiant: The year of the world. 2924. before
Christ's birth 1040. Nephanus*
Jonathan the son of Sama (one of those that were sent by David in this army)
fought Jonathan.
hand to hand and slew him: so that approving himself to be the means of that
victory, he bare away the honor of the battle, and praise of his valor: for
this Philistine boasted likewise that he was descended from the race of the
Giants. After this battle they warred no more on the Israelites. Hereupon
David delivered from war and danger, and ever after enjoying a perfect peace,
2. Reg 12. David a poes. David's instruments of Music.
some are of five measures. He made instruments also, and taught the Levites to
praise God upon them, on the Saboth days and other feasts. The form of these
instruments was after this manner. The Cinnare is composed of ten strings, and
is played upon with a bow. The Nable contains twelve sounds or cords, and is
stricken with the fingers. The Cimbals were large and great and made of brass,
of which it suffices in this sort to make some mention, least the nature of
those instruments should wholly be unknown. Now all those that were about the
king were valiant men: but amongst all the rest, there were eight most notable
and heroic men. The noble 2. Reg. 23. David's thirty eight cha^pions
actions of five of which I will declare, because they might suffice to
exemplify the virtues that were in the other that remained: for they were
capable to govern a country, and to conquer Issemus the son of Achemaeus,
who having very oftentimes Issemus.
thrust himself into the midst of his disordered enemies, never gave over
fighting till he had slain nine hundredth of them. After him was Eleazar the
son of Dodeias, who had accompanied the Eleazar.
king in Sarphat. He in a certain battle (wherein through the huge multitude
of the enemies, the Israelites were affrighted and put to flight) only kept
his place and affronted the enemy, and rushing in amongst them made a great
slaughter of them: so that through the great quantity of blood which he shed,
his sword stuck fast to his hand; and the Israelites seeing the Philistines put
to flight by him, came down and ran upon them, and obtained a miraculous and
famous victory over them. For Eleazar slaughtered those that fled, and the
rest of the army followed and spoiled those that were slain. The third was the
son of Ilus called Sebas, who fighting against Sebas.
David (as we have declared heretofore) was gone up into the higher city to
ask counsel of God, what the event of that war should be, and the enemies
being encamped in that valley (that extends it self as far as Bethleem, a
City some twenty furlongs distant from Jerusalem) David said to his
companions: There is very good water in the place where I was born, and
especially that which is in the pit which is near unto the gate, if any one
will bring me of Three champions pass through the enemies camp and drew water
in Bethleem, and brought it unto David.
Abisai Ioabs brother, who slew six hundredth of the enemy Abisai.
in one day. The fifth was Banaia of the race of the Levites, who being defied
by certain Banaia,
Egyptian of a wonderful stature, having defied him (notwithstanding the said
Banaia was naked and the other armed) yet charged he him, and took away his
iauelin and slew him. To Banaias slew an Egyptian with his own spear.
these foresaid acts of his, a man may annex this as the most valiant, or very
nearly equalling the rest. For it came to pass, that after a certain snow a
Lion tossing amidst the flakes thereof, fell into a pit (whose mouth was so
narrow, that a man could not discern where it was, especially for that at the
same time it was covered with snow) where being enclosed, and seeing no means
The year of the w^d, 2924 before Christ^ b^h 1040. Banaia slew a Lion. Hedio
and Ruffinus, chap. 13. 2. Reg 24. David ^endeth loab to muster the people.
to escape, he roared out amain: which when Banaia who passed that way heard,
he followed the voice, and drew near unto the place; and afterward went down
into the pit, where with a staff he bare in his hand he fought with, overcame,
and slew the Lion. The thirty three other were of like valor and virtue. But
King David being desirous to know how many thousands of men he could number
amongst the people, and forgetting the commandment ordained by Moses (who had
given order that if the people had been numbered, there should be paid unto God
for every head half a sicle) he commanded Ioab to go and number all the
people: and although Ioab had manifestly proved unto him that it was a thing no
ways necessary; yet could he not persuade him, but that he enjoined him with
all expedition, to set forward on his way, and muster the people of the
Hebrews.

Hereupon Ioab took with him the principals of the Tribes and Scribes, and
after circuited all the country of the Hebrews, to know how many men there
were, and at the end of nine months and twenty days, he returned to Jerusalem
to the king, and presented him with the list of the people, the tribe of
Benjamin only excepted (for he neither numbered that tribe, nor the tribe of
Leui.) This done, the king perceiving that he had displeased God, was very
sorrowful and pensive. The sum of the Israelites that were numbered.
The route of the other Israelites was of nine hundredth thousand men, able to
bear arms, and to follow the war, besides that the only tribe of Judah
contained 400. thousand men. When the Prophets had certified David how God was
displeased with him, he began to pray and beseech him that it might please him
to appease his wrath, and to pardon his offense. Hereupon God sent the Prophet
Gad unto him, who brought him the choice of three things, willing him to make
election David having election of three sorts of punishment chose the plague.
his person: he therefore made choice of a plague, that was both as incident to
the prince, as the subject; wherein each man was touched with equal and
imminent fear, saying, that it was better to fall into the hands of God, then
into the hands of his enemies. When the Prophet had received this answer from
him, he reported it unto God; who sent a plague and mortality amongst the
Hebrews, whereby they died after diverse manners: so that it was very hard to
discern the malady, which being but one in kind, yet notwithstanding seized
the people by ten thousand causes, and unknown occasions. For one of them died
after another, and the sickness surprising them at unawares, brought a sudden
dissolution of the spirits, and swouning upon them; so that some of them gave
up the ghost with grievous torments, and most strange dolors. Others were
presently partched up through the burning agonies they endured, and
(unrecoverable by A huge slaughter of those that died of the past^lence that
was i^flicted by God. David prayed for the innocent people.
(at which time the pestilent mortality began to rage) until dinner time,
there died seventy thousand persons. And now had the Angel of God stretched
out his hand over Jerusalem ready to inflict punishment thereon, when as the
king put on sackcloth and prostrated himself on the ground, beseeching and
praying God that it would please him to surcease his wrath, and be pacified
with the number of those that were already consumed by the pestilence. Whilst
thus he prayed, lifting up his eyes, he beheld the angel of God houering in
the air over Jerusalem, with his naked sword: whereupon he besought God and
said, that it was he that was the shepherd,

Hereupon God accepting this prayer, surceased the plague, and sent the Prophet
Gad unto him, commanding him that he should presently repair to the threshing
floor of Oronna the A commandment to ^ld an Altar.
Iebusite, and there build an altar, on which he should offer sacrifice unto
God. Which when David understood, he neglected not this ordinance, but went
presently to the appointed place. The year of the world. 2930. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1034. Oronna the Iebusite, supra lib. 7. chapter 3 called
Orphona. Oronna gives David his floor. The sum that was paid for the
threshing floor.
Oronna (who threshed his come) saw the king (accompanied by his sons)
coming toward him, he ran out to meet him, and humbled himself before
him. This man was by nation a Iebusite, and one of the greatest friends that
David had (by means whereof he left him vnspoiled at such time as the
fortress of the Iebusites was taken, as we ha^ heretofore declared.) Oronna
asked him for what cause his Lord came thus unto him, who was his servant?
David answered him that it was to this intent, that he might purchase his
threshing floor, to the intent that he might build an Altar in that place, and
offer sacrifice unto God. Oronna replied, that both his floor, chariots, and
oxen were the kings to offer up for a burnt sacrifice, beseeching God that he
would graciously accept that offering. To this the king answered, that he
highly esteemed his simplicity and magnaminitie, and that he favorably
respected Oronna answered, that his Majesty might do as best pleased him.
Hereupon he bought the foresaid floor of him for fifty sicles. Then erected
he an Altar in this place, The place of the Altar that was built. Gen 22. Supra
li. 1. chapter 13
and offered sacrifices thereon, as well burnt offerings as other sacrifices
for prosperity: and by this means the divine majesty was appeased, and ever
after showed himself favorable. (Now this place was the very same, whereto
Abraham in times past had brought his son Isaac to offer him up for a burnt
sacrifice unto God, and as he was about to sacrifice him, a Wether upon the
instant presented it self near unto the Altar, which Abraham offered up in
steed of his son, as we have heretofore made manifest.) David seeing that
God had heard Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 14. The workmen allotted for the
building of the Temple.
this prophetical declaration, the King commanded to number the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and it was found that they were one hundredth and fourscore
thousand men: of which number he appointed eighty thousand to intend the
hewing of stones; and ordered that the rest of the common people should bear
stones unto them: and he appointed three thousand and five hundredth, who should
govern them, and have the ouerseeing of the works. He gathered 1 Paral. 22.
David gathers great store of iron, brass and wood.
also a great quantity of Iron and brass, to work upon, with store of huge
and mighty Cedar trees,

CHAP. XI.
David during his life time surrendreth the kingdom to* Solomon.

THen calling unto him his son Solomon, he charged him that after his
decease, and his enstalment in the kingdom, he should build a temple unto God:
telling him that though The building of Salomons Temple is commanded.
he had both a will and intent to perform the same; yet that he was
contradicted by God, for that he had been soyled with slaughters, and brought
up in war. Adding further, that it was foreprophecied unto him, that the
finishing of that edifice was by Gods ordinance reserved to his younger son
that should be called Solomon, whom God should no less tender and care for,
then the father does his son: and how the whole land of the Hebrews should
be made happy under this Prince; and among all other benefits, that they should
have peace (which is an especial prerogative and blessing) and not only be
freed from foreign wars, but also from civil David coun^elleth Solomon ^o
honor God.
piety, justice and fortitude, and keeping those his ordinances and laws,
which he gave us by Moses, and not permitting others to transgress the same.
And as touching the temple (which he will that thou shall build when thou shall
obtain the kingdom) enforce thy self to discharge that duty toward God:
neither be thou dismayed or afraid at the greatness of the work. For before I
shall depart out of this world, I will set all things in a readiness for thee.
Know therefore that I The year of the world. 2930. before Christ's Nativity
1034. The treasure that was gathered toward the building of the Temple. The
assistants that Solomon had in building the temple. The commandment as
touching the Arc, and laying up al other sacred vtensils within the Temple.
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 15. David grows old and numbe. Abisace warmeth him.
have already gathered ten thousand talents of gold, and an hundredth thousand
talents of silver; of brass and iron there is as much, which is a thing
innumerable; of stone and of wood, a matter most incredible. Moreover thou
shall have many thousands of masons and carpenters, and if ought be defective
besides these, thou shall thy self make provision thereof: when thou have
performed this, thou shall be gracious in gods sight, who shall be thy
sovereign and safe conductor. He exhorted also the governors of the people to
set to their helping hand, and yield their assistance to his son in
finishing this work, and in furthering the service of God without suspicion of
any inconvenient; assuring them that they should enjoy a firm peace, and a
flourishing estate (such blessings as God bestows upon those that study
after piety and justice.) Moreover he charged him to place the Arc within the
Temple at such time as it should be finished, David's exhortations, not only
unto his son, but also to the other Princes.

Now when David was very old, so that by reason of his years his body was
so cold and benumd, that notwithstanding the many couerings and clothes they
laid upon him, yet could he not be her or warmed: his Physicians assembled
themselves together and consulted, and at last conluded, that one of the
fairest virgins that was in the country, might be chosen out to lie with the
king: because by this means she might warm his chill lims, and comfort his
decaying heat. Whereupon after search made, they found out a Damsel called
Abisace which surpassed all

The fourth son of David was a goodly tall young man, called Adonias, the
son of Aegistha, who (resembling Absalon in complexion, and ambition) began
to usurp with a deliberation 3. Reg. 1. Adonias affects the kingdom.
to make himself king, and amongst his ordinary discourses which he used to
his friends, he said that it behooued him to take possession of the kingdom.
To this intent he prepared many chariots and horses, and fifty men to attend
him for his guard. His father certified of these his proceedings, reproved him
not, neither crossed this his deliberation; neither demanded of him likewise,
wherefore he presumed to attempt such unseemly actions. Of this his revolt he
had The year of the world. 2931. before Christ birth 1033.
for his coadiutors Ioab the general, and the high Priest Abiathar: but they
that contradicted him Sadoc, and the Prophet Nathan, and Banaia the captain of
the guard, with Simei David's friend: besides all other the valiant men at
aries. Whereas therefore Adonias made a banquet out of the City, and in the
suburbs near unto the fountain of the park royal, he invited all his
brethren unto the same, except Solomon; and took with him Ioab and Abiathar,
with the governors of the tribe of Judah: but as touching Sadoc, the Prophet
Nathan, Banaia, and the rest of the contrary party, he called them not unto
the banquet. This did the prophet Nathan tell to Bethsabe Salomons mother,
certifying her that Adonias was made King without Bethsabe by Natha^s perswa
sion certifieth Daiud of Adonias vsurpatio^,
the knowledge of David, aduising her both to have care of her own security,
and the estate and majesty of her son (who by reason of Adonias usurpation
was like to be supplanted) wishing her in person to certify the king thereof:
and further promising, that whilst she debated these Bethsabe being thus
persuaded by Nathan, came unto the King, and humbling her self before him (and
afterward requiring license to speak unto him) she certified him of all those
things that had happened, according as she had been advised by the Prophet:
particularly deciphering unto him what banquet Adonias had made, and what
guestes he had invited (namely Abiathar and Ioab, with the rest of his sons,
except Solomon and his particular friends) urging this furthermore, that the
people expected, who it should be whom David would nominate to succeed him: for
which cause she earnestly besought David that he would provide and forsee, that
he who should succeed him in the government, should neither seek her blood, nor
the death of her son Solomon. Whilst Bethsabe discoursed after this manner,
the chamberlaines gave the king to understand Nathan attended to speak with
him. Whereupon David commanded that he should be called in, and as soon as he
was entered, he asked the king if that day he had appointed Adonias to govern
and succeed in the kingdom after him? for that (said he) he has made a
sumptuous feast; where unto he has invited all thy sons, but Solomon;
thither also has he called Ioab: where after the great cheer and banqueting,
they have proclaimed and cried, long live King Adonias. Furthermore (said he)
he has neither invited me, nor the high Priest Sadoc, nor the captain of the
guard Banaia. It therefore behooves thee to let us know, if this be done by
thy The year of the world, 2931. before Christ's Nativity, 1033.


As soon as Nathan had made an end of his speech, David commanded that
Bethsabe should be called in (who had retired her self out of the kings
chamber, at such time as the Prophet entered into the same.) As soon as Bethsabe
reentred the chamber, David said unto her, I swear unto thee by that great
God, that thy son Solomon shall reign after me, according as before this The
kingdom is confirmed to Solomon by an oath.
time I have already sworn unto thee, and he it is that shall sit upon my
throne, yea even this present day. Upon these words Bethsabe humbled her self,
and besought God to grant the king long life. Whereupon he called for Sadoc the
high priest, and Banaia captain of the guard, and gave them in charge to take
the Prophet Nathan with them, and all the men at arms that attended him in
court, charging them to mount his son Solomon upon the royal Moyle, and
Solomon king, commanding the high priest Sadoc and the Prophet Nathan to see
his will performed; charging those that followed him through the City with
sound of trumpet and a loud voice to cry out, that Solomon was seated for ever
on his fathers throne, to the intent that all the people might understand that
by his fathers consent he was declared king. But as touching Solomon, he gave
him instructions how he ought to behave himself with piety and justice, in
the government of all the people of the Hebrews, and of the tribe of Judah.
After this, Banaia besought God that it would please him to be favorable unto
Solomon, and with all expedition Solomon was mounted upon the kings mule, and
conducted out of the City near unto the fountain; where (after he had been
Solomon is anointed king, and placed in his fathers throne.
Adonias and they that banquetted with him, hearing the noise, were all of them
sore troubled; and Ioab in particular said, that those tunes and trumpettings
did no ways content him.

Whilst thus they sat at the banquet, and every man through amase forbore to
eat his meat, (being distracted through variety of thoughts) Jonathan the
son of Abiathar came hastily in Adonias most willingly behold, and said that
he was a messenger of some glad tidings: but contrariwise he recited unto them
all that which had befallen Solomon, or had been decreed by David. Whereupon
Adonias and all his guests forsook the banquet, and suddenly fled every man
unto his own house. But Adonias fearing the kings displeasure Adonias for fear
of the kings displeasure flies from his banquet, and takes hold of the horns
of the Altar.
(by reason of his ambition and arrogancy) ran unto the altar, and laying
hold of it after the manner of a suppliant, hung thereon, according as he in
reason had cause to do. Now when these tidings were brought unto Solomon, and
what he had done, and how he required that Solomon would assure him, that he
would neuermore call to memory that which had happened, but pardon his offense:
Solomon answered him graciously and moderately, and pardoned him that fault;
notwithstanding with this caution, that if hereafter it should appear that he
intended or Adonias himself, who should be the author of his mischief: with
this answer he sent some to deliver him from the altar. When as therefore he
came into Salomons presence and had saluted him, he was commanded to repair
home unto his house, without suspect of any inconvenient: yet by the way was he
admonished to behave himself uprightly, for the time to come, if in any sort
he either respected his credit or profit: But David willing that his son
should be accepted for their known and anointed king amongst the people,
assembled the governors in Jerusalem, with the Priests and Levites; and first
of all taking the number David numbreth the Levites, and distribuith their
offices.
of them, he found thirty three thousand men that were above thirty three
years old; twenty and three thousand of which, he appointed to take charge of
the building of the temple, six thousand to be Judges and Scribes, with the
like number of musitions to play upon instruments, who David (as we have
heretofore declared) and distributed by him according to their families. So
that separating the Priests from the rest of their tribe, he found four and
twenty 1. Paral 13. The division of the Priests into 24. kinreds, 2. Paral. 24.
families of them, sixteen of the house of Eleazar, and eight of the house of
Ithamar, giving order that one only family should for the space of eight days
perform Gods service. And thus were all the families distributed by lot in the
presence of David, of the high priests Sadoc and Abiathar, and of all the
governors. The first family that ascended the temple was written first, the
second next, and so successively the rest, to the number of four and twenty
(and this law remains The year of the world 2931. before Christ's Nativity.
1033. He divided the Levites into 24. parts. Moses posterity appointed to
keep the divine treasure.
in the same sort even unto this day.) He made also twenty and four divisions
of the tribe of Leui (who ascended according as they were chosen by lot, in the
same manner as did the priests, every eight day.) He honored in particular
those of Moses posterity: for he appointed them to be keepers of Gods
treasury, and of those presents which the kings should offer. He enacted also,
that all (as well Levites as Priests) should serve God day and night, according
as they were commanded by Moses. That done, he distributed his whole army into
twelve companies, with their governors, centurions and conducters: every
squadron contained four and twenty thousand men, whom he appointed to guard
and attend king Solomon, for the space of thirty days (continuing from the
first until the last, with their captains over thousands, and centurions.) He
likewise established those men in office and authority over every squadron,
whom he 1 Paral. 26. The army divided into 12 parts. 1. Paral. 27. David
assembling the governors of the tribes commends his son Solomon to the^. 1.
Paral. 28.
knew to be most resolute and virtuous. He appointed also surueiros, who should
have the charge of the treasure, of the buroughs and fields, and of the
cattle (whose names in mine opinion it were unnecessary to declare.) After
that every one of these things were in this manner disposed, he summoned all
the governors of the Hebrews (and in general all those that had any
commission over the affairs or demaines of the kings) to a general assembly,
and seating himself in a hie erected throne, he spoke after this manner. My
brethren and countrymen, I am desirous that you should know, that having
determined with my self to build a temple unto God, I have made provision of a
great quantity of gold and silver, the sum whereof amounts to a hundredth
thousand talents: but God by the Prophet Nathan has forbidden me to build the
same, by reason of your wars, and for that my hand has bin soiled with the
slaughter of enemies, and has Jacob, Judah, by the general consent of them all,
obtained the principality; and that I amongst my six brethren have bin
preferred and placed by God in the kingdom, and notwithstanding no one of them
supposes himself to be injured: so do I also request that Solomon having
obtained the empire, my other sons, neither in respect of him, nor amongst
themselves nourish any unnatural hatreds and seditions, but knowing that he is
chosen by God, they may willingly subject themselves to his dominion. For
whereas if God so pleases, it is not to be misliked to submit our selves to
foreign subjection, how much more are ye bound to congratulate and favor your
brother no otherwise, then if you were partakers of the same honors with him?
Truly I desire nothing more then that Gods promises Solomon) may presently be
dispersed, and perpetually endure in this country: Which without doubt will so
fall out, and all things shall happily succeed, if thou my son be a
maintainer of piety and justice and the ancient laws, and ordinances of thy
progenitors, otherwise if these be neglected, there is no other thing to be
expected but mortality and misery. After he David gives his son the modle
of the Temple
had finished these sayings, he gave his son the plot and modle of the
building of the Temple, with all the foundations both of the houses and
chambers, together with the number, height and breadth of the same. he also
limited the weight of those vessels that were to be fashioned either of gold or
of silver, exhorting him to employ all his care and diligence in performance of
the same. He encouraged likewise the governors and the tribe of Leui to assist
him, both for that The princes of the people gave a huge sum of gold silver,
brass and precious stones toward the building of the Temple.
the chariot of God, and the Cherubims, that should stand upon the Arc, and
cover it with their wings. Now when the king had spoken after this manner, all
the governors, priests and Levites according together, showed a great
readiness, and made many signal and heroical offers. Ialus, being one of
Moses posterity.This thing highly contented all the people, and David (seeing
the affection and readiness of the governors and priests, and in general of
all the rest) began to bless God with a loud voice, calling him the creator
and father of this whole world, the fashioner both of divine and humane things,
and the president and governor of the Hebrews, and their felicity and The
year of the world 2931. before Christ's birth 1033.
David, for all those benefits they had received during the time of his
government. The next day in way of sacrifice unto God, they offered up a
thousand calves, a thousand 1 Par. 29. The ^fices and ^stiuall solem^ed upon
Salomons coronation.
rams and a thousand lambs for sacrifice and a burnt offering: in way of
peace offerings also, they slew many thousand other beasts. The king celebrated
a feast all that day with the whole people, and Solomon was anointed with oil
the second time, and proclaimed king. Sadoc also was established high priest of
all the people, and Solomon was conducted into the kings house,

CHAP. XII.
The death of David, and how much he left his son toward the building of the
temple.

NOt long time after this, David fell sick through age, and knowing that he
should depart Hedio and Ruffinus ch 16. 3. Reg. 2. David's last counsel to
Solomon.
out of this world, he called for Solomon his son, and spoke unto him after
this manner following. My son, I must now depart and sleep with my fathers,
and enter the common way, which both they that now live, and those which come
after shall tract; from whence Moses, and to take heed least either surprised
by slatterie, or misled by favor, or seduced by covetousness or any other
sinister affection, thou be drawn to neglect and forsake the same: for thou
can by no means continue in Gods favor, except thou keep his laws, for
otherwise he will withdraw his providence from thee. But if in such sort as it
becomes thee and we wish, thou behauest thy self toward him, thou shall
continue the kingdom in our family; and no other house at any time but our
own, shall obtain the dominion Ioab, who through emulation David wills
Solomon to punish Ioab.
slew two good and just generals, Abner the son of Ner, and Amasa the son
of Iethram: punish him according as thou think meet, for that hitherto he
has escaped punishment, by reason he was stronger and more powerful then my
self. I commend also unto thee the sons of Berzillai the Galaadite, whom for
my sake advance to honor, and adorn with dignities: not in bestowing David
commends Berzillai sons to Solomon. How Simei should be punished.
any benefits on them, but in repaying those courtesies I have received, which
their father with a liberal hand bestowed upon me during the time of my
banishment, and for which he made us indebted to him. As touching Semei the
son of Gera of the tribe of Benjamin, who during the time of my flight, and
at such time as I retired my self into my camp, injured me with great
outrages, and afterward came out to meet me near unto Jordan, and took
assurance of me,

After he had thus exhorted his son, and had communicated with him all his
affairs, both as touching his friends, as those also whom he thought worthy of
punishment, he gave up the The years of the age and reign together with the
virtues of David.
ghost (after he had lived seventy years, and reigned in Hebron a City of
Judah for the space of seven years and a half, and thirty three in Jerusalem
over the whole nation.) He was a just man, adorned with all virtue, requisite
in a king that should have the government of so many nations. For he was
valiant beyond comparison, and in those battles which he fought for his
subjects: he was the first that thrust himself into danger, and exhorted his
soldiers to behave themselves valiantly, not commanding them like their
governor, but travailing and fighting with them as Viras wife. He left as much
or rather more riches behind him, they any other king of the Hebrews, or
other nations had done. His son Solomon buried him most royally in Jerusalem,
with all those ceremonies which were accustomed in royal obsequies, The year
of the world, 2923 before Christ's birth 10^. The sumptuous sepulcher of David.
Hircanus ta^th a huge sum of money out of David's tomb. Herod spoyleth
David's sepulcher.
Hircanus being besieged by Antiochus surnamed the wicked (who was Demetrius
son) and willing to gratify him with some sum of money (to the intent he might
levy the siege, and transport his army some otherways) and unable to levy
money by any other means, he opened one Cabinet of the monuments of David, from
whence he drew three thousand talents which he delivered to Antiochus, and by
this means delivered the City from the siege (as we have declared in an other
place.) And again a long time after this, Herod also opened an other Cabinet,
from whence he took out a great sum. And as touching the tombs of Princes
no man defaced them, because they were most magnificently builded, for fear
least they should

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE JEWS,
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS
The Contents of the Chapters of the 8. book.
1 How Solomon obtaining the kingdom, expelled his enemies. 2 Of the riches,
prudence and wisdom of Solomon, and how first of all he builded the Temple in
Jerusalem. 3 How Solomon being dead, the people revolted from Roboam his son,
and made Hieroboam king of the ten tribes. 4 How Susac king of the Egyptians
sacking Jerusalem, carried away the riches of that City into 5 The war of
Hieroboam against Abiam Roboams son, and the slaughter of his army, and how
Basanes the rooter out of Hieroboams posterity occupied the kingdom. 6 The
irruption of the Aethipians into the land of the Hebrews under Asa, and the
overthrow of their army. 7 Basans stock being wholly rooted out amongst the
Israelites, Zamri ruled in Israel with his son Achab. 8 Adad king of Damasco
and Syria, encamping and fighting two several times against Achab, is
overthrown. 9 Of Iosaphat king of Jerusalem. 10 Achab being provoked to war
by the Sryans is overcome and slain in the battle.
CHAP. I.
How Solomon obtaining the kingdom expulsed his enemies.

WE have declared in the former Book what David was, how great his The rear
of the world. 2931. before Christ birth 1033. 3. Reg. 2. Solomon king of Israel
after David's death.
virtue has been, what profits and benefits those of his nation received by
him, what wars and battles he worthily exployted, and how happily at last
(through extremity of age) he departed out of this Solomon his son (being at
that time very young) had obtained the kingdom, and was placed in his fathers
throne (according as David had determined, and the divine power had decreed)
the whole people (according to the common course in the election of new
Princes) with happy acclamations wished him perpetual felicity in all his
affairs, and after his well governed estate and royalty, long, many and
prosperous years. But Adonias, who during his fathers life time thought to
possess and seize himself of the royal estate, came unto the kings mother,
and with The year of the world, 2931. before Christi Nativity, 1033.
Bethsabe said, that if there were anything wherein she might sted him, he
should manifest it unto her, and that she would grant it him willingly.
Whereupon he began to say, that it was a thing very well known that the
kingdom appertained unto him, both in regard of his age, as also in respect of
the favor and good liking of the people: but since that it had been
transferred unto Solomon her son by the will of God, he was content
therewith, and would be his servant, being very glad of the fortunate success
of his affairs. He therefore besought her that she would solicit Solomon in
his behalf, and persuade him to give him Abisace to wife, who had slept with
David, for that he had not had any carnal Adonias requires Abisace to wife.
company with her by reason of his age, and that as yet she was fully possessed
of her virginity. Bethsabe promised him to further his suit to the utmost of
her power, and willingly to employ her Bethsabe address her self to the king,
intending to certify him both what Adonias had requested, and what she had
granted. When tidings came to Solomon that his mother came to visit him, he
went out to meet her, and embraced her, and afterward conducting her into the
place where the royal treasure was, he sat him down, and commanded his
servants to place a seat on his right hand, for his mother, who settled by him
spoke unto him after this manner. My son, vouchsafe me one favor that I
shall request at thy hands, and send me not hence discontended, and confused
through thy refusal. Solomon answered her, that she should command him, by
Abisace for wife to Adonias his brother. The King displeased at this her suit
dismissed his mother, alleging that Adonias hammered hie thoughts in his head,
and that he wo^dred that in requiring Abisace to wife, he had not requested
Salomo^ likewise to give him place in the kingdom: for Adonias was elder than
he, and had more mighty friends then he had; namely the general Ioab and the
high Priest Abiathar. For which cause he incontinently sent Banaia captain of
his guard to kill Adonias his brother. Then calling unto him the Adonias is
slain. Abiathar is dispossessed of the priesthood
high Priest Abiathar: The pains (said he) that thou have endured by
accompanying my father David, and attending and bearing the Arc with him, make
thee escape from death: yet notwithstanding for that thou have been an
assistant to Adonias, and followed his faction, I condemn thee to depart from
my presence, charging thee not to see my face any more, but to retire thy self
to thine own house, and there to live in thy country until thou have ended
thy days: for having in this sort neglected me, it is not convenient that thou
should be in honor with me. For this cause was the house of Ithamar
deprived of the priestly dignity (according as God had foreprophecied to Eli
one of the ancestors of Abiathar) and translated to the race of Phinees, and
established in Sadoc. Those of the race of Phinees, who led a private life all
that time that the Priesthood remained in the family of Ithamar (whereof Eli
was the first) were these, Boccias the The genealogy of the high Priest Sadoc.
son of Joseph, Ioatham the son of Boccias, Maraeoth the son of Ioatham,
Aropha the son of Maraeoth, Achitob the son of Aropha, Sadoc the son
Achitob, who was the first high Priest under king David.

Ioab having tidings of the death of Adonias was seized with sudden and
extreme fear: for he loved him more than king Solomon, and by reason of that
friendship which he bare unto him, he justly and upon good grounds apprehended
his own danger, and in this respect he fled unto the altar, hoping in that
place to be secured in regard of that reverence which the king bare unto God.
But when Ioabs resolution was made known unto the king, he sent Banaia unto
him with commission to bring him from the altar, and to conduct him to the
judgment seat, that he might in that place justify his actions: But Ioab said
that he would never abandon the Temple, but that he had rather die in that
place than in another. When Banaia had certified the king of this his answer,
Abner and Amasa: commanding that his body should be buried in the same place,
to the end that his sins should never depart from his race, and that both
David and Solomon might be held guiltless of the death of Ioab. This command
of his Banaia Ioab is slain, Banaia is substituted in his place.
executed, and was afterward made general of all the men of war. Moreover
the king established Sadoc soly in the place of Abiathar whom he had deposed.
He commanded Semei also The year of the world 29^1. before Christ's Nativity.
1033. Sadoc obtains Abiathars place in the Priesthood. Simeies punishment and
death.
to build him a house in Jerusalem, and to keep himself therein, without
passing the flood of Cedron: for if he chanced to break that commandment,
the penalty which he should incur, should be no less then death; and to the
more serious performance of this his iniunction, he tied him by a solemn oath.
Semei thanked Solomon for the charge he had imposed on him, and swore that he
would fulfill the same: so that forsaking his own country he came and dwelt
in Jerusalem, where after he had soiourned for the space of three years, it
happened that he had news that two of his fugitive slaves had fled, and retired
themselves in Geth: whereupon he went to find them out, and no sooner returned
he back again with them, but that the king had intelligence that he had
neglected his commandment; and that which is more, that he had broken that
oath which he made unto God: wherewith he was wroth. For which cause calling
him unto Have thou not sworn (said he) that thou will no ways abandon or
issue out of this City to depart into an other? Truly thou shall not escape
the penalty of thy perjury, but I will see justice done upon thee for the
same, and for those outrages thou did offer unto my father during his flight,
at which time thou did show thy self to be a wicked man in all things: to
the end that thou may understand that the wicked receive no privilege,
although that their punishments be for the present deferred, but at such time
as they suppose themselves to be assured (because they have suffered no
punishment) their punishment is augmented and made more grievous, then it had
been if they had presently been executed for their offenses. Whereupon Banaia
slew Semei, according as he was commanded. From that day forward Solomon Hedio
and Ruffinus chap. 2. 3. Reg 3. Solomon marieth the king of Egypts daughter,
and establishes the kingdom.
had his royal estate secured, and after that his enemies had received
condign punishment, Pharao king of Egypt, and afterward builded the walls
of Jerusalem, far greater and more stronger then they were before: and all
the rest of his life, he governed his commonweal in peace; so that his
youthly years hindered him not from the observation of justice, and the
maintenance of laws, neither excluded the remembrance of that which his father
had charged him at the hour of his death: but behauing himself in all things
exactly, he executed the affairs of his kingdom with that circumspection,
that such, as excelled him in years and were advanced in prudence, could not
surpass him.

CHAP. II.
Of the wisdom, prudence, and riches of Solomon, and how first of all he
builded

AS soon as he came to Hebron, he determined to pay his vows unto God, on
that brazen altar which was erected by Moses, and sacrificed thereon in burnt
offerings a thousand God appears to Solomon by night in a dream and wills
him to ^ke that which most of all he desired.
head of cattle; which honorable devotion of his was most acceptable unto
God. For the very same night, after he had appeared unto him in a dream, he
commanded him to ask whatsoever blessing (as he imagined) sufficient to
recompense this his piety. But Solomon required a most high and excellent
thing, which God does most liberally bestow, and men in like sort very happily
receive. For he demanded neither gold nor silver, nor any otherkind of riches
(such as a youthly man would require) for these are only affected by the
common sort, when the other Solomon requires wisdom at Gods hands who with
it gives him riches and honors also.
him to give him all other things whereof he had made no mention, namely riches
and glory, and above all these such an understanding and wisdom, as no one
man either king or private has had before him. Moreover, that he would
continue the kingdom in his family for many ages, if so be that he continued
in the ways of justice, and obeyed God in all things, and walked in his
fathers ways in imitating his chiefest virtues.

After that Solomon had received these blessings from God, and was made happy
by these promises, he forsook his bed, and worshipping God returned unto
Jerusalem, where he offered modle whereby they may directly shape an answer to
such demands as shall be offered them The year of the world. 2931. before the
Nativity of Christ. 1033. Two women accuse one an other for ^chaunge of their
children.
I, O king (said she) and this woman dwell together in one chamber; but so it
fortuned that both of us on one day and at the same hour, bare each of us a
son: some three days after we were brought a bed, this woman lying by her
infant, has in sleep ouerlaid it and stifled it, and has taken my child
from between my knees and laid it by her, and settled the dead child whilst I
slept, in my bosom. Now on the morrow when I thought to offer the teate unto
mine infant, I found not mine own, but perceived that her child lay dead by
me: for I knew it, because I had exactly marked it. This my child I have
redemaunded at her hands, and because I could not recover it, I have made my
recourse unto your majesty's justice, O king: for in that we were sole women,
and she is obstinate and fears not to be After the king had heard this her
demand, he inquired of the other if she had any thing to answer unto this
accusation. But she denying the act, and auerring that the child which
remained alive, was hers; and that the dead one appertained to the other: and
besides that, since no man appeared that might determine the controversy, but
all the assistance were amazed at the obscurity and difficulty of the debate;
the king at last bethought him of this policy. He commanded that both the
children should be brought before his presence, as well the living, as the dead;
and calling one of his guard Solomon commands both the children* to be
divided into two parts.
unto him, he commanded him with his naked sword, to cut both the children into
two parts, to the intent that both of the^ might take the half of the living,
and the other half of the dead child. This sentence of his was secretly
condemned by all the people, accounting it very childish. In the Solomon by the
speech and gesture of the women discovers the true mother.
her self to behold the division of the infant: and moreover required that the
true mother should be punished. But the King coniecturing by the discourse both
of the one, and of the other, which of their meanings was most unfeigned;
adjudged the infant unto her that cried first, (for that in equity she was the
true mother) and condemned the wickedness of the other, who had murdered her
own child, and labored as much as in her lay to procure the death of her
companions innocent infant. All the people took this judgment for an assured
proof and sign of the kings prudence and wisdom; and from that time
forwards they respected and Vri governed the country of Ephraim, wherein
Salomons governors and captains.
was comprised the rule of Bethleem. Aminadab commanded over the quarter of
Dura, and the sea coast, and had espoused the daughter of Solomon. The great
plain was subjected to Banaia the son of Achila, who governed likewise all
the country that extended toward Jordan. Gabar 3. Reg 4.
commanded the Galaadites and Gaulonites; as far as the mountain Libanus,
and had under him sixty great cities, and forts. Achinadab governed all
Galilee as far as Sidon, and had espoused also one of Salomons daughters
called Basima: Banacat had the country that confineth the sea near to the
City of Arce: Saphat, the mountains Itabyr and Carmel, and the land of
Galilee as far as Jordan: Sonbeia governed the whole land of the Beniamites:
Tabar had all Judah waxed opulent, by reason that the people addicted themselves
wholly to the tilling, and manuring of their lands. For their peace was under
such assurance, that being distracted by no warlike tumults, and besides that
fruitfully enjoying a most desired liberty, they especially intended this The
happy peace of the Israelites in Salomons time.
thing only, to increase their private and particular estates. The king also
had other governors who ruled the Syrians, and commanded other strange nations,
which are extended from Euphrates as far as Egypt, who gathered the tribute
of those nations for the king. These Barbarians every day furnished the king
for his own table and the maintenance of his household, with Salomons daily
expenses.
thirty Cores of fine flower, and sixty of the courser: ten fat oxen, and
twenty grass beeues, Salomons chariots and horsemen.
and besides these he had twelve thousand horsemen, half whereof kept always
about the king in Jerusalem, the rest were billetted in diverse villages
belonging to the king, and remained there. And they that had the charge to
furnish the kings expenses, provided likewise necessary prouender for the
horses, conueying it to that place wheresoever the king soiourned. But so great
was The year of the world. 2931. before Christ's Nativity 1033. Salomons
prudence and wisdom.
the wisdom and prudence which God had bestowed upon Solomon, that he
surpassed all his progenitors: and the Egyptians likewise, who are esteemed the
wisest of all men, were far behind him in wit. For he excelled all those
that in that time were in the greatest account amongst the Hebrews, whose
names I will not omit; and these they were, Ethan, Eman, Chalt, and Dodan the
son of Imaon. He composed also a thousand and five hundredth books of odes
and canticles, and thirty thousand books of Parables and Similitudes: for to
every kind of plant he alluded his parable from Hysope, unto the Cedar. The
like did he of all living creatures that feed on the earth, swim in the
waters, or fly in the air; for none of their natures was he ignorant of:
Salomons method in coniuration whereby he cast out devils. The author in this
place abuses the gifts of God bestowed on Solomon in extending them to those
arts which are sorbidden by the express word of God. A Jew casts out devils.
neither had he omitted to search the faculties in particular; but examined and
discoursed on them all, and had an inward speculation and knowledge of their
several and secret properties. He Vespasian, his sons, tribunes, and other
soldiers, that cured diverse that were possessed. And the manner of his cure
was this: He applied to the nose of the Demoniack a ring, under the seal
whereof, was a root of those things that Solomon had declared, which drew the
devil out of the nostrils of the sick, as soon as he smelled the root: and
as soon as the man was fallen, he adjured him never more to return,
intermixing some mention of Solomon, and

After this, the said Eleazar being desirous to show unto them that were
present, the efficacy of his art, he set a pot or pitcher of water not far
from the place where the possessed stood, and commanded the devil at such time
as he forsook the man to ouerturne the pot, and thereby to give a sign unto
the assistants that he had forsaken the possessed: which act of his manifestly
declares how great the science and wisdom of Solomon was. For which cause I
thought good in this place to make mention thereof, that the worthy nature of
this king might be known unto all men, and how beloved he was of God, and how
surpassing in all kinds of virtue. When Hiram king of Tire understood that
Solomon succeeded his father in the kingdom, he was glad thereof (for he was
David's friend) for which cause he sent messengers unto him to salute him, and
Solomon returned an answer in these terms. Solomon
to Hiram the king:
Know thou, that my father having a will to build a temple unto God; has been
withdrawn from the performance thereof, by the continual Hirams ambassadors
to Solomon.
wars and troubles he has had: for he never took rest before he either had
defeated his enemies, or made the^ tributaries unto him. For mine own part, I
thank God for the peace which I possess, and for that by the means thereof, I
have opportunity (according to mine own desire) to build a temple unto God: for
he it is that foretold my father that this house should be builded during my
reign. For which cause I pray you send some one of your skilfullest men with my
servants to the wood Libanus, to hew down trees in that place: for the
Sidonians are more skillful in 3. Reg 5. Solomon requires carpenters and
workmen from Hiram.
hewing and preparing timber then our people are, and I will pay the cleauers
of wood according


When Hiram had read this letter, he was very glad to p^e the contents of the
same, and wrote back again unto him to this effect.

The king Hiram
unto king Solomon:
Thou have cause to thank God, in that he has delivered thy fathers kingdom
into thy hands, to thee I say, who art a man wise and full of virtue. For which
cause since no news can come unto me more gracious, nor office of love more
esteemed then this, I will accomplish all that thou requestest: for after I
have caused a great quantity of Cedar and Cyprus wood to be cut down, I will
send it thee by sea by my servants, whom I will Hiram promises Solomon wood,
and in steed thereof requires corn.
command (and furnish with convenient vessels of burden) to the end they may
deliver the same, in what place of thy kingdom it shall best please thee, that
afterward thy subjects may transport them to Jerusalem. You shall provide to
furnish us with corn, whereof we stand in


The copies are yet at this day kept, not only by those of that nation, but
also by the Tyrians: so that if any man desire exactly to know that they be,
let him search the public records of the Tyrians, and he shall find in them
matters accordant to that we have said. All which I say, to that end that the
readers might be assured, that I outstrip not the truth in any sort, and that I
insert not in this history matters that are merely apparent and deceitful, and
only fashioned for delight; neither fear I that any man shall examine my
writings; neither desire I likewise that every The year of the world. 2931.
before Christ's birth 1033. The truth of Joseph's history
Solomon had received these letters from the King of the Tyrians, he praised
his facility and benevolence, and presently sent him that which he demanded:
every year therefore he sent him two thousand Cores of wheat, and the like
number of Bads of oil (this Bad contains seventy and The king sends H^
great quantity of wheat, oil, and wine.
two sextaries.) He gave him also the like measure of wine. From that time
forward the friendship betwixt Hiram and Solomon increased more and more, so
that both of them protested that it should continue for ever. The king imposed
on his people the tribute of thirty thousand workmen, whom he gave in charge
to travel continually, and distributed them very discreetly. He The order of
the carpenters in Libanus.
the fourth month. Ador^ was constituted superintende^t over this tribute.
Besides these, there were 70000. men appointed to carry stones and wood, who
were the inhabitants of that country, which David had left. There were four
score thousand hewers of stone, over whichwere 3200. commissaries: these had
the king commanded to cut the greatest stones to make the foundations of the
temple, which after they had hewed and prepared in the mountain, he commanded
should be The order of the malons and other workmen.
drawn and brought into the City, and not only commanded he his countrymen
to perform Hiram.

Solomon began this building in the fourth year of his reign, in the second
month which the Hedio and Ruffinus ch 9. 3. Reg. 6.
Macedons call Artemisium, and the Hebrews Iar; five hundredth nintie and two
years after the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt; one thousand and
twenty years, since the arrival of Abraham in Mesopotamia; one thousand
four hundredth and forty years after the Deluge: And since Adam the first man
until Solomon (who builded the Temple) all the years that are passed, have
been three thousand one hundredth and two. But the beginning of the building of
the Temple happened in the eleventh year of the reign of Hiram, who governed in
Tire, and When the building of the temple began. The depth of the foundatio^s
of the temple.
since the first time that Tire began to be inhabited until the said building
of the temple, there passed two hundredth and forty years. The king therefore
laid the foundations of the Temple, and The height, length, and breadth of the
temple. The porch before the temple. The cells which were builded in the circuit
of the temple.
cubits: and the entry thereof was to the Eastward. The porch that gave entry
thereinto had twenty The beams and walls beautified with gold.
were covered with Cedar planks intermixed with gold: so that all the Temple
shined, and the burnisht gold lightened, and dazzled their eyes that entered into
the Temple. All the whole building of the Temple was most artificially made of
stones most exactly carved, and most closely and cunningly joined together: so
that they that curiously pried into the same, could not any ways observe any
stroke of the hammer, nor other workemans tool, but all the whole mass seemed
The year of the (...), 2933 before Christ's birth 1031.
to be a natural, and no artificial frame; and rather gathered in that place
of it self, then garnished by the hands of cunning workmen. As touching the
ascent into the higher part of the Temple, the king in that sort devised it,
that in the thickness of the wall he included a pair of winding stairs to
that purpose. This part had not a great gate toward the Eastward as the lower
had, but in the sides there were little doors made: All the whole temple both
within and without was Winding stairs.
covered with Cedar planks, tied together with strong chains to fortify and
strengthen the same. The Temple inwardly was divided into two parts, the one
whereof contained the sanctum sanctorum, of twenty cubits (which was
inaccessible) the rest of the space, of forty cubits, was consecrated to the
use of the Priests. And in the midst of the wall made he two gates of Cedar,
enriched The temple divided into two parts.
with store of gold, and diverse curious carved works, and hung them with
tapestrie: wherein were embrodered Two cherubims.
their wings touched the southren wall of their sacred place, and the other the
northren wall: the other wings that touched one an other, served for a cover for
the Arc which was placed between them both. But what the figure of the
Cherubins was it is impossible to express: he made the paueme^t The pauement
gates and all other things in the temple beautified with gold.
of the Temple also, of plates of beaten gold. To the gate of the Temple also
he fastened convenient doors 20. cubits high, answerable in height to the wall,
and covered with plates of gold. In a word, he left not one place either within
or without the Temple, that was not garnished with gold: he Solomon sent unto
Hiram king of Tire for one, who was a cunning workman called Vram, the son
of a woman of the line of Nephthali; and of Vrias the Israelite. Solomon
sends to Hiram for Vram a cunning workman.
This man had great knowledge in all kind of works, but his especial
excellency was in working gold, silver and brass, who made all that which
concerned the Temple, according as the king commanded. He made two pillars of
brass four fingers thick, and eighteen cubits high, and twelve in the
circumference: on the chapters of each of them, he planted a founded lilly of
five cubits in height, which he environed with certain grates made of brass
after the 3. Reg. 7.
manner of enterlaced nets, which covered the lillies on each side, of which
there hung down two hundredth Pomgranats in two ranks. These pillars placed he
in the entrance of the porch, the one A vessel called the brazen sea.
was sustained by twelve heifers, which by three and three were placed directly
opposite against the quarters of the four winds: and the hindermost part of
these heifers were set somewhat stooping, to the end that this round and ample
vessel might be the more surely supported by them. This sea contained three
thousand Bads. He made also ten brazen bases four square, for the lauers, each
one in length five cubits, in breadth four, in height three, thus were the
parts of this Ten brazen bases of the lauer.
work severally fashioned. There were four little pillars square, and erected
at every corner one, Ten round lauers.
cubits, and from brim to brim there were likewise four cubits: which lauers
he placed upon ten bases or feet called Mechonoth, five of which stood on the
left side of the Temple, that extended to the northward, the other five on the
right hand toward the southward, yet so as they affronted the East. Here
likewise placed he the sea full of water, to the intent that the priests
entering into the temple, might wash their hands and feet before they went up
unto the The year of the world. 2933. before the Nativity of Christ. 1031.
The use of the sea, and the other ten lauers. The Altar and vessels
appertaining to the same.
Moses had commanded) whereof one he dedicated in the temple, that according to
the law it might give light there in the day time. He made a table also, on
which the loaves of bread were laid, on the north side of the temple hard The
Table of sac^ed bread. The candlestick. The cups and vials. The bowls. The
censors.
cubits, before the tapistry of the holy of holiest, where the Arc should be
placed. The king also caused fourscore thousand pots, and a hundredth thousand
ewers of gold, and twice as many of silver, to be made; and fourscore thousand
plates of gold, and twice so many of silver, to offer the kneaded flower in
them upon the altar; and threescore thousand cups of gold, and twice so many of
silver, to lay the flower mingled with oil thereon; and two thousand measures
of gold, and twenty thousand of silver, resembling a Hin or an Epha of Moses.
Twenty thousand of Censors also all of gold, wherein the perfume was burnt, to
hallow the temple: and other censors likewise in which they carried fire from
the great altar, and laid it on the lesser which was within the Priest^ garme^^
the priests, with their surcots, heads, pectorals, and with their precious
ouches, notwithstanding there was but one crown wherein Moses had written the
name of God, which has continued even until this day. He made also ten
thousand stoales for the priests of fine linen, with scarlet Instruments of
music.
girdles; for every one of them, two hundredth thousand trumpets according to
the ordinance of Moses, and forty thousand instruments of music to record
and praise God with (as the Psalterie; and harp of a mixed matter, the fifth
part gold, and the fourth part silver.) All which Solomon most magnificently
prepared for the service of God, sparing no cost, but employing himself to the
uttermost of his power, toward the ornament of the temple which he beautified,
and endowed with all these treasures. He environed the temple likewise with a
certain wall some three cubits hie, The enclosure before the temple. The Fan^.
opened with very great gates, every one according to the quarter of the wind;
and the doors thereof were covered with gold. Into this place all the people
that were purified might enter, and they likewise that kept the ordinances of
Moses. It may not be spoken or scarcely belee^d, although it were seen, how
admirable that exterior temple was: for he filled huge trenches, which by
reason of their immeasurable depth, could not be lookte down into without
vehement apprehension of fear (for they were four hundredth cubits deep) yet
notwithstanding he filled The huge tre^ches where: in the foundation of the
temple was laid filled.
them, and raised them to the height of the hill, whereon the temple was built;
and by this means it came to pass, that the walk without the temple, was
equalled with the foundation of the same.

After that king Solomon had in seven years finished these so huge, fair, and
magnificent buildings, and all the other necessaries which he had bestowed upon
the temple, and declared thereby Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4 3. Reg 8.
his great riches, and confirmed his readiness to be such, that that which at
the first sight might require a man's whole life to finish, he accomplished in
few years, in respect of the greatness of the temple: He wrote unto the
governors and elders of the Hebrews, commanding them to assemble all the
people in Jerusalem to behold the temple, and to bring in the Ark of God; and
although this assembly was publicly proclaimed; yet scarcely did the people
make their appearance Salomons temple was consecrated in the month of October.
in Jerusalem before the seventh month, which we call Thuri, and the
Macedonians Hyperberete. Moses had before time made, with all those necessaries
which appertained to the divine service, The Arc is carried into the temple.
and bare them into the temple. The king and all the people with the Levites
marched before, having their cattle ready to sacrifice, and filling the way
with offerings, and the blood of diverse slaughtered beasts, burning an infinite
quantity of perfumes, wherewith the air was filled round about, the sent
whereof dispersed it self far and near, to make it known that God would be
The year of the world. 2941. before Christ's Nativity 1023. The Priests place
the ark of God in the sanctuary, and in it the tables of stone wherein the
ten commandments were written. The candlestick, table, and altar of gold.
The b^asen altar. A cloud in the tabeinacle.
present in that new builded and consecrated place (if we may so speak of
divine things after a humane manner.) Thus ceased they not to sing and dance
until they came unto the temple: and after this sort conducted they the Arc.
But when as it was to be carried into the holy of holiest, the rest of the
multitude departed, and the Priests only placed it under the two Cherubims,
who embraced it with their wings, as if it had been covered with a pauilion
or some canapie: for they had been expressly fashioned after that manner by
the workman. The Arc contained naught else but the two tables of stone, in
which were kept in writing the ten commandments pronounced by God on the
mount Sinai. For as touching the candlestick, and the table, and altar of
gold, he placed them in the temple before the most holy of holiest, in places
correspondent to those where they stood, when they were in the Tabernacle. Then
offered they the Solomon arising Salomons prayer unto God. Godimmeasurable. The
cause why the temple was builded. God is true in his promises.
from his throane wherein he was seated, addressed his prayers unto God, in
such words as he O Lord (said he) thou have an eternal house, neither are we
ignorant that thou have builded this whole mass of the universe for thy self,
which consists of heaven, earth, air, and sea: which thou altogether
fillest, yet art thou not contained by them. But therefore have we adorned and
erected this temple to thy name, to the end that we might offer up our
sacrifices and prayers in the same, and send them up to heaven (as a sweet
sacrifice) to obtain thy favor, assuring ourselves that thou art here present
also, and wilt never be absent from this place. For whereas thou see all
things, hear all things, yet forsakest thou not us all: neither do thou
abandon the place where thou do worthily inhabit; but rather thou art
always near unto all men, but in especial present with those that think on
thee day and night. These words spoke he looking upwards toward God, and
afterward David of all that which should happen, the greater part whereof was
already accomplished, and the rest was shortly to succeed. Furthermore, he
declared how God himself had given him his name before he was borne, and that
it was known how he should be called: and how at such time as he should be
king after the decease of his father, he should build him a temple; which
things they saw brought to pass according as they were foretold: for which
they ought to give God thanks, and not to lose any hope of any of those things
that had been promised them, in regard of their happiness, having occasion of
belief by the sight of those things which they then beheld.

When the King had spoken after this manner unto the people, he turned again
and beheld Salomons prayer, wherein he thanketh God for his benefits, and
beseeches his future protection.
the temple, and lifting up his hands toward the people he began thus: It is
impossible (said he) for men to yield effectual thanks unto God for those
benefits they have received of him: for God (who is more abundant then all
men) has no need of them: But (O Lord) it behooves us, that since of thy
grace thou have made us more excellent the^ other living creatures, we should
bless and give thanks unto thy majesty, and in especial it concemeth us to
honor thee for the benefits thou have bestowed on our family, and all the
Hebrew nation. But with what other means then ought we to appease thee when
thou art displeased, and when we are to entertain thy mercy, then by that
voice which we draw from the air, and which as we know mounteth back again
into the air? I ought therefore first of all to give thee thanks in respect of
my father, whom from obscurity thou have raised to high majesty: next for
that thou have fulfilled all those things David to perform during his life,
and at such time as he was near unto his death: namely, that the kingdom
should continue in our family, and that his race should multiply in innumerable
successions. Bestow thou this benefit upon us, and bequeath unto all mine, that
virtue wherein thou take delight. Moreover I beseech thee that a portion of
thy spirit may come and dwell in The year of the world, 2941. before Christ's
Nativity, 1023. Solomon humbly beleecheth God that he will protect this temple
as his own house.
He pr^ieth that ^angers may be heard a^ (...) this place.
A (...) from heaven consumes Salomons sacrifies. 3. Reg. 8.
joy humbled themselves on their faces, and lay prostrate on the pauement. But
the king began to praise God, and incited the people to do the like,
considering they had already received the testimonies of his mercy, exhorting
them to pray that he would be always merciful unto them, and that he would
keep them for ever in cleannes and vncorrupt minds, and that they might justly
and religiously lead their lives in observing those commandments which he had
given them by Moses. For in so doing the people of the Hebrews should prosper
and grow more happy, then all the nations of the world. Moreover he exhorted
them to keep in their remembrance those means, by which the benefits they
possessed had bin gotten, assuring them that by the same Solomon exhorts the
people to praise God, and to give him thank, and to pray unto him.
they should retain continuance, increase, and multiplication thereof. For
they ought to think 3. Reg. 8. Salomons sacrifices in the dedication of the
Temple. The feast of Tabernacles. The king dismisseth the people.
therein. The king also feasting with the whole people, celebrated the
solemnity of the Tabernacles for the space of fourteen days in great pomp
and magnificence. And when as all things were sufficiently performed, and
nothing was deficient that concerned the service of God, every one (dismissed
by the King) departed to his own dwelling place, giving him hearty Solomon a
long life. And thus they returned home with joy, praising and singing hymns
unto God, so that they rid their way, and returned to their families with great
pleasure, and without any travel. After then that they had conducted the Arc
into the temple, and had beheld the greatness and beauty of the same, and had
celebrated 3. Reg. 9. God appears again to Solomon, and promises him all
blessings if he swarued not from his fathers precepts.
most excellent sacrifices, and made great solemnities, they returned every
one unto his City. But a vision that night appeared unto the king during his
sleep, which gave him assurance that God had heard his prayer, and that he
would keep his temple and dwell in the same for ever, (if so be his posterity
and all the people addicted themselves to live virtuously,) promising himself
in especial, that if he continued in the observation of those aduertisements
which his father Judah: but if he forgot A grievous commination against the
Israelites, if they fall from the way of righteousness.
the exercises of piety, and exchanged them for the service of strange Gods,
he would pluck him up by the roots, without leaving any remainder here to
reign after him. Neither should the people of Israel remain unpunished, but
should be exterminate by infinite wars and adversities, and be cast out of the
country which he had given unto their ancestors, and become banished men, and
runnagates in a foreign land. And as concerning the Temple which is builded at
this The year of the world 2941. before Christ's Nativity. 1023.
present, I will (said he) deliver it to the enemies to ransacke and burn it,
and the City shall be destroyed by the hands of the enemies: and their
miseries shall be so notorious through the world, and to such extremity shall
they be driven, as it shall hardly be believed: so as their neighbors round
about them, hearing tidings of their calamities shall be astonished, and shall
seek out the cause why the Hebrews are thus hated by God, who before times
have been so advanced by him in riches and honors: and they shall understand
thereof by those that survive, in hearing them confess their sins; and the
transgressions they have committed against the ordinance of their forefathers.
These things that were declared unto him in a dream, are registered in the
sacred letters.

Seven years after the Temple had been thus builded (as it has been
heretofore declared) Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 5. Salomons palace finished in
thirteen years.
space (for he was not so intent and earnest in building thereof, as he was in
the structure of the temple.) For although the temple were very great and of
incredible and marvelous magnificence, yet so it is that God (for whom it was
made) assisting the workmen, it was thoroughly finished within the term of the
years aforesaid. But the royal Palaces being far lesser then was the
temple, were builded more slowly, because the stuff had not been prepared so
long time before, neither with so great affection; and the rather, because the
palaces that were builded, were not for God, but for kings: Notwithstanding
this house was builded very magnificently, according as the wealth of the
country and the power of the Hebrew king required. But it shall not be amiss
if I declare all the order and disposition of the same house, that by the
description The haule. The tribunal.
covered with Corinthian work, with stairs of the like measure, and carved
gates both pleasant for sight, and fit for fortification. In the midst of this
space, and hard by the temple, there was another square Pauilion thirty cubits
large, sustained with strong pillars, within which there was a magnificent
tribunal, on which the king sat to give judgment: unto which there was
annexed an other palace prepared for the Queen. All the chambers as well
those that were ordinarily in use, as those for recreation after he retired
himself from public affairs, were adorned The Queens house and other
palaces of pleasure. The ornaments of Salomons palace.
with planckes of carved Cedar, and were builded partly of stone ten cubits
square, partly of curious marble, and very rarely and cunningly wrought (such
as are wont to adorn Temples and palaces) and are found out by the most
curious and cunning Masons. And that which made it more beautiful, were three
panes of tapistrie, and the fourth admirable for the artificial engrauings:
for the workmen had made therein trees and plants of diverse sorts, shadowed
with their Chambers of pleasure with household stuff of gold.
branches and leaves, hanging in such sort, that to behold them, a man would
have thought that they shook, the workmanship was so exquisite and curious
that covered the stone. The rest, as far as the roof, was enchaced, and
flourished with diverse antiques and pictures. Furthermore, he builded other
places of pleasure, with very long porches to beautify the palace; amongst
which, there was one most magnificent to make banquets and feasts in, which
altogether was 3. Reg. 10.
arbors likewise delightful to behold, and most contenting in summer, for that
they were covered and warranted from the heat. To speak in a word, all the
building was made of white marble, of Cedar, of gold, and of silver, the
floores and walls were figured with diversity of flowers and of precious
stones, inchaced in gold, after the manner of the Temple of God, which shined
with such like ornaments. There was likewise erected a most mighty throne,
made in form of a tribunal, with six steps of pure iuorie: on each side of
which there stood two ramping Salomons throne made of Iuory. 3. Reg. 5.


Solomon builded all this that has been spoken of, in the space of twenty
years, being furnished by Hiram king of the Tyrians for these his buildings,
with great sums of gold, and far more greater of silver, besides a
quantity of Cedar and Pine trees. Solomon also remunerated him, and gave him
great presents, and sent him every year sufficient of corn, wine and oil
(as The year of the world. 2941. before Christ's birth 1023. Salomons gratuitie
to Hiram for the benefits he received. 3. Reg. 9. 3. Reg 5. Solomon
interprets certain hidden questions sent unto him by Hiram. Menander the
Historiographer makes me^^ of Hira^ and Solomon.
Hiram having visited them, and not well pleased with them, sent unto Solomon to
certify him thereof, that he had no use for his cities: and from that time
forward they were called the country of Chebal, which is as much to say in the
Phoenician tongue, as Unpleasant. Hiram likewise sent unto Solomon certain
mysteries and difficult questions, requiring him to decide the same, and to
dissolve those doubts and difficulties that occurred in his demands. Solomon
being a man of ripe judgment and understanding, pretermitted none of them; but
after he had attained their resolution in his own opinion, and had gathered
the sense, he expressed and opened the same. Of these two kings, Menander (who
translated the antiquities of the Tyrians out of the Phoenician After the
decease of Abibale, Hiram his son succeeded him in the kingdom, who lived
fifty and three years, and reigned thirty and four. He annexed the field
which is called Ample, unto the Island, and dedicated a golden pillar in
Jupiters Temple. He also caused a great quantity of wood to be hewed down in
the mountain Libanus, to make couers and roofes for temples. For having pulled
down some ancient temples, he builded that of Hercules, and that of Astrate,
and made this first building of Hercules in the month Peritien, and made war
against the Eucecans, who refused to pay their tributes; and after he had once
again brought them under his subjection, here turned to his own palace. In
his time lived the young son of Abdimon, who always resolved those questions
which Solomon king of Jerusalem proposed. Dius also makes mention of him Dius
makes mention of Hiram.
Abibale, his son Hiram reigned: he it was that fortified the quarter of the
City to the Eastward, and enlarged the same, and conjoined the temple of
Olympian Jupiter to the City, which before that time was in an other place,
and filled all the place between them with earth, and adorned it with pendants
of gold: and afterward going up to Libanus; he hewed down timber to build
temples withal. He said also, that Solomon reigning at that time in Jerusalem,
sent unto Hiram certain subtle questions, demanding the exposition Dius of
Solomon.
thereof under this condition, that if he declared them not, in way of penalty
he should pay a great sum of money; and afterward that a certain Tyrian
called Abdimon, expounded that which had been proposed: and in lieu thereof
proposed certain others, which Solomon could not expound, and for that
occasion he paid a great sum of money unto Hiram. This is it that Dius
writes.

The king seeing that the City wanted both bulwarks and towers to secure the
same, and that the strength of the same was no ways answerable to the dignity
thereof, he repaired the walls, Solomon repaireth the walls of Jerusalem and
erecteth towers. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 6. Solomon builds certain cities.
Azor, Magedon, Gaza.
and erected great towers on the same. Moreover he builded certain Cities,
which deserve to be memorized among the most renowned, namely Asor and Magedon,
and for the third, the city of Gaza in the country of the Philistines: against
which Pharao king of Egypt led out his army, and took it by force, and after
he had put all the inhabitants thereof to the sword, he destroyed the same, and
afterward he gave it in dower unto his daughter, which married with Solomon.
For which cause the king fortified it, seeing it to be already sufficiently
defenced by nature, and that it stood very commodiously for the war, and to
hinder the invasions of the enemy that might Betachor, Baleth.
the sweet streamie rivers, wherewith they were watered. Afterward, entering
into the desert that is above Syria, and co^quering the same, he builded an
other great city two days journey distant from the higher Syria, a days
journey from Euphrates, and six from the great Babylon. The cause why this
City was inhabited far from the civil and peopled quarters of Syria, was,
because in no place of the lower country there was water to be found, and in
this City only there were fountains and springs. He therefore builded this
City, and begirt it with strong walls, and called it Thadamor (which is the
name which the Syrians term it by, even at this day: and Salomons works in
that time. But for Thadamor or Palmyra.
that there are diverse that demand the question how it comes to pass, that
all the kings of Egypt that have been since Minaeus the founder of Memphis,
and who reigned diverse years Why the Egyptian kings were called Pharaohs.
before our great ancestor Abraham, who (I say) have been till Salomons time,
for the space of more then thirteen hundred years, have been called
Pharaohs, deriuing that name from one that reigned in the mid time between
both: I have thought it requisite to manifest the same to the intent to resolve
that doubt, and express the cause of that name. The name of Pharao amongst The
year of the world, 2953. before Christ's birth 1011. The Egyptian kings called
Pharaohs. Ptolemei. Caesares. Herodotus writes not the names of the Egyptia^
kings. Nicaule queen of Egypt, and Ethiop comes to Solomon.
Herodotus of Halicarnasseus says, that since Minos the founder of Memphis,
there have been three hundredth and thirty kings of Egypt; yet declares he
Pharaohs. For when after these a woman had obtained the kingdom, he calls
her by her own proper name, Nicaule: Whence it appears, that the men who
have been kings, were usually called by this name, and that it had not been
communicated unto this woman: for which cause it was necessary to declare her
own first name. For mine own part, I have found in the books of our nations,
that since Pharao, who was father in law to Solomon, no one of the kings of
Egypt have been called by that name: and that some little while after, the
aforenamed woman came unto Solomon, who reigned in Egypt and Aethiopia: of
whom a little after we will make some discourse. And at this present I have made
mention of it, to make it known that our records and the Chronicles of the
Egyptians, accord in many things.

But King Solomon conquered the Chanaanites (which till that time were not
under his sub iection) and those that inhabited the mountain Libanus, as far
as the City of Amath, and made them tributaries, and chose out amongst them
every year such, as he might employ in 3. Reg 10. Solomon compels the
remainder of the Chananites to pay tribute.
servile actions, and in domestical business, and tillage of the sand. For no
one Hebrew was a slave, neither was it convenient, that since God had subjected
diverse nations under them (whom they might make slaves of) that they should tie
those of their own nation to that bondage; who were all of them employed in
arms, and rather took delight to mount chariots, and to ride horses, then to
drudge like slaves. Over the Chanaanites (whom he employed in his service) he
appointed five hundredth and fifty commissaries, who had their charge and
authority from the king, and tasked them to those works and handy-labours
wherein they employed them. He builded The thraldom of the Chananites. 3. Reg.
10.
a navy also in the gulf of Egypt, in a certain place of the red sea called
Asiongaber, which is named Berenice, not far from the City of Elana (which
country in times past appertained to the Jews.) And toward the building of
this navy, he obtained of Hiram king of Tire a very convenient furtherance: for
he sent him modles of ships, and men that were skillful in navigations, whom he
charged to sail with his procurers and factors, to the country at that time
called Ophir, and at this present the Land of gold, in the country of India,
to bring gold from thence: who returned back again unto the King, after they
had gathered about four hundredth talents.

About this time the Queen of Egypt and Aethiopia (a woman adorned with
wisdom, and The queen of Egypt and Ethiope reforteth to Solomon.
admirable in all other things) having heard of the renowned virtue and
prudence of Solomon, Solomon; knowing by effect that it exceeded the report
which she had heard of him. But in especial she wondered The queen of Ethiope
wondreth at Salomons wisdom
at his palace, considering the greatness and beauty thereof; and above all,
the rich furniture and curious architecture of the same; wherein she perceived
the great wisdom of the king: But above all the house called Liban, and the
magnificence of his ordinary table, and the apparel and service of the same,
made her astonished. The attire of his servants likewise, and the goodly order
which they observed in their service; moreover the sacrifices that were every
The year of the world, 2953. before Christ's Nativity, 1011.
The queen of Ethiope praileth Salomons wisdom.
to think of those things which she had beheld. O King (she said) all that
which a man knows by hearesay may be misbeleeued. But the renown which is
come unto our ears as touching your riches, both those which you have in your
self (I mean your wisdom and prudence) as those also which your kingdom
has brought you; is neither false nor fained; which notwithstanding, yet does
it make your felicity far less then that which I see before mine eyes: for
report depends only on hearesay, neither gives it so certain a notice of
things, as the sight discovers I will discover likewise, how besides her
words she expressed her affection she bare unto the king, in testifying the
same by diverse presents which she The Queen gives Solomon many sumptuous
presents.
offered unto him. For she gave him twenty talents of gold, and an innumerable
quantity of sweet odors and precious stones. It is said likewise that we have
that plant which distilleth balm, and which our country brings forth at this
day, by the gift of this Princess. Solomon for his part requited Solomon
remunerateth the Queens bounty. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 7.
for there was nothing which she could require, which he granted not unto her:
showing himself most ready to give her satisfaction with a liberal and royal
heart. When the Queen of Egypt and Aethiopia had received these favors at the
kings hands (according as it has been spoken) and he likewise had
magnificently requited her, she returned back again into her own country.

About the same time there was brought unto the King from the country called
the Region The precious timber that was brought to Solomon.
of gold, a quantity of precious stones and of pine trees. This wood was
employed to make supporters in the temple, and in the kings house, and to make
instruments of music likewise, as Harpes and Cimbals, on which the Levites
might praise God. Amongst all the gifts that were ever presented unto Solomon,
that which was given him at that time, was most excellent in greatness Solomon
have drawn us to make mention of this matter. The weight of gold which this
navy brought unto the king, was six hundredth, sixty and six talents: besides
that which the merchants bought themselves, or that which the Kings and princes
of Arabia had sent unto him in way of present. This gold caused he to be
moulten down, and made thereof two hundredth targets, each one waying six
hundredth sicles, and three hundredth bucklers, each of them waying three mines
of gold, and placed Salomons virtues and wisdom, spread far and near through
out all nations: so that the kings of what country soever they were, Salomo^s
ships spent three years in their journey. Many kings present Solomon with
sundry presents. The horses and other gifts presented to Solomon.
had a desire to see his presence, because they believed not the report, and
desired to manifest their affection to him by magnificent presents. They
therefore sent him vessels of gold and of silver, gave them the greater grace
was, that they had squires to back them, who were in their pride of The year
of the world 2953. before Christ's Nativity. 1011.
youth of goodly personage to behold, and surpassing all other in height,
having long locks which they daily intermixed with wires of gold, that when as
the sun did reuerberate his beams upon their heads, they should be more
glorious and bright. The king mounted on his charior and apparelled in a white
raiment, was accustomed to ride abroad about the sun rise, environed with
these young armed men, having bows and quiuers.

There was a certain place called Ittan, some eight leagues distant off of
Jerusalem, delightful and enriched with gardens and pleasant fountains of
water, whither he usually and willingly Ittan.
retired himself for his pleasure, using in all things a most admirable
providence and promptitude, and taking pleasure in those things that were well
contrived. He forgot not likewise to make causeyes, but caused the hie ways
that led to Jerusalem (where he made his abode) to be paued The ways about
Jerusalem paued with flint. The cities of Chariots. The abundance of silver in
Solomon's time. Egyptian horses.
with black stone, both to the intent to make them more accessible for those
that travailed to and fro, as to show the magnificence and riches of his
government. He then divided his chariots and placed them in such sort, that in
every City there was a prefixed number, and some few he kept about himself,
and those Cities he called the cities of Chariots: he stored Jerusalem also
with abundance of silver, so that it was as plentiful as stones; and with
Cedar wood (whereof before that time there was no quantity) he so stored the
country, that it was as plentifully to be had as wild figgetrees. He
commanded the merchants of Egypt also, to buy him certain chariots drawn by
two horses, for the price of six hundredth dragmes of silver, which he sent unto
the kings of Syiria, and to those on the other side of Euphrates.

Now although he were the most magnificent and entirely beloved of God,
surpassing both in 3. Reg. 11. Solomon marrying strange women is seduced by
the^.
Sidonians, Tyrians, Ammonites and Idumeans, whereby he transgressed the laws
of marriage instituted by Moses, who inhibited to marry with those of foreign
nations. Afterward he began to honor their gods also, to gratify and
express the love which he bare unto them: which thing the lawmakers
foreseeing, he had forbidden the Israelites to marry with those that were not
of their own nation, for fear least conforming themselves unto foreign
fashions, they Solomon transported with these brutish pleasures, made no
account of these things, but took him wives of the daughters The rear of the
world. 2964. before Christ's birth 1000.
of princes and nobles, to the number of 700. and three hundredth concubines,
besides the daughter of Pharao king of Egypt: By which means he was
excessiuely overcome by them, in so much as he followed their examples, and was
forced to give a testimony of the good will and extreme affection that he bare
them, in ordring his life according to the fashion of their countries. As
therefore he increased in years, and his judgment grew weak, he was in such
sort misled, that he could not retain in memory the customs of his country,
but grew more and more in neglect of God, and continued the worship of those
gods which were introduced by The punishment inflicted on Solomon far honoring
strange gods.
notorious in Gods sight, threatening him that ere long he should repent the
wickedness he had committed. Yet notwithstanding the realm should not be
taken from him during his life, because David that he should be his successor
in the same: but after his decease his son should bear the penalty of the
same; not so as all the people should revolt, but that he would give ten tribes
unto his servant, and leave two unto the grandchild of David, because he had
loved God, and by reason of the City of Jerusalem where it pleased him to make
his habitation.

When Solomon heard these things, he sorrowed; and was sore troubled in that
all his felicity (for which he toforetime was admired) began to decline.
Neither passed there long time after The year of the world 2964. before
Christ's birth Aooo. Ider enemy to Solomon.
Ader, by nation an Idumaean, and of the princely stock, who upon this
occasion grounded his rebellion and insurrection. For at such time as Ioab
general of David's army, had conquered Idumaea, and in the space of six
months defeated all the youth, and those that were capable to bear arms, he
fled unto Pharao king of Egypt: who entertained Ader fled into Egypt.
him very courteouly, and gave him an house, and lands for his maintenance,
and loved him dearly when he came to man's estate: so that he married him with
Taphines his wives sister, on whom he begat a son, who was brought up with
the kings children: who having intelligence in Egypt of David and Ioabs death,
addressed himself unto Pharao, and besought him to give him leave to repair
into his own country. The King asked him what he wanted; Ader beseeches
Pharao to dismisle him that he might return into his country.
or what the cause was that moved him, to be so hasty to forsake him:
Notwithstanding therefore that he importuned and requested him diverse times,
yet prevailed he nothing with him for that time. But when Salomons fortunes
began to decline (by reason of his iniquities above mentioned, and the wrath of
God provoked against him:) Ader by Gods permission came into Idumea, after he
was lice^sed by Pharao to depart. But being unable to move the people Ader
returns into Idumaea, and from thence departs into Syria. Raas and Adet
enemies to Solomon.
to revolt from Solomon, by reason of the strong garrisons he held, and knowing
that without hazard of his own person, he could move no alterations or
innovation in that place, he departed from thence, and went into Syria, where
co^federating himself with a certain man called Raas (who was fled from his
master Adarezar king of Sophene, and lived like an outlaw in that Region) he
contracted friendship with him, and a great sort of outlawes and thieves that
were his followers, Salomons life time. Thus were the Hebrews enforced to
sustain these outrages at Aders hands. Moreover a certain man called Jeroboam
the son of Nabat, by nation a Jew, rebelled Ieroboa^ rebelleth against
Solomon.
against Solomon, and raised his hopes above his estate, persuaded thereunto by
a prophecy that concerned him, and incited him unto the action. For being left
very young by his father, and carefully instructed by his mother, as soon as
Solomon perceived him to be of a noble and courageous spirit, he made him
commissarie over the building of the walls, at such time as he immured and
fortified Jerusalem. In this office he behaved himself so well, that the king
thought very well thereof, and in way of recompense gave him the estate of
General over the tribe of Joseph. Achias the Prophet soretelleth that he
should be king over the ten tribes.
(who was of the City of Silo called Achias) who approaching near unto him,
and saluting him, drew him out of the way into a place, where none but
themselves were present, and there renting the garment which he wore upon his
back into twelve pieces, he commanded Jeroboam to take ten, telling him that
God had so decreed, and how he would rent the government from Solomon, and
reserve only one tribe unto his son, with that other which was annexed unto
it, by reason of the promise made unto David; and to thee (said he) he gives
the other ten, because Solomon has offended God, and addicted himself to
the love of strange women, and the service of foreign gods.

Now since thou know the cause wherefore God has alienated the kingdom
from Solomon, David did, a great reward of thy piety, and recompense of thy
observance attends thee: so that thou shall become as mighty as David has
been before thee. Jeroboam confirmed in great hopes by these words of the
Prophet, being by nature haughty, in years young, and besides that, desirous
of authority; he took no rest, but being possessed of the place of general,
and remembering himself of that which had been told him by Achias, he
presently began to persuade the people to revolt from Solomon, and to choose
him for their king. Solomon hearing news of this his deliberation and
enterprise, sought the means to Jeroboam flies into Egypt and remains there
until Salomons death.
lay hands on him, and to put him to death: but Jeroboam preventing him, fled
unto Susac king of Egypt, with whom he remained until the death of Solomon.
And thus for that

CHAP. III. The year of the world. 2964. before Christ's Nativity. 1000.

After the death of Solomon the people reuolte from Roboam his son, and
proclaim Hieroboam king of the ten tribes.

But when Solomon was very old, he died, after he had reigned fourscore
years, and lived nintie four, and was buried in Jerusalem; of all kings the
most happy, rich, and The death of Solomon. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 8. al. 4.
3. Reg. 12.
prudent (except that sin whereunto he was drawn by women in his old age) of
whom and those calamities that presently after befell the Hebrews, we have
sufficiently spoken. After the death of Solomon, as soon as his son Roboam
(whom he begat upon an Ammonitish woman Nooma) succeeded him in the kingdom,
the governors of the people sent certain messengers into Egypt to recall
Jeroboam, who arriving in the City of Sichem, Roboam came thither also,
resolving himself in that assembly of the Israelites to take the kingdom upon
him by the peoples consent. To him therefore the Princes of the people resorted
with Ierobod, beseeching him The people: require Roboa^ to mitigate their
burden.
that he would remit somewhat of their feruitude, and show himself more
merciful then his father had been: for that under his government they had
been sorely oppressed, assuring him that by that means his kingdom should be
the more assured, if so be he had rather be beloved then feared. He some three
days after promised them to return an answer to their demands, and by that
means drew them into suspicion, that upon the motion he misliked of the offers
they had proposed: for they thought that it became his years to be affable and
ready to deserve well, The wholesome advise of the elders. The year of the
world. 2971. before Christ's birth 993. Roboam rejects the advice of the
elders and follows the counsel of the younger.
persuaded him to speak familiarly unto the people, and remitting a little of
his kingly austeritie, to apply himself to the favor and good liking of the
multitude: for that by this his affability he might the more easily draw their
hearts unto him, because that by a natural inclination subjects take delight
in those kings that are courteous, who with a certain decent familiarity
entertain themselves amongst them. But Roboam rejected this counsel of theirs
(which was both good and profitable in all occasions, but especially at such
time when it is upon the point to be inseated in a kingdom) and that not
without Gods providence, since contrary to all reason so that calling unto him
certain youngmen of his own humor and disposition, he certified them what
the Elders had counseled him, and willed them to discover their opinion in
that matter: but neither their age, nor Gods permission suffered them to know
that which was expedient. For which cause they counseled him to answer the
people, that his little finger was more great then the loins of his father,
and that if they had experimented and endured grieuances under him, that he
would be far more rigorous, and that if his father had chastised them with the
stroke of the whip, that they should expect to be punished by him, with rude
torments. The king delighted herewith, supposed the answer to be answerable to
the dignity of his Empire. Whenas therefore the people were assembled on the
third day to hear his resolution, and all of them were in suspense, expecting
and desirous to hear Roboam contemning the counsel of his friends, proposed
unto himself that of the young men. All which happened by the will of The
Israelites moved with their ^pulse revolt from Roboam.
God, to the end that that which Achias had prophesied might be fulfilled. They
touched by these his answers no less then if they had been wounded with the
sword, conceived a most hearty grief, and were displeased with him, and no
less moved, then if they had already felt the mischief that was threatened:
so that they began all of them to cry with a loud voice, That from that time
forward they had nothing to do with David's alliance, neither with his
succession, telling him that they would only leave the temple his father had
builded unto his charge, and threatening him to abandon him. Furthermore they
were so hainously and grievously incensed, that (Roboam having sent unto them
Aduram the superintendent of the tribes to pacify their wrath, Roboam
perceived (supposing that it was himself, who in the person of his officer was
put to death, and stoned by the people) he feared least in effect his life, and
the fortune of his kingdom should fall into the like desaster. For which cause
he suddenly ascended his c^iot and fled to Jerusalem, where the tribe of Judah,
and that of Benjamin (by their common suffrages) made him King. But as touching
the rest of the people, from that day The year of the world. 2971. before the
Nativity of Christ. 993. Roboam inteding to make wa^e on those tribes that
^uolted is inhibited.
David, and proclaimed Jeroboam King of their estates. Roboam the son of
Solomon being sore displeased herewith, assembled the two tribes of his
obeisance, with an intent to muster one hundredth and fourscore thousand chosen
men, to make war on Jeroboam and his people, and to enforce them by war to
acknowledge him for their Sovereign. But God restrained him by the means of a
prophet, who forbad him to make war; saying, that it was ill besitting that
war should be waged betwixt two parties of one nation, and the rather for that
this their revolt had happened by the will of God: by which means and persuasion
he dismissed his army. But first of all I will rehearse that which Jeroboam
king of Israel did, and afterward subsequently I will declare the acts of
Roboam King of the two Tribes, and thus shall the course of the history
continue in due order every ways.

After that Jeroboam had planted his royal court in the City of Sichem, he
made his ordinary The court and palace of Jeroboam.
abode in that place, except that sometimes he soiourned in the City of
Phanuel. Not long after this the feast of Tabernacles being at hand, Jeroboam
(supposing that if he permitted the people to go up and worship God in
Jerusalem, and solemnize the feast in that place, they might either repent
themselves of their revolt, or being retained and withdrawn by the temple and
service that was celebrated therein, they might be persuaded to forsake him,
and submit themselves to their first King; and by that means he might be
drawn into danger of his life) he practiced and plotted this invention. He
caused two golden calves to be cast, and builded two several Why Ieroboa^s:
calves were made.
temples, the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan (which is situate near unto
the source of little Jordan.) In each of the chapels of these two towns, he
placed one of these calves, and afterward My friends and contrymen, I know
that you are not ignorant how God is in all places, and that there cannot be
any place wherein he assisteth not, nor time wherein he hears and beholds
them not, that serve him with true affection: For which cause I think it not
convenient, that you go up unto Jerusalem at this time, which is a City enemy
unto us; neither that you make so long a journey in way of devotion: for it was
a man that builded that temple, even Jeroboam persuades the people to
Idolatry.
as I have consecrated two golden calves, the one in Bethel, and the other in
Dan, to the end that every one of you that inhabit near unto these Cities,
transporting your selves to the same, may adore God. Neither shall you want
priests or Levites: for I will elect some such among you, to the intent you
have no more need of the Tribe of Leui, or the sons of Aaron. Aaron the first
priest did. By such like speeches seduced he the people, and caused them to
fall from their forefathers religion, and transgress the ordinances of their
country, and this was the beginning of all those mischiefs that afterward
fell upon the Hebrews: by which means being overcome in war, they fell into
captivity and subjection of strangers, (whereof we will entreat further in
place convenient.) Now when the feast of Tabernacles (which happened in the
seventh month) was at hand; he himself intended to celebrate in Bethel after
the same manner, as the two other tribes had feasted in Jerusalem, and erected
an altar before the calfe, The neglect of Gods service is the cause of all
evil.
and was himself the high priest, ascending up to the altar being assisted by
the priests.

Now at such time as he was about to sacrifice, and to offer up burnt offerings
in the sight of the Iadon (sent from Jerusalem by the commandment of God) who
standing up in the midst of the people, and in the hearing of the king, turned
himself toward the altar, and spoke after this manner: Thou Altar, Thou Altar
(thus says 3. Reg. 13. The prophecy against the Altar in Bethel. The
prophecy is confirmed by a miracle.
the Lord) there shall a man rise of the Tribe of David called Josias, he shall
kill upon thee the false prophets of his time, and shall burn the bones of the
deceivers and seducers upon thee: And to the intent that each man may believe
that this prophecy is true, it shall be confirmed by a prodigy. This Altar
shall suddenly break, and the far of the sacrifices that are laid thereon
shall be powered on the ground. Jeroboam displeased with these words of the
Prophet, stretched out his hand, commanding them to lay hold on him. But the
hand that he stretched out, became instantly withered, so that he could no more
draw it back again to himself, but held it hanging Jeroboam was very much
contented, and invited the Prophet Ieroboams withered hand restored.
to dine with him. But Iadon answered him and said, that he neither might enter
into his house, nor taste any bread or water within the City, because God had
prohibited him: furthermore The year of the world 2971. before Christ's
Nativity. 993.
Jeroboam held in great honor (in that he soothed him up in whatsoever was
best pleasing to his ears.) This man at that time lay sick upon his bed,
being faint through age; and when he was informed by his son that there was a
prophet come from Jerusalem, and what wonders Hedio and Ruffinus. chapter 9.
he had wrought, and how Jeroboam by his prayers recovered again his withered
hand; he fearing least the King should make more account of this stranger, then
of himself, commanded his sons presently to saddle his Ass, and to have him
in a readiness against his departure. The Prophet is brought back by the
subtilty and fraud of the false Prophet.
him. Iadon answered him, that God had interdicted and charged him not to taste
any kind of sustenance in any man's house, that dwelt within that City.
Truly, said the other, with me thou might eat, for I also am a prophet,
and honor the same God that thou do: and now also come I unto thee by his
commandment, to conduct thee back again into my house, and to entertain thee
with a friendly dinner. These words of the false prophet made Iadon credulous
so that he returned back again with him. But as they sat at their banquet
and were making merry together, Iadon and said unto him; that since he had
broken his commandment, he should suffer punishment for the same: and withal
expressed unto him the manner, which was, that in his return homewards, he
should be torn in pieces by a Lion; and that he should not be buried in the
monument of his fathers. This thing happened in my opinion by the will of The
disobedience of the Prophet, his punishment and burial.
God, to the intent that Jeroboam should not respect Iadons words, who had been
found a liar. As therefore Iadon returned back to Jerusalem, a Lion met him on
the way, and tore him in pieces from his Ass and slew him, yet offered he no
violence to the Ass that bare him, which he preserved with the body of the
prophet standing fast by the same, until such time as certain passengers
beholding the spectacle, brought news thereof into the town unto the false
Prophet, who sent his sons to bring back the body: which by their assistance
he honorably buried, charging Iadons prophecy is detracted to Jeroboam by the
false Prophet.
the prophet and given his son these things in charge (being other ways a
most wicked and impious man) he addressed himself unto Jeroboam, and said unto
him: Why art thou troubled at the words of this mad man? The King told him all
that which had happened about the Altar, and his hand, and assured him that he
accounted him a true and divine prophet, and one sent by God. But the false
prophet began most maliciously to overthrow his opinion, and disguise the By
such like allegations he made the King believe that which he said, and having
wholly distracted his thoughts from God and good works, and observation of Gods
laws, he drew him to all wickedness and impiety: by which act of his he
outraged God, and offended Jeroboam.

As touching Roboam Salomons son (who was King of the two Tribes, as we have
before Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10. Roboams defenced cities. (...). Paral. 11.
this declared) he builded these great and strong Cities, Bethleem, Itama,
Thecos, Bethsur, Socoth, Odolam, Epan, Maresa, Zipha, Adoraim, Lachis, Zicha,
Saraim, Elon, and Hebron, which being within the confines of Judah, he builded
first. He builded also other great Cities in The year of the world. 29^1.
before Christ's birth 993.
Jeroboam had erected; and during the term of three years, they increased the
kingdom The godly Israelites return to Roboam.
of Roboam: who being married to one of his own line had three children, and
was afterward married also with Maacha the daughter of Thamar daughter to
Absalon, who was of his parentage likewise, of whom he begat his son called
Abiah. He had also diverse other children by other women; but above all the
rest, he loved Maacha most entirely. He had eighteen legitimate Roboams wi^es
and children.
wives, married unto him according to the law, and thirty concubines: he had
eight and twenty sons and threescore daughters, and declared for his successor
in the kingdom Abiah (...) son of Maacha, and committed all his treasures and
strong sorts unto his hands. But mortal men most usually are corrupted by the
untoward flatteries of wavering fortune, as appears by this King. For Roboam
seeing his kingdom thus increased, he bent himself to all unjust and impious
actions, and contemned the service of God: the people also conformed themselves
to his impieties. For the life of the subject is oftentimes perverted, by
reason of the corrupt and dissolute life of their princes; and those that are
inferiors, beholding the riot of their superiors, will easily be withdrawn
from all modesty, and follow those vices they profess, as if they had been
their professed virtues: for should they do the contrary, they should seem
to disanull Roboam, Regi^ ad exempium totus comp^itur orbis.
wherein the subjects addicted themselves to impiety, and all errors: for they
would not make profession of honesty, for fear least they should seem to
study the means to be offensive unto the king.

CHAP. IIII.
Susac king of Egypt after the spoil of Jerusalem, transporteth the riches of
that City into Egypt.

But God sent Susac king of Egypt to take vengeance for that excess, which
was committed Alias, chap. 5. Susac inuadeth Judea with great forces.
against his majesty by Roboam (whose actions Herodotus wrongfully ascribes
to Sesostris.) For this Susac in the fifth year of Roboams reign, assembled a
huge army of diverse thousands of men, and brought them out against Roboam:
wherein it is reported that he had twelve hundredth chariots, threescore
thousand horsemen, and four hundredth thousand footmen. The greater part of
these were Libyans, and Aethiopians: breaking in therefore into the Hebrews
country with this power, without stroke-striking he seized the strongest
places of the kingdom of Roboam, and fortified them, and at last came and
encamped before Jerusalem. Jerusalem besieged. Samaeas the Prophet reprehendeth
the Jews of their impiety. 2. Paral. 2. Samaeas comfort the people.
But Roboam and his associates, seeing themselves begirt with a strong siege on
every side by Susacs army; at last had his recourse unto prayers: yet could he
not move God to incline and favor him with the victory. For the prophet
Samaeas threatened and told him, that God would abandon Susac had without
bloodshed or resist taken and surprised the City, and was received into the
same by discomforted Roboam; he kept not those conuentions that were made
betwixt them, but spoiled the temple, Jerusalem and the temple are spoiled.
and took away with him those treasures that were dedicated unto God, and the
service of the Solomon: neither left he behind him the quiver of gold, which
was offered by David, and received by him of the king of Sophena: Which done,
he retired back again into his own country. Of this expedition Herodotus of
Halicarnassus makes mention (who differs only in the 3. Reg 1^. What
Herodotus wrote of this expeditio^.
name of the King) and says that he assailed diverse nations, and subdued
Palestina and Syria, and took many men prisoners without any resist: whereby it
is manifest that he means no less then The year of the world. 2975. before
Christ's Nativity 989. Roboam for the golden shields and bucklers makes new of
beasse. Roboam dies and Abias reigns after him The year of the world. 29^8.
before Christ's birth 976. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 11. 3. Reg. 14. Ieroboams
impiety.
that our nation has been overcome by the Egyptian. For he says that in
their gates who yielded themselves up unto him without inforcement, he erected
pillars which were figured with the secret parts of a woman. But our king
Roboam yielded up the City into his hands without contradiction. It is said
that the Aethiopians have learnt of the Egyptians the use of circumscissio^ of
the prepuce. For the Phenicians and Syrians, that are in Palestine, confess
that they have learnt it of the Egyptians. But it is a matter very manifest
that no other are circumcised in Palestine of Syria, but our selves. But let
each one speak of these things, according as him list.

After the retreat of Sisac, king Roboam made shieldes and bucklers of brass,
in steed of those of gold, and gave the like number unto his guard, and in
steed of living in a brave army, in a royal and princely estate, he reigned
after a servile and fearful manner, being all his life time enemy to Jeroboam.
Abias succeeded him in his reign at such time, as Jeroboam had already
reigned eighteen years over the ten tribes. Thus were these things
terminated. It behooves now at this present to declare that which Jeroboam did
afterward, and how he died. He observing no mean or end of his impiety,
employed himself continually in making of Altars and high places, and presumed
to ordain common sacrificers. But God withheld not long time to heap the
punishment of those his impieties on the head of him, and of all his
posterity. Whereas therefore his son Obimes was sick about that Ieroboams
son falls sick, his mother is sent to Achias the Prophet.
time, he commanded his wife to lay aside her royal garment, and to apparel
her self like a common Achias the Prophet, assuring her that he was admirable
for his knowledge in foretelling things to come, and had foretold him that he
should be king: for which cause he willed her to repair unto him after the
manner of a stranger, and enquire of him if her son should escape that
sickness. Whereupon she disguised her self according as her husband had
commanded her, and came unto the City of Silo where Achias dwelt, and as she
was upon entering his house (notwithstanding he had lost his sight through age)
God appeared unto him, and certified him in these two points: first that
Ieroboams wife came unto him: and next, all that he should answer to her
demand. At such time therefore as she entered into his house after the guise of
a common and strange woman, Achias cried with a loud voice. Enter thou wife of
Jeroboam, wherefore hidest thou thy self? Thou can not hide thy self from
God, David's posterity, I have given it unto thee: but thou have forgotten the
same; and having forsaken my service, have molten down new gods whom thou The
punishment of Jeroboam and the misery of the people foreprophecied.
honor: so also will I exterminate thee, and abolish all thy posterity,
and cast them off for a pray unto dogs, and fowls of the air. For I will
constitute a king over my people that shall leave no one of Ieroboams race
alive. The people also shall have part of this punishment, and shall be
deprived of this their fruitful country, and be scattered among the regions
on the other side of Euphrates, because they have followed the impieties of
their king, and adoring those gods that Jeroboam. When Achias had finished his
prophecy, the woman started back sore troubled and dismaide through the
danger of her son, and went lamenting onward on her way, wounded with the
future death of him, and by reason of her so earnest affection she was
afflicted with incredible torments. The haste which she used was importunate,
because of her son whom she should see dead; by so much the sooner she hasted
homeward, but it behooued her to use expedition in the behalf of her husband.
Whenas therefore she was arrived, she found her son expiring, as the Prophet
Jeroboam.

CHAP. V. The year of the world, 2988. before Christ's Nativity, 976.

Ieroboams expedition against the son of Roboam, the overthrow of his army,
and how Basanes rooted out the whole posterity of Jeroboam, and made himself
king.

But Jeroboam was nothing moved herewith, but levied a great army with an
intent Alias, chap. 6. The expedition of Jeroboam against Abias king of Judah.
Abias levied an army against Jeroboam.
to make war against Abias the son of Roboam, who had obtained his fathers
kingdom over the two tribes. For he despised him, because he was young in
years. This notwithstanding, the young king was no whit dismaide (although he
understood of Ieroboams coming) but with greater wisdom then was incident to
his years, and beyond all Jeroboam at the mountain of Samaria; where
incamping his host near unto him, he provided all things in a readiness that
were requisite for the battle, and had with him four hundredth thousand
fighting men, but Jeroboam had twice as many. Now when the armies were
arranged, and expected to give the allarum and charge, Abias stood up in a
certain high place from whence he might be seen and heard, and making a sign
with his hand, he required that Jeroboam, and the people would first of al
hear him peaceably, which granted to him, and each one atte^ding in silence,
he brake out into these words. There is none of you but knows, that. God has
promised the kingdom to David and his posterity for ever. I therefore greatly
admire how you Abias, oration to the Hebrews, wherein he vpbraideth them of
their superstition, and forsaking of their religion.
have revolted from my father to submit your selves to Jeroboam his servant,
whom at this present Jeroboam usurps iniustly even at this day, and which as
I suppose he shall not enjoy long time. For he shall be punished by God, and
shall cease to contradict his laws, and to dishonor them as he does
continually, in persuading you to do the like. You have received no injury at
my fathers hands, but by reason that he was misled by the sinister counsails of
certain wicked persons, and spoke unto you certain words which in appearance
seemed unfitting in your ears, you have forsaken him in your displeasure: but
in effect you have separated your selves from God and his commandments. Truly
you should have pardoned a young man untrained and untaught in oratorie, not
only for the rude words which he used, but although his youth and ignorance
should have moved him to commit some churlish and Thus spoke Abias to the
people. But whilst he yet continued his discourse, Jeroboam sent certain of
his soldiers by by-waies to enclose Abias within two strieghts, before his
followers could discover them. Now when Abias was thus enclosed in the midst of
his enemies, his army began to be discomforted, and to lose their courage: but
he encouraged them and exhorted them to put their trust in God, who could not
be enclosed by his enemies: so that all together having called upon God to
assist them, and after that the Priests had sounded the trumpet, they thrust in
amongst their enemies with a great shout, and Ieroboams soldiers, that they
fled, and those on Abias side had the upper hand. Never was there war
recorded by the historians either amongst the Greeks, or Barbarians, that was
pursued with so great a slaughter as the army of Jeroboam: whereby it appeared
that this wonderful and admirable victory came from God. For they discomfited
five hundredth thousand of their enemies, and took their most defenced places
by force, and spoiled them. Bethel and Ithan also with their ^ds and signiories
belonging unto them: so that as long as Abias lived, Jeroboam was never after
of force to raise any power The year of the world, 2988. before Christ's birth
976. The death of Abias. 3. Reg. 15. Asa king of Judah. The year of the world,
2991. before Christ's nativity, 973. The year of the world. 2992. before
Christ birth. 972. The year of the world. 2993. before Christ's birth 971
since the loss he received. Abias suruiued, after this his victory, only
for the space of three years; and was buried in Jerusalem, in the Sepulcher of
his ancestors, leaving twenty two sons and sixteen daughters behind him, all
which he begat on sixteen women. His son Asa succeeded him in the kingdom,
whose mother was called Maacha: under his government the country of Israel
enjoyed a firm peace for the term of ten years. This is that which we have
observed of Abias, son of Roboam, the son of Solomon. Jeroboam the King of
the ten Tribes died likewise, after he had reigned twenty two years, and Nadab
his son succeeded him at such time, as Asa had already reigned two years.
The son of Jeroboam governed two years, resembling his father in impiety and
wickedness. During these two years, he made war against Gabaa a City of
the Philistines, and encamped thereabout to surprise it by force: but being
betrayed Baasa the son of Machil, he died. This Baasa taking possession of
the kingdom, exterminated all the posterit^ of Jeroboam: and it came to pass
that they of Ieroboams race that died in the City, were torn in pieces, and
devoured by dogs; and they that were in the fields, were made a pray unto
birds, according as Gods prophet had pronounced. By this means the house of
Jeroboam suffered a deserved punishment, for their impiety and wickedness.

CHAP. VI.
The Aethiopians besiegde Jerusalem during the reign of Asa, and are

But Asa King of Jerusalem was a man of upright and honest life, and such a one
as feared God, neither did he, or enterprised he any thing, that had not a
natural relation to piety, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 12. al. 8. Asas piety.
and the prescript of the laws. He corrected whatsoever was vicious and
irregular in his kingdom, redressing whatsoever was erroneous in the same, and
purging it from all impiety. He had an army of three hundredth thousand men of
the Tribe of Judah, armed with bucklers and iauelins, and two hundredth and
fifty thousand of the Tribe of Benjamin, bearing bucklers and bows. After he
had reigned ten years, Zaraeus King of Aethiopia came out against him, with a
great army of nine hundredth thousand footmen, and one hundredth thousand
horsemen, with three hundredth chariots, and destroyed all the land as far as
Maresa, a City of Judah: in which Asa came and met with him, and opposed army
against army in the valley of Saphath, not 3. Reg 15. The Ethiopia^s war
against Asa.
far from the City. Where seeing the great number of the Aethiopians, he
besought God that he would give him the victory and slaughter of diverse
thousands of his enemies: for he said that he came out against Zaraeus, not
assuring himself in any other thing, except only of Gods assistance, who had
the power to make a handful of men superiors over many, and the feeble to
overcome the mighty.

Whilst Asa prayed thus unto God, a certain sign of vi^orie was given him;
so that rejoiced and confirmed in that God had given him a token (...) he would
assist him, he assailed 2. Paral. 14. The year of the world, 3000. before
Christ's birth 964.
his enemies and slew a great number of the Aethiopians: as for the rest that
were put to flight, he pursued them as far as the country of Gerar; and
after they had conquered their enemies, they Asa and his had thus by this
means obtained at Gods hands such a victory and so great riches, they
returned Asas victory.
back again to Jerusalem: and when they drew near unto the City, the
prophet Azarias came out to meet them, who stayed them, and began after this
manner to speak unto them: That since they had obtained from God so notable a
victory, they ought to behave themselves like virtuous men, and such as feared
God, conforming themselves unto his will in all things, The exhortation of
Azarias the Prophet.
protesting that if they persisted in the same, God would give them the
continual victory over their enemies; and besides that, happy life: but if
they forsook the service of God, that all things should fall out contrary
unto them. That the time should come, when neither true prophet or 2. Paral 15.
Cities should be overthrown, and their nation should be scattered over the
face of the whole earth, and live like wanderers and vagabonds. In the mean
while therefore, while they had time, he counseled the^ to live uprightly,
wishing them that they would not deprive themselves of that favor which God
bare unto them. When the King and all the people heard these words, they were
very joyful, and every one both in general and particular, were careful to
serve God. The King also sent out certain deputies over the country, who were
charged to see the laws duly The year of the world. 3000. before the
Nativity of Christ. 964. Religion renewed in Israle. Basaes impiety, 3. Reg.
16. A prophecy against Basa.
Asa king of the two Tribes.

Now will I return to Basa King of the multitude of Israel, who (having slain
Nadab the son of Jeroboam) usurped the kingdom. He made his abode in the city
of Thersa, and reigned four and twenty years, showing himself more wicked
and impious, then either Jeroboam or his son had bin. He plagued the people
many ways, and dishonored God very greatly, who sent the Prophet Gimon unto
him, to foretell him that his whole race should perish, and that his house
should be persecuted with as many miseries as himself had inflicted on
Ieroboams posterity: because that having received the government from God, he
showed himself ungrateful unto him for his goodness, and governed his people
impiously and unjustly: whereas justice and piety are both profitable unto
those that practice them, and wel-pleasing unto God. Further, in that he had
conformed Jeroboam used, and was wholly contaminated with all his vices, he
might assure himself that resembling him in wickedness, he should undoubtedly
equal him in punishment. When Basa heard all those evils (that should shortly
fall on him and his posterity, by reason of his wickedness) he redeemed not
the time, neither endeavored himself to gain the reputation of a reconciled
life, or to obtain pardon at Gods hands, by repenting himself of his
forepassed sins: but even as they that have a recompense proposed unto them
to make them more affectionate in exploiting any thing, do diligently endeavor
themselves to perform the same: so Basa, notwithstanding the prophet had
foretold him of that which should happen, persisted in his wickedness as if it
had been in virtue, and became worse and worse, to the utter ruin and
confusion both of him and his household: and daily addicted himself Basa
surprised Ramath, and fortifieth it. The year of the world. 3006. before
Christ's birth 958. Asa inciteth those of Damasco to invade Bala. The year of
the world. 3016. before the birth of Christ. 948. Alias. chap 9. The death of
Basa.
his roades into Asaes kingdom. But Asa fearing the invasion of his enemy, and
considering that the soldiers who were left in Ramath, did most grievously
spoil all the dominions that were under him, sent ambassadors to the King of
Damasco with gold and silver, to induce him to a society in war, and to
renew that amity between them, which was confirmed betwixt both their
fathers. Who willingly received those treasures that were sent him, and made a
league with him, and brake the truce which he had with Basa: so that he sent
the governors of his dominions Basaes subjection, with commandment to destroy
them. Of these they burned some, and ransackt other some, amongst which were
Elon, Dan, and Abellane. Which when the King of Israel understood, he gave
over the fortifying of Ramath, and with all expedition returned to yield those
of his subjects his assistance, who were utterly distracted. But Asa in the
mean while builded two strong towns, Gabath and Maspha, of that stuff which
Basa had prepared to build withal. Basa afterward (prevented by the common
debt of death) had no more opportunity to make war against Asa. He was
buried in the City of Arsane, and his son Ela succeeded him in the kingdom,
who after he had reigned some two years, was traitorously slain by Zamri a
captain of a half regiment of horsemen. For whilst Ela banquetted with Osa,
who was the steward of his house, Zamri wrought Ela, who at that time was alone
and destitute of men of war and captains, for that all of them were at the
siege of Gabathon a City of the Philistines.

CHAP. VII.
Basaes offspring being extinct among the Israelites, Zamri reigned in Israel;
and after him Amri, and his son Achab.

AFter that Ela was slain, Zamri took the Kingdom upon him, and wholly rooted
out Basaes posterity (according as the prophet Gimon had foretold.) For after
the same manner The year of the world, 3017. before Christ's birth 947. Basaes
stock destroyed.
was his family utterly overthrown for their impiety, as Ieroboams progeny
was ex tinguished for their iniquity (as we have toforetime declated.) For the
army which b^ ^ged Gabathon, hearing news of the Kings death, and that Zamri
had murdered him, and seized the kingdom, they made Amri general of the
army, and anointed him for their king: who leuying the siege before Gabathon,
came before the royal City of Thersa, which he besieged and took perforce.
Zamri seeing the City destitute of defense, had retired himself into the most
secret and retired place of the palace; where setting it on fire he burned
both himself and it, after he The year of the world 3017. before Christ's
Nativity. 947. Diverse factio^s of the people. Amri king of Israel* The year
of the world, 3021. before Christ's birth 943.
had reigned seven days. Suddenly after this, the Israelites fell at
controversy amongst themselves, because that some of them sought to prefer
Thaman to the kingdom, and others were wholly addicted to Amri; but they of
Amries side had the better, and being of the better sort slew Thaman, and made
Amri sovereign over the people. The thirteenth year of Asa, Amri began his
reign, and was King for twelve years space; six years governed he in Thersa,
and six in Mareon (which the Greeks call Samaria) himself imposed this name
of Samaria, calling it by the name of Samar, who had given him the land on
which he builded this City. He differed in nothing from the other kings his
predecessors, but in that he was worser then any of them: for all of them
busied their heads on this thing only, that by daily impieties they might
alien the people from God. For which cause God being displeased, cansed the one
of them to cut off the Amri died in Samaria, and Achab his son was his
successor. Amri dies, and Achab his son succeeds him. The year of the
world. 3028. before Christ's birth 9^6. Alias, chap. 10. Asa dies, Iosophat
succeeds him.


Hereby a man may truly and easily perceive, what care the divine majesty
has of humane affairs, and how he loves the virtuous, and utterly rooteth
out the vicious. For the kings of Israel through their impiety in a short and
successiue course the one after the other, were cut off and confounded with all
their families. But Asa (king of Jerusalem and the two Tribes) living happily
in the favor of God, for his piety and justice attained to a reverend and old
age, and after he had reigned one and forty years, he died a good death. And
after his decease, Iosaphat his son (whom he begat on his mother Abida)
succeeded him; who in all things that concerned either piety or fortitude,
seemed to emulate and equal his grandfather David, according as Achab King of
Israel made his abode in Samaria, and governed the kingdom for the space of
twenty two years, without any alteration of those ordinances which his
progenitors kings of Israel had established; but that he exceeded them daily in
complotting worser wickedness. For he imitated all their impieties and
wickedness (but especially the apostasy of Jeroboam) for he adored those calves
that were erected by him; and besides that, he added far worse impieties then
the former. He took to wife Iezabel the daughter of Ithobal King of the
Tyrians and Sidonians, of whom he learned to adore the gods of her nation: for
The year of the world. 3031. before the birth of Christ. 933. Iezabel. 3. Reg.
17. The dearth of victuals prophesied to the Israelites.
she was a busy and audacious woman, and of such immeasurable madness, that
she fear not to build a temple in honor of Bell the god of the Tyrrians, and
to plant a wood furnished with all kind of trees, and to ordain priests and
false prophets also in honor of that God. The king The year of the world.
3037. before Christ's birth 927
through want of rain was waxen dry, God commanded him to repair unto
Sareptha (a City not far from Sidon and Tire, and situate in the midst
between them both) where he should find a widow woman, who should furnish him
with food. As soon therefore as he drew near Crows feed Elias. The widow of
Sareptha entertaining Elias neither flower not oil fail.
understand, that it was she who should nourish him. Whereupon he came unto her
and saluted her, praying her that she would bring him some water to cool his
thirst; and as she was ready to depart, he called her back again, and willed
her to bring him some bread also. Whereupon she swore that she had nothing in
her house, but a handful of flower and a little oil, and that she was come
forth to gather sticks, to the end she might bake the same, and make bread for
her self and her son, and when they had eaten the same, they must needly
perish through famine, because they had not any thing more left them. Go, said
the prophet, and be of good courage, and conceive better hopes, and when thou
have prepared meat for me, bring it me: for I tell thee that thy pitcher of
meal shall neither fail, nor thy pot of oil be empty, until that God send
Menander of the famine during the time of Elias.


Menander makes mention of this default of rain in the acts of Ithobal king
of the Tyrians, speaking after this manner. In his time there was a season
without rain, from the month of October until October in the next year
after, but upon his supplication and request there fell The year of the world,
3037. before Christ's Nativity, 927.
Achabs time: for about that time Ithobale reigned over the Tyrians, as
Menander testifies in his history. This woman (of whom we have spoken
heretofore, that nourished the Prophet) seeing her son fallen sick, and
lying senseles, as if he had been already dead, or yielding up of the ghost;
wept, and brake out into such passionate laments, as were answerable to her
desolate estate, and said, that the cause of her misfortune was, in that the
Prophet was come into her house, and had discovered her sins, and that for
the same cause her son was dead. But he recomforted her, and willed her to be
of a good courage, and commanded her to bring the child unto him, assuring her
that he would restore him to life. Now when Elias restores the w^wes son to
l^e.
she had brought him, he took the child and bare him into his lodging where he
remained, and 3. Reg. 18.
him, that he would return the soul into the body, and restore life unto the
infant. Whereupon God having compassion on the mother, and being willing to
gratify the Prophet, and to the intent that no man might suppose that he came
unto her to endomage her; he restored the child to life beyond all expectation.
For which the mother gave thanks unto the Prophet, saying, that by this means
she was thoroughly persuaded, that God had spoken unto him. Not long after he
sought out Achab, according as God had commanded him, to let him understand
that he should have rain. At that time the famine reigned over the whole
country, and there was great want of necessary victuals; so that men did not
only faint for want of bread, Elias is sent by God to prophecy fault to Achab.
The year of the world. 3040. before Christ's birth 924. Achab seeks for
Elias. Obediah co^cea leth and sustaineth a hundredth prophets
Obediah unto him (who was the master of his herds) he commanded him that he
should each way seek out for fountains and brooks, willing him that if he
found out any grass, he should mow the same, and give it to his cattle for
their sustenance. And whereas by his command the Prophet Elias was sought in
diverse places, and could not be found: he willed Obediah also to follow him. So
taking both of them several ways, the king followed one, and the master of
the cattle an other. This Obediah was a godly and virtuous man, who when the
Prophets were put to death, hid one hundredth of them in dens, and sustained
them with bread and water. After this man was departed from the king, Elias met
with him and asked him what he was: which when he had certified him, he Elias
commanded him to repair unto the king, and to certify him that he was hard
at hand. Obediah asked him wherein he had offended him, that he would make him
a minister and messenger unto him, who had sought to kill him, and had bylaid
the country to apprehend him? For there was not any straight whither he sent
not some of his men to find out Elias, with charge, that if they found him,
they should put him to death. Now it may so be (said he) that whilst I repair
unto the king, the spirit of God wherewith thou art fulfilled will carry thee
away, and the king not finding thee here and frustrate of his desire, will
revenge himself on my head. Be thou not therefore so secure by my danger,
whereas thou may know how careful I am of such holy men as thou art, who
have delivered a hundredth Prophets from Iezabels fury, and now at this time
conceal and sustain them in secret places. Notwithstanding Elias commanded
him to repair unto the king, and to cast off all fear, swearing unto him by
an oath, how that day he would make himself seen and known unto Achab.

When Obediah had certified the king that Elias was at hand, Achab went out to
meet him, and being fraught with indignation said unto him. Is it thou that
heapest so much mischief on the Achab accuses Elias of impiety.
Hebrews heads? Art thou the man that art the cause of this sterilitie? To
whom Elias replied without flattering him any ways, that it was he and his
race that were the occasions of these mischiefs, because they had brought
strange Gods into their country whom they adored, and had forsaken the true
God, who was and is only to be worshipped. He therefore willed him presently
to assemble all the people on the mount Carmel, and bring with him his wife and
her prophets, Elias reproves the superstition of the people.
in that place: Elias stood up in the midst of them and said. How long will you
live thus, having both your souls and opinions dismembered and divided? For if
you think that the Hebrews God is the true and only God, why follow you him
not? and why keep you not his commandments? But if you think that the
honor belongs not to him, but to foreign gods, follow you them. When Elias
perceived that the people replied nothing hereunto, he The year of the world,
3040 before Christ's birth 924.
prayed them (in confirmation of that infinite and distinct power of God from
that of strange Gods) that whereas he was but one only Prophet of the true God
at that time present, and the other were four hundredth that worshipped the
false; that he might take an Ox and kill the same, and lay it upon wood,
without putting any fire thereto to consume the sacrifice; and that they also
might do the like, and call upon their gods, and beseech them to send down
fire to consume their sacrifice: which if they should do and confirm the same
by miracle, that then the true nature of their gods should be known. This
counsel of his was generally allowed. Whereupon Elias commanded the false
Prophets first of all to choose themselves an Ox, and to kill the same, and
afterward to call upon the assistance of their gods: and when it manifestly
appeared that their prayer and invocation was of no force; Elias began to mock
them, saying, why call you not Elias that was to make his sacrifice, commanded
the false Prophets to stand aside, willing the people to draw near unto him,
and observe, for fear least secretly he should convey fire under the wood.
When the people Elias doctrine and office confirmed by miracle.
were approached, he took 12. stones, according to the number of the twelve
tribes of Israel, and made an Altar, and dug a deep trench round about the
same; and afterward heaping wood upon the Altar, and laying his sacrifice
thereupon, he commanded them to fill four tuns with fountain water, and to
power it upon the Altar in such sort, as the trench might receive and drink up
the water. Which done, he began to pray and call upon God, beseeching him that
it might Fire from heaven deuoureth the sacrifice.
had he finished his prayer, but fire fell from heaven upon the Altar in the
sight of all the people, and consumed all the sacrifice; so that the water was
consumed, and the place dried up. Which when the Israelites beheld, they fell
down on their faces upon the earth, adoring one only God: confessing Bells
priests slains.
him to be the most mighty and only true God, and auowing that al other were
but forged names, and fruits of an evil and truthles opinion; and laying hands
themselves upon their false Prophets, they slew them by the commandment of
Elias. He willed the king also to depart, and take his refection, and to take
care for nothing, because he should very shortly see that God would send Elias
foreprophecieth rain
him rain; and thus departed Achab from him. But Elias ascended the top of the
mount Carmel, and sat him down on the earth, leaning his head upon his knees:
whilst thus he sat, he commanded Elias understood this, he sent unto Achab,
wishing him to retire himself within the City before the rain fell: who had
no sooner recovered the City of Iezrael, but that the air was presently
clouded and covered with a shower, and a vehement wind intermixed with rain
fell upon the earth, and the Prophet seized by the spirit of God ran with the
kings chariot as far as Iezrael a City of Asser. When Iezabel Achabs wife
had notice what wonders Elias had performed, and how he had slain her 3. Reg.
10.
revenge her self on him, as he had slain her Prophets. Which for that Elias
feared, he fled into the City of Bersabe, which is upon the borders of the
tribe of Judah, bounding upon Idumaea, in which place he left his servant, and
retired himself into the desert: where whilst he prayed God, Elias flies
from Iezabel.
that he would take him out of the world, by reason he was not better then
others, for which cause he should desire to live after them; he fell asleep
under a certain tree, and after that some one Gods care for his servants
had awakened him, he arose and found bread and water ready prepared by him.
Whenas therefore he had eaten and was recomforted, he went unto the mount Sinai
(where it is said that Moses received the laws from God) where finding out a
hollow cave, he entered into it, and remained God speaks to Elias in the
desert.
therein. And being demanded by a certain voice which spoke unto him, he
knew not from

Hereupon as soon as it was day, he forsook the cave, he heard an earthquake,
and saw a The year of the world 3040. before Christ's birth 924. lehuking of
Israel. Elizeus calling
Iehu the son of Nimsi king of the people, and Azael of Damasco king of the
Syrians; certifying him that in his place, Elizeus of the city of Abela should
be prophet; and that the wicked people should be destroyed, the one by Azael,
and the other by Iehu. When Elias had heard these things, he returned into the
country of the Hebrews, and met Elizeus the son of Saphat at the cart, and
with him diverse others driving before them twelve couple of oxen: him did he
approach, and cast upon him his garment, who instantly began thereupon to
prophetize, so that forsaking his oxen, he followed Elias. Yet required he him,
that before his departure, he Elias, attending on him during all the term of
his life like his disciple and servant. This issue had the affairs of this so
excellent a Prophet. But a certain Citizen called Naboth Hedio and Ruffinus.
chap. 14. al. 11. 3. Reg. 21. The story of Naboth, who was stoned to death for
denying Achab his vineyard.
of the City of Azar, had a vineyard near unto the lands of Achab, who
required him that he would sell him the same, at what price he thought
convenient at his own election, to the intent he might annex the same to his
own lands, and make them all but one possession: wishing him, that if he would
not sell it him for silver, to choose in exchange thereof, any one field of his
that best liked him. Naboth answered him, that he would not do it, but that he
intended to gather the fruit of his own land himself, which he had received
as an inheritance from his father. The King no less tormented then if he had
lost his own inheritance (in that he might not be Iezabel his wife questioned
with him as touching the cause of his discontent, and how it came to pass that
he neither washed, dinde, nor supt: who told her of Naboths rude behavior, and
how having used al just and reasonable composition unto him, in abasing
himself more then his royal authority permitted, he had been outraged by
him, in that he obtained not the thing which he requested at his hands.
Hereupon Iezabel willed him to be of good cheer aduising him, that dismissing
his displeasure he should continue his ordinary entertainment, because she her
self would take upon her to revenge him on Naboth. Whereupon she presently sent
letters in Achabs name to the governors of the country, whereby she enjoined
them to celebrate a fast, and to assemble the people, charging them that in
that place Nabotl should have a seat prepared Naboth (convinced by false
witness, for scandalizing both God and the King) was stoned by the people and
put to death. When Iezabel had tidings hereof, she repaired to the kings
presence, and told him that he should enjoy Naboths vineyard; and disburse
nothing for the same.

But God displeased with this her wickedness, sent the Prophet Elias purposely
to meet with Achab in Naboths ground, and to tell him that he iniustly
possessed the lawful inheritance of a Elias prophecieth what revenge God will
take of Achab and Iezabel.
legitimate heir, whom he had done to death: As soon as the King perceived
that he came unto Naboths carcass was consumed by dogs, that both his and his
Queens blood should be shed, and that all his race should be destroyed, for
that they durst commit such an impiety, and so wickedly slaughter against all
law, so good and guiltless a Citizen. At length Achab upon these words was
seized with displeasure, and repented for the offense he had committed: so that
apparelling himself in sackcloth, and walking barefoote, he tasted not any
Achabs repentance.
meat, but confessed his sins, under hope to appease Gods wrath. For which
cause God certified him by the Prophet, that during his life time the
punishment of his race should be deferred, because he had repented him of his
misdeeds: but that the threats and menaces should take effect Elias signified
unto the king.

CHAP. VIII. The year of the world. 3040. before Christ Nativity 924.

Adad King of Damasco and Syria, fights at two several times with Achab, and
is overthrown by him.

Whilst Achabs affairs were after this manner disposed, the son of Adad
(that reigned over the Syrians, and those of Damasco) assembled the forces of
his whole country, 3. Reg. ^0. Adads war against Achab
and associated with himself two and thirty other kings, with whom he came
and made war against Achab. Who being far inferior to him in forces, came
not out into the open field to bid him battle, but closing up his soldiers in
his strongest cities, he himself retired into Samaria (which was begirt with a
very strong wall, and generally very hard to be surprised.) Achab, to require
him to give audience to his ambassadors which he would send unto him, by whom
he should be certified what his resolution was. As soon as the King of Israel
had granted them free access, the ambassadors came, and (according to the
kings directions) required that Achabs The Syrians emballage to Achab.
goods, his children, and wife should be at Adads command: which if he would
confess, and suffer him to seize so many of them as best liked him, he would
leuy the siege and batter the City no more. Achab gave the ambassadors
commission to certify the King of Syria that both himself, and all whatsoever
was his, was at his command. Upon which answer the King sent a second message
unto Achab, enioyning him the next day to admit such of his servants, as he

Achab amazed at this second embassadge of the King of Syria, assembled his
people, and certified them, that he was ready to deliver up into the enemies
hands his wives, and children, for their safety and repose; and to abandon all
that likewise which was in his possession (for that the Syrian had demanded no
less at his hands in his first embassage.) But that now he required that his
servants might be admitted to ransacke all their houses, to the end they may
leave nothing therein that was worthy regard, willing by this means to take a
pretext of making war, knowing well (said he) that I will spare nothing that is
mine for your safety. At this present he profereth Achab persisted in those
things, which first of all were required by him (because he had a desire of His
answer to the Legates.
the conservation of his subjects:) but as touching his second demand, that he
would no ways condescend thereunto: and thus sent he them away. When Adad
heard this answer, he was sore moved, and sent unto Achab the third time,
threatening him that his soldiers should make a bulwark more higher then the
walls (he so much trusted in) yea though only each of them should bring Achab
answered, that he ought not to glory in his army, but that his true glory was,
when he had the better in the battle. When the ambassadors were returned
back, they found the King at dinner with 32. kings A lad^ confidence in his
soldiers.
his allies, to whom they made report of Achabs answer. Hereupon Adad gave
commandment to begirt the City with Pallisadoes, and to raise bulwarks of
earth, and busily to intend the siege. Whilst these things were in hand, Achab
was grievously troubled, and all the people with him: but at length he grew
confident, and cast off all his sear through the arrival of a certain
Prophet, who said unto him, that God promised to deliver all those thousands of
soldiers, and The Israelites God promises victory against the Syrians.
his boastfull enemies which he beheld, into his hands. The same Prophet being
afterward demanded Achab therefore calling unto him the governors sons,
found that their number amounted to two hundredth thirty and two: and having
notice that the Syrians intended naught else but pleasure and banquetring, he
opened the City gates, and sent these young men out against them. Now when the
sentinels of the aduers part had discovered them, they certified Adad thereof,
who sent out certain soldiers against them, commanding them that if they were
come out The year of the world. 3040. before the Nativity of Christ. 9^4.
Achab within the City arraunged another army, and kept them in a readiness.
When as therefore the young men had charged the Syrian guard, and slain a
great number of them, and had pursued the rest even unto their own camp;
Achab spying his present victory and advantage, caused his whole army to
break forth; who giving an unsuspected charge upon the enemies, discomfited
the Syrians (who little expected for such a stratageme from the Hebrews) and
assailed them disarmed and drunken: so that they left both Achabs victory
against the Syrians.
armor and weapon behind them, and fled from their camp; and their king
likewise was so hotly pursued, that he scarcely had opportunity to save
himself by the swiftness of his horse. Achab made a long chase in following
the Syrians and slaughtering them that fled: he spoiled their Adads chariots
and horses also, and with them returned back into the City.

But whereas by the advice of the said prophet, he was persuaded to prepare and
keep an army in readiness against the next year (for that the Syrian was like,
nay rather resolved to charge him again) the King intermitted no preparation
that concerned the war. For Adad (being escaped from the fight with those few
forces that remained after the battle) consulted with his friends, how he
might war against the Israelites. Who advised him from thence forth never
more to fight with the^ in mountainous places, for that their God was powerful
upon the mountains, and for that cause they had been overcome by them: but if
he fought with them in the plain, both h. and his should be assured to have
the upper hand. Moreover they counseled Adad supposing that they Adads second
expedition against the Israelites. The year of the world. 3041. before Christ's
birth 923.
had discreetly counseled him in this matter, ordered and levied his army
according as they had advised him. And as soon as the springtime was come, he
assembled his army, and led the^ forth against the Israelites; and arriving
near unto the city of Ap^iec, he enca^ped in a plain field. But Achab with
his forces (marching out to meet with him) pitched his tents and arranged his
battle near unto him (although he were far inferior both in force and
number.) To him the prophet appeared anew, telling him that God would once more
have the victory, to make it known that Achab drew out his army and affronted
them, and presently charged them: where after a long and dangerous fight
betweeue them, the enemies were put to flight, and many of them slain in the
chase. For some of them were entangled with their own chariots, othersome slew
one an other pell-mell; and some few of them found the means to fly unto their
City of Aphec, who perished likewise to the number of seven and twenty
thousand (being slain by the ruin of the walls that fell upon them) besides
one hundredth thousand men that gave up the ghost in that fight. But Adad
attended by some of his faithful Adad permitted them: Whereupon they
incontinently presented themselves to Achab clothed in sackcloth, and having
their heads wreathed about with cords (according to the manner of suppliants
amongst the Syrians) telling him that Adad besought his majesty to grant him
his life; promising on his behalf, that from thenceforth he would always
continue his servant, and acknowledge his favor. Achab answered them, that it
highly contented him Adad is received into favor by Achab and dismissed upon
condition.
that their king was as yet alive, and had escaped from the fury of the fight,
offering him by them that good will and honor, which one brother ought to show
unto another. After this they drew Achab, that he should offer him no wrong, if
so be he discovered himself unto him, and withal presently resorted unto
Adad; whom they drew out of the place where he was hidden, and afterward
brought him unto Achab, who was mounted upon a chariot. Adad prostrated
himself before him: but Achab stretching out his hand made him incontinently
mount up with him into his chariot, and kissed him, willing him to be of good
courage, assuring him that he should receive neither injury nor injustice at
his hands. Hereupon Adad gave him thanks, protesting that during his life time
he would never be forgetful of his favors: promising him moreover The year
of the world ^041. before Christ's Nativity. 923.
Achab gave him many worthy presents, and sent him back into his kingdom.
Thus ended the war betwixt Adad and the king of the Israelites. After this a
certain Prophet called Micheas came unto another Israelite, commanding him to
wound him upon the head, assuring him that God was so pleased, and had so
commanded him. When as this Israelite would in no sort condescend hereunto, he
prophesied unto him, that since he had disobeyed Gods commandment, he should
meet with a lion, which should rent him in pieces. Which coming to pass,
according as it was foretold, the Prophet addressed himself again unto
another, commanding Achab answered him, that he was justly condemned. Whereupon
Micheas discovered his head, and made it known who he was. And to this intent
used the Prophet this policy, that his words might be of greater force and
value. For he told the king that God Achab was reproved for dismissing Adad.
would bend himself against him, because he had permitted the blasphemer Adad
to depart unpunished; assuring him, that God would cause him to be slain by
Adad, and suffer the people of Israel to be slaughtered by the Syrian army.
The king displeased with the liberty and free speech The reward of learned
preachers.
this his prediction, he departed home unto his house.

CHAP. IX.
Of Iosaphat King of Jerusalem.

HItherto have we spoken of Achabs estate: but now must I return unto Iosaphat
king of Jerusalem; who having enlarged his kingdom, and planted garrisons in
those cities that The year of the world. 3042. before Christ's birth 924.
Iosaphats piety. 3. Paral. 17.
were subject unto him (and in those likewise which his grandfather Abiah had
possessed in the portion of Ephraim, at such time as Jeroboam reigned over the
ten Tribes.) This king had perpetual Moses, training them up in the observance
thereof, and in the study of piety. Which all the Citizens embraced and
entertained so willingly, that they seemed to emulate and strive the one with
the other, which of them should exceed the rest in the service of God. The
Nations likewise that dwelt round about him, loved Iosaphat, and were at peace
with him. The peace in Iosaphats time Iosaphats army.
The Philistines also paid those tributes which were imposed on them. And the
Arabians Judah three hundred thousand men, over whom he placed Edraus General,
and two hundred thousand under the conduct of Iohanan. Who besides these had
two hundred thousand Archers on foot of the tribe of Benjamin. Another
Chieftaine called Ochobat levied and led for the king one hundred and
fourscore thousand men armed at assay (besides those which he sent into the
defenced cities.) He married his son Ioram to Athalia the daughter of Achab
king of the ten tribes. And not long after (resorting to Samaria) Achab
received him very courteously, and magnificently entertained his army with
bread, wine, and flesh in all abundance: requiring him to yield him his
assistance against the Adads father had won and conquered from his father.
Iosaphat promised to assist him: and being Iosaphats expedition with Achab
against the Syrian (...). 3. Reg. 22.
no ways inferior unto him in force, he sent his army from Jerusalem to
Samaria. When these two kings were departed out of the city, and each of them
were seated upon their thrones, they distributed their pay to every one of
their soldiers. At that time Iosaphat commanded, that if at that present there
were as yet any prophets amongst them, they might be sent for, to give notice
what the issue should be of this their war against the Syrians; and whether
they thought The year of the world 3047. before Christ's birth 917.
Achab and the Syrians, confirmed for the space of three years, since the time
that he took Adad prisoner and delivered him, to that present.

CHAP. X.
Achab fights against the Syrians, and is over come and slain in the battle.

HEreupon Achab called for the Prophets (who were in number four hundredth) and
commanded The false prophets prophecy plausibly.
them to enquire of God whether he would give him the victory in that battle
Adad or no, and whether he should recover the City which he intended to
besiege? Who answered and counseled him to hazard the battle, in that he
should have the upper hand over the Syrian; and should take him prisoner as he
had done before time. Iosaphat understanding by their words that they were
false Prophets, asked Achab if he had not any other Prophet of God, who might
more exactly certify him of that which might succeed. Achab answered, that he
had one as yet remaining, but that he hated him because he prophesied naught
else but mishap and misery unto him, and had foretold him that if he should
fight against the Syrian, he should be overcome and slain; and for that cause
he held him at that time in prison, signifying unto him that his name was
Micheas the son of Imlah* Iosaphat required that he might be brought into his
presence (which was accordingly performed by one of his Eunuchs; Micheas, that
all the other Prophets had prophesied to the king victory.) But Micheas told
him that it was not lawful for him to lie against God, but that it concerned
Micheas the true prophet.
him to speak that which God should inform him of, concerning the king. As
soon as he came before Achab, and was adjured to speak the truth, he said
that God had showed him the Israelites put to flight, and dispersed by the
Syrians, that pursued them no otherwise then sheep without their shepherd.
All which signifies no less (said he) but that the rest of the people
returning home in safety; Achab only should be slain in the battle. When
Micheas had spoken after this manner; Achab turning himself toward Iosaphat,
said unto him, I told you before this, how this fellow was affected toward me.
But Micheas constantly auowed, that he prophesied nothing but that which God
had commanded him to speak, assuring Achab that he was solicited by Achab
much discomforted. But Sedechias one of the false Prophets stepped forth, and
exhorted him to set light by Micheas words, the rather for that he spoke
untruly. And in confirmation of this his allegation he alleged Elias (who was
a far more skillful Prophet in foretelling things to come, then Micheas was)
yet that the same Elias had foretold that the dogs should lick Achabs blood in
the City of Iezrael in the field of Naboth, because Naboth had been stoned to
death by the instance of Achab. Whereby it appeared manifestly, that since he
contradicted a Prophet so excellent as he was, he lied in saying that the king
should die within three days. Moreover (said he) it shall appear whether he
be truly sent from God or no, if as soon as he shall receive a buffet from me,
he cause my hand to wither, according as Iadon made Ieroboams hand shrink, at
such time as he thought to apprehend him. For I think (said he) O king, that
thou art assuredly informed hereof: which said he struck him, and for that no
inconvenient fell upon him, by reason of that his audacious attempt, Achab
assured himself, and recovered his courage* and forwardly set forth against
the Assyrian army. For as it is to be supposed, the will of God was of such
power, that it caused the false Prophets to triumph over the true: which was
the cause that the false prophets were trusted more then the true, to the
intent that Gods preordained will might be fulfilled. But Sedechias made him
iron horns, and said unto Acha^, that God by them signified unto him that he
should ruinate all Syria. But Micheas prophesied to the contrary, that within
very few days Sedechias should walk from cane to cave to hide himself,
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 15.
and avoid the punishment of his falsehood. Achab displeased hereat, commanded
that he should Achmon the governor of the City, yielding him no other
allowance but bread and water for his sustenance. Thus marched these two kings
with their armies against Ramath which is in Galaad: which when the king of
Syria understood, he drew his army into the field, and came out to meet with
them, and encamped near unto Ramath. Now was 3. Reg. 22. al. (...) Achab and
Iosaphats war against the Syrian.
it concluded betwixt these two confederate kings, that Achab should enter the
battle in a private habit, and Iosaphat should be invested with the royal
ornaments, and supply Achabs person in the battle, to the intent that Micheas
prediction might be made frustrate. But notwithstanding this The year of the
world. 3^47. before Christ's Nativity 917.
popular disguise, Gods justice prevented him: for Adad king of Syria
commanded his army, that they should put no one of the enemy to the sword, but
only the king of Israel.

As soon as the charge was given, the Syrians perceiving Iosaphat in the front
of the army, and coniecturing that it was Achab, they made head altogether
against him, and having environed and pressed him very nearly, they perceived
that it was not he: for which cause they retired back again. But although
they had fought from the morning until the evening, and had the upper hand;
yet flew they no man (because they sought after no other but Achab to put him
to the sword) whom notwithstanding they could by no means meet withal. At
length one of Adads servants called Aman, shot at randon amongst the enemies,
and by fortune hurt Achab in the breast, and shot him through the lungs. This
hurt of his concealed he from his soldiers, for Achab wounded by an arrow in
the battle dies.
he were terribly pained, yet sat he in his chariot until sun set; at which
time his heart failed him, and he gave up the ghoast. When night came, the
Syrian army withdrew themselves into their camp, and receiving tidings by an
Herault, that Achab was dead, every one retired home unto his house: but
Achabs body was conveyed to Samaria, and interred in that place. As for his
chariot, it was washed in the fountain of Iezrael, because it had been
bebloudied, by reason of the kings hurt, whereby the truth of Elias prediction
was ratified, and confirmed: for the dogs The dogs lick Achabs blood according
to Elias prediction.
lickt his blood; and from that time forward the common women continually
washed themselves in that fountain. He died also in Ramath (according as
Micheas had foreprophecied) Whereas Achab, according as two prophets had
foretold him, it appears that we ought to honor and magnify the majesty of
God in all places, and to reverence his prophecies delivered by them, and to
ascribe always more credit unto them, then to the vain and The Oracles of the
Prophers are to be reverenced.
plausible speech of such as currie favor; and no less to respect them, then
things of infinite profit, since by them we are divinely admonished what we
ought to take heed of. It behooves us also to consider what force the
ordinance of God is of, by examining those things which befell Achab. For it is
impossible to avoid the preordinance of God, notwithstanding that men flatter
and nourish themselves with vain hopes, which inueigle them so far, that
finally they are overtaken in the snares thereof. For this careless
inconsideration was fatal to King Achab, in that he believed not his death
which was foretold him; but being deceived by the flattering persuasions The
matchles necessity of fate.
Ochozias.

THE NINTH BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE JEWS,
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS
The Contents of the Chapters of the 9. book.
1 Ioram Achabs son overcomes the Moabites in battle. 2 Ioram King of
Jerusalem obtaining the crown, kills his brothers and his fathers friends. 3
Iorams army is overthrown by his enemies, and his sons are slain, only one
excepted; at length he himself dies a miserable death. 4 The king of Damasco
warreth against the king of Israel. 5 Ioram with all his posterity is slain
by Iehu, Ochosias king of Jerusalem is slain also. 6 Iehu reigns amongst the
Israelites in Samaria, and his posterity after him till the fourth generation.
7 Athalia reigns five years in Jerusalem, and after she is slain by the hie
priest, Ioas Ochosias son is proclaimed king. 8 Azael King of Damasco
gathers an army, first against the Israelites, and afterward against
Jerusalem. 9 Amasias King of Jerusalem makes war against the Idumeans and
Amalechites, and obtains 10 Amasias making war against Ioas king of the
Israelites is overcome. 11 Ozias overcomes the nations round about him. 12
Rasin or Rabe king of Damasco vexes the inhabitants of Jerusalem with war,
Achaz their king is compelled to call the king of Assyria to assist him. 13 The
King of Assyria takes Damasco by force, and slaieth the king, and translateth
the people into Media, and planteth other Colonies in the same. 14 Salmanazar
taking the king of Israel captive, translateth ten of the 12. Tribes into
Media, and causes the Cuthaeans to inhabit their region.
CHAP. I.
Ioram Achabs son, overcomes the Moabites in battle.

AS soon as King Iosaphat was returned back again to Jerusalem (from the
war wherein he had given succor to Achab against Adad the King of Syria, The
year of the world, ^048. before Christ's Nativity, 916. 4. Reg 3. 2. P^. 19.
20. Iehu the Prophet reprehendeth Iosaphat for helping Achab. Iosaphat renews
the true service of God. Iosaphat placed Judges and Magistrates in every city.
as we have heretofore declared) the Prophet Iehu (in his return) came forth
and met him, and reproved him because he had given Achab (who had been a man
both impious and wicked) his assistance, assuring him that God was displeased
with that his confederacy; yet notwithstanding that he of his Iosaphat began
to celebrate sacrifices, and to offer up thankesgiuings and peace offerings unto
God: Which done, he rode in progress and circuit round about those countries
that were under his dominion, giving order that the people should be instructed
in those ordinances which were delivered from God by the hands of Moses, and
exhorted his subjects to the practice of piety, contained in the same. He
planted judges likewise in every city, commanding them to execute justice unto
the people, without respect of any thing, but only justice. He charged them
likewise, that they should not be corrupted with rewards, or seduced by
dignity, riches, or nobility, but that they should do justice indifferently
unto all men, knowing that God sees all things, how secretly soever they be
carried Amasias the Priest, and Zabadias of the Tribe of Judah. After this
manner did the King dispose of his estate.

About this very time the Moabites and Ammonites (and with them their
confederates a The Moabites and Ammonites war against Iosaphat.
Iosaphat had intelligence that the enemies had past the lake, and were already
far entered into his country, he was afraid, and assembled the people of
Jerusalem in the temple, and standing upright, and turning his face toward the
propitiatory, he besought and requested God that he would give him power and
Iosaphats prayer in the temple of Jerusalem for victory.
force to overcome his enemies. For such had been the form of their
supplication, who in times past builded the temple: namely, that it might
please him to fight for that City, and oppose himself against those that
durst attempt or assault that place, to the intent to dispossess them of that
Iaziel arose up in the midst of the congregation, and Iaziel the prophet
assures the^ of victory.
cried out, and certified both the people and the King, that God had heard
their prayers, and promised them to fight for them against their enemies,
enioyning them the next day to sally out in arms, and go and make head against
their adversaries, whom they should encounter in the mountain situate betwixt
Jerusalem and Engaddi, in a place called the hillock of Sis (which place in The
year of the world, 3048 before Christ's birth 916.
Hebrew signifies Eminency) willing them not to fight against them, but only
to arrest in that place, and see how God would fight and make war for them.
When the Prophet had spoken these words, the king and all the people prostrated
themselves upon their faces, giving thanks unto God and adoring: mean while
the Levites sung continual hymns, with instruments and voices. About the
beginning of the day, the king departed into the desert that is under the City
of Thecoa, aduising the people to believe all that which the prophet had said
unto them, and not to arrange themselves in battle ray, he commanded the
Priests to march before them with The manner and weapons whereby Iosaphat
overcame his enemies.
their trumpets, and the Levites that they should sing hymns and
thankesgiuings unto God, as if (said he) our country were already delivered
from our enemies. This advise of the kings seemed pleasing unto them all; so
that they performed whatsoever he counseled them. But Iosaphat looking down
into the valley (wherein the enemies had pitched their tents) and seeing it full
of dead men, rejoiced greatly at the unexpected The Ammonites and their
confederates kill one another.
succors that God had sent him, who had given them the victory, not by the
dint of their own swords, but by his providence and power only. He therefore
permitted his army to make pillage of the enemies camp, and to spoil the
dead; and so great was the multitude of them that were slain, that scarcely
they could gather the spoils of them in three days space. On the fourth day
the people assembled together in a valley and hollow place, where they blessed
God for the power The spoils of the Ammonites.
and succors he had sent them, by reason whereof the place was called the
valley of Benediction. The fame and praise of Iosaphat in every place.
abroad in the ears of foreign nations, they were all of them afraid,
supposing that God did manifestly express his power, and extend his favor
toward him. And from that time forwards Iosaphat lived in great glory, in
justice, and piety. He likewise was a friend to the King of Israel that
reigned at that time, who was Achabs son, with whom he adventured in a voyage
by sea, intending to traffic with certain merchants of Tharsis, but he had a
great loss: for Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 2. Ochozias Achabs son king of
Israel.
his ships were cast away by reason they were ouer-great; and for this cause he
had never more mind to exercise navigations. Hitherto have we spoken of
Iosaphat king of Jerusalem.

But as touching Ochozias Achabs son, who reigned over Israel, and was
resident in Samaria: Jeroboam in wickedness, who first fell from God, and made
the Israelites revolt from him. The tenth year of his reign, the king of the
Moabites rebelled against him, and denied to pay him those tributes which he
was wont to pay unto Achab his father. But it came to pass, that as Ochozias
ascended the stairs of his palace, he fell down from the top thereof: and
being sick of the fall, he sent to Accaron unto the God called the Myiodis or
fly, 4. Reg. 1. Ochozias having a grievous fall, seeks to be informed of a
false Oracle, and is reproved by Elias.
to enquire whether he should recover that sickness or no. But the god of the
Hebrews appeared to Elias the Prophet, and commanded him to go and meet those
messengers that were sent by Ochozias, and to ask them if the people of the
Israelites had not a god, but that their king sent to foreign gods to enquire
of his health? and to charge them to return and declare unto Elias did that
which God had ordained; and the messengers of the king having understood that
which was declared unto them, returned back again with all expedition unto
him. Ochozias meruailing much at their sudden repair, asked them the cause
thereof: who answered him, that a certain man came unto them, who forbad them
to pass any further, but to shorten their way to let your majesty know (said
they) from God, that your sickness shall wax worse and worse. Hereupon the
king commanded them Elias form and habit.
to describe what manner of man he was that spoke these words unto them: who
answered, that he was a hairie man girded with a leatherne belt and
understanding hereby that it was Elias, he sent a captain with fifty
soldiers unto him, commanding him to bring the Prophet prisoner unto him. This
captain that was sent, perceiving Elias sitting on the top of a mountain,
commanded Elias answered and said unto him: To the end thou may know by
thine own experience that I am a true Propht, Ochozias soldiers fear to fetch
Elias are consumed with lightning
I will pray that fire may fall from heaven, and consume both thee and thy
soldiers. And incontinently after Elias had prayed, lightning fell down from
heaven and consumed both the captain and his soldiers.

When the King had tidings of this loss, he was sore displeased, and sent
another Captain The year of the world. 3048. before the Nativity of Christ.
916.
Elias with the like number of soldiers as the first had, who threatened the
Prophet that if he would not willingly come down, he would violently pull him
thence; but Elias prayed that fire might fall from heaven, and incontinently
both he and his were consumed in like manner as the first. When the King had
understanding likewise how his second messengers had sped, he sent a third unto
him, who being a discreet man, and courteous in condition, arriving in the
place where by chance Elias was, he saluted him very courteously and said unto
him, that contrary to his own will, and to no other purpose but to fulfill
the kings pleasure, he was come unto him; and that they that were sent with
him, came not thither voluntarily, but by the same command: He therefore
required him to have compassion both of him and of his soldiers, and to
vouchsafe to come down, and to come after them unto the King. Elias took
pleasure in this his discreet The year of the world. 3049. before the birth
of Christ. 915. Ochozias dying without issue, ^am his brother reigned in his
steed.
so lightly accounted of him as if he had been no God, or else such a one as
had no power to foretell him any truth as touching his sickness, but that he had
sent to the gods of the Accaronits to demand of them as touching the success
of his sickness: Know (said he) that thou shall die. And not long time after
(according to the prophecy) he died in such manner, as Elias had foretold him,
and his brother Ioram succeeded him in the kingdom: because he departed
without issue. This Ioram was a wicked man also, and as impious as his father:
for abandoning the service of the true God, he adored strange gods. In all
things else he was a man of execution. In his time Elias was no more seen
amongst men, and until this day no man knows what his end Elizaeus (as we
have heretofore declared.) It is written in holy writ as touching Elias, and
Enoch who was before the Deluge, that they vanished: for Elias according as
Enoch, was taken from the sight of men. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 3. 4. Reg. 3.
Eli^aeus. Ioram asks and against the Moabites.
no man has known of their deaths. After that Ioram had taken possession of
the kingdom, he resolved to make war upon Misa the king of the Moabites (who
paid Achab his father before him the tribute of 200000. sheep bearing wool)
Whenas therefore he had assembled his forces, he sent unto Iosaphat, requiring
him that since he had been his fathers friend, he would likewise second and
send him aid in his intended war against the Moabites, who had as then newly
revolted from his government. Iosaphat not only promised him to yield him
succors, but moreover he assured him that he would draw the king of Idumaea
(who was his subject) into their association. When Ioram understood these
things by those whom he had sent unto Iosaphat, he Ioram, who by reason of the
necessity wherewith he was pressed, cried unto God, expostulating with him for
what offense of his he would Want of w^ in the Hebrew army.
betray three such kings, as were there present into the hands of the king of
Moab without stroke Iosaphat, who was a virtuous man, encouraged him, and sent
into the army to know whether there were any Prophet of God that had followed
them to the battle, to the intent (said he) that we may understand by God what
we ought to do: and whereas one of the servants of Ioram said, that he had
seen Elizaeus the son of Saphat the disciple of Elias, all the three kings
(by the solicitation of Iosaphat) resorted unto him: now when they drew near
unto The kings seek for counsel at Elizaeus hands.
the Prophets tent (which he had pitched apart from the rest of the company)
they asked him what should become of the army, and Ioram in especial
questioned with him? To whom Elizeus answered, that he had no reason to
solicit him in this sort, but to repair unto his fathers and mothers
Prophets, who would certify him the truth. Notwithstanding Ioram entreated him
that he would prophecy, and continue the preservation of the army, and the
defense of his life: Elizeus swear by the living God, that he would answer him
nothing, except for Iosaphats sake, who was an vpightman, and such a one as
feared God. Afterward calling unto them a certain Elizaeus foreprophecieth
store of water, and their victory.
man that could cunningly play upon instruments (for so had the Prophet
commanded) whilst he sung, Elizeus was ravished with a divine spirit, and
enjoined the kings to make certain trenches in the channel of the river: for
(said he) you shall see the river full of water without either vvind, cloud, or
rain: so that both the whole army and all their cattle shall be saved, and
sufficiently sustained: and God will not only bestow these benefits on you,
but will give you The year of the world 3049. before Christ's Nativity. 915.
the upper hand of your enemies also; and you shall surprise the fairest and
strongest Cities of the Moabites; and you shall cut down their trees, ruinate
their country, and fill up their fountains and rivers. When the Prophet had
spoken thus, the next day before sun rise the river flowed abundantly with
water: for some three days journey off, God had suffered a very strong and
settled rain to fall in Idumaea; so that both the soldiers and their horses
were sufficiently refreshed and watered. When the Moabites were informed that
the three kings came out against them, and took their way through the desert,
their king presently assembled his army, and commanded them to keep the
passages of the mountains, to the end they might hinder the enemy from entering
their country unawares. Who beholding about the sun rise, that the water of
the river A wonderful blindness of the enemy grounded on the rednes of the
water that flowed.
was blood red (for at that time it arose in the country of Moab, and at this
hour the water is The victory of the Hebrews against the Moabites.
swiftnes of his horse, to break through the Israelites camp on that side
where he thought it was least defenced. Which when he had attempted and could
not execute, because he charged on that side which was the best defended, he
returned back again into the City, and committed a desperate and hateful
action: for he took his eldest son, who ought in right to succeed him in
the kingdom, and set him on the wall of the City, and in the sight of all his
enemies offered him for a burnt sacrifice unto God. The kings beholding this
woeful spectacle, were moved with The king of the Moabires sacrifices his own
son.
compassion of his necessity, and overcome with humanity and mercy, levied
the siege, and returned back again into their countries. After that Iosaphat
was returned into Jerusalem, he Iosaphats death.
buried in Jerusalem, according as the successor of David's virtue and kingdom
ought to be entombed.

CHAP. II.
Ioram obtaining the kingdom of Jerusalem, slew his brothers and his fathers
friends.

HE left behind him diverse children, the eldest of whom he appointed his
successor in the Ioram (as his uncle was, who was his mothers brother and The
year of the world. 3050. before the birth of Christ. 914. Ioram Iosaphats
son king of Jerusalem. 4. Reg. 4.
Achabs son whilome king of Israel.) The king of the ten lines returning
back unto Samaria, kept with him the Prophet Elizaeus, whose actions I will
here recite, because they are notable and deserve to be registered in writing,
according as we have gathered them out of holy scriptures. Obedias wife (who
was sometime steward of Achabs house) came unto him and told him, that he was
not ignorant that in that persecution wherein Iezabel sought to murder the
Prophets, how her husband saved one hundredth of them, for whose private
maintenance he had borrowed much money of other men, and that now he being
dead, his creditors strove to draw both her and her children into servitude.
For which cause she besought him in consideration of this act, to have
compassion on her husband, and to yield her some succor. Hereon Elizeus asked
her if she had Elizaeus commands the widow to fill her empty vessels with
oil.
vessels of her neighbor: that done, he willed her to lock up her doors; and
to pour oil into the vessels, in that it was Gods pleasure to fill them all.
The woman did according as he had commanded her, and all the vessels were
found full, so as none of them were empty: whereof when she had certified the
Prophet, he advised her to go and deliver her oil, and pay her debts, and
when all was paid, he assured her that there would be some remainder, that
might serve to The year of the world, 3050. before Christ's Nativity, 914.
Elizeus advises Ioram to avoid Adads ambush, who lay in wait to kill him.


By this means Elizeus discharged the widow of her debts; and that trouble
which her creditors intended against her. He admonished Ioram likewise, by
certain messengers, that he should take heed of a certain place wherein the
Syrians lay in ambush, intending to slay him: by means of which admonition the
king went not out on hunting. But Adad being sore displeased, because his
ambushment was discovered, began to suspect his own followers: whereupon
calling unto him his household servants, he maliciously termed them traitors;
and furthermore threatened them with death, for that they had discovered a
matter, which was only committed to their trust, unto his enemy. Whereupon one
of the assistants told him, that he ought not to conceive that false opinion of
them, neither suspect that they had discovered his intended ambush to cut off
his enemy: Elizeus had discovered and discoursed all that which was intended
against him. Whereupon he sent out his soldiers with an express charge, to
know in what City Elizeus made his ordinary abode, who returning back,
brought 4. Reg 6. Elizaeus is besieged in Dothaim by his enemy.
him news that he remained in Dothaim: For which cause Adad sent a great
number of horsemen and chariots to Dothaim to lay hold on Elizeus, who begirt
the City by night, and laid watch round about the walls, that no man might
escape them. Early in the morning when the Prophets servant had notice hereof,
and was advertised that the enemies sought to surprise Elizeus, he fearfully
hasted and discovered their intent unto his master; who encouraged him and
commanded him to shake off his fear, for that he held himself both secured
and assured of Gods help: whereupon he prayed God that at that present he would
show his power and assistance both The Angels about Elizaeus the prophet
and horsemen that environed Elizeus: so that he laid his fear aside, and was
assured when he perceived these succors. That done, Elizeus besought God
again that he would blind his enemies eyes, and to cause a thick cloud to
fall upon them, to the end they might not discover him. Which done, he
presently thrust himself amongst the thickest of his enemies, demanding of
the^ whom they came to seek for? They answering him that they sought for the
Prophet Elizeus: he promised them to deliver him into their hands, if so be
they would come with him into the City where he was. They blinded in eyes, and
depraved in understanding by God, followed the Elizeus leads the Syrians
blinded into Samaria where by his persuasion they are courteously entertained
and presented by Ioram, and sent home.
Prophet willingly, who marched before them. When as therefore Elizeus had
brought them Ioram to lock the gates and to inuiron the Syrians with his
soldiers. This performed, he prayed God that he would clear the Syrians
sight, and take away the cloud that obscured their eyes: who being delivered
from their blindness, perceived that they were in the midst of their enemies.
Whereat being sore astonished, and uncertain whence this divine and unexpected
act had befallen them, King Ioram asked the Prophet whether he should kill them
with darts. But Elizeus forbad him to do so: for (said he) it is a just and
convenient matter, that they who are taken by order of war should lose their
life, but that they had done no evil unto his country; but by Gods providence
came thither without their own knowledge: for which cause he counseled him to
give them presents and present them meat, and afterward to suffer them to
depart without any injury.

Ioram giving credit to the Prophets words, entertained the Syrians
magnificently and with great humanity, and sent them back unto Adad their
king, to whom upon their arrival they declared all that which had happened unto
them. Adad astonished at this unexpected event, and wondering at the apparition
and power of the God of the Israelites; lastly admiring the Prophet whom God so
wondrously assisted; he concluded from that time forward, never more to attempt
the king of Israel in secret, because he feared Elizeus: but concluded to make
open war Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4.
against him, hoping to have the upper hand of his enemies, by means of the
great number and force of his army: So that he issued out with a mighty power
against Ioram, who supposing himself to be ouermatched by the Syrian army,
locked himself up within Samaria, putting his trust and confidence in the
fortification and strength of the walls thereof. Adad hoping to surprise the
Samaria besieged by the Syrians.
to besiege it. But Ioram was so destitute of convenient supplies, that by
reason of the incredible want of victuals, an Asses head was sold in Samaria
for eighty pieces of silver, and a measure of pigeons doung at five pieces of
silver, which they used in steed of salt: neither was there any thing that more
troubled the king, then that he feared least some one constrained by famine,
should deliver or betray the City unto the enemy. For which cause he every day
walked the round about the walls, and visited the sentinels of the City, for
fear least any one should lie hidden The year of the world, 3050 before
Christ's birth 914.
The famine so great in Samaria, that women eat their own children.
with an other woman her neighbor and friend, that since the famine and
scarcity was such, as they could find no redress for the same, that they
should kill their children (for each of them had Ioram was grievously tormented
to hear these words, and rent his garments, and cried out with a loud voice,
and afterward Ioram threatens Elizaeus death. 3. Reg. 7.
wholly enraged against the Prophet, he devised in his heart to put him to
death, because he prayed not unto God to grant him means to escape those evils
that environed them round about: so that he sent a man presently to cut off his
head; who prepared himself with all expedition to the slaughter. But Elizeus
was not ignorant of this resolution of the kings: for sitting at home with his
disciples in his house, he told them that Ioram the murderers son sent a man
to take away his head: but (said he) when as he that has the matter in charge
shall come hither, Ioram repenting himself of that displeasure which he had
conceived against the Prophet, and fearing least he that had the commission to
murder him should speedily execute the same, hasted himself all that he might
to hinder the slaughter, and save Elizeus. When as therefore he came into his
presence, he accused him, for that he had not besought God to deliver them from
those many evils which they suffered, considering that he himself was an
eie-witnesse, they were miserably consumed by them. Elizeus promised him the
next day (about the same hour that the king came unto him) that he should have
so great abundance of victuals, that two measures of barley should be sold

By these words of his, the king with all his attendants were wonderfully
comforted, and made no difficulty to believe the Prophet, because that before
time they had been ascertained by their experience of the truth of his
prophecies; and the expectation of this day was the cause that the necessity
and misery of the present was more patiently endured. But a certain friend of
the kings, and the governor of the third part of his army (on whose shoulder
the king at that time happened familiarly to lean) spoke unto him after this
manner: Prophet, thou tellest us incredible matters: for as it is impossible
that God should rain down heaps of barley and 4. Reg. 7.
flower from heaven, so cannot that which thou speak come to pass. To whom
the Prophet replied: Thou thy self (said he) shall see the issue hereof, but
shall partake no part thereof. Which The enemies flight by reason of a terror
that God sent among them.
and arms, as if an army had violently charged them. Whereupon they grew
suspicious, and were so moved, that they forsook their tents, and ran unto
Adad, and told him that Ioram King of the Israelites had entertained the king
of Egypt, and the king of the Isles for his confederates, whom he led out
against them, and how already they had heard the noise of them that approached
to bid them the battle. Adad (whose ears w^ filled with no less rumor then
those of the people) was amated and amazed at their sayings: so that all of
them abandoned their camp, The year of the world. 3050. before Christ's birth
914.
Ioram and the inhabitants of Samaria. For which cause drawing near unto the
The lepers certify the Samaritanes of the flight of their enemies.
had found the enemies camp, who signified no less to Iorams guard, so that
at last it came unto his ears. Whereupon he presently sent for his friends and
captains, and told them that the departure of the Syrians made him suspect
some stratageme or ambush: for they (said he) having lost their hope to
surprise us by famine, are retired under an intent, that when we shall issue
and fall a spoiling of their camp, they may come upon us, and kill us; and
afterward take our City without any stroke strooken. For which cause (said
he) I advise you to keep good guard within the City, and let this retreat of
our enemies make us the more considerate. Some one of his counsel praised
this advise of his, and allowed his foresight, aduising him to send out two
scouts upon horseback, to search every quarter betwixt that and Jordan, to
the end that if they should Spies sent abroad.
The enemies camp spoiled by the Samaritanes.
the king understood, he suffered the people to issue out, and spoil the
camp, who recovered things of no small value therein, but much gold and
silver, and troops of all sorts of cattle: and besides that, they found so
great a quantity of wheat and barley, that had they dreamed thereof, Elizeus
had prophesied. Now The truth of Gods oracles. The punishment of incredulity.
4. Reg. 8.
the measure which we call Sat contains an Italian bushel and the half. But
the captain of the third part of the army, was he only that enjoyed no part of
this benefit: for being appointed by the king to have the keeping of the gate,
and to restrain the multitude from headlong pressing out, for fear least
thrusting one an other, some of them should be trodden under foot and slain, he
himself was trod upon and slain (according as the Prophet had foretold) for
that he only amongst the rest, would not give credit to that which he had said,
as touching the great abundance of victuals that should happen.

When Adad king of the Syrians was safely returned to Damasco, and knew that
God had suffered such a confusion and fear to fall both on him and his army,
and that it had not happened by reason that the enemy sallied out upon him; he
was sore discouraged to see that God was so displeased with him, and through
anguish and agony of mind fell sick: And for that (at that very time)
Elizeus was come into Damasco; Adad understanding thereof, sent Azael (who was
one of his most trusty servants) unto him to present him, and to consult with
him upon his sickness, whether he should recover or no.

Hereupon Azael loaded forty camels with the most fairest and most
honourablest presents, Elizeus is sen^ unto by Adad* to enquire counsel of him
as touching his sickness.
that either Damasco, or the princes royal court affoorded; and repairing to
Elizeus, saluted him very courteously, telling him that he was ^nt unto him by
king Adad, first of all to present A^ael hearing thereof was sore grieved, and
Elizeus himself began to weep, so that the tears fell from his eyes
abundantly, in that he foresaw how many evils the people should suffer after
the decease of Adad. And when as Azael demanded him the cause wherefore he was
so discomforted? I weep (said he) for the compassion that I have of the people
of Israel, by reason of those calamities which they shall endure by thy means*
The year of the world. 3055. before Christ's Nativity 909. The prophecy of
Adads death, and Azaels government.
For thoushalt kill the better sort of them, and shall burn their strongest
Cities: thou shall murder their infants, and dash them against the stones, and
shall open the women's wombes that are with child. Azael answered, what force is
there in me to execute these things? Elizeus said unto him, that God had
certified him that he should be king of Syria. When Azael was returned back
unto Adad, he signified nothing unto him but glad tidings, as touching his
sickness: but the next day he cast a wet net upon him and strangled him, and
seized the kingdom into his own hands. This Prince was a man of execution,
and well beloved amongst the Syrians, and common people of Damasco, who even
until this day honor Adad and Azael his successor as gods, by reason of
their benefits and those temples which were builded by them, which Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 5.
adorn the City of Damasco. For every day do they celebrate feasts in memory
of these kings, Ioram king of Israel hearing of the death 4. Reg. 8.
of Adad, began to give over his fear, and cast off that suspicion which he
had conceived of him, Iorams impiety.
rejoicing that yet at last he might have liberty to live in peace. The other
Ioram king of Jerusalem (for he likewise was so called, as we have heretofore
declared) by murdering of his brethren and his fathers friends, who were
governors, obtained the kingdom, and became so wicked and impious, as he
differed in nothing from the kings of Israel, who transgressed the first laws
and ordinances of the Hebrews, and perverted the service of God. For Athalia
Achabs daughter his wife taught him to execute diverse mischiefs, and amongst
the rest to adore strange The year of the world. 3057. before Christ's birth 907
gods. This notwithstanding God would not altogether abolish his race, by
reason of his promise David, yet intermitted he not daily to introduce new
impieties; and soil the ancient laws of his forefathers with new corruptions.
Mean while it came to pass that the Idumaeans The Idumae^s revolt.
revolted and slew their king, who had been before time subject unto Iosaphat
Iorams father, and in his place established an other to their own liking. For
which cause Ioram invaded Idumaea by night with his horses and chariots, and
spoiled the country round about his kingdom, without passing any farther: yet
profited he nothing in so doing, for all of them revolted from him, and amongst
the rest the inhabitants of the country of Labina.

But so great was the fury of this man, that he constrained the people to
ascend the high mountains, and adore strange gods. Yet whilst he behaved
himself in this manner, and Elias, which ^ertified him that God would do
great justice upon him, because he had forsaken the ways of his forefathers,
and followed the impieties of the kings Iorams wickedness reproved by Elias
letters.
of Israel, constraining the Tribe of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
forsake the pure service of their God to serve Idols, (...) Achab had
constrained the Israelites to do. Furthermore, because he had murdered his
brethren, and slain upright and virtuous men: The Prophet likewise certified
him by letters, what punishment he should endure, namely the ruin of his
people, the death of his wives and children, and lastly his own death: which
should happen unto him by a sickness in his belly, wherewith he should be so
tormented, that his entrails strangely rotting within him, should drop out of
his belly, and that he himself should Elias denounce unto him by his letters.

CHAP. III.
Iorams army is discomfited, his sons are slain, except one: and himself
finally dies a miserable death.

NOt long after the Arabian army that dwell toward Aethiopia, confederating
themselves The expedition of the Arabians against Ioram. 2. Paral. 21. The
year of the world. 3060. before Christ's birth 904.
with other Barbarians, invaded Iorams country, and spoiled the same, and
ransacked the kings house, and slew his sons and daughters, and left him but
one only son called Ochozias, who escaped from his enemies hands. After this
(...) he himself was strooken with a long sickness, according as the Prophet
had foretold him, for God powered his displeasure* upon his entrails: whereupon
he died miserably, seeing them fall out of his belly. The people likewise
handled his body ignominiously, supposing as I think, that being cut off in
that sort by Gods displeasure, he was unworthy of royal funeral, for he was
not buried in the sepulcher of the Iorams death. The year of the world. 3060.
before the Nativity of Christ. 904.
kings, neither was there any honor done unto him. He lived forty years, and
reigned eight: and they of Jerusalem made his son Ochozias king.

CHAP. IIII.
The king of Damasco warreth against the king of Israel.

IOram king of Israel, hoping after the death of Adad to recover Ramath in
Galaad from Hedio and Ruffinus chap 6. Iorams expedition against Ramath. 4 Reg.
9.
the Assyrians, after he had made greater preparation and apparation for the
war, he led his army against the same. In this siege he was hurt by an arrow
which was shot by a certain Iehu the son of Nimshi, who took the City by
force) intending upon his recovery to make war against the Syrians. But the
Prophet Elizeus sent one of his disciples to Ramath, and gave him the holy
oil, and willed him to anoint Iehu, and to say unto him that God had chosen
Iehu by Gods commandment anointed king.
and anointed him for king: and after he had informed him likewise in certain
other instructions, he commanded him to depart after the manner of one that
flies, making no man privy of his departure^. When this disciple of his came
unto the appointed City, he found Iehu sitting in the midst of the captains
at war (according as Elizaeus had told him) and drawing near unto him, he
told him that he would communicate certain secrets with him, for which Achab,
and revenge the blood of the Prophets unjustly murdered by Iezabel: and that
both he and his house might be brought to naught in like sort, as the sons of
Jeroboam the son of Nabat, and the children of Basa were extinguished for
their impiety; so that no one of the race of Achab might survive in the world.
As soon as he had spoken thus, he issued out of the chamber with all speed,
endeavoring that he might not be discovered by any of the army. Now when as
Iehu was come out, he returned to his place where he sat with the captains,
who demanded of him, and besought him to declare unto them, wherefore the
young man came unto him (alleging that they supposed him to be out of his
wits.) Truly (said he) you have diuined well: for he has talked unto me after
the manner of a mad man: wherein (they desirous to understand wherefore he
came,

As soon as he had spoken these words, every one of them cast off their
garments and spread them before him, and sounding a trumpet, they proclaimed
Iehu king; who assembling his army, determined to conduct them toward the City
of Iezrael against Ioram (who lay there to recover his wound which he had
received at the siege of Ramath in Galaad, as we have heretofore declared.)
Thither also was resorted in way of friendship and consanguinitie, Ochozias
king of Jerusalem both to visit Ioram, and to see how he was recovered of his
wound: for he was his nephew and son unto his sister, as we have said before.
Iehu desirous to surprise Ioram and his followers on the sudden, made an
ordinance, by which he prohibited that none of his soldiers should Ioram;
alleging that it should be a manifest demonstration of their good will toward
him; whereas contrariwise, they that did otherwise, declared that they held him
not for their king.

CHAP. V.
Ioram with all his race is slain by Iehu, Ochozias king of Jerusalem is
likewise slain with him.

THe men of war were very joyful to execute this his ordinance, and guarded
the ways, to Iehu attended by certain of his choicest horsemen, and mounted
^n his own person upon a chariot, marched toward Iezrael. And when as he drew
near unto the City, the sentinel that was appointed by Ioram to discover
those that repaired to the City, perceived Iehu resorting thither with a
multitude of attendants, and told Ioram that a troop of horsemen were at hand.
Whereupon a scout was sent out to discover who they were; who drawing near
unto Iehu, asked him what news there was in the army, telling The year of the
world 3060. before Christ's Nativity. 904.
Iehu willed him to take no care thereof, but to follow after him. The
sentinel perceiving this, certified Ioram that the messenger whom he had sent,
trouped along with them that came, and followed their general. Whereupon the
king sent out a messenger the second time; and Iehu commanded him to attend him
as he did the first: which the sentinel signified to Ioram likewise, who
finally mounted his chariot to go out and meet them, accompanied with Ochozias
king of Jerusalem, who (as we have said) was come into the City, to see how
the king recovered upon his hurt, because he was nearly allied unto him. But
Iehu marched on softly and in goodly array, til Ioram meeting with him in the
field of Naboth, asked him how the army did? Who in steed of answer, reviled
him bitterly, and called him the son of a poisoner and of a harlot. For which
cause Ioram (fearing his turbulent spirit, and suspecting Ochozias, that they
were both of the^ craftily surprised by treason: but Iehu flung a dart at him
and pierced him through, and cleft his heart. For which cause Ioram instantly
fell upon his knees, and died. Hereupon Iehu commanded Badac (who governed the
third part of his army) to cast Iorams body into Naboths field, remembering him
of the prophecy of Elias Iorams slaughter.
foretold by him to Achab, who murdered Naboth, namely, that he and his race
should die in that field. For sitting behind Achabs chariot, he heard these
words pronounced by the prophet: In The truth of E^ias prophecy.
effect it so fell out as he had prophesied. When Ioram was fallen down,
Ochozias was afraid to be slain: for which cause he turned his chariot to
take another way, hoping that Iehu would not discover him. But he was pursued
and overtaken in a certain steepy way, and was hurt with an The death of
Ochozias king of Jerusalem, and his burial.
and was carried to Jerusalem and buried there, after he had reigned one year,
and surpassed his father in wickedness.

CHAP. VI.
Iehu reigns over Israel, and keeps his court in Samaria; and after him his
progeny, to the fourth generation.

AT such time as Iehu arrived at Iezrael, Iezabel being on the top of a tower
in her princely A famous example of Gods judgment.
upward, asked her what she was, commanding her to come down unto him: at
length he charged her Eunuchs to cast her down from the top of the tower;
who in her falling bebloudied the walls: and no sooner fell she upon the
ground, but that her body was trampled under the horses feet, until she died.
That done, Iehu repaired to the palace with his friends, and reposed himself
therein, commanding his servants that they should bury Iezabel (in respect of
the royal race from whence she was descended) but they to whom the charge of
the obsequies were committed, found no part of her body, but her hands and
head, for all the rest was devoured by dogs. Iehu certified hereof, wondered at
the prophecy of Elias, who had foretold that Iezabel 4. Reg. 10.
should die in that sort in Iezrael.

Now in that Achabs seventy sons were brought up in Samaria, Iehu sent two
letters, the one unto the masters of the infants, the other to the governors
of the City, giving them to understand, that they should choose one of the
most virtuous amongst Achabs children, to reign as king over them, because they
had a multitude of strong chariots, horses, armor, men, and strong Cities; to
the end that in so doing, they might take revenge on those that slew their
lord and master. (This did he under a color to sound how the Samaritans were
affected toward him.) When the governors and tutors had received these
letters, they were afraid, and made account that they could prevail nothing
against him, who had prevailed already against two mighty kings. For which
cause they wrote back unto him, acknowledging him for their sovereign; and
offering themselves in all duty, to be under his subjection. Whereupon Iehu
sent back unto Achabs 70. children slain in Samaria.
heads of Achabs children, divided from their shoulders. Which command of his
they failed not to execute, but presently packed up the heads in panniers, and
sent them unto him to Iezrael. As soon as they were brought thither, tidings
thereof was carried to Iehu, as he sat at supper with his friends, who
commanded that they should be laid in two heaps, at the City gates on either
side thereof. Which done, he issued out as soon as it was day to see them; and
beholding them, he began to tell those that accompanied him, that he had
voluntarily armed himself against his The year of the world. 3060. before
Christ, birth 904.
Achabs race, was done by the ordinance of God, and that his house was
destroyed according as Elias had foretold. And after he had slain and
dispatched both these and all those that were found to be of Achabs race
amongst the Israelites, he went unto Samaria: and meeting by the way with
Ochozias household servants (who was king of Jerusalem) he asked them whither
they went? who answered The roting out of Achabs line.
him, that they went to salute Ioram and their king Ochozias (for they knew not
as yet that they were both of them slain.) Hereupon Iehu commanded his
servants to lay hands on them, and put them to the sword, notwithstanding they
were forty two in number. After them he met The slaughter of Ochozias
servants. Ionadab.
with a virtuous man called Ionadab (who in times past had been his ancient
friend) who embracing Achabs house. Iehu caused him to mount up with him in his
chariot, and accompany him to Samaria, telling him that he should well
perceive, that he would spare no one wicked man, but would punish all the false
Prophets, and tellers of lies, and abusers of the people, who had made them
forsake the true service of God, and adore strange gods: because the most
laudable and allowed spectacle that might encounter a good man's eye, was to see
the punishment of the wicked. Ionadab persuaded by these words, mounted up into
his chariot, and went with him to Samaria; and after Iehu had sought out Achabs
kindred, he put them to death: and intending that no one of his false prophets
and priests should escape his hands, he assembled the^ together by a subtle
policy. For gathering the people together, he protested that he would have
Achab had had, willing that all the priests and ministers that belonged unto
them, should present themselves, for that he intended to celebrate rich and
magnificent sacrifices to Achabs gods; protesting that whatsoever Priest should
be absent, he should lose his head. Now this god whom Achab honored, was
called Baal. Having in this sort assigned a day wherein he would offer
sacrifice, he sent through all the country of Israel, charging all Baals
priests to repair unto him, and commanding that each of them might have their
vestments given them. As soon as they were apparelled; he resorted to his
lodging, accompanied with his friend Ionadab, and commanded that a search
should be made amongst them, to epsy whether any one of contrary quality or
condition were meddled with the^; for that he intended that no stranger should
be amongst the priests. When as therefore he understood that none but the
priests were in that The slaughter of Baals priests.
too long time been neglected, dreadfully threatening all those, who should any
ways intermit to root out the name and memory of these wretches out of the
world. They therefore slew all these priests, and environed the kings palace,
and in so doing, cleared Samaria of foreign gods. This Baal was the God of the
Tyrians (for whom Achab builded a temple in Samaria, intending Baal God of the
Tyrians.
thereby to content Ithobaal the king of the Tyrians and Sidonians) to whom he
assigned priests, and honored him with all sorts of sacrifice. After this Idol
was exterminated, Iehu suffered the Israelites to adore golden calves. When
this execution was performed in punishing the wicked, The kingdom promised to
Iehus posterity.
God (to whom this action of his was acceptable) told Iehu by his Prophet, that
his children should obtain the kingdom of Israel to the fourth generation.
This was Iehus estate.

CHAP. VII.
Athalia reigned five years in Jerusalem, and after she was slain by the hie
priest, Ioas is proclaimed king.

AThalia Achabs daughter, hearing news of the death of her brother Ioram, and
her son Ochozias, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 7. 4. Reg. 11. Athalia rooteth out
all the royal blood, only Ioas Ochozias Ion is saved.
together with the utter ruin of all the royal posterity, bethought her self to
extinguish David's memory, and in such sort to root it out, that no one of that
line should remain Ochozias sons escaped her bloody hands, by this means that
ensues. Ochozias had a sister by his fathers side, whose name was Iosabetha,
who was married to Ioiada the hie priest; who entering into the kings palace,
and finding Ioas at that time but one year of age hidden with his nurse
amongst the dead, she took both him and his nurse, and locked them up in a
closet within the temple, where Ioiada her husband and she did secretly nourish
them for the space of five years, during which time Athalia reigned in
Jerusalem The year of the world. 3060. before Christ's Nativity 904. Ioas by
Ioiadas means who was the high Priest, is createdding.


About the seventh year, Ioiada entered into discourse with five centurions,
and persuaded them to oppose themselves with mutual consent against Athalias
proceedings, and to assure the kingdom to little Ioas. Whereupon giving and
receiving faithful promises of secrecy the one unto the other, they
confidently addressed themselves to execute their intended purposes, after this
manner: They whom the hie priest had chosen to execute this act, went through all
the country, and gathered the priests and Levites together, with all the
governors of the tribes, and afterward returned and brought them to Jerusalem
to the hie priest, who made them swear an oath, that they would keep secret
that which he should inform them of, as a thing that required silence, and men
of execution to perform the same. As soon as he had assured them by oath,
David's line) and said unto them: Behold your king, who is of that race which
(as you know) was chosen by God to reign over you for ever: I therefore think
it fit that the third part of you guard and keep him within the temple, and
that the fourth make their watch round about the same. An other company shall
have the guard of the great gate that leads to the palace: As for the rest
of the people, let them remain disarmed within the temple, and suffer no armed
man to enter thereinto, except the priest only. He appointed also an other
company of priests and Levites to be about the king, with iauelins, and drawn
swords, charging them that whosoever durst be so bold to enter the temple
armed, they should presently put him to the sword; and laying all fear aside,
to attend The year of the world. 3067. before Christ's birth 897
the safety and guard of the kings person. They being obedient to that which
the hie priest had Ioiada opening the Arsenall, (which in times past was
prepared by David) distributed amongst the centurious, Levites and Priests all
the iauelins, quiuers, and all other sorts of arms that were therein, and
disposed all them that were armed round about the people, joined hand in hand
to impeach any one from entering in amongst them that were not of their faction.
Afterward bringing out the infant Ioas into the midst of the company, they set
the royal crown on his head, and Ioiada after he had anointed him with oil,
proclaimed him king: whereupon all the people reioiced and clapping their
hands, cried out, God save the King.

Athalia hearing this noise and applause beyond all hope, was greatly troubled,
and with those soldiers which she had about her, she hastily issued out of the
palace, and arriving in the temple Athalia saw the child standing before the
Tabernacle with the royal crown on his head, she rent her garments, and
storming through despite, she cried out and commanded that the traitor should be
slain, that had thus betrayed her and sought to dispossess her of her
kingdom. But Ioiada called the centurions, and commanded them to carry Athalia
out unto the brook Cedron, and Athalias punishment.
there to kill her (because he would not permit that the temple should be
defiled with her cursed blood.) Moreover he charged them, that if any one
should attempt to rescue her, they should kill them likewise. Hereupon, they
(that were appointed to execute this his command) took her, and led her
without the gate of the kings mules, and there slew her. After that Athalia was
in Ioiada assembled the people and the men of war in the temple, binding them
all by an oath, to yield the king their faithful service, and to procure the
prosperity and increase of his kingdom. Secondly, he made the king swear in
like manner, that he would maintain The king and the people joined by oath to
serve God.
the service of God, and in no manner disanull Moses laws. That done, they
ran unto Baals temple (which Athalia and her husband Ioram had built to the
dishonor of God, and their forefathers, and for the honor of Achab) and
leuelled it with the ground, and put to death their hie priest called Mathan.
The charge and guard of the temple, Ioiada committed to the priests and
Levites, according to the order established by David, with commandment twice
a day to offer their ordinary burnt offerings, and consequently to make
perfumes according to the The restoring of Gods service.
law. He appointed also certain of the Levites to be porters to guard the
temple, to the intent Ioas and led him out of the temple, and attended him to
the palace, and having placed him in the royal throane, all the people cried,
God save the king, and banquetted and feasted for diverse days. Thus after the
death of Athalia the city was in quiet. Ioas was 7. years old at such time as
he was made king, his mother Ioas piety during Ioiadas time.
was called Sabia, and was of the town Bersabe. He carefully observed the
laws, and highly affected the service of God all his life time: and when he
grew to man's estate he married two wives, The year of the world, 3067. before
Christ's Nativity, 897. 4. Reg. 12.
Ioas, both how he escaped Athalias treasons, and obtained the kingdom.

CHAP. VIII.
Azael King of Damasco leuieth an army, and first of all assaulteth the
Israelites, and after marches forward against Jerusalem.

But Azael king of Syria making war against the Israelites; and against their
king Iehu, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8. 4. Reg 12 13 The war between Azael
and Iehu.
Iehu went not out against him to resist him, but (being become a contemner of
God, and a despiser of piety, and his laws) he died after he had reigned
seven and twenty years over the Israelites: he was buried in Samaria, and
left behind him Ioas his son to succeed him in the kingdom. But Ioas king of
Jerusalem conceived a certain desire to renew the Temple: for which cause
calling unto him Ioiada the high Priest, he commanded him to send through all
the country the Levites and Priests, and to The year of the world, 3089.
before Christ's birth 875.
levy upon every one of their heads half a sicle of silver for the building
and reparation of the temple, which was fallen into decay in Ioram, Athalia,
and her followers, times. But the high Priest Ioiada, and the Levites also, and
expostulated with them for disobeying his commandment, enioyning them from
that The restoring of the temple.
time forth to provide for the building of the Temple. Whereupon the high Priest
used present dispatch in leuying the money, wherewith the people were highly
contented. He therefore made a chest of wood closed on every side (except that
on the upper lid thereof, there was a little cranny left open) which he placed
near unto the Altar, commanding that every one should offer according to his
devotion, and put in his offering thorow^ the cranny into the coffer, to be
employed in the repairing of the Temple; whereunto all the people showed
themselves affectionate: so that they gathered together a great quantity of
gold and silver, with great zeal; and when the Ioiada and king Ioas hired
masons, and carpenters, and prepared great beams of excellent timber. After
that the Temple was repaired, they employed the remainder of gold and silver
(which was of no small quantity) to make cups, pots, and vessels, and other
vtensils: and every day offered they sacrifice of great value upon the Altar,
and this custom was continued so long as Ioiada lived. But after his decease
(which happened in the hundredth and thirtith year of his age, after he had lived
a just and upright life, and was interred Ioas im pie tie after Ioiadas death,
and how he was reproved by the Propher. 2. Paral. 28.
in the sepulcher of David in Jerusalem, because he had established the
kingdom in David's posterity) Ioas had no more care to serve God, and with him
the rest of the governors of the people were corrupted in contradiction of the
laws and ordinances, which they knew were very convenient for them. For which
cause God being provoked by this change, and incensed against the king, and the
rest, sent his Prophets unto them to protest, to expostulate with them for
their offenses, and to withdraw them from their iniquity. But they pursued
sin the more vehemently; so that neither the punishments, by which they, who
had offended God before times, had been plagued, with all their posterities;
neither all the aduertisments given them by the Prophets, could induce them to
amend, or to forsake those sins wherein they were engaged: but that which is
worst; King Ioas stoned Zachary Ioiadas son, and put him to death in the
Temple, forgetting himself most ungratefully of the benefits he had received
by his father. And Zachary having received a charge from God to prophecy, came
into Zachary stoned to death.
the midst of the people, and counseled both them and him to follow justice,
foretelling them that they should be grievously punished, except they did
believe. This Zachary did at his death call God to witness and judge of those
calamities he endured, in dying grievously and violently for the good counsel
which he had given them, and the benefits which his father had in times past
done unto Ioas. But many days passed not before the king suffered due
punishment for these misdeeds. For Azael king of the Syrians invaded his
country, and after he had first of all ruinated The year of the world, 3089.
before Christ's birth 875.
Gitta, he marched forward with an intent to besiege him at last in Jerusalem.
Ioas desperate of all succors, emptied all the treasures of God, and those of
the kings, and took away the presents, that were hung up in the Temple, and
sent them to the Syrian, redeeming the siege by this means, least he should be
drawn into hazard to lose all. The Syrian pacified with such and so The spoil
of the temple.
great riches, and abundant treasure, suffered not his army to pass to
Jerusalem. After this Ioas was seized with a grievous sickness, and (to the
intent that the death of Zachary the son of Ioiada Ioas death. The year of
the world. 3105. before Christ's birth 859.
might not escape unrevenged) his friends conspired against him, and he died by
their hands. He was entombed in Jerusalem, but not in the sepulcher of his
ancestors, because he had fallen from God: He lived seven and forty years.

CHAP. IX.
Amasias king of Jerusalem made war against the Idumaeans and Amalechites,
and obtained the victory.

AMasias his son succeeded him in the kingdom. But in the one and twentieth
year of Ioas reign Ioachas, the son of Iehu, took possession of the
kingdom of Israel in Samaria, 4. Reg. 14. Amasias king of Jerusalem.
and was seized thereof for the space of seventeen years. But he followed not
his fathers steps, but rather behauing himself impiously, according as his
predecessors The forces of Israel weakened and restored by God. The year of the
world. 3089. before the birth of Christ. 875.
in the kingdom, and contemners of God had done; For which cause the king of
Syria subdued him, and cut off a great part of his dominions, and took his
greatest cities from him, and defeated Elizeus, which he foretold unto Azael at
such time as he prophesied unto him, that he should reign over the Syrians,
and them of Damasco, after that he had murdered his master.) Ioachas being in
this extremity, had his recourse to God in prayer and supplication, beseeching
him that it might please him to deliver him from the hands of Azael, and not to
suffer him to be under subjection and thraldom unto him. God (that respects
the repentant, as if they had been innocent, and that gently checketh those,
whom he might utterly exterminate, if he so pleased) gave him assurance against
this war and danger, so that the country (having obtained peace) recovered
presently her former estate and prosperity. When Ioachas was dead, his son
succeeded him in the government, and began to reign Ioas king of Judah. (For
this king of Ioas king of Israel and Samaria. The year of the world. 3103.
before Christ's birth 861.
Israel was called Ioas, as well as he that reigned in Jerusalem) he gouemed
the kingdom sixteen years. He was a good man, and had no correspondence with
his father in disposition. About this time Elisaeus the Prophet was very old,
and fell sick: to him resorted the king of Israel to visit him, and finding
him in the extremity, and past hope of recovery, he began to weep and lament
himself, calling him his father, and his armor, because that during his life,
he had never occasion to use the sword against the enemy; but that by means of
his predictions, he had always the upper hand of them without stroke striking:
that now he departed this life, and left him disarmed to the mercy of the
Syrians, and other his enemies; so that he had neither security of liberty,
not life, but that he rather wished to die with him, then to live in those
dangers.

Elizeus being moved with these his complaints comforted the king that lamented
in this sort, and commanding him to draw his bow that he had brought with him
(for the king had bent the same) Elizeus said unto him, draw, and he shot three
arrows, and gave over at the fourth. Oh Eliz^us foretells that Ioas should
overcome the Syrians thrice. Eliz^us death and the raising of a dead man to
life that was cast into his tomb.
said Elizeus, if thou had shot more arrows, thou had utterly ruinated the
kingdom of the Syrians, and since thou have contented thy self with three
shoots only, thou shall overthrow the Syrians in three battles, which thou
shall fight against them, and shall recover the country they have taken from
thy father. After the king understood these things he departed, and not long
after the Prophet died (who was renowned for his justice, and manifestly
beloved of God, who showed miraculous and incredible works by his prophecies,
and such and so worthy as the Hebrews ought to keep them in perpetual
remembrance) and was buried magnificently (according Elizeus both in respect of
his prophecies during his life Ioas treble victory.
time, as of that which happened after his death, in witness of his divine
power. After the death of Azael king of Syria, Adad his son obtained the
kingdom, against whom Ioas king of Israel made war, and having over come him
three times, he recovered all that country, those cities, The year of the
world. 3^03. before the Nativity of Christ. 86^.
and towns of the country of Israel, that Azael his father had conquered
before him. (All which came to pass according as Elizaeus had prophesied.)
After that Ioas had forsaken this world for another, the kingdom fell to
Jeroboam his son.

CHAP. X.
Amasias making war against Ioas king of Israel, is overcome.

THe tenth year of the reign of Ioas king of Israel, Amasias reigned over the
Tribe of Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9. Amasias king of Jerusalem.
Judah in Jerusalem: his mother was called Iudan, and was a citizen of
Jerusalem. He was Ioas, who was traitorously slain by his friends: he
therefore laid hands on them, and put them all to the sword (yet extended he
not his displeasure to their children, but conformed his actions according to
the laws of Moses; which says, that it 4. Reg. 14. De^ 24.
is not lawful to punish the children for their fathers offenses.) He
afterward levied an army of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and chose the men
that were in their flowring years, and about twenty years of age: the number
of whom amounted to three hundredth thousand men, whom he divided into
Centuries. He sent also to the king of Israel, and waged a hundredth thousand of
his armed men for a hundredth talents of silver, because he intended to make
war upon the The year of the world. 3106. before Christ's birth 858.
that he had with him, because they had no piety in them, signifying unto him
from God, that if he were followed by them in that war, he should be
overcome: and contrariwise, that he should have the upper hand over his
enemies, if he fought with a few men, according to Gods direction. Hereupon the
King was sore moved (because he had already paid the Israelites their wages)
but The dismission of the Israelits. 2 Paral. 25. Amasias victory over the
Amalechites.
the prophet ceased not to exhort him to do that which was pleasant in Gods
sight, who would give him silver in abundance. For this cause he dismissed
them, telling them that he freely gave them their pay; and he with the forces
of his kingdom marched out against those nations, and fought with them, and
over came them, and slew ten thousand of them, and took no less number

Whilst Amasias stood upon these terms, the Israelites (that had taken wages
of him, and were cashierd by him) conceived a displeasure against him,
supposing themselves to be injured by him, as if he had dismissed them for men
of small resolution. For which cause they invaded his country, and spoiled it
as far as Bethsemer, and carried away a great quantity of cattle, and slew
three thousand men. This victory and prosperity made Amasias proud, so as he
began to forget God, who was the author thereof, and continued the honor of
those gods which he brought from the country of the Amalechites. For which
cause a prophet came unto him and said, that Amasias i^ reprehended^y a proohet
for his idolatry.
them, and had delivered them into his hands; so that diverse of them were put
to death, and diverse led away prisoners, which they themselves had brought unto
Jerusalem, according to the custom of war. These words moved the King unto
displeasure, so that he commanded the prophet to silence, threatening him to
punish him, if he intermedled with his affairs any more. Who answered him,
that he would no further urge him; yet withal he foreprophecied unto him, that
God would not suffer this his innouatio^ to rest unpunished. Anon after,
Amasias (not able to keep a moderation amidst his affluence and prosperity:
but waxing more insolent against almighty God, by whom he possessed the
blessings he enjoyed) in height of his pride wrote to Ioas king of Israel,
commanding him and his to yield him homage, according as in times past the
Israelites David and Solomon, threatening him, that if he refused to do him
voluntary service, he would enforce him to decide the different by arms: to
whom the Israelite replied thus. King Ioas
to King Amasias.
There was in the mountain of Libanus a cypres tree of great height, to whom a
little thistle wrote, demanding of him his daughter in marriage for his son. But
during this interparlee betwixt them, there came a certain wild beast, that
troad down the thistle. Let this example admonish and dissuade thee from
attempting of too mighty matters, nether growing proud of thy last victory
against the Amalechites, least through thy presumption thou expose The year of
the world 3106. before Christ's Nativity. 858. Amasias expedition against Ioas
king of Israel.
both thy life and fortune to the incertaine hazard of war.


When Amasias had perused this answer of his, he was the more whetted unto
war (God also as it seemed pricked him forward, to the intent to chastise
those iniquities that were committed by him.) When as therefore he had drawn
his army into the field, and both the armies were upon the point to wage the
battle, a sudden fear and discouragement seized him (such as God in his
displeasure is accustomed to inflict) which made Amasias army turn their
backs: so that (by the apprehension they had conceived) they were scattered
before they came to handy strokes; and Amasias being left alone, was taken
prisoner. Him did Ioas threaten, that except he persuaded the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to open their gates, and to receive both him and his army into the
City, he would put him to death. For which cause Amasias (constrained by
necessity and fear of death) wrought so Amasias taken prisoner by the king of
Israel
much as his enemies were received into Jerusalem, who made a breach of three
hundredth cubits in their wall; and there-thorow Amasias was led captive into
Jerusalem. In this manner was Ioas made master of the City, who afterward
carried away the treasures of the temple, and took away Jerusalem ruinated.
the gold and silver, that Amasias had in his palace, and having in this sort
raunsomed him from captivity, he returned back again into Samaria. This
happened in the fourteenth year of the reign of Amasias, who afterward fled
into the City of Lachis, to avoid the conspiracy The temple spoiled.
of his domestical friends, by whom notwithstanding he was surprised, and
slain by them that were sent to do the deed: his body was brought and
royally entombed in Jerusalem. Thus died Amasias slain
Amasias for introducing innouations in contempt of God; he lived fifty four
years, and reigned twenty and nine: his son Ozias succeeded him in the
kingdom.

CHAP. XI.
How Ozias overcame his neighbor nations.

But in the fifteenth year of the reign of Amasias, Jeroboam Ioas son began
to reign The year of the world, 3120. before Christ's birth 844. Hedio and
Ruffinus. chap. 11. 4. Reg. 14. The enlargement of the kingdom of Israel.
over the Israelites in Samaria, and enjoyed the kingdom for the space of
forty years. This King dishonored God, and offended him grievously in
observance of Idols, and diverse absurd and strange actions, by which he heaped
ten thousand mischiefs and miseries on the Israelites heads. To him came there
a certain prophet called Jonas, who prophesied unto him, that he should make
war against the Syrians, and that he should overcome them, and enlarge Iosuah
had confined them:) Jeroboam encouraged by this prophecy, led forth his army
against the Syrians, and spoiled all their country (according to the prophecy
of Jonas!) And for that I have promised to yield an exact history in writing
of all those things that happened in our nation, me thinks it shall not be amiss
to declare that, which I have found written of this prophet in our Hebrew
Chronicles. This man (being commanded by God to repair unto the kingdom of
Ninus, and to proclaim that which should happen to the City of Niniue;
namely, that the government thereof should be abolished) through fear which he
conceived, repaired not thither, but fled from Gods presence into a City
called Ioppa; where finding a ship, Jonas hid himself, and covered his face,
performing no such matter as the rest had Jonas. 1 Jonas sent unto Niniue
flies the presence of God, and ascending a ship is cast in a strome into the
sea.
done. Whereas therefore the turbulent waves incensed by violent winds,
increased more and more; the mariners and passengers began to imagine amongst
themselves, that some one of them in that bark had caused that tempest:
whereupon they agreed amongst themselves to cast lots, to know which of them
were the occasion of their danger. Which done, the lot fell upon Jonas, who
being demanded whence he was, and for what business he traveled: answered
them, that he was an Hebrew by nation, and a Prophet of the most high God; and
counseled them, that if Jonas himself, and whetted on likewise by the fear
they conceived, to lose their lives, they cast him into the sea: whereupon The
year of the world, 3120. before Christ's Nativity, 844. Jonas cast into the
sea is deuou red by a whale, and cast upon the coast of Niniue foretells them
of the loss of their empire. Jonas. 2. 3. 4. Reg. 14. 15


King Jeroboam having passed all his life time in prosperity, and reigned for
the space of forty years, departed this life, and was entombed in Samaria,
and Zachary his son succeeded him Ozias the son of Amasias reigned in
Jerusalem over the Ieroboams death. Ozias king of Judah. The year of the world,
3136. before Christ's birth 828.
two tribes, after that Jeroboam had already reigned fourteen years; his
mother was called Achia, and was of the City of Jerusalem. He was a man of a
good nature, and such a one as loved justice, of noble courage, and very
laborious in providing for all occurrences: he made war against the
Philistines, and after he had overcome them in battle, he took Ita, and
Amnia, two of their strong forts, and raced them. This exploit done, he set
upon the Arabians that neighboured upon Egypt, and after that (having built a
City upon the red sea) he planted a garrison therein. He afterward
discomfited the Ammonites, constraining them to pay him tribute, and Ozias
expedition, and the repaiting of the city.
subdued all as far as the marshes of Egypt. After that, he began to provide
for the City of Jerusalem: for he built it a new, and repaired the walls
thereof, that had been beaten down or 2. Paral. 26.
taken Amasias prisoner, he rode in triumph into the City. Besides this, he
erected a number The year of the world, 3150. before Christ's nativity, 814.
Ozias riches and army
of towers, each of them one hundredth and fifty cubits hie. These enclosed he
with walls to set garrisons therein, and in diverse barren places he caused
diverse fountaine-heads to be made: for he had an infinite multitude of beasts
of carriage and other cattle, in that the country was fit for pasture. He
took pleasure also in tillage, for which cause he was often busied about his
land, in trimming, sowing, and planting the same. He had about him a chosen
army, to the number of three hundredth and seventy thousand fighting men, whose
generals, conductors, and captains, were valiant and invincible men, and were
in number two thousand. He taught his soldiers Azarias, Ozias transgresses
his vocation, and is punished with a leprosy and compelled to depart out of
the city. The year of the world. 3170. before Christ birth. 794.
accompanied with fourscore Priests) inhibited him the same, telling him that
it was not lawful for him to sacrifice, in that it was only allowed in those
that were of the posterity of the hic Priest Aaron.

Whilst after this manner Azarias expostulated with him, commanding him to go
out of the temple, and not to contradict the ordinances of God; the king waxed
wrath, and threatened to take his life from him, except he kept himself quiet.
Whereupon there fell a great trembling and earthquake, and the temple cleft in
twain, and a great light of the funne entered thereinto, and reflected on the
kings face in such manner, that all his body was instantly covered with a
leprosy, and before the City (in a place called Eroge) the half of a
mountain (that stood to the obeyed the commandment that was given him,
enduring a pitiful and lamentable punishment The year of the world, 3170.
before Christ's birth 794.
Iotham succeeded him in the kingdom. Finally he died through grief and
discontent, after he had accomplished threescore and eight years, whereof he
reigned fifty two, and was only buried in his garden.

Zachary Ieroboams son having reigned six months over the Israelites, was
slain by treason complotted against him by a familiar friend of his called
Sellum, the son of Iabes, who Zacharias slaughter. 4. Reg. 35.
possessing the kingdom after him, enjoyed not the same above thirty days.
For the general Manahem (being at that time in the City of Tharsa, and
understanding of that which had happened to Zachary, departed thence with all his
force, and came to Samaria, and in a battle which he Sellum: And afterward
obtaining the crown, he went from thence toward the City of Tapsa, the
inhabitants whereof locked and barred their gates against him, and would
Manahem king of Israel. The year of the world. 3174. before the birth of
Christ. 790. The Tapsians slaughter.
not receive him: in revenge whereof he spoiled all the country round about,
and took the City by force, and (being highly incensed against the Tapsians
for their insolence) he put the^ all to the sword, not sparing their little
children (which was an incredible and barbarous cruelty in him.) Manahem
reigned in this manner for the space of ten years, continuing a most cruel
and unbridled tyranny over the people. Afterward being assailed by Phul king
of the Syrians, he went not out against him, neither practiced to resist him,
but procured his peace for the sum of a thousand talents of silver, which in
way of composition he paid unto him. The people furnished Manahem with this
sum in way of contribution, paying fifty drachmes a piece. Anon after Peace
bought with money. The year of the world. 3185. before Christ's birth 779.
Phaceias. The translation of the Israelits
whose name was Phaceias, who imitating his fathers cruelty, possessed the
sovereignty but two years: for he was slain at a feast in the midst of his
friends, by a treason practiced against him by Phaceias the son of Romelias,
who enjoyed the kingdom for the space of twenty years, addicting himself to
all impiety and wickedness. But Teglaphalassar king of Assyria, led forth his
army against the Israelites, and spoiled all the country of Galaad, and that
beyond Jordan, and Galilee, Cydida and Asor also, and led all the inhabitants
thereof prisoners, and transported the kingdom to himself. This is that which
we have thought good to write as touching the king of Assyria. The year of the
world. 3187. before Christ's birth 777. Iothams piety.


Iotham the son of Ozias reigned in Jerusalem over the tribe of Judah: he was
the son of Ierasa. There was no virtue deficient in this king, for he was
devout toward God, just toward men, and careful to repair the City: for he
willingly employed himself in restoring that which had need of reparation and
ornament. He built galleries, and porches about the temple, and repaired the
walls that were fallen down: he erected huge and impregnable towers: in a
word, he restored all that which was deficient in his kingdom. He made war
upon the Ammonites, and ouercomming them in battle, he made all their nation
tributarie, and constrained them to pay him yearly a hundredth talents, and ten
thousand Cores of wheat, and as many of barley, and his kingdom in such sort
increased, that he was redoubted abroad, and happy at home. Now about the same
time there lived a certain Prophet called Naum, who Hedio and Ruffinus. chap.
7. The prophecy of the destruction of Niniue. Naum. 2.
prophesied the overthrow of the Assyrians, and of the City of Niniue, and
spoke to this effect. All To this effect did he prophecy, and spoke many other
things to this intent, which it concerns not to repeat. For I have omitted it
purposely, because I would not be troublesome to the readers. But all those
things which he forespoke as touching Niniue, came to pass one hundredth and
fifteen years after. But this is sufficient for the manifestation

CHAP. XII. The year of the world. 3204. before the Nativity of Christ. 760.

Rasin King of Damasco makes war against Jerusalem, Achaz sends for the
King of Assyria to assist him.

AFter that Iotham had lived one and forty years, and reigned sixteen, he
died, and was buried in the sepulcher of the kings: after him the kingdom fell
to Achaz his son, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13. Achaz impiety The sacrifice
of his son.
who was a contemner of God, and a transgressour of the ordinances of his
forefathers, and conformed himself to the customs of the kings of Israel: for
he erected Altars in the City of Jerusalem, and sacrificed unto Idols,
offering up his own son unto them (after the manner of the Chanaanites) and
perpetrated diverse such like offenses. During these impious Rasin King of Syria
and Damasco, and Phaceias King of Israel made war against him (for these two
were confederates) leading therefore both their armies against Jerusalem, they
besieged it a long time, yet profited nothing, by reason the walls were very
strong. But the King of Syria having seized the City of Elath, near unto the
red sea, and slain all the inhabitants thereof, planted Syrians therein,
putting all the garrisons The punishment of impiety. Esaias. 7.
likewise to the sword, and all the Jews round about, and carried away with
him a great booty into Damasco, and afterward returned home with his army.
The King of Jerusalem understanding that the Syrians were retired, and
supposing himself to be sufficient to fight against the king of Israel, led
forth his forces against him, and was overcome in 4. Reg. 16.
battle (because that God was incensed against him for his wickednesses, which
were both Zacharias the son of Achaz, whom the general of the army of the
Israelites The slaughter of the army of Judah.
called Amias slew, with Ericam the governor of the whole Realm, and he took
Elcan the general of the tribe of Judah prisoner also. They led away likewise a
great number of women and children, with a great booty, and afterward
returned unto Samaria. At that time there was a certain Prophet living in
Samaria, whose name was Obel, who coming out to meet the army, cried with a
loud voice unto the people, that the victory which they had, did not happen
unto them through their valor, but by reason of the wrath of God conceived
against Achaz king of Judah. He furthermore reproved them, for that not
contenting themselves with the good hap of that victory, they had so far
presumed Judah and Benjamin prisoners, who were of their own alliance: he
therefore counseled them to send them back unto their houses, without any
injury by injustice offered unto them; threatening them, that if they did the
contrary, they might be assured that God would punish them.

After this admonition, the Israelites assembled themselves together to consult
upon this 4. Reg. 16. The Israelites by the prophets advice dismiss those
prisoners they had taken of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.
matter, at which time Barachias (one of the principal governors of the
state, and three others with him alleged, that it was not lawful for the
Citizens to lead their prisoners into the City, for fear (as they said) that
God should utterly extinguish them all. For those sins (said they) which we
have already committed, and against which the Prophets have exclaimed, are
cause enough to incense God; so that we have no cause to annexe new impieties
to the precedent.

CHAP. XIII.
The King of Assyria takes Damasco by force, kills their king, translateth
the people into Media, and planteth new colonies in Damasco.

WHen king Achaz had received this overthrow by the Israelites, he sent unto
Theglaphalasar king of Assyria, requiring him to assist him in the war which
he intended against The year of the world, 3207. before Christ's birth 757.
the Israelites, Syrians, and them of Damasco; promising to give him great sums
of money, and at that present also he sent him very bountiful presents: Who
after he had considered on the embassage, came forth with his army to assist
Achaz, and spoiling Syria, and sacking Damasco, he slew Rases their king also,
and transported them of Damasco into the higher Media, The year of the world,
3207. before Christ's birth 757. 4. Reg. 16 17. The translation of the
Israelites. Achaz gives the gold and silver of the temple to the king of the
Assyrians.
and sent certain people of Assyria into Damasco. He wrought much mischief
likewise in the Achaz took all the gold and silver that was in the kings
treasury, and in the temple of God, and carried it unto Damasco, and gave it to
the king of Assyria, according to those promises he had made him, and after
much gratuitie and thanksgiving, he returned back again to Jerusalem.

This King was so senseless and ignorant of his own profit, that although he
were ouerpressed by war by the Syrians, yet ceased he not to adore their
gods, but persisted in their honor, as if he expected the victory by their
means. And although he were overcome again, yet intended he the honor of the
Assyrian gods; choosing rather to reverence any, then the true God, whom his
forefathers worshipped: Yea so far grew he in contempt and neglect of all
true piety, Achaz shuts the doors of Gods temple, and honors strange
gods. Achaz death. The year of the world, 3215. before Christ's birth 749.
Oseas impiety and punishment.
that taken all the precious presents out of the same. After he had in this
sort committed these outrages against God, he died, when he was thirty and six
years old; and after he had reigned sixteen years, and left his son Ezechias
to succeed him in the kingdom. At that very time died Phaceias King of the
Israelites, by the means of a certain conspiracy, which Oseas his intended
friend, wrought against him: who held the kingdom for the space of nine
years, showing himself both to be wicked, and a contemner of God. Against him
Salmanasar King of Assyria moved war, and overcame him because God was not
favorable unto him, neither assistant in his enterprises: he was therefore
subdued, and constrained to pay a certain tribute imposed upon Oseas, Ezechias
the son of Achaz, and Abia a Citizen of Jerusalem, reigned over the two
tribes. He was a man of a virtuous disposition, and one that loved justice and
piety: for as soon as he came unto the kingdom; he resolved with himself
first of all that the chiefest and most necessary and most profitable thing
that might be, was the Hedio and Ruffinus. chap 14. 4 Reg 17. The piety of
Ezechias king of Judah.
establishment of the service of God. When as therefore he assembled the
people, the Priests, and the Levites, he began to discourse and devise with
them, in these or such like words. There is no one of you but knows, that
for my fathers offenses, and for your irreuerent regard and service toward
God, ye are fallen into many and mighty calamities, because through your
extreme madness, you have suffered yourselues to be persuaded to adore those,
whom he esteemed to be gods. Since therefore you have learnt (to your own
misery) how pernicious a thing As soon as the king had spoken after this
manner, the Priests opened the temple, and after they had gathered the sacred
vessels, and cast all uncleanness out of the same, they offered sacrifice upon
the altar, according to the custom. Afterward the king sent to all the
provinces under his dominion, and gathered together the people of Jerusalem, to
celebrate the feast of unleavened bread (which had been intermitted Ezechias
ambassadors that were sent to the Israelites to exhort them to celebrate the
feast of unleavened bread, are slain by them.
a long time through the impiety of the kings his predecessors.) He sent also
unto the Israelites,

When Ezechias ambassadors came unto the Israelites, and had delivered unto
them the message that they had in charge: so far were they from conformity,
that they mocked them, 2. Paral. 29. 30
and esteemed them to be mad, and spit upon those Prophets that exhorted them
to piety, and foretold them the evils they should suffer, unless they
subscribed to the service of God; and finally The word of God is never without
fruit.
appear manifestly hereafter. But diverse of the tribes of Manasses, Zabulon
and Issachar (respecting the good counsels of the Prophets) submitted
themselves to the service of God, and repaired al together to Jerusalem to King
Ezechias to honor God. As soon as they were arrived there, Ezechias ascended
into the temple accompanied with the governors, and all the people, and
offered The year of the world, 3218. before Christ's Nativity, 746. Ezechias
sacrifice.
there seven bulls, seven rams, and as many goats: and after that he, and
all the governors had laid their hands upon the heads of the sacrifice, they
delivered them to the Priest, according as it appertained to them, and they
sacrificed and made burnt offerings of them. The Leuits also (assisting round
about with instruments of music) sung hymns and songs unto God, according as
they had been taught by the ordinance of David: The other Priests had trumpets,
with which they reported to the tune of their hymns. Which done, the king and
all the people cast themselves prostrate upon the ground, and adored God; and
afterward sacrificed seventy oxen, a hundredth sheep, and two hundredth
lambs. The King likewise bestowed six hundredth oxen, and three thousand sheep
upon the people to feast withal. And when as the Priests had ioifully
performed all things (according to the custom contained in the law) the King
took Salomons time. When the solemnity of the feast was past, they iournied
and went through the country, and purified it. They purged the City likewise
of all uncleanness of Idols, and the Reformation of Gods service. The year of
the world. 3224. before Christ's birth 740.
King ordained that the daily sacrifices should be made according to the law
upon his charge. He enacted also that the people should pay the tenths to the
Priests, and Levites, with the first fruits, The king overcomes the
Philistines. Ezechias forsakes the service of the king of Assyria.
him those tributes which his father before him had paid unto him, he would
destroy all his country. Nevertheless Ezechias set light by his threats,
assuring himself in that piety and zeal he bore toward God and in the
Prophet Esaias, by whom he was exactly instructed as touching all

CHAP. XIIII.
Salmanasar slays the king of Israel, and leads the Israelites captive into
the country of Media.

WHen tidings was brought to Salmanasar King of Assyria, that the king of
Israel had privily sent unto Soan king of Egypt, to request his assistance in
war against the Assyrian, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 15.
he was sore displeased; and drew forth his army against Samaria in the seventh
year Oseas. But the King of Israel withstood his entrance into the City, by
which means he was besieged therein for three years space, and finally
Samaria was taken by force in the ninth year of Oseas, and the seventh of
Ezechias reign. At which time all the kingdom of 4. Reg. 17.
Israel was destroyed, and all the people transported into the countries of
Media, and Persia; and amongst the rest king Oseas was taken prisoner. The King
of Assyria caused certain nations of a country, which (by reason it abutted
upon a certain river in Persia called by that name) was called Chut, to remove
their habitation, and to dwell in Samaria, and inhabit the country of The
Israelites removed from their possessions are translated into the region of the
Chuthites.
Israel. As for the ten Tribes of Israel, they were transported out of their
country (nine hundredth forty seven years, since their predecessors departing
out of Egypt possessed the country of Chanaan; eight hundredth years after
the government of Iosuah; and two hundredth and forty years, seven months, and
seven days, since they revolted from Roboam David's nephew, to give Jeroboam.)
This was the end of the Israelites, who transgressed the laws, and disobeyed
the Prophets, who foretold them of that calamity which should happen unto
them, except they repented them of their impieties. The sedition that they
moved against Roboam establishing his servant for their king, was the original
of their mischiefs. For Jeroboam committing impiety against God, and they
imitating his wickedness prevailed so much, as the majesty of God grew
displeased with them, so that he punished them according as they deserved. But
the The year of the world, 3224 before Christ's birth 740. The Tyrians
Chronicles touching the wars of Salmanazar against the Tyrians written by
Menander.
King of Assyria rauaged and spoiled all Syria, and Phaenicia with his army,
and his name is found written in the Chronicles of the Tyrians: for he made
war against the Tyrians, at such time as Elulat reigned in Tire, whereof
Menander makes mention, who wrote the history of Tire, and has translated
their Pantarches into the Greek tongue. The King Elulat (said he) reigned six
and thirty years, and pursued the Chuteans that were revolted from him by
sea, and made them subject. Against whom the King of Assyria sent forth his
army, and invaded all Phaenicia, and afterward having couenanted a peace with
them, he returned back again. The Cities of Sidon, Arce, and Paletyr, and
diverse other cities revolted from the Tyrians, and submitted themselves to the
king of Assyria. For this cause, and for that they of Tire did not obey him, he
drew his army forth once more against them; and he was furnished by the
Phaenicians with sixty But these Chuteans and new inhabitants, of Samaria (for
to this day their name remains there, as having bin brought from the Region
of Chut which is in Persia, where there is a river of that name) for that they
were of five nations, they brought with them each of them the god whom they
honored in Gods displeasure against the idolatrous Chuthites
their nation, to the number of five gods, whom they served after the manner of
their country. Whereupon the true and supreme God was grievously displeased,
and provoked against them: for a plague fell amongst them, that consumed them
in such sort, that they could find no remedy, until such time as they had
notice that it behooued them to adore the great God, and that therein consisted
their safety. They therefore sent unto the king of Assyria, requiring him to
send them Priests from amongst the Israelites, whom he had led away prisoners
in war. Which The Chuteans embrace the service of God and in prosperity claim
kindred of the Jews.
done, they learning the law, and the manner of Gods service by them, began
very diligently to observe both: by which means the plague ceased suddenly.
And now even unto this day continue they in the same Religion, and are called
by the Hebrews Chuteans, and Samaritanes by the Greeks. These as often as
they find the Jews in prosperity, call them their cousins (according

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 10. book.
1 Senacharib King of Assyria, besieges Ezechias in Jerusalem. 2 Ezechias
having lived for a certain time in peace; dies, and leaves his son
Manasses to succeed him. 3 The Kings of the Chaldees and he of Babylon, war
against Manasses, and led him away 4 The history of King Josias. 5 Josias
death in battle, who hindered the King of Egypt from leading his army against
the Babylonians, and the event thereof. 6 The army of Nabuchodonosor comes
into Syria. 7 Nabuchodonosor puts Ioacim to death, and makes Ioachin King.
8 Nabuchodonosor changes his purpose, besieges Ioachim, and is reconciled
under composition. The year of the world. 3231. before the Nativity of
Christ. 733.
9 Sedechias is appointed king over Jerusalem. 10 Jerusalem is taken, and the
people translated into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor. 11 The successors of
Nabuchodonosor: the destruction of Babylon by Cyrus king of Persia.
CHAP. I.
Senacherib King of Assyria besieges Ezechias in Jerusalem.

IN the fourteenth year of the reign of Ezechias King of the two Tribes,
Senacherib King of Assyria drew forth a huge army against him, and surprised
4. Reg. 18. The destruction of Iudaea.
all the Cities of Judah and Benjamin by strong hand. To him Ezechias Senacherib
had heard and considered upon the ambassadors instructions, he resolved on
peace, and accepted Ezechias offer, promising that he would depart in peace as
soon as he had received three hundredth talents of silver, and thirty talents
of gold: swearing an oath unto the ambassadors, that under these conditions he
would depart away without offering any outrage. Ezechias giving credit to these
words of his, emptied the treasuries, and sent the prefixed sum The oath of
Senacherib, and his breach thereof.
to Senacherib, hoping to be delivered from his enemy, and the hazard wherein
his country stood. But the Assyrians having received the money, set light by
their promises; so that Senacherib Rapsaces his general in Iudaea with a great
power, accompanied with two of his chiefest minions and courtiers, with
commission to spoil Jerusalem: The names of these two were Tharata and
Anachares. As soon as they were encamped near unto the walls, they sent unto
Ezechias and commanded him to come and speak with them: but he through fear
which he had conceived, went not unto them, but sent three of his most familiar
friends, Eliacim the superintendent of his realm, Sobna and Ioachus that had
the commission of his registers. These three presented themselves before the
chiefetaines of the Assyrian army: whom when Rapsaces had beheld, he commanded
them to return unto their master, and to tell him that the great king
Senacherib was desirous to know under what hope he thus neglected his
government, and obstinately refused to Ezechias, and to make both him and his
subjects stoop under the Assyrian government. Whilst Rapsaces Rapsaces
persuasion, to cause Ezechias submit.
spoke thus in the Hebrew language (wherein he was very skillful) Eliacim
(searing least the multitude should be strooken with fear upon the hearing of
these words) besought him to speak in the Syriack tongue. But he sufficiently
instructed what it was that he feared, answered him with

When both the Ambassadors, and the people had heard that which the Assyrian
had spoken, they reported the same to Ezechias, who incontinently cast his
royal garments off, and clothed himself in sackcloth, carrying the
countenance of a disconsolate man, and casting himself 4. Reg. 19. Ezechias in
adversity has recourse to God, he is co^sorted by Esaias.
prostrate upon the earth after the manner of their country, he besought God
to be assistant unto him, since all other hope was vain. He sent also certain
of his friends, and some Priests unto the Prophet Esaias, requiring him to pray
unto God, that since the sacrifice was offered unto him for public security,
it might please him to frustrate the enemies hopes, and to have pity and The
year of the world. 3231. before Christ's Nativity 733.
compassion on his people. When the Prophet had performed no less then he
required, he received an answer from God, by which he assured the king, and
all them that were about him, foretelling them that the enemies should be
overcome without stroke strooken, and should retire with shame, and not with
that advantage which they bragde of at this present, because God had already
determined how they should be overthrown. He foreprophecied also, that
Senacharib himself (the king of Assyria) should fail of his enterprise in
Egypt, and that upon his return to his own court, he should be slain. At
that very time the Assyrian wrote letters to Ezechias, in which he called him
fool and mad man, to think that he could warrantize himself from being his
slave, yea his in especial, who had conquered diverse and far greater nations:
threatening him with utter ruin at such time as he should surprise the City,
if he opened not the gates of Ezechias had red these letters, he set light by
them, by reason of the confidence he had in God: and having opened them, he
spread them in the temple. And whilst he renewed his prayers unto God for the
salvation of the City, and his subjects, Esaias the Prophet told him that his
prayer was heard: that hereafter likewise they should manure their lands in
peace and security, and should enjoy their possessions without fear. Not long
after, the king of Assyria having but cold success in his expedition against
Egypt, returned back again without doing any thing, for this cause that
ensues. He had lost much time in the siege of Pelusium, and at such time as he
had already raised certain bulwarks as hie as the wall, so that he wa^ted
nothing but to give the assault; news was brought him that Tharsices king of
Aethiopia brought an army to rescew the Egyptians, with an intent to take his
way through the desert, Senacharib troubled with these tidings, speedily
departed thence with his army. But Herodotus says, that he made war with
Vulcans priest, especially Herodotus of Senacharib.
for that he was both a king and a priest: Besieging Pelusium (said he) for
this cause he gave over the siege. The King of Egypt called to his God for
assistance, by whose power the Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11.
Arabians suffered much misery. But in this also he erreth, in that he sets
down the Arabian for the Assyrian. In one night (said he) there was such a
multitude of mice, that they gnew all the enemies bows and other arms: whence
it came to pass, that the king being disarmed withdrew his siege from
Pelusium. But Berosus a writer among the Chaldees makes mention of Senacharib,
and how he reigned amongst the Assyrians, and troubled both Asia and Egypt
with war, and declares the manner in these words. But Senacharib returning
from the Egyptian The punishment of Senacharib, for displeasing God.
Rhabsace, and God caused a pestilent sickness to fall upon his army, which
was so violent, that the first night of the siege there died one hundredth
fourscore and five thousand men, with their governors and chieftains. With
which loss he was so affrighted, and troubled, that fearing to lose all his
army, he fled with those that remained, and retired himself into his kingdom
to the city called Niniue, where after he had lived for a time, he was
traitorously slain by Adramelech, and Selenar his two elder sons: and being
dead, was carried into his own temple called Arusche, and his children were
driven out of the kingdom for committing the murder, and retired themselves
into Armenia, and Asseradochus succeeded Senacharib. Such was the end of the
Patricides.
Assyrian army that came before Jerusalem.

CHAP. II.
Ezechias having for a time remained in peace, dies: and leaves his son
Manasses to succeed him.

KIng Ezechias (being in this sort beyond al hope delivered from his fears)
offered thanksgiving and sacrifices unto God, with all the people,
acknowledging that there was no other Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 3.
cause that had slain part of his enemies, and put the rest to mortal fear,
neither that had delivered Jerusalem from thraldom, but only Gods succor and
assistance. And whilst he altogether intended and was occupied about the
service of God, he fell sick of a grievous disease, 4. Reg. 20.
Ezechias sickness and the prolongation of his life assured by miracle
Being therefore in this sort toyled with discontents, he lamented and besought
God, that it would please him to lengthen his life a little time, until he had
children to succeed him, and that he would vouchsafe that his soul might not
be taken from him, before he were the father of a son. Hereupon God taking
compassion of him (and the rather, because he was not grieved for The year of
the world, 3231. before Christ's Nativity, 733.
Esaias unto him, to assure him, that after three days he should be recovered of
his sickness: and that after he had lived some fifteen years more, he should
depart out of this life, and leave a lawful heir behind him. When the Prophet
(according as he was commanded) had brought these tidings to the king; he
doubted both the unexpected messenger, and the mightiness of his disease: for
which cause he required some prodigious sign at Esatas hands, to the intent
that he might certainly believe, that he was sent as a messenger from God unto
him for the truth of those things, which either exceed our hope, or reason,
are wont to be confirmed by these means. Whereupon Esaias asked him what sign
he required, and it should be given him. For which cause he requested, that
since the declining Balad King The Assyrian Monarchy destroyed. The embassage
of the king of Babylon to Ezechias.
of Babylon sent an Ambassador to Ezechias with presents, calling him his
allie and friend: who receiving his messengers, willingly feasted them, and
showed them his treasures, his arsenall, and all other magnificence that he had
of gold and precious stones, and after he had given them presents for Balad, he
dismissed them. Whereupon the Prophet Esaias came unto him, asking him Ezechias
answered, that they were of Babylon, and came unto him from the king, telling
the Prophet how he had showed them all that which he had, to the end that
having seen and observed his riches and power, they might afterward certify
their king thereof. Whereunto the Prophet replied, saying: Know thou that
within a little The captivity of Babylon foreprophecied by Esaias. The year of
the world. 3232. before Christ's birth 732.
time thy riches shall be transported into Babylon, and thy children shall be
made Eunuchs, and (being no more men) shall be slaves unto the King of
Babylon. All which God gave him to understand before it happened. For which cause
Ezechias was sore troubled, to hear these tidings, saying, that he desired
that his people might not fall into those miseries: but since it was impossible
to change the decree of God, he required that he might have peace during his
life time. Of this Balad king of Babylon, Berosus makes mention. This Prophet
truly divine, and admirable Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4.
have left in writing all that which he prophesied: the truth whereof, has
afterward in effect appeared to posterity. Neither did he alone perform this
much, but besides him, twelve others have done the like, and all that which is
happened unto us, either good or evil, has fallen out truly according to their
prophecies. But hereafter we will speak of every one of them. Now when as
Ezechias had lived his prefixed time (according as we have forespoken) and
governed his kingdom Ezechias death.
in peace, he died when he was fifty four years old, and in the nine and
twentieth year of his reign.

CHAP. III.
The Kings of Chaldaea and Babylon war against Manasses, and take

HIs son Manasses (the son of Achiba, a woman borne in Jerusalem) succeeded
him in 4. Reg. 21. Manasses impiety and cruelty. The year of the world. 3247.
before Christ's birth 717.
the kingdom. This man forsook his fathers ways, and followed sinister
customs, expressing in his manners all kinds of mischief, not omitting any
impiety, but addicting himself to all the iniquities of the Israelites, who
were destroyed because of their sins committed against God. He was so
impudent as he spared not to pollute the very temple of God, the City, and
the whole country: for making his entry in despite of God, he slew afterward
all those that were virtuous men among the Hebrews. And although he had no
want of Prophets; Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. Alias cap. 4.
calamities upon them, which (for contempt of religion) the Israelites their
brethren had a little before that suffered. But they unwilling to give trust to
these speeches of theirs (whose admonitions had they respected, they might have
avoided their imminent evils) at length in effect experimented the truth
thereof. For whereas they perseuered in their accustomed and dissolute manners,
The year of the world 3247. before Christ's Nativity. 717. Manasses surprised
and led prisoner into Babylon. and after his repentance restored to his
kingdom. The year of the world. 3288. before Christ's birth 676. Manasses
purifieth the city and consecrateth the temple again.
God incensed the king of Chaldaea and Babylon against them; who sending his
army into Iudaea, and spoiling the whole region, at length surprised and led
away Manasses prisoner, and made him subject to what punishment it should
please them to inflict upon him. At last the wretch (taught by his own
mischief) acknowledged his sin, and humbly besought God in prayer, that he
would make his enemy courteous and merciful: neither did God show himself
inexorable; but having compassion on his miseries, gave care unto him, and
after some space of time, the Babylonian sending him home, restored him to his
former government. As soon as he was returned back to Jerusalem, he began (as
much as in him lay) to show the fruits of repentance, and to fear God in all
things, cleansing his spirit of all those sins, whereunto before time he was
addicted. He purged the temple also, and cleansed the City; and from that time
Moses prescript offered thereon solemn sacrifices, and after that he had
purua^ed those things that concerned the service of God, as it appertained; he
bethought himself likewise of the security of the City of Jerusalem, and
carefully repaired the old and ruined walls, annexing also an other enclosure
thereunto, and erecting high towers likewise, furnishing the same with munition
and victual sufficient for a City of defense. And so much was he changed
during The year of the world. 3302. before Christ's birth 662. Manasses death.
the rest of his life, that he was held most happy; and after the time he began
to serve God, Amos, the son of Emalsema, of the city of Iabath; who
imitating his fathers youthly course, was slain in his own house, by a
conspiracy plotted by his Amos king of Judah a wicked prince.
own household servants, after he had accomplished the years of four and
twenty, and reigned two. After his death the people slew his murderers, and he
was buried with his father, and the kingdom was given to his son Josias, who
was only eight years old.

CHAP. IIII. The year of the world. 3304. before the birth of Christ. 660.
Josias king of Iudae. 4 Reg. 22. Josias restores the true service of God. The
fear of the world, 3307. before Christ's birth 657.

The History of Josias.

Josias mother was of the City of Boseeth, and was called Ieda: he was a man
of a good nature, and of his own instinct inclined to virtue, conforming
himself to the customs and manners of his progenitor David, both in the scope
and rule of all his life. When he grew to be twelve years old, he gave
manifest approbation of his piety and justice: for he drew the people to a
conformable course of life, and to the detestation and abolishing of Idols,
that were no gods, and to the service of the only and true God of their
forefathers. And considering the actions of his predecessors, he began to
rectify them in that wherein they were deficient, with no less
circumspection, then if he had been an old man; and that which he found to be
correspondent and advisedly done by them, that did he both maintain and
imitate. All Josias rooteth outidolairie. The year of the world. 3321. be fore
Christ birth. 643. Judges. The zeal of the people in the reparation of the
temple.
made for strange gods, and overthrew their altars; and all those gifts that
had been offered unto them by his predecessors, were defaced in a mockery: and
in this manner caused he the people to return to the service of God, and to
forsake the honor that they did unto Idols. He offered likewise the ordinary
sacrifices and burnt offerings upon the altar, and established Judges and
magistrates to determine public debates, and to do each man right, charging
them to have no less respect of equity, then they had of their own lives. He
sent also through all the country, Amasias, who was already governor of the
city, and Saphan the secretary, and Ioata Committee over the registers, with
the high Priest Elcia: who with all expedition and diligence provided workmen,
and all that which was requisite for the building, and began the work. This
sudden and speedy reparation The year of the world. 3321. before Christ's
birth 643.
Elcia the high priest, and caused him to melt down the remainder of the money
that was given toward the building of the temple, and to make vessels, cups,
and ewers for the service of the altar. He commanded also, that all the gold
and silver that was in the treasury should be brought forth, and employed
after the like manner in cups, and other vessels. Now whilst the high Priest
searched the treasury, he found the sacred books of Moses in Moses sacred
books found in the temple.
the temple, which he brought and delivered to the scribe Saphan; who after he
had perused the same, presented them unto the king, giving him to understand
that all that which he had commanded was accomplished: besides that, he read
the books unto him. Which when the king had heard, he rent his clothes, and
called Elcia the high Priest unto him, and the scribe Saphan, Olda the wife of
Sallum, Olda the prophetess sent unto by Josias.
a man in high dignity, and famous, by reason of his nobility: commanding
them that when they came unto her, they should endeavor to appease Gods wrath,
and labor to recover his favor; because it was to be feared, that by reason
that their ancestors had transgressed the The pophecie of the Jews misery.
laws of Moses, they should be in danger to be dispossessed of their country,
and abandoned by all men, should at length perish miserably. When the
prophetess had heard the kings commandment, she willed those that were sent
unto her to return unto the king, and to certify him from her, that God had
given a sentence against them, which might not be revoked, by any prayers
whatsoever; namely, that since they had transgressed the law of Moses, the
people should perish, and should be cast out of their country, and deprived of
al their goods that they had, and Josias sake who was a virtuous man: but that
after his decease God would pour his intended punishments upon the people.
This prophecy of the woman they signified unto the king, who sent into all
parts and assembled the people in Jerusalem, commanding the Priests and
Levites, and generally all men without distinction of age, or person 4 Reg. 23.
A lively image of a godly prince.
to be present in that conuention. Now when they were assembled, he first of
all caused the sacred books to be read, and afterward standing aloft upon his
throne, he caused all the people Moses laws. Whereupon all of them did
willingly approve whatsoever he said, promising to do that whereunto they
were exhorted. And therewithal offering up present sacrifices unto God, they
besought him to show himself favorable and merciful toward them. The king
likewise commanded the hie priest that if there were any necessary in the
temple which were made by his predecessors in honor of Idols and strange Gods,
he should cast it out. And after that a great quantity was found therein, all
of it was gathered together and burnt, and the ashes afterward were scattered
here and there. And as touching the Priests (that appertained to Idols that
were not of the race of Aaron) he put them to death. When these things were
thus executed in Jerusalem, he came afterward to the plain country; and all
that which Jeroboam had erected there in honor of Idols, he utterly The truth
of the divine oracles. 3. Reg. 13.
Jeroboam had builded. This had the prophet foretold that came to Jeroboam, at
such time as he offered sacrifice, and told him in the presence of all the
people, all that which should happen: namely, that one of David's posterity
called Josias, should do these abouenamed things: which prophecy took effect
three hundredth, sixty and one year after. After this, King Josias transported
himself to the Israelites (who had avoided the captivity and servitude of the
Assyrians) and persuaded them to forsake their impieties, and the services they
had performed to strange Gods, and to honor the sovereign and true God of
their fathers, and to cleave unto him. He made a search also through every
house, borough, and city, fearing least as yet there should be any Idol
hidden. He likewise sought out the chariots that were made by his ancestors,
in honor of the sun, and all that which was adored whatsoever it were, and
utterly abolished the same. After he had The celebration of the passover.
other Levites five hundredth lambs, and five hundredth bullocks. Having
therefore such an abundance of beasts they sacrificed according to the law of
Moses (the priests taking charge thereof, The year of the world 3321. before
Christ's birth 643. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9. Alias cap. 5.
and confirming the rest of the people by their example) Neither was there ever
such a solemnity kept by the Hebrews since the time of Samuel the Prophet;
because all things were done according to the laws and ancient customs,
which were observed in the time of their fathers. After this Josias lived in
peace, riches, honor, and estimation amongst all men: and thus finished his
life.

CHAP. V.
Diverse exploits of Nechao.

NEchao King of Egypt having gathered great forces, conducted his army toward
the The year of the world. 3334. before Christ's birth 630. The Egyptians work
their passage through Iudaea.
empire of Assyria: for Nechao affected the government of all Asia. Now when he
drew near unto the City of Mende (which was under Josias subjection) King
Josias denied him passage, and would not suffer his army to march through his
country. For which cause Nechao sent a Herald unto him, to let him
understand, that it was not against him that he made war, but that he bent
his course toward Euphrates: for which cause he wished him in no sort to
hinder his intended journey, least thereby he should be constrained to make
war upon him. But Josias respected not this demand of his, but resolved
himself to hinder his passage through his country: And truly I suppose that
the destinies pricked him forward to this arrogance, to the end he might have
some occasion to do something against Nechao. For whilst he disposed his
army, 4. Reg. 23.
arrow that was shot by a certain Egyptian, which cooled and tempered the
spleen he had in war. For feeling himself sorely ouerpressed with pain, by
reason of his wound; he commanded his army to retire, and returned himself to
Jerusalem, where he died of his wound, and was Josias death.
buried with his fathers with great magnificence, after he had lived nine and
thirty years, and reigned thirty and one. For him the people mourned with
great heaviness, lamenting and sorrowing for many days. The Prophet Jeremy
also made a deploration over him in lamentable An Epitaph written by Jeremy on
Josias
verse, which is as yet extant even in these days. This Prophet left in
writing those evils that should afterward happen unto the city, and the
captivity wherewith we are entangled at this present, and the surprisall of
Babylon. Neither has he alone foretold the same: but the Prophet Ezechiel has
likewise done the like; who first left two books written of the same argument.
These two Prophets were of the race of the Priests. But Jeremy kept in
Jerusalem, from the fourteenth year of the reign of Josias, until the
destruction of the City and temple; as in 2. Paral. 25. Jeremy prophecieth the
captivity. of Babylon. In what time Jeremy lived. Ioaz king of Judah. 4. Reg.
23. 2. Paral 36. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 7. Alias. chap. 6. Eliacim called
Ioachim made king of Judah. The year of the world. 3335. before Christ's birth
629.
time and place convenient we will declare, setting down those occurrences
that happened to this Prophet. After the death of Josias (heretofore mentioned)
his son Ioaz succeeded him in the kindome, at such time as he was twenty and
three years old, who reigned in Jerusalem; his mothers name was Ametala: he
was a man full of impiety, and of a malignant and perverse nature. The King of
Egypt returning from the war, sent unto Ioaz, commanding him to meet with
him in Samath a City of Syria, where he was no sooner arrived, but he kept him
prisoner, committing the kingdom to Eliacim his brother (on the fathers side)
who was his elder brother likewise. Ioachim: he imposed atribute also on
Iudaea, of one hundredth talents of silver and a talent of gold, which Ioachim
paid. And as touching Ioaz, he led him into Egypt, where he finished his
days, after he had been king three months, and ten days. Now Ioachims mother
was called Zabuda, of the City of Abuma. He was a wicked person, and of a
malignant nature, having neither piety toward God, nor respect of equity
toward men.

CHAP. VI.
Nabuchodonosors army comes into Syria.

IN the fourth year of his reign, a certain man called Nabuchodonosor
possessed the The year of the world. 3336. before the birth of Christ. 628.
Nabuchodo nosor king of Babylon warreth against the Egyptians.
kingdom of Babylon; who at that time went out with a great army against
Carchabesa (a City situate near unto Euphrates) resolving with himself to
fight against Nechao king of Egypt, under whose power all Syria was subject.
Nechao understanding of the Babylonians intent, and how great his army was,
made very little account thereof, but with a huge army addressed himself
toward Euphrates, with an intent to repulse Nabuchodonosor. But he was
overcome in battle, and lost diverse thousands of his men. Whereupon the
Babylonian The year of the world. 3336. before Christ's birth 628.
Nabuchodonosor reigned over these conquered countries, and the eight year of
the reign of Ioachim over the Hebrews, the Babylonians led forth his army
against the Jews, with a mighty power, threatening them to use al hostility,
except Ioachim would pay him tribute. Ioachim fearing his threats bought his
peace with silver, and paid him for three years space the tributes that were
Ioachim paseth Nabuchadnezzar tribute. 4. Reg. 24.
imposed on him. But in the third year (understanding that the Egyptian was
up in arms against the Babylonian) he denied the payment of the tribute;
notwithstanding he was frustrated of his hope, for the Egyptians were not so
hardy as to make war. All which the Prophet Jeremy The year of the world.
3343. before Christ's nativity, 621.
daily foretold him, signifying unto him that he builded his hope in vain upon
the Egyptians, and that it would fall out that the City should be overthrown
by the king of Babylon, and Ioachim himself should be delivered prisoner into
his hands. But because there was no means for them to escape this justice, all
that which he said was nothing auailable. For notwithstanding Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 8. Ioachim reuolteth from the king of Babylon.
the people and governors heard thereof, yet made they no reckoning of the
same; but were displeased with those counsels which he proposed unto them,
accusing Jeremy as if he took pleasure to utter and publish ominous and
adverse presages against the king: they likewise called him in question before
the kings counsel, and required that he might be condemned. Whereupon some of
them gave sentence against him: the rest reproouing the advice of the elders
that were thus addicted, took a more discreet course, and caused the Prophet
to depart out of the kings house, forbidding his adversaries to do him any
mischief: they protesting that he had not only foretold the future calamities
of the city, but that many before him had done the like, as Micheas Micheas had
been honored as a Prophet sent from God. By these words they The year of the
world. 3345. before Christ's Nativity 619. Jeremy foretells the destruction of
Jerusalem. Ier. 22.
appeased the people, and delivered Jeremy from the death intended against him.
This man wrote all his prophecies, and red them to the people in their fasts,
and assembled them in the temple in the ninth month of the fifth year of the
reign of Ioachim, which book he had composed touching that which should
happen unto the City, the temple, and the people. When the governors heard
the same, they took the book from him, and commanded that both he and his
secretary Baruch should withdraw themselves out of the sight of men: and they
took the book, and presented it unto the king; who in the presence of his
friends, commanded his secretary to read the same: and after he had heard the
contents thereof, he waxed wondrous wroth, and renting Jeremy and his
secretary Baruch, and to lead them out to be punished. But they had prevented
his indignation.

CHAP. VII.
Nabuchodonosor puts Ioachim to death, and establishes Ioachin in the
kingdom.

NOt long after this, he went out to meet the king of Babylon, who was marched
out Nabuchadnezzars entertainment into the city, and his cruelty. 4. Reg. 24.
2. Paral. 36. Ioachin or Iechonias king of Judah.
he opened the gates unto him, supposing that he intended him no evil. But
when the Babylonians were entered into the City, the King observed not his
promises, but put all such to death as were in the flower and beauty of their
years, and spared none of the inhabitants of Jerusalem: with them also he slew
their king Ioachim, and caused his body to be cast from the top of the walls,
and vouchsafed him no sepulture, establishing Ioachin his son King of the
country, and of the city. Moreover he took three thousand of the most
honorable Citizens of Jerusalem prisoners, and led them to Babylon with him,
amongst whom was the Prophet Ezechiel, at that time very young in years. This
was the end of king Ioachim, who lived thirty six years, and reigned eleven.
Ioachin that succeeded him in the kingdom was the son of Nosta

CHAP. VIII. The year of the world. 3346. before Christ's Nativity. 618.

Nabuchodonosor changes his purpose and besieges Ioachin, and receives him
under composition.

AS soon as the Babylonian had bestowed the kingdom of Iudaea on Ioachin, he
was seized with a sudden fear, which made him suspect least Ioachin
remembering himself Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9.
of the injuries he had done unto him by the murder of his father, might draw
the country into rebellion, and revolt against him. For which cause he sent
out certain forces and besieged Ioachin in Jerusalem; who being a man of a
good nature and of an upright heart, was loath 4. Reg. 25.
to forsake the City in that danger without a governor, considering that it
was for his cause that Nabuchodonosor a truce ^eaker.
not a year: for the King of Babylon observed it not, but commanded his
captains to imprison all the youth and artificers that were in the City, and
to bring them bound unto him. The number of them was ten thousand eight
hundredth thirty and two persons, besides Ioachin, his mother, and his near
allies, whom they took prisoners.

CHAP. IX.
Sedechias is made King over Jerusalem by the Babylonian.

IN steed of Ioachin, he appointed Sedechias his uncle king of Jerusalem, whom
he bound by an oath that he should govern the country without any innovation,
or partial favor toward the Egyptians. This Sedechias was one and twenty
years old, at such time as he came unto the kingdom, and was Ioachims
brother by the mothers side: he was a contemner of all laws, and a peruerter
of ordinances. For the young men that were about him Sedechias king of
Jerusalem seduced by his courteours and false prophets, gives no ear to
Jeremy.
were without the fear of God, and all the people under his dominions
committed whatsoever outrages were best liking unto them. For this cause the
Prophet Jeremy came unto him, protesting oftentimes against him, and
denouncing, that (if he renounced not all those impieties and iniquities he
used, and addicted not himself to that which was just, but gave ear unto his
governors, Sedechias gave ear to these discourses of the Prophet, he was
persuaded, and acknowledged all that to be true which he had spoken, and very
profitable both for him, and his people: Ezechiel prophecieth the destruction
of the temple.
but anon after his friends corrupted him, and diuerted him according to their
own opinions. Ezechiel also at the same time had prophesied in Babylon all
those calamities which were to fall upon the temple, and sent notice to
Jerusalem of that which he had received from God. Notwithstanding Sedechias
gave no credit to his prophecies, by reason that all the Prophets were
accustomed Sedechias: but Ezechiel differed in this, that he said that
Sedechias should not see Babylon; The year of the world. 3354. before Christ
birth. 610. Sedechias revolt from the Babylonian. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
The king of Egypt coming to rescue the king of Jerusalem, is overthrown by
Nabuchodonosor with all his army, and driven out of Syria.
notwithstanding that Jeremy had prophesied, that the king of Babylon should
lead him away prisoner in bonds, because therefore these two accorded not in
their sayings; he concluded that the matter wherein they agreed, was of no
consequence. Notwithstanding all things happened unto him according as the
Prophets had pronounced, as we will declare in a convenient place. After that
he had continued his alliance and friendship with the king of Babylon for the
space of eight years, he brake the league that was between them, and
confederated with the Egyptians (under hope that they should overcome the
Babylonians.) Which when the king of Babylon understood, he led forth his army
against him, and destroyed his country to the uttermost: Sedechias was, levied
a huge army, and came into Iudaea, with an intent to raise the siege. Whereupon
the Babylonian withdrew his army from Jerusalem to encounter with the
Egyptian, and fought with him, and overcame him in battle, and pursued him
with such alacrity, that he put him to flight, and drove him altogether out of
Syria. As soon as the Babylonian was dislodged from Jerusalem, the false
prophets deceived Sedechias, telling him that the Babylonian should never more
return to make The year of the world. 3346. before the Nativity of Christ.
618. Sedechias seduced by false prophets The prophecy of the captivity of
Babylon and the delivery. Ier. 25. 29. 37.


But the Prophet Jeremy presenting himself before the king, prophesied the
contrary to these impostures, assuring both him and the people, that no profit
could befall them by means of the Egyptians, for that the Babylonians should
overcome them, and should return and encampe before Jerusalem, and besiege the
same, and destroy the people by famine, and lead them away prisoners that were
remaining, and carry away all their substance; and that after they were seized
of the riches of their temple, they should finally burn the same. As for the
City, they should race it: and (said he) they shall keep us captive for the
space of seventy years: And from this servitude Diverse men gave credit to
these words of Jeremy; but the governors and contemners of God, entreated him
very cruelly, as if he had been a man transported out of his sense. And
whereas he had an intent to visit his native country Anathoth, some twenty
stounds off of Jerusalem, one of the magistrates encountering him in his
journey, and laying hold on him, retained him, loading him with this slander,
that he went and stole away to submit himself to the Babylonians. But Jeremy
answered, that he was falsely accused, and that he repaired only to the place
where he was borne. This Prince giving him no credit, arrested him, and brought
him before the judgment seat, where he sustained all sorts of The year of the
world, 3354. before Christ's birth 610. Jerusalem besieged. 4 Reg. 25. Ier. 39.
Two mighty enemies, Famine and pestilence. Jeremy persuades them to yield.
the extremity of wrong and injury. The ninth year of the reign of
Zedechias, and on the tenth day of the ninth month, the King of Babylon came
and encamped the second time before Jerusalem, and entrenched himself round
about the same, for the space of eighteen months, and laid battery and siege
thereto, with as great spleen as might be possible: And they that were
besieged therein, were encountered with two most heinous afflictions, famine,
and most grievous pestilence. At this time the Prophet Jeremy being in prison,
held not his peace, but cried with a loud voice, and preached, and exhorted the
people, willing them to entertain the Babylonians, and to open their gates
unto them: because that in so doing they might warrantize themselves with all
their families, whereas otherways they were assured of destruction. He
foretold them Jeremy, and reproving him for a mad man; urging this, that he had
abated their courage, and by his woeful predictions, had weakened the hearts of
the people, which were otherways ready to fight for him and their country,
by reason that he flying unto the enemy, menaced them with the surprisal and
utter ruin of their City. But the king in regard of the natural humanity
and justice that was The reward of godly preachers in this life.
in him, was not any ways whetted in respect of his own interest; yet to the
intent he might not Jeremy, they let him down into a pit full of mud, to the
intent he might die in that place, and be strangled by the ordure: in effect,
he was set therein up to the neck. But one of the kings servants (an
Ethiopian by nation) certified the king of the Prophets affliction, assuring
him that his friends and governors did not justly, so to thrust and bury the
Prophet in the mud, and cursedly to conspire against him, tyring him with bonds
and tortours worse then death. For which cause the king hearing this news, was
sorry that he had delivered the Prophet to the governors, and commanded the
Ethiopian to take thirty men of his court with him (with cords and such other
things necessary, Sedechias neglects the prophets good counsel for fear of
the governors.
him in secret, demanding of him if he had any message to deliver him from
God, praying him to let him understand what soever he knew as touching the
success of the siege. The Prophets answer was, that although he should tell
him, yet it would not be believed; and that if he should exhort him, he would
not give ear or listen unto him. But (said he) O king, thy friends have
condemned The year of the world, 3354 before Christ's birth 610.
Jeremy grounding himself upon the faith which he had plighted unto him,
counseled the king to yield up the City to the Babylonian, because that God
had willed him to signify unto the king, that if he would save his life, and
avoid the imminent danger, and save his City from utter ruin, and preserve
the temple from burning, he should submit; or otherwise, that none but he
should be the cause of all these evils that should happen unto the City and
Citizens, and of that calamity that should Upon these words the king dismissed
Jeremy, charging him to communicate the counsel that was held between them to
no one of the Citizens, no not to the princes, if so be they should light on
any inckling of their conference, or ask of him whether the king had sent for
him: aduising him to answer, if so be

CHAP. X.
Jerusalem is taken, and the people carried into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor.

Mean while the Babylonian continued his violent siege against the City of
Jerusalem, and having raised towers upon certain bulwarks, he drove away by
this means all those Jerusalem besieged eighteen months and at length taken.
that approached near unto the walls: he raised also (round about the circuit
of the City) diverse platformes, that equalled the walls in height. Mean
while the City was as valiantly and courageously defended by the inhabitants,
for neither pestilence nor famine plucked down their spirits: And although that
within the City they were tormented with these scourges, yet were not their
resolutions distracted by the war, neither did the enemies inventions
astonish them, nor their engines affright them; but that they invented new
countermines: so that all the battle betwixt the Babylonians and Jews seemed
to be a trial both of valor and art; whilst these by the one do assuredly
hope to surprise the City, and the other thought their safety consisted
herein, if they ceased not by new inventions to frustrate their enemies
endeavors: And in this estate continued they both for the space of eighteen
months, until they were consumed by famine, Zedecias, the ninth day of the
fourth month) who were put in trust by Nabuchodonosor to perform the siege.
For touching his own person he made his abode in the City of Reblata. Now if
any The year of the world. 3356. before Christ's birth 608.
man be desirous to know the names of them that had commandment at such time
as Jerusalem was surprised, these they be, Nergelear, Aremantus, Emegar,
Nabosar, and Echarampsar. The City being taken about midnight, the princes of
the enemies army entered into the temple: which when Zedecias understood, he
took his wives and his children, with the princes and his friends, and fled
through a great valley by the desert: which when the Babylonians understood by
certain Jews that were revolted, and had submitted themselves unto them, they
arose early Sedecias flies by night, and is suprised by the enemy.
in the morning to pursue them, and ouertooke and surpised them near unto
Jericho. Whereupon those princes and friends of Zedecias that had taken their
flight with him, seeing the enemies near unto them, forsook him, and
scattering themselves here and there, concluded each of the^ to save himself.
When as therefore the enemies had apprehended him, who was attended by a few
followers only, and accompanied by his children and wives, they brought him
unto the kings presence, who no sooner beheld him, but he called him wicked and
perfidious, and vpbraided him with breach of his promise, and contempt of his
majesty, to whom he had sworn he would The year of the world, 3356. before
Christ's Nativity, 608.
Ioachin to bestow it on him) he had notwithstanding employed all his forces
against his benefactor. But (said he) that great God that hates thy treachery
has delivered thee into my hands: and when he had spoken these words, he
caused Zedechias friends and children to be slain before his eyes, with all
his other prisoners: afterward Sedechias has his eyes pulled out, and his
children slain before his face.
commanding his eyes to be plucked out, he led him to Babylon. All which
happened unto him, according as the prophets Jeremy and Ezechiel had foretold
him: namely, that he should be surprised and brought before the king of
Babylon, and should speak with him face to face, and should see him with his
eyes (for so had Jeremy prophesied) but being made blind and conducted to
Babylon, he should not see the City of Babylon (according as Ezechiel Thus was
the race of the kings extinguished How many and how long the kings reigned that
were of David's luie.
that descended from David; who were in number one and twenty, that reigned
after him. All of them together governed five hundredth and fourteen years,
six months and ten days: adding thereunto the twenty years of the first
king Saul, who was of an other tribe. After this, the Babylonian sent
Nabuzardan general of his army unto Jerusalem to spoil the temple, giving him
in charge to burn both it, and the kings palace, and to race and level the
City with The temple the palace, and the city spoiled and burnt.
year of the reign of Sedechias, spoiled the temple, and carried away the
vessels that were consecrated to Gods service, both those of gold, as also them
of silver: he took likewise the great lauer that was given by Solomon. The
columns and pillars of brass, with their chapters likewise, and the tables
and candlestickes of gold, and after he had borne away all things, he burned
the temple the first day of the fist month of the eleventh year of Sedechias
reign, which was the eighteenth of Nabuchodonosors government. He burned also
the kings royal palace, and raced the City. This temple was burned 470.
years, six months, and 10 days after the foundation thereof: and in the
year 1062. six months and ten days, after the departure of the people out
of Egypt: and 1950. years, six months and ten days, after the Deluge: from
the creation of Adam until The general for the king of Babylon having
destroyed the City, and transported the people, took prisoners the high
Priest Sareas, and The captiuitle of Babylon.
his fellow in office the Priest Sephan, with the governors and keepers of the
Temple; which were three; the Eunuch also which had the charge over the rest,
and seven of Sedechias friends and his secretary, besides sixty other
governors, al which (together with the vessels which he had pillaged) he sent
to Reblatha a City of Syria, unto the king of Babylon; who commanded in that
place that the high Priest and governors should be beheaded: as for the rest
of the prisoners and Sedechias the king, he carried them with him to Babylon:
he sent also in bonds, with the rest, Iosadoch Sareas the high Priest, whom he
had put to death in Reblatha (as we have heretofore declared) And for that we
have reckned up the race of the kings, and set down likewise what they were,
and how long they continued, me seems that it shall not be unnecessary to
recite the names of the high Priests, and to report who they have been, that
have administered the priesthood under the kings. Sadoc was the first high
Priest of the temple builded by Solomon: The high Priests in Jerusalem.
After him his son Achimas succeeded in that honor, and after Achimas
Azarias, after whom succeeded Ioram, and after Ioram Ioschua, after Ioschua
Axioram, who had for his successor Phideas, to Phideas succeeded Sudeas, to
Sudeas Iulus, to Iulus Iotham, to Iotham Vrias, to Vrias Nerias, to Nerias
Odeas, to Odeas Saldum, to Saldum Elcias, to Elcias Sareas, to Sareas Iosadoch,
who was carried away prisoner into Babylon: all which have succeeded in the
priesthood by lineall Nabuchodonosor was come to Babylon, he shut up Sedechias
in prison, Sedecias death
where he kept him until he died, and after his death he honored him with a
royal tomb. He likewise offered the vessels that he had taken out of the
temple of Jerusalem unto his gods, and caused the people to inhabit the
country of Babylon, delivering the high priest from his Hedio and Ruffinus.
chap. 11.
bonds. The general Nabuzardan that led the people away captive, left the
poorer sort in the country of Iudaea, and those also that voluntarily yielded
themselves unto him, over whom he appointed Godolias the son of Aicam
governor (a man that was both upright and noble) commanding The year of the
world. 3356. before Christ's birth 608. Godolias captain of the fugitives.
Jeremy set at liberty by the Baby lonian, and richly offered and presented.
Jeremy also out of prison, persuading him to repair with him to the king of
Babylon, telling him that he had received express commandment from the king,
to furnish him with all things necessary for that journey; but if he were not
contented to repair to Babylon, he should declare to him in what place he
would make his abode, to the intent he might certify the king thereof. But the
Prophet would not follow him, neither depart or soiourne in any other place,
desiring rather to live amidst the ruins of his country, and among the
pitious relics of his poor nation.

When the general Nabuzardan understood his resolution, he gave charge to the
governor Godolias (whom he left in Iudaea) to have care of him, and to furnish
him with all that which he Jeremy dwelt in the City of Masphath, praying
Nabuzardan that he would send him his disciple Baruch (the son of Neria, a man
of a noble family, and excellently learned in that country language.) Now
when as these that during the siege of Jerusalem were retired out of the City,
understood of the Baruch dismissed out of prison. The Jews resort to Masphath
to Godolias.
retreat of the Babylonians, they assembled together from all parts, and came
to Masphath to Godolias, under the conduct of John the son of Careas, and
Iezanais and Sareas, and others. And besides these, a certain man called
Ismael of the blood royal, a wicked and fraudulent man, who during the siege
of the City, had retired himself to Bathal king of the Ammonites, and had
soiourned with him during all the troubles. Who being in this sort assembled
before him, Godolias counseled to remain in that country without any fear
of the Babylonians, promising Godolias had thus curreously entertained those
that were fugitives, and how he had permitted them to inhabit and till the
country (provided that they paid their tribute to the John and the other
governors being with him, and assured both of his clemency and courtesy,
began entirely to love him. For which cause they told him, that Bathal king of
the Ammonites had sent Ismael to murder him by some treachery, that by that
means he might have the dominion over the Israelites that remained, in that he
was of the blood royal. Assuring him, that the means of his deliverance from
that treason, was, if so be he would command them to kill Ismael in secret:
assuring him on the contrary side, that they feared, that if Ismael should
happen to kill him, their whole nation that remained, was like to fall to utter
ruin. But Godolias told them plainly, that these stratagems they intended,
were practiced against a man that had received pleasure at his hands; and that
it was not likely that he whom he had succored during the time of his
necessity, Ihon and the rest (seeing their persuasions were in vain) departed
from him. Some thirty days after, Ismael (accompanied with ten men) came to
Masphath to Godolias, who received them with presents and magnificent
entertainment, so that to express to Ismael and his companions how heartily
they were welcome, Godolias drunk so hard that he was somewhat ouerseene with
wine. Now when Ismael perceived him to be in that key, and ouerloaden with
drink and sleep, he stepped unto him with his ten associates, and cut both his
throat and theirs, who kept him company at the Godolias with presents, being
utterly ignorant of that which had happened. Ismael knowing them, called them
unto him, as if he intended to bring them to Godolias, and as soon as they
were entered, he locked the court and slew them, and afterward cast their
bodies into a deep ditch, to the intent they might not be discovered. Of this
number there were some that escaped, who besought him that they might not be
put to death, before they The year of the world. 3356. before the Nativity of
Christ. 608.
Ismael understood, he spared them: But he kept them prisoners that were in
Masphath with their wives and children, in the number of whom were the
daughters of Sedecias, whom Nabuzardan had left with Godolias. This done, he
retired back again to the king of the Ammonites. John and the governors of
his company, understanding of the acts committed by Ismael in Masphath, and
above all, of the murder of Godolias, they were wonderfully displeased: so
that each of them assembling his private force issued forth to pursue and
persecute Ismael, whom they ouertooke near unto a fountain in Hebron. The
prisoners that were with Ismael, seeing John his confederates, took courage,
supposing that it was some succors that came to help them, and forsook him
that led them, and began to join with John's followers: and thus fled Ismael
John gathering together all those whom he had rescued from Ismaels hands, both
Eunuchs, women, and children, retired into a certain John releaseth limaels
captives.
place called Mandra, where he soiourned all that day, resolving from thence to
depart into Egypt, fearing least the Babylonians should put him to death, if
they should remain in Iudaea, for that they would be displeased with the death
of Godolias, whom they had planted in the government.

Being thus plunged and perplexed with these deliberations, they addressed
themselves to the John asks counsel of God, and being informed refuses the
same.
Prophet Jeremy, beseeching him to enquire of God, and to certify them, what
it behooued them to do in this their doubtful estate, binding themselves by an
oath to do that which Jeremy should command them. Hereupon the Prophet
promised that he would ask counsel of God for John, the governors, and the
rest of the people, that if they inhabited Iudaea he would assist them, and
have care of them, and keep them so, as the Babylonians (whom they feared)
should do them no harm: but if they departed into Egypt, he would abandon
them, and would be so incensed against them, that he would thrall them in the
like misery, as their brethren had endured in times past. Whilst the Prophet
thus warned them from God, they would not believe him, in that he commanded
them to remain in that place by Gods prescript ordinance: but they imagined
that under a false pretext of Gods command, he had counseled them thereto,
but that in effect Ier. 42. 43.
he spoke in favor of his disciple Baruch, persuading them to stay there, to
the end they might be consumed by the Babylonians: contemning therefore the
counsel which God gave them by John and the rest of the multitude went into
Egypt, and led with them both The prophecy of the Babylonian army, and the
Jews captivity.
Baruch and Jeremy. Whither they were no sooner come, but God told the prophet
that the Babylonian should lead his army into Egypt: for which cause he willed
him to foretell the people that Egypt should be destroyed, and that they should
partly be slain in that place, and partly led captive to Babylon. Which came
in like manner to pass: for in the fifth year after the destruction of
Jerusalem (which was the three and twentieth year of the reign of
Nabuchodonosor) Nabuchodonosor in his own person led his army into Coelosyria,
and having conquered the same, he made war upon the Ammonites and Moabites.
And after he had brought these nations under his obeisance, The year of the
world. 3361. before Christ birth. 603.
he went and sought against the king of Egypt and overcame him: and after he
had slain their king that governed at that time, and planted an other in his
place, he afterward Oseas; and consequently that of the two tribes, under
Nabuchodonosor king of the Babylonians and Chaldees, upon the taking in of
Jerusalem. True it is that Salmanazar after he had displaced the Israelites,
planted the Chutheans in their place, who beforetime inhabited the innermost of
the countries of Persia and Media, and were called Samaritanes, according to
the name of the place which they inhabited: but the Babylonian having led the
two tribes prisoners, has not planted any other people in their places.

For this cause Iudaea, Jerusalem, and the temple, remained desert for the
space of seventy Nabuchodonosor chose the most noblest young men amongst the
Jews (and such as were allied to king Sedecias, and esteemed likewise for the
good disposition and fair proportion of their bodies and faces) and committed
them to masters to be instructed, commanding that every one of them should be
gelded, according as they were accustomed to deal with young children of other
nations, whom he subdued by force. He allowed them victual from his own
table, and they were The year of the world, 3361 before Christ's birth 603.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 12. Dan 1. Daniels forwardnes and his fellows
towardnes in studying wisdom and good letters.
taught and instructed in the disciplines of the country, and in the
Chaldeetoong. These were very apt to learn wisdom: and for that cause he
commanded that they should be trained up in the exercise thereof. Of these
there were four of Zedechias kindred, fair in body, and virtuous in nature,
who were called Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias; whose names the
Babylonian changed, and willed them to be called by other names, distinct and
different from their own: Daniel was called Balthazar; Ananias, Sidrach;
Misael, Misach; and Azarias, Abdenago. These did the king esteem very highly
for their excellent nature, and for the great affection that they had to
attain unto learning and wisdom, wherein they profited greatly, and were for
that cause highly reckoned of by him. And whereas Daniel and his kinsemen
thought good to live austerely, and to abstain from those meats that came
from the kings table, and in general from Askenas the Eunuch (who had the care
and charge over them) beseeching him to convert those meats to his own use,
which were sent them from the kings table, and to allow them herbs and dates,
and such things as had no life; because they intended to hold that course of
life, and to forsake all other. Askenas told them, that he was ready to
condescend unto their demands; but that he feared, least being called for by
the king, they should be found to be lean in body, and discolored in face
(for without doubt in following that diet, they must needly lose their colors,
and be less dispost in comparison of others) which might be the cause to bring
him into hazard of his head. They perceiving that Askenas intended naught else
but his security, persuaded him to allow them but ten days of approbation,
under condition that if by that regiment of diet their habitude of body should
not be any ways altered, Daniel and his companions made show as if they had
been nourished with dainties, and brought up in abundance. From that time
forward, Askenas took all that which was allowed the four young men from the
kings table, and boldly kept it to himself, giving them in steed thereof, the
diet that they chose and delighted in. They having their spirits more pure and
subtle to comprehend their masters instructions, and their bodies more strong
to Daniel especially having profited in wisdom, studied the interpretation
The year of the world, 3363. before Christ's natiuite, 601. Dan. 2.
Nauchodonosor dreaming, forgets his vision sends for the magitions not
able to discover his doubts, he threatens them with death.
of dreams, and God appeared unto him. Two years after the surprisall of
Egypt, king Nabuchodonosor dreamed a wonderful dream, the issue whereof God
made him see in a dream: but he forgot the same when he arose out of his bed.
And for that cause sent he for his Chaldees and divines, telling them that he
had dreampt a dream, but that he had forgot the same; commanding them to
declare unto him what the dream was, and the signification thereof also.
Whereunto they answered, that it was impossible for men to sound out the secret
thereof; notwithstanding they promised him, that if he would declare his vision
unto them, they would Nabuchodonosor threatened them with death, except they
represented his dream unto him; and they protesting that they could not
fulfill his request; he commanded them all to be slain. But Daniel hearing how
the King had condemned all the sages to death, and knowing that both he and his
companions had part in that danger, addressed himself to Ariochus the captain
of the Kings guard, requiring him to inform him, for what cause the king had
adjudged the Chaldees and sages to be put to death: And having intelligence
what had happened as touching the dream, and how the king by forgetting the same,
had charged them to inform him therein, and how they had answered that it was
impossible for them to perform the same, and how thereby they had provoked the
king to displeasure: he besought Ariochus to go unto the king, and to procure
one nights repriue in the behalf of Ariochus told the king what Daniel had
requested, who respited the execution of the Magitians for that night, until
he might see what would become of Daniels promise: who retiring himself with
his companions into his chamber, besought God all the night long to manifest
unto him the dream, and deliver the Magitians and Chaldees from the kings
wrath, with whom both he and the rest of his companions were like to die,
except he might know what the king had dreampt the night past, The year of the
world. 3^63. before Christ's birth 601.
Daniels wisdom) signified unto him both the dream and the signification
thereof, to the intent the king might be resolved in the meaning thereof.

Daniel having received the truth from God arose very joyfully, and certified
his brethren, The vision and the Rouelation thereof opened to Daniel.
(who had already lost all hope of life, and thought on no other thing but
death) and gave them courage and hope of life. Having therefore rendered thanks
unto God, for that he had had compassion of their young years, as soon as it
was day he went unto Arioch, requesting him that he might be brought to the
kings presence, certifying him that he would open unto him the dream which he
had seen the night past. Now when Daniel was brought unto the kings presence;
Daniel tells the king his dream, and the enterpretation thereof.
Nabuchodonosors dream of the four monarchs of the world.
brass were poudered as small as dust: whereupon a violent wind seemed to
blow, which by the fury and force thereof, was borne away and scattered into
diverse countries: on the other side the stone grew so mighty, that it seemed
to fill the whole earth. This was that vision that appeared unto you, the
signification whereof is expressed after this manner. The head of gold
signifies But for mine own Daniel and his fellows advanced to honor. The
year of the world, 3364 before Christ's birth 600,
part; I thought it not expedient to express it in this place: because the
only but and intent of my writings is only to register such things as are
past, and not such matters as are to come. But if any man have a desire to know
these things, and cannot bridle his curiosity, but will understand such
matters as are hidden, let him ^ead the book of Daniel, which he shall find
amidst the sacred scriptures. When king Nabuchodonosor had heard these things,
and remembered himself of his dream, Daniels wisdom, and casting himself
prostrate on the earth after the manner of those that adore God, he embrased
Daniel, giving direction that sacrifice should be offered unto him, as if he
were God. Moreover he called him by the name of God, and committed the The
kings edict for honoring the golden statue. Dan. 3.
administration of his whole kingdom to him and his companions, who by reason
of the commotions and conspiracies of their maligners and detractors, happened to
fall into most eminent and dreadful danger, upon this occasion that ensues.
The king built a golden Image sixty cubits high, and six in bigness, and
erected it in a great plain near unto Babylon, and being ready to dedicate
the same, he assembled all the governors and princes of his countries,
commanding then first of all, that as soon as they should hear the trumpet
sound, they should prostrate themselves on the earth to adore the statue;
threatening that whosoever should do the contrary, Daniel and his companions
utterly refused to perform that duty, alleging for their justification that
they would not transgress the laws of their country: for Daniel and his
kinsmen refusing to adore the statue are cast into the furnace.
which cause being apprenended, they were instantly cast into the furnace of
fire, and (protected therein by Gods providence) escaped death beyond all men's
expectation. For the fire touched them not, neither could it burn during their
abode in the furnace. For God so fortified their bodies that they could not be
consumed by fire: which accident made them in greater estimation The year of
the world 3364. before Christ's Nativity. 600.
The year of the ^ld, 3369. before Christ's na^uitie, 595.
his kingdom again. Having had this dream, he assembled the Magitians once
more, demanding their answer, and the signification thereof. But it was
impossible for any one of them either to find out, or declare the intelligence
of this dream unto the king: only Daniel discovered the same, and the effect
was answerable to his prediction. For the king passed the forelimited time Dan.
4. The dream and exposition thereof.
in the desert, so that no man durst intermeddle with the affairs of estate
during seven years. But after he had called upon God, that it would please him
to restore him to his kingdom, he repossessed Nabuchodonosor had reigned
forty three years, he died: he was a man of execution, and more happy
Nabuc^odosors death.
then any of his predecessors. Berosus makes mention of his acts in the third
book of his Chaldaique history, where he speaks thus. His father
Nabuchodonosor, having notice that the governor whom he had appointed over
Egypt, and the neighboring parts of Coelosyria and Phaenicia, The year of
the world, 3381. before Christ's birth 583. Berosus of Nabuchodosor. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 13.
was revolted from him (being at that time in himself unable to endure the
troubles of war) Nabuchodonosor, who was in the flower of his age, and sent
him forth against him: who encountering the rebel, and fighting with him,
overcame him, and brought the country under his subjection. Mean while
Nabuchodonosor the father died, of a sickness in Babylon, after he had reigned
one and twenty y^ares. Nabuchodonosor the son, having notice of his fathers
death, gave order to the affairs of Egypt, and the rest of the country, and
committing the care and transportation of the Jews, Syrians, Egyptians, and
Phaenicians to his friends, to bring them to Babylon with his army and
carriage, he with a few men made hasty iourneies through the desa^t. And when
he had taken the administration of the kingdom upon him (which in his absence
was in the hands of the Chaldees, and by their chieftaine was reserved until
his return unto his use) he became Lord of all his fathers Empire. When
Megasthenes of Nabuchodonosor. D^ocles. Philostratus.
of Media) desired to have a place conformable to that of her birth.
Megasthenes in the fourth book of his Indian History, makes mention of this
garden in that place, where he enforced himself to prove, that this King
surpassed Hercules in valor and execution of worthy actions. For he said,
that Nabuchodonosor overcame the chief City of Libya, and a great part of
Spain. Diocles in the second book of his Persian History, and Philostratus
in his Phae^ician and Indian History, make mention of this King, saying, that
he overcame the City of Tire at the end of thirteen years; at such time as
Ithobal reigned over the Tyrians.

CHAP. XI. The year of the world, 3382. before Christ's Nativity, 582.

Nabuchodonosors successors, the destruction of Babylon by Cyrus King of Persia.

AFter Nabuchodonosors death, his son Euilmerodach obtained the kingdom, who
incontinently delivered Iechonias king of Jerusalem out of prison, and held him
in the Euilmerodach releaseth lechonias from his long imprisonment. 4. Reg 25.
Ierem. 52. Niglisar. Labosardach. Balthazar or Naboandel king of Babyl^
number of his most esteemed friends, and gave him presents, and committed the
government of the palace of Babylon into his hands. For his father had not
kept his promise with Iechonias, when he surrendered himself, his wife,
children, and friends into his hands, in the behalf of his country, and to
the intent that the City of Jerusalem should not be rased Euilmerodach died in
the eighteenth year of his reign, and Niglisar his son obtained the
kingdom, which he possessed forty veeres, and afterward died. After him the
succession of the kingdom came unto his son called Labosardach, which
continued in him but for the space of nine months, and after his death it came
unto Balthazar, who by the Babylonians was called Naboandel. Against him Cyrus
king of Persia, and Darius king of Media made war; and at such time as he was
besieged in Babylon, there happened a marvelous and prodigious spectacle.

Balthazar sat upon a certain festival in a royal chamber, where he was
served with great The year of the world. 3421. before Christ's birth 543.
store of vessel fit for his majesty and royalty; and with him at the
banquet there sat his concubines, and most intirest friends. At which time (to
show his magnificence) he caused those vessels Nabuchodonosor his predecessor
(fearing to employ to his own use) had stoared up in his Idols temple. But
Balthazar was so puffed with pride, that he drank out of them, and employed
them to his uses. Now so came it to pass, that whilst he quaffed and
blasphemed the name of God, he saw a hand issuing from a wall, which Dan. 5:
Balthazar see^h a hand thrust out of a wall and writing certain sillables. The
year of the world. 3425. before the birth of Christ. 539.
wrote in the same certain syllables: by which vision being somewhat
terrified, he assembled his Magitians and Chaldees, and all that sort of people
(who amongst those barbarous nations made profession to interpret prodigies
and dreams) to the intent they might signify unto him the meaning and
understanding of that writing. Now when these Magitians had told him that they
could in no sort sound or understand the same, the king was sore vexed and
toubled at this unexpected vision: whereupon he caused it to be proclaimed
through his country, that whosoever Nabuchodonosor destroyed Babylon, whose
name was Daniel, a man wise and expert in searching out of things that were
impossible and only known unto God, who evidently expounded that which
Nabuchodonosor required, at such time, as no other man could satisfy his
demand. Whereupon the But Daniel (refusing all these presents of his, in that
the wisdom that is given from above is not corrupted thereby, but is freely
answerable to those that have need thereof) told him that that writing did
foretell him the end of his life, because he had not learned to fear God,
neither to lift his thoughts higher then humane nature: notwithstanding he had
Nabuchodonosor having been driven to lead his life among beasts by reason of
his impieties, after diverse requests and supplications had obtained mercy, and
was returned unto humane conversation, and into his own kingdom; for which
cause all the time of his life he praised almighty God the governor of all
things: whereas he had omitted to do the like, and had blasphemed the name of
God in diverse sorts, and had swilled both himself and his concubines in the
vessels dedicated to God: For this cause God was displeased with ^he year of
the ^rld. ^25. before Christ's birth 9^9. Daniel interprets the writing to the
king. The king performs his promises to Daniel.
him, and certified him by this writing, what end he should expect. Whereupon
he expounded the writing in these terms: Mane (which is as much to say, as
number) shows that God has numbered the days of thy life and dominion, which
shall endure but a little while. Thekel signifies a balance; God therefore
(said he) waying thy government shows that it shall be overthrown: Phares,
this word signifies a fragment, God shall break thy kingdom, and shall
divide it amongst the Medes, and Persians. When the king had heard this
interpretation, he was very sorrowful (according as the nature of things so
desastrous, and so apparent required.) Notwithstanding he delaied not to
perform those presents which he had promised the Prophet, although (as he well
perceived) the words aboaded him ill, and gave him all that which he promised
him, considering with himself, that it was his own destiny that he ought to
accuse, and Daniel, who like a virtuous man had declared the truth of things:
notwithstanding they were Babylon surprised by Cyrus king of Persia.
very vnfauorie in his ear. Not long after, this Balthazar and the City were
overthrown and taken by Cyrus king of Persia and his army. For this was that
Balthazar, under whom, and in the seventeenth year of whose reign, the
surprisal of Babylon happened. This as far as I could gather, was the end of
king Nabuchodonosors posterity.

Darius (who with his allie Cyrus) had destroyed the estate of the Babylonians,
was threescore and two years old at such time as he took Babylon. He was
Astyages son, and is otherways called by the Greeks. He took the Prophet
Daniel, and led him with him into Media, and kept him near unto him, doing him
much honor: for he was of the number of the three governors whom he
constituted over three hundredth and threescore provinces; for so had Darius
commanded it. Daniel being thus honored and beloved by Darius, and only
trusted by him in all things, for that God was with him, was grievously hated:
for they are most hainously hated, who have greatest interest in Princes
favors. Whereas therefore they that were jealous of the good esteem which he
had with Darius, sought occasion to calumniate and backbite him, he warily cut
off all opportunity thereof: for he would neither be bribed with silver, nor
corrupted The force of envy. Daniels honor and vprightnes. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 14. Dan. 6.
with presents, supposing it to be an act of much dishonestie, to receive gifts
after a man had done any courtesies. He therefore gave his maligners no manner
of ground to detract from his reputation. Yet notwithstanding, they seeing they
could find no hole in his coat, whereby his honor might be touched, blamed,
or calumniated, they sought out a new means to disgrace him. For they
perceiving that Daniel did thrice every day make his prayers unto God, they
supposed Darius, certifying him that the princes and governors had concluded
to gither to this effect: That for thirty days space an intermission should
be granted to the people; during which time, it was neither lawful for them to
demand any thing, neither of himself, or of any man or God whatsoever; and if
any man should attempt any thing against this common decree, it was ordered
that he should be cast into the Lions den. But the King perceiving not the
drift of their malice, nor how they sought by this devise to entrappe Daniel,
told them that he liked of the decree, and promised to confirm the same, and
propounded a public edict, wherein the princes resolutions were ratified. Now
whilst all men endeavored through sear, carefully and diligently to observe
this edict, Daniel set light thereby, and according to his accustomed manner
standing in Daniel for that he only amongst the rest had presumed to infringe
their decree: urging moreover, that he did it not for the religion sake that
was in him, but because he was observed and watched by his maligners. And for
that they feared least Darius by reason of the great affection he bare unto
Daniel, should be ready to pardon him (notwithstanding he had transgressed
their edict) they concluded upon no milder judgment, but that he might be cast
into the Lions den, according to the form of the edict. Darius hoping that
God would deliver Daniel, and that no harm should befall him by the jaws of
wild beasts, exhorted him patiently to endure that adventure. Now Daniel cast
into the Lions den.
as soon as he was cast into the den, the king sealed up the stone that closed
the mouth thereof, Daniels behalf. And when the day was come, as soon as he
arose he came unto the den, and finding the seal unbroken wherewith he had
marked the stone, he opened the same, and called unto Daniel with a'loud voice,
asking him if he were whole and in safety. He hearing the king speak,
answered that he had received no hurt: whereupon Darius commanded that they
should draw him out of the Lions den. His adversaries perceiving that Daniel
had escaped all inconveniences (because that God had taken care of him) would
not that he should escape: and thereupon The year of the world. 3425. before
Christ's birth 539. Daniels enemies rent in pieces by the Lions.
Daniel, because they had been fed and gorged before. For which cause, the
king displeased with their injurious malice, commanded a quantity of flesh to
be cast unto the Lions; and when they were glutted, he willed that Daniels
enemies should be cast among them, to the intent he might know whether the
Lions would touch them or no, when they were gorged. At which time Darius saw
very manifestly, that God had by his power warranted Daniel from death. For as
soon as the nobles were cast into the den, the Lions spared not one of them,
but tore them all in pieces, as if they had been hungry and without meat. I
suppose that these Lions having been a little before glutted with meat, did not
annoy these men by reason of their famine; but I rather judge that their
malignitie did whet on their fury: for when as God so pleases, unreasonable
creatures do justice upon malignant Daniels adversaries being in this sort
exterminated and destroyed, Darius gave notice hereof to all the subjects of
his provinces, praising that God whom Daniel adored, saying, that he was the
only true God, who had all power: he honored Daniel likewise with especial
regard, esteeming him amongst the chiefest of his familiars. He therefore being
thus famous and admirable (because he: was beloved by God) builded in Ecbatane
in the country of the Medes a magnificent castle, and a marvelous monument
that remains even unto this day, which seems to those that look thereon,
that it is but newly builded, and made but that very day which they behold the
sarine; the beauty thereof seems so living and perfect, as that continuance
of time does in no sort deface it. For it fares with buildings as with men,
they wax old and are enfeebled by years, and lose their beauty; at this day
all the kings of Media, Daniel had conference with God. For he has not only
prophesied of things to come (as other Prophets have done) but also has
determined the time wherein those things should happen. And whereas other
Prophets Daniels prophecies.
were accustomed to foretell adversities, and for that occasion were misliked
both by princes Daniel foretold them always good success: so that he has
drawn unto him the good will of all men, by reason of those pleasing
predictions that he pronounced; and by the issues thereof he has obtained a
testimony of truth, and a reputation likewise of divinity, and has left us
certain writings, by which he has manifestly declared the immutabilitie and
exact certainty of his prophecies.

It is said, that being at Susa the Metropolitan City of Persia, at such time
as he walked abroad attended by his familiars, that there fell an earthquake
with a great noise: so that he was left alone, and all his companions fled from
him. And that thereupon being sore troubled, he fell upon his face, and both
his hands: at which time some one touched him, and commanded him to stand up,
and to see that which should happen to his countrymen after diverse ages. Being
Daniels vision of the Ram and Goat, by whom the king of Media, and Persia
were prefiguted.
last whereof was the greatest of all. Afterward he looked toward the west,
and perceived a goat carried through the air, that butted at the ram, and
having encountered him twice, had beaten and trampled him under his feet.
Thirdly, he saw a goat, in whose forehead there grew one great horn only:
which being broken, four others broke out in steed thereof, bending each of
them toward the four winds of the world. He has written also, that from
them, there shall arise another little one also, which as God (who presented the
vision to him) told him, being grown to perfection, should war against the
whole nation of the Jews, and take the City by force, and confound the estate
of the temple, and hinder the sacrifices, for one thousand two Dan. 2.
hundredth ninety and six days.

Daniel writes that he saw these things in the field of Susa, and has
declared that God himself told him what that vision signified, which was, that
the Ram signified the kingdoms of the Persians, and the Medes: His horns
signified the kings that were to reign in those kingdoms; and that the last
horn signified the last king, who should surpass all the rest in riches and
glory. That the goat signified, that there should come a certain king among
the Greeks, who should fight at two several times with the Persian, and
should overcome him in war; and afterward possess the whole government: And
that by the great horn that grew in the front The year of the world 3425.
before Christ's Nativity. 539.
of the Goat, the first King was represented; and how that after he was taken
away, four other should spring thereout. And whereas every one of these
turned themselves toward the four corners of the world, it was a sign that
after the death of the first, he should have four successors, that should
depart the kingdom between them: who neither should be his allies or
children; yet such notwithstanding as should command the world for many
years: That from them, there should arise a certain King that should oppose
himself against the Hebrewe nation, and their laws, and should overthrow
their policy; spoil their temple, and be a let that for three years space
the sacrifices should not be solemnized. Now so has it happened, that our nation
has been so handled under Antiochus the famous, as Daniel had foreseen, and
has written diverse years before, all that which should happen.

At the same time Daniel wrote as touching the Empire of the Romans, how it
should destroy our nation: and has left all these things in writing, according
as God declared Daniels predictions of the Roman Empire. Dan. 9.
them unto him; so that they who read and consider those things, that have
happened, admire Daniel for the honor that God dignified him with, and find
thereby that Epicures err, who drive all divine providence from human life,
and affirm that God governs not the affairs of the world; or that the world
is administered by a happy and incorruptible essence, which causes all things
to continue in their being: but say, that the world is managed by it self, by
casualtie, without any conductor, or such a one as has care thereof. For if it
were so, and that it were destitute of a sovereign governor (as we see
ships destitute of their pilots to be drowned by the winds; and chariots that
have no driuers to conduct them, Daniel has foretold, I judge that they are
far estraunged from the truth, that affirm that God has no care of human
affairs; for if we The Epicures error convicted.
see that all things happen casually, then happen they not according to his
prophecy. But I have written hereof according as I have found and red, and if
any one will think otherwise, let him continue his opinion as long as him list.

THE XI: BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 11. book.
1 Syrus King of Persia dismisseth the Jews from Babylon, and permits them
to return into their country, and contributeth toward the raparation of the
Temple. 2 The Kings governors hinder the building of the Temple. 3 Cambyses
commands the Jews that they should not build the Temple. 4 Darius Hystaspis
son builds a Temple for the Jews. 5 The bounty of Xerxes (Darius son)
toward the Hebrew nation. 6 How during Ataxerxes reign, the whole nation of
the Jews were almost extinguished through Amans treachery. 7 Bagoses General
of Ataxerxes, the youngers army, does much injury to the Jews. 8 How
bountiful Alexander of Macedon was unto the Jews.
CHAP. I. The year of the world. 3426. before the Nativity of Christ. 538.

Cyrus King of Persia dismisseth the Jews from Babylon, and permits them to
return into their country, and contributeth toward the building of the
Temple.

THe first year of the reign of Cyrus (which was the seuentith after that our
The end of the Babylonian captivity after seventy years. 1. Esd. 1. 3. Esd.
2. The edict of Cyrus king of Persia.
nation was translated from Iudaea to Babylon) God had compassion of the
captivity and calamity of his poor afilicted people: and even as he had
foretold them before the destruction of the City, that after they had served
Nabuchodonosor and his posterity for seventy years, he would again restore
them For he awakened the spirit of Cyrus, and made him write his letters
thorowout all Asia to this effect. Thus says the King Cyrus: Since the
Almighty God has made me king of the whole world; I am persuaded that it is
he whom the Jewish nation do adore: for he has declared my name by his
Prophets before I was borne, and has said that I shall build his Temple in
Jerusalem, which is Esaias. chap. 44. 45. his prophecy of Cyrus
in the country of Iudaea. Now Cyrus knew these things by reading of a book
of prophecy written by Isay, two hundredth and ten years before his time. For
(he says) that God did secretly reveal these things unto him, speaking to
this effect. I will that Cyrus, who^ I have declared King over many nations,
shall send my people back into their country of Iudaea, and shall build my
Isay foretell one hundredth and forty years before the ruin of the Temple.
Cyrus in reading these things (being ravished in admiration of the Majesty of
God) was surprised with an affection and zeal to finish that which was
written. He therefore called for all the men of greatest reckoning among the
Jews that were in Babylon, and told them that he Cyrus permits the Jews to
return into their country to build their temple and city
gave them license to return into their country, and to repair the City of
Jerusalem, and erect the Temple of God; promising them that he himself would
assist them. And to that effect he wrote unto his governors, and princes of
those countries that confined upon Iudaea: charging them to contribute both
gold and silver toward the building of the temple, and to furnish them with
cattle for the sacrifice. After that Cyrus had certified the Israelites of
this his intent; the Princes of the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with all
the Levites and Priests departed The vessels belonging to the temple sent back
from Babylon to Jerusalem.
ancient service of God but newly awakened. Cyrus sent them back also those
vessels consecrated to God* (...) king Nabuchodonosor had sent into Babylon
after he had spoiled the temple; and delivered them to Mithridates his
treasurer, commanding him to carry and commit them to Abassars hands, who
should have the custody thereof, until the temple were builded, to the end
Cyrus King of Sisine and Sarabasane, health. I have permitted those Jews that
inhabit my country, to return into their native country, and to reedifie
their City, and erect Cyrus mandate to the princes of Syria
the temple of God in Jerusalem, in the same place where it stood before. I
have also sent my treasurer Mithridates and Zorobabel the Prince of the Jews,
with express charge and authority, to lay the foundations of the same, and to
build it sixty cubits in height, and as many in breadth, making three Isles of
hewn stone, and an other of such timber as the country affoordeth; the Altar
likewise, whereupon they may offer sacrifice unto God: and my pleasure is that
the charge of all these things come out of my cofers. I have also sent back
those vessels which Nabuchodonosor Mithridates, and to Zorobabel the Prince of
the Jews, to be conveyed to Jerusalem, and restored to the temple of God: the
number whereof I have heereunder subscribed. Fifty lauers of gold, and four
hundredth of silver; fifty pots of gold, and four hundredth of silver; fifty
golden sieues, and five hundredth of silver; thirty Ewers of gold, and three
hundredth of silver; thirty great viols of gold, and two thousand four
hundredth of silver; and besides all these, one thousand other great vessels. I
release them also of the tribute which their predecessors were accustomed to
pay, The year of the ^orld, 3426. before Chriss birth 538.
namely, the leuy of cattle, wine and oil, and of two hundredth five thousand
five hundredth drachmes; and two thousand five hundredth measures of wheat,
yielding fine flower. Commanding these necessary furnitures to be delivered
them out of the Tributes of Samaria; and the Priests shall offer up these
sacrifices in Jerusalem according to the ordinance of Moses: and during their
sacrifice they shall make prayers unto God for the preservation of the king,
and his house, to the end that the Empire of the Persians may be still
permanent. And my will is, that they that disobey and contradict these things,
shall be hanged on the gibbet; and that their goods be confiscate. These were
the contents of his letters. Now the number of those that returned The number
of the Jews that returned from the captivity of Babylon to Jerusalem.
together from the captivity into Jerusalem, was forty two thousand four
hundredth sixty two.

CHAP. II.
The Governors for the King do hinder the building of the Temple.

Whilst these men laid the foundations of the Temple, and were very
affectionately busy Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2. 1. Esd. 4. The Samaritanes
inhibite the Jews from building the temple. Alias cap. 3. The letters of the
Samarita^s and others written to Cambysis as touching the reedifying of the
city and temple of Jerusalem.
about the building thereof, the nations that bordered upon them, and in
especial the Chuteans (whom Salmanazar king of Assyria sent from Persia and
Media to inhabit in Samaria, at such time as he translated the people of the
ten tribes) incited the princes and governors, to interdict the Jews from
raising and building their city, and reedifying the temple. Cyrus intending
his other wars, was ignorant hereof, and having conducted his army against the
Massagetes, it was his hap incontinently to finish his life. When as therefore
Cambyses his son had obtained the kingdom, they of Syria and Phoenicia, the
Ammonites, Moabites, and Samaritanes wrote their letters to Cambyses in these
terms. O King, thy servants Rathimus the secretary, Semelius the Scribe, and
those men that are counselors in Syria and Phoenicia, give thee to understand,
that those Jews that were led captive into Babylon are returned back into
this country, and do build a wicked and rebellious City, and repair the
places and walls of the same, and reedifie their temple likewise. Know
therefore that if these things be permitted to be finished, that they will no
more endure to be thy subjects and tributaries, The year of the world. 3435.
before Christ's birth 529.
your fathers records, wherein you shall always find that the Jews have been
rebels, and enemies to their kings; and that their City has been for this
cause laid desolate until this present. We have thought good to signify thus
much to your majesty, which perhaps is unknown unto you, because that if this
City be once more reinhabited and enclosed with a wall, your way is shut up
from passing into Coelesyria and Phoenice.

CHAP. III.
Cambyses inhibiteth the Jews to build the Temple.

WHen Cambyses had red this letter (in that he was by nature both wicked and
malicious) he grew inwardly jealous, and displeased at the contents thereof,
and wrote back again after Cambyses answer wherein he inhibiteth the Jews
from building the city or temple
this manner. The King Cambyses to Rathymus the secretary, of his casual
events, and to Belsem and Semelius scribes, and to al his other counselors and
inhabitants in Samaria and Phoenicia, health. Having red your letters, I have
commanded the records of mine ancestors to be examined, and I find that the
City of Jerusalem has bin always enemy to their kings, and that the
inhabitants thereof have always raised sedition and wars. I have likewise
found, that their kings have bin mighty, and violent, and that they have vexed
Syria and Phoenicia with continual tributes. Incontinently after the receipt
and reading of these letters, Rathymus and the s^ibe Semelius, and those of
their faction, took their horse and rode hastily to Jerusalem, leading with
them a great number of people, prohibiting the Jews from the building either
of their City or temple. Thus was this work interrupted until the second
year of the reign of Darius king of Persia, for the space of nine years. For
Cambyses reigned six years, during which time The year of the world 3443.
before Christ birth. 521. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9. al. chap 4. Darius the
son of Hystaspis made emperor of the Persians.
Cambyses, the Magi that held the Empire of the Persians for the space of one
year being taken away, the seven families of Persia made Darius (the son of
Hystaspis) king.

CHAP. IIII.
Darius the son of Hystaspis causes the Temple to be builded.

THis Darius, during the time that he lived a private life, made a you unto
God, that if he obtained the kingdom, he would send back unto the temple of
Jerusalem all those 1. Esd. 5. 6. Darius voweth to send the sacred vessels to
Jerusalem. Zorooabel.
Zorobabel, who was appointed governor over the captive Jews, came unto him
from Jerusalem. For he was the kings ancient friend: for which cause he with
other two were chosen to be of his guard; and obtained thereby that honor which
he expected. The first year of the reign of Darius, he entertained all his
courtiers with great pomp, and magnificence both those of his household, as
they also that were his governors and Princes of Media and Persia, and the
commanders in India confining upon Aethiopia, with all the chieftaines of his
army in one hundredth, twenty and seven provinces. Now after they had made great
cheer, and were full of wine, they departed each of them unto their lodgings,
to betake themselves to rest: But king Darius laid in his bed, reposed very
little all the night long, but passed the time without sleep, for which cause
Dar^us propounds three questions to three of his guard. 3. Esd. 4.


Whereupon the first of them began after this manner to express the force of
wine. Noble princes, when I consider the force of wine, I find nothing that may
surmount the same. For wine The first expresses the power of wine.
entangleth and deceives the understanding, and makes the princes
understanding like to the poor man's, who is abandoned; and gives the slave
that freedom in discourse, which appertains to men of greatest liberty: It
makes the poor resemble the rich: It changes and transformeth the soul,
asswageth the miserable man's grief, and makes the indebted forget their

When the first of them had in this sort declared his resolution, as touching
wine, he was silent; The second extelleth the kings power. 3. Esd 4.
and the next began to speak of the kings force, showing that it was of
mighty consequence, and more powerful then any other thing that seems to
have force and intelligence; and thus handled he the subject of his
demonstration. Kings (says he) have dominion over men, who have they command
their subjects to kill or to be killed, they resist not for fear least they,
should seem The year of the world 3443. before Christ's birth 521.
to transgress the kings commandment. When they have obtained the victory,
all the glory and profit of the war redoundeth unto the king. They likewise
which bear no arms, but intend the tillage of the earth, after they have
travailed and supported all the toil of their tillage, reap and gather the
fruits, to the end to pay the King his tribute: And if he will or command any
thing, it must needly be performed without any intermission or omission.
Furthermore, when the king is addicted to any pleasures, or intends to enjoy
his pleasant and delightful rest, during the time that he sleeps, he is
guarded by them that watch, who are as it were tied unto him, through the fear
and awe they have of him: For not one of them dare forsake him when he
sleeps, nor depart from him to follow their own affairs; but intend those
services only which he thinks necessary, which is the guard of his person.
Who therefore will not esteem the

After he had spoken to this effect; Zorobabel, who was the third, began to
justify in respect of Zorobabel the third, expresses the power of women, and
at length attributes the palm unto truth.
women and truth, and spoke after this manner. True it is, that wine has much
force, and no less true that all men obey the king; yet far more mighty is
the power of a woman. For by a woman the king was bred, and brought into this
world, and those men that plant the vineyards where wines do grow, are borne
and nourished by women; and generally there is not any thing which we enjoy not
by them. For they weaue us garments, they have the care and custody of our
houses; neither is it possible for us to be severed from women. Yea they that
possess much gold and abundance of silver, and other things of great and
inestimable price; only upon the Apame the daughter of Rhapsaces his
concubine, and patiently endure when she took the diadem from his head, and
set it on her own. When she laughed, he laughed; and when she was displeased,
he

But whilst the Princes in way of admiration beheld one another, he began to
discourse of truth, saying: I have already declared what the force of women is,
yet notwithstanding both the king and they are more feeble then truth. For
whereas the earth is huge and mighty, the heaven likewise of an immeasurable
height, and the sun of unspeakable celeritie; and whereas the will of God
both governs and moves these things (because God is just and true) it
therefore follows, that truth is the most mightiest of all things, against
which injustice may no ways prevail. Furthermore all other things
notwithstanding they seem to be of value, yet are they mortal and of little
continuance: but truth is immortal and everlasting. Moreover, all those When
Zorobabel had spoken after this manner, he made an end of his discourse:
whereupon all the assembly began to pronounce that his assertions were of most
value, and that only verity had an immutable force, and an indeterminable
continuance. Whereupon the king commanded him to ask what he would, as
touching that which he had promised to give, because he intended to grant it
him, as to the wisest, and best learned amongst the rest. For (said he) thou
shall Zorobabel obtained both praise and great rewards by his good discourse
Darius being put in memory of his vow, commands that the temple should be
restored. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4.
sit henceforth next unto me, and shall be called my familiar.

When the king had spoken thus, Zorobabel called to his remembrance the vow
that the king had made, if so be at any time he obtained the kingdom, namely,
that he would build Jerusalem, Nabuchodonosor, and carried into Babylon. For
this (said he) O king is my request which you permitted me to ask, and you
promised me to grant at that time as I was judged wise and well lettered by
you. The king took great pleasure at these words of his, and arising from his
throne kissed him. He wrote also unto his governors and princes, that they
should send away Zorobabel, and those of his company to build the temple.
Moreover he sent letters to them of Syria and Phoenicia, commanding them to
cut down the Cedars of Libanus, and to send them to Jerusalem The year of the
world. 3443. before the Nativity of Christ. 521. Darius letters for the
liberty. possession and erection of the temple granted to the Jews. 1. Esd. 6.
Cyrus before time had resolved to restore unto Jerusalem.

When Zorobabel had obtained these things abouenamed at the kings hands; he
issued out of the palace, and lifting up his eyes unto heaven; he began to
give God thanks for the wisdom and victory he had granted him, and for the
good success he had given him in Darius presence. For (said he) O Lord, if
thou had not been favorable unto me, I had not obtained it. After he had at
this time, and in this sort given thanks for the present, and prayed God to
show himself always favorable hereafter, he repaired to Babylon, and told his
countrymen what good news he had received Glad tidings brought to the Jews.
more to the possession of that country wherein they were borne: and they fell
to feasting and banqueting for seven days space, for the restoring unto their
country, as if they had solemnized the feasts of their birth days. Anon
after they made choice of those governors and common sort, that (with their
wives, their children, and horses) should return unto Jerusalem, who by the
assistance of Darius conuoy, performed their journey to Jerusalem with joy and
consolation; The Jews depart from Babylon to Jerusalem. 3. Esd. 5.
playing on their Psalteries, Flutes, and Cymbals; and were after this manner
conducted on their way, with delight, by the number of those Jews that
remained as yet in Babylon. Thus therefore went they forward, being a certain
and determinate number of every family. I have not thought it meet to repeat
these families name by name, for fear I should confound my story, and least
the Judah and The number of the Jews that went ou^ of Babylon. 3. Esd. 2.
Benjamin, were four millions, six hundredth, twenty and eight thousand.
There were likewise four thousand and seventy Levites: And of their wives and
children together, forty thousand, seven hundredth, forty and two. Besides
these, there were of singers of the tribe of Leui, one hundredth, twenty and
eight; of porters, one hundredth and ten; and of sacred servants three
hundredth, twenty and two. There were certain others likewise, that pretended
that they were of therace of the Israelites, yet could they not give testimony
of their descent; the number of whom were six hundredth, fifty and two. Of the
number of priests, they that had espoused wives (whose genealogy could not be
derived, and who were not found also in the genealogies of the Priests
Zorobabel the son of Salathiel; descended of David's line, and of the tribe of
Judah; and Jesus the son of Iosedech the high priest: besides Zorobabel
chieftaine and Jesus high priest of this company.
which were Mardochaeus and Serebaeus, who were chosen by the people to be
their governors, who contributed one hundredth pounds of gold, and five hundredth
of silver. Thus the priests and Levites, and a part of all the people of the
Jews which were then in Babylon, were conducted to dwell at Jerusalem; the
other part of them following a little after returned every one into his

The seventh month after their departure out of Babylon, the high priest
Jesus, and the governor Zorobabel sent messengers through all the country, and
assembled the people from all quarters of the region, who with all alacrity
and expedition repaired to Jerusalem. There erected 1. Esd. 3.
they an Altar in the same place, where before time it was builded, to the end
they might offer lawful sacrifices thereon, according to Moses law: in which
action of theirs, they yielded little content to their neighbor nations, who
in general were incensed against them. They ceebrated The year of the ^orld,
3443 before Christ's birth 521. The feast of Tabernacles.
The temple began to be built.
act well pleasing unto them; to bring wood and timber from Libanus, and to
bind it, and gathering it together in rafters to ship it, and land it at the
port of Ioppa. For Cyrus had before time given them that commandment, and now
the second time they were en^yned thereunto by Darius.

The second year after their arrival in Jerusalem, the Jews assembled
together in the second month, and the building of the temple went forward; so
that having laid the foundation thereof in the first day of December, they
builded upon the same the second year. Over this work those Levites that were
above twenty years of age, were overseers; with them also was Jesus, and his
sons and brothers joined, and Zolimiel the brother of Judah the son of
Aminadad, and his sons. And through the diligence that these overseers of the
temple used, it was sooner finished, then it was expected: As soon as the
sanctuary was builded, the priests apparrelled in their accustomed habits, and
the Levites, and the sons of Asaph arose, and with trumpets praised God,
according as David first of all had set down the manner of his service. The
priests and Levites with the elders of the tribes (calling unto their minds how
great and precious the

The Samaritanes hearing the noise of the trumpets, ran out to know the cause
thereof, in that they were lewdly affected toward the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin; and understanding that the Jews which were returned from Babylon had
reedified the temple, they addressed themselves to Zorobabel and Jesus, and to
the chief governors of the families, requiring them that it might be The
Samaritans desirous to further the building of the temple are rejected.
lawful for them to repair the temple with them; and to have part in the
building thereof. For (said they) we honor God no less then you, we pray unto
him and adore him; we conform our selves to your customs ever since the time
that Salmanazar King of Assyria removed us out of Chuthea and Media hither. To
these demands of theirs, Zorobabel and Jesus the high priest and the
governors of the tribes answered, that it was impossible for them to admit
their assistance in the building of the temple, for that they had received
their first commandment from Cyrus to perform the same, and afterward from
Darius: notwithstanding they gave them license to adore therein, offering them
that the temple should be common to both, if they pleased: yea and accessible
to all other nations, that would repair thither to adore God. The Chutheans
(for so were the Samaritanes called) hearing this answer, were sore offended;
and persuaded the other The Samaritanes suppose to hinder the building of the
temple.
nations of Syria to requite their princes (who continued their authority
since the time of Cyrus, and afterward ruled in Cambyses time) to hinder the
building of the temple; and to delay the Jews, who were so intent and busy in
their work. Whereupon Sisin governor in Syria and Phaenicia, and Sarabazan,
accompanied with others, came unto Jerusalem; and demannded of the chieftaines
of the Jews, by whose permission they builded the temple, which rather seemed
to be a fort then a temple, and for what cause they fortified their City with
gates and so Zorohabel and Jesus the high Priest answered, that they were the
servants of the The Syrian princes examine the cause why the Jews repair
their city and temple.
living God, and that their temple had been built by one of their kings, who
was opulent and surpassed all other in virtue, that after it had continued long
time in venerable estimation (by reason their fathers had committed impiety
against God) Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon and Chaldaea, having taken the
City by force destroyed the same; and after he had spoiled the city he burned
it, and transported the people captive into Babylon.

But after that Cyrus king of Persia had obtained the kingdom of Babylon, he
commanded The year of the world. 3444. before Christ's birth 520. 1. Esdras. 5.
Nabuchodonosor carried from thence, as well gifts as vessels, should be
delivered to Zorobabel and the treasurer Mithridates, to be conuaied to
Jerusalem, and be placed again in the temple, as soon as it should be
builded. And he commanded also, that it should be presently reedified, willing
Abassar to repair to Jerusalem, and give order for all that which was
requisite; who resorting thither as soon as he had received Cyrus letters, did
speedily lay the foundations anew. From that time forward until this present
it has been continued; but the subtlety and malignitie of their enemy had
wrought so much, that as yet it remained imperfect. If therefore it please you,
and you think it good, signify that you hear, by your letters to Darius, to
the end that examining the registers of the kings, he may find that we are not
faulty in any Zorobabel and Jesus had answered to this effect; Sisin and they
that accompanied him, thought not good to hinder the building, until such time
as they had certified Darius hereof: for which cause they wrote unto him
presently. Hereupon the Jews were much discomforted and troubled, fearing
least the king should change his mind in respect of the building of Jerusalem
and the temple. But two Prophets Aggeus and Zachary (who were amongst them)
began to persuade them, willing them to fear no desaster from the Aggeus and
Zachary the Prophets.
Persians, because God had assured them: for which cause, the people gave
credit to the Prophets, and diligently intended their building, and intermitted
no one day.

When the Samaritanes had in this sort written to Darius, and accused the Jews
unto him for fortifying their City, and reedifying their temple; and how it
seemed to be rather a fort, then The Satharitans indeuouring to hinder the
reparatio^ of the temple and city do further it the more.
had produced Cambyses letters, by which they were forbidden to build the
temple; he understood that the reestablishment of Jerusalem stood not with the
security of his state. But when he had read Sisins letters and his associates,
he commanded that the Panchartes and Chronicles of the kings should be
searched, how the matter has past; and there was found in Ecbatane a City of
the Medes, in a tower a certain book, in which these things were written. The
first year of the reign of Cyrus, commandment was given to build the temple
of Jerusalem, and the altar therein: It was likewise decreed, that the height
of the temple should be sixty cubits, and the Cyrus decree as touching the
temple and the Jews.
breadth as many; three stories of hewed stone, and one story of the wood of
that country: and it was ordained that the expense of that building should be
deducted out of the kings revenues. Nabuchodonosor, and carried away to
Babylon: And the commission to effect all these things was given to Abassar,
governor of Syria and Phoenicia, and The year of the world. 3450. before
Christ's birth 514.
his companions, to the end that they might depart from these places, and the
Jews might be permitted to build therein. Furthermore, he ordained that the
charge of this pile and building should be gathered out of the tributes of his
countries, and that they should furnish the Jews with bulls, weathers,
lambs, goats, flower, oil, and wine, and all other things which the Priests
should think meet to offer sacrifice, to the intent that they might pray for
the preservation of the king of Persia: commanding that they that should
transgress or contradict this commandment of his, should be laid hold on, and
hanged on a gibbet, and that their goods should be 3. Esdras. 6.
thereby. When Darius had found these things written in his Panchartes and
Chronicles, he wrote back to Sisin and his companions in this form: King
Darius to Sisin, and Sarabazan, with their associates; health. Having found
amongst the memorials of Cyrus the copy of your missiue; I Darius epistle to
the prefects of Syria.
have sent it you, and my pleasure is that the contents thereof be executed.
Fare you well. Sisin and his associates being c^tified of the kings pleasure,
resolved themselves conformably to execute the same: and taking the care of the
sacred buildings upon them, they assisted the Princes and magistrates of the
Jews in such sort, as the building of the temple was finished with great
diligence, by the instigation of the Prophets Aggeus and Zachary, according to
Gods commandment, Cyrus and Darius; so that it was finished within seven
years. In the ninth year of the reign of Darius, and the three and twenty of
the eleventh month, called by us Adar, and by the Macedonians Distre; the
Priests and Levites, and all the rest The finishing of the temple.
of the people offered sacrifices for the renouation of their former felicity,
after their captivity, and for their new temple also: sacrificing one hundredth
bulls, two hundredth sheep, four hundredth lambs, twelve goats, according to
the number of the twelve tribes of Israel; and for the sins of each of them.
The Priests and Levites also (according to the laws of Moses) appointed The
year of the ^orld 3450. before Christ's Nativity. 514. The temple dedicated
23. of March, or as it is in the first of Esdras 6. dedicated the third of
March. The passover celebrated.


Now when the feast of unleavened bread (which is the feast of Easter) drew
near, in the first month called Xanthicus by the Mecedonians, and Nisan by
the Hebrews, all the people of the towns round about Jerusalem resorted
thither, and celebrated the feast; purifying both themselves, their wives, and
children, according to the ordinance of their forefathers: And after they had
solemnized the feast called Easter, or the passover in the 14. moon, they
banquetted for seven days space, sparing no cost how great soever it were.
They offered burnt offerings also, and sacrifices of thanksgiving,
acknowledging Gods goodness that had brought them home into their native
country, to live according to the laws of their forefathers, and had made
them The form of commonweal in Jerusalem.
chiefest authority remained in the hie Priests, until the Asmonaeans
obtained the kingdom: for before the captivity of Babylon, they were under
the government of kings, who began from Saul and David's times, about some five
hundredth, thirty, two years, six months, and ten days; and before their
kings certain governors called Judges reigned: and under this sort of
policy lived they more then five hundredth years; from the death of Moses and
Iosuah. See here the estate of the Jews delivered from their captivity,
during the days of Cyrus and Darius. True it The Samaritanes mighty enemies
of the Jews.
is that the Samaritanes were their mighty and malicious adversaries, and did
them many mischiefs, trusting in their riches, and pretending themselves to be
the Persians kinsmen, because Darius, to accuse the Samaritanes; and to that
intent Zorobabel and four others were sent. As soon therefore as the king
understood by these Ambassadors, what crimes and accusations they had brought
against the Samaritanes, he dispatched The embassage of the Jews to Darius.
The year of the world, 3464. before Christ's Natinitie, 500. A commandment to
supply the charge of the building of the temple and sacrifices.
his letters, and addressed them to the governors and counsel of Samaria;
the tenor of which letters was to this effect. King Darius to Tangara and
Sambaba governors of Samaria, to Sadrach and Bobelon, and to their companions
our servants being in Samaria, health. Zorobabel, Ananias, and Mardocheus,
Ambassadors in the behalf of the Jews, accuse you to be perturbers of the
building of their temple; alleging, that you refuse to discharge that, which
by my decree you ought to furnish them with, for the charge of the sacrifices.
My will is therefore, that upon the sight of these letters, you deliver out of
the royal treasury in Samaria, appointed for the tributes, all that which
shall be necessary for them to perform their sacrifices, upon the request of
the Priests, to the intent they let pass no day without sacrifice and prayer
unto God for me, and for the Persians. This was the contents of his letter.

CHAP. V.
The beneficence of Zerxes Darius son, toward the Jews.

AFter Darius death, his son Zerxes succeeded him, not only as heir in the
government Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 5. (...). Esd. 7. Xerxes king of Persia.
Esdras learned in the law.
of his kingdom, but also as successor unto his piety and devotion toward
God: for he no ways changed those institutions of his fathers that concerned
religious service, but with great benevolence favored all the Jews. During
his reign Ioacim the son of Jesus was hie priest: Amongst them also that
remained in Babylon, there lived a hie priest with the Jews in that place
called Esdras; a just man and one of great reputation amongst the people: and
whereas he was very skillful in the laws of Moses, he obtained great
friendship with the Xerxes favors the Jews.
certifying his favor toward Fsdras, to the princes in those parts, to this
effect:

Zerxes king of kings,
to Esdras the high priest, and reader of the divine law, health.
It is decreed by me and seven other of my counsel, that whosoever in my
kingdom of the Israelites, their Priests, or Levites will repair with thee
unto Jerusalem, he may freely perform the same with my good license, The year
of the world. 3506. before Christ birth. 458.
and reuisit Iudaea according to the law of God: bearing with you those
presents unto the God of Israel, which both I and my friends have vowed. I
likewise give thee license to take with thee all the gold and silver
whatsoever, that any of thy nation living here in Babylon will offer up unto
God, to buy offerings to be sacrificed upon the altar of thy God: and to make
whatsoever vessels of gold or silver, which either thou or thy brethren shall
think meet. Those sacred vessels also which are given thee, thou shall
dedicate unto thy God, and if there be ought else requisite in this behalf,
that according to thy wisdom shall thou provide, and the charges shall thou
receive out of my treasury. I have also commended thee to the treasurers of
Syria and Phoenicia; and have written to them, that whatsoever Esdras the
priest and reader of the law of God shall require, they shall presently
deliver it him. And to the end that God may be favorable Esdras (according to
the wisdom given thee from above) shall appoint Judges, who shall in Syria
and Phoenicia execute justice unto the people, according to the science of the
law. Teach thou likewise freely all such as are ignorant, so that whosoever
violateth either Gods or the kings law, he may be fined, or else condemned to
death, as not sinning through ignorance, but of contumacie.

Farewell.

When Esdras had received this letter, he was wonderfully contented, and began
to adore Esdras assembled the Jews that dwelt in Babylon.
God, confessing openly that it was he, who was the author of that favor he
had received at the Esdras, were very joyful; and diverse amongst them took
their goods and came unto Babylon, desiring to return to Jerusalem: but all
the rest of the Israelites would not abandon or leave their quiet dwelling
there. For which cause it came to pass, that two tribes were under the
obedience of the Romans in Asia and Europe: but the ten tribes were on the
other side of Euphrates, even until this day; being many infinites of
thousands, whose number may not be comprehended. With Esdras there departed a
great number of Priests, Levites, porters, singing men, and servants of the
temple. Esdras had foretold the king that God would be their protector, and
that therefore he required no conuoy of horsemen at his hand for his security.
After that they had recommended themselves unto God, they set forward on their
way, the twelfth day of the first month, of the seventh year of the reign of
Zerxes, and arrived in Jerusalem Esdras repaireth to Jerusalem and commits
the vessels and other precious presents to the treasurers hands
in the fifth month of the same year. Whereupon he incontinently presented
unto the treasurers (who were of the race of the Priests) the silver that was
consecrated, namely, six hundredth and fifty talents, and silver vessel a
hundredth talents, of vessel of gold twenty talents, Esdras had delivered
these abouenamed presents unto the hands of the priests, he offered burnt
offerings unto God, according to the law, namely, twelve bulls for the public
conservation of the people, 72. rams and lambs, and twelve goats for the
expiation of sin. And after them he delivered the kings letters to his
princes and governors in Coelosyria and Phoenicia, who being constrained to
execute that which was enjoined them by the king, honored the nation of the
Jews, and supplied them every ways in their necessities. This counsel had
Esdras himself given of their departure. But in my opinion God (having regard
of his wisdom and integrity) did happily advance his deliberation.

Not long after this, there came certain men unto him, complaining that some
of the people, Priests, and Levites* had transgressed against the policy, and
broken the laws of the country, for that they had espoused certain strange
women, and confounded the race of the Priests: requiring him that he would have
an inward regard to Gods ordinances, for fear least he (conceiving a general
hatred against them all) should send them anew some grievous calamities. For
which cause Esdras devoured with sorrow, incontinently rent his clothes, and
tore his hair, and pulled his beard, and cast himself upon the ground,
because the principals amongst the people The year of the world. 3506. before
Christ's birth 458.
Esdras (raising himself from the earth, and lifting up his hands to heaven)
said, that he was ashamed to look thereupon, because the offenses of the
people were so heinous; Esdras prayers for the Levites that had married
strangers. (...). Esd. 9.
who had forgotten the inconuenients that had befallen their forefathers for
their impieties, beseeching God that he would reserve some remainder and seed
of the adversity and captivity, which at that time happened unto the^, and that
he would once more establish the^ again in Jerusalem their native country:
that he would take compassion of them, and grant them pardon for those
Achonius, one of the principal men of Jerusalem, repaired unto him, and said,
that they had sinned, because they had espoused strange women, and persuaded
Esdras to adjure them all, to banish both them and the children begotten by
them; wishing that they, who obeyed not the law, might be punished. Esdras
(persuaded by these words) made all the Princes of the Priests, Levites, and
tribes of Israel swear, that they would dismiss their wives and children,
according to the counsel of Achonius. And as soon as he had received their
oaths, he departed from the temple unto John's house the son of Eliasib, and
there spent he all the day without tasting any meat (by Judah and Benjamin came
thither within three days, on the twentieth day of the ninth month, called by
the Hebrews Thebeth, and by the Macedonians Apellaeus. And as soon as they
were seated in the upper part of the temple, in the presence and assistance of
the Elders, although the weather was very intemperate, by reason of the frost;
Esdras arose and reproved them for that they had transgressed the law, in
taking wives unto them, who were not of their nation: for which cause he told
(...). Esd. 10.
them (that if they would perform a matter that were agreeable unto God, and
profitable for themselves, they should dismiss such wives. Whereupon with a
loud voice they all cried, that they would do it willingly: but that there was
no small number of them, and that the time was winter, and the matter of that
consequence, as one or two days could not end it: For which cause they thought
it very needful, that the execution were deferred for a while; and that at
the length some of the Princes, who were free from that sin, with certain
other chosen Elders of every place, should make inquisition of them that had
married wives contrary to the prescript of the law. Which being approved by
them, about the new moon of the tenth month, this inquisition (...) began,
which continued until the new moon of the month ensuing: and there were many
of the family of Jesus the high Priest, and of Priests, Levites, and
Israelites, that

When Esdras had in this sort reformed the error committed by such marriages,
he so corrected the evil custom thereof, that this reformation continued
firm and irreuocable for ever. In the seventh month, they solemnized the
feasts of Tabernacles, whereto when all the people were resorted, they all
gathered together in an open place of the temple toward the gate that looks
eastward, requiring Esdras that he would read Moses ordinances unto them, which
he performed, and standing up in the midst of the multitude, he red the law
unto them from the morning The reading of Moses law. 2. Esd. 8.
until noone. By which reading not only for the present, but for the time to
come, they learned that which was just; and also calling to memory that which
was past, they were so discomforted, that the tears fell from their eyes, in
thinking with themselves, that if they had kept the law, they had not suffered
any of those evils, by which they had been tormented. But Esdras beholding
them in that estate, willing each of them to repair homeward, and to weep no
more, because that day was a solemn and holy day, wherein they ought not to
weep, because it was forbidden: He rather commanded them to intend their
feasts and pleasures, assuring them that the repentance The year of the world.
3506. before Christ's birth 458.
and grief of those faults that were committed by them in times past, ought to
serve them and instruct them to assure and defense themselves, to the end that
hereafter they commit not the like. They following Esdras exhortation, began to
celebrate the solemnity, and continued their feasts in their tabernacles
during eight days. After which time they returned every one unto his house,
praising God in hymns; and thanking Esdras for the amendment of those
unlawful marriages that had happened in their policy: who after he had gotten
great honor 2. Esdras. 1.
among the people, finished his life, being laden with years, and was buried
honorably in Jerusalem. About the same time also died Ioacim the high Priest,
whose, son Eliacim succeeded in his place.

After this it came to pass that a certain man that was one of the captive
Jews, and king Xerxes Nehemias, walking before the City of Susa (which was
the Metropolitan City of Persia) heard certain strangers that came from
far; who upon their entry into the City devised the one with the other in
the Hebrew tongue; for which cause he drew near unto them, and asked them
whence they came. Who returning him this answer, that they came from Iudaea:
he began to demand of them again, of the estate of Jerusalem, their native
City, and how the people fared. To whom they answered, that they were in very
bad estate, and that their City walls were converted to dust and rased, and
that the nations round about them afflicted the Jews with many outrages, in
making inrodes into their country, and spoiling them daily, not sparing them
by night; so that diverse of them were led away prisoners; yea some Citizens of
Jerusalem; and that daily the high ways were found full of dead bodies.
Hereupon Nehemias The year of the world, 3519. before Christ's nativity, 445.
Nehemias (whom he perceived to be heavy and disconsolate) he asked him what
he ailed? Nehemias (after he had besought God to give him grace and persuasiue
speech to discourse unto the king) answered. O king, how is it possible that I
should be other but discomforted, and that grief should not pierce even unto
the very center of my soul, when

This said, the King gave ear to his request, and promised him his letters,
assuring him that he would address them to the governors, commanding them to
do him honor, and to furnish him with all things necessary, to accomplish
that which he intended. For which cause (said he) cease thou to be sad, and do
thy service willingly. Hereupon Nehemias adored God, and thanked the king, for
the promise he had made him; and therefore by the pleasure he conceived, he
cleared that confusion and sorrow, that before that time he bate in his
countenance. The next Sadeas the governor of Syria, Phaenicia and Samaria, in
which he commanded him to honor Nehemias, and to furnish him with all things
necessary for that building which he intended. As soon as he came to Babylon,
he took diverse of his countrymen with him, who willingly followed him, and
went with him unto Jerusalem Nehemias having gotten license, and authority to
build the walls of Jerusalem inciteth the people thereunto. 2. Esd. 2.
in the five and twentieth year of the reign of Xerxes, and after he had
presented his letters before God, he delivered them to Sadeas; and the other
governors. Afterward assembling the people in Jerusalem, he stood up in the
midst of them, and spoke unto the whole congregation to this effect. You men of
Jury, there is none of you but knows that God has our forefathers Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in perpetual memory, and that in regard of their justice, he
has never failed to have care of us: by his mercy likewise I have received the
favor from the king to repair therein. After he had spoken to this effect, he
gave order that the governors should take The year of the world 3519. before
Christ's Nativity. 445.
the measure of the wall, and distribute the task amongst the people,
according to the buroughs and towns, and according to every man's ability:
and after he had promised to employ both himself, and all his family therein,
he dismissed the assembly. Hereupon the Jews (incited by his authority)
addressed themselves to the work; which name of Jews was first imposed both
on them and their religion by reason of the tribe of Judah, who first of all
came into these places.

The Ammonites, Moabites, Samaritanes, and all the inhabitants of Coelesyria,
understanding the walls were raised, with such haste and diligence, were sore
agrieued, and resolved with themselves to lie in ambush, and to hinder them in
their deliberations; so that they slew diverse (...). Esd. 4. 6.
Jews, and sought the means likewise to murder Nehemias himself; and having
hired certain Nehemias diligence or resolution, The ardent care in building
the walls of Jerusalem.
but that (keeping a court of guard round about him) he instantly prosecuted
his purpose, setting light by all occurrents; so great was his affection to
accomplish his intent. And for that cause did he carefully and intentiuely
stand upon his guard, not for that he feared death, but for that he believed
that after his departure the Jews would not finish the building of the walls.
He commanded afterward that the workmen in their travel should have their
furnitures fast by them, so that both Masons and laborers carried their
swords. Moreover, he gave order that they Xerxes, and in the ninth month.
After the City was fortified, Nehemias and the people offered sacrifices unto
God, and The walls of Jerusalem finished. The year of the world, 3527. before
Christ's Nativity, 437.
spent eight days in feasting. When the rumor was spread abroad that this
building was finished, Nehemjas perceiving that the City was weakly manned,
besought the Priests and Levites to forsake their dwellings without the City,
and to come and dwell within, and to that intent he builded them houses upon
his own charge. He ordained likewise, that they that intended their husbandry,
should bring the tenths of their fruits unto Jerusalem, to the intent that the
Priests and Leuits by enjoying their continnall maintenance, Prouifion for the
priests.
might intermit no time in the service of God, wherein he was willingly obeyed.
By this means the City of Jerusalem was very well peopled. After that
Nehemias had honorably 2. Esd. 10. The death of Nehemias.
executed diverse other worthy actions, deserving praise, he died at such time
as he was laden with age. He was a man of a good nature, just and highly
affectionated toward his country: he left the City of Jerusalem encompassed
with a wall, for a perpetual memory of his love unto Xerxes.

CHAP. VI.
How during the reign of Artaxerxes, the whole nation of the Jews were in
danger to be extinguished by Amans treachery.

AFter the death of Xerxes, the kingdom fell to Cyrus his son, who by the
Graecians was called Artaxerxes. Under his government all the race of the Jews
both men, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 6. Esiher. 1.
women, and children, were in danger to be utterly exterminated: the cause
whereof I The year of the world, 3543. before Christ's nativity, 521.
whose means (as it is said) our nation was preserved. After that Artaxerxes
had taken the kingdom upon him, and established governors over one hundredth,
and seven and twenty provinces from India, as far as Aethiopia: in the third
year of his reign, he entertained and feasted all his friends with great
magnificence, the nations of Persia likewise with their governors (according
as it became a king so opulent, who was prepared for one hundredth and eighty
days The year of the world. 3543. before the Nativity of Christ. 421.
Vasthi also made a banquet unto her women Assuerus sends for Vasthi to grace
his feasts, she refuteth, and therefore is cast off by him. The year of the
world, 3545. before Christ's birth 419.
Muchaeus answered, that the injury was not only offered unto him, but to all
the Persians, who being after that manner despised by their wives, were like to
pass their lives ignominiously, for that no one of them would acknowledge
duty toward their husbands, taking their example from the Queens
disobedience, which she showed toward him, who was the governor over all.
Whereupon he concluded, that she that had thus dishonored him, should be
grievously punished: which done, he thought it meet that this ordinance of the
kings might be published thoro^ all nations, that Queen Vasthi should be
separated from his bed, and another woman chosen in her place. But the king,
who vehemently loved her, and could hardly endure to be separated from her,
knowing that he could not keep her contrary to law, was wholly devoured in
sorrow, for that he might Vasthi, might be extinguished. The king allowing and
ratifying this counsel of theirs, sent out certain messengers and deputies,
commanding them to bring unto his presence the fairest virgins that were to be
found in his kingdom: when as therefore they had assembled a great number of
them, they found in Babylon a young orphelin (without either father or mother)
who was brought up under her uncle (whose name was Mardocheus) of the tribe of
Benjamin, and one of the greatest men amongst the Jews. It came to pass, that
this Esther Esther came unto his presence, he settled his affection on her more
then on all the rest, and being surprised with her love, he took her for his
lawful wife: and the nuptials were solemnlie The year of the world. 3549.
before the birth of Christ. 41^. The maiden Esther made Queen. Esther. 2.
Mardocheus came from Babylon to Susa.
Esther entered into the royal palace, he set a diadem upon her head, and so
lived with her, that he never questioned with her either of her birth, or
nation. Her vnele also came from Babylon to Susa (the chief city of Persia)
where every day he walked before the palace gate, enquiring how Esther did:
for that he loved The year of the world, 3^49 before Christ's birth 415. The
kings command that no m^n ^uld app^oth his th^e except h^ ^re called (...). 4.
M^chtus d^couereth the (...). Esther, 2.
her as dearly as if she had been his own natural daughter. Now the king had
made a law that no man should approach his presence, except he were called;
during the time that he was in his throne; and round about his seat there stood
certain officers with their axes; ready to punish those, who being uncalled
should attempt to approach the throne. The king himself sat aloft, and holding
in his hand a golden scepter, whenever he intended to save the life of any
one that approached his throne uncalled, he stretched forth the same, and
touched him therewith: who being thus touched by these means avoided the
penalty of death. And as touching these things we have sufficiently spoken in
this place.

Not long after this, when as Bagathous and Theodestes, two of the kings
Eunuchs, had conspired against him; Barnabazus, who was of the Hebrew nation
and one of their servants, disclosing Mardocheus, who by her means made the
king privy to their conspiracy. Who sore troubled herewith, found out the
truth by examination, and after he had commanded them to be executed on the
gibbet, he for that time gave no recompense to Mardocheus for the safeguard of
his life: he only commanded his name to be registered and chronicled in his
commentaries, commanding that he should attend in the palace, and be esteemed
for one of the kings most inward friends. Now as often as Aman (the son of
Amadath an Amalechite) came unto the palace to visit the king, all those that
were either Persians Aman being* ho^ured by all men is neglected by the Jews.
Esther 3.
or trangers (according to the kings especial direction) did him honor: But
Mardocheus showed him no honor (both by reason of that upright judgment that
was in him, as also for that the laws of the Jews f^ bade the same.) Which
when Aman had observed, he demanded whence Mardocheus, he thought it not
sufficient to procure his punishment at the kings hands, but resolved wholly to
exterminate his race (for he was by nature a capital enemy of the Jews, by
reason that the Amalechites, from whom he challenged his descent, had been
wholly ruinated by them.) For which cause, he addressed himself unto the king,
and accused them, saying that there was a certain cursed nation spread through
his whole kingdom, insociable, and abhorring the customs of other men, who
used diverse laws and ceremonies hateful both for their manners, and studies
to all the rest of his subjects, and all mortal men. This nation (says he) if
thou will do a gracious and acceptable Aman had made this his request, the
king answered, that he forgave The de^ruction of the Jews granted unto Aman.
him the money, and that he permitted him to deal with that nation as best him
liked. When Aman had obtained this his desire, he presently sent an edict
through all nations in the kings name, and to this effect. The great king
Artaxerxes unto his governors of a hundredth, and seven and twenty provinces,
extending from India as far as Aethiopia: Health. Having obtained the Empire
over so many nations, and extended my dominion over the world, according Aman
(who for his wisdom and justice is more honored then all others by me, and
for his approved fidelity, has the second place in authority next me) that
there is a certain race of men intermedled among you, enemies to all
humanity, using none but their own laws, and such as are different from
others, disobedient to their kings, and of depraved manners and customs, that
neither allow our monarchy, nor further our affairs: I will and command, that
they (being made known by Aman, a man whom we hold as dear as our father) be
slain, with Mean while the King and Aman feasted, and made good cheer,
whilst the City hung in The year of the world. 3549. before Christ birth.
415. The lamentation of the Jews upon the hearing of this edict. Esther. 4.
Mardocheus having intelligence hereof, rent his garments, put on sackcloth,
and cast ashes on his head, walking through the City, and crying that their
nation had not committed any crime that deserved death: and using these or such
like speeches, he came unto the Kings palace, and stood before the gate,
because it was unlawful for him to enter thereinto in that habit: The like
also did the Jews that were in the Cities, where those edicts had been
published against them, weeping and lamenting their miseries. But when the
news hereof was brought unto the Queen, that Mardocheus stood before the
palace gate in a lamentable estate, she was sore troubled, and sent certain of
her servants unto him to command him to exchange his attire; but they could not
persuade him to put off his sackcloth, because the inconuenie^t, for which he
had put it on, was not ouerpast. Acratheus, and sent him unto Mardocheus, to
know what hateful accident had befallen him, that made him put on this
desolate habit, and pour forth those lamentable tears (notwithstanding she
had instantly prayed him to disrobe him of the one, and dry up the other.)
Hereupon Mardocheus told the Eunuch of the edict made against the Jews, and
sent by the king unto all his provinces; the offer of the money that Aman
likewise had tendered to the king, whereby he had bought the utter ruin of his
nation at the kings hands. The year of the world. 3^54. before Christ's birt^
410.
Moreover he gave him the copy of that which had been proclaimed in Susan, to
be delivered unto Esther: whom he commanded to beseech the king, and to
esteem it no dishonor to put on an abject and base garment, to save her
nation, and to preserve the Jews from that death, whereunto at that time they
were exposed: for that Aman the next in honor to the king, had Esther
understood this, she sent again unto Mardocheus, giving him to understand that
she was not called for by the king, and that whosoever entered unto him, and was
not called, should die, except the king would warrantize him by stretching out
his golden scepter: for he, unto whom the king extended that favor, although
he were not called unto him; yet suffered he not death, but obtained pardon.
When these things were reported by the Eunuch from Esther unto Mardocheus, he
commanded him to tell her, that she ought not so much to tender the particular
respect of her life, as the lives of her whole nation; assuring her, that if at
that present she had not care of them, their succors should wholly proceed from
God by some other means then this: but she and her fathers house should be
destroyed by them, whom she had contemned. Upon this reply, Esther sent the
Mardocheus, commanding him to repair unto Susan, and to Fasting and prayers
unto God for the safety of the people.
call a general assembly of all the Jews that remained there, willing them
for three days space to fast and abstain from all kind of meat for her
safety, and that both her self and her servants would do the like, promising
them that at that time she would present her self to the king, notwithstanding
his contrary edict; and that if she must needs die, she would willingly endure
it.

Mardocheus following this direction of hers, caused the people to fast, and to
pray unto God for her: he likewise himself besought him that it might please
him at that present to have compassion their desolate and destressed nation; as
before that time he had oftentimes had care of them: and that as he had
pardoned them at such time as they had offended; so now also at this present he
would deliver them from that perdition which was denounced against them. For
that they Aman unto displeasure, in that he would not adore him, or perform
that honor unto him, which is only due to God: for which cause in despite he
has imagined this thing against them, who would not transgress the divine
ordinances. The people likewise prayed to the like effect, beseeching God that
he would have care of their preservation, and warrantize the Israelites in what
place soever they were from the misery at hand, which was before their eyes,
and already expected by them. Esther also besought God (according to her
country manner) casting her self prostrate on the earth, clothed in
sackcloth, and abstaining for three days space from meat and drink, and what
thing soever else was delectable, beseeching God to have compassion upon her,
that when she presented her self before the king she might have words fit to
persuade Esther resorteth to the king to solicit him in the bahalfe of the
Jews.
of their imminent danger, which without his prevention would surely fall upon
them. After she had in this sort for three days space both fasted and prayed,
she cast off her mourning attire, and changed her habit, attiring her self
like a maiesticall Queen, having two of her servants on whom she leaned, and
the third that followed her carried up with the tops of her fingers her The
year of the world. 3554. before Christ's birth 410.
train, which was large and trailed on the ground: and in this equipage came
she unto the king, having her cheeks stained with crimson blushes, making show
of majesty mixed with beauty, and not altogether estranged from fear. But
when she beheld the king sitting aloft in his throne, glorious in his garments
distinguished with gold, and adorned with pearl, and rich stones, a certain
fear suddenly fell upon her, and by chance he had cast a frowning and yreful
look on her; whereupon being presently astonished, her members failed her, her
color faded, and she fell betwixt her handmaids arms in a swoune. Hereon the
king (by the will of God, as I verily esteem) changed his affection, and
(suspecting least fear should cause his wife to fall into some grievous
accident) he suddenly lept from his throne, and embrasing her with both his
arms, he raised her up, and kissed her, and spoke comfortable words unto her,
praying her to be of good courage, Esther only requested this at his hands,
that only he and his entire friend Aman would vouchsafe to grace her with
their presence at her banquet: which the king readily granted her. Now when
they were come unto the banquet, and in the midst of their cups, the king
commanded Esther to ask what she would, and he would grant it her, assuring
her that he would refuse her in nothing; yea although she demanded the half
of his kingdom. But she deferred to discover her suit until the next day,
requiring him once more to repair with Aman unto her banquet. When the king
had promised to reuisit her, Aman departed with great joy, for that he alone
had the credit to banquet with the king and Esther, and no other had ever
obtained the like honor amongst any kings of that dominion. But in his
return, perceiving Mardocheus in the court, he was sore moved, because that
(notwithstanding Zaraza his wife, and his friends, and told them what honor
(not only the king but the queen also had done him; and how he only with the
king had supped that day with the queen; and was invited the next day also to
banquet with the king and her: notwithstanding he told them that he was
discontented, because he saw Mardocheus the Jew in the court. Zaraza his Amans
hatred against Mardochaeus.
wife told him, that he should cause a gallows to be raised of fifty cubits
high, and that the next day he should demand license of the king, that
Mardocheus might be hanged on that gibbet. Aman praising his wives counsel,
commanded his servants to prepare the timber, and erect the gallows in his
court, to the end to hang Mardocheus thereon: which they diligently performed.
But God mocked at Amans cursed hope, and knowing certainly what should happen,
took Alaudable custom in a king. Esther. 6.
his predecessors, and of those things that were done by himself, and to read
the same. When as therefore they were brought and read, he found that a
certain man whose name was there set down, had received a great possession
for reward in reacknowledgment of his virtue. He red likewise of an other that
had obtained recompense for his fidelity; and consequently of others; till at
last he came to the place where the Eunuchs Bagotheus and Theodestes were
noted down, for a secret conspiracy against the person of the king; and how
it was discovered by Mardocheus. Now when the secretary (having only recited
this accident) turned over to an other history, Mardocheus: He answered, that
he found nothing set down. Whereupon the King commanded him to give over, and
inquired of those to whom that office appertained, what hour of the night it
was, and knowing that the morning was already discovered, he commanded that
some one should certify him, which of his familiars attended before the
palace: at this time it chanced that Aman was found there, who repaired
thither sooner then he was accustomed, with an intent to beseech the King, that
it might be lawful for him to put Mardocheus to death. The year of the world.
3554. before the Nativity of Christ. 410.


Now when the officers had brought the king tidings that Aman was before the
palace; they were commanded presently to call him in. As soon as he came into
the kings presence, he said unto him: Knowing that thou art my affectionate and
only friend, I prithee give me thy counsel, how I may condignly honor him,
according to my greatness, whom I do most affectionately love? Aman thinking
the advice he should give, should be given for himself (because he supposed
that he only was beloved by the king more then all others) counseled him that
which in his opinion was the best, in this manner. For (said he) if you intend
to inuest the man with glory, who (as you say) is beloved by you, cause him to
be mounted upon a brave horse, and let him be apparelled in a royal habit, and
put a chain of gold about his neck, and let some one of thy chiefest friends
march before him, and proclaim through out the City, that thus is the Aman
gave this counsel, in that he hoped that it should be his own fortune. But
the king (highly contented with this his advise) turning toward him, spoke
thus unto him: Thou have a horse, a garment, and a chain, seek out therefore
the Jew Mardocheus, and give them him, and match thou before him, making this
public cry: For (said he) thou art mine inward friend, and it is very decent
that the execution of that thing be committed to thy trust, which thou have so
faithfully counseled. And this command I to be done, in this sort; because
Mardocheus has been the preserver of my life. Aman hearing these words, beyond
al expectation was confused in his spirit, and being wholly discomforted, knew
not which way to turn him: he therefore issued out, having with him the horse,
the purple habit, and the chain of gold. Meeting therefore with Mardocheus
before the palace, who was clothed Honor offered to Mardochaeus.
his life, and discovering the treachery of those Eunuchs that would have
slain him, he put upon him the scarlet habit that the king wore ordinarily,
and put the chain about his neck, and afterward mounting his horse, he went
round about the City, Aman also walking before him, and crying, that thus
should be dealt and done with him whom the king honored, loved, and thought
worthy of estimation. Now after they had circuited the whole City, Mardocheus
gave his attendance on the king, but Aman came not in presence; so much was he
ashamed at that Esiher. 7.
himself as yet on Mardocheus, because God was with him.

Now whilst they were discoursing and debating this matter together, Esthers
Eunuchs came to hasten Aman to the banquet, and Sabuchadas one of the Eunuchs
seeing the gibbet erected in Amans lodging (whereon he intended to execute
Mardocheus) demanded of one of the servants, wherefore it was raised up: and
understanding that it was for the queens uncle, whom Aman would require at the
kings hands, to the end he might put him to death, for that time he held his
peace. But when the king being seated with Aman at the banquet, required the
Queen to declare what she would require that he might grant her, she began to
lament the danger of her Aman, saying, that he alone was that wretched and
envious man, who had complotted their tragedy. Hereupon the king was very
sore troubled, and rose from the banquet to depart into the garden: then began
Aman to pray and beseech Esther to forgive him his offense, for that at that
present he was in a dangerous estate. Now Aman having all his trecheries and
cruelty discovered in the banquet is adjudged to the gallows.
whilst he was fallen upon her bed to beseech her favor, the king entered, and
grew the more displeased Aman was wholly confounded with this question; so as he
had not a word to answer him. Hereupon the Eunuch Sabuchadas stepping forth,
accused him for that he had found him in his lodging erecting a gibbet for
Mardocheus, assuring the king that one of his household servants had told him
it, at such time as he was sent to call him to the banquet; alleging moreover
that the gibbet was fifty cubits hie. Which when the king understood, he
adjudged Aman to no other death, but that which he intended against Mardocheus;
and thereupon presently commanded The year of the world, 3554 before Christ's
birth 410. Esther. 8.
Aman (as he had deserved) but also caused him to fall into the same snare
which he had prepared for an other man. Thus died Aman, who had unjustly abused
the kings friendship: as for his goods they were given unto the Queen.

After this, the king called for Mardocheus unto him (for already he had notice
that he was his wives uncle) and gave him the ring which he had given unto
Aman: the Queen likewise gave Amans goods bestowed on Mardochaeus.
him his goods, and required the King to deliver the nation of the Jews from
that dismay whereinto they were fallen, through the peril of their lives:
letting him see those letters which were Aman the Amadathite through all his
countries, assuring him that she could not live to behold the death of her
brethren, and the total ruin of her country. The king assured her, that he
had undertaken nothing that might discomfort her, auowing to her, that he would
not contradict her will, wishing her to write her self in the kings name all
that, which she would have done in the behalf of the Jews; promising that
when she had done the same, he would seal it with his own seal, giving her
authority to send the same through all his realms: to the end that they that
read those letters, confirmed by the kings seal, should not any ways
contradict the execution of the same. Whereupon he sent for his secretaries of
estate, commanding the^ to write unto the magistrates of all the nations as
touching the Jews, and to the princes and governors of one hundredth, twenty
and seven provinces, from India as far as Aethiopia. The contents of

Artaxerxes the great King
to the governors and those that faithfully rule under us; Health.
Many men being puffed up with pride, by reason of the many and mighty The
kings letters for the security of the Jews.
benefits and honors, which they receive through the too lavish liberality of
their benefactors, do not only exercise their pride toward their inferiors,
but also are not afraid to wax insolent against them, who are the authors of
their benefits, extinguishing as much as in them lies, all gratuitie that has
ever been amongst men, and being corrupted with unexpected felicity abuse
those graces against them, by whom they have gotten the same, in effect no
ways fearing God, whose power they suppose they can deceive. On the other
side, other some enhanced to the administration of the common weal, and giving
place to the hatred they have conceived against some particular men, deceive
their princes, and by false accusations and detractions provoke Aman the
Amadathite (an Amalechite by nation, and by that means a stranger, and not of
the Persian blood, but entertained by us) has in all things enjoyed the fruit
of our bounty hitherto; so Mardocheus of his life, who preserved mine, seeking
by his fraud and malice to practice the ruin of Esther the companion of our
life and kingdom; and by this means striving to dispossess me of my most
faithful friends, he determined to transfer the kingdom unto others.
Touching my self, in that I know that the Jews, who are by this wretch
destinated to die, are no wicked men, but such as live under a well pollicied
government, praying God continually that it would please him to continue the
kingdom in us, and our successors: I absolve them not only of that penalty,
contained in my former letters sent by Aman (which by these presents have
offered them outrage in their adversity. And I command that this be done the
thirteenth The year of the world. 3554. before Christ's birth 410.



As soon as the Poasts had received these letters, they presently mounted on
horseback, and road each of them his appointed way, and Mardocheus being
clothed in a royal habit, and adorned with a crown of gold on his head, and
a chain of gold about his neck, issued forth: and The Jews revenge them on
their enemies.
Mardocheus constrained them to moderate themselves; and after the kings
Esther. 9.
hundredth of their enemies. But after the king had declared unto Esther, the
number of the dead that perished in the City, suspecting with himself what
might happen through the whole country, and had likewise questioned with her if
she requested any further matter, promising her that he would see it executed:
she besought him that it might be lawful for the Jews to revenge them yet
once more the next day upon their enemies, and to hang Amans ten sons upon
the gibbet: which the king (being loath to contradict Esther) permitted the
Jews to do: they therefore returning the fourteenth day of the month Distre,
slew about three hundredth more of their enemies; yet aliened they not in any
sort the smallest portion of their goods. Furthermore, the Jews slew in the
Champion country, and in the Cities, about seventy five thousand of their
enemies, Mardocheus also wrote unto the Jews, who lived under the Empire of
Artaxerxes, commanding them to observe those days, and to solemnize them;
willing them to charge their successors to do the like, to the end that this
feast might continue for ever, and outliue all oblivion. For since on that day
they should have been made away by Aman, they should do well if after they had
escaped that danger, and taken revenge on their enemies, the very same day they
should observe the same to give thanks unto God: For this cause the Jews keep
a solemn Purim, as who should say, Lottes. But Mardocheus was great Phrurae
^festa. Mardocheus authority.
and mighty with the king, administering the kingdom with him; he had also a
part of the greatness of the Queen: and for this cause the affairs of the
Jews had better success, then was hoped for. See here how matters passed,
during the reign of Artaxerxes.

CHAP. VII.
Bagoses General of Artaxerxes the youngers army, offers many outrages to
the Jews.

AFter the death of Eliasib the high Priest, Judas his son succeeded in the
office. And The year of the world. 3560. before Christ's birth 404. Hedio and
Ruffinus. chap. 7^: The revenge taken on John for slaying his brother.
John his son obtained the place; in whose time Bagoses general of
Artaxerxes army polluted the temple, and made the Jews tributaries; so that
before they could offer their ordinary and daily sacrifices, they were
compelled to pay for every lamb fifty drachmes, which happened upon this
occasion. John had a brother called Jesus, whom Bagoses favored, and promised
to give him the high priesthood. Jesus won by these persuasions, quarrelled
with his brother John, who was so much provoked against him, that he slew his
brother Jesus in his choler. It was a thing very strange, that John being a
priest, should commit such, an The year of the world 3^84. before Christ's
Nativity. 380.
impiety against his brother; and yet far more strange in that so cruel an
act, and an offense so impious has neither happened amongst Greeks nor
Barbaria^s. God also left it not unpunished, but for the same sin the people
were reduced under captivity, and the temple was polluted by the Persians.
When Bagoses had intelligence, that John (the high Priest among the Jews) had
slain his brother Jesus in the temple, he resorted thither in all haste, and
began to utter, and break forth into bitter threats against the Jews: Have
you (said he) been so bold as to commit murder in your temple? And when he
thought to have entered into the same, they hindered him. Whereupon he replied:
Am I therefore more polluted then the body that leth dead in the temple? and
having spoken thus, he entered thereinto, and for the space of seven years
Bagoses being The year of the world, ^599. before Christ's Nativity, 365.
Iaddus high priest, whose brother Manasses marries Sanaballaths daughter. The
year of the world, 3608. before Christ's nativity, 356.
thus animated against the Jews, punished them for murdering Jesus. After
that John was Iaddus his son was made high Priest; who had a brother called
Manasses: Sanaballath sent by the later King Darius to govern Samaria (for he
also was of the race of the Chutaeans, from whom issued the Samaritanes)
knowing that Jerusalem was a famous City, and that the Kings thereof wrought
much trouble unto the inhabitants of Assyria, and Coelesyria; he willingly
married his daughter Nicazo to this Manasses, with an intent that this marriage
should be as a pledge of his good will to all the nation of the Jews.

CHAP. VIII.
What benefits Alexander King of Macedon bestowed upon the Jews.

ABout that time, Philip king of Macedo^ died in the city of Aegaeas, being
traiterousle slain Alexander made king after Philip his father king of Maced on.
by Pausanias the son of Cerastes of the race of Orestes; and his son
Alexander succeeded him in the kingdom: who passing over Hellespont, gave
battle unto the huge army of Darius near the river Granic, and there obtained
a famous victory. And hereupon he also inuading the country of Lydia (after
he had conquered Ionia, and ouerrunne Caria) finally set upon the quarters of
Pamphilia, as it is declared in an other place. But the elders of Jerusalem
were sore displeased, for that Iaddus brother, who was at that time high
Priest, and had married a foreign woman, should be companion and associate
with him in the priesthood; so as they mutined against him. For they supposed
that that marriage would be but a means to animate The year of the world,
3629. before Christ's birth 335.
those, who had a mind to profane marriages, and prove an inducement to other
to communicate

They therefore commanded Manasses either to forsake his wife, or else never
more to approach the Altar. The high Priest likewise being incensed against his
brother, as well as the people, The year of the world. 3630. before the birth
of Christ. 334.
drove him in like manner from the sacrifice. For which cause Manasses
(addressing himself to his father in law Sanaballath) told him that although
he loved his daughter Nicazo very entirely; yet would he notwithstanding
condescend for her sake to be deprived of the priesthood (which was the
greatest dignity that could be among their nation, and which had ever continued
in his race. Whereupon Sanaballath answered and promised him, that he would not
only continue Manasses under hope of greater fortunes retains the for rain
wife he had.
and make him governor of all places where he commanded, provided the
marriage solemnized betwixt his daughter and him, were continued. He
furthermore assured him that he would build a temple (resembling that in
Jerusalem) upon the mountain of Garizim which was the highest among the rest,
permitting him to do the same with Darius consent. Manasses puffed up by these
promises, remained with Sanaballath, and grew in hope that he should obtain the
priesthood by Darius means: for Sanaballath was very old. Whereas therefore
diverse other, both Priests and common people, among the Israelites, were
entangled in such like marriages, there arose no small commotion in Jerusalem.
For all they of this condition retired themselves to Manasses, The Apostacy of
the priests.
whom Sanaballath furnished with money, and lands to till, and houses to
inhabit in all

At the same time Darius understanding that Alexander, having passed the
Hellespont had overcome those governors, whom he had established near unto
the flood Granicus, and that he passed further, spoiling of his country, he
gathered together both his horsemen and footmen, Hedio and Ruffinus, ^hop. 8.
resolving to make head against the Macedonians, before they should gain all
Asia: he therefore passed Euphrates, and mount Taurus in Cilicia, to encounter
and fight with his enemies in the country. Sanaballath joyful of Darius
descent, incontinently told Manasses that he would fulfill his promises, The
year of the world. 3630. before Christ birth. 334.
as soon as Darius should return from the conquest of his enemies. For not
only he, but also all the Asians persuaded themselves most assuredly, that the
Macedonians would not abide the battle against the Persians, by reason of
their great multitude; but it fell out altogether contrary to their
expectation. For the Persian encountering with the Macedonian was overcome, and
Alexanders victory against Darius.
after he had lost the greater part of his army, and left his mother, wife and
children prisoners, he himself fled into Persia. Alexander arriving in Syria,
seized Damasco, took Sidon, and besieged Tire: and by his letters sent unto
the high priest of the Jews, he required him to send him some supplies in his
war, and to sell his army victuals for their money; assuring him that if he
desired the friendship of the Macedonians, he would give him that tribute which
he paid to Darius, besides other good turns. The high priest answered
Alexanders messenger, that he had sworn Darius never to bear arms against
him, during his life time; against which oath of his, he would never work any
indignity. Which when Alexander heard, he was sore displeased, and resolved
notwithstanding to continue the siege at Tire, until such time as it was
taken; yet threatened he that as soon as he had taken the same, he would lead
forth hs army against the high priest, to the end that all men might know to
whom they ought to keep their faith. For which cause sparing no labor) he
overcame Tire, and after he had given order to the estate thereof, he came unto
Gaza; and took it with Babemeses the captain of the garrison that held it.
But Sanaballath finding a fit opportunity to make himself great, forsook
Darius, and followed Alexander, leading with him eight thousand of his
subjects, and finding him upon the beginning of the siege of Tire, he offered
to surrender him all those places wherein he commanded, acknowledging him for
his Darius. Alexander accepted him willingly: whereupon Sanaballath freely
informed him of the whole estate; giving him to understand that Manasses (who
was brother to Iaddus the high priest of the Jews) was his son in law, who
with diverse of the same nation, were desirous to build them a temple in the
countries under his dominion, assuring the king of much profit thereby, because
in so doing the force of the Jews should be dismembered into two parts, and
they might not conspire together to make any new insurrection or trouble, as in
times past they had done during the government of the kings of Assyria.

When Sanaballath had permission from Alexander to build this temple, with the
greatest speed he might, he finished the same, and made Manasses the high
Priest thereof, supposing that it Manasses enjoys his desire.
was the greatest advantage that might happen to his daughters children. Seven
months after Sanaballath died. Alexander also raced Gaza, and prepared
himself to come suddenly upon Jerusalem. Which when the high priest Iaddus
understood, he was much grieved, and sore afraid, not knowing how to grow in
favor with the Macedonians: and on the other side knowing that the king was
displeased against him (because before time he had disobeyed him:) He therefore
commanded the people to make their prayers unto God, and he in his own person
offered sacrifice; requiring God that it would please him to be a shield of
defense, and succor to their nation, and to deliver them from those imminent
dangers wherein they were plunged. But the next night following whilst he
slept, God appeared unto him, and willed him to be of good courage, and
commanding him that as soon as he had circuited the walls, he should open the
gates boldly, and command the rest Alexander, without apprehension of any
future evil, because that God had prevented the same. As soon as he awaked
from his sleep, he was very joyful, and certified the rest of this prediction
of God; and performing that which had been commanded him, he expected in this
manner the approach of the king: and when he knew that Alexander intending to
befiege Jerusalem meets with the hie priest and people in white, and is
honorably received by the^, and does the^ honor in memory of his vision that
appeared unto him in the like habit.
he was not far off from the City, he marched forth to meet him,
accompanied with the Priests, and a multitude of other people, presenting a
most royal manner of entertain, and far different from that of other
nations, near unto a place called Sapha; which word signifies a watch (by
reason that from that place a man may discover the City and Temple of
Jerusalem.) Alexanders train, grounding their hopes upon his displeasure, made
their attempt to sack the City, and to hew the high Priest in pieces: but it
fell out quite contrary. For Alexander espying the people from a far in
white rayments, and the Priests going before them in their fine rochets, and
the high priest attired in a robe of purple, bordered with gold, having his
miter on his head, and his plate of gold, wherein the name of God was written,
Alexander himself marched forward before the rest of his company, and fell
prostrate on his face before that Name, saluting first of all the hie Priest;
and at the same instant The year of the world. 3630. before Christ's birth 334.
Parmenio only drew near unto him, and asked him what he meant to adore the
Priest of the Jews, whereas all other men adored him. To whom he answered; I
do not adore him, but that God whom the Priest worshippeth: for in my sleep I
saw him in such a habit, as I see him in at this present, at such time as I
was in Dio a City of Macedonia: and whilst I consulted with my self by what
means I might attain to the conquest of Asia, he counseled me to make no
delay, but to march forward boldly, assuring me that it would be he that would
guide both me and mine army, and would deliver the Empire of the Persians into
my hands. Since that time I have not seen any one attired after the same
manner: and at Darius, and discomfit the Persians; and that my purpose shall
have a happy issue.

When he had answered Parmenio in this sort, he gave the hie Priest his hand,
and went with him into the City, being conducted by the priests: after this,
when he came unto the temple, he Alexanders sacrifice in the temple, the
confirmation of his conquest by Daniels prophecy, his bounty to the Jews.
offered sacrifice, according to the hie priests direction, whom he honored
likewise with very great reverence. And when as likewise Iaddus showed him the
prophecy of Daniel, wherein he declared that a certain man of the nation of
the. Greeks, should destroy the estate of the Persians, and that in his
opinion it should be he: thereof Alexander was very joyful, and dismissed the
multitude that attended him for that time. The next day assembling the Jews,
he commanded

After that Alexander had in this sort demeaned himself in Jerusalem, he
marched with his arm / against the neighboring Cities, and wheresoever he
went, he was received with great affection. Alexander had entertained the
Jews, they resolved to demean themselves like Jews. For such is the nature
of Samaritanes (as we have declared The Samaritans be kinsme^ to the Jews in
prosperity, strangers in adversity.
heretofore) that when the Jews are in affliction, they deny all acquaintance
with them, (wherein they confess the truth:) but when they perceive any beam
of good adventure shining upon them, suddenly they vaunt of their alliance,
saying, they are near akin, and of the race of Ephraim and Manasses the sons
of Joseph. They came therefore to the kings presence, and met him near unto
Jerusalem, with great magnificence, and demonstration of singular affection
toward The ^eare of the world. ^632. be fore Christ's birth 332.
him. And after that Alexander had entertained them, they of Sichem approached
near Sanaballath had sent unto the king) beseeching him that he would visit
their City and honor their temple with his presence: whereupon he promised
that at his return he would visit them. They required him also, that he
would acquit them of the tribute of the seventh year, because they did not
sow in the same. He asked them who they were that made that request? They
answered him, that they were Hebrews: but that they were called Sichemites by
the Sidonians. He asked them again, if they were Jews? and they said, they
were not. Well (said he) I have made this grant unto the Jews: when as
therefore I shall return, if I be more particularly informed, I shall do that
which shall be held requisite. Thus dismissed he the Sichemites, but he
commanded Sanaballaths men of The temple on the mount of Garizim. Onias son
of Iaddus high priest. The year of the world, ^635. before Christ's Nativity,
329.
war to follow him into Egypt: promising in that place to impart possessions
unto them by lot; Alexanders death, his Empire was divided amongst his
successors, and the temple builded near unto the mount Garizim remained
entire. And if any one were accused in Jerusalem for eating unlawful meats, or
for transgressing the Saboth, or for any such like fault, he fled unto the
Sichemites, saying, that he was accused unjustly. In that time deceased the hie
priest Iaddus, and Onias his son succeeded him. This was the estate of them
of Jerusalem at that time.

THE XII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 12. book.
1 Ptolomey the son of Lagus is made lord of Jerusalem, and the rest of
Iudaea by a stratageme, and leads diverse Jews with him prisoners into
Egypt. 2 Ptolomey Philadelphus translateth the laws of the Jews into the
Greek tongue, and dismissing diverse captives of that nation, he dedicateth
many presents in the temple of God. 3 In what estimation the Jews were with
the Kings of Asia, and how the freedom of those Cities they built, was granted
them. 4 Joseph the son of Tobias drives away the Jews imminent calamity,
by reason of his friendship with king Ptolomey. 5 The frienship and society
between the Lacedaemonians, and Onias the high Priest of the Jews. 6 The Jews
distracted by seditions call Antiochus to their assistance. 7 How Antiochus
leading his army to Jerusalem, and possessing the City spoiled the Temple. 8
Antiochus forbidding the Jews to use the laws of their forefathers, only the
son of Asmonaeus called Matthias contemned the king; and put his captains to
flight. 9 Matthias being dead, Judas his son succeeded him. 10 Appollonius a
captain of Antiochus is overcome in Iewry and slain. 11 The overthrow and
death of Lysias and Gorgias sent out against the Jews. 12 How dividing their
armies, Simon overcame the Tyrians and Ptolemaidans, and Judas the Ammonites.
13 The death of Antiochus Epiphanes among the Persians. 14 Antiochus Eupator
overthrowing the army of the Jews, besieges Judas in the temple. 15 Antiochus
giving over his siege, plighteth a league of friendship with Judas. 16
Bacchides a captain belonging to Demetrius being sent with his army against
the Jews, returns back to the King, without the dispatch of his business.
17 Nicanor elected captain after Bacchides and sent out against the Jews, is
slain with his whole army. 18 Bacchides sent out once more against the Jews
overcomes them. 19 How Judas being overcome in battle, is slain.
CHAP. I.
Ptolomey the son of Lagus overcomes and surpriseth both Jerusalem and
Iudaea by a stratageme, and leads away diverse of the Jews prisoners into
Egypt.

ALexander King of Macedon having overcome the Persians, and established The
death of Alexander, and the ware of his successors.
the estate of the Jews (according as it has been spoken) he departed this
life. Whereupon his dominions and kingdoms fell into diverse men's hands:
Antigonus was lord of Asia: Seleucus of Babylon, and the bordering nations:
Lysimachus had Hellespont: Cassander Macedon: and Ptolomey the Lagus held
Egypt. Now when as these men were at discord amongst themselves (whilst each
of them affected the sovereignty, and fought the one with the other) diverse
great and continual wars grew to head, which afflicted many The year of the
world. 3643. before Christ's birth 32^.
Cities: whereby it came to pass, that many of the inhabitants thereof died in
fight, and all Syria likewise under Ptolomey the son of Lagus (who beyond his
merit was called Soter, that is as much to say, as a Savior) lived in little
safety. He it was that seized Jerusalem by a stratageme, and policy: for he
entered the City upon a Saboth day, under pretext to offer sacrifice; and The
year of the world 3643. be fore Christ's Nativity. 321. Jerusalem surprised by
policy, and the Jews led away captive.
whilst the Jews suspected nothing, but spent the day in idleness and quiet,
he surprised the City without resist, and ouerpressed the Citizens with
hateful captivity. Agatharchides the Cnidian (who wrote the acts of
Alexanders successors) witnesses no less, reproching us of superstition, as
if intending thereby, that by that means we lost our City. He writes to this
effect. There is a certain nation, which are called Jews, who inhabit a
city which is called Jerusalem, both strong and mighty. They suffered it to
fall into Ptolomeies hands, because they would not stand upon their guard, and
through their importunate superstition, they permitted themselves to be subdued
by a tyrant conqueror. See here what Agatharchides says in this place of our
nation. But Ptolomey leading away with him diverse prisoners of the better
quarters of Iudaea, and the places near unto Jerusalem, of Samaria and mount
Garizim, sent them into Egypt Alexander, when as after the discomfiture of
Darius, he sent Ambassadors unto them: he put diverse of them into his
garrisons, giving them the same privileges in the city of Alexandria, which
the Macedonians had. After he had received their oath, that they should be
faithful unto his successors, in memory of the great trust and favors he had
bestowed on them, many of the other Jews likewise of their own accord went
into Egypt, partly allured thereunto by the plenty of the country, partly by
the liberality of Ptolomey toward their nation. Yet were there continual
Sedition betwixt the Jews and Samaritanes as touching the temple
seditions betwixt their posterity and the Samaritanes: for that they would
keep and maintain the customs and ordinances of their forefathers; whereupon
diverse wars arose amongst them.

CHAP. II.
Ptolomey Philadelphus causes the laws of the Jews to be translated into the
Greek tongue: and dismissing many captive Jews dedicateth many presents in
the temple of God.

AFter him Philadelphus succeeded in the kingdom of Egypt, and held it for
nine and thirty The year of the world 3680. before Christ's nativity, 284.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2. The library of Ptolomey Philadelphus.
Demetrius Phalereus master of the kings library, endeavored to his uttermost
to gather up all sorts of books that were in the world, and bought all that
which was agreeable to the kings intent, who above all things was curious to
assemble diversity of books. He being one day demanded by the king, how many
thousands of volumes he had already gathered: he answered him, that he had
already assembled about some two hundredth thousand volumes: but that shortly he
would gather to the number of five hundredth thousand. Besides he certified him,
that he had been lately advertised that there were diverse volumes among the
Jews, wherein many things as touching their laws and policies Demetrius care
in collecting and gathering books, wrote unto the high Priest of the Jews,
commanding that this translation might be finished. In the mean time a
certain Aristaeus, who was entirely beloved and befriended by the king, by
reason of his modesty, and had diverse times before that present resolved with
himself to solicit the King, to dismiss all the Jews that were in his
kingdom, supposing that at that instant he had fit opportunity offered him to
make his request, he spoke unto Sosibius the Tarentine, and Andrew the chief
captains of the kings guard, beseeching them to favor him in that which he
intended to move the king in. Having therefore sounded the affections of these
noble men, he addressed himself unto the king, and spoke unto him after this
manner: Since my sovereign, it behooves The year of the world. 3684. before
the Nativity of Christ. 280.
Jupiter, forasmuch as he maintains our life, and the lives of all men. For
that honor therefore which you owe unto God, send back these people into
their country, and permit When Aristaeus had ended this discourse of his, the
king beholding him with a cheereful and pleasant countenance, asked him how
many thousands he thought they were, whose liberty he required? Andrew (being
hard at hand) answered, that there were more then one hundredth and twenty
thousand. Whereupon the king replied, is this demand Aristaeus a matter of
small consequence, which thou requirest? Sosibius and the other Aristaeus
suite; or rather to satisfy the will of God, which was especially to be
respected. Whereunto conforming himself, he sent out his proclamation; The
king of Egypts proclamation touching the liberty of the Jews solicited by
Aristaeus.
certifying thereby that he not only set them at liberty, who had been
brought thither by his father, or those of his army who attended him; but them
also who before time had been in his kingdom; or that sithence likewise had
been brought thither: and notwithstanding Whosoever of you that in my fathers
service (by bearing arms under him) have made any roades into Syria and
Phaenicia, and after the conquest of Iudaea have taken any prisoners, and
brought them to our Cities and countries, with an intent to sell them: all they
also, who have heretofore detained any, or at this present have any such
captives in their possession, they are to set them at liberty that live under
their thraldom, receiving for the ransom of every person six score drachmes:
namely the men of war, at such time as their wages shall be paid them: as for
When this edict of the Kings published to this effect, was proclaimed abroad,
and that only point was omitted, that concerned those that before time had
been, and afterward the second time were led away prisoners, in whose behalf
he had given no direction; he showed himself most bountiful in like manner
toward these: And gave order that the number and tallie should be speedily
gathered, and the money The year of the world, 3684 before Christ's birth 280.
distributed to the co^mittees, and tresurers appertaining to him. Which being
speedily performed in the space of seven days, all the kings ordinance was
accomplished, and there was laid out for the ransomes of them all to the sum
of more then four hundredth and sixty talents: For the masters exacted
sixescore drachmes for the children also, grounding themselves upon the kings
edict, by which it was ordained that for every person they should have that
sum, extending the same even unto the children.

These things being thus magnificently exployted, according to the kings
command, he gave Demetrius in charge to make a decree, as touching the
translation of the books of the Jews. For the king did nothing rashly, but
administered all things with great wisdom, and circumspection; and for that
cause the copy of Demetrius suggestion, and the letters sent Demetrius is
this: Demetrius
to the great king: Health.
Most mighty Prince, since you have committed the trust unto me to find out
Demetrius exhortatory letter to Ptolomey as touching his library.
those books that are deficient in your library, and to search for such
volumes as hitherto have been hid from my sight, to the end that I might
gather them and perfect them, and that those which are lost, might be restored
with all the diligence that thereunto belongs, after that I had used herein
all the care that in me was possible; I give you to understand that amongst
others, we Hecataeus the Abderite says, that neither Poets nor Historians have
made any mention of them; neither of those, who have been policied and
governed under the same: because in themselves they are pure, and are not to be
declared by impure lips. May it therefore please your Majesty to write unto
the high Priest of the Jews, commanding him to send you six Ancients of
every tribe, such as he shall know to


When the king had in this sort been both advised and suggested, he wrote unto
Eleazar the high The kings liberality toward the Jews.
Priest of the Jews, as touching this matter: giving him likewise to
understand of that liberty by him granted unto the Jews that were in his
kingdom: He sent him also fifty talents of gold, to make cups, ewers, and
vessels, with an infinite number of precious stones, commanding his coferers,
who had the charge of his Jewels, to suffer the workmen to choose what stones
they best liked. Furthermore he willed that a hundredth talents should be given
for the sacrifices and oblations, and other uses of the temple. But after that
I have declared what was the copy Eleazar the high Priest, and the manner how
he obtained that sacerdotall dignity; I will set down both the rich
presents, and their curious workemanshippe

After the death of Onias the high Priest, his son Simon surnamed the Just,
succeeded him in his place, who for that cause was so called, by reason of the
piety which he showed toward God, and the good affection which he bare unto his
countrymen. This Simon dying, and leaving behind him one only son, of young and
tender years who was called Onias: his brother (which was this Eleazar of whom
we speak at this present) took upon him the priesthood, and to him wrote
Ptolomey in such manner as is hereafter expressed. King Ptolomey
to the high priest Eleazar, Health:
Whereas Prolomeis epistle to Eleazar for interpreters to translate the Bible.
diverse Jews dwelt in my kingdom, whom my father has honored (though during
the mine own cofers: I have likewise inrouled some of those that were of age
in the companies The year of the world. 3684. before Christ's birth. 280.
Andrew the principal captain of my guard, and Aristaeus also (whom we
especially honor) to confer with you: by whom I have sent you one hundredth
talents of silver, as the first fruits of those gifts and sacrifices, which we
intend to offer in the temple. You shall do us an especial favor, if you
signify your mind unto us by your letters.




As soon as Eleazar had received the kings letters, he returned him an answer
full of honor Eleazars letters in answer to Prolomey.
and affection, according to the tenor which ensues. The high Priest Eleazar
to king Ptolomey: Health.
If you, your Queen Arsinoe, and your children be in health, all our affairs
likewise have no less fortunate success. We have received your princely
letters with no small joy, and have both read and considered upon the contents
thereof; we have also published them in the presence of all the people, and
have declared unto them your piety toward God, and have Andrew and Aristaeus
(very virtuous and excellently learned men, and honored by you amongst your
dearest friends) have brought unto us, to be employed in sacrifices and other
necessities of the temple. Know therefore, that whatsoever stands either with
your content or profit, we will enforce our own natures, to the end we may
acknowledge the benefits, which you have diverse ways bestowed upon our nation.
We have therefore duly and continually offered sacrifice for you, your sister
Arsinoe, your children and friends: the people likewise have prayed that God
would send you happy success in whatsoever you desire, that your kingdom may
be continued in peace, and that the translation of our law may be accomplished

Fare you well.



This is the answer which the high Priest sent unto him. Yet have I thought it
to be a matter merely unnecessary to set down the names of the seventy two
Elders in particular, who were sent by Eleazar together with the law,
notwithstanding they are set down in the Epistle. Yet think I it not amiss,
to recite the excellency and fashion of those presents that were sent by the
The description of those presents which Ptolomey dedicated in the temple of
Jerusalem.
king, and offered up unto God, to the end that all men may know how zealous he
was toward the service of God. For in performance thereof, he spared no
immeasurable expense, but continually

The king desirous to make it great in all dimensions, desired to know the
greatness of that The golden table.
which was at Jerusalem, to the intent that he might cause it to be far
greater. And having certain notice how great it was, and that there was no let
but that he might make his far greater, he said that he would have it five
times greater then the other: but that he feared, least being so great it
fashion: so that by his ripe judgment, he showed the workmen such inventions,
as before The year of the world. 3684. before Christ's birth 280.


See here what this present was, which through entire affection the king
presented; wherein the price of the stuff, the diversity and beauty of the
workmanship, and the excellency of the engrauing was accomplished in
perfection. Moreover, in this he so far enforced himself to perform so
much, that if it might not surpass the other which was already in the temple,
at leastwise in art, new invention and excellency of project, it might be
far more excellent and admirable. He gave besides this, two vessels of gold,
scaled from the bottom as far as the half part Two golden standing cups.
And in the midst of them there was a labyrinth a cubite hie, made of all sorts
of precious stones; and at the foot thereof were ingraued spires, after the
manner of twigs; and fast by them a certain fould like unto a net made in
ouall fashion, that ascended even unto the brims. The midst thereof was filled
with little targets, of the greatness of four fingers, made of precious
stones, and round about the edges thereof were lillies, iuy, flowers, and vines
with their clusters of grapes engraven round about. This was the beauty and
excellency of those two cups, The year of the world. 3684. before the
Nativity of Christ. 280. Two silver standing cups. Thirty viols.
Ptolomeis charge and diligence in the finishing of his presents.
the charge, did oftentimes (forsaking his more serious affairs) visit the
shoppes, and examine the works; and that which more and more increased their
diligence, was, for that they saw him so intent upon the business, which made
them the more earnest upon their work.

And these were the presents which were sent by this king to be dedicated in
the temple of Jerusalem. All which being consecrated and laid up in the temple
by the high Priest Eleazar, after he had greatly honored those that brought
them thither, and delivered into their hands certain presents to be tendered in
his behalf unto the king, he dismissed and sent them back again. No sooner
were they arrived in Alexandria, but the king (having notice thereof, and how
the seventy two Elders were come with them) he sent to seek out his
Ambassadors Andrew and Aristaeus, The 70. interpreters coming to Alexandria
are royally entertained.
who came and presented him with letters from the high Priest Eleazar, and
answered him to all that which he demanded of them face to face. And being
desirous to communicate with the Elders that came from Jerusalem to expound and
interpret the law, he contrary to his ordinary custom and manner, dismissed
all those that resorted thither for their particular affairs, Eleazar had sent
unto him; who coming to his presence (accompanied with those presents which
the high priest had delivered them to present unto him, with the original
wherein the law was written with golden letters) he asked them where their
books were: and they discovering and opening them, showed them unto him. After
the king had seen them, he was very much astonished, to see the membranes and
parchments so delicate, and to behold the whole form thereof so perfectly
conjoined, that it was impossible to discover the seams: and he told them that
he gave them thanks for that they were come unto him, and more great thanks
unto him that had sent them; and the greatest and most especial thanks unto
God, For naturally extreme joy and most grievous sadness have like effects.
After he had commanded that these books should be committed to their trust, who
were deputed to that office, at length he saluted the Elders, telling them that
it was very behoouefull for him first of all to debate with them upon the
matter, to which intent he had sent for them: and afterward to give them
intertainment: in a word, he confessed unto them, that their access was so
grateful unto him, that he promised them, so long time as he lived, he would
every year renew and honor the memory of the same (and by good hap it was
the very same day wherein he overcame Antigonus by sea.) His pleasure was also,
that they should be his guests,

Nicanor likewise, who had the charge to entertain strangers, commanded
Dorotheus (who was ordinarily employed in the same) to prepare for every one of
them such things, as were necessary for their diet and entertainment. For so
was it ordained by the king, that in every City that had any particularity in
their manner of life, there should be a commissary appointed to provide for
forrainers that arrived in that place, to the intent they might be entreated
according to their customs: intending thereby that their entertainment should
be the more agreeable unto them, and that they might be the less tired with
foreign novelties. This custom of his was put in practice at this time, by
Dorotheus care and exact diligence, who in his own person disposed all that
which was necessary for that hospitality. He prepared two places to banquet
in, in Dorotheus to entertain them in like manner, as he was wont to do
those, who repaired unto his court from Iudaea. Hereupon he dismissed the
Egyptian priest, and other that were wont to make the ordinary prayers: which
done, he commanded that one of the elders called Eliseus (who in like sort was
a Priest) to bless the table: whereupon he standing The year of the world,
3684 before Christ's birth 280. The banquet that Ptolomey made for the Jews and
their prayers before meat.
Aristaeus has written to that effect. In a word, the king was not only
astonished at their answers, but Menedemus also, who having affirmed that all
things were administered by divine providence, and that it appeared what the
virtue and excellency of this discourse was, this questioning debate was
finished. But the king protested in their presence, that their access had
infinitely contented and instructed him, in that by their means he had
obtained the good hap to be informed by them how to goueme his kingdom.
Whereupon he commanded that each of them should have three talents given him,
and that they might be conuaied to their lodgings. Some four days after
Demetrius took them with him, and led them over that trench of the sea, that
contains seven furlongs, and that bridge which coupleth the Island with The
translation of the Bible into the Greek tongue.
the continent, and toward the northermost end thereof, he assigned them a
lodging remote from all noice, and fit for contemplation: to which place after
he had brought them, he besought them, Dorotheus presented them with a part of
diverse dishes, which were prepared for the King: for so had his Majesty
commanded it. Thus every morning entered they the Kings palace, and after
they had saluted him, they retired themselves to their accustomed place; and
after they had washed their hands in the sea water, and were purified, they set
them Demetrius assembled all the Jews in that place where the law had been
translated, and caused it to be read over in the presence of the interpreters
themselves. Which done, the assembly approved the exposition of the
interpreters: and praised Demetrius, by whose suggestions, and invention they
enjoyed so great a good. They requested likewise, that this exposition should
be perused, and ouerred by the Nobles and governors. After this, both the
Priest, the Elders of the interpreters, and the magistrates of the people
required, that since this translation was so happily achieved, it might
remain unaltered; so that no jot thereof might be changed. Which resolution
being allowed by all men, it was ordered that if any man perceived Demetrius,
by what means it came to pass, that neither any Poet, nor Historiographer had
made mention of that law, notwithstanding that in it self it was so admirable.
To whom Demetrius gave this answer: that no man was so hardy to touch that
work, by reason that it was divine and every way venerable: assuring him also,
that certain men who had attempted to set Theopouspus Gods justice upon those
Ethnickes that intermedled with the sacred scriptures
intending to reduce certain contents of that law into his history, had been
distraught in mind for more then thirty days, and that having some
intermission of his fit, he appeased God by prayer; thereby easily coniecturing
what was the cause of his malady. Moreover, he was certified by a vision that
appeared unto him in his sleep, that this inconvenient befell him, in that he
had too curiously serched into sacred and divine matters, and had intended to
communicate the same with profane men: from which enterprise since he had
desisted, he recovered his right wits again. The year of the world. 3684.
before Christ's birth 280.
Theodectes the tragic Poet, intending to make mention in some of his peomes
of a certain history written in the sacred scriptures, was strooken blind;
and acknowledging the cause hereof to proceed from his audacious presumption,
he was restored to his sight after he had appeased Gods displeasure.

When the king had considered on these words, according as Demetrius had
discoursed them unto him, he prostrated himself on the earth, and commanded
that the books should be carefully kept, to the end they might continue in
their pure integrity. Furthermore he exhorted the translators to repair
oftentimes unto him from Iudaea, assuring them that in so doing the matter
would redound both to their honor and profit; telling them that for that time
he thought good to dismiss them: but when they should return unto him again
of their own motion, The presents which the king bestowed upon the
interpreters, and those he sent to Eleazar.
Eleazar the high Priest he sent by them ten couches, whose feet were of
silver, and the furniture correspondent, and a vessel of thirty talents. Ten
purple robes likewise, and a magnificent crown, and one hundredth pieces of
fine linen: and besides that, he sent in way of present unto the temple
ewers, basins, and two golden vessels: beseeching Eleazar by his letters, that
if any one of his subjects had a will to come unto him; he would permit him,
asluring him that he would highly esteem the conversation of so learned men:
and that he had riches which he Ptolomey Philadelph esteemed and honored the
Jews

CHAP. III.
How the Kings of Asia honored the nation of the Jews, and gave them liberty
and freedom to dwell in those Cities that were builded by them.

THey received honor likewise at the hands of the kings of Asia, because they
had borne Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 3. The immunit^es and privileges granted
the Jews by Seleucus Nicanor king of Syria.
arms under them. For Seleucus surnamed Nicanor, highly respected them, and
permitted The privilege in Antioch continued to the Jews.
the present war, Mutianus at that time governor of Syria, opposed himself
against them. Again, when as Vespasian and his son Titus had conquered the
world, although the Alexandrians and Antiochians required them, that the
privileges that the Jews enjoyed might continue no more; yet could they not
obtain the same. Whereby the humanity and valor of the Vespasian and Titus;
that notwithstanding they had been so travailed by the wars of the Jews,
and were so bitterly incensed against them, for that they had not by laying
down their arms submitted themselves, but had continued war against them to
the uttermost; yet deprived they them not of their aforesaid privileges, but
surmounted their displeasure, which they had long before conceived against
them: and in like sort had not regard to the request of two so puissant cities,
as Alexandria, and Antioch were. In such sort as they granted nothing in favor
of them, neither ordained any thing in disfavor of those whom they had
overcome in war, to the intent to abolish one only jot of those privileges
which they had in times past; but said that they that had resisted them by
arms, and who had been overcome, were sufficiently punished for their
obstinacy: and as touching those that had not committed Marcus Agrippa was of
the same opinion, as touching the Jews. For whereas the Ionians were
seditiously bent against them, and besought Agrippa that it might be only
lawful for them to make use of the privilege, which Antiochus Seleucus nephew
(whom the Greeks entitled by the name of God) had given them; requiring that
if the Jews were of their blood, they might be tied to adore the same gods
which the Ionians worshipped. When as therefore this matter was referred to the
determination of the Judges, the Jews had the day, and obtained The year of
the world 3684. before Christ's Nativity. 280.
Nicholas Damascene. For Agrippa pronounced, that it was unlawful for them to
innouate any ways: And if any man desire to have exact knowledge hereof, let
him read the hundredth twenty three, and twenty fourth book of the histories
of Nicholas. Neither ought this judgment of Agrippaes to seem in any sort
strange, for at that time our nation had not by any wars procured the Romans
displeasure. But upon just occasion may a man admire the magnanimity of
Vespasian and of his son Titus, who behaved themselves with such moderation
after so great a war, and so grievous battles, as they had fought against us.

Now will I return to my purpose, from whence I have digressed. At such time
as Antiochus the great reigned in Asia, the country of Iewry was grievously
spoiled, and both the Jews Antiochus the great king of Asia and Syria vexes
the Jews.
and the inhabitants of Coelesyria endured many miseries. For Antiochus making
war against Ptolomey Philopator and his son, called Ptolomey the Famous, they
were pitifully perplexed. For whether Antiochus either overcame or was
overcome, they were continually spoiled: so that betwixt the prosperity and
adversity of Antiochus, they fared like a ship tossed and tormented with a
storm. Finally after Antiochus had overcome Ptolomey, he conquered Iewry. After
the death of Philopator, his son sent a great army into Coelesyria under the
conduct of Scopas, who seized a The year of the world, 3742. before Christ's
nativity, 222.
great number of those Cities; and our nation also was enforced by war and
conquered by him. Not long after this, Antiochus fought with Scopas, near unto
the flood Jordan, and obtained the victory, discomfiting the greater part of
his enemies army; at which time Antiochus recovered again those Cities of
Coelesyria, which were before time surprised by Scopas. He took Scopas had
planted in the fortresses of the higher City. For which cause Antiochus
supposing it to be a matter behoouefull for his honor, to acknowledge and
remunerate the affection and forwardness, which the Jews had expressed in his
service, wrote unto his captains and friends, signifying unto them how forward
the Jews had been in his wars: and to express likewise what gifts he
intended to bestow upon them. Hereafter I will insert the copy of his letters,
which he wrote in favor of them, after I have recited that which Polybius the
Megalopolitane writes, answerable to this purpose, which I will recite out of
the sixteenth book of Ptolomey Epiphanes king of Egypt warreth against the
kings of Syria. The year of the world. 3760. before Christ's birth 204 Polybius
the Megalopolitane of Scopas Ptolomeis captain. Antiochus Epistle to Ptolomey
as touching the liberty of Jews.
his histories. Scopas (says he) the general of Ptolomeies army, marching
toward the midland, did in one winter overcome the whole nation of the Jews.
He recites also in the same book, that after that Scopas had been overcome,
Antiochus seized Bathanaea, Samaria, Abila, and Gadara; and anon after the
Jews, which dwelt at Jerusalem where the temple was, joined themselves with
him: and although we are to speak more amply and particularly of that
apparition that happened near unto the temple; yet notwithstanding we will
refer the recital thereof until an other time. This is that which Polybius
has written. But to return unto our purpose: I will recite in this place the
copy of those letters which were sent by the King. King Antiochus
to Ptolomey; Health.
Whereas the Jews have given us a most apparent testimony of their affection
toward us, since the first time of our entrance into their country, and have
magnificently a temple. My pleasure likewise is, that all they of the same
nation govern their estate, according The year of the world. 3760. before
Christ birth, 204.
to their own laws. Let the ancient Priests and Scribes of the temple also,
and the singing men be freed from all taxations, that are paid by the powle,
and the tributes of the crown, and all other whatsoever. And to the end that
the city may be the sooner builded, I grant unto all them that inhabit the
same at this present, or that hereafter shall transport themselves thither
within the month of October to inhabit, the same exemption of all charges for
three years space. We forgive them moreover the third part of their tributes,
to the intent they may recover themselves of their losses. We will also that
those Citizens that have been forcibly led from thence into servitude, be set
at liberty, both they themselves as also those that are of their alliance;
commanding their goods to be restored unto them.

Farewell.



These were the contents of this letter. And to yield the more honor unto the
temple, he That it should not be lawful for any stranger to enter within the
enclosure of the temple, without the Jews permission; except those that should
The edict of Antiochus the great in honor of the temple.
be purified, according to the law and custom of the place. That no man should
bring into the City any flesh of horse, mulet, wild or tame asses, leopards,
foxes, or hares, or generally of any cattle prohibited to be eaten by the
laws of the Jews. That it should not be lawful likewise for any man to bring
their skins into the City, or to nourish any such beasts in the same; but that
it might only be lawful to use those beasts which might be sacrificed unto
God, according to the law of their ancestors. That whosoever should contradict
those inhibitions, he should pay 3000. drachmes of silver unto the Priests.
Furthermore to express his piety and fidelity toward us, at such time as he
heard of the troubles that happened in Phrygia and Lydia, he wrote also unto
Zeuxis Antiochus to Zeuxis his father: Health. If thou art well, I am glad of
it: I likewise am no less healthy. Understanding that those of Lydia and
Phrygia are newly grown to rebellion, I have thought good (according to my
duty) to prevent the same: and whilst I consulted with my friends Antiochus
Epistle to Zeuxis, in which he makes honorable mention of the Jews.
what was to be done, it has been thought fit that two thousand families of
the Jews, with all their households should be sent thither, all which should be
drawn out of Mesopotamia and Babylon to plant them in garrisons, and places of
security. For I am persuaded of their good affection and zeal toward us,
both in respect of their devotion toward God, as also for the testimony which
our predecessors have borne of them; namely, that they are faithful, and ready
to The year of the world. 3764. before Christ's birth 200.
to build them houses on, with sufficient lands both for tillage and to plant
their vineyards in: for which they shall pay no tribute for ten years space:
and during such time as they may gather of their own for their sustenance,
they shall be allowed their provision of corn for them and their servants. Our
will is also that they, who shall be employed in necessary affairs, be
sufficiently provided of that they need, to the intent that being so
bountifully dealt withal by us, they may show themselves the more affectionate
in that which concerns us. Thou shall give order also to the uttermost of thy
power, that this nation be no ways ouerpressed, or interessed Hitherto have we
sufficiently declared, what friendship Antiochus the great bare unto the Jews.
After this Antiochus contracted alliance and friendship with Ptolomey, who gave
him his daughter Cleopatra in marriage, and assigned him for her dowry
Coelesyria, Samaria, Iudaea, and Phoenicia; and for that these two kings
divided the tributes Antiochus friendship and confederacy with Ptolomey The
Samaritanes molest the Jews. The year of the world, 3770. before Christ's
Nativity, 194. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4. Onias the h^gh priest provoke
the king of Egypt for non payment of his tribute.
between them, the chiefest in authority in every province, redeemed the
exaction of their country, and paid the sum agreed upon to the kings
treasury. At that time the Samaritanes puffed up with their prosperity, vexed
the Jews, spoiling their country and leading them away prisoners perforce.
This happened under the high Priest Onias. For after the decease of Eleazar,
Manasses his uncle obtained the Priesthood; and after the death of Manasses,
Onias the son of Simon surnamed the Just, enjoyed this dignity. Simon was
brother to Eleazar, as I have heretofore Onias was of no great capacity, and
withal was very covetous: by which means he failed to pay the twenty talents
of silver, which his predecessors were wont to pay to the kings of Egypt, of
that tribute which the people paid unto him. Whereupon Ptolomey Euergetes, the
father of Philopator, was grievously incensed against him; so as he sent an
ambassador to Jerusalem to accuse him, for that he failed to pay his
accustomed tribute, threatening him, that if hence forward he received it not,
he would divide his country amongst his soldiers, and send them to inhabit
the same. When the Jews were ascertained of his complaints, The year of the
world. 3770. before Christ's birth 194.
Onias was no whit moved thereby, because he was wholly given over to
covetousness.

CHAP. IIII.
Joseph the son of Tobias preuenteth the imminent calamity of the Jews, and
becomes Ptolomies friend.

But a certain man called Joseph, the son of Tobias, and of Onias sister,
who was the high Priest, being young in years (but honored in Jerusalem for
his wisdom, foresight, The taxatio^ of the hie priest for offending the king.
and justice) having certain notice by his mother of the arrival of this
Ambassador, Onias his uncle on the mothers side, for that he did not any ways
provide for the security of his Citizens, but sought to draw his countrymen
into a general hazard, for that he retained in his hands that money which was
levied for the tribute: Whereby he told him that he had obtained the government
over the people, and purchased the high priesthood. And that if he were so
bewitched with money, that for the love of the same he could have the patience
to see his country in hazard, and behold his Citizens also suffer all that
which cruelty could inflict upon them; he counseled him to repair unto the
king, and to require him to bestow the whole or the half of the Tribute upon
him. Hereunto Onias answered, that he would no more execute the government, and
that if it were possible for him, he was ready to give over the priesthood,
Joseph asked him, if he would permit him in the peoples behalf to go
Ambassador unto Ptolomey. Whereunto Onias answered, that he gave him free
leave. Upon this occasion Joseph went up into the temple, and summoned the
people to a general The kings ambassador honorably entertained, who
reports Joseph's liberality upon his return into his country.
assembly, exhorting them to be no ways troubled, and to conceive no fear
through the negligence of his uncle Onias, requesting them to be confident in
heart, and estraunged from all sinister suspicion; promising them that he
himself would go in Embassage unto the king, and faithfully plead their cause
before him, and persuade him that they had committed no insolent neglect, or
contempt against his majesty. Which when the people understood, they gave
Joseph hearty thanks. Whereupon he presently came down from the temple, and
honorably entertained Ptolomey, and having presented them with gifts of great
price, and feasted them magnificently for many days, he sent them back unto
their Prince; assuring them that he himself would in person follow them. And
the rather was he incited to this journey, because the Ambassador had persuaded
him to repair into Egypt, under such assurance, that he would obtain all his
requests at Ptolomeies hands; the rather for that he was won with the young
man's free spirit and noble entertainment.

As Soon as the Ambassador returned into Egypt, he certified the king of
Onias ingratitude, and Joseph's humanity; certifying him that he would come in
person to entreat pardon for the people, for that offense they had committed
against him; and the rather, for that he was in especial authority among the
people: and so far usurped he upon Joseph's praises, that both the king
Cleopatra had a good opinion of him, notwithstanding he was as yet absent. But
Joseph sent unto Samaria unto his friends, and borrowed money, making his
preparation for his voyage. Having therefore furnished himself with apparel,
vessels, and horses, with the expense of almost twenty thousand drachmes, he
arrived in Alexandria. At that very time it chanced that the Princes, and
governors of Phoenicia and Syria repaired thither to buy their tributes: for
the king was accustomed every year to sell them to the men of most respect in
every City: These meeting with Joseph on the way, began to mock at his
baseness and poverty. But when he came to Alexandria, and had intelligence
that the king was at Memphis, he set forward and went out to meet him. When as
therefore the king, accompanied with the queen and Athenion his friend, who had
discharged the place of Ambassador in Jerusalem, came riding Athenion (who had
been honorably entertained by Joseph) perceiving him upon the way, certified
the king that it was he, of whom he had spoken upon his return from Jerusalem;
protesting on his behalf, that he was both a good and honorable young man.
Whereupon Ptolomey embraced him above the rest, and made him mount his chariot.
Where he was no sooner seated, but the king began to accuse Onias for that
which he had committed. But Joseph said unto him: Pardon him, O King, and have
respect to his old old years. For you know that ordinarily old men and young
children have one and the same understanding; but for our The year of the
world. 3770. before Christ's birth 194.
Joseph sitting near unto the king, were sore displeased; and the day drawing
near wherein they were to receive the assurance of their tribute, they that
were of the greatest reckoning in their country farmed the same; so that the
tributes of Coelesyria, Phaenicia, Iudaea, and Samaria, amounted together to
eight thousand talents. Whereupon Joseph arising, blamed the farmers for that
they had plotted amongst themselves to beat down The tributes of Coelesyria
committed to Joseph.
approved the sale of these tributes unto Joseph, who in this sort augmented
his revenue. When as therefore he was demanded whether he could give sureties:
he made him answer with a bold courage: O king (said he) I will give thee such
pledges, as are both worthy and honorable, and such as you cannot mistrust.
Whenas therefore the king instanted him to produce them: I w^ (said he) O king,
present thee for sureties, thy self, and the Queen thy wife, that one of you
may be a surety for me to the other. Ptolomey smiling hereat, granted him the
farm of the tribute, without further surety. This favor of his displeased
those governors of the Cities that Joseph obtained two thousand footmen from
the king, to the end to enforce the tribute from those Cities, who were
negligent in their paiments: and after he had borrowed five hundredth talents of
the kings friends in Alexandria, he departed into Syria.

As soon as he came to Ascalon, he demanded the payment of the tribute at the
Citizens hands, which they not only refused to perform, but moreover
vpbraided him with injurious words. For which cause laying hold on about some
twenty of the principals among them, he put them to death: and having gathered
their substances together, he sent the King some thousand talents, certifying
him of that which he had done. Ptolomey admiring at his wisdom, The
Ascalonites and Scythopolitans punished for their contempt.
Joseph, through the severity of his justice and their disobedience, they
opened him the gates, and received him willingly, and paid him their tributes.
Whereas also the Scythopolitanes in way of co^tumacy refused to lay down,
according to order, their accustomed tributes; he slew the chiefest amongst
them: the confiscations of whose goods he sent unto the king. When as therefore
he had gathered much silver, and made great gains of the purchase of the
tributes, to the intent to establish and make his power of more continuance, he
liberally employed his gettings; considering with himself that it was a part
of wisdom to keep and entertain his good hap, by those riches which he
himself had gotten: For he sent many presents both to the King and Hircanus,
Joseph's wealth and children.
whom he begot on the daughter of his brother Solymius, whom he married upon
this occasion which ensues.

Walking upon a time in Alexandria in the company of his brother (who led with
him his daughter already mariageable, to the intent to bestow her upon some
Jew of good quality) whilst he sat at meat with the king, there entered into
the banquet a certain fair damsel, trained up in dancing; with whom growing
enamored, he told his brother thereof, praying him that burningly inflamed with
the love of this dancer, and told his brother that he was in danger to The
year of the world 3770. before Christ's Nativity. 194.
be enamoured all his life time; and that notwithstanding the king would not
grant her unto him. His brother told him, that he ought not to vex himself,
promising him that he should assuredly enioie her whom he loved, and that
already she was his wife; opening unto him how all things had happened, and how
he had rather wrong his own daughter then to suffer his brother to fall into
dishonor. After that Joseph had praised the kind and natural affection of his
brother toward him, he took his daughter to wife, who bare him a son called
Hircanus, as it has been said. Who being thirteen years old, gave
testimony of that natural spirit, and dexterity that Hyrcanus offspring and
towardnes.
was in him; by reason whereof his brethren conceived a certain hatred against
him, the rather for that he excelled them in all things, and had such parts in
him, as might draw them to emulate him. Whereas therefore Joseph was desirous
to know which of his children had the ripest Hircanus the youngest of them
after all the rest, into a desert place distant from the high way some seven
days journey, and gave him with him three hundredth couple of oxen, to sow the
ground in that barren place, hiding from him before his departure the yokes
that should couple them together. When as therefore he came unto the place, and
perceived that the yokes were missing, he asked advise of some of the
husbandmen: who counseled him to send some one back unto his father to fetch
the couples. But he supposing that he ought not to lose so much time as would
be spent in sending back a messenger, devised a cunning expedient stratageme,
more then might be

Whenas therefore news was brought unto Joseph, that about that time king
Ptolomey was blessed with a young son, and how all the chiefest Lords of
Syria, and the countries under his obeisance, repaired to Alexandria in great
pomp to celebrate the birth day of the kings son; he being of himself
unable (by reason of his age) to repair thither, he sounded his children,
Hircanus might be sent: Joseph took great pleasure thereat, and calling for
Hircanus, asked him if Joseph sends his son Hircanus to Ptolomey.
he would go to king Ptolomey; who promised to undertake the journey, and told
his father that he needed no great sum of money to perform the voyage;
because in the way he would travel frugally, and content himself for the
whole expense with ten thousand drachmes. Joseph was very glad to hear of his
sons prudence; and after Hircanus had kept silence for a while he counseled
his father, that he should not present the King with any thing out of Iudaea,
but that he should write unto his factor in Alexandria, commanding him to
deliver such sums of money Joseph imagining with himself, that perhaps he
would only employ some ten talents in presents, and allowing his sons
counsel, wrote unto his factor Arion (who had the The year of the world.
3780. before Christ's birth 184. Treason intended against Hircanus.
use of almost three thousand talents of his in Alexandria.) For gathering up
his money in Syria he was wont to send it thither; and as often as the prefixed
time came wherein the kings tributes were to be paid, he commanded Arion to
defray the same: Having therefore letters of credence unto him, he iourneyed
toward Alexandria. Whereupon his brethren wrote presently unto all the kings
friends, that by some means they would make him away. As soon as he was
arrived in Alexandria, and had delivered his fathers letters to Arion; Arion
asked him how many talents he would have? hoping that he would crave but ten,
or some little overplus: but Hircanus had told him that he had need of a
thousand, he waxed wroth; and reproved him for his prodigality, telling him
how his father had gathered his goods with much travail, and thriftie sparing;
and refusing his demands, he prayed him to imitate his fathers example who had
begot him: and in a word he told him, that he would deliver him no more then
ten talents; and that for no other use, then to buy gifts to present the king
withal. Whereupon Hircanus waxing angry, caused Arion to be kept in prison:
All which his wife certified to Cleopatra, praying her that she would moderate
the young man (for Arion was in great estimation with the The year of the
world. 3780. before the Nativity of Christ. 184. Hircanus apology of his
actions.
Ptolomey sent for Hircanus, and said unto him; that he marueiled that being
sent unto him from his father, he had not as yet visited him; and besides that,
he had committed his fathers agent to prison: he therefore commanded him to
yield him a reason thereof. Whereunto he answered, that there was a law among
the Jews, that no man should taste of the sacrifices that had not first of all
visited the temple, and sacrificed unto God; and that in that respect he had
not hitherto visited his majesty, because he expected certain presents to
present his highness with from his father, who was his bounden servant.
Furthermore, he alleged, that he had punished his fathers servant, because he
had disobeyed his commandment, which he ought not to do, whether his master
were either noble or ignoble: and if (said he) we chastise not such men as they
have deserved, expect (O

When Ptolomey heard these words, he began to smile, and wondered at the
magnanimity of the young man. Arion perceiving that the king held himself
satisfied, and that he was like to have no assistance at his hands, delivered
Hircanus the thousand talents, and by this means was he set at liberty. Some
three days after, Hircanus came and saluted both the king and Queen, who
entertained him graciously, and feasted him kindly, for the affection sake
which they bare unto his father. He privily inquiring among the merchants,
bought one hundredth young laddes well lettered, and in the flower of their age,
paying a talent for every one; and the like number of virgins for so many
talents. Being therefore invited to a banquet by the king, with all the Princes
and other Lords, he was placed beneath them all, because that (by reason of his
young Hircanus, so that the table was laden round about him, a certain
pleasant fellow of the Kings called Triphon (whose merry conceits and jests
the king very willingly listened unto) during the time he was at meat, being
solicited by those that were at the table, came unto the king and said unto
him. See here my liege, what store of bones are before Hircanus: hereby you may
conjecture, that his father has fleeced all Syria, as he has bared these
bones of flesh. The king laughing Hircanus jests.
at Triphons words, asked Hircanus how he came by so many bones before him? Not
without great cause (said he) O king; for dogs devour the flesh with the
bones, as these do (in which speech he glanced at those who sat with him at
the table, because they had no bones before the^) The king wondering at his
discreet answer, commanded all the rest to applaud him, in approbation of his
witty vrbanity. Hircanus sounding what other me^ would give, gauemore then the
rest, for which he receives another kingly reward.


The next day he sought out all the kings friends, and the principals in court,
and saluted them one by one, enquiring of their servants, what presents they
would court the king with upon the birth of his son? Who told him, that some
of them would give twelve talents, and othersome that were in dignity, would
present him according to their ability. Whereupon Hircanus made a show of
discontent, in that he wanted power to offer such a present, pretending that he
had no more but five talents. All which these servants presently reported to
their masters: who were very joyful thereat, for the hope they had conceived
that Joseph should be blamed, and would offend the King through the abiectnesse
of his present. Now when the day of the solemnity was Hircanus presented the
hundredth young Lads he had bought, to the King, and the virgins unto Cleopatra:
for whom he had paid a talent by the powle. At this unexpected magnificence of
his gift, all men were amazed: but beside this, he gave gifts of diverse talents
to the King and Queens favorites and servants, and their attendants; whereby
he warranted himself from the danger that might fall unto him by their means.
For the brothers of Hircanus had written unto them, to murder him. Ptolomey
was highly delighted in the great magnificence of this young man, and willed
him to ask whatsoever gift he best liked at his hands. But he required no
other thing, but that it would please the King to recommend him, by his
letters, to his father and brethren. When as therefore the king had singularly
honored him, and had Hircanus brothers assailing him on the way, are slain
and discomfited.
out to meet with him, with an intent to murder him, with their fathers
knowledge. For he being displeased with him, by reason of his above named large
expense, had no care to warrantize him: yet concealed he his discontent for
fear of the king. But when his brothers came and encountered him on the way, he
slew diverse of those that accompanied them, and two of his brethren The year
of the world, 3780. before Christ's birth 184.
also were left slain upon the place, and the rest fled to Jerusalem unto
their father. And when as upon his repair unto Jerusalem, he perceived that no
man entertained him, he waxed afraid, and departed presently from thence to
the other side of Jordan, where he past his life in receiving and gathering the
tributes of the Barbarians. In that time Seleucus surnamed Soter the son of
Antiochus the great reigned in Asia. At that time also died Joseph, Hircanus
father, who was a man of good conceit and great courage; who established the
people of the Jews in their entire Joseph's death. Onias, and after him Simon
his son high priest. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4.
peace, and had released them from prouertie and many desasters, and had held
the tributes of Syria, Phoenicia, and Samaria for the space of twenty two
years. His uncle Onias died also about the same time; leaving the priesthood to
his son Simon; after whose death, his son Onias was made high priest: to
whom Arius king of Lacedemon sent an embassade and letters, the copy

CHAP. V.
The frienship and society of the Lacedaemonians, with Onias the high Priest of
the Jews.

ARius King of Lacedemon, to Onias Health: We have found out a certain writing
wherein The letter of the king of Lacedemon to the high priest of the Jews. 1.
Machab. 12.
it is recorded, that the Jews and Lacedaemonians are of the same race, and
both of them descended from Abraham. It is therefore requisite, that since you
are our brethren, that you give us to understand wherein we may pleasure you.
The like will we do also, and will Demoteles our messenger brings you our
letters foulded in square, the seal whereof is an Aegle holding a Dragon in
hertalous. These were the contents of the Lacedaemonians letters. After the
death of Joseph it came to pass, that the people began to mutine in the
quarrel of his children. Sedition amongst the people after Joseph's death.
For the elder brethren made war against Hircanus, who was the yoonger, by
means whereof the people were divided: The greater part of them followed the
Elder faction, and the high Priest Simon also, by reason of his affinity with
them, followed their party. Whereupon Hircanus resolved to repair no more
unto Jerusalem, but fixing his habitation on the other side of Jordan, he made
continual war against the Arabians, slaying a great number of them, and
taking many prisoners. He builded a huge tower of white marble from the bottom
to the top, Hircanus afflicts the Arabians with continual war. Hircanus
builds a strong tower.
About the same he drew and forced a deep trench of flowing water; and having
hewed the front of the rock that stood opposite against his building, he made
diverse caves therein, many furlongs long. He made also diverse chambers therein,
both to eat, sleep, and dwell in. He drew thither likewise currants of
springing water, in so great abundance, that it gave much delight to those that
dwelt there, and great ornament to the whole building. The mouth of every cave
was so little, that but one only man could enter at once, which he therefore
made so narrow, because they might the better serve for his security and
refuge; that if so be he were at any time assailed by his brethren, he might
avoid the danger of surprisall. Moreover, he builded many huge halles, which he
adorned with great and goodly gardens, and this place thus builded, was The
year of the world, 3790. before Christ's Nativity, 174. Antiochus Epiphanes
king of Syria. The sons of Prolomey Epiphanes, Philometor and Physcon.
Hircanus kills himself. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 6. 1. Macchab. 1. Jesus
created high Priest by Antiochus Epiphanes. Jesus deprived of the priesthood.
far from the country of Essebonitis. He commanded in this country some seven
years, all that time that Seleucus reigned in Syria. After whose death, his
brother Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, obtained the kingdom. Ptolomey also
King of Egypt (who was likewise called Epiphanes) died, and left two children
very young behind him, of whom the eldest was called Philometor, and the younger
Physcon. When as therefore Hircanus perceived that Antiochus grew mighty and
strong, and feared to be punished by him for his executions done against the
Arabians, he slew himself with his own hands, and Antiochus enioied all his
goods.

CHAP. VI.
A mutiny of the rich Jews the one against the other.

ONias the high Priest being dead about this time, Antiochus gave the
priesthood to Jesus his brother. For that son, unto whom Onias had left the
succession, was as yet very young (of whom we will speak in convenient time
and place.) This Jesus (Onias brother) was deprived of the priesthood, through
the kings displeasure conceived against him, who gave it shortly after to his
younger brother called Onias: For Simon had three sons, who, as we The year
the of world. 3790. before Christ's birth, 174. Onias surnamed Menelaus
substituted in his place. The wars betwixt Jason and Menelaus. Apostates from
the Jewish religion.
Jesus caused himself to be called Jason, as his other brother caused himself
to be called Menelaus, whereas his name was Onias. But Jesus, who had first of
all been established in the place of the high priest, arose against Menelaus,
who was elected in the place after him. The people therefore were divided into
factions, and Tobias sons were on Menelaus side: but the greater number of
people followed Jason: so that Menelaus and the sons of Tobias being
grievously vexed by them, retired themselves to Antiochus, giving him to
understand, that it was their intent to forsake the religion and ordinances of
their fathers, and to follow that of the kings, and to live after the manner of
the Greeks; exhorting him to give them license to erect a place of Exercises in
Jerusalem. Which when Antiochus had granted them, they so demeaned themselves,
that there appeared no more sign of Antiochus having all things in his
kingdom, according to his hearts desire, resolved to make war in Egypt;
desiring to be possessed of the same, both for that he contemned Ptolomeies
sons age, (who were as yet weak) as also for that they were not as yet
capeable to manage their so mighty estates. Arriving therefore near to Pelusium
with a great power, he circumuented by a subtle policy the young Ptolomey
Philometor, and subdued Egypt: for after he had besieged Memphis and taken the
same, he came to Alexandria, with an intent to besiege the City, and to lay
hold of the king who was therein. But he was driven, not only from Alexandria,
but also out of all Egypt, by the Antiochus enforced to depart out of Egypt.
The history of Antiochus Epiphanes.


CHAP. VII.
Antiochus leads out his army against Jerusalem, takes the City and
spoileth the Temple.

AFter that King Antiochus was returned out of Egypt, and for the fear of the
Romans had forsaken that country, he led his army against Jerusalem, and
encamped Antiochus entering Jerusalem spoileth the temple. The year of the
world, 3796. before Christ's birth 168.
before the City, and surprised it by surrender, in that the gates of the
City were set open unto him by those of his faction: all which happened in the
hundredth, forty and third year of the reign begun by Seleucus. Now when he
faw himself Lord and master of Jerusalem, he slew diverse of the contrary
faction; and after he had gathered together many great and rich spoils, he
returned back to Antioch. This misfortune happened some two years after the
surprisall of the City, in the hundredth, forty and five year of the reign
of that family, on the five and twentieth day of that month which we call
Chasleu, and the Macedons Apellaeus, the The year of the world. 3798. before
Christ's birth 166.
them, who gave him peaceable entrance, and opened him the gates, and effected
him the means to spoil the inestimable riches of the temple, with greater
freedom: but being no less tyrannous to the friend, then to the offender, he
spared neither. For having seen what quantity of gold was in the temple, and
how huge a number of presents and precious ornaments were in the same, he was
so overcome with covetousness, that he brake and violated all conuentions and
conditions. After therefore he had spoiled the temple, and carried away the
vessels dedicated unto God, the golden candlestick, the golden altar, the
table of show bread, the censors, and pulled down the curtains made of fine
linen and scarlet; after he had emptied the treasures that were hidden, and
left nothing behind him of any value: he drowned all the Jews in grievous and
towers, he planted a garrison of Macedonians therein, with whom remained the
rabble and The year of the world. 379^. before Christ's birth 166. Antiochus
abrogating Gods law through extreme tyranny enforces the Jews to Idolatry, and
fortifieth the temple. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 7.
skumme of the wicked Apostate Jews, who were given over to all impieties, and
who also afflicted their fellow Citizens with many and mischievous injuries.
The King also commanded that an Altar should be erected in the temple, on
which he caused swine to be slaughtered, offering sacrifice contrary to the
religion and ordinance of the Jews. He constrained them likewise to forsake
their devotion toward God, and to adore those Idols whom he reverenced for
Gods, building in every City and Borough both Temples and Altars, on which he
ordinarily caused swine to be offered. He forbadde them likewise to circumcise
their children, threatening to punish him whosoever he were, that was found to
do the contrary. Moreover he chose certain ouersecrs that should constrain
them to fulfill his commandment; so that a great number of Jews, some of
their own accord, othersome for fear of the threatened punishment, endeavored
themselves

The Samaritanes seeing this affliction of the Jews, claimed them no more for
their kinsmen, The devil seekehth to abolish the Bible. The variable wits of
the Samaritanes which made them so odious in the sight of the Jews.
and called their temple of Garizim no more the temple of God, but (as we have
heretofore declared) they showed their own corrupt and unconstant natures, and
challenged their descent from the Medes and Persians, as in effect they were:
for which cause they sent ambassadors to Antiochus with letters to this
effect. To King Antiochus the mighty God, the suggestion of the Sidonians that
dwell in Sichem.
Our ancestors enforced by the continual pestilence that raunged in their
country, and induced by a certain ancient superstition, have been
accustomed to observe that day as festival, which the Jews call their
Sabbath; and having builded on the mount of Garizim a temple, and dedicated it
unto a god, who has no name, have offered up in the same The year of the
world. 3799. before Christ's birth 165.
diverse and solemn sacrifices. But since that you have inflicted punishment on
the Jews, according as their wickedness deserves, the commissaries of the King
supposing that we were Apollonius, and your steward Nicanor, not to molest us
any more, by charging us with those accusations which appertain unto the
Jews: who neither are tied unto us by alliance, neither accord with us in
manners; but that our temple, which has not hitherto born the name or title of
any God, may now be called the temple of Jupiter of Greece: by which means we
shall be delivered from all trouble, and being at liberty to intend our
affairs, we may the easier and more willingly pay you greater tributes.


To this request of the Samaritanes the King answered, sending them back their
own letter: King Antiochus
to Nicanor; Health.
The Sidonians of Sichem have sent us this suggestion; which we annexe unto
these our letters. Since therefore they, who were sent unto us to this intent,
have sufficiently approved both to us and our counsel of friends, that they
are utterly strangers unto those crimes, wherewith the Jews are charged, and
are desirous to live according to the laws of the Graecians, we absolve them
in as much as concerns this cause, and their temple, which hereafter shall be
called by the name of Jupiter of Greece: we have written to the like effect
also to Apollonius our Magistrate.

Given the forty and six year, and the eleventh of the Month Hecatombaeon,
which signifies August.



CHAP. VIII.
Antiochus forbids the Jews to use their laws, only Matthias the son of
Asmonaeas contradicts him, and obtains the victory against Antiochus
captains.

AT that same time there dwelt a certain man in Modin (a village of Jury)
whose name was Matthias, who was the son of John, and who was the son of
Simon, the son of Asmonaeus a Priest of the rank of Ioarib, borne in
Jerusalem: This Matthias had five sons, John called Gaddis, Simon called
Matthes, Judas called Machabaeus, Eleazar named Auran, and The year of the
world. 3799. before the Nativity of Christ. 165. The zeal and piety of
Matthias and his sons.
Ionathas called Apphus. This Matthias oftentimes complained unto his sons,
as touching the miserable estate of their commonweal, the sack of their
City, the sacrilege of the temple, and the miseries of the people, telling
them that it were better for them to die for the law, then to live in
ignominy. When as therefore the commissaries deputed by the King, came unto
the Borough of Modim, to constrain the Jews to perform that which was
enjoined them, and to command them to sacrifice, according to the ordinance;
requiring Matthias (who surpassed the rest in honor, and other qualities, but
in especial in excellency of descent and nobility) to begin first of all to
offer sacrifice, to the end that the rest might follow him and be induced by
his example; promising him that in so doing, the King would honor him greatly.
Matthias answered thereunto, that he would in no sort commit that idolatry,
assuring them that notwithstanding Antiochus; yet that neither he, nor any of
his children could or would be induced to forsake their fathers religion. Now
as soon as he had returned this answer, and held his peace, a certain Jew
stepped forth to offer sacrifice, according to Antiochus ordinance; wherewith
Matthias was in such sort displeased, that both he and his sons fell upon
him, and with their swords An Apostata slain by Matthias.
hewed him to pieces. He slew Apelles the kings captain likewise, with
certain other soldiers, who would have withstood him. And not content
herewith, he overthrew the Altar, crying out with a loud voice: If (said he)
any one be affectioned to the laws of his fathers, and the service of God, let
him follow me: and this said, he suddenly retired himself into the desert with
his sons, leaving the borough utterly dispossessed. The rest doing the like,
retired themselves into the desert, Matthias with his sons Hieth into the desert
The Jews are slain on the Sabbath day, which slaughter makes Matthias more
werie.
cease from all labor, on that day.) There were therefore about some thousand
stifled in their caves, accounting both men, women and children. Yet
notwithstanding diverse escaped, who joined themselves with Matthias, whom they
appointed likewise for their captain; who declared unto them that they ought
to fight on the Sabbath day, assuring them that if they did it not, but
scrupulously observed the law, they themselves should be enemies unto
themselves, if perhaps the enemy should assail them that day, and should not
stand upon their guard: for by that means they should be destroyed without
resist. By these words he persuaded them to do as he had said: and until this
day it is a custom among us, that if need require we make no difficulty to
fight on the Sabbath day. Matthias therefore having assembled a sufficient
number of Matthias rooteth out all Idolatry.
for the fear they had; these commanded he to circumcise their children that
were not circumcised; driving those from every place, whom King Antiochus had
ordained to see his law executed.

After therefore Matthias had governed for the space of one year, he fell
sick of a most desperate disease; for which cause he called for his sons,
and spoke unto them after this manner. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 8.
My sons, I must now walk the way that is destinated unto all men: I
therefore recommend and exhort you to follow my deliberation, and diligently to
observe the same, remembering you of the intent of me your father, who have
begot and nourished you, which is, to maintain Matthias exhorts his sons to
piety, fortitude and concord.
except you submit unto those who either voluntarily or forcibly betray the
same: show your selves therefore to be worthy sons of me who am your father;
strengthen your hearts with courage to overcome all force and necessity;
thinking with your selves, that if God see that you be such, he will not
forsake you, but taking pleasure in your virtue, he will once more grant you
the favor to recover your former peace and liberty, and will establish you in
assured possession of your ancient laws. True it is, our bodies are mortal
and subject unto destiny, but the memory The year of the world, 3799 before
Christ's birth 165.
of our virtuous actions are enfranchised by immortality: being therefore
stirred up with the love thereof, strive and bestirre your selves to obtain
honor, to the end that proiecting mighty things, you make no difficulty to
hazard your lives in the execution of the same. Above al things, I exhort you
unto concord, to the end that in whatsoever one of you shall be found more
naturally apt and fitted then another, he may prosecute the same without any
contradiction of the rest. I charge you also to observe and obey your brother
Simon (who is a politic and valiant man) in whatsoever he shall counsel
you. As touching your chiefetaine, you shall serve under Machabaeus, because he
is both valiant and strong: for he shall revenge the injuries and outrages,
which have been done to our nation, and put our enemies to flight: second him
therefore with men of valor, and such as fear God: and by this means you shall
augment your forces.

CHAP. IX.
Matthias dies, and his son Judas succeeds him.

AFter Matthias had spoken in this sort unto his sons, and prayed God to
favor their (...). Macchab. 3. Matthias death Judas Machabaeus appointed
governor.
enterprises, and to restore the people to their ancient policy, and the
accustomed fashion of their life, which they had in former times continued and
observed; he died anon after, and was buried in Modin. And after the people
had grievously lamented and mourned for him, for a certain time; and performed
publicly such honor in his funerals, as was agreeable to his estate: his
son Judas Machabaeus took upon him the government

CHAP. X.
Apollonius general of Antiochus army, comes into Iewry, and is discomfited
and slain.

WHen Apollonius, who was Antiochus general in Samaria heard hereof, he
gathered his Machabaeus made head, and overcame Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 9.
Judas Machabaeus overcomes Apollonius in battle. Seron governor of
Coelesyria is put to flight in Iudaea
him in a battle, wherein there died many, and among the rest Apollonius;
whose sword Machabeus got as his part in the spoil. There were a great number
of them also who were wounded, and much booty was taken in the enemies camp:
after which execution enriched with spoils, he retired himself. But Seron
governor of Coelesyria hearing hereof, and understanding that diverse had
joined themselves with Judas, and that he had already about him a sufficient
power to keep the field, and bid the battle; he thought that it concerned
him to begin to punish those, who resisted the kings Edicts. For which cause
after he had assembled all the forces that he had, and besides them hired
certain apostate or figitiue Jews, he marched forth against Judas, and came
as far as Bethoron a village in Iewry, where he encamped. Judas also that the
means to obtain victory, and to have the upper hand over their enemies,
consisted not in the greatness of their number; but in their devotion toward
God: whereof they had a most evident example in their forefathers, who had
oftentimes defeated with a small number of men diverse thousands of their
enemies, because they fought for justice, for their law, and for their
children: for the greatest force (said he) that a man may have, is to be
innocent and without injury. By these words persuaded he his soldiers, so
that without any fear of the multitude of their enemies, they all together
ran upon Seron, and encountering with him, they discomfited Judas therefore,
pursuing them as far as the Champion, slew about eight hundredth of them. The
rest saved themselves in those quarters that bounded upon the sea.

CHAP. XI. The year of the world. 3799. before Christ's birth 165.

Lysias and Gorgias lead their armies into Iewry, and are overthrown.

WHen King Antiochus heard these tidings, he was highly displeased at that
which had happened: he therefore assembled all his forces, and hiring diverse
strangers and mercenarie Antiochus preparation to invade Iudaea.
Islanders, he prepared himself to invade Iudaea about the spring time. But
after the muster of his army, when he truly found that his treasures failed
him, and that he was in great scarcity of money (for all his tributes were not
truly paid him, because the nations were rebellious) being likewise in his
own nature a man of a great and magnificent spirit, that could not be
contented with that which he then had, he resolved first of all to go into
Persia, to gather Lysias (a man very much esteemed by him, and such a one as
governed all the country from Euphrates, as far as the borders of Egypt,
and the lower Asia) giving him likewise a part of his army and some of his
Elephants. To him had the King given charge to see his son Antiochus well and
carefully trained up, until his return: commanding him expressly, that when
he had conquered Iudaea, he should make Antiochus committing his kingdom,
provinces and son to Lysias charge, departs into Persia.
the inhabitants thereof his slaves, and sell them to those that would give
most, and destroy Jerusalem, and utterly abolish that race. The king having
given this charge to Lysias, led forth his army toward the country of Persia,
in the hundredth, forty and seventh year: and after he had passed Euphrates,
he marched onward toward the governors of the higher country.

As for Lysias he chose Ptolomey the son of Dorymenis, Nicanor and Gorgias
(men of great The year of the world, 3800. before Christ's birth 164.
thousand horsemen, to invade Iewry. Who marching as far as the City of
Emaus, encamped in the plain field, and strengthened their army with diverse
allies out of Syria, and of the countries thereabouts, and with diverse Jews
also, who were Apostataes. There came also certain merchants with them, with
an intent to buy those that should be taken prisoners, bringing Gives with them
to manacle those that should be apprehended, and money to pay for them. When
Judas had viewed the camp, and numbered the enemy, he encouraged his soldiers,
exhorting Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 10. Ptolomey, Gorgias, aand Nicanors war,
in Iudaea.
them to repose their confidence and hope of victory on God, willing them to
invoke and call upon him, according to their law, and that clothing
themselves in sackcloth they should humble themselves according to their
accustomed manner in such extreme dangers, and call upon My countrymen and
companions, never have we hitherto had any occasion more necessary, wherein we
ought to express our courages, and contemn our dangers, Judas oration to his
soldiers.
the^ at this present. For at this time, if you fight courageously, you may
recover your liberty, which of it self is so acceptable unto you all, that
being of it self most desired, ought the rather more Thus spoke Judas to his
army, to encourage them.

Whilst thus he was intent about the future battle, certain tidings was
brought him, that 1. Machab. 4.
Gorgias was sent with one thousand horsemen, and five thousand footmen, to the
end that (under the conduct of some fugitives) he might by night time, and when
he least suspected him, set upon him: Whereupon he decreed the very same night
to break into the enemies army, especially for that he knew that their forces
were divided. Having therefore refreshed both himself and his army somewhat
lively, and left a number of fires in his camp, he marched all the night, and
sought out the enemy, who was at Emaus. Gorgias perceiving that the Jews had
forsaken their camp, supposed that they were retired for fear into the
mountains to hide themselves: For which The year of the world 38^0. before
Christ's Nativity. 164.
causes travailing onward, he determined to search diligently in what place
they might be. But early in the morning, Judas accompanied with three thousand
men (who were slenderly armed by reason of their poverty) showed himself unto
his enemies, who were at Emaus; and after he had suruaied and seen their
warlike discipline, and mighty number, and how souldierlike they were
encamped, he exhorted his followers, telling them that it concerned them to
fight, notwithstanding they should be naked: for although they were in that
estate, yet God (who took pleasure in the greatness of their courage) had
already given them the victory against a number of armed soldiers: and
suddenly he commanded the trumpets to sound, so that rushing in upon his
enemies on the sudden he dismayed them, and discomforted their hearts. And
after he had slain diverse of them who resisted, and put all the rest to
flight, he pursued them as far Judas overcomes Lysias army.
about some three thousand of the enemy. Notwithstanding Judas would not permit
his soldiers as yet to take the benefit of the spoil, because they were as
yet to fight against Gorgias and his army; assuring them, that as soon as they
had valiantly executed the same, it should be lawful for them to make their
booty, without fear, because they should have no further enemies either to
fear or expect. Whilst he spoke in this sort unto his soldiers, they that
were with Gorgias discovering from the top of a certain hill, perceived that
the army that was left behind them, was put to flight; and that their camp was
on fire: for although they were far off, yet did the smoke assure them of
the same. When these men understood that the matter had fallen out in this
sort, and perceived that Judas and his fellows in battle ray expected their
coming, Judas perceived that Gorgias troops were discomfited, without stroke
stricken, he went out to gather the pillage; and after Judas gathere^ a huge
(...).
he had gotten together great store of gold, silver, scarlet, and purple, he
returned to his dwelling place, with joy, praising God for their happy
success: For this victory did not a little advantage them, toward the
attainment of their liberty. But Lysias being confused at the discomfiture
(...) once (...) (...) (...) and lo^ five thousand of his soldiers.
of those whom he had sent, assembled an other army of almost threescore
thousand chosen men, and five thousand horsemen, to invade Iudaea. After he had
therefore made his entry by the mountains, he encamped in Bethsura a village
of Iudaea. Judas having knowledge thereof, came forth against him, accompanied
with ten thousand men; and discovering the number of his enemies far to
exceed his (after he had besought God by prayer that it would please him
Lysias knowing the resolution of the Jews, and how they were pressed to die,
except they might live in liberty; on the other side redoubting their
desperations, more then their forces, he gathered together the rest of his
army, and returned back to Antioch: where he soiourned, hiring many foreign
The temple of Jerusalem. The year of the world, 3801. before Christ's birth 163.
soldiers, to make a greater army and preparation to invade Iewry with all.
After that Antiochus captains had been discomfited so many times, Judas
assembled the people together, and told them, that after they had obtained so
many victories through the mercy of God, it behooued them to ascend up unto
Jerusalem, and to purify the temple that was desolated; and to offer those
sacrifices ordained by the law. Ascending therefore thither with a multitude of
people, he found Antiochus, he builded a new of all sorts of stones, neither
hewn, nor hammered according to art. The five and twenty day of the month of
Chasleu (with us September) there were lights set upon the candlestickes, and
perfumes The temple left desolate for three whole years space. Dan. 12.
which happened the same day three years wherein before time the sacred Religion
was changed into profane and hateful impiety. For the temple was ruinated
and left desolate by Antiochus, and remained in that estate for the space of
three whole years. For this desolation happened in the hundredth, forty and fifth
year, and the five and twentieth day of the month called Apellaeus or August;
in the hundredth, fifty and three Olympiade: and the temple was repurged on the
same day, in the year one hundredth, forty and eight; and the hundredth, fifty
and fourth Olympiade. The year of the world. 3801. before Christ's birth, 163.
Daniel had foreprophecied, four hundredth and eight years before: for he
declared evidently that the Macedonians should destroy the same.

After that Judas had reestablished the service of the temple, both he and his
countrymen solemnized The festival solemnized for the reestablishment of the
temple.
a feast for eight days, omitting not any kind of honest pleasure, banqueting
them sumptuously and magnificently, and honoring God in Hymns and Psalms.
Thus rejoiced they at this reestablishment, seeing that contrary to all hope
after so long time, they had recovered the customs of their country, and
their ancient religion: so that a decree was made for those which should come
after, whereby it was commanded, that for the space of eight days the
rebuilding of the temple should be solemnized, with the ceremonies and ancient
ordinances: and Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 21. Match. 5. Judas makes continual
war with the neighboring nations.
about displeased with the reestablishment and force of the Jews, oppressed
diverse, whom they surprised by ambushes and treachery. On those Judas made
continual war to hinder their incursions, and to make them partakers of
those evils they had inflicted upon the Jews. So that inuading Acrabathan he
slew the Idumaeans that were descended from Esau, and brought away a great pray
out of their country, and shut up the sons of Baan their prince, who lay in
wait Timotheus. These did he encounter with and overcome, and took their
City of Iazor, and burned it, and led away their wives and children into
captivity, and afterward returned into Iudaea. The neighboring nations
hearing of his departure, assembled themselves together in Galaad against the
Jews, who inhabited the frontires of Galaad, who having retired themselves to
the fort of Dathema, sent letters unto Judas, giving him to understand that
Timotheus intended to surprise the place whereunto they were retreated, and
requested him to deliver them from this danger. And whilst he was reading of
these letters, certain messengers came unto him out of Galilee, giving him to
understand, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11.
that they were assaulted by the inhabitants of Ptolemais, Tire, Sidon, and
other people thereabouts.

CHAP. XII.
Judas fights with the Ammonites, Simon against the Tyrians, and others, whom
he discomfiteth.

IVdas bethinking himself of that which best concerned him in these two urgent
and instant occasions, commanded his brother Simon to take three thousand
chosen men with him, and to go and succor those Jews that were assailed in
Galilee: and himself Jonathan his other brother, and eight thousand fighting
men, repaired unto the country of Galaad; leaving the government of the rest
of the forces in the hands of Joseph the son of Zachary, and with Azarias,
commanding them to have a careful and diligent eye to Iudaea, and not to
enter battle with any one, until his return. Simon arriving in Galalee,
fought against his enemies, and discomfited them; and afterward pursuing them
that fled as far as the gates of Ptolemais, he slew about three thousand: and
after he had gathered the Simo ouerco^ming his enemies in Galilee, delivers
the Jews that were captive. Judas and Ionathas succor the Jews besieged in
Galaad.
spoils of such as were slain, he set many Jews at liberty, who were
prisoners, and having restored them their goods, retired himself back again
to his country. But Judas Machabaeus, and Jonathan his brother having past
Jordan, and marched on the other side thereof for the space of three days,
encountered with the Nabatheans, who peaceably came out to meet them; by whom
Bosra taken and burnt.
bear arms. Neither was he contented therewith, but when night drew on, he
marched toward another Castle where the Jews were enclosed, and shutvp by
Timothy and his army; and attaining The year of the world. 3801. before
Christ's birth 163. Judas succoureth the besieged Jews.
Timotheus soldiers perceiving that it was Machabaeus, whose valor and good
hap they had already approved to their great loss, they without delay took
themselves to flight. But Judas with his army followed after them, and slew
about eight thousand of them, and marching toward Malla (a City of the
enemies) he surprised the same, and Timothies soldiers slain. Malla taken and
bu^nt. Chaspoma and Bosor taken Timothy gathers new forces, and is overcome
by Judas.
slew all the men therein, and afterward consumed it with fire. After this
departing thence, he took and destroyed Chaspoma, Bosor, and diverse other
places in Galaad.

Anon after Timothy levied an other great army, and drew out with him all his
allies to his succor, and a number of Arabians, whom he had hired for wages:
with this army of his passed he the flood, and encamped near unto a town
called Rapha; exhorting his soldiers to behave themselves like valiant men
against their enemies the Jews, and to hinder their passage over the stream:
foretelling them, that if they should win the passage, both he and his were
assured of the worst. Judas understanding that Timotheus was prepared to fight,
took with him al his forces, and marched hastily against the enemy; so that
having passed the river he set upon the^, killing diverse of them that resisted,
and grievously affrighting the rest, who casting away their arms, were
constrained to fly. There were some of them, who saved themselves by swiftnes
of foot: and some also, who retired themselves into a temple called Carnain,
where they were in hope to be secured and so to escape: but Judas had taken in
the City where the temple was, he slew them, and burnt the same, enforcing his
enemies to suffer diverse and dreadful sorts of death. After this execution, he
led away The Jews are brought out of the country of Galaad into Iu^aea. Ephron
besieged and burnt
with him from Galaad all the Jews, their wives and children, and substance,
and brought them with him into Iudaea. When as therefore he drew near unto
the town of Ephron, which was situate directly in his way, so that it was
impossible for him to march any other ways or return home, except they
leuelled their way (which they refused to do) he sent Ambassadors unto the
inhabitants to pray them to open their gates; and to grant him free passage
through their City. For they had made Baricadoes of stones to cut off the
passage. When as therefore the Ephronites would give no ear unto him, he
besieged their City for a day and a nights space, and took and burned the
same, and slew all the men that were therein, and afterward drew

After they had past Jordan, they came into a great plain, wherein the City
of Bethsan (by the Greeks called Scythopolis) confronted their eyes; from
whence they departed and came into Iudaea with joy and gladness, singing and
praising God, and using their accustomed An admirable victory of Judas
Machabaeus, who in all these conflictes lost not one man. Joseph and Zachary
overcome by Gorgias, lose two thousand ^olgiers.
pastimes and songs of victory. This done, he offered up sacrifices of
thanksgiving for their happy success, and the safety of his army; for that
in all those battles and encounters he had not lost one Jew.

In the mean while two captains, to wit, Joseph the son of Zachary and
Azarias, who were left for the garrison of Iudaea (whilst Simon went into the
country of Galilee against those of Judas and Jonathan his brother were in
Galaad against the Ammonites) desirous also for their part to obtain the
honor and reputation of valiant men of war by some notable exploit; took
their forces, and went toward Iamnia. Against these issued out Gorgias, who
was governor in that place, and charged them in such sort, as the Jews lost
some two thousand men, and fled as far as the marches of Iudaea. This
mischief fell upon them, because they had disobeyed Judas commandment, who
had prohibited them to fight with any before his return. For besides many
other proiects of his warlike prudence, this is to be wondered at, that he
forsaw that if they should attempt any thing contrary to his command, they
should have but bad success therein. Judas and his brethren making war
against the Idumaeans, gave them no respite, but continually charged them on
every side: they took also the City of Chebron, Chebron and Marissa besieged.
the enemies, and raced the City of Marissa likewise. Afterward coming to
Azot, they took and spoiled it, and carried away a great quantity of booty
from thence, and returned back into Iudaea in safety, joyful of their
victory.

CHAP. XIII. The year of the world. 38^1. before Christ's birth 163.

The death of Antiochus Epiphanes in Persia.

AT that time Antiochus travailing along the higher countries of his kingdom,
understood Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13. 1. Mac. (...). Antiochus desirous to
spoil Dianaes temple, besieges Elymias, and is shamefully repulsed to
Babylon. The year of the world. 3802. before Christ's birth 162.
that there was a very w^althy City in Persia called Elymais, in which there
was a rich temple of Diana, replenished with all sorts of presents: wherein
also he was informed, that Alexanders arms and curets, who was Philip king of
Macedons son, were reserved there of long time. Upon these considerations he
was incited to repair unto Elymais, which he besieged and labored to take by
force. And for that the inhabitants thereof, were neither affrighted with his
approach, nor terrified with his siege, but sustained the same valiantly, he
failed Antiochus Epiphanes burdned with cares falls sick.
in such sort, that he knew well that he should die: and for that cause he
called for his most familiar friends, and certified them, that his sickness
was violent and desperate, and that he was seized with such affliction, for
that he had tormented the people of the Jews, and destroyed their temple,
committed horrible sacrilege, and contemned the reverence of God: and whilst
thus Polybius Megalopolitan of the cause of Antiochus sickness.
Polybius the Megalopolitane (who is otherwise praise worthy) for that he
writes that Antiochus died, for that he would have spoiled the temple of Diana
in the country of Persia. For since he had only intended to commit
sacrilege, but had not effected it, he merited not to suffer punishment for
the same. And if it seems good unto Polybius, that Antiochus was punished by
death for this occasion, it is far more likely to be true, that his death
befell him for the sacrilege he had committed in the temple of Jerusalem. But
our purpose is not to argue against those that maintain, that Polybius reasons
are of greater truth and consequence, then ours are.

CHAP. XIIII.
Antiochus Eupator discomfiteth the Jews, and besieges Judas, and shuts
him up in the temple.

BEfore Antiochus gave up the ghost, he called for Philip one of his chiefest
familiars, and made him governor of his kingdom. And having delivered the
diadem into his hands, Antiochus appoints Philip governor of his kingdom,
and commits his son Antiochus to his charge. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14.
Lysias creates Antiochus the younger king, and surnameth him Eupator. The
Macedons in the castle of Jerusalem do much harm ^o the Jews. Judas
Machabaeus besieges the castle. The fugitive Jews fly out of the castle, and
require Antiochus assistance.
his royal robe, and his ring with other jewels, he charged him to bear and
deliver them to his son Antiochus, requiring him earnestly to have care of
his bringing up, and to maintain the kingdom in his behalf, until he
coming unto the years of discretion, were fit to manage it himself. This
done, Antiochus died the hundredth, forty and ninth ye^re of the kingdom of
Syria. After that Lysias had certified the people of the kings death, he
p^oclaimed his son Antiochus, Eupator (according to the instructions that
were given him.) About that time the garrisons and Apostataes that were in the
fortress in Jerusalem did much mischief unto the Jews. For setting upon
those at unawares, who ascended the temple to worship and offer their
sacrifice, they slew them: for the fortress commanded the temple. For these
causes Judas resolved to cut off these garrisons, and to that intent he
assembled all the people, and besieged it. This enterprise was undertook in
the year one hundredth and fifty, after that Seleucus had usurped the
government of those countries. Having therefore made him certain engines, and
raised diverse rams, he industriously continued the siege: But diverse of those
Apostataes that were revolted, and of that garrison, issued out by night, and
assembling together such men as were of so malicious nature as themselves,
Antiochus, requiring him that he would not suffer them to be abused in such
sort by those of our nation, nor so carelessly neglected by them, considering
their disgrace grew by his fathers service, for whose sake they had forsaken
their own religion, and followed his laws and ordinances. Furthermore they
inferred, that the fortress was in danger to be surprised by Judas, and his
associates, except some present succors were sent unto them. When Antiochus
the younger had notice hereof, he was sore displeased, and sent for his
captains and friends, commanding them to hire strange soldiers, and all those
in his kingdom, who were of years to bear The year of the world 3803.
before Christ's Nativity. 161. Antiochus marches into Iudae a with his army.
Bethsura besieged. Judas with his forces encountreth the king at Bethzacharia.
arms; so that he gathered in short time an army of one hundredth thousand
footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen, and thirty two Elephants: and with
this Equipage departed he out of Antioch, committing his army to Lysias
direction. As soon as he came into Idumaea, he went up unto Bethsura a walled
City, and very difficult to be surprised, which he besieged and begirt: but
with such disadvantage, that the Bethsurians resisting him valiantly, and
sallying out upon him, burned those preparations and engines which he had
furnished for the battery of the town. When as therefore a long time was
consumed about this siege, Judas having intelligence of the kings approach,
raised his camp from before the Castle of Jerusalem, and marching forward to
meet the enemy, he shut his army in a certain straight, in a place called
Beth-zacharia some seventy stounds distant from the enemies camp.

The king having tidings hereof, raised his siege from Bethsura, and marched
toward the straight wherein Judas army was enclosed, and about the morning he
set his soldiers in battle array. He first of all caused his Elephants to march
one after another through the straight (for that it was impossible for them to
march in square.) About every Elephant were one thousand footmen, and five
hundredth horsemen. These Elephants bare high towers on their backs, garnished
with archers. Touching the rest of his forces, he caused them to ascend two
several ways by the mountains, under the conduct of his most intirest
friends, commanding them with a huge shout and cry to charge their enemies,
and to discover their golden and brazen bucklers, to the end the reflection
thereof might dazel the eyes of the Jews: whereupon the mountains resounded
with fearful cries of Antiochus army: Yet was not Judas any ways amated
hereat. For entertaining the Eleazar surnamed Auranes Judas brother, seeing a
huge Elephant among the rest armed with royal trappings, and supposing that the
king was upon the same, he ran against him with a mighty courage; and after he
had slain diverse of them that environed the Elephant, and scattered the rest,
he thrust his sword into the belly of the beast, and wounded him to the death:
so that the Elephant falling upon Eleazar, slew him with the weight thereof;
and thus nobly died this worthy man, Eleazar Judas brother kills an Elephant.
Judas returns to Jerusalem and Antiochus follows him. The Bethsurites yield
up their city. The temple of Jerusalem besieged.
overthrowing a great number of his enemies, through his infinite valor. Judas
seeing his enemies forces so great in number, retired back to Jerusalem to
continue his siege: and Antiochus sent part of his army to Bethsura to surprise
the same, and with the rest he himself marched onward to Jerusalem.

The Bethsurites being afraid of this mighty army of the king, and seeing
their necessary provisions failed them, yielded up their City, after they had
taken the kings oath, that they should receive no outrage. When as therefore
Antiochus became Lord of this City, he offered them no injury; only he
thrust them out disarmed from the City, and planted a garrison therein. He
spent a long time also in besieging the temple of Jerusalem, for that they who
kept the same, defended it valiantly. For against every engine the king
builded and raised up against them, they erected a counter-engine. Their only
want was victuals, because their old provision was consumed, and the ground had
not bin manured that year, because it was the seventh, in which according to
the law, the country and soil should not be stirred: which was the cause that
diverse of those that were besieged, fled secretly for want of victuals,
insomuch that very few remained for the defense Antiochus and Lysias the
general had received tidings, that Philip coming out of Persia, intended
Antiochus hearing news of Philips intent to invade Persia, gives over his
siege to meet him.
to make himself master and lord of the country; they concluded to give over
the siege for that time, and to march forward against Philip, without giving
any inckling thereof either to his soldiers or captains. He only commanded
that Lysias should communicate the same with the captains, without discovering
of his deliberation or enterprise against Philip, and to tell them that for
these reasons he levied the siege, first for the length thereof; next for the
strength of the place; lastly for want of victuals; and for many affairs that
required some circumspect and careful foresight in his kingdom. Furthermore,
for that he thought it most expedient to capitulate with the besieged, and
contract friendship with all the nation of the Jews, promising and Lysias had
expressed and published these reasons; all the army and the captains approved
the same.

CHAP. XV. The year of the world. 3803. before the Nativity of Christ. 161.

Antiochus gives over his siege, from before the City, and enters a league
and alliance with Judas.

WHereupon Antiochus sent a herald to Judas and those that were besieged with
him, promising Antiochus makes peace with Judas. The wall of the temple
defaced. Onias otherways called Menelaus, led away prisoner.
them peace, with permission to live according to their religion. Which
conditions they willingly entertained, and having taken an oath and assurance
from the king; they surrendered up the temple. Whereupon Antiochus entered the
same, and seeing it to be a place so well fortified, he contrary to his oath,
commanded his army to level the wall that environed the same with the ground:
which done, he returned to Antioch, leading away with him the high Onias, who
was called Menelaus. For Lysias had counseled the king to murder Menelaus, if
he intended that the Jews should line in peace, without any commotion: and the
rather, because it was he only who was the author of all these evils, by
reason of the counsel he had given to Antiochus his father, to enforce the
Jews to forsake their religion. The King for that cause sent Menelaus unto
Beroea a City of Syria, where he commanded him to be put to death, after he
had enjoyed the high priesthood for the term of ten years. He was a wicked
and impious man, who for his only ambitious desire of authority had enforced
our nation to revolt from their religion. Alcimus or lacimus made high priest.
The year of the world, 3804. before Christ's birth 160. Philip slain by
Antiochus. Onias the high priests son builded a temple in Egypt resembling
that at Jerusalem.
As soon therefore as Menelaus was dead, Alcimus was made high priest, who was
called Iacimus. Now when Antiochus found that Philip had already conquered a
great part of his country, he fought with him, and taking him prisoner, slew
him. But Onias the son of the Menelaus, and given the priesthood to Alcimus,
who was not of the race of the priests, and had transferred this honor into
another family at the persuasion of Lysias, he fled unto Ptolomey King of
Egypt, where being honorably entertained by the King and his Queen
Cleopatra, he obtained a place in the Heliopolitane signiorie, where he builded
a temple like unto that which was at Jerusalem: whereof we shall hereafter
have more fit opportunity to speak.

CHAP. XVI.
Bacchides general of Demetrius army, comes to make war against the Jews,

AT that time Demetrius Seleucus son fled to Rome, and took possession of
Tripolis Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 15. 1. Machab. 7. Demetrius seazeth Tripolis
and other cities of Syria, and kills Antiochus and Lysias.
in Syria, and after he had set the diadem upon his head, and had levied and
hired certain soldiers, he invaded the kingdom: where he was received to the
general content of all men, who submitting themselves unto him laid hold on
the king Antiochus and Lysias, and brought them alive unto him; but he
incontinently commanded that they should be put to death, after that Antiochus
had reigned two years, as we have already declared in an other place. To this
new elected king diverse Jews (banished for their impiety) and with Alcimus
made their resort: who in general accused their nation, and as principals Judas
and his brethren, obiecting against them, that they had slain his friends, and
all Alcimus the high priest, with Apostates accuses Judas before Demetrius.
such as were on his side; and that among all those that were in the kingdom
and expected his coming, some of them were slain; and that the rest being
driven from their native country were banished into other places: requiring
him that he would send some one of his friends to take knowledge of the
outrages committed by Judas and his brethren. Demetrius was much moved by these
reports of theirs, and for that cause sent Bacchides (who was in times past
much esteemed by Antiochus Epiphanes for his valor, and to whose government at
that time all Mesopotamia was committed:) To whom he gave an army, joining with
him the high priest Alcimus, with commission to kill Judas, and his
confederates. Bacchides departing from Antioch with his Judas and his brethren,
to entreat with him upon certain articles of peace, because his intent was to
surprise them by some subtlety and treachery. But Judas smelling his drift,
gave little trust unto him: for in that he came thither with so great an army,
he easily coniectured that he intended no peace; but to make war:
notwithstanding Bacchides kills diverse that trust his oath.
some of the people gave ear unto the peaceable proclamation of Bacchides, and
supposing that there was no sinister intent in Alcimus, who was their
countriman, they submitted themselves under his government. Having therefore
received an oath from them both, that neither The year of the world, 3804
before Christ's birth 160. Bacchides uses great tyranny in Bethzeth. Alcimus
uses popularity and familiarity to win the peoples hearts, and kills all
such as were of Judas faction.
Bacchides setting light by his oath, slew three score of them; and by this
breach of his faith toward these, he caused others (who intended to submit
themselves) to forsake and fly his government. As soon as therefore he had
removed his army from Jerusalem, he came unto the village of Bethzeth, and
there apprehending many of those which had fled, and some others among the
people, he slew them all, commanding all those that lived in the country to
obey Alcimus, to whom he left in that place for the guard of his person a part
of his army: and that done, he returned unto Antioch to King Demetrius. In the
mean while Alcimus intending to assure his estate and government; and
supposing that it should be so much the better confirmed, if so be he could
obtain the good will of the people, he used all kind of plausible Judas
resists Alcimus power.
all those whom he found to be of Judas faction. Judas perceiving that Alcimus
having gathered great forces, had already slain diverse of the most vprightest
men, and such as feared God in all his nation, he addressed himself also to
ouerrunne the country, and slew as many of Alcimus partakers, as he could meet
with. Who perceiving in himself that he was unable to resist Judas, made his
account to recover Demetrius favor. For which cause he repaired to Antioch,
and incensed Demetrius Alcimus accuses Judas to Demetrius.
grievously against Judas, accusing him for enforcing many injuries against
him: protesting that he should endure far more, except he were prevented and
punished by a good army

CHAP. XVII.
Nicanor being sent after Bacchides to be chieftaine of the war against
Judas, is discomfited with all his army.

Demetrius imagining, that if Judas should increase in power, it should be some
prejudice to his estate, he sent Nicanor his most entire and faithful friend,
to make war against Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16. Demetrius sends Nicanor
against Judas. Nicanor dissembling with Judas labored to surprise him
him: (who was one of them also, who accompanied him in his flight from Rome.)
Having therefore furnished him, in his own opinion, with a sufficient army,
and able to make head Judas, he commanded him to spare no one of that nation.
As soon as Nicanor came to Jerusalem, he intended not incontinently to make
war upon Judas, but cast with himself to surprise him by some subtlety: to
this intent he sent him a peaceable message, alleging that it was neither
necessary not convenient for him to fight or hazard his fortune; protesting
unto Judas, that he would offer him no injury; and that he resorted thither
with his friends, only to express the good affection of king Demetrius
toward him, and how well he was affected toward the nation of the Jews.
Judas and his brethren believed this false embassage of Nicanors, and
suspecting no kind of sinister dealing, they gave him credit, and entertained
both him and his army. When as therefore Nicanor had saluted Judas, he
conserred with him, and in the mean while gave a sign unto his soldiers to
lay hands on him: who perceiving and discovering his Nicanor saw that his
intent and subtlety was discovered, he resolved to make open war upon Judas,
and to bid him battle near unto a borough called Caphar-salama: in which
place obtaining the victory, he constrained Judas to retire himself into the
fortress in Jerusalem. When as therefore Nicanor returned from the siege of
Judas in the temple of Jerusalem, certain of the Priests and Elders went out
to meet with him, and after they had done their reverence, they showed Nicanor
threatens the people that except they yield up Judas he will destroy the
temple.
him those sacrifices, which (as they said) they intended to offer unto God for
the kings prosperity and health. But he blaspheming, threatened them; that if
the people did not deliver Judas into his hands, he would destroy the temple
upon his return, and with these menaces he departed out of the city. Which
when the Priests heard, they began to shed abundant tears, praying God that

Whenas therefore Nicanor departing from Jerusalem arrived near unto the
borough of Bethoron, he encamped there; and to that place a great supply of
soldiers came unto him out of Syria. Now Judas was encamped in an other borough
called Adas about thirty furlongs distant from Bethoron, having with him at
the most not above one thousand men. Notwithstanding he exhorted his soldiers
not to be afraid of the multitude of their enemies; neither to think with The
year of the world. 3804. before Christ's birth, 160. Judas and his followers
put Nicanor and his soldiers to flight.
Nicanor, there arose a dangerous conflict between them; wherein Judas had the
upper hand: for he slew a great number of the enemy, and finally Nicanor
himself fighting courageously was slain; and as soon as he fell down dead,
his army betook them to flight. For having lost their chieftaine, they
dispersed themselves, and cast away their weapons: Judas speedily pursuing
them, made a great slaughter, and by sound of trumpet certified them of the
neighboring villages, that he had discomfited the enemy. Whereupon the
inhabitants there about understanding hereof, betook them to their weapons,
and meeting with those that fled in the foreward, Adar. March.
call it, and the Macedonians Distre: And hereof each year there is both a
solemn feast and memorial observed. From this time forward the nation of the
Jews were in quiet without any invasion, and lived in peace for a little time:
but afterward they were troubled with the like combats and dangers. Whereas
therefore the high Priest Alcimus intended to beat down an old wall of the
sanctnarie, which had been builded by the holy Prophets, he was Alcimus the
high priest dies.
suddenly strooken by God; so that he incontinently lost his speech, and fell
to the ground, and after he had endured many grievous torments for diverse
days, at last he died miserably: after he had enioied the Priesthood for the
space of four years.

After his death, the people with a general consent gave his place to Judas.
Who understanding of the great power of the Romans, and how they had conquered
Gaul, Spain, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 17. 1. Macchab. 8. Judas couena^teth a
peace with the Romans.
Carthage, Greece, and the Kings Perseus and Philip, and besides all these, the
great King Antiochus; determined to make friendship with them; and sent
Eupolemus the son of John, and Jason the son of Eleazar his two entire
friends unto Rome, to entreat the Romans to be their allies and confederates,
and to write unto Demetrius, that he should give over to war against the
Jews. When the Ambassadors that were sent from Judas, were arrived in Rome,
the Senate entertained them; and after they had discoursed with them upon the
occason of their Embassage, they accepted and concluded upon their alliance,
and made a decree, the copy whereof was then brought into Iudaea, and the
original reserved in The decree of the Romans touching society and
friendship of the Jews.
That no man under the obedience of the Romans, should maintain war against
the nation of the Jews: neither should furnish them with victuals, ships, or
silver, who should make war upon them. And if any enemies should assail the
Jews, the Romans should give them succors to the uttermost of their power.
And that likewise if any one should make war against the Romans, the Jews
should succor them. That if the Jewish nation would add or diminish any thing
of that association, it should be done with the common advise of the people of
Rome, and that that which should be ordained, should remain irreuocable. This
arrest was written by Eupolemus the son of John, and by Jason the son of
Eleazar, at such time as Judas was high Priest, and his brother Simon general
over the army. See

CHAP. XVIII.
Bacchides is sent once again into Iudaea, and obtains a victory.

WHen as Nicanors death, and the discomfiture of his army was reported to
Demetrius, he Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 1^. 1. Match. 9. Demetrius sends
Bacchides with forces into Jury. Bacchides meets Judas with 20000. soldiers.
sent a new army into Iudaea, under the conduct of Bacchides: who departing
from Antioch, and repairing to Iudaea, encamped in Arbela a city of Galilee,
where having enforced, conquered, and taken a great number of those that were
retired into caves, he departed Judas was encamped in the village of Berzeth,
he marched out against him with twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand
horsemen. Now Judas had not on his side in all above two thousand men, who
perceiving the multitude of Bacchides soldiers were afraid; so that some of
them forsaking their camp, fled away: by which means there remained no more
with Judas, but eight hundredth men. Seeing himself therefore abandoned by so
many of his men, and pressed by his enemies, who gave him neither truce nor
time to reassemble his forces, he resolved to fight with those eight hundredth
The year of the world. 3804. before Christ's birth 160. Judas with a small army
intends to assail a mighty host.
Judas replied to this effect: God forbid (said he) that the sun should see
me turn my back upon mine enemies. And if by this means I meet with my
death, and that I must needs spend ^y last blood in this battle, I will never
soil so many notable actions so worthily achieved, nor stain so much glory
obtained with so great virtue by one ignominious flight. And having in this
sort exhorted the small remnant of those soldiers that were with him, he
commanded them that without any apprehension of danger, they should bend
themselves altogether against the enemy.

CHAP. XIX.
Judas overcome in the battle, dies.

But Bacchides drew out his army, and arranged them in battle, placing the
horsemen on both the wings; his light armed soldiers and archers in the front
of the army; and after Bacchides disposes his army, and fights with Judas.
these a strong band, called the Macedonian Phalanx; and he himself led the
right wing of the battle. And in this array he approached Judas camp, and
caused the trumpets to be sounded; commanding all his soldiers to give a great
shoute, and to charge their enemies. Judas did the like, and encountered
Bacchides; so that on both sides there was a most cruel conflict, Judas
perceived that Bacchides and the flower of his army fought in the right wing,
he chose out a certain number of his most resolute followers, Judas disperseth
the enemies army, kills some, and at last is slain himself.
and drew toward that quarter, and setting upon them, he brake their squadron;
and afterward thrusting into the midst of them he forced them to fly, and
pursued them as far as the mount Aza. They of the left wing, perceiving the
flight of those in the right, went after Judas, and enclosed him on the
backpart. He being unable to fly, and seeing himself enclosed by his enemies,
resolved with his soldiers to fight it out. When as therefore he had slain a
great number of his enemies, and being enfeebled more through weariness, then
by the wounds received of them, he fell to the ground, and was himself at
last slain likewise: adding this honorable manner of death to his former
notable and valiant exploites. His soldiers seeing Simon and Jonathan his
brothers upon entreaty recovered his body, and carried it to Modim (a place
where his father was buried) there was he interred by all the people, who wept
for him diverse days, and honored him publicly according Judas is buried in
Modim.
to the custom of their country. Such was Judas end, who was a valiant man, a
great warrior and very respective of the commandments of his father
Matthias, having done and suffered all that he might for the liberty of his
country. Being therefore after this manner adorned with virtue, he has left
behind him a perpetual renown of his worthy acts, and an honorable memory
of himself obtained by the liberty, in which he reestablished his nation,
retyring them from the servitude of the Macedonians: who died also after he had
discharged the office of

THE XIII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 13. book.
1 Jonathan after his brother Judas death, succeeds him in the government. 2
Jonathan having wearied Bacchides by war, compels him to draw to a league,
and to depart away with his army. 3 Alexander the son of Antiochus Epiphanes,
makes war upon King Demetrius. 4 Demetrius sends an ambassador to Jonathan
with presents, persuading him to be of his faction. 5 Alexander by greater
proffers then Demetrius did offer, and by offering the high Priests place to
Jonathan, draws him to favor his faction. 6 Of the temple of God builded by
Onias. 7 How Alexander after the death of Demetrius, highly honored Jonathan.
8 Demetrius the son of Demetrius ouercomming Alexander, possesses the
kingdom, and plighteth friendship with Jonathan. 9 Tryphon Apamenus after he
had overcome Demetrius, reserueth the kingdom for Antiochus Alexanders son,
who receives Jonathan into favor. 10 Demetrius being overcome by the
Parthians, Tryphon breaks his covenant of peace, and laying hold on Jonathan
traitorously kills him, and afterward assaulteth Simon his brother. 11 How
the nation of the Jews committed both the priesthood and the government of the
army to Simon 12 Simon driving Tryphon into Dora, besieges him, and enters
friendship with Antiochus surnamed Pius. 13 A debate arising between Antiochus
and Simon, Cendebaeus the kings captain is driven out of the country. 14 How
Simon was traitorously slain at a banquet by Ptolomey his father in law. 15
How Prolomies endeavors being made frustrate, Hircanus obtained the government.
16 How Antiochus surnamed the Just, leading an army against Hircanus for three
hundredth talents is both reconciled and tied in league of friendship. 17
Hircanus expedition into Syria. 18 How Antiochus Cyzicenus assisting the
Samaritanes is both conquered and enforced to fly. 19 Aristobulus was the
first that set the Diadem on his head. 20 The acts of Alexander King of the
Jews. 21 The victory of Ptolomey Lathurus against Alexander. 22 Demetrius
Eucaerus overcomes Alexander in battle. 23 The expedition of Antiochus
Dionysius into Iewry. 24 Alexander being dead, his wife Alexandra succeeded him
in the kingdom.
CHAP. I.
Jonathan after the decease of his brother Judas, succeeds him in the
government.

WE have declared in our former book, how the nation of the Jews The year of
the world. 3805 before the Nativity of Christ. 159.
(after they had been under the subjection of the Macedonians) recovered Judas
their captain performed, and in which he finally died in the behalf of their
liberty: how likewise (after the death of Judas) all the wicked Apostate
Jews, who had revolted from their religion, took courage, molesting and doing
many injuries to the rest of their countrymen. Finally, how besides their
malice, the famine invaded the country; so that diverse being unable to
sustain these two mortal scourges of famine and war; The year of the
world, 3805 before Christ's birth 159. The Jews compelled by the Apostates and
by famine submit themselves to the Macedonians. Bacchides murthereth those of
Judas faction.
were constrained to submit themselves unto the Macedonians. In the mean while
Bacchides gathering together the false Apostataes (who were fallen from the
religion of the Jews, with an intent to live after the profane manner of the
Paganes) committed the government of the country unto them: who laying hold on
Judas friends and partakers, betrayed and delivered them to Bacchides: who
first of all tormented and beat them at his pleasure, and afterward put them
to death. This so grievous affliction (then which the Jews had never endured a
worse, since their return from Babylon) was the cause that those of Judas
faction, who were yet alive, fearing the total and cruel ruin of their
nation, addressed themselves to Jonathan his brother, exhorting him to imitate
his brother Judas virtues, and to have no less care of his countrime^, then
the other had; who fought for their liberty until his latest breath,
requiring him not to abandon Jonathan answered them, that he was ready to die
for them; and being in all things esteemed no less valiant and politic then
his brother Judas, he was proclaimed general and chiefetaine of the Jews.

Bacchides having notice hereof, feared least Jonathan should be no less
infestuous to the king and Macedonians, then his brother Judas before him had
been; for which cause he sought the means to make him away by treason. But
both Jonathan and his brother Simon gat intelligence Jonathan by the public
instigation of the Jews undertakes the government. Bacchides co^plotteth to
betray Jonathan and his brother.
hereof; and having discovered his practice, they took all their families with
them, and fled into the desert that confined the City Jerusalem: and retiring
themselves near unto a water called the lake of Asphar, they remained in that
place. When Bacchides perceived that they mistrusted Jonathan knowing well that
Bacchides came out to seek him, sent his brother John (surnamed Gaddis) unto
the Arabians Nabatheans, to commit the trust of their goods unto their hand,
until the end of the war betwixt him and Bacchides: for the Arabians were
his friends. Whilst therefore John marched toward the Bacchides draws out
his forces against Ionatha^ John the brother of Judas is slain by Amars
sons. Bacchides assaileth Jonathan on the Sabbath day, and loses two
thousand of his men.
Nabatheans, the sons of Amaraeus laid an ambuscado for him (who were of the
city of Medaba) and after they had furiously set upon him on the way, and laid
hold on whatsoever he brought with him, they at length slew him and all his
company: for which fact of theirs, they were shortly after punished by his
brethren, as we will make manifest in that which afterward follows.

When Bacchides knew that Jonathan was inca^ped in the marshes of Jordan, he
made choice of Bacchides how with great fierceness he set forward against him,
he stretched out his right hand to strike him; but he preventing the stroke by
stepping aside, Jonathan and his companions lept into the river, and so saved
themselves by swimming over to the other side of Jordan, because the enemies
durst not Bacchides returned incontinently to the Castle of Jerusalem (after he
had lost about some two thousand of his men.) After this, he fortified diverse
Cities (which were before t^ne ruinated) namely Ierico, Emaus, Betheron,
Bethella, Thamnata, Pharathon, Techoa, and Gazara, and builded in every one of
them certain towers, and great and strong walls, and afterward he planted
garrisons therein to sally out upon the Jews and vex them; but in especial he
fortified the citadel of Jerusalem, in which he kept for hostages The castle
of Jerusalem fortified.
the children of the principallest men of Iudaea.

About that time there came a certain man to Jonathan and his brother Simon,
bringing them news that the sons of Amaraeus would solemnize their nuptials,
and were to lead the bride Simon reuengeth his brother John's blood on the sons
of Amaraeus.
from the City of Gabatha, which was daughter to one of the noblest amongst
the Arabians: Jonathan and his brother, supposing that a fit opportunity was
offered them to revenge their brothers death, and to punish the Medabanes for
the wrongs they had done unto their brother, they took with them the greatest
forces that they could, and marched toward Medaba; where they lay in ambush
under the covert of a mountain. But when they saw them that led the bride and
accompanied the bridegroom, and a great troop of their friends likewise,
according to the accustomed manner of marriages, they brake out of their
covert, and put them all to the sword; The year of the world. 3808. before
Christ^ birth 156.
John upon the sons of Amaraeus. For not only these alone, but their friends
that accompanied them, with their wives and children, were all of them slain,
to the number of four hundredth. And in this manner Simon and Jonathan returned
into the marshes aforesaid, and aboade there. But Bacchides having fortified
all the garrisons of Iudaea, returned back unto the king. And at that time the
estate of the Jews was in peace for the space of welny two years.

But the wicked, and such as were revolted from the religion of the Jews,
seeing that Jonathan Demetrius by the solicitation of the fugitives sends
Bacchides against Jonathan with an army. Bachides displeased with the Apostates
for that they could not surprise Jonathan kills fi^ie of them. Jonathan and
his brother besieged in Bethalaga.
and his followers conuersed in the country in great assurance, by reason of
the peace, Demetrius, requiring him to send them Bacchides, who might apprehend
Jonathan, declaring that it might easily be done, and that in one night
breaking in upon them, he might murder them all before they were aware. When
Bacchides by the kings commandment came into Jury, he wrote unto all his
friends both Jews and also his other allies, requiring them to lay hold on
Jonathan: but when by no policy nor prowes of theirs, they were able to
apprehe^d him (for that Ionatha^ having notice of their ambushes, stood upon
his guard) Bacchides the Macedonian was displeased with the Apostataes or
fugitives, obiecting against the^ that they had deceived both the king and him,
and laying hold on fifty of the principallest of them, he put them to death.
But Jonathan and his brother, with those of their company, retired themselves
unto Bethalaga (a certain village in the desert) for fear of Bacchides, in
which place Bacchides understanding hereof, took the army that he had with
him, and those Jews that were his confederates, and marched forward against
Jonathan; where battering those fortifications that were made by him, he
besieged him for many days. But Jonathan for all his busy siege and violence,
was not awhit terrified, but resisted him valiantly; and leaving his brother
Simon in the city to make head against Bacchides, he secretly stole out, and
gathered a great number of soldiers that favored his proceedings, and in the
night time with valiant courage brake into Bacchides camp; and after he had
there slain a number of them, he gave his brother Simon notice of his coming:
who, as soon Ionathas stealing out of the city assaileth Bacchides by night.
Bacchides reuengeth himself on the fugitives, and i^ enforced to retreat.
as he heard the noise in the enemies camp, hastily issued forth with his
soldiers, and burnt all the Macedonians engines, and for his part also made a
great slaughter of them. Bacchides seeing

CHAP. II.
Jonathan constrains Bacchides to make peace with the Jews, and to depart

But Jonathan knowing his deliberation; sent an Ambassador unto him to
conclude a peace and amity betwixt them, with this condition; that they should
each of them deliver up Mac (...). Bacchides makes peace with Jonathan.
Jonathan lives at Machmas punishing the wicked.
those prisoners that were taken on either side. Bacchides supposing that his
request would be to his great honor, and that a fit occasion was now offered
him, whereupon he might raise his siege without any disgrace, promised Jonathan
his friendship; so that both of them swore from that time forward never to make
war the one against the other; and each of them both received, and restored
their prisoners. Thus returned Bacchides into Antioch unto his King, and after
that retreat he never made war again upon Iudaea. But Jonathan having
obtained this security,

CHAP. III. The year of the world. 3813. before Christ's Nativity. 151.

Alexander the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, makes war against Demetrius.

IN the hundredth and sixty year, Alexander the son of Antiochus the Famous
came Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 11. Alexander the son of Antiochus Epiphanes
comes into Syria, and seazeth Ptolemais.
into Syria, and seized the City of Ptolemais, by the treason of those
soldiers that were therein; who were ill affected toward Demetrius, by reason
of his arrogance, which was such, that he granted no man access unto him: for
being locked up in a royal fort defenced with four towers (which himself had
builded near unto Antioch) he suffered no man to approach his presence, but was
careless and wholly negligent in his affairs; living in pleasure and Demetrius
knew that Alexander had seized Ptolemais, he gathered all his forces and
marched forth against him.

CHAP. IIII.
Demetrius couenanteth a peace with Jonathan.

Moreover he sent Ambassadors unto Jonathan, that might confirm an alliance
and ratify Demetrius war against Alexander. (...). Machab. 10.
a friendship betwixt them: for he determined with himself to prevent
Alexander, for fear least he capitulating with him first of all, should
obtain his assistance. And this Jonathan, least remembering those injuries he
had before time received at his hands, he should oppose himself against him.
He therefore sent unto him, requiring him to assemble his forces, and to make
preparation for the war: commanding likewise, that those Jews should be
delivered into his possession, whom Bacchides had shut up for hostages in the
fortress of Jerusalem. After that Demetrius had demeaned himself in this
sort, Jonathan resorted to Jerusalem, and in the presence of all the people,
and of the garrison that was in the fortress, he red the kings letters; and
after the reading thereof, the cursed and revolted Jews that were in the
fortress were sore afraid, seeing that the king permitted Jonathan to leuy an
army, and to receive the hostages. But he receiving them into his hands,
restored each of them to their fathers and mothers: and by this means remained
Jonathan in Jerusalem, where he made diverse The Macedonians forfaking their
garrisons resort to Antioch.
who were in the garrisons through out al Iudaea, they forsook them all, and
retired back into Antioch, except they that were in the City of Bethsura, and
those in the fortress of Jerusalem: for they consisted for the most part of
those Jews that had abandoned their religion, who for that occasion feared to
forsake their garrisons.

CHAP. V.
Alexander draws Jonathan to his party.

But Alexander knowing what promises Demetrius had made unto Jonathan, and
being well assured how valiant he was, and how he behaved himself against the
Macedonians; Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 8.
moreover how he was vexed by Demetrius and his Lieutenant Bacchides: He told
his friends and familiars that it was impossible for him to meet with a better
allie at that time then Jonathan, who had approved himself a valiant man
against his enemies, and for particular causes bare hatred against Demetrius,
from whom he had received many injuries, and on whom he Alexander endeavors
to draw Jonathan to his faction by presenting him with the high Priesthood.
had wrought sundry reuenges: for which cause if they thought it good to draw
him unto their side against Demetrius; the time was veriefit to entertain, and
confirm a mutual peace between them: which advise of his being approved by
his favorites; he sent a letter unto Jonathan to this effect. King Alexander
to Jonathan his brother, Health:
We have long sithence understood


Jonathan having received this letter invested himself in the habit of the
high Priest, and the day of the feast of the Tabernacles, which was the fourth
year after the death of his brother Judas. The year the of world. 38^3.
before Christ's birth, 151.


When Demetrius heard these news, he was much troubled, and accused himself
of sloth and too much negligence in looking to his affairs, for that he had
not prevented Alexander in the courteous entertainment of Jonathan, but had
suffered him to take the benefit of this occasion. He sent letters likewise to
Jonathan and the people, containing that which follows: King Demetrius to
Jonathan, and to all the nation of the Jews: Health. Since you have observed
the Demetrius studieth by promises to assure himself of Ionathans frie^dship.
friendship that you bear unto us, and have not entangled your selves with our
enemies, notwithstanding their diverse solicitations, we praise your fidelity,
and pray you to persevere in the same estate, assuring you that you shall
receive the like favors from us, in all integrity. For I will forgive
Jonathan the high Priest, permitting him to plant such a garrison therein, as
in his opinion shall be held both honest and lawful; and such as will
faithfully maintain it to his use. I will also that all the Jews, who are
imprisoned in my country, be set at liberty. Moreover, it is my pleasure,
that no horses of the Jews be taken up to run post for us. I grant also on
the Sabboths, and other festival days; yea, three days also before every one
of those feasts, liberty and freedom be used. And my will is, that the Jews,
who inhabit within my dominions, be likewise freed of all molestations. The
like privilege grant I them that will bear arms with me, to the number of
thirty thousand: who in what place soever they shall be, shall have no worser
entertainment then mine own army: and part of them will I place in my
garrisons; the rest shall be of my guard; and I will make them captains in my
court, and will The battle between Alexander and Demetrius, and of Demetrius
death.
place garrisons in them, my will is that all this be done and fortified, at
the charges levied out of mine own coffers. These are the promises and offers
that Demetrius made unto the Jews.

But king Alexander having gathered great forces, as well of strange and hired
soldiers, as of those who in Syria had revolted from Demetrius, led forth his
whole army against the enemy, and after the ensigns were displaied and the
onset given, the left wing of Demetrius compelled Alexanders soldiers that
fought against it to fly; and his men pursuing them hard at heels spoiled
Demetrius fighting valiantly slew some of his enemies; and in pursuing other
some, who could not endure his fierce assault, was in the end, by setting
spurs to his horse, mainly carried into a deep and muddy bogge, whereinto by
misaduenture his horse fell, and being unable to get out he was slain in that
place. For being discovered by his enemies, they turned back upon him; and
having enclosed him, they altogether shot their arrows against him, who being
on foot and fighting valiantly, was The year of the world 3813. before
Christ's birth 151.
at length slain, after he had received diverse wounds, and was no more able to
sustain himself. Thus died Demetrius, who departed this life the eleventh
year of his reign, as we have discoursed in an other place.

CHAP. VI.
Onias wins the favor of Ptolomey Philometor, and obtains leave of him to
build a temple in Egypt, which was called the temple of Onias.

But Onias the son of the high priest called also Onias (who flying out of
his country Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4. Onias the son of Onias the high
priest seeks to build a temple in Egypt.
lived in Alexandria, with Ptolomey Philometor, as we have heretofore declared)
seeing all Iudaea destroyed by the Macedonians, and their kings; and intending
in his heart to purchase an immortal memory, he determined to beseech the
king Ptolomey and the queen Cleopatra by letters, that it might be lawful for
him to build a temple in Egypt, resembling in all points that which was at
Jerusalem, and that he might have liberty to plant Levites and Priests in the
same, of his own kindred: And hereunto was he especially moved, by a certain
prophecy of Esaias, who more then six hundredth years before, had foretold that
a temple should be assuredly builded in Egypt, in honor of the almighty God
by a Jew. Being therefore incited by this Oracle, he wrote a letter to Ptolomey
and Cleopatra, to this effect: During The year of the world. 3814. before
Christ's birth 150.
the time that I was employed in your wars, and by Gods favorable assistance
have done Esaias, which says thus: There shall be (says he) a temple for our
Lord God in Egypt: many other things also has he foretold as touching this
place.




This is the effect of that which Onias wrote unto K. Ptolomey. And by his
answer which he made hereunto, a man may easily conjecture what piety was
both in him, and Cleopatra his sister, and wife. For they have returned the
sin and transgression of the law, which through this means fell upon Onias
head, by this answer that ensues. King Ptolomey and Queen Cleopatra to Onias
Esaias did long time sithence prophecy the same, we give you license, if it may
be done according to the law, and with this condition, that we commit not any
sin against God.




Upon this answer, Onias (taking possession of the place) builded therein a
temple, and erected an altar unto God according to the model of the temple of
Jerusalem, but far less, and A temple builded in Egypt by Ptolomies consent.
The wars of the Jews li. 7. chap. 37. Sedition betwixt the Jews and
Samaritanes as touch ing their temple.
Iesse rich. Yet think I it no ways requisite to declare the dimensions
thereof, neither the vessels in the same, because I describe them particularly
in my seventh book of the wars, and captivity Onias in devotion and zeal,
frequented the divine service* in that place, and renewed the ceremonies. But
let this suffice for the present as touching this temple.

But it came to pass, that the Jews of Alexandria, and the Samaritanes that
brought in the service and worship of the temple upon the mount Garizim, under
Alexander the great, fell at odds, and debated their differents before
Ptolomey. For the Jews said that the temple in Jerusalem builded, according to
Moses laws and ordinances, was the lawful temple; but the Samaritanes The
year of the world. 3814. before Christ's birth 150.
maintained that that which was builded on mount Garizim, was the true temple.
They therefore besought the king that it would please him to sit in judgment,
with the assistance of his friends, to hear their allegations in this behalf,
and to condemn the party unto death, who should be found faulty in his
process. Now the advocates which pleaded for the Samaritanes, were Sabbaeus
and Theodosius: and Andronicus the son of Messalam defended the cause of
those of Jerusalem, and the other Jews. And both of them swore both by God and
by the King, that they would bring their proves according to the law,
beseeching Ptolomey to adiudge him to death, whom he should find to have
falsified his oath. The king therefore sat down with his friends, both to
hear the cause, and determine upon their differents. But the Jews of
Alexandria were sore moved and displeased against them, that had drawn the
pre-eminence of the Sabbaeus and Theodosius suffered Andronicus to declaime
first, who began to approve the lawfulness, holiness, and religion of the
temple in Jerusalem out of the law; and by the successiue government of the
high priests, who from father to son, and from hand to hand, had received
this honor; therein alleging that all the kings of Asia had honored the
majesty of that place with presents and rich oblations: whereas neither in
record of men, nor course of antiquity, the temple of Garizim has been in any
estimation. By these and such like words, Andronicus persuaded the king, that
the temple of Ieruusalem was builded according to the ordinance of Moses,
inuiting him to adiudge Sabbaeus Theodosius to death. This may suffice as
touching the differents of the Jews of Alexandria; and such things as befell
them during Ptolomey Philometors time.

CHAP. VII.
Alexander after Demetrius death honors Jonathan greatly.

AFter that Demetrius was slain in fight (according as we have heretofore
declared) Alexander was king of Syria, who wrote to Ptolomey Philometor;
requiring his daughter Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. 1. Mac 11. Alexander king
of Syri^ marries Cleo patra Ptolomeis daughter
in marriage, telling him that it was a matter answerable to his dignity, to
contract affinity Demetrius. Ptolomey yielding a willing ear to these his
demands, and entertaining them with great pleasure, wrote back that he was
very glad that he had recovered his fathers kingdom; promising him to give him
his daughter in marriage; giving him to understand, that he would meet him at
Ptolemais, and bring his daughter unto him to that place, and there celebrate
the nuptials. After he had written these letters, Ptolomey made his speedy
repair to Ptolemais, and led with him his daughter Cleopatra; where meeting
with Alexander (according to their appointment) he delivered him his daughter,
with such a dowry of gold and silver, as well beseemed his kingly magnificence.
Unto the solemnizing of this marriage, Alexander Jonathan, commanding him to
repair unto him to Prolemais. Where, after he was arrived, and had both
presented his service with other magnificent presents to both the kings; he was
highly honored by both, insomuch as Alexander constrained him to put off his
ordinary garments, and to put on a purple to be, and after that to sit upon a
royal throne: commanding his captains to march before him through the City;
and to command by public edict, that no man should dare to speak any thing
against him; neither offer him any cause of discontent in what sort soever. All
which the captains performed; so that they, who purposely and maliciously
repaired thither to accuse him, seeing the honor that was done unto him by
this publication, fled away hastily, for fear least some mishap should befall
the. This king Alexander loved Jonathan so entirely, that he affoorded him the
chiefest place amongst the number of his dearest friends.

CHAP. VIII. The year of the world 3818. before Christ's Natinitie. 146.

Demetrius the son of Demetrius over comes Alexander, obtains the
kingdom, and contracteth friendship with Jonathan.

IN the hundredth, sixty and fifth year (of the reign of the Greeks)
Demetrius the son of Demetrius (accompanied with diverse hired soldiers, whom
Lasthenes Candiot furnished him with) departed out of Candia, and came into
Cilicia. Which news as Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 6. Demetrius the son of
Demetrius passes out of Greece into Cilicia and seeks to make himself Lord
of Syria.
soon as Alexander heard, he was grievously vexed and troubled: for which
cause he instantly posted from Phaenicia to Antioch, with intent to assure the
affairs of his kingdom in that place before the arriual of Demetrius. He left
behind him for his governor in Coelesyria Apollonius Dauus, who coming unto
Iamnia with a great army, sent a messenger unto the high Priest Ionatha^, A man
confident in battle.
where the vanquished shall have no advantage by his flight. Jonathan whetted
by this bitter message, Simon, and came unto Ioppe, and encamped without the
City (because the Citizens had shut the gates against him) for they had a
garrison planted in that place by Apollonius. But as soon as he addressed
himself to batter the City, the inhabitants were afraid, for fear least he
should surprise the same by force, and for that cause they opened him the
gates. Apollonius understanding that Ioppe was taken by Jonathan, he took
three thousand horsemen, and eight thousand footmen with him, and came into
Azot; whence he departed, leading out his army with a sober march, foot by
foot; and arriving at Ioppe, he retired back to draw Jonathan into the field,
assuring himself upon his horsemen, and grounding his hope of victory upon
them. But Jonathan issuing out boldly, pursued Apollonius as far as Azot: who
finding himself in the Jonathan was in no sort abashed to see the thousand
horsemen, that Apollonius had laid in ambush near unto a certain stream, to
the Apollonius fights with Jonathan, and is put to flight.
end they might charge the Jews behind, but disposed his army in such sort,
that his soldiers on every side turned their faces upon the enemy; commanding
his mento defend themselves on both sides, fighting with those that assailed
them either in the vantgard or the rereward. This battle continued until
evening, and Jonathan had given his brother Simon a part of his forces,
charging him to set upon the enemies battle: as for himself, he drew himself
and his soldiers into a form of a battalion resembling a Tortuse, to the end
that being covered with their bucklers, joined the o^e with the other, they
might bear off the horsmens arrows, to which all of them showed themselves
obedient. The enemies horsemen shooting all their arrows against Simon
perceived they could charge no further, he set upon them with his soldiers so
courageously, that he put them all to flight. The horsemen of Apollonius
perceiving that the footmen were disar^aid, grew heartles likewise; and
wearied also for that they had fought until the evening, and having lost the
hope that they had in the footmen, they took their flight in great disorder,
and confusion: so that they brake their ranks of themselves, and were
scattered through all the plain. Jonathan also pursued them as far as
Jonathan pursued the enemy as far as Azot, and burns Dagon^ temple, and
kills 8000. men.
Azot, and taking the City by assault* he slew diverse of them, constraining
the rest that were in him. He willingly entertaining their good affection,
departed from thence, and iournied toward The year of the world. 3818. before
the Nativity of Christ. 146. Alexander sends presents to Jonathan.
Jerusalem charged with great spoils, which after his victory against his
enemy, he drove before him after he had spoiled the country.

As soon as Alexander heard that Apollonius the general of his army was
discomfited, and forced to fly, he made a show that he was glad thereof,
pretending that it was against his will that Jonathan had been molested by
war, who was both his friend and ally. Whereupon be sent an Ambassador unto
him, to signify unto him how much he rejoiced at his victory, offering him
presents and honors, with a chain of gold, such as the kings were accustomed
to give to those of their kindred: he likewise gave him Accaron and the country
thereunto belonging, to him and his heirs for ever.

About the same time king Ptolomy Philometor set out an army by sea, and
another by land, to Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 7. Ptolomey Philometor (...) ^to
Syria with an army to assist his son in law Alexander* Jonathan meets with
Ptolomey, and is honorably entertained by him. Treason intended against
Ptolomey, and discovered: for which cause he takes away his daughter from
Alexander, and gives her to Demetrius for his wi^e.
Alexander; and in his way all the Cities entertained him very affectionately,
according as Alexander had commanded them, and conducted him as far as the
City of Azot: in which place all of them exclaimed before him, and challenged
Justice at his hand, for that the temple of Dagon was burned and destroyed;
accusing Jonathan for the firing thereof, and the slaughter of many people
therein. But Ptolomey hearing these accusations, answered them not a word: But
when Jonathan came forth to meet him at Ioppe, he courted him with royal
presents, and all the honor that was possible, and after he had kept him
company as far as the flood called Eleutherus he dismissed him, and sent him
back to Jerusalem. When Ptolomey was come to Ptolemais, he hardly escaped
death, and that contrary to all expectation by Alexanders own complotting,
and Ammonius his friends mediation: Ptolomey wrote unto Alexander, requiring
him that Ammonius might be punished for his treasons and conspiracies practiced
against him, which in their natures required a severe and cruel punishment.
But seeing that Alexander delivered him not up into his hands, he coniectured
and concluded, that he himself was the author thereof; and conceived a
heinous displeasure against him. In like manner before that time, Alexander had
offended the Antiochians, by the means of the said Ammonius, who had laden
them with many wrongs and incommodities: but in the end Ammonius was punished
for these his ou^agious misdemeanors, and disgracefully slain like a woman,
whilst in a woman's attire, he fought to hide himself, as we have expressed it
in another place.

At that time Ptolomey began to accuse himself for bestowing his daughter in
marriage on Alexander, Demetrius to be his friend and confederate: so that he
brake off the affinity that he had with him; and after he had withdrawn his
daughter from him, he presently sent Ambassadors unto Demetrius to confirm a
league of peace and affinity with him; promising him to bestow his daughter
upon him in marriage, and to establish him in his fathers kingdom. Demetrius
very joyful to hear of this Embassage, accepted both of the confederation
and marriage. There only remained one difficulty for Ptolomey to surmount,
which was how he might persuade the Antiochians to admit Demetrius, against
whom they were so grievously incesed, for the indignities which his father
Demetrius had offered them; but this difficulty overcame he by this means that
ensues. The Antiochians hated Alexander, because of Ammonius (as we have
expressed heretofore) and by that means were the more easily drawn to drive
him Ptolomey came unto Antioch, and was both by the Citizens and soldiers
therein, ptoclaimed king, and was constrained to take two Diademes, the one as
king of Asia, the other Ptolomey persuaded the Antiochians to accept Demetrius
for their king, and reiused the Diadem of Asia.
asking of Egypt. He was a man of a gentle and just nature, no ways
ambitions; but such a one as prudently did forecast what was to ensue:
st^riuing by all means possible to avoid the hatred and jealousy of the
Romans. For which cause (assembling the Antiochians together) he wrought so
much with them, that at last he persuaded them to accept of Demetrius, assuring
them that if he should receive that benefit at their hands, he would no more
keep in memory those things that had fallen out betwixt them and his father:
protesting for his own part, that he would instruct him both how to order the
course of his life honestly, and to manage his public affairs Demetrius.

But when as Alexander was departed out of Cilicia, with a great army, and was
come into Syria, and had burned and spoiled the country of the Antiochians,
Ptolomey accompanied with his son Demetrius (for he had already married his
daughter unto him) issued out with their armies, and obtained a joint and
mutual victory, by ouercomming Alexander, who was The year of the world,
3818 before Christ's birth 146. Alexander being overcome flies into Arabia, and
is stain in that place. Ptolomeis death.
constrained to fly into Arabia. It came to pass in that conflict, that
Ptolomeies horse hearing the noise of an Elephant, was troubled and stumbled in
such sort, as he threw his master on the ground: which when his enemies
perceived, they ran al together upon him, and gave him diverse wounds in the
head, whereby he was in danger to have been slain, unless his guard had
rescued him: notwithstanding he was so sick for four days space, that he
could neither hear nor speak. But Zabel the potentate of Arabia beheaded
Alexander, and sent his head unto Ptolomey; who being somewhat come unto
himself after his wounds on the fifth day, and having some knowledge, heard and
saw together a thing both delightful in his ear, and pleasant in his eye,
which was the death and the head of his enemy. But some few days after he died
himself, being full of joy in that he saw his enemies fall. This Alexander
surnamed Balls, reigned for the

Demetrius surnamed Nicanor, having obtained the kingdom, began through his
malice to dismember Ptolomeies army, forgetting both the confederacy and
affinity that he had with him, by reason of Cleopatra his wife, who was
Ptolomeies daughter. But the men of war hating his ingratitude fled into
Alexandria to warrantize themselves from his wickedness; notwithstanding they
left the Elephants in his power and possession.

But the high Priest Jonathan having assembled an army of all the country of
Iudaea, began to besiege the castle of Jerusalem, where there was a garrison of
the Macedonians, and a great number of wicked Apostates that were fallen from
the Jewish religion, who in the beginning set light by the engines that
Jonathan had raised to surprise the place, in the strength whereof they reposed
Demetrius and certified him of the siege; who was sore displeased thereat, and
taking a strong army with him, departed from Antioch to make war upon
Jonathan. At such time as he came Jonathan appeaseth Demetrius by presents.
to Ptolemais, he wrote to Jonathan and commanded him to come unto him:
notwithstanding Jonathan gave not over the siege, but took the Elders and the
Priests with him, with gold and silver, robes and a great quantity of presents
to bear unto Demetrius, and when he had delivered them into his hands he
appeased his wrath; and after he had received many honors at his hands, he
obtained the confirmation of his priesthood, in as ample manner, as he enjoyed
it du^g the times of his predecessors: And although the miscreant Jews accused
him, yet did not Demetrius give them any credit. Moreover, Jonathan requiring,
that for the whole country of Demetrius to Jonathan his brother, and to all
the nation of the Jews: Peace and Joy. We have sent you the copy of the
letter, that we have written to Lasthenes our father, to the end you may know
the contents thereof, which is this. King Demetrius
to Lasthenes Demetrius letters, to Lasthenes in which he bestows many
privileges on the Jews.
his father: Joy and Peace.
Because the people of the Jews are our confederates, and observe our
ordinances, my intent is to requite their good affection, and to assign them
the three governments of Apherema, Lydda, and Ramatha, with their
appurtenances, which have been taken from Samaria and annexed to Iudaea.
Secondly, we remit all that which our predecessors kings received of them that
sacrificed in Jerusalem: And other tributes likewise, which were gathered
Jonathan, to be affixed in some open and conspicuous place in the sacred
temple.


See here what he wrote at that time. Demetrius perceiving that his country
was in peace, and that he lived without fear of any war, he dismissed his
army, and cashierd his soldiers; hiring only certain strangers (who were
mustred out of Candy and other Isles) whereby Demetrius incurreth the hatred of
his soldiers by abridging their pay in time of peace.
it came to pass that his own soldiers conceived an envy and hatred against
him, in that he gave them no wages: whereas his predecessors maintained them as
well in peace as in war, to the end that they might be the more affectionate
toward them; and that if need required to employ

CHAP. IX. The year of the world 3820. before Christ's birth. 144.

Tryphon Apamenus overcomes Demetrius, and gives the kingdom to Antiochus
the son of Alexander, and plighteth friendship with Jonathan.

A Certain man called Diodotus, and by surname Tryphon (an Apamean by nation
and general of Alexanders army) hearing what mutiny there was amongst
Demetrius soldiers, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 8. 1. Machab. 11. Diodotus
called Tryphon Apamenus requires Malchus to commit Antiochus Alexanders ^n to
his charge. Jonathan sends Emballadors with presents to Demettius, to request
him to cassiere the forces in the castle of Jerusalem and the fortresses there
about.
came unto Malchus the Arabian, who had the bringing up of Antiochus Alexanders
son, and wrought as much as in him lay that he would commit Antiochus to his
trust, to the intent he might make him king, and establish him in the
sovereign government which appertained Triphon he was persuaded to condescend,
and suffered himself to be drawn by his persuasions. See here what this man
pretended at that time. But Jonathan the high Priest, desiring that they within
the citadel of Jerusalem and those wicked and Apostate Jews, and in general
all those that were in the garrisons thorowout all the country, might be
displaced and dismissed; he sent Ambassadors with rich presents unto Demetrius,
beseeching him to cashiere those that were in garrison in the fortresses of
Iudaea: who not only promised him that demand, but also matters of far greater
moment, after that war which he had then in hand, were determined. For the
present troubles at that time, gave him no leisure to perform the same: he
therefore praid him for the right of their friendship to send him some Jonathan
chose out three thousand fighting men, and sent them unto him. But the
Antiochians hated Demetrius, both because of the injuries they had endured
under him, as also for the hatred they had conceived against his father, who
had in like manner done them much wrong; so that they only expected and
watched their opportunity, to expulse him. Understanding therefore that the
succors that Jonathan sent unto Demetrius were at hand; and foreseeing that in
short time he would gather a great army, if they hasted not themselves to
prevent him betime; they betook them to The rebellion of the citizens of
Antioch, and the revenge taken on them by Demetrius.
their weapons, and beset the kings palace after the manner of a siege, and
guarded all the gates with an intent to lay hold on the king. Who seeing
himself roundly beset by the armed multitude of the Antiochians, took those
hired soldiers (with those whom Jonathan had sent him) Demetrius mercy, who
pardoning them their rebellion, pacified that sedition. After this he rewards
the Jews with part of the pillage, thanking them as the only authors of his
victory. Whereupon he sent them back to Jonathan, with no small
acknowledgment and testimony of their prowess and virtue. But afterward he
discovered his evil nature toward him, and falsified his promises, menacing
him to make war upon him except he paid him those tributes, which the people
of the Jews ought, and were wont to pay unto the kings his ancestors before
time. And these deseigns Tryphon hindered him: for he was enforced to turn
those forces that he had prepared against Jonathan, to make war upon Tryphon:
who returning from Arabia into Syria, with the younger Antiochus (who at that
time was under years) he set the diadem upon his head. All the army likewise
that had abandoned Demetrius, for shorting them of their wages, came and
followed him, and made open war against their master, and under Demetrius
thrust out of Antioch.
Antiochus and Tryphon fought with him and overcame him, seazing both his
Elephants, and the City of Antioch. Whereupon Demetrius being wholly
discomfited, fled into Cilicia. But The year of the world. 3820. before
Christ's birth 144. Jonathan for the favors and benefits he received at
Tryphons and Annochus hands, offers and performs his best endeavors against
Demetrius.
the younger Antiochus sent Ambassadors and letters to Jonathan, calling him
his ally and friend, confirming the priesthood unto him, and allotted him the
four governments annexed to Iudaea; and besides these, he gave him vessels of
gold, a robe of purple, with permission to wear the same: he gave him also a
pendent of gold, and enrolled him amongst his chiefest friends, and created his
brother Simon General of his army, from the marches of Tire as far as
Egypt. Jonathan highly rejoiced at these favors of Antiochus, and sent
ambassadors both unto him and Tryphon, protesting that he was their friend and
ally, and that he would fight on his side against Demetrius, who neglecting
those benefits which he had received (notwithstanding that in his necessity he
had been succored by him) returned him evil for good, which he had so kindly
extended toward him.

But after that Antiochus had granted him leave to leuy a great army out of
Syria and Phoenicia, to fight against Demetrius followers, he addressed
himself incontinently into the cities, who received him very magnificently;
yet did they not afford him any men of war. Coming from thence unto
Ascalon, the Citizens in honorable array came out to meet him with presents;
whom, together with the cities of Coelesyria, he exhorted to forsake Demetrius
part, and to follow Antiochus, to the end, that joining themselves with him,
they might all of them combine their forces against Demetrius, and take
vengeance of those mischiefs which they had oftentimes endured by his means:
and which if they prudently examined, they had many reasons to prosecute their
revenge. After he had persuaded these Cities to enter into confederation
against Demetrius, he came to Gaza, to induce them likewise, and reconcile them
to Antiochus. But he found Demetrius; yet would they not join their forces, or
submit their City to his government. For which cause Jonathan besieged their
city, and spoiled their country: for with the one half of his army he begirt
Gaza; and with the other half he ouerranne the country, spoiling and burning
the same. The Gazeans seeing these miseries which they were constrained to
endure, and perceiving that no succors came unto them from Demetrius; but that
their own overthrow was at hand, and their assistance far off; and that which
was worse, most uncertain: they thought it to be the wisest part for them to
forsake the one, and follow the other. Whereupon they sent messengers unto
Jonathan, protesting that they would be both his friends and confederates. For
men do unwillingly take knowledge of Upon this submission of theirs, Jonathan
received them into favor, and took pledges of them, and sent them to
Jerusalem; and from thence marched he along the country as far as Damasco.
And whereas a huge host sent by Demetrius, came out against him, as far as
the City Cedasa near unto Tire and Galilee, making their reckoning to divert
Jonathan from Syria, by succouring and relieuing those of Galilee, who were
their confederates: Jonathan went out speedily to meet with them, recommending
the estate of Iudaea to the charge of his brother Simon. Who assembling all the
power that was possible to be gathered thorowout all the country, encamped
before Bethsura, a strong fort in Iudaea; Demetrius being before time seized
thereof, kept garrison therein, as before this we have declared.) When as
therefore Simon raised his bulwarks and fitted his engines Simon Ionathans
brother takes in Bethsura.
to assault the City, and employed all his study to surprise the same, they
that were besieged waxed afraid, least if he should take the town by force,
they should lose their lives. For which cause, they sent an herault unto Simon,
requesting him that he would permit them to depart out of Bethsura with the
safety of their lives and goods, and go unto Demetrius: who satisfying their
demands, they presently departed out of the City, and he planted a garrison
therein of his own men, in place of the Macedonians. In the mean while
Jonathan, who was in Galilee, caused his army to dislodge from a place called
the waters of Genezareth, where first he was encamped, and marched toward the
plain of Azot, without any suspicion that his enemies had bin planted
Demetrius soldiers had intelligence the day before that Jonathan shoud march
forward against them, they laid an ambush for him, which they placed near the
mountain, preparing the rest of their forces to bid him battle in the plain.
As soon as Jonathan perceived their preparation to the battle, he arranged
his army as conveniently as was possible; but when they that lay in ambush
arose, and charged the Jews upon their backs, they fearing to be enclosed,
and consequently easily slain, began to fly; so that all of them abandoned
Jonathan, except some few to the number of fifty at the uttermost, and
Matthias the son of Absalom The year of the world. 3810. before the Nativity
of Christ. 144. Jonathan puts Demetrius soldiers to flight.
and Judas the son of Chapsaeus, the chieftaines of the army; who boldly
entering, and like desperate men charging the enemy in the vantgard with such
fury, that they made them amassed at their valor, and by force of handie blows
compelled them to trust to their heels. Which when they that fled from
Jonathan perceived, they rallied themselves and began to pursue them as far
as Cedasa, where the enemies were encamped.

Now when Jonathan had obtained this famous victory, wherein there died about
some two thousand of the enemy, he returned to Jerusalem, and (seeing that by
Gods providence all things fell out according as he himself desired) he sent
Ambassadors unto Rome, purposely to renew the ancient league that was made
betwixt them, and the people of the Jews: commanding his Ambassadors upon
their return from Rome, to transport themselves to Sparta, Jonathan renews
his frienship and co^federacy with the Romans and Lacedaemonians.
they were come to Rome, and had presented themselves before the Senate, they
declared how they were sent from the high Priest Jonathan, who required the
reuonation of their alliance. Whereupon the Senate granted all that which they
had demanded as touching the amity of the Jews, and gave them their letters
of recommendation to bear unto all the Kings of Asia and Europe, and to the
governors of all the Cities; commanding them to grant them free passage to
return into their country. And in their return they passed by the
Lacedaemonians, and presented those letters which Jonathan had written unto
them, the copy whereof contained matters to this effect. Jonathan the high
Priest of the Nation of the Jews, and all the communaltie of the Jews;
To the Ephores, Senate and people of Sparta: Health.
The year of the world, 3821. before Christ's birth 143.
we have that which we desire: For our selves, we are in good disposition. For
as much as heretofore we have received a letter by the hands of Demoteles,
written from Arius your king to Onias our high Priest, making mention of that
acquaintance and alliance, which is between you and us (the copy whereof we
have hereunder inserted) and have received your letters with great content, and
have with all kindly acceptance requited both Demoteles and Arius
(notwithstanding we were not ignorant of this consanguinitie long before, for
that we were instructed therein by our sacred scriptures.) And whereas we have
not first of all acknowledged you for our kinsmen, it was to no other end but
for fear we should ravish the honor of ratifying the friendship between us,
which we intended always should be yours. Since which time wherein Numenius
the son of Antimachus, and Antipater the son of Jason, men honorable
amongst our counselors, both to the Romans and to you also; to whom we have
given our letters to be presented unto you, in our behalf, to the end they
might renew the amity which is between you and us: you shall therefore do
well if you write back unto us, and certify us wherein we may steed you, in
that we have ever had an earnest desire, and will to continue our love toward


These Ambassadors of his were kindly entertained by the Lacedaemonians, who
made a public ordinance as touching their association, and amity with the
Jews; which they delivered unto them.

In this time were there three sects among the Jews, who had different and
contrary opinions as touching humane affairs; the first was that of the
Pharisees; the second of the Sadduces; Three sects of the Jews. The Pharisees.
The Essenians The Sdaduces
and the third of the Essenians. The Pharisees affirm that some things and not
all things, are directed by destiny; and that some other things were tied to
men's election, whether they would perform them or not. The Essenians said,
that destiny governed all things; and that nothing happened amongst men, that was
not disposed thereby. The Sadduces auow that there is no destiny; and that
human affairs in that destiny is not, cannot be governed and disposed
thereby: The wars of the Jews. lib. 2. chap. 1^.
irregard. But hereof have I entreated more exactly in my second book of the
wars of the Jews.

Demetrius Captains desirous to abolish the dishonor of that discomfiture,
and recover the loss that had lately befallen them, gathered together a
greater power then the former, and went out against Jonathan; who having
intelligence of their coming, marched speedily to encounter The year of the
world, 3821 before Christ's birth 143. Demetrius captains once more make war
upon sonathan, and seeing their purposes discovered fly by night.
them near unto the plain of Amath: for he resolved to prevent their intended
road into Iudaea. Encamping therefore some fifty furlongs off of the enemy,
he sent out spies to discover of what force they were, and how they were
encamped. Who, when they had by a most diligent view known all that possibly
they could, returning took certain prisoners, and brought them away by night
with them: by whose confession the intent of the enemies was discovered unto
Jonathan, which was, that they would set upon them on the sudden. But
Jonathan with a provident care speedily fortified his camp, and prepared all
things necessary for defense, and placed a watch or Sentinel without his
host, keeping his soldiers up in arms all the night, and exhorting them to
be both valiant and ready, forasmuch as they must needs fight by night, to the
end that they might not be surprised by the subtilties and policies of their
enemies. But when the Demetrius understood that their intended purpose was
discovered unto Jonathan, they were in suspense, and knew not what counsel to
take: for this troubled them, because they saw that nothing would fall out to
their good, without the practice of subtle means to entrap their enemies: and
supposing themselves not to be of sufficient strength to bid Jonathan battle
in the plain field; they therefore resolved to fly, and leave great fires
through all their camp, to the end their enemies might think they were
asleep: and so they discamped by night. On the morrow, when Jonathan drew
near their camp to bid them battle, and saw it abandoned, and coniectured
thereby that they were fled, he followed after them; but he could not overtake
them, because they had already past the flood Eleutherus, and were retired into
their strong holds and places of security. Returning therefore from thence
into Arabia, and making war on the Jonathan marches into Arabia, and
spoileth the Nahatheans. Simon his brother takes Ioppe. Jonathan and Simon
repair the city of Jerusalem and the fortresses of Jury.
Nabatheans, he spoiled their country, took great booties, and led away many
prisoners: and from thence came to Damasco, and sold all in that place. About
this very time, Simon his brother (marching through out al Iudaea and Palestine
as far as Ascalon; planted his garrisons in all those places, and fortified
them both with men and munition: and finally came to Ioppe, which he took by
force, and planted a great garrison therein, because he was advertised that
they of Ioppe intended to surrender the City to Demetrius forces. When Simon
and Jonathan had in this sort disposed all things, they came to Jerusalem, and
assembled the people together in the temple, and persuaded them to fortify the
walls of the City, and to strengthen the enclosure of the temple that was
ruinated, aduising the^ to fortify the same with strong towers: and besides
this, he caused another wall to be builded in the midst of the City, to
warrantize the same Jonathan gave order as touching all those things that
concerned the buildings within the City, and set his brother Simon about the
fortresses in the country. But Demetrius passing the river, came into
Mesopotamia, intending at one time to take possession both of it and the City
of Babylon, that being seized thereof, he might the better provide for all the
occurrences of his kingdom. For the Greeks and Macedonians, who inhabited that
country, had solicited him by often Ambassadors to come unto them, promising
him to subscribe to his authority, and to war with him against Arsaces King
of the Parthians. He puffed up with those Demetrius makes war upon Arsaces
king of the Parthians, and is taken prisoner.
hopes, marched toward them with great speed, resolving with himself, that
after he had overcome the Parthians (if he had any forces left him) he would
wage war with Tryphon, and easily drive him out of the kingdom of Syria.
Being therefore entertained by those of the country with great affection, he
levied a great army, and assailed Arsaces; but he lost the day, and himself
was taken prisoner, as we have elsewhere declared.

CHAP. X.
Demetrius is taken prisoner, Tryphon breaks the covenant of peace betwixt
him and Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9. 2. Mac 11. 13. Trypho^ laboring to
transfer Antiochus kingdom into his own hands, and fearing Ionathans
opposition traitorously complotteth his death.
Jonathan, and surpriseth and kills him trecherousle, and afterward makes
war against his brother Simon.

WHen Tryphon understood that Demetrius affairs had so unfortunate an issue,
he forsook Antiochus and his service; and complotted with himself how he
might kill him and make himself king. But the fear that he had of Jonathan
Antiochus friend, hindered this intent of his: For which cause he resolved first
of all to deliver himself of Jonathan; and that ^one, afterward to make
Antiochus the young king away. Having therefore concluded with himself to kill
Jonathan by some stratagem of treason, he came from Antioch to Bethsan (which
The year of the world. 3821. before Christ's birth 143.
Jonathan came to meet him with forty thousand chosen men, supposing that
Tryphon resorted thither to make warte upon him. But he knowing that Jonathan
came thither with so much strength, wrought him by presents and counterfeit
courtesies; commanding his captains to obey Jonathan, thinking by that means
to persuade him that he entirely and truly loved him, and to extinguish his
suspicion, to the intent he might lay hold and entrap him, at such time as he
had least suspicion of him. He counseled him to dismiss his army likewise,
because having cut off all occasion of war, he had no reason to retain them,
for that there was no suspicion of alteration. After this he invited Jonathan
to come to Ptolemais, and to bring with him some few of his soldiers,
signifying unto him that he would deliver the City into his hands, and resign
all the fortresses that were in the country to his possession; urging Jonathan
suspecting no sinister dealing, and believing that Tryphon spoke of good and
entire affection, discharged his forces, and took only three thousand men
with him, whereof two he left in Galilee, and with one thousand repaired to
Ptolemais unto Tryphon. But the Ptolemaidans shutting the gates as soon as he
was entered (according as Tryphon had commanded them) took Jonathan prisoner,
The year of the world, 3822. before Christ's Nativity, 142.
and slew all those that attended upon him. He presently sent also part of his
army unto the two thousand that were left in Galilee, to the intent to put them
all to the sword: but they having notice of that which had befallen their
chiefetaine, taking up their arms, speedily departed out of Galilee. And
although the soldiers of Tryphon exceeded them far in number, yet were they
not so hardy as to try whether part were the stronger; because they knew that
the Jews were

CHAP. XI.
The people makes Simon general of their army, and declares him the high
priest.

THey of Jerusalem understanding of the surprisall of Jonathan, and the loss
of his soldiers, grievously lamented for this accident, that so great a man as
he was, was taken from 2. Mac. 14. Ionathans want lamented by all men.
them, in that they feared (and that not without cause) that being destitute
after his decease Ionathans death, began presently to make war upon the Jews
on all sides, as against those who had no longer any chiefetaine, under whose
conduct they might wage war, and show themselves valiant. And Tryphon
likewise having gathered forces, was determined The neighbo^ring nations and
Tryphon invade Iudaea. Simon Ionathans brother assembleth the people, and
animateth the^.
to ascend into Iudaea, to war against the inhabitants thereof. Simon
perceiving that the Citizens of Jerusalem were dismayed with the fear, which
they apprehended of those rumors and new tumults of war, and being desirous
to animate them against all incursions and attempts Tryphon; assembled the
people in the temple, and began to exhort them after this manner. You are not
ignorant (men and brethren) how both I, my father, and brethren, have
voluntarily offered our selves unto death for your liberty. Since therefore, I
have abundance of such like examples, and that it is the ordinary course of
our family to die for our law and religion, there is no fear so great as can
pluck out this resolution out of my heart, as it may plant such a desire of
life in me, as to be drawn to forget all honor. Wherefore since you have such
The year of the world. 3823. before Christ's birth 141.
a chiefetaine and commander, as sets light by all danger, whereby he may
endure or act any thing for your safety; it behooves you to follow me
courageously to what place soever I shall conduct you. For I am of no better
account then were my brethren, whereby I should spare my life; neither am I
less then they, whereby I should through negligence and cowardice shun and
naught, and contemn you as if you had no chiefetaine: and I know already that
they are marching The year of the world. 3823. before Christ's Nativity. 141.
Simon succeeds his brothers Judas and Jonathan. Simon sends Jonathan
Absaloms son to ^oppe to expulse the inhabitants thereof
forward to fight with you. By these words Simon harmed the people, who were
distracted with fear, so that they revived their spirits and conceived better
hope. Whereupon all of them cried out with a loud voice, that Simon was their
general, and that he was to succeed his two valiant brethren Judas and
Jonathan in the government; and that as touching themselves, they would be
obedient in all things that he should command them. He therefore assembled in
one instant all the men at arms in that country, and hasted himself to
repair the City walls, defencing them with high and strong towers, and sent
a certain friend of his called Jonathan the son of Absalom, with an army to
Ioppe; commanding him to expulse the inhabitants of that city from thence, for
that he feared least they should submit themselves to Tryphon: As for himself
he remained in Jerusalem to secure the same.

Tryphon departing from Ptolemais with a great army, came into Iudaea; leading
his prisoner Jonathan with him. Whereupon Simon with his army went out against
him as far as Addida Tryphon by fraudulent promises under certain conditions
persuades Simo^ that his brother should be set at liberty.
(a City situate upon a mountain, at the foot whereof begins the
champion country of Iudaea.) Tryphon knowing that Simon was made governor of
the Jews, sent messengers unto him, intending to circumuent him by treason and
policy; giving him to understand, that if he were des^ous of his brothers
enlargement, he should send him one hundredth talents of silver, and two of
Ionathans children for hostages, to assure him, that being set at liberty, he
should not withdraw Iudaea from the obedience of the king. (For till that
present he was held and kept prisoner, by reason of the money which he ought
the king.) Simon was no ways ignorant of this cunning intent of Tryphons, but
knew well enough that he should both lose his money, if he should deliver
Tryphon demanded, telling them that the whole scope of his actions were naught
else but traitorous stratagemes and subtilties: yet notwithstanding he told
them, that he had rather send both the money and the children to Tryphon, then
by refusing his conditions and demands, to be accused to have neglected the
life of his brother. Simon therefore sent both the money and children of
Jonathan: but Tryphon having received both, kept not his promise; but detained
Jonathan: and leading his army through the country, intended to pass by
Idumaea to repair to Jerusalem. He came therefore to Simon to encounter with
him, encamping always right over against him. They that were in the Castle of
Jerusalem, hearing news hereof, sent Tryphon word that he should hasten and
come unto them, and send them munition: whereupon he addressed his horsemen,
pretending that very night to ride unto Jerusalem; but the snow about that time
fell in such abundance, that it covered the way in such sort and was so thick,
as the horses could not travel; which hindered his repair to Jerusalem. For
which cause he departed from thence, and came into Coelesyria; and speedily
inuading the country of Galaad, he put Jonathan to death in that place, and
after he had buried him there, he returned to Antioch. But Simon sent unto
Basca and transported his brothers bones, and interred them in his Jonathan is
slain by Tryphon.
country Modin in his fathers sepulcher, and all the people mourned and
lamented for him many Simon also builded a great monument of white and polished
marble for his father and his brethren, and raised it to a great height, and
garnished it round about with galleries and pillars Ionathans monument.
all of one piece, which was an admirable work to behold. Besides that, he
erected seven Pyramides for his father, mother and brethren, for each of them
one, so great and so fair, as they moved admiration in those that beheld
them; and are as yet to be seen at this present day. So great was Simons care,
that Jonathan and the rest of his family should be honored with so magnificent
a sepulcher: which Jonathan died, after he had exercised the place of high
priest, and possessed the government for four years. Thus much as touching
his death.

As soon as Simon had taken possession of the high priesthood, by the election
of the people, the very first year of his government, he acquitted the people
of the tribute which they were The year of the world. 382^. before Christ's
birth 140. The Jews discharged of tributes, Simons authority.
wont to pay to the Macedonians. This liberty and exemption from tribute
happened amongst the Jews one hundredth and seventy years, since the time that
Seleucus surnamed Nicanor obtained the kingdom of Syria. And in so great
honor was Simon amongst the people, that in their private contracts and
public letters, the date began from the first year of Simon the benefactor
and governor of the Jewish nation. For they prospered greatly under his
government, and had the victory of all their neighboring enemies round about
them. For he destroyed the Cities of Gaza, Ioppe, and Iamnia: he raced also the
citadel of Jerusalem, and leuelled it with The year of the world. 3823.
before Christ's birth. 141. Simon raceth the castle of Jerusalem.
All this persuaded he the people to do in a common assembly, laying before
their eyes how many evils they had suffered, by the means of the garrisons,
and how much they were like to suffer hereafter, if a stranger should once more
be master of the kingdom, and build a citadel in that place. By these
exhortations The year of the world, 3824. before Christ's birth 140.
he persuaded the people to finish these works, and all of them began to
travel without intermission both day and night, so that in the space of three
years they plained the mountain, and wrought it down; and from that time
forward there was nothing but the temple that commanded Simon performed
hitherto.

CHAP. XII.
Simon besieges Tryphon within Dora, and contracteth alliance with Antiochus,
surnamed the Devout.

NOt long after the captivity of Demetrius, Tryphon slew Alexander the son of
Antiochus, surnamed God, notwithstanding he had the care and charge of his
education for four Hedio and Ruf. finus, chap. 10. 1. Macc^b. 15. Tryphon
murdering Alexander, obtains the kingdom.
years, during which time he reigned; and spreading abroad a certain noise
and rumor, that the young king in exercising himself fortuned to die, he sent
his friends and familiars Demetrius was prisoner among the Parthians, and that
if Antiochus his brother should obtain the kingdom, he would punish them
diverse ways, and revenge their revolt and rebellion, which they had committed
by Tryphon having obtained dominion discovers his corrupt nature Tryphons
army submit to Cleopatra Demetrius wife, who married with Antio chus Soter and
committed the authority to his hands.
forsaking him. The army hoping, that if they bestowed the kingdom on Tryphon,
it would redound highly to their profit, they proclaimed him king. But after he
had attained the fullness of his desites, he showed how malicious and wicked
his nature was. For at such time as he was a private man, he flattered the
people and made show of moderation; and by such allurements he drew the^ to do
what him listed: but after he had taken possession of the kingdom, he
discovered his hypocrisy, and showed plainly that he was not unaptly called
Tryphon, that is to say, a trifler Cleopatra Demetrius wife, who had at that
time shut up both her self and her children in Seleucia. And whereas Antiochus,
surnamed the Devout, and brother to Demetrius, was driven from place to place,
and had not any City that would entertain him for fear of Tryphon, Cleopatra
sent unto him, enuiting him both to be her husband, and to take the possession
of the kingdom. And hereunto did she the rather draw him, partly for that she
was thereunto persuaded by her friends, and partly for the fear she had, least
some one of Seleucia should betray the city to Tryphon. As soon as Antiochus
was arrived in Seleucia, and that from day to day his forces increased, he
marched forth into Hedio and Ruffunus chap. 11. Antiochus having driven Tryphon
out of Syria, besieged him in Dora. Tryphons death. The year of the world.
3827. before the birth of Christ. 137.
the field, and fought with Tryphon, and overcame him in battle, and drove him
out of the Simon the high priest of the Jews, to confirm a friendship and
confederacy with him. Simon very courteously accepted his demands, and
presently sent Antiochus both money and victuals, sufficient to furnish his
army at the siege of Dora, so that in short space he was accepted amongst the
number of his entire friends. Tryphon flying from Dora to Apamea, was in that
place besieged, taken and flaine, after he had reigned three years.

CHAP. XIII.
After Tryphons death, Simon made war against Antiochus, and drove Cendebaeus

But the innated avarice that was in Antiochus, and the malignitie of his
nature made him forgetful of those offices and services that Simon had done
him: so that he sent Cendebaeus Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 1^.
his great friend with a mighty army to invade Iewry, and to surprise Simon.
But he having some privy intelligence of Antiochus treachery, notwithstanding
that at this time he was very old, was in such sort moved with the injuries
that Antiochus had done him, as animated The year of the world. 3827. before
Christ's birth 137. Simon and his son expels (...) out of Jury.


CHAP. XIIII.
Simon is traitorously slain by his son in law Ptolomey at a

HE governed Iudaea for the space of eight years, and was at length slain at
a banquet by the treachery of Ptolomey his son in law; who being seized of
Simons wife and his The year of the world, 3830. before Christ's natiuiti, 134.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13. 1. Mac. 16. No faith nor trust, no not in sons in
law.
two children, and detaining them in prison, sent out certain of his train
besides, to kill John the third son surnamed Hircanus. But the young man
hauing-some inkling of their drift, retired himself speedily into the city,
and avoided the danger that they complotted against him; assuring himself of
the good will of the people, in consideration of the benefits they had received
at his fathers hands, and the hatred that they bare unto Ptolomey; who
intending to enter the city gates was sharply repulsed by the citizens, for
that they had already entertained Hircanus.

CHAP. XV.
How Ptolomey failing of his hopes, Hircanus obtained the Sovereignty.

WHereupon Ptolomey retired unto a certain Castle, situate beyond Ierico
called Dagon: The year of the world. 3831. before the birth of Christ. 133.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14. Ptolomy besieged by Hircanus knowing the power of
natural affection keeps his mother and brethren prisoners, whippeth them on
the walls, and threatens to throw them down.
but Hircanus was made high Priest in his fathers steed, who after he had
recommended himself to God by the firstling sacrifices that he offered,
marched out against Ptolomey his brother in law to make war upon him. Now
when he was fully addressed to besiege the place Ptolomey was retired, he had
the advantage in all other things, but only by the affection that he bare unto
his mother and his brethren, he was overcome. For Ptolomey having taken them,
and whipped them upon the walls in all men's presence, threatened Hircanus that
unless he levied his siege, he would cast them down headlong from the top of
the Castle: now whereas one way Hircanus had a great desire to enforce and
surprise the place; so also on the other side he was wholly weakened, through the
desire that he had to redeem those, whom he loved, from the enemies tyranny.
True it is, that his mother stretching out her hands, besought him that for her
sake he should not give over valiantly to assault the place; but that he should
be the more encouraged to surprise the fortress, and to lay hold upon his
enemy, and be revenged on the wrong that was offered unto his decrest friends:
alleging that she thought it better to die in Hircanus heard his mother speak
thus, he was more furiously incensed to give the assault: but as soon as he
saw his mother so beaten and so sore wounded, his heart melted within him, and
that seruent desire which he before had to batter and beat down the city, was
presently alaid and cooled; and so the pitiful compassion on his mother,
surmounted and overcame his irefull affection of revenge. Whilst thus the
siege was continued and prolonged, the year of repos^ celebrated among the
Jews was come: For they observed the seventh year, as the seventh day is
observed in the week; so that by this occasion Ptolomey was delivered of this
siege, who afterward slew both Hircanus mother and brethren: which done he
fled unto Zeno surnamed Cotyla, who at that time tyrannized The end of the
histories of the Bible.
in the city of the Philadelphians.

CHAP. XVI. The year of the world. 3831. before Christ's birth 133.

Antiochus the Devout makes war against Hyrcanus, and upon the receipt of
three hundredth talents contracteth alliance with him.

ANtiochus calling to mind the manifold losses he had received by Simons
means, invaded Jury in the fourth year of his reign, and in the first of
Hyrcanus government, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 15. Hircanus is driven into the
city by Antiochus.
which was in the hundredth sixty and two Olympiade. And after he had spoiled
all the country, he locked up Hyrcanus within the City of Jerusalem, which he
had besieged with seven camps; yet with no advantage at all, both in regard of
the strength of the walls, as in respect of the valor of the Citizens, as
also the want of water which he had in his camp; which was notwithstanding
remedied by a great fall of rain, which fell about the setting of the Pleiades
in Pleiades the seven stars.
Antiochus caused one hundredth towers to be erected every one three stages
hie, on which he planted certain companies of armed soldiers; who daily fought
with the besieged, and who by the means of a double and deep trench, took
from them all their commodities. They on their side made often sallies, and if
they chanced at any time to charge the enemy on the sudden, they made a
great slaughter: but if they were discovered, they retired soldierlike. But
Hyrcanus considering the great number of people that were in the City, who
rather consumed soldiers victuals then performed any service, he divided those
that were unfit for war and sent them out of the City, The weaker sort are
thrust out of the city.
retaining only those with him, who were valiant and warlike. But Antiochus
permitted them not to have free liberty to depart; so that wandering here and
there between the walls and the Antiochus affoordeth seven days truce to
celebrate the feasts of tabercles.
was to be celebrated during these affairs, they that were within had
compassion of their countrymen, and drew them within the walls, and
entertained them within the City. At this time Hyrcanus sent a messenger to
beseech Antiochus to grant him truce for seven days, by reason of the
solemnity of the feast: whereunto he accorded for the honor which he bare
unto God. Furthermore, he sent a magnificent sacrifice into Jerusalem of Bulls
with gilded horns, and vessels full of diverse odors, with other vessels of
gold and silver. Those that had the charge of the gates received the sacrifice
at their hands that brought the same, and offered them in the temple. Antiochus
himself also gave the soldiers certain meats to grace their festival,
showing himself herein to be of a far better disposition then Antiochus
Epiphanes, who after he had taken Antiochus of whom we we speak at this
present, was by all men called Devout by reason of the incredible affection
that he had to the service of God.

Hyrcanus acknowledging the bounty and affection he had toward God and his
sacrifices, sent ambassadors unto him, requiring him that he would permit them
to use the ancient policy of their forefathers. Whereupon the King sequestring
all those far off from his company, who counseled him to destroy the Jewish
nation, who lived a part and had no acquaintance with others, made no reckning
of their words. And understanding that all the conversation of the Jews
Hircanus makes peace with Antiochus, and the siege is given over.
up their arms and pay the tributes of Ioppe, and the other Cities that were
out of Iudaea, and would receive a garrison, such as he should appoint; he
would discharge them of this war. They accepted all other his conditions, but
they consented not to receive a garrison, least they should be enforced to
entertain such with whom they could not converse; but in steed of the
garrison they gave pledges, and paid five hundredth talents of silver, of which
the king received three hundredth in hand, with the pledges; amongst which was
Hyrcanus brother: and after he had beaten down the cope and panes, of the
wall, with the other battelments of defense; he raised the siege and departed.
But Hyrcanus opening David's monument (who surpassed all other The year of the
world, 3838. before Christ's Nativity, 126. Hircanus takes a huge sum of
money out of king David's tomb. Nicholas Damascene.
kings in riches during his time) drew three thousand talents out of the same:
whereby he took Antiochus, whom he entertained in the city with all his army,
and furnished him largely and magnificently with all that which was necessary
for the same: And that which more is, Antiochus having enterprised an exploit
against the Parthians, Hircanus marched also in his company. Nicholas Damascene
bears witness hereof, writing after this manner in his History: Antiochus
erected a trophey near the flood Lycus, after he had overcome Indates general
of the army of the Parthians, and abode there two days at Hircanus The years
of the world. 3838. before Christ's Nativity. 1^6.
the Jews request, by reason of a solemn feast at that time, in which it was
not lawful for the Jews to travel, wherein he is no ways mistaken. For the
feast of Penticost was at that present the next day after the Sabbath, and it
is not lawful for us neither in our Sabboths nor feasts to journey any ways.
Antiochus fighting against Arsaces king of the Parthians lost the greater part
of his army, and was himself slain. His brother Demetrius succeeded him in
the kingdom of Syria, Antiochus slain in the con^ct against the Parthians.
whom Arsaces had put in prison at such time as Antiochus came into the
kingdom of the Parthians, as we have declared heretofore in an other place.

CHAP. XVII.
Hircanus leads his army into Syria.

HIrcanus hearing news of Antiochus death, led forth his army with all
expedition against the Cities of Syria, hoping to find them disfurnished both
of garrisons and means of Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 16. Hircanus surpriseth
diverse cities of Syria, and lays deso late the temple that was builded on the
hill G^zim. The year^ of the world, 3840 before Christ's birth 1^4. The
Idumaeans conquered by Hircanus admit circumcision, and the ^awes of the Jews.
Hircanus makes a league with the Romans.
defense, as in effect it came to pass. He therefore took the City of Medaba
at the end of six months, after that his army had suffered many calamities.
Afterward, he seized Samega, and the Cities thereabouts. The Cities of Sichem,
and Garizim also where the Cutheans dwelt, who had a temple there made
according to the model of the temple of Jerusalem (which Alexander the great
permitted Sanaballath to build in favor of his son in law Manasses, brother
to the high priest Iaddus, as we have heretofore declared) which temple was
laid desolate two hundredth Hircanus also took certain fortresses and Cities
of Idumaea, as Adora and Marissa; and after he had subdued all the Idumaeans he
permitted them to inhabit the country, under this condition, that they should
consent to be circumcised, and to live according to the laws and religion of
the Jews. They through the desire they had to live in the place where they were
borne, submitted themselves to be circumcised, and to live according to the
customs and ordinances of the Jews; and from that day forward they were
comprehended within the number of the Jews.

Whilst thus Hircanus was high priest, he thought good to renew the amity
betwixt the Jews and the Romans; and to this effect he sent an embassage with
letters unto the Senate. As soon as the Senate had received his letters, they
made alliance with him, to this effect ensuing: Fanius M. F. Pr. assembled the
Senate in the field of Mars the eight day of February, in the presence of L.
Manlius L. F. Mentina, and C. Sempronius C. F. Falerna; concerning that which
Simon the son of Dositheus, Apollonius the son of Alexander, Diodorus the
son of Lison, men of good reputation and honor, and sent Ambassadors by the
people of the Jews, have proposed; who have dealt with us as touching the
confederation and amity that this nation had with the Romans, and have
likewise conferred as touching the affairs of estate, namely, that Ioppe and
the ports thereof, Gazara and the fountains thereunto belonging, and those
other Cities of the country, which Antiochus took from them, contrary to the
decree of the Senate, should be restored unto them: and that it may not be
lawful for the kings soldiers, to pass through their country, neither any of
those provinces, that are under their government: and that Antiochus during
this war, contrary to the arrest and decree of the Senate, should be
declared void, to the end that the ambassadors sent in the Senates behalf,
may provide for the restitution of those things, which antiochus has spoiled
them The year of the world. 3844. before Christ's birth 120.
of; and may rate and set down the domages, which the country has received
by this war. Item, that commendatorie letters should be written in the
behalf of the Jewish ambassadors, to the kings and free people for their
secure and safe return into their country. It has been held convenient, to
make and ratify this ordinance, to the end to renew friendship and
confederation with men of so good respect, sent unto them by a nation so good
and faithful toward them. And as touching the letters, the answer was; that
they should be written, at such time as the affairs of the Senate would permit
them any leisure; and that from this time forward, they would have Fanius was
commanded also to deliver the ambassadors money out of the common purse, to
bear their charges home into their country: and thus did Fanius dismiss the
Ambassadors of the Jews, after he had given them silver out of the common
treasury, with the decree of the Senate addressed to those that should conduct
them, and give them assured conuoy to return into their country. And this was
the estate of the affairs during Hircanus priesthood.

But King Demetrius. being sharply whetted to make war against Hircanus,
could have neither The year^ of the world. 3844. before the Nativity of
Christ. 120.
Ptolomey, surnamed Physcon, to require him to send some one of Seleucus race
unto them, to take upon him the kingdom. Whereupon Ptolomey sent them
Alexander surnamed Zebina, Demetrius being overcome by Alexander is slain.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 17. Alexander slain in the conflict betwixt him and
Antiochus Gryphus.
accompanied with an army; who waging battle with Demetrius put him to the
worst, and constrained him to fly to his wife Cleopatra to Ptolemais: who
neither accepting, nor entertaining him, he was constrained to retire himself
from thence unto Tire; where he was taken, and after he had suffered many
miseries by the hands of his enemies, he finally died. Alexander having by this
means obtained the kingdom, made a league of amity with Hircanus. And whereas
it so fell out, that Antiochus surnamed Gryphus, the son of Demetrius made
war against Antiochus had taken possession of the kingdom of Syria, he
forbear to make war against the Jews, for that he had intelligence that his
brother by the mothers side (who was in like sort named Antiochus) assembled an
army against him at Cyzicus. Remaining therefore in his country, he resolved
to make preparation against his brothers coming, who was called Cyzicenus,
because he was brought up in that City, and was the son of Antiochus called
the Conseruer, who died in the country of the Parthians, and who was brother
to Demetrius the father of Gryphus, and it so fell out that both these
brothers, were married to one and the same Cleopatra, as we have heretofore
expressed. When The year of the world, 3852. before Christ's nativity, 112.
Antiochus the Cyzicenian was arrived in Syria, he made war against his
brother, which continued many years: during all which time Hircanus lived in
peace (for presently after Antiochus Hircanus whilst the brothers weaken
themselves by civil wars lives in peace.
greatly during the time of Alexander Zebina, and principally during the reign
of these two brothers. For the war, wherein they consumed one another, gave
Hircanus an opportunity, to leuy all the revenues of Iudaea, without any
contradiction: so that by the same means he gathered infinite sums of money.
For whilst the Cyzicenian destroyed his brothers country, Hircanus also made
known his inclination and disposition: and seeing likewise that Antiochus was
destitute of those succors he expected out of Egypt, and that both himself
and his brother also (through their mutual discords) weakened one another
estates, he set as light by the one, as by the other.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Antiochus the Cyzicenian came to the relief of the Samaritanes, and how
being conquered, he fled away.

FOr which cause he drew sorth his army against Samaria (which was a strong
City) and The year of the world, 3854. before Christ's birth 110. Hircanus
besieges Samaria.
is at this day called Sebaste, because it was reedified by Herod, as we will
make manifest in time and place convenient. He therefore began to be^ and
batter the same with all diligence; animated thereunto, because of the extreme
hat^ (...) the Samaritanes, in that only to please the kings of Syria they had
offered many grievous outrages to the Marissens, Antigonus and Aristobulus, who
so diligently and valiantly behaved themselves, that the Samaritanes being
ouerpressed with extreme famine, were constrained to eat such things, as were
unusual and unaccustomed amongst men: and to call Antiochus the Cyzicenian
Antiochus seeking to (...) lieue the Samaritanes, is overcome and put to slight
by Aristobulus.
to their rescous. Who readily repaired thither, but was repulsed by
Aristobulus soldiers, and being pursued by the two brethren as far as
Scythopolis, he hardly escaped; and they returning to their siege, freshly
assaulted and besieged the Samaritanes within their own walls: So that once
more they were constrained to send Ambassadors to Antiochus for aid, who was
their allie; who sent unto Ptolomey Lathyrus for about some six thousand men of
war, who furnished Hircanus country, and spoiled and forraged the same as
far as Egypt. For he durst not bid him battle hand to hand, because he had
not competent forces; but thought that in spoiling the country he might cause
them to leuy the siege, and forsake Samaria: but after he had lost a great
number of his men by diverse ambuscadoes of his enemies, he went unto Tripoli,
committing the general charge of that war to Callimander and Epicrates, two
of his captains. This Callimander more rashly then The year of the world,
3854. before Christ's birth 110. Ep^tares corrupted with money, sells
Scythopolis and other places to the Jews. Hircanus takes Samaria.
wisely attempting to set upon the enemy was himself slain, and his soldiers
discomfited. And Epicrates given over to covetousness did openly yield up
Scythopolis and other Cities into the hands of the Jews: so that it was
impossible for either of them to leuy the siege. Finally after that Hircanus
had continued his siege before the City for the space of one whole year, he
became master of the same: and not contenting himself with the surprisall
hereof, he utterly destroyed it; enforcing the rivers through the midst thereof;
yea he ruined the same in such sort, that the mud and soil both of the water
and earth took away all the appearance of the City; so that it seemed as if
it had never been. Of this Hircanus there is a certain incredible matter
committed to memory, namely, how during his high priesthood God had conference
with him. For it is reported, that the very same day wherein his sons fought
against Antiochus the Cyzicenian, whilst Hircanus is foretold by a voice in
the temple of his sons victory.
being himself alone, he offered incense in the temple, that he heard a voice,
saying: that his two sons had at that present overcome Antiochus: all which he
incontinently signified unto the people at the gate of the temple; and
according as he had said, so came it to pass. See here what occurrences
happened in Hircanus time.

About this very instant likewise, the affairs of the Jews prospered not only
in Jerusalem and Iudaea, but also amongst the inhabitants of Alexandria; and
finally in Egypt and Cyprus. For Queen Cleopatra rebelling against her son
Ptolomey Lathyrus, appointed Chelcias and Ananias Chelchias and Ananias
captains of Cleopatras army. Strabo of Cappadocias report of the loyalty of
the Jews. Hircanus grow eth in discontent with the Pharisees.
the sons of that Onias (who had builded the temple in Heliopolis, according
to the pattern of that in Jerusalem) her chiefetaines. And having committed
her army unto their hands, she acted nothing without their advise, according as
Strabo the Cappadocian witnesses, speaking Cleopatra, suddenly revolted to
Ptolomey: Only the Jews that were of Onias faction, remained constant in their
duty, because the Queen made great account and reckoning of Chelcias and
Ananias their countrymen. Thus far Strabo. This great felicity and
prosperity of Hyrcanus moved the Jews to conceive a hatred against him, and
especially the Pharisees opposed themselves against him. These Pharisees were
one of the sects of the Jews (whereof we have heretofore entreated) which sect
was in so great credit with the common people, that when they deposed any
thing, were it against the king or the high priest, they were presently
believed. Hircanus had been one of their disciples, and was in like sort very
much beloved of them. He therefore invited them to a feast, and entertained
them with all humanity, and seeing that they Eleazar, a man of a malicious
nature, and such a one as delighted in mutiny, said unto him: Since you desire
to hear the truth, if so be Eleazar the Pharisee vpbraideth Hircanus that his
mother was a slave.
you affect the estimation of a good man, give over the place of priesthood,
and content your self with the government of the people. Hircanus demanded of
him the cause wherefore he should forsake the priesthood? Because (says he)
that we have heard say by our ancestors, that your mother Antiochus the Famous
(which notwithstanding was a false report.) Hircanus hearing this, was sore
moved against him; as also all other of the Pharisees, who were assistant in
that place. Amongst the rest there was a certain man called Jonathan, of the
order of the Sadduces (who maintain an opposite opinion against the Pharisees)
who was an The Sadduee Jonathan incenseth Hircanus against the Pharisees.
inward and dear friend to Hircanus, with whom he communicated the injurious
speeches that Eleazar had spoken by him, who told him that (as he thought)
Eleazar had spoken these words by the public consent of the Pharisees; and
that he might discover the same most manifestly, if he enquired of them what
punishment Eleazar had deserved for speaking after this sort. Hircanus therefore
questioned with the Pharisees as concerning his punishment, telling them that
he should very well perceive, that this injury had not been pronounced by the
common consent of Hircanus was sore offended with this their answer, and
imagined that this Eleazar had spoken after this manner by the common
instigation of the rest. This displeasure and conceived dislike of his, did
Jonathan aggrauate The year of the world. 3854. before Christ's birth. ^10.
Hircanus forsakes the Pharisees, and follows the Sadduces. The constitutions
of the Pharisees.
to the uttermost, and handled the matter in such sort, that he drew Hircanus
to forsake the Pharisees, and subscribe to the opinions of the Sadduces,
abolishing their ordinances, and causing the^ to be sharply punished that
observed the same. These practices of Hircanus incensed the people against him
and his sons. But hereof will we speak in another place. At this present I
will declare how the Pharisees have made many ordinances among the people,
according to the tradition of their fathers, whereof there is nothing written
in the ^awes of Moses; for which cause the sect of the Sadduces rejects them,
affirming that they ought to keep the written ordinances, and not to observe
those that are grounded upon the tradition of the fathers: And great dispute
and dissensions have been raised among them upon this occasion, because the
richer sort only, and not the baser sort of people, cleaued unto the Sadduces:
but the Pharisees had the communalty Hircanus death. The year of the world.
3861. before the birth of Christ. 103.
in my second book of the wars of the Jews. But Hircanus finally appeased
this mutiny, and lived afterward in much peace and happiness, and after he had
most discreetly governed his princedome for the space of one and thirty years
he died; leaving five sons behind him. This man was honored by God with
three great gifts, the gift of government; the gift of Priesthood; and the gift
of prophecy. For God spoke unto him diverse times by Oracles, and Revelations,
and gave him the knowledge of things to come, which he in such sort foretold,
that he declared that Hircanus prophecy of his sons.
his two eldest sons should not possess the principality any long time,
whose end it shall not be amiss to set down in what manner it was, to the
intent that the prophecy of their father may be the better known.

CHAP. XIX.
Aristobulus obtains the government, and first of all places the kingly
Diadem on his head. The year of the world. 3862. before Christ's birth 10^.
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 18. Aristobulus Hircanus son was the first afer the
captivity of Babylon that set the Diadem on his head, Aristobulus admitte^h
his brother Antigonus to be his copartner in the kingdom, and imprisoneth the
rest of his brethren and samisheth his mother.


AFter the death of their father, Aristobulus the eldest of his sons
determined to exchange the principality into an absolute estate of a kingdom,
and the better to attain thereunto, he first of all set the diadem upon his
head, four hundred eighty and one years and three months, since the people
of the Jews were delinered from the seruitu^ of Babylon, and led again into
their country. And for that Aristobulus amongst all his other brethren,
Antigonus best of all, who was the heerest unto him in age; he accepted him as
a companion in the government of the kingdom: but as touching the rest, he
shut them up in prison. He locked up his mother likewise, who had contended
with him as concerning the government (for that Hircanus had committed all
things to her disposition) and so far extended his cruelty, that he ^amished
her to death in prison. After he had thus handled his mother, he slew his
brother Antigonus also; (whom he pretended to love above all the rest, and whom
(as he made show) he had made partner of his kingdom. From whom be estranged
himself, by reason of some slanders and false accusations raised up against
him, which at the first he gave no credit to, both for that the friendship
which he bare unto him, made him slightly respect the (...), as also for that
he imagined the he was enuiously slaundered: It came to pass, that Antigonus,
returning upon Aristobulus happened to fall sick. Antigonus intending to
celebrate the solemnity ascended the temple in great bravery, attended by
some of his army, to make his especial prayers for his brothers health.
Whereupon certain malicious wretches, desirous to break the concord that was
between them, made use of this occasion, and of Antigonus magnificent pomp
and good fortune^ and came unto the King, amplifying unto him in malicious
words, what pomp and majesty he had showed i^ that solemnity, Antigonus
death complotted. Aristobulus (...) incensed against his brother Antigonus.
telling him that in these his actions; he deme^ed himself in no so^ like a
private man; but that all his action^ were leuelled at a royalty: finally,
that his intent was to enter the kingdom by force, and to kill him, in that he
made his account that since he might be (...) Aristobulus although he would
very hardly be induced to believe these reports; yet notwithstanding being
desirous both to extinguish the suspicion, and to provide for his own
security, he disposed certain of his guard in a dark and privy place under
ground, and lodged himself in a certain tower called Antonia, commanding
that no man should offer violence, except to those who entered armed: Giving a
further charge to his guard, that if Antigonus entered armed, he should be
slain. Which done, he first sent for his brother, willing him to repair The
year of the world. 3862. before Christ's birth 102. Aristobulus Queen
contriueth Antigonus death.
unto him without weapons. Which when the Queen and they that complotted the
murder of Antigonus understood, they persuaded the messenger to certify him
the contrary, namely, that his brother expected (in that he made warlike
preparation and furniture for war, that in that estate and pomp, and in
those his royal and warlike accoustrements, he should come and visit him, to
the end he might be an eyewitness of his brave furniture and preparation. But
Antigonus suspecting no harm intended him, and relying on the good will of his
brother, marched all armed on foot toward Aristobulus, to show himself in that
bravery: and when he came right over against the tower, that is called
Straton, where the passage was very dark, the kings guard flue him.

By this accident a man may easily conjecture, that there is scarcely any power
greater then The force of slander.
offered us of great wonder in respect of one that was called Judas of the sect
of the Esseans, who in all those things that he prophesied varied in no sort
from the truth. He seeing Antigonus come Judas the Essea^ a prophet.
up into the temple, cried out among his disciples (who frequented with him to
be instructed by him in the method of prophecy) that he was weary of his
life, because Antigonus security argued the vanity of his prophecy, by which
he had foretold, that that very day he should be slain at Stratons tower;
whereas the place, where he should be murdered, was six hundredth stounds off,
and the better part of the day was already spent: so that it could not be
imagined, but that he should be in danger to have made a false prediction.
Whilst he debated his doubts Antigonus was slain in a certain place under
ground, which was called the tower of Straton, of the same name with that other
that stands near the sea, which was afterward called Caesarea; which
ambiguitie troubled the diuiner. Incontinently after this accident, Aristobulus
repented himself in that he had put his brother to death; and this repentance
of his, was seconded by a most grievous The punishment of Aristobulus for the
murt her of his brother.
sickness, proceeding from the affliction of his spirit and detestation of
that cruel murder: so that with grievous agony and torment he vomited blood,
as if all his entrals had been torn in sunder. This blood so vomited by him,
it fortimed (in mine opinion) by the divine providence of God, that a certain
servant of his bearing it from his presence, by some trip of his foot happened
to stumble, and shed the same in that very place, which had been soyled with
the blood of slaughtered Antigonus. By which means they that beheld the same,
raised a great cry, exclaiming that the Page had shed the blood in a
convenient place. Aristobulus hearing this outecrie, demanded the cause
thereof, and for that no man addressed himself to satisfy him, he was the The
touch of conscience.
more earnest to know it (according to the nature of men, who are always more
suspicious and desirous to know those things, which are most concealed.)
Finally, from words he fell to menaces, and never a man for fear of him durst
tell him the truth. Whereupon he altogether dismayed and affrighted in his
conscience, casting forth abundant tears, and laden with grievous sighs,
began toocrie out in thi^ manner: How then? Mine impious and detestable act is
not hidden from God, h^ the sudden punishment of my brothers murder pursues
me: wherefore, O thou shameless body of mine, how long will thou detain my
soul, which is due, and appertains The year of the world, 38^. before
Christ's birth 101.
reigned one year. He was called Philelles, that is to say, a lover of the
Greeks. Thus after he had prouted his country many ways, and subdued the
Iurreans, and joined the greater port of the country ^o Iudaea; and had
constrained them likewise, who should remain in that country, to be circ^sed,
and to live according to the laws of the Jews, he died thus miserably. He was
Aristobulus compels the Irureans to be circumcised, and to observe the Jaws
of the Jews. ^un
by nature curtious, and very shame fast, as Strabo testifies, speaking after
this manner, by the authority of Timagenes. This was a courteous man, and
profitable to his countrymen the jews in many things: for he enlarged their
country, and conquered a part of the nations of the I^eans,

CHAP. XX. The year of the world. 3863. before the Nativity of Christ. 101.

The exploits of Alexander king of the Jews.

WHen Aristobulus was dead, Salome his wife 9whom the Greeks called Alexandra)
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 19. Salome surnamed Alexandra Aristobulus wife makes
la^naeus Alexander king.
set his brothers at liberty (whom, as we have heretofore declared, he had
shut up prisoners) and made Iannaeus (who was called Alexander) king; who both
in age and modesty surpassed all the other brethren; but such mishap had he,
that from his birth day upward, his father had conceived so great a hate
against him, that he never admitted him to his presence so long as he lived.
The cause whereof (as it is reported) was this. When as Hircanus loved
Aristobulus and Antigonus, who were his two eldest sons, with most entire
affection, God appeared unto Alexander: wherewith he grew discontent, in that
Alexander executes the one brother that affected the crown, and honors the
other.
he conceived that he should be heir of all his goods; and so much prevailed
displeasure with him, that as soon as he was borne, he sent him out of his
presence into Galilee, to be nourished and brought up in that place. But God
has apparently proved that he lied not to Hircanus. For after Aristobulus
death, he taking possession of the kingdom, caused one of his two brethren to
be put to death, who affected and labored to make himself king: and as for
the other, who resolved himself to live in idleness and pleasure, he honored
him greatly.

After that he had established his estate, according as he thought it most
expedient, he led Alexander besieges Ptolemais.
forth his army against Ptolemais, and having obtained the upper hand in the
battle, he couped The year of the world. 3864. before Christ's birth 100.
Zoilus tyrant of Straton and Dora.
yet unconquered, and there was no opposite left but Zoilus, who was seized of
the tower of Straton and Dora where he governed. Whilst Antiochus Philometor
and Antiochus Cyzicenus were thus at debate and war the one against the
other, and consumed each others forces, the Ptolemaidans had not any succor
from them. But whilst they were travailed with this siege, Zoilus (who held
the tower of Straton and Dora) assisted them with that army he had under him,
and gave them some succors, by reason that (since these two kings were whetted
with intestine troubles and wars) he cast how to advance himself to the
crown and sovereignty. For these two kings seemed to neglect their own
dangers, resembling herein those wrastlers, who Ptolomey Lathyrus, who held the
Isle of Cyprus at that time (whither he retired himself after he had been
driven out of his kingdom by Cleopatra his mother.) To him the Ptolemaidans
sent Ambassadors as unto their allie, requiring him to come and deliver them
from Alexanders hands, into which they were in danger to fall. These
ambassadors persuaded him, that if he would pass into Syria, he should have
both Zoilus to friend, and those of Gaza to his followers, in the rescue of the
Ptolemaidans: and moreover, they assured him that the Sidonians and diverse
others would second him: and by this means so encouraged him with promises,
that he hasted himself to set sail.

But in the mean space Demaenetus (who was both eloquent and in great
authority with the Citizens) made the Ptolemaidans change their resolution,
telling them that it was much better for them to hazard themselves in some
uncertain danger, wherewith the Jews threatened them, then to deliver
themselves into the hands of such a master, from whom they could expect nothing
but manifest servitude. And moreover, not only to sustain a present war; but
that which is more, an imminent war from Egypt: for that Cleopatra would not
permit that Ptolomey should leuy an army of the neighboring nations, but would
come against them with a great power, and would enforce her self also to
thrust her son out of Cyprus. And as for Ptolomey, if he were frustrate of
his hope, yet might he notwithstanding once more return again to Cyprus;
where as they were to expect no less but extreme danger. Now although that
Ptolomey Zoilus and the Gazeans require aid against the Jews at Ptolomies
hands.
and perceiving that upon his encamping, they of the City admitted not his
ambassadors, neither in any sort gave ear unto them, he was wondrously
perplexed. But after Zoilus and they of Gaza were come unto him, requiring him
to yield them assistance, for that their country was destroyed by the Jews,
and by Alexander: For which cause Alexander raised his siege from before The
ye^re of the world, 3864. before Christ's birth 100. Alexander persuades
Ptolomey to cut ost Zoilus. Zoilus taken. Ptolemais besieged by Ptolomey.
Ptolomey, and retiring his army into his own country, he began to use this
stratageme. For covertly he incited Cleopatra against Ptolomey; and openly he
made a show of amity and confederation with Ptolomey: promising him to give
him four hundredth talents of silver, provided that he would deliver him of the
tyrant Zoilus, and assign those possessions held by him unto the Jews.
Ptolomey having made a peace and league with Alexander, did at that time
willingly lay hold on Zoilus: but after that he understood that Alexander had
sent and incensed his mother against him, he brake all accord, and went and
besieged Ptolemais, that would not entertain him. After therefore he had left
his lieutenants at the siege with part of his forces, he departed with the
rest, to enter upon and spoil the country of Iudaea. Alexander perceiving
Ptolomies intent, assembled about fifty thousand fighting men of his own
country, Ptolomey takes Azota town in Galilee.
(or as some historians have written, eighty thousand) with whom he went out
to fight against Ptolomey, who suddenly setting upon Azoch a city of Galilee on
a Sabbath day, took it by force, and led away from thence ten thousand
prisoners, and a great quantity of other booty.

CHAP. XXI.
How Ptolomey Lathyrus fought against Alexander, and obtained the victory.

HE afterward set upon Sephor a City near unto Azoch, from whence he
departed with the loss of many men, with an intent to fight with Alexander,
who came forth to make Ptolomey assaulteth Sephor. H^catontamachi, or the
warriors by hu^dreths.
head against him, and met with him near unto Jordan, in a place called
Asophon, and encamped right over against the enemy. He had in his vantgard
eight thousand men, whom he called Combattants by the Hundreths: who carried
brazen bucklers. Ptolomies foreward also had bucklers after the same fashion,
who perceiving themselves to be inferiors in other points, deferred the
charge, and were loath to hazard battle. But Philostephanus the camp master
did not a little encourage them: For he caused them to pass the flood, hard by
which they were encamped, neither would he hinder Alexander from passing the
same, making his account, that if the enemies had the river on their backs, he
should be the more assured of them, that they should not warrantize themselves
from the fight. In the beginning of the skirmish, each one of them fought, with
answerable valor; so that a great number of them fell on both sides. But
Philostephanus Alexanders army had the better, he took a part of his
followers, and speedily seconded those who were ready to retire themselves. The
wing of the Jews vanguard Alexanders overthrow.
that saw themselves freshly charged, and not succored by any means, began to
fly; and so far were those that marched next them from yielding them
assistance, that contrariwise all of them became partners in one shameful
flight. But they of Ptolomies side behaved themselves far otherwise: for they
pursued and flewe them, and after they had wholly disarraied them, they charged
them so hotly, that they blunted their weapons, and wearied their arms with
killing them. It is reported that thirty thousand men were slain in the
battle (Timagenes says, fifty thousand) as for the rest, some of them were
taken prisoners, and other some fled unto their houses. After that Ptolomey had
obtained this victory, he ouerranne and spoiled the whole Ptolomey to the end
he might afflict the Jews with more terror causes his soldiers to eat man's
flesh.
country, and in the evening he quartered himself in certain villages of
Iudaea, which he found full of women and children, and commanded his soldiers
without respect of person, to cut their throats, and to chop them into pieces;
and afterward to cast the morsels into a boiling cauldron, and when they were
well fod to eat the same: All which he acted, to the intent that they that
were fled from the battle, and retired to their own habitations, should know
that their enemies would eat man's flesh, that by this means they might
redoubt them the more when they should behold them. Strabo and Nicholas report,
that they demeaned themselves after this manner, as I have declared. And
Ptolomey took Ptolemais also by force, as I have made known else where.
Ptolemais taken by force. Cleopatra prepares an army against her son.


But Cleopatra perceiving how her son prospered, and how he had spoiled Iewry
without Chelcias and Ananias both Jews; and sent the greater part of her
riches into the Isle of Coos, with her nephews, and her testament, to be
reserved and kept there in saseue. And after she had commanded her son
Alexander to set sail toward Phoenicia, with a great navy, because the
inhabitants The year of the world. 3864. before Christ's birth 100.
of that country were revolted from her obeisance: she her self departed and
came to Ptolemais, and besieged it, when she perceived that they refused to
grant her entry. Ptolomey made have to depart out of Syria, and to enter
Egypt, hoping to be lord thereof at one time, when he should find the country
disfurnished of men of war. But his purpose failed him. At that time it
fortuned, that Chelcias one of the two Generals of Cleopatras army, died in
Coelesyria, being in pursuit of Ptolomey. Cleopatra having tidings of her
sons enterprise, and that the success and fortune he expected in Egypt had
failed him, she sent part of her army to drive him out of Ptolomey driven out
of Egypt. Ptolemais besieged and taken by Cleopatra.
the country; so that he was enforced to return back again out of Egypt,
and to go and spend his winter at Gaza. Mean while Cleopatra besieged, and
took the City of Ptolemais, whither Alexander resorted unto her, with great
presents, and an answerable respect unto his fortune, who Ptolomey, having now
no other recourse left him but to her favor and assistance. Upon his arrival,
certain of her familiars counseled her to lay hands on him, and to seize the
country; and not to permit that so great a number of Jews and they so valiant
men, should become subjects unto one man. But Ananias gave her counsel to the
contrary, alleging that she should commit an act of great injustice, if she
should depose him, who was her allie, from the government; who was beside that,
very nearly allied unto her. For (said he) I would you should know, that by
committing this wrong, you shall raise in all the rest of the Jews a heinous
hatred against you. Cleopatra conforming her self according to Ananias
counsel, resolved with her self to offer Alexander no injury; but in steed
thereof, she entertained Alexanders peace with Cle opatra renueth The year of
the world, ^873. before. Christ's Nativity, 91. Alexander takes Gadara.
him as her allie and friend at Scythopolis a City of Coelesyria. Now when
Alexander perceived, Ptolomey, he incontinently drew his army into Coelesyria,
and after six months siege, took Gadara: he ^lie shortly after Amath also
(which is a great fortress belonging to the inhabitants about Jordan) where
Theodore the son of Zenon had hoorded up the richest and goodliest part of
his substance: who surprising the Jews at unawares, slew about ten thousand of
them, and pillaged Alexanders baggage. This did not any ways astonish
Alexander: but notwithstanding the desaster, he marched forward toward the
Cities Raphia and Anthedon, which Herod afterward called Agrippias situate
on the sea coasts, and took them perforce; and seeing that Ptolomey was
retired Alexander besieges Gaza. Apollodorus by night inuadeth the camp of the
Jews.
from Gaza into Cyprus, and that Cleopatra his mother was in Egypt, he
besieged the City of Gaza, and spoiled all the country round about it, by
reason of the displeasure which he had conceived Ptolomies hands against him.
Against him Apollodotus captain of the Gazeans made a sallie by night, and
entered the camp of the Jews, having only with him two thousand strange
soldiers, and one thousand of his own followers. And as long as the night
lasted, the Gazeans had the upper hand, because that they made their enemies
believe that Ptolomey was come to their rescue, and to assault the Jews
afresh: but as soon as the day appeared, and this opinion was found false,
as soon as the Jews were assured of the truth, they turned back upon them,
and charging the Gazeans, they slew about some one thousand fighting men of
them. All this notwithstanding, they bethought them on no surrender, but stood
out, being neither amated with loss of men, or lack of provision whatsoever,
resolving themselves rather to endure any misery, then to submit themselves
Aretas king of Arabia, who had promised no less. But it came to Aretas king of
Arabia flattereth the Gazeans with hope of rescue. Lysimachus kills his
brother, Apollodotus, and betrayeth Gaza to Alexander.
pass that Apollodotus was slain before his arrival, and the City taken.
For Lysimachus his brother conceived a jealousy against him, by reason of the
good opinion which the inhabitants had of him; and having slain him and
gathered those fighting men that he might, he yielded up the City unto
Alexander, who at the first made a peaceable entry, but afterward dispersed
his soldiers, and gave them license to execute all hostility against the
Citizens: so that they acted their cruelty in every place, and slew many of
the Gazeans: Neither died these Citizens ^euenged, but so manfully behaved they
themselves, that they butchered no less number of Jews, then they murdered
Citizens among them, Some of them likewise perceiving themselves to Alexander
put to the sword, and instantly rased and leuelled that City with the ground
which done, he returned to Jerusalem, after he had spent one whole year at the
siege before Gaza. The year of the world. 3873. before Christ's Nativity. 91.
Antiochus Gryphus slain. Seleucus Gryphus son makes war with Antiochus the
Cyzicenian. The year of the world, 3874. before Christ's birth 90. Antiochus
Eusebes puts Seleucus to flight. Antiochus Seleucus brother fights against
Antiochus the son of the Cyzicenian. Demetrius Eucaetus made king of Damasco
by Ptolomey Lathurus. Cittons cast at Alexander.


About this time Antiochus, surnamed Gryphus, died by the treason of Heracleon,
in the forty and fifth year of his age, and in the nine and twentieth of his
reign. His son Seleucus had the kingdom after him, who made war against
his uncle Antiochus surnamed Cyzicenus, and having overcome and taken him, he
slew him. Not long after Antiochus the son of Cyzicenus, and Antoninus,
surnamed the Devout, came to Arade, and placed the Diademes upon their heads,
and made war against Seleucus, whom they overcame in one conflict, and drove
him out of all Syria; who flying into Cilicia, and arriving again in the City
of the Mopseates, he exacted a sum of money at the Citizens hands. But the
people were so incensed, that they set fire on his palace; whereby it came to
pass that both he and his friends were burned to dust. During the time that
Antiochus the son of Cyzicenus reigned in Syria, another Antiochus Seleucus
Philip his son took the Diadem, and governed in certain places of Syria.

Mean while Ptolomey Lathurus sent to Gnidus for his fourth brother Demetrius
Eucaerus, and made him king of Damasco. Against these two brothers Antiochus
made a manly and valiant resist, but died very shortly after. For repairing to
Laodicea to succor the Queen of the Galadenians, who made war against the
Parthians, he died fighting valiantly; and his two brothers, Demetrius and
Philip possessed Syria, as hereafter it shall be declared. As for Alexander, a
domestical sedition was raised against him; for the people arose and mutined
at such time, as he assisted at the Altar to solemnize the feasts of
Tabernacles, and during the time that he intended the Amath destroyed. Obeda
king of Arabia.
with the Syrians, he made no use of them. After this having overcome the
Arabians, he constrained the Moabites and Galaadites to pay him tribute, and
destroyed the City of Amath whilst Theodore for fear gave over to resist
him. But encountering with Obeda the king of Arabia, and being surprised and
betrayed by an ambuscado in certain miry and unhaunted places, he was thrust
by the press of the Camels into a deep trench (near to Gadara a village of
Galaad) from whence he almost despaired to escape: notwithstanding avoiding
that danger he came to Jerusalem. And besides this his last mishap the people
hated him, against whom he made war for the space of six years, and slew at
the least fifty thousand of them: and the more he entreated them to compremit
these heinous debates between the^, the more grievous displeasure conceived
they against him, because of the inconuenients they had suffered: so that when
he demanded of them what they would have him to do: they all of them with one
voice cried out, that he should kill himself. And thereupon they presently sent
messengers to Demetrius Eucaerus, requesting him of his

CHAP. XXII.
Demetrius Eucaerus overcomes Alexander in battle.

HE coming onward with his army, and taking with him those who had incited him
to the The year of the world, 3884. before Christ's nativity 80. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 20. Demetrius Eucaerus marches out against Alexander.
Demetrius fights with Alexander, and has the upper hand. Alexander in this
fight loses all his hired soldiers.
enterprise, came and encamped near unto the City of Sichem. But Alexander
gathering together some twenty thousand Jews (whom he knew to be well
affected toward him) with six thousand and two hundredth mercenary soldiers
and strangers, marched forward against Demetrius, who led with him three
thousand horsemen, and forty thousand footmen. Both on the one and the other
side there fell out many subtle stratagems: the one of them Demetrius
followers to his faction: but neither the one nor the other prevailed ought at
all by these devices: so that finally they were driven to decide their quarrel
by the sword; in which encountry Demetrius had the upper hand. For all the
strangers that were on Alexanders side were every one hewed in pieces, after
they had made sufficient proof both of their faith and valor. There died also
many of Demetrius soldiers. But after that Alexander had fled unto the
mountains, diverse Jews (to the number The year of the world. 3884. before
Chriss birth. 80. Six thousand men resort unto Alexander. Alexander being
assailed by the Jews besieges the mightiest of them in Bethom. Alexander
crucifeth 800. Jews, and murthereth their wives and children in their presence.
Demetrius, resorted unto him; which when the conqueror heard, he retired
himself. After this the Jews made war against Alexander, and in diverse
losses which they received, there died a great number of them in diverse
combats: Finally after he had closed up the most strongest amongst them in the
City of Bethom, he besieged them; and after he had taken the City, and
brought them under his subjection, he carried them to Jerusalem, where he
perpetrated an unspeakable and cruel murder. For whilst he banquetted with
his concubines, in the sight of them all, he commanded eight hundredth of them
or thereabout to be crucified; and before their eyes whilst they yet lived he
caused their wives and childrens throats to be cur. All which he did to revenge
himself of those wrongs which he had received: but he exceeded the bounds of
Thracidas, that is to say, as cruel as a Thracian: and this title continued
among the Jews. The soldiers of the contrary party, who amounted to the number
Alexander surnamed Thracidas.
Alexander lived, they were in exile. But at the last after he was delivered of
all these troubles, he lived in quiet, and governed his kingdom peaceably all
the remnant of his life. But Demetrius departing from Iudaea to Beroea,
besieged his brother Philip with ten thousand footmen, and one thousand horse.
But Straton Lord of Beroea allied to Philip, called Zizus Duke of the Arabians,
and Mithridates Sinaces governor of the Parthians, unto his help; who
repairing unto him with great forces, besieged Demetrius in his own trenches,
in which they so enclosed him by continual shooting of darts, and want of
water, that they constrained him, and those that were with him Demetrius
besieges his brother Philip in Beroea
to submit themselves to their mercy. When as therefore they had prayed the
whole country, and were seized of Demetrius, they sent him prisoner to
Mithridates, who at that time was King Mithridates King of Parthia honored
Demetrius by all means possible, until such time as he was surprised with a
sickness, whereof he died. Incontinently after the battle, Philip came into
Antioch, and having obtained the kingdom ruled over Syria.

CHAP. XXIII.
The explaites of Antiochus Dionysius against Iudaea.

AFter this, Antiochus called Dionysius (who was Philips brother) came into
Damasco to Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2^. Antiochus king of Damalco. Antiochus
thrust out of his kingdom by his brother. The year of the world 3887. before
the birth of Christ. 7^
Philip (who had an army in a readiness to invade the Arabians) had tidings
hereof, he came to Damasco with great speed, and made him sirrender up the
City, both by the means of Milesius whom Antiochus had left governor in the
Castle, as also by the consent of the Citizens themselves. But Philip showed
himself ungrateful toward Milesius, performing nothing of that which he had
promised him, at such time as he delivered him the City, because his intent
was, that the world should think that the fear of his power, and not Milesius
savor was the cause of the surprisall of Damasco. Which act of his drew him
into suspicion with Milesius, and was the cause that he lost the City again.
For departing from thence to exercise himself at tile Milesius lock the gates
against him, and kept Antiochus. Who having intelligence of that which had
befallen Philip, returned out of Arabia, and at that verse instant-led his army
into Iudaea, in which there were eight thousand footmen, and eight hundredth
horsemen. Alexander fearing his approach, made a deep trench Caparbasa called
Antipatris.
from Caparsabe (which is called at this day. Antipatris) as far as the sea
of Ioppe (which was the only straight whereby he might be assailed) and made a
wall furnished with wooden towers, with their courts of guard, distant the one
from the other an hundredth and fifty furlongs, to keep back Antiochus. But
he fired all these his fortifications, and made his army pass into Arabia The
year of the world. 3884. before Christ's birth 80. Antiochus death and the
famine amongst his army. Are^as king of Coelesyria. Cerraine cities taken by
Alexander.
Antiochus charged very valiantly, and in the onset lost his life (yet with
victory) whilst he sought to succor a company of his men that were hardly
laid to. After Antiochus death, his army retired to the borough of Cana, where
diverse of them died for hunger.

After him Aretas reigned in Coelesyria, who was called unto that kingdom by
those that held Damasco and hated Ptolomey the son of Mennaeus. Aretas led
his army into Iewry, and got a victory against Alexander near to Adida: which
done, he retired out of Iudaea, upon a coposition made between them. Moreover,
once more Alexander marched toward the city of Dion, and took the same. And
afterward he led his army against Essa, where Zeno had hoorded Antiochus, with
the fortress of Gamala. And obiecting many crimes against Demetrius the lord
of those places, he dispossessed him of his government. Finally, after he had
made war for the space of three whole years, he returned into his country,
where the Jews entertained him willingly by reason of the happy exploits which
he had achieved.

About the same time the Jews were already possessed of the Cities of Syria,
Idumaea, and Phoenicia; of the tower of Straton, Apollonia, Ioppe, Iamnia,
Azoth, Gaza, Anthedon, Raphia, The year of the world, ^887. before Christ's
Nativity, 77. The Jews are Lords of the cities of the Syrians, Idumaeans and
Phaenicians. Pella destroyed and rased. Alexanders sickness.
Rhinocura, all which were near unto the sea: and in the firm land on the
side of Idumaea, as Adora,

After this, king Alexander fell sick, by the means of his surfeit and
drunkenness; and for the space of three years he was travailed with a
quartane ague. This notwithstanding, he was always in the camp, until such
time as being wearied with travels, he died in the marches of the country of
the Gerasens, at such time as he besieged Ragaba (which is a Castle situate on
the other side of Jordan.) The Queen perceiving that he was at deaths door,
and that there remained To whom will thou leave both me and thy children in the
estate, wherein we be? or why should we survive or live one after another,
considering that thou assuredly know, that the hearts of thy people are
estranged from us? Hereupon the king comforted her, and gave her this
counsel, that if she would assure the kingdom both unto her and her
children, she should behave her self according to his direction, which was,
first to conceal his death, and not to suffer his men of war to have notice
thereof, until such time as she had taken this Castle. Which done, he advised
her to repair to Jerusalem in pomp, and triumph; and that being there she
should bestow some authority upon the Pharisees, who should recount her The
year of the world. 3890. before Christ's birth 74. Alexander inst^cteth his
wife how she may ^igne securely. The authority of the Pharisees among the
people.
estimation and credit with the people, and can do much hurt unto those they
hate, and further them (...) like sort very mightily, toward whom they are
well affected: For the people easily believes them, when they urge ought
against any man, notwithstanding it be of envy; and that he himself also had
incurd the displeasure of the people for their sakes, in that he had offended
them. When as therefore (said he) thou shall arrive in Jerusalem, send thou for
the chiefest amongst them, and pray them to come unto thee; and after you have
showed them my dead body, use the most plausible speech that you can, and give
them permission to dispose of my body how they list, whether it be their
pleasure to interdict, and deny me funeral (in that they have received many
indignities by me) or whether in a^ngment of their displeasure, they will offer
After he had given his wife these aduertisements, he gave up the ghost; after
he had reigned seven and twenty years, and lived for The year of the world.
3890. before Christ's birth 74. Alexanders death.


CHAP. XXIIII.
After Alexanders death, his wife Alexandra governs the kingdom.

AFter that Alexandra had taken the Castle of Ragaba, she conferred with the
Pharisees, according to her husbands counsel, and committed unto their
discretion, not only that which concerned her husbands obsequies, but also the
government of the kingdom: Alexanders funeral.
whereby she not only appeased the displeasure which before time they had
conceived against Alexander, but also obtained their good will and amity. They
therefore came and declaimed amongst the people, making an oration of the acts
and gests of Alexander, complaining every where, that they had lost a good
king, and by the enforced praises that they used, they incited the people to
great grief and lamentation: so that they buried him with more magnificence,
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 22. Hircanus and Aristobulus Alexanders sons.
then any king that reigned before him. This Alexander left two sons behind
him, the one called Hircanus; the other Aristobulus; and by his testament
committed the government of the kingdom to Alexandra his wife. For Hircanus
was incapable to manage affairs; and rather delighted in peace and quiet; and
Aristobulus, who was the younger, was both active and fit for government. The
people were well affected toward Alexandra, because she had manifestly
expressed how greatly she misliked her husbands misgouernment. She appointed
Hircanus high priest Hircanus high Priest.
Hircanus had disanulled, and the Pharisees (according to the customs of their
forefathers) had introduced; so that she bare the name, and the Pharisees the
authority royal. For they restored such as were banished to their estates,
and delivered prisoners; and in all things they demeaned themselves like great
Lords. Alexandra also for her part undertook the care of the common weal, and
kept a great number of soldiers The Pharisees admitted to the administration
of the commonweal are greedy of revenge. Aristobulus and his followers accuse
the Pharisees of tyranny.
in pay, and increased her power in such sort, that the tyrants round about her
feared her, and delivered her hostages and pledges of peace. All the country
was in quiet, only the Pharisees troubled the Queen, persuading her to put
those to death, who had counseled king Alexander Diogenes, and after him
diverse others, one by one: until such time as those in authority came unto the
royal palace, accompanied with Aristobulus (who seemed to be displeased with
that which had happened, and who if the occasion were offered, made show that he
would not permit his mother to govern after that manner) and told her that
which had happened, and in what dangers they had been, to express their duty
and loyalty which they ought to their deceased master; and how for that cause
they had been greatly honored by him; requiring her that she would not utterly
frustrate them of their hopes, which they expected in lieu of their service,
that now they that had escaped from the danger of their foreign enemies, were
in their houses murdered like beasts by their private maligners, without any
relief or succors

That Aretas king of Arabia and other princes would be glad of this news, to
hear that she should estrange those persons far from her, whose names have
been dreadful even amongst Alexanders house, they were content to lead their
lives in that contemptible and abject condition. Whilst thus they spoke, and
exclaimed on the soul of Alexander, praying him to have compassion as well of
those that were already dead, as of those who were in danger of their lives,
the tears ran from the eyes of all the assistants: and Aristobulus (above
the rest) was heartily The year of the world 3890. before Chr^ (...). 74.
Alexandra commits the custody of the Castles to the Jews. Aristobulus i^
sent to (...) against Ptolomy. Tigranes inuading Syria, hears (...) of
Lucullus pursuit of Mithridates, and returns home. The year of the world.
3893. before Christ's birth 71.
was kept.

Not long after, she sent her son Aristobulus with a strong army, commanding
him to draw his forces toward Damasco, against Ptolomey called Mennaeus, who
was an ill neighbor unto that City: but he returned thence without atchieuing
any memorable action. About the same Tigranes king of Armenia, invaded Syria,
with five hundredth thousand men of war, intending shortly to set upon Iewry.
This rumor affrighted the Queen, and all the communaltie (and not without
cause.) Whereupon she sent Ambassadors with many princely presents unto
Tigranes, who besieged the City of Ptolemais. (For Queen Selena, otherways
called Cleopatra, reigned in Syria, and persuaded the Syrians to deny Tigranes
passage.) But Alexandras Ambassadors met with the king of Armenia, and
besought him to conceive a good opinion of their Queen, and of all the whole
nation of the Jews: who received them willingly, praising them for that they
had sought him out so far to do him honor, and put them in good hope. After
the taking in of Ptolemais, it was told Tigranes that Lucullus pursued
Mithridates (who was not as yet apprehended, for that he was fled into Iberia,
which was the cause Lucullus had entered Armenia, and forraged the same.)
Tigranes hearing this news, returned back into his country. After this,
Queen Alexandra fell sick of a dangerous and noisome disease: whereby
Aristobulus took occasion to entermeddle with the affairs of estate. Walking
The year of the world. 3894. before Christ's birth 70. Alexandras sickness, and
Aristobulus attempt.
therefore abroad one night attended by a trusty servant, he repaired unto
those Castles, which were committed to the custody of his fathers friends: for
of long time he had misliked his mothers government, and now was the more
afraid, that if she should happen to die, all her posterity should be made
subject to the power of the Pharisees. For he well perceived how unapt his
elder brother was to govern the kingdom, unto whom notwithstanding the
succession appertained: only his wife, whom (accompanied with his children) he
had left with Alexandra, had an inckling of this his intent. He therefore went
first of all to Agaba, where Galestes one of The year of the world, 3897
before Christ's birth 67. Aristobulus seazeth the castles; and great co^ course
of people resort to him.
Queen hearing that Aristobulus was departed from court, yet little suspected
she at the first, that he was retired to work some alteration in the state.
But when as messengers came flocking one after another, and told her that after
the first Castle, the second; and after the second, all the rest had
consequently been surprised by Aristobulus: at that time both the queen and
the whole nation were dismayed, fearing least he should presently usurp the
sovereignty; but above all they feared, least he should revenge himself on
those, who had outraged his familiars: and it was thought meet that both his
wife and children should be committed to the Castle, that adjoined the temple.
But from all parts round about resorted there soldiers to Aristobulus; so that
he was attended like a king: for in the space of some fifteen days he took
twenty and two forts,

Hereupon the ancient Jews and Hircanus repaired unto the Queen, humbly
entreating her to take some mature counsel and good advice touching the
present affairs, because that Aristobulus Hircanus and the elders inform the
Queen, and accuse Aristobulus. Alexandras death. The year of the world. 3899.
before Christ's birth 65.
her son was already well nigh lord of the whole country, since he had so many
forts under his command: Furthermore, that it was inconvenient and indecent
for them to consult without her express order, notwithstanding she were
grievously sick, but that the impendent with greater excellency then could be
expected from one of her sex, and expressed both in her The year of the
world. 3899. before the (...) of Christ, 65.
Alexandras family in cu^ much trouble.
calamities, wherewith her family was replenished. And notwithstanding her
regiment after Alexandra.

THE XIIII. BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 14. book.
1 How after the death of Alexandra, her youngest son Aristobulus made war
against his brother Hircanus for the kingdom; who obtaining the victory,
compelled Hircanus to fly into a castle in Jerusalem. And how after it was
agreed and concluded between them, that Aristobulus should be king, and
Hircanus live as a private man without dignity. 2 Of the race of Antipater,
and how he purchases renown, great power and authority both to Hircanus to
Aretas king of Arabia. 3 Aristobulus, being vanquished, is pursued as far as
Jerusalem. 4 Hircanus and Aristobulus send Ambassadors to Scaurus to request
his aid and succor. 5 Aristobulus and Hircanus present themselves before
Pompey, to debate their titles touching the kingdom. 6 Pompey is seized of the
fortresses by a warlike stratageme. 7 They of Jerusalem shut their gates
against the Romans. 8 Pompey takes the Temple and lower part of the city by
force. 9 Scaurus makes war against Aretas, and by the persuasion and
solicitation of Antipater makes aleague with him. 10 Alexander being overcome
by Gabinius, retireth himself into a castle, where he is shut up and besieged.
11 Aristobulus escaping out of prison, flies from Rome, who being taken again
in Iudaea by Gabinius, is sent back prisoner to Rome. 12 Crassus warring
against the Parthians, passes through Iewrie, and spoyleth the Treasury of
the Temple. 13 Pompey retireth into Epirus, and Scipio comes into Syria. 14
Caesar's voyage into Egypt, wherein the Jews do him faithful service. 15
Antipaters valiant acts, and the amity betwixt him and Caesar. 16 Caesar's
letters, and the Senates decree, as touching the friendship betwixt the Jews
and Romans. 17 Antipater commits the government of Galilee to his son
Herod, and that of Jerusalem to Phasaelus his other son; and how Sextus
Caesar adua^ced Herod to great honor and dignity. 18 Cassius afflicts
Jury, and exacteth eight hundredth talents. 19 Malichus poisoneth Antipater. 20
Herod puts Malichus to death, by Cassius commandment. 21 Antigonus the
son of Aristobulus seeking to recover his fathers kingdom by the aid of the
Herod. 22 Herod meeting Antonius in Bithynia wins his favor with a great
sum of money, to the intent he should give no ^are to his accusers. 23
Antonius arriving in the province of Syria establishes Herod and Phasaelus
for Tetrarches. 24 The Parthians make war in Syria to restore Antigonus the
son of Aristobulus to the kingdom. 25 The Parthians take Hircanus, and
Phasaelus prisoners, and lead them away. 26 Herod at Rome is declared King of
Jury by the Senate. 27 Herod returns from Rome, and fights against
Antigonus. 28 Antigonus is discomfited by Sosius and Herod
CHAP. I.
How after the Contention between the two brethren touching the kingdom, it
was agreed that Aristobulus should be king, and Hircanus live as a private man.

WE have already entreated in our former Book both of the acts and The year
of the world, 3899. before Christ's Nativity, 65. The office and duty of an
Historiographer
death of Queen Alexandra: it now remains at this present to prosecute and
continue the sequel of our History, to the end that we neither

When as therefore Hircanus had taken upon him the high Priesthood, in the
third year of the hundredth seventy and seventh Olympiade, and in the year
that Q. Hortensius and Q. Metellus Aristobulus and Hircanus strive for the
kingdom.
Aristobulus suddenly undertook the war against Hircanus, and fought with
him near unto Jericho: where a great number of Hircanus followers submitted
themselves of their own accord to Aristobulus. Through which accident Hircanus
was enforced to fly to the fortress of the higher city, wherein Alexandra
Aristobulus mother had imprisoned both his wife and children (as before this it
is specified) The rest of his faction for fear of his brother, who had gotten
the victory, retired themselves within the enclosure of the temple, where they
were besieged and taken. After this a peace was entreated of betwixt both the
brethren, and their different was accorded in this manner: that Hircanus should
pass the remnant of his life without entermedling with affairs of estate, but
should only intend his The peace betwixt Hircanus and Aristobulus.
security and peace: and Aristobulus should command the kingdom. This league
was ratified Aristobulus retired himself into the palace; and Hircanus to
Aristobulus lodging, to lead a private and quiet life.

CHAP. II.
Of the race of Antipater, and how he is advanced to high estate, and how
Hircanus flies to Aretas King of Arabia.

But acertaine friend of Hircanus (by nation an Idumaean, and by name
Antipater) being well monied, and by nature both factious and industrious, and
through ambition but Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. (...). Antipater the Idumaean
Hircanus friend. Antipater of Iudaea, as Nicholas Damascenus impli^th, first
called Antipas.
badly affected toward Aristobulus, the rather for that he affected Hircanus
faction, began to stir much trouble. True it is, that Nicholas Damascene
writes of this man, that he was descended from the noblest amongst those Jews
who returned from out of Babylon into Jury: but this he did of set purpose to
gratify Herod Antipaters son, who by a casualtie became afterward King of
the Jews (as we will express hereafter in time and place convenient.) This
Antipater was at the first called Antipas, according to his fathers name, who
(as it is reported) was made governor of all Idumaea by king Alexander and his
wife: and afterward made a league The year of the world. 3899. before Christ's
birth. 65.
Antipater considering with himself what Aristobulus power was, and fearing
least some mischief might be fall him through the hatred the young king had
conceived against him, he communicated with certain of Ant^er incen^ the
princes of the jews against Aristobulus.
the greatest reckoning amongst the jews, and secretly and cunningly incensed
them against Aristobulus; telling them that they had done amiss, both to see
and suffer Aristobulus to detain the kingdom unjustly in his hands, and to
dispossess his elder brother Hircanus, to whom by right of inheritance it
appertained. He likewise accosted and sounded Hircanus ordinarily with these
words; telling him that he lived in danger of his life, and would doubtless be
overtaken; except he sought his own security, and fled his imminent peril:
alleging, that Aristobulus Hircanus gave small credit (for that of his own
nature he was courteous, and could not easily be induced or seduced by
detractions) but this negligence and carelessness in him, was the cause that he
was accounted a silly and abject man. On the contrary side, Aristobulus was of
a different and more heroic nature, being more actuie in performance, and
careful in prevention.

Now although Antipater saw that Hircanus made small accountof his
instigations; yet ceased he not daily to invent and propose new surmises and
accusations, urging Aristobulus hatred and practice to mu^her him: and so much
prevailed he by his importunity, that at last he persuaded him to fly to
Aretas king of Arabia, promising him that in so doing, he would give him both
Hircanus having debated upon these conclusions, at last thought good to fly to
Aretas (for that he knew that Arabia confined upon Iewry.) Whereupon he first
of all sent Antipater to Aretas, to take assurance of him that he should not
betray him into his enemies hands, if so be he should submit himself unto him,
and require his assistance. When as therefore Antipater had received this
assurance from the king, he returned to Jerusalem unto Hircanus: and The year
of the world, 3900. before Christ's nativity, 64.
not long after that took him away with him, and departed the City by night,
and afterward with great iourneies arrived at Petra, where Aretas kept his
royal court. And for that he was inwardly familiar with the king he besought
him to reestablish him in the kingdom of Iewry, and wrought so much by his
importunity and the presents which he gave him, that he persuaded Aretas to
attempt the matter. Whereupon Hircanus promised, that if he confirmed Hedio
and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
those twelve Cities which his father Alexander had taken from the Arabians,
the names whereof are these that follow: Medaba, Nabello, Liuias, Tharabasa,
Agalla, Athona, Zoara, Orona, Marissa, Rydda, Lusa, Oryba.

CHAP. III.
Aristobulus being vanquished, is pursued as far as Jerusalem.

ARetas induced by these promises, was content to send forth an army against
Aristobulus, Aretas makes war against Aristobulus, and enforces him to fly
to Jerusalem. The Arabian besieges Aristobulus in the temple.
Hircanus: and Aristobulus perceiving himself to be destitute of all his
friends and followers fled unto Jerusalem. After him the king of Arabia led his
army with all expedition, and besieged him in the temple: In this siege the
common people assisted Hircanus, neither were there any but the priests only
that stuck to Aristobulus side. Whereupon Aretas marshalled the forces he had,
and busily set the army both of Jews and Arabians about the siege. Whilst
these things were under these terms, the feast of unleavened bread, which we
call the passover, was at hand, and The Jews fly into Egypt.
the princes of the Jews forsaking their country were fled into Egypt. About
that time, a certain Onias (such a one who for his virtue was beloved of God,
and in times past had by his devout prayers and supplications in a time of
drought, obtained rain from God) hid himself, perceiving that this sedition
would be of some continuance. This man therefore being surprised and brought
into the camp of the Jews, they required him that as by his prayers he had
obtained water; so at that time likewise he would by his imprecations incense
God against Aristobulus, and his accomplices. But whereas he contradicted and
excused himself, he was at last constrained by the people to perform their
request; so that standing up in the midst of them he The year of the world.
3900. before Christ's birth 64. Onias contradicting the Jews petition is stoned
to death.
spoke after this manner. O God, King of the whole world, since they who are at
this present here with me are thy people, and those that are besieged are thy
priests; I humbly beseech thee, that when they shall require thee to be
incensed against their brethren, thou will not hear them: and when as likewise
they shall provoke thee against the other, thou will not respect them.
Hereupon, a certain sort of reprobate soldiers amongst the Jews, hearing
these words of his, stoned him to death: but God incontinently punished this
cruelty in them; and the murder of Onias so cursedly perpetrated, was
revenged by this means which ensues. At such time as Aristobulus and the
priests were besieged, the feast of Easter or the passover fell out, during
which time it was an usual custom amongst the Jews to honor God with many
sacrifices: Now for that they who were with Aristobulus, had not any beasts to
offer up in sacrifice, they required the other Jews Aristobulus and the priests
that were with him, willingly condescended, and let down the prefixed price
and delivered the same from the wall: but the others, after they had received
the money, delivered them not those beasts which they required them to sell
them for sacrifice; but so far were they given over to impiety, that Breach
of faith, and the revenge thereof
they falsified their oaths not only toward men, but defrauded God also, in
denying that which they had promised toward the furnishing of the sacrifice.
For which cause, the priests (being defrauded in this manner contrary to the
oath and protestations of their adversaries) besought God to show vengeance on
their countrymen, that had committed this heinous and periutious

CHAP. IIII.
Hircanus and Aristobulus send Ambassadors to Scaurus, to covenant their peace
with him.

Mean while Pompey sent Scaurus into Syria (himself being in person detained
in Armenia Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4. Hircanus and Aristobulus ambassadors
unto Scaurus.
in pursuit of the war betwixt him and Tigranes.) Now when as Scaurus came
unto Metellus and Lollius had newly taken the City; for which cause he marched
onward toward Iewry: Where being arrived, certain Ambassadors came unto him
in the behalf of Aristobulus, and others also in the name of Hircanus,
requiring alliance and confederacy in the behalf of them both, and offering
in eithers respect a tribute of four hundredth talents. But Scaurus preferred
Aristobulus promises, both for that he was a man of mightier substance and
greater mind, and withal more moderate in his demand; whereas Hircanus was
poor and covetous, and notwithstanding he demanded greater things then his
brother did; Scaurus is presented.
yet was his promise of less assurance: For it was a harder matter to subdue a
City that was so defenced and strong, then to repulse a troop of runnagate
Nabatheans, and they scarcely well animated to prosecute that war. For these
causes therefore he (receiving his money) levied the Aretas to return; which
if he refused, he declared him an enemy to Rome. Aristobulus makes war
against Aretas and Hircanus.
This done, Scaurus returned to Damasco, and Aristobulus led forth his army
against Aretas and Hircanus, and fighting with them in a place called Papyron
he obtained the victory, and slew about some seven thousand of his enemies,
amongst the number of which was Cephalius Antipaters brother.

CHAP. V.
How Aristobulus and Hircanus debate their titles in the presence of Pompey.

NOt long time after this, Pompey came unto Damasco: and as he travailed through
Coelesyria, Pompey comes into Syria, and Aristobulus sends a royal present
unto him.
diverse Ambassadors resorted unto him from all parts of Syria, Egypt and
Iudaea. For Aristobulus sent him a present of great value, namely a golden vine
of five hundredth talents price. Hereof Strabo the Cappadocian makes mention in
these words: There came an Ambassador out of Egypt, bearing a crown of four
thousand pieces of gold; and an other from Iewry, with a vine or garden, and
the workmanship was called Terpole, that is to say, recreation: And this vine
have we beheld at this day in the City of Rome in the temple of The year of
the world. 3900. before the Nativity of Christ. 64. Antipater for Hircanus,
and Nicodemus for Aristobulus come as ambassadors to Pompey. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 5. A castle destroyed in Apamea. Ptolomey Me^naeus fined at a
great sum of money.
Alexander king of the Jews; and it was esteemed and valewed at five hundredth
talents. It is said, that Aristobulus prince of the Jews sent the same.
Straight after this, there came other fresh Ambassadors unto him (Antipater
from Hircanus: and Nicodemus, from Aristobulus) who accused those that had
taken money, namely Gabinius, for that he first of all had received three
hundredth talents beside other presents: and secondly Scaurus, who had received
four hundredth; alleging that by that means they had incensed them against
him. He therefore gave direction, that they should repair unto him about the
spring, each of them to justify and maintain their several rights: as for
himself he drew his forces from their wintring places, and marched toward
Damasco, destroying in his way a certain fortress which Antiochus the
Cyzicenian had fortified in Apamea. He visited also the country of Ptolomey
Mennaeus (who was a perverse and wicked man, and no ways differed from
Dionysius Tripolitane) who was punished with the loss of his head, and was
united also with him in friendship and affinity; yet acquitted of the death he
deserved, by the means of a thousand talents ransom, which Ptolomey
distributed amongst his soldiers for their pay. He raced likewise the Castle
of Lysias (wherein a Jew called Silas tyrannized) and passing by the Cities of
Heliopolis and The year of the world. 3902. before the birth of Christ. 62.
Aristobulus and Hircanus accused by the Jews before Pompey.
Chal^is, and having likewise ascended the mountain (which is between them)
he came to Coelesyria; and from Pella repaired to Damasco. In which place he
gave audience to the Jews, and their princes Hircanus and Aristobulus, who were
at odds the one against the other, as touching their particular interests, as
all the whole nation against them both; alleging that they would not be
governed by kings, because their custom was to obey Gods Priests, whom they
Hircanus complained, for that being the elder borne, he had bin deprived of his
inheritance by Aristobulus, and had only but a small portion of the country
allotted him, because Aristobulus had seized the rest by force. He complained
likewise of those incursions, that both by land and sea Aristobulus followers
had endomaged the frontires with. For the people had not revolted, if he had
not been a violent and turbulent man. To this accusation of his, a thousand of
the principallest of the Jews (drawn on by Antipaters persuasion) subscribed,
who auerred and justified the same. But Aristobulus answered, that Hircanus was
dispossessed of the kingdom, Aristobulus Apology before Pompey.
by reason of his incapacitie and natural defects; alleging for himself,
that the government Alexander had had. He brought in also for his witnesses
certain arrogant young men, who were hated for their pomp, purple robes,
their curiosity in painting and curling their hair, and bard horse, and other
braueries which they presented, not like men that intended to expect judgment,
but as if their pretense had been to make show of their pomp. After that
Pompey had heard them, he condemned Aristobulus violence, but for that time he
dismissed them (after some favorable and gracious conference) promising them
that he would come into their country, and determine their differents, after
he had seen the region of the Nabatheans: commanding them in the mean while
to live in peace. He used Aristobulus likewise very kindly, fearing least he
should incense the people, Aristobulus came into Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6.
the City of Delion, and from thence went into Iudaea, without respect of that
which Pompey had commanded him.

CHAP. VI.
Pompey makes himself Lord of the Castles by a warlike stratageme.

POmpey hearing this, was sore displeased therewith; and taking with him his
army which Pompey marches out against Aristobulus.
he had prepared against the Nabatheans (with the supplies he had in Damalco,
and the Aristobulus: when as therefore he had left Pella and Scythopolis behind
him, he came to Core* as (which is the entrance into Iudaea) drawing toward the
heart of the country. There found Aristobulus descends from his fortress to
con* far with Pompey.
he a goodly Castle situate upon the top of a mountain called Alexandrion,
whither Aristobulus was retired. For which cause he sent Ambassadors to inuit
him to come and parlee with him: who persuaded by the counsel of many of his
inward friends, in no sort to commence war against the Romans, came down
unto him, and after he had debated his title with his brother, The ye^re of the
world, 3902. before Christ's Nativity, 62. Aristobulus delivers the
fortresses to Pompeis hands. Hedio and Ruff^s. chap. 7. Mithridates king of
Pontus slain by his son Pharnaces.
as touching the kingdom, Pompey permitted him to return again into his
Castle. And this did he two or three times, always flattering Pompey through
the hope he had of the kingdom, and making a show that he would be obedient
unto him in whatsoever he would command him. Mean while he retired himself,
and fortified the place, and made preparation for the war, for fear least
Pompey should transfer the kingdom to Hircanus. But when as Pompey
commanded him that he should deliver up the fortresses that he held, and had
written with his own hand to the captains of the garrisons (who otherwise
would not have obeyed him) Aristobulus submitted, and in discontent repaired to
Jerusalem, with full intent to prepare for war. Not long after this, when as
Pompey marched toward him with his army, certain messengers coming from
Pontus certified him of Mithridates death, who was slain by his son
Pharnaces.

CHAP. VII.
They of Jerusalem shut their gates against the Romans.

WHen Pompey was encamped near unto Jericho (in which place there were a
number of Date trees, and where also grows that balm which is the most
precious of all other ointments, distilling from a little shrub, which is
opened and slit by a sharp cutting stone) the next morning he marched toward
Jerusalem. At that time Aristobulus (being sorry Gabinius coming to receive
the money Ari^obulus had promised, has the city gates shut against him. Hedio
and Ruffinus. chap. 8. Pompey besieges Jerusalem. The year of the world,
3903. before Christ's birth 61.
for his misbehauiour) came unto him, offering him money, and promising him to
receive him into Jerusalem; he besought him (that dismissing public enmities
and quarrels) he would peaceably Pompey pardoned him, and condescended to his
request, and sent Gabinius with his soldiers, both to receive the money, as
also to enter the city; but his purpose failed him in both: for Gabinius
returned, because he was excluded out of the city; neither received he any
money, for that Aristobulus soldiers would not permit that any promise should
be performed. Hereupon Pompey waxed wroth; so that after he had committed
Aristobulus to prison, he went in person against the city, which was strongly
fortified on every side, except toward the quarter that extends northward,
which was easy to be beaten down: for this side is environed with a large and
deep valley, compassing the temple, which is enclosed with a marvelous strong
wall of stone.

CHAP. VIII.
Pompey takes the Temple, and lower part of the City perforce.

But within the City there grew a division and faction, by reason of the
difference and dissident opinions of those that kept the same; for some thought
good to yield up the city into Pompeies hands; othersome (that were of
Aristobulus faction) counseled that the gates should be kept shut, and
preparation for war should be made, for that the Romans detained Aristobulus
prisoner. These later prevailing more then the rest seized the temple: and
breaking down the bridge which was betwixt it and the City; addressed
themselves to stand on Jerusalem partly betrayed, partly besieged by Pompey.
their defense. But the others not only delivered the City into Pompeies
hands, but the royal palace Piso his lieutenant thither with his forces to
take possession thereof, and to plant his garrisons therein; and to fortify the
houses near adioining the temple, and whatsoever convenient habitation without
the walls. First therefore Piso offered the besieged certain conditions of
peace: which for that they refused, he fortified and shut them in on every
side, being in all these his endeavors assisted by Hircanus. On the out side of
the City, Pompey encamped with his army on the north part of the temple (which
was the easiest and meetest side to be assaulted) on this side Pompey makes
preparation to besiege the temple.
also there were certain high towers, and a huge trench, besides a deep
valley tha^ begirt the temple. For toward the city all ways and passages
were so broken up, that no man could either go up or down, and the bridge was
taken away on that side where Pompey was encampt. Each day did the Romans
travel earnestly to raise a mount, and cutting down all the timber permits
to defend themselves against their enemies, at such time as they are assailed
and urged The year of the world, 3903. before Christ's birth 61.
The Jews intermitted not their sacrifice notwithstanding the siege. The
taking of the temple.
sacrifices: but twice a day in the morning and about the ninth hour the
Priests offered upon the altar; and notwithstanding any difficulty or danger
of the siege that might happen, they omitted not the course of their oblations.
For at such time as the temple was taken (in the third month and on a fasting
day in the hundredth seventy nine. Olympiade, in the year wherein Caius
Antonius Marcus Tullius Cicero were Consuls) the enemy entered the temple by
force, and slew those that withstood them. Yet notwithstanding all this, the
priests ceased not to exercise their accustomed sacrifice: and neither the
hazard of their lives, nor the great number of those that were dead, could
force them to fly, but that they held it more convenient for them to endure all
things that might happen in attending upon the Altar, the^ to transgress or
vary one jot from their ordinances. And that this may seem to be no fable, or
praise of their dissembled devotion, but the exact and perfect truth, all those
that write the Histories concerning Pompey and his acts, do witness no less:
amongst the number of which, are Strabo, Nicholas, and Titus Liuius the Roman
Historiographer the most famous among the rest. The greatest of those towers
was battered by these engines, and fell, bearing a great pane of the wall to
the earth with it, which was the cause that the enemies in Cornelius Faustus
the son of Sylla, with his soldiers. After him mounted the Centurion Furius,
accompanied with those that followed him, on the other side: and through the
midst of the breach did the Centurion Fabius enter with a strong squadron. The
whole circuit was filled with murders; and some of the Jews died by the
Romans swords; other some slew one another; the rest cast themselves down
headlong from the steepie places: many likewise set fire on their houses, and
consumed themselves therein, for fear they should behold the executions that
were performed by their enemies. There died about twelve thousand Jews, and
very few Romans. Absalom also, who was Aristobulus father in law, and uncle,
was taken prisoner. The religion of the temple likewise was not Twelve thousand
Jews
a little profaned. For whereas before that time no profane man either
entered or beheld that Pompey and diverse others that accompanied him, entered
the same, and slain. Pompey entering the temple, neither touches or takes
away any thing.
saw that which was not lawful to be beheld by any other but the high priests
only. But although he found a table of gold, and a sacred candlestick, with
diverse other vessels and odoriferous drugs in great quantity; and whereas
beside that, there was about two thousand talents of silver in the sacred
treasury in the temple: yet touched he nothing thereof through the reverence he
had of God, and herein he behaved himself answerably to his other virtues. The
next day he commanded those that had the charge of the temple to purge the
same, and to offer sacrifices Alias, cap. 9. Pompey ^estoweth the Priesthood on
Hircanus.
unto God, according to the law; committing the high Priesthood to Hircanus
hands, both for that he had stood him in great steed in many things, as for
that he had hindered the Jews, that were of the country, from joining
themselves with Aristobulus. After this he beheaded the authors Faustus and the
rest with cond^gne gifts, who with great courage had first attempted and
ascended the wall: As for Jerusalem he made it tributarie to the Romans,
Jerusalem tributary to Rom^
taking away from the Jews those Cities they had conquered in Coelesyria, and
assigning them a proper and peculiar government. After this he enclosed the
nation within certain limits, whereas before time their dominions were of a
large extent. Not long after this, he repaired Gadara, that not long before was
destroyed: all which he performed in favor of Demetrius the Gadarenian his
late servant and bondsman. And as touching Hippon, Scythopolis, Dion, Gadara
restored. Cities taken from the Jews
Samaria, Marissa, Azot, Iamnia, and Arethusa, he restored them to the ancient
inhabitants thereof, all which were situate in the heart of the land: besides
Gaza, Ioppe, Dora and the tower of Straton (cities situate upon the sea coast,
and ruinated before times with diverse wars) he Herod, and decked with gates
and fair temples, and the name thereof was changed and called Caesarea. Thus
Hircanus and Aristobulus through their dissensions and civil broiles, were the
cause of that servitude and misery that fell upon the Jews. For we have lost
our liberty, and have been subdued by the Romans. Besides that, we have been
enforced to surrender up those cities unto the Syrians, which we before time by
force of arms had conquered and gotten from them. And that which is to be
lamented, the Romans in a little time have drawn The year of the world. 3903.
before Chri^s Nativity. 61.
from us more then ten thousand talents: and the roialty which before time was
an honor reserved for those that were of the race of the high priests, has
been bestowed on men of obscurity and community: whereof we will speak in
place convenient. After that Pompey had given Ceelesyria to Sc^urus, from
Euphrates as far as to the frontires of Egypt, with two legions of the
Romans; he went into Cilicia, and from thence drew toward Rome, leading with
him Aristobulus in bonds and his children (who were two sons, and two
daughters) one of which called St^rus president of Coelesyria.
Alexander, escaped by flight; and as touching Antigonus (who was the younger)
he was led to Rome with his sisters.

CHAP. IX.
Scaurus makes war against Aretas.

SCaurus led forth his army against Petra a City in Arabia, and for that the
City might very hardly be besieged, he spoiled all the country round about.
When as therefore Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9.
his army was pressed with famine, Antipater by the commandment of Hircanus,
furnished him with come and all other necessaries out of Iewry. Who being sent
Ambassador to Aretas from Scaurus, in that he had sometime soiourned with him,
persuaded him to contribute a certain sum of silver to war^antize his
country from pillage; and he himself also became pledge for three hundredth
talents. This done, Scaurus finished the war, according to his desire, and
with no less contentment to Aretas and his country.

CHAP. X.
Alexander overcome by Gabinius, retireth himself into a Castle, wherein he is
shut up and besieged.

NOt long after this, Alexander Aristobulus son made diverse inroads into
Iewry: for The year of the world. 3904 before Christ's birth 60.
which cause Gabinius came from Rome into Syria, and (besides other things
worthy of memory which he achieved) he led forth his army against Alexander,
for that Hircanus had not as yet sufficient power to resist him, being
otherwise exercised in building the walls of Jerusalem that were beaten down by
Pompey; notwithstanding the Romans that were in Iewry Alexander travailing
through the whole country, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10. al. 11.
assembled diverse Jews; so that in short time, having gotten together ten
thousand footmen and fifteen hundredth horse with good munition, he fortified
the castle of Alexandrion near unto the City of Coreas. He fortified
Machaeron also in the mountains of Arabia. Gabinius therefore Castles forti^ed.
came forth against him, having sent before him Marcus Antonius accompanied
with other chiefetaines of war, who armed the Romans of their train and the
Jews that were under their obedience, whose captains were Pitholaus and
Malichus. They took also those allies whom Antipater had hired, and in this
equipage came they to make head against Alexander. Gabinius also seconded them
with his troops. Hereupon Alexander drew more near with his army toward
Jerusalem, where waging battle with the Romans, he lost about three thousand
of his Gabinius repaired to Alexandrion, and invited those that held the same
to depart, promising them pardon for the rebellion they had begun. And where as
many of his enemies had encamped themselves before the fort, the Romans charged
them: in which conflict Marcus Antonius was adjudged to have behaved himself
very valiantlv, in that he slew diverse of his enemies. Gabinius left a part of
his army in that place, to the end that during the siege thereof, he might go
and visit t^ country of Iudaea: he commanded therefore that all those Cities,
which in his journey he ^und either Gabinius causes d^ers cities in Jury to be
repaired that were defaced.
desolate or destroyed, to be repaired: so that Samaria, Azot, Scythopolis,
Anthedon, Raphia, Dora, Marissa and Gaza, with diverse others, were new builded:
so that through the obedience that was given to Gabinius command, it came to
pass that the Cities were safely inhabited,

And after Gabinius had behaved himself in this manner in the country, he
returned to Alexandrion. Whilst therefore he thus insisted about the siege,
Alexander sent Ambassadors Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11. al. 11. Alexandrion
and other castles ra^ed.
unto him, demanding pardon at his hand for his offenses, and restoring into
his hands the Castles of Hircania and Machaeron, and finally that of
Alexandrion; which Gabinius leuelled with the ground. And whereas Alexanders
mother came unto him (who favored the Roman faction, and whose husband and
children were kept prisoners in Rome) she obtained all that which The year of
the world. 3904. before Christ's birth. 60.
Hircanus to Jerusalem to take charge of the temple and priesthood. He ordained
also five judgment seats and places of session, and divided the province into
answerable parts: for the one answered in Jerusalem; the second at Gadara; the
third in Amatha; the fourth at Ierico, and the Five presidiall ^eidges in Jury.
fifth at Saphora, which is a town of Galilee. By this means the Jews were
delivered of their monarchy, and lived under an Aristocracy, or government of
the nobility.

CHAP. XI.
Aristobulus escapes out of prison and flies from Rome, and is apprehended
again by Gabinius in Iudaea, and led back prisoner to Rome.

But Aristobulus flying from Rome, returned into Iewrie, and determined to
reedifie Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 12. al. 13. Aristobulus returning (...) Ro^e
(...) to reestablish Alexandrion.
the Castle of Alexandrion, which not long since was ruinated. Against him
Gabinius sent out certain men of war with their captains, namely Sisenna,
Antonius and Seruilius, both to keep him from the possession of the place, as
to apprehend and surprise him likewise. For many Jews resorted unto him, being
drawn thereunto by the ancient reputation that he had: who desired likewise
to work innouations. Pitholaus also (who was established lieutenant general
in Jerusalem) of his own accord came unto him, with a thousand men well armed:
but the other that were retired within, for the most part were not sufficiently
furnished with arms; for Aristobulus making his reckoning to seize Machaeron,
dismissed those Aristob^s overcome in battle by the Romans.
their valiant resist. Being therefore forced by the enemies, they were put to
flight, and about five thousand of them were slain; and the rest dispersed
wandering here and there, sought for their own private securities: but
Aristobulus fled to Machaeron with more then a thousand followers, and
fortified the place. And though his affairs had very slender success; yet
lost he not his hope: But after he had endured the siege some two days, and
received many wounds, he was taken Aristobulus sent back again prisoner to
Rome with his son Antigonus.
prisoner, and with his son Antigonus (who fled from Rome with him) led away
captive by Gabinius. Such was the adventure of Aristobulus, that he was sent
prisoner back again to Rome, Gabinius letters) who had promised their
delivery to their mother, at such time as she surrendered the Castles into his
hands: whereupon they returned into Aristobulus sons discharged.
Iewry. But Gabinius intending to make war against the Parthians, and having
already past Euphrates, changed his resolution, and determined to return into
Egypt, and reestablish Ptolomey, as it is declared in an other place. In this
expedition also he was furnished by Antipaters means, with victuals, money and
munition; and by his advice those Jews that inhabit Pelusium (who kept as it
were the very entry into Egypt) were drawn into his society. When as
Antipater releeueth Gabinius in his journey to Egypt to install Ptolomey.
Alexander Aristobulus son usurps the Monarchy. Alexander overcome by
Gabinius.
therefore Gabinius returned back out of Egypt, he found all Syria full of
tumult and rebellion. Alexander Aristobulus son, taking once more possession
of the kingdom, caused diverse Jews from day to day to revolt, and forraging
the country with a huge army, he slew all those Romans who^ he met withal, and
besieged all those that fled into the mount Garizim. Gabinius seeing the
affairs of Syria in that estate, sent Antipater before him unto them to appease
these commotions, and to heal them of their frenzy, and if it were possible
to reduce them to a better mind: for Antipater was a man of good discretion. In
effect, he repairing unto the^, moderated diverse of the^, and brought them
under obedience: but it was impossible for him to reconcile Alexander, for he
having thirty thousand soldiers with him, came forth to meet with Gabinius,
with who^ he fought, and was overcome, with the loss of some ten thousand of
his men, near unto the mount Itabyr.

After that Gabinius had ordered all things in Jerusalem by Antipaters advice,
he presently set Mithridates The conquest of the Nabatheans. Mithridares and
Orsanes.
and Orsanes (men of good reckoning among the Parthians) who had retired
themselves unto him, causing a bruit to be spread, that they were fled with
Gabinius. Now when Gabinius had performed great and magnificent exploits in
war, he returned to Rome, surrendering the government to Crassus. Nicholas
Damascene, and Strabo of Cappadocia (who differs in nothing from Nicholas)
have written of these expeditions of Pompey, and Gabinius in Iudaea.

CHAP. XII. The year of the world. 3904. before Ch^s birth 60.

Crassus going against the Parthians, passes by Iudaea, and robs the sacred
treasury.

CRassus intending to make war against the Parthians, came into Iewry, and
took away with him the sacred money (which Pompey had not touched, which
amounted to the Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 13. al. 14. Marcus Crassus in his
expedition against the Parthians takes the treasure out of the temple of
Jerusalem. The year^ of the world, 3911. before Christ's birth 53.
sum of two thousand talents:). He spoiled the temple also of all the gold
that was in the same, to the sum of eight thousand talents. Furthermore, he
bare away a wedge of solid gold, to the weight of three hundredth pounds, which
pound amongst the Jews contains two pounds and a half. He that delivered him
this ingot was a Priest, and the keeper of the sacred treasure, Eleazar, who
gave him the same upon no malicious intent (for he was a virtuous and just man)
but whereas he had the custody of the tapestries of the temple committed to his
hands (which both were admirable to behold, by reason of their beauty and
esteem, and withal were in like sort tied and fastened to this beam) and
perceiving that Crassus sought all the means that in him lay, to gather all
the money he could, he fearing least he should have seized on all the ornaments
of the temple, gave him this beam for a ransom to redeem all the rest:
binding him upon the delivery thereof by an oath, that he should not take any
thing away that was in the temple, but should content himself with that only
piece of great esteem and value, which he gave him. This beam was enclosed in
an other hollow beam of wood; so that no man knew thereof but only Eleazar.
Crassus therefore took this beam, as if he determined to leave all other
things Crassus breaks his oath. Whence the temple of Jerusalem grew so rich.
S^abo of Cappadocia.
in the temple; yet notwithstanding he falsified his oath, and carried away
whatsoever was therein. Neither is it to be wondered at, that there was so great
riches found in our temple, since all those Jews that were dispersed through
the face of the whole earth, and all those that feared God (both in Asia and in
Europe) for a long time offered their presents in that place. The greatness
and multitude whereof wants no testimony: neither is it fained in way of
ostentation, but diverse other historians make mention thereof; and amongst the
rest Strabo of Cappadocia speaks after this manner. And Mithridates sent men
into the Isle of Coos, to fetch from thence the money that queen Cleopatra had
laid up there, and eight hundredth talents of the Jews. But we have no public
money, but that which is dedicated unto God. It is therefore a thing most
manifest, that the Jews that inhabit Asia, transported this money into Coos,
for the fear that they had Mithridates: For it is not likely that they, who
inhabited Iudaea, and had a City so strong, and a temple so well defenced,
should send their money to Coos. Neither is it credible likewise, that the
Jews remaining in Alexandria should do it, for that they feared not to fall
into danger through this war of Mithridates. The same Strabo also says in an
other place, that at such time as Sylla passed through Greece to make war
against Mithridates and Lucullus, he sent men to Cyrene, which was troubled by
reason of the mutinies of our nation, wherewith the whole world was filled, and
says thus: There were four sorts of people in the City of the Cyrenians: One
of them were Citizens; the second were Laborers; the third were Soiourners;
and the fourth were Jews, who at this present are intermingled through all
Cities; neither is there an inhabited place thorowout the world, neither was
there any nation that inhabit the same, wherein these have Thus far Strabo.

After that Crassus had disposed all things according to his own pleasure, he
dislodged and marched forward to make war against the Parthians, where both
he and all his army were destroyed Crassus slain in Pa^thia. Cassius resists
the Parthians.
(as it is declared in an other place.) As for Cassius, he retired himself
into Syria, and took possession thereof, to the end he might affront the
Parthians; who being proud of their victory lately obtained, made excursions
so far: and coming to Tire, he finally arrived in Iudaea, The year of the
world, 3911. before Christ's birth 53.
Pithola^s also to death, for that he maintained Aristobulus faction. All which
he did by Antipaters procurement and instigation, who was in great credit with
him, Antipaters wife and children.
and who also at that time was highly esteemed amongst the Idumaeans; amongst
whom he married his wife, who was descended of one of the most famous families
of Arabia, her name was Cypron, by whom he had these four sons: Phasaelus
and Herod (who after was made king) Joseph and Pheroras, and one daughter
called Salome. This Antipater also made alliance with other princes, and
especially with the Arabian, to whose custody he committed his children,
during The year of the world. 3917. before Christ's birth 47.
the time he made war against Aristobulus. But Cassius gathered another army,
and marched toward Euphrates to make head against the Parthians, as it is
specified and registered by

CHAP. XIII.
Pompey retireth himself into Epirus, and Scipio comes into Syria.

ANon after this Caesar (being Lord of Rome) after that Pompey and the Senate
were fled on the other side of the Ionian sea, set Aristobulus at liberty,
determining to send him into Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 14. al. 15. Aristobulus
delivered out of prison i^ poisoned. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 15. al. 16. The
slaughter of Aristobulus son.
Syria, with two legions; as being a sufficient man to govern the state
affairs in that quarter. Naitheles Aristobulus failed of his hopes and
authority he expected at Caesar's hands: For Pompeies partakers prevented and
poisoned him, wherethrough he died; so that he was buried by those of Caesar's
faction. His body was kept embalmed with honey for a long time, until that
Antonius sent it into Jury to be entombed among the kings and princes.

Scipio by Pompeies commandment caused Alexander Aristobulus sons head to
be cut off, charging him with some misdemeanors which he had committed against
the Romans, and after this manner finished he his days being executed in
Antioch. Ptolomey the son of Mennaeus, who governed in Chalcis (at the foot
of the mount Libanus) took his brothers, and sent his son Philippion to
Ascalon to Aristobulus wife, commanding her to send her son Antigonus, and
his daughters (one of which, called Alexandra, was beloved by Philippion, and
married by him) but afterward he being slain, Ptolomey Philippions father
married her, and continued

CHAP. XIIII.
Caesar's voyage into Egypt, wherein he was assisted by the faithful service of
the Jews.

AFter Pompeies death, and that victory which Caesar had obtained against him,
Antipater Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16. al. 17. Antipater gathers soldiers
out of Syria for Caesar's service.
(governor of Iudaea by the commandment of Hircanus) was very profitable
unto Caesar. For whereas Mithridates the Pergamenian brought him certain
supplies, and could not bring them on, by reason of an arm of Nilus passing
through Pelusium; but was constrained Antipater came unto him, and brought with
him three thousand soldiers, and so dealt with the princes of Arabia to
associate them with Caesar, that by his means all they of Syria gave him their
assistance, and never altered their affection that they bare unto Caesar. These
were Iamblicus a great Lord, and Ptolomey his son; and Tholomaeus the son
of Sohemus, dwelling on the mount of Libanus, and welny all the Cities.
Mithridates being departed from Syria came to Pelusium, where being repulsed
and excluded by the Citizens, he besieged the City. Antipater in this war
behaved himself valiantly, and after he had beaten down Antipater helps
Mithridates to take Pelusium. The Jews (...) Onias country are confederated
with Caesar.
a pane of the wall, he first of all set forward to enter the City. Whilst
Pelusi^m was in this estate, the Jews that inhabited Egypt in the country of
Onias, would neither grant passage to Antipater, nor Mithridates that marched
toward Caesar. But Antipater, who was of their nation, Hircanus, in which he
invited them to be friends unto Caesar, and exhorted them to furnish his army
in whatsoever they stood in need of; so that seeing that Antipater and the high
Priest were accorded together, they submitted themselves. They that dwelt round
about Memphis, hearing that they were thus Memphis in Egypt.
united, sent for Mithridates also unto them, who came and received them into
his favor.

CHAP. XV. The year of the world 3917. before Christ's Natiniti^. 47.

The noble actions of Antipater, and the amity that he had with Caesar.

WHen he was come to a place called Delta, he fought with his enemies in a
place, which is called the camp of the Jews: in which battle Mithridates led
the right wing, and Antipater The conflict of the Egyptians with Mithridates at
Delta Alias cap. 18.
the left. When as therefore they came to handie blows, Mithridates wing
retired and fainted, and grew in danger to be wholly discomfited, had not
Antipater (running with his soldiers along the bank of the river) obtained the
upper hand of his enemies, by putting the Egyptians that were conquerers to
flight, and restoring Mithridates. And so long pursued he them that he
Mithridates, who chased the Egyptians, to take part of the pray with him, that
he had recovered from the fugitive enemy. In this fight there fell eight
hundredth on the enemies side, and fifty on Aatipaters. Afterward Mithridates
wrote hereof unto Mithridates commends Antipaters service to Caesar.
Caesar, and certified him that Antipater was cause of the victory, and their
preservation: so that Caesar from that time forward highly commended him, and
in all this war he made use of Antipater in his most dangerous attempts:
Whereby it came to pass that Antipater was grievously wounded in diverse fights.

Now after that the war was finished, Caesar sailed into Syria, and bestowed
great honors as Caesar confirms Hircanus in the priesthood, and makes
Antipater a citizen of Rome. Strabo. A^nius. Hyp^rates.
well on Hircanus to whom he confirmed the high Priesthood, as on Antipater,
whom he made a free Citizen of Rome, and granted him full exemption of all
charges in all places. Diverse men Hircanus himself was an agent in this warte,
and that he came into Egypt: whereunto accords Strabo the Cappadocian,
speaking after this manner by the authority of Asinius; after that Mithridates
had entered Egypt, with Hircanus the high Priest of the Jews. The same Strabo
in an other place speaks thus by the authority of Hypsicrates, that
Mithridates issued alone; and that Antipater was sent for into Ascalon, where
he prepared three thousand soldiers, because he was governor of Iudaea, and
encouraged the rest of the guernours; and Hircanus the high Priest also had a
part in this war. Thus far Strabo. At that time came Antigonus, Aristobulus
son unto Caesar, lamenting unto him the inconvenient that had befallen his
father, and how he was slame by poison in his service, and how his brother had
his head strooken off by Scipio; beseeching The year of the world. 3919.
before Christ's birth 45. Antigonus Aristobulus son accuses Hircanus, and
Antipater before Caesar. Antipaters answer to his objection. Antipater made
governor over Iudae^.
him to have compassion of him, who was excluded and thrust out of the
kingdom. Hircanus and Antipater also, for their tyrannical and violent
government over their nation, and injuries offered to himself. Antipater being
at that time present, answered for himself in those points wherein he was
accused; declaring that Antigonus and his friends were factious and seditious
men, protesting for himself how much he had travailed, and how many exploits
he had executed, in the late war, whereof Caesar himself was a witness.
Moreover he auowed that Aristobulus had been justly led twice into captivity
to Rome, for that he had been always an enemy, and no ways well affectioned
toward the Romans. And as for his brother, who was beheaded by Scipio, he
auerred that he was justly punished by him, for his Larcinies, and not
injuriously and outragiously as he pretended. After that Antipater had spoken
to this effect, Caesar declared Hircanus high Priest, and gave Antipater any
government whatsoever best him liked,

CHAP. XVI.
Caesar's letters, and the Senates decree as touching their amity with the Jews.

Moreover Caesar permitted Hircanus to repair the walls of Jerusalem
(according to his humble suit.) For after that Pompey had beaten them down,
they lay leuelled with the Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 17. al 18, Hircanus by
Caesar's permission rep^ireth the walls of Jerusalem. The Senates, decree as
touching their league with the Jews.
earth; and he commanded the Consuls at Rome, that this decree should be
registered in the Capitol. The example of which ordinance of the Senate
contains matter to this effect. L^ius Valerius the son of Lucius the
Praetor, has related to the Senate (assembled in the temple of Concord the
thirteenth day of December) in the presence of L. Caponius the son of Lucius,
and ^ius P^pyrius Quirinus; the requests made by Alexander the son of Jason,
Numenius the son of Antiochus, and Alexander the son of Dorotheus,
Ambassadors in the behalf of the Jews, men of good regard, and our allies,
and proposed by them in renewing the ancient favors they have received from
the Romans: and in testimony of the confederation; have brought us a violl
and buckler of gold of fifty thousand crowns price, requiring our letters
might be given The year of the world. 3919. before the Nativity of Christ. 45.
them, addressed to the free Cities and the kings our confederates, to grant
them passage through their countries and ports with all security, and without
any offense. And we have thought good to make friendship and alliance with
them, and to grant them all that which they require, in accepting the buckler
brought by them. This happened in the time that Hircanus was high priest and
prince, and in the ninth year of his princedome, in the month of July.

Hircanus was in like sor^ honored by the people of Athens, for many
commodities and friendships Hircanus honored by the Athenian^.
that they received at his hands. They sent him also a decree which they
ratified in his behalf, the tenor whereof ensues: The year wherein Dionysius
the son of Asclepiades was governor, and priest, in the month of July, and
on the 20. day, this arrest or decree of the Athenians was delivered to the
governors by the Praetor Agathocles. Eucles the son of Menander Dorotheus the
high priest, with the chief assistants of the people. Dionysius the son of
Dionysius published the same: Since that Hircanus the son of Alexander the
high priest and the prince of the Jews, continues his good affection toward
all the people, and in especial toward every Citizen of Athens, and has
showed them many friendships, receiving with all humanity those Athenians that
come unto him, whether they resort thither as Ambassadors, or for any other
particular occasion whatsoever, and sends them back after they have provided
them of safe conduct, whereof we have heretofore had testimony by the report of
Theodosius, the son of Theodorus Simeus; who has made recital unto the
people of his worthiness, and of the will he has to do us all the good that
is possible: We Let this suffice to express the honors bestowed on Hircanus by
the people of Rome, and the Citizens of Athens. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 18.
Caesar departs out of Syria. Antipater pacifieth all occasion of commotion in
Iudaea. The year of the world, 3921. before Christ's birth 43.


After that Caesar had given order for the affairs of Syria, he returned back
by sea. And as soon as Antipater had brought Caesar out of Syria, he returned
into Iudaea, and suddenly builded up the walls which were before time defaced
by Pompey; and in riding circuit about the country, he pacified the troubles,
not only by menaces; but by counsels also, which he gave every one to live
in peace; certifying them that if they submitted themselves to Hircanus their
prince, they should live happily, and enjoy their possessions without any
trouble: and that if they hoped to advance themselves by any new commotion
(supposing by that means to profit themselves Hircanus a tyrant; and in steed
of the Romans and Caesar to be their governors, they should feel and find them
to be their most hateful enemies, for that they would not suffer, that any
thing should be altered that they had established. By these and such like
admonitions, he kept and continued all the country in peace.

CHAP. XVII.
Antipater commits the government of Galilee to his son Herod, and that
of Jerusalem to Phasaelus his other son: and how Sextus Caesar aduanceth
Herod to great honors and dignities.

ANtipater perceiving that Hircanus was slow and idle, he declared and
appointed Phasaelus Alias, chap. 20. Antipater makes Phasaelus governor in
Jerusalem, and Herod. in Galilee.
his eldest son governor over Jerusalem, and the country thereabout: As for
Herod (who was very young, for he was not at that time above fifteen years
old) he committed Galilee unto his charge, who although he were young in
years, yet did not his tender age any ways prejudice him because he was of a
noble spirit, and found out this sudden occasion to express that virtue that
was in him. For having apprehended Exechias, The year of the world, 392^.
before Christ's Nativity, 43. Herod executes Ezechias and his followers for
robberies. Sextus Caesar governor of Syria. The form of Phasaelus his
government.
Sextus Caesar, who was uncle to Caesar the great. Furthermore his brother
Ph^saelus was incited to follow his noble actions, and enforced himself to
obtain no less reputation then he had; for which cause he strove to get the
good will of the common people in Jerusalem, and governed the city with such
discretion, that he acted all things to each man's content, and abused not his
power to any private man's injury: which was the cause that Antipater Antipater
notwithstanding his high authority was always faithful to Hircanus. Antipater
wins the Romans hearts by Hircanus money, and draws the Jews into hatred.
The Jews accuse Antipater and Herod before Hircanus. The year of the world.
3922. before the birth of Christ. 42.
duty he ought to Hircanus (as in such like occasions it oftentimes falls
out) notwithstanding diverse of the greatest amongst the Jews (seeing Antipater
and his sons so highly advanced both by the public favor of the whole
nation, as also by the revenues, that they drew both out of Iewry, as also by
the emploiment of Hircanus money) were grievously incensed against them. For
Antipater had made friendship with the Emperors of Rome, and having persuaded
Hircanus to send them money, he had appropriated the same unto himself,
sending it not in Hircanus name, but in his own; which though Hircanus knew,
yet was he not moved therewith, but rather well contented. But that which most
of all terrified the princes of the Jews was, to behold Herod, who governed
after a royal and tyrannical manner: For this cause they addressed themselves
to Hircanus, and accused Antipater openly. How long (said they) will you
dissemble and wink at those things that are daily practiced? see you not that
Antipater and his sons possess in effect the royal power and authority of
the kingdom, and that you have only the name? Assure your self that you are
not out of danger in contemning thus both your self and your kingdom. For
Antipater and his sons are not now your substitutes, neither intend they your
profit, or your countries good (whatsoever your opinion is of them) but they
openly are known for lords and Commanders. For Herod (Antipaters son) has
already put Ezechias and his accomplices to death, and thereby transgressed our
laws, which forbid to take away any man's life (how wicked soever he be) except
he be first of all condemned to death by Hircanus heard this, he grew wroth
(for their mothers, whom Herod had slain, had incensed him by their continual
exclamations in the temple, exhorting the king and people to call Herod to
account before the council of that which he had done.) So that Hircanus moved
by these women, called Herod to answer unto those accusations which were
objected against him. Who made his appearance, forewarned by his father not to
present himself after the manner of a private person, but well attended and
accompanied to withstand all inconuenients. After Herod called in question
appeareeth with a great train.
therefore he had taken order for the affairs in Galilee (according as he
thought meet in his own discretion) and that he himself was sufficiently
accompanied to make his voyage, with such a guard as neither might terrify
Hircanus with number, nor leave himself vnsecured in danger, Sextus Caesar
governor of Syria wrote unto Hircanus to absolve him, adding threats to his
persuasions, if so be he should perform the contrary; which gave Hircanus
occasion to deliver Herod in despite of the council and their intent; the
rather also for that he loved him as entirely as his son. When as therefore
Herod presented Sextus Caesar writes to Hircanus to discharge Herod
himself before the council with his retinue, all of them were astonished,
and none of those that accused him in his absence, durst open their mouths to
speak one word, but all of them kept silence, not knowing what to do. Now
whilst they stood upon these terms, a certain man called Sameas, who was of
upright conversation, and for this cause was not distracted with fear, arose
and spoke to this effect. Dread king, and you honorable assistance, I could
never yet remember, that ever any man which was called in question to defend
his cause before us, has appeared Same as one of the Judges foretells
Hircanus and his counsailers of their imminent death by Herodsmeans.
Herod accused of murder (and for this occasion called before us) who could
imagine that he should appear before us in a purple robe, having his hairs
trimmed, and besides that, a guard of armed men about him? with an intent that
if we condemn him, according to law, he may put us to death without law, that
after he The year of the world, 3922. before Christ's birth 42.
Herod in this action, for that he has a more inward regard of his particular
profit, then of the law: but I accuse both you and the king, who have given
him such assurance. Know therefore, that there is a soueraign God, that will
one day punish both you and the king, and him whom you will deliver by the
kings means. And so generally fell it out as he had said: For as soon as
Herod had obtained the kingdom, he put all those of the council to death,
and Hircanus himself likewise; only Herod honored Sameas. Herod admonished
by Hircanus saves himself by flight, and appears no more in judgment.
Sameas was exempted: for he held him in great estimation, because of his
wisdom and justice, and because that at such time as the City was besieged
by Herod and Sosius, Sameas persuaded the people to receive Herod, telling
them, that by reason of their sins and offenses, they might not escape from
him; whereof we will speak in place convenient. Hircanus, perceiving that the
Herod, deferred the sentence till the next day, and sent secretly unto Herod,
counsailing him to fly out of the City, assuring him that there was no other
means to save his life. Thus posted he to Damasco (as if he fled from the
kings presence) and presenting himself before Sextus Caesar, after he had
assured his person, he resolved with himself that if the council should call
him once more to his answer, he would not obey them. But after his departure
the council were displeased with Hircanus, and labored to persuade him, that
all these things tended to his destruction: which he well perceived, yet knew
he not what to do, he was so negligent and void of foresight.

When Sextus had made Herod governor of Coelesyria (which estate he sold unto
him for ready money) Hircanus was afraid least Herod should make war against
him: neither passed there Alias, chap. 21. Sextus Caesar sells his presidents
place to Herod for ready money. Herod marches against Hircanus with a great
army, and is dissuaded from war by his father Antipater, and his brother
Phasaelu^.
Herod marched forth against him with a great army, supposing himself to be
much wronged by the assignation he had sent him, and in that he was summoned to
give a reason of his actions before the council. But his father Antipater, and
his brother Phasaelus came forth against him to hinder his approach toward
Jerusalem, striving to appease his fury, and counsailing him not to attempt
any thing by way of action; but that contenting himself that he had threatened
and affrighted Hircanus, he should not attempt any further against him, who had
raised him to that high degree. They told him also, that it became him not
only to remember that he was cited to answer, but that he was absolved also,
and permitted to depart without danger or any violence. Moreover, that he ought
to think, that God governs the balance of war, and that the issue of
battles is uncertain, and for that cause he ought not to expect the victory,
if he made war against the king who was his familiar, and from whom he had
received far more kindness, and no displeasure: who though he made some
appearance and shadow of severity, touching the accusation intended against
him, yet notwithstanding it proceeded not so much from him, as from his evil
counselors. Herod in some sort pacified by these persuasions, obeyed his
father, supposing that it sufficed him in regard of his future hopes, that he
had given the people so large a testimony of his power. This was the estate of
the Jews at that time.

But Caesar arriving at Rome, prepared himself to set sail toward Affricke,
with an intent Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 19. Hircanus ambassadors to Caesar.
to make war against Scipio and Cato. To him Hircanus sent Ambassadors,
beseeching him to confirm the amity and association that he had with him. But
now at this present, I think it The Jews much honored by the kings of Europe
and Asia.
of our valor and fidelity. And although diverse men lewdly affected toward
us, believe not that which the Macedonians and Persians have written of us,
because the same matters are not extant in all places, neither set down in
public writings, but only amongst our selves and some Barbarians; yet is it
manifest that they cannot contradict the declarations made by the Romans,
Julius Caesar testified in a braien pillar that the Jews were free citizens of
Alexandria. Julius Caesar's decree as touching the honors, immunities and
privileges granted to the Jews.
which are manifestly affixed in public places in Cities; as likewise also at
this present they are written in the Capitol in brazen pillars. Julius Caesar
in like manner in a brazen pillar erected by him, has declared unto the Jews
that inhabited Alexandria, that they were free Citizens therein. Julius Caesar,
made in favor of Hircanus and our nations. Caius Julius Caesar Emperor, high
Priest, Dictator the second Time, to the governors, Senate and people of the
Sidonians: Health. If you are well, we are in health, both our selves and our
army. I have sent you the copy of an inscription, registered in favor of
Hircanus Alexanders son, high priest ^d prince of the Jews, to the end it
may be placed among your public monuments: and my will is, that it be engraven
in a table of brass, both in Greek and Latin letters; the tenor whereof The
year of the world 3922. before Christ's birth 42.
is this that follows: Because Hircanus Alexanders son the Jew, both at
this present as also heretofore, as well in peace as in war, has expressed
his fidelity toward us and our estate, as diverse chieftaines of our armies
yield testimony of him; and for that in our last Alexandrine war, he
seconded us in the battle with fifteen hundredth men; and having been sent by
us to Mithridates, has surmounted all those of his company in valor: For
these causes my will is that Hircanus Alexanders son and his successors, be
princes of the Jews: and further, that they continue always in the high
Priesthood, according to the ordinance and custom of their country: and that
both he and his children be our associates; and be enrowled likewise amongst
our chiefest friends: and that all that which appertains to the Priesthood,
according to the ordinances of the Jews, be attributed to him and his. And if
there happen any different as touching the discipline Caius Caesar being Consul
are these.

That the sons of Hircanus be Princes over the nation of the Jews, and
enioie the places granted unto them. That the high Priest and Prince of the
Jews give favor and aid unto those that are offenced. That Ambassadors be
sent to Hircanus the son of Alexander high Priest of the Jews, to entreat of
amity and association with us. That a brazen table be erected in the Capitol:
and likewise at Sidon, at Tire, and at Ascalon in the temples, wherein shall be
engraven the contents hereof in Roman and Greek letters, to the end that all
the tresurers that are in the cities,

Caius Caesar Emperor, Dictator, Consul, for the good of the Senate and people
of Rome, has granted to the honor, virtue, and humanity of Hircanus the
son of Alexander, that both he and his children shall be High Priests in
Jerusalem, and of the whole nation, according to the rites and customs,
whereby their ancestors have enjoyed the Priesthood.

Caius Caesar, Consul the fifth time, has ordained that they shall inhabit
Jerusalem, and build again the walls of the City; and that Hircanus
(Alexanders son the high priest and prince

Caius Caesar, twice Emperor, has ordained, that the Jews shall contribute
every year for their cities, except loppe; he acquiteth them also every
seventh year (which they call the year of rest) because that therein they
neither reap, nor sow, neither gather the fruits of trees. His further
pleasure is, that every second year, they bring their tributes unto Sidon,
which shall be the fourth part of that which shall be sown; and besides this,
that they pay the tenths to Hircanus and his sons, which they have paid to
their predecessors, unto this day. Commanding that no man whether he be
governor, captain, or ambassador, or any other whatsoever he Hircanus
Alexanders son and his children, receive the tribute of that city (both by
them, that till the land, as by the gates, entries, and issues of merchandises
that are transported unto Sidon) twenty thousand, six hundredth, seventy and
five bushels every year, exempting the seventh year, which is called the
year of rest, wherein they neither labor nor gather any fruit of the trees.
It is the Senates pleasure also, that Hircanus and the Jews have those
villages, which are the demains, places, and habitations that have appertained
to the kings of Syria and Phoenicia, The year of the world. 3922. before the
Na^itie of Christ. 42.
Hircanus the high priest and prince of the Jews possess the same. It is
lawful also for Hircanus and his sons, and their ambassadors sent by them,
to behold the iusts and combats, and to sit among the Senators, and that at
all and every time or times wherein they shall require to be brought into the
Senate by the Dictator, or by the master of the horse, they may have free
entrance; and that within ten days at the most they receive their answer, if
there be any decree ratified by the Senate.

Caius Caesar, Emperor, the fourth time Consul, and the fifth time Dictator
for term of life, has ratified these things, as touching Hircanus the son
of Alexander, the high priest and prince of the Jews: Because that the
generals my predecessors have testified as well in the provinces, as Hircanus
high priest and prince of the Jews, and that nation also toward us and our
state; and whereas both the Senate and people of Rome have gratified them for
the same: we think it convenient also to have the same in memory, and to give
order that Hircanus and his sons may be remunerated by the Senate and people
of Rome, according to the measure of their loyalties and good deserts.

Julius Caius Caesar Roman Consul, to the governors, Senate and people of
Patras: Health. The Jews are come unto us to Delos, with some of the colonies
of their countrime^ in the presence of your Ambassadors, and certify us of a
decree made by you, whereby you forbid them the practice and ancient use of
their sacrifices and oblations: I think it not meet that you make Caius
Caesar Consul had prohibited by Edict, that in celebrating the Bacchanals, no
one should dance about the City; yet were the Jews alone exempted from this
inhibition: and neither have they been prohibited to contribute, neither to
banquet together. My self also in like case in the defense I have made to
forbid all other sodalities, have excepted the Jews therein, and have given
them leave and license to assemble and demeasne themselves, according to the
customs, ceremonies, and ordinances of their country. If therefore you have
made any such decrees against our friends and associates, you shall do well to
disanull them,

After Caius Caesar's death, the Consuls Marcus Antonius and Publius Dolobella
assembled M. Antonius, and P. Dolobella bring Hircanus ambassadors into the
Senate. Dolobe^ letters ^o the Ephesians.
the Senate, and having brought in Hircanus Ambassadors, they declared their
requests, and contracted amity with them: the Senate likewise ordained, that
each thing should be granted them that they required. And Dolobella having
received Hircanus letters, sent them thorowout all Asia, and to Ephesus (which
is the Metropolitan city of Asia) in these terms. The general Dolobella
to the Princes, Senate, and people of Ephesus: Health.
Alexander the son of Theodore Ambassador to Hircanus the high priest and
prince of the Jews, has given us to understand, that his subjects cannot go
on warfare, because it is not lawful for them to bear arms,


See here how Dolobella honored Hircanus at such time as he sent his
Ambassadors unto him.

Lucius Lentulus Consul pronounces, that the Jews (that are citizens of Rome)
and that observe Lucius Lucullus in the French, Lentulus in the Latin, being
Consul makes an edict in behalf of the Jews. Josephus conclusion concerning
these edicts.
and offer the sacrifices of the Jews in Ephesus before the tribunal, be
exempt from warfare, by reason of their religion. Given the ninteenth of
October. There are besides these many Hircanus and our nation, and some other
cities. In like sort there were diverse decrees and writs sent unto the
governors and rulers of the provinces touching our privileges: all which may
be easily believed by those that shall read our History, with no preiudicate
opinion, if they consider those that we have here inserted. For we have showed
most express and lively testimonies of the friendship that we have had with
the Romans, and such as at this day are affixed to pillars, and engraven in
tables of brass in the Capitol; and that hereafter shall The year of the
world, 3922. before Christ's Nativity, 42.
remain affixed for ever: For which cause, I have thought it to be a frivolous
and unnecessary matter to insert all in this place; and I think that there is
not any man of so sinister judgment, that will not believe how much we have
been esteemed by the Romans, as they have given testimonies by diverse decrees
published in our behalf; neither may any man suppose that we lie, considering
the truth of that which we publish.

Thus have we sufficiently declared the amity and association; that in times
past we have had with the Romans. About this time it came to pass, that the
estate of Syria was sore troubled upon Caecilius Bassu^ murthereth Sextus
Caesar.
the occasion that ensues. Caecilius Bassus one of Pompeies partakers, laid an
ambush for Sextus Caesar and slew him, and seazing upon his army, usurped the
government: whereby there arose great war nigh Apamea. For Caesar's captains
marched out against Caecilius, with great force Antipater sent his sons with
a power to second them (in remembrance of the benefits he had received at
Caesar's hands) supposing it to be an act of justice, that the murderer should
be punished for his so heinous offense. Now whereas this war Marcus succeeds
Sextus in Syria. Caesar slain by Cassius and Brutus.
continued a long time, Marcus came and succeeded Sextus. Mean while Caesar
was slain by Cassius and Brutus in the midst of the Senate, after he had
commanded three years and six months, as it is expressed in an other place.

CHAP. XVIII.
Cassius afflicts the Jews, and exacteth about eight hundredth talents at

AFter Caesar's death, the brand of civil war began to flame, and the greatest
men of Rome travailed the one this way, the other that way to gather men of
war. But Cassius came Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 20 Cassius comes into
Syria, and exacteth more the^ 700. talents of silver from the Jews. Herod
wins Cassius heart by the money he leuieth in Galilee.
into Syria, with an intent to take the army that was near to Apamea, and
having levied the siege he drew both Bassus and Marcus to be of his faction;
and travailing from City to City; he gathered a number of soldiers, and much
furniture, and imposed huge tributes: but especially he afflicted Iewry, and
exacted of that country more then seven hundredth talents of silver. Antipater
seeing the state in so great fear and trouble, committed the exaction of the
two parts of this money to his sons; the other he commanded to be assigned to
Malichus, who was his enemy, and the other part unto an other. Herod first of
all gathered that which was commanded Cassius: for he being prudent and
discreet, thought it no small policy at that time to win the Romans good will
by other men's expense. Under the other governors the Cities were set to sale,
together with their inhabitants: and amongst them these four were the
chiefest, namely, Gophna, Emaus, Lydda, and Thamna: for Cassius sold the people
thereof to them that would give most. Furthermore, Cassius was so much
transported with Choler, that he had slain Malichus (so much was he moved The
year of the world. 3923. before Christ's birth 41. Malichus lays in wait to
mu^er Antipater, but forsweareth the same and is reconciled.
against him) if Hircanus had not restrained his fury, by sending him one
hundredth talents of his own money by Antipater. But as soon as Cassius was
departed out of the country of Iudaea, he practiced Antipaters death,
supposing that his cutting off would assure Hircanus state the more strongly.
But Antipater was not ignorant of this his resolution; for having an inckling
Malichus (who was a politic and subtle fellow) denied stoutly that he had
intended any treason, purging himself with an oath before Antipater and his
children, that he had never any such intent, especially for that he saw that
Phasaelus h^ld Jerusalem* and Herod had an army at command. And in the end,
perceiving the difficulty wherein he was, he reconciled himself to Antipater,
and they agreed at that time that Marcus governed Syria: who perceiving that
Malichus began to raise troubles in Iewry, resorted thither, and the^ wanted
little but that he had slain him, had not Antipater by earnest request
obtained his life.

CHAP. XIX.
Malichus poysoneth Antipater.

But imprudent Antipater saved Malichus to his own mischief: For when Cassius
and Marcus had assembled their army, they committed all the charge into Herodes
hands, Cassius and Marcus make Herod governor of Coelesyria.
and made him governor of Coelesyria, and delivered him great forces both of
foot and horse, and ships by sea: They promised him likewise the kingdom of
Iudaea, after they had finished the war, that was at that time betwixt them and
Anthony and Caesar the younger. Whereupon The year of the world, 3923. before
Christ's birth 41, Malichus causes Antipater to be poisoned
Malichus mightily fearing Antipaters power, determined to make him away; and
having corrupted Hircanus butler with money (with whom both of them celebrated
a feast) he made him away by poison, and afterward assembling many men of
war about him, he made himself master of the City. When Herod and
Phasaelus understood of the traitorous conspiracy attempted against their
father, they were grievously incensed against Malichus. But he denied all, and
in especial abiured the intent or practice of the murder. Thus died Antipater
a just and virtuous man, and such a one as dearly loved his country. But
Herod, who was his younger son, incontinently resolved to revenge his
fathers death, and came forth with an army against Malichus: But Phasaelus, who
was the elder, determined to circumuent him by policy, for fear least he
should raise a civil war. He therefore accepted of Malichus iustifications,
and made a Antipaters death, and only intended his fathers monument and
funerals. Mean while, Herod resorting to Samaria, and finding it in desperate
estate, restored the same, and pacified the dissensions that were amongst the
inhabitants. Not long after (by reason of a feast) he came to Jerusalem with
his men of war. Whereupon Malichus being afraid of this his access,
persuaded Hircanus that he should not permit him to enter into the City:
whereunto Hircanus condescended, alleging for pretext of his defense, that
amongst the holy people it was not lawful to intermixed a troop of polluted
men. But Herod made small reckoning of them that brought him this news, and
notwithstanding this command entered the City by night: whereat Malichus was
much amazed. Whereupon, according to his wonted dissimulations, he openly wept
and bewailed the death of Antipater as Herodes friends, to take no notice of
this his dissimulation; but to make a show for their parts that they were well
affected toward Malichus.

CHAP. XX.
Herod at the command of Cassius, kills Malichus by policy.

HEreupon Herod certified Cassius of Antipater his fathers death, who knowing
very well of what conversation Malichus was, wrote back unto Herod that he
should revenge Herod in that so just execution which he intended. After
therefore that Cassius had taken Laodicea and the inhabitants of the country
came together, bringing with them crowns and silver to present him, Herod
expected that Malichus in that place should receive his punishment: but he
entering into suspicion of some like practice, at such time as they drew near
unto Tire in Phoenicia, attempted far greater things. For whereas his son
was an hostage in Tire, he entered the City with an intent to draw him thence,
and afterward to return into Iudaea. After this usurping upon that
opportunity which he had by reason of Cassius troubles (who hastily marched
forward to meet with Anthony) he determined to draw the people to an
insurrection, and to make himself Lord of the country: but God disappointed
Herod being a man of ripe judgment, incontinently discovered his pretense,
and sent one of his servants before, as if under purpose to prepare a banquet,
because he had told him before time that he would entertain all his followers:
but in effect, he sent him to the captains to command them to issue out with
their daggers, and to meet Malichus; who marching forth and meeting him near
unto the shore of the City upon the sea coast, stabbed him in that place with
their daggers. Which act did so much astonish Hircanus, that through amaze he
waxed speechless: and finally being much moved, he demanded of Herodes men,
what accident had happened, and who it was that had slain Malichus? Whereof
when they certified him, and how nothing was done without Cassius command: he
answered that all things were well done, for that Malichus was a wretched man
and a traitor to his Malichus was justly punished for the wickedness he
committed against Antipater.

When Cassius was departed out of Syria, there arose a new tumult in Iudaea:
for Faelix, who The year of the world. 3924. before the birth of Christ. 40.
was left in Jerusalem with an army, marched forth against Phasaelus, and all
the people were in arms. For which cause Herod speedily repaired to Fabius
governor of Damasco, and intending to succor his brother, was prevented by a
sickness: so that Phasaelus obtaining the victory by his own forces against
Faelix, enclosed him up in a tower, whence afterward he dismissed The year of
the world. 3924. before Christ's Nativity. 40. Faelix assaileth Phasaelus in
Jerusalem, and is overcome by him.
him under composition. Whereupon he presently and grievously rebuked Hircanus;
for that being forgetful of diverse benefits which he had received by him, he
had given aid unto his enemies. For Malichus brother being at that time
revolted, planted garrisons in diverse fortresses, and namely in Masada, which
was the strongest of them all. As soon as Herod therefore had recovered his
health, he drew forth his forces against him, and dispossessed him of diverse
places that he held, and after suffered him to depart with his life and goods.

CHAP. XXI.
Herod discomfiteth Antigonus the son of Aristobulus, and drives him out of

PTolomey Mennaeus drew unto him by force of his money Aristobulus son the
young Antigonus, who had gathered a power, and hired Fabius, and was likewise
drawn Ptolomey Me^naeus adopteth Antigonus Aristobulus son.
by Ptolomey, under titles of consanguinitie and adoption. With him joined
Marion (whom Cassius had made Governor in Tire:) For this man having occupied
Syria by tyranny kept garrison therein. Marion also invaded Galilee, which
confined his country; and having seized three strong fortresses therein, he
kept garrisons in the same. Herod also marching forth against him,
dispossessed him of them al; and graciously dismissed those Tyrians that had
the keeping Herod expels Antigonus out of Jury. Herod marries Ma^a^me
Hircanus niece by his daughter. Doris Herod's wife.
thereof, bestowing benefits on some of them for the love he bare unto their
city. And that Antigonus, and fought with him; and overcame him before he had
scarcely entered on the marches of Iudaea, and drove him from thence. When he
was come to Jerusalem, Hircanus and all the people honored him with crowns:
for already was he inserted into Hircanus family, for that by promise he was
his son in law, by which means he had more willingly undertaken his
defense, for that he was to marry Alexanders the son of Aristobulus
daughter, who was Hircanus niece: on whom he begat three sons and two
daughters. Before her also had he married a wife of his own nation, who was
called Doris, on whom he begat Antipater his eldest son.

CHAP. XXII.
Herod meeting with Antonius in Bithynia, gives him a great sum of money, to
the end he should not give ^are to those that would accuse him.

ANtonius and Caesar having overcome Cassius near unto the City of Philippi;
Caesar went from thence into France, and Antonius into Asia. And being in
Bithynia, Ambassadors resorted unto him from all parts: Thither also repaired
certain principal men among the Jews to accuse Phasaelus and Herod, saying,
that Hircanus had only the name, but he the authority of the kingdom. But
Antonius greatly honored Herod, who came unto him The judge corrupted with
money. Hircanus ambassadors present Antonius with a crown of gold and require
the captive Jews liberty sold by Cassius.
to answer those accusations that they had imposed on him: for which cause
they that were his Herod had bought that privilege from them with his money.
As soon as Antonius was arrived in Ephesus, Hircanus the high priest and all
our nation presently sent an Ambassador unto him, with a crown of gold;
requiring him that he would write unto the provinces, that the Jews whom
Cassius had taken prisoners (contrary to the law of arms) might be set at
liberty, and that their country (which was taken from them in Cassius time)
might be restored. Antonius supposing that the demands which the Jews had
proposed, were reasonable, wrote back presently to the high priest Hircanus
and the Jews; and sent an edict also to the Tyrians to this effect.

Marcus Antonius Emperor
to Hircanus high Priest and Prince of the Jews; Health*
If you are well, all goes well. I and mine army are in perfect estate.
Lysimachus the son of Pausanias, Joseph the son of Mennaeus, and Alexander
the son of Theodore your Ambassadors, came unto me to Ephesus, and have
renewed the same Embassade which they heretofore brought to Rome, and at this
present likewise they have duly and faithfully acquitted themselves of the
Antonius writes to Hircanus as touching Brutus and Cassius actions and deaths.
Embassade which they present in the behalf of you, and your nation, by giving
us to understand what affection you bear toward us: so that I esteem you for
our friend, since I am given to understand how friendly you have behaved your
self toward us both in words and deeds, since we have had any knowledge of
your good and honest conversation and piety. For at such time as The year of
the world. 3924. before Christ's birth 40.
Caesar. But we have gotten the upper hand of their impious enterprises, which
are fallen upon Macedonia, as on the country and air, from whence proceed such
detestable and ungracious desseignes: and we have likewise cut off the course
of their desperate resolution, which made them encounter us near to Philippi a
city of Macedonia, where we seized Brutus likewise compelled to fly to
Philippi, where being enclosed by us, he suffered the like ruin with his
consort Cassius; and since they have been punished as they deserved, me seems
that we are seized of peace, and that Asia has had repose from war, and all
the body thereof is relieved from a grievous malady, by the means of our
victory. For which cause remembering us of you and your nation, to the end to
increase your good fortunes, we will bethink us of that which shall be
commodious for you; and we have already sent letters from city to city, to
the intent that if any one among you, either captive or free man, have been
sold to the utmost by Caius Cassius, or any of that army, they may Dolabellas
right, forbidding the Tyrians to molest you, and commanding them to restore
all that which they have taken from the Jews in goods or possessions. As for
the crown which you sent me, I accept the same.


Marcus Antonius Emperor,
to the governors, Senate and people of Tire: Health.
I have Marcus Antonius writes to the magistrates of Tire to restore Hircanus
and the Jews their lands, goods, and liberty.
been informed in Ephesus by Hircanus ambassadors (who is high priest and
prince of the Jews) that you have seized their country, and spoiled the same,
at such time as our adversaries held that province. But in as much as we have
undertaken the war for the Empire, and that in defense of right and piety,
we have punished these in grateful, disloyal and perfidious persons; our will
is, that you suffer our allies to live in peace: and as touching that which you
have obtained by our

For no one of them has obtained either province or army by the consent of the
Senate; but have ravished them by force, and afterward bestowed them on those
who have been ministers of their impieties and injustice. But since they have
been punished according to their deserts, we require that our allies may enjoy
their own, without any impeachment: and if you hold any places at this
present, which belong to Hircanus prince of the Jews (that were seized since
the time that Caius Cassius by unjust war invaded our provinces) restore them
unto him, without offer of any violence, to hinder him from the possession of
his own. And if you have or pretend to have any right in them, at such time as
I shall repair to those places, it shall be lawful for you to debate your
right, and we will so judge as that our allies shall receive no wrong.


Marcus Antonius Emperor,
to the governors, Senate, and people of Tire; Health.
I have sent you my edict, which my pleasure is that you carefully look unto,
and that you register it amongst your public records in Roman and Greek
letters, and set it up in writing in an open place, to the end that it may be
red by all men.

Marcus Antonius Emperor and Triumuir in the presence of the Tyrians assembled
for their public affairs, has declared, that Caius Cassius during the
troubles, by the assistance of his soldiers, has ravished another man's
province; and has in like sort spoiled our allies, and has ransackt the
nation of the Jews, who are friends to the people of Rome* and for that by our
valor we have repressed his insolence, by our edicts and judgments we will
correct his offenses; to the end that all things may be restored to our allies,
and that all whatsoever has been sold,


He wrote to the like effect to the Sidonians, Antiochians, and Arabians, all
which we will insert in a convenient place, to testify what account the Romans
made of our nation.

CHAP. XXIII. The year of the world. 3924. before Christ's birth 40.

Antonius arriving in the province of Syria, makes Herod and Phasaelus
Tetrarches.

AFter this Antonius retired himself into Syria, and Cleopatra came forth to
meet him near unto Cilicia, and entangled him in her loves. At that time also,
one hundredth Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 21. Cleopatra comes into Cilicia to
Antonius. Herod accused by one hundredth Jews before Antonius.
of the chiefest reckoning among the Jews came once again in embassade to him
to accuse Herod, and his adherents: who to this end had chosen out the most
esteemed Orator that might be found. Messala likewise undertook the defense of
the young men that were accused, and made them answer. Hircanus also was there
in person, who was already by marriage allied unto them. After that Antonius
had heard both the one and the other in the city of Hircanus, which of both
the parties governed the commonweal best? who returned him answer, that
they, who were on Herod's side were most studious of the weal public. Antonius
(who long since had borne good affection toward them, by reason of the
ancient hospitality that he had received with their father, during the time
that Gabinius was in Iudaea) established them both for Tetrarches, committing
to their hands the affairs in Iudaea: And to this effect wrote he his letters
and committed fourteen of their enemies Antonius makes Phasaclus and Herod
Tetrarches.
to prison, whom had not Herod besought for their lives, he had condemned them
to death. This notwithstanding, as soon as they returned from their embassade,
they could not contain themselves in quiet, but resorted once more unto
Antonius to the number of one thousand, to the city of Tire where Antonius
soiourned. But Antonius (already corrupted by store Herod and his brother,
who commanded in that place) ordained that the Ambassadors of the Jews
should be punished, for that they had attempted and affected some innovation; A
thousand Jews repair to Tire to accuse Herod, who are partly slain, partly
wounded, and partly put to flight.
where contrariwise he confirmed Herodes government. At that time Herod, who
walked by the sea side, came unto them, aduising both them and Hircanus (who at
that present was with them) to give over their appeal, for fear least some
grievous misfortune should befall them. Whereunto since they gave no regard,
certain Jews and inhabitants of that city, all at once ran upon them, who
slew some of them, and hurt other some, and the rest taking their flight
toward their country, ever afterward contained themselves and lived in
quiet, through the fear they had conceived. But when the people ceased not to
exclaim and protest against Herod, Antonius was in such sort displeased, that
he commanded all those whom he held prisoners,

The year after, Pacorus the kings son, and Barzapharnes a prince among the
Parthians, invaded and seized Syria. And about this time died Ptolomey the
son of Mennaeus; and his son Lysanias reigned in his steed, who plighted
friendship with Antigonus the son of Aristobulus, The year of the world.
3925. before Christ's birth 39.
who obtained this favor at his hands by the counsel and solicitation of a
certain prince of great authority and credit with him.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The Parthians make war in Syria to restore Antigonus son of Aristobulus

AFter this Antigonus promised the Parthians to give them one thousand talents
of silver, Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 23. Antigonus promises the Parthians a
great sum of money to install him in the kingdom. Pacorus sends horsemen
to Antigonus in Iudaea. The Jews inhabiting about mount Carmel join
themselves with Antigonus.
and five hundredth women, if so be they would deprive Hircanus of the kingdom,
and restore it unto him, and withal put Herod and his friends to death. Yet
did he not deliver them that he promised, notwithstanding the Parthians led
their army into Jury to restore Antigonus, to wit, Pacorus by the sea coast,
and Barzapharnes to the landward. The Tyrians locked their gates against
Pacorus, but the Sidonians and Ptolemaidans received him into their city. He
sent a troop of horsemen into Jury to discover the estate of the country, and
to give succors to Antigonus. The chieftaine of these horsemen was the kings
butler; who in like sort was called Pacorus. But for that certain Jews
(inhabiting about the mount Carmel) joined Antigonus, and were prepared with
him to invade his enemies, he conceived some hope that he might by their means
reduce a certain part of the region under his government, which is called
Drymae, and certain of his wel-willers meeting him in the way, persuaded him
to press forward as far as Jerusalem; where being seconded by others (and
his followers already much increased in number) they address themselves to
assault the kings palace. And whereas those of the faction of the brethren
brought present supplies, and the skirmish was maintained in the market place,
the young men repulsed the enemy, and drove him into the temple. The year of
the world. 3925. before Christ's birth 39. Penticost. Herod fights with his
enemies in the suburbs. Pacorus chieftaine of the Parthians entering the city
persuades Phasaelus to go ambassador to Barzapharnes.
Herod, who in a skirmish that he had with them, slew a great number of them.
And whereas there were daily assaults between both parties, the enemies
expected until such time as the people assembled from all parts of the
country, should repair to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast of Penticost.
Which being come, many thousands of men assembled about the temple, both armed
and unarmed, who seized both the temple and the City (except the kings house
only, which Herod made good with a few men of war. The wall thereof did
Phasaelus his brother keep. But Herod with a company of his followers sallied
out upon the enemy, who were planted in the Phasaelus showed no little valor.

But Pacorus conductor of the Parthians came into the City with some few
horsemen at Antigonus request, making show that he came to appease the
sedition, but the effect and scope of his coming was, to obtain the
sovereignty for Antigonus. Furthermore, after that Phasaelus was come out to
meet with him, and had courteously entertained him in his house, Pacorus
persuaded him to go Ambassador with him to Barzapharnes, laying a bait under
this pretense to surprise him. He suspecting no treachery, was easily
persuaded (notwithstanding that Herod misliked the course) who knowing the
perfidious manners of the Barbarians, exhorted him rather Pacorus, and to
assault and oppress his forces, when they were come unto him. Naithelesse
Hircanus and Phasaelus undertook this embassade, and Pacorus (leaving with
Herod two hundredth horsemen, and ten of those whom they call free men)
conducted the Ambassadors. Now as soon as they came into Galilee, the
governors of the Cities in that country, came forth armed to meet them:
Barzapharnes also at the first gave them friendly entertainment, and honored
them with presents; but anon after, he began to practice treachery. For
Phasaelus and his attendants were conducted to a lodging that adjoined the sea;
where hearing tidings that Antigonus had promised one thousand talents, and
five hundredth virgins to the Parthians, he The Parthians complot trecheries
against Phasaelus.
began already to suspect the Barbarians. For a certain friend of his had
given him an inckling, that there were treasons intended against him that very
night, and that his lodging was privily Herod, fearing least he having an
inckling of their desaster, should betake himself to flight. And that this was
true, they incontinently gathered by the guard that was set about them: For
which cause there were certain of Phasaelus friends, who counseled him, that
without any more delay, he should betake him to his horse and fly from thence:
and amongst the rest Ofilius was most earnest, who had wrought out of Saramalla
a rich Syrian (who offered them his ships that road hard by to further their
flight) all that which they pretended. But Phasaelus would neither forsake
Hircanus, nor leave his brother Herod in danger, but repairing to Barzapharnes
he told him, that he did him wrong to use these sinister practices against
them. For that if he had need of money, he was more likely to receive
Antigonus: and howsoever he wrought, it was an intolerable injury to put
Ambassadors to death, who came unto him under pledge of his honor, and had no
ways offended him. But the Barbarian hearing these things, protested by an
oath, that no one point of that which he had suspected, was true; but that he
was only troubled with false surmises: whereupon he presently departed to
Pacorus.

CHAP. XXV.
The Parthians lead away Hircanus and Phasaelus into captivity.

AS soon as he was departed, certain of the Parthians took Hircanus and
Phasaelus prisoners, Herod, Hircanus and Phasaelus surprised by the Parthians.
had commandment given him to entice and train him without the City walls,
and afterward to apprehend him. But Herod was forewarned of this treachery,
by certain messengers (who were sent by Phasaelus to give him notice thereof)
who being intercepted by the enemy in the way, and Herod getting notice
thereof, he addressed himself to Pacorus (and those in greatest authority
among the Parthians) as to them that were the masters: who subtly dissembled,
The year of the world 3925. before Christ's Nativity. 39. The Parthians lay a
plot to surprise Herod* (...) discovers i^, and preuenteth them by flight.
Phasaelus good estate. But Herod gave them no credit, because he was already
other ways aduertized of his brothers surprisall, and had also ^rre greater
suspicion of the Parthians by the solicitation of Hircanus daughter, whom he
had married. And although the rest made no account of her aduertisements, yet
Herod, gave credit unto her for that she was a most wise woman. Now whilst
the Parthians were in deliberation what were best to be done (in that it was
held no policy to make open assault upon such a man) they deferred the whole
matter until the next morning. Whilst thus they were debating of their
differents, Herod came unto them, who rather giving credit to Alexanders
daughter, the niece of Aristobulus) and her mother (who was Hircanus daughter)
and her younger brother, with all their family and train, he departed into
Idumaea without espiall or suspicion of the enemy. Amongst whom there was not
one so hard or^yron-hearted, who seeing such a pitiful spectacle could not be
moved to compassion, beholding the mothers drag away their little children,
and abandon their country with tears and complaints: and that which

But Herod mastered these misfortunes by his invincible courage, and for that
he was a constant man in all fortunes, he exhorted every one of them whom he
met in the way, to be of good Herod comfort his friends in their flight.
courage; and not to abandon themselves to immeasurable sorrow, for that by
such means they might hinder his retreat, on which their sole and securest
conservation depended: whereupon they for their parts endeavored themselves to
digest their griefs, according to Herodes exhortation. Mean while he hardly
refrained from laying violent hands on himself, by reason of the chariot
wherein his mother road, which ouerturned and had almost slain her: yea so
much did this casualtie terrify him (for fear least the enemy in pursuit
should surprise him during these Herod seeing his mothers chariot ouerturned
is ready to murder himself.
delays) as that he drew and prepared his sword to kill himself, had not some
assistants and followers Herod retiring toward Massada is assailed by the
Parthians.
were not in peace with him during this his flight; for scarcely had he
travailed sixty stounds Joseph his brother came forth to meet him, and to
consult with him as touching their whole estate, and to know of him what should
become of that great multitude that followed them, considering that they had no
soldiers in pay, and the Castle of Massada (whither he pretended to fly) was
too little to hold all the people: for which cause he sent away many to the
number of nine thousand, willing them to disperse themselves here and there in
the The Parthians spoil the citizens of Jerusalem, and destroy Marissa
necessary, he went unto Petra the chiefest City of Arabia. As soon as it
was day the Parthians sacked all that which appertained to the Citizens of
Jerusalem; and amongst other things they spoiled the palace; notwithstanding
they meddled not with Hircanus money, which amounted to The year^ of the world.
3925. before Christ's birth 39. Antigonus restored to the kingdom by the
Parthians cu^th off Hircanus cares to prevent his reinstalment in the
Priesthood.
Herod, and especially that which had been transported into Idumaea by his
mature providence. Neither were the Parthians content with the spoil of the
City, but they forraged all the country round about, and raced Marissa a
very rich City. Thus Antigonus brought back into his country by the king of
the Parthians, received Hirtanus and Phasaelus that were prisoners: yet was he
vehemently displeased, because the women had escaped, whom according to his
promise he intended to have delivered with the money: and fearing least
Hircanus through the favor of the people should be reestablished in his
kingdom (who was then prisoner in the custody of the Parthians) he cut off
both his ears, depriving him by that means from enjoying the priesthood any
more, by reason of that maime, because the law commands that they who are in
that dignity, Phasaelus is to be admired for his great courage at this time:
for understanding that he must needly die, he was no ways dismayed with
death, but that which he held most miserable and dishonorable was, that he
must needs die by the hands of his enemy. Seeing therefore that he could not
dispatch himself by other means, (because he was bound and chai^ed) he knocked
out his own brains against a stone, and so ended Phasaelus dash eth out his
own brains. Antigonus puts poison into Phasaelus wounds in steed of curing
him.
his life (with as great honor as may be imagined in such a desperate estate)
depriving his enemy of that power which he intended to practice in tyrannizing
over him at his pleasure. It is said that the wound being very deep, Antigonus
sent privily surgeons to cure him; and that under color of healing him, they
should put poison into the same, wherethrough he might die. But before
Phasaelus gave up the ghost, he understood by a certain woman that his brother
Herod had escaped from his enemies: for which cause he endured his death with
far greater cheerfulness Herod was no ways discomforted with the greatness
of those adversities which environed him round about, but was the more whetted
on to find out new inventions, and to adventure dangerous attempts. For he went
unto Malchus king of the Arabians Herod flies to Malchus king of Arabia to
borow money
(to whom before time he had showed much courtesy) hoping to receive the like
of him in this time of his great necessity, and to draw some money from him
either by loan or gift, according as he had often and very bountifully
pleasured him. For being ignorant of his brothers death, he endeavored himself
to ransom him speedily from his enemies, by paying his ransom (which
amounted to three hundredth talents) and for that cause he led with him the
son of Phasaelus, Malchus, who charged him in the kings behalf to retire
back again, for that the Parthians had enjoined him that he should neither
receive nor retain Herod. And this colorable pretense used he, because he
Herod is commanded out of Arabia, and flies into Egypts from thence after some
storms he repaireth to Rome, where he certifieth Antonius of thatwhich had
befallen him.
would not pay his debts: and hereunto was he persuaded by the advice of the
greatest in authority among the Arabians, who pretended thereby to make
themselves masters of that treasure that Antipater had committed to their
custody. Herod answered them, that he repaired not into their country to give
them cause of any trouble, but only to consult with him about certain matters
of great importance touching his own estate, and that afterward he was
resolved to depart, and withdraw himself into Egypt as secretly as might be
possible. He returned Malchus repented himself of his in gratitude, and
speedily sent after Herod, but he could not overtake him: for he had gotten
far onward of his way, and was already arrived in post near to Pelusium,
where being denied his passage to Alexandria in those ships that were there, he
addressed himself to the magistrates of the place, who highly respected and
honored him, and sent him to the City where Cleopatra was; who entertained
him kindly: yet notwithstanding could she not persuade him to remain with her.
Whereupon he repaired toward Rome (notwithstanding the winter and those
grievous troubles that at the very same time afflicted Italy, as it was
reported.) Embarking himself therefore to sail into Pamphilia, he was tossed
with a most Sappinas and Ptolomey two of his indeered friends. He found also
that the City of Rhodes had suffered much misery by Cassius wars: and
although his means were very scant, yet profited he them in what he might, and
caused their walls to be repaired, notwithstanding that by so doing, he
greatly hindered himself. After that he caused a little frigote to be built,
and embarked himself with his friends to repair into Italy, and arrived at
Brundusium, and from thence went to Rome. The year of the world. 3925. before
Christ's birth 39.
The first to whom he discovered his misfortunes, was Marcus Antonius: to whom
he reported all the occurrences in Iudaea, and how his brother Phasaelus was
taken by the Parthians and slain; and how Hircanus was imprisoned with him.
The manner also how they had established Antigonus king, under promise to give
them one thousand talentes, and five hundredth of the fairest women, whom he
intended to choose out of his own race. Lastly, how he stole away by night,
and rescued them; and escaping his enemies hands, had afterward endured many
pains and miseries. Furthermore, that his friends were in great danger, and
left besieged; for which cause he had sailed by winter, and despised all
dangers, only to seek for assistance at his hands, on whom depended his
hope, and last refuge.

CHAP. XXVI.
Herod is made king of Jury by the Roman Senate.

ANtonius hearing all those alterations that had befallen Herod, had
compassion of his misery (bethinking himself of the estate and condition of
great men, who are Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 23. al. 25. Antonius loved Herod,
and hated Antigonus. Caesar Augustus Herodes friend.
likewise subject to no less casualties) and the rather was he induced to do
him good, both in remembrance of the friendship he had with Antipater his
father, as also by reason of Herodes promises of certain sums of money, if
so be he were made king by his means, as he had been before time declared
Tetrarch. But that which most moved him hereunto, was the hatred which he bare
unto Antigonus, whom he accounted to be a mutinons man, Caesar was well inclined
to succor him, both in regard of those armies which Antipater had brought into
Aegyptin his fathers service, as also because of the good hospitality and
kindness that he had showed him in all things, as in especial to gratify
Antonius, who was well affected toward Herod. Whereupon the Senate being
assembled, Messala and Atratinus brought forth Herod, and after they had
praised him, Herod admitted into the Senate, and declared king.
and recited the benefits which the Romans had received by his father, and the
great affection and good will which he bare to the people of Rome; they accused
and declared Antigonus for the Romans enemy, not only for his ancient crimes,
but also for that in contempt of the Romans he had received the kingdom from
the Parthians. Whilst the Senate was sore displeased at the report of these
things, Antonius arose, and declared openly before the^ all, that in
furtherance of Herod should be made king: which opinion of his was generally
allowed, and finally ratified. The principal demonstration of the love and
affection which Antonius bare unto Herod, was, that he not only obtained him
the kingdom, beyond all hope: for never thought he that the Romans would grant
that dignity unto him, who were wont to reserve that honor to those of the
kings blood; and therefore he intended to have demanded it for his wives
brother Alexander, and nephew to Aristobulus by the fathers side, and to
Hircanus by the mother (which Alexander Herod afterward put to death, as it
shall be declared Herod intending the kingdom for his wives brother enjoys
the same himself.
in place convenient) but also for that within the term of seven days, he
sent him out of Italy with the unexpected titles of his felicity.

As soon as the Senate weas risen, Antonius and Caesar issued forth, leading
Herod between Herod ascends the Capitol with Antonius and Caesar.
first day of Herodes reign Antonius feasted him; and after this sort was he
established king in the hundredth eighty and fourth Olympiade, in the year
wherein C. Domitius Caluinus twice Consul, and Caius Asinius Pollio were
Consuls. Mean while Antigonus besieged those that were in the castle of
Massada, who were plentifully furnished with all things necessary (except it
were water) for which cause Joseph Herodes brother that was within, and two
hundredth of his friends, had Herodes family besieged by Antigonus in Massada.
concluded to fly unto the Arabians: for that they understood that Malchus had
repented himself of the fault he had committed against Herod. But whilst
they stood upon these terms, God powered down a huge rain on a certain
night, that in short time filled their cestemes in Antigonus soldiers after
such a manner, sometime in open Ventidius under pretext to help Joseph, fisheth
to get money of Antigonus.
field, sometime by covert assault, that they slew a great number of them. At
that time Ventidius a Roman captain was sent into Syria to drive the
Parthians from thence, and after their departure he arrived in Jury, making
show that he would assist Joseph: but in effect all his pretense was to draw
money form Antigonus. Being therefore encamped near unto Jerusalem, and having
drawn The year of the world. 3926. before the Nativity of Christ. 38.
Antigonus, he retired himself with the greater part of his forces: and to the
intent his deceitful dealing might not be discovered, he left Silo with a
company of his soldiers: who likewise was honored by Antigonus, for fear
least he should be cause of some new trouble before such time as the
Parthians, whose coming he expected, should yield him aid.

CHAP. XXVII.
Herod returns from Rome by sea, and fights against Antigonus.

AFter that Herod was come from Italy by sea to Ptolemais, and that he had
assembled no Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2^. al. 16. Herod returning back out
of Italy, leads forth his army against Antigonus. Herod assaulteth Ioppe,
and takes it.
Antigonus, and passed through Galilee. Silo and Ventidius also gave him
assistance in this action, having received direction by Gellius from Antonius,
that they should assist Herod to recover his country. But Ventidius was
employed in appeasing the troubles that were raised in the cities by the
Parthians: and as touching Silo he kept in Iudaea, having been corrupted by
Antigonus. But the further that Herod daily marched into the country, the
more and more increased his forces; and all Galilee (except a very few)
submitted themselves unto him. Whilst therefore he marched forward toward
Massada, (being urged thereunto in that he was to relieve his parents that were
besieged therein) the city of Ioppe would not grant him passage: for the
citizens thereof were his enemies: so that it behooued him first of all to Silo
laying hold, dislodged his army and made thitherward: whom when the Jews did
pursue, Herod sallied out with a small company, and put them to flight, and
saved Silo, notwithstanding he fought very coldly and cowardly. Afterward
being seized of Ioppe, he hasted onwards to deliver his friends that were
besieged in Massada; but part of the inhabitants submitted themselves unto him
for the friendship Many submit themselves to Herod.
they had borne unto his father; an other sort of them, for the honor that
they bare unto him: the rest admitted his goue^ment in acknowledgement of those
benefits they had received from them both. But the greatest part was thereunto
moved by the hope they had conceived of their new elected king, and the
confirmation of his government. Thus by these means was his army

Whilst thus he marched forward, Antigonus seized those places that were
fittest to lay ambushes in, or to fight at advantages by the way
(notwithstanding that by those means and stratagems he did but small or no
hurt at all to his enemy; so that Herod raised the siege, and discharged his
friends out of the castle of Massada: and after he had taken the fort of Ressa,
he approached Ressa taken, and Massada delivered from the siege, after which
Herod marches toward Jerusalem. Herod proclaims about the walls of
Jerusalem that he repaired thither for the good of the people, and the
commonweal. Antigonus vpbraideth Herod that he is but half a Jew, and of no
kingly race. The enemy repulseth Herodes power from the wall.
Jerusalem being attended by Siloes army, and by diverse citizens of the city,
who were afraid of his power. And when as he had pitched his camp to the
westward of the city, those that kept the watch and guard on that side, shot
their arrows and cast stones against him: diverse likewise trouped sorth and
fought hand to hand against those that were planted there: For which cause
first of all Herod caused proclamation to be made round about the walls,
signifying unto them Antigonus made this answer (turning his speech to Silo
and the Roman soldiers) that contrary to all justice they gave the kingdom to
Herod, who was a private man, and an Idumean (that is to say, a half Jew)
whereas it has been a custom to bestow the same on them that are of the line
of the Priests. For albeit at that present they were displeased with him, for
that he was feazed of the kingdom by the means of the Parthians, and had
resolved with themsel^ to dispossess him; yet that there were diverse others of
that royal race, who might be man kings according to the law, who have no ways
misdemeaned themselves toward the Romans; and moreover Antigonus commanded
his men to assail those that were near unto the wall: who shooting many
arrows with great courage against them, drove them easily from the tower they
kept.

At that time Silon gave manifest proof that he had been corrupted by money,
for he suborned The year of the world, 3927. before Christ's Nativity, 37.
Silon su^orneth some of his soldiers to take an occasion to depart from
Jerusalem. Herod procured and furnished the army with victuals and (...), ^ion.
Antigonus soldiers. Thus was the whole army troubled; so that each of them
prepared themselves to dislodge. But Herod importuned and cried out upon the
captains and soldiers that were under Silons charge, telling them that it
concerned them not to abandon him whom Caesar, Anthony and the Senate of Rome
had sent thither: That for his own part he would give order that they should
have abundance and foison of whatsoever they demanded; and incontinently
departing from them (after he had presented them with this request) he deprived
Silon of all color and pretext of flight: for he Antigonus was not ignorant
thereof; so that he incontinently sent men thorowout the country, who might
intercept and surprise the pu^ueiours and victualers. Who following Antigonus
Antigonus sends out soldiers to surprise Herodes victualers.
commandment, assembled a great number of soldiers near unto Ierico, and
encamping in the mountains, espied and watched those that brought the
victuals. Mean while Herod lay not still, but took with him ten companies,
five of Roman soldiers, and five of Jews, with whom he intermixted some
foreign soldiers, with some few horsemen, and came to Ierico; where being
arrived he seized the town, which was abandoned by the inhabitants, of whom
Antigonus also purchased this favor at Silons hands by store of bribes, that
part of his army was lodged in Lydda, The Romans sent to their garrisons to
winter.
all which he did to currie favor with Anthony.

Whilst thus the Romans lived in all abundance and bare no arms; Herod would
not be still, but sent his brother Joseph into Idumaea, with one thousand
footmen and four hundredth horse; and himself resorted to Samaria, where his
mother and his other parents kept, who before Antigonus garrisons, and being
arrived at Sephoris (during a great snow) after that Antigonus garrisons were
departed out of the foresaid castles, he found great abundance of all sorts of
necessary munition. And there having notice of certain thieves, who Robbers.
inhabited in caves, he sent a troop of horsemen, with three companies of
footmen, against them: whom he commanded to do justice on those robbers (now
the place where they kept, was not far from a borough called Arbela:) and
forty days after, he himself with all his army resorted Herod fights with
his enemies in Galilee, and overcomes them, and brings all Galilee under
his subjection.
thither. Now whereas the enemy issued out against him with a hardy resolution,
the left wing of his squadron retired and fainted; but he coming on with his
maine battle put them to flight, who were already almost masters of the field,
and made those of his followers that fled,

About this time Silon and his captains, who had passed the winter in the said
garrisons, came unto him (for that Antigonus would no more furnish them with
victuals:) for he gave them maintenance for no more time then a month,
commanding those that dwelt round about them to spoil the country, and
afterward to retire themselves into the mountains, to the end that the
Antigonus refuses to victual the Roman army.
Romans might be destitute of necessary maintenance, and by that means might
be consumed Herod gave Phaeroras his youngest brother the charge of that
provision, commanding him to enclose the fort of Alexandrion with a wall, who
speedily brought to pass that the soldiers had all sorts of necessaries at
commandment: he reedified also the fort of Alexandrion which had been laid
desolate. About that time Anthony soiourned in Athens, and Ventidius was in
Syria, who having sent for Silon to accompany him against the Parthians, did
first of Ventidius sends for Silon to war against the Parthians.
all charge him to assist Herod in that war: and afterward to excite the
provincial confederats to further his war. But Herod dismissing Silon and
his company to follow their destinated wars The year of the world. 3927.
before Christ's birth 37. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 25. Herod leads his
soldiers against those thieves that held the caves. Herod lets down his
soldiers from the top of the mountain in cofers.
Ventidius, did in his own person lead out his soldiers against those thieves
that lived in dens. Now these cau^ were s^uare in the most highest and
inaccessible mountains, impregnable through narrow paths, environed with sharp
rocks, wherein the robbers inhabited secretly, with all their families. King
Herod caused a certain number of cofers to be made, fastened to iron chains,
which he caused to be let down by an engine from the top of the mountain
(because it was neither possible by reason of the steepinesse of the hill to
ascend; the same from beneath, neither from above to creep downward against
them.) These chests were filled with soldiers, armed with great hooks to draw
these thieves unto them, and to break their necks headlong from the height to
the bottom. But the use of these cofers was dangerous, for it was necessary
to let them down an infinite depth into the caves, especially for that the
thieves had necessary A certain old man kills his wife and seven of his
sons, and at last casts himself headlong from the rock.
by them that he would suster them to go and submit themselves to their
enemies, took up the entry of the cave, and as his sons advanced
themselves to issue out, he slew them, until such time as he had inassacred
them all, and after them his wife; and finally, when he had cast their dead
bodies down the rocks, he threw himself down headlong after them,
preferring death before servitude. Yet before his death, he reviled Herod in
bitter words, and vpbraided him of Herod (who saw all that which had happened)
stretched out his hand unto him and promised him pardon; yet would he not
respect him; and by this means were all these caves entered, and the thieves
therein taken.

Now when the king had established Ptolomey captain over the soldiers in that
region, he retired himself into Samaria, with six hundredth horsemen, and three
thousand footmen, with a Herod retireth toward Samaria to fight with Antigonus.
resolution to fight with Antigonus, and so to end their quarrel. But Ptolomey
had but very slender success in his government: for they that before time had
troubled the country of Galilee sallied out upon him, and overthrew him. After
which execution they fled into the Marshes and inaccessible places, where they
robbed and spoiled all the country. But Herod returning and setting upon them
punished them: for he slew some of them, and the rest were constrained to
Herodo punishes the rebels in Galilee. Ventidius overcomes Pacorus and the
Parthians in battle.
Pacorus was slain in war, and the Parthians were discomfited with him;
which was the cause that Ventidius sent Machaeras to succor Herod with two
legions* and 1000. horse, and that by the commandment of Antonius. But
Machaeras was drawn by Antigonus (who corrupted him with money) and
notwithstanding Herodes contradiction and disswasion; yet resorted he unto him,
alleging that he did it Machaeras kills many Jews. Herod resolving to
depart to Antonius, and to accuse Machaeras is reconciled by him, and leaves
his brother Joseph with an armi^ behind him.
to look into his actions. But Antigonus suspecting his sudden approach,
entertained him not; but caused him to be darted at, and driven thence; giving
him to understand by his entertainment, what opinion he had of him, and how he
was affected toward him: who at that time perceived Herod had given him good
counsel; and that himself had misdone in misbeleeuing his advice: for which
cause he returned to the City Emaus, and slew all those Jews whom he met
withal in the way, whether friends or enemies: so highly displeased was he at
that which had happened. Herod sore moved hereat, came to Samaria resolving
with himself to post unto Antonius to complain of these agrieuances;
considering that he had no need of such associates, who did him more harm then
his enemies; whereas of himself he was able to make good his war against
Antigonus. But Machaeras hasted after him, requiring him to stay, and to
travel The year of the world, 3927. before Christ's Nativity, 37.
Joseph behind him, who might with them make war against Antigonus. By these
persuasions and instant entreaties of Machaeras, he was some what appeased: so
that he left his brother Joseph behind him, with an army; charging him no
ways to hazard his fortune, or to fall at ods Herod repaireth to Antonius at
the siege of Samosata, and in the way kills many Barbarians.
with Machaeras. As for himself he hasted toward Anthony, who at that time
besieged Samosata (a City situate near unto Euphrates) having with him an
army of his associates both horsemen, and footmen. When Herod was arrived in
Antioch, he found diverse men assembled there, who were desirous to go and seek
out Anthony: but they durst not set forward on the way, for fear least certain
Barbarians should set upon them, and kill them in their journey: these did
Ierode assure, and offered himself to be their guide upon the way. Now when
they came to their second Herod who was in the rereward; when as therefore
they had broken the former ranks whom they had met, Herod with his troop that
was about him incontinently repulsed them; and after he had encouraged his
followers and whetted them on to the fight, he wrought so much, that he made
those that fled to turn their faces, and to fight; so that the Barbarians were
put to the sword on all sides. The king also pursued them so long, until at
last he recovered that which had been taken by them, which was a certain
number of sumpter horses and slaves. But being

When he drew near unto Samosata; Anthony sent out his army in goodly array to
meet and honor him, and with all to succor him, in that he had heard that
the Barbarians had assailed Herod was honorably entertained by Antonius and
his host.
him. As soon as he came to Anthonies presence, he entertained him kindly; and
after he had heard that which had befallen him in the way, he embraced him in
admiration of his virtue, and did him great honor, as to him whom a little
before he had raised to royal dignity. Not long after this, Antiochus
surrendered the fort of Samosata to Anthony, and upon this occasion Anthony
committed the province with the army to Sosius, The year of the world. 3928.
before the birth of Christ. ^6. Sosius has the army committed to his charge by
Antonius who departs into Egypt. Joseph Herod's brother is slain by Antigonus.
and after he had commanded him to succor Herod, he departed into Egypt.
Sosius therefore sent two legions of soldiers before into Iudaea to succor
Herod, and afterward he followed with the rest of his army.

In the mean while Joseph died in Iewry on this occasion that ensues: For
forgetting his brother Herodes commandment, which he gave him at such time as
he repaired to Anthony, he took to him five companies of soldiers which
Machaeras had left him, and marching toward Ierico to gather in the fruits of
the field, he pitched his tents upon the mountains: And for that the Roman
troops were but newly levied, and consisted of those men who were untrained in
the wars, and for the most part were gathered out of the country of
Coelesyria: the enemies having Joseph died, fighting valiantly; and all his
army was discomfited: for six companies of them were slain. After that the
dead bodies were at Antigonus command, he cut off Joseph's head, which Phaeroras
his brother ransomed for the price of fifty talents. Which done, the Galileans
reuolting from their governors, drowned The Galileans revolt from Herod.
Machaeras fortifieth Geth. Herod departs from Daphne a suburb of Antioch
into Galilee. Herod fights with the Galileans, and overcomes them, and
drives them into a castle.
Herodes partakers in the lake; so that diverse commotions and troubles were
raised in Iewry. Machaeras he fortified the Castle of Geth. This misfortune of
Joseph's was reported to the king, in a certain suburb of Antioch called
Daphne, who before the tidings, had already conceived some suspicion and fear,
grounded upon certain dreams, which gave him certain intelligence of his
brothers death. Departing therefore from thence with all expedition, he
arrived near Herod assailed them by break of day: But being unable to offer
them any prejudice, by reason of the indisposition of the weather, he led his
men into the villages near adjoining. But when Antonius second legion was come,
and annexed to his forces; they that were within the forte were The year of
the world. 3928. before Christ's birth 36.
Herod marched with all diligence to Jericho, with an intent to revenge his
brothers death; and being encamped near unto the same, he banquetted and
entertained the chieftaines of his army; and after the feast was ended, and he
had dismissed his company, he withdrewe himself into his lodging. In The
house wherein Herod sole^nized his feast, fell down when the guests were gone
without any man's detriment. Herod wounded by his enemies. Antigonus sends
Pappus to Samaria.
which place it appeared, how much God loved the king: for the roof of the
house where he had solemnized his feast fell down, without hurt to any one
vvhomsoeuer: for no man was left within it. Whence it came to pass, that each
one persuaded himself, that Herod was beloved by God; considering he had
avoided so great and unexpected a peril.

The next day, six thousand of his enemies came down from the top of the
mountains Herodes soldiers with darts, and stones, who was himself also hurt
in the thigh with an arrow. Antigonus sent a captain to Samaria, whose name
was Pappas, with some soldiers, intending thereby to signify unto his enemies,
that he had more men of war then he needed. Pappus drew near to Machaeras
the Roman captain: and as touching Herod he took five cities by force, and
put some two thousand of them that were in garrison to the sword; and
afterward (having set the houses on fire) he went out to encounter Pappus; who
was encamped in aborough called Isanas. Diverse that came from Jericho and
Jury, submitted themselves to Herod, who drawing near the enemy (who
marched forward with great hardines) fought with him and overcame him, and
being inflamed with a great desire that he had to revenge his brothers death,
he pursued them that fled Fight in the houses.
of the houses were beaten down, and he saw that all was filled with soldiers,
whereby diverse were slain by stones that were darted at them from above, and
afterward cast and killed them by heaps: which was the most grievous spectacle
of all those that had happened in those wars, to see an infinite number of
bodies hidden one under another amidst the roumes of the houses. This exploite
of Herod did very much abate the courage of his enemy, who hereafter
expected far more worse fortune at his hands: For a man might have seen them
fly away in heaps; and had not a sudden and forcible tempest fallen upon
them, the triumphant army of Herod had incontinently entered Jerusalem with
assurance of victory, which had made a final The year of the world, 3929.
before Christ's nativity, 35.
end of all that war. For Antigonus each day bethought him how to fly away,
and to forsake the city. But for that it was already grown dark, Herod
commanded his soldiers to refresh themselves; and for that he himself was
weary, he entered into his lodging to bath himself: in which place he ouerwent
a mighty misfortune, from which he escaped by Gods providence. For (whereas he
was naked and accompanied with one only servant to attend him) at such time as
he bathed, there were a certain number of armed enemies hidden in that
lodging, who Herod being alone and naked in his house escaped unhurt amongst
many armed enemies.
were fled thither for the fear they had: and during the time that Herod
bathed, the first amongst them issued with his naked sword and got the door;
and after him the second; and the third no less armed without offending the
king, for the fear that they had of his presence: and content to escape in
their own persons, without the prejudice of other men. The next day he sent
Pappus Phaeroras, who was slain by his own sword in revenge of the injury
offered to Joseph. When the tempest was done, he departed from thence, and
approached near to Herod sends Pappus head to his brother Phaeroras. Herod
besieges Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, and encamped near unto the City. This was about the third year
since he was created king at Rome, and encamping himself in the place which
was (as he thought) fittest for battery; he addressed himself toward the
temple side, resolving to batter and make breach in that place in like manner
as Pompey had done before him. Having therefore erected three bulwarks in three
places, he builded towers thereon by the assistance of many workmen; and by
means of a great quantity of wood, which he caused to be cut down round
about the place; and having Herod repaireth to Samaria to marry Alexanders,
daughter.
pointed such men as were of ripe judgment to ouersee these works, he left his
army well provided, and resorted to Samaria, to marry with the daughter of
Alexander, who was Aristobulus

CHAP. XXVIII. The year of the world. 3929. before Christ's birth 35.

Antigonus is discomfited by Sosius and Herod.

AFter this marriage was solemnized, Sosius repaired thither through the
country of Phaenicia, having first of all sent his army through the continent,
he himself also resorted Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 26. al. 27. Sofi^s and
Herod lead a mighty army against Jerusalem.
thither with many as well footmen as horsemen: thither also repaired the king
from Samaria, with no small army, to annexe himself with the old bands: for
he had about thirty thousand men. All these assembled themselves together
near unto the walls of Jerusalem, and planted their siege nigh unto the wall
of the city that extends toward the north^. The army contained eleven
legions of footmen, with six thousand horsemen: besides the succors Sosius,
who was sent by Antonius to succor Herod: and Herod himself, who made war
for himself, with an intent that having dispossessed Antigonus (who^ he had
proclaimed enemy to Rome) he himself might be king in his place, according to
the Senates decree. Those Jews that were within the enclosure of the walls
(that is to say, almost all the nation) resisted the Herodians with great
courage and affection, vaunting and boasting much of the temple of the Lord,
and wishing all good hap and success to the people, namely, that God would
deliver them from all dangers: and spoiling all provision without the city,
that was either behoouefull for the use of man or beast, by their secret thefts
and excursions also they made the very besiegers destitute of relief and
victuals. Which inconvenience Herod so well prevented, that he forstalled
their means of theft, and laid ambushes Herod preuenteth the dearth
in the camp. He erected also with no less carefulnes three bulwarks, by the
diligent labor of a great number of workmen: for it was summer time, and
neither was the air inco^modious or negligence of the workmen such, but that
they presently furnished and finished them. Afterward having raised their
engines upon them, they battered the wall, with as much violence and diligence
as was possible: notwithstanding all this, they did no ways amate those that
were within (who for their parts used all the cunning that might be possible to
defend themselves, and by diverse sallies set fire upon the enemies engines; and
burnt not only those that were half made, but those that were wholly
perfected: and when necessity drove them to handy The Jews without fear
resist those that besieged them.
new, and contermined against those mines that were made by the enemy; so that
they fought under ground hand to hand. Thus using despair rather then courage,
they sustained the war to the uttermost; yea notwithstanding they were
besieged by a great army, and pressed by famine and want of victuals: for the
year wherein this siege was continued, was the seventh, in which the earth was
unmanured, which by us is called the year of rest. But finally twenty chosen
soldiers first of all mounted upon the wall; and after them one of Sosius
Centurions: for the first wall was taken in the fortith day after the siege,
and the second on the fift^th, and some galleries were burned, which were near
unto the temple: which (as Herod said) were burned by Antigonus, The outward
part of the temple, and the lower city taken.
town, for fear they had least the Romans should hinder them from offering
their daily and ordinary sacrifices unto God: and they sent ambassadors to
their enemies, to require that it might be lawful for them only to bring in
certain beasts to offer the^ for sacrifices. Which Herod their king granted
the^, hoping by this means that they would submit themselves and yield up the
places: The Jews fly to the upper city and the temple.
But perceiving that his opinion failed him herein, and that they obstinately
resisted him, to continue the soueraintie in Antigonus; he gave the assault,
and took the City by force: where all things were incontinently filled with
murders, in that the Romans were displeased because they had so long time
continued the siege; and the Jews that were on Herodes side enforced
themselves Jerusalem taken.
did the religious reverence of the temple save those suppliants that resorted
thither for safety, but that without all compassion both old and young were
slaughtered: Neither did their murdering hand spare or refrain from women;
nay not so much as from young infants. And although the king besought and
requested them to forbear them, yet no man gave over, but all sorts of persons
were murdered by them, without respect either of sex or age. Antigonus
inconsiderate The year of the world. 3929. before Christ's birth 35. Antigonus
submits himself to Sosius
of that estate wherein he had been, or the fortune and desaster that at that
present attended him, came down from the tower and humbled himself on his
knees before Sosius feet; who having no compassion of the change of that estate
wherein he saw him, outragiously scorned him, calling him Madame Antigona: yet
left he him not without guard after the manner of a woman, but fast bound for
his further assurance. But Herod was busied in devising how he might moderate
his associates and strangers, after he had had the upper hand over his enemies:
For the strangers swarmed into the City by heaps, and not only into the
Temple, but also into the Sanctuary. He therefore exhorted some, and
threatened other some, and restrained the rest by force of arms; and he was
more troubled at that present in Herod sore troubled in pacifying the
strangers. The spoil of the city hindered.
being a conqueror, then if he had been conquered: for that those things that
were not lawful Sosius most instantly, to preserve it to the utmost, asking
him if the Romans would leave him king of a desert, after they had voided the
City of men and goods? Alleging furthermore, that he esteemed the government
of the whole world of no value in regard of the life of one of his Citizens.
Sosius answered, that it was reason that the pillage should be given to the
soldier, who had borne the hazard of the siege: whereunto Herod answered,
that he would satisfy every man out of his own treasury: and by this
means, he raunsomed the rest of the City by fulfilling those his promises:
For he gave many mighty gifts unto every one of the soldiers, and by
proportion unto the captains; but above all he royally rewarded Sosius; so
that every one of them departed very rich in silver. Marcus Agrippa and
Canidius Gallus were Consuls, which was in the hundredth, fourscore and fifth
Olympiade, When Ierusal^ was taken.
in the third month on the days wherein the solemn fast was celebrated; as
if this affliction had iumpt together in one issue and instant with that of
Pompeies: for on the same day had the same City been taken twenty and seven
years before. Sosius offered a crown of gold unto God, and afterward
departed from Jerusalem, leading Antigonus prisoner with him unto Anthony. But
Herod fearing least if Antigonus should be kept by Anthony, and sent to Rome,
he should debate his title with him before the Senate by protest that he was
descended of the royal line; whereas Herod was but a Plebeian and common
person: and that although he had offended the Romans, and thereby might not
deserve to be king; yet at least his children, Herod I say, fearing these
things, wrought so much by force of his money with Anthony, that he caused him
to Herod bribeth Antonius with money to make away Antigonus. The end of the
Asmonean family, and the extinction of their priest. hood.
put Antigonus to death; so that at that time Herod was truly delivered from
all fear. Thus ended the estate of the Asmoneans, after six score and six
years. This family was famous both for their nobility, as also by reason of
their Sacerdotall dignity, and for the noble actions and exploites, which
their ancestors had achieved for our nation; but they lost their authority
through their mutual factions: which sovereignty was derived to Herod
Antipaters son, who was ignoble by birth, and of mean friends; who were
subjects and vassals to kings. See here what we have received from our
ancestors, as touching the end of the race of the Asmoneans.

THE XV. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 15. book.
1 Jerusalem being overcome by Sosius and Herod, Antigonus is beheaded by
Anthonies commandment. Herod makes away the chiefest friends of Antigonus. 2
How Hircanus being dismissed by the Parthians returns to Herod. 3 Herod
after he had made Aristobulus his wife Mariammes brother high priest,
practices and works his death. 4 Cleopatra thirsting after the kingdoms of
Iewry and Arabia, labors to beg a part of them at Anthonies hands. 5 The
arrival of Queen Cleopatra in Iudaea. 6 Herod makes war against Aretas,
at such time as Anthony was overthrown by Caesar in 7 Of the earthquake in
Iewry. 8 Herodes oration to his army. 9 Herod intending to repair unto Caesar
does of necessity kill Hircanus. 10 How Herod obtained the continuance of his
kingdom of Iudaea at Caesar's hands. 11 Herod makes away Mariamme through
false calumniations of her enemies. 12 Of the famine that afflicted the land of
Iewry. 13 The building of Caesarea. 14 Herod builds a new temple in
Jerusalem.
CHAP. I.
Jerusalem being taken by Sosius and Herod, Antigonus is beheaded by Anthonies
command: Herod makes away all his chiefest friends.

IN the former book I have declared how Sosius and Herod took the City The
year of the world. 3930. before Christ's Nativity. 3 4. Herod prefers his
favorites, and kills his enemies. The Pharisees honored by him. Pollio
foreprophecied Herodes tyranny.
of Jerusalem by force, and with it Antigonus prisoner: now will we also declare
that which has subsequently followed: For after that Herod had obtained the
absolute government over the whole land of Iudaea, he advanced all those among
the common people, who favored his proceedings: as for those who Pollio the
Pharisee, and Sameas his disciple, were highly honored by him: For during the
time of the siege of Jerusalem, they counseled the inhabitants to receive and
entertain Herod: for which cause he respected them accordingly. This Pollio in
times past (when Herod was found guilty of death) foretold Hircanus and the
rest of the Judges in way of exprobration, that being absolved by them he
should one day inflict punishment on them all. Which prediction God in process
of time approved by the event: no sooner therefore became he master of
Jerusalem, but he gathered together all the rich household stuff that was in
the palace; and furthermore having spoiled the rich men of their goods, and by
this means levied a great sum of gold and silver, he sent great Anthony and
his friends. Moreover he condemned five and forty of Antigonus principal and
noblest favorites to death, setting straight watch about their doors, that
none of The slaughter of them that were of Antigonus ^action.
them might be carried out under color of being dead. The dead bodies likewise
were trodden under foot: and all the gold, silver, or jewels that was to be
found amongst them, was carried to the king, and converted to his use, so that
there was no end of these miseries. For the covetousness of the conqueror
(whose greedy and thirsting desire could hardly be quenched) said hold on
whatsoever was theirs. And for that it was the seventh year, it necessarily
came to pass that The year of the world. 3930. before Christ's birth 34.
Anthony having taken Antigonus prisoner, resolved to keep him in prison
until the time of his triumph: But after he had received tidings that the
nation of the Jews were ready to innouate and rebel, and continued their good
affection toward Antigonus, in regard of the hatred they conceived against
Herod; he concluded with himself to take his head from him at Antioch: For the
Jews could scarcely contain themselves. Strabo of Cappadocia testifies no
less in these words. Anthony having Antigonus beheaded. Strabo of Antigonus.
brought Antigonus the Jew to Antioch, caused his head to be cut off; and was
the first among the Romans that has caused a king to be beheaded in this
manner: supposing that the Jews might never otherways be induced to change
their opinions, and receive Herode^ yet this opinion of his was not answerable
to equity. For notwithstanding whatsoever impulsion he might Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. (...).
their former king. But Anthony supposed that that infamy would obscure his
renown, and lessen the general hate that they bare to Herod. See here what
Strabo writes.

As soon as the high priest Hircanus (who was prisoner among the Parthians)
heard that Herod: had taken possession of the kingdom, he returned back unto
him, being delivered after Hircan^ heating ^idings that Herod had obtained the
kingdom returns unto him.
this manner following. Barzapharnes, and Pacorus princes of the Parthians had
taken Hircanus, who was first high priest, and afterward king, and with him
Phasaelus Herodes brother, and led them away prisoners with them into their own
country: Phasaelus not able to endure the dishonor of imprisonment, and
preferring an honorable death before a reprochful and ignominious life,
murdered himself, as I have heretofore declared.

CHAP. II.
How Hircanus dismissed by the Parthians, returned unto Herod.

PHraates king of Parthia, understanding how nobly Hircanus was descended, who
was Hircanus highly honored in Babylon by the Jews.
brought prisoner unto him, entertained him graciously: and for this cause drew
him out of prison, permitting him to converse in Babylon, in which place there
were a great number of Jews, who honored Hircanus very much; and no less
then their high priest and king. The like also did all they of that nation
inhabiting as far as Euphrates, which did not a Hircanus. But after that he
was advertised that Herod was possessed of the kingdom, Hircanus leaving his
country, expects favor at Herodes hands.
he transferred his hopes another way, being of his own nature tenderly
affected toward his friends, expecting that one day Herod would requite him
for that he had delivered him from death whereunto he was condemned; and in
danger likewise of the penalty and punishment. He began therefore to consult
with the Jews, as touching his journey; who in way of duty and love came to
visit him, and who besought him, and importuned him to abide with them,
offering him all service and honor; assuring him that he should in no less
manner be respected among them, then their high priest and king; yea in far
higher regard then he might any ways be in his own country, by reason of the
maime he had in his body through Antigonus tyranny: alleging that kings do
not ordinarily call to their remembrance those pleasures Hircanus be withdrawn
from the desire he had to repair homeward. Herod also wrote unto him, that he
should require Phraates and the Jews that inhabited his kingdom, in no sort
to envy his felicity, in that he should partake with him both in dignity and
royalty, alleging that the time was now come wherein he might acknowledge
the benefits he had received, by being heretofore nourished and preserved by
him. With these letters he sent Samaralla likewise on an embassage to Phraates,
furnished with great and rich presents, endeavoring by that means to Saramalla
Herodes embasdour to Phraates.
win him, that he in no sort should hinder his gratulation and good intent
toward one that had so highly deserved at his hands; yet were not his
protestations answerable to his pretense. Hircanus under his power, or at
leastwise to dispatch him out of his life, which he afterward performed. When
as therefore Herod had persuaded the Parthian to dismiss Hircanus, and the
Jews to furnish him with money sufficient to bear his expense in his journey,
he received him Herod highly honors Hircanus.
with all honor. In common assemblies he gave him always the highest place,
and in the time of festiuals, he made him always sit down before him; and the
more closely to deceive him, he The year of the world, 3930. before Christ's
Nativity, 34. Herod gives the high priesthood to Ananel.
called him brother, endeavoring himself by all means wholly to extinguish in
him all color and Ananel, and gave him the Priesthood. For which cause
Alexandra grew suddenly displeased, not being able to endure that outrage. This
woman was Hircanus daughter, and Alexanders wife, who was king Aristobulus
son, who had two children by her husband, the one wondrous beautiful, who
also was called Aristobulus; the other was Mariamme, who was likewise fair,
and married to Herod. She was sore moved and highly displeased to see her son
so much indignified, for that during his life another was called to the honor
of high Priesthood: for which cause she Cleopatra by the means of a certain
Musition, beseeching her to beg the high Priesthood Alexandra soliciteth
Antonius by Cleopatras mediation for the high priesthood for her son.
at Antonius hands for her son. But for that Antonius made little reckoning
of those suites, a certain friend of his called Gellius, who was come into
Jury about certain of his affairs, and who had seen Aristobulus, fell in love
with him by reason of his beauty: and being abashed likewise at his great and
goodly stature, and allured by Mariammes admirable beauty, he openly protested
that he accounted Alexandra a happy mother in her children: and devising to
this effect with her, he persuaded her to send the pictures of her two children
to Antonius, for that if he should but behold them, he would refuse him in
nothing, wherein he should request his friendship. Alexandra persuaded by these
words, sent their pictures unto Antonius. Gellius also made the matter more
wonderful, telling him that the children seemed rather to be engendered of no
Antonius might be allured to affection them. Who supposing it to be a matter
ill be seeming him to send for Mariamme, who was married to Herod, and
desirous likewise to avoid Clopatras suspicions, wrote unto Herod that under
some honest pretext he should send Alexandras son unto him (with this
addition, if it might not seem troublesome unto him.) Which matter when Herod
understood, Antonius requires Aristobulus at Herod's hands
he thought it no ways incident to his security to send Aristobulus, (who was
a fair young man, and little more at that time then sixteen years old, and
so nobly borne: considering that Antonius was at that present in such
authority, that no one in Rome was in greater credit then he; and who besides
that, was very much addicted to his pleasures, which he openly hunted after
without fear of punishment in regard of his greatness and power. He therefore
wrote him this answer, The causes why Aristobulus was not sent.
be filled with war and troubles, for that the Jews pretended alteration in
government, and sought to innouate by preferring a new king. When as therefore
he had in this sort excused himself unto Antonius; he resolved to entertain
both the younger Aristobulus and his mother Alexandra, with more respect.
Moreover his wife Mariamme did continually importune him to give the priesthood
to her brother, alleging that by that honor he might prevent the occasion of
his travel. For which cause assembling his friends together in counsel, he
grievously accused Alexandra before them, protesting that she secretly
conspired against the kingdom: and that by the mediation of Cleopatra, she
labored to dispossess him of the sovereignty, to the intent that Herod
inueieth against Alexandra for pretending to usurp the kingdom.
her sons by Antonius means might govern in his steed. Which practice of
hirs was so much Aristobulus, alleging that heretofore he had established
Ananel in that place for no other respect, then for that Aristobulus was under
years.

After that he had thus seriously and considerately discoursed in the presence
of the Ladies, and the consistory of his friends; Alexandra almost beside her
self, not only through the joy she had Alexandra excuses herself, and having
promise of the priesthood for her son is reconciled to Herod.
conceived by this unexpected good fortune, but also for the fear she had to
be suspected, began to defend her self with tears and protestations, saying,
that al whatsoever she had either practiced or done, was to prefer her son unto
the Priesthood who^ she saw dishonored: but as touching the kingdom that she
had never pretended, neither would (if so be she should be presented therewith)
receive the same, thinking her self for the present sufficiently honored,
both for that she saw Aristobulus in that estate, as for the assurance that all
her progeny should receive, in that he was lifted up in dignity above the
rest. Being therefore overcome by those merits, she accepted willingly The
year of the world, 3930. before Christ's birth 34.
the honor for her son, and showed her self obedient in all things,
requesting him that if she had committed any thing rashy and through
inconsideration of passion, either in respect of her children, or in unbridled
carriage of her tongue, he would be pleased to pardon her. After these debates
and interchangeable discourses on either side, they shook hands the one with
the other, in token of a more fixed and unfeigned friendship then was before,
burying (as they then pretended) all evil suspicion or cause of unkindness.

CHAP. III.
Herod prefers Aristobulus his wife Mariammes brother to the Priesthood,
and afterward pu^eth him to death.

HEreupon Herod took away the Priesthood instantly from Ananel, who was not
that countriman borne (as we have heretofore declared) but was borne amongst
those Jews Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3. Herod takes the Priesthood from
Ananel.
that inhabit and were planted beyond Euphrates by the Assirians. For diverse
thousand Jews inhabit the country of Babylon, and from thence took he his
original also, being otherwise of the race of the Priests, and entirely
affected toward Herod for a long time before, with whom he had familiar
acquaintance. He had preferred him to this honor at such time, as he was made
king; and degraded him likewise to appease the troubles of his family;
demeasning himself herein contrary to the law of the country. For whereas
any one has once been The Priesthood taken from three.
was Antiochus Epiphanes, who dispossessed Iosuah, and preferred his brother
Onias to his place. The second was Aristobulus, who took it away from his
brother Hircanus, and usurped it himself. Herod was the third, who gave the
Priesthood to Aristobulus, establishing him in Ananels place before he was
dead: and by this means supposing that he had found out a remedy to appease
the discords of his family, he notwithstanding all this lived not without
suspicion what event would follow after this reconciliation: For he feared
Alexandra, least demeasning her self in such sort as before time she had done,
she should seek occasion hereafter to raise new troubles. Alexandra suspected
by Herod, is spied and watched, and her actions observed.
He commanded her therefore to contain her self within the roial palace,
and to do nothing of her own authority. Besides that, he had appointed
certain intelligencers, who should diligently Herod; for being full of
feminine pride, she disdained to see her self thus wrongfully suspected,
desiring rather to suffer any thing, then to be deprived of the liberty of free
speech: and under color to be honored, to live continually in servitude and
fear. Whereupon she sent certain of her trusty friends to Cleopatra to
complain, and lament unto her the importable miseries of her present estate,
requiring her, according to her power, to give ready and speedy relief.
Whereupon Cleopatra sent her word, that both she and her son should resort
unto her into Egypt, with as great secrecy as might be possible. Upon which
advice and the allowance Alexandra pretending to fly into Egypt is betrayed by
her servant.
thereof, she practiced this policy. She caused two coffins to be made, such as
men were wont to Esop one of her household servants declared this enterprise of
hers to Sabbion one of Alexandras friends, supposing that he had been made
privy thereunto: who had no sooner inkling thereof, but (for that before times
he was Herodes enemy, by reason he was suspected to have been one of those
that sought to poison Antipater) he determined by discovery of this secret
flight, to convert Herodes hate into assured friendship: and presently
discovered Alexandras secret enterprise to the king. Who dissembling the matter
until it was upon the point of execution, surprised her at such time as she
thought to fly, and yet notwithstanding Cleopatra would not have contained
her self, had she but had such an occasion offered her to express her hatred
against Herod. For which cause under the color of a high and magnanimous
spirit, he made show to pardon her Herod contriueth Aristobulus death.
of his mere clemency: yet inwardly resolved he to make young Aristobulus
away: yet not rashly and upon the instant, least the act should grow apparent
and palpable.

Now the feast of Tabernacles was at hand, which was one of those that was
ceremoniously The year of the world. 3932. before Christ's birth 33.
and solemnly celebrated among us; for which cause he concealed his intents
during the festival days, intending both in himself and in the presence and
company of the people, to follow all kind of pleasure and delight; yet did
his enny incite him to hasten the execution of his will. Aristobulus was at
that time some seventeen year old, who at such time as he approached the
altar to offer sacrifices, according to the law, apparelled in the high
priests ornaments to perform the ceremonies, he (who for amiable countenance
and goodly stature surpassed the young and tenderness of his years)
expressing in his countenance the dignity and nobility of his race, drew the
eyes and good affection of all the people unto him; so that they openly called
to remembrance the noble actions of Aristobulus his grandfather. All the people
therefore being surmounted by those their affections, and at that present time
being all of them troubled with the joy they Aristobulus discovered it self
openly, and they manifestly (although too hastily in such a kingdom) declared
what evils they generally endured: For all which causes Herod concluded to
execute that which he had heretofore complotted, and conceited against
Aristobulus. As soon therefore as the feast was ouerpassed, he soiourned in
Jericho, where Alexandra entertained him. In that place he used Aristobulus
with all kindness, to the end to draw him into some place, where he feared
nothing, playing also with him, and counterfaiting to sport, after the fashion
of the young men, to gratify him. Now, for that the place where they disported
themselves was by nature too hot, they quickly wearied, left their sport, and
went out together to take the fresh air, and recovering a pleasant shade under
certain arbors, Aristobulus began to swim, being persuaded thereunto by
Herod. Whereupon Herodes confederates (who were deputed to execute the
murder) laid hands of him and thrust him under the water, pretending to duck
him in sport, and never gave him over until such time as they had stifled him
in the water. This happened Aristobulus is drowned by Herodes direction, Ananell
restored to the priesthood.
about the evening, and after this manner died Aristobulus, after he had lived
in all for the space of eighteen years, and administered the priesthood one
whole year: and after this Ananel presently recovered his former dignity.

Now when this accident was reported to the women, all of them were suddenly
devoured in tears, and transported with strange lamentations, which they spent
over the dead body. All the Alexandra had notice of this wicked deed, she was
more passionate The lamentation for Aristobulus death
and perplexed then any other, being so much the more discomforted, for that
she knew how all things had happened. But the fear of a far greater mischief
constrained her to repress her passion; in such sort, that diverse times she
was ready to bereave her of her own life, and dispatch her self out of
misery with her own hands. But she contained her self, to the end, that
suruiuing (and living after her son, who was so traitorously and fraudulently
slain, and prolonging her own life without giving any suspicion or shadow,
that she supposed her son to be thus cursedly murdered) she might with more
opportunity expect the occasion to revenge her self: For Herod, he labored
by all means to persuade the strangers, that this death had befallen
Aristobulus without his knowledge; and Herodes counterfeit sorrow.
did not only prepare that which was requisite for the funeral, but vexed
himself likewise, and made show of a man truly devoured in his sorrow: and it
may be that in remembrance of Aristobulus beauty and flourishing young years,
he was truly touched with compassion, notwithstanding that he imagined that
this death of his should be a means of his entire security, demeasning
himself in all things very circumspectly, with intent to purge himself of
that crime. But especially he showed his great magnificence in the interring of
his body, both in the furnishing and preparation of the hearse, as in the
perfumes and other things thereunto belonging, in such sort as the

CHAP. IIII. The year of the world. 3931. before the Nativity of Christ. 33.

Cleopatra thirsting after the kingdoms of Arabia and Iewry, labors to beg
a part of them at Anthonies hands.

But none of all these things could either move or mollify Alexandra, but
that daily more and more she increased her sorrow, and in the heart of her
tears kindled her wrath Alexandra certifieth Cleopatra of Herodes treasons and
her sons traitorous murder.
and heat with a desire of revenge: She therefore certified Cleopatra by her
private letters of Herodes treasons, and her sons most miserable and untimely
death. Cleopatra long before that time desirous to assist her, and having
compassion of her misery, undertook the matter, and ceased not to incite
Anthony to revenge Aristobulus death, telling him that it was an unpardonable
Herod being created king in such a state, whereunto he had no right, should be
suffered to practice such conspiracies against the true and lawful kings.
Anthony persuaded by these her words (as soon as he came unto Laodicea) sent
for Herod, to the end that making his appearance, he might answer that which
might be objected against him, as touching Aristobulus death: for he disliked
the act, notvvithstanding that Herod himself had attempted it. But although
Herod was afraid of this accusation, and did not a little suspect
Cleopatraes displeasure (for that she ceased not continually to provoke Anthony
against him) yet obeyed he this commandment, and transported himself thither
(the rather for that he durst not otherwise do) notwithstanding he left his
uncle Joseph behind him, committing the government both of the kingdom and his
private estate unto him, giving him secret instructions to kill Mariamme, if so
be that Herod ready to repair unto Antony, commands Joseph, to whose
charge he committed the kingdom, to kill his wife.
Anthony should happen to do him any mischief. For he loved her so extremely
by reason of her beauty, that he supposed himself injured, if after his
decease she should be beloved by any other; and he openly declared that all
that misery which befell him, proceeded from Anthonies passion, and entire
affection, and admiration of her beauty, whereof he had before time heard some
report. As soon therefore as he had in this sort disposed his affairs,
notwithstanding he had little hope of good hap, yet repaired he to Anthony.

But Joseph governing that kingdom that was committed to his hands, conuersed
diverse times upon this occasion with Mariamme, and communicated oftentimes with
her, not only for public profit sake, but also to do her that honor which
so great a princess deserved. At such time therefore as he secretly devised
with her, as touching the friendship and ardent affection Herod bare unto he^,
his speeches were iested at after the manner of Ladies, but especially flouted
at by Alexandra. For which cause Joseph, being ouer-forward to express the
kings good will toward her, proceeded so far that he discovered the
commandment that was given him; thereby to make manifest, that it was not
possible for Herod to live without her, and that if any inconvenient should
happen unto him, he would not in death also be disioined from her. This
discourse of Joseph's was not interpreted by the Ladies, as a demonstration of
his good will, but rather as a manifestation of Herodes malignitie, who dying,
desired also that they should perish, and interpreted that which he had spoken,
as the testimony of his tyrannous and malicious heart. At that time there was a
rumor spread in the City of Jerusalem by Herodes maligners, that Anthony had
in such sort tormented him, that he was dead. Whereupon all those of the kings
house A foolish rumor of Herodes death.
Alexandra incited Joseph to forsake the palace, and take the Ladies, and to
retire himself under the ensigns of the Roman legion, who at that time were
about the city for the security of the kingdom, under the conduct of the
Tribune Julius, to the end first of all, that if any trouble should happen in
the kings house, they might be by this means in safety, having the Romans to
friend; and afterward, for that they hoped that if Anthony should see
Mariamme, she might obtain all things at his hands whatsoever she desired,
assuring him that he would restore the kingdom unto her, and deprive her of
nothing that concerned, or was answerable to her royal estate.

But whilst they were distracted with these deliberations, there came letters
from Herod, contrary to some few men's report, and all men's expectation. For
as soon as he came unto Anthony, Herod appeaseth Anthony by presents, and
certifieth his friends by letters of his health.
from Jerusalem, and suddenly debating the matter with him, he appeased him in
such sort, as he was no more displeased against him: and from that time
forward, Cleopatras speeches were but coldly conceited of in regard of his so
ample satisfaction. For Anthony said, that there was no reason that a king
should be answerable for that which he had done in his kingdom; for that in so
doing, he should no more be king: but that when the honor is once given him,
he has the authority likewise left him, to use his regal power. Urging
further, that it concerned Cleopatra The year of the world 3932. before
Christ's Nativity. 32.
likewise her self, not to search too curiously into the affairs and
government of kingdoms. Herod certified all this by his letters, and
signified further, what other honors he had received at Anthonies hands in
assemblies and feasts, to which he invited him always; notwithstanding that
Cleopatra seemed to be displeased therewith, detracting him; and being desirous
to get the kingdom of Iewry into her hands, strove by all means possible to
put him to death: but that he had found Anthony always an upright man, and
feared not henceforward that any evil should be fall him: and returning
presently upon this, he brought with him a more ample testimony of Anthonies
most assured affection, both in respect of his own kingdom, as of his
particular affairs. And as touching Cleopatra, she pretended not to seek any
further then that which she had, because that Anthony had given her Coelesyria
in steed of that which she had demanded, for bearing Anthony wholly rejected
those suites.

After these letters came unto their hands, the trouble and disturbance wherein
they were, and their desire to retire unto the Romans, as if Herod had been
dead, was wholly extinguished. Yet was not this their resolution hidden from the
king; but that Herod after he had brought Anthony on his way (who at that time
set forward in his wars against the Parthians) he returned into Iewry. Upon
his arrival, his sister Salome, and his mother certified him exactly of
Alexandras intent, and the determination of her friends. Salome likewise spoke
against Joseph her husband, and slandered him, obiecting against him that he
had had Mariammes company. Al which she spoke through the malice she had long
time conceived against him, for that in a certain debate Joseph and Mariamme
accused before Herod.
Mariamme had in her rage despitefully hit them in the teeth with their obscure
birth. Herod (who was always inflamed with the earnest affection which he
bare unto his wife Mariamme) was suddenly troubled hereat: and although
jealousy pressed him forward, yet love restrained him and kept him from doing
any thing rashly, through passion or affection: for which cause he called
Mariamme aside, and demanded of her in secret, what familiar company she had
kept with Joseph? She by solemn oaths and by all possible allegations in her
own defense appeased the king Mariamme excuses and purges her self before
the king, and is reconciled.
by little and little, and pacified his choler. For in such sort was he
transported with the love that he bare unto his wife, that he believed she had
sufficiently purged her self of those slanders, that had been enforced against
her; yielding her most hearty thanks for her honest affection toward him, and
declaring unto her openly the great esteem and love that he bare unto her.
Finally Mariamme said unto him: It is not the act of a lover to have given
commandment, that if any thing should befall thee otherways then well with
Anthony, I should presently be done to death with thee; notwithstanding I have
no ways offended thee.No sooner were these words out of her mouth, but the
king entered into a strange passion, and giving over his embraces he cried out
with a loud voice and tore his hair, saying, that he had a most evident proof
that Joseph had committed adultery with her: for that he would not have
discovered those things which had been spoken to him in secret, except they had
greatly trusted the one the other, and in this emotion or rage of jealousy
hardly contained he himself from killing his wife. But Joseph should be slain
without either audience Herod commands that Joseph should be slain, and
imprisoneth Alexandra.
or justification of his innocence and as touching Alexandra, who was the
cause of al these troubles, he kept her prisoner.

About the same time there grew certain troubles and alterations in Syria: for
that Cleopatra continually solicited and importuned Anthony, and whetted on
his displeasure against all, persuading Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4. Cleopatra
very covetous. Cleopatra murthereth her brother and sister.
him to remove all from their governments, and to bestow the same on her
self. And for that Anthony loved her extremely, she was in great estimation
and credit with him: and being in her own nature inclined to covetousness,
she abstained from no kind of corrupt dealing and wickedness. For knowing
that the kingdom should descend unto her brother, she Arsinoe, she caused her
to be slain by Anthonies means at such time, as she made her prayers in the
temple of Diana in Ephesus. Moreover in what place soever she understood that
there was any hope to get money, whether it were in robbing of temples, or in
breaking open sepulchers; she would be possessed thereof: neither was there any
religious place so sacred, from whence she took not away the ornaments.
Furthermore there was not any thing so profane and interdicted, which she laid
not hands on to satisfy her unbridled avarice. Neither was the whole world
sufficient The year of the world, 3932. before Christ's birth 32.
Antonius to take from others, to be liberal toward her: and therefore
intring into Syria with him, she presently bethought her self how she might
get it into her possession. For she caused Lysanias Ptolomeies son to be put
to death, obiecting against him that he had private intelligence with the
Parthians. She begged Jury also at Cleopatra contrieth Lysanias death
Antonius hands, and required him besides that to dispossess the kings of
Arabia. He was in such sort possessed by this woman that he seemed not only to
be bewitched with her words, but also incha^ted by her poisons, to obey her in
whatsoever she thought meet: yet was he ashamed to commit so manifest an
iniquity, for fear least being so far ouerruled by her, he should happen to
offend Antonius gives Cleopatra a portion deducted out of Jury and Arabia.
in matters of more consequence. Least therefore either by denying her, he
should draw her to discontent;

CHAP. V.
Cleopatras progress into Iudaea.

AFter that Cleopatra had obtained all these things, and had accompanied
Antonius as far as Euphrates, who at that time went to make war in Armenia:
she returned back again, and by the way visited Apamea and Damasco, and at
last took her Cleopatra comes to Herod who enstateth her in that the part
of Arabia and these revenues of lericho that were given her An intemperate
woman given to lust.
Herod met with her, and assured that portion which had been given unto her
in Arabia, with all the revenues of Jericho unto her. This country brings
forth that balm, which of all other ointments is the most precious, and only
grows in that place, and no other, to the bigness of great Dates. Being
arrived in that place, and grown inwardly familiar with Herod, she fought to
allure and draw him to her lust, being of her self naturally addicted to such
pleasures and intemperance; and happily also being somewhat touched with love,
or rather (as it seems most likely) she in this sort laid the foundation to
entrap him under color to revenge her self of some outrage by that means.
But in effect she generally manifested, that she was overcome by her desire and
sensual lust. But Herod was not over kindly bent toward Cleopatra, knowing
of long time how badly she was inclined toward Herod goes about to put
Cleopatra to death, and is dissuaded by his ^riends.
in so doing all those should be delivered from diverse evils, whom either in
time past she had molested, or hereafter s^d bring in trouble. Moreover that it
would be profitable for Antonius also, whom without all doubt she would
forsake, if any occasion or necessity should enforce him to make trial of her
friendship. But whilst he debated and discoursed upon this resolution, his
Antonius would not endure the same, notwithstanding Antonius conquereth Armenia.
it might be approved that it stood with his profit: nay rather that by this
means he should increase his desire, for that by force and subtilty he might
seem to have lost her. Further, that no on color of excuse should be left
him, in that she was the woman of greatest note and nobility of that time; and
that what soever profit might redound unto him by her death, should be annexed
with Antonius injury. Whereby it most evidently appeared, how great and
remediles domages would befall both, to the kingdom and the kings family also;
whereas nothing let him by repulsing her vnlvwfull demand to dispose
allthings for the present state with great discretion. By these and such
Cleopatra many rich presents, and to conduct her onward on her way toward
Egypt.

As soon therefore as Antonius was seized of Armenia, he sent Artabazes
Tigranes son, Herod brings Cleopatra onward off her way toward Egypt.
with all his children, who were great princes, prisoners into Egypt, and
presented them to Cleopatra with all those precious Jewels likewise, which were
taken by him or found in the kingdom. But Artaxias his elder son (who at
that time had saved himself by flight) reigned in Armenia, The ye^e of the
world. 3933. before Christ's birth 31.
whom Archelaus and Nero the Emperor drove out of his kingdom, and placed his
younger brother Tigranes in his room, as it shall be declared hereafter. As
for the tributes of the countries which Herod was bound to pay unto Cleopatra,
for the lands bestowed on her by Antonius, he without deceit justly paid them,
supposing it to be very incident to his security, to continue himself in her
good favor. As for the Arabians, they seeing that Herod had the leuying of
such a tribute, paid him for some little time two hundredth talents a year;
but afterward Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5.
they grew slow and negligent in their paiments, and scarcely satisfied the
half, and that also very negligently.

CHAP. VI.
Herod makes war with Aretas at the same time that Antonius is overthrown
by Augustus Caesar in his Actian war.

ARetas demeasning himself thus ungratefully, and refusing to do that which
in right he ought to perform; Herod made a show to take arms against him,
but deferred his revenge in regard of the contentions amongst the Romans. For
at that time naught else was expected then the Actian war (which fell in the
hundredth, eighty and seventh Olympiade) in which Augustus Caesar determined to
try his title with Antonius for the Monarchy. In the Herod leuieth an army
to assist Antonius against Octauian. Herod is incited by letters to the
Arabian war.
mean while Herod, who had already for many years been master of a
peaceable and fruitful country, from whence he drew rich revenues and many
forces, gathered diverse companies of men, Antonius. But he by letters signified
unto him, that he had no need of his assistance: notwithstanding he commanded
him to make a road upon the Arabian, whose perfidious dealing Antonius had not
only understood by Herod himself, but also by Cleopatras aduertisements. For
she very cunningly conceived, that it would redound unto her profit, if one
of these two should overthrow the other. Herod according to these instructions
from Antonius, returned back into his country, and retained his army always
ready about him, and incontinently with the same invaded Arabia, and with his
forces both horsemen and footmen came directly to Diospolis, where the Arabians
(having notice Herodes battles and conquests.
of his intended war against them) came out to meet him. In this place
fought they a most cruel battle, wherein at the last the Jews had the upper
hand. After this a great army of Herod The year of the world, 3934. before
Christ's birth 30.
was foreaduertised, he marched forth against them, accompanied with the
greater part of his forces. As soon as he drew near to Cana, he determined
to incampe in that place, and after he had well fortified and entrenched his
forces, to set on the enemy upon the first opportunity: but whilst he employed
himself in the execution hereof, all the army of the Jews cried out,
requiring him without delay, to lead them forward against the Arabians. And
thus highly were they encouraged, both in respect of the confidence they had in
the good administration and ordering of their army, as in regard of their
forwardnes, who had been actors in the former war, and partakers of the
victory; so that they scarce gave their enemy leisure to settle themselves to
their weapons. Whenas therefore Herod perceived that the heat and forwardnes
of the soldier Athenio endomaged Herod, and the Jews. For he having the
command of that army which Cleopatra had in that place; and besides that,
bearing a privy grudge toward Herod, disposed his army in a readiness, and
expecting the eue^t of the Cleopatras chieftaine overthrows Herod.
battle, resolved with himself to contain his forces, if the Arabians
overcame the Jews; and if so be they had the worst (as indeed it came to
pass) to set upon the Jews, who should be The Arabians returning to the
barrel kill those that fly and cake the camp.
of the victory, he charged and overcame them who had retreated into certain
rough and difficult places (whereunto their enemies were better accustomed then
themselves) where being grievously wounded and ill entreated by the Arabians,
who returned back and set upon them, diverse of them that fled were slain, and
died sundry kinds of deaths; and of those that escaped, The year of the
world. 3935. before Christ's birth 29.
Herod losing the hope of this battle, posted on horseback as fast as he
might, to bring on fresh supplies: but notwithstanding all his expedition and
diligence; yet could he not recover the place in due time, but that the camp
of the Jews was taken and sacked, and the Arabians obtained no small good hap
beyond their expectation, becoming Lords of that victory which was wholly
unexpected by them, and wherein they slew a great number of their enemies. From
that time forward Herod began to make certain incursions and roades into
Arabia, praying the country, and doing them much mischief: He encamped
himself likewise upon the mountains, forbearing to draw his whole forces into
the field; notwithstanding by his diligence and industry in travel, his
labors were not fruitless; but that prevailing in some exploites he sought
out all means to abolish and put away the ignominy of

CHAP. VII.
Of the earthquake that happened in Iewry.

AT such time as Caesar and Anthony made trial of their titles in the Actian
war, and in the seventh year of the reign of king Herod, there happened such
an earthquake in Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. An earthquake in Iudaea kills
ten thousand men.
the country of Iudaea, that never the like was seen in any other place: so
that diverse beasts were slain thereby, and many men were overwhelmed with the
ruins of their houses, and perished to the number of ten thousand. Only the
men of war received no damage, The Arabians kill the Ambassadors of the
jews.
extinguished; and as if they had no adversaries remaining alive to contradict
them. For which cause laying hold of those ambassadors of the Jews, who came
unto them to entreat of peace in their desperate estates, they slew them, and
afterward in the heat of their spleen, set upon their enemies camp. But the
Jews not daring to expect or prevent their assault, for that their present
miseries had dejected their minds, seemed to neglect their common weal, and
in a manner to despair of their safety. These thus affected did the king
encourage, and called unto him Herod comfort the Jews that were out of
heart for their former losses.


CHAP. VIII.
Herodes Oration to his army.

FRiends and fellow soldiers, there is not one of you but knows that at this
time, there are so many present and impendent misfortunes attending our
estates, as are able to Herod comfort and exhorts his soldiers.
fight, and that all those things that have befallen us unto this present, are
of that kind, that by your own virtue and magnanimity they may be recovered,
I have resolved to inform, and confirm you in those means, whereby you may
retain and continue your accustomed valor and noble courage. First of all
therefore I will approve unto you (as touching our war) that it consists on
just grounds, for that we are enforced thereunto through the outrage of our
enemies, the knowledge The cause of war against the Arabians.
whereof should chiefly make you recover your courage.

Secondly, I will apparently approve unto you, that our estates are not so
desperate, but that we have great and assured hopes to obtain the victory.
First of all therefore, I will discourse of that which formerly I proposed, and
will make your selves judges of those things which I will discourse upon. For
you your selves Cleopatras means, but our selves? For the friendship I had
with Anthony, and his benevolence toward me, was the cause that their burden
of misery was so lightened; for that Anthony forbore to commit any thing that
might draw us to suspicion. The year of the world, 3935. before Christ's
Nativity, 29.
Besides, after she had wrought him by her solicitation to cut off certain
portions of the two kingdoms to be given unto her, the matter was so handled
by me, that by diverse presents particularly bestowed upon him by my hands, I
have obtained security for us both, and by disbursing two hundredth talents of
mine own, and giving my word for two hundredth more for others, for the
revenues of that very land which in times past was ours, and these now possess
and enjoy. Notwithstanding, reason it were in my opinion, that we that are
Jews should not be tributaries, or give any portion of our country to any
man; and if we must needly do it, it ill becomes us to pay it for these, who
enjoy their lives by our means. It should not be reasonable for the Arabians,
who after they had confessed with many plausible protestations and
thankesgiuings, that they enjoy their liberty by our benefit, to have deprived
and thrust us from our own, and to have Legates inviolable.
both in the confession of the Graecians and opinion of the Barbarians is most
hateful and heinous, this have they perpetrated in murdering our
Ambassadors. For the Greeks say, that ambassadors

But let us wade further, and way our own forces by themselves. In the first
battle we had the With whom soever. Justice is, there is God also.
victory: in the second, upon the first charge we put them to flight, and
found them unable to make their party good against us.

Afterward, when the victory was ours, behold Athenio, not by lawful war,
but subtle treachery assaulted us. But shall this be called their fortitude,
or rather their fraud and second iniquity? why therefore should we have less
courage, who ought to have the greater confidence? or why should we fear them,
who are always inferiors, if they fight openly, and without fraud? and when
they seem to overcome, they do it by injustice? Moreover, if any man suppose
them to be valiat, this should the rather incite them more and more unto
virtue; for it is no honor for a generous and noble mind to overcome his
inferior, but to have means and might to conquer his superior. And if any
one be terrified by our domesticke you shall have bethought your selves of
these things, and moreover in regard that God has The year of the world.
3935. before the Nativity of Christ. 19.


These persuasions of his did not a little encourage the Jews to the battle,
and made them more forward then before. As for Herod, after he had offered
sacrifice, according to the custom, he drew his army forth and led them with
great confidence against the Arabians, and passing Jordan he encamped near
unto the enemy, with an intent to surprise a fort situate between them both:
making his account that it would further him much, either if upon the present
he should be drawn forth to fight, or if it concerned him to march onward, for
that this The Arabians are overcome by Herod.
gave the charge, and afterward some other followers were slain: so that
those of the Arabians side being overcome, betook them to retreat. This
success of theirs bred no little hope in the Jews, who seeing the enemies
army addressed to attempt any thing rather then to fight, waxed the more hardy
to assail the Arabian in his trenches, and beat him from his camp. They
being forced by these assaults drew forward to their defense in great disorder,
bringing neither courage nor hope of victory with them: yet notwithstanding
they defended themselves, both in regard of their great number, as also in
respect of that necessity whereunto they were enforced by the Jews. The
skirmish on both sides was hot, and diverse on either party were put to the
sword, Herod, The Arabians enforced by thirst require truce at Herodes hands.
to be led away captives; so that within five days space four thousand of
them yielded themselves prisoners. On the sixth day, all the rest determined to
sally out, and assail the enemy; rather making choice of assured death, then
thus lingeringly and ignominiously to pine away. When as therefore they had all
concluded hereupon, they incontinently brake out of their Herod, whom to their
own sorrow they had approved to be a valiant soldier.

CHAP. IX.
Herod constrained to repair unto Augustus Caesar, puts Hircanus to death.

Herod puffed up with his succesfull good fortune, returned back into his
own country, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7. Herod dismayed at Antonius
overthrow.
Caesar obtained against Anthony in the Actian war. For at that time he not
only supposed himself to be utterly overthrown, but both his friends and
enemies that were round about him lost their hopes, for that it was unlikely
that he should escape unpunished, who had been so inwardly united in
friendship with Anthony. Whereby it The year of the world 3935. before
Christ's Nativity. 29. Herod determines to make away Hircanus.
came to pass, that his friends in no sort concealed their despair, and his
enemies under their colorable and dissembled griefs, covered their joy,
promising themselves thereafter a better and more pleasing administration of
the common weal. Hereupon Herod perceiving, that except Hircanus, there was
not any one of the blood royal alive, determined to cut him off, resolving
with himself, that if he happened to escape the danger, that a man who at that
time was more worthier the kingdom then himself, should not entermeddle
amongst his affairs: and if any misfortune should be fall him in regard of
Caesar, he desired to dispossess Hircanus of the kingdom, in regard of the
envy which he bare him, for that he was the only man who deserved to be
advanced to that dignity. Whilst thus he was tormented and traveled in his
thoughts, he had an occasion offered him by Hircanus own followers to execute
his intention. For Hircanus being

But Alexandra being an ambitious woman, and unable to conceal with modesty
the hope she conceived of change, solicited her father that he should not any
longer endure the subjection Alexandra solliciteth Hircanus her father to
require assistance at Malchus hands.
of Herod, who was the very scourge of their family, but rather that he should
stand upon his own guard, and reserve himself to his, better hoped fortunes.
She furthermore gave him counsel to write unto Malchus, who had the government
of Arabia, requesting him to grant him both protection and entertainment. For
that if Herod should chance to be cut off by Caesar's displeasure, doubtless
the kingdom would return unto him, both in regard of his nobility, as
Hircanus at the first repulsed, but afterward being overcome by the
importunity of the woman, who ceased not day and night to sing the same song
of future hope, and of Herod's treasons, he gave certain letters to a friend of
his, written to the Arabian, wherein he required him to send him certain
horsemen, who might conduct him to the Asphaltite lake, which lies distant from
the confines of Jerusalem some three hundred furlongs. And therefore especially
committed he these letters to Dositheus trust, both for Three hundredth
furlongs contain nine German miles.
that he favored Hircanus and his daughter, and seemed likely for diverse
causes to hate Herod: for he was Joseph's kinsman, who was slain by Herod, and
not long before certain of his brothers were slain amongst others at Tire by
Anthonies command: yet for none of these occasions continued he faithful to
Hircanus. For he setting more by the present favor of the king that then
Malchus, and return his answer, for that it merely concerned him, if he knew
his resolution also. Which when Dositheus had diligently performed, the
Arabian returned this answer, that he was ready to entertain both himself
and his whole family, and all those Jews likewise which were of his faction,
promising to send him a band of soldiers, who should be able to conduct him
safely thither, and should be obedient to his command in all things. Now as
soon as Herod was seized of these letters, he called for Hircanus, and
demanded of him whether he had any confederacy with Malchus: who denied the
same. But Herod protesting and bringing forth his letter in an open assembly,
commanded him afterward Herodes commentaries: for by some Hircanus by Herodes
command is put to death.
are they delivered otherwise, namely, that he was executed, not for this crime
which he had committed, but for some treasons against the king. For they write
to this effect, that Herod at a certain banquet (dissembling his suspicion)
demanded of Hircanus, whether he had received any letters from Malchus: and
that he answered, that he had received letters, but such as contained nothing
else but officious salutations. Further, that another asked him, whether he had
received any present therewithal: and when he had answered, that he had
received nothing but four coursers for his saddle, the king wrested this to a
capital offense of corruption and treason: and commanded him presently to be
led to death. Now that he died guiltless, they allege this for a most
approved argument, namely, his gentle disposition, who even in his youthful
years never gave Hircanus dies guiltless. Hircanus life.
sign or appearance of rashness, or pride, or signification of
audaciousnesse, no not even then when he had the royal government in his
hands, but in that freedom of authority disposed the most things by
Antipaters advise. But at that time he was more then fourscore years old, and
knew that Herod's estate was secured: and passing Euphrates also, and living on
the other side of the river, he left such as held him in great honor, and
returned home into his own country, to the end he might live under Herodes
government. Whereby it is less likely, that he would attempt any alteration
so far different from his nature; so that all these things seem to be fained
The year of the world. 3935. before Christ's birth 29.
Herod.

Thus ended Hircanus his life, after his variable and adverse fortune,
wherewith during all his life time he was afflicted. For at such time as his
mother Alexandra lived, he was created high priest of the Jews, and obtained
that honor for the space of nine years: and after his mothers death, he had
scarcely governed the kingdom for the space of three months, but that he was
expulsed by his brother Aristobulus; and afterward restored by Pompeies
assistance, and receiving all his former honors, he lived in full possession
of them for the space of forty years. After this he was once more distated by
Antigonus, and being maimed in his body, lived certain years in captivity
among the Parthians: from whence not long after he returned home; and though he
had many things promised him by Herod; yet after so many alterations of
fortune Antipater and Herod by this man's goodness obtained their so great
riches: for which deserts of his, against all law, and right, he was cruelly
put to death.

But Herod after Hircanus death (addressed himself to perform his iourny
toward Caesar) and Herodes disposition of his affairs before he repaired to
Caesar.
having little hope of any good fortune, in regard of his friendship with
Antonius, he grew desperately jealous of Alexandra, for fear least she taking
opportunity of the time, should incite the Pheroras, he left his mother Cypros,
his sister, and all his kindred in the castle of Masada, and commanded his
brother, that if any misfortune should befall him, he should retain the
kingdom in his own hands and maintain it. As for his wife Mariamme, for that
by reason of certain dislikes betwixt her, his mother and sister, they might
not live together, he left her with her mother Alexandra in the castle of
Alexandrian, and committed them to the custody of his treasurour Joseph, and
Sohemus the Iturian, and with her the keeping of his castles, both which had
always been his faithful friends, and to whom in way of honor he committed
the custody of these princely Ladies. But he gave them also this commandment,
that if they should be certified that any sinister mishap had befallen him,
they should presently Pheroras.

CHAP. X.
How Herod obtained the kingdom of Iudaea at Caesar's hands.

AFter he had in this sort given order for all his affairs, he withdrew
himself unto Rhodes, Herod comes to Caesar and declares unto him what
pleasures he had done Antony, promising him no less duty and love, if so be
he might be received into his favor.
intending there to meet with Caesar. And as soon as he arrived in that
city, he took the Diadem from his head and laid it apart; but as for his
other princely ornaments, he changed them in no sort; and being admitted to
Caesar's presence, he at that time gave a more For he freely confessed before
Caesar, that he had entirely loved Antonius, and that to the utmost of his
power he had done him service, to the end that he might obtain the
sovereignty and monarchy; not by annexing his forces unto his, in that he was
otherways employed in the Arabian war; but in furnishing him both with wheat
and money, and that this was the lest office which it behooued him to perform
toward Antonius; for that being once his professed friend, it behooued him not
only to employ his best endeavors on his so princely benefactor, but also to
hazard both his head and happiness to deliver Antonius with my presence and
assistance in his Actian war, yet at leastwise I assisted him with my
counsel, certifying him that he had but one only means left him for his
security, and prevention of his utter ruin, which was, to put Cleopatra to
death, for that by cutting her off he might enjoy her estate, and might more
easily obtain his peace, and pacify thy displeasure against The year of the
world, 3935. before Christ's Nativity, 29.
Caesar) in regard of the hate which you bear unto Anthony, you condemn my
friendship also, I will not deny that which I have done; neither am I afraid
freely and publicly to protest how much I have loved him: but if without
regard of persons, you consider how kindly I am affected toward my
benefactors, and how resolute and constant a friend I am, and how mindful of
kindness, the effect of that which I have done, may make me known unto thee.
For if the name be only changed, the friendship notwithstanding may remain,
and deserve a due praise.

By these words (which were manifest testimonies of his resolute and noble
courage) he so Caesar, who was a magnificent and worthy monarcke, that Hedio
and Ruffinus. chap. 8. Caesar confirms Herodes authority.
he converted this his accusation into an occasion to win and work him to
be his friend: for which cause Caesar in setting the diadem upon his head,
exhorted him that he should no less respect his friendship, then he had in
former time Anthonies: and withal did him much honor; certifying him
moreover, that Capidius had written unto him, how much Herod had assisted him
in his wars that he had with the monarchs of Syria. Herod seeing that he
was thus entertained, and that contrary to his expectation, the kingdom was
more surely confirmed unto him, then before time, both by Caesar's bounty, as
also by the decree of the Senate, which he had practiced to obtain for his
greater assurance, accompanied Caesar as far as Egypt, presenting both
himself and his friends with many rich gifts, beyond the proportion of his
estate: endeavoring Herod conducteth Caesar toward Egypt, and presents him
with many sumptuous gifts. Herod inter taineth both Caesar and his at my very
heroically.
Caesar's hands, that Alexander, who was one of Anthonies dearest friends, might
not be sought out to be punished: yet notwithstanding he could not obtain the
same, by reason of an oath that Caesar had past before he solicited him. That
done, he returned back again into Iewry, with more greater honor and
assurance, then before; whereby he stroke them with wonderful amazement, who
expected his contrary success, as if by Gods especial providence he always
ouerwent his dangers, to his greater honor. Incontinently therefore, he
prepared himself to entertain Caesar, who returned out of Syria to take his
journey into Egypt, and received him at Ptolemais, with all royal honor, and
gave his army presents with all abundance of munition: so that he was accounted
for one of Caesar's most affectionate friends, and Caesar also eight hundredth
talents, and so royally satisfied he all men, that they confessed themselves
Herod gives Caesar eight hundredth talents.
to have had far greater entertainment, then the revenues and profits of his
kingdom could afford them. By which means he gave the more ample testimony
of his forward friendship, and free affection to deserve well, and making use
of the opportunity of the time, he obtained the reputation of a prince of an
heroicke and noble spirit; so that he was held inferior unto no man, for
the good entertainment that he gave to the chiefest Romans in their return out

CHAP. XI.
Herod being incensed by false accusations, puts his wife Mariamme to death.

But as soon as he returned into his kingdom, he found all his household
troubled, and Mariamme and Alexandra displeased with Herod.
both his wife Mariamme and her mother Alexandra grievously displeased with
him. For they supposing (and not without cause) that they were not shut up in
that Castle for their securities sake, but as it were in a prison; so that in
as much as they neither might make use of Mariamme also supposed that her
husband did but dissemble his love, rather for his own profit and commodity,
then for any entire affection he bare toward her. But nothing more grieved
her, but that she had not any hope to live after him, if so be he should happen
to die, especially for the order he had left as concerning her: neither could
she ever forget what commandment before that time he had left with Joseph; so
that by all means possible, she labored to win the affections of those that
had the charge of her, and especially Sohemus, knowing very well that her
safety depended wholly The year of the world. 3935. before Christ's birth 29.
Sohcmus discoueteth the kings secrets.
Herod, he might greatly gratify the Ladies; who in all likelihood should not
be deprived of that dignity, wherein they were at that time; but would return
him the like kindness when Mariamme should be Queen, or next unto the king.
Furthermore, he hoped that if Herod also should return with all things
answerable to his desires, that he would perform nothing without his wives
consent; Mariamme was very sore displeased to hear that there was no end of
her miseries, but they were altogether united and tied to the dangers of
Herod; and she oftentimes wished that he might never more return again in
safety, supposing that her life with him should be very intolerable, all
which she afterward dissembled not, but openly confessed that which afflicted
her with discontent. For when as Herod beyond all expectation a^ined in his
country, being adorned with mighty fortune, he first of all, as it became
him, certified his wife of his good tidings and happy success, whom only
amongst all other his friends and wives, he embraced and saluted, for the
pleasing conversation and affection that was Herod but coldly entertained by
his wife Maria^me.
Herod was sore troubled, perceiving these things not only suspected, but
also fully manifest: but above all things he was distracted, when he considered
the incredible and apparent hatred that his wife had conceived against Herodes
sorrows to see his wives affections distracted and changed.
him, which in such sort incensed him that he could not resist the love that
had attainted him; so that he neither could continue in wrath, nor listen long
to peace; and being unresolved in himself, he now was attempted by this;
straight distracted by a contrary affection: so much was his Mariamme his
wife; Salome his sister and his mother having an inckling of his discontents,
thought that they had gotten a fit opportunity to express and execute their
hatted toward Mariamme: for Hrodes si^t (...) and his mother incense the king
by slanderous reports against Mariamme.
which cause they conferred with Herod; and whetted his spleen and
displeasure with variety of slanders, sufficient at one assault to engender
hatred, and kindle his jealousy against her. To these reproaches of theirs, he
lent no unwilling ears; yet had he not the heart to attempt any thing against
Antony and Cleopatra slain Caesar Lord of Egypt. Sohemus honored by Horod with
dignities. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9. Caesar enlarges Herodes dominions.
time he had published some fatal doom against her, had not a happy messenger
brought him word, that Anthony and Cleopatra being dead, Caesar was become Lord
of Egypt: for which cause hasting forward to meet and entertain him, he left
his family in that present estate. Upon his departure he recommended Mariamme
to Sohemus, giving him great thanks for the care he had had of her, and granted
him in way of gratuitie a part of Iewry to govern.

When Herod was arrived in Egypt, and had friendly and familiarly conferred
with Caesar, he was highly honored by him: for Caesar gave him those four
hundredth frenchmen that were of Cleopatras guard, and restored that part of his
country unto him again, which was taken away and spoiled by her. He annexed
also unto his kingdom Gadara, Hippon, and Samaria, and on the sea coasts the
Cities of Gaza, Anthedon, Ioppe, with the tower of Straton: which when he had
obtained, he grew more mighty then before: And after he had accompanied Caesar
as far as Antioch, he returned into his own country. Upon his arrival, he
found that fortune which was favorable unto him abroad, too froward at home,
especially in regard of his wife, in whose affection before time he seemed to
be most happy. For he was as inwardly touched with the lawful The year of the
world. 3935. before Christ's birth 29. Mariamme a froward woman.
Mariamme, as any other of whom the Histories make report: and as touching her,
she was both chaste and faithful unto him; yet had she a certain womanly
imperfection and natural frowardness, which was the cause that she presumed
too much upon the entire affection wherewith her husband was entangled; so that
without regard of his person, who had power and authority over others, she
entertained him oftentimes very outragiously: All which he endured patiently,
without any show of discontent. But Mariamme vpbraided and publicly reproched
both the kings mother and sister, telling them that they were but abiectly and
basely borne. Whereupon there grew a great enmity and unrecoverable hatred
between the Ladies; and from thence also there arose an occasion of greater
accusations and calumniations then before. These suspicions were nourished
amongst them, for the space of one whole year after Herodes Caesar; and
finally this long contrived, and fore-imagined hatred at last brake out
violently upon this occasion that ensues. When as about midday the king had
withdrawn himself into his chamber to take his rest, he called Mariamme unto
him to sport with her, being incited thereunto by the great affection that he
bare unto her. Upon this his command she came in unto him; yet would she not
lie with him, nor entertain his courtings with friendly acceptance, but
vpbraided him bitterly with her fathers and brothers death. The king took
these reproachful words in very evil part, and was almost ready to strike her,
but his sister hearing a greater stir and noise within then was usual; sent in
the butler, who long before that time was suborned by her, whom she commanded
to tell the king, that Mariamme had prepared a drink for him to incite and
quicken him unto love, willing him that if the king should be moved thereat,
and Mariamme having prepared a poison for his grace, had dealt with him to
deliver it to his majesty. Charging him moreover, that if the king in hearing
him speak of this portion, should seem to be moved therewith, that then he
should proceed no further in his discourse. He therefore (being in this manner
before hand instructed what he ought to do) at that very instant was sent in
to discover his treachery unto the king; for which cause with a sober and
stayed countenance be entered in unto him, being seriously and well prepared to
discourse, and told him that Mariamme had bribed him to present his Majesty
with an amorous cup of drink. Now when he perceived that the king was troubled
with these words, he prosecuted his discourse, alleging that the potion was a
certain medicine which Mariamme had given him, the virtue whereof he knew not,
which he had received

Herod, who before this was highly displeased, hearing these words, was so
much the more The year of the world, 3936. before Christ's birth 28
incensed: for which cause he presently commanded Mariammes most faithful
servant to be examined by torments, as concerning the poison, supposing that it
was impossible for her to undertake any thing whatsoever, without his priuitie.
He being tired and tormented after this cruel manner, confessed nothing of
that for which he was tortured; but declared unto the king that the hatred
which his wife had conceived against him, proceeded from certain words that
Sohemus had told her. Scarcely had he finished these words, but that the king
cried out with a loud voice, saying, that Sohemus, who before time had been
most faithful both to him and his kingdom, Mariamme: for which cause he
presently commanded his ministers to lay hands on Sohemus, and to put him to
death. As for his wife, he drew her to her trial, and to this effect he
assembled his most familiar friends, before whom he began to accuse Sohemus
suspected by Herod, in Mariammes behalf is put to death. Mariamme is accused
by Herod, and condemned, and imprisoned. Mariamme by Salomes instigations is
led to execution.
her with great spite and spleen, as touching these potions and poisons
aforesaid; wherein he used intemperate and unseemly speeches, and such as for
their bitterness did ill become him in cause of justice; so that in the end
the assistants, seeing the butte and bent of his desire, pronounced sentence of
death against her: which being past, both he, and all other the assistants were
of this opinion, that she should not so speedily be executed, but that she
should be kept close prisoner in some sure place of the palace. But by Salomes
solicitations Herod was incited Mariamme was led unto her death.

Alexandra her mother considering the estate of the time, and fearing no less
mischief from Herodes hands, then her daughter was assured of; she indecently
changed her mind, and abiectedly laid aside her former courage, and
magnanimity. For intending to make it known, that she was neither party nor
privy to those crimes, wherewith Mariamme was charged, she went The year of
the world. 3936. before the Nativity of Christ. 28. Alexandra indecently
strives to acquit her self of Mariammes treason.
Mariamme by the hair, the assistants, according to her desert, condemned her
generally for her shameful hypocrisy: but she that was led to be punished,
convicted her by her mild behavior. For first of all, she gave her no answer;
neither was any ways altered by her reproaches; neither would so much as cast
her eye upon her; making it appear, that she discreetly concealed and covered
her mothers imperfections, and was agrieued that she had so openly showed so
great indignity: expressing for her own part a constant behaiour; Mariamme,
having been a woman that excelled both in continence and courage:
notwithstanding that she defaulted somewhat in affability and impatience of
nature: for the rest of her parts, she was of an admirable and pleasing
beauty, and of such a carriage in those companies wherein she was entertained,
that it was impossible to express the same, in that she surpassed all those of
her time; which was the principal cause that she lived not graciously and
contentedly with the king. For being entertained by him, who entirely loved
her, and from whom she received nothing that might discontent her, she presumed
upon a great and intemperate liberty in her discourse. She disgested also the
loss of her friends very hardly, according as in open terms she made it
known Herodes mother, and sister, and himself likewise grew at ods with her,
and in especial her husband, from whom only she expected no hard measure.

After her death the king began more powerfully to be inflamed in his
affections, who before times, as we have declared, was already miserably
distracted. For neither did he love after the Herod's miserable estate, and
moan after the death of his wife.
common manner of married folk, but whereas almost even unto madness he
nourished this his desire, he could not be induced by the too unbridled manners
of his wife to alay the heat of his affection, but that daily more and more by
doting on her, he increased the same. And all that time especially he supposed
that God was displeased with him, for the death of Mariamme his wife.
Oftentimes did he invoke her name, and more often indecently lamented he her.
Mariamme, as if as yet she had been alive. Whilst thus he was affected, A
plague inuadeth Jerusalem.
there befell a pestilence within the city, that consumed a great sort of the
people, and the better part of the nobility, and each man interpreted that
this punishment was inflicted by God upon men, for the vninst death of the
Queen. Thus the kings discontents being by these means increased, he at last
hid himself in a solitary wilderness, under pretext of hunting; where
afflicting himself incessantly, at last he fell into a most grievous sickness.
This disease of his was an Herod falls grievously sick.
could any remedies relieve him of his agony; but when as the sickness seemed
rather to increase, all men at last grew almost desperate of his recovery. For
which cause his physician, partly in respect of the contumacy of his disease,
partly, because in so great danger there was not any free election of diet,
they gave him leave to taste whatsoever best pleased his appetite, committing
the uncertain event of his health to the hands of fortune.

Whilst thus he soiourned in Samaria, which now is called Sebaste, Alexandra
inhabiting at that time in Jerusalem, having notice of this his estate, sought
to reduce all the strong Alexandra in Herodes absence seeks to get the
possession of the castles.
fortresses that were within the city, under her subjection: the one of which
abutted upon the temple; the other was situate within the city: for they that
are Lords of these, keep all Herod's children begotten of her daughter
Mariamme, for fear least he being dead, they should be seized by others: and
if it should fortune him to recover his health, in the mean while they might
be kept and held by no man more securely, then such as were his domestical
friends. This suite and solicitation of hers was but The year of the world
3936. before Christ's Nativity. 28. Herodes counselors certify him of
Alexandras intent. Alexandra put to death. Costabarus whom Herod had matched
with his sister Salome, usurps in Idumaea.
coldly conceited of, and the captains who at other times showed themselves
always faithful, at that time were the rather far more constant in their
duty, both for that they hated Alexandra, as also for that they thought it a
great offense to despair of the health of their prince. For these were the
kings old friends, and one of them was Herodes own nephew, whose name was
Achiabus. For which cause they sent present messengers unto him, to certify
him of Alexandras intent: who having heard these news, presently commanded her
to be slain: and at length ouerco^ming his sickness, he grew so badly affected
both in body and mind, that he waxed hateful unto all men; so that all those
who offended him for how little cause soever, were readily sought for to be
punished. In this his intemperance he imbrued his hands in the blood of diverse
of his inward friends, as Costabarus, Lysimachus, Antipater surnamed Gadias,
and Dositheus, for this occasion Costabarus was an Idumean, and one of the
greatest account amongst his countrymen, who was descended from the Priests of
Cozas, whom the Idumaeans esteem for a God. Now after that Hircanus had drawn
the policy of the Idumaeans to the reformed customs of the Jews, Herod was
made king of the Jews, and appointed Costabarus to be governor in Idumaea and
Gaza, giving him Salome his sister to wife, after he had put Joseph to death,
to whom she had bin married before time, as we have heretofore declared.
Costabarus seeing himself in this estate beyond his expectation, grew more
elate and proud then his good fortune required, and in a little time forgot
himself so far, that he thought himself dishonored, if he should perform
that which Herod commanded him, and scorned that the Idumaeans should be under
the Jews subjection, notwithstanding they had received their manner of
government from them. He therefore Cleopatra, giving her to understand, that
Idumaea had always been under her ancestors subjection; and for that cause
she ought upon just cause to demand and beg that country at Antonius hands,
and that in respect of himself he was ready to become her servant. All which
he practiced, not to gratify Cleopatra in any sort whatsoever, but to the
intent, that if Herodes fortunes should be any ways weakened, he might more
easily by this means both enlarge and obtain the kingdom of Idumaea. And
with these foolish hopes was he transported, in regard of his birth and riches,
which he had heaped together, by such dishonest means, as he continually
practiced, as he that intended no small matters. But notwithstanding Cleopatras
often and earnest petition to obtain this sovereignty; yet could she not
obtain it at Antonius hands. When Herod had notice of these covert and
cunning practices, he was ready to kill Costabarus. Costabarus preserved by
his wives intercession.
him; yet held him always in suspicion, by reason of this his practice. Not
long after it happened, that Salome fell at debate with Costabarus, for which
cause she sent a libell of divorce to her husband, notwithstanding it were
against the laws and ordinary customs of the Jews. For according to our
ordinances, it is only lawful for the husband to do the same; and as touching
the wife, notwithstanding she were separated, yet is it not lawful for her to
marry again, except her husband first give her license. But Salome without
respect of the laws of the country, grounding her self too much upon her
own authority, forsook her husband, saying, that she separated her self
from her husband, by reason of the great friendship which she bare unto her
brother, Costabarus, Lysimachus, Antipater and Dositheus accused before Herod.
Babas sons preserved by Costabarus.
for that she had received some notice that Costabarus practiced some
innovation with Antipater, Lysimachus and Dositheus. And this accusation of
hers confirmed she by Babas children, whom, he had already kept with him in
all security for the space of twelve years. All which was true, and at that
time beyond all men's expectation wonderfully troubled Herod, as soon as he
heard it. For as touching Babas sons, he had heretofore resolved to cut them
off, for that they had been always badly affected toward him and all his
enterprises; but all that time he had let them pass, because by continuance
they were grown out of his remembrance. Now the cause of this enmity and
hatred which he bare toward them, was gathered from this ground. At such time
as Antigonus enjoyed the sovereignty, and Herod besieged the city of
Jerusalem with an army: now those incommodities and necessities that ordinarily
happen unto those that are besieged, were the cause that diverse acknowledged
Herod, and fixed their hopes upon him. But Babas sons Antigonus, and blamed
Herod continually, encouraging the inhabitants to continue the kingdom in
those to whom it appertained by descent: and they themselves followed that
course, which in their opinion was most profitably for the commonweal. But
after that the city was surprised by Herod, and he grew master of the estate,
Costabarus, who was appointed to keep the city gates, and to lie in wait that
none of those who were accused to have forsaken the kings side, should escape,
knowing that the sons of Babas were greatly esteemed The year of the world.
3936. before Christ's birth 28.
Herod by an oath, that he knew not what was become of them; yet, though
suspected of perjury, he concealed them. And afterward when the king had by
proclamation promised a reward to him that should discover them, and sought for
them by all means, neither then also would he confess the fact. For being
afraid least he should be punished for his first denial, he continued through
concealment, being not only now driven thereunto by friendship, but also by
necessity.

Now when the king had notice hereof by his sisters report, he sent certain
messengers to Babas sons and others are accused before Herod and slain.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10. Herod introduces diverse foreign customs. The
year of the world, 3939. before Christ's birth 25. The theater, and the
wrestling places.
the place where they were hidden, and slew them, and all those that were
partakers of the same Hircanus kindred was now left alive, but all of them
being slain, who excelled in nobility and dignity, he did what himself
listed without any contradiction or controulement: for which cause he by little
and little forsook the ceremonies and ordinances of his country, and
corrupted the decrees and institutions of their ancestors, which he ought to
have kept inviolable, by his new and strange inventions. In whose time there
was a very great change and alteration of the ancient and good manner of
living; for all fell from bad to worse, and the politic order, whereby the
people ought to be governed and kept within compass of their duty, went to
decay. For first of all, he ordained certain wrastlings from sieve years to
five years, in honor of Caesar; and builded a Theater for that purpose within
Jerusalem. He erected also a most huge Amphitheater within the plain, which
were two piles worthy the regard and beholding, Caesar's titles, and the
trophies of those nations, which were overcome by him, altogether set out and
shining with gold and silver. As for the instruments thereof, there wanted
neither furniture, costly vestments, or precious stones. Thither also were
drawn certain savage beasts, as Lions and other wild beasts, which were
worthy to be placed in this famous show, being admirable both for their force
and ratenesse of nature, who fought the one with the other, and against such
men likewise who were condemned to die: whereby the strangers conceived,
together with the Herod obtained no small honor by these expe^ces.
interpreted this thing for a manifest corruption of those disciplines and
manners which before time they had entertained, and honored amongst them. For
it was an act most manifestly impious, to hazard men against wild beasts, to
delight the eyes of other men: It was also a matter as impious, to change and
profane the ordinances of the country, for foreign exercises: But the most
hated of all these, were the Trophies: For in that they were certain Images
attired in armor, the use and veneration whereof were forbidden by our laws,
this displeased and grieved them more then any thing whatsoever: neither was
Herod ignorant of those troubles, which they procured. But he thought it to be
a matter of danger to attempt the same for the present by force; and for that
cause he familiarly debated the same with some few of them, and discoursed The
Jews suppose that the Trophies coue red with arms were Images.
country. Herod perceiving that they were discontented, and that they would
not easily be wrought upon, except they had some contentment, he called the
most worthiest men amongst them, and led them into the Theater, demanding of
them what they thought these Trophies The year of the world. 3939. before
Christ's birth 25.
were: and when as they cried out that they were images of men: he
incontinently caused all the ornaments to be taken off from them, letting them
see that they were naught else but naked stocks of wood; so that suddenly their
displeasure was turned into a laughter, and their doubts were pleasantly
discussed. Thus appeased he the people, and moderated the fury of their
mislikes: so that diverse of them changed their opinions, and were no more
displeased. Notwithstanding there were some of these that persisted in the
indignity they conceived in those unaccustomed exercises, supposing that the
corruption of their ancient discipline was an inducement to their grievous
calamities; and they imagined that it rather concerned them to undertake all
dangers, then to endure any alteration in their policy, by permitting that
Herod should introduce new and extraordinary fashions, who only in word was
their king, but in effect an enemy of their Ten men conspire against Herod.
amongst these there was one that was blind, who urged and egged on by the
strangeness of those things which he had heard, not for that he was of
ability to execute any thing with his hand, but to testify that he was ready
to suffer with the rest, if any misfortune should befall them, by whose example
the rest of them were not a little confirmed. These having mutually undertaken
this their resolution, repaired to the Theater under hope that Herod should
not escape them, for that they intended to assail him unawares, at leastwise
if they failed of him, their hope was to fall foul on someof his favorites
and followers, accounting this to be some solace in their expected death, if in
regard of their violated religion they might bring the king in hatred with the
Herod had sent abroad to pry and search into such like actions, having
discovered all this their conspiracy, signified the same unto the king, at
such time as he was ready to enter into the Theater. He knowing Herod has
intelligence of the conspiracy.
full well what hatred was continually hatched against him, betook himself to
his palace, and sent for the conspirators by their names: who being
apprehended in the fact, and knowing that there was no way for them to escape,
resolved to endure their present misfortunes with a valiant courage: for being
no ways dismayed, with a constant countenance they drew out their weapons,
protesting that their conspiracy was honest and holy, not attempted by them
for private affection, or their own profit sake, but in the behalf of their
public discipline, which no good man

Now when with great confidence they had alleged these things for their
justification, they were led away by the kings ministers to be slaughtered by
diverse sorts of torments. Not long after The ten men are executed, and the
intelligencer is cut in pieces.
this, that intelligencer who had betrayed them, growing hateful in all men's
eyes, was slain by certain men, and chopped in pieces with their swords, and
afterward cast unto the dogs in sight and presence of many men. Yet did no man
discover this act, until after long and wearisome inquisitions made by Herod,
it was wrought out of certain poor women (who were privy to the fact) with
diverse torments. Then were all the actors of that murder punished, with their
whole families: and notwithstanding all this, the common people was in no sort
dismayed, but were ready to defend their laws, except they were restrained by
some greater power. Which Herod fortifieth two castles within Ierusale
Antonia, Samaria or Sebaste.
had two strong castles within the City, one wherein his palace was; an other
called Antonia, that adjoined near unto the temple, fortified by him; he
thought good to strengthen a third called Samaria, the name whereof he changed,
and called it Sebaste (which was distant from Jerusalem some days journey) to
contain those of the common sort that were abroad under his obedience, and
very fit to bridle any vprores that might be raised in the City and fields.
And for the whole nation he builded a fort, which in times past was called
Straton, and afterward he named Stratons tower or Casarea. Gabala.
it Caesarea. He builded also a fort in Galilee, which was called Gabala, in a
large plain where by course he kept his horsemen. Besides these, he builded
the fort of Esthmonites in the

Now when he had fitly disposed all these Castles through his whole country,
for the security and safety of his kingdom, the matter of rebellion was
taken from the common people, who upon every light cause are subject to
commotions, in that he had prepared a remedy against all Herod planteth
garrisons in the fortresses to withstand conspiracies.
privy conspiracies, by planting such forces always near at hand, who might
prevent and pacify all alterations upon their original. After this betaking
himself to encompasse Samaria with a wall, he brought to pass that diverse of
those, who had borne arms with him against his enemies The year of the world.
3942. before Christ's birth 22.
and diverse of the people likewise that dwelt round about, came to inhabit it
both in regard of the temple, which he intended to build in that place, as also
for that he fortified the same for his own security (although that before
time it was not in the number of famous Cities.) He therefore changed the name
thereof, and called it Sebaste, and distributed the lands that confined the
city, among the inhabitants of the same (which was by nature a fruitful and
goodly country) to the intent that within a little space they might enrich
themselves. He environed the city also with a strong wall, being assisted by
the natural strength and steepinesse of the place: and besides the whole
circuit, he included so much ground, that it is no ways inferior to any of
the famous Cities; for it contained the circuit of twenty furlongs or stadia.
And in the midst thereof there was a sacred place, containing a furlong and a
half, wonderfully adorned; in which

CHAP. XII.
A famine invaded the land of Iudaea.

THat very year, which was the thirteenth year of Herodes reign, very great
calamities happened in that country (either through Gods displeasure, or for that
the revolution of Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 11. al. 10. A daily drought and
sterilitie in Iudaea. The want of victuals breeds the plague.
thereof the earth grew barren and produced not those fruits, which of it self
it was accustomed to bear. And after this the ordinary course of men's diets
being altered by reason of the want of corn, the want of sustenance was
accompanied with a bodily sickness (for that by custom these two plagues do
ordinarily entertain one an other:) For this made the plague and sickness more
vehement, for that the sick in this great penury could neither have care of
themselves as was expedient, nor get convenient nourishment for preservation of
life: And many died daily; and those also that remained alive were in despair,
because they could not relieve their want and necessities, what diligence
soever they used. For which cause, after the old fruits of that year were
wholly consumed, and all the rest of their store was utterly spent, there
appeared not any means whereupon Herod makes money of all his rich ornaments
and household stuff of gold and silver, and buieth corn.
then themselves: and although he might have recovered some little means for a
great sum of money, yet wanted he it also to defray the charges:
notwithstanding in that he knew, that it behooued him to employ his uttermost
endeavors in yielding a general remedy to such and so violent an oppression,
he molted down all those moueables he had either of gold or silver within his
palace, and spared nothing either for the matter, the excellency, or the
fashion; no not so much as the vessels wherein he was ordinarily served. This
money sent he into Egypt, where at that time under Caesar, Petronius held the
government. This man being Herodes friend, in that he desired the safety of
his subjects, at such time as diverse of them retired themselves unto him, by
Herod wrought so much, that the care that was taken by him did not only
change the affections of those, which before time were his enemies, Herod
distributeth the corn he had bought among the people.
but beside all this, he purchased great praise and commendation for his
liberality and singular providence. For first of all he distributed a certain
quantity of corn to all those, who were not able of themselves to supply
their own wants, using herein both great care and diligence. The year of the
world, 3942. before Christ's Nativity, 2^.


Now after he had furnished his subjects with these things, he thought good
also to show kindness to the neighboring cities, and stored the Syrians with
seed corn to sow their lands (which yielded him no little profit) for the
earth incontinently gave him a large and plentiful tribute for that she had
received; so that all of them had abundance of victuals: and as soon as the
The Jews favor Herod for his bounty.
much honor and reputation achieved he abroad. For whereas in strangers
necessities he had showed himself so full of magnanimity, each man did not
respect what he had been before, but such as they had lately found him to be.

About the same time also he sent Caesar certain supplies, namely five
hundredth chosen men of his guard, whom Elius Gallus led into the wars in
Arabia, and had often use of them in his most Herod sends Caesar five
hundredth of his guard. The palace built in Jerusalem. Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 12.
dangerous attempts. When as therefore his kingdom was restored to his former
felicity, he builded a royal palace in the higher part of the city,
furnished with many large buildings, and decked with gold and marble seats; so
as they might receive a great number of men: he named also each room of the
house according to their several names, and called one the lodging of Caesar,
and another of Agrippa. After this, being entangled with love, he married a
wife, least he should be distracted by vain desires, and the cause of this his
new marriage was this. There was among those that dwelt in Jerusalem, a certain
citizen called Simon, the son of Boethas the Alexandrine, who was a Priest,
and one of the chiefest in nobility among the^: this man had a daughter, the
fairest and comeliest creature of that age, whose beauty renowned by the
common voice, it came to pass, that with her fame Herod at one time
entertained a good affection toward Simon seemed unworthy his affinity, and
yet too worthy to be blasted by contempt, he made election of a convenient
means to obtain the fulness of his desire, which was to raise both Simon and
his to higher dignities. For which cause he presently deposed the high Priest
Jesus the son of Phabetes, and established Simon in his place; and that
Herod remoueth Jesus from his Priest hood, and places Simon in his room, and
marieth his daughter.
done, he contracted affinity with him. After the marriage was consummate, he
builded a new castle in that place wherein he had overcome the Jews, upon the
time and incontinently after the overthrow of Antigonus, and when he had taken
upon him the government. This place is distant from Jerusalem some sixty
furlongs or stades, strong by nature, and fit for defense and from far with
great cost and expense. The plain that adioyneth upon it, is all full of
buildings The year of the world. 3942. before the Nativity of Christ. 22.
Caesar, Caesar and the Romans in that he respected their honor more then he
did the ordinances of his country; although in all things he had a respect to
Herod bestowed great diligence and no less costs in his buildings.
his particular advantage, and determined with himself to leave behind him
after his death large

CHAP. XIII.
The building of the City of Caesarea.

WHen as therefore he had found out a fit and convenient place upon the sea
coast, to build a city on, which of long time had been called the tower of
Straton, he both magnificently The tower of Straton otherwise called Caesarea,
builded by Herod. Piraeus the port of Athens.
designed and set down the model and form thereof, and made many sumptuous
buildings both of royal palaces, and of other private lodgings, not builded
after a slight Piraeus, and was so spacious that it was able to receive many
great ships into the road, and had diverse roumes and warehouses to lay up the
merchandise therein. And the more admirable was this pile, because the stuff
that was fit to finish this so great work, was not gathered or gotten in that
place, but must needly be brought from another place, upon great charge and
expense. This city is seated in Phoenicia upon the coast, in the way to
Egypt, between Ioppe and Dora, certain villages situate upon the sea
coasts, unfit either for landing or harbor, Dora and Ioppa ill harbors
by reason of the Affricke wind, that driving the sand of the sea upon the
shore gives not any quiet road unto the ships, but that the merchants are
enforced for a long time to ride at ancor. The port of Caesarea.
that it was able to receive a great fleet, and he cast down to the bottom
thereof, which was about some twenty fathoms deep, certain huge stones, that
for the most part were fifty foot long, eight foot broad, and nine foot high,
some more and some less. The pile that was erected upon this to affront the
sea, was a pane of two hundredth foot, the half whereof was opposed against the
waves to break the fury of the stream, and for this cause was called in the
Greek tongue Procymation, that is to say, Before flood: The other half served
as a foundation to bear up a wall of stone fortified with diverse towers, the
chiefest whereof was a fair pile or building, which was called Drusus, in
memory of Drusus, Caesar's son in law, who died very young: it had also
diverse retreats or hostries in the same, into which the mariners were received
and lodged. The the haven there were certain buildings, abutting one upon
another of pollished marble, and The year of the world 3942. before Christ's
Nativity. 2^.
in the midst there was a little hillocke, on which there was a certain
monument placed in honor of Caesar, which presented it self to their sight who
sailed to the port, in which there were the figares of the City of Rome and of
Caesar. This city also was called Caesarea, as much to be wondered at for the
matter whereof it was built, as for the art whereby it was erected: and no
less cunning was there showed in the vaults and conduits under ground, then in
those buildings that were above them; some of them were conuaied toward the
port, and discharged themselves into the sea by certain compassed spaces: but
there was one that went athwarts, that comprehended all the rest, to the end
that there by the raine-water, and the clensings of the City might be conuaied
into the sea, and that when the sea should flow it might wash and cleanse all
the city.

He erected also a Theater of stone, and behind the same to the Southward an
Amphitheater, The theater and Amphitheater. Herod sends his sons Alexander
and Aristobulus to Rome unto Caesar. Caesar gives Herod the dominions of the
Trachonites of Batanea and Auranita. Zenodorus lives by spoil.
during which time, the king was neither wearied by intending the work, nor
negligent in furnishing the necessary charges. After this, perceiving that the
City of Sebaste was already inhabited also, he resolved to send his two
sons Alexander and Aristobulus to Rome, to present them unto the Emperor
Caesar; who no sooner resorted thither but they were lodged in Pollios house,
who amongst all the rest was an entire friend of Herodes. They might have lien
also at Caesar's house, who entertained them with as great familiarity and
kindness, as might be possible: and gave Herod license in like manner to
confirm the kingdom in one of his children, which soever best liked him,
annexing to his government, the countries of Trachona, Batanea, Zenodorus had
hired Lysanias demains or Lordship, and not contenting himself with those
revenues which he gathered, but desirous to gather more, he lived upon spoils
and robberies in Trachona, which is a country, the inhabitants whereof
commonly live by pillage and spoil, which they purchase from the citizens and
merchants of Damasco. And so far was Zenodorus from prohibiting these
robberies, that he himself also was partaker of the booty; so that the
nations that neighboured round about, seeing themselves thus abused, sought for
remedy at Varus hands, who was their governor, requiring him to certify
Caesar of Zenodorus wrongs and outrages. Which when he understood, he commanded
that such lawless rioters should be punished, and that the country should be
added unto the jurisdiction of Herod, to the intent, that by his vigilancie
the inhabitants Herod having received the gift of this country at Caesar's
hands, resorted thither under the conduct of Herod punishes the robbets.
Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 13. Agrippa is sent into Asia. Agrippa sends the
Gadareans bound unto Hetode who came to accuse him. Zenodorus signiory sold to
the Auranites, and bestowed on Herod by Caesar is the cause of the wars.
certain guides that knew the ways, and having brought their power and
prolling to an end, he left the neighboring nations in assured peace. But
Zenodorus being partly whetted on with envy, partly incited by the grief
which he conceived through the losle of his possessions, resorted to Rome to
accuse Herod; yet could effect nothing of that which he intended.

When Agrippa was sent into Asia by Caesar to govern the provinces beyond the
seas, Herod because he was his very friend and familiar, went to salute him
at Mitelene where he wintered, for that he was one of his inward friends, and
asterwards returned into Iewry. But Agrippa with an intent to accuse Herod:
but he sent them bound unto the king, and vouchsafed them no audience. On the
other side, the Auranites, who of long time hated Herodes government, stirred
up commotions, and labored to draw the country into rebellion, and that upon
a just ground, as it seemed, at that time: for Zenodorus despairing of his
affairs, went and sold them a certain part of the Lordship in Auranita (which
was comprehended within Caesar's donation to Herod) for the sum of fifty
talents of yearly revenue, wherewith they grew discontented, for that they
were unjustly deprived of their estates: and hereupon The year of the world.
3942. before Christ's birth 22.
Herod knew, and could have prouidently prevented them, yet exhorted he them
to maintain their titles rather by good means then open violence, being loath
to give any occasion of new trouble or disquiet. At length in the seventeenth
year of his reign, Caesar came into Syria: upon whose arrival diverse of the
Gadareans Caesar comes into Syria before him the Gadareans accule Herod, and
afterward murder themselves.
began to exclaim against Herod, accusing him of his severity and tyranny:
which accusation they the rather attempted, because they were chiefly incited
thereunto by the instigations and false suggestions of Zenodorus, who bound
himself by an oath, that he would never give over Herodes tyranny, they were
reduced under Caesar's protection. The Gadareans persuaded by these his
protestations, began to continue their exclamations, and that some what the
more audaciously, for that they perceived that they lived as yet unpunished
whom Agrippa had delivered into Herodes hands (for Herod had set them at
liberty without any punishment, not with standing that in regard of his own
subjects he was inexorable, as ever man was) and most patient in enduring those
injuries that were offered him by strangers, The year of the world, 3946.
before Christ's nativity, 18.
whom he always dismissed without revenge. When as therefore they accused him
of violence and rapine, and for violating and racing down their temples,
Herod being nothing dismayed thereat, presented himself before the Emperor
to justify his actions. But Caesar entertained him very kindly, and
diminished nothing of the good affection which he bare unto him,
notwithstanding Caesar's disposition and the inclination of his counsel, and
fearing (as it was most likely) to be delivered into Herodes hands, the next
night after some of them slew themselves; other some for fear of torments
brake their own necks; and some of them also drowned themselves in the river.
And thus whereas they seemed to foreiudge themselves, Caesar presently absolved
Herod.

And this felicity of his was seconded with an other of no small consequence.
For Zenodorus Vlatha, Paneaas, and other regions are given to Herod. Herod
highly esteemed by Caesar and Agrippa. Caesar makes Pheroras a Tetrarth.
having his bowels broken through an extreme flux of blood, finished his life
at Antioch in Syria. Whereupon Caesar gave Herod his country, which was a
large and ample signiorie, and Caesar and Agrippa, Caesar honored no man more
then Herod next to Agrippa; and Agrippa respected him above all men next to
Caesar. Whereupon he grew to be so confident, that he begged a Tetrarthy at
Caesar's hands for his brother Pheroras, on whom he bestowed one hundredth
talents of revenue out of his own kingdom, to the intent that if he should
happen to die, Pheroras estate might be assured and left no ways subject unto
his children. As soon as therefore he had conducted Caesar as far as the
sea, upon his return he builded a goodly temple of white marble in Zenodorus,
near to a place which is called Panion, which is a goodly cave in the heart of
a mountain, and a place of great pleasure, under Herede builds a temple
near unto Panion. Herod remitteth the third part of his tribute.
which there is a wide poole of immeasurable depth, which is full of standing
water, and the upper part of the mountain is very hie. From under this cave
spring the fountain heads of the flood Jordan. This place of it self so
famous and delightful, was chosen out by Herod and adorned also with a temple
which he built in honor of Caesar. At that time also he released the third
part of those tributes, which his subjects paid unto him, to the end (as he
said) that he might relieve his subjects after the penury they had endured.
But the truth of his intention was, that he did it to that end to win their
favors, who were sinisterly affected toward him. For they had conceived an
hatred against him, because all piety was in a manner abolished, and the
Herod with great discretion prevented the same, and cut off all occasions of
insurrection, commanding every one to intend his labor; forbidding them to
make any assemblies in the City, or to talk one with an other under color of
walking abroad for pleasure or feasts sake. Moreover, he had sent out certain
intelligencers to discover all that which was done, appointing grievous
punishments for those that misliked, or maligned his government. For diverse The
year of the world, 3946. before Christ's Natiuitis, 18.
of them were led unto the Castle of Hircania, some openly, some privately;
where they were no sooner imprisoned, but they were put to death; and both in
the city and in the country there were certain men appointed to take note of
al such that used any assemblies upon any occasion whatsoever. And so inwardly
was he tormented with their dislikes, that as it is reported of him, he took
upon him the habit of a private man, and thrust himself in the night time
into the company of thepeople, to understand and gather what they thought of
his government; and those whom he found to be intractable and obstinate, and
would not be conformed to his will, he dispatched them by one means or other,
binding the rest of the people by an oath to serve him faithfully, Herod
binds the people by an oath.
and constrained them to keep the oath they had sworn, and to acknowledge his
soueraintie: whereunto diverse through the fear they conceived, easily
condiscended. But they, who had a Pollio and Sameas: and notwithstanding they
denied to take the oath, yet did he not punish them as he did the other for
their refusal, in respect and reverence of Pollio their Herod excuses the
Pharisees from swearing for Polias and Same as sakes. The Esseans not much
unlike the Pithagorists.
master. From this rigor also were they exempt, who amongst us are called
Esseans, which is a sort of men that live after that manner, that Pithagoras
did among the Graecians; of whom I have more expressly discoursed in an other
place.

At this present I think it not a matter to be ouerslipt, neither estranged
from the aim of my history, to report for what cause the king had so
religious an opinion of those men. There was a certain Essean called Manahem,
who in his sect was accounted an upright and just man, and Herod one day at
such time as he was very young, and went to school, saluted him and called
him king of the Jews. Herod supposing that Manahem knew him not, or that he
mocked him, reproved him sharply for this his speech, saying, that he
acknowledged himself to be one of the common sort. Manahem smiling, hit him
gently with his hand upon the back, and said unto him, Thou shall be king, and
shall have a happy reign. For such is Gods pleasure, and at that time remember
Manahe^ foretells He todes government.
thy self of the words that Manahem spoke unto thee, which shall serve for a
testimony to put thee in mind of thy mutable estate. For it becomes thee
nothing more, then by justice, piety, and equity to win the hearts of thy
subjects: yet know I by revelation from God, that thou will not follow these
instructions; for thou shall forget and neglect both divine and humane. At that
time Herod gave small regard to those his words, in that he had Herod
questioneth with Manahem about the continuance or his kingdom, and loves the
Esseans for his sake.
no hope that any such thing should happen: but not long after; as soon as he
had obtained the kingdom to the fullness of his felicity, he in the
greatness of his power sent for Manahem, and asked him how long he should
reign. But he returned him a doubtful answer. Which when Herod perceived,
he asked him anew, if he should reign ten years. Whereunto Manahem answered,
and twenty, and thirty, without setting him down any prefixed term. Herod
contenting himself herewith embraced Manahem and gave him license to depart,
and continued his affections toward the Esseans for his sake. I have thought
good to register these things,

CHAP. XIIII.
Herod builds a new Temple in Jerusalem, after he had pulled down the old.

IN the eighteenth year of his reign, Herod, after he had finished these
many and admirable Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 14. al. 11. Herod intends to
reedifie Gods temple.
actions, conceited in his mind no mean, but a mighty project, which was to
reedifie Gods Temple of greater bigness and answerable height, hoping that
this work, Herod certifieth the people that he will reedifie the temple.


Men and brethren, I hold it to be a matter both vain and superfluous, to
recount unto you what things I have performed, during the time of my
government. For they have been of that nature, that they have returned me but
little honor; and your self great profit and security. For you The year of
the world. 3947. before Christ's birth 17.
Solomon first built: yet ought we not to object as a blame, or ascribe this
action to any impiety in our ancestors. For the temple was not at their
disposition, but the measure of the building was set them down by Cyrus and
Darius the son of Hystaspes, to whom and their successors they have first of
all been slaves, as after their time they have been under the subjection of
the Macedonians: so that they had not the means and opportunity, to raise this
religious monument, according to his first pattern, to that requisite and
convenient height. But since at this present by Gods permission, I have
obtained the kingdom; and that for a long time hitherto we have enioied a
happy peace; and that neither money nor great revenues are wanting; and that
which is our greatest good, we are made happy by the favor of the Romans,
who in a sort are the Lords of the whole world, and in effect

This sudden and unexpected speech of Herodes, filled all men's ears with
wonder, and hearts with expectation in that he seemed to promise such a thing,
as was beyond their hope, and as they thought far greater then his power: and
that which most distracted them was, for that they had conceived a fear, least
after he had pulled down the old, he should not be of ability to erect a
new. For which cause his counsel seemed to be dangerous, and attempt over
difficult. But The Jews fearing least Herod should pull down the old temple
before he had prepared matter for the new he promises the contrary.
Convenient stuff is gathered for the building of the temple. How the temple
was builded by Herod.
Neroes reign our countrymen had thought to have raised it to the first
height. The building was of white and strong marble stones, which were each of
them twenty and five cubits long, eight cubits high, and about some twelve
cubits broad. All the structure of the fame was made after the manner of a
princely palace on all sides, and the middle part thereof was higher then the
rest: so that it might easily be discovered by the inhabitants of the country
many furlongs off; and especially it was most apparent and subject to their
sight, who dwelt opposite against it, or repaired unto the city. The doors
thereof and their tramsomes were correspondent to the rest of the magnificence
of the temple, garnished with diverse rapestries, and azured flowers, which
invested and adorned the pillars: workmanship was so exquisite as it is
incredible to be reported amongst men. There was a The year of the world 3947.
before Christ's Nativity. 17.
stony rising or hillocke, and very straight and high, the top whereof toward
the eastermost part of the city was somewhat smooth and upright. The first
that encompassed it with a wall was Solomon our king, who by Gods favor and
the mediation and labor of diverse workmen, did first of all build the higher
part: Herod also invested the lower part thereof with an other wall; under
which to the southward there lies a most deep valley. This wall was made of
huge stones, close fastened the one unto the other with lead, shutting all
within his enclosure, and extending it self very deep; so that the greatness
and height of this four square building was an incredible thing to be
imagined. The greatness of the stones appeared in the front, but on the inside
they were fastened togiether with claspes of iron, which fortified and
strengthened the building for ever against all injuries of times. This work
having been thus continued to the top, and the void space between Herod had
placed there with all those spoils, which he had taken from the Arabians. In a
corner on the north side there stood a very strong and defenced fortress,
builded by the Asmonians, who were Herod's predecessors, and had been both
kings and high priests, and had imposed a name on that tower which was Baris,
in which they The place where the high priests stole was kept. Under whose
custody the stole was.
kept the priestly vesture, where with the high priest was wont to be adorned
at that time only when he was to offer sacrifice. King Herod kept the same in
that place, and there remained it after his death until the time of Tiberius
Caesar: under whom Vitellius governor of Syria came unto Jerusalem; where he
was entertained by all the people with as great magnificence as was possible:
and being desirous to acknowledge the favors that he had received at their
hands, being requested by them that they might have the keeping of the high
priests ornaments, he wrote unto Tiberius Caesar to grant them that favor, and
til the death of king Agrippa the Jews had the same in their possession. But
after that Agrippa was dead, Cassius Longinus that governed Syria, and Cuspius
Fadus lieutenant of Iudaea, commanded the Jews to return the same into the
fortress Antonia, saying that the Romans ought to be Lord thereof, as they had
been in times past. For which cause Claudius Caesar, to request his favor
therein, who arriving at Rome found the young king Agrippa there, who besought
the Emperor that it might be lawful for him to have the keeping of the habit:
who commanded Vitellius the governor of Syria, to deliver it unto his hands.
Before time it was kept under the seal of the high priest, and the custody of
the tresurers, and on the eeue of a certain solemn feast the tresurers went
up to the captain, who kept the forttesse for the Romans, and after they had
opened their seal they took the habit: and after the feast was past, they
returned it back again unto the same place, and shut it up under the same
seal in the presence of the captain. All which we have thought good to lay
open to make the diversity known that was used in that care.

After that Herod had in this sort builded this strong tower for the security
and guard of the Antonius his friend, and one of the chiefest men in Rome. In
the westeme part of this porch, there were four gates, whereof the one opened
The tower of Antonia.
upon the kings palace, to which there was a direct way through the midst of
the valley: the two others led unto the suburbs: and the fourth opened upon
the rest of the city, and gave open passage unto the same, by the means of a
number of stairs, by which men might descend to the foot of the valley; and
from thence there was an ascent by other stairs to ascend upwards. For the
city was situate near unto the temple, after the manner of a theater; and
was bended to the southward by a deep valley. As touching the fourth side
turned toward the south, it had likewise certain gates in the midst thereof;
and upon the same there was a triple gallery very royal and princely, the
length whereof extended from the oriental valley as far as the western. The
porch builded aloft above the valley.
on the same he erected this porch of so great a height, that but to look from
the top thereof, and to consider the depth as well of the valley as the
height of the porch, it would make a man giddie, and his eye could not pierce
unto the immesurable bottom of the same. It had in length four ranks of
pillars opposed the one right over against the other (for the fourth pane The
year of the world. 3955. before Christ's birth 9.
The inward court into which, and no further, the Jews might enter.
with few steps. It was enclosed with a separation of stone, with an
inscription, forbidding any stranger to enter the same upon pain of death.
This inward porch both to the southward and the northward had three gates, in
rank equidistant the one from the other; and toward the eastward had one great
gate, by which those men entered who were cleansed with their wives. For beyond
that place it was not lawful for the women to have access. But the third
inward space was only accessible by the Priests. In it was the Temple, and
before the same the altar; on Herod durst not enter the interior sanctuary,
from whence profane men were excluded by the law: but by the mediation of the
priests he intended the structure and building of the inward porch, and
finishing in eight years space the rest of the edifice, at length also he
finished the Temple it self, by the endeavors of the same priests, within the
term of one year and six months. By which means the people were replenished
with the fullness of joy, and every one gave thanks unto God for that the
whole work was finished so speedily, and wished all happiness to the king for
his cost and diligence in the execution and finishing thereof: and they
celebrated a great feast in honor of the restoration of the Temple. Then did
the king offer up three hundredth oxen unto God, and The dedicatio^ of the
temple.
the rest of them each one according to his ability offered so many
sacrifices, as that scarcely

About the very time of the celebration of this feast in honor of the
reedification of the Temple, the kings day of coronation fell out, which he was
wont to solemnize every year with great joy: and for this twofolde occasion
the solemnity and joy was far more sumptuous A conduit under ground from the
castle Antonia.
and complete. The king also caused a conduit of water to be made, and
conuaied by pipes under ground, drawing it from the Castle Antonia unto the
Oriental gate of the temple, near to which he builded an other Tower also, to
the end, that by the conduits he might ascend privily unto the Temple, if
happily the people should practice any insurrections against his roialtie. It
is reported, that during the building of this temple, it never rained by day
time, During the building of the^ temple it never rained by day.
but only by night, to the intent the work might not be interrupted: and our
predecessors have

THE XVI. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 16. book.
1 How Alexander and Aristobulus returning unto Herod their father, were
calumniated by Salomes and Pheroras means. 2 How Herod gave Alexander and
Aristobulus wives. 3 How Herod sailed unto Agrippa. 4 The Jews of Ionia
accused the men of that country before Agrippa for indeuouring to take away
their privileges, granted unto them by the Romans. 5 How Herod returned into
Iudaea. 6 Of the discord in Herodes house between him and his sons. 7 How
Antipater being at Rome, Herod brought Alexander and his brother, and accused
them Caesar. 8 Of the defense of Alexander, and how he was reconciled unto his
father. 9 How Herod did celebrate every five years certain sportes, for
having finished Caesarea. 10 The Embassage of the Cyrenian and Asian Jews unto
Caesar. 11 How Herod needing money, entered into David's Sepulcher. 12 How
Archelaus king of Cappadocia did reconcile Alexander unto his father. 13 How
the Trachonites revolted. 14 Of Herodes expedition into Arabia. 15 How Syllaeus
accused Herod unto Caesar. 16 Of Euryclis his calumniations against Herodes
sons. 17 How Herodes sons were condemned in a council at Berytus.
CHAP. I.
How Alexander and Aristobulus being returned unto their father, were assailed
and calumniated by Salome and Pheroras.

AMongst the rest of the affairs of the common wealth, the king thought it
behooued The year of the world 3955. before Christ's Natiuiti^. 9. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 1. Herod made a new law that wall breakers should be sold into
bondage out of the kingdom. The punishment of theft according to the law of
Moses. Exodus 1. 22. Deuteronomy. 12. 15.
him to redress and hinder private injuries, both in the City and country:
for the which purpose he made a new law unlike to the former, that it should be
lawful for such as were wall-breakers, to be sold for slaves out of

At the same time Herod sailed into Italy to salute Caesar, and to see his
children living at Rome. Where Caesar receiving him very courteously, permitted
him to take his sons home with Herod sailed into Italy, and brought home his
sons from Rome.
him, as being now sufficiently instructed in the liberal arts. Who returning
into their country were joyfully received of all their countrymen, both for
that they were of comely stature, and of courteous conditions; and in their very
behavior did show that they came of kingly lineage. The years of the world.
3955. before Christ's birth 9. Salome and others falsely accused Herodes sons
and made their father hate them.
Salome and the rest, by whose false accusations their mother Mariamme was
oppressed, to envy them; fearing their puissance, and verily persuading
themselves that they would be reuengers of their mothers injuries. So taking
hereby occasion, they began also falsely to accuse them, as misliking their
father, who had caused their mother to be slain; and as though they had an
auersion from him, whose hands was imbrued in their mothers blood. For they
well perceived that by such calumniations they might draw them into hatred, and
auert their fathers good will from them. Yet did they not carry these their
inventions to the kings ears, but contented themselves to brute them abroad
amongst the common people, which so in the end coming to his hearing, would
cause in him such enmity and hatred against his sons, as that it would
overcome in him all natural affection.

CHAP. II.
How Herod gave wives unto Alexander and Aristobulus.

But the king as yet mistrusting nothing, moved with a fatherly care over them,
had them Herod married his son Arist^ to Bernice Salomes daughter, and
Alexander to ^phyta the daughter of the king of Cappadocia. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 2. Herod carried Man Agrippa all about his kingdom. Agrippa
offered a hundredth beasts at Jerusalem.
in such estimation as reason did require, and for that they were now come unto
man's estate, he married them both: and unto Aristobulus he gave Bernice the
daughter of Salome; and unto Alexander Graphyra the daughter of Archelaus king
of Cappadocia. Which done, understanding that Marcus Agrippa was returned out
of Italy into Asia, he went unto him thither, and invited him into his
kingdom, requesting him to accept of his friends entertainment. Agrippa
yielding unto, Herod omitted nothing that might delight him: for he received
him in his Cities newly built, showing him the fair houses and goodly
edifices, entertaining him and the rest of his friends and followers with all
sorts of delights, pomp and magnificence, as well at Sebaste, as at the haven
of Caesarea, and in the Castles he built, to wit, Alexandrium, Herodium, and
Hircania. He also brought him to Ietusalem, where all the people met him,
apparelled in such goodly and brave attire, as they were accustomed to adorn
themselves withal when as they celebrated their festiuals, and with many
joyful acclamations received and saluted him. Agrippa offered a hundredth head
of fat oxen to God, and feasted all the people; and although he would willingly
have made a longer abode there, yet winter drawing nigh, fearing tempestuous
weather, he was forced to sail away with all speed into Ionia, both he and his

CHAP. III.
How Herod sailed unto Agrippa.

Herod having past the winter at home, and hearing that Agrippa was now with
an army Herod sailed unto Agrippa to Chius, and gave a great sum of money to
reedifi^ the porch.
minded to go to Bosphorus, the spring time being now at hand, he sailed unto
him again, and taking his course by Rhodes and Cous, he came toward Lesbus,
thinking there to find Agrippa: but by a contrary wind he was driven from
thence, and forced a while to stay at Chius, where many privately coming to
salute him, he rewarded them with princely rewards: Mithridates, was not yet
repaired, but lay still ruinated for want of money to repair it, he gave them
so much money as largely Herod found Agrippa at Synope a city of Pontus, and
was by him honorably entertained.
sufficed to restore it to the former beauty and bigness; exhorting them with
all expedition to reedifie and adorn the City as it was in times past. At
last the wind changing, he sailed first to Mitylene, and then to Byzantium;
and there understanding that Agrippa had already past the rocks of Cyanes, he
followed him with all speed, and ouertooke him at Synope a City of Pontus: who
contratie to Agrippas expectation arrived there with his navy: Herodes coming
was very grateful unto Agrippa, and with especial affection they embraced
one an other. It was an Herod still present with Agrippa in sports and serious
affairs. Agrippa went by land to Ephesus.
evident sign of frienship, that the king omitting his own private business,
would now come unto him in so convenient a time. Wherefore Herod still abode
with him in the army, always present Agrippa having dispatched the business in
Pontus for which he came, it pleased him not to return by sea, but to go by
Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, and the greater Phrygia, and so they came by land to
Ephesus: and there taking ship they came to Samos. And in all that whole
journey, almost in every city he gratified Herod, at his entreatie relieuing
many of their necessities. And The year of the world. 3956. before Christ's
birth 8. Herod helped many in the way with money. Herod was a mediator for many
to Agrippa. The citizens of Ilia are reconciled to Agrippa, and they of Chius
obtain a privilege.
Herod did in the way help many with money that wanted, and spent much upon
his guests: and moreover if any one had any suit unto Agrippa, Herod was the
only man that might obtain his suit for him. And although Agrippa also was
both nobly minded and easily entreated to grant all such things as were not
prejudicial to any man; yet was it a matter of no small moment and importance
in king Herod, to incite him to use beneficence being even of his own accord
forward enough to put the same in practice. For first of all he reconciled
Agrippa being angry against the Iliensians, and himself paid the money that
the people of Chius were indebted unto Caesar's receivers, obtaining for them an
immunitie: and he also assisted and pleasured others in what soever they needed.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Jews of Ionia accused those countrymen for offering to take from them
their privileges, granted unto them by the Romans.

WHen they came into Ionia, a great multitude of Jews inhabiting that country
being gathered together, expected him to speak unto him; and finding
opportunity, they The Jews of Ionia complain unto Agrippa of the injuries
offered them by those countrymen. Nicholaus did make a speech unto Agrippa in
the behalf of the Jews.
complained unto him of the wrongs that those countrymen offered them, not
permitting them to live according unto there laws; and that upon festival
days they pulled and haled them before their tribunal: and that they would
not permit them to send sacred money unto Jerusalem, Herod labored to have
the Jews complaints heard by Agrippa, and willed one of his friends and
followers called Nicholaus, to plead the Jews cause: who made a speech unto
Agrippa, sitting with the rest of the Roman nobility, and other kings and
princes, in their behalf after this manner: Most worthy Agrippa, true it is
that all men that suffer injury are constrained to fly for redress to the
higher powers, and we over and above hope to obtain our suit. For we ask
nothing but that which your beneficence has already granted, and that which
they endeavor to take from us that are, as we also are, your subjects. And
although that your benefit bestowed upon us was great, yet are we worthy still
to enjoy it, only for that you your self judged us worthy seventh day from al
labors, we spend that day in learning our religion, and the laws and customs
The year of the world. 3956. before Christ's birth 8.
thereof, esteeming this custom not to be of small force to correct and amend
our manners. These our customs having in them nothing that any that searches
them, can justly reprehend, they are now also, though many are persuaded the
contrary, consecrated and confirmed by their antiquity: So that we must needs
make a conscience of it to forsake our laws, that have endured so many ages.
These are the injuries that these people by violence offer us; they
sacrilegiously take from us the money dedicated to God: they impose tributes
upon us, who are free: they upon festival days force us to their tribunals,
to law and other profane business, without any necessity, but only in
contumely and disgrace of our religion, which they know well in the mean while
that they persecute with unjust and unlawful hatred. For your Empire equally
providing for the good of all your subjects, does not only nourish the mutual
concord of them all, Agrippa, whereof we seek redress at thy hands,
requesting thee that hereafter we may live according to our religion as before
times, and that our adversaries may have no more authority over us then we over
them: which is not only justice and equity, but already also granted by your
clemency. And there are yet extant to be seen in the capitol many decrees
and ordinances of the Senate concerning this matter, engraven in brass, which
are read unto this day: doubtless for our truth and fidelity so oftentimes
tried: or at least, though we not deserving it, yet holy and inuiolate. For you
do not only not withdraw from us and all other nations your former benefits
granted unto us, but you do rather every day beside all hope and expectation
increase them: all which, time will not suffer me to recount. And that we may
not seem vanely to boast of our duties and officiousnes Antipater, who came
with two thousand soldiers to assist Caesar in the Agyptian wars, wherein he
so valiantly behaved himself, that neither by sea nor land any one in those
wars deserved more commendations then himself. I will not at this time
recount how much good he did Caesar in those wars, and what and how great
rewards he therefore received: but rather I should first of all put you in
remembrance of the letters that the Emperor writ unto Antipater the honors
and privileges of the city. For this only argument had been sufficient to
have declared that we did not obtain such favor without desert, and request
thee now to confirm the same, of whom we might justly hope for new benefits,
seeing such friendship and familiarity between thee and our king. For we have
understood by our nation that dwell in Iudaea, how many offerings thou did
there sacrifice unto our God, and with what vows thou honouredst him: how thou
feastedst the people, and wast delighted in that mutual hospitality. All
which are as it were an argument of the friendship confirmed between so great
a Roman prince, and the nation of the Jews, even in Herodes house. By all
these, we humbly request in the presence of the king nothing but this only,
that thou would not permit us deceitfully to be defrauded of that, which you

Now no one of the Greeks offered to oppose himself against that which
Nicholaus did speak: for this was no contention to a Judge concerning their
right, but only a deprecation and supplication to avoid injury. Neither did
they deny it, only thus they excused themselves, that the Jews dwelling
amongst them were troublesome unto them. But the Jews showed themselves to be
free citizens, and to live according to their religion and laws of their
country without any Agrippa confirms the Jews privileges.
man's molestation or injury. Wherefore Agrippa understanding that they were
wronged, answered thus; that he would not only gratify them for his friend
Herod's sake, but also for that they seemed to him to demand a reasonable
matter. Wherefore though they had demanded a greater thing of him, he would have
granted them whatsoever he might, without preiudicying the people Agrippa
departed from Lesbus.
for living according to the institutions and ordinances of their country.
Having thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly. Then Herod arising, thanked him
in all their names. And then after mutual embracing one another, they
departed, taking their leaves, from Lesbus.

CHAP. V. The year of the world, 3956. before Christ's Nativity, 8.

How Herod returned into Iudaea.

THe king having a prosperous wind, within a few days after atriued at
Caesarea; and from thence he went to Jerusalem; and calling together all the
people, as well the Citizens Herod returned to Jerusalem and made a speech
unto the people, and let them understand the cause of his injury, and remitted
the fourth part of his tribute.
as also the country people then present, there he told them the cause of his
journey, and how he had obtained immunities for the Jews living in Asia, that
they might converse there among the Gentiles without any molestation. Then he
recounted unto them, what felicity they had received and enjoyed by his
reign, seeing that his greatest care was so to provide for his subjects, that
they might want nothing. And to gratify them the more, he told them, that

CHAP. VI.
Of the discord in Herodes house, between him and his sons.

IN the mean time, the discord of his house was daily increased; for Salome
greatly maligned Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 3. al. 7. Salome perlecuteth
Mariammes children with natural hatred.
the two young men, as having a hereditarie hatred rooted in her heart; and
presumed by reason of her good success in her exploit practiced against their
mother, to Salome and Pheroras did renew their old hatred against them, who
daily practiced, by all means they could, to overthrow them: the young men
also hated them, but not with like hatred that they were hated of them. For
they for their ingenuous manners and noble race dissembled not their anger, but
with lavish tongues declared Alexander and Aristobulus being by Salome and
Pheroras drawn into bad words are by them accused to their father Herod.
their minds. But Salome and Pheroras contrariwise enuiously and craftily
prepared themselves a way by calumniations, always provoking the magnanimous
spirits of these young men, whose fierceness might soon bring them into
suspicion with their father, to the intent that he Salome not ceasing to
gather by their own speeches probable arguments of suspicion, that they did
not only take their mothers death impatiently, but also raging like young men,
did both bewail her death and their own case, who were compelled to live with
the murderers of their infortunat mother, and as it were contaminat themselves
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4. al. 8. Pheroras and Salome accuse Alexander and
Aristobulus before Herod
with living amongst them. And the absence of the king greatly increased this
their dissension; who being returned, and having made a speech unto the people,
he presently was admonished both by Pheroras and Salome his sister, that he was
in great danger, by reason of the Archelaus king of Cappadocia would help
them, to accuse their father unto Caesar. Herod hearing this, was greatly
troubled; and so much the more, for that he heard the same also reported unto
him by others: And hereby he was put in memory of that which was past, how
that for the dissension of his house he could not long enjoy his friends and
dearest wife. And as it were foreseeing by that that Herod was fortunate
abroad, and unfortunate at home.
was past what would ensue, and fearing some greater calamity would befall
him, he was altogether amazed. And truly as abroad he was most fortunate above
all hope; so at home he was most unhappy and unfortunate beyond men's opinion:
So that one may well doubt whether his fortunate success abroad did
counteruaile his misfortunes at home; or whether it had been Herod aduanceth
Antipater to bridie the arrogance of his sons.
good to call unto the court another son of his, whom he begat when he was a
private man, and to grace him with honors, and to oppose him against the other
two brethren, to the end, to bring down and repress their fierce and hautie
minds: (this son of his was called Antipater) not minded (which after
overcome by affection he did) to make him sole heir of all, but thinking
hereby to bridle Mariammes children, and to diminish their arrogancy by
setting them see The year of the world. 3956. before the Nativity of Christ. 8
that it was not needful to keep the inheritance of so flourishing a kingdom
only for them: wherefore he introduced Antipater one opposed against them,
that thereby the young men laying their pride aside, might show themselves more
tractable to their father: and so now he thought he had by this means
provided for the safety of these young men. But it fell out far otherwise,
then he expected, for the young men esteemed this fact as an injury done unto
them: And Antipater was of that nature, that having gotten promotion contrary
to his expectation, Antipater enciteth his father aganist his brothers.
he did endeavor all ways possible to be in greater account with his father
then the two young men, who was now through false accusations alienated from
him, and every day (as he also desired) ready to believe any thing that might
incense him against them.

Wherefore this was all his labor, yet had he an especial care not to be
thought an accuser of his brethren, but he used others of his accomplices, whom
the king nothing suspected, who Herod: And being many in number and trusty one
to an other, the young men were every day entrapped more and more: for many
times they shed tears for very grief of the contumelies and injuries that
they suffered; and many times they mentioned their mother, and complained unto
those whom they thought to be their friends, of their father, as one that dealt
not well with them: all which Antipaters partakers maliciously noting, and
adding thereunto something of their own invention, they did presently tell it
unto Herod; and so did nourish the dissension of his house. For the king being
moved hereat, and purposing to humble Mariammes children, did daily increase
Antipaters honors, and at his entreaties at last brought his mother into the
Herod brought Antipaters mother into his palace. Herod delivers Antipater
to Agrippa, to be carried to Rome.
court, and many times secretly writing unto Caesar in favor of Antipater, he
especially commended him in particular unto him: and being to sail to salute
Agrippa, who now was to depart out of Asia, having governed that province ten
years, he only took with him Antipater of all his sons, whom also he
committed unto Agrippa with many gifts, to go with him to Rome, and to be
brought into favor with Caesar; so that now all things seemed to be done, as
it were by this man's beck, and the young men to be already disinherited.

CHAP. VII.
How Antipater living at Rome, Herod brought Alexander and his brother
thither, Caesar.

THis journey did greatly advantage Antipater, and increase his honor, and
preeminence above his brethren: for he became famous at Rome being by his
fathers letters commended Antipater was honored at Rome. Antipater when he was
present incited his father against his brethren by hes, and being absent he did
the same by letters. Herude failed to Rome, and followed Caesar to Aquileia,
Herod accused his sons before Caesar.
unto all his friends there: yet this was a great grief unto him, that he
could not daily calumniate his brethren; for he feared least his fathers mind
should change, and so he should affect Mariammes children most. This was his
daily cogitation, but though he were absent, yet he ceased not by letters to
incite his father against them, as having care of his safety, but in deed for
that he thereby through his bad practices hoped to obtain the kingdom: so
that Herodes wrath against them, that he now was become a deadly enemy unto the
young men. But indeuouring to resist this affection, and fearing rashly in his
anger to commit any thing to prejudice them, he determined to sail again to
Rome, and there accuse his sons before Caesar, least he being lead away through
indignation and displeasure conceived against the young men, should seem to
cast off all love and fatherly affection toward them. And repairing to Rome
and not finding Caesar there, he followed him unto Aquileia, and coming to
speech of him, and requesting him to take notice of his misfortunes, he
presented his two sons, and accused them before Caesar of insolency, and for
having attempted to poison him, complaining their hatred to be gone so far,
that now by any wicked and execrable way whatsoever they sought their fathers
kingdom: notwithstanding that Caesar had given him full power and liberty
Caesar, and trouble his ears with these complaints. And spoke after this
manner: Have I deserved this at their hands? what wrong have I done them? or
how can they think it reason, that I who have exposed my self to so many
dangers, and undergone The year of the world. 3956. before Christ's birth 8.
so difficult labors for a long time to obtain the kingdom, should not
peaceably enjoy the same, and suffer me to be Lord of my own dominion, and
permit me the liberty to leave it unto him who shall deserve such honor in
the best performance of a son-like duty? So that the beholders hereof seeing
piety so rewarded, might hereby be the more incited thereunto, especially
seeing that without violating the law of nature, it is not lawful to think
any such thought: for no man can affect his fathers kingdom, but he does also
desire his fathers death, seeing that it is not permitted men to succeed those
in the kingdom who are yet alive. He alleged moreover, that for his part he
had had a care that they should want nothing convenient for a kind father to
provide for princely children, neither ornaments, nor followers, nor delights:
that also he had provided for them wives of noble race, and had married one of
them unto Archelaus his daughter king of Cappadocia: and which was the greatest
matter of all, he had not used the authority of a father against them after
these their enterprises, but brought them unto Caesar their common benefactor;
and that forsaking his own right of a father, who had been injured, or of a
king, against whom treason had bin wrought, he now was content to debate his
matter with them before such a judge, as well knew how to decide the thing in
question according to right and equity: yet requested he him that that offense
of theirs might not be left unpunished, nor he forced to lead the rest of his
life still in perpetual fear: seeing that it was expedient that they should
never see light again after such heinous offenses, and to escape unpunished
after the violating of all laws of God and nature. Herod having with a
vehement voice objected these accusations against his sons before Caesar;
Alias, chap. 9. Alexander and Aristo bulus move all that were present even
their father and accuser to tears and compassion.
trouble them, that they were not able to speak in their own defense, seeing
that in deed it was their want of skill and tender years, by reason whereof
they were so amazed. Which also Caesar well perceived, and all that were
present were so moved to compassion, that neither their father who was their
accuser could long refrain from being moved hereat to compassion.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Alexanders defense, and how the two brethren were reconciled unto their
father Herod.

THen the young men perceiving both their father and Caesar to relent, and the
rest that Alexander speaks in his own and his brothers defense.
were present partly to pity them, partly to shed tears of compassion: the
one of them named Alexander, who was the elder, framing his speech unto his
father, began thus to purge himself of the crimes objected against them. My
father, how well and friendly minded thou art toward us, this present
judgment declares: for had thou determined any Caesar our judge, it is an
argument that thou seek to save us: for no man brings any one to the
temple whom he purposes to destroy, which greatly aggrauateth our cause, who
do censure our selves unworthy to live, rather then to incur an opinion of
impiety committed against thee such a father. How far more expedient is it
to die guiltless, then to live suspected of such offenses. Wherefore, if truth
be our patron, we shall be happy either by thy own judgment, or for that we
have escaped danger: but if calumniations do prevail against us, it is
superfluous and to no purpose that we live. For what good would it do us, if
we live in continual suspicion? attempted, which may add credit to this
calumniation; Can any man show that poison was prepared The year of the world.
3956. before the Nativity of Christ. 8
by us for you; or that we conspired with any; or that we corrupted any
servants with money and gifts; or that we writ any letters against thee? yet may
calumniation feign every one of these upon no occasion. It is a grievous matter
for discord to be in a princes court; and the hope of dominion, which your
majesty affirmed to be the reward of piety; does often impell men's minds unto
heinous offenses. But although it be most certain that we cannot be convicted
of any crime; yet how can we clear our selves from accusations forged against
us before them that will not hear us? But did we speak some insolent words;
yet were they not against thee, O my father (for that had been impiety) but
against them who tell all they hear. We bewailed our mothers misfortune. It is
true: but not because she is dead, but because after her death she is evil
spoken of by those, who ought not to do it. We affect the kingdom of our
father Caesar being living? Thy children by thee begotten are not so impious
nor foolish, though more unfortunate then thy estate requires. And seeing thou
have nothing to accuse us of, or nothing to prove any accusation laid unto our
charge, how can thou be persuaded that we are guilty of such inhumane acts?
Caesar (who is Lord of all, and now our Judge) only this, that if thou can,
O my father, put away out of thy mind all suspicion of us, to suffer us to
live hereafter, how unhappy and unfortunate soever: for what is more miserable
than to be rashly accused without cause? But if thou can not, we living, live
without fear of us, let us die condemned by our own censure. For our lives
are not so dear unto us, that we desire to keep them to his molestation that
bestowed them upon us.

Caesar with these words, though before not greatly crediting such accusations
and slanders laid against them, was now more moved to believe that they were
guiltless; and the rather, All men do pity the young men. Caesar pronounces
the young me^ herein to have oftended, that they gave occasion of suspicion, and
he exhorreth the father to be reconciled to his children.
Herod, he perceived him also to be much moved, and all that were present
were sorrowful for the young men; so that all courtiers present thought hardly
of the king for the absurd and frivolous accusation framed against the^: and
the flower of their age, wherein they were now indaungered, moved all men's minds
what they could to assist them: And much more were they incited after that
Alexander had ingeniously refuted his fathers accusations, the accused
remaining still in the same habit and place, and for grief fixing their eyes
upon the ground. At last some hope appeared, so that the king himself seemed
to need some excuse, for having so rashly accused his sons without any
certain proof of his accusations. At last Caesar having a while deliberated
with himself, pronounced that the young men were innocent, and guiltless of
the crimes laid unto their charge: yet herein they were culpable, in that they
had so behaved Herod he requested him to lay aside all suspicion, and to be
reconciled unto his children. For it was unjustly Herod is reconciled to his
children.
done of him to believe such forged accusations against those whom he had
begotten, and that one might recompense another in time to come for their
former offenses, and renew the good will between them in times past, if to
abolish all suspicions either did hereafter show himself more friendly to
other then before. Caesar having thus admonished the young men, they preparing
themselves to entreat their fathers wonted favor; he not expecting so long,
came and embraced each of them one after another, they weeping exceedingly; and
all those that were present both servants and others did the like. Antipater
friendly dot^ congratulate his brethren returned into his fathers favor.
Herod dit^ give Caesar ^00. tale^.


Then giving humble thanks unto Casar, they departed together; and Antipater
with them Herod gave Caesar three hundredth talents, who was now bestowing his
gifts and presents at Rome, and exercising his liberality upon the people. And
Casar again bestowed upon him half of the revenues out of the mines of the
metal in Cyprus; and the other half unto the ouerseer thereof, and gracing
him otherways also, he gave him leave to choose which of his sons he pleased
for to succeed him in his kingdom; or if he had rather to distribute it
amongst them all which Herod presently would have done, but Caesar would not
The year of the world, 3956. before Christ's Nativity, 8. Caesar gave Herod
half his reuennes out of the mines of Cyprus. The rebels are conquered
permit him, affirming that during his life he should keep it all whole and
undivided, and his sons should be subject unto him.

After this Herod returned again into Iudaea, in whose absence the
Trachonites that were no small part of his kingdom, were revolted: yet by the
industry of the captains he left to ouersee all in his absence, they were
conquered again, and forced to do as they were commanded. As Herod and his
sons were sailing toward home, arriving at Eleusa a city of Cilicia which
is now called Sebaste, he found Archelaus there, who was king of Cappadocia.
Archelaus did courteously entertain Herod, and was very joyful that his
sons and he were made friends, and that Alexander his son in law had so
well cleared himself and his brother of the crimes laid unto their charge. And
so each one bestowing upon the other princely gifts, they departed, taking
Herod being new returned into Iudaea, and calling the people together into the
temple, told them all that had past in his absence from them, and the courtesy
of Caesar: and told them also of other affairs that he thought meet for them
to know, and turning the latter end of his speech unto his sons, and
exhorting the courtiers and common people to concord, he told them that his
sons should reign after him, and first of all Antipater: and after him his
sons that he had by Mariamme, Alexander and Aristobulus; in the mean time
every one of them should honor him as King and Lord, notwithstanding his old
age, which for long experience was the fitter to govern, seeing there was
nothing in him wanting to keep both his subjects and children in their
obedience; and that the soldiers also if they only respected him, should live
in all happiness and felicity without molestation. Having

CHAP. IX.
How Herod having finished Caesarea, for joy thereof did celebrate every
fifth year certain sports.

ABout this time Caesarea was finished, the tenth year after it was begun to
be built, the eight and twentieth year of Herodes reign, in the hundredth,
four score and twelve Olympiade. The year of the world, 3957. before Christ's
nativity, 7. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. al. 10. Caesrea is finished. O^nale
^men.
In the dedication hereof there was great pomp and sumotuous preparations:
Caesar, and were to be renewed every fifth year. All this provision the king
at his own cost and charges provided to be brought from any place whatsoever,
to show the greatness of his magnificence. Iulia Caesar's wife also bestowed much
of her, own to the furnishing hereof, and sent many precious things out of
Italy; so that the worth of them all amounted unto five hundredth talents. And a
great company being gathered together to behold these sports, he received all
Ambassadors sent unto him from other nations, to thank him for Caesar
himself and Agrippa often did say, that Herodes magnanimity was greater then
his present revenues could bear, and that Caesar and Agrippa commend Herod's
magnanimity. A^ipartis is built.
he well deserved an empire, as big as all Syria and Egypt. These sports being
ended, he builded another town in a field called Capharsaba, choosing for it a
watery soil fit for plants: the city was compassed with a river; and he also
planted round about it a wood full of most goodly trees. This town he called
Antipatris, after his fathers name Antipater. After which he also builded
Cypron is built.
and adorned within with rare and sumptuous edifices. And not forgetting his
brother, he dedicated unto him most goodly buildings: for first he built a
tower as big as Pharo in the city, The tower and town of Phasaelus is built.
in remembrance of his dead brother, and called it by his name Phasaelus, which
also was the strongest hold and defense in all the city. After this, he
builded a town near unto the valley of Jericho, as one goes toward the
north, whereby the fields that before almost lay desert were now tilled and
inhabited by the townsmen; so that of them it was named Phasaelus field. It
were hard The year of the world. 3957. before Christ's birth 7. Herod built
the temple of Pythius.
Apollo at Rhodes; and gave them many talents of silver to build their ships.
He also builded the greatest part of the public houses and places in the City
by Actium, which Caesar built for the Nicopolitanes there inhabiting, and that
with his own proper costs and charges: He also for the Antiochians inhabiting
the greatest City of Syria, builded porches on each side of the greater
street, that goes quite through the midst of the City, and does as it were
part it into two: and that street it self that lay open, he paued with
polished stone: which The sports of Olympus.
perpetual master and maintainer of those sports. It is admirable to see in
one man such diversity of minds: for on the one side if we respect his
liberality and beneficence toward all men, we must needs say, he was of a
most free and bountiful nature; contrariwise, if we consider the injuries and
cruelty he showed against his subjects and dearest friends, we must confess
him to Why Herod was liberal to strangers, and cruel to his own nation.
have been a hard man, and intractable, and who passed all bounds of modesty;
so that we would think him to have been of two contrary dispositions. But I
am otherwise persuaded, and Caesar, Agrippa, and others of their friends: for
he desired to be an example unto his subjects, that as he himself honored men
better then himself; so they should all honor him likewise: thereby declaring
what thing he did naturally most desire. But the Jews religion does not permit
them license to honor potentates, who of necessity ought to have greater care
and respect of right and equity, then of such officiousness toward
superiors: for it was disprofite enough unto the Jews that they could not
with statuaes Herod greedy of honor.
and temples obtain the kings favor, and with such like flatteries satisfy
the fond appetites of a vaineglorious man. And this seems to me to be the
reason that Herod was unjust, and hard

CHAP. X.
Of the Embassage of the Cyrenian and Asian Jews unto Caesar.

THe Asian and Cyrenian Jews were greatly afflicted by the Citizens of those
countries, who having had the same privileges granted unto them by the
ancient kings that the Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10. The Jews of Asia and
Cyrenc being afflicted by the inahbitants there send an embassage to Caesar,
and do obtain of him immunitie,
Citizens had, were now greatly injured by the Greeks: as though they carried
money Caesar, who wrote unto every province, that it was his pleasure that the
Jews should enjoy like privileges with the other inhabitants of the country.
The copy of which writing we have here set down, that it may the better
appear, how the Roman Emperors of ancient times were affected unto our nation.

Caesar Augustus Pont. Max. Trib. potestatis, thus decrees. For as much as the
nation of the The year of the world 3957. before Christ's Nativity. 7.
Jews has always been trusty unto the Romans, not only at this day, but also
in all former ages, and especially in the time of our father Caesar the
Emperor, under Hircanus their high priest: I have ordained, that according to
the common sentence of the Senate, they shall live after their country laws,
under which they lived in the time of Hircanus the high priest of God: and that
their temple shall retain the right of a sanctuary, and that it shall be
lawful for them to send votiue money unto Jerusalem by certain persons: and
that they shall not be compelled to appear before any judge upon their Sabbath
days, or the day before their Sabaoths, after nine of the clock upon the
preparation day. And if any one be known to steal the holy books, or holy
money laid up in their places appointed for religion, he shall be guilty of
sacrilege: and his goods shall be confiscate unto the treasury of the people
of Rome. I also decree for the good C. Marcius Censorinus, shall together with
this my edict be published in that famous place, which all Asia has dedicated
unto my name, to wit, Argyra. And if any shall be so hardy as to do contrary
to our decree, he shall be punished extraordinarily. This was engraven in a
pillar in Caesar's temple. Caesar wishes health unto Norbanus Flaccus: let it
be lawful for all Jews wheresoever living, to carry their sacred money unto
Jerusalem, according to their ancient custom, and that no man should forbid
them so to do: and this did Caesar write in favor of the Jews.

Agrippa also wrote in the Jews behalf, as follows: Agrippa wishes health
unto the magistrates, Senate, and people of Ephesus. I will that the Jews
living in Asia keep their sacred Agrippa writ unto the rulers of Ephesus in
the Jews behalf, and to Syllanus and the magistrates of Cyrena.
money, which according to the custom of their country, they are wont to send
unto Jerusalem: Syllanus the magistrate, that the Jews might not be
constrained upon their Sabaoths to appear before a Judge. M. Agrippa wishes
health to the Cyrenian magistrates, and Senate. The Jews inhabiting amongst
you, for whom Augustus has already written unto Flauius the president of
Libya, and unto other magistrates of that province, are not to be hindered from
sending their holy money to Jerusalem; as their custom is: and they have now
complained unto me, that they are molested by the false accusations of some bad
people, and forbidden to do it under pretense of a certain tribute, which
notwithstanding they are not to pay. Wherefore I command that they may be
permitted to live after their custom, C. Norbanus Flaccus proconsul, Health
unto the magistrates of Sardinia: Caesar has written unto me, commanding that
no man hinder the Caius Norbanus Flaccus writes in the Jews behalf. Julius
Antonius proco^full.
Jews, according to their custom, to send sacred money unto Jerusalem:
wherefore I also write unto you of the same, that you may not be ignorant both
of my will and Caesar's also. Moreover, Julius Antonius proconsul did also write
unto this effect, Health unto the magistrates, Senate and people of Ephesus.
The Jews of Asia in the Ideas of February, I sitting in judicial seat at
Ephesus, signified unto me, that Caesar Augustus and Agrippa have permitted
them to use their country customs; and every one, according as he thinks
good, to contribute his first fruits for Caesar's and Agrippas decrees and
ordinances, do permit and grant them also to do all things they please,
according unto their country customs, forbidding any man to hinder them
therein.

I have thought good to annex these decrees, for that I know that these my
writings will come unto the Grecians hands, that I may show them that in former
ages we were so esteemed of the public magistrates that were not permitted to
hinder us from using our country rites and ceremonies; and that by their
consent we worshipped God in our own religion: which I do inculcate despise us
for that we differ from them in religion, but favor us in that we follow
virtue. For The year of the world. 3957. before Christ's birth 7.


CHAP. XI.
How Herod having need of money, opened David's Sepulcher.

Herod spending lauishly much and many sums of money, both at home and
abroad, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7. al. 7. 12. The desire of gold.
hearing that Hircanus, who reigned before him, opened David's Sepulcher, and
took out of it three thousand talents of silver, and that there was left yet
far more, able to defray any great charges whatsoever, he long time purposed
to do the like. And at this time in Hircanus did; but he took from thence a
great company of precious attires and ornaments of gold; whereby he was entised
to make a more diligent search: and he sent two of his company for the nonce
into the inner part of the Sepulcher, where the bodies of Solomon and David
were intombed, who were there lost, and as it is reported, fire came out of
those secret places and consumed Herod lost two of his men in David's
sepulcher. Nicholaus the histotiographer reproved
them. Whereat Herod being terrified, departed out of it; and moved with
religion to make satisfaction, he builded a most sumptuous monument of white
marble, at the entrances into the Sepulcher: of which building Nicholaus also a
writer of that time, makes mention; but he speaks not how they went into the
Sepulcher of David, thinking that therein he should not keep Herodes cruelty
against Mariamme, and his sons; as though he did thereby deserve credit and
praise, accusing her of adultery, and them as traitors unto their father: and
this he does clean through his works, too much extolling the kings good
deeds, and too diligently excusing his bad deeds and iniquities. But as I
have said, we must pardon him, who did not so much write to leave a memory of
things done unto after ages, as to gratify and please his king. But I, who
come of the lineage of the Asamonian Joseph came of the priestly line of the
Asamoncens. A discord in Herod's house
kings, and execute the office of a Priest, account it a shame to lie: and do
intend truly to recount the history of all things that were acted and done,
yet with a reverence of the posterity of that king, who do also now bear
sway and rule* yet with their pardon and leave, having a greater care to the
verity of our history, then to them.

After the Sepulcher was thus violated, Herod's house began to decay, whether
revenge lighting upon that part which was already scarce sound, or whether by
mere chance such calamity at that time befell him, as might justly be thought
the reward of impiety. For there was a discord in the court not unlike unto
civil wars, every one striving against other with hatred and forged
accusations, but especially Antipaters politic practice against his brethren
was to be noted, who entangling them by other men's forged accusations, himself
oftentimes seemed to take Antipaters crafty plotting against his brethren.
Ptolomeus his procurator unto Antipater his son, and did communicate all his
secrets unto his mother, so that all things were done according as they
pleased, and they made him displeased against those whom they knew the kings
displeasure might redoud unto their profit.

But Mariammes children did every day stomach the matter more and more,
disdaining to give place unto their inferior: and for their nobiltie not
enduring to be removed from their places and not to keep their dignity also:
their wives did the like, and Alexanders wife Glaphyra, The women ax discord
and variance.
who was the daughter of Archelaus king of Cappadocia, did greatly envy and
disdain Salome; Aristobulus should be in equal honor with her. Pheroras also
the kings brother had a hand in this other contention about a private cause of
suspicion and hatred. For he fell so far in love with one of his maids, that
he Pheroras refused the kings daughter offered him t^ wife.
refused the kings daughter offered unto him, rather making choice of his
maid. Herod took this in very evil part, seeing his brother (who had
received so many benefits at his hands, and was almost his fellow in his
kingdom by his means) not to show the like brotherly affection to The year
of the world, 3957. before Christ's Nativity, 7.
him again as he then ought, and himself to be an unhappy brother. And
seeing he could not dissuade him from that madness, he married his daughter
unto Phasaelus his son, and afterward thinking that now his brothers mind
toward his maid was satisfied, he complaining of his injurious dealing in
repulsing his daughter offered unto him to wife, he now offered him another of
his daughters named Cypros. Then Ptolomeus advised Pheroras not still to
contemn his brothers offer, and persist in such folly; telling him it was his
mere folly therefore to incur the kings displeasure and hatred, and loss of
tranquillity. Pheroras understanding this counsel profitable for him, having
been once before injuriously accused, and obtained pardon at the kings hands,
sent away his maid, by whom he now had a son, and promised the king to mary
this his other daughter; and appointed the thirtith day after to celebrate his
marriage; making a solemn

Then Herod, not able any longer to contain himself, used many speeches,
whereby he evidently showed his mind to be alienated from his brother. And
there were many, who taking hereat opportunity, did by forged calumniations
increase his alienation: so that now there was no day nor hour past, wherein
he did not still hear some new alterations and stirs amongst his dearest
friends; whom nature willed to combine themselves to maintain concord and
amity. For Salome being now offended at Mariammes children, did not permit her
daughter married unto Aristobulus, Salome entised (...) daughter to bewray her
husbands se^ts,
one of the young men, to enjoy mutual love and comfort of her husband,
enticing her Alexander were alone, that then they were wont to talk of
Mariamme their mother, and use reproachful words against their father; and
threatening, that if they ever did obtain the kingdom, they would make the
sons of the king, whom he had by other wives, notaries and towne-clerkes: and
so they might reap profit of their learning which they now studied for: and
whenever they saw any of the kings wives wear any of Mariammes apparel,
that then they vowed in steed of that attire, to cloth them with sackcloth,
and shut them up where they should never see the Sun. Salome presently told
all this to the king:

But presently the mischief was againse set on foot, for Pheroras the kings
brother, meeting Alexander, who (as we have said) was Glaphyra her husband, who
was daughter to Archelaus: he Herod greatly moved against Pheroras for
a^firming that he was a in love with Glaphyra.
told him that he heard by Salome; that Herod was far in love with Glaphyra: so
that he could not shake off this affection. The young man hearing this, became
jealous, and was in a great rage: and now what honor soever or gifts Herod for
the love of his son gave her, Alexander did interpret it in the worst sense,
being now made jealous by that which he had heard of Pheroras, and Pheroras had
told him. But Herod was hereat the more enflamed, not enduring himself falsely
to be accused of so shameful a fact, inueighin against the great malice of his
friends, who for his great good tur^s he did them, so rewarded him. And
presently sending for Pheroras, very sharply he began to^ hide him, saying: O
most impious that lives amongst men! art thou become so ungrateful, either to
speak or think such a matter of us? Think thou that I do not perceive thy
drift, that thou speak not these words unto thy son to discredit me, but
also to the intent by this means thou might work some treason against me,
and cause me to be poisoned? For who but a good son, as this is, would suffer
his father, suspected for such a matter, to live, and not be revenged of him
for such offense? Whether do thou think but I will honor them above their
merits. The king having discharged his choler against his brother The year of
the world. 3957. before Christ's bir^ 7. Salome excuses her self.
Pheroras; and he being taken in a manifest fault, answered, that that report
was first devised by Salome, of whom he heard it, which she (being then
present) hearing, began to exclaim, saying, it was not her devise, and that
they all labored to make the king hate her, and to put her to death, being one
who did especially wish him well; and what in her lay, seeking his safety: and
that now he was in danger of more treason then ever before: for (said she) I
was the only cause that you did put away the woman, whom you so doated after,
persuading you to marry the kings daughter: and this is the cause that you
hate me. With these speeches tearing her hair, and striking her breast, she
made a show of innocence: but this her gesture was a color to hide her bad
intent. So Pheroras was left in great pexplexitie, not knowing what to say or
do; and finding no pretense to excuse his fact: for on the one side he
confessed, that he told it unto Alexander; Herod believe, that he heard it of
Salome. This contention endured a good while, at last the king being wearied
sent away his brother, and his sister, and greatly commending his sons
moderate mind, and that he had given him intelligence of those speeches very
late in the night, he went to supper.

After this contention, Salome was hardly thought of, because she was judged to
be the author of this ill report, and the kings wives wished evil unto her,
because they knew her to be of strange The effect of calumniation.
qualities and hard to please, and so variable, that according to the time, one
while she would profess friendship, and presently after hatred. Wherefore they
still had some thing to inform Herod of against her, taking occasion happening
by chance, which was this. There was a king of the Arabians, named Obodas, a
slothful man, and one given to idleness: and there was one Syllaeus Syllaeus
the Arabian desiring Salome to wife was denied.
Syllaeus coming unto Herod about some business, and viewing Salome, who then
sat at supper with him, began to set his mind upon her, and finding she was a
widow, he entered into talk with her, and she finding her brother now not so
friendly unto her as before he had been, and also entangled with the beauty
of this young man, did not greatly deny to marie him, and many feasts being
made at that time, they showed evident signs of their mutual consent, and
love one unto another. The kings wives told the king of this in scoffing sort:
Herod herewith not contented, demanded of Pheroras how the matter stood, and
willed him at supper time to note if he could epsy any tokens of familiarity
betwixt them: And Pheroras told him that by signs and mutual viewing one
another, they sufficiently showed their intents. After this the Arabian Herod
concerning this matter, requesting him to let Salome be his wife: affirming
that that affinity would be profitable unto him for the traficke between his
people and the Arabians, whose prince he was to be, and did already enjoy a
great part of the dominion. Herod told all this unto his sister, and asked her
if she would marie him: and she answered, she would. Then they requested that
Syllaus should become a Jew in religion, or else it was not lawful for him to
mary her. He would not condescend hereunto, affirming that he should be stoned
to death by his people, if he did it; and so he departed without obtaining his
purpose. From that time forth, Pheroras, and especially the kings wives accused
Salome of intemperancy, affirming that she had had the company of the Arabian.
Now Herod determined to marry his Salomes son, whom Pheroras refused for the
love of his maid, which son of Salomes was her eldest that she had by
Costabarus; and that to show his good will toward Salome his sister. But he was
dissuaded by Pheroras, who told him that the young man would never love such a
father in law, because of his fathers death, persuading him rather to marie her
to his eldest son, who was to succeed him in his Tetrarchie: which he easily
persuaded the king unto, and so obtained pardon for his former offense.
Wherefore the spousals being changed, the maid was Herod married his daughter
to Pheroras son.
married unto the youg man, who had an hundred talents in dowry with her, more
then otherwise should have been given with her.

But all this while the dissension of Herodes house did not cease, but rather
increased, he having a shameful beginning, and coming to a sorrowful end.
Herod had three Eunuchs, whom he The sons hatred toward their father is
bewraied.
Alexander with great sums of money, and being upon tortures examined if they
had accompanied with him, they confessed all: yet they affirmed that they knew
no practice of his attempted against his father. But their torments being
increased by Antipaters favorites, they were forced to confess that Alexander
secretly hated his father, and he exhorted them to forsake Herod, who The
year of the world 3957. before Christ's Nativity. 7.
was now good for nothing; who dissembled his age by painting his face to make
himself seem younger then he was, and coloring his head and beard black,
which were already grown very white through age: but rather fer their minds
upon him who would in despite of his father enjoy his kingdom due unto him,
and that then he would advance them to the highest honors of the kingdom: for
he had not only title unto it by his birth, but also was now prepared likewise
to invade it; and that he had many of the captains of the soldiers, and many
of the kings friends on his side, who were prepared to do or endure any thing
for his sake.

Herod hearing this, fear and anger did invade him, by reason that his sons
words seemed both contumelious and threatening, and being for both these causes
in a rage, he feared some greater matter to be put in practice against him,
which he could not suddenly, and having so little Herod crediteth all tales,
and so puts many to death unjustly.
to death. Then they of his household every one being careful to save
himself, were one turned against another, every one deeming it his own
safety to prevent others, by accusing them unto Herod: which done, presently
they incited other men's envy against them, and every one of them to desire
such measure as they had measured unto others: and thus they also revenged
their private quarrels; and presently after, they themselves were taken, and
did by other men's Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8. Herod denies to be familiar
with Andromachus and Gemellus.
whose fidelity he had before times experienced, not to come in his sight; nor
within his court gates. For he did now shake off the friendship between
Andromachus and Gemellus and himself, who were his ancient friends, and
oftentimes had gone Ambassadors for him, and always been of his counsel, and
had been tutors unto his children, in whom he had always reposed more
Demetrius was familiar with Alexander; and Gemellus, for that he knew him to
wish well unto Alexander: for he was one of them Antipater the cause of all
mischief.
who had brought him up, and had abode with him at his being at Rome. And no
doubt but he had censured them with some more heavy sentence, had it not been
that they were so eminent persons. Wherefore at that time he was contented to
have banished them, and deprived them of all their authority, to the end, that
having now disgraced these good men, he might the more freely play the tyrant.
Antipater was the cause of all this mischief, who from the first time that
Many were tortured and examined for Alexanders cause.
he perceived his father to be fearful and suspicious, still after that
joined with him as a counselor, and as it were increased his rage and
cruelty; and then he gallantly played his part, endeavoring, that whosoever
would resist him should be made away. Wherefore Andromachus and the Alexander,
to see if they were guilty; or if they knew of any treason to be practiced
against him: but they knowing nothing to inform him of, died amidst their
torments. Where he so much more tortured others, for that contrary to his
opinion, he found not so much as an evil thought against him; Antipater
craftily interpreting it, that they had rather in torments conceal the truth,
then to show themselves not trusty to their masters and friends: wherefore
many being taken he caused them to be tortured to get some thing out of some of
them. At last one amongst the rest, not able to endure those torments imposed
upon him, said; that he had often heard Alexander say: so often as any one
commended his goodly stature, or skillful shooting and the rest of his virtues,
that these qualities nature bestowed upon him rather then other benefits;
Alexander to have conspired with his brother Aristobulus to kill his father
when he was hunting, and then to fly with speed unto Rome, and beg the
kingdom of Caesar. There were also found some of this young man's letters The
year of the world. 3957. before the Nativity of Christ. 7.
written unto his brother, complaining of the injurious dealing of his father,
who had given certain grounds unto Antipater, the yearly revenues whereof
amounted unto two hundredth talents. Then Herod thinking himself to have
probability enough, his former suspicion was now confirmed; and so he took
Alexander and cast him in prison: and again he began to rage; notwithstanding
that himself did scarcely believe the informations against him: neither could
he himself devise any cause wherefore they should seek to work treason
against him. And those complaints seemed childish: neither was it probable that
having openly killed his father, Alexander being in prison his friends were
tortured. One accused Alexander to have sent letters to Rome against his
father. Alexander confesses the treason, and who had a hand in it.
he would afterward have gone to Rome. Wherefore endeavoring to find some
stronger argument of his sons impiety, and because he would not be thought
rashly to have committed his son to prison, he caused the most noble and
eminent of all Alexanders welwillers to be

Whilst thus all the court did resound with fear, torments, and contentions;
a certain man accused Alexander to have sent letters to his friends at Rome,
to entreat them to cause him to be sent for by Caesar thither, that he might
accuse his father of certain conspiracies against Caesar, and how he more
esteemed the friendship of Mithridates king of the Parthians, then the
friendship of the Romans: affirming also, that he had poison ready prepared at
Ascalon. Herod hearing this, was comforted by the parasites about him, as
having not done any thing rashly; and so he gave now full credit unto all: yet
the poison was diligently sought for, but could not be found. Alexander being
now oppressed with this calamity, he yet took courage, and because he would
more incite his fathers displeasure against him, he did not deny it: perhaps
meaning to make his Pheroras and his most trusty friends were herein
conspirators: And that in the night time Salome came secretly unto him, and as
it were forced him to lie with her; and that all of them aimed at this mark, to
have him made away, that so they might enjoy their wished liberty. He also
accused Ptolomeus and Sapinnius of this conspiracy, who were more faithful
unto the king, then all others: so that now these men, who before were most
friendly one to an other, began like mad men to rage one against another: and
punishment so hastily pursued every one, that they had not leisure Herod was
so troubled with the contention in his house that he was weary of his life.
and heaviness, wherewith the wonted felicity thereof was destroyed. Herod
himself amidst these calamities, could not but be weary of his life, who not
daring trust himself in any bodies hand, he was tormented with a daily and
hourly fear of some untimely death, that would befall him: and many times
persuaded himself, that he did see his sons before him with a drawn sword,
ready to kill him; and this was his cogitation night and day, so that herewith
he almost ran mad.

CHAP. XII.
How Archelaus king of Cappadocia reconciled Alexander unto his father.

Whilst Herod was thus troubled in his mind, Archelaus king of Cappadocia
careful Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9. al. 13. Archelaus the king of Cappadocia
seineth displeasure against Alexander his son in law, and so reconciled. Herod's
unto him.
for his daughter, and the young man his son in law, and pitying his friend
Herod entangled in such calamities; he thought it his duty to make a journey
unto him. And finding him so affected as it was reported unto him before his
coming, he thought it an unfit way to argue him of too much credulity and
rashness; perceiving that thereby he would Archelaus devised an other way to
appease these troubles. Wherefore he counterfaited indignation against the
young man, approouing all the kings actions for good; affirming that he would
break the band of wedlock between his daughter and Alexander, and that if
she knew of the conspiracy, and did not inform the king thereof, himself
would punish her. Then Herod contrary to his expectation, seeing Archelaus so
angry for the offense committed against him, began to remit his anger; and now
with just consideration waighing what he had done by The year of the world.
3957. before Christ's birth 7.
little and little, he began to have a fatherly affection, and to be hereby
moved to compassion; yet so often as any one sought to excuse the young man, he
grew to be very angry thereat. But when Archelaus also began to accuse him,
then Herod's heart relented, and he with tears besought Archelaus not to yield
too much to anger, nor for the young man's offense break off the marriage. Then
Archelaus perceiving him to relent, began to turn the matter against Herod's
friends, Archelaus lai* cth the fault of Alexanders offense upon others, and
especially upon ^roas.
as the causers of all this mischief, who had corrupted the young man, who of
himself was void of malice; and especially he aggrauated the matter against
Pheroras the kings brother. Pheroras having now incurred the kings displeasure,
perceived that none could so soon reconcile him unto the king, as Archelaus;
wherefore clothed in black, and making other signs as though he despaired of
his life, he went unto him; who did not deny to help him what he could:
Pheroras confessed himself to be author of all mischief, and obtains pardon
of his brother.
himself to have been cause of all this mischief; by which confession of his
the kings wrath would be greatly appeased, and so he also should have better
occasion to entreat for him. Pheroras followed his counsel, which fell out
happily for them both: for the young man contrary to any ones expectation, was
freed from all his troubles; and Archelaus made Pheroras and Herod friends;
and he himself having now gotten great friendship of the king in those his
adverse and troublous times of his, he returned joyful into Cappadocia, being
rewarded with rich gifts, and being accounted of as Herodes chiefest friend.
They also agreed amongst themselves, that Herod should go to Rome, because he
had already written unto Caesar, concerning this matter, Herod accompanied
Archelaus unto Antioch.
and they both went together unto Antiochia, and there Herod reconciled Titus
the president of Syria unto Archelaus, and so he returned into Iudaea.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Trachonites revolted.

Whilst Herod going to Rome was absent from his kingdom, the Arabian wars
began, hereby taking an occasion. The inhabitants of Trachon, whose country
Caesar taking The year of the world, 3958. before Christ's nativity, 6. The
cause of the Arabian war. Caesar gave Trachonitis to Herod Alias, chap. 14.
from Zenodorus gave it unto Herod, being forbidden and hindered from
stealing, were now forced to frame themselves to live like husbandmen in more
civility, then before: but this kind of life pleased them not; neither did
their country yield fruits worth their labors, yet at Herod compelling them
thereunto they abstained from iniuring the inhabitants bordering upon them,
which did greatly redound unto Herodes credit, by whose diligence they were
brought unto it. But when Herod was sailed into Italy to accuse Alexander, and
to commend Antipater unto Caesar; the Trachonites hearing a brute of his
death, revolted and turned to their accustomed robberies: Yet were they at that
time again subdued in the kings absence by the captains that he left at home,
and forty of the chiefest of the thieves amongst them being taken, the rest
terrified by their example left their own country, and fled into Arabia,
where Syllaeus Herodes captains subdue the rebels in Arabia.
received them in revenge that he could not obtain Salome for his wife; and
receiving of him a strong hold to dwell in, they did not only make incursions,
and rob and spoil the borders of Iudaea, but also of Coelesyria, and drove
away the prays they got into the place allotted them, Syllaeus Herod
returning from Rome, found that his people were greatly endomaged by these
thieves, and seeing he could not subdue them by reason the Arabians did protect
them, not enduring that injury and entering into Trachon, he killed all The
thieves taken and punished.
their families; whereby they were so much the more enraged against his
country; for they had a law amongst them, whereby they were commanded to
revenge the death of their families, and so contemning all dangers they came
and wasted all Herodes country, with continual incursions. Then the king
complained hereof unto Saturninus and Voluminous then presidents sent thither by
Caesar, requesting that he might have the thieves to punish them. They hearing
this Alias, chap. 15
news, with as much speed as they might, gathered their forces together, and
making themselves stronger then they were before, with sudden incursions
wasted all where they came, destroying Herod demanded the thieves to be
delivered unto him, and the money he had lent to be repared.
a war, rather then a robbery: for now they were a thousand in number.
Wherefore Herod required these thieves and robbers to be delivered unto him,
and required the debt that Obodas ought him, for Herod had lent Obodas
threescore talents, and sent them unto him by Syllaeus, and now the time was
expired where in the money was to be repaied. But Syllaeus, who had taken all
the rule from Obodas, and himself now governed all, denied that those thieves
were in Arabia, and deferred the payment of the money: so that now this matter
was debated on before The year of the world. 3958. before Christ's birth 6.
Saturninus and Voluminous the rulers of Syria, do reconcile Herod and the
Arabia^s.
Saturninus and Voluminous then Presidents of Syria. At last it was by them
determined, that within thirty days, the money dew to Herod should be
repaied, and the runnawaies of both countries delivered each to other. But
there was no one Arabian that either had fled unto Herod for any offense
committed nor for any other cause: but the Arabians were convicted to receive
the thieves that fled from Herod.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Herod went into Arabia with an army.

WHen the day was come that was appointed, Syllaeus not minded to stand unto
the agreement Herod exacted his money, and the Herod by the permission of
Saturninus and Voluminous entered into Arabia with an army. and destroyed the
castle callep Repra. Nacebus with 25. Arabians slain. Herod carried 3000.
Idumaeans into Trachon.
thieves to be restored unto him, Saturnius and Voluminous permitting him with
force of arms to persecute those obstinate people: so he leuying an army, went
into Arabia, in three days space going as far as ordinarily men were wont to
march in seven, and coming unto the castle wherein the thieves kept, at the
first onset he took it, and destroyed it, being called Repta, and did no other
harm unto the inhabitants. And a captain of the Arabians named Nacebus came to
succor the thieves, and so fought with Herodes army, in which battle a few of
Herodes men were slain, but of the Arabians were slain five and twenty; with
their general; and the rest were put to flight. Being thus revenged upon the
thieves, he led three thousand Idumaeans into Trachon to keep the inhabitants
from robbing, and sent letters unto the Roman governors, who abode in
Phaenicia,

CHAP. XV.
How Syllaeus accused Herod unto Caesar.

But then were messengers hastily sent unto Syllaeus at Rome, and informed him
otherwise aggravating every thing according unto their fashion. Syllaeus being
then before insinuated Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 10. al. 16. Syllaeus accused
Herod unto Caesar.
into Caesar's acquaintance, by chance was then also about the palace; and
hearing these news, he presently changed his apparel, and clothing himself
in black, he went in this Caesar, informing him how Arabia was afflicted with
wars, and that the whole kingdom was wasted by Herod, who had entered into
the country with an army, and with tears complained that two thousand and
five hundredth of the Arabian nobility were slain, and amongst them his friend
and kinsman Nacebus, and great riches were taken away, which were laid up at
Repta, and that all this was done in contempt of Obodes who had no army ready,
nor a fit captain for his forces, he being not there. Syllaeus having thus
spoken, adding moreover that he would not have come to Rome, but that he was
persuaded that Caesar would have had a care of the common peace, and
tranquillity of his subjects, and that had he been at home Herod to his cost,
should have violated that peace. Caesar hereat was greatly moved, and enquired
of some of Herodes friends, who were then present; and of certain men that
were larely come out Herod had led an army out of the limits of his own
kingdom. Which they not denying, and Caesar not vouchsafing to hear the cause
why, his displeasure against Herod was greatly increased, so that he writ
threatening letters unto him; telling him that hitherto he had used him as a
friend, but hereafter he would use him as a subject; which also Syllaeus
signified unto the Arabians. By which letters of his they were made proud, and
would neither render up unto him the thieves that were escaped; nor restore the
money he lent their king; not pay him The Arabians and Trachonites
understanding that Caesar was offended with Herod, resolce thereat.
rent for the pasture ground that they hired of him; boulstering themselves
herewith, that the king had offended Casar. Moreover, the Trachonites hearing
this, rebelled against the garrison of the Idumaeans, and joining with the
Arabian thieves, who wasted their country, not so much respecting their own
gain as their revenge and particular profit, they did many misciefes Herod
did put up all injuries, and durst not once mutter, Caesar being offended at
him; for the which cause he was not courageous nor valiant as before: For first
of all, Caesar would not admit his ambassadors, whom he sent to plead his
cause before Caesar; and Herod again sending other ambassadors, Caesar sent
them back aagaine, their business undone.

Wherefore Herod being in this perplexity, greatly feared Syllaeus, who being
now at Rome, did easily persuade Caesar anything; for that Caesar was now very
credulous; and Syllaeus aimed The year of the world, 3960. before Christ's
Nativity, 4. Caesar offended with Herod. Obodas dying Aeneassucceeded him in
the Arabian kingdom. Caesar would not give audience to the Arabian ambassadors.
at some greater matter. For Obodas dying, Aeneas succeeded him in the kingdom
of Arabia; who changing his name, called himself Aretas, whom Syllaeus by
forged calumniations did seek to depose from the crown, and usurp the
kingdom unto himself; giving great sums of money unto the courtiers, and
promising great sums unto Caesar; whom he now perceived to be angry against
Aretas, for that without his consent he presumed to take upon him the
government of the kingdom. But at last he also sent letters and gifts unto
Caesar, and amongst the rest a crown of gold worth many talents, and in those
letters he accused Syllaeus, who, as an impious and disloyal servant, had
poisoned his king Obodas; in whose life time he had also invaded the government
of the kingdom, committing adultery with the Arabians wives, getting together
other men's money, thereby to obtain the kingdom. Caesar would not permit
these ambassadors Herod feared that if he did defend himself, he should so
much the more incite Caesar against him; and so was forced to put up all
injuries that were done unto him; Herod sent Nicholaus Damascene to Caesar.
and finding no end of his miseries, he finally determined to send again to
Rome ambassadors, to see if by the help of his friends Caesar might be
persuaded to think better of him, and so committed that embassage unto
Nicholaus of Damasco, and sent him to Rome.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Euryclis his calumniations against Herodes sons.

AT this time the dissension of Herodes house was much increased; and although
at all Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11. al. 17. Eurycles a Lacedemonian ^nuateth
(...) into Herodes familiarity. Eurycles insinuated himself into Alexanders
friendship.
other times his court was never void of suspicion, which is a pernicious evil
to Kings and Princes, yet at that time especially this mischief was in his
principal vigor and force. For one Eurycles a Lacedemonian and a noble man of
his country, but having a turbulent wit given over to flattery and pleasure,
yet cunningly dissembling both vices, coming unto Herod and giving him gifts,
and receiving greater gifts at his hands, was by him courteously entertained;
and familiarly conuersing with him, brought it so to pass that he was received
amongst his especial Eurycles lodged at Antipaters house, being also familiar
with Alexander for their often meeting one another: for he said that Archelaus
king of Cappadocia and himself were great friends; and therefore he
counterfaited himself to reverence Glaphyra very much; and all men judging
him in different unto all parties, he diligently noted whatsoever past, and
every word that was spoken, seeking by all means he could, matter to gratify
others by carrying of tales; and with such flattering fair speeches he
insinuated himself into every man's friendship, that he seemed as Alexanders
sole trusty friend, and to use other men as it behooued a friend. And by this
his deceit he so insinuated himself into Alexanders favor, that the young man
thought him to be his only friend, unto whom he might impart his secrets; so
that Alexander opened unto him his grief, for that his father was something
alienated from him, and recounted unto him his mothers Antipater had now gotten
all authority and dignity from him, and his brother: and was the only man
that could do all; and that these injuries were no longer tolerable, their
father being now so incited against them, that now he would neither admit them
unto his counsels; nor banquets. And he committed his griefs (as he then
thought) into his friends bosom. But Eurycles told Antipater all, affirming
that though it nothing concerned him, yet he could not but speak of it for the
greatness of the danger then imminent, willing him to beware of Alexander, who
did not stick openly to show what mind he bare, but did as it were manifestly
show that he desired to make away his father. Which done, he received of
Antipater most rich gifts, as pledges of his good will toward him; and finally
he was by him persuaded to relate this news himself unto Herod. The king
lent a greedy care whilst he recounted Eurycles observing all Alexanders
words and actions related them to Antipater and Herod. Eurycles by craft got
money of Archelaus.
Alexanders malice, and was so moved with the circumstances of his speeches,
that he conceived a deadly hatred against his son; which also without futer
delay he did make manifest: for he rewaded Eurycles for his pains with fifty
talents. Which he having received went unto Archelaus, and tal^g and speaking
well of Alexander, recounted unto him in what steed he had stood him in
reconciling him unto his father: and receiving of him also a sum of money, he
departed before his mali^ was disco^d; and returning into his country, and
using the like shifts there also, he was finally by his countrymen banished
from Lacedemonia. Furthermore, The year of the world. 3960. before the
Nativity of Christ 4^ Herod does give care unto the accusers of Alexander and
Aristobulus. Iucundus and Tyrannus confess that Alexander did solicit them to
kill Herod as he was a hunting.
Herod not content now, as before he was, to hear only that which was told
him of Alexander and Aristobulus, did now himself also conceive a proper
hatred against them himself, observing all things, and making diligent
inquiry though no man accused them, and permitting all men to speak what they
list against them. And amongst the rest Euaratus of Cous had conspired with
Alexander, and he seemed now to hear no talk more willingly then this, and
such like. But then greater misfortunes then all the rest befell the young men's
false accusations, never ceasing to be forged against them, and every one as
it were, striving to accuse them of some crime or other unto the king,
pretending the care they bare of his safety. Herod had two champions,
Iucundus and Tyrannus; both acceptable and grateful unto him, for their
strength and tall stature and bigness of body, these two for some offense were
banished the court and received into Alexanders service, and placed amongst his
stipendarie horsemen; and for that they were very active he bestowed many
gifts and much money upon them. Whereat the king presently conceiving
suspicion, began to torture them, and after many torments they confessed that
Alexander had hired them to kill Herod as he was a hunting wild beasts: for
so it might easily be bruited abroad that he falling off of his horse, fell
upon his own lance; and so was slain: which once before had almost happened
unto him. They also declared unto him, that certain gold was hidden and
buried in the stable: and they also accused Herodes chief huntsman, that at
Alexanders command he had given Alexanders servants the kings lances and his
armor. After them the Prefect of the Castle of Alexandrium was taken and
examined upon tortures, and it was How Alexander writ unto the captain of
Alexandriu^ to receive him. Dyophantus the scribe does counterfeit other men's
hands. Alexander and Aristobulus ar^ imprisoned: and Aristobulus warns his
mother in law.
objected against him, that he promised to receive them into the Castle, and to
deliver unto them Alexanders hand written to this effect: So soon as by Gods
assistance we have done that which we entend to do, we will presently come
unto you: be careful therefore, that according unto your promise you do
receive us into the Castle. Herod having had a view of these letters, did now
without any hesitation believe that in deed some treacherous practice was
plotted against him by his sons. But Alexander affirmed, that Diophantus the
scribe had counterfeited his hand, and that that letter was Antipaters devise.
For Diophantus was accounted cunning in such matters, and afterward being taken
with the like, he was therefore put to death. And the king produced them that
had been tortured at Jericho before the people to accuse his sons, where they
were stoned to death, and the people hereat moved, Alexander and Aristobulus
with the same death. But Herod; by the means of Ptolomeus and Pheroras did
restrain them, and commanded the young men to be cast into prison, and there
to be kept so straight that no man was admitted unto them; but many spies were
set, who should narrowly mark all their actions and words; and now they were
acconnted as condemned men both by other men's opinions and also by their own.
One of them, to wit Aristobulus, for grief enuiting his Aunt, and mother in
law to compassionate his present calamity, and to hate him that was the author
hereof, affirming that she also was in great danger, being accused in hope to
marry with Syllaeus to have signified unto him by letters all that past in
Herod's court. Which words the woman presently came and recounted unto her
brother Herod. The king no longer able to bridle his fury, commanded them both
to be bound and kept Alexander confesses to Herod that he purposed to fly to
Arch^laus.
Archelaus, named Mela, who was one of the greatest lords of the country: and
Herod willing to show his sons malice, he sent for Alexander out of prison,
commanding Mela ambassador of Archelau^ king of Cappadocia.
him to recount how and after what order, or whither they meant to fly: he
answered, unto Archelaus, who had also promised them to send them to Rome; but
that they had no further intent or purpose to effect any unlawful practice
against their father, and that all other accusations were false. And that he
requested that Tyrannus and the rest might have been better examined; Antipater
prevented that, who by his own forged tumors spread amongst the people
Glaphyra Alexanders wi^ is demanded if she knew of any treason against Herod.
did cause them to hasten their deaths. Which being said, Herod commanded both
him and Mela to be lead unto Glaphyra, that she might be asked whether she were
any way priule unto the conspiracy against Herod, and coming unto her, the
woman seeing her husband bound, presently tore her hair, and being amazed with
great compassion cried out amain. The young ^ans cheeks were also bedewed
with tears; so that a long time after those that were present amazed and
moved to compassion at this miserable sight, could neither speak or do the
kings The ^art of the world. 3960. before Christ's birth* 4^.
command. At last Ptolomeus, to whose charge Alexander was committed, willing
him to speak whether his wife was privy to his intent: he answered, how could
it be otherwise, who is dearer unto me then my own life, being mother of her
and my children? Then she answered, crying out alowd, that she was privy to
nothing that was any harm; yet (quoth she) if it will avail you any thing, or
help to save your life, I am ready to tell any lie whatsoever seeing I must
die, and will deny nothing you would have me to say. Alexander answered,
neither did I purpose any impiety against my father, as some suppose, who
ought not to think so: neither do thou know of any one: this thou know,
that thou and I purposed to fly unto Archelaus thy father, and that he
promised to convey us to Rome, which she also affirmed.

Herod now thinking that Archelaus was convicted of evil will toward him,
delivered letters Archelaus excuses himself to Herod. Caesar and Herod made
friends.
unto Olympus and Voluminous, commanding them in the way as they went to pass
by Eleusa a town of Cilicia, and deliver certain letters unto Archelaus
himself to the same effect: and that from thence they should go to Rome, and
if so be when they came there they found that Caesar had been reconciled unto
him by Nicholaus his means, that then they should also deliver certain letters
unto him, declaring all that was past between him and his sons, and the
proofs alleged to convince the young men. Archelaus writ again unto Herod,
that indeed he would have entertained the young men, for fear that any
greater mischance should befall them or their father, by reason of the
suspicion against them; yet was he not minded to send them to Caesar, nor to
have confirmed them in any malicious course. The messengers coming to Rome
found Caesar reconciled unto Herod, and delivered the letters unto him. For
Nicholaus his embassage was Syllaeus. For he perceived the Arabians at variance
amongst themselves, and that some of them had declared all Syllaeus his bad
practices, and that by his means and procurement many of Obodas kinsmen were
murdered; as his adversaries, manifestly proved by certain of his letters
which they intercepted.

Now Nicholaus desirous to reconcile Herod unto Caesar, omitted not this
occasion by chance offered him; for he well knew that if he began with the
kings defense, he should then find a hard Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 12. al. 18.
Nicholaus accuses Syllaeus and excuses Herod.
and heavy judge against him; but if he began to accuse Syllaeus, he should
find also fit occasion to plead his kings cause. Wherefore Nicholaus taking
upon him to prove the accusation against him at the day appointed, he
accompanied with the king Aretas Embasladours; accused Syllaeus as a murderer
of his Lord and king, and many other Arabians; and that he had borrowed much
money to trouble the peace of the common wealth; and that he had corrupted many
women and honest matrons both at Rome and in Arabia. He added hereunto a most
grievous crime, to wit, that he by his lies and false reports had deceived
Caesar, whom in all things he had misinformed concerning that which Herod had
done. Which when he once mentioned, Caesar commanded him to omit the rest, and
only to recount the matter concerning Herod, whether Herod did not enter into
Arabia with an army, and did slay two thousand and five hundredth men, and
carry away captives and rob and spoil the country? Nicholaus answered,
that to these demannds himself was able to answer, that Herod did none of
all these, or at least very little hereof, which he did recount; and that he
did not deserve any displeasure. Caesar contrary Nicholaus said: and hereupon
Nicholaus recounted unto Caesar how Herod had lent D. talents, and that he
had a writing in pawn wherein he was permitted after the day appointed, if
then it were not repaied him again, A ^arration of the Arabian wars, and the
bo^owed money.
to pray upon all the whole country, and satisfy himself: and that this was
no hostile invasion, but according to law and equity a requiring of his right
and debt due unto him. And that this was not rashly done, though by the writing
he was so permitted to do, but by the consent of Saturninus and Voluminous
presidents of Syria, in whose presence Syllaeus swore by Caesar's good fortune
at Bery^m, that within thirty days after both the debt and also certain
fugitives from the king; should be restored unto him, and that Syllaeus
performed none of this: and so Herod went again unto the presidents, and they
permitted him to go and take pledges for his money; and that so by Caesar's name
was violated. It now (quoth he) remains that I speak something concerning
The thieves of Trachon.
the captives. There were forty thieves of Trachon, and afterward more that
fled from Herod for fear of punishment, and fled unto Arabia, whom Syllaeus
protected and succored to the injury of all men, and gave them ground to
inhabit, and was partaker of their prays; The year of the world. 3960.
before Christ's birth 4.
Caesar, the lying invention; which to provoke thee to wrath himself devised.
For I am well able to affirm this, that when the Arabian army assaulted us,
and one or two of our men were slain; then at last Herod forced to make
resistance, he slew Nacebus and with him five and twenty and no more: for
every one of which Syllaeus falsely recounted unto Caesar a hundredth; and so
told him that two thousand and five hundredth were slain. Caesar hereat greatly
moved with an angry countenance looking upon Syllaeus, he asked him how many
Arabians were slain in that fight: he amazed and knowing not what to reply,
answered, that Caesar commanded the writings to be read, containing the
conditions between them, and the writings of the presidents, and the letters
of the Cities containing the complaints of the robberies. And so the matter was
brought to this pass, that Caesar was reconciled unto Herod, and condemned
Syllaeus to die; and repenting himself to have written so threatening letters
unto Herod, he objected that also unto Syllaeus, affirming, that by his false
enformations he had caused him to pass the limits of friendship in using his
friend so hardly. And so he sent Syllaeus into his country, that after he had
satisfied his creditors he might be punished according to the sentence. But he
still continued angry with Aretas, for that without his authority Syllaeus
condemned to die. Caesar was purposed to give the kingdom of Arabia to Herod,
and was altered by Herodes letters. The year of the world, 3961. before
Christ's birth 3. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13. Aretas ambassadors unto Caesar.
Caesar allows Herod to punish malefactors.
he had usurped the crown and kingdom, and he was minded also to bestow
Arabia upon Herod: but the letters which Herod sent him changed his mind.
For Olympus and Voluminous Caesar's wrath toward Herod was pacified, presently
they delivered unto him the letters as they were commanded: wherein was
contained the arguments whereby his sons were convicted of treason against him.
Which Caesar having read, he thought it not convenient to trouble the old man,
unfortunate with his sons, with an other kingdom: and so he admitted Aretas
Ambassadors, and chiding them that their king had rashly usurped the kingdom
without his authority and knowledge, not expecting his pleasure: he received
their gifts, and confirmed him in the kingdom by his authority. This done,
being now reconciled unto Herod, he writ unto him that he was sorrowful for
him, that had such children; and that he should if they had attempted any
treason against him, punish them as men that sought to murder their father:
for he gave him free and full authority; but if they only attempted to fly;
Archelaus king of Cappadocia, and the rest of his friends, and the nobility
thereabout, according as they should advise him; so to do. And this was the
effect of Caesar's letters.

CHAP. XVII.
How Herodes sons were condemned in the council at Berytum.

Herod receiving this letter, rejoiced above measure, both for that he had
again obtained Caesar's favor; and also for that Caesar had given him full
authority to do what he Caesar appointed, only Herod affembleth all that
Caesar willed except Arch^laus.
Archelaus excepted, either for that he hated the man, or else for that he
feared he would have withstood that his purpose: and when they were all come
together, as well the presidents as the rest who were called out of diverse
Cities, he would not bring his sons into the council, but kept them in a
village of the Sidonians, named Platan, not far distant from the City, to
the intent, that if they were called for, he might bring them forth. Then Herod
himself alone entering into the council before an hundredth and fifty men there
assembled for that purpose, began to accuse Herod ^ccuseth his sons.
neither did he sufficiently express his mind showing many signs of fury,
and anger; neither did he deliver in writing any proofs of the accusations
unto the Judges: but indecently himself alleged there the father against the
son, himself also reading before them certain letters written by them,
wherein was contained no impiety nor treason, but only a consultation to fly
away, and certain hard speeches whereby they showed themselves offended. Which
when The year of the world. 3961. before Christ's Na^tie. 3.
he came unto, he exclaimed as though hereby they confessed their treacherous
practices, greatly exaggerating the matter, and protesting that he had rather
die then hear such speeches. Lastly, affirming that both nature and Caesar
permitted him authority against them, and that his country laws so commanded,
that if any one being accused, his father or mother should lay their hands upon
his head, and the standers by must presently stone him to death: which though
he might easily do in his own country and kingdom; yet he thought good also
to expect their censures. Yet he came unto them, not for that they were to
judge his sons, who were taken in a manifest crime, but that by this occasion
they might add their suffrages to the just indignation of a father offended,
and that they might leave an example unto all posterity, that such treasons
ought not to be left unpunished. The king having thus spoken, and not
permitting the young men to be brought unto Saturninus, one that had been
Consul, and had been graced with many honors, pronounced Saturninus does
pronounce an indifferent sentence.
an indifferent sentence, limited with circumstances, to wit, that he condemned
Herodes sons, yet not to die: for (quoth he) my self have sons, and I would
not add this calamity to Herodes misfortune past. After him also his three
sons, who were their fathers legates; pronounced the same sentence. But
Voluminous pronounced, that they had deserved death, who were so impious toward
their father; whose sentence after him the most part followed: so that it
seemed that they were Voluminous and other of Herod's friends pronounce Herodes
sons to be beheaded. Herod asked of Nicholaus what his friends at Rome thought
of his sons.
now ordained to be put to death. Presently Herod carried them with him to
Tire, where he met Nicholaus, who was now there arrived, returning from Rome:
unto whom the king first recounting Tyro, others dissembling their grief;
spoke freely what he thought: this Tyro had a son of Alexanders age, and
beloved of Tyro speaks to Herod, and not observing modesty he and the
captains were imprisoned.
him, whom Alexander much accounted of. This follow many times amidst the
multitudes exclaimed, that truth and equity was now banished from out of the
world, and that in their steed malice and untruth reigned: whereby there was
such a mist and fogge caused over the whole world, that no man could see his
own errors. This his free speech though it was not without danger, yet all men
hereat were moved, for that he had some reason to show his fortitude in so
dangerous a time, and every one was willing to hear this speech: and though
themselves for fear were silent, Tyro with great audacitie also came unto the
king, and besought him that he might talk with him alone: which the king
granting, he used these words with great lamentation. I can no longer, O my
king, suppress this my grief, which causes me so boldly to speak though
with my own peril; yet if it please thee my king, that which I intend to speak
shall be for thine advantage.

Where now my Lord are thy wits? where is that thy courageous mind ever
hitherto able to match all difficult businesses whatsoever? how hapeneth it
that thou have so few friends and kindred? for I account not them kinsmen or
friends, that permit such wickedness and hatred in thy court, which erst was
most happy and fortunate. And what art thou unto thy self? will thou not look
authors of this unfortunate calamity. The king at first took these words of
Tyro in good part, The year of the world. 3961. before Christ's birth 3.
Tyro immodestly and soldierlike urging the king, and for his own simplicity
not able to discern what fitted that time, the king at last thought this
rather a turbule^t vpbraiding him then a friendly admonition, and asking who
those captains and soldiers were, he commanded them all and Tyro also to be
bound and kept in prison. Then one Trypho the kings barbar, taking hereat
occasion, told Tyro is by his son and a barber accused to have practiced
treason against the king.
the king that Tyro had often solicited him, as he shaued the king, to cut his
throat with his razor, promising him for a recompense great rewards, and that
he should be one of Alexa^ders chief friends. Having spoken these words, the
King commanded him to be apprehended, and the barbar, and Tyro and his son to
be tortured. Tyro his son seeing his father in most miserable torments, and
that he still obstinately persisted in them, and by the Kings displeasure,
coniecturing that there was Tyro with his own hand should have killed the king:
for he could get opportunity to come unto the king when no man else was with
him, and so he would kill him, and for Alexanders sake endure any torments
whatsoever. This spoken, he delivered himself and his father from further
tortures, but it is incertaine whether the tale he told was true, or whether he
devised it to free them both from torments. Then Herod now laying all doubt
aside (if before he were in any) thought what death his sons should die, and
leaving no place to repentance and mercy, he hastened to execute his purpose,
and producing 300. captains, and Tyro and his son, and Tyro with 300
captains are accused before the people, and slain. Alexander and Aristobulus
strangled at Sebaste and buried in Alexandrium.
the Barbar his accuser, he accused them all before the people, and the people
throwing any thing Alexander and Aristobulus were carried unto Sebaste, and
there by their fathers command were strangled: and their bodies buried by night
in the castle Alexandrium, where their grandfather by the mothers side, and
many of their progenitors lay buried. But perhaps some will nothing marvel
that a hatred so long a breeding should in the end so prevail, that it
overcame natural affection. But one may justly doubt whether the fault were in
the young men, who exasperated by a hard father so long time, fell into such
hatred of him, or whether it is to be imputed unto his unkindness and immoderate
desire of honor and rule, who could not abide any to be his equal, but rather
choosing to do all at his own pleasure: Or rather unto fortune, whose power the
wisest living is not able to resist. Wherefore I am persuaded, that fortune
has predestined all humane actions, so that they must have a necessary The
cause of these calamities was destiny and Gods providence.
event. And this inevitable force we call fate or fatal destiny, for that there
is nothing which it effects not. But it suffices briefly to have touched
this high matter, which is of it self very difficult, which attributes some
thing unto our actions, and examineth the causes of the variety of our
actions, which speculation is already comprised in the two volumes of our law.
Furthermore as touching the young men's fault, we may accuse their youthly
arrogance, and the free kingly pride which was in them, who did give too great
ear unto their fathers accusers, and for that they were Wherein Alexander and
Aristobulus offended. Herod: shameful error not to be excused.
unjust serchers into his life and actions, and that they maliciously suspected
him, and could not rule their tongues: but hereby gave double occasion unto
their adversaries, and matter unto those tale bearers that sought to get the
kings favor. But their fathers shameful fault cannot be excused, who suffered
himself so to be ouerruled with passion, that he put the^ to death that were
begotten Alexander the eldest of them. It had bin enough for him, suppose he
had condemned them, either to have kept the^ in perpetual prison; or to have
banished them into some far country: seeing that he was assured of the Roman
power, under whose protection he neither needed to have feared invasion; nor
secret treason against him. For so soon to put them to death only to satisfy
his own furious will, what other thing does it betoken, but only an impious
liberty casting off all fatherly humanity and kindness? especially seeing that
he was aged, whose years could neither plead ignorance, not that he was
deceived. For neither was he

THE XVII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 17. book.
1 Of Antipaters malice, who was Herodes son. 2 Of Zamaris the Babylonian
Jew. 3 Of Antipaters treacherous practices against Herod his father. 4 How
Herod sent Antipater unto Caesar. 5 Of Pheroras death. 6 How Pheroras wife was
accused for intending to poison the king, and how Herod knew Antipaters
practices against him. 7 How Antipater was condemned to die, and imprisoned. 8
Of Herodes sickness, and the sedition amongst the Jews. 9 Of Antipaters
death. 10 Of Herodes death, his testament, and funeral. 11 How the people
began a sedition against Archelaus. 12 Of the sedition of the Jews against
Sabinus, and how Varus punished the authors thereof. 13 How Caesar ratified
Herodes testament. 14 Of the false Alexander. 15 How Archelaus being again
accused, was banished unto Vienna.
CHAP. I.
Of Antipaters malice, who was Herodes son.

AFTER that Antipater had made away his brothers through the extreme impiety
and unbridled fury, wherewith Herod their father was incensed and The year
of the world, 3961. before Christ's Nativity, 3. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 1.
Antipater after he had made away his brothers, grew hateful both to the
soldiers and the people
whetted against them; yet incontinently obtained he not that which undoubtedly
he hoped for. For being delivered and discharged of that fear he conceived,
least his brethren should be partakers with him in the kingdom, he found it a
difficult and dangerous matter for himself to find the means how he might
obtain the kingdom: so strange and heinous a hatred had all the nation
conceived against him. On the other side, in showing himself proud and lofty,
he more and more whetted and increased that hatred which the soldiers had fore
conceived Antipater governed the kingdom with his father.
the kingdom with his father, living in no less authority then himself:
Herod also reposed more confidence in him even in those things, for which he
was worthy to lose his head. For the king conceived that in confirmation of
his good affection toward him, Antipater had accused his brethren, as under
resolution to continue his father in security, and not for any hatred he bore
as well unto them, as to his father; though indeed he hated them for his
fathers sake being transported with fury. But all these were but as it were
many subtle stratagemes to insinuate himself into Herodes counsels and
savors, and these did he craftily make use of, to cut off the Herod Antipater
wish eth his fathers death.
might be deprived of all means and manner of relief, if so be Antipater
should bend his forces against him. For the treason he complotted against his
brothers, proceeded from the hatred he bare unto his father: but at that time
was he the more egged on to prosecute his intended purposes, without any delay
or procrastination. For if Herod should happen to die, it was a matter most
assured that the kingdom should be his; and should his life conti^ any longer
time, and the practice Antipater went about should be discovered, seeing
himself environed The year of the world. 3961. before Christ's birth 3.
Antipater spared no cost to win his fathers friends.
Herod had at Rome, by sending them diverse presents, and namely to Saturninus,
who was governor of Syria. He hoped also by bribes and rewards to draw his
fathers brother into his faction, and to corrupt the kings sister also, who was
married to one of the kings most esteemed friends in court. Furthermore, he was
a subtle and politic man in entertaining those men with colorable and
cloaking show of friendship, with whom he conuersed, and to draw himself into
credit with them: contrariwise, he was sufficiently practiced to dissemble his
malice and discontents, Salome his Aunt, who of long time before had sounded
his inclination, and who was not so simple as to suffer her self to be
deceived; but had already by all cunning means that might be prevented
Antipater could not deceive his aunt.
his malice, although she had a daughter married unto his uncle, by the mothers
side. This daughter was first of all wedded to Aristobulus, and afterward by
Antipaters means espoused to his uncle. For Callaeas her husbands son had
married the other. But neither could this affinity color the matter so much,
but that his malice was discovered; neither could that former consanguinitie
extinguish the deserved hatred conceived against him. Herod constrained Salome
(who through amorous passion had thought to have married her self to Syllaeus
the Arabian) to marry with Alexas, and that by the mediation and persuasion of
Iulia Caesar's wife; who Herod compels Salome to marry Alexas.
Salome not to refuse that marriage, for fear least he should prove her utter
enemy. For that Herod had made an oath, that if Salome condescended not to
marry Alexas, he would never make account of her: For which cause she followed
Iulias advise, who was Caesar's wife, and counseled her also to her profit and
preferment.

At the same time Herod sent his daughter to king Archelaus, who had been
married to Alexander, presenting him a dowry out of his own treasury, least
there should any different arise Glaphyra sometimes Alexanders wife is sent back
to Archelaus king of Cappadocia. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2. Herod brings
up his sons children.
between them, and he himself most carefully brought up his sons children.
For Alexander had two sons by Glaphyra, and Aristobulus begat on Bernice
Salomes daughter, three sons and two daughters. These sometimes would he
present and commend unto his friends, and bewailing the misfortune of his
sons would beseech God that no such ill fortune might befall their Pheroras
for the eldest of Alexanders sons; and the daughter of Antipater for
Aristobulus eldest son: and one of Aristobulus daughters was married to
Antipaters son; and the other he espoused to Herod his own son, whom he
had begotten of the daughter of the high priest. For it is lawful in our
country, and according to our custom, to have diverse wives at one time. The
king procured these marriages through the compassion he had of those Orphelins,
thinking by these mutual alliances to cause Antipater to be their friend. But
Antipater conceived no less ha^ed toward the children, then he had done malice
toward their fathers. For the care that Herod had Antipater hates his
brothers children.
Archelans, as his sons in law; and Pheroras who was a Tetrareh should do
the like, for that he had married his son to Alexanders daughter. And so much
the more was (...) incited, because all the people had compassion of these
Orphans, and had conceived (...) against him, who never ceased to express his
malice against his brethren. He therefore (...) all the means that were
possible to dis^ll those de^es, which his father ha^ (...) upon (...) Antipater
laboreth his father to break of the marriages he (...).
this effect, being very loath that they should ever live to be partners with
him in the kingdom. So that at last Herod condescended to Antipaters demand,
which was, that he might marry Aristobulus daughter, and his son be espo^sed
to Pheroras daughter, and thus were the promised and Herodes former (...) At
that time Herod had nine wives, namely, Antipaters mother, the high priests
daughter, by whom he had a son that bare his name, and a daughter of his
brothers, and a cousin of his own, by (...) Herodes nin^ wives.
had no children. He had another wife also, that by nation was a Samaritane, by
whom he had two sons Antipas and Arohelaus, and a daughter called Olimpi^;
who was afterward married to Joseph the kings cousin. As for Archelaus and
Antipas they were brought up (...) Rome, with a certain private friend of his.
Moreover, he espoused one that was called Cleopatra, that was The year of the
world. 3961. before Christ's Nativity. 3.
borne in Jerusalem, by whom he had Herod and Philip, which Philip was brought
up at Rome. By Pallas he had Phasaelus: by Phedra and Helpia he had two
daughters, Roxana and Salome. As touching his eldest daughters, Alexanders
sisters by the mothers side, whom Pheroras had refused to take in marriage, he
matched the one with Antipater his sisters son, and the other he wedded to
Phasaelus his brothers son, and this was Herod's progeny.

CHAP. II.
Of Zamaris the Babylonian Jew.

AFter this intending to assure his estate in the country of Trachonite, he
resolved to build Herod builds a castle in the region of the Trachonites,
and makes Zamaris the Jew that came from Babylon governor therein.
a borough of the bigness of a City in the midst of the country, as well to
warrantize his country as to be in better ^adines to repulse his enemies, and
to repulse them with more expedition. And having intelligence that a certain
Jew was come from Babylon with five hundredth archers on horseback, and about
one hundredth of his kinsmen, and had adventured to pass Euphrates, and was in
the country adjoining Antioch near unto Daphne in Syria, where Saturnine
general of the Roman army had given him a Castle, called Valatha to inhabit,
he sent for him and his followers, promising him to give him both lands and
lordships in the signiorie of Batanea, which confineth on Trachonite, intending
that he should make head against those that would assail him, and promising
him that both his land and his soldiers should be exempt from all tributes,
and paiments of customs. This Babylonian Jew was induced by these Herodes life
time.

But Philip, who succeeded him, exacted afterward some small tribute of them,
and that but for a little while. But Agrippa the great, and his son of the
same name, vexed them very grievously with taxations; yet permitted them to
enjoy their liberty, whose successors the Romans imposed many grievous
tributes upon them, yet continued their freedom, of whom hereafter Zamaris, to
whom Herod had given the possession of this country, died, after he had lived
virtuously, and left a virtuous offspring behind him, amongst whom was Iacim
renoumed for his dexterity on horseback, who with his troup of horse was of
the king of Babylons guard. This Iacim died when he was very old, and left
his son Philip to succeed him, a man valiant in Iacim and Philip the sons
of Zamaris.
arms, and addicted to all sorts of virtue, as much as anyone that has been
renoumed in writing, for which cause king Agrippa loved him and put his trust
in him, and committed the trust and training of his soldiers unto him, who led
them also forth if any occasion of service was proffered.

CHAP. III.
Antipater conspireth against Herod.

Whilst the estate and affairs of Herod were thus disposed, all men's eyes
were fixed upon Antipate^, after that Herod had permitted him to intend his
particular profit. This Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
permission was granted him under the hope that his father had, that he would
behave himself faithfully, and affectionately toward him: but he abused this
authority more audaciously then could be expected; for he traitorously
colored his conceived malice, and easily drew his father to believe him in
whatsoever he said. He was feared by all men, not only for his force and
authority, but for his subtilties and policies. But above all the rest,
Pheroras respected him most, and was inlike manner as greatly esteemed by him.
For Antipater had circumuented him Pheroras deceived by women.
by the means of certain women, who favored his faction: For Pheroras was
commanded by his wife, his mother and sister in law, notwithstanding that he
hated them, by reason of the outrage they had offered to his daughters who were
virgins; naithelesse he was enforced to dissemble all things, because he could
do nothing but that they were always round about him, and had such masterie
of his affairs, that they wrought him to perform whatsoever they pleased. To
these likewise ^as Antipater nearly tied, both of himself and by his mother:
for these four women were of one mind and affection in all things, and spoke
as it were by one mouth: yet was The year of the world. 3961. before the
Nativity of Christ. 3.
Pheroras at ods with Antipater upon some slight mislikes, and she that
wrought this debate betwixt them was the kings sister, who had of long time
espied all their drifts, knowing that the friendship they bare one another
tended to the overthrow of Herod: neither refused she to express what her
opinion was therein. And they knowing well that the king disliked this their
inward familiarity, and that he was privy to that which they pretended, which
was his utter ruin, resolved between themselves to refrain their pub like
familiarity, and to make a show that they were at ods one with another, to
which intent they reproched one another, especially at suchtime as they were
either in Herod's presence, or there was any one with the^, who (as they
thought) would certify him thereof. But in secret they intermitted not their
accustomed friendship, and continued their intercourses with more privy
affability, and such was their ordinary demeanor and behavior: Salome
ignorant hereof, neither when they first devised this drift, neither afterward
Salome discovers to Herod the conspiracies of the Ladies and others.
when they put it in execution: for she diligently noted all things, and
aggrauated the same in her reports to her brother, who^ she informed of their
secret assemblies and ba^quetting, urging their secret consultations, which (as
she said) had no other issue but his ruin, except upon their discovery he
soughtto repress them in time. Further, that for the present they behaved
themselves like enemies in outward show, and all their speeches tended to
disgrace one another; but that in secret they were friends, and that in private
they entertained their amity, and promised each other their mutual assistance
to strengthen themselves against those to whom they were loath their friendship
should be discovered. These things observed, she with all diligence signified
the same unto her brother, who of himself had already many probabilities
thereof. But he durst not make show thereof, because

There was amongst the Jews a sect of people that were called Pharisees, who
were too much addicted to selfe-opinion, and boasted themselves to be the
exactest obseruers of the law in all the The Pharisees subtle and arrogant.
country, to whom these women were very much addicted, as to those who were
much beloved of God, as in outward appearance they made show for. These were
such as durst oppose themselves against kings, full of fraud, arrogancy, and
rebellion, presuming to raise war upon their motions, and to rebel and
offend their princes at their pleasures: whereas therefore all the nation of
the Jews had sworn to be faithful to Caesar, and to the estate of the king;
these only refused to take the oath, and of this sect there were to the number
of six thousand. For which cause the king having imposed an amercement upon
them, Pheroras wife paid it for them; for which cause they The Pharisees would
not swear obedience but were find. Pheroras wife paieth their fine, for which
benefit they promise her the kingdom. Bagoas, Carus and others are put to
death by Herod.
Herod and his posterity to an end, and would bring to pass that the crown
should descend to Pheroras and his sons. Salome had got an inkling hereof,
and had told Herod no less: and how they likewise corrupted every one of his
courtiers; for which cause he put those to death amongst the Pharisees, who
were the principal authors of this advise, and with them also the Eunnch
Bagoas, and Carus who was his darling, and one of the goodliest men of that
time. He afterward cut off all those amongst his household servants, who were
of the Pharisees faction: For Bagoas was bewitched with that hope by them, that
he suffered himself to be called the father and benefactor of the king, who
should be established according

But after that Herod had punished those amongst the Pharisees, who were
convicted to have Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 4. Herod accuses Pheroras wife,
and commands him to put her away
been of the conspiracy, he assembled a Council of his friends, before whom
he accused Pheroras wife, and ripped up the outrage that was done unto his
daughters, as it has been declared, ascribing the same to the pride of this
woman, obiecting it for a crime against her, for thereby she had iniued his
honor. Besides this, he accused her that she had of set purpose stirred up
mutinies, and by all means possible both in word and in effect, contrary to
all law of nature, she stirred up debate betwixt him and his brother; and that
the fine that he had imposed upon his adversaries, was satisfied at her charge:
so that no ^ot of that conspiracy was contrived without For which causes (said
he) brother Pheroras, it shall not be amiss for you of your own accord to
drive such a wretched woman from you, before you be requested, and the sentence
be prouounced against her, otherwise she will be the cause to kindle a war
betwixt you and me. For if at this present you will continue the friendship and
brotherhood betwixt you and me, separate your self from her: in so doing I
will account you for my brother, and you shall lose nothing by the affection
which I bear unto you. For the bond of brotherly love cannot continue safe and
inviolate, unless you put her away. Now although Pheroras was The rear of the
world. 3961. before Christ's birth 3. Pheroras refuses to put away his wife.
Herod interdicteth Pheroras and Antipater their priuic meetings, and
forbids the Ladies no less
moved with the importance and weight of this discourse, yet said he, that for
the love he bare unto his wife, he would forget nothing of that duty which
consanguinitie required at his hands in regard of his brother: but that he had
rather die then to live without her company, whom he loved more dearly then
his life. Herod although he took this answer of his brothers for a most
gricuous injury, yet forbear he to discover his displeasure toward him: he
only forbad Antipater and his mother, and in like manner Pheroras to frequent
the one with the other any more. He commanded the women likewise that they
should give over their familiar entertainments the one with the other, which
all of them promised to perform. Yet this notwithstanding upon fit
opportunities and occasions, they visited one another, and Antipater and
Pheroras feasted one another by night. The report also went that Antipater had
the company of Pheroras wife, and

CHAP. IIII.
Herod sends Antipater unto Caesar.

ANtipater suspecting his fathers dislikes, and fearing least his hatred should
by increase bring him into hazard, he wrote unto his friends in Rome, requiring
them to write their letters Herod sends Antipater to Caesar.
unto Herod, requesting him to send Antipater unto Caesar, with all expedition
as was possible. Which being brought to pass, Herod sent him thither with
diverse royal presents, and gave him his testament and will with him, wherein
he had bequeathed the kingdom to Antipater. Antipater should die before him,
then bequeathed he the same to his son Herod, whom he had by the high Priests
daughter. About the same time Syllaeus the Arabian repaired to Rome,
notwithstanding he had neglected those things that Caesar had given him in
Antipater accuses Syllaeus at Rome before Caesar. Aretas accuses Syllaeus,
for killing Phabatus and others.
charge. Him did Antipater accuse before Caesar, for the same defaults
wherewith he was charged by Nicholaus. Syllaeus also was accused by Aretas, for
murdering diverse of the best account in the city of Petra, contrary to his
mind: amongst the which was Sohemus (a man of much virtue and honor) and
Phabatus Caesar's servant, of which crimes Syllaeus was accused upon that
occasion which ensues: There was a certain man of Corinthus, who was one of
the kings guard, and such a one as he putvery great trust in: him did Syllaeus
persuade by store of money and bribes, to kill Herod; which he promised to
perform. Phabatus made privy to Syllaeus mind, he Syllaeus chiefest A traitor
that sought the kings death is apprehended.
friend. They being examined confessed that they came thither to solicit and
egg forward with many exhortations the Corinthian to execute the murder, and
to assist him if he stood in need of them. Which being fully approved by Herod
before Saturnine, he sent them to Rome, there more amply to be proceeded
against, and so to be punished.

CHAP. V.
Pheroras death.

Herod perceiving that his brother Pheroras did constantly continue his
affection toward his wife, he commanded him to retire himself into his own
dominion: whereupon Anoth sole^nly observed.
he willingly departed to his Terrarchy, protesting by many solemn oaths that
he would never more return into the city, unless he were assured that Herod
was dead. Not long after it happened, that the king falling sick, he was sent
for to receive certain secret instructions, as from the mouth of a dying man;
but Pheroras would not obey him in regard of his oath. This notwithstanding
Herod dealt more kindly with him, and continued his love and affection toward
him: for he came unto Pheroras as soon as he heard of his first sickness, and
being unsent for also, and after he was deceased he sent his body to
Jerusalem, and honorably entombed him in that Pheroras in his sickness is
visited by Herod, and being dead is honorably buried by him.
place, and grieously lamented his death. This was the beginning of all
Antipaters mishaps, who at that time was departed to Rome. For it was Gods
pleasure that at last he should be punished for the murder of his brethren.
This matter will I discourse of at large, that it may serve for an example unto
many kings how they ought to practice and follow virtue in all their actions.

CHAP. VI. The year of the world. 3961. before Christ's birth 3.

Pheroras wife is accused, and Herod is advertised of Antipaters conspiracies.

AFter Pheroras death, two of his freemen, who were Taphnites by birth, and
such as Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. Pheroras freemen accuse his wife for
poisoning him.
Pheroras in his life time both inlie trusted, and dearly loved, came unto
Herod, requiring him not to suffer his brothers death to pass unpunished, but
to make diligent inquiry of that unfortunate and unexpected misaduenture.
Herod lent a willing care unto their suite, perceiving that the matters they
importuned him in, were likely and very credible. Whereupon they told him,
that Pheroras, the day before his unexpected sickness, had supt Pheroras to
his end. For the women of Arabia amongst all others are skillful in poisons,
and are great sorcerers, and she that was charged with this fact, was esteemed
a great friend and sauourer of Syllaeus best beloved. That Herod tortureth the
Ladies bond women, and sounds out Antipaters and their secrets.
Pheroras mother and his wifes sister went into those quarters upon purpose to
buy that poison, and returned back, and brought this woman with them the day
before the supper. The king moved by these words of theirs, tortured both
those maidseruants of theirs, who were their bondwomen; as also certain other
of their free servants. Now when the fact would not be extorted, by reason that
none of them confessed the same, at length she that was last of all put to
Antipaters mother might feel the like torments, since she was the cause of
all those mischiefs which they endured.

These words of hers made Herod the more eager and inquisitiue, so that by
force of tortures he wrought out all the secrets of these women, their
banquets, their secret assemblies, and those very words that Herod had spoken
apart betwixt his son and himself, which had been reported unto the women
that Pheroras entertained: namely, that he would give him one hundredth talents,
provided he would use no conference with Pheroras. Moreover, they reckoned up
the hatred that Antipater bare unto his father, the complaints that he made
unto his mother of the too long life and continuance of his father: for that in
regard of himself he was already waxen Antipater had found out the devise to
be summoned to Rome, and Pheroras withdrew himself into his Tetrarchy. These
words, which as he knew had reference unto that which his sister had often
informed him of, were not by him held incredible; so that being pressed with
the malice of Antipater, he sequestered Doris his Herod thrusts Doris
Antipaters mother cut of his palace. Antipater the Samaritane declares how
Antipater the kings son had provided poison for his father.
at many talents: and from that time forward he showed himself more favorable
toward those women of Pheroras household. But nothing did more whet Herod's
displeasure against Antipater, then did a certain Samaritane, who was also
called Antipater, who had the ordering of the affairs of Antipater the kings
son. For he being brought in question and tortured, declared amongst other
things, that Antipater had mixed a mortal poison, and delivered the same to
Pheroras his uncle, commanding him to practice the kings death in his absence,
and by that means least suspected. That this poison was brought out of Egypt
by one called Antiphilus, Antipaters friend. That it was sent to Pheroras by
one called Theudion, Antipaters mothers brother. That this poison was kept by
Pheroras wife, and was committed by her husband to her custody. were acted,
and as many men thought at that time she told nothing but the truth. That
poison The year of the world, 3961. before Christ's Nativity, 3. Pheroras wife
confesses that she has the poison, and casts her self down headlong from
the roof.
(said she) was brought by Antiphilus out of Egypt, and bought there by the
means of a brother of his, who was a physician. After this Theudion brought it
to our house, and I having received it from Pheroras hands, kept the same, but
bought by your son Antipater to poison you that are his father. Now therefore
after that my husband fell sick, and you in kindness came to visit and
comfort him, he being moved with compassion, and conquered by your brotherly
kindness, by your good affection and loving care in giving order for his
health, called me unto him, and said: O Wife, Antipater has circumuented me,
whilst by his pestilent counsels and poisoning practices he desires to cut
off his father, and deprive me of a kind brother. Now therefore since as I
perceive there is no part of my brothers loving and natural affection
diminished toward me, wherewith he was wont to entertain me, and that my
latest hour of life approaches,

After she had spoken thus, she brought forth before them all the poison, and
the box wherein it was kept. After her another of Antiphilus brothers, and the
mother to them both confessed The year of the world, 3962. before Christ's
nativity, 2. The king puts away his wife, and blotteth his son out of his
testament. He degradeth Simon, and enstateth Marthias in the Priesthood.
Archelaus and Philip are accused by Antipaters means
no less, being constrained thereunto by force and violence of torture, and
acknowledged the box. The kings wife also, who was the daughter of the high
priest, was accused for confederacy Herod put her away from him, and raced
his sons name out of his testament, wherein he had bequeathed him the
kingdom after his decease. He displaced also his father in law Simon the son
of Boethus from the priesthood, and placed Matthias the son of Theophilus,
who was borne in Jerusalem, in his steed. In the mean space Bathillus
Antipaters freeman returned from Rome; who being tortured, confessed that he
brought a poison with him to deliver it to Antipaters mother, and Pheroras, to
the end that if the first poison were not effectual enough to dispatch the
king, they might make use of this other, to cut him off speedily. There came
letters also to Herod's hands from his friends in Rome, written and devised by
Antipaters means, to accuse Archelaus and Philip, for that very often they
had refreshed the memory of Alexander and Aristobulus death, contrived by
their father; Antipaters friends certify Herod of, in that by many and mighty
presents he wrought them thereunto. He himself also wrote unto his father
colourably, after a manner excusing the young men, and imputing their words to
their indiscretion and young years. Mean while he busied himself in accusing
Syllaeus, and coutted the chiefest Romans buying diverse ornaments and jewels to
present them with, to the valewe of two hundredth talents. And it is to be
wondered at, that so great matters being brought on foot against him seven
months at least before his return into the country of Iudaea, that no
inckling thereof came unto his ears. But the cause partly was, the diligent
Antipater. For there was not any that would put himself in hazard to procure
his security.

CHAP. VII.
Antipater is condemned, and cast into prison.

Herod concealing his displeasure, answered Antipater his sons letters
(wherein he gave Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. Herod writes friendly letters to
Antipater, and calls him home from Rome.
him to understand, that as soon as he had dispatched his affairs as it
behooued him, he would return) charging him to hasten homeward, for fear least
during his absence, some Antipater receive in Cilicia, and already had he
received others at Tarentum, by which he understood of Pheroras his uncles
death, whereat he was sore grieved; not The year of the world. 3962. before
the Nativity of Christ. 2. Celenderis in Cilicia.
Pheroras, but for that he died before he had murdered his father, according
as he had promised him. As soon as he came to Celenderis a City of Cilicia,
he grew doubtful whether he should return or no, and grievously was he
distracted by his mothers disgraces, who was banished from the court. Sundry
also were the opinions of his friends in this behalf: for some of them
counseled him to stay, and expect th^euent of these troubles in some place:
other some on the other side, advised him to delay no longer his return into
his country, for that upon his arrival he might easily satisfy all those
objections and accusations that were enforced against him, because his accusers
had naught else to strengthen their cause with; but his absence: This latter
advise liked him best; so that he betook himself to sea, and at last arrived
in the port of Sebaste so called, and builded by Herod to his great charge in
honor of Sebaste a haven builded by Herod in honor of Caesar: Antipater upon
his return is saluted by no man.
Caesar.

And now already it manifestly appeared that Antipater was upon his downfall:
For no man came out to salute him, no man entertained him, as they did upon his
departure, when as all of them accompanied him with prayers and happy
acclamations: but contrariwise they boldly and openly spoke against him, and
bitterly cursed him, telling him that he was justly punished for the
wickedness he had committed against his brothers.

About the same time Quintilius Varus, who was sent to succeed Satumine in the
government of Syria, was at Jerusalem, and drew thither at that instant upon
Herodes request, to assist him with his counsels in his present and weighty
occasions. Now whilst these two sat and Quintilius Varus gouernout of Syria.
consulted together, Antipater came in before any man expected him, and in that
purple garment Varus should both hear and judge all his misdemeanors. He
altogether amazed at the greatness of that unexpected mischief, which he both
heard and saw, departed presently from them wholly amazed, and in the way met
with his mother and his wife (which was Antigonus daughter, who had been king
of the Jews before Herod) by whom he was advertised of all that which had
happened, and for that cause more diligently prepared himself for his trial.
The next day Varus Herod calls his son in question before Quintllius Varus.
and Herod sat in judgment, accompanied by their friends on both sides;
thither also were cited the kings kindred and his sister Salome, and certain
others, who could discover his secret practices, some of which had been
tortured, and namely Antipaters mothers servants, who a little before his
arrival, had been apprehended with a letter to this effect: That he should
take heed that he returned not into the country, because his father was made
privy to all his practices, and that for the present he had no other refuge
but only to Caesar, and to take care likewise least he should fall into his
fathers hands.

Hereupon Antipater humbling himself on his knees before the king his father,
besought him not to condemn him before his cause were heard, but to suspend
his judgment until such time as he had heard his iustifications. But Herod
after he had commanded him to withdraw himself Antipater. After this he
reckoned up the cares he had spent in their education and instiution, and how
bountifully he Antipater accused by Herod
had bestowed upon him as much riches as he required: he furthermore alleged,
that none of all these favors could preserve him from falling into lapse of
the loss of his life by their policy, to the intent that they might
injuriously possess the kingdom before either the law of nature, or the will
of their father, or their own rights could challenge the same. But above all
the rest, he wondered at Antipater, with what hope he could possibly be puffed
up to attempt so audacious and wicked an enterprise. For by his testament he
had made him the heir of his kingdom, and in his life time also had made him
equal partaker of his dignity, glory and power: For in his own respect he
had never found any thing against them, but by his report: neither had he given
sentence against them, but by Antipaters advice, who for the present were
absolved by him, because he was become the heir of their patricide. The year
of the world. 3962. before Christ's birth 2.
Nicholas Damascene, who was his dear friend, and conuersed ordinarily with
him, and was privy to all that which had passed, to prosecute the rest that
appertained to the inquest and approbation of his crime.

But Antipater turning himself toward his father, began to justify himself,
urging the same Antipaters answer to his fathers objection.
testimonies and favors that his father had showed unto him, and the honors
he had received at his hands, which he would never have showed him if he had
been unworthy of the same, and had not by his virtue deserved these favors.
He alleged also, that by his virtue he had prevented all that which might have
happened, and that where the cause required his labor or diligence, he
dispatched all things with his own industry; that it was unlikely that he,
who had delivered Caesar himself was witness thereof; who could be no more
deceived then God himself: whereof those letters bore record, which were
written by him; which in equity should be of no less force then the slanders
of those, who fought to set them at odds: the most part of which objections
and reproaches had been complotted and devised by his enemies, who have had the
leisure to pursue the same during his absence, which they could not have
performed in his presence. Finally he auowed, that all those confessions were
false which were extorted by torture, in that it ordinarily falls out, that
such as are put to the trial Upon these his protestations, all the council
and assistants were confounded. For all of them had great compassion of
Antipater, who was wholly drowned in his tears; so that his very enemies began
to pity him. And Herod himself made it appear, that he seemed in some sort
to be altered in his opinion: notwithstanding he enduoured to conceal the same.

But Nicholaus, according as he was requested, prosecuted that accusation which
the king had Nicholas Damascene prosecuteth the kings accusation.
begun, urging all things to the uttermost, and producing all the witnesses,
and those manifest proves, that were gathered from their examinations who were
tortured. In especial he amply discoursed of the kings virtue, which he had
fatherly expressed in the education and instruction Moreover that his first
childrens foolish rashness was not so much to be wondered at, for that being
young, they had been corrupted by the malice of their counselors, and had
blotted out of their hearts all the laws of nature, rather through ambition of
rule then desire of riches. But that Antipaters boldness was both wonderful and
wicked, who more cruel then the cruellest beasts (who toward their benefactors
acknowledge each good tume) was nothing mollified by his fathers so great
indulgence; neither terrified by his brothers calamity, but that he must needs
emulate them in their cruelty. And thou thy self (said he) O Antipater, wett
the Judge of their attempted treasons, by thy inquisition they were indicted,
thou did execute the justice against them being convicted. Neither do we
disallow that thou did prosecute them with just indignation, but rather
admire thee for liking with them, whose assistance thou mighest hereafter use
in oppressing thy father. Thou have The year of the world. 3962. before
Christ's birth 2.
Herodes virtue, but according to your own appetite and malice, intending to
deprive such a father of his part, who granted you the whole; and seeking in
effect to murder him, whom in words you pretended Varus equity, and all
whatsoever justice is in the world. Do thou therefore accuse them of
falsehood, who were examined in torments to the end thou might endaunger
their credit, who were the preseruers of thy fathers life? shall we believe
thee more then them in their torments? Will thou not (O Varus) deliver the king
from the injuries of those, who are his own flesh and blood? will thou not put
this wicked beast to death, who has murdered his brothers to pretend a love
toward his father, and who has at last been discovered to be the most
mortal enemy of them all, to the intent that at one instant he might
establish the kingdom in himself? Thou know that Patricide is no private
crime, but a public injury Patricide the public injury of life and nature.
which who so punishes not, is of himself guilty of an injury offered to
our common mother nature.

After these speeches, he annexed certain points as touching Antipaters
mother, which through feminine frailty had been blabbed out by her, to wit,
that she had asked counsel of southsaiers and diuiners, to whom the kingdom
should befall: And that she had offered sacrifices, and made prayers for the
death of the king. And moreover he declared what lascivious pranks Antipater
had played with Pheroras women, in banqueting and amorous and wanton
dalliances. The informations likewise that were presented by such as were
tortured, with sundry testimonies of diverse men, some suborned; the other found
out to be incontinently produced and Antipater was exposed to the accusations
of those men, who had the government in their hands, and that the good fortune
that had long time accompanied him, had openly delivered him into the hands of
his enemies, they manifestly discovered the insatiable hatred which they had
conceived against him, whereas before time the fear that they had of him
enforced them to be silent: yet was he not so much burdened with other men's
hatreds, as with his own wickedness, namely his deadly hatred against his
father, his breach of amity amongst his brethren, whereby he filled the kings
household with seditions and murders, The year of the world 3962. be fore
Christ's Nativity. 2.
of some complotted, and acted by other some; neither giving place to hatred
according to justice, nor to amity according to good affection, but according
as it might stand with his profit. Which for that diverse men perceived long
before that time, they judged of events according as they had reason, and the
rather because that being void of hatred, they spoke but their opinions: And
whereas heretofore they had cried with a loud voice against him, at such time
as they were shut up; at this time when as they were deprived of their fear,
they declared al things that they knew. And whereas there were diverse produced
of the mischiefs committed by him, yet Antipater accused by all men.
seemed there nothing to be fained, for that the accusers neither spoke in
favor of the king, neither concealed any thing for fear of peril, but
condemned all Antipaters wicked actions, and judged him worthy of death and
punishment, not so much for his fathers security as of his own deinerit.

As soon as Nicholas had finished his discourse and accusations, Varus
cummanded Antipater Varus gives Antipater license to justify himself.
Antipater strives by his protestations, and inuocations of God to justify
himself.
to answer to those crimes, that were objected against him, if he had any
thing to allege, that he was not guilty of those forfaits or heinous crimes
that were laid unto his charge. For of himself he desired nothing more, and
knew well that Herod his father desired no less, then that he should justify
himself, and maintain his innocence. But he humbling himself upon his face,
and lowly bending his body to the ground, besought God, who was the searcher of
all Antipater, who, whereas before time disposed all his actions in such sort,
as if there had been no God that had the ouersway of humane affairs, at such
time as justice ouertooke him, and he was disfurnished of the benefit of the
law, had his recourse to Gods power, alleging that he was reserved by God to
this end, that he might diligently intend his fathers safety. Hereupon Varus,
when as by often Herod presently commanded his son to be put in bonds, no man
knowing what The poison is ministered to a condemned man, and it kills him.
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7.
talk had been between him and Varus upon his departure, but all men's opinion
was that the king did nothing in imprisoning him, but by his counsel. When as
therefore he had fast bound him, he sent unto Caesar, and wrote his letters
unto him, as touching Antipater, sending

At the very same time there was a letter intercepted, sent by Antiphilus to
Antipater, which Antiphilus remained in Egypt, which letter being opened by
the king, was written to this effect. Herod imprisoned his son and sent
ambassadors to Caesar to certify his abuses. Antiphilus letter to Antipater.
I have sent you Arms letter, hazarding thereby mine own life: for you know
that I am in danger of the displeasure of two mighty families, if I should be
discovered. As for your self, bethink you well of your affairs in this
respect. Such were the contents of this letter. The king made diligent search
for others also, but he could find none: for Antiphilus servant, who had
brought that which was read, denied that he had any other. But whilst the king
was in this doubt, one of his servants and friends perceived that the inside of
the messengers vnder-coat was newly Acme to Antipater, Health: I have written
the letters to your father, according as you gave me instructions, and have
counterfaited the copy of my letter, as if it had Acmes letter to Antipater.
been sent by Salome my mistress. I assure my self, that when he has read the
same, he will punish Salome as one that has practiced treason against him. But
that letter that was supposed to have been written by Salome to Acme, was of
Antipaters invention, and written in Salomes name, according The year of the
world. 3962. before Christ's birth 2. Acmes letters to Herod.
to his invention, and in Acmes style. The contents were these: Acme to king
Herod, Health: Whereas I have an especial care, that nothing be concealed
from thee that concerns thy security, having found a letter of Salomes
written against thee unto my Lady, I have not without danger taken the copy
thereof, and sent it unto you, in which she required that she might have license
to marry Syllaeus. Tear this copy, least through the knowledge of the same, I
grow in danger of my life. Now in that which she had written to Antipater, she
had discovered that she had written these words to Herod, according to that
commandment he had given her, as if Salome had conspired to work some treason
against him. She sent also the copy of those counterfaite letters in the name
of Salome, and sent them unto her mistress to work treason.

This Acme was a Jew borne, and chambermaid to Iulia Caesar's wife, and did that
which is above Herod inflamed with hatred against his son.
written for the love which she bare to Antipater, whom he had hired by great
sums of money, to the end, that she should assist him to execute the
mischief, which he practiced against his father, and against his Aunt. Herod
made almost desperate by the great mischiefs of Antipater, was stirred up on
the sudden to shorten his days, for that he was the only means that stirred
up these great tempests of sedition in his kingdom, and who not only practiced
against his father and his Aunt, but against his sister also; and had in like
sort corrupted Caesar's family. Salome also incensed him the more, beating her
breasts and offering her self to all deaths, if any such like matter might be
duly proved against her. For which cause Herod sent for Antipater, commanding
him to speak freely all that which he had to say without fear. But he having
not one word to answer for his defense, Herod said unto him: Since that on
all sides thou art convicted, Antiphilus, and named none other. At that time
Herod Antipater lays all the fault upon Antiphilus.
being wounded by extreme grief, would have sent Antipater to Rome unto
Caesar, that he might receive his judgment from him, but afterward he feared
least by the interest of his friends he should escape the danger, for which
cause he kept him bound and fettered in prison, as he had done before. And in
the mean while sent certain messengers with letters to Caesar, to accuse his
son, and to declare wherein Acme had been his confederate, producing the copy
of the letters. These ambassadors therefore resorted to Rome, instructed in
those things they were to answer to those interrogatories that should be
offered them, and with them he sent his letters.

CHAP. VIII.
Herodes sickness, and the sedition amongst the Jews.

Mean while Herod fell sick, and made his will, and appointed his youngest
son to succeed Hedio and Russinus, chap. 8. Herod falling sick makes his
will and leueth his succession of the kingdom with his other goods to his
friends and kinsfolks. Herod impatient in his old age and wondrous wayward.
The year of the world, 3963. after Christ's birth 1.
him in the kingdom, for that through Antipaters instigations he had conceived
a hatred against Archelaus and Philip. He sent also one thousand talents unto
Caesar, and five hundredth to his wife, and to his children, friends and
freemen. He bestowed also money, rents, and lands upon his own children: he
gave his sister Salome an ample possession, for that she had always perseuered
in loving him, and had never offended him. And having lost all hope of
recovery, for that he was about seventy years old, he became very tutchie
and froward in Judas the son of Saripheus, and Matthias the son of
Margalothus the most excellent interpreters of the laws and ordinances of the
country: and for this cause were in greatest estimation among the people, by
reason that they instructed and trained up the youth. For all those that
desired to obtain virtue, spent all their time with them, who understanding
that the kings sickness was dangerous, they incensed the younger sort,
counsailing them to overthrow all those works that the king had caused to be
made contrary to the law and custom of the country; to the end, that they
Herod had done diverse things contrary to the ancient law; against which
Judas and Matthias exclaimed openly. For he had erected over the portall of the
great temple, an Aegle of gold of great value. Now the law A golden Eagle upon
the greatest gate of the temple.
prohibiteth that they, who pretend to live according to the same, should not
in any sort erect any image, nor represent any figures of living creatures
whatsoever. For this cause these doctors The year of the world, 3963. after
Christ's Nativity, 1. Contempt of death.
counseled them to pull down that Aegle: telling that, that although the
matter seemed to want no peril, yet ought they rather to prefer an honest death
before a pleasant life, if so be it be employed for the defense of their
country laws and religion. For in so doing they should obtain immortal
praise for the present, and a memorable and eternal glory in time to come;
neither that they should protract the execution thereof for fear of danger,
since death was a thing that might not be avoided; so that since by the
general course of nature, they must needly die, it should become them bravely
to forsake their lives with praise and honor in embracing virtue. For to die
in the execution of some noble exploit (which cannot be achieved without
hazard or danger) their children should be richly rewarded with the fruits
thereof, and their other parents that should ou^liue them (of what sex soever)
should reap the fruits of that glory which was honorably achieved

About that time there was a rumor spread, that the king was dead, which gave
very great furtherance to the doctors resolution. For at high noone they went
up into the temple, they pulled The young men pulling down the golden eagle hew
it in pieces with their axes. Judas and Matthias with forty other young men
being brought to the kings presence justify their actions with joy and the
king sends them bound to Jericho.
and hewed down the Aegle with their axes; in the sight and assembly of a
great number of people that were in the temple. Now when the tidings hereof
came unto the ears of the kings captain, he fearing least some further and
more fatal tumult might be raised, drew out a strong company of soldiers
with him, to repulse those that were assembled to hew down the Aegle, and
charging the rude and disarmed multitude, who were gathered together, he easily
flew and dispersed the most; as for those 40. young men that valiantly
addressed themselves to resist, he apprehended them, and with them the authors
of this sedition Judas and Matthias, who thought scorn Moses has left us in
writing, according as he was suggested and taught them by God: neither do we
refuse any death or punishment which thou shall inflict upon us, being assured
in our consciences, that we suffer not for our impiety, but piety sake. Thus
spoke they all of them, Herod assembleth the governors of the Jews, and
expostulateth with the^ about this co^motion.
continuing the like constant boldness in their answers, as they had showed
in their actions, being also ready, constantly to endure any punishment for
that which they had attempted. Hereupon in like manner, how upon his great
charges he had repaired and reedified the temple; whereas the Asmoneans for the
space of 125. years, wherein they reigned, could not perform such a building
in the honor of God. Moreover he signified unto them, how he had adorned the
same with precious gifts, for which he hoped that after his death his memory
and glory should survive. After this he expostulated with them for what cause
they abstained not from offering him that outrage during his life time? And why
at noon days and in the sight of all the people, they had laid hands on those
presents which he had dedicated unto God, and The governors suspecting his
cruelty, and fearing least his unbridled passion should urge him further, by
which means they might be assured of some severe punishment, answered him:
that those things were not done by their consents, and that in their opinion
the injury ought not to be let slip without punishment. At that time Herod
showed himself more favorable toward the rest, but he caused Matthias to be
deprived of the priesthood, as one in part who had been the cause of that which
had happened; Matthias is deprived of the hie priesthood and Iozar is assigned
his place. Joseph Ellemi for one day hie priest. Matthias and Judas burned
and in his place substituted Iozar one of his wives brethren. During the
priesthood of this Matthias it happened also, that an other high priest was
elected that very day, wherein the Jews did usually celebrate their fast. For
Matthias the night before the day of the fast, seemed in his dream Joseph the
son of Ellemus appointed him to be his assister and substitute, by reason of
his alliance. Herod therefore deposed Matthias: and as touching the other
Matthias, who had moved this trouble, both he and his companions were by his
commandment consumed with fire.

This very night the moon was ecclipsed, and Herod's sickness grew more
vehement. For God The Eclipse.
punished those sins which he had committed. For he was inflamed with a lent or
slow fire, which to The year of the world. 3963. after Christ's birth 1. Hedio
and Ruffinus, chap. (...). Herodes horrible sickness.
The hot bath^ of Calliroes that flow into the lake Asphaltite.
Asphaltite. Being there it was thought good by his physicians, that he should
refresh himself in those waters: There being set by them into a bathing tub be
filled with oil, he waxed so sick, that they held him for dead. Whereupon all
his household servants wept and grievously lamented; and all his familiar
friends crying out and bewailing him, with their great noise caused him to come
to himself: and seeing himself wholly out of hope to escape, he gave order
that there should a distribution be made to every soldier the sum of fifty
drachmes, and he offered great Herod bestows a distribution among his
soldiers. Herod commands that the noblest of the Jews should be slain
after his death.
presents to their captains and his friends. Afterward he returned to
Jericho, where a melancholy Salome, and Alexas her husband; telling them that
his end was at hand, for that his griefs did incessantly torment him: which as
he said he ought to bear patie^tly, because it was an end that should happen
to all men. But that which most grieved him was, that he saw himself deprived

CHAP. IX. The year of the world. 3963. after Christ's Nativity. 1.

Antipaters death.

Whilst he delivered these instructions to his kindred, he received letters
from those Ambassadors Letters are sent from Rome that Acme was executed by
Caesar's command, and that he had authority to use Antipater at his pleasure.
Herod calling for a knif^ and an apple, intends to stab himself. Achiab
withholdeth his hand. Antipater thinking his father to be dead, deals with
his keeper for his delivery, which Herod heating of, commands him to be
slain.
which he had sent to Rome unto Caesar; the effect whereof was, that Acme was
put to death by Caesar's command, who was displeased with her for that she had
been of Antipaters conspiracy, who was remitted to Herodes pleasure like a
king and father to use him, as best pleased him; either to exile and banish
him; or if it so pleased him, to put him to death, Herod receiving these
news, recovered his spirits a little through the pleasure he received in the
contents of those letters, both of the death of Acme, as of the power that was
granted Achiabus his nephew hastily stepped within him, and stayed his hand, and
called for assistance. At that time the sorrow and lamentation was renewed in
all the palace, as if the king had been already dead: and Antipater
certainly believing that his father was departed, began to hope (and confirmed
no less in his words) that being delivered out of prison, he should obtain
the possession of the kingdom without any difficulty: and devised with the
Jailer as touching his deliverance, offering him great presents both in hand,
and hereafter, as if there Antipater demanded, that he presently went and
certified the king what his intent was, and what offers he had made him.
Herod, who had already conceived a sinister opinion of his son, hearing
what the Jailer had said, began to exclaim, and to beat his head, although he
was almost at the uttermost gasp, and lifting himself up upon his elbowes, he
commanded that one of his guard should presently haste and kill him; and that
done, that he should be buried in the castle of Hircanion without any honor.

CHAP. X.
Herodes will, death, and burial.

AFter this having changed his mind, he made a new testament. For he appointed
Antipas Tetrarch of Galilee and of Peraea, whereas before that he had
instituted him for his Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10. Herod's will is changed.
successor in the kingdom. He created Archelaus king; he gave the provinces
of Gaulonites, Trachonites, Batanea and Paneade to Philip his son, and
Archelaus brother by the mothers side; to be Tetrarch over those places. He
gave his sister Salome Iamnia, Azot and Phasaelis, with fifty thousand crowns
of gold. He provided also for his other kinsmen, all whom he left rich in
money, which he gave them, and revenues which he assigned them. He gave Caesar
ten millions of drachmes in silver, amounting to the sum of eleven hundredth
thousand His legacy to Caesar and Iulia his wife.
francs, besides a great quantity of gold and silver plate, and of precious
moueables. To Iulia Caesar's wife, and to certain others, he bequeathed five
millions of drachmes, amounting to five hundredth and fifty thousand francs, or
there abouts. After he had in this manner disposed all things, some five days
after he had caused Antipater to be executed, he departed this life: having
Herod's death.
reigned after Antigonus death, for the space of thirty and four years, and
thirty and seven years after he was elected and approved king by the Romans:
a man without respect cruel, and severe toward all men; slave to his wrath:
Lord of the laws: yet so favored by fortune, as no man more; for from a
private man he became a king, and being environed with many perils, he always
happily escaped them, and he lived also a very long time. And as touching his
family and children, in this also in his own opinion was he happy, in that he
overcame his enemies and adversaries: but in my opinion, he was most
unfortunate. Herod's mutable and strange fortune. Salome and Alexas after the
kings death dismiss the Jews yt were shut up in the Hippodrome.


But before the kings death was thoroughly known, Salome and Alexas discharged
those that were locked up in the Hippodrome, and sent every one of them home
unto his own house, telling them that the king commanded them to depart and
follow their household affairs, and till their land: wherein they performed a
most noble action, and benefited the whole nation with an especi^ll good turn.
After that the kings death was bruited abroad, Salome and Alexas caused all the
men of war to be assembled in the Amphitheater in Jericho, and first of all
they caused Herod's letters to be read after which were addressed to the
soldiers, in which he gave them thanks The year of the world. 3963 after the
Na^tie of Christ. 1. Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 11. Herod's tha^sgiuing to his
army and testament read, and Archelaus is applauded by the people. Alias. cap.
12. Herod's corpse is buried with great pomp and solemnity in Herodion.
Archelaus his son, whom he had appointed to be their king after him. That
done, Ptolomey, to whom the king had committed the custody of his seal,
recited his testament, which was to take no effect except that Caesar approved
the same. Thereupon all of them began to applaud and honor. Archelaus for
their king. The men of war flocked about him in troops, accompanied with their
captains, promising him to serve him with no less will and affection, then
they had done his father, praying God to yield him his assistance.

At that time also the kings hearse was prepared, and Archelaus gave order that
his obsequies should be most royally performed, and bestowed all the furniture
that was requisite for that funeral and princely enterment. He was carried out
in a gilded litter, distinguished with diverse The Germans and French served
under Herod.
abiliments and discipline. After them followed all the army, marching in order
in like manner as when they were addressed to battle, each one under his
corporal and captain. Next these followed five hundredth of his household
servants, bearing perfumes, and all these in this equipage marched to the
Castle Herodion, distant some eight stades or furlongs off. For there Herod.
Archelaus continued his mourning for seven days space in honor of his father.
(For the law of the country ordains no less.) And after he had feasted the
people, and laid aside his mourning apparel, he ascended up into the temple.
All the way as he went, all the people with shouts and acclamations Archelaus
banquetteth the people.
cried, God save the king; and with prayers and praises honored him to their
uttermost; and he being conducted up to a high station and state, which was
made for the purpose, and placed in a throne that was embelished with gold,
entertained the people very graciously, taking pleasure in their acclamations
and congratulations that they bestowed upon him. He gave them thanks also for
that they had blotted out of their remembrance the injuries, that his father
had done unto them; protesting in his own behalf, that he would enforce
himself to requite their Caesar should ratify his fathers testament. For this
cause, although the soldiers that were in Jericho enforced themselves to set
the diadem upon his head, yet would he not accept that uncertain honor,
because it was not as resolved whether Caesar, who was the principal party in
the gift, would grant him the government or no. He alleged likewise, that if
his affairs succeeded Archelaus pro miseth that with Caesar's approbation he
will carefully intend the desires and profits of the people.
according to his desire, he would not according as his honor commanded him,
forget their love, or leave their good affection unrequited. And that in the
mean while he would enforce himself by all means to further those things
that concerned them, and entertain them with more kindness then his father
had done. But they, according as it is the custom of the common Archelaus
spoke kindly and courteously unto them, the more they applauded him, and
presented him with diverse petitions, for certain grants and donations from
him. Some of them cried out unto him, that he should cut off some part of their
taxes and tallages, which they paid annually: Othersome cried upon him, to
deliver those prisoners that were committed by Herod, of whom diverse had pined
a long time in prison: Others instantly urged him to cut off those tributes
which had been imposed by him upon bargains and sales, which was to pay the
half of the bargain. Whereunto Archelaus did not in any sort contradict,
striving to the uttermost of his power to please the people, for that he knew
full well that their good affection would be no small advantage toward him in
the confirmation of his kingdom.

CHAP. XI. The year of the world. 3963. after Christ's birth 1. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 12. ^l. 13. The seditious people bewail Matthias, and those
that were executed with them.

The people mutiny against Archelaus.

Mean while certain men among the Jews that were desirous of innovation, in
their private conuenticles bewailed Matthias and his confederates, whom Herod
had put to death and condemned for racing and defacing the golden Aegle: for
that incontinently after their decease, they had neither been publicly
honored, nor lamented for, by reason of the fear that the people had
conceived of Herod. For which cause at that time they required with
lamentations and great cries, that their obsequies might be solemnized, and as
if the dead bodies had received some contentation by their tears and tempest
of exclaimes, they uttered many heinous and disgraceful speeches against
Herod; and assembling themselves together they Archelaus to do them justice
against those, that during Herodes life were in authority; and especially they
demanded, that the high priest who was advanced by his father, should be They
would be revenged on Herod's friends and would depose the high priest. The year
of the world, 3964. after Christ's na^, 2.
deposed, and that an other more lawful and upright might be placed in his
steed, to offer and exercise the high priests place. Now although Archelaus was
sore displeased at these their violent proceedings, yet notwithstanding he
conformed himself to their good likings, in that he was with all expedition to
repair unto Rome, to understand and attend Caesar's pleasure. He therefore
called for the general of his army, willing him to persuade them not to seek a
revenge for those men, who were dead, notwithstanding they were their friends;
because whatsoever was done, was done according to law; and that no inquiry
might be made thereof, except to the great prejudice of his reputation and
hazard of his state, in regard of the incertaintie of the time: that Caesar's
consent, he should return back again unto them, and that then he would
consult with them for the common profit, according to their just demands,
wishing them for the present to contain themselves, and to take heed least
they stirred up sedition.

When he had thus instructed his General, he sent him unto them. But they
cried out with a loud voice, and would not suffer him to speak, but for fear
of danger and death they put him to silence. And if any other were so forward
as to speak unto them, and persuade them to some moderation, and to alter
their sinister resolutions, he was also in danger; for that they had this
persuasion, that all things ought rather to be ordered according to their
pleasures, then by the Herodes life time they had been deprived of their
dearest friends, it should be now a matter unworthy their courages, after his
death to be cut off from the privilege to demand their revenge. For they were
transported with their own opinions, and held all that for lawful and
upright, which was in any sort conformable to their pleasures, without
foreseeing the danger that might happen thereby: so much were they pleased to
be revenged on those, whom they reputed to be their enemies. Now whereas diverse
were sent by Archelaus, to consult with them; and diverse came unto them, not as
messengers from him, but as friends and lovers of peace of their own motion,
with an intent to pacify them, they would not permit any of them to speak;
and through their rage there arose a great tumult, which had grown to a further
extremity, if a greater number of people had joined

At that time fell the feast of unleavened bread, which is called Pascha, which
is a memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt, at which time all m^ do
most willingly present their sacrifices, Sedition at the feast of the Passover.
and a greater number of beasts are slain at that feast, then at any other
time. To this solemnity also an infinite number of people assembled from all
parts, to honor God: whereby the seditious (supposing that they had gotten a
fit opportunity) lamented Judas and Matthias, who were the expositors of the
law, and kept themselves within the temple, whither they had gathered good
store of victuals, which they were not ashamed impudently to beg for. But
Archelaus, fearing least their rage should produce some more grievous effect of
mischief, sent out a band of armed men, with a captain, and a regiment of a
thousand men, to repress their headlong

Now Archelaus supposing that his whole fortune was endangered, except he
repressed the The year of the world. 3964. after Christ's birth 2.
Archelaus made Three thousand Jews slain.
proclamation, that each one should repair unto his own house. For which
cause they departed and abandoned the feast, for fear of greater mischief;
notwithstanding they had spleen enough, as it is the ordinary custom of the
ignorant multitude.

After this Archelaus accompanied with his mother, betook himself to sea, and
led with him Nicholas and Ptolomey, with diverse other his friends, committing
the government of all his household Archelaus repaires to Rome and many of his
faction follow him.
and kingdom to his brother Philip with him also departed Salome Herodes
sister, leading with her her children. There went also diverse other of his
kindred, who said that they would all of them labor for Archelaus, that he
might obtain the kingdom, but in effect it was to contradict him with all
their power: and in especial to urge that against him with great vehemency,
that was done in the temple. Sabinus Caesar's Viceroy in Syria, posting into
Iewrie to take charge of Herodes money, met with Archelaus in Caesarea. But
Varus arriving in the mean while detained him from finishing that voyage; for
Archelaus had sent for him to come thither by Ptolomey, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 13. al. 14.
and Sabinus willing to do Varus a pleasure, would not seize the fortresses of
Iewrie; neither sealed up Herodes treasuries, but left them in Archelaus
possession, until such time as Caesar had given order for the estate; and
after he had made this promise he stayed in Caesarea.

After Archelaus had set sail toward Rome, and Varus was departed for
Antioch; Sabinus went to Jerusalem, where he seized the kings palace, and
calling before him the kings agents, Sabinus repaireth to Jerusalem with an
intent to leaze Herodes treasures and castles. Antipas under hope to recover
the kingdom saileth to Rome.
and the captains of his gatrisons, he required them to deliver up their
Castles into his hands. But they, according as Archelaus had commanded them,
continued the possession in their accustomed manner, according to the kings
direction, pretending to keep the same in Caesar's behalf. At the same time,
Antipas Herod's son travailed to Rome likewise, under the hope to be elected
king, in regard of Salomes promises; and for that he better deserved the same
then Archelaus, considering that in the first testament, which should be of
more force then the latter, he had been appointed king. He led his mother also
with him, and Ptolomey the brother of Nicholas, who had been one of Herodes
most esteemed friends, and was well affected to further and set forward his
Ireneus, a man very eloquent, and to whose charge in regard of his
sufficiency, the affairs of the kingdom had been committed. For which cause,
although he were persuaded to give over the kingdom unto his elder brother,
who was confirmed in the kingdom by his fathers testament, yet would he not
give ear thereunto. But Antipas no sooner arrived in Rome, but all his
kinsfolk revolted from Archelaus unto him, not so much for the love they bare
him, as for the hatred they had conceived against Archelaus: and above all, for
the desire they had to recover their liberty and to draw themselves under a
Roman governor. For they thought that if there were any contradiction, that
Antipas, for whom they endeavored to procure the roialtie, should be more
profitable unto them then Archelaus. Sabinus also by his letters accused
Archelaus to Caesar: But Archelaus by Ptolomey Caesar a supplication containing
his right and title to the kingdom, his fathers testament, and the account of
the money which Herod his father had sealed up, together with his ring, and
expected the issue.

But when he had read these letters, and those which Varus and Sabinus had sent
him, and understood what sums of money he had left, and what the annual
revenue was, and how Antipas challenged the kingdom, and appropriated it to
himself, according as his letters made mention: Antipater Salomes son accuses
Archelaus before Augustus Caesar.
he assembled all his friends to have their advise thereupon. Amongst them was
Caius the son of Agrippa and his daughter Iulia, adopted by him, whom he
caused to sit in the chiefest place: which done, he commanded the assistants to
speak what they would touching this matter. At that time Antipater Salomes
son, a man very eloquent, and a great adversary to Archelaus, Caesar had
granted it him, he had already seized the forces of the state; when as upon a
festival day he had slain so many: who although they had deserved that
punishment, yet ought the justice thereof to have been reserved to a lawful
power, and not to have bin usurped by him, either being king with Caesar's
prejudice, whose authority he had contempned; or by being a private man, which
was a greater oversight. For which cause he undeservedly at this time hoped for
his approbation, whom already as much as in him lay, he had deprived of The
year of the world, 3964. after Christ's Nativity, 2.
the title and authority of his allowance. Moreover he objected against him,
that of his own authority he had changed certain chieftaines of the army,
and that he had seated himself in the royal throne, and like a king had
determined certain causes, and had granted certain demands of the people:
finally, that he had left nothing undone, which he might have performed, had
Caesar confirmed his title: He alleged also, that they who were enclosed in
the Hippodrome were dismissed by him, and diverse other acts, partly true,
partly probable, in regard of the ambition of young men, who desirous to
govern do ordinarily commit such things: besides this, his neglect in mourning
for his father, and withal his rear banquets all night long at that very
time his father died; whereat the people began to mutiny, seeing the small
regard he had of his fathers death, from whom he had received so great goods
and honors. How all the day long he made Caesar should grant him the kingdom,
he would behave himself no less unkindly toward him, then he had done
toward his most kind father. That it was no less then a heinous crime in him,
to delight himself with songs and daunces at his fathers death, as if he had
been his enemy: That he now came to Caesar's presence, to the intent to
obtain the kingdom by his consent, whereas already he had behaved himself
no otherwise then if he had already been established king by his authority.
But most of all he exaggerated the slaughter he had committed in the temple,
and the impiety perpetrated so near to the feast of Easter, at which time
diverse both strangers and citizens had been slaughtered after the manner of
sacrifices, and the temple filled with carcasses, not by a stranger, but by
him, who under the color of religion Antipater to be king. For he had been
allotted the kingdom by his father, not when his mind was dead before his
body, but when both his judgment was sound, and his body in health. Yea
although at that time Archelaus father had such a conceit of him, as in his
latter testament and bequest he pretends, yet that he had already declared
what kind of king he was likely to be, who contemned Caesar's authority in
confirming the kingdom, and being as yet a private man doubted not to murder
the citizens in the temple. This said, Antipater (to give greater credit to his
words, bringing

Whereupon Nicholas arose, and alleged in Archelaus behalf as touching the
slaughter, Nicholaus excuses Archelaus.
that it was to be imputed to their impiety, who could not be restrained from
their tumults and vprores, before Archelaus was enforced to appease them by
force, alleging that they were so much the more guilty, for that they had not
only exercised their malice, but also had enforced others to attempt so
heinous a revenge against them: for their insolency seemed in appearance to
concern Archelaus; yet in a sort their contumacie pertianed to Caesar's
injury. For those that had been sent by him to appease and repress their
sedition, were against all law and right charged and slain by them, without
respect of God or regard of the solemn feast: whose defense Antipater was not
ashamed of, without respect of equity; so that he might satisfy that hatred
Archelaus. That therefore it was their fault, who first of all abstained not
from injury, but whetted those swords, which were drawn in maintenance of the
peace, against their own bosoms. He enforced all other things also, whereof
they had accused Archelaus against themselves, saying, that none of these
things were done without their consents: and that the offense was not so
grievous, as they intended it should be esteemed, to the end they might
discredit Archelaus. So great a desire was in them to hurt their kinsman, a man
both well respected, and affected by his father, as also kind and officious
toward them in all things that concerned them. As for the testament, that it
was made by the king when he was in perfect estate of mind and body, and of
greater force then the former, because the authority and confirmation thereof
was ascribed to Caesar the sovereign of the world. Further that Caesar would
not imitate them Herod, who being during his life time bountifully graced by
him, by many benefits, do now after his death go about to violate his last and
truest testament: (...) that rather like a friend and confederate he would
confirm his will, who like his faithful and sworn welwiller had committed
all things to his trust. For that there must needs be a great difference
between their malice and Caesar's virtue and faith, which was renowned through
the whole world. For which cause he would not judge his decree to be
inconsiderately past, who left his succession to his well deserving son, and
referred all things to his trust. For that it was unlikely The year of the
world. 3964 after the Nativity of Christ. 2^ Caesar pronounces Archelaus to
be worthy o^ the kingdom. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14.
that he should err in the choice of his successor, who had so discreetly
submitted all things to Caesar's judgment. After this manner Nicholas also
finished his discourse. Hereupon Caesar courteously raised Archelaus, who lay
prostrate and humbled before his feet, telling him that he was most worthy to
be king, by giving an apparent testimony, that he was constant in his
resolutions, pretending that he would do nothing but that which should be
answerable to Herodes testament, and Archelaus profit; and seeing the young man
was confirmed in some good hope with this his promise, he determined nothing
more for that time, but dismissing the council, he debated with himself
whether he should ratify the kingdom to Archelaus only, or divide it amongst
Herodes kindred, especially since all men had need of his assistance.

CHAP. XII.
The Jews mutiny against Sabinus, and how Varus punishes the authors of the
sedition.

But before Caesar had determined any thing certainly in this behalf,
Marthalce Archelaus mother died of a sickness, and Varus the president of the
Jews in Syria, had sent letters, which certified the emperor of the rebellion
of the Jews. For after Archelaus departure, all the nation Marthace Archelaus
mother dies. Varus pacifieth the seditious at Jerusalem.
was in an uproar. To pacify which Varus resorted thither, and punished the
authors of the same, and after he had in this sort appeased all things, he
returned to Antioch, leaving a regiment of soldiers in Jerusalem to restrain
the factious invocations amongst the Jews: yet prevailed he nothing by this
his policy. For as soon as Varus was departed, Sabinus, who intended Caesar's
affairs, remaining in that place, grievously burdened the Jews, trusting to
that power that was left him, and supposing Sabinus had offered them. And not
only were those of Iudaea grievously offended (but diverse also resorted out of
Galilee and Idumaea, from Jericho and the Cities situate on the other side of
Jordan, desiring all of them to be revenged on Sabinus. And dividing their
camp into three bands after this manner, the one part of them took up the
Hippodrome, and of the other two Alias, chap. 15. Sabinus avarice raises a
great sedition in Jerusalem at the feast of Penticost.
Sabinus fearing their number, and resolution, who were resolved either to die
or to overcome, sent present letters unto Varus, requiring him with all
expedition to send him a supply, because the regiment that was left by him, was
in great danger; and must needs utterly perish without his speedy rescous: as
for himself he withdrew into the tower and dungeon of the castle Phasaelus,
which was a fortress which was builded and so called in honor of Herodes
brother, who was slain by the Parthians; and from the top thereof made a sign
to the Romans, that they should sally out upon the Jews, being afraid to
trust himself A most bloody battle fought betwixt the Romans and Jews near
unto the temple.
they seized the outward galleries, and those that encompassed the temple, and
in that place there was a hot assault: for they flung down stones with their
hands and slings, and there were certain archers mixed amongst them, who in
that they had recovered a place of advantage, grievously gauled the Romans
which were below, in that they had no means to avoid their shot, but were in
such sort exposed thereunto, as their enemies had the better. And with this
disadvantage fought the Romans a long time, till at length sore aggrieued at
this their present indignity, Diverse Jews are slain and burned in the roof
of the porches.
to nothing in a moment, and they that were resorted thither were all of them
consumed before they were aware. For some of them fell with the roof of the
Galleries; othersome shot at and slain by those that stood round abouts;
othersome despairing of their The year of the world. 3964. after Christ's birth
2. A greater part of the sacred treasure taken away by the soldiers. The
palace besieged by the Jews.
lives, and amazed at the mischief, either cast themselves into the fire, or
slew themselves with their one swords; and all those that retired under hope to
save themselves by that way they ascended, were encountered by the Romans, who
slew them all in that they were discouraged and disarmed, though furiously
desperate: so that no one of them that ascended the porches escaped with life.
Afterward the Romans thrusting forward one another by those ways, where the
fire was aslaked, entered the treasure house where the sacred money was kept, by
which means a great part thereof was stolen away by the soldiers, and Sabinus
to all men's knowledge carried away four hundredth talents. But the Jews being
afflicted with a double calamity, first of all with the loss of their friends
in that fight: and lastly, with the spoil of the treasury; yet assembled they
a troop of the most valiantest soldiers, and besieged the palace, threatening
to burn Sabinus and all other the Romans that were therein, except they
speedily departed; and in so doing, they promised both them and Sabinus all
assurance and security, whereby it came to pass that diverse of them that were
in the palace, issued out and submitted themselves unto them. But Rufus and
Gratus having three thousand of those valiant soldiers under their charge, who
had served Herod, joined themselves with the Romans. The like did those
horsemen Rufus and Gratus captains of Herodes army join with the Romans.
which followed Rufus, who in like manner submitted themselves to their
direction: yet for all this, the Jews continued and intended their siege
undermining the walls, and exhorting their adversaries to depart, and not to
exempt them of their liberty, which they had long time enioied under their
predecessors. Sabinus was willing to depart from thence with his soldiers; yet
durst he not trust them in regard of their former attempt, and he suspected
over much the over Varus. At the same time infinite other troubles were raised
in diverse other places of Iudaea, according as Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 15.
Diverse tumults in Jury. Two thousand of Herodes soldiers assail the kings
people. Judas Ezechias son the archtheefe.
each man either was incensed with a desire of gain, or a will to revenge. For
two thousand men of war, who had sometime served under Herod, and being at
that time cashierd, lived at home, assembling themselves together assailed
those of the kings faction, who made head against them, under the conduct of
Herodes nephew Achiabus, who never daring to encounter them in a place of
equal advantage, in that they were old soldiers, and well exercised in
war, defended himself, and that he held and kept himself as near as he
could in the mountains and places of advantage. Moreover, Judas the son of
Ezechias the Archthiefe, whom Herod overcame with so much difficulty, at
Sephoris a City of Galilee, gathering unto him a band of desperate men,

Whilst these troubles ranged in every place, Simon also, who had been one of
Herodes servants, and both for his shape, stature, and strength was esteemed
amongst all men, undertook Simon Herod's servant.
the kingdom, and being attended by a mighty army, and proclaimed king by
them, who were a wicked and unbridled multitude, and persuading himself that
he was worthy to be king above Gratus, who with the kings soldiers had coupled
himself with the Romans, and gathered all the forces that he had, went out
against this Simon. And after a fierce battle, they on the other side of
Jordan, were put to flight, and fighting rather under courage then military
discipline, they were overcome. And whilst Simon in traversing Gratus conflict
with Simon. Simon beheaded. The Jews almost enraged in rebellion. Athronges
strong in body and goodly in stature attempreth royal dignity.
a valley sought to save himself by flight, Gratus met with him, and cut off
his head. About the same time also the royal palace of Amatha, that was fast
by Jordan, was burned by men of as Simon was. And thus through the whole nation
reigned this raging rebellion, for that the country had no king, who by his
virtue might govern and moderate the people* for that the strangers, who were
sent to repress these mutinies, did rather incense them through their violence
and avarice. For a certain obscure and base man (neither esteemed for virtue,
nor worthy regard for his riches, but being a shepherd utterly unknown before
time, and only famous for his huge stature and strength) called Athronges, was
so audacious, as to aspire to royal dignity, and took pleasure to offer
violence setting light by his life, and exposing himself The year of the
world. 3965. before Christ's birth 3.
Herodes life time: the other, in Arius with forty of their most valiant
footmen, they shot him through with their darts. The rest that expected
nothing less then life, were saved by Gratus, who came in upon them with the
kings soldiers: whereupon leaving the deadbodies, they retired. Continuing
their war after this manner a long time, according as occasion was offered,
they had done much mischief to the Romans, and far more injury to the
nation of the Jews. Finally they were Gratus: the other, in fighting against
Ptolomey. The eldest was taken by Archelaus, and the last being dismayed with
these accidents, and seeing Athronges and his brethren taken.
no means to escape (for besides his other mishaps his soldiers were
afflicted with sickness) he with the rest upon Archelaus faith and oath
submitted himself unto him. But this was done some little while after.

At this time was all Iudaea full of robberies, and as many seditious
assemblies as drew together, so many kings were there elected, who were raised
to the utter ruin of the common weal. Amongst the rest, the Romans were they
that smarted least, but the murders were executed against Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 16.
those that were of the country. But Varus understanding by Sabinus letters,
in what dangers they were, and fearing the utter overthrow of his third legion,
he took with him the two Arctas also, who was Lord of Petra; drawing himself
into confederacy with the Romans, in regard of that hatred he bare toward
Herod, sent him horsemen and footmen. When all these forces were assembled at
Ptolemais, he delivered a part thereof to his son, and one of his friends
commanding them to make war upon the Galileans, who bordered upon that City,
who entering that region, and putting all those to flight, whosoever durst make
head against him, he took Sephoris, and selling the inhabitants under the
spear, he consumed the City with fire. Varus Arus burned by the Arabians.
was free from the contagion of the seditious, but he pitched his camp in a
certain village, which was Ptolomies possession, called Arus. The same did the
Arabians burn, revenging themselves on Herodes friend for his sake, and
marching onward the Arabians spoiled also an other village Sampho and Emmaus
burned. Varus repaireth to Jerusalem, and delivers the legion that was
besieged.
called Sampho, and for that it was strongly fortified burned the same.
Besides, in that journey nothing escaped their hands, but they put all to fire
and sword. For both Emmaus was burned by Varus command, and in revenge of his
soldiers that were sl^ine in that place, it was left desolate and void of
inhabitants. From thence drawing near to Jerusalem, those Jews that besieged
the legion on that side, upon the sudden view and approach of the army of the
Romans, fearfully fled, giving over that siege which they intended. But those
Jews of Jerusalem, being Varus, alleging in their excuse, that the people in
regard of the feast were assembled in that place, and that the war was not
begun by their consent, but undertaken by their boldness who resorted
thither from diverse places; and that they were so far off from assailing the
Romans, as they rather seemed to be besieged by them. And long before this
Joseph king Herodes nephew, Gratus and Rufus with their soldiers were gone out
to meet Varus, and those Romans that had sustained the siege, had done no
less. But as touching Sabinus, he would not appear in Varus presence, by
stealing away privily out of the City, he fled unto the The year of the world
3965. after Christ's Nativity. 3.
seaward. Then Varus sending a part of his army through the whole region, sought
out the authors of this sedition, and those that were noted men in the action,
some of which, who were most guilty, were punished: the rest were delivered.
Now of those that were punished for this occasion, there were about two
thousand crucified; and that done, seeing that his army stood him in The
punishment of the conspirators.
little steed, he dismissed them. For diverse disorders and outrages, contrary
to Varus express command, were acted by his soldiers, who sought after
nothing more then to increase their means by other men's miseries. And hearing
that ten thousand Jews were assembled together, he hasted to apprehend them:
but they not daring to hazard their fortune in a fight with him, by Achiabus
advice submitted themselves. But Varus having pardoned the people for this
their rebellion, sent all those that were the ringleaders thereof to Caesar,
who discharged diverse of Herodes allies, and such as bare arms with them: for
that neither in regard of kindred, nor respect of justice, they had abstained
from rebellious insurrection. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16. al. 17.
After that Varus had in this sort appeased all the troubles in Iewrie, and
left the first legion in garrison in Jerusalem, he returned to Antioch.

But Archelaus was crossed in Rome by an other occurrent that arose upon this
occasion: Certain Ambassadors of the Jews resorted thither by Varus
permission, requiring, that it might be lawful for them to live according to
their own laws: these presented themselves to the number The year of the
world. 3966. before Christ's birth 4. The embassage of the Jews to Rome.
Archelaus and the ambassadors of the Jews appear before Caesar. Philip Herod^
son.
of fifty, and were backed by eight thousand Jews, that inhabited the City.
And when as Caesar had assembled the council of his friends, and chiefest
citizens in Apolloes temple, which he had builded to his mighty charge,
thither resorted the Ambassadors, who were followed by Archelaus also attended
by his friends. But the kings kindred neither stood by Archelaus in regard of
the hate they bare him, and yet disdained they to assist the ambassadors, for
that they were ashamed in Caesar's presence to oppose themselves against their
nearest friend and kinsman. Philip also was present at that time, who by Varus
persuasion resorted thither out of Syria, especially to the intent to plead for
his brother, to whom Varus wished all good fortune: besides that, hoping not a
little that if the Jews should obtain the liberty to live according to their
laws, it might come to pass that the kingdom being divided amongst Herod's
children, he might also light on some part thereof. After therefore the
Ambassadors of the Jews had obtained license to propose their demands,
pretending with themselves wholly to extinguish the royalty: they began to rippe
up Herodes disgraces, alleging how only in name he had been a king; The
ambassadors of the Jews rip up Herodes and Archelaus iniquity.
whereas otherwise he had used all the tyrannous practices that the most
wickedest person could have invented toward the destruction of his nation, and
that not content with these, he had of his own head practiced and invented
new. Neither that it needed them to reckon up how many he had deprived of life,
when as the estate of those that were alive was far more desperate, whom he
not only affrighted with perpetual terror and severity, but also with
injurious hands had not abstained from their goods. By which means it came to
pass, that he not only builded, but beautified foreign Cities inhabited by
foreign nations, to the end he might the rather utterly spoil those by
exactions, which were situate and seated in his own country: and that he
enforced his nation to extreme poverty, which he received in most happy
estate, whilst he spoileth those nobles of their estates, who upon weak
probabilities were condemned to die, or Herod had in no other sort governed,
then as if the government of them had been committed to a most savage beast.
For which cause, whereas in times past that nation had bin afflicted with many
calamities and murders, yet that there is no example extant amongst their
monuments of antiquity, that may be compared with their present calamity
under Herod. For Archelaus their king, supposing that whatsoever king might
befall them, he would always demeasne himself more affably then Herod had
done; and that to honor Archelaus they had mourned with him for his father, to
gratify him in other things, to the intent they might tie his good affection
unto them. But he without delay and all at once had made manifest to the whole
nation, what opinion they were to conceive of him, notwithstanding that as yet
he was not confirmed king (for that it lay in Caesar's hands to bequeath it yea
or no) and as if he had been afraid least he should assuredly be acknowledged
The year of the world. 3966. after Christ's birth 4.
for his fathers son, he had showed an example of his virtue, moderation and
good government, that he would use toward his subjects, by the first act which
he has committed, not only against God, but also against men. For in the
temple it self he has caused three thousand of his own countrymen to be
slain. And how can he choose but ^e justly hated, who besides his other
cruelties, obiecteth against us the crime of rebellion and mutiny. The effect
of their request therefore was this, that they might not any more be governed
by a king, nor any such like government, but that they might be annexed unto
Syria, and submit themselves unto those uernours that should be sent thither.
That in so doing it should truly appear whether they were seditious, and
addicted to chaunges, or whether they would live in peace at such time as they
had favorable governors. After the Jews had spoken to this effect: Nicholas
discharged Nicholas excuses Herod and Archelaus.
the kings of those accusations that were objected against them, and namely
Herod, who (as he said) had never been accused all his life time, and that it
was no reason that they, who justly accusing him, might have caused him to be
punished during his life time, should now address their accusations against
him after he was dead. And as touching those things that were objected
concerning Archelaus actions, it ought to be imputed to their insolence, for
that engaging themselves in matters contrary to law, and having begun to
murder those who sought to appease the tumult, they accused such as had kept
them in obedience. Besides this, he objected against them, that they were
addicted to alterations, and took pleasure to stir up seditions, for that
they knew not what thing it was to obey justice and the laws, and that there
was no nation in the world so headstrong as that of the Jews; for that they
would have the upper hand over Thus spoke Nicholas.

CHAP. XIII.
Caesar confirms Herodes testament, and appoints his children to be his
successors.

WHen Caesar had heard these things, he dismissed the assembly. But some few
days after he desirous to make an end of this matter, declared Archelaus not
king, but Lord of half Caesar makes Archelaus an Ethnarque, and bestows the
one half of the kingdom on Philip and Antipas.
that government that appertained to Herod, promising him to bestow a royal
dignity upon him, if so be he behaved himself virtuously, according as it
became him. As for the other Herodes sons, Philip and Antipas, who debated
with his brother Archelaus for the whole kingdom. The same Antipas also had
the country on the other side of Jordan, and Galilee, with two hundredth
talents of annual revenue. As for Philip, he had Bathanea, Trachonitis, and
Auranitis, and part of the palace that was called by Zenodorus name, with one
hundredth talents. As for Archelaus, he had Idumaea, Iudaea and Samaria, which
were discharged of the fourth part of the tributes by Caesar, for that they had
not joined themselves with the rest of the people during the time of the
sedition. Besides that, Archelaus had the tower of Straton, Sebaste, Ioppe, and
Jerusalem. For Gaza, Gadara, and Hippon were cities of Greece which Caesar had
dismembered, and adjoined to Syria. Archelaus had five hundredth talents of
yearly rent out of his country. Thus was the patrimony Herodes sons. As for
Salome, besides that which her brother had given her in his will, which were
the cities of Iamnia, Azot, Phasaelis, and half a million of Salome.
silver money, Caesar granted her a royal house in Ascalon; so as she received
in the whole sixty talents of annual revenue, and had her house allotted her
within the dominion of Archelaus. All other of Herodes kindred, received that
which was bequeathed unto them by his testament. Two Herodes two daughters that
were virgins married to Pheroras sons.
of his daughters that were unmarried, were endowed by Caesar with a quarter of
a million of silver money which he gave them, beside their fathers portion, and
they were married to Pheroras sons. Moreover he gave Herodes sons, all that
which he had given him by his testament, amounting to the sum of one thousand
and five hundredth talents; contenting himself only to receive some few
mooueables, not so much for their value, as in remembrance of the king, who had

CHAP. XIIII. The year of the world, 1966. after Christ's Natiuie, 4.

Of the counterfaite Alexander.

AFter these things were in this sort disposed by Caesar, a young man and a Jew
borne, brought up in the city of Sidon, by a certain Roniane libertine, ^uded
himself Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 18. Alias, chap. 17 The false Alexander.
into Herodes kindred, for that all those that beheld him, reported that he
resembled Alexander Herod's son, who was slain by him; and by this means, he
began to aspire unto the kingdom: whereupon calling to him a companion, who was
his own countriman, and a long beaten courteour, and his craftimaister, and
fit to execute any dangerous and desperate actions, he by his instructions
sained himself to be that Alexander Herod's son, who was delivered
Aristobulus, and that they were both escaped in this manner. Being puffed up by
these toys, he failed not to deceive other men; and as soon as he came to
Creete, as many Jews soever as he fell in conference with, he persuaded
them no less, and getting much money at their hands, he sailed into the Isle
of Melos, where he gathered a great sum of money under pretext that he was
of the Kings blood. And now hoping that he should recover his fathers kingdom,
and that he should remunerate those who were beneficial unto him, he hasted
toward Rome, accompanied with his friends in great pomp. And being arrived at
Puteol, he there also was entertained with no less favor by those Jews whom
he deceived by his colorable title, and diverse others, who had been Herod's
friends and familiars came unto him, and entertained him as their king. The
cause hereof was the natural disposition of men who take pleasure in false
reports, together with the report of his resemblance. For they that had
frequented very familiarly with Alexander, held it for a matter most assured,
that he was the man, and none other, and affirmed unto other upon their oaths
that it was he; so that this rumor at last came to Rome. And all the Jews that
dwelt there came forth to The false Alexander comes to Rome.
meet him, saving, that it was Gods handie work, that he was after that sort
preserved beyond all men's expectation: and they greatly rejoiced in his mother
Mariammes behalf, from whom he was descended; and he was carried in a litter
through the streets with all the apparel of a king, the charge whereof was
defraied by those who were his friends. He was attended with a great multitude
of men, and honored with great applause, as it ordinarily falls out at such
Caesar's ears, he gave small credit thereunto, persuading himself that it was
a hard matter to deceive Herod in a cause of so great importance:
notwithstanding conforming himself in some sort to the opinions of men, he
sent a certain freeman of his called Celadus, who had very familiarly
conuersed with Alexander and Aristobulus during their infancy, giving him in
charge to bring Alexander unto him, to the end he might see him; which The
false Alexander cannot deceive Caesar.
he did, and was never the wiser in discovering him. This notwithstanding
Caesar was not fully deceived. For although he resembled him somewhat, yet was
he not so nearly like him, that he could deceive those who narrowly observed
him. For this counterfeit Alexander had hard hands, in that he had been
accustomed to labor, which the true Alexander could not have Caesar therefore
discovering the treachery both of the counterfeit scholar and lying master,
and how they accorded in their confident iustifications, he enquired of them
what was become of Aristobulus who was secretly hid with him, and for what
cause he presented not himself to enjoy the honor that appertained to those,
who were so nobly descended? It was answered him, that he remained in the Isle
of Cyprus, for fear of dangers, to which they are exposed who sail by sea, to
the end that if any misfortune should befall them, all Mariammes race should
not be extinguished, but that at leastwise Aristobulus might be left alive.
Whilst he auowed these things, and the author of this fable justified no
less, Caesar drawing the young man aside, said unto him: my friend, if thou will not deceive me, thou shall have this recompense, that thou shall not
Caesar, how and by whom it was contrived. At that time Caesar being loath to
falsify his promise that he had past to this false Alexander, and seeing that
in times The false Alexander is condemned to ^g at an oate.
past he had travailed with his hands, he caused him to be enrowled among the
number of his sailors to row, and caused the other that induced him to this
fraud to be put to death, contenting himself that the inhabitants of Melos had
lost their charges, which they had employed upon this false The year of the
world. 3966. before Christ's birth 4.
Alexander, who had a shameful end, as it has been heretofore declared.

CHAP. XV.
Archelaus is accused anew, and afterward banished, and sent into Vienna.

AFter that Archelaus had taken possession of that Sovereignty that was
allotted him, he Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 19. al. 18. The priesthoed is taken
from Ioazar, and delivered to Eleazar, and from him to Iosuah the son of Sia.
Archelais builded.
came into Iudaea, where he deposed Ioazar the son of Boethus from the high
priesthood, accusing him to have favored the seditious, and established
Eleazar his brother in his place. After this he reedified the palace in
Jericho, and sumptuously adorned it, drawing away Archelais, and contrary to
the laws of his country, he married Glaphyra Archelaus daughter, who had been
his brother Alexanders wife, by whom also he had diverse children,
notwithstanding the law of the Jews forbids a man to marry his brothers
wife. Neither did Eleazar enjoy the priesthood any long time, but during his
life time Jesus the son of Sias was substituted in his place.

The tenth year of Archelaus government, the chiefest governors among the
Jews and Samaritanes unable any longer to endure his cruelty and tyranny,
accused him before Caesar, and especially after they had understood that he had
transgressed Caesar's command, who had Caesar understood, he was sore
displeased, and caused Archelaus agent to be called before him, who was then at
Rome, and sent for Archelaus also, and esteeming it too base an indignity for
him to write unto him, Go (said he) unto him with all expedition, and bring him
unto me without delay. He posting forward with all diligence, at length arrived
in Iudaea, where he found Archelaus banqueting with his friends, and having
certified him of Caesar's pleasure, he incited him to hasten onward of his way.
As soon as he came to Rome, after that Caesar had heard certain of his
accusers and his Archelaus banished and confined.
iustifications, he banished him, and confined him in the City of Vienna in
France, and confiscated all his goods.

But before Archelaus was sent for to Rome, he reported unto his friends this
dream which Simon an Essean, having first of all obtained security and
license to speak, said that the vision pretended, that a great alteration
should befall in Archelaus estate, to his utter disgrace. For the oxen
signified afflictions, in respect that those kind of creatures do ordinarily
travel; and as touching the change of estate it was signified by this, in that
the earth being labored by the travel of the oxen, retained not the same
estate: and as touching the ten ears of corn, they signified the like number
of years. And therefore when Archelaus sovereignty should be at an end. Thus
interpreted he this dream. And the fifth day after the vision thereof, his
factor Archelaus by Caesar's commandment came into Iewrie to summon him to
Rome. Some such like matter Simon the Essean interprets Archelaus vision.
happened to Glaphyra his wife also, the daughter of king Archelaus, she (as we
have said) married Alexander Herod's son when she was a maid, and brother to
this Archelaus; who being slain by his father, she was married the second time
to Iubaking of Mauritania, and he also being dead, she living with her father
in Cappadocia was married to Archelaus, who put away Mariamme his wife for the
love he bare unto Glaphyra. She living with Archelaus, was encountered with such
a dream. She thought that she saw Alexander fast by her, who cherishing and
embracing Glaphiras dream.
her, checked her saying: Glaphyra, Thou approouest the truth of that proverb,
which Archelaus, thou art content to admit my brother for thy husband. This
notwithstanding I will not forget the love that I have borne there, but will
deliver thee from him, who has done thee this reproach, by retaining thee The
year of the world. 3973. after Christ's Nativity. 11.
for mine own, as heretofore thou have been. After that she had told this
vision to certain women that were her familiars, she died very shortly after.
Which accident I have thought good to register in this place, in that I was to
entreat of those kings; and otherwise the matter seems to be a signal
example containing a most certain argument of the immortality of souls, and
Gods providence. And if any one deem these things incredible, let him reserve
his opinion to himself, and no ways contradict those, who by such events are
incited to the study of virtue. Quirinius Censor of Syria.
Now when the government of Archelaus was annexed to Syria, Cirenius, who had
been Consul, was sent by Caesar to tax Syria, and to dispose of Archelaus
house.

THE XVIII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 18. book.
1 Cyrenius is sent by Caesar into Syria and Iudaea to tax the people,
Coponius is made governor Judas the Galilean raises up new troubles. 2 What
and how many Sects there were among the Jews. 3 The Tetrarches Herod and
Philip build Cities in honor of Caesar. 4 The sedition of the Jews against
Pontius Pilate. 5 That which happened to the Jews that were dwelling at Rome in
Pilates time. 6 Of Vitellius his arrival in Jerusalem, and how he received
commission from Tiberius Caesar, to make war against Aretas, after he had
received hostages of Artabanus. 7 Herod the Tetrarches war against king
Aretas, and his overthrow. 8 Agrippaes voyage to Tiberius, where he is accused
and shut in prison. He is delivered after the Tiberius by Caius his successor.
9 How Herod the Tetrarch was banished. 10 The sedition of the Jews and
Greeks at Alexandria. 11 Caius sends Petronius into Iudaea to make war
against the Jews, if so be they refused to receive his statue. 12 That which
happened to the Jews that were at Babylon, and of the two brethren Asinaeus and
Anilaeus.
CHAP. I.
Cyrenius is sent by Caesar into Syria.

Cyrenius the Roman Senator having executed all degrees, offices, and
dignities, until such time as he obtained the Consulship: a man of great
reckoning Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 1. Quirinius is sent by Caesar into Syria
to execute justice in that place. Coponius prefect of Iudaea. The taxation of
the people of the Jews.
and estimation, was sent into Syria by Caesar's direction, to do justice among
the people, and to sesse and tax each man's goods: with him was sent Coponius a
captain of a company of horsemen, who was appointed to have the commandment
of all Iewrie. Cyrenius therefore came into Iudaea, which was already annexed
unto Syria, to tax the goods of the inhabitants thereof, and to confiscate
Archelaus substance. And although at the first the Jews thought but hardly of
this description, yet notwithstanding without contradiction they submitted
themselves, being persuaded thereunto by the counsel of the high priest Ioazar
the son of Boethus, Judas the Gaulanite, borne in the town of Gamala, who
having a certain man called Sadoc the Pharisee confederate with him, labored
to stir up the people to rebellion. Alleging that the description was no
other thing, but a manifest confession of their Alias, chap. 3.
servitude, exhorting all the nation to maintain their liberty, and putting
them in hope that they thereby should happily establish their estates, and
enjoy their goods with security; and besides this, obtain both honor and
glory in prosecution of such an enterprise. Moreover, that God The year of
the world. 3973. after the Nativity of Christ. 11.
Slaughters, thefts, seditio^s and famine in Iudaea.
The temple of Jerusalem burn^.
all the beautiful buildings. So dangerous a thing is it to change the
customs and manners of a country. For Judas and Sadoc having introduced and
raised a fourth sect, and tying the Sectaries to their command, filled the
whole common weal for the present with many troubles, and produced the roots
of these mischiefs, which afterward branched abroad from this unaccustomed
Judas and Sadoc authors of the fourth sect.
sect. For which cause I think it not amiss to discourse briefly of these
sectaries opinions, whereby so many evils have fallen upon our nation.

CHAP. II.
How many, and what sects there were among the Jews.

THere were three sects among the Jews, of long continuance and antiquity,
that of the Esseans; that of the Sadduces; and that of those who were called
Pharisees. Of these Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11. al. 5. Three sects of the
Jews of whom mention is made in the second book of the wars of the Jews.
The Pharisees doctrine.
have we spoken in our second book of the wars of the Jews; and yet now I
think it not amiss to speak somewhat of them in this place also. The
Pharisees use a very austere The Sadduce^ opinion.
that which is in the law, and hold it a virtue to dispute with their masters,
as touching the decrees of their sect. Their opinion is entertained by very
few, yet such, who for the most part are men of the best reckoning; yet
entermeddle they not in any case with any affairs, and when they are advanced
to any honors, either with their own good liking, or with constraint, they
are enforced to allow of that which the Pharisees shall propose, otherwise the
common people will not endure them. The Esseans attribute unto God the
government and disposition of all things. The Esseans profession.
They say that the souls of men are immortal, and all the uttermost of their
endeavor and delight is to maintain justice and equity. They send their
offerings unto the temple, yet sacrifice they The Esseans life and manners.
They have one custom which is worthy admiration, and such a one as is not to
be found amongst any other, either Greeks or Barbarians, that make any
reckoning of virtue, which they have not practiced for a little while, but even
from all antiquity; which is, that they possess their goods in common:
neither does the richest amongst them make more use of his possessions: then he
The year of the world. 3973. after Christ's birth 11.
that has least of all. They are at least four thousand in number, who
neither have wives nor slaves; supposing that women are the occasion of
injustice, and that slaves do arise by mutinies: and living apart by
themselves, they serve one another: and choose out certain upright men among
their priests to gather the fruits and renenewes of their lands, to the end
they may be sustained and nourished thereby: In a word, they follow the same
course of life that they do, who are called Plisti among the Danes. The fourth
sect was founded by Judas of Galilee, which accords Plisti among the Danes.
Judas Galileus the author of the fourth sect.
altogether and in all things with the Pharisees, but that they are extremely
iealious of their liberty, acknowledging but one only God, Lord and master of
all things, and had rather both themselves with their dearest children and
kinsfolk endure the most grievous and bitter torments that may be imagined,
then call any mortal man their Lord. Of which constancy of theirs Gessius
Florus iniurics.
most heinous injuries which were offered us by Gessius Florus our governor,
by which means at length it came to pass that they revolted and rebelled
against the people of Rome. Thus much as touching the sects among the Jews.

CHAP. III.
The Tetrarches Herod and Philip build Cities in honor of Caesar.

AFter that Cyrenius had confiscated Archelaus goods, and finished the
valuation of every man's estate (which happened thirty seven years after
Antonies overthrow by Caesar in Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3. Anan the son of
Seth made high priest in Ioazars place. Alias, chap. 6. Sephoris chief city of
Gal^e Betaramphtha called Iulias. Paneas. Bethsaida. Men's bones scattered in
the temple The year of the world, 3974. after Christ's birth 12. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 4.
the Actian battle) he deposed Ioazar from the priestly dignity, by reason of
that sedition which the people stirred up against him, and established Ananus
the son of Seth in his place. But Herod and Philip took each of them the
possession of their Tetrarchy, and disposed of the affairs thereof. Herod
enclosed Sephoris with a strong wall, and made it the chiefest city and
ornament of all Galilee: he fortified also another City called Betaramphtha
and named it Iulias Caesar's wife. Philip repaired Paneada situated near unto
the sourse of Jordan, and called it Caesaraea: he repaired also the borough of
Bethsaida near unto the lake of Genazereth, and gave it the dignity of a
City, both for the number of the inhabitants as for other preheminences, and
called it Iulia by Caesar's wives name. As for Coponius the governor in Iudaea,
who (as we have said) was sent with Cyrenius, in whose time there happened that
which follows. At the feast of unleavened bread, which we call Pascha, the
custom was that the Priests opened the temple gates about midnight, at which
time certain Samaritans, who secretly entered into Jerusalem, as soon as the
gates were open, spread men's bones amidst the porches, and over all the temple:
whereby it came to pass, that the priests began to keep a more diligent
watch, then they had done before time.

Some little while after, Coponius returned to Rome, and Marcus Ambiuius
succeeded him in the government. In his time Salome king Herodes sister
departing out of this life, bequeathed unto Iulia the City of Iamnia, and all
the lands and country round about: she gave her also Phasaelis situate in the
plain, and Archelais where there are diverse date trees, bearing most excellent
fruit. After Ambiuius, Annius Rufus had the command, under whom died Caesar
the second Roman Emperor, after he had reigned fifty seven years, six
months and two days, The year of the world. 3975. after Christ's birth 13.
The year of the world. 39^. after Christ's birth 15. The year of the world.
3978. after the birth of Christ. 16. The year of the world, 3979 before
Christ's birth 17
and had Antonius his copartner in the monarchy for the space of fourteen
years. He lived in the whole seventy seven years.

After Caesar succeeded Tiberius Nero the son of Iulia his wife, who was the
third Roman Emperor. He it was that sent the fifth governor into Iudaea,
whose name was Valerius Gratus, who Annius Rufus. This Gratus deposed Ananus,
and appointed Ismael the son of Fabius high Priest; and after his decease
(for he lived but a little whiles after) Eleazar the son of Ananus was made
high Priest. A year after this, this Eleazar also was deposed, and the
Priesthood was given to Simon the son of Camithus, who continuing in this
dignity for a years space and no longer, Joseph called Caiaphas succeeded
after him. After Gratus had behaved himself thus, he returned to Rome, after he
had remained in Iudaea for the space of 11. years, After him came Po^tius
Pilate and succeeded him in the government. But Herod the tetrarch being
entertained into Tiberius The year of the world. 3979. after Christ's birth 17.
The year of the world, 3990. after Christ's nativity, 28.
there flocked many, who were not assuredly held for men of free condition; all
which he infranchised, and gave them great gifts, under that condition, that
they should not abandon the city. To some of them he gave houses already
builded; to other some lands very apt to be tilled, knowing that the
habitation of such a place was contrary to the laws and customs of his
country, and the ordinances of the Jews. For that Tiberias was builded in a
place full of sepulchers; Tiberias builded.
and our law says, he that conuerseth in those places is held vncleaue and
defiled for the space of seven days.

At that very time died Phraates king of Parthia* being traitorously slain by
his son Phraataces, Phraates king of the Parthians slain by the treason of
Phraataces his son. Thermusa Phraataces mother.
for this cause. After that Phraates had gotten many lawful children, he took
unto him an Italian woman to his concubine, called Thermusa, whom with other
presents Julius Caesar had sent unto him. After he had begotten on her his
son Phraataces, he was so much besotted with her beauty, that he took her
to his wife, and held her in high estimation. She that might persuade him unto
all that whatsoever she listed, enforced her self to the uttermost to make her
son king of Parthia, and seeing that she might not attain thereunto, except
she had first found out the means to deliver her self of Phraates lawful
children, she persuaded him to send them Phraates in no sort had the power to
contradict Thermusas will, and only Phraataces was brought up in the affairs
of estate; who thinking the time too tedious and long if he should expect the
kingdom whilst his father were dead, conspired against him by the instigation
and furtherance of his mother, with whom (as it is thought) he committed
incest. In effect, being equally attainted of these two heinous Phraataces
slain.
crimes, both for the murder of his father, as his incest committed with his
mother, he was generally hated by his subjects, who rebelled against him before
such time as he was settled in his kingdom. By this means was his fortune
overthrown, and he died. The noble men among the Parthians perceiving, that it
was impossible for them to maintain their policy without a king, and that
their king ought lineally to descend of the race of the Arsacians (because by
custom they Herod to come and be their king, who otherwise was in hatred with
all the people, and accused of extreme cruelty. In a word, he was an
unsociable man, and extremely choleric, notwithstanding he were of the blood
of the Arsacides: they therefore flocked about him, and killed him at a banquet
made at a certain sacrifice (for the custom of the Parthians was, that every
one bare his weapon) or as the common report was, that he was slain Herod se^
for by the Parthians, and slain in hunting.
at such time as he was a hunting. For this cause, they sent Ambassadors to
Rome, requiring that one of those that were hostages there might be their king,
and one Vonones was sent unto them, Artabanus king of Media, who was of the
race of the Arsacides. To this request of theirs he willingly condescended, and
came unto them with his army. And Vonones marched forward to make head against
him. At the first encountry, although the common sort amongst the Parthians
favored Artabanus; yet was he overcome and fled to the mountains of Media.
But not long after, having assembled a greater army, he once more set upon
Vonones and discomfited him, at Vonones king of the Parthia^^ put to flight by
Artabanus,
which time Vonones retired himself with some horsemen of his into Seleucia.
But Artabanus having made a great slaughter of those that fled, and wholly
abashed the minds of the Barbarians, he retired himself to the city of
Ctesiphon, with those people that accompanied him, and was afterward made king
of Parthia. Vonones arrived in Armenia, and at the first sought to make
himself king over that nation, sending to this effect certain Ambassadors to
Rome: but Tiberius The year of the world, 3990. after Christ's Nativity, 28.
Vonones submits to Syllanus governor of Syria, Orodes king of Armenia.
Antiochus king of Comegena.
Artabanus by an express Embassage had threatened him with war. For they of
greatest power among the Armenians (who are those that dwell a^out the ^loud
Niphates) maintained Artabanus title, and Vonones destitute of all hope to
obtain the kingdom, yielded himself to Syllanus, who was Governor of Syria,
and in regard that he had bin brought up at Rome, he was kept in Syria* and
Artabanus gave Armenia to Orodes one of his sons. Antiochus king of the
Co^agenes died also at that time, and there fell a debate betwixt the commons
and the nobility; so that both parties sent their Ambassadors to Rome. The
nobles required that the form of their government might be changed into diverse
(...); and the people requested that they might be honored by a king, as they
had been accustomed. The Senate decreed that ^icus should be Germanicus
poisoned by Pis^es (...).
For at such time as he arrived in the East, and orderly disposed all things,
he was poisoned by Piso, whereof he died, as it is declared in another place.

CHAP. IIII.
The rebellion of the Jews against Pontius Pilate.

PIlate Governor of Iud^ led his army from Caesarea to Jerusalem, where he
wintered Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. al. chap. 8. Pilat brings Caesar's
statues to Jerusalem, and upon the peoples instant motion transferreth the^ to
Caesarea
them with an intent to bring in Caesar's statues, and standards into the City,
in contempt of our law which forbids us to make images. For which cause,
those Governors Pilate was the first, who unawares and by night entered
Jerusalem, bringing with him his images. Which when the people understood, in
great multitudes they resorted to Caesarea, beseeching him for many days, that
he would transport those images into some other place. But when as Pilate
denied them to perform their request, because the matter would redound to
Caesar's dishonor, and the Jews also ceased not to solicit him, some six
days after commanding his soldiers to lie in ambush in a readiness, he sat
him down in the Tribunal within the Hippodrome, making use of the opportunity
of the place, for that it was most fit for a stratageme. There being urged once
more about the same business, he gave a sign to his soldiers to beset The
year of the world, 3997. after Christ's nativity, 35.
them, threatening them with death, except they would presently give over their
suite, and repair Pilate amazed at the confidence they showed in the
conservation of their laws, suddenly caused Caesar's images to be transported
out of Jerusalem into Caesarea, and out of the sacred treasury he made Pilate
seeking to draw certain springs of water to Jerusalem stirs up a rebellion.
certain conduits of water, that had their fountain heads more then two
hundredth stades off. But the people took no pleasure in those conduits, and
diverse thousands of men assembled themselves exclaiming against Pilate,
endeavoring thereby to make him give over his enterprise. Some of them also
uttered diverse injurious speeches against him, as it ordinarily falls out
amongst an unbridled multitude. But he causing them to be hemmed in by a great
number of his The year of the world. 3998. after Christ's birth 36.
And so unmercifully laid on them, who were naked and disarmed, that some of
them were slain, othersome grievously hurt: and after this manner was the
tumult and sedition appeased.

At that time was JESUS a wise Man, if it be lawful to call him a Man. For he
was the performer of diverse admirable works, and the instructor of those who
willingly entertain the truth: Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. al. chap. 9.
and he drew unto him diverse Jews and Greeks to be his followers. This was
Christ, who being accused by the princes of our nation before Pilate, and
afterward condemned to the Cross by Jesus Christ crucified by Pilate. Hedio
and Ruffinus. chap. 7. Alias, chap. 10
from that time forward the race of the Christians, who have derived their name
from him, has never ceased.

At that time also there fell out another accident, which very sore troubled
the Jews, and in the temple of Isis at Rome there were many shameful acts
committed. But I will first of all recount The year of the world. 3998 after
the Nativity of Christ 36.
Paulina, renowned both for the nobility of her house, as also through her
study and exercise in virtue. Besides this, she was very rich, and with her
riches beautiful; and in her flowring years; and notwithstanding a very
mirrhor of chastity. She was married unto a certain noble man called
Saturnine, that equald her in all those her excellent perfections. A certain
young man called Decius Mundus one of the knights of greatest account at that
time, fell in love with her. But she was of that disposition, that it was
impossible for him to corrupt her by presents: And the more she refused those
infinite presents which he sent unto her, the more was Mundus heart inflamed
with ardent affection; so that to enjoy her but only one night, he offered her
two hundredth thousand drachmes, amounting in our English money to Mundus
father, whose name was Id^, expert in all sorts of subtilties, who being sore
aggrieued to behold the young man's resolution, whom she saw wholly addicted to a
desperate death, she addressed her self unto him, and encouraged him with
hope, promising him to bring him to Paulinas speech, by the means of a
certain bribe which she intended to offer. He rejoicing very much at her
motion, demanded what sum would serve her: who requiring nothing more then
fifty thousand drachmes to obtain Paulina; he furnished her Paulina,
exhorting them to work so wisely that he might enjoy her. They bewitched with
this huge present they had, and hoped to receive, promised her to work the
feat. Whereupon the eldest among them resorted to Paulina, and having Anubis,
in that the God was surprised with her love, and desired that she would come
unto him. Paulina took great pleasure in this his discourse, and told her
familiars how she had been honored with the amorous solicitation of a God, and
certified her husband how Anubis would banquet and lie with her. Whereunto he
consented, knowing how great his wives chastity was. She therefore repaired to
the temple, and after she had supt, and the time was come wherein she was
usually accustomed to lay her down to rest, and the gates were locked up by the
priests that were therein; and the lights likewise were taken away; Mundus, who
was hidden within, failed not to accost her; who thinking that it was the God
Anubis, satisfied his desires all the night long; and in the Paulina also early
in the morning repaired to her husband, and certified him how Anubis had
appeared unto her, and boasting her self among her familiars what conference
he had used with her. But some of them believed her not, in regard of the
manner of their entertainment; the rest were altogether amazed, supposing those
things to be no ways incredible, at such time as they bethought themselves of
the Ladies chastity. Some three days after this act was committed, Mundus
meeting with Paulina, said unto her: You have saved me two hundredth thousand
drachmes, wherewith you might have augmented your treasure, and this
notwithstanding you have not failed to satisfy my request: neither am I
grieved that you have contemned me under the name of Mundus, since that
undertaking Anubis name I have accomplished Tiberius causes Isis priests and
Ida to b^ hanged and banished Mundus.
impudence, tore her garments, and having told her husband of all this subtle
circum^ention, she requested earnestly his assistance, and that he would not
forsake her in the prosecution of her revenge: who presently certified the
Emperor of each particular thereof. Now when Tiberius had diligently
understood, how all things had happened, by the inquisition and examination of
the Priests, he condemned them and Ida, who had been the inuentor and
complottor of this treason against Paulina, to be hanged: he pulled down the
temple also, and cast Anubis The year of the world. 3998. after Christ's birth
36.
statue into Tyber, and banished Mundus; supposing that he ought not to be more
grievously punished, considering that the fault which was committed by him,
proceeded from extreme love. Behold here the insolence committed in the temple
of Isis, by the priest that appertained to that temple. Now intend I to declare
that which happened to the Jews that were at that time in Rome, according as
heretofore I both purposed and promised.

CHAP. V.
Of that which befell the Jews that were at Rome in Pilates time.

THere was a certain Jew, that having been accused for the breach of the
laws of his Fuluia Saturnines wife delivers gold and purple to four Jews to
be sent to the temple in Jerusalem, they convert it to their own uses, which
when Tiberius knew he commands all the Jews to be thrust out of Rome.
country, and fearing to be punished for the same, fled from thence, being
without respect, a man of a most mischievous behavior. He dwelling at that
time in Rome, professed himself to be an expounder of Moses law, and drawing
unto him three other no less reprobates then himself, he followed his
ordinary profession. Fuluia a Lady of much honor became their scholar, and
had embraced the religion of the Jews, whom they had persuaded to send
certain purple and gold to the temple of Jerusalem: which after they had
received at her hands, they converted it to their own use, as before that time
they had determined to do. Tiberius, who was informed hereof by Saturnine his
familiar friend, and Fuluias husband, who had discovered the same unto him,
commanded all Jews whatsoever to depart out of Rome. Of these the Consuls
chose out and enrowled to the number of four thousand men, whom they

Neither was the nation of the Samaritanes exempt from this trouble: for a
certain subtle companion, who sought by all the means he might to encroch
upon the peoples favor, persuaded them to withdraw themselves with him to the
mount Garizim (which they supposed to be the holiest amongst all their
mountains) in which place he auowed that he would show them the sacred Vessels
buried in a certain place, where Moses had laid them, and at that time they
being gathered together in arms, by his persuasion encamped themselaes in a
borough called The Samaritanes assemble at Tirathaba to ascend the mountain
Garizim, Pilat charge and overcomes them and puts them to flight.
Tirathaba, where they entertained those that repaired thither to adioyne
themselves with them, Pilate prevented them, and got up before them with his
horsemen and footmen, who charging those that were assembled in the borough,
put them to flight, and slaying some, and putting the rest to flight, led away
a great number of them prisoners with him. Pilate executed the chiefest
ringleaders amongst them, and those also of greatest force among the fugitives.
The tumult of these Jews being published abroad, and their misfortune made
known, the Senate of Samaria addressed themselves to Vitellius who had bin
Consul, and who at that time governed Syria, before whom The year of the
world. 3999 after Christ's birth 37. Alias, cap. 11 Pilate accused before
Vitellius is sent to Rome.
they accused Pilate for the murder of those whom he had slain, saying, that
they assembled not in Tirathaba to rebel against the Romans, but to warrantize
themselves against Pilates tyranny. Whereupon Vitellius sent Marcellus his
friend, to take charge of Iudaea, commanding Pilate Pilate, after he had
soiourned ten years in Iewrie, repaired to Rome, having no means to
contradict that commandment that Vitellius had given him. But before he
arrived there, Tiberius was departed and dead.

CHAP. VI. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8. al. 12. Vitellius comes to Jerusalem,
forgiueth the Jews their tribute, commits the charge of the hie priests
garments to them. The hie priests vestments reserved in the castle of Antonia.

Vitellius comes to Jerusalem.

AS soon as Vitellius came into Iudaea, he went up to Jerusalem and celebrated
there the feast of the passover, and after he had been magnificently
entertained in that place, he Hircanus the high priest the first of that name
(for diverse have been so called) having builded a tower near unto the temple,
did for the most part make his residence therein, and there kept his vestments
that were committed to his charge, the rather for that he only had the
authority The year of the world. 3999. after Christ's birth 37.
Herod being exalted to the kingdom, and seeing this tower to be strongly
scited, builded the same most magnificently, and called it Antonia, in honor
of Antony, who was his great friend. And having found these vestments in that
place, he retained them with him, assuring himself that the people would
attempt nothing against him. Archelaus his son and successor in the
kingdom, kept the same course that Herod had done. But after that the Romans
had obtained the souraignty thereof, they kept the high Priests ornaments in
their hands, and reserved them in a place builded for the purpose, under the
seal of the Priests, and the prefect of those that kept the sacred Vitellius
returned those ornaments into the hands of the Priests, according to the
ancient orders, Vitellius advanced Jonathan the son of Anani to the
priesthood, and degradeth. Joseph sur^amed Caiaphas.
leaving them to be used at such time as need required, commanding the prefect
to trouble himself no more about the place where they should be kept. After
he had done this favor to the nation of the Jews, he dispossessed the high
Priest Joseph surnamed Caiaphas, and advanced Jonathan the son of Ananus to
that dignity, and afterward returned to Antioch.

At that time he received letters from Tiberius, by which he commanded him to
capitulate and conclude a friendship with Artabanus the king of the Parthians
(whose hatred he suspected, and feared least being seized of Armenia, he should
work further displeasure to the state of Rome) willing him to assure the
league by hostages, and namely with Artabanus son. After Tiberius had written
these letters above mentioned unto Vitellius, he persuaded the kings of Iberia
and Alania by great store of money, that with all expedition they should make
war against Artabanus. But the Iberians would not be drawn thereunto, yet
suffered they the Alaines to march through their country, and opened them their
gates of the mount Caspius, to give them passage to invade Artabanus. Thus once
more was Armenia conquered, and the country of the Parthians was filled with
war, whereby the chiefest among them were slain, The Parthians lose Armenia.
Vitellius having sent money to a certain kinsman and friend of Artabanus,
pretended to corrupt him to make Artabanus away. But Artabanus perceiving the
plot that was intended against him, and seeing that he could not escape, Such
things as happened betwixt Vitellius and Artabanus.
because it was attempted by a great number of the best accounted nobles within
his court, ceased to pass any further: and seeing himself most apparently
environed, and thinking that under color of friendship he was fraudulently
betrayed, he thought it better to retire himself into the provinces of the
higher country, and there to save himself, rather then to put himself in
hazard, and resort unto them who had already betrayed and forsaken him.
Arriving in in that place he assembled a great number of soldiers of the
countries of Danes and Swethians, Artabanus restored to his kingdom by the
Danes and Swethians. A league betwixt Vitellius and Artabanus. Herodes banquet
in the midst of Euphrates. Artabanus sends* Tiberius his son in hostage,
(...) a Jew seven cubits high. Herod aduertileth the emperor of al^ things
before Vitellius letters came to his hands.
Tiberius had tidings hereof, he wrought the means to draw Artabanus into
friendship with him, which when Artabanus had notice of, he willingly admitted;
so that Artabanus and Vitellius met together near Euphrates, and by the means
of a bridge that was builded upon the river they debated the matter together,
being each of them attended by their guardes. After that they had concluded the
peace, Herod the Tetrarch feasted them in a very magnificent Pauillion,
erected in the midst of the flood not without his great cost. And not long
after Vitellius sent Darius Artabanus son in hostage to Rome, with diverse
presents; amongst which there was a man seven cubits high, a Jew borne, who was
named Eleazar, who was called a Giant by reason of his greatness. That done,
Vitellius returned to Antioch, and Artabanus to Babylon. Herod desirous to be
the first who should advertise Caesar of the receipt of these hostages, sent
express messengers with letters, by which he fully satisfied him of all that
which had happened, omitting nothing for the Consul to certify: so that after
Vitellius letters were brought unto him, and that Caesar had already certified
him of the true information that Herod had given him, Vitellius was sore
troubled: and suspecting least he had received a greater injury then the
matter made show for; he conceived in his heart a secret despite, which
continued until such time as Tiberius was dead, and Caius obtained the Empire.
The year of the world. 3999. after Christ's Nativity. 37.


At that time also died Philip Herodes brother, in the twentieth year of
Tiberius reign, after he had reigned himself for the space of seven and
thirty years, in Trachonitis, Gaulonitis and Bathanaea. During all the time
of his government, he behaved himself very peaceably, and far from
business. For he made his ordinary abode within his own dominion. He walked
being accompanied with a small number of his chosen servants, and had that
seat carried after him wherein he was accustomed to sit and do Justice, and
therein sat he to the end that if any one presented himself, and required
his assistance, he might without delay do him right. For upon the first
motion the seat was placed in that part where the plantiffe met him; and being
seated therein, he examined the cause, punishing Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
al. cap. 1^. The year of the world. 4000. after Christ's birth 38.
performed with great solemnity and majesty. And for that he left no heirs
males behind him, Tiberius seized his estate, which he annexed to the
government of Syria, ordeining that the tributes that were gathered in his
Tetrarchy, should be kept within the bounds of the same region.

CHAP. VII.
The war of Herod the Tetrarch against king Aretas, and his overthrow.

Mean while Aretas king of Arabia Petrae, and Herod fell at strife, the one
with the other, for this cause that ensues. Herod the Tetrarch had married
Aretas daughter, with Herod the Tetrarch puts away Aretas daughter and
marieth Herodias his brother Herodes wife.
whom he had lived married a very long time. Afterward taking his journey
toward Rome, he lodged with Herod his half brother by the fathers side (for
Herod was the son of Simons daughter, which Simon was the high Priest) and
there being surprised with the love of Herodias his brothers wife, which was
the daughter of Aristobulus their brother, and sister to the great Agrippa, he
was so bold as to offer her some speech of marriage: which when she had
accepted, the accords were made between them, that at such time as he should
return from Rome, he should displace her, and lead her away with him, with
conditions, that he should banish Aretas Herodias) before he suspected that she
knew thereof, required him to send her to the castle of Macheron, which was the
frontire town betwixt Herodes and Aretas countries; without certifying him any
ways of her intent. Herod without suspect easily condiscended unto her
request, thinking she was ignorant of his drift, but she long before that time
had taken order with the governor of Macheron Herodes wife returns into her
own country.
(which at that time was under her fathers government) to prepare all things
for her journey, where being arrived she speedily posted into Arabia, under the
conuoy of those governors, who received and conducted her the one after the
other. As soon as she arrived in her fathers court, she Herodes resolution,
whence arose the beginning of this discord betwixt them. As soon as therefore
they had both of them assembled their armies upon the confines of the country
of Gamalite, they fought together under the conduct of the two generals, to
whom they had committed their armies. In this battle Herodes army was wholly
discomfited through the treason that was complotted against him by certain
banished men of Philips Tetrarchy, Herodes army discomfited by the Arabians.
which were in pay with Herod. Tiberius was certified of all this by those
letters which Herod had written unto him: and being sore displeased with
Aretas for his proud attempt, he Tiberius commands Vitellius to make war
against Aretas.
commanded Vitellius to make war against him, willing him that if he could
take him alive he should send him bound unto him: but if dead, he should send
him his head. Such was the commission that Tiberius sent to the governor of
Syria.

Diverse Jews wereof the opinion, that Herodes army was overthrown by the just
vengeance of God, who punished him most justly, because of the execution which
he caused to be done Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10. ^l. 14.
on JOHN surnamed BAPTISTE: For he had done this man to death; who was
replenished with all virtue, and who exhorted the Jews to addict themselves
thereto, and to execute justice toward men, and piety toward God: exhorting
them to be baptized, and telling them that baptism should at that time be
agreeable unto God, if they should renounce not only their sins, but if to
the purity of their bodies they should annex the cleanness of their souls
repurified The year of the world. 4000. after Christ's birth 38.
by justice. And whereas it came to pass that diverse flocked and followed him
to hear his doctrine, Herod feared least his subjects allured by his doctrine
and persuasions should be drawn to revolt. For it seemed that they would
subscribe in all things to his advice; he therefore thought it better to prevent
a mischief by putting him to death, then to expect some sudden commotion,
which he might afterward repent. Upon this suspicion Herod caused him to be
John Baptist slain by Herod.
bound, and sent to the Castle of Macheron, whereof we have spoken heretofore,
and there was he put to death. The Jews were of opinion that in revenge of
this so grievous a sin, Herodes army, against whom God was displeased, had
been subjected to their utter ruin and overthrow. But Vitellius being
addressed to make war against Aretas, gathered together two legions, and
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 1^. Vitellius leads his army against the king of
Arabia.
all those horse or foot that he could assemble amongst those kings, who were
the Romans allies, The year of the world. 4001 after Christ's birth 39.
Vitellius* repaireth to Jerusalem, and displaceth Jonathan, and prefers his
brother. Caius Caligula succeeds after Tiberius.
plain: as for himself he came to Jerusalem accompanied with Herod the
Tetrarch and his friends, to offer sacrifice unto God upon the next festiual
day, where he was most magnificently received by all the people of the Jews.
There soiorned he for the space of 3. days, during which time he deposed
Jonathan from the high priesthood, and invested Theophilus his brother. The
fourth day letters came unto him that aduertized him of Tiberius death, for
which cause he commanded Caius behalf. He called his army back also, and
sent them to their wintering garrisons, because it was not lawful for him to
prosecute the war, by reason the sovereign estate was fallen unto Caius.

It is said, that Aretas hearing news of Vitellius expedition or voyage, and
after he had taken counsel of the Augurs, said, that the army should not find
engines to pierce as far as Petra, because the chiefetaines thereof, or he
that had the command of the expedition, or he that obaied his ordinance in
conducting the same, or he against whom the army was conducted, should Aretas
gathers by auguries that it was impossible for the army to come to Petra.
Herodes progeny.
die. Vitellius therefore retired himself to Antioch. A year before the death
of Tiberius, Agrippa Aristobulus son came to Rome, to entreat with the
Emperor about certain affairs, Herodes progeny, both for that it is
pertinent to this present narration, as also that the greatness of Gods
providence may appear, to the end that a man may know that neither the number
of children, nor any other humane force whatsoever it be, can be available
without the fear of God; considering that within the space of one hundredth or
somewhat less, it so fell out, that all Herodes line, which was very populous
and fruitful, was extinguished, a very few excepted. Whereby we are given to
understand, what the misery of mankind is, and learn to moderate our own
selves. It is also expedient to speak something of Agrippa, who amongst all
others deserves admiration in that being a man wholly drowned in obscurity and
base in birth, he was exalted to such greatness, as no one of those that knew
him, would ever have Herod the great had two daughters, borne by Mariamme
Hircanus daughter. The one of them which was called Salampso, who was married
by Herod to Phasaelus the son of Phasaelus, who was Herodes brother. The
other called Cypros was espoused to Antipater her Cousin, who was Salomes
son, who was Herodes sister. Phasaelus had five children by Salampso. Three
sons, Antipater, Herod and Alexander; and two daughters, Alexandra and
Cypros, whom Agrippa the son of Aristobulus married, and Alexandra was married
to Timaeus of Cyprus, who was a man of great dignity, and with whom she died
without issue. Cypros had by Agrippa her husband two sons and three
daughters: Bernice, Mariamme and Drusilla: their two sons Agrippa and Drusus.
Drusus died very young: but Agrippa was brought up by his grandfather amongst
his other brethren Herod, Aristobulus and Bernice. These were Herodes children
son unto him who was surnamed the Great; Bernice was Costobarus daughter,
begotten on Salome Herodes sister: Aristobulus died leaving his children under
age, under his fathers charge with Alexander his brother, as we have already
recounted. These attaining their full age were in this sort married: Herod
brother to Agrippa was matched with Mariamme Olympias daughter, who was Herodes
the Great his daughter, and of Joseph Herodes brother: By The year of the
world, 4001. after (...) Nativity, 39.
her he had his son Aristobulus: Aristobulus Agrippas third brother married
Iotape the daughter of Sampsigeram king of the Emesenians. They had a daughter
which in like sort was called Iotape, which was deaf. These were the children
begotten by Herodes three sons. But Herodias their sister married Herod the
son of Herod the Great, whom he begot on Mariamme the daughter of Simon the
high priest, by whom Salome was begotten. After her birth Herodias in contempt
of the laws of the country, married her self with Herod her husbands
brother begotten of the same father, being separate from him during his life
time, who was Tetrarch of Galilee. His daughter Salome was married to Philip
the Tetrarch of Trachonitis Herodes son, who dying without children,
Aristobulus married her, who was Herodes son and Agrippas brother. They had
three sons, Herod, Agrippa, and Aristobulus. See here the posterity of
Phasaelus and Salampson. Antipater by Cypros had a daughter that in like sort
was called Cypros, Alexas Selcius the son of Alexas, of whom he begat a
daughter called likewise Cypros. As for Herod and Alexander, who (as I said)
were Antipaters brothers, they died without issue. Alexander Herodes son, who
was slain by his father, begat Alexander and Tigranes on the daughter of
Archelaus king of Cappadocia. Tigranes being king of Armenia died without
issue, after he had been accused at Rome. Alexander had a son called
Tigranes, after his brothers name, who was sent by Nero to reign in Armenia,
who had a son called Alexander, who married Iotape the daughter of Antiochus
king of Comagena. This Alexander by Vespasian was elected king in Lesis a City
of Cilicia. As soon as Alexanders posterity began to Hedio and Ruffinus. cap.
12. Alias, cap. 15. Agrippa from obscurity obtained great* dignity and power.
multiply, they fell from their country religion to follow the customs of the
Greeks. All the Herodes daughters died without issue. Having after this manner
reckoned up Herod's posterity, which continued until such time as Agrippa the
great began to reign; it remains at this time to declare what adventures
befell this Agrippa, and how he escaping his dangers obtained at last so great
power and dignity.

CHAP. VIII.
Agrippas voyage to Tiberius, where he is accused and shut in prison, and is
delivered after Tiberius death by Caius his successor.

SOme little time before the death of king Herod, Agrippa conuersing at Rome,
grew into Drusus Tiberius the Emperors son, and Agrippa living at Rome
through his lavish liberality grows into necessity.
was beloved by Antonia the wife of Drusus the elder, by ye means of his mother
Berenice, whom Antonia held in great estimation, and to whom she had
recommended her son. And whereas by nature he was of a liberal and high
spirit, as long as his mother lived he would not discover his intent, least he
should provoke her displeasure against him. But incontinently after Berenice
was dead, and he became Lord of himself, partly by his daily and bountiful
entertainment and living, partly by his immoderate liberalities, but especially
by his lavish prodigality toward Caesar's freemen, whose favor he hunted
after, he was brought into extreme poverty, and could no more live at Rome;
the rather for that Tiberius having lost his son, forbad his friends to come
into his sight, for fear least their presence should refresh and increase the
Agrippa bethinketh himself how he might shorten his miserable life. Cypros
Agrippas wife certifieth Herodias his sister of his poverty, and requires her
assistance. Agrippa dwells at Tiberias.
sorrow he conceived for the loss of his son. For these causes he returned
back into Iudaea, having but badly ordered his estate, spent his money and
left himself no means to satisfy his importunate and many creditors. For
which cause incertaine how to dispose himself, and ashamed of his present
estate, he withdrewe himself into a Castle called Malatha in Idumaea,
bethinking himself after some sort to cut off his miserable days. Which
purpose of his, when Cypros his wife apperceiued, she endeavored by all means
to prevent his resolution: she wrote also to his sister Herodias, who was
married to Herod the Tetrarch, certifying her both what Agrippa had decreed,
as also by what necessity he was enforced thereunto: and she exhorted her,
that in regard of affinity she should assist him, and imitate her in this,
who, as much as in her lay, relieved his misery, although her fortunes were
far weaker then hers. Being therefore sent for Herod continue long time in
that mind, although by the means he had given him, he had not satisfied his
kinsmans necessities. For being in the City of Tire in a certain company,
where he drunk immoderately, Agrippa esteemed it for an extreme injury
Herod taunteth Agrippa with his poverty.
that Herod had vpbraided him with his poverty, and hit him in the teeth that
he maintained him at his charge. For which cause he withdrew himself to
Flaccus, who had sometimes been Consul The year of the world. 4001. after
Christ's birth 39. Agripp^ ^ieth himself to Flaccus.
at Rome, and for the present was president of Syria, with whom at Rome he had
fallen into familiarity, who entertained by him lived with him, who long
before that time had entertained Aristobulus; who though Agrippas brother, yet
was he his enemy; yet notwithstanding this dissension between them, Flaccus
entertained them both with equal favor. But Aristobulus remitted nothing of
his hatred he bare his brother, neither ever rested he before he had drawn
Flaccus into dislike with his brother, upon this occasion. The inhabitants of
Damasco, contending with the Sidonians about their demaines, and being to
debate their cause before Flaccus, knowing what interest Agrippa had in him,
they besought him that he would further their cause, promising him a great
sum of money: whereupon he addressed himself in what he could to further
those of Damasco. But Aristobulus, who had an inkling of this conclusion and
promise, Aristobulus draws Agrippa into Flaccus disfavor.
Flaccus, and after inquisition was made, and he found guilty of the fact,
Agrippa grew out of the presidents favor; and falling again into extreme
poverty, he came to Ptolemais; and for that he had no means of maintenance,
he determined to sail into Italy. And for that he wanted money, he commanded
Marsyas his freeman, that by all means whatsoever he should seek to take up
money upon interest. He spoke unto Protus (who was Agrippas mothers freeman
(who by the testament of his deceased Mistress was left unto Antonias
protection) that upon his Masters bill and promise, he would lend him some
money. But he alleging that Agrippa before that time ought him money,
extorted from Marsyas a bill of his hand, for Agrippa by Marsias mean^
borrows money of Protus.
twenty thousand attique drachmes, deducting out of that sum two thousand
and five hundredth, which Marsyas took for himself; which he might the more
easily do, for that Agrippa

But when Herennius Capito, who was treasurer of Iamnia, understood of his
being there, he sent his soldiers unto him, to exact three hundredth thousand
silver drachmes at his hands, for Agrippa whilst Here^nius Capito (...) money
at his hands, f^ieth to Alexandria by night.
which he stood indebted to Caesar's treasurer during his being at Rome, by
which means he was enforced to stay. Whereupon he made a show that he would
obey their demand, but as soon as it was night, he caused the cables of his
ship to be cut, and cast off, and sailed to Alexandria, there requested he
Alexander Alabarcha to lend him two hundredth thousand drachmes in silver. But
he protested that he would trust him with nothing. But admiting Cypros his
wives constant love toward her husband, and her many other virtues, he upon
her promise accorded to do Agrippa borrows money at Alexandria
Agrippas unthriftiness. Thus Cypros having furnished her husband for his
journey into Italy, returned her self and her childred Agrippa arriueth at
Puteol and is admitted to Caesar's presence.
into Iudaea by land. But Agrippa, as soon as he arrived at Puteol, wrote unto
Tiberius Caesar, who lived at Capreas, signifying unto him that he came to do
his duty, beseeching him that he would grant him free and favorable access.
Tiberius with all expedition returned him a very kind answer, certifying him
that he would be very glad to see him safely arrived in Capreas. In a word, as
soon as he was arrived, Caesar expressed and made it known, that his
affection was answerable to his letters, and both embraced him and lodged him.
The next day Caesar received letters from Herennius Capito, who aduertized him
that Agrippa ought three hundredth Caesar had read the letters, he was sore
displeased, and commanded those of his chamber, that they should not admit
Agrippa to his presence, until such time as he had discharged that debt.

But he nothing dismayed at Caesar's displeasure, required Antonia Germanicus
and Claudius mother, who was afterward Emperor, to lend him the sum of
three hundredth thousand Agrippa borrows 300000 silver drachmes of Antonia
Germanicus and Claudius mother. Caius commended to Agrippas charg^ Allius
Caesar's freeman lends Agrippa money.
drachmes, to the end he might not lose Caesar's friendship. Who remembering her
Berenice Agrippas mother, and with what familiarity they had conuersed
together, and how Agrippa likewise Claudius her son, lent him that money:
Whereupon he paying the debt, without any contradiction enjoyed the princes
favor, and was so reconciled to Caesar, that he committed his nephew to
Agrippas charge, commanding him to attend him always, whither soever he went.
Being by this benefit bound and tied to Antonia, he began to reverence her
nephew Caius, who was gracious in all men's eyes, and honored in memory of his
parents. At that time by chance there was one Allius a Samaritane Caesar's
freeman, of whom he borrowed ten hundredth thousand drachmes of silver, and
paid Antonia her due, and kept the rest the more honorably The year of the
world 4001. after Christ's Nativity. 39. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 13. Eutychus
Agrippas freema^ beth^keth him to accuse Agrippa to the Emperor.
Caius. By whom being entertained with most inward familiarity, it happened one
day that riding in the same Coach with him, Agrippa wished (for they two were
alone) that Tiberius might shortly surrender the kingdom and empire unto
Caius, who was each way more worthy then he. These words of his were ouerheard
by the Coachman called Eutychus, who was Agrippas freeman, who for that time
spoke not a word thereof. But being afterward accused for stealing* Agrippas
garment (as he indeed had done) and brought back again after he had fled away
to Piso (who was the prefect of the city) he asked him why he fled: who
answered, that he had certain secrets which he desired to reveal unto Caesar,
that appertained to his profit and safety: for which cause he was sent by him
in bonds to Capreas. Tiberius according to his dilatorie manner, wherein no King
or tyrant ever equalled him, held him prisoner. For neither

And as touching his offices, he left the^ in their hands, to whom he had
committed the^, in regard of his subjects welfare. For naturally all magistracy
is subject to avarice, but in especial strangers For what cause Tiberius
changed not his governors*
induce those, who exercise the same to gather, and ingrosse the more
instantly, when as the time Tiberius disposition, this action of his may
suffice to justify Gratus and Pilate his successor; neither demeasned he
himself otherwise toward the rest of his subjects of the empire.

And as touching his prisoners, the reason why he delaied so much to give them
audience, was to the end, that they who had been condemned to death, should
not speedily be delivered from those torments, wherewith he threatened them, and
which they had deserved by their wickedness. Why Caesar would not give audience
to his prisoners
For whilst he kept them in that pain, their mishappe increased the more. For
this cause Eutychus could not obtain audience at his hands, but was long time
detained prisoner. Afterward in process of time, Tiberius transported
himself from Capreas to Tusculanum, which Agrippa soliciteth Antonia to bring
Eu ^ychus to his answer. Antonia very much honored by Tiberius Antonia
discovers Seianus conspiracy to Caesar.
was distant from Rome some hundredth furlongs. There did Agrippa solicit
Antonia, to cause Eutychus to be called to his answer, as touching the
accusation which he pretended against him. Now Antonia was in great favor with
Tiberius, both in regard of the affinity that was between them (in that she
was Drusus wife, who was Tiberius brother) as in respect of her modesty. For
she being young continued in her widowhood, and would not marie with any other,
notwithstanding Augustus importuned her to wed; but lived always in honor
without blame. Besides that, she had done Tiberius a great pleasure: for at
such time as Seianus his friend, and a man in great account in those days (by
reason he had the government of the army) practiced a conspiracy The year of
the world. 4001. after the Nativity of Christ. 39.
against him; whereunto diverse of the Senate, and of his freemen, and his men
of war likewise were accessarie: yet brought she all their intents to
nothing. This attempt had taken a great head, and Seianus had finished his
purpose, had not Antonia used more advised courage, then Seianus did in
executing his treason. For having discovered the danger that threatened
Tiberius, she wrote and sent her express letters by Pallas one of her trusty
servants unto him to Capreas, certifying him in particular the whole process
of the conspiracy. Caesar having true understanding thereof, caused Seianus and
his consederates to be executed. Although therefore that before that time he
honored Antonia greatly, yet did he afterward honor her far more, in such
sort as he trusted her in all things. When as therefore she entreated him to
give Eutychus audience: Tiberius answered, if, said he, Eutychus has falsely
objected any thing against Agrippa, Agrippa intending to punish his free man;
do rather heap the punishment upon his own head. When Antonia had Agrippa
urges Eutychu^ trial, and for certain speeches of his is cast into bonds.
reported this answer of his to Agrippa, he did the more instantly solicit
her, requiring her that the matter might be brought to trial. And for that
Agrippa ceased not to importune her, Antonia took the occasion which was this:
Tiberius being after dinner time catied in his litter, and having Caius and
Agrippa before him, she walking foot by foot by the litter, besought him to
call Eutychus to his trial: whereunto he replied: The Gods (said he) know that
that which I do, I do it not of mine own will, but for the necessity I am
presied with upon your request, and having spoken thus, he commanded Macron
Seianus successor to bring Eutychus before him: which was performed Tiberius
asked him what he had to say against him, who had enfranchised him. My
soueraign (said he) Caius that is here present, and Agrippa rode one day
together in the same Coach, and I sat at their feet. After diverse discourses
held between them, Agrippa began to speak after this manner unto Caius; O
said he, would God the day were come wherein the old man departing out of this
world; would make you governor thereof. For his son Tiberius would be no
hindrance unto you, for him might you make away. Then should the world be
happy, and I likewise have my share in the felicity. Tiberius esteeming this
his accusation to be true, and having of long time conceived a grudge against
Agrippa, for that notwithstanding he had commanded him to honor Tiberius, who
was his nephew, and Drusus son; Agrippa had given small regard to his
commandment, and had not honored him, but was wholly addicted Caius. For
which cause said he to Macron, bind me this fellow. He scarcely understanding
that which he spoke, and no ways suspecting that he should give that
commandment in respect of Agrippa, deferred the performance until such time
as he might more exactly understand his mind; when as therefore Caesar turned
into the Hippodrome, and by chance met with Agrippa in the teeth: This is he
(said he) Macron, whom I have commanded to be bound, and dema^ding of him
once more by whom he spoke: It is Agrippa said he. Then had Agrippa recourse
to submissiue and humble prayers, refreshing the memory of his son, with
whom he had bin brought up; and alleging the education he had used toward
his nephew Tiberius. But he prevailed nothing, but was led away bound in those
purple ornaments which he then wore.

At that time it was very hot weather, and being in distress of wine he was
extremely thirsty, Thaumastus one Thaumastus Caius servant gives. Agrippa
drink, whom he promises to procure his freedom.
of Caius servants, who carried water in a pitcher; he required him to give him
drink: which when he had willingly bestowed on him, he drank, and afterward
said unto him. This service thou have done me in giving me drink, shall do
thee good one day. For as soon as I shall escape out of these bonds, it shall
not be long before I obtain thy liberty at Caius hands, for that thou have not
neglected to do me service in this my imprisonment, as thou have before time
done me whilst I was in my prosperity and dignity: Neither deceived he the
man's expectation of his promise, but rewarded and gratified him. For
afterward, when he had obtained the kingdom, he begged Thaumastus liberty at
Caius hands, and made him superintende^t of his affairs, and after his decease
he gave order that he should serve in the same place, with his son Agrippa and
his daughter Bernice; Agrippa stood before the palace bound with other
companions, who were likewise in bonds, and through the grief he conceived, he
leaned against a certain tree, on which there sat an owl. One of those
prisoners, who was by nation a Germane, beholding that bird, asked the
soldier that was fettered with him, who he was that was apparrelled in
purple: and understanding that his name was Agrippa, and that he was a lew,
and one of the nobility of that nation; he required the soldier, who to the
end to guard him was chained with him, to suffer him to draw near unto The
year of the world. 4001. after Christ's birth ^9.
Agrippa, and to have a little conference with him, for that he had a great
desire to ask him of certain things concerning the customs of his country.
Which when he had obtained, and having got near him, he certified him by an
interpreter of that which follows: Young man (said he) the sudden change
that has befallen thee at this present, afflicts and oppresses thee with
great and grievous torment; neither will thou easily believe that thou shall
escape from thy misery: yet so does the divine providence dispose all things,
that thou shall shortly be delivered. Know therefore, and I swear unto thee by
the Gods both those of mine ancestors, and A certain Germane foretells
Agrippa of his happy fortunes to come, and the manner of his death.
those also, who have residence and presidence in this place, and who have
procured us this iron chain, that I will tell thee all, not to yield thee
pleasure by my vain discourse, or to entertain thee with fruitless
consolation, knowing well that when these predictions shall happen to fail,

This presage of the Germane seemed so ridiculous to Agrippa, as it afterwars
deserved most mighty admiration. But Antonia being sore grieved at the young
man's calamity, thought it not only a difficult matter for her to entreat
Tiberius for him, but altogether unprofitable in regard she should be repulsed:
yet wrought she so much with Macron, that he was committed to the custody of
such soldiers, who were of more reconciled behavior, and had a Centurion
appointed to keep him, that suffered him to use his daily bathings, and gave
his friends and servants leave to visit him, by whose service and kindness his
necessities might be relieved. His Silas also was admitted to speak with him,
and amongst his freemen Marsias and Stichus, who brought him in such meats as
he was delighted withal, and couerings under color to sell them, which by the
permission of the soldiers, who had no less direction from Macron, they spread
by night for him to take his rest upon. See here the estate wherein Agrippa
lived in prison for the space of six months. But Tiberius being returned to
Capreas began at first to be attainted Agrippa lived six months in prison.
with a certain lingering disease: and for that his sickness increased more
and more, he began to conceive a sinister hope of himself, and commanded
Euodus, whom he most honored amongst all his freemen, to bring him his
sons, because he intended to talk with them Tiberius salleth sick, and
sends for his sons. Tiberius Gemellus the son of Drusus. Caius the gracious
Germanicus son.
before he died. But the sooth is, that he had not any children of his own, but
had adopted them. For Drusus, who was his only child, was already dead, and
had left behind him a son called Tiberius, surnamed Gemellus. He had Caius
also his brother Germanicus son, who was in the flower of his age, and had
travailed very diligently in good disciplines. To him also the people ascribed
very much, in remembrance of the virtues of his deceased father; and as
touching himself, he was of a sweet conversation, and so modest, that he was
familiar and conversant with all men. Whereby it came to pass, that not only
the people, but the Senate also held him in great estimation, as also all the
subjects in every several province. For they that spoke with him were drawn
partly by his affability, partly by the fidelity that they saw in him: so
that when he was dead, all of them mourned, not counterfaitly lamenting his
loss, but with unfeigned sorrow; for that there was not any one that supposed
not his death to be every man's particular loss. He therefore demeaned himself
so modestly toward all men, that his son after his death was Tiberius by an
Augury vnderderstandeth Caius success and succession before his death.
hazard.

After that Tiberius had charged Euodus to bring him the two young men the next
morrow by break of day, he besought the Gods of that place to give him an
evident sign, whereby he might know who should succeed him: For although he
desired to leave the Empire to his sons son; yet made he more account of that
which God should make manifest unto him. He therefore The year of the world.
4001. after Christ's birth 39.
conceived a presage, that he, who the next day should enter first to salute
him, it should be he, who in the Empire should necessarily succeed him. And
having settled this thing in his fantasy, he sent unto his little sons
Master, charging him to bring him unto him by break of day, supposing that God
had ordained that the Empire should be his: but the matter fell out quite
contrary to his expectation. For being in this thought, he commanded Euodus,
that as soon as he might, and as soon as the day should arise, he should
suffer him of the two young princes to enter in unto him, who should arrive the
first. He walking out met with Caius before the chamber door (for Tiberius was
not there, who being ignorant of that which his grandfather thought, was busy
about his breakfast) and said unto him: That the Emperor his father called for
him, and with all suffered him to enter. When Tiberius beheld Caius, he
suddenly began Tiberius was distated of the Roman Empire; and besides that, was
in danger of his life. For he made reckoning that they, who were more stronger
then he, would not suffer him to converse among them, and that alliance could
not assure him his life: for sometimes for fear, and other whiles for hatred,
some one would accuse him, that he went about and busily Tiberius addicted to
the Mathema^kes
sought to seize the Empire; or that he had complotted some stratageme, least
he should lose the Empire with his life. In a word, Tiberius was very much
addicted to Astrologicall predictions and natiuities; so that the greater part
of those things which he executed in all his life time;

He seeing Galba one day coming toward him, spoke this of him to certain of
his familiars: He foretells Galbas succession in the empire.
Behold the man that shall be one day honored with the Roman Empire. And amongst
all the Emperors, he gave greatest credit to divination, for that in certain
things he had found the conjectures correspondent to truth. But at that time he
was so grievously disquieted, by reason of the misfortune that had happened; yea
he was in such sort grieved, as if his grandchild had bin already lost, and he
blamed himself for that he had sought these presages: for that he might have
died without falling into that desaster, in being ignorant of that which was to
come; whereas now he should die in the knowledge of their mishaps, whom he
loved most entirely. Being thus troubled to see that the sovereignty of the
Empire should contrary to his intention fall into their hands, who Caius after
this manner which ensues: My son, although that Tiberius be Tibetius
recommendeth the Roman, empire, and Tiberius his grandchild to Caius.
more nearly allied unto me, then you are; yet notwithstanding both by mine
own advice, as also by the will of the immortal Gods, I commit unto your hands
the Empire of the Romans. I require you therefore, that when you shall enjoy
the same, you forget not the good will I have borne toward you, who have
established you in so high and worth a dignity; and charge you likewise that
you forget not your Cousin Tiberius, but knowing that by the will of the Gods I
am he, who after them am the author of so many goods, which have befallen you,
you return me the like good will and affection: and that likewise you take
care of Tiberius, by reason of your mutual alliance: for you ought to know
that Tiberius serves you for a bulwark to maintain your Empire, These were
the last words which Tiberius spoke to Caius, who promised him to perform all
that which he required, notwithstanding he meant nothing less, For
incontinently after he was installed in the Empire, he caused Tiberius to be
made away, bethinking him of those diuinations: as also the same Caius died
anon after by a conspiracy that was practiced Caius kills Tiberius.
against him. When that Tiberius had declared Caius his successor in the
Empire, he lived not many days after, and died after he had governed twenty
two years, five months, and three days. Thus Caius was the fourth Emperor:

The Romans having intelligence of Tiberius death, greatly rejoiced at the good
news; yet durst they not assure themselves: and though of long time they would
have willingly redeemed Caius Caligula the for? Roman emperor.
the truth of these reports with a good sum of money; yet feared they least
the news should be false, and least if they showed themselves too deligent in
expressing their signs of joy, they should afterward be accused for it, and
lose their lives thereby. For only Tiberius had done much mischief to the
noble families in Rome, being of himself a man choleric, implacable Tiberius
a tyrant.
toward all men without any occasion, having a natural inclination so cruel,
that the easiest pain The year of the world, 4001, after Christ's Nativity,
39. Marsias Agrippas freeman certifieth him of Tiberius death.
whereunto he adjudged those whom he condemned, was death: notwithstanding
therefore that each man took pleasure to hear the news, yet did each one
conceal it, until such time as they might be more fully assured through the
fear of those miseries they foresawe, if the matter should fall out
otherways. But Marsyas Agrippas freeman, having certain notice of Tiberius
death, ran speedily to comfort his Master Agrippa, with these good news, and
meeting with him as he came out of the Bath, he made a sign unto him, and
told him in the Hebrew tongue, the Lion was dead. Agrippa conceiving that which
he meant, was ravished with joy, and said unto him: I will requite thee for all
those benefits I have received at thy hands, and especially for this good
news; provided that it prove true. The Centurion, who had the keeping of
Agrippa, considering what expedition Marsyas had used in running, and the
pleasure that Agrippa had conceived in his report, he began to suspect some
alteration, and asked them what had happened: and Agrippa told him plainly what
he had heard, in that he had grown already into inward familiarity with him.
The Centurion reioiced at this news, as well as Agrippa, hoping to speed the
better thereby, and made Agrippa good cheer: but whilst they were in the
midst of their banqueting, and drunk freely; there came one unto them, who
told them that Tiberius was alive, The rumor was spread in Rome that Tiberius
was alive.
and that within few days he would come to Rome. The Centurion troubled with
this news, for that he had committed a Capital crime in eating in the
company of a prisoner, upon the news of Caesar's death, and by rejoicing with
him, he drove Agrippa out of the place where he sat, and reprochfully said
unto him: Think thou (said he) that I know not how falsely thou Caesar's
death? yes be assured thou shall answer thy lie with the loss of thy head.
This said, he caused Agrippa to be bound, whom before time he had suffered to
go at liberty; and shut him up in more close prison, then he had been before:
so that Agrippa was all that night long in this extreme misery. The next day
the rumor was spread through the whole City, that confirmed Tiberius death,
and at that time every one boldly protested it. There were some also, who
offered sacrifices for this cause, and there came letters also from Caius,
which Caius certifyeth the Senate and Piso of Tiberius death, and his
succession, and wills that Agrippa should be lent to his own lodging.
were addressed to the Senate, by which he certified them that Tiberius was
dead, and how the Empire was committed to his hands. He wrote an other also to
Piso, who had the guard of the City, containing the like report, and besides
that, commanding him to transfer Agrippa from the company of those soldiers,
by whom he was kept, to the same place where he was lodged Caius arriving in
Rome, brought with him Tiberius body, which he burned most magnificently,
according to the custom of the country. And although he were very willing to
deliver Agrippa the same day; yet was he dissuaded from the Tiberius funeral.
same by Antonia, not for any ill will she bare the prisoner, but in regard of
Caius honor, least thereby he should show himself to be glad of Tiberius
death, in setting him at liberty so speedily, whom he had committed to prison.
When as therefore some few days were ouerpast, he sent for him to his house,
and caused him to be powld, and his garments changed, and that done, he set a
diadem upon his head, and made him king of Philips Tetrarchy, to which he
annexed Lysanias Tetrarchy, and changed his chain of iron into a chain of
gold of the same weight, and sent Caius creates Agrippa king; and gives him
two tetratchies. Agrippa departs into his kingdom. The year of the world,
4002. after Christ's na^uitie, 40.
Maruslus into Iudaea to govern there. The second year of Caius reign,
Agrippa asked license

CHAP. IX. Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 14. Alias, cap. 16. Herodias Agrippas
fister enuieth her brothers happiness, and inciteth her husband to seek (...)
kingdom.

Herod the Tetrarch is banished.

HErodias Agrippas sister was married to Herod the Tetrarch of Galilee and
Peraea. She envied her brother to see him raised to so great authority, and to
far greater dignity then her husband enjoyed. For which cause she was
displeased, that her brother, who fled out of his country in that he wanted
means to pay his debts, was returned in great honor, and with greater
substance. This charge endured she with great hearts grief, especially at such
The year of the world. 4002. after the Nat^tie of Christ's. 40.
Agrippa Aristobulus son condemned to death by the sentence of his own father
(so poor and indigent, that to redress his necessities wherewith he was daily
pressed by his creditors, he was constrained at last to fly to Rome) should
return with such titles of a king, and that her husband who was a kings son,
and was called to the kingdom by his father, should live obscure, and pass
his life like a privy man. Husband (said she) if heretofore it has bin no
prejudice unto thee to live in less dignity, then erst thy father has done;
now at leastwise, desire that due honor which belongs to thy family: neither
think it to be sufferable to subscribe to him in estimation, Herod dissuaded
her as much as he might, for that he contented himself to live in quiet, and
suspected the confusion that was at Rome, which he endeavored as much as in him
lay, to lay open to Herodias. But the more negligent she saw him, the more
instantly incited she him to seek out the kingdom, and never gave she him
over until she had conformed Herodias his wife with him. Agrippa smelling their
intentand the preparation they made, made his provision likewise. And having
notice that they were put to He rode with Herodias repair to Rome. Agrippa
sends Forunatus with letters and presents after him. Baiae are certain
hathes in Campanis not far from Puteol.
sea, he sent Fortunatus one of his freemen to Rome, with presents to the
Emperor, and certain letters against Herod, with commission to certify
Caius of every particular, according as the occasion should serve. He embarking
himself after Herod, had a happy passage, and was only prevented by him, but
for the space that Herod presented himself to Caius: for he incontinently
followed him, and delivered his letters. For they arrived at one time at
Puteol, and found Caius at Baia, a village of Campania, distant from Puteol
some five stades, enriched with most royal and Caius talked with Herod in that
he visited him first, he received Agrippas letters, containing Herodes
accusations; for they accused him of a conspiracy made and complotted betwixt
him and Seianus, since the beginning of Tiberius Herod is accused for
favoring Artabanus the Parthian. Herod is perpetually banished and confined
in Li^ons in Frahe^ and Agrippa is made Lord of his lands and goods, and
Herodias despising Caesar's bounty accompanies him in exile.
Empire: And how for the present he favored Artabanus king of the Parthians to
the prejudice of the Emperor Caius: of this the preparations Herod had stored
up in his Arsenals, gave evident testimony, which were sufficient to arm
seventy thousand men of war. Caius was sore moved with these informations,
and asked Herod if that which was informed him as touching his warlike
preparation, was true. He unable to contradict the same in any thing, for fear
he Caius supposing the accusation of his revolt to be sufficiently approved,
deprived him of his Tetrarchy, and annexed it to Agrippas kingdom; bes^owing
Herod's substance also upon him. He banished him likewise for ever, and confined
him in the city of Lions in France, and understanding that Herodias was
Agrippas sister, he gave her all that which in right appertained unto her. And
supposing that she would not willingly accompany her husband in that his
calamity, he told her that her brother should be her warrant. But she gatio him
this reply: Mighty Emperor, you speak magnificently, and as it well
beseems so great a majesty, but there is a cause that hinders me from
partaking the benefit of that bounty, which you intend toward me, which is the
affection that I bear unto my husband, whom if I should forsake in this his
misety, it would very ill beseem me, in that I have been Caius displeased
with this her resolute answer, banished her likewise with her husband, and
gave the confiscation of her estate also to Agrippa. God did after Caius at the
first governed the commonweal very happily, but after wards usurped divine
honors.
this manner punish Herodias, in regard of that enu^e which she had conceived
against her brother, and plagued Herod in that he had so lightly listened to
the foolish persuasions of a woman. But Caius governed the Empire the first and
second year of his reign, with most noble directions, behauing himself
graciously toward all men, whereby he obtained the good liking of the Romans,
and the favor of his other subjects. But in process of time the greatness of
his estate The year of the world. 4002. after Christ's birth 40.
made him surpass the limits of humane condition, and challenge to himself
the title of divinity, whereby he governed all things in contempt of God.

CHAP. X.
The sedition of the Jews and Grecians in the city of Alexandria.

ANd whereas there arose a sedition betwixt the Jews and Grecians, that
inhabited Alexandria, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 15. al. cap. 17. Appion prince
of the Alexandrians embassage accuses the Jews because they ascribed not
divinity to Caefar.
three chosen Ambassadors on either side were sent unto Caius. One of these
Ambassadors of Alexandria was Appion, who charged the Jews with many
outrages, and amongst other things he alleged that they made no reckoning of
honoring Caesar: And Caius, and in all other things had received him as a God,
the Jews supposed it to be a dishonor for them to honor his statues, or swear
by his name. After that Appion had urged many things, and inueyed grievously
against the Jews, hoping that Caius would be provoked against them, as in all
likelihood and appearance it should have fallen out, Philo the chiefest among
the Ambassadors of the Jews, a man offamous memory, and brother to Alexander
Alabarcha, Philo Iudaeus for the Jews is shut out, and can get no audience,
and commits the cause to God.
being experienced in Philosophy, enforced himself to answer those
accusations which were urged against the Jews. But Caius commanded him
silence, and willed him instantly to withdraw himself, and was so sore
displeased that it appeared very manifestly, that he intended some heinous
revenge against them. Whereupon Philo departed after he had been grievously
^aunted, We must be of good courage, since Caius in words seems to be
displeased with us: for in effect he will arm God in our behalf against
himself.

CHAP. XI.
Caius sends Petronius into Syria to make war against the Jews, who should
refuse his statue.

But Caius being sore displeased for that the Jews only despised his
ordinances, sent Petronius into Syria to succeed Vitellius in his room,
charging him with a strong army to invade Alias, cap. 19. Caesar sends
Petronius into Syria, and commands him in spite of the Jews to plant his
statue in Gods temple.
Petronius came into Syria, he endeavored himself to satisfy Caesar's
command, and having assembled as great an army as he could possibly leuy, and
leading forth with him two legions of Roman soldiers, he wintered at
Ptolemais, intending upon the first spring to invade Iudaea. All which he
signified to Caius by his letters, who commending him for his industry, advised
him to use all expedition therein, and to make war The Jews repair to
Prolemais beseeching him that he would not bring his statues into the holy
city.
against those who should disobey his commandments. Mean while diverse
thousands of the Jews resorted to Petronius, who soiourned at Ptolemais,
beseeching him not to constrain them to do that thing which was contrary to
their laws, or to transgress the ordinances of their forefathers. For if
(said they) you have wholly decreed to bring and erect this statue in our
temple, first deprive us of our lives: and afterward do that which shall
seem good in your eyes. For it is impossible for us as long as our souls
remain within our bodies, to permit that which is forbidden by our laws, or
to suffer such impiety in regard of that honor, which we owe unto our
lawmaker, and our predecessors, who have ratified our laws to the intent we
should increase in virtue. Petronius enraged at this their protestation,
answered thus. If I were Emperor, and of mine own mind enterprised this
action, you had reason to use these kinds of insinuations unto me. But since
Caesar has sent me this commission, there is no contradiction, but that I must
obey his decrees: For if you resist the same, you shall endure a most severe
and rigorous punishment for your disobedience and contumacy. Hereunto the Jews
answered. My Lord (said they) Caesar's letters, neither will we also any ways
violate or infringe the prescript of our law, under hope of the divine
assistance and in imitation of the virtue of our ancestors: For we are not so
faint hearted, that under hope of a vain and untimely desire of life, we
should break those laws which almighty God has proposed unto us, under the
reward of eternal felicity: for which cause we will endure all fortunes
whatsoever; so as our country law and religion may remain inuiolate, and we
are ready to encounter any misfortune, under hope that God will assist us, for
whose honor The year of the world, 4002. after Chriss birth 40.
we fear not to adventure on any danger. This had we rather do, then by
obeying thee through cowardice, to incur perpetual ignominy; and that which
is more, Gods wrath in neglect of his laws, whose authority even in thine
own judgment, is more to be regarded, then Caius commission. Petronius
coniecturing by these their answers, how hard a matter it was to estrange them
from their opinion, and perceiving that he could not do for Caius that he
expected in the erection of his statue, without great bloodshed, whereby much
murder and inconvenience might follow, he took certain of his nearest and
dearest friends with him, and posted to Tiberias, that he might more
conveniently and circumspectly look into the Jews actions. They The Jews
meet Petronius at Tiberias, Beseeching him not to violate the sacred city with
his images.
fearing some imminent danger through the wars they expected from the Romans,
and greater mischief through the breach of their laws, assembled once more
many thousands of them, and Petronius at Tiberias, beseeching him that he would
not enforce them to that necessity, nor defile their sacred City with
forbidden images. Whereunto Petronius answered: Therefore (said he) you will
fight with Caesar, without regard either of his ability or your own
weakness? We will not fight (said they) but we will rather die then depart
from our laws. Whereupon prostrating themselves, and laying open their naked
throats, they said they were ready to entertain their deaths. In these terms
continued they for the space of 40. days, neglecting their husbandry, whereas
at that time it was the chiefest seed time. For it was most resolutely
concluded among them, rather to suffer death then to admit the statue. Whilst
the matter stood upon these terms, Aristobulus Agrippas brother, and Elcias
surnamed the Great, accompanied with diverse of their household train, and some
of the chiefest among the Jews, came unto Petronius, Aristobulus king Agrippas
brother and Elcias the high Priest entreat Petronius in the Jews behalf.
Caius, with what obstinacy the people refused the dedication of his image in
the Temple: and how giving over the care of their husbandry, they prepared
themselves for the war without any trust or confidence in their own
strength, being rather addressed to die then to suffer so great an indignity
to be offered to their religion. Besides, how giving over their tillage there
was nothing to be expected but robbery, whereas they should want means to pay
their customs, by which means they hoped that Caesar would be moved to
moderate his severity toward that nation, and not to give them cause of
rebellion: and that if he might not be moved from the prosecution of the
war, that then he might go forward with his business. This was the effect of
Aristobulus

But Petronius partly in respect of their prayers, who instantly urged him, and
the waightinesse of the action; partly in regard of the contentious purpose of
the Jews, supposing that it was a Petronius promises the Jews to write unto
Caius in their behalf, and exhorreth them to follow their husbandry.
matter unworthy a man to put so many thousands of men to death, to satisfy
Caius unbridled desire and insolence, and touched with the fear of God, and
the remorse of his own conscience, he had rather to his own danger inform the
Emperor of the absurdity of the matter, by his letters, being no ways
ignorant of his wrathful spirit and forwardness in revenge, except his
furious passion and expectation were answered. For this thought he, that
although it altered not his resolution, but happily enforced his displeasure
against him, in that he did not speedily execute his command; yet that it was
the duty of a good man no not to refuse an assured death, if so be When as
therefore he had assembled the Jews together in Tiberias (when many thousands
of them resorted thither) and disposed all those warlike forces that at that
time gave attendance on him round about him, he told the Jews first of all,
not his own, but the Emperors intent, who would make them shortly taste his
displeasure, and enforce them to bear the burden of his indignation, who were
so bold as to contradict him. For himself, that it necessarily concerned him,
that since by the Emperors favor he had received so great houour, he should
not commit any thing contrary to his command. I hold it (said he) a matter
most just to employ my life and honor for you, to the end that so huge a number
of men should not be drawn into danger of death, and I will respect the
excellency of the laws of your fathers, for which you think you ought to
entertain war and danger: neither is it lawful Caesar and certify him of
your minds, and in all that I may, I will assist you to obtain your requests.
God (whose power surpasses all industry and humane force) vouchsafe to
conduct you, and make you constant in the observation of your laws, and grant
that he through excessive desire of humane glory, commit not any thing that may
offend God. And if Caius be displeased and enforce his inevitable displeasure
against me, I will undertake all danger, and endure all torments both in body
and spirit, to the end that I may not behold so many virtuous men, as you The
year of the world. 4002. after Christ's Nativity. 40.
are, perish in your good and just actions. Go therefore each of you, and plie
your work, and till your lands, my self will send unto Rome, and both in my
self and by my friends, I will employ my self for you. After he had spoken
thus, he dismissed the assembly, praying the chiefest amongst them to encourage
the husbandmen to plie their business, and to confirm the rest of the people
in their good hope. Of himself also he ceased not to animate them. And truly
God showed his assistance to Petronius, and assisted him in ^ll his affairs.
For as soon as he had finished his After a long and continual draught there
fell a sudden shower.
discourse unto the Jews, there suddenly fell a great rain beyond all humane
expectation. For the day was very fair, neither was there any appearance of
rain in the air, and all that year long there was an extreme drought; so
that men were past hope to have any moisture, notwithstanding that sometime
there appeared certain clouds in the heavens. At that time therefore the
Petronius, soliciting their cause, should not be repulsed. But Petronius was
more amazed then all the rest, seeing evidently that God undertook the
affairs of the Jews, and gave them testimony of his manifest assistance; so
that they that were their professed adversaries, had no means to contradict
them, as he himself wrote to Caius at large, with inductions Petronius writes
to Caius.
and exhortations, to the end he should not draw so many thousand men into a
desperate resolution, and unhappy death. For without war it was impossible
for them ever to make them forsake their religion. Furthermore, that he would
not cut off and lose the revenue which he received of that nation; and would
not erect a trophey of an everlasting curse and malediction against himself.
Adding moreover, what the power of their God was, which he had so clearly
Petronius letters.

On the other side king Agrippa, who at that time conuersed at Rome, grew more
and more in favor with Caius, having entertained him at a banquet, wherein he
enforced himself to exceed Agrippa honors Caius in Rome, and in reward
thereof Caius wills him to demand somewhat, who desires nothing else then
that Petronius commission to erect the statue should be revoked.
all others in sumptuousness, as in all other sorts of delights and pleasures;
yea with such festiuals entertained he him, that not only others, but also the
Emperor himself could not attain to such magnificence; so much enforced he
himself to exceed all others through the great desire he had to content and
satisfy Caesar in all things. Caius was abashed at this his courage and
magnificence, seeing Agrippa enforce himself above his power and means to
abound in silver, and all this to the intent to please him. For which cause
Caesar in acquitall of his kindness, Agrippa to his utmost power, in granting
him that which he most desired, being one day whet with wine, invited him to
drink a carouse: adding these words; Agrippa, I have heretofore known the
honor thou have showed toward me, and thou have expressed the earnest
affection that thou bear me, in hazarding thy self in diverse dangers, into
which thou have been drawn during Tiberius life time, and have omitted
nothing, no not in that which exceeds thy power to show thy virtuous
affection toward me. For which cause I think that it should be a great shame
for me, if I should suffer my self to be overcome by thee in kindness,
without some answerable correspondence: I will therefore put that in practice
which I have heretofore omitted. For all those things that hitherto I have
bestowed on thee, are of no reckoning. My will is that thy readiness and virtue
should at this present be requited, by such means as might Agrippa would beg
some great province at his hands, or the revenues of some Cities.

But although he had already prepared his demand, yet did he not discover his
intent, but gave Caius this ready answer, that whereas he had served him to
the dislike of Tiberius, it was not for the gain he expected heretofore, and
for the present also he did nothing under hope to be rich, contenting himself
that he was in the Emperors good favor. That the benefits he had received by
him, were great, yea exceeding all that which he durst ever have hoped. For
(said he) although they be but small in comparison of your greatness, yet in
respect of my self, who have received them, and in my conceit and quality,
they are very great. Caius being amazed at this his courage, insisted the
rather to persuade him, that he would grant him all that he would Agrippa said:
Dread prince, since it is your good pleasure to think me worthy to be honored
by your presents, I will not request any thing at your hands that may tend to
enrich me: for that by those goods you have already given me, I am greatly
honored: but I beseech and request one thing at your hands, which will
purchase you the reputation of piety, and will procure God to be propitious
unto you in all your actions, and which also will breed me much glory among
those, who shall hear that I have not been refused in my demand, which
concerns me more then the necessities of this life: I therefore beseech you
The year of the world. 4002. after Christ's birth 40.
Petronius to erect in the temple of the Jews, may never be advanced there.
This was Agrippas request, which to his great hazard he presented the Emperor
with, knowing very well how perilous a matter it was, and as much as concerned
his life to demand any such thing at Caius hands, that was not answerable to
his humor. Caius on the one side moved with the service Agrippa had done him,
and on the other side seeing how great an indignity it should be for him, if
before such an assembly of witnesses, he should deny that which he had so
instantly pressed Agrippa to request, as if he suddenly had repented himself;
and admiring Agrippas virtue (who having means within a little time to augment
his particular estate, either by revenues or other commodities, had preferred
the common cause, the laws of his country and piety before all these) he
granted Petronius, praising him for that he had used such diligence in
assembling his army, as also for all that whereof he had certified him, annexing
these words: If (said he) you have already planted the statue, as I commanded
you, let it remain in the place: but if it be not done, be thou no more
troublesome to the Jews, but dismiss thine army, and repair thou in person
to that place whither I have sent thee. For I urge no more the erection of that
statue, for the desire that I have to gratify Agrippa, whom I entirely honor,
and in such sort, as it is impossible for me to contradict any thing
whatsoever, that either he has need of, or shall require. These were the
contents of those letters, which Caius wrote to Petronius, before he understood
that the Jews bethought them of revolt: for they made it known, that rather
then they would endure that statue, they would hazard a war against the
Romans: which when Caius understood, Petronius to this effect: Since the
presents Caius writes to Petronius charging him to murder him self for
neglecting his command.
which the Jews have given thee, have prevailed more with thee then my
commandments have done, so as to please them thou have despised that which I
have enjoined thee, I make thy self the judge how much thou have deserved to
incur my displeasure, to the end that thou may serve for an example to all
those, who shall come after thee, that an Emperors commandment ought not in
any sort to be neglected. Although this Epistle was both written and sent, yet
did not Petronius receive the same during Caius life time, for that they that
carried the same, were Petronius received those letters that certified him of
Caius death, before he received the other. For God would not forget Petronius,
who exposed himself to great dangers for the love of the Jews, and for the
honor of God. And Caius being taken out of the world by Gods wrath being
kindled against him, by reason that he affected divine honors, received his
reward; and Petronius obtained favor both at Rome, and through all his whole
government, and especially among the principal Senators, against whom Caius
was accustomed to vomit his choleric disgraces. He died a little after he had
written the letter to Petronius, by which he threatened and denounced him death.
Hereafter will I declare the cause why he was taken out of this world, and the
manner how treason was complotted and wrought against him. The letter that
brought tidings of Caius death, was delivered to Petronius first, and
incontinently after Petronius receives letters of Caius death before those
whereby he was commanded to kill himself.
he received that wherein he enjoined him to kill himself. He highly reioiced
at this his good hap, and Caius death, and admired Gods providence, who
speedily and happily had rewarded him both for the honor that he bare unto his
Temple, as also for the assistance he used toward the Jews. Behold how
Petronius escaped from death, by an unexpected means.

CHAP. XII.
That which happened to the Jews t^t were at Babylon, and of the two brethren
Asinaeus and Anilaeus. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16. al. cap. 20. A grievous
commotion among the Jews in Mesopotamia and Babylon,


IN those days there happened a grievous commotion amongst those Jews that
inhabited also for that it was defenced with very strong walls. Upon the same
river also there stood an The year of the world, 4003. after Christ's
Nativity, 41. Nearda Nisibis two cities of Babylon.
other city, called Nisibis, in which the Jews, in respect of the strength of
the place, kept their Dragma, which they were accustomed to offer unto God, and
the rest of their votiue money. These two cities therefore served them for two
store houses, and from thence, according as the time required, they sent the
money they had gathered to Jerusalem, and committed the conuoy thereof to
diverse thousands of men, for fear least it should be taken away by the
Parthians, who at that time had the sovereignty in Babylon. Among these Jews
lived Asinaeus and Anilaeus two brethren, borne in Nearda; whose father being
dead, their mother set them and bound them Asinaeus and Anilaeus, boris in
Nearda, retire into a certain place, and great companies flock unto them.
to the weauers trade, for that amongst those nations it was accounted no
indignity to follow that trade: for both men and women exercise themselves
therein. It happened that their master with whom they lernt their occupation,
beat them one day, for that they came somewhat late unto

The governor of Babylon likewise intending to cut off this mischief before
it grew to greater Asinaeus and his companions be set by the governors and
princes of Babylon.
head, assembled as many men as he could possible, both Parthians and
Babylonians, and marched forth against them, with an intent to root them out
before they should have any Asinaeus, who at that time by chance sat idly with
his fellows, uing his arms fast by him: Ye men (said he) methinks I hear the
neighing of horses, not such as when they are in their heat, but as when they
are backed by men. Moreover, I hear the noise of their bridles, and I fear
least the enemies secretly stealing upon us, should circumuent us: let
therefore some one of us go and discover what the matter is, and certify us
truly of that which he shall perceive: I would I were found a liar in that
which I have told you. This said, some one Asinaeus and all his company,
forasmuch as they were not in a readiness to defend themselves: for that we are
forbidden by our law in any sort to travel on the sabbath. Asinaeus determined
with himself not to do that which the spy had said, but thought that it was
better for them to behave themselves valiantly in that their necessity wherein
they were plunged, and that if they must needly die, it better became them to
make breach of their law, then to hearten their enemies by their submission. He
therefore presently betook himself to his weapons, and Asinaeus after he had
encouraged his soldi ers, puts his enemies ^o flight.
of them, for that they despising Asinaeus and his followers, marched as if
they went to lay hold on men already vanquished; but in the end they were
constrained to betake them to flight.

When the bruit of this skirmish was brought to the ears of the king of
Parthia, he was wholly astonished at the boldness of these two brethren, and he
had a desire to see them, and to The year of the world. 4003. after Christ's
birth 41.
Artabanus had been injured by them, in that they had invaded his country;
notwithstanding said this ambassador, he making less account of the
displeasure he has conceived against you, then of your virtue, has sent me
unto you to give you my hand and troth in his name Asinaeus and Anilaeus are
sought unto by Artabanus for friendship.
for safe conduct and security in your voyage, requiring you to be his
friends: he conditioneth therefore with you without any deceit or fraud,
promising you gifts and honors, and determines to increase your dignity by
his power. Asinaeus refused to enterprise this voyage, but sent his brother
Anilaeus with certain presents, such as he could possibly find. He therefore
departed with the messenger, and presented himself before Artabanus; who
seeing Anilaeus come alone, asked him how it happened that Asinaeus came not with
him, and understanding that he stayed in his Artabanus sent back Anilaeus to
persuade his brother Asinaeus to come to the court. Artabanus did this,
supposing that this his amity with the two brothers would be a bridle for the
Jews, who otherways might encroach upon his governments. For he feared least
if any rebellion should happen, and he should be troubled in that war,
Asinaeus and they of Babylon should grow more strong, both Anilaeus, who easily
persuaded his brother, giving him to understand among other things, what
goodwill the king bare him, and the oath that he had sworn, so that both of
them resorted to Artabanus, who received them very graciously, admiring
Asinaeus virtue, who had so great a courage to exercise his enterprises,
considering especially that he was a man of a low stature, and who to look
on seemed to be contemptible: And he told his friends that without comparison,
he had a greater heart then his body.

And when as in banqueting he had named Asinaeus and showed him to Abdagasis
the general of his army, signifying unto him with what valor these brethren
were endowed in feats of arms: Abdagasis Abdagasi^ would have slain Asinaeus
but Artabanius will not permit him,
required that it might be lawful for him to kill Asinaeus, to the end that he
might punish the wro^gs he had done to the estate of the Parthia^s. Never (said
the king) will I give my consent to betray a man, who has committed himself to
my protection: and has given me his hand, and who builds upon the oath I
have past unto him in the name of the Gods. But if thou art a valiant man in
feats of arms, thou have no need to make me foresweare my self, to the end I
might do justice on him for his outrages committed against the Parthians: but
at such time as he and his brother shall depart from hence, assail him, and
overcome him by thy valor, provided that I be not privy to thy attempt. And
afterward calling Asinaeus to him in the morning: It is time (said he) that
thou return homeward, for fear thou prouokest diverse of the captains of my
court, which contrary to my will, will endeavor themselves to kill thee. I
commit the Artabanus commits the territories of Babylon to Asinaeus charge
and dismisseth him with gifts.
comlines and beauty. Whom without ever seeing her, only by report of her
beauty The year of the world. 4003. after Christ's Nativity. 41. Anilaeus
kills a noble man of the Parthians, and leads away his wife.
Anilaeus Asinaeus brother loved entirely: and when as by no one of his
allurements he could obtain her favor, neither had any other hope to enjoy
the Lady, he could not bridle his unruly lust, but he made war against her
husband, and killing the Parthian in their first conflict, his wife became his
both in subjection and bed-seruice, which thing was the original of many
mighty calamities both to himself and toward his brother. For when as having
lost her former husband, she was led away captive, she carried with her the
images of the gods of her country, which she highly esteemed, according as it
was the custom of those that inhabited that place, to have their gods whom
they adored in their houses, whom at such time as they travel into a foreign
country, they carry about with them. She therefore brought them with her, and
used them according to the fashion of her country at the first secretly: but
after she was known for Anilaeus

Their chiefest friends seeing this, first of all reproved them, for that
Anilaeus committed such things, as were no ways used amongst the Hebrews, and
altogether repugnant to their laws, for that he had married a woman of a
foreign nation, that contradicted and violated their accustomed religion: for
which cause they advised them to beware, least in submitting themselves too
Anilaeus being reproved for his wifes idolatry kills one of his friends.
much to their unbridled pleasures, they should lose the honor and power they
had received from God, even until that present. But seeing their persuasions
profited nothing, and that Anilaeus likewise had villanously slain one of his
dearest friends, who had somewhat too freely reproved him (who at such time as
he lay a dying, being touched with the zeal of the laws of his ancestors,
Asinaeus and Anilaeus and all their associates might die the like death: they
for that they were transgressors of the law; the other, for that they
succored not themselves in that oppression, which they suffered for the
maintenance of their laws.) They were sore displeased, yet notwithstanding
they contained themselves, calling to their remembrance that their felicity
proceeded from no other cause, but from the valor of those brethren.

But when they understood that the Parthian gods were adored by this woman,
they bethought them that it behooued them not any more to bear with Anilaeus,
in contempt of their laws: for Anilaeus is accused before his brother
Asinaeus, but he winketh at his Fault.
which cause, addressing themselves to Asinaeus in great assemblies, they
exclaimed against Anilaeus, saying, that he ought, although at first he had no
power to dispose of himself, yet now at Anilaeus should incur some danger,
she poisoned Asinaeus, to the end that her love being in authority she might
more freely practice her impiety. Now when Anilaeus had gotten the government
Asin^us poisoned by the Parthian woman.
into his own hands, he drew out his forces against certain villages
belonging to Mithridates, one of the chiefest among the Parthians, and
Artabanus son in law, which villages he spoiled, and carried away
moueables, men, sheep and other riches. When Mithridates, who at that time was
resident in those quarters, understood of the spoil of his villages, he was
sore displeased; and the rather for that without any occasion or proffer of
injury, Anilaeus had assailed, Anilaeus draws his forces into Mithridates
country, and spoileth his villages, and takes him prisoner.
him in contempt of his estate, who was a chief peer of the country: for
which cause he incontinently assembled the greatest power of horse and footmen
he could gather, to set upon Anilaeus Anilaeus was advertised by a certain
Syrian, who dwelt in an other village, who had exactly told him all
Mithridates intent, and the place where he intended to banquet with his
soldiers, after he had made his soldiers take their refection, he departed by
night to the end he might charge the Parthians before they might be advertised
of his coming. He therefore rushed in upon them about the fourth watch of the
night, and slew The year of the world. 4003. after the Nat^tie of Christ. 41.
Mithridates prisoner, and caused him to be carried away naked on an Ass,
which is one of the greatest disgraces which the Parthians imagine may be
offered them. Having after this disgraceful manner carried him into a fo^est,
some of his familiars persuaded him to kill him: but Anilaeus told them
incontinently, that they ought to deal with him far otherwise, for that it
behooued them not to kill a man, who was one of the chiefest among the
nobility of the Parthians, and one who was most honored in regard of that
affinity and alliance he had with the king: that although all that which
heretofore had been offered to Mithridates were insupportable; yet if they
should be the means of the safeguard of his life, he would remitte the
injuries; and remunerate them for their mercy in saving Mithridates Anilaeus
dismisleth Mithridates.
was sent back again.

But no sooner returned he home unto his house, but that his wife hit him in
the teeth, that he lived but by the mercy of his enemies; notwithstanding he
were the kings son in law: that he had made no reckoning to punish those,
who had so much injured him: that he likewise contented For which cause (said
she) recover thou thy former virtue and honor, which thou have heretofore lost,
or I swear by the Gods of the king my father, that the bond of marriage which
is betwixt thee and me, shall be dissolved. Mithridates unable to endure these
usual reproaches, and on the other side, apprehending his wives hautie coarage,
from whom he feared to be separated; he assembled the greatest power of men of
war that he could possible, notwithstanding it were against his will, and led
them forth; supposing himself to be unworthy of life, if he who was by nation
a Parthian, should be cowardly put to ye worst by the Jews. When Anilaeus
understood that Mithridates came forth against him with a great force, he
thought that it would redound greatly to his indignity, if he should lie
lurking amidst his matshes, and hoping that he should have no worse fortime
against

But after they had marched about ninety stades, and passed through a country
that was scant of water, and were about the heat of the midday travailed
with thirst: Mithridates army came in sight and charged them even at that
time, when they fainted for want of drink, and through the extremity of
heat; so as they could scarcely vveild their weapons. At that time Anilaeus
soldiers encountering with Mithridates fresh men, were shamefully put to
flight: whereby it came to pass, that a great number of them were murdered,
and many thousand men put to Anilaeus himself and all those of his company
retired themselves in great haste into a forest, leaving Mithridates Lord and
Master of the field, whereof he was very joyful. A great number of
dissolute persons flock ^o Anilaeus, with who^ he spoyleth certain boroughs
of the Babylonians.
Notwithstanding this desaster, an infinite number of lawless men resorted to
Anilaeus, who set little by their lines, provided there might no limit be
proposed to their unbridled licentiousnes; so that he gathered a greater number
of men, then those whom he had lost: yet were they fa^e different in valor
from the former: for they were men wholy ignorant of warlike discipline,
notwithstanding he being accompanied with these men, went and set upon
c^rtaine buroughs of the Babylonians, which were wholy destroyed by his
rapine and violence. For which cause; the Babylonians and his other enemies
sent unto Nearda to the sewes that were there, requiring that Anilaeus might be
delivered into their hands: whereunto condiscending not (for although The
Babylonians require Anilaeus that they may punish him: they assail and ^ay him.
that they might live in peace. And to entreat of the conditions of peace, the
Babylonians sent certain men to confer with Anilaeus. They having suruaied
the place wherein Anilaeus kept, assailed both himself and his followers by
night, and slew all those they encountered with, without resist, and among the
rest Anilaeus. When the Babylonians saw that they were delivered from the
oppression of Anilaeus, who till that time had been as it were a bridle unto
them to restrain and curb the hatred they conceived against the Jews, with
whom they had oftentimes been at The year of the world. 4003. after Christ's
birth 41.
odds, by reason of the contrariety of their religions, whereby it grew that
they oftentimes fell at debate upon each opportunity, wherein they met.

At that time therefore that Anilaeus men were discomfited, the Babylonians set
upon the Jews on all sides; who seeing themselves in danger by reason of the
insolence of the Babylonians, against whom they were too weak to make resist,
and on the other side unable to live amongst The Jews afflicted by the
Babylonians repair to Seleucia.
them, they went and dwelt at Seleucia, a City famous in regard of Seleucus
the son of Nicanor who builded it. In that City dwelt diverse Macedons,
diverse Greeks, and a great number of Syrians. The Jews fled thither, and
soiourned there about some five years, without any molestation; but in the
sixth year, when the plague grew rise in Babylon, the Jews that remained
there, were enforced to seek them some new habitation; and that remove of
Fifty thousand Jews slain in Seleucia. The Jews that were saved repair to
C^phon.
For the chiefest of these two nations concluded the peace, which presently
after followed, to the The Jews retire into Ne^da and Nisibis.
among themselves to make a general war against the Jews; whereby it came
to pass that they assembled themselves at Nearda and Nisibis, trusting
themselves to the strength of these

THE XIX. BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 19. book.
1 How Caius was slain by Cheraeas. 2 How Claudius obtained the Empire. 3
Dissension betwixt the Senate and the people. 4 How Claudius advanced Agrippa
to his fathers Kingdom, and his edicts in favor of the Jews. 5 Agrippas
return into Iudaea. 6 Petronius Epistle to Doritas in the behalf of the
Jews. 7 Agrippas actions until the time of his death.
CHAP. I. The year of the world. 4004. after Christ's birth 42.

How Caius was slain by Cheraeas.

Caius did not only express and manifest his fury toward those Jews that
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 1. Caius tyranny toward the Jews. Caius tyranny
toward the Senators and Patricians.
dwelt in Jerusalem, and in other neighboring places; but also through all the
countries both by land and sea, which were subject to the Roman Empire,
filling the whole world with an infinite number of mischiefs; yea such and so
heinous as the like hereof hithe^to have never been heard of. But Rome in
especial felt the force of his fury, which partooke no less calamity and
misery, then any other city: but especially the Senators, Patricians, and
Jupiter, and to call him brother. Many such impieties committed he, by which he
expressed that his unbridled and boundles madness did never forsake him. Caius
calls himself Jupiters brother.
Amongst his other mad prankes that he played, this is worthy of memory:
for on a time, thinking it to be too much trouble for him to cross the sea
between Puteol a city in Campania and Caius spoiled all the temples of Greece.
not of those excellent pictures or imagery that was therein: Giving a
commission that all statues and whatsoever ornaments, or gifts, and presents
that were dedicated in any temple, should be brought unto him, saying, that
such things as were admirable, should be reserved for a place of admiration,
such as was the city of Rome: with these spoils of the temples decked he his
palace Jupiter Olympius statue; which the Greeks had in great estimation, and
Phideas the Athenian caruer had made, should be transported to Rome. But
Memmius Regulus, to whom he had directed this commission, executed it not,
because the masons informed Caius commands Memmius Regulus to transfer
Jupiter Olympius to Rome.
him, that without spoiling it they could not remove it from the place. It is
reported also that he was hindered from this execution by such prodigies as are
almost incredible, which he certified Caius of, giving him to understand; what
the occasion was that had moved him to disobey him therein, and whilst he was
in danger of death for this his delay, the sudden and successful death of
Caius warranted him from the same. Yea so far stretched his unbridled fury,
that having a daughter newly borne, he caused her to be carried into the
Capitol, and laid at the feet of the Jupiter, saying, that that child was
common betwixt him and Jupiter, leaving the judgment Caius compares himself
with Jupiter.
to all men, which of the two parents were the greatest. And notwithstanding
all these his misdemeanors, yet did men tolerate him.

He gave liberty to slaves also to accuse their masters, of whatsoever crimes
they would, which was so much the more hateful, because all things were done by
Caesar's authority, and to his good liking: Caius gave slaves ^ree liberty to
accuse their masters, and countea^nced Pollux to accuse his master Claudius.
so that Pollux, who was Claudius bondsman; durst accuse him, and Caius the
Emperor, was contented among the Judges to hear his uncle brought in question
for his life; hoping (although it fell out otherwise) to pick out an occasion
to put him to death. For having filled all the countries of his Empire with
false accusations, and all sorts of mischiefs, and giving slaves a prerogative
above their masters; their Lords devised many conspiracies against him, some
for spite, Many conspiracies against Caius.
by his death to prevent those inconveniences that threatened them. In a word,
his death concerned the security of the laws and the safety of all men, and
had he not been speedily cut off, ont nation almost had been utterly
exterminated. For which cause I thought good to make an exact and ample
declaration of every occurrent, namely, for that the knowledge there of makes
very much toward the manifestation of Gods power and will, which bring
consolation unto those who are in adversity, and keep them within the bounds
of modesty, who suppose that their The year of the world, 4004. after Christ's
Nativity, 42. Three conspiracies against Caius. Emilius Regulus. Cassius
Chaereas. Annius Minucianus.
prosperity should continue always firm, and that although they neglect
virtue, think that no evil may befall them. Three plots of conspiracy were
intended against him, and purposed to his utter mine, each of which was
attempted by men of great reckoning. For Aemilius Regulus, who was borne in
Corduba in Spain, was fully resolved to kill him himself, or to make him away
by the means of his confederates. Chaereas Cassius colonel over a thousand
men, was the chieftain of an other band; and Annius Minucianus was in no less
readiness to do his uttermost herein. The cause that moved the^ to accord thus
altogether in hatred against Caius, was, that in resp^ct of Regulus, he was by
nature a detester of all iniquity: for he was a man endowed with great
magnanimity, and beautified with a liberal spirit; so as he dissembled not
any of his counsails, but communicated them with many, who either were his
friends, or valiant men fit for execution. And as Minucianus, he was induced to
seek his revenge through the desire he had to do justice on him in Lepidus
behalf, who had been one of his especial friends, and one of the rarest men
that were ever found among the Roman citizens (whom Caius had put to death
through the fear he had conceived of him) knowing well that all they against
whom Caius was incensed, could not escape with lesser indignity then loss of
life. As for the third man Chaereas, he could not endure the shame and reproach
of cowardice that Caius had objected against him, but feared besides that, his
friendship and inward familiarity with Caius would draw him into manifest
dangers: for which cause and his own security, and honors sake, he thought
good to make him away. Generally all of them were resolved to rid the world
of Caius, and bring an end to his pride and tyrannical power, for their hope
was that their attempt should have good success, which if it happily fell out,
their country Chaereas was egged on with a desire he had to grow famous, and
through the facility and convenient means he had to finish the same, because
his colonels room gave him most secure access unto him.

About that time the Circensian games were solemnized, which is a kind of
pastime which the Romans very willingly behold, and to this intent they resort
to the place of these exercises, and the common people is wont to demand
somewhat at their Emperors hands, which they The Cireensian games. C^ius
c^useth diverse to be murdered, who request mitigation of their exactio^s.
desire to obtain; and they after they have examined their requests, do
never refuse them. Now they required with instant and importunate
supplications, that Caius would discharge them of their taxations, and moderate
the excessive tributes which they paid: but he Chaereas the more Chaereas for
many causes is incited against Caius.
to execute his enterprise, to the end he might finish his furious and lawless
life, whose pleasure was all men's injury, and prejudice. And very oftentimes
was he determined to set upon him whilst he banqueted, yet deferred he to do
the same, not for that he failed or fainted in his resolution, but because he
expected some fit opportunity to hit him home and speed him to the death. He
Caius guard a long time, yet took he small pleasure in conuersing with him.

But after that Caius had appointed him to gather in his tributes, and that
money which was confiscate, he seemed to have less occasion then before: for
at that time he had doubled their paiments, in the execution whereof he
followed his own nature rather then Caesar's command, and spared those of whom
he ought to have compassion for their poverty sake. Caius was sore displeased
herewith, and objected it against him, that the cause why he delayed the
bringing in of his money, was his cowardice and negligence: And amongst other
outrages that he offered him, as often as he gave him the watchword, as he
usually went to setch it once a day upon his watch day, he gave him the names
of women and other that were full of ignominy, notwithstanding that he
himself was not exempt from note of no less daintines. For in certain
ceremonies Chaereas. As oftentimes as Chaereas received the watchword, so often
times grew he in choler, which was increased the more at such time, as he
delivered the same to his companions, who openly mocked and iested at him. For
when it was his turn to receive the word from Caesar's mouth, he ordinarily
fitted him with such a one as might move laughter, which made him the bolder to
conspire with his confederates, in that he had just occasion to The year of
the world. 4004. after the Nativity of Christ. 42. Popedius is accused of a
crime by Timidius unto Caesar.
Timidius accuse (in that he was his enemy) that he had used certain injurious
speeches against Caius: and for proof thereof he alleged Quintilia for his
witness, a woman amongst all stageplaiers dearly beloved by many, but in
especial by Popedius, by reason of her incomparable beauty, and for that she
refused to bear witness in a matter falsely objected against him, whom she
entirely loved, Timidius required that she might be examined by torture. Caius
provoked herewith, commanded Cheraeas with all expedition and diligence to see
Quintilia tortured, and the rather gave he Cheraeas these commissions, to kill
and torment those whom he pleased, for that he had conceived this opinion, that
he would acquit himself with more cruelty, to the intent he might exempt
himself of that reproach of faintheartednesse, Quintilia was led forth Caius
commands Quintiliana to be tortured who confesses nothing.
to be tortured, she trod upon the foot of one of those, who were of the
confederacy, giving him to understand that he should be of good courage, for
that there was no fear that she would bewray any thing in torture, but would
endure it with great constancy: notwithstanding Cheraeas tormented her
cruelly, which he rather performed by constraint then of his own free will.
And seeing he could enforce nothing out of her, he brought her back to Caius,
in so pitiful an estate, that all they that beheld her had compassion of her.
Caius likewise himself was moved, and bethinking him of those pains which
she had endured, he desisted from the enquest and accusation Popedius is
absolved.
which was prosecuted against Popedius and Quintilia, and gave her a certain
sum of money, to comfort her against the indisposition that might happen by
reason of her torments,

This displeased Cheraeas very much, as if he had been the cause of all those
evils that had happened to those two persons, having been so great, that to heal
them it behooued Caesar to minister a medicine. He consulted therefore with
Clement, who was captain of the footmen, and Papinius, who had the command of
the guard, and spoke unto them to this effect: We have (said he) Cheraeas
conferreth with Clement and Papinius.
O Clement employed ourselves to the uttermost for the Emperors safety, for
by our providence and travel we have wrought so much, that of all those, who
have conspired against him, some of them have been slain: the rest in such
sort tormented and martyred, as Caius himself had compassion on them. But what
reward or honor receive we for all these services? Clement hearing these
words, held his peace, giving manifest testimony by his looks, and the change
of his color, Caius cruelty, Cheraeas emboldned himself to discover the
calamities and dangers, wherein both the City and the whole Empire were
plunged, telling him that the common report was, that Caius was the cause of
them: but (said he) those that will narrowly examine the truth, will judge that
I and Papinius that stands by me, and you Clement more then we, have caused
the Romans torment and the worlds misery, for that of our own will we have
been ministers of Caius commands; and although the means lies in us to make
an end of those violences that are committed against the Citizens, and injuries
to the whole world: yet serve we him for his guard and hangmen, instead of men
of war. And we bear arms not to maintain our liberty, and the Caius
cruelty. For it is not for the good will he bears us, that he makes use of
us, but that which is more, we are suspected by him, and he will cause us to be
slain, as he has done others. For his displeasure is not limited by justice,
but by his will: we also shall serve him for a mark to aim at: For which
cause it behooves us to provide for the security and liberty of all men, and
especially to warrant our selves against those dangers that threaten us.

Clement declared by apparent signs that he thought well of Cheraeas
resolution, but he counseled him to make no words of it, for fear the rumor
thereof should be spread among the Caius getting an inckling thereof, they
should all of them be drawn into danger of death, and in the mean while it
behooued them to hope that some good fortune would fall out to their
furtherance: and that for himself, his age had taken from him the necessary
courage that belonged to such enterprises. It may be (said he) that I may
furnish you with some advice more secure then yours is, Cheraeas: for a more
honester then it is, who is he that can propose? This said, Clement returned to
his house, ruminating with himself upon those words, which he had both heard
and spoken. But The year of the world. 4004. after Christ's birth 42. Cornelius
Sabinust.
Chaereas waxed fearful, and conferred with the Colonel Cornelius Sabinus,
whom he knew to be a man of reputation, a lover of liberty, and greatly
discontented with the estate about the miseries of the common weal; and seeing
it was necessary to attempt that with all expedition which he had intended, he
thought good to impart the matter to him, fearing least Clement should discover
all the conspiracy, considering that delay and procrastination, would be but
an occasion to hinder the action. When as therefore he perceived him to give
willing ear to all that which he intended, and that already he was confirmed
with no less resolution, then himself was; but in that he knew not with whom
he might familiarly communicate the same, he said nothing: whereas otherways
he was ready not only to conceal that which he had heard, but also declared
Annius Minutianus.
that which he had in his heart, he was so much the more encouraged. For which
cause Minucianus, who was conformable unto them in virtue, good affection, and
great courage; and who besides that, was suspected by Caius by reason of
Lepidus death. For Minucianus and Lepidus were very great friends, and had
been associates in the same dangers. For Caius was feared by all those, who had
any public office, sparing none of them in particular or in general, but made
them all groan under the burden of his fury. Now they knew well one another,
that all of them were displeased to see the common weal in that estate: but
the apprehension of the danger, suffered them not to manifest the hatred that
each one of them bare to Caius, although that their secret conceit engendered
amongst them a certain amity. For before that time, as oftentimes as they met
together, they were accustomed to esteem Minucianus, for the most honorable
man of the company; as in truth among all the Citizens Chaereas, what the
watchword was he had received that day (for all the city knew very well what
mockery Caius usually used in giving Chaereas the watchword) Chaereas
notwithstanding this disgrace, failed not to answer him relying on the
wisdom of Minucianus, and said unto him.

But give you me for the watchword Liberty; mean while I give you thanks for
that you have awakened me more speedily then of my self I have accustomed to
be. You need not now any further enforce your self to incite me by your
words, since both you and I have undertaken the same resolution. Before we were
assembled in this place, our thoughts were united. Behold here my sword, that
is girt unto my side; this shall suffice for us both. And if you please, you
shall Caius. It is I that deserve to be trusted in this execution, and I make
you my judge, since you have the like intention, as I have. Minucianus
perceiving with what affection Chaereas spoke, embraced him with all love, and
after he had praised him, he exhorted him to continue his constancy: then
departed they the one from the other, with prayers and wishes, and Chaereas
entered into the Senate, some one among the people cast out a word, that
redoubled his courage: Dispatch (said he) that which thou have to do: for God
will assist thee. Chaereas was somewhat afraid, least Chaereas with certain
others intend to kill Caius.
some one of his associates had betrayed him. But at last he thought that it
was some one of those, who being privy to his resolution, gave him a watchword
to animate him the more; or that it was God, who governing and observing humane
affairs, pushed him forward. After he had imparted this his deliberation to
diverse, sundry Senators, Knights, and men of war, being advertised hereof, were
in arms. For there was not any one that supposed not that Caius death was the
greatest good hap the common weal could expect. For which cause all of them
enforced themselves, as much as was to them possible, to assist that execution
with courageous and virtuous Calisthus also, who was Caius freeman, and
Calisthus Caius freeman certifieth Claudius that Caius commanded him to poison
him.
raised by him to great authority; yea such as he almost equalled him,
adjoined himself unto them for the fear he apprehended of all men, and for
those great riches, which he had gathered together, for that he was a man of a
corrupt conscience, and easily won by bribes and presents, doing wrong unto
all men, and abusing the power that he had against whomsoever he pleased,
contrary to all right and reason. Besides, for that he knew the unbridled
nature of Caius, who having The year of the world. 4005. after Christ's birt^
43.
once conceived an ill opinion of any man, could never afterward be dissuaded
or reconciled. Amongst diverse other dangers that he had to apprehend, the
greatness of the danger of his riches was not the least, which was the cause
that made him serve Claudius, and secretly to follow him under hope, that after
Caius death, he should be his successor in the Empire, and that at that time he
should by him be maintained in the same estate, which he inioyed: and by this
means thought he to obtain his amity and good liking, by giving him to
understand how Caius had commanded him to poison him, and how he had invented
infinite delays to defer this execution. As for mine own part, I think that
Calisthus forged this matter. For if Caius had pretended to kill Claudius, he
had not been dissuaded by Calisthus allegations, who had incontinently received
his reward, if he had deferred to execute his Masters command, with all
expedition in Caius to execute that rage against Claudius, and Calisthus was
thereby thanked for a benefit which he no ways deserved.

Those that were about Chaereas day by day, followed the action very slowly,
notwithstanding that he willingly delayed not, but thought all occasions fit to
finish his purpose in, for that he Chaereas expe^h the occasion to assail
Caius.
might assail him at such time as he ascended up into the Capitol, or even
then when he solemnized those ceremonies, which he had instituted in honor of
his daughter, or at such time as he stood in the palace to scatter gold, and
silver money among the people, by casting him from the top of the palace
into the market place, or at such time as he celebrated those mysteries, that
were introduced by him. For no man suspected Chaereas, so discreetly had he
behaved himself in Caius. And although he had done nothing to any effect; yet
so it is, that the power of the gods was sufficient to give him force, and to
kill him without drawing weapon. Chaereas was sore displeased against his
companions, in respect that he feared that they would let slip their
occasions; and although they perfectly knew that he travailed for the
maintenance of the laws, and for the good of them all: yet did they request
him to delay a little, for fear least in the execution he should in some sort
miscarrie, and for that cause the city might be brought in trouble, by the
informations that would be made of that act; and that finally when Caius should
be so much the better defenced against them, they should not know how to show
their virtue, when the time required that they should assault and set upon him.
They therefore thought it good that Caesar, who first of all disanulled the
peoples authority, and appropriated it to himself. This solemnity is
celebrated in a tent before the palace, where the noble Citizens with their
wives and children remained to behold the sport, and Caesar himself likewise.
At that time concluded they that it would be an easy matter for them, when as
so many thousands of people should be shut up in so narrow a place; so that The
final conclusion of the confederates as touching Caius death?
he, who would step foremost to give the stroke, might very easily be
succored; for that he could have no force in arms, although his guard should
have the courage and desire to defend him. Chaereas resolved upon this, and it
was concluded that the first day of those sports that were next at hand, the
deed should be done: but their adventure was greater then their conclusion.
Chaereas assembled all the confederates, and told them that the opportunity of
time that ouerslipt them, accused and reproched them of slacknesse in that
execution, which had been so virtuously resolved amongst them: and that it was
to be feared, least if any thing should be discovered, the whole matter should
wax frustrate: by which means Caius might grow more cruel then he was
before. See we not (said he) that by how much liberty we take from our
selves, by so much we augment Caius tyranny: whereas we ought first of all to
obtain security for our selves, and afterward purchase perpetual felicity
to others, the greatest glory whereof shall redound unto our selves. Now they
having nothing to reply against so honorable a resolution, and yet
notwithstanding no ways enforcing themselves toward Chaereas spoke thus:

Most noble and generous Gentlemen, what is the cause that we linger and delay
in this sort? see you not that this day is the last day of the games, and that
Caius is ready to depart to sea? For he has determined to sail into
Alexandria, and to see Egypt: verily it will be a small honor for us, if we
suffer him to escape our hands, to the end that both by land and sea, he may
triumph over the Romans vain boast and negligence. How can we choose but
condemn ourselves justly, The year of the world. 4005. after Chris^s
Nativity. 43.
Caius should be slain during my life time, and I should be deprived of so
deserved an honor, which so worthy an attempt may challenge.This said, he
departed with an intent to attempt and end the matter, and encouraged the rest
to do the like; so that all of them were desirous to set hand to the
enterprise, without any further delay. The custom was, that the captains of
the guard entered the palace with their swords by their sides, and in such
equipage they asked the Emperor the Chaereas turn to fet the word; when as a
great number of people flocked to the palace, to take up their places to
behold the games with great prease and noyce; wherein Caius was greatly
delighted: for there was no distinction of place either for Senators or
Knights, but each one sat together confusedly, men and women, slaves and
freemen. Caius arriving there first had offered sacrifice in honor of Caesar
Augustus, in dignifying whom likewise those sports were solemnised. It came
to pass that whilst those beasts were embowelled, that were appointed for
sacrifice, Asprenas gown, who at that time was a Senator, was besprinkled
with blood: whereat Caius began to laugh; yet notwithstanding this was a
presage for Asprenas. For he was slain that very day that Caius was. It is
reported that Caius at that time, Caius sacrifices to Augustus Caesar.
Asprenas,
contrary to his own nature behaved himself most affably toward al men, so
that all the assistants The Theater.
There was within the same a certain several room, separated from the rest,
where the plaiers and musitions kept. When the people were seated, and Chaereas
with the captains were near about Caesar, who sat on the right side of the
Theater: Batibius one of the Senators, a man very expert in feats of arms,
asked Cluuitus privily in his ear, who sat by him and had in like sort been
Consul, whether he had heard any news? who answering him, that he had heard
nothing; on this day (said Batibius. Cluuitus.
Batibius) shall the tragedy be played of a tyra^ts death. Cluuitus made him this
reply in Homers words.

Whist, least some Greek should listen to our talk.

Now whilst some one darted certain apples and rare and precious birds at the
people, Caius took great pleasure to behold how they strove one with another
round about him, buffeting one another to see who should get the same: but at
that present there chanced two presages: for the sport that was represented was
of a Judge, who was apprehended and crucified, and in the dance they
represented Cynera, who was slain with Mirrha her daughter: and there was a
great quantity of blood gathered to counterfeit both the murder of the Judge
that was crucified, as also of Cynera. It is affirmed likewise, that the day
was the very same, whereon Philip the son of Amyntas king of Macedon, had
been slain by Pausanias one of his familiars, at such time as Caius was
incertaine with himself whether he should remain until the sports were
finished; for that it was the last day of them, or rather should resort to the
bath, and after he had taken his refection return back again thither, as he
had done before time; Minucianus sitting next unto him, fearing least the
occasion should be ouerslipt, arose for that he had seen Chaereas depart out
of doors, with an intent to go and encourage him. But Caius caught him by the
gown, saying, whither go you my friend? at which time for the reverence sake
that he bare unto Caesar, he sat him down again, but the fear that he had
grew so forcible, that he arose again; so that Caius could not detain him,
supposing that he departed thence to dispatch some important business. At that
time did Asprenas counsalle Caesar to repair to the bath, telling him that
after his refection he might return thither again; all which he did, being
desirous Chaereas were already disposed to take advantage of the time, and
were agreed each of them to stand prepared and in a readiness; in a place
appointed, to the intent to act the tragedy: and the delay was very grievous
unto them; for that it was already three a clock after noone. So that
Chaereas seeing that Caius lingered so long, intended to go in unto him and
assail him in his seat: but he conceived that he could not bring that to
passe-vvithout great loss and murder of Senators, and Knights that were there
present. Now although he had this apprehension; yet addressed he himself to
the execution thereof, supposing The year of the world. 400^. after Christ's
birth 43.
that the loss that might happen by the death of some one, would be well
recompensed by the security and liberty, that would redound unto all men.
When as therefore they were in a readiness to enter the Theater; news was
brought them that Caius was risen to come forth, by means whereof there arose
some noice. For which cause the confederates returned back into the Theater,
and appeased the people, telling them that they displeased and anoyed the
Emperor: but the effect was, to draw him aside from all those, who might yield
him any assistance; and so to set upon him. Before Caius marched Claudius his
uncle and M. Minutianus his sisters husband, and Valerius, who at that time was
Proconsul, who might not any ways be drawn from their place, although they
had the will, by reason of the place and dignity which they held. Caius
followed after them, accompanied with Paulus Aruntius. Now when he was entered
into the Claudius with his associates held: he turned aside by an unfrequented
way to the bathes, upon purpose to see certain young boys, who were come out
of Asia, and were sent him out of that country; partly to sing in those
ceremonies that were instituted by him, and partly to dance in arms about the
Theater; and in that place Chaereas came and incountred him, asking him the
vvatchword: which Caius gave him very reprochfully according to his custom.
For which cause without any further delay, Chaereas assailing him both in word
and act; drew his sword and gave him a great wound, which Caius slain.
notwithstanding was not mortal: some say that Chaereas purposely vvounded
him after that sort, because he would not kill him at once, but to his further
torment increase the number of his wounds: but I cannot believe the same, for
that in such executions a man has no leisure Chaereas had such an intention, I
account him the veriest fool that might be, for that he rather took his
pleasure to content his despite, then readily to deliver both himself and
others, who by his delay in being of his confederacy might be drawn into
hazard. For if Caius had not been suddenly slain, he could not have wanted
means of rescous, and it should seem that Chaereas had not pretended to do
so much mischief to Caius, as to himself and his fellow confederates. And
being in this incertaintie, whether his enterprise should have fallen out
happily or no, he had without reason both undone himself and lost the
occasion: whereas having happily hit home, he might without a word speaking,
warrantize himself against those, who would offend him. But let each man
think what best pleases him. Caius feeling the grief of the wound (for he
was strooken betwixt the shoulder and the neck, and his Cornelius Sabinus, who
was already prepared to encounter him, who thrust him down upon his knees:
whereupon all of them environed him round about, and with, mutual exhortations
encouraged one another to do their uttermost in murdering him. At length in
all men's opinion they agreed on this, that it was Aquila that gave him the
Aquila gave Caius his deaths wound, but Chaereas was the author and chief
actor of the tragedy.
deadly wound, that severed his soul from his body. But this act ought to be
attributed to Chaereas. For although diverse set to their hands in the action;
yet was he the first, who had bethought him of the action, having long time
before any of them premeditated the Caius calm enough, in that he was a man
almost thoroughly slain. For which cause it is necessary, that all that which
others have done should be ascribed to Chaereas advice, virtue, and diligence.

Thus died Caius, being slaughtered with many mortal wounds: now when Chaereas
and his great number of people, and officers and soldiers that gave their
attendance that day in garding The year of the (...). 4005. after Chr^ts
Nati^tie, 43. Chaereas with his confederates re^reth into Germanicu^ house. The
Germans Caesar's guard.
Germanicus lodging, who was Caius father, whom they had lately slaughtered.
This house adjoined upon the palace. For although the palace was but one,
yet consisted it of diverse lodgings which were builded by several Emperors,
whose names, whether they had begun or finished the works, were imposed on
the same buildings. When as therefore they were escaped from the prease, they
were in safety as long as the inconvenient that had befallen the Emperor was
as yet hidden. The first report of his death came to the Germans who were of
his guard, being a company chosen out of that nation named the Celtique band,
for the preservation of the Emperors person. These men are very prone unto
wrath, and amongst all other Barbarians, it is a rare thing in them to examine
the causes of their execution: otherwise they are men strong in body, and who
in the Caius murder, were vehemently aggrieued thereat, for that it is their
manner to censure all things, not according to right, but as they are
answerable to their own profits: Caius in especial was dearly beloved by
them, in that he had obtained their favor by bestowing much money upon them.
Their captain was one called Sabinus, who was not advanced to Sabinus with his
German soldiers seeks for those that slew Caius. Asprenas cut in pieces.
that estate either for his virtue, or the nobility of his ancestors (for he
was but a fencer) but for his mighty strength and huge body. They therefore
ran about with their naked swords, searching for Caesar's murderers from house
to house, and meeting with Asprenas at first, whose gown (as we have said) was
bebloudied with the blood of the slaughtered sacrifice, which was a presage
that aboaded him but little good fortune, they hewed him in pieces. The second
was Norbanus (who for his nobility and ancestors might derive his titles from
the noblest Citizens, amongst whom were diverse generals of armies) who seeing
they made no reckoning of his dignity, Norbanus.
and being of himself endowed with great force and strength, he took a sword
from one of them which first assailed him; with whom he grapled, and made them
know that he intended that they should buy his blood very dearly: and in deed
so had he done, but that being environed by diverse, who assailed him at once,
he was beaten down, and slaughtered with many deadly wounds. The third was
Anteius, one of the number of the Senators, who with some others Anteius.
met not with these men by chance, as the two other had done, but to show the
hatred that he bare unto Caius, and the pleasure that he took to see him lie
dead, was come out of his house, being egged on with envy to feed his eyes
with that spectacle. For Caius had banished Anteius Anteius, and not content
therewith he had sent his soldiers to kill him. He therefore with great pleasure
beheld the slaughtered carcass of this tyrant: but hearing the uproar that was
raised in every part of the house, he thought good to hide himself; yet might
he not avoid the narrow search of the Germans, who were so displeased, that
they slew all those whom they met with, whether they were guilty or guiltless
of the fact. Thus were these three made away.

But after the rumor of Caius death was heard in the Theater, every one was
amassed, and could scarcely believe it. For although diverse of them were very
glad, that he was taken out of What sort of people they were that lamented
Caius death.
the world, persuading themselves that it would highly profit them; yet did
their fear hinder their belief. On the other side, there were some, who
desiring not that any such mishap should Caesar, and conceiving in their
thoughts, that it was impossible to be done, for that there was no man so
hardy, as to enterprise the same; they supposed the report to be utterly
untrue. Of this mind were certain women and children, slaves and soldiers.
These by reason they received wages at his hand, and tyrannized with him being
his ministers in all those outrages that he offered to many good Citizens, in
partaking the booty and other advantages that Caius drew unto him. As for the
women and children, they were of that opinion, by reason that such kind of
people take delight in plays, iusts, donations of flesh and other such
pastimes, which Caius in word pretended to do to gratify the common people,
but in effect it was to have means to satisfy his rage and cruelty. He was
also gracious among the servants and slaves, for that by him they had the
liberty to accuse and contemn their Masters, and were therein countenanced
by Caius. For when they falsely accused their Masters, they were easily
believed: and when they discovered their Masters treasures, in recompense of
their discovery they were not only made free by him, but also sent home with
rich and ample rewards. For the reward that was assigned them, was the eight
part of those goods that were confiscated. As for certain of the nobility,
although the matter seemed true to some of them, for that before time they
were privy to that which the rest intended, and notwithstanding they desired
that the enterprise should be effected: yet kept they all things close, and
gave no sign of joy, nor made any show that they heard The year of the world.
4005. after Christ's birth 43. Diverse ^umors of Caesar's death.
Caius tyranny, they might bewray them: whereby if Caius should be yet alive,
they might incur the danger of punishment. For the voice was, that he had
been vvounded in certain places; yet that he was not slain; but as yet
alive; and among his Physicians hands, who dresied his vvounds. No man
therefore durst liberally discover the secrets of his heart to his neighbor:
for they that spread those reports were either friends (and for that cause
were suspected as favorers of his tyranny) Caius, there was no certainty
to be gathered of that which they said. There arose also another report,
which abashed and beat down the hearts and hopes of the nobility, namely
that Caius setting light by the danger wherein he was; and as little also by
the vvounds he had received, was come into the market place all bloody as he
was, and after that manner declaimed before the people. See here how they that
spread these rumors, preferred their conjectures, which were void of all
reason, which distracted those uncertainly that heard the same, according as
they were affectioned. This notwithstanding no man removed from his place, for
fear least they should be suddenly accused, knowing well that they should be
censured, not according to their thoughts and affections, but according to the
disposition of their judges and accusers.

But after that the troop of Germans had environed the Theater with their
naked swords, all The Germain soldiers resort to the Theater.
the assistance expected nothing but death; and as soon as any man entered,
they were seized with such an amazement, as if they had already felt the
strokes; so that they knew not what to do, having no heart to depart from
thence: and otherwise persuading themselves, that if they stayed there any
longer, it would breed them further danger. Finally, when the soldiers were
entered into the Theater by force, all the whole assembly cried out, and
besought them, protesting that whatsoever was done it was beside their
knowledge, whether it were either attempted by conspiracy, or any other
means. They therefore most humbly entreated them, that they would spare them,
and not inflict the peualtie of the guilty on those that were innocent: for
their own parts, they besought them to search out those, who had committed the
act, if any such thing And thus spoke they with tears; beating their breasts,
and calling the gods to witness, alleging all that which the present danger
suggested them with, and as much as such as pleaded for their lives could
profer. By these persuasions of theirs the soldiers fury was abated; so that
they began to repent themselves of that which they had executed in the
Theater: for this also was a cruelty, as they themselves, notwithstanding
their barbarous inciuilitie, supposed it to be; which was, that the heads of
Asprenas and other that were slain, were carried and set upon an altar.
VVhereat all the assistants were most grievously discontented, remembering
themselves of the dignity of the men; and having compassion of that which had
befallen them; considering also that they themselves were not far off from
dangers, being uncertain whether they should save themselves: vvherby it came
to pass, that some of those, who had for good cause Caius, durst not freely
rejoice at his death, because they were upon the point to lose their own
lives, having as yet no appearance of any safety.

At length Aruntius, a man who was gracious among the people, and was one of
the common criers, who had a strong voice, and by crying such goods as were to
be sold, had gathered so great substance, as that he was accounted one of the
richest men in Rome, and in great estimation Aruntius enters the Theater, and
signifies the Emperors death.
amongst all men in that behalf, entered the Theater in a mourning habit, and
after a lamentable manner: and although he inwardly hated Caius; yet for the
fear he conceived least he should lose his goods, and in consideration of the
present danger, he dissembled his joy, wearing all those garments of mourning,
and using no less lamentation then if he had bemoaned the death of his dearest
friend. After this manner came he into the Theater, publishing Caius death, The
Germain^ fury awakned by the death of Caius is pacified.
their swords, certifying them of the Emperors death, which act of his did
manifestly save the lives of all those, who were assembled in the Theater; and
all them likewise, whom they could have met with. For if they had had but the
least surmise, that Caius had as yet been alive, there was not any sort of
cruelty which they had not committed. For they bare him so great love and
affection, that to warrantize him from that mishap, they would have redeemed
him with the loss The year of the world. 4005. after Christ's Nativity. 43.
of their own lives. But as soon as they understood that he was dead, they
repressed their furious rage, which egged them forward to revenge: knowing that
it auailed them nothing to discover their affections toward him, in that he
could yield them no requital. Besides, the fear they had least that in
pursuit of their tyrannous murders, the Senate should be incensed against
them, if so be the government of the estate should be returned into their
hands, made them contain themselves. Thus was the fury of these Germans
appea^ed for the death of Caius.

Mean while Chaereas (who feared very much least Minucianus should fall into
the Germans hands, and in their fury be slaughtered by them) sought for him
among the soldiers, enquiring Chaereas, Minutianus and Clement consult about
Caesar's death.
of every one whether they knew if he were slain or no. Whereupon Minutianus
and Clement were brought unto him, who in his presence commended Chaereas
exploit, and gave him thanks Caius, who before any thing was either devised,
practiced or executed against him, was already hateful to all men, and had in
such a sort violated all laws, that his greatest friends were resolved to take
arms against him, who in appearance had deprived him of life, when both in
truth and in effect it was he himself, who was the author of his own ruin.

Hereupon all they arose who were in the Theater, and raised great noise and
trouble in seeking to save themselves. The occasion was, that a certain
Physician called Arcion, being called Arcion a certain Physician dismisseth
some.
out to go and dress certain men that were wounded, making a show as if he
went to go and prepare such things, as were necessary for those that were
wounded, made those issue out with him who sat nearest unto him: but the truth
was, that he did it to the end to draw them out of the present danger. Mean
while the Senate assembled themselves in the palace, and the people flocked
together to make inquiry after those, who had murdered Caius: the people with
an entire and simple intent, the Senate only to use some forward proceeding.
For Valerius Asiaticus, who had otherwhiles been Consul, came forth among the
people, who were in an uproar, and suposing it a strange matter that no man
knew who had slain the Emperor, whilst every one The Senate and people
enquire after those that flue Caius. Valerius Asiaticus wishes he had been
the author.
the Consuls published an edict, containing the accusations that were presented
against Caius, commanding the people and soldiers, who were as yet in the
Theater, to retire themselves to their lodgings. And the people were put in
great hope, that they should be eased of those taxations, wherewith before time
they had been burdened, and the men of war were promised honors and
dignities, if they would contain themselves in their accustomed order, and
stir up no further trouble. For it was to be feared; least if they had been
further fleshed in slaughters, the City should have fallen into some great
danger through rapines, and the spoils both of houses and temples. But by this
time all the whole order of the Senate was assembled, especially those who were
confederates in Caius murder, who seemed to gather courage, and to speak
boldly as

CHAP. II.
Claudius took upon him the government of the Empire.

Whilst the estate of the Empire was thus distracted, Claudius was suddenly
fetch out of Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2. The soldiers elect Claudius Emperor.
his house: For the soldiers assembling themselves together, and conferring
among themselves what was requisite to be done, perceived that it was
impossible, that so many and so weighty affairs of the common weal should be
well disposed by a popular government; and that this change also would yield
them little profit, if some of those who were in authority Claudius, who was
Caius uncle, for their Emperor; who was a man of that reputation, that none of
those, who had been assembled in the Senate, was more capable then he was, both
in regard of the virtue of his ancestors, as also in respect of the doctrine
wherewith he was endowed. Who likewise being by them exalted to the dignity of
the Empire, would The year of the world. 4005. after the Na^tie of Christ. 43.
Cnaius Sentiu^ Saturninus declaimeth in the Senate.
Claudius was received and elected Emperor by the men of war. But Cnaius
Sentius Saturninus having intell^gence that Claudius was in this sort elected
(who in appearance seemed virtuously to contradict, but in effect desired
nothing more) presented himself before the Senate: and being neither amated
nor amassed in any sort, he freely spoke his mind; and as it became his birth
and nobility, he spoke unto the assembly after the manner that ensues.

You Lords of Rome, although it be an incredible matter, that the liberty which
has so long time been unexpected, should return and visit us; yet so it is,
that we see the excellency thereof; although it be uncertain how long time
the Gods will bestow it on us: which is such, that it Liberty a pr^cious thing
governed by such l^es, which in times past have made our commonweal to
flourish. For mine own part; I cannot remember our ancient liberty, for that
I was borne after the subversion thereof: But I infinitely desire to have the
happy fruition of that which we enjoy at this present. And I think the^ also
very happy; who are borne and brought up in virtuous studies. I likewise
suppose that a second honor next to the immortal Gods is to be ascribed to
them, by whose virtue at last though very late even in this our age, we have
obtained the felicity to enjoy the same: which happiness would God with our
inheritances we might bequeath to our posterity. For in regard of our selves,
this day suffices us both, as well all those that are young as they also
Julius Caesar bent his thoughts to overthrow the popular government in Rome,
and violated that happy course of law, whereby our state was policied; the
commonweal Liberty purchased by virtue. Tyra^nies breed many mischifes in
commonweales. Julius Caesar.
has been overthrown. For in subiecting the law to his good liking; and
himself to his particular desires, there is not any kind of misery and
mischief, that has not overthrown our city; so that his successors have
employed themselves to their uttermost, and with a certain emulation, to
abolish the laws of our country, striving which of them might despoyle our
commonweal ofher noblest citizens: for that they have made their account, that
their security consisted in communicating their secrets with such as were base
and abject; abasing not only the hautie courages of those men, who were famous
for their nobility and virtue, but also by slaughtering a great number of them
by all sorts of punishment, and vvhilest each of them Caius, who this day has
lost the benefit of life, has wrought greater mischiefs himself alone, then
any other, by enforcing his brutish and beastly wrath not only against the
common citizens, but also against his own parents and friends; demeaning
himself alike toward all men, and manifesting his injustice in that he
pursued them with most injury, who were most innocent: and by this means
grew hateful not only to men, but also to the immortal Gods. For it is not
enough for tyrants to satisfy their concupiscence, to use all sorts of
outrages, to ravish both men's wealth and their wives; but all their gain and
glory is when they may utterly ruinate both their fortunes and families, who
are their enemies. For all liberty is opposed against tyranny, and it is
impossible (notwithstanding all the miseries that may if they may possibly do
it. Since therefore at this present you are delivered from so many mischiefs,
The year of the world. 4005. after Christ's birth 43. An exhortation to
maintain liberty.
Chaereas. For he only has been the man, who by the power of the Gods, and
through his great wisdom and valor, has given you your liberty. Neither
ought you to forget him, but to heap honors on his head, yea especial
favors, as to the man who first of all Chaereas to be honored for his noble
attempt.
consulted, and first of all hazarded himself against a tyrant for your
liberty. It is an honest and well beseeming action in men of free hearts to
restore and repay condign kindness for the benefits that they have received:
such is this man in your behalf not like to Brutus and Cassius, who murdered
Caesar; for they were the originals of seditions and civil wars in this
city: and this

Thus spoke Sentius, and his advice was entertained with great applause, not
only by the Senators, but the knights also that were there present. Whereupon
a certain Senator called Trebellius Maximus arose, and stepping to him pulled
off the ring which Sentius had on his finger, wherein was inchased a stone with
Caius picture in it, which Sentius had forgot to pull off: so intent was he
about that which he both said and did: and by this means the engraued Image was
broken. Now for that it was late, Chaereas demanded the watchword at the
Consuls hands, who gave him the word Liberty. Thus all of them were astonished
at this change, and could scarcely believe that which had happened. For since
that time that the popular government had been abolished, Chaereas requires a
watchword at the Consuls ^ands.
Chaereas had received the word, he gave it to his soldiers, who subscribed to
the Senates authority: of these there were about four companies, which
preferred the lawful government before a tyranny, who also retired themselves
to their chieftaines. As for their parts, the people returned to their several
houses, full of joy, hope and courage, for that they had regained the
government of the state, which belonged unto them, and not to any particular
governor. In a word, Chaereas was their only hope: He foreseeing that there
would some mischief follow, if Caius wife and daughter should remain alive,
and that if all his friends and family should not be utterly extinguished, all
those, who should be spared, would serve to no other end, but to the ruin of
the Caius, he sent Iuius Lupus one of the captains of the guard, to kill both
his wife and daughter, which he did: And the cause why he gave this charge
chiefly to Lupus, was, for that Lupus was Clements kinsman, who was a
confederate in the execution of Caius, to the end that partaking after this
Chaereas sends Julius Lupus to kill Caius wife and daughter.
manner the death of the tyrant, he might be known to have dealt as forwardly
for the commonweal, as if from the beginning he had been a counselor and
agent in the conspiracy. Notwithstanding there were some of his companions of
that opinion, that it should be but cruelty to deal with a woman in that sort,
for that Caius had offended through the corruption of his own nature, and not
by the counsel of his wife; and that all those evils which he committed Caius
had committed, alleging that she had given him an amorous drink, by which he
was tied and entangled in such sort unto her, and so led and transported by her
love, that she governed all that which concerned the estate of Rome, and the
world subject to Rome; but her defenders prevailed nothing. For finally it was
resolved, that she should lose her life.

To finish this Tragedy, Lupus was dispatched, who lost no time in the
accomplishment of The year of the world. 4005. after Christ's birth 43.
Caesonia Caius widow lying fast by the body of her slaughtered husband,
destitute of all that which the law gratifieth those that are dead with,
altogether bloody and greatly afflicted, having Caesonia accuses Caius for
that he would not give credit ^o her counsail^.
her daughter fast couched by her. Being in this estate, she was heard to utter
no other words, but that she blamed Caius, for that he had not given credit to
that counsel which she had given him so often: which words of hers were by
certain of them interpreted two ways: For some of them thought that she
meant, that she had counseled her husband to give over his cruelty, and
murders which he exercised against his Citizens; and that in his government he
should use a tempered measure with virtue, for fear least his subjects
misliking of his manners Caius to set upon the conspirators and kill them,
without any delay; yea before they had committed any offense, and by that
means provide for his security. They therefore said, that Caesonia blamed
Caius for that he had behaved himself too carelessly, in that wherein she had
counseled him. Such were the words Caesonia spoke, and such was the
exposition, as diverse men interpreted the same. She seeing Lupus coming,
showed him Caius body, and besought him with tears and complaints to come no
nearer. But perceiving that he continued in his resolution, and made no
account of her words, but did that for which he came, after that she knew the
cause of his arrival, she offered her naked throat unto him, with a great
courage, using such supplications as they ordinarily do, who despair of their
lives. For she willed him to defer no longer, to finish that Tragedy which
Lupus: and after her was her daughter slain, which was very young. This did
Lupus certify Chaereas of with all expedition. This was Caius end after he had
lived 4. years, wanting 4. months. Before such time Caius a wicked man.
as he obtained the Empire, he was an intemperate and wicked man, addicted to
his pleasure, a favorer of tale-bearers, exceedingly fearful, and for that
cause, when he got the upper hand of any man, he was ready to kill him. He
esteemed this the only fruit of his power, when he abused the same against
innocents; and gathered or heaped up great spoils and booties by wicked and
unjust murders, rapines and oppressions; lifting himself above all humane
authority, and affecting to be esteemed as a God, suffering himself to be
tra^sported by the peoples praises. Furthermore, all that which the law
condemned and punished, as a thing most detestable, that made he Caius given
over to lust.
Caius builded a haven.
travel by sea. True it is that it was not brought to perfection, but only
half finished, because the workmen travailed leisurely. But the chief cause
thereof was, that he spent his study in unprofitable matters, and loved rather
to consume his substance to feed his own private lusts wherein he took
great delight, then to erect and build any goodly or famous work, which might
have redounded to the profit of the common weal. Otherwise he was a man well
spoken, and very expert in the Greek and vulgar Roman tongues, apprehending
presently that which others Caius an excellent Orator
said: and although they had spent long time in discovering their minds; yet
answered he them upon the instant, and in affairs of consequence he had such a
moving persuasion and power, as Tiberius brothers son, whole successor also
he was, he was enforced to be studious, seeing that Tiberius, who was of the
same veers, was in like manner excellently learned. Caius therefore enforced
himself to imitate the Emperor Tiberius, whose near kinsman he was, and
surpassed all those that were in Rome at that time; yet notwithstanding all
these great advantages, which his good instruction had bred in him, could not
hinder the misfortune that befell him, by the abuse of his authority. So rare
a thing it is to see them, The year of the world, 4005. after Christ's
nativity, 43.
who have liberty to do what they list without punishment, to govern
themselves with modesty. In the beginning he took delight in the friendship
of very honest men, to get credit and reputation, thinking to outstrip the
most excellent; but after he was given over to licentiousnes, the affection
that he bare them was changed; and in steed thereof he grew in hatred of them
from day to day; whereby they were enforced to conspire against him, and seek
his ruin.

Now as I have heretofore declared, Claudius understanding of that which had
befallen Caius his Nephew, and seeing all his house wholly troubled, for this
occasion was in such distrust, that he Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3.
knew not what to do to save himself: but went and hid himself in a certain
corner, where he was surprised, having no other cause to apprehend his danger,
except his nobility. For during the time that he lived a private man, he
behaved himself modestly, kindly, and favorably unto Caius death, in that
they supposed that upon just occasion, he was done to death: for which cause
they rather bethought themselves on that which concerned their estates, and how
they might assure themselves in those dangers, seeing the Germans were wholly
bent against those, who had slaughtered Caius; rather incited thereunto of
their own cruel natures, then of any good affection Claudi^s and put him in
fear of his life, the rather for that he saw Asprenas head and the rest of
the nobility that were massacred, carried about to be seen: for this cause he
kept himself in a certain place, which was only accessible by certain steps
or stairs, and hid himself therein, because it was obscure. In that place one
of the soldiers of the palace, called Gratus, being unable to discern who he
was in regard of the obscurity of the place, and supposing him to be some one
that desired to be concealed, he drew near unto him, to the intent he might
the better know him: And when as Claudius besought him that he would depart and
leave him, he passed the more onwards, and laying hold of him and drawing him
into the light, knew him; crying out to those that followed him: This is
Germanicus, let us take hold of him, and create him Emperor. Claudius Caius,
besought them that they would pardon him, protesting unto them his innocence,
and how he had in no sort bin either accessarie or agent in that which had been
done. Whereupon Gratus beginning to smile, took him by the hand saying, that
he had no cause in that sort to suspect his life. For (said he) it behooves
thee to pull up thy spirits, and to bethink thee how to govern an Empire, of
which the gods (who have the care of the whole world) have despoiled Caius, to
reward thy virtue with. Arise therefore and take possession of the throane of
thine ancestors. This said, he lifted him on his shoulders, for that Claudius
could not walk on foot through the fear and joy that he had conceived of that
which had been told him. Upon these speeches diverse of the soldiers of the
guard assembled about Gratus, and Claudius, whom they supposed to be dragged to
his death, they had compassion of him as on an innocent, for that they knew him
to be a man of a mild nature, who all the time of his life intermedled with
nothing, and who in like sort had been often in great dangers during Caius
life. There were others of them that said, that the judgment of his matter
appertained to the Consuls: whereupon although a great number of soldiers
flocked about him, and the simple people that were unarmed, fled from them; yet
could not Claudius go onward in his way; so weak and feeble felt he himself
in his whole body. It fortuned Claudius against his will drawn unto the Empire.
likewise, that they who carried his litter, perceiving this flight fled away
for fear, and left him; so little hope had they that their Master should
escape with his life, whom they saw thus to be drawn by the soldiers. Now
when Gratus and his associates were arrived in the court of the The cause that
induced the army to make Claudius Emperor.
soldiers unto them, who took pleasure to behold Claudius, enforcing
themselves to place him in the imperial dignity in regard of that good
affection which they bare to Germanicus his brother, whose memory was much
honored among all those, who had at any time conuersed with him. Moreover they
ripped up how many auaritious acts the Senate had committed, and how great
errors the chiefest Senators had defaulted in before the public government was
changed. Moreover they considered upon the danger and difficulty of their
actions then in hand, for that The year of the world. 4005. after the Na^tie
of Christ. 4^
Claudius should enjoy the same by their permission and good will, he would
have them in remembrance who had fauouted him, and would recompense them
according to their merits. This was the effect of their discourse, which they
held among themselves, or when they met with one an other. Finally, all of them
atlength concluded upon this advice, and environed Claudius, and lifting him up
upon their shoulders, they carried him into the army, to the intent that no man
might hinder them to finish that which they Claudius carried on men's shoulders
into the army. Defference betwixt the citizens and Senators.
intended. There fell a debate also betwixt the Senators and Citizens: For the
Senate desirous to recover their former dignity, and enforcing themselves to
avoid the servitude that had befallen them by the outrage of tyrants, intended
the maintenance of their offered good fortune. Contrariwise Claudius was
advanced, making their account that if he were created Emperor, they should
avoid a civil war like unto that which happened in Pompeius time.

The Senate knowing that Claudius was carried into the army by the soldiers,
chose out some The Senate persuade Claudius to resign the dignity o^ered him.
of their order, and now sent them as messengers in their behalf, to signify
unto him that he ought to use no violence in obtaining the Empire, but rather
to remit the charge of the common weal to the Senate. That he both was and
should be one of the Senators, and have the conduct of the common weal, and
dispose it according to law, persuading him to call unto his remembrance those
grievous mischiefs, which the former tyrants had wrought in the common weal,
and Caius their late Emperor. That it should ill become him, who had detested
the fury of others tyranny at such time as they used outrages, should
willingly be drawn to oppose himself against his country. That if he would
obey them, and continue to express the virtue and constancy of his life,
which in times past he led with commendation, he should obtain those honors
which free Citizens could afford him, and in suffering himself to be governed
by laws, to the end he might have part in the commandment, and to be
commanded in his turn, he should obtain the praise of virtue. That if he
would not be dissuaded by the slaughter of Caius, which was fresh in memory,
for their own parts they would hinder his proceedings as much as in them lay.
They also alleged, that they were furnished with men of war, with store of
armor, and a great The Ambassadors that brought this message, were Veranius
and Broccus, who both of them were Tribunes of the people. They prostrating
themselves on their knees before him, humbly besought him that he would not
draw the common weal into civil war. And seeing that Claudius was enclosed
with a great company of men of war, in respect of whom the Consuls were of
no force, they besought him that it would please him to demand the government
at the Senats hands, and receive it from them

CHAP. III.
The Sedition that arose betwixt the Senate and the people.

ALthough Claudius knew with what presumption the Senate had sent this
Em^assage: yet did he modestly entertain the same for the present. But
supposing that it stood very Claudius denies to give over the dignity that
was offered him. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 4. al. 3.
little with his security to commit himself to their trust, and being
encouraged by the Agrippa, he determined in no sort to let the sovereignty
escape out of his hands, ^n that it was so willingly and freely bestowed on him
when he thought least on it. After that A^rippa had performed all those duties
unto Caius which were requisite for such a one as had bin by him advanced to
honor, and having taken his body and laid it in a litter, he brought him out
before the soldiers of his guard, and certified them that Caius was yet alive,
and for that he found himself sick of those wounds which he had received, he
sent to seek for Physicians. But afterward The year of the world. 4005.
after Christ's birth 43. Claudius confirmed in his resolutions by Agrippa.
Claudius was taken by the men of war, he thrust so much that he got himself
passage, and came unto him, whom he found altogether dismayed, and ready to
surrender all things into the Senats hands, and encouraged him and incited him
to take upon him the government of the Empire which the men of war had
offered him. Which done, he departed and was suddenly sent for by the Senate,
whither he resorted altogether perfumed with odors, as if at that time he were
returned from some banquet, and had known nothing of that which had happened. He
therefore asked the Senators what was become of Claudius, who certified him of
the truth; and besides that, required him to give them his opinion and
counsel as touching the present affairs: his answer was; that he was
ready to adventure his life in the behalf of the Senate; yet by the way he
told them that they ought to have an especial regard of the commonweal,
Agrippa replied, would God Agrippa tells the Senate his opinion.
grave fathers, that you were able to perform the matters you intend; yet will
I not fear to discover that unto you, which concerns you nearly. You know
well that the army which is with Claudius, consists of such men, who have
been long time trained up in feats of arms, and that those that are to fight
on your side, are but men gathered together, and such as you couple them with
are the very scumme of your slaves, who are both intractable and untrained. We
shall therefore Claudius such men, as may persuade him to give over the Empire.
And to perform this message, behold my self in a readiness to be commanded by
you. To this effect spoke Agrippa; And hereunto the Senators accorded, and sent
him to Claudius, appointing him certain others to accompany him. As Agrippa
with some other is sent to Claudius. Claudius answer to the Ambassadors.
soon as he came to Claudius, he secretly discovered unto him in what
perplexity the Senate was, and gave him instructions to answer and demean
himself like an Emperor, and to show his dignity and power. Whereupon
Claudius gave the Ambassadors this answer. That he wondered not that the Senate
were so unwilling to be commanded by a soueraign, in regard of that cruelty
which the forepassed Emperors had used to their destruction. But for the
present, they should taste of his

Those that were sent from the Senate hearing these words, returned back
again. But Claudius The soldiers oaths taken.
instantly assembled his men of war, and exacted an oath of fidelity from
them, bestowing on every one of them who were of his guard in way of largess,
five thousand drachmes, amounting to some 25. pound a man of our sterling
money. He presented their captains also with prelents answerable to their
qualities, promising to perform no less bounty to all the rest of the
Jupiter the victorious before day, and some of them hid themselves through the
fear they had of that which should be spoken: othersome departed out of the
city, and resorted to their country farms, foreseeing with themselves the
issue of all these things, and perceiving that their hope of liberty was lost,
they thought it far better for them to be exempt from danger, and to pass
their life in repose, though it were with subjection, then to be altogether
uncertain of their security and safety, by maintaining the dignity of the
Senators: yet about some hundredth of them drew themselves together and no more,
Now whilst they were consulting upon that which they were to do, they suddenly
heard a shout of soldiers that were assembled round about them, requiring the
Senate to choose them an Emperor, and not to suffer their The soldiers
require a Monarch at the Senats bands.
liking they had of Claudius; notwithstanding there were some that pretended
some hope to be advanced both in respect of the nobility of their race, as in
regard of their alliance that they had by marriage with the Caesar's. For Marcus
Minucianus a man of himself of noble descent, and who had married Iulia Caius
fister, stood up to demand the so^ (...) ^ment: but the Consuls The year of
the world. 4005. after Christ's birth 43. Some affect the Empire.
Caius tutors withdrewe Valerius Asiaticus from thinking on those things: and
there had happened as great a slaughter as might ever been heard of, had any of
these had the liberty to desire the Empire, or oppose themselves against
Claudius. For amongst other the fencers, who were of no small number, they of
the watch and the sailers joined themselves together with the men of war.
They therefore that pretended to demand the Empire gave over their suits partly
in the cities behalf, partly for their own private security sake.

About the day spring Chaereas and his companions went forth to debate the
matter with the soldiers, but they seeing by the beckoning with their hands
that they would draw them to silence, and were upon the instant to fall into
discourse, made a great noise to cut them off from proceeding Caius, suffered
not the Senate to obey the soldiers. At length Chaereas being unable to
conceal his passion wherewith he was surprised, and hearing that they asked for
a monarch, promised that he would give the^ one, if they would bring him a
token from Eutychus, who was the wagoner to the green band, whom Caius had
loved extremely, in so much as he employed his soldiers in servile labors, as
to build him stables for his horses, and reproched the^ with diverse such like
matters, telling the^ that he would bring them Claudius Claudius to unite
themselves with those, who had already bound themselves by an oath to serve
him faithfully. So that the Senate was aba^doned, and destitute of all defense;
so as there was no difference betwixt private The souldier^ with displaied
ensign^s repair to Claudius. Sabinus rather choseth death then to allow of
Claudius.
men and Consuls. All of them were astonished and confused, not knowing what to
do, because they had thus provoked Claudius displeasure against them. And now
fell they to reuiling one another, in testimony of the repentance they
conceived for these their proceedings. Whereupon Sabinus one of those who had
murdered Caius, arose and protested that he would sooner cut his own throat,
then consent to the establishment of Claudius; or behold with his eyes the
misery and thraldom Chaereas; telling him that he had deserved very little by
cutting off of Caius, if he thought to live without the liberty of his country.
To which he answered, that he made no account of his life; yet that he intended
to sound Claudius mind, and with this resolution they concluded. Mean while
certain of the Senators sought on every side to break through the midst and
thickest of the soldiers, to go and do reverence and homage to Claudius:
amongst whom was Q. Pompeius one of the Consuls, whom the men of war accused to
be one of the principal actors to incite the Senate to recover their liberty,
and they drew their naked swords Q. Pompeiu^ the Consul with other^ resort to
Claudiu^.
against him. And if Claudius had not restrained them, they had surely
dispatched him, but he made him sit down by him, and by that means delivered
him from the danger. The other Senators, who accompanied him, were not
entertained thus honorably; but some of them were Claudias. Aponius retired
himself sore wounded, and the rest were in great danger to lose their lives.
But King Agrippa drawing near unto Claudius, desired him to use as much
lenity as was possible in him toward the Senators, for that if any mischief
should betide them, he should have no other persons to command. Claudius is
persuaded b^ Agrippa to use the senators more mildly.
To the which counsel of his Claudius gave place, and assembled the Senate in
the Palace, causing himself to be carried through the city in the company of
his soldiers, who marched before him, doing much mischief to the common
people. But amongst those that slew Caius, Chaereas and Sabinus were come out
into the streets, notwithstanding they were forbidden by Pollio, whom not long
before Claudius had made captain of his guard. And as soon as Claudius came
into the palace, whither he assembled his friends, he pronounced sentence
against Chaercas. For although Lupus, Those that murdered Caius are executed.
and diverse other Romans. It is said of Chaereas that he endured this accident
with a great courage, which he expressed not only in that he changed not
his countenance, but also by the reproaches which he gave Lupus who wept. For
when as Lupus was putting off of his clothes, and complained of the cold
that he felt, he taunted him thus, alluding to his name which was Lupus; The
ye^e of the world 4005. after Christ's Na^itie. 43.
That never any cold did harm to a woolfe. Furthermore when he came to the
place of execution, where a great number of people were gathered together to
behold the spectacle; he asked the soldier that was appointed to behead him,
if he were a cunning hea^man, and whether he had a new sword, wishing him to
use that wherewith he murdered Caius. His death was happy, for he received but
one stroke; whereas Lupus was faintharted, and received diverse, because he
stretched not out his neck freely. Some few days after at such time as the
Romans solemnized their expiations, and that every one honored the memory of
his dead friend, they gave Chaereas a part of that honor, and cast his portion
into the fire, saying, that was to deface and purge their ingratitude, whereof
they were guilty toward him: Thus ended Chaereas his life: But for Sabinus,
although Claudius had not only absolved him, but also suffered him to exercise
his office, Sabinus kills himself.
days, thrusting his sword through his body to the very hilts.

CHAP. IIII.
Claudius confirms Agrippa in his fathers kingdom.

INcontinently after this, Claudius cashierd all those of his soldiers whom he
suspected, and published an edict, by which he confirmed the kingdom to
Agrippa, that Caius Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. ^l. 4. Claudius gives Agrippa
Iudaea, Samaria, and Lysanias country.
had given him, accompanying his bounty with many praises; annexing moreover
unto Herod his grandfather had possessed, to wit, Iudaea and Samaria; which in
that they were as one lawful inheritance appertained unto him. He gave him
also out of his own dominions, Abela and all the country about the mount
Libanus, that in times past appertained to Lysanias: And he caused the alliance
that was past betwixt them twain to be engraven and registered in an open place
of the City of Rome. He took from Antiochus the kingdom Antiochus king of
Comagena. Alexander Lysimachus. Alabarcha.
that he had, and gave him in exchange a portion of Cilicia and Comagena. He
set Alexander Lysimachus Alabarcha at liberty, who had been his old friend,
and sometimes governor in Arabia, and otherwhiles his mother Antonias steward,
who had been committed prisoner through Caius displeasure, and married Bernice
Agrippas daughter, with his son Marcus: which after the death of Marcus, who
died before he was espoused, was afterward married with Agrippas allowance to
Herod his brother, for whom Agrippa begd of Claudius the kingdom of Chalcis.
At that very time the Jews that were in the City of Alexandria, mutined
Herod Agrippas brother created king of Chalcis. Sedirion in Alexandria betwixt
the Greeks and Jews. Claudius edict in favor of the Jews in Alexandria.
against the Greeks. For after Caius death the nation of the Jews, which had
been oppressed during his reign, and injuriously dealt withal by the
Alexandrines, recovered their former courage, and instantly fell to arms. For
which cause Claudius gave commission to the governor of Egypt, to pacify and
appease that uproar. He sent also his letters patents into Alexandria and
Syria, at the request of the two kings Agrippa and Herod, to this effect.
Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, Father of the people, signifies
this that follows. Understanding that the Jews inhabitants in Alexandria,
and for this cause called Alexandrines, have at all times enjoyed the selfsame
privileges of the City, which the ancient and first Alexandrines have had.
Caesar Augustus, their privileges have continued in force during the several
successions of many of our governors, which rights of theirs have never been
called in question no not in that time when Aquila was governor in Alexandria.
Since in like sort Caesar Augustus has not let them, but when the
chiefetaine of their nation was dead, they might establish other substitutes
and governors in his place, willing that all of them should yield him
obedience in observation of their laws and custom^s, without constraint or
impulsion to do any thing contrary to their religion: yet notwithstanding the
Alexandrines have mutined against the Jews, being in Caius, by reason of the
folly and frenzy of Caius, who disgraced and oppressed the nation of the
Jews, because they would not violate their religion, nor acknowledge the said
Caius for a god. Our will and pleasure is, that no one of the privileges of the
nation of the Jews be abolished, by reason of Caius frenzy; but my mind is
to maintain those which heretofore have been given them, to the end they may
continue and live according to their ancient laws and customs: Commanding
you and every one of you very carefully to provide, that after the
publication of this our ordinance, they be in no sort The^ year of the world.
4005. after Christ's birth 43.
This was the tenor of that ordinance which was made in favor of the Jews in
Alexandria.

But that which was generally made in favor of those, who were dispersed
through the whole world, was to this effect: Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus
Germanicus, High priest, Father of the Claudius edict in the behalf of the
Jews scattered through the whole empire.
people, elected Consul the second time, signifies that which ensues. Our we
beloved friends, the kings Agrippa and Herod, have required us that we will
permit all those Jews, that live under the Roman Empire, to use the same laws
and privileges which they have used heretofore, as we have granted to the
Jews, that dwell in Alexandria. Which suite of theirs we have willingly
granted, not only in favor of those that require the same, but also for that
I think them worthy such a grace, for whom I have been entreated in regard of
the fidelity and friendship they Augustus time they have never been exempted
from them. It stands with reason therefore, that henceforth the Jews, who
live under our Empire of what place soever* they be, may observe their
ancient customs, without any contradiction: Giving them to understand that
hereafter they use our clemency so much the more moderately, without
neglecting the religion of other nations, in retaining their own. And our will
is, that this present ordinance be published by the Magistrates of Cities,
Colonies and countries of Italy, and be sent unto kings and foreign princes,
by fit ambassadors, within thirty days at the least, to the end that they
should be in such sort set up, that they may be seen and read by all those
that pass by.

CHAP. V.
Agrippas return into Iudaea.

BY these edicts of Claudius Caesar, which he sent both to Alexandria and other
parts of the world, it plainly appears how well affected he was toward the
nation of the Jews. And presently after this, after he had dignified Agrippa
with all kinds of honor, he sent Claudius sends Agrippa into his kingdom.
him back into his kingdom to govern the same, commanding all his presidents
and lieutenants in his provinces, through which he was to pass, to give him a
friendly and honorable conuoy. But he having wisely and happily dispatched his
affairs, returned in all haste. As soon as Caius had given him: which was of
the same weight the iron chain was of wherewith his royal hands were
manacled; in memory of the adversity he had past, and the testimony of the
exchange thereof into better fortune: commanding that it should be hanged up
in the temple, and over the chamber of the treasury, to testify unto those
Agrippa hangs up his golden chain over the treasury chamber in the temple.
that should behold the same, that the highest estates are subject to
alterations, and that God can raise men again from obscurity to happy
fortune. For this chain that hanged in the temple being consecrated to God,
manifestly expressed unto all men, that king Agrippa was upon a very small
occasion despoiled of his former dignity, and made prisoner: and then a little
while after, Simon the son of Boethus placed in Theophilus room (...) and
^finus, cap. 6. Agrippa ^eleaseth the tributes to those of Jerusalem. Silas.
The Dorite^ place Caesar's statue in the synagogue of the Jews, and thereby
vehemently offend both Agrippa and Petronius
When as therefore Agrippa had duly and devoutly acknowledged Gods mercies, he
deposed the hie priest Theophilus the son of Ananus, and bestowed that honor
on Simon surnamed Canthara the son of Boethus. This Simon had two brothers, and
Boethus was their father, whose daughter had bin married to king Herod, as
heretofore it has bin spoken. Simon held the priesthood with his brethren and
his father in such sort, as before time the three sons of Simon hie priest son
of Onias had done, during the Empire of the Macedonians, as we have declared in
our former books. After the king had given order for the priesthood, he
thought good to recompense the good affection Silas, who had been his companion
in many dangers, general of all his army. Not long after certain young men
that were Dorites under the color of constancy in case of religion, who also
had daily expressed in their actions an unbridled rashness, brought the image
of Caesar into the temple of the Jews, and erected it in that place; which
insolence of theirs highly offended Agrippa, who construed it as The year of
the world, 4005. after Christ's natiuit^, 43.
an act that tended to the abolition of the religion of their country: for
which cause, with all expedition he repaired to Petronius, who was governor of
Syria, and complained against these Dorites, who was no less displeased with
the action then he himself. For he supposed that such breach of religion was
the means to further impiety, and for that cause he wrote to those which had
attempted this innovation somewhat sharply, to this effect following.

CHAP. VI.
Petronius letter written to the Dorites, in the behalf of the Jews.

PVblius Petronius lieutenant
to Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, to the Magistrates Alias,
cap. 5. P. Petronius writes to the Dorites to send them unto him who have
broken Caesar^ edict.
of the country of Doria, health:
Whereas Caesar has published an edict, by which he permits the Jews to
live according to their laws and customs, some one amongst you have been so
presumptuous to contradict the same in effect (although in words you protest
that you obey him) and do all that which you can to hinder the Jews from
enjoying their Synagogue, in so much as in the same you have planted Caesar's
image, not only thereby opposing your selves against the Jews, but also
against the Emperor himself, whose image might have been better placed in his
own temple, then in a foreign temple: and you have placed it in their
Synagogue; whereas by right every one ought to be master of his place,
according to Caesar's judgment: For it should be very ridiculous in me to
allege mine own judgment Caesar's, who has granted the Jews the liberty to
live according to their laws and customs, and has commanded that they should
converse in equal freedom among the Greeks. For these causes I command you,
that they, who have been so bold as to contemn Augustus decree (against whom
their own magistrates have been displeased, excusing themselves that this
accident happened not by their motion, but by the fury of the common people) be
brought before me by the captain Proculus Vitellius, to yield a reason of that
which they have done, exhorting the magistrates that if they will not be
accounted parties in this contempt, they labor to discover those that are
guilty unto Proculus, and give order that no sedition or violence be offered
thereupon. Which notwithstanding it seems that they affect, although we and
the most honored king Agrippa, whom I take for my good and special friend,
labor nothing more, Augustus has ordained as touching this matter, may be the
better known unto all men, I have annexed his edict which he published in
Alexandria: and although they are sufficiently known unto all men, yet has
the most honored king Agrippa read them unto me at such time, as I sat in my
tribunal seat, concluding according to right, that the Jews ought not to be
excluded nor hindered from enjoying those benefits, which are granted unto them
by Caesar: I therefore charge all men, that hence forward they take heed least
they seek any occasion of mutiny or sedition, and that every one live
according to his religion.


See here how Petronius proceeded in this matter, both to amend that which was
past, as also to prevent that which was to come, that none should be so bold to
attempt the like. After this Agrippa Simon Canthara, and gave it again to
Jonathan the son of Anani, whom he esteemed to be more worthy then the other.
But Jonathan declared that he was not Jonathan the son of Ananus is restored
to the priesthood, and refuses it, and prays that his brother Matthias may
minister therein. Marsus prefect of Syria.
desirous of this dignity, for in effect he refused it, saying: O King, I most
willingly acknowledge the honor which it pleases you to bestow upon me, and
know well that it is a dignity which of your own freewill you bestow upon me;
notwithstanding that God judges me unworthy. It suffices me that I have once
been invested with the sacred habit: for at that time I wore it with more
holiness, then I can now receive it at this present; yet notwithstanding if it
please you to know one that is more worthy of this honor then my self, I will
inform you of one. My liege, I have a brother, who toward God and you is pure
and innocent, whom I dare recommend unto you for a most fit man for that
dignity. The king took great pleasure in these his words, and Jonathan he
bestowed the priesthood on Matthias his brother, according as Jonathan had
advised him: and not long after this Marsus succeeded in Petronius room, and
took upon him the government of Syria.

CHAP. VII. The year of the world. 4005. after Christ's birth 43.

Agrippas acts until the time of his death.

SIlas was made general over the kings army, and for that he had always been
faithful Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7. Silas by too much reviving the kings
miseries and misfortunes, and ripping up his own deserts grows into ye kings
hatred, and is sent prisoner into his country.
unto him, and had never forsaken him in any danger that was offered, without
partaking the utmost extremity, but had always adventured on the greatest
perils in respect of his entire and constant resolution, he made his account,
that being so firm a friend to the king he should also be partaker and
companion with him in the honor. For which cause in all things whatsoever, he
submitted not himself to the king, but challenged to himself a liberty to
speak what him listed. For this cause he grew hateful in the kings sight, for
that in particular he boasted Silas grievously provoked the kings displeasure
against himself, that rather subscribing to his wrath then his wit, he not only
dispossessed Silas of his generals room, but also sent him bound into his
country in that place to be held prisoner. This notwithstanding time assuaged
his displeasure, and the king drawing himself into better consideration Silas
had endured in his behalf, he revoked the sentence that he had pronounced. At
such time therefore as he was ready to celebrate the festiual day of his birth,
and al his subjects were addressed to take their pleasure, he speedily sent for
Silas, to the Agrippa sends for Silas out of prison, who dissembling not his
displeasure is left still in prison.
end he might be partaker thereof, and banquet with them. But Silas, who was of
a free nature, supposing that he had just cause to be displeased, concealed it
not from those who were sent unto him, but spoke unto them after this manner.
To what honor does the king inuit me at this present, to the intent
incontinently to deprive me thereof? for he has not only deprived me of those
honors which he bestowed upon me, in acknowledgement of the good affection I
have always showed unto him; but he has altogether spoiled me, and
contu^eliously entreated me: but if he think that he can restrain me from
speaking freely* he deceives himself. For my conscience These words spoke he
with a loud voice, willing them to relate the same unto king Agrippa; who
seeing that he was grounded in an incurable folly, left him in prison.

After this the king began to fortify the walls of Jerusalem, on the side of
the new town, upon the common charge; increasing them both in length and
breadth, and might he have thoroughly Agrippa fortifieth the walls of Jerusalem.
Claudius commands Agrippa to desist from building the walls.
finished them, it had been a fortress invincible, by all humane force. But
Marsus the governor Caesar what the work was; and Claudius suspecting some
commotion, wrote expressly to Agrippa, commanding him thence forward to desist
from further building of the walls, according to that form wherein he had
begun: whereunto he would not disobey. This king Agrippa was of a nature so
ready to exercise liberality, and took so great pleasure to use his
magnificence toward all sorts of nations, that the great expenses he was at,
obtained him great reputation. So that his whole pleasure and delight was, to
show courtesy unto al men, and to purchase good esteem, being every way
different in nature and disposition from king Herod his predecessor. Agrippa
^ored the (...) more then Herod.
For Herod was naturally malicious, extreme in punishing me^, and
irreco^ciliable to those with whom he was displeased, manifestly expressing
that he loved the Grecians better then the Jews. For he beautified those
cities that belonged to strangers, and gave them money, and erected them
Agrippa was very courteous and lowly, and equally imparted his bounty unto
all men. He was courteous unto strangers, and testified no less by the
bounty he bestowed on them. To his countrymen he behaved himself affably, and
in especial he was merciful to all those that were in misery. For which cause
his ordinary court and the place he took most pleasure in, was Jerusalem. He
was a diligent obseruer of the The year of the world 4005. after Christ's
Nativity. 43.
laws of his country, and lived religiously, and with as great piety as was
possible: neither passed there one day wherein he offered not sacrifice. It
happened at one time that a certain cunning lawyer, who was called Simon, and
dwelt in Jerusalem, had assembled the people by reason of the kings absence,
who for the present was in Caesarea: In which assembly he alleged many things
against him, that he was a profane man, and that upon just cause he was
forbidden to enter Simon the lawyer backbiteth the king who craving pardon is
reconciled unto him.
the temple, in that it was not lawful nor decent for those that were
unclean, to enter thereinto. These words of Simons thus wrongfully urged
against him, were signified to the king by certain letters sent him, by the
governor of the city: when as therefore he sat him down in the Theater, he
commanded that very Simon to sit next him, and in peaceable and kind manner
he spoke thus unto him. Tell me, I pray thee, what thing thou see fault
worthy, or done Simon having not any thing to reply, besought him to pardon
him. The king grew friends with him far sooner then it could be imagined,
resolving with himself that mercy does far better become a king, then
wrath; and that moderation is more requisite, then-^aughtie courage; so as he
after he had bestowed certain presents on Simon, he dismissed him. Now
although he had many reparations in diverse places; Alias, cap. 6. Agrippa
honoreth Beryth with good ornaments.
yet honored he those of Beryth above all the rest, and builded them a Theater
surpassing all other in sumptuousnes and beauty: and besides that, he made them
a sumptuous Amphiatheater, and bathes and porches: in which he neither spared
cost, neither scantled the beauty and greatness of the works in any sort. The
dedication also of these things were celebrated with great pomp and
magnifice^ce: he also made great shows and plays in the Theater, in which
there were all sorts

After that he had finished these above named buildings in Beryth, he resorted
to Tiberias a city of Galilee, and was admired of all the otherkings, so that
Antiochus king of Comagena came Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8.
to visit him: the like did Samsigeran king of the Emesenians: Cotys king of
Armenia the less; and Polemon Lord of Pontus: and besides all these, Herod
prince of Chalcis and his brother, all whom he received and entertained most
magnificently and amiably, to show his greatness; to the end that all men might
perceive, that he was deservedly honored with the presence of so many kings.
And during the time that these princes were with him, Marsus the governor of
Syria visited him likewise, whom to the end he might express the reverence he
bare to the Romans, he met with seven furlongs off from the city. This
interuiew of so many kings was the original of that discontent that grew
betwixt him and Marsus; for whilst he sat in his litter, he sent for these
other kings. But Marsus suspected this concord and so great amity, supposing
that this agreement of so many kings would be no ways profitable or beneficial
to the Romans. For which Agrippa is displeased with Marsus for sending away the
kings.
cause he presently sent unto them, charging them with all expedition to
return each of them into Agrippa took in ill part, and for this occasion he
conceived scarce kindly of Marsus. He took the priesthood from Matthias, and
gave it to Aelioneus the son of Cithaeus. After he had reigned three whole
years over Iudaea, he came to Caesarea, which in times past was called the
tower of Straton, and there made he sports in Alias, cap. 7. Aelioneus the
son of Cithaeus made high priest. Agrippa is sal^d in the Theater for a God,
and spieth the owl which the Germane foretold him of, that five days after he
should die.
honor of Caesar, ordaining a certain feast for his conservation, to the
celebration whereof there were assembled a great number of all those, who
were of estate and dignity through the whole country. On the second day of
this solemnity, he showed himself being apparrelled in a Robe of silver, made
with admirable workmanship; and came in the same to the Theater in the morning.
Whereas the first reflexe of the rising sun ^eat upon his Robe, he shined
after such a sort, that all those that beheld him were seized with reverence
and fear. Whereupon certain Agrippa reproved them not for using these words:
neither rejected he their palpable and detestable flattery. But not long after,
he looking upwards, perceived an owl over his head perched upon a cord, and
knew the same incontinently, that he was but a message of his misfortune:
whereas before time he had denounced The year of the world. 4005. after the
Nat^itie of Christ: 43.
unto him his felicity, and conceived thereupon a most hearty and inward
grief. And suddenly he was seized with a terrible griping in his belly, which
began with very great vehemency for which cause turning his eyes toward his
friends, he spoke unto them after this manner: Behold him (said he) whom you
esteem for a God, condemned to die, and destiny shall apparently convince you
of those flattering and false speeches, which you have lately used in my
behalf. For I, who by you have been adored as one immoitall, am under the
hands of death. But I must willingly entertain that which God pleases to send
me: For I have not lived in obscurity, but in so great and wonderful
felicity, that each one of you have termed and held me happy.

Whilst he spoke thus, his griefs augmented in such sort as he was brought
almost to his Caius Caesar (having first of all governed Philips Tetrarchy The
year of the world. 4009. after Christ's birth 47. 1^00. Myriades amount to 15
tons o gold. Herod the prince of Chalcis and Chelcias kill Silas.
three years, to which was annexed the signiorie of Herod in the fourth
year) and three Claudius Caesar, during which time he governed over the above
named countries: and moreover over Iudaea, Samaria and Caesarea. His revenue
amounted to twelve hundredth myriades, besides which, he made many loanes. For
in that he was very liberal in giving, he spent far more then his revenue,
and spared not any thing to show himself magnificent. Before the people knew
of his death, Herod his brother prince of Chalcis, and Chelcias the kings
lieutenaut and friend, agreed between themselves to send Aristo one of their
trustiest servants to kill Silas, who was their enemy, as if they had been
commanded by the king.

Thus died king Agrippa, leaving behind him a son called Agrippa, seuenteen
years old; and Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9. al. cap. 8. Agrippa^ children alive.
three daughters, one of which that was called Bernice, was married to Herod
his fathers brother, when she was sixteen years old. The two other were
Mariamme and Dr^silla: this Mariamme Julius Archelaus Chelcias son: and
Drusilla which was six years old, was promised also to Epiphanes son to
the king of Comagena.

After Agrippas death, they of Caesarea and Sebaste forgot themselves of those
benefits they had The Caelerias and Sebastea^s r^uile Agripp^ being dead.
received from him, and used him no less despitefully, then as if he had been
their utter enemy. For they reprochfully abused him after his death, and
reviled him in such sort as it is unseemly to report the same. Furthermore all
the men of war, who were at that time many in number, went unto the kings
lodging, and with one accord seized the statues of the kings daughters, and
carried them to the brothell house; where after they had placed them, they
uttered all the indignities that they could possibly, practizing such shameful
matters, as they may not be expressed. Charon, drinking to one another for joy
the king was dead. Thus expressed they their ingratitude, not only toward
their king Agrippa, who had bestowed so many liberalities on them; but also
toward Herod his grandfather, who had builded their Cities, and to his
extreme charge erected Agrippa Agrippas son.
their ports and temples. At that time Agrippa the deceased Agrippas son was at
Rome, and was brought up under the Emperor Claudius. When Caesar understood
how those of Caesarea and Sebaste had injuriously dealt with Agrippa, he was
sore displeased, and moved with their ingratitude, Claudius inte^deth to send
young Agrippa into his fathers kingdom but is dissuaded, and sends Cuspius
Fadus for president into Iudaea, and those parts.
and his purpose was, to send the younger Agrippa with all expedition to take
possession of the kingdom of his father, and therewithal to discharge
himself of his oath: but diverse of his freeman Caesar, and for this cause he
sent Cuspius Fadus to govern Iudaea, and the whole realm; honoring his dead
friend in this, in that he would not suffer Marsus, who had been his The ye^e
of the world. 4009. after Christ's birth 47.
enemy, to enter into his kingdom. He gave especial commission also, that
Fadus should sharply punish those of Caesarea and Sebaste, for the outrages
they had offered to his deceased friend, and the excess that was committed
against his daughters, who were yet living; commanding him to transport the
companies of the Caesarians and Sebastens, and the five Roman legions into the
country of Pontus, to serve in that place, and to take those Roman soldiers
that bare arms in Syria, to serve in their place: yet notwithstanding this
commandment of his they were not displaced. For they sent Ambassadors to
Claudius to appease him, and by this means they obtained the favor to remain
in Iudaea. After this they gave an entrance to those most grievous The Jews
themselves were the cause of those wars which began under Flotus.
mischiefs and calamities that befell the Jews: for they spread the seed of
that war, which was awakened under Florus government. And for that cause
after that Vespasian had obtained

THE XX. BOOK OF THE ANTIQVITIES OF THE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 20. book.
1 The dissension between the Philadelphians and the Jews: and of the Ephode
which was the sacerdotall stole. 2 How Helena Queen of Adiabena and her sons
embraced the religion of the Jews. 3 The Governor Tiberius Alexander
punishes the sons of Judas of Galtlee. 4 How agreat number of Jews were
slain about the temple. 5 The sedition of the Jews against the Samaritanes. 6
The actions of Foelix president of Iudaea. 7 The government of Porcius Festus
in Iudaea, and of certain murderers. 8 Albinus government. 9 How Florus, who
succeeded Albinus, enforced so many injuries against the Jews, that they were
constrained to fall to arms.
CHAP. I.
The dissension between the Philadelphians and the Jews: and of the Ephode
which

AFTER King Agrippas decease (as we have heretofore declared in our former
Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 1. Cas^ Longi^ presect of Syria.
book) the Emperor Claudius sent Cassius Longinus to succeed Marsus in the
government of Syria, whom he displaced of that honor in memory of Agrippa, who
during his life time had oftentimes required by his letters, that he should not
suffer Marsus to govern the estate of Syria. As soon as Cuspius Fadus came
into Iewrie to take charge of that country, which he was to govern under
Caesar, he found the Jews that dwelt on the other side of Jordan in an uproar,
who had taken arms against the Philadelphians, about the limits of a certain
Fadus punishes the Jews for their insurrection against the Philadelphians.
beyond Jordan, armed themselves in this manner, without the consent of their
governors; and had slain a great number of the Philadelphians. Which when Fadus
understood, he was sore displeased, for that they had not reserved the cause to
his hearing, and opened their griefs they had conceived against the
Philadelphians, but were so bold of their own authority, and without fear
to betake themselves to their weapons. Having therefore apprehended some three
of them, who had been principals and authors of the sedition, he commanded
them to prison, and executed The^ year of the world. 4^09. after Christ's birth
47. Annibas executed, (...) and (...) banished. Tholomaeus the arch thiese,
Fadus requiteth the high priests ga^me^t should be delivered into the power of
the Romans and kept in ye (...) of A^onia. Alias, cap. 2. The Jews deliver
pledges to the intent they might be permitted to send letters to Caesar.
Claudius upon the younger Agripp^s mot^on grants the Jews liberty to have the
custody of the hie priests vestment.
one of them called Annibas, and banished the other two, whose names were
Amaram and Eleazar.

Anon after this, Tholomaeus the Archthiefe was also taken, and brought unto
him, who commanded him to be executed, in that he had done many robberies in
Idumaea and Arabia; and by this means all the country of Iudaea was cleared
of all thieves, by the care and providence of Fadus. After this he sent for the
high priests, and the governors of Jerusalem commanding them, according to the
Emperors direction, that they should deliver up into the Castle of Antonia the
long and sacred robe, which the high priest only was accustomed to wear; to
the end that it might be at the Romans disposition, as in times past it had
been. This command of his they durst not contradict; yet notwithstanding, they
required Fadus and Longinus (who at that Caesar, to beseech him that the sacred
robe might remain in their custody. Secondly, that it might please them to
expect the answer which Caesar would return upon this their request. Fadus
gave them this answer, that he permitted them to send their Ambassadors to
Rome, provided, that before hand they delivered him their children for
hostages. Which when they had readily performed, the Ambassadors were sent
away. Now when they came to Rome, the younger Agrippa (who was his son that
lately died) knowing the cause of their coming, and being ordinarily
accustomed to attend upon Caesar (according as we have heretofore declared)
besought Caesar, that he would grant the Jews their request, as touching the
sacred Robe, and Fadus. On this his petition Claudius gave the Ambassadors
audience, and told them that he favored their suit, willing them to be
thankful to Agrippa, upon whose suit he respected them, and allowed of their
demands; and besides this answer, he delivered them a letter to this effect:

Claudius Caesar Germanicus, Conseruer of the people, Consul created the fifth
time, Emperor the fourth time, Father of the country the tenth time,
to the Magistrates of Jerusalem, the Senate, people, and all the nation of the
Jews; Health.
Being required by our well-beloved Agrippa, whom I both have, and at this
present do bring up with me, and whom I know to be most devout; I have heard
your Ambassadors, who were admitted to my presence by his means, and have
received their thanks for the benefits I have bestowed on your nation: I have
also willingly Vitellius heretofore ordained. To which demand of yours I
vouchsafe my allowance: first in regard of mine own piety, and for that I
desire that every one should serve God according to his own religion: next,
for that I am resolved, that in so doing I shall gratify king Herod and young
Aristobulus, whose piety toward me I am privy to, and whose good affection
toward you I can witness, with whom I have had diverse occasions of
friendship, both in regard of their virtue, as for the honor that I bear unto
them. I have also written to this effect to Cuspius Fadus mine Agent: The names
of those who have received my letters, are Cornelius the son of Ceron, Trypon
the son of Theudion, Dorotheus the son of Nathanael and John the son of
John.

Given the eight and twentieth of June, in the year wherein Rufus and Pompeius
Syluanus were Consuls. Ali^s cap. 3. Claudius Epistle to the Jews. Alias, cap.
9. Herod prince of Chalcis has authority granted him to create the hie
priest. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2. al. 5. Monobazu^ the king of Adiabena
begets two sons on Helena his sister. Monobazus and Izates.


At that same time Herod, who was Agrippas brother that lately deceased, to
whose hands in times past the government of Chalcis had been committed,
required the Emperor Claudius to grant him the power over the temple, and the
sacred vestments and necessaries, and the authority of choosing the high
priest. All which he obtained, and from that time forward until the end of the
war of the Jews, this power remained in all his successors. According to
this authority Herod deposed Canthara from the priesthood, and gave the
succession thereof to Joseph the son of Caneus.

CHAP. II.
How Helena Queen of Adiabena and her sons embraced the religion of the
Jews.

AT that time Helena Queen of Adiabena and her son Izates conformed
themselves to the religion of the Jews, upon this occasion that ensues:
Monobazus king of Adiabena, who was also called Bazeos, being surprised with
the love of his sister Helena, espoused her, and got her with child. Upon a
time it happened, that sleeping with her, he laid his hand on her The year of
the world. 4009. after Christ's nativity, 47.
belly, whilst she lay asleep, and him thought, that he heard a voice that
commanded him to take away his hand from off her belly, least he should crush
the fruit that was therein, which by Gods providence should have a happy
beginning, and no less fortunate ending. Monobazus was sore moved at this
voice, and as soon as he awoke he told it to his wife; and afterward when the
child was borne he called him Izates: Besides, he had another elder son by
the same wife, who was called Monobazus, according to his own name. And he had
also other sons by his other wives: yet notwithstanding Izates was most
manifestly his best beloved, and so cherished by him, as if he had been his
only begotten son. For which cause, his other brothers envied him, which
increased their hatred, for that all the rest of them were aggrieued, because
Monobazus made most account of Izates. The father manifestly perceived all
this, yet did he pardon them, knowing that Izates, by reason of the hatred
Izates sent to Abemerigus, marieth his daughter Samacha.
his brethren bare unto him, he gave him many great gifts, and sent him to
Abemerigus, who reigned at that time in a fort called Spasinus, committing his
sons life into his hand. Abemerigus also entertained him with kind affection,
and loved him in such sort, that in process of time he gave him Samacha his
daughter to wife; and for her dowry he gave him a country of great reuenew.

Monobazus being old, and seeing he had no long time to live, desired before
his death that his son might come and visit him: he therefore sent for him
and received him very lovingly, giving Caeron very fruitful in Amomum, in which
the relics of Noes a^ke are to be seen.
him a country which he called Caeron, which brings forth great abundance
of excellent Noe was saved, during the Deluge; which remnants are to be seen
at this day, if any man have a desire to behold the same. Izates remained in
that place until his fathers decease. But on the very day of his death Helena
sent for all the Lords and Governors of the kingdom, and captains of all the
Army, and upon their assembly she spoke unto them after this manner.

I suppose (said she) that you are not ignorant of my husbands mind, who has
desired that Izates might be king in his steed, and has esteemed him most
worthy of such an honor: yet expect I your judgment in this point. For he
that receives the sovereignty, not from one man's Izates was made king by his
mother Helena, and the nobility, and Monabazus governs the kingdom till his
coming.
hand, but from many, and has the same confirmed unto him by their consent is
happy. She used this discourse unto them to try what their intent was, who
were there assembled. They understanding Izates, whom his father deservedly,
and to all their contents, and the desire of the common people had preferred
above the rest of his brethren: alleging moreover, that they would put his
brethren and kinsmen to death before his coming, to the end that he might
enjoy the kingdom with all security: for by their deaths all the fear that
might grow by their hatred and envy might be extinguished. Hereunto the Queen
answered; that she gave them thanks, for the favor they bare unto her and her
son Izates; notwithstanding she required them to suspend their judgments as
touching the death of his brethren, until such time as Izates himself should
give his consent thereunto.They seeing they might not obtain the liberty
Helena condescended, and made his elder brother Monobazus king, and set the
Diadem on his head, and gave him his fathers seal ring, with that robe which
they call Sampsera; exhorting him to govern the kingdom until his brothers
arrival. Izates having certain notice of his fathers death, resorted thither
speedily, and receiving his brother Monobazus willing surrender, took upon him
the government of the kingdom.

During such time as Izates soiourned in the fortress of Spasinus, a certain
merchant, who was Izates and his mother Helena learn the true service of God
according to the manner of the Jews.
a Jew, called Ananias, having access to the kings wives, taught them the
manner how to serve God, according to the religion of the Jews, and Ananias by
their means growing acquainted with Izates, taught him the like, and
accompained him into Adiabena: being drawn thereunto by his earnest
entreaties, at such time as Izates resorted thither upon his fathers sending
for. It chanced also in like sort that Helena was in like manner instructed by
another Jew, and retained the rites and religion of the Jews

After that Izates came into his kingdom, and knew that his brethren and
kinsfolk were The year of the world. 4009. after the Nativity of Christ. 47.
Izates sends his brothers to Claudius Caesar and Artabanus.
for which cause he sent some of them to Rome for hostages with their children
unto the Emperor Claudius, and the rest unto Artabanus king of Parthia.
Afterward when he was thoroughly assured that his mother was wholly addicted to
the religion of the Jews, he endeavored himself the more to show himself
zealous therein: and supposing that he could not be a perfect Jew, except he
were circumcised, he prepared himself to be circumcised. Which when his mother
understood, she labored to her uttermost to hinder his resolution, certifying
him that Izates is dissuaded by Helena his mother, and Ananias from
circumcision.
in so doing he should bring himself in great danger; for that in being king,
he would draw himself Ananias, who, according with Helena in the course of her
dislike, threatened Izates, that if he would not obey his mother, he would
forsake him, and depart from him, for that he feared, least if the matter
should be publicly known, he should suffer some punishment, as being the
only author and instructor of the king in indecent matters, that otherwise he
might serve God, although he were not circumcised; since he had resolved to
live according to the institutions and laws of the Jews; and that God would
pardon him: for in this true religion consists, more then in the circumcision
of the body, though he were not actually circumcised, Eleazar, coming from
Galilee, and accounted a man of great experience in the doctrine of our
religion, persuaded him to be circumcised. Eleazar persuades Izares to be
circumcised.
For coming one day unto him to salute him, he found him reading of the books
of Moses, and said unto him. O King, contrary to your knowledge you offend the
law, and God likewise; for it suffices you not, that you understand the same,
but the chiefest matter you are tied unto, is to do that which the law
commands: how long therefore will you remain uncircumcised? And if as yet
you have not perused the law as touching this point, read it now to the intent
you may know what impiety it is to omit it.

After the King had heard this, he would no longer defer his circumcision:
for which cause withdrawing himself into another chamber, he called a surgeon
unto him, who acted that which he required, and afterward calling his mother
and master Ananias unto him, he certified them what had past; whereupon they
grew straungely amassed, fearing least the king should grow in danger of the
loss of his kingdom, if this action of his should come to light; for that his
subjects would not endure that such a man that followed a contrary religion
should be their king: they feared also, least they themselves should be in
danger, for as much as the cause of all this matter would be imputed to them.
But God by his providence prevented, least any of those things which they
feared should come to effect, for he delivered Izates himself and his children
They that ^olie on God and put their confidence in him do always reap the
reward of their piety.
likewise out of many dangers, yielding them his assistance in their doubtful
and desperate estates,

When Helena the kings mother perceived that the estate of the kingdom was in
peace, and that by all men's opinion, both homebred and strangers, her son
was reputed happy by the Helena the Queen of Adiabena resorteth to
Jerusalem. Alias, cap. 6.
good will of God, she was seized with a desire to go and visit the city of
Jerusalem, and adore God in that temple, which was so much renowned through the
whole world, and offer sacrifice of thanksgiving therein; for which cause she
besought her son that he would suffer her to perform her vows: who willingly
co^descended to her desire, and furnished her royally with althings that were
necessary for such a voyage; giving her a great mass of money with her, and
bringing her onward on her way many days journey; so that at length she
arrived in Jerusalem, to the great advantage Helena sent her servants some into
Alexandria to buy a great quantity of come, the rest into Cypris to buy dried
figs; who returned with all expeditio^ they might; whereupon Helena distributed
the victuals among the poor, leaving a singular memory of her beneficence
among the whole nation. Her son Izates also understanding of this famine,
sent a great sum of money to the governor of Jerusalem. But hereafter will I
declare what other benefits the king and Queen have bestowed upon our nation.
The year of the world. 4009. after Christ's birth 47.


Now Artabanus king of Parthia, perceiving that the princes of his kingdom had
conspired against him, resolved with himself to go unto Izates, for the
security of his life and person, hoping by his means, if it were possible, to
recover his kingdom. He therefore retired thither, and brought with him about
one thousand men of his kinsfolk and household servants. And by the Artabanus
re^reth himself to Izates, and requires his assistance.
way he met with Izates, whom he knew very well by his royal train,
notwithstanding he were unknown unto him by countenance. Drawing therefore
near unto him, he first of all humbled himself on his knees, according to the
custom of the country, and afterward spoke unto him after this manner.

Dread king, forsake me not, who am thy servant, neither reject thou my
prayers. For being dejected by the means of my misfortunes, and of a king
become a private man, I have need of

These words pronounced he with weeping tears, and with looks lowly fixed
upon the ground. When Izates had heard Artabanus name, and saw his humble and
submissiue estate, he leapt incontinently from his horse and said unto him:
King, be of good courage, and let not thy present and perplexed condition
dismay thee, as if thy misfortunes were irrecouerable. For Izates comfort
Artabanus, and promises him his assistance.
this sorrow of thine shall suddenly be changed, and thou shall find a better
friend and allie, then thou hopedst for at this time. For either will I
repossesse thee of thy kingdom of Parthia, or I will lose mine own
government. This said, he caused Artabanus to get up on horseback, and
Artabanus saw, he was discontented, and swear by his fortune and honor to
come, that he would set foot on ground, if he would not get up on horseback
and ride before him: whereunto he obeyed, and mounting upon his horse again, he
conducted him to his palace; yielding him all the honor that was possible,
both in his sittings and banquets, as in his assemblies, not respecting his
present estate or condition; but his former dignity: considering with
himself, that such casual misfortunes and changes are incident to all men.
Furthermore he wrote unto Izates writes to the Parthians, and persuades them
to receive their king.
the Parthians, persuading them to receive their king Artabanus, assuring them
on his faith and oath, that he would obtain a free pardon for all that which
was past, and to that intent he offered himself to be an arbitrator between
them. The Parthians gave him this answer, that they Cinnamus was advanced in
his place and dignity, and that they feared least a sedition should happen
amongst them. Cinnamus who was a noble and honorable minded man, knowing that
their intent was such, wrote himself unto Artabanus, who had nourished and
brought him up, exhorting him to return upon his faith, and to receive again
his own kingdom. Artabanus upon Cinnamus restores the kingdom to Artabanus.
this motion gave credit to his words, and returned back again. Whereupon
Cinnamus came forth and met him, and prostrating himself before his feet,
called him king; and afterward taking the diadem from off his own head, he
set it upon Artabanus head, who by this means was restored to his former estate
by Izates mediation: after he had been driven out of his kingdom by his
chiefest nobility. And he did not forget the favors which he had received at
Izates Izates receives great honors and gifts at Artabanus hands. Antiochia
and Mygdonia builded by the Macedons. Vardanes after his fathers death laboreth
to persuade Izates to make war against the Romans, but he prevails not.
had builded the City of Antioch by them called Mygdonia.

Presently after Izates was in this sort honored, Artabanus died, leaving his
kingdom to his son Vardanes who repaired to Izates, praying him to join
with him in that war which he intended to wage against the Romans: but he
prevailed not with him. For Izates knowing the Romans force and good hap,
imagined that he undertook a matter beyond his power. Furthermore, he had sent
five of his young sons to Jerusalem to learn our tongue and discipline, and
Vardanes from enterprizing against the Romans, whose power and puissant
conquests he ordinarily reckoned up unto him, to the end he might dismay him,
and by these his allegations cause him to give over his purposed intent of war
against them. But the Parthian was displeased with this his persuasion, and for
that cause denounced a present war against Izates. But this his enterprise
had but a fruitless issue: for God cut off all his hopes. For the Parthians
understanding what Vardanes intent was, and how he was resolved to undertake a
war against the Romans, slew The year of the world. 4009. after Christ's birth
47. After Vardanes was slain the kingdom is com^ted to Gotarza. Vologelus
king of Parthia. Monobazus and his kindred think to receive the Jews religion.
The Adiabenians conspire with the king of Arabia against Izates.
Gotarza, whom not long after this, his brother Vologesus flew by treason,
restoring to his two brothers by the mother side these provinces, that is to
say, the kingdom of Media to Pacorus who was the eldest, and Armenia to
Tiridates who was the younger.

When Monobazus king Izates brother and the rest of his kinsfolk saw how
happily all things succeeded to Izates* and how in respect of his piety
toward God, he was honored and reverenced by all men, they also resolved
themselves to forsake their religion, and to serve God after the manner of the
Jews. But this intent of theirs was discovered. Whereupon the chiefest among
them grew displeased; yet did they not manifest their despite, but kept it
hidden in their hearts, seeking some fit occasion to revenge themselves as
soon as they might. They wrote Abias king of Arabia, and promised him great
sums of money, if he would take arms against their king, promising him that
upon the first charge, they would forsake him, for that they desired to be
revenged on him, who was grown in hatred of their religion. Having therefore
confirmed their promise with an oath, they incited him to make haste. The king
of Arabia performed that which they required, and marched forth against Izates
with a great power. And when as the first charge was ready to be given, and
before they came to handy-strokes, all Izates soldiers forsook him, and
turning their backs to their enemies, fled in great disorder, as if they had
been surprised with a Panique fear; yet was Izates no ways dismayed, but
having discovered that it was the treason and conspiracy of his greatest
peers, he retired himself also into his camp, where he inquired of the cause
that they pretended. After he knew that they had complotted Arsam, which he
battered and assaulted with such spirit and diligence, that he took the same
with a great quantity of booty that was therein, and returned to Adiabena
with great triumph: but he took not Abias alive; for he himself had
prevented his captivity with his death. The Lords of Adiabena seeing
themselves The Lords of Adiabena persuade Vologesus to kill Izates.
frustrated of their former hopes, in that by Gods hand they were delivered
into the hands of their king, could not contain their displeasure, but
practiced further mischief: for they wrote their letters to Vologesus king of
Parthia, desiring him to kill Izates, and to bestow an other king upon them who
was a Parthian, for that they hated their king, who had abolished their
religion, Izates was not a little troubled in his mind, when he understood
this message: For he thought that if he should restore the gifts, he should
offer himself great prejudice; for that it would be imagined that he did it
for fear: knowing on the other side, that if the Parthian should recover that
which he redemaunded, yet would he not be in quiet; he therefore commended his
cause to God, trusting that he would take care of him. And building upon this,
that the greatest good he might have, was to have God to help, he shut his
wives and children in a strong Castle, and his corn in his strongest towers:
and afterward burned all the hay and forage; Izates likewise encamped not
far from thence, having with him about six thousand horsemen. To whom the
Parthian sent a messenger to give him to understand how great his power was,
which extended from the river of Euphrates as far as Bactria, recounting unto
him what kings he had under his subjection, threatening him to punish him very
severely, in that he behaved himself so ungratefully toward his benefactors;
yea in such sort as the god whom he adored, might not deliver him out of the
kings hands. Hereunto Izates answered, that he knew well that the Parthian
far exceeded him in power, but that he was far Izates calls upon God, who
sends the Dahans and Sacans into Parthi^, upon whose arrival Volgesus
returns.
pride, who have not been afraid in their unbridled language, to profane thy
holy and sacred The year of the world 4010. after Christ's Nativity. 48.
name, and utter blasphemous speeches against thy power. Thus prayed he with
sighs and tears, and God heard him: For incontinently and the very same
night, Vologesus received letters, by which he was certified that a great
number of Dahans and Sacans taking opportunity by his absence, were entered
into the kingdom of Parthia, and spoiled the whole country; for which cause
he returned back into his country without any further trouble. And thus
Izates by Gods providence was warranted from the Parthians threats.

Not long after this, at such time as he had lived fifty five years, and
reigned four and twenty, and left behind him four and twenty sons, he
died, and appointed his brother Monobazus Izates delivers up the kingdom to
his brother Monobazus and d^eth.
to succeed him in the kingdom, requiting hereby his faith and loyalty, in
that during the time of his absence, and after the death of his father, he had
faithfully ruled and governed the Helena hearing news of his death, lamented
very grievously as reason would, in that she being his mother was deprived of
a son that so zealously honored and feared God. Yet notwithstanding she was
comforted, when she understood that her eldest son was to succeed him in the
kingdom, and hasted her self with all diligence to go and meet him. As soon
as she arrived in Adiabena, she lived not long time after her son Izates.
Whereupon Monobazus took both her body and his brothers bones, and sent them
to Jerusalem, commanding that they should be buried in three Pyramides which
Helena had builded, some three stades or furlongs off of Jerusalem. But
hereafter will we recite the acts and gests of Monobazus during his reign.

But during Fadus government in Iudaea, a certain Magician called Theudas, who
persuaded Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5. al. 8. Theudas persuades the people that
with a word he will cause Jordan to divide it (...), and yield them passage, he
with his followers are slain.
flood lordan; for he said he was a prophet, and told them that the river
should divide it self into two parts upon his commandment, and yield them
free passage. By these words of his he deceived diverse of them. But Fadus would
not permit that such a fury of theirs should breed them any commodity, but
he sent a troop of horsemen who charged them on the sudden, and slew a great
number of them; and took diverse of them prisoners alive, amongst whom was
Theudas, whose head was stricken off, and was afterward carried to Jerusalem.
This is that which befell the Jews under Fadus government.

CHAP. III.
The Governor Tiberius Alexander punishes the sons of Judas the Galilean.

AFter Fadus succeeded Tiberius Alexander, the son of that Alexander who had
been governor of Alexandria; a man of as great riches as any one of his time
and place, who Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5. al. 8. Tiberius Alexander governor
of Iudaea.
surpassed likewise his son Alexander in piety and service of God, who
forsook the religion of his forefathers. In that time there happened a great
famine in Iewrie, during which Q. Helena senthuge sums of money into Egypt,
and bought come and distributed the same to those that were in want, according
as I have forespoken. At the same time James and Simon the sons Judas of
Galilee, who had busied themselves to incite the people to resist the
government of James and Simon the sons of Judas of Galilee crucified.
the Romans, were put to death at such time as Cyrenius valued each man's
goods, as we have heretofore declared. These did Alexander command to be
crucified. Herod king of Chalcis took away the sovereign priesthood from
Joseph the son of Camydas, and transferred it to Ananias the son of
Nebedaeus. After Tiberius Alexander succeeded Cumanus. Then died Herod, who was
brother to king Agrippa the Great, in the eighth year of Claudius Caesar. He
left The year of the world. 4011. after Christ's birth 49.
behind him three sons, Aristobulus whom he had by his first wife:
Bernicianus and Hircanus by Bernice his brothers daughter. Claudius Caesar gave
the kingdom belonging to him, to Agrippa the younger. During the time that
Cumanus governed, there happened a sedition in Iudaea, whereby diverse Jews
miscarried. The cause of all which accidents I will rippevp from

CHAP. IIII. The year of the world. 4011. after Christ's birth 49.

How a great number of Jews were slain about the Temple.

AT the time of the feast of Pascha (during which time we are accustomed to
feed on Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9. al. 10.
unleavened bread) a great number of people assembled themselves from all parts
to the city of Jerusalem. Whereupon Cumanus fearing least by this occasion
there should arise some commotion, he gave order that a company of his
soldiers should be armed, and should keep their guard in the porches of the
temple, to the end that if any trouble should happen, they might repress it.
Those governors, who had been his predecessors, had done the like in In the
feast of Pascha a certain soldier showing his privy members moves a
sedition among the people, whereby twenty thousand Jews lost their lives.
such manner of assemblies. It came to pass on the fourth day of the feast,
that a certain soldier Cumanus, saying; that the soldier was set on by him.
Which when Cumanus understood, he was in like manner grievously offended in
regard of those injuries: yet exhorted he those, whom he saw too forward in
raising factions, to keep the peace, for fear least a sedition should grow
during the time of the feast; and seeing they would in no sort obey him, but
contrariwise that they ceased not to injury and revile him, he commanded that
all the forces he had should be in arms, and retire themselves into the
fortress of Antonia that was near unto the temple, as we have heretofore
declared. The Stephen Caesar's servant robbed in his journey, for which cause
Cumanus spoileth the villages near to the place where the robbery was done. A
certain soldier ^eareth the books of Moses ^aw, and therefore is beheaded by
Cumanus commandment.
lamentation was scarcely finished, before a second succeeded the same. For
some of those who had a part in this mutiny, being about some hundredth stades
off of the city, robbed one Steven that was Caesar's servant in the high way,
and took from him all that which he had. Which when Cumanus understood, he
presently sent some of his soldiers to spoil those Moses in one of these
villages, which he took and brought, and before them all ^ore it in pieces,
with heinous blasphemies and vile speeches against the law and whole nation,
The Jews understanding hereof, suddenly assembled themselves in great numbers,
and ran to Caesarea, where Cumanus kept for that present, requiring him that he
would revenge not their cause, but Gods, whose law was on that sort
dishonored; signifying unto him, that it was impossible for them to live, so
long as their law was thus contemned. Cumanus fearing least a second mutiny
and vpore should be raised among the people, by the counsel of his friends cut
off the soldiers head, who had committed that outrage against the law, and by
this means appeased he

CHAP. V.
The sedition of the Jews against the Samaritanes.

THere happened also an enmity betwixt the Samaritanes and Jews, upon this
occasion. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10. al. cap. 12. Certain Samaritanes kill
diverse Galileans in their way to Jerusalem. The year of the world. 4014. after
Christ's birth 52.
They of Galilee, who resorted to the city of Jerusalem at the times of our
solemn feasts, were accustomed to pass through the country of the
Samaritanes. And at that time it happened, that their way lay through a borough
called Nais, situate in a great champion field, where a quarrel arising
betwixt diverse inhabitants of the place, and certain passengers, a Cumanus;
requiring him to execute justice on those that had murdered their countrymen:
but he being corrupted with money by the Samaritanes, made no account of their
complaint. The Galileans being provoked by this contempt of his, persuaded the
common people of the Jews to betake them to their weapons; and maintain their
liberty; telling them that servitude is of itself tedious; but that when it is
accompanied with outrages, it is intolerable. But their governors labored to
pacify them, promising them to deal so effectually The year of the world,
4014. after Christ's nativity, 52. The Galileans in revenge of their injuries
burn certain villages of the Samaritanes and spoil the same.
with Cumanus, that he should take punishment of the murderers: but they gave
them no audience, but fell to arms, requiring Eleazar the son of Dinaeus to
be their chieftaine. This Eleazar was a thief, who for many years made his
abode in the mountains: They therefore spoiled and burnt certain villages of
the Samaritanes. After that the report of all that which had passed, came to
Cumanus ears, he took a company of the soldiers of Sebaste, with four bands
of footmen, and armed the Samaritanes likewise to go and make war against the
Jews, whom they took, and slew many of them, and led more of them away
prisoners. When the chiefest governors in Jerusalem saw into what an infinity
of mischiefs they were fallen, they clothed themselves in sackcloth, and cast
ashes on their heads, exhorting those that were mutinous to forethinke
themselves of the ruin of their country, the danger the temple was in to be
burned, the Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8. al. 12. The Samaritanes accuse the
Jews before Numidius Quadratus.
into their strong holds, and from that time all Iudaea was replenished with
thefts. The governors of Samaria resorted to Numidius Quadratus governor of
Syria, who dwelt at that time in Tire to accuse the Jews for that they had
fired their villages, and spoiled them; telling him that their loss did not so
much trouble them, as for that they saw the Romans were contemned by the
Jews: who notwithstanding ought to appear before them as their competent
Judges: yet naithelesse The Jews lay the burden of the wars on the
Samaritanes and Cumanus.
authors of that mutiny and uproar, and that Cumanus being wholly corrupted by
their money, had smothered the matter, and done no justice on the murderers.
When Quadratus heard this, he reserved the judgment till another time, telling
them that he would give sentence in the matter at such time as he came into
Iudaea, and had examined the truth of both sides; so that they returned without
doing any thing.

Anon after Quadratus came into Samaria, where he heard that the Samaritanes
had been Cumanus had left in prison. From thence he transported himself to
Lydda, which is a burrow of no less bigness then a city, in which place he
sitting on his tribunal seat, heard the Samaritanes the second time, and
discovered by the report of a certain Samaritane, that one Dortus one of the
principallest among the Jews, and Dortus with four other are crucified.
four other his confederates induced the people to rebel against the Romans.
These did Quadratus cause to be executed. As for Ananias, who was the high
Priest, and the captain Ananus, he sent them bound to Rome, to render an
account to the Emperor Claudius of that which they had don. Moreover he
commanded the chief governors both of the Samaritanes and Jews, that they
should speedily repair to Rome; whither Cumanus and captain Celer should
Ananias, Ananus, Cumanus, Celer and some other are sent to Rome.
conduct them, to the end they might be judged by Caesar himself, upon the
information taken on both sides. And fearing least the common people of the
Jews should break out into some rebellion, he repaired to the city of
Jerusalem, to give order that the Jews should attempt to raise no new stirs:
but when he came thither, he found all in peace, and busied in the celebration
of the feast, and offering sacrifices to God, according to their accustomed
ceremonies. Being therefore assured that no man would innouate or rebel in
that place, he left them to their solemnities, and repaired to Antioch.

But the Jews that were sent to Rome with Cumanus, and the principal
Samaritanes had a day assigned them by the Emperor to decide the differents
that were between them: Cumanus and the Samaritanes labored all that they
might by the mediation of Caesar's friends and freemen, Alias, cap. 13.
Agrippa Agrippa moves Agrippina to entreat Caesar to hear the cause of the
Jews.
had not been in Rome. For he seeing that the matter was handled to the
disadvantage of the Jews, besought Agrippina the Emperors wife, that she
would labor her husband in such sort, that he would be pleased to take full
knowledge of that which was done, and that afterward he should execute due
justice on those whom he found guilty of that sedition. Claudius favorably
gave ear to this request, and hearing the whole matter, he found that the
Samaritanes were the first authors of all those mischiefs, and caused them to
be put to death who came before him The year of the world 4015. after Christ's
birth 53. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap 9. al. 14. Claudius ^oelix governor of
Iudaea.
Cumanus: he gave order also that captain Celer should be sent back to
Jerusalem, and that there in sight of all the people he should be dragged about
the City, until he died. Furthermore, he sent Claudius Foelix Pallas brother
to govern Iudaea.

In the twelfth year of his reign, he gave Agrippa Philips Tetrarchy, with
Batanea; and besides that, annexed thereunto Trachonitis and Abila, which in
times past appertained to Lysanias Tetrarchy, taking from him the province of
Chalcis, which he had governed for the space of four years. After that
Agrippa had obtained this gift at Caesar's hands, he married his sister Drusilla
to Azizus king of the Emesenians, who consented to be circumcised, because
Epiphanes Drusilla.
king Antiochus son would not give care unto the marriage, for that he
refused to entertain the religion of the Jews, although in times past he had
promised his father no less. He gave Mariamme.
Mariamme also to Archelaus Chelcias son, who by her fathers consent was
before time promised him, on whom he begat a daughter called Bernice. A little
after this, the marriage of Azizus and Drusilla was broken off, on this
occasion following. At such time as Foelix governed Iewrie, he saw Drusilla and
was surprised with her love, for that she surpassed all other women in beauty.
^oelix gets Drusilla from her former husband.
He therefore sent her a certain Magician called Simon, who was borne in
Cypris, and one of his greatest friends among the Jews, who persuaded her to
forsake her first husband, and to marry with Foelix, giving her to understand
that she should be happy, if she refused not this match. She unadvised, and
resolved to rid her self from the envious affection, which her sister Bernice
bare toward her (who hated her in regard of her beauty, and for this occasion
ceased not to injury her) she condiscended to forsake the religion of the
Jews, and to marry with Foelix, by whom Agrippa. His death hereafter will I
declare, and how in the Emperor Tiberius time he died, and was burned in the
fire of the mountain Ve^ius with his wife. Bernice remained a widow very long
time after Herodes death, who was both her uncle and her husband, and the
report was that she had the company of her brother. Finally she wrought so
much, that Polemon king of Cilicia caused himself to be circumcised, to the
end he might espouse Polemon king of Cil^cia marries Bernice. The yea^re of
the world. 4018. after Christ's birth 56. Mariamme scorning Archelaus, marries
Demetrius.
her, purposing by that means to make it known how falsely she had been
accused. Whereunto Polemon gave ear, because she was rich. But this marriage
continued not any long time: For Bernice through her impudency, as it is
reported, abandoned Polemon, who giving over that marriage forsook also the
religion of the Jews. At the same time Mariamme having refused Archelaus her
husband, married with Demetrius one of the chiefest Jews that were in
Alexandria, Agrippinus. But of all this, will I speak more exactly hereafter.

The Emperor Claudius died after he had reigned thirteen years, eight
months and twenty days. Some say, that he was poisoned by Agrippina his
wife, the daughter of Germanicus Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 10. al. 15.
Claudius brother, which was first married to Domitius Oenobarbus one of the
greatest men of Rome, after whose death and long widowhood, she was finally
married to Claudius, into whose house she brought her son called Domitius, by
his own fathers name. Claudius had before time put Messalina his wife to
death, for the jealousy that he had of her: although he had had children by
her, namely Britannicus and Octauius. He had Octa^ia also by his first wife
Paetina, Agrippina Mesla^na and Paetin^ Cl^dius wives.
Nero, whom Claudius so named, and adopted for his son. Agrippina, fearing
least Britannicus, growing to man's estate, should succeed his father in the
Empire, and desirous to make her own son Emperor, as it is reported: she
left nothing unattempted that might bring her husband to his death, and
presently sent B^rrus, who was general of the army, with certain other
captains, and those of greatest power amongst his freemen, to bring Nero into
the field, and to proclaim him Emperor. He being thus established Nero
Emperor.
in the Empire, caused Britannicus to be secretly poisoned; and not long after
this he openly caused his mother to be put to death, yielding her this
recompense, not only for that she had The year of the world. 4019. after
Christ's birth 57. Nero a tyrant.
borne him in her womb, but also for that by her policies he had obtained the
Empire. He likewise murdered Octauia his wife, and diverse other noble men,
under color of some conspiracy Neros history, of whom some have had no
regard of the truth, but have spoken Neros tyranny
at their pleasure, for that he had been their benefactor: othersome
transported with hat^ed and despite against him, have not been ashamed to
publish such impudent lies against his renown, as they deserve to be
condemned. Neither do I wonder that they have invented so many lies against
Nero, considering that in those histories which they wrote as touching the
precedent Emperors, they have not studied to speak truth, although they had
not any occasion to hate them; The year of the world 4019. after Christ's
Nativity. 57.
considering that they lived a long time after their death. But let these
contemners of truth write as them lists, for that they seem to take delight
in that license. For mine own part I am intended to write nothing but the
truth: neither stand I much on that which concemeth not the matter which I
entreat of, purposing in all truth and diligence to declare that which has
befallen our nation of the Jews, without omitting of either their misfortunes
or follies, that have proceeded with them. I will therefore return to the
discovery of our affairs. Azizus king of Emesene being dead the first year
of the Emperor Neros reign, his brother obtained the kingdom: Aristobulus
the son of Herod king of Chalcis, had the government of the signiorie of the
lesser Armenia from Neros hands. Caesar gave Agrippa a certain portion of
Galilee, commanding those of Tiberias and Tarichaea to live under him. Besides
this, he gave him Iulias situate

CHAP. VI.
The acts and gests of Foelix governor of Iudaea.

But the affairs of Iudaea grew daily worse and worse. For the country was
replenished Alias, cap. 16. Foelix punishes yt thieves, and Magicians and
other seducers of the people. Eleazar the son of Dinaeus sent to Rome.
again with thieves, and enchanters, who deceived the common people. Foelix
apprehended many of them daily, and caused them to be executed and put to
death. He took Eleazar also the son of Dinaens, who was captain of those
outlawes and thieves that ranged in the country, and surprised him by a
subtlety. For Foelix had given him his word, that he Jonathan the hie priest,
who had diverse times admonished him to use more circumspection in the
government of Iudaea, for fear he should be blamed by the people, for that he
had required Caesar that Foelix might be admitted to the government, he thought
it not amiss to cut off Jonathan, who continually solicited and vexed him.
For this cause he persuaded and bribed a certain man called Dora, who was
borne in Jerusalem, and was one of those in whom Jonathan reposed his most
trust, Foelix conspireth against Ionathas.
to bring in certain thieves to murder Jonathan, who willingly listened to his
demands, and desirous to gratify the governor, by this means that ensues
brought that to effect which he had intended. There were certain thieves that
came up to Jerusalem, under color to adore God, who carrying their swords
closely hidden under their garments, accosted Jonathan and slew him. Butchery.
thronging in among the people, slew some of those who were their adversaries;
and othersome to pleasure those, who had hired them with ready money to rid
them of those they misliked. And these outrages committed they not only in
other parts of the City, but in the temple likewise, where they slaughtered
some who little suspected that any impiety should be committed in that place.
For mine own part, I think that God has destroyed our City in detestation
of that impiety, and for that he accounted the temple for an impure mansion
place, he has sent us the Romans, who have set fire on the same to purge the
City, and make us slaves with our wives and The deceitful Magicians.
and miracles done by the power of God: whereunto diverse gave ear, and at last
suffered the penalty of their folly. For Foelix recalling them back again,
punished them.

At that same time there came a certain man from Egypt to Jerusalem, who
termed himself a prophet, who incited the common people to follow him to the
mount called Oliuet, situate not far off from Jerusalem, and only distant
some five furlongs from thence, telling them Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 12. al.
cap. 17. A fall prophet draws the Jews to the mount Oliuet.
from thence that he would make them see the walls of the City fall unto the
ground, by which way he promised them to give them entry. Which being reported
to Foelix, he caused his soldiers against the Syrians that were in the same
City, in that they strove to have an equal authority The year of the world.
4019. after the Nativity of Christ. 57. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 13. al 18. A
broile in Caesarea between the Syrians and Jews.
Herod, who was a Jew, had builded the City of Caesarea: on the other side,
the Syrians auowed the Jews sayings to be true: but they replied also that
Caesarea was in times past called the tower of Straton, and that at that time
there was not one Jew that inhabited the same. Which when the governors of
that country heard, they laid hands on the authors of this sedition, as well of
the one as of the other party, and gave them the bastinado, pacifying by this
means the trouble for a little space. For the Jews once more being puffed up
with their riches, and contemning the Syrians injuriously reviled and provoked
them: on the other side, the Syrians being weaker in substance, but as great in
heart (by reason the greatest number of those that bear arms with the Romans
were Caesareans and Sebastens) at some times brake out into opprobrious The
year of the world 4020. after Christ's birth 58.
upper hand. Foelix perceiving that this debate might breed a war, came on
between them, requiring the Jews to desist from further violence, and
commanding his soldiers to beat down those who should refuse to obey him: by
which means a great number were slain and diverse taken prisoners. Moreover he
gave his soldiers liberty to spoil, and rob diverse very rich houses. The
other Jews, who besides their authority were renowned for their moderation,
fearing least the like misery should befall them, besought Foelix to sound a
retreat, and to call in his soldiers, and to spare that which as yet remained,
being sore grieved at that which had happened: to which Foelix condiscended. At
that same time king Agrippa gave the priesthood to Ismael, the Ismael the son
of Phabeus the high priest. The strife between the high priests and the
priests.
Phabeus. There arose also a dissension betwixt the high priests, and the other
priests and governors of Jerusalem, and each faction walked forth accompanied
with a troop of proud and mutinous persons, who decided their debates with
bitter words, and flinging of stones; so that no man might pacify them. For
all things were so out of order, as if there had been no Magistrates in the
City: And the impudency and audaciousnesse of the high priests permitted so
much, that they sent their servants into the granges to seize the tenths that
were due unto the priests; whereby it came to pass, that some poor priests
died of necessity, and want: so much did the violence of the seditious at that
time prevail above all right.

CHAP. VII.
The government of Portius Festus: and of certain murderers.

AFter that Portius Festus had bin sent by Nero to succeed Foelix in the
government of Iudaea, Alias, cap. 19. Foelix acculed.
the chiefest of those sewes that inhabited Caesarea, repaired unto Rome to
accuse Foelix, and without all doubt he had been punished for the injuries he
had committed against the Jews, if Nero had not pardoned him upon his brother
Pallas submission Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14.
and entreaty, who importuned him, and was at that time in great reputation
with him. Furthermore, two of the chiefest amongst the Syrians that wrought
Berillus, who had sometimes been Neros Master, and at that time was secretary
of estate in the Greek tongue, by mighty bribes, to beg at Neros hand the
reuocation of the right and title, which the Jews enjoyed in the government
Berillus solicited the Emperor, and obtained a letter at his hands, which was
the cause of those mischiefs that afterward happened in our nation. For the
Jews of Caesarea understanding what commission the Syrians had gotten; were so
much the more kindled and encouraged to make war. As soon therefore as
Festus was arrived in Iudaea, he found the country grievously afflicted with
robberies, and the lower country was spoiled by sword and fire. The thieves
likewise at that time increased The cutthro^ among the Jews. Festus
discomfiteth a great deceiuer with all his ^ollowers.
wondrously, and they used short swords after the manner of a Persian Cymetre,
and crooked like the Roman faulchion; with which they slew diverse men. For
thrusting themselves into the press of people that came in great multitudes on
the festival days to celebrate Gods service, they killed those very easily
whom they listed, and oftentimes repairing to their enemies Festus sent diverse
forces both of horse and foot against certain Jews, that were seduced by an
enchanter, who had promised them security and repose from all their troubles
and molestations, if so be they would follow him into the desert, Hedio and
Ruffinus. cap. 15. al. 10.
who slew both the deceiuer and the deceived that followed him. At that time
king Agrippa erected a stately building, within the palace at Jerusalem, near
unto the porch. This palace in times past appertained to the Asmoneans, and
was situate in a high place with a goodly prospect, from whence they that
listed might with pleasure, behold the whole city of Jerusalem, wherein The
year of the world. 4020. after Ch^sts birth 58. The chiefest men of Jerusalem
stop up the prospect of Agrippa^ house.
Agrippa sore displeased, and the governor Festus far more then he, who
commanded them to pull down the wall. But they besought him that he would
give them license to send their Ambassadors to Nero, to this intent, alleging
Joseph Cabi yt son of Simon made high priest.
that it was impossible for them to live, if any part of their temple should be
beaten down. Which being granted them, they sent ten of their chiefest
nobility, and with them Ismael the high priest, and Chelcias the Treasurer of
the temple unto Nero: who no sooner heard their suit, but he pardoned them not
only for that they had done, but he commanded that the building should
remain as it was. All which he did in favor of his wife Poppea, who was
entreated by the Jews, for that she was a devout Princess to sue for them.
She therefore commanded the ten Ambassadors to return, and kept Chelcias
and Ismael for pledges with her. The king understanding how all things had
past, gave the high priesthood to Joseph surnamed Cabi, which was the son of
Simon, who in times past had been high Priest.

CHAP. VIII.
The government of Albinus.

CAesar being aduertized of Festus death, sent Albinus to govern Iudaea. But
king Agrippa commanding Joseph to lead a private life, and advanced in his
steed a certain Albinus governor of Iudaea. Ananus the son of Ananus the high
priest Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16. al. 21. Ananus had five sons that succeeded
him in the priesthood. The ^eare of the world, 4025. after Christ's birth 43.
James the brother of ^ur Lord stoned. Ananus accused before Albinus.
man called Ananus, the son of Ananus, who is reported to have been most
happy. For he had five sons, al which supplied the place of the high priest,
after himself had long time before them enjoyed the room: The like whereof
has never happened to any of our high Priests. The younger Ananus, who, as we
said, was advanced to this place, was a rash and headstrong Ananus was of this
disposition, he thought that he had a fit occasion offered him to do what him
listed after Festus death, and during the time that Albinus was as yet upon his
way. He therefore ascended and sat down in the tribunal, assisted by the
Judges, and caused James the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, to
appear before him, with certain others; and accused them for transgressing
the law and blasphemy against God, and caused them to be stoned to death. They
that were men of upright conscience within the city, and diligent obseruers of
the law, were very much displeased with this act, and sent secretly unto the
king, beseeching him to prohibit Ananus, that hereafter he should commit no
such like offense: for that his first action was not allowable. Some of them
Albinus being on his way from Alexandria, to inform him that it was not
lawful for Ananus to assemble the council without his license. Albinus
persuaded by these words, wrote a choleric letter to Ananus, wherein he
threatened to punish him. And for the same cause king Agrippa dispossessed him
of the Priesthood, after he had held the same for the space of three months,
and in his steed he established Jesus the son of Damneus. After that Albinus
was arrived in Jerusalem, he employed all his care and study to pacify the
country, by executing diverse Jesus the son of Damneus possesses A^anus
place.
of the thieves.

But the high priest Ananias daily increased in honor and credit, and
purchased the good will of the citizens by his liberality and great gifts. But
he had certain mischievous servants about him, who conuersed with those that
were most intemperate and audacious, who repairing from Some forcibly gather
the tenths of the ^riests.
by the tenths, died at that time for want of victuals. And the thieves
renewing their entrance into the city by night, during the feast that was
celebrated at that time, took the secretary of captain Eleazar alive, who
was Ananias son, who was the high. And having bound him, led him out of the
city, sending Ananias word that they would deliver his secretary, if he would
labor so The ye^re of the world. 4026. after Christ's birth 64. The thieves
apprehend. Ananias kindred and servants.
Albinus, as to deliver them their ten companions then prisoners, who were
taken by him. To the performance whereof, Ananias persuaded Albinus by manifest
reason: and by obtaining his demand, increased and begat a number of miseries.
For the thieves used all the wily means they could devise in apprehending
some one of Ananias house; and when they had taken any one of them alive, they
would not deliver him except before they might have one of their own
delivered. So that increasing both in courage and number, they waxed more and
more insolent to afflict the country.

At the same time king Agrippa enlarged the city of Caesarea, surnamed
Philippi, and in honor of Nero called it Neronias. He builded also to his
great charge a Theater in favor of Caesarea Philippi new builded by Agrippa,
and called Neronias. The Berytian^ receive much kindness at Agrippas hands
the Berytians, wherein every year he spent diverse thousands of silver in
sports. He distributed Jesus the son of Gamaliel succeeded in the priesthood,
which the king had given him, and taken away from Jesus the son of Damneus:
who resigned him his place against his will. Whereupon there arose a discord
between them. For having assembled their resolutest followers, they grew from
bitter words to fatal blows and stones. But amongst all the rest Ananias was
the richest in wealth, and by his Ananias, Costobarus and Saul prepared to
spoil the weaker.
bounty reconciled the more unto him. Costobarus also and Saul gathered each
of them a band of rascal and desperate men. These two were of the blood
royal, and by reason of their affinity Agrippa, they were well beloved. ^or
which cause they were outrageous and violent in spoiling and rauishing the
fortunes of the weaker sort. From this time forward, the estate of our City
grew desperate, encrcasing daily more and more in wickedness.

When Albinas understood that Gessius Florus came to succeed him, desirous that
they of Jerusalem should acknowledge some good turn at his hands, he called
before him all those Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 17. al. 22. Albinus executes the
heinous malefactors. Agrippa gives them of the tribe of Leu^. leave to w^are
linen garments. Agrippa permits the ministers of the temple to sing the
sacred hymns.
prisoners that were notoriously guilty of murder, and caused them to be
executed. As for those that were imprisoned upon any small or slight cause,
upon payment of their fines, he delivered them: and in so doing the prison was
cleansed of malefactors, and from that time the country remained full of
thieves and Robbers. The Levites, who were ordained to sing the hymns unto

At that time was the building of the temple finished: And the people
perceiving that more then eighteen thousand workmen should be idle, and
deprived of wages, whereupon they The people of the Jews beseech the king that
it may be lawful for the^ to repair the porch.
were accustomed to live in travailing in the building of the temple: on the
other side, being Ioath to reserve their money through the fear they had of the
Romans, to provide that these workmen (in the intertainment of whom they
resolved to employ their treasure: for if any one of them travailed but one
hour in the day, he was suddenly paid his wages) they requested the king that
it might please him to repair the Eastern gate on the outward part of the
temple, situate in a descent; the walls whereof were in height four hundredth
cubits, made of square stones of white marble, from the top to the bottom, and
every stone twenty foot long, and six foot thick. This work was first
builded by king Solomon, who was the first that builded our Claudius Caesar had
given the commission of building the temple, thinking with himself that it was
very easy to break it down, but very hard to build it up, and Matthias the
son of Theophilus high priest.
that to reedifie the porch it would cost much time and expense, he denied
their request, permitting them nevertheless to paue their city with broad
stone. He took the priesthood from Jesus the son of Gamaliel, and gave it
to Matthias the son of Theophilus. In whose time the war betwixt the
Romans and Jews grew to the first head.

But I think it not amiss, but very answerable to the course of this present
history, to speak The year of the world, 4026. after Christ's nativity, 64
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 18. The succession and number of the hie priests among
the Jews. Aaron and his progeny.
of the priests, and to show how they had their beginning, and to whom this
honor may be lawfully communicated, and how many they were in number until
the end of the war. The first of them was Aaron Moses brother, after whose
death his children succeeded him, and from that time forward the honor has
continued with their successors. For it is a law observed by our ancestors,
that no man shall be admitted to the priesthood, except he be of Aarons
posterity: for albeit he were a king, if so be that he were of an other line,
it was impossible for him to obtain the priesthood. All the priests after
Aaron, who (as we have said) was the first, until Phanasus, whom the seditious
created priest in the time of the war, have been in number 83. whereof 13
have executed the office from the time that Moses erected Gods tabernacle in
the desert, until such time as arriving in Iudaea, king Solomon builded a
temple to God. For in the beginning the hie priesthood Aarons posterity, and
obtained this degree in succession the one after the other. Their first
government was Aristocratia, which is the government of the nobility:
afterward a monarchy; and finally a royal government. The number of years
wherein these thirteen flourished, were six hundredth and twelve years, from
the day that our fathers departed out of Egypt, under the conduct of Moses,
until the edification of the temple that was builded in Jerusalem by king
Solomon. After these thirteen high priests, there were eighteen others; who
after Salomons time succeeded one after another, until the time that
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, having encamped before the City, took the
same, and burned the temple, and transported our nation into Babylon, Iosedech
prisoner. The time of the priesthood, and continuance of these eighteen was
four hundredth, sixty six years, six months, and ten days: so long as the
Jews have had the royal government. After the surprisall of Jerusalem by the
Babylonians, until such time as Cyrus king of Persia dismissed the Jews, and
gave them leave to return from Babylon into their own country, with
permission to reedifie their temple, there are 70. years: and at that time the
captives being returned, Jesus the son of Iosedech took upon him the high
priesthood, who with those of his posterity to the number of fifteen, have
governed in a Democratie or popular estate, until the time of Antiochus
surnamed Eupator, for the space of four hundredth and fourteen years. This
Antiochus was the first, who with his general Lysia, displaced Onias, surnamed
Menelaus, of his priesthood; commanding him to be slain at Beryth, Iacim high
priest, who notwithstanding was of Aarons race; but not of his family. For this
cause Onias the son of Onias, There were 83. high priests in all.
and nephew to the deceased Onias retired himself into Egypt, where growing
familiar with Ptolomey Philometor and Cleopatra his wife, he persuaded them to
build a temple in the confines of Heliopolis, not unlike to that of Jerusalem,
and to create a high priest in the same: of which temple in Egypt we have made
very oftentimes mention. After that Iacim had held the priesthood for the
space of three years, he died without successor. For the City remained seven
yerees without a high priest. Again, the Asmoneans recovered the government of
their nation, and after they had warred against the Macedons, they established
Jonathan hie priest, who exercised the office seven years: but afterward he
was slain by an ambush, and treason conspired against Tryphon, as we have
declared elsewhere. After him Simon his brother undertook the priesthood, who
was not long after slain treacherously by his son in law at a banquet.
After him succeeded his son Hyrcanus, who enjoying this dignity for the
space of thirty one years, died when he was very old, leaving behind him
Judas surnamed Aristobulus; who dying by sickness, left his brother Alexander
his heir both of the kingdom and high priesthood. After that Aristobulus had
obtained the royal government, he enjoyed both dignities one whole year. For
this Judas surnamed Aristobulus was the first that set the diadem on his head,
causing himself to be called a king. The which Alexander did continue: for he
also joined the kingdom with the high priesthood, and reigned 27. years: and
feeling himself draw near to his death, he left it in Alexandras his wives
hands to dispose of the priesthood as she pleased. She therefore Hyrcanus, and
as touching the kingdom she kept it in her own hands nine years, and
afterward died. Her son Hyrcanus was high priest for so long time, for after
Alexandras death his brother Aristobulus made war against him, and having
overcome him, he took the kingdom from him, and not only seized the crown,
but the priesthood. After he had reigned three years, and as many months,
Pompey repaired to Jerusalem, and took it perforce, and laying hold of
Aristobulus, sent him bound unto Rome with his children. After which he
restored the priesthood once more to Hyrcanus, committing the government of the
nation unto his hands, The year of the world. 4026. after the Nativity of
Christ. 64.
Hyrcanus governed twenty and four, but Barzapharnes and Pacorus princes of
the Parthians passed Euphrates, and made war against Hyrcanus, and took him
alive prisoner, and made Antigonus Aristobulus son king. But after he had
governed three years and three months, Sosius and Herod took him alive
perforce, and Antonius sent him to Antioch where he was put to death. After
that Herod was created king by the Romans, there was never any hie priest
created Aristobulus slain by Herod, supra lib. 15. cap. 3.
of the posterity of the Asmoneans (for he gave the hie priesthood to certain
men of obscure and base condition, who were of the order of the priests)
Aristobulus only excepted. This Aristobulus was Hyrcanus nephew, who was
prisoner among the Parthians, and having given him the priesthood he married
himself with Mariamme his sister, to the intent to continue himself in the
Hyrcanus: but afterward fearing, least all of them should turn to Aristobulus
side, he caused him to be slain, by finding out a means to cause him to be
stifled, at such time as he bathed himself in a fishpond near to Jericho, as
we have declared before this. After him he bestowed the priesthood no more on
any of the line of the Asmoneans. Archelaus his son followed his fathers
steps in respect of the priesthood, and from that time forward the Romans have
enioied the sovereignty over Iewry. All they then that have exercised the
priesthood from Herodes time, until the day that Titus took the City and the
temple, have been in all twenty and eight. All the continuance of their
government was one hundredth and seven years. Certain of these governed during
Herodes life, and in the days of Archelaus his son, but after these two were
dead, the government was Aristocraticall, or of the

CHAP. IX.
How Florus, Albinus successor, offered many injuries to the Jews, which
constrained them to take arms.

GEssius Florus being sent by Nero to succeed Albinus, filled all Iudaea with
many mischiefs and miseries. He was a Clazomenian borne, and was married to a
certain woman called The year of the world. 4028. after the birth of Christ.
66. Gessius Florus governor of Iudaea. Gessius Floru^ worse then, Albinus.
Cleopatra, no less mischievous then himself: who being beloved by Poppea
Neros Albinus as if he had been their benefactor. For he concealed his
mischief, taking care least it should wholly be conceited or discovered: but
Gessius Florus behaved himself in such sort, as if he had been sent to make
open show and sale of his villainies, publishing his injustice in the ears of
our nation, without omitting either rapine or injustice in execution and
inflicting punishment on the innocent. For he was pitilesse and covetous, and
made no difference betwixt noble and ignoble, and was not ashamed to be
partaker with thieves: of whom there were diverse that made it their profession,
to steal without any fear, in that they were assured of their safety,
because he was partaker with them. And in a word, there was no moderation in
him, in sort as the poor Jews The year of the world, 4030. after Christ's
birth 68. Florus the original cause of the wars of the Jews. The beginning of
the wars.
these thieves, were constrained to abandon their own houses, and to fly
their country, and remain in some more commodious place of security, yea
though it were among strangers. What need I speak any more? He that
constrained us to raise our swords against the Romans, was Florus, who made his
account that it was better for them to die all at once in great troops, then
to perish by little and little. In brief, the war began the second year of
the government of Florus in that province, which was the twelfth year of Neros
Empire. But they that desire to know exactly all that which we have been
constrained both to do and suffer, may peruse my books as touching the Wars
of the Jews. For which cause in this place I will end this ancient history,
after which I have begun to describe the history of the War.

This ancient history contains all that which has been reported to be done
since the first The Epilog of the Antiquitles of the Jews.
creation of man, until the twelfth year of Neros Empire, omitting nothing
that has befallen the Jews, as well in Egypt as in Syria, and Palestine. All
that likewise, which we have been enforced to suffer under the Assyrians and
Babylonians; as also our estate under the Persians and Macedons, and finally
under the Romans. All this, as I suppose, I have compiled and gathered together
with careful diligence, and I have enforced my self to recite the number of
those, who have been high priest for the space of two thousand years. I have
also collected the succession The year of the world. 4030. after Christ's birth
68. Joseph expert in the Greek and Hebrew tongues.
of kings, their actions, and governments, with the power of their monarchies,
according as it is amply described in holy scriptures, as also I have promised
in the beginning of my history. Furthermore I dare boldly say, that whatsoever
I have set down, is so assured, that there is no man either Jew or of what
nation soever, yea although he should have employed the uttermost of his power,
could more exactly communicate the same unto the Greeks, then I have done. For
in their confessions and opinions who are of our nation, I have such knowledge
in that which concerns our doctrine, as I surpass them all: And as touching
the Grecian disciplines, I have studied and learnt the tongue, although I cannot
boast of the familiar and fit pronunciation of the same, for that I have lived
in the country. For amongst us we make but slender reckoning of those, who are
exercised in diverse tongues, for that this study is accounted profane by us,
and This volume was written The year of the world. 4057. after Christ's birth
95.
me life, I will shortly entreat of our wars, and the events of the same that
have happened hitherto, which is the thirteenth year of Domitianus Caesar's
Empire, and the fifty six year of mine

The end of the Antiquities of the Jews.
THE LIFE OF FLAVIVS
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.
KNOW therefore that I am not basely but nobly descended, being Josephus Ilnage.
Simon, surnamed Psellus, that is, the stutterer, who lived at such time as
Hircanus the high priest the first of that name, and the son of Simon the
high priest, was in office. This Simon Psellus had nine sons: the one of
these was Matthias, surnamed Aphlias. This Matthias took to wife the daughter
of the high priest Jonathan, by whom he had one son, who was Matthias
surnamed Curtus, who was borne in the first year of Hircanus priesthood.
Matthias begat Joseph the ninth year of Alexandras government, and of Joseph
came Matthias Joseph the son of Matthias was borne in the first year of Caius
Caesar's Empire, and the 4001. year of the world, and the 39. after Christ's
birth.
the tenth year of the reign of Archelaus; and Matthias begat me the first
year of the Empire of Caius Caesar. I likewise have three sons, mine eldest
is Hircanus, who was borne in the fourth: my next Iustus, who was borne in the
seventh: and Agrippa my last was borne in Vespasians Empire. This genealogy of
mine do I in this manner propose, according as I have found it written in the
public registers, to put them to silence who shall pretend to reprove or
detract the same.

My father Matthias was not only famous for his express nobility, but has
also been praised by reason of his justice and authority in Jerusalem, which
is the mother city of all the rest in our country. My bringing up during my
tender years was with Matthias, who was my brother by the same father and
mother, with whom I happily profited in all kind of sciences, having a good
memory and a quick apprehending spirit: so that being as yet a child of
fourteen years of age, I was praised by all men in regard of the good affection
I bare to learning, and the priests and noblest citizens always assembled
about me, to receive certain exact instructions from me in Joseph from his
infancy very studious, and addicted to learning.
Banus lived in the desert, clothing himself with that which the trees brought
forth, and feeding on no other kind of meat, but that which they willingly
yielded him, washing himself oftentimes by day and night in cold water to
keep himself chaste: I began to imitate his course of life, and after I had
lived with him for the space of three years, and

At the age of nineteen years, I began to intermeddle with public affairs,
following the sect of the Pharisees, which very nearly resembles that sect
among the Graecians, who are called Stoics. After I was six and twenty
years old, it was my fortune to repair to Rome upon this Joseph a (...).
occasion that ensues: During such time as Foelix governed Iudaea, there were
certain priests my familiars, men of much honor and more virtue, who upon
some slight occasion were bound and sent to Rome by his commandment, to
answer to that which was objected against them in Caesar's presence. Whereupon
I being desirous to labor for their liberty, having especial intelligence,
that notwithstanding the torments wherewith they were martyred, they buried not
in forgetfulness that piety which they ought to God, but lived on figs and
nuts: and for this cause I departed for Rome, and was encountered with many
great and grievous hazards by sea. For the ship, wherein I sailed, was wrackt
in the midst of the Adriatike sea, and there were about six Joseph's ship*
(...).
hundredth of us that swamme all night long, and upon the day spring by Gods
providence a Cyrenian ship came in sight, and both I and certain others to the
number of fourscore out swimming the rest, were taken up into it and saved.
After I had in this sort escaped: I came to Dicaearchia, which the Italians
call at this day Puteol, and grew acquainted with Aliturus a Jew borne, who was
a plaier, and in good reputation with Nero; by whose means insinuating my
self into Poppeas knowledge, whovvas Caesar's wife, I determined to beseech her
to procure those Priests liberties, with all expedition: which done, I by her
means recovered their present liberty: and being gratified likewise by her with
many great gifts, I returned into my country. There found I the commonweal
too much addicted to factions and troubles, and diverse too prone and ready to
rebel and forget their allegiance to the Romans. I enforced my self to
repress the seditious, Joseph obtains the priests liberties. The Jews
seditious.
and exhorted them to change their opinions, representing before their eyes
the quality of those, against whom they enterprised their war, with whom
they neither might compare in experience of war, neither in good fortune: for
this cause I advised them not to hazard and overthrow their country by their
rashness and rage, and with it their posterities and themselves.

To this effect spoke I unto them, and instantly entreated them to forsake
their untamed resolution, for that I foresaw that the end of this war would
redound to our utter ruin; but I prevailed nothing Joseph dehorting the Jews
from sedition is suspected by them of treason.
with them. For the fury of desperate and dissolute men prevailed above
reason: for which cause fearing least by continual enforcing of one thing, I
should grow into hatred and suspicion among the^, as if I favored their
enemies; fearing likewise least if they should lay hold on me, they should put
me to death, seeing that the fort of Antonia was already seized upon by the
seditious; I retired my self into the inward part of the temple. In process
of time after Manahem and the chiefest among the thieves were put to death, I
came out again from the temple, and conuersed with the priests, and chiefest
Pharisees, who were surprised with great fear. And grievously were we
disma^ed, when we saw the people in arms, and being uncertain what to do, and
wanting the means Gessius would with all expedition draw out great forces, and
chastise those peacebreakers. But as soon as he arrived, and had fought with
them, he was overcome, and a great number of his men were slain: whereupon
grew the utter ruin of our whole nation. For such as desired the war,
were puffed up with that victory, and conceived an assured hope that in the
end they should overcome the Romans. Besides that, this ensuing occasion
presented it self. The inhabitants of the cities that bordered upon Syria,
laid hands on those Jews that dwelt amongst them, and slew both them, their
wives, and children, without any just cause or crime committed by them. For
they had not conspired The Jews are plagued both by strangers and their own
co^imen.
any ways or intended to revolt from the Romans, or to use any hostility or
any secret conspiracy against any of those, with whom they were conversant.
But among all the rest, the citizens of Scythopolis exceeded all other in
impiety and wickedness. For being besieged without by certain of the Jews,
they enforced those Jews that inhabited amongst them to take arms, and to
charge those of their own nation (which is both prohibited and unlawful by
our laws) who fighting against them discomfited them: but after this
overthrow they in such ^ort falsified and forgot their faith, that they had
given to their associates and fellow citizens, that they slew every mothers
son of them, to the number of many thousands. The like misfortune also fell
upon those Jews that inhabited Damasco. But of this we have more amply spoken
in those our books, which we have written of the wars of the Jews, and
at this present I make mention The Jews constrained by necessity to make
war.
enforced necessity.

After that Gessius was overcome (as we have heretofore declared) the chiefest
men of Jerusalem perceiving that the thieves making a party among the
seditious, and were strongly and plentifully armed and provided, they began to
fear least if they should be found disarmed; they should suddenly be
overthrown by their enemies (as in effect it fell out afterward) and hearing
Ioazar and Judas, who were both virtuous and honorable men, to persuade the
mutinons to lay by their arms, and to let them know that it was more
behoouefull for the good of the nation, that such men as were in authority and
reputation, should have the keeping thereof. The resolution that was taken by
them was, that they had them always ready upon all occasions, but that they
expected until they were certified what the Romans intended to do.

With this commission and such like instructions, I repaired into Galilee,
where I found the Sephorites were in no small hazard in respect of their
country, for that they of Galilee had resolved The danger of the Sephorites.
to forage the same in regard of their league of friendship continued with the
Romans, Senius Gallus Governor of Syria. But I delivered them all of that
fear, and appeased the common people by permitting them, to send at all times
when they pleased, their hostages to Gessius, who lay at Do^a a City of
Phoenicia. I found likewise that the inhabitants of Tiberias were already in
arms, upon this occasion following. There were in that Sedition in the city
of Tiberias. Three factions in the city of Tiberias.
City three different factions, the one of the nobility, whose chief^aine was
Julius Capella, and all those that accompanied him, that is to say, Herod the
son of Miarus; Herod the son of Gamalus and Compsus the son of Compsus
(for Crispus his brother, who in times past had been governor for Agrippa
surnamed the Great, was amongst his possessions on the other side of Jordan)
all these I say gave counsel at that time to subscribe to the Romans
authority, and to obey their king. But Pistus would no ways accord to this
advice, in regard of his son Iustus: Iustus Pistus son, who was the
ringleader of the third faction, carried himself very doubtfully as touching
the war; yet notwithstanding he sought and thirsted after innovation, hoping
that by a change he should increase his power. Presenting himself therefore in
the midst of the multitude, he enforced himself to persuade the common sort,
that their City had always The oration of Iustus Pistus son to the
multitude.
belonged to Galilee; and that during the days of Herod the Tetrarch, who
founded the same, it was the chiefest City, whose pleasure it was that the
City of Sephoris should yield obedience to that of Tiberias. Furthermore, he
auowed that they had not lost that pre-eminence in the time of king Agrippa the
father, but had continued the same till Foelix obtained the government of
Iudaea. But for the present wherein they had been given by Nero to the younger
Agrippa, Agrippa, he incited the people to rebellion, signifying unto them that
the opportunity invited Iustus inci^eth the people to rebellion.
them to take arms, to the end that being associated with the Galileans, they
might make themselves Lords, for that all of them would willingly join
themselves with them through the hatred they ^are to the Sephorites, on whom
they would revenge themselves with great force, because they continued in their
allegiance, which they promised to the Romans.

And by these words he won the peoples hearts unto him, for he was a man that
was very eloquent, Iustus the offspring of war
and by his subtlety and politic discourse, easily overthrew all that which
his adversaries Iustus had persuaded the Citizens of Tiberias to take arms,
and had constrained diverse men likewise, who were of the contrary opinion, to
do the like, he issued out with them, and burned the villages of the
Gadarenians and Hippenians, that are situate in the confines of Tiberias and
Scythopolis: In this estate was Tiberias: and as touching Gischala, their
estate and affairs were brought to this issue. John the son of Leui seeing
some of the Gischala burned and spoiled.
took it by force, and after they had consumed it by fire and utterly
destroyed the same, they returned every one to their dwelling places. John
being sore displeased with this act, armed all those that were with him, and
set upon these abouenamed nations, and having obtained the victory,

But those of Gamala perseuered in their faith toward the Romans, for the
occasion that ensues. Philip the son of Iacim, who governed under king
Agrippa, escaping beyond all opinion, Gamala faithful to Rome. The danger
whereinto Philip Iacims son was fallen.
and flying to the royal palace in Jerusalem at such time as it was besieged,
fell into another great danger, to wit, to be slain by Manahem, and those
thieves that were with him: but certain Babylonians his kinsmen being at that
time in Jerusalem, hindered the thieves from executing their purpose at that
time. When as therefore Philip had soiourned there for the space of four
days, on the fifth he fled away, disguizing himself in a false hair, for
fear he should be discovered: And as soon as he was arrived in one of those
villages which was of his own possession, Philips greater good, he crossed the
scope of his intent, which otherwise had been the ruin of many, for being
surprised by a sudden fever, he committed certain letters of his, written to
Agrippa and Bernice who were yet but young, to one of his freemen, comman^ding
him to deliver them to Varus, who was put in trust Varus iniustly executes him
that brought the letters. Varus tyranny in governing the country. Varus
seeks to conceal his power and tyranny.
by the king and Queen, to administer the affairs of their kingdom, for that
they were gone to Beryth to meet with Gessius. As soon therefore as he had
received Philips letters, and understood that he was escapt, he took it very
hardly, for that he thought it would be said that the king and the Queen had
no use of him since Philip was arrived. He ^refore brought him that had the
carriage of these letters, into the peoples presence, obiecting against him
that he had forged Philip was in Jerusalem, making war with the Jews against
the Romans: and for that cause he commanded him to be executed. Philip being
ignorant of the cause why his freeman did not return, sent another with
letters, to the intent he might discover what was become of his first
messenger, and for what cause he stayed so long. But Varus accusing this second
messenger also very falsely, commanded him to be executed, as he had done the
first. For the Syrians that inhabit Caesarea, had made him proud, insomuch
that he aspired to high and great matters, by telling him that Agrippa should
be put to death by the Romans, in regard of those faults which the Jews had
committed; and that Varus, who was royally descended, should possess his
government. For without question Varus was held to be of the blood royal, for
that he derived his petigree from the Tetrarch Sohemus Varus grew proud, and
retained Philips letters by him, hoping by these means that the king should
have no knowledge thereof; and he set watch in every passage, for fear least
any man should fly and certify the king of that which had happened; and to give
the Syrians the better content, who dwelt in Caesarea, he put diverse of those
Jews that dwelt among them to death. He intended also to undertake a war
against the Jews of Bathanaea, who were called Babylonian Jews, by confed^
^ing himself with the Trachonites of Bathanaea. For which cause, sending for
twelve of the Jews who were of most estimation among the inhabitants of
Caesarea, he enjoined them to repair to Ecbatane, to signify unto those of
their nation that dwelt there, that Varus understanding that they pretended to
take arms against their king, and scarcely believing it* had sent them unto

As soon therefore as these with the other twelve Ambassadors came to
Caesarea, Varus having Varus kills the seventy Jews with the ambassadors.
The Jews retire themselves into ye fortress of Gamala and. thither resorteth
Philip also.
inckling of their coming, met them on the way with the ki^ngs forces; and
slew them altogether Varus, and certified the rest of that which had happened.
Whereupon they incontinently fell to arms, and with their wives and children
retired themselves to the fort of Gamala, abandoning their villages which were
stored with all kind of goods, and many thousand cattle. When Philip had
tidings hereof, he repaired himself also to the fort of Gamala, where he no
sooner arrived* but the people cried out with a loud voice, exhorting him to
take the sovereignty, and to make war against Varus Philip moderated their
fury, recounting unto them what benefits the king had bestowed on them, and of
what power the Romans were, against whom it was but a folly for them to take
arms; and in the end he persuaded them to peace. The king understanding that
Varus was determined to kill and murder all the Jews that were in Caesarea,
with their wives and children all in one day (who were many in number) he sent
unto him Equus Modius to supply his place, as it has been by us declared in an
other place. Mean while Philip kept the fort of Gamala, and the country
thereabouts, perseuering in their fidelity and loyalty to the Romans. As
soon as I arrived in Galilee, Gamala still faithful to the Romans. Joseph by
the commandment of the council remains in Galilee.
and had perceived and learnt all occurrences that had happened, by those who
reported the same unto me, I presently signified the whole estate by my
letters, to the council at Jerusalem, to know Iustus also, I told them that I
was sent Ambassador unto Herod the Tetrarch, wherein diverse figures of living
creatures were painted; for that our law forbad them to allow or do such
things, and I exhorted them to suffer us to do that execution as soon as they
might.

Capella and those of his party, did for a long time refuse to consent
thereunto, but in the end The Palace set on fire that was in Tiberias.
we enforced them so much, that they condescended. Now whilst we debated upon
this conclusion, Jesus the son of Saphias (of whom we have spoken heretofore,
declaring how he was the chieftaine and conductor of the faction of sailers and
poor men) took with him certain Galileans, and set fire on all the palace,
under hope to get great riches thereby (for that there were certain roofes of
the house covered with gold) who spoiled many things against our consent.
Capella, and the chiefest Tiberians, we retired our selves from Bethmaus into
the higher Galilee. In the mean time Jesus men slew all the Greeks that
remained there, and who before the war had been their enemies. Which when I
was certified of, I was grievously displeased; and came down to Tiberias, and
disposed of the kings moueables, for ^re least they should be carried away by
the robbers: and having recovered a candlestick of ^rinthian work, princely
tables, and no small quantity of massiue silver, I resolved with my self
^eserue it to the kings use. Calling therefore ten of the chiefest Senators and
Capella Antyllus Joseph procures the safety of the kings goods.
son unto me, I delivered the vessels into their hands, charging them to
deliver the same to no man, except it were to my self.

From thence; with mine associates I went unto John at Gischala, toknow what
his mind and Caesar's wheat that was stored up in the villages of higher
Galilee, telling me that he would bestow the same in reedifying and repairing
the walls of his country. But I smelling out both his drift and counsels,
denied him that liberty. For I thought that that wheat would either serve the
Romans, or my self, for that already I had the care of that country committed
to my hands by the City of Jerusalem. When as therefore he could win nothing
at my hands, he appealed to my companions, who were improuident of those
troubles that were to come, and greedy of rewards, and obtained at their hands
through his ^auish liberality a liberty to dispose of all the come that was in
the province, in that I my self was unable to contradict them both. After this
John used another subtlety, for he said that those Philippi, being by the
command of their king, to whom they were subject, kept prisoners within their
walls; being in want of pure oil, desired to buy the same at his hands, for
fear least contrary to their custom, they should be compelled to use that
John's acts in Gischalis and his covetousness.
of the Greeks. But this spoke he not in respect of religion or devotion, but
for his filthy lucres sake. For knowing that among the Caesareans, two
sextaries were sold for a drachme, and that at Gischalis eighty sextaries were
sold for four drachmes, he sent all that oil that was in that place unto
them, doing it (as he thought) by my permission. But I did not willingly
condescend John gathered a great sum of money by this cunning shift.

From this place dismissed I my companions, and sent them back to Jerusalem,
employing my self wholly afterward in preparing armor, and fortifying cities.
After this, calling the stoutest Sosephsendeth back his companions to
Jerusalem. Joseph president of Galilee
thieves before me, when as I perceived that I might not recover their weapons
from them, I persuaded the multitude to hire them by rewards, telling them that
it was more profitable for them to entertain them in their service, then to
suffer their country to be spoiled by their excursions. And thus having taken
their oaths, did I dismiss the^ under condition, that they should not come
into our region, except they were called, or to receive their due pay under
condition, that they Joseph joined seventy of the nobility with him. Joseph
at thirty years of age offered no woman violence, and would not be bribed.
I should injury Justice, or through corruption of rewards distaine mine
incorrupted honor. At such time therefore as I was thirty years old, at
which years although a man bridle himself from unlawful affections; yet
hardly can he escape from the poisoned sting of detraction, especially if a
great authority be annexed to his green years: I never offered vain and
unlawful courting to any woman, neither could any man fasten bribe on me, in
that I pretended want John under my subjection, who had oftentimes sought to
entrap me; neither could Joseph's bounty toward his enemies.
I endure to revenge my self on him, neither on any of the above named people,
as in the sequel of this story I will make manifest.

For which cause I suppose that God, who is the trier and searcher of all just
hearts, both delivered me at that time out of the hands of mine enemies, and
afterward, and that many times out of dangerous and several misfortunes; as
hereafter shall appear in time and place. But so The Galileans faith and love
toward Joseph.
great was the faith and benevolence of the common people of Galilee toward
me, that their cities being overthrown, and their families led into
captivity, they spent not so many tears for their own calamities, as they
bestowed cares for my perseruation and security. Which when John perceived, he
began to envy me, and besought me by his letters, that I would give John
desires that he might bath himself in the hot b^thes of Tiberias.
him license for his health sake, to bath himself in the hot bathes of
Tiberias: which I, suspecting no treason, willingly granted him that which he
demanded. Moreover I wrote unto those, t^ whom I had committed the trust and
administration of the city, to prepare him a lodging, and furnish all his
companions with victuals, and to provide him also of all things necessary for
his diet and entertainment. In the meanespace, I my self past my time in a
certain village of Galilee called Cana. But after that John came to Tiberias,
he wrought the townsmen in such sort, John's treason.
ear unto his entreaties, especially such as rejoicing in innouations were too
prone to change, and greedy of dissension: but in espec^ll Iustus and his
father Pistus, willingly entertained this occasion to revolt from my obedience,
and to submit themselves to John; yet was this conspiracy of theirs prevented
by my speedy access. For a certain messenger came unto me from Silas, whom I
had in former time preferred to the government of Tiberias, who certified me of
the citizens intent, and exhorted me in all haste to make my repair thither,
for that otherwise the city would shortly fall into another man's hands. As
soon therefore as I had perused Silas letters, I travailed all night long with
two hundredth chosen men, and sending a messenger before me, who might signify
my approach to the citizens, I lost neither time nor way: And The people of
Tiberias came out to meet Joseph.
among the rest John, who after he had beheld me and saluted me with a
suspicious countenance, fearing least his treason being discovered, he should
grow in danger of his life, speedily retired himself into his lodging. And
when as I drew near the city within a furlong, dismissing Joseph's
exhortations to the Tiberians.
all my guard but one, and retaining only ten armed soldiers with me, I
began to expostulate with the Tiberians from a certain high place, from whence
I might be heard, and I counseled them that they should not revolt, least in
so doing they might shortly repent them of their John seeks to betroy and
murder Joseph.
the Tiberians, or to persuade them: but rather to seek for mine own
security, and how I might escape mine enemies. For after that John had learnt
that I was destitute of followers, he sent a thousand of his chosen soldiers;
commanding them to kill me; who were at hand and ready to commit the murder,
had I not speedily lept down with my servant Jacob, and being relieved by
Herod the Tiberian had been brought to the lake, where finding a bark by
chance, and putting forth to sea, I escaped contrary to mine enemies
expectation, and came to Taricheas.

As soon as the inhabitants of that city understood how perfidiously and
traitorously the Tiberians had dealt with me, they were sore displeased, and
betaking themselves to their weapons The Galileans require that they may invade
Tiberias.
persuaded me to lead them forth against them, telling me that they would
revenge the injury that was offered unto their governor, and they blased this
treason of theirs through all Galilee. For which cause a number of armed
Galileans came unto me; requesting me that I would invade Tiberias, and
entering it that I would spoil the same, and in the ruins thereof that I
would sell the inhabitants with their whole families under the spear. The like
did my friends, who escaped with me out of the city, persuade me. But I in no
sort would admit their suit, supposing it to be a matter unworthy my
discretion, to revive a cause of civil war, imagining with my self that
such a contention ought to proceed no further then words: yea

But when as John perceived that he failed of his purpose, he began to fear:
for which cause taking with him those armed men which he kept about him, and
forsaking Tiberias, he repaired John excuses himself to Joseph.
to Gischala, and from thence he wrote his letters unto me, excusing the fact,
as if he had been no ways guilty thereof, and he besought me that I would in
no sort suspect him, and confirmed his words with execrable oaths, whereby he
might win the more credit to his writing. But the Galileans who were
gathered in great multitudes from all the parts of the region, knowing that he
was a wicked and perfidious man, besought me that I would lead them forth
against him, promising Jesus the captain of the thieves, that kept upon the
confines of Ptolemais, they promised him a great sum of money, if with his
army of eight hundredth men, Jesus captain of thieves.
who lived under his command, he would wage war with us. He allured by
their promises, Jesus seeks to betray Joseph.
gates, that they should only suffer Jesus to enter with the foremost of his
company, and exclude the rest: and if they should attempt to break in by force,
they should beat them off. Who fulfilling Jesus entered with a few: and being
commanded by me presently to lay down his weapons, except he desired to be
slain, he seeing himself environed with armed soldiers, obeyed. Whereupon
they that followed him, and were excluded, perceiving Iosephpolitickly
surpriseth Jesus.
that their captain was apprehended, suddenly betook them to flight: And I
leading Jesus apart, told him that I was not ignorant of those treasons which
he intended against me; neither by whose provocation he attempted the same. Yet
told I him that I would pardon him, if so be by changing his manners he would
be faithful unto me hereafter. Who promising me all that Joseph's bounty
toward Jesus.
which I requested, I dismissed the man, and gave him leave to depart with his
weapons: yet threatened I to punish the Sephorites, except hereafter they
desisted from their treasons. About the same time there came two noble men unto
me, who were subject to the king of Trachonitis, bringing with them both
horsemen, armor, and money: whom when the Jews would have constrained to be
circumcised, if so be they would remain amongst them, I would not permit them
to be troublesome to the Trachonites, alleging that every man ought
according to his own mind, and not by other men's impulsion, serve God: And
that it was not to be suffered Joseph's care of religion.
that they, who for their security sake were fled unto us, should repent
themselves of their trust they put in us. And thus having persuaded the
multitude, I freely and abundantly furnished these men with all things
necessary.

In the mean space Agrippa sent out his forces under the conduct of Equus
Modius, to take the Castle Magdala by force, which for that they durst not
assault, they beset the ways, and the rather troubled Gamala. But Ebutius
Decadarchus, who had the government of the great champion, Ebutius against
Joseph.
hearing that I was come to a certain village called Simonias, situate upon
the confines of Galilee, and distant from the same some sixty furlongs, took
with him by night one hundredth horse that attended him, and about two hundredth
footmen, with certain inhabitants of the City of Gaba their associates, whom
he conducted by night, and assailed and beset the borough where I was. Against
whom after I had drawn forth a valiant band of men, Ebutius labored all that
he might to toule us into the champion, for that he trusted very much in his
horsemen: but he easily perceived that we might not be won. For knowing the
advantage which the horsemen Ebutius charged us for a while very valiantly. At
length perceiving that he had no use of his horsemen in that place, he sounded
the retreat, and departed back again, with lost labor to Gaba, having only
lost three men in the battle. Ebutius departs without performing any thing.
But I presently pursued him with two thousand armed men, and when I came to
Belara, which is situate on the confines of Ptolemais, distant some 20.
furlongs from Gaba, where Ebutius enca^ped at that time, and besetting all the
passages with courts of guard, whereby we might be more secure from the
excursions of our enemies, until we had carried out the wheat, whereof there
was a great quantity stored up in that place, which was gathered out of the
townships therabout, belonging to Queen Berenice, and loading diverse Camels
and Asses, which to that end I had Joseph transporteth corn into Galilee.
Joseph against Neopolitanus.
Ebutius the battle; and whereas he detracted the same, being terrified by our
boldness, I took my course to encounter with Neopolitanus, who (as it was
reported) was in the territory of the Tiberians, and foraged there. Now this
Neopolitanus was a captain of horsemen, and had undertaken to defend
Scythopolis against their enemies: Having therefore driven him from doing any
wrong in the country belonging to the Tiberians, I provided for the security
of Galilee.

But John the son of Leui, who (as we said) lived at Gischala, after he heard
that all things sell John maligneth Joseph's good success.
out fortunately with me, and that I was loved of my subjects, and feared by
mine enemies, was fore aggrieued thereat: and supposing his own fortune was
embased by my felicity, and being The Gabarenians revolt upon John's persuasion.
more discreetly governed: but among the rest the Sephorites gave least ear
unto him, for that neglecting us both they only held for the Romans. As for
the Tiberians, they would not consent to rebel: yet notwithstanding they
promised him some friendship. But the Gabarenians wholly addicted themselves
unto John, by the means of one Simon a principal Citizen, who was John's
fellow and friend. Yet did they not openly seem to allow him, for that they
vehemently feared the Galileans, whose good will toward me, they were long
time assured of, but privily The Dabarittenians spoil Ptolomies wifet.
Ptolomeis wife the kings steward, under the conduct of certain horsemen should
in great pomp travel along the great plain, out of the kings country into
the Romans government, they suddenly set upon them, and putting the woman to
flight, they spoiled all that which she carried with her. Which done, they
drove to Taricheas, a place where I then kept, certain moyles laden with
apparel and household stuff of diverse sorts; among which there were diverse
silver vessels, Ptolomey, as being one of the same tribe, in that our law
permits not to defraud, no not our enemies, if they be of the same tribe; I
told those that brought the goods thither, that they must be kept to be sold,
to the end that the price of the goods might be bestowed upon the building of
the walls of Jerusalem. This motion of mine, the young men interpreted very
hardly, in that they were cut off from the part of the pray which they hoped
for. For which cause dispersing themselves in the streets of Tiberias, they
spread a rumor that I would betray that country to the Romans, alleging that
I only fained that the pray was destinated toward the repairing of the walls
of Jerusalem: whereas the truth was, that I kept the same to the intent I might
restore it to the owner. In which matter they were no whit deceived in their
opinion. For after the departure of Dassion and Iannaeus the soones of Leui
entire friends to the king, and commanded them that taking the household stuff
with them, they Joseph labors to restore Ptolomey to his goods.
should convey it unto the king, threatening them with death if they revealed
this secret unto any man.

But when as the rumor was spread through Galilee, that I would betray the
region into the hands of the Romans, and all of them being grievously bent and
intent against me to punish me, they of Taricheas also giving credit to the
young men's fained speeches, persuaded my guard, and the rest of the soldiers,
that forsaking me whilst I was asleep, they should come into the horse race,
and consult with other in that place how to degrade me, and give the honor
unto another. They being persuaded, came to the appointed place, where they
found many others Jesus the son of Saphias, who at that time had the
magistracy of Tiberias in his hands, a man given over to all wickedness, and
borne to breed troubles, and Sedition against Joseph. Jesus the son of Saphias
conspireth against Joseph.
stir up seditions. This man bearing Moses tables in his hands, and coming
out into the midst of the assembly spoke thus with a loud voice: If (said he)
you be touched with no care of your selves; yet at leastwise contemn not these
sacred laws, which this your chiefetaine Joseph, a man worthy to be hated by
all men, has of long time dared to betray, and for that cause is worthy of
extreme punishment.

After he had spoken thus, and was applauded by the acclamations of the people,
he leading Simon one of Joseph's guard awaketh him.
purpose to put me to death. Mean while I suspecting nothing of all this
tumult, and tired with labor and weariness, took my rest, when as suddenly
Simon one of my guard, who at that time only remained with me, seeing the
incursion of the people, came and awaked me: and certifying me of mine instant
peril, he gave me counsel likewise, that rather like a noble and undaunted
chieftaine, I should shorten mine own life, then shamefully die by mine
enemies direction. Whilst he gave me this counsel, I committing my safety to
Gods hands, and changing my Joseph moves the people to compassion.
garments, went forth into the assembly, after a mournful manner, and wearing
my sword hanging about my neck, stealing by that way, by which I knew that
none of mine adversaries might meet me, and coming into the horse race, I
offered my self to every man's eye, and lying prostrate

For which cause after silence, I began thus: Men and brethren (said I) if in
your opinion I deserve death, I refuse not to die, yet before my death will I
certify you of the whole truth: Truly Joseph's oration and confession before
his adversaries
when as I perceived that this City was most commodious and fit to entertain
strangers, and that I perceived that many men forsaking their own countries,
were delighted with your conuersations, and willing to partake with you in all
sorts of fortune: I was resolved to build up your walls with this money; for
which being thus destinated to do you good, your indignation is provoked
against me. Upon these words the Taricheans and strangers cried out, giving me
thanks, Joseph escapes from danger.
the Tiberians that I would reedifie their walls, and fortify other convenient
Cities, they giving credit to my words, repaired every one of them to their
own houses. And I beyond all expectation escaping from so great a peril, with
certain of my friends, and some twenty soldiers, returned to my house.

But once again the thieves and authors of sedition, fearing least they should
be punished for these their offenses, begirt my lodging with six hundredth armed
men, intending to consume Joseph in an other danger.
it with fire. Of whose arrival, as soon as I had intelligence, imagining
with my self that it Joseph's stratageme.
into this mutiny: whereby they might have no further cause to be incensed
against me. Which done, laying hold of one of the most troublesome fellows,
that with the rest came in unto me, I caused him to be beaten with many
grievous strokes, and his hand to be cut off, and hung about his neck; and
thus handled, we thrust him out of doors to return unto those who had sent
him. But they being wondrously afraid herewith, and suspecting the like
punishment if they should stay there any longer, for that they suspected that I
had diverse armed soldiers in my house, they suddenly all of them fled away;
and so by this stratageme escaped I the other dangers. Another sedition.
being deceived by their words, who labored to flatter them. Which when I
heard of, I once more informed the people that they ought not to persecute
those, who resorted unto them for rescous, and I iested at their folly, who
accused them of impoisoning, and that the Romans would not vainly nourish so
many thousands of soldiers, if they pretended to make away their enemies with
poison. Being by these words somewhat pacified, they had scarcely withdrawn
themselves awhile, but that by certain outcasts and wicked men, they were
incited against the nobility, Joseph privately dismisseth the Taricheans.
betwixt it and the lake, I called for a bark, and entering into the same with
them, I crossed over into the confines of the Hippenians: and furnishing them
with money to buy them horses, for that they could not transport their own
with them in that flight, I dismissed them, requiring them to digest their
present misfortunes with a constant mind. For I my self took it very
heavily, that I was once more enforced to land those men in the enemies
country, who had committed themselves to my trust: yet thinking that, if it
should so fall out, that they should fall into

But they of Tiberias wrote unto the king, requiring him to send a garrison
into their country, and promising him to revolt and follow him. Which done, as
soon as I came unto them, they required me that I would build them those walls
which I had promised them: for they had already heard that Taricheas was
environed with walls. Whereunto I condescended, and gathering stuff from every
place, I set the workmen to their task. But some three days after departing
The Tiberians letters to Agrippa. Seven stadia make almost a German mile.
Sedition and rebellion in Tiberias.
from Tiberias toward Taricheas, which was thirty stades distant from thence,
by chance a troop of Roman horsemen were discovered, not far from the City,
which made the inhabitants times, when I remained in that city, I took no
care of the guard of mine own person, having Joseph in danger for the
Tiberians takes.
been with me the next morning, yet they might not have taken arms because
our laws forbad the same, how great soever the occasion be that is offered.
And although I should have drawn forth the Taricheans and the strangers that
were retired thither, and if under hope of pray I had led them forth, yet saw I
that they were too feeble to resist their forces. On the other side, I already
perceived that if I stayed over long, the army which was sent by the king
being already entered the city, would have excluded me: I therefore determined
to use this stratagem. I presently therefore guarded the gates of the Taricheans
with my most trusty friends, suffering no man to pass out of Joseph saileth
to Tiberias.
ships to be laden with soldiers, they changed their former opinion. For
which cause laying by their weapons, they themselves with their wives and
children came forth to meet me, entertaining me with happy acclamations: for
that they thought I had heard no inkling of their intents, beseeching me that
for the safety of their city, I would enter the same. But I drawing near the
city, commanded the masters of the barks to cast anchor far off the shore,
least the

At length the rest of the multitude, as soon as they perceived in how great
danger they were, they besought me that I would punish the chief author of
this conspiracy, who was Clytus the author of the sedition in Tiberias.
called Clytus a bold and rash young man. But I, that held it a wicked act to
kill one of the same Leuias one of my guard to go unto him, and cut off his
hand: who not daring for that he was alone to enter into so huge a multitude,
for fear least his cowardice should be discovered by the Tiberians, I called
Clytus unto me, and said unto him. Since (said I) ungrateful and perfidious
man, as thou art, thou deseruest to lose both thy hands, I charge thee to
become thine own executioner, for fear least through thy delay Clytus cutteth
off his own left hand.
thou procure thy further punishment. And whereas with many prayers he besought
me to grant him one of his hands, I hardly condescended: at length of his own
accord for fear least he should lose both, he took a knife and cut off his
left hand: and thus was this tumult appeased.

As soon as I returned to Taricheas, and the Tiberians understood what
stratageme I had used Iustus and his father Pistus, I invited them to sup with
me, and during the repast I told them that I was not ignorant, that the Roman
army excelled all men of the world in power and force: notwithstanding that I
kept my self silent in the respect of those thieves that were round about, and
I counseled them that they also would do the like in expectation of some
better days; and yet that in the mean time they would not think amiss of my
government, because the time afforded them not a more affable and commodious
governor. I admonished Iustus also that before I came from Jerusalem, the
Galileans had cut off his brothers hands, accusing him to have forged false
letters before the war, and that after Philips departure Chares Philips own
kinsman, and had Joseph dismisseth the Tiberians.
moderately punished his brother in law Jesus, who had married his sister. After
this discourse during supper time, I dismissed Iustus and his friends early in
the morning, with their freedoms. But before this came to pass, it happened
that Philip the son of Iacimus departed from the fort Philip the son of
Iacimus.
of Gamala upon this occasion that ensues. As soon as he understood that
Varus was revolted from king Agrippa, and that Modius Equus who was his friend,
was sent to succeed him, he certified him of his estate by his letters: which
when he had received, he highly rejoiced at Philips Philip, that he was the
chieftaine of the Jews army, who undertook the war against the Romans,
sent certain horsemen to Philip to bring him to his presence: before whom he
no sooner arrived but he embraced him very kindly, and showed him to the Roman
captains, telling them that that was Philip, of whom it Agrippas kindness and
humanity toward Philip. Hedio, Gadara
was commonly reported, that he was in rebellion against the Romans. He
therefore charged him, that taking with him certain horsemen he should post in all diligence to the fort of * Gamala, and drawing his household servants from
thence, he should lead and reestablish the Babylonians in Batanaea, and
travail to his uttermost power that the subject should be continued in
obedience and peace. After Philip had received this commandment from the
king, he hasted

But Joseph a certain drougier or treacle seller, gathering together a sort of
bold young men, and inciting the nobility of Gamala, persuaded the people to
fall from the king, and that betaking Joseph stirred up a sedition in Gamala.
them to their arms, they should recover their former liberty: and thus drew
they other into their opinion, killing those that durst contradict them.
Amongst these died Chares and Jesus his kinsman, and the sister of Iustus the
Tiberian, as we have heretofore declared. After this they requested me by
letters, that I would send them aid, and certain laborers to begi^ their
town with a wall. To both which requests of theirs, I easily condescended.
About this time the country of Ga^lonite, as far as the borough of Solyma,
rebelled against Agrippa. I also enclosed Seleucia and Sogan, which were two
strong places inaccessible, and fortified by nature, with Many Jews revolt
from the Romans.
they were situated amongst the rocks. I fortified in like sort Taricheas also
and Tiberias, and Sephoris, cities of Galilee; and the borough of the cave of
the Arbalians, Bersobe, Selamen, Iotapata, Capharath, Comosogana, Nepapha, and
the mountain Itabyrium. In those places hoorded I up great store of corn, and
laid up store of armor, and munition for defense.

Mean while John the son of Leui, increased his hatred daily more and more
toward me, being greatly agrieued to see my fortunes happy, and the success
answerable: and whereas he was wholly resolved to rid me of my life, after he
had encompassed his country Gischala with walls, he sends Simon his brother
with one hundredth soldiers to Jerusalem, to Simon the son of Gamaliel,
requiring him to labor the matter in such sort with the city, that my
authority might be disanulled, and that John by the common consent of all
might be ordained governor over the affairs of Galilee. This Simon was borne
in Jerusalem, noble in birth, and in sect a Pharisee John labors to supply
Joseph in his government.
(which sect of all other seemed most exactly instructed in the laws of our
country) a man of excellent wisdom, who by his counsel was able to repair
the decaying ruins of his country, who of long time had made use of John's
friendship, because he was at that time mine enemy. This man solicited by the
intercessions of his friends, persuaded the hie priest Ananus, and Jesus the
son of Gamala and other of his line and faction, to cut off my increasing
honors, and Simone counsel against Joseph.
not to permit me to attain the fulness and content thereof. For it should be
very profitable for them also, if I were removed from the government of
Galilee. Further, he told Ananus and the Simon, yet Ananus the high Priest
replied, that it might not easily be done, for that diverse priests and
governors of the people bare witness for me, that I behaved my self honestly
in that government, and that it was ill done to intend an accusation against a
man, who might not be touched with any misdemeanour. When Simon had heard what
Ananus had said, he besought him and the rest also to speak nothing thereof;
neither to make his motion known, certifying them that he had prouidently
provided, that I should be speedily driven out of Galilee: And calling unto him
his brother John, he charged him to send presents to Ananus. For (said he) in
so doing they would so much work with him, that they would make him change his
opinion. In the end Simon obtained, that which he long time sought Ananus and
his adherents were corrupted with money, and accorded to cast me from the
government of Galilee, without the consent or allowance of any other of the
citizens. For which cause they thought good to send certain noble men in
birth, and no ways inferior to Simons second counsel against Joseph.
one another in learning, whereof two of them were of the common sort, and
Pharisees; the one called Ionathas; the other Ananias; the third was Iozarus of
the tribe of Leui, who was also a Pharisee and of the race of the priests. But
Simon was of the order of the priests, and the youngest of them all. These did
they command, that calling together a council of the Galileans, they
Ambassadors with soldiers sent to Joseph.
or if in regard of the name of priesthood, they should say they loved me, they
should likewise auerre that two of them were priests. Being thus instructed,
and receiving forty thousand silver drachmes of the public treasure, for
their fellow and consort Ionathas, they set forwards.

And for that at the very same time a certain man called Jesus of Galilee,
was come to Jerusalem with a band of six hundredth soldiers, they sent for him
and hired him, and gave him three months pay, commanding him to follow
Ionathas and his companions; and to do that which Simon John's brother, who had
one hundredth soldiers with him, who had commission from those that sent them,
that if I willingly gave over arms, they should send me alive to Jerusalem:
and if I resisted, by their authority they might lawfully kill me. They had
letters also directed to John, which incited him to make war against me.
Moreover they charged the Sephorites, Gabarites, and Tiberians to maintain
John against me. After that I had intelligence hereof, by my Joseph's father
signifies all these news unto him.
fathers letters, who had intelligence thereof by Jesus the son of Gamala,
one of those who were present at the deliberation, and who entirely and
familiarly loved me: I was much grieved, seeing with how much ingratitude my
countrymen required me, who of malice had decreed upon my Joseph resolves to
return home.
and retire my self into mine own. Whereupon they were altogether surprised
with great sadness, and besought me with weeping tears, that I would not
forsake them, for that they should be utterly overthrown, if so be they were
left destitute of my conduct. But whereas by no means they might persuade me,
and the care of mine own security prevailed very much with me, the Galileans
fearing least I should leave them, and by that means the thieves should be
encouraged to set upon them, they sent messengers through all Galilee, to
signify unto them the resolution of my departure. Whereupon diverse of them
being made privy to these news,

That night in my sleep I had a wonderful dream: For lying in my bed, and
being wholly Joseph's admirable dream.
disconsolate and troubled with the news I had received, me thought that a
certain man from above spoke unto me after this manner: Pacify thou the
passions of thy spirit, and be thou free from all fear. For that which
discomforteth thee, shall be that which shall make thee great, and happy beyond
thine expectation. For not only these things shall turn to a fortunate end
or After I had this dream, I awaked, and so prepared as I was w^nt I down
into the plain: and as soon as I came thither, all the people of Galilee,
with their wives and children, humbling themselves upon the earth, and weeping,
besought me that I would not leave them for a pray to their enemies: neither
that I would abandon their country A number of Galileans besought Joseph that
he would not forsake them.
to serve for a pray and mockery to their adversaries. But seeing that I made
small reckoning of their prayers, they constrained me by oath to remain
amongst them, and uttered diverse injurious outrages against the people of
Jerusalem, that envied them the peace and happiness which they enjoyed.

After I had heard these words, and seen the desolation of the people, my
heart was broken Joseph consents to stay in Galilee.
me: as for the rest, I sent them back every own to his own house. When
these five thousand presented themselves, I annexed them to the other three
thousand that I had with me, and drew out with them fourscore horsemen, and
marched on toward Chabalon a borough upon the marches of Ptolemais, where I
undertook to prepare them for the battle, expecting some assault Placidus,
who was come with two companies of footmen and one of horsemen, sent Placidus
against Joseph.
by Cestius Gallus to burn the country towns of Galilee, and other little
buroughs that bordered on Ptolemais. And for that he was entrenched before the
City of Ptolemais, I encamped mine army likewise not far from the borough
Chabalon, some sixty stades off: and diverse times drew I out my forces to bid
him battle, but never would he offer any thing but skirmishes. For Placidus
perceiving my forwardness to fight, was abashed thereat, and retired himself:
yet departed he not from Ptolemais.

About that time came Jonathan with the other Ambassadors, who (as we have
heretofore declared) were sent by Simon, and the high priest Ananus, who
labored to entrap me by policy, for that they durst not assail me in open
field. They therefore wrote a letter unto me to this Ionathans letter to Joseph.
effect: Jonathan and the Ambassadors with him, who are sent by those of
Jerusalem,
to Joseph Greeting.
We are certified by the chiefest men of Jerusalem, that John of Gischala has
oftentimes sought to betray you: for which cause we are sent to repress his
malice, and to exhort him hereafter to submit himself unto you: and being
desirous to confer with you, as touching that which concerns the public
profit, we pray you to resort unto us as soon as you can, with some few
attendants, because the borough is not able to entertain many.


To this effect wrote they unto A horseman brought the letters.
me, hoping that one of these two effects would fall out, either that I coming
disarmed, should be easily surprised by them; or that bringing with me a great
company, I should be condemned for an enemy of my country. The messenger that
brought me this letter was a valiant young man, mounted on horseback, who had
in times past borne arms for the king. The time wherein Joseph's policy.
to talk with my friends of other affairs: and not long after arising from
supper, and dismissing the rest to their rest, I only retained with me some of
my most inward friends, and commanding Joseph
to Jonathan, and those that accompany him, Health.
I am very glad to Joseph's answer to Jonathan.
hear that you are arrived in Galilee in good health; especially for that I
may now redeliuer into your hands the government of the affairs thereof, to
the end (according as I have long time desired) I might return into my
country. I will not only therefore visit you at Xallon: but in any further
place also, notwithstanding you had never sent for me. Notwithstanding pardon
me, though I come not at this present: for I am now at Chabalon to confront
Placidus, who pretends to invade Galilee. Resort you therefore unto me, who
shall read my letters.

Farewell.



After I had written this answer, and delivered it to the soldier to carry
it unto them, I sent by the same way thirty of my most approved friends of
Galilee, commanding them to salute Ionathans message and letter to Joseph.
them that were come, without any further speech. I assigned also to each of
these one of my most resolute and best soldiers, to take heed least any of
those I sent should confer with Ionathans men. They therefore set forward on
their way: and Jonathan and the other seeing their first purpose failed them,
they sent me another letter, after this tenor which ensues: Jonathan and his
company
to Joseph, Health:
We command you that within three days, you make your appearance before us,
without any of your soldiers, in the borough of Gadara, to the end you may
answer to that which John has objected against you.


As soon as they had written this, and The Ambassadors of Jerusalem coldly
entertained in Galilee.
them to return back, and not to deprive them of the good governor they had.
Jonathan and his companions were provoked with these cries; yet durst they not
make any open show of their displeasure, but without returning them any
answer, they resorted to other Cities, where they met with no less effectual
exclaimes from the multitude, protesting with a loud voice; that no man should
be able to dissuade them from continuing Joseph in authority in their
government. Whereupon Jonathan with his followers marched forth without any
further speech, and came to Sephoris, the greatest City of Galilee. But the
inhabitants thereof being addicted to the Romans, John came out to meet them,
accompanied with three thousand soldiers, and I having intelligence by their
letters, that they were resolved to make war against me, departed from
Chabalon, accompanied with three thousand soldiers, and having committed the
camp to the charge of my trustiest friend, I went to Iotapata, because I would
be within four stades of them, and sent them this letter: If your will be that
I must needly come unto you, there are in Galilee two hundredth and four Cities
and buroughs, Joseph writes again to the^.
I will meet you in any one of them, which you please, except Gabara or
Gischala: for that the one is the place of John's nativity, and the other is
his associates and friends.




As soon as Jonathan had received this answer, he replied not any more, but
sought the means to entrap me. John was of the opinion to write unto all the
Cities and buroughs of Galilee, supposing The consultation of the ambassadors
against Joseph.
that without question there were one or two in them that were mine enemies,
whom they might incense against me, a^ against their common enemy. He gave
order also, that this his resolution should be sent to Jerusalem, to the end
that those of the City understanding that I was adjudged an enemy by the
Galileans, might in like sort confirm that their decree by their opinion. For
he said, that by this means it would come to pass, that the Galileans, who
were well affected toward me, should forsake me for fear they had of them.
This advice of John's meruailosly ^cchaeus, who flying from them, came and
brought me the news, and particularly related to me their intent. For which
cause, perceiving that the time req^ed no longe^ delaie, and supposing that
Jacob was one of my most assured and ^rustiest servants, I commanded him to
take two hundredth men with him, and to belay the ways between Gabara and
Galilee, and to send me Joseph besetteth the wai^ of Galilee.
those whom he should surprise, that came that way; and especially those that
carried letters. I sent Jeremy also, who was one of my friends, to the marches
of Galilee, with six hundredth men at arms, to keep the passages that way
toward Jerusalem, commanding him to lay hands on all those that carried
letters, and to commit the men to prison, and to send me their pacquets.

After I had in this sort instructed those whom I sent, I willed and commanded
the Galileans the next day following, to take their arms, and to furnish
themselves with victuals for three d^es, and to attend me at the borough of
Gaba^th. Those sould^ers that I had I distributed Joseph with (...) troops
resorteth to Gabara.
in four companies, and kept those with me in whom I reposed most confidence
for the guard of my person, and ha^ing appointed captains over them, and
commanded them to be careful, I changed them to suffe^o unknown soldier to
enter in among them: The ^xt day I came to Gabaret, the fifth ^ure of the day,
where I found all the fields about the City full of men of war, of those
of Galilee, who resorted thither to assist me, according as I had commanded
them. Thither also came there a multitude of other men from other buroughs. As
soon as I came to their presence, and was ready to speak unto them, all of
them began to cry out, call^g Ionathans messenger and letters fell into their
hands, who had the guard of the passages by my appointment, and according to my
direction the men were kept in security, as I gave order: and finding the
letters Ionathans soldiers having intelligence of my coming, retired both
themselves and their goods, and with them John also into Jesus house, which was
a great tower, nothing different from a cittadell, in John and the ambassadors
forces retire to Jesus house.
which they hid a number of men of war, and locked up all the other gates
save one; expecting that I should come that way, to salute them. In a word,
they had commanded their soldiers that when I should enter, they should suffer
no man else to enter with me, but exclude all the rest. For they made no other
account, but that by this means they might easily lay hold on me. But they
were deceived of their hopes: for having notice before hand of their intents,
as soon as I came thither, entering into a lodging that was right over against
theirs, I fained that I went to Ionathans soldiers supposing that I was
asleep, and that in troth I was safe; they came forth in all haste into the
plain, laboring to dissuade my soldiers from their love and alleagiance, and
detracting my government. But all things fell out contrary to that they
thought: for as soon as they were discovered, the Galileans gave a great
shout, testifying the good will they bare unto me, who was their governor, and
they blamed the Ambassadors for that without any cause of injury, they were
come to disturb the public peace, willing them to be gone, for that they
intended to admit no other governor. When these things were signified unto me,
I made no doubt to adventure my self among them, for which cause I speedily
went out to hear what these Ambassadors could allege against me. Upon my
arrival the Joseph presents himself among his enemies.
whole troop shouted for joy, and applauded me with a loud voice, giving me
thanks for my

Jonathan and his adherents hearing this were afraid, least if the Galileans
should set upon them, they should grow in danger of their life's, and began to
bethink themselves how they might escape. But perceiving that they might not
retire for that I required them instantly to stay, they were altogether
dismayed, and past their senses. I therefore commanded the people to surcease
their shouting, and planted the soldiers of greatest trust in every passage,
to prevent least John should charge them unawares. After this I exhorted the
people to betake them to their weapons, to the end that if the enemy should
suddenly assail them, they might not be driven into disorder. This done, I
first of all began to rippe up to Ionathans followers and fellows, what
letters they had written, and how they had certified him, that Joseph obiecteth
treachery against the ambassadors.
debates that were between me and John; and how they had incited me to come
unto them. Afterward in sequel of my discourse I produced their letters in
open view, to the end they might not deny any thing, seeing themselves
convicted by their own hand writing, and spoke thus unto them.

If being accused by John, I should produce two or three witnesses that were
men of reputation, to testify for my life, it were a matter most evident, that
thou should be compelled, O In the mouth of two or three witnesses
consists truth.
Jonathan and you my Lords Ambassadors (after you had foreinquired of their
lives) to acknowledge mine innocence, and to acquit me of that whereof I am
accused. But to the intent you may know that I have faithfully governed the
estate of Galilee, I suppose that three witnesses The Galileans testimony of
Joseph's good guernment.
contrary to right. Whilst I spoke after this manner, all of them with one
accord called me their benefactor and defender, and gave testimony of my
forepassed government; and exhorted me to continue the same hereafter. And all
of them affirmed by a public oath, that I had carefully prevented, least any
woman should be violated, or any man by my means should be drawn into any
injury, or inconvenience. This done, I publicly red the two letters in the
presence of all Joseph openly reads Ionathans epistles.
the Galileans, which were taken from Ionathans messengers by those, who were
appointed by

The people having heard this, were displeased and animated against Jonathan
and his followers, and flocked on to murder them; and they had surely done it,
had I not pacified the displeasure The wrath and fury of the people against
Jonathan and his fellow ambassadors.
Jonathan, I told all of them that I pardoned whatsoever was past, if so be
they would repent themselves of that which was done, and if upon their return
into their country, they would truly report unto those who had sent them, how
all things had past under my government. This said; I dismissed them,
notwithstanding that I knew they would perform nothing of that which they had
promised. But the whole multitude prosecuted their displeasure against them,
requiring me to give them leave to punish those with all rigor, who had
committed this slanderous act. But I labored all that I might to persuade
them, to lay no hands upon them, knowing full well that whatsoever mutiny it
be, it cannot but breed prejudice to the common weal. This notwithstanding the
multitude would by no means be satisfied, but all of them ran in heaps with
great fury to the lodging, where Joseph pacifieth the sedition without
bloodshed.
Jonathan and the Ambassadors kept. Whereupon seeing that it was impossible to
restrain their fury, I incontinently betook me to my horse, and commanded
the people to follow me to Sogan a borough of the Arabians, distant from thence
some twenty stades. By this stratageme I brought to pass, that the beginning
of the civil war might not be imputed to me.

After I came near to Sogan, I assembled the people, and told them that they
should not violently submit themselves to their froward displeasures, nor
entertain their unquenchable desire Joseph sends one hundredth ambassadors to
Jerusalem.
of revenge: and I commanded them to pick out an hundredth of the chiefest and
oldest men amongst them, who should make their repair to the city of
Jerusalem: and there complain unto the people against those that had kindled
sedition in their country. And I said unto them, if the people be favorable
and listen to your discourse, you shall persuade them to write unto me, that
according Jonathan and his partners depart from hence. After I had given them
this charge, and that they were furnished with all things necessary for their
journey, in all expedition on the third day after the general assembly, I
dispatched them and sent five hundredth armed men with them. I wrote also to my
friends in Samaria, so to further them that they might finish their journey in
all security. For Samaria was already in subjection to the Romans, and it
behooued my men of necessity, who would make a short journey to pass that
way. For from Galilee by this means a man may in three days arrive at
Jerusalem. Furthermore I guarded the Ambassadors my self as far as the
frontiers of Galilee, laying forces and guards upon the ways, to the end that
no man might easily discover or know of their departure. Which done, I
soiourned for a certain time at Iapha.

But Jonathan and his companions having failed of their purpose intended
against me, dismissed John to Gischala: as for themselves they went to
Tiberias, hoping to bring the same under their obeisance. For that Jesus, who
was President at that time, had written unto them, and promised The ambassadors
hope to get Tiberias into their hands and possession.
them to persuade the people to entertain them, and take their part if they
came: and under this hope they also retired themselves thither. Silas, who (as
I declared) was left by me as mine Agent in Tiberias, certified me of all this
by his letters, requiring me to use all diligence: and I condescending
thereunto, was brought in danger of my life upon this occasion that ensues.
Jonathan and his followers being come to Tiberias, persuaded diverse who were
mine enemies, to revolt from me; but after they were certified that I was there
in person, they were afraid, and came unto me, and saluting me, told me that
they reputed me happy, for that I had so wisely Joseph falls in danger.
John's: they therefore required me to repair unto my house, promising very
shortly to deliver John into my hands: and these speeches of theirs they
seconded with dreadful oaths, which Jonathan and his confederates policy.
made me think that I had no cause to misbeleeue them. Furthermore they
required me to take up my lodging in another place, for that on the morrow was
the Sabbath day, and it were an inconvenient that the city of Tiberias should
be drawn into trouble on that day. I that suspected nothing repaired to
Taricheas, leaving notwithstanding certain of my friends behind me in
Tiberias, who might curiously observe what the common talk was of me: and all
along the way betwixt The people assemble in the Proseucha.
assembled in the Proseucha or Oratorie, which was an ample house wherein they
prayed, and was able to contain a great multitude. When Jonathan was entered
into this place, he durst not manifestly speak unto them of a revolt, but only
told them that their city had need of a better Governor. But the President
Jesus without dissembling; spoke plainly after this manner unto them. It were
better for you (my friends) that you were subject to four men of nobility and
great wisdom, Jonathan. Hereupon Iustus arose and praised that which Jesus had
proposed, and drew some of the people to his opinion. But the greater part
took no pleasure therein, and there had presently followed a mutiny, The
Jews sixth hour is to us eleven or twelve a clock at noone.
had not the assembly been dismissed, by reason it was midday, which is the
ordinary hour amongst them to take their repast in. Thus did Ionathans consorts
remit the determination of the matter until the next day, retiring themselves
without any good done. Which being presently reported unto me, I resolved with
my self the next morning to repair to the City of Tiberias, and on the
morrow I arrived there in due time, for I found the people already assembled
in the place of prayer, and they that were drawn to that convocation, knew not
the cause why they were assembled. Ionathans partners seeing me there in person
contrary to their expectation, were very Ionathans and his associates
subtlety.
friend of theirs had informed them, that he had discovered certain Roman
horsemen upon the frontiers of that territory, some thirty stades off of the
city, in a place called Homonoea: and that the news being brought to them,
those of John's faction had presently signified the same unto them, to the
intent they should not endure their country to be sacked by the enemy. They
used this speech, supposing that under pretext of rescuing the country, they
might drive me abroad, and strengthen the City for themselves.

Now although I knew very well what their intent was, yet gave I ease unto
them least I should drive the Tiberians into an opinion, that I was negligent
and careless of their security: I therefore road out, and came to the place
of which they had spoken, where finding scarce a John's partakers False
accusations and Epistles produced by the ambassadors against Joseph.
urging against me a very vehement accusation, that I made no account to
relieve them in their wars, but that I studied nothing but mine own
pleasures. And whilst they spoke these words, they produced four letters, as
being written unto them by those who were upon the marches of Galilee,
requiring them to come and succor them, for that the Roman horsemen and
footmen would within three days forage and spoil their country: for which
cause they made haste, and would not neglect their suit who besought them. The
Tiberians hearing these allegations, and supposing them to be true, cried out
saying, that it behooued them not in that manner to dally time, but to go and
succor their country men environed with great dangers. Whereunto I John's
partakers, and was of the opinion, that since those letters said that the
Romans gathered head in four diverse places, it was requisite to divide our
power into five companies, appointing every one of them a chieftaine over
them. Joseph discovers the subtlety of the ambassadors.
For it is an honor for good men not only to give counsel, but also when
need requires to be the first and foremost in the action: For I told them that
it lay not in my power to lead any more then one company. This my advice was
pleasing unto all the people, who presently constrained these men to march out
unto the war, whereby it came to pass that they were greatly confused to see
that they might not finish that which they had imagined, because I crossed all
their enterprises. Hereupon one amongst them called Ananias, a wicked and
perverse man, counseled Ananias one of the ambassadors a wicked man.
same hour that all of them should gather together in that place in arms, to
protest before God, that if they obtained not succors at his hands, they held
all sort of resist unprofitable. He spoke this, not for any piety that was in
him, but to the end to surprise both me and my followers unarmed. To this
advice of his was I enforced to condescend, to the end it might appear that I
contemned not that which appertained to the service of God. As soon therefore
as we were retired every one of us to our several lodgings, Jonathan and his
partakers wrote to John, to resort unto them early in the morning with his men
of war, and all the power he could make: for that they might easily lay
hands on me, and accomplish that which they had so long time longed after.
Ionathas writes to John to come unto him
He receiving this letter, willingly obeyed. The next day I commanded two of my
strongest

But Jesus as soon as I was entered with my friends, having the guard of the
gate would not permit the rest of my followers to enter with me: and at such
time as we were ready to begin our prayers, according to the custom of our
country, Jesus arising demanded of me what was become Jesus talk with
Joseph. Joseph's debate with Jesus for twenty pieces of gold.
of the household stuff that was taken out of the kings palace when it was
burned, and where the bullion of silver was, and with whom I had left the same:
of all which he therefore made mention, that he might delay the time till John's
approach. I answered, that Capella had all, and those ten of the chiefest
nobility of Tiberias, and willed him to ask of them whether it were true that
I spoke: who confessed that they had it. What (said he) are become of those
twenty pieces of gold, that you received by the sale of a certain weight of
massiue silver, where are they? I answered him, that I had delivered the same
to the Ambassadors, to defray their charges in their voyage toward Jerusalem.
Hereupon Ionathans partakers said, that I had done amiss, in employing the
public treasure to the use of private Ambassadors. The people being
displeased herewith; for I very easily perceived the wicked disposition of
these men, and seeing that a sedition The peoples love to Joseph
they manifestly discovered what hatred they wrongfully bare unto me. Whereupon
Jesus fearing least some change might arise, commanded the people to depart,
and required the council to stay, for that it was impossible to examine matters
discreetly, where so much trouble and turmoile was. The people cried out, that
they would not leave me alone among them. Whereupon there came one unto Jesus,
who secretly informed him that John with his armed men was at hand, who for
that cause being unable to contain and conceal his joy, God so providing for
John and his followers had utterly overthrown me.) Forbear (said he) ye
Tiberians to enquire of the twenty pieces of gold: for Joseph almost suddenly
surprised by the enemy is delivered from peril.
Joseph meriteth not punishment for this matter, but because he affects the
tyranny, and that by his words he has deceived the people of Galilce, and
gotten the sovereignty to himself. Whilst they spoke these words, they
sought suddenly to lay hands on me, intending to murder me. But those two
whom I had with me, perceiving their intent, drew their swords, threatening
those who should dare attempt to offer me violence. The people likewise
gathered stones to cast at Ionathans partakers, and pulled me away violently from
mine enemies: and for that if I should have gone but a little further, I had
met with John and his army, through the fear I had I turned an other way. For
crossing down a privy way that led me to the lake, I betook me to a boat
and

Whereupon I incontinently sent for the chiefest men of Galilee, and told them
how contrary to all law and right I had almost been murdered by Jonathan and
the Tiberians. For which Joseph certifieth the Galileans how traitorously
Jonathan and the Tiberians had dealt with him
cause the Galileans were grievously displeased against them, and willed me
without delaie to make war against them, or if I list not my self, to suffer
them with all expedition to cut off both John and Jonathan, with all their
followers. Yet did I restrain them the best I could, and pacified their
displeasure, and prayed them to expect until such time as we knew what news
our Ambassadors would bring that were gone to Jerusalem. For I told them that
we ought to execute no kind of thing without their approbation and consent:
and by these means I persuaded them. But John seeing at that time that his
policy had but very slender success, returned back again

Some few days after our Ambassadors, who were returned from Jerusalem,
certified us, that the people of Jerusalem were sore displeased with Ananias
the high priest, and Simon the son The hundred ambassadors return from
Jerusalem.
of Gamaliel, for that without their common consent they had sent Ambassadors
into Galilee, and sought to displace me of the government there, and their
displeasure was so kindled that they were ready to set their houses on fire.
They brought me also letters, by which the governors of Jerusalem upon the
instant request that the people had made unto them, confirmed me in the
government of Galilee, commanding Jonathan and his associates to return back
again with all An assembly in Arbela.
expedition. After I had received these letters, I repaired to the borough of
Arbela, where I assembled the Galileans: before whom I commanded the
Ambassadors to report how much the Jonathan had iniuried me in; and how they
confirmed me in the government of this country, and had called and commanded
both Jonathan and his confederates back again to Jerusalem, to whom I
speedily sent that letter that was directed to them, commanding the messenger
to observe very The council held against Joseph by Jonathan and his
companions.
carefully both their actions and acceptance. After they had received the
letters, they were greatly troubled, and sent for John and those of the
council of Tiberias, with the governor of Gabara, and consulted with them what
they were best to do. The Tiberians opinion was that they should John, but he
furthermore gave this counsel, that some two Ambassadors should be sent from
them to the people of Jerusalem, to accuse me for that I had unjustly governed
the common weal of Galilce, telling them that they might very easily incense
the people against me, both in regard of their authority, as also for that
the common people are by nature variable and inconstant. This counsel that
John gave was allowed by them all: whereupon it was thought fit that Jonathan
and Ananias should in person repair to Jerusalem, and that the other two
should remain at Tiberias, and for their conuoye they gave them a hundredth
armed soldiers.

The Tiberians had before this provided for the security of their walls, and
gave commandment to all the Citizens to take arms, and afterward sent for
some supplies to John to strengthen The Tiberians intend war against Joseph
Jonathan with his followers taken and kept captive.
their garrison, if they should any ways be provoked by me. For John kept at
Gischala. Mean while Jonathan travailing onwards of his journey came to
Dabaritta, a City situated upon the uttermost borders of Galilee in a great
plain; and there met he about midnight with some of my troops that kept the
watch, who commanded them to lay by their arms, and kept them safely bound, as
I had commanded them. Hereof Leui, who had the charge of this quarter,
certified me by his letters: for which cause dissembling the matter for some
two days, I sent letters to the Tiberians, by which I counseled them that
laying their arms aside, they should Jonathan and his train were already
arrived in Jerusalem. But I setting light by their injuries, resolved to
circumuent them by this cunning stratageme: For I thought it a dangerous matter
to kindle war against the Citizens. Being therefore very willing to draw
them out of their walls, I chose out ten thousand of my best soldiers, whom I
distributed into three bands, and lodged one company of them secretly at Dora,
to lie there in ambush: I encamped also an other thousand in a certain
borough situate in a mountainous place, some four stades distant from
Tiberias; commanding them that as soon as I gave them a watchword or sign,
they should break forth: as for my self, I withdrew my self and kept in the
open field, and sat me down on the grass. Which when the Tiberians
perceived, they made continual excursions The Tiberians scoff very bitterly
against Joseph.


But being very desirous to surprise Simon by some policy, and Ioazar also
with him, I sent unto them, req^ring them that they would march forth a little
without their walls, attended by their friends and guard for their security
sake. For that I was determined to confer with them upon a peace, and to
confirm the one half of the government unto them. Hereupon Simon deceived by
his folly, and overcome and blinded with greedy desire, came forth with all
expedition: but Ioazar suspecting some stratageme, would not adventure without
the walls. As soon as Simon attended by his friends and guard, I went out to
meet him, and embraced him kindly, giving him thanks for that he was come
down; anon after walking along with him, as if I Joseph surpriseth Simon by
^ilty, and leads him away prisoner.
intended to communicate somewhat with him in secret, I withdrew him from his
friends, and laying hands on him, I delivered him to my friends to lead him
into the borough, and gave a sign unto my soldiers that they should come
down, and with them I assaulted the City of Tiberias. There was a sharp
skirmish on both sides, and the Tiberians had welnie gotten the victory: For
my soldiers began to fly; but perceiving how the matter went I animated those
of my company, and with them gave a valiant onset on the Tiberians, who almost
had the better, and chased them into their City, and sent an other company by
the lake to set fire on those houses which they should first fall upon.
Hereupon the Tiberians thought that their City was taken Joseph surpriseth
Tiberias.
the fury of my soldiers, and for that it was late I retired my self with my
soldiers, both to the intent I might spare the City, and relieve my weary
and wounded soldiers. Hereupon I sent for Simon to come and banquet with me,
and comforted him in his misfortune, promising him to send him to Jerusalem,
and to assure him in his journey homeward, and to furnish him for his ordinary
expenses with all things necessary. The next day I assembled ten thousand
soldiers, Joseph sends the authors of the sedition to Iotapata.
incontinently to Iotapata. As for Jonathan and his consortes, I set them at
liberty, and gave them money for their charges, and sent the^ back to
Jerusalem with Simon and Ioazar, and five hundredth soldiers for their guard.
Hereupon the Tiberians reassembled themselves before me, beseeching me to
pardon their misdeeds, promising me to recompense by their future fidelity
their forepassed and foul faults: beseeching me also to restore those goods
unto the citizens, which in way of pillage were taken from them. Whereupon I
gave a present command, that all the pray should be brought and laid before
me: and whereas the soldiers delaid to perform the These goods that were
taken from the citizens are restored.
to be, asked him where he had gotten that garment: who confessing that he had
taken it in the spoil of the city, I chasticed him with strokes, and
threatened a worser punishment to all those that would not restore that which
they had taken away: whereby recovering a great part of the pray together, I
gave every citizen that which he knew to be his own.

In this place I cannot choose but in some sort I must reprehend Iustus, who
wrote upon this argument, and others, who promising a history are not afraid
in contempt of truth, either for favor A reproof of Iustus the
historiographer that fal^ely accused Joseph.
or hatred, to commit lies to their posterity. For they differ nothing from
counterfaiters of evidences, and racers of records: But for that these men are
more corrupted by impunitie. For he to the end he might seem to employ his
time well, undertaking to set down the events of

Tell me therefore Iustus (for thou desire to be held for the man of greatest
note amongst all other historians, and art not ashamed to vaunt and boast thy
self of that title) tell me I pray thee in familiarity (for I must so talk
with thee as if thou were present before me) how I and the Vespasian, how the
inhabitants of these ten cities cried out to Vespasian in the city of
Ptolemais, requiring that thou might be punished, as the author of their
mischiefs, and assuredly thou had been punished by the Emperor, had not
Agrippa, who had received commission to execute thee, upon the instant request
of his sister Berenice spared thee life, and kept thee bound in prison for a
long time. Furthermore, thy politic behauiours do sufficiently express
Tiberias Iustus country. Sephoris and Tiberias two chief cities of Galilee.
these histories, that thou have been no friend to Rome, nor faithful to thy
king. And I enforce these my authorities from the greatest cities of Galilee,
Sephoris and Tiberias, in which thou Iustus were borne. For Sephoris situate
in the heart of Galilee, having round about it a number of villages, and being
a city sufficiently able in it self to attempt and execute any noble action
at their pleasure; yet notwithstanding the citizens thereof resolved to observe
their faith to the Romans, and thrust me out of doors, forbidding every man
among them to bear arms for the Jews. And to the end they might be more
assured in my behalf, the inhabitants deceived Cestius Gallus, who was
general of the Roman Legions in Syria in contempt of me, although at that
time I had a great power, and terrified the country round abouts. But when our
great city of Jerusalem was besieged; and that temple which was common to all
our nation, was in danger to fall into the enemies hands, the Sephorites sent
no succors, to the end it might not be said that they took arms against the
Romans: But thy country Iustus being situate upon the lake of Genazareth
distant from Hippus thirty Vespasians coming, even until such time as he
begirt your city walls with a siege, and then laid you your arms aside for
fear of danger: yea even the^ had your Vespasians hands. It was not therefore
my fault, but your offense, that behaved your selves like enemies. Do you not
remember how often times I have obtained the victory against you, and how few
times you could complain of bloodshed? But you falling at dissension one with
another have been the instruments of your own ruin, and not for the love you
bare either to the King, or the Romans, but of your own malice slew one
hundredth eighty and five citizens, at such time as I was besieged by the
Romans in Iotapata. Nay more, is not this true, that during the siege of
Jerusalem, whereof I have made mention, there were more then two thousand
Tiberians slain, or otherwise taken prisoners? But perhaps thou will allege;
that at that time thou were no enemy, for that thou were fled to the King; but
I tell thee that thou fleddest thither for the Agrippa, upon many presents
delivered from punishment, at such time as thou were condemned by Vespasian to
lose thy head? For what cause having made thee prisoner twice, and having so
Iustus condemned to death.
many times past the sentence of banishment against thee, and having once
commanded thee to be thine own murderer, has he given thee life upon the
importunate solicitation of his sister Bernice? And after so many crimes
committed by thee, having entertained thee for his secretary, when he found thy
corruption in that office, he banished thee from his presence.

But I will not too exactly touch thee with these matters, yet notwithstanding
I wonder at thine impudence, that have openly protested that thou have written
more exactly and perfectly of this matter, then any man: whereas thou art
utterly ignorant of those things that were done Iustus knew nothing of the
wa^es of the Jews.
siege of Iotapata; seeing thou did not follow us. Neither could thou be
able to learn how I behaved my self therein, for that there was no one left
alive to give thee certain intelligence. Thou will perhaps say, that thou have
carefully described that, which happened during the siege of Jerusalem* And how
may this be possible? For thou were neither agent nor looker on in that war;
neither have thou red the commentaries of Vespasian. But I conjecture hereby
that thou have not read them at all, forasmuch as thou have written clean
contrary to that which is contained therein. And if thou art so confident, that
thy history is truer then other men's, why did thou not publish it during
Vespasians and Titus lives, who were the generals of that war; neither before
king Agrippa and those of his rate, who were all of them very expert in the
Greek tongue? Iustus published his book when Titus and Vespasian were dead.
thine exact diligence before them, who were privy to all things. But now when
they are dead, and thou think that no man lives that may reprove thee, thou
have undertaken this boldness to publish thy work. But I have used no such
policy or fear in my books, but have presented them to the Emperors
themselves, who have been eye witnesses and actors thereof. For I knew in mine
own soul that I had set down all things truly: Whereupon I obtained my
expected approbation. Moreover I communicated the same history with diverse
others, whereof some of them were present at the war, as was king Agrippa,
and some of his kindred. And Titus the Emperor himself was so desirous that
men should search for the truth of that history out of these books, that he
placed them in a library, and caused them to be published, being Manifest
testimonies of the truth of Josephus history. The first Epistle. The second
Epistle.
subscribed with his own hand. As for king Agrippa, he sent me seventy two
Epistles, testifying the truth of my books, whereof two of them are
underwritten, to the end that the truth may appear thereby. King Agrippa
to his dear friend Joseph, Health.
I have with great contentment ouer-red thy book, wherein thou seem in my
opinion to have handled this matter more exactly, then any other. For which
cause I pray thee send me the rest.

Fare well my dear friend.

King Agrippa
to Joseph his dear friend, Health:
I perceive by thine own writing, that thou need no intelligence from me,
how matters have passed from the beginning: yet when we


Thus was he a witness of the truth of my accomplished history, not
flattering me, for it became Josephus prosecuteth his history, and leaves to
debate with Iustus.
him not; neither deriding me, as you perhaps may object; for far was it from
so noble a mind to be subject to so servile a folly: but only to this end,
that the truth of my writings might be commended to the reader by the worth of
his testimony. And thus much have I thought good to set down in way of
answer to Iustus.

Now as soon as I had pacified these troubles in Tiberias, and had established
a council of such as were well affected toward me; I bethought my self of
that which concerned me to do in respect of John. All they of Galilee were of
the opinion, that I should arm them all, and that in battle array I should
march against John, and do justice upon him, as he that had been the John,
assigning them the term of twenty days, to determine of that which seemed
best for their own security: and I threatened to set fire on Four thousand of
John's followers forsake him, and follow Joseph.
their houses, and confiscate their goods, except they gave over their arms.
They hearing these things, were greatly troubled, and forsook John: and after
they had laid down their weapons, they came unto me to the number of four
thousand: so that only fifteen hundredth men remained with John or
thereabouts, either of Citizens, or strangers of Tire. When John perceived

At that time the Sephorites grew so bold, that they took arms under the
confidence and strength of their walls, and for that they saw me distracted with
other business. They therefore sent to Cestius Gallus governor of Syria,
praying him to repair unto them, with all expedition, to take possession of
their City, or to send them a garrison of men at the least. Gallus promised to
come unto them, but he set down no certain time of his approach: whereof when
I was advertised, I took the men of war that I had, and marched against the
Sephorites, and took their City by force. The Galileans very glad of this
opportunity, and supposing the time was come wherein they might satisfy the
insatiable hatred that they bare against that City, marched Sephoris spoiled.
ransackt all things, and left nothing vnspoiled: neither was there any kind
of misery which they inflicted not on their countrymen. Which when I saw, I
was sore griened, and commanded them to give over, signifying unto them that it
was impiety in them, to show themselves so savage toward their countrymen.
And seeing that neither by any prayer or command that I made, I could draw
them to obedience, for that their hatred surpassed my counsels, I commanded
those that were about me, and whom I most trusted, to spread a rumor that the
Romans charged us on the other side of the City, with great force. All which
I did, to the end that by

And hardly escaped Tiberias from being spoiled by the Galileans, through this
occasion which Tiberias in danger of ruin.
ensues. The chiefest of their council wrote unto the king, that he should
come unto them, and take possession of their City. The king promised to
satisfy them very shortly, and answered them by his letters, and delivered
them to one of his chamber, called Crispus a Jew borne, to carry them to the
Tiberians. The Galileans knowing this messenger, took him and brought him unto

Which when I heard, I stood in great doubt how I might deliver the Tiberians
from that Joseph consulteth with himself.
Tiberians had written and sent for the king: for the answer which he made
them, did evidently express the truth. And having a long while debated the
matter with my self, I said unto them, I know as well as you, that the
Tiberians have offended: neither will I hinder you from spoiling their City;
yet must you proceed to the execution thereof with some judgment. For the
Tiberians alone do not betray our liberty, but others also, who are more
accounted of in the country of Galilee. Stay therefore until such time as I am
thoroughly informed, who they be that are authors of this treason; and then shall
you have them all under your hands, with all those amongst them, whom you may
particularly think worthy punishment. By these persuasions I The Galileans
w^ath pacified conceived against the Tiberians.
won the people, who departed from me wholly contented and pacified. As for the
messenger Crispus secretly unto me, I charged him to make those soldiers
drunk, who had the charge of him, to the end that he might in all security
fly back to the king. Thus Tiberias being ready to be destroyed, the second
time by my government and providence, avoided at that time a great and fatal
danger.

At the same time Iustus, the son of Pistus, fled unto the king without my
knowledge: the cause of which flight of his, I will orderly express. As soon
as the Romans had began their war against the Jews, the Tiberians concluded
to obey the king, and in no sort to rebel against Iustus desires to command
Galilee.
the Romans. But Iustus egged them on to take arms, thirsting after
alteration, and hoping Iustus to be their governor. My self also, whom the
people of Jerusalem put in trust with the government of Galilee, was oftentimes
so much moved, that I failed little of killing Iustus; so intolerable was his
wickedness. He therefore fearing least my displeasure should shorten his
days, went unto the king, supposing that he might live more freely and
securely with him. The Sophorites beyond their expectation having escaped this
first danger, wrote unto Cestius Gallus the second time; requiring him to come
unto them, to the end that he might be the sooner seized of their City; or
that he should send them forces to withstand the incursions of their enemies:
and finally they Gallus sent them store of horsemen, and after them footmen,
who came by night, and were received into their City. But seeing that the
country round about them was but in poor estate, by reason of the Roman
horsemen, I took my soldiers, and came to Garizim, where I encamped some
twenty stades off of Sephoris, and by night I approached the Joseph assaileth
the walls of Sephoris.
same, and set ladders to the wall, with which I entered a number of my
soldiers, and became master of the better part of the City; from whence
notwithstanding we were afterward constrained to retire, for that we knew not
the place, killing before our departure twelve Roman footmen and to horsemen,
with some Sephorites, to the only loss of one of ours. Afterward a fight
happening between us and their horsemen in open field, we fought for a long time
with disadvantage: For the Romans having environed me on all sides, my rereward
through the fear Iustus, who in times past had served in the very same place
under the king. At that very time the kings forces both of horse and foot
came thither, under the government of Sylas captain of the guard, who encamped
some five stades off of Iulias, beset the high ways that bended toward Cana
with men of war, and the fort of Gamala, to hinder the inhabitants from
receiving any commodities Silas captain of the kings guard.
from the country of Galilee.

As soon as I received news hereof, I sent out two thousand soldiers, with
Jeremy their coronell, who shrouding themselves within a stade of Iulias,
near unto the flood Jordan, offered nothing else but light skirmishes, until
such time as I had gathered three thousand soldiers more, and was come unto
them. The next day having planted an ambush in a certain trench Sylas
supposing that our men fled for cowardice, set forward to follow them as fast
as he might possible: but they that lay in ambush charged him on the back, and
discomfited his army: and I presently turning and making head Joseph puts
the kings soldiers to flight.
against them, constrained the kings forces to trust to their heels. At that
time the estate of the country was at a good point, had not some cursed spirit
thwarted mine honest purposes, For

Sylas and his soldiers having news of mine accident, recovered their
courages, and understanding that we kept but slender watch in our camp, they
laid an ambush by night on this side Joseph's misfortune animateth the enemy.
Jordan, with their horsemen, and as soon as the day appeared, he drew out our
soldiers to fight:

Not long after Vespasian arrived at Tire, accompanied with king Agrippa.
Against whom the Tyrians began to utter many reproaches, telling Vespasian that
the king was both an enemy to Vespasian and Agrippa ar^iue at Tire.
the Tyrians and the Romans, alleging that Philip his General had betrayed
the kings palace and the Roman army in Jerusalem, and that by the kings
commission. Which when Vespasian understood, he reproved this impudent
boldness of the Tyrians, for blaming a king of that power, and a friend to the
Romans: and advised the king to send Philip to Rome, to yield account Philip
was sent thither, yet presented he not himself The governors of Decapolis
accuse Iustus. Of Vespasians arrival, and the siege of Iotapata read Joseph
lib. 4. cap. 5. of the wars of the Jews.
before Nero; for finding him extremely busied with troubles and civil wars,
he returned unto the king without doing any thing. When Vespasian was arrived
at Ptolema^s, the governors of the ten Cities of Syria cried out against Iustus
the Tiberian, accusing him for burning of their buroughs. Vespasian therefore
delivered him bound unto the king; to the end that the subjects of his kingdom
might have him punished. But the king before that time, unwitting to Vespasian,
had kept him prisoner, as it has been heretofore declared. The Sephorites also
resorted to Vespasian, to salute him, and receive a garrison from him, with
their commander Placidus, who made many roades into the country; and I pursued
them until such time as Vespasian arrived in Galilee: of which arrival I have
amply spoken in my books of the Wars of the Jews; how Vespasian did me much
honor. For by his commandment I married a virgin, that was one of those that
had been taken captive in Caesarea. But she remained not long time with me: for
after I was set at liberty, and that I followed Vespasian, she retired her
self to Alexandria. After which, I married another woman in Alexandria, from
whence I was sent to Titus to the siege of Jerusalem, where I was oftentimes
The dangers that Joseph past betwixt the Romans and Jews.
cried out continually to the Emperor to execute me for a traitor. But Titus
well experienced in the changes of war, pacified the violence which his
soldiers intended against me, by his silence. And after the City of Jerusalem
was taken, Titus often solicited me to take that which I liked among the ruins
of Jerusalem, promising to give it me. But I making but small account of any
thing after the ruin of my country, besought him that he would give me
certain free men, and the sacred Bible, which I received for a great
consolation in my miseries. All which he graciously granted me. Not long after
having begd my brother and fifty other of my friends, they were given me, and
I was refused in nothing. Entering into the temple by Titus permission, Joseph
discharges a number of captives.
without paying any ransom: and I rest^d them to their former free condition.
Being sent with Cerealis and one thousand horse into the City of Thecoa by the
Emperor Titus, to epsy if the place were fit for a camp: in returning from
thence I saw diverse prisoners, who were Joseph delivers three from the gibbet.
on the gibbet, amongst which were three of my familiars; whereat I was grieved
in my soul, and I came and signified the same unto Titus with tears: who
incontinently commanded the

After that Titus had appeased the troubles of Iudaea, coniecturing with
himself that the possessions which I had in Jerusalem, would yield me but
little profit, by reason of the Roman garrison Joseph repaireth with Titus to
Rome, and is honorably entertained by Vespasian.
that should be placed there; he planted me in a possession in a champion
country: and intending to embarke himself to depart for Rome, he took me
with him in his own ship, and did me great honor. As soon as we came to
Rome, Vespasian had great care of me, for he lodged me in his own house, where
he kept before he was Emperor, and honored me with the title of a citizen of
Rome, and gave me an annual pension in money; and as long as he lived,
continued his good affection toward me, forgetting no kind of bounty which he
might use toward Joseph envied and slaundered.
Jonathan, having stirred up a sedition in Cyrene, and gathered about him some
two thousand inhabitants of the country, was the cause of their overthrow: and
as touching himself, being bound by the governor of that country, and
afterward sent unto the Emperor, he said it was I that had sent him arms and
money. But Vespasian knew his falsehood, and condemned him to death, and
commanded him to be executed. After this mine enemies objected diverse crimes
against me in regard that I was in good reputation, but God so wrought that I
escaped them all. Moreover I received in gift from Vespasian an ample
possession in Iudaea, and at that very time I forsook my wife, because her
manners pleased me not, although she were Joseph's third wife.
the mother of my three children, of whom two are deceased, and the third, who
was called Hircanus, Iustus, who was the eldest, and Simonides, who was also
surnamed Agrippa. Thus far as touching my domestical affairs. That bounty
which I received from the hands of the Caesar's, has always continued mine.
For after Vespasians death, Titus who succeeded him in the Empire, continued
the same favor which his father had showed me. For although I were oftentimes
accused, yet were not mine adversaries believed. Domitian, who succeeded him,
augmented mine honors. For he punished those Jews that accused me, and gave
order that the Eunuch and slave whom I kept to teach my son, and by whom I
was accused, The perpetual favor of the Caesar's toward Joseph.
Domitia the Emperors wife, she always continued her good affection toward
me. Behold here the short recital of my whole life, whereby let each man
conjecture of my manners, as him lists. But O thrice excellent Epaphroditus,
after I have given and offered thee all this ancient history of our nation, I
will for this present pause in this place.

THE LAMENTABLE AND TRAGICAL HISTORY OF THE WARS AND UTTER RVINE OF THE
JEWS. Comprised in seven Books by Flauius Josephus, the Son of Matthias.
And newly translated out of the Latin, and French into English by Tho. Lodge,
D. M. P.

Printed at London on Bread-street hill, at the sign of the Star, 1602.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL HIS esteemed friend M. Anthony Palmer Esquier.
SIR, my affection that had rather be an actor then an orator, do well then
speak well, has picked you out to be the patron of this tragical history of
the wars of the Jews. The reasons that drove me hereunto, are neither the
expectance of worldly benefits, nor the fruitless vp-shot of ostentation, but
your virtue (which is not beloved respectiuelie but only for it self) has
created this good conceit in me, which (if you so please) your acceptance may
continue. Now since as the Philosopher supposes it is an action worthy a good
man, to do good unto his friend; so is it no less commendable to accept an
office of kindness from a friend. For by giving we bewray our well wishing; and
by receiving, we proportion and continue friendship: upon this ground I pray
you build the good entertainment of my present, and nourish this good custom
in me (which was usual both amongst Grecians and Latins) I mean my
translation, which if it please you, I have my wish. As for my maligners, I
expect no worse from them then Jason the Thassalian, who being assailed and
wounded by an enemy (who had an intent to kill him) had an impostumation
opened that saved his life: their stabbe and stroke of disgrace shall cure and
heal the hidden and neglected infirmities of my mind, and notwithstanding I
shall both Genio and ingenio live to love you, and lament their want of
char^ie. Thus heartelie commending me, I hastily take my leave, being tied
prentize of late to other men's importunities.

Your loving Friend, Tho. Lodge.

THE FIRST OF THOSE
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS THE SON OF MATTHIAS, AS TOUCHING THE WAR, AND
DESTRVCTION OF THE JEWS.
THE PRAEFACE, In which the Author taxes diverse Historiographers of untruth:
and declares his intent, and specifieth the principal
FOr as much as the war which was enterprised betwixt the Jews and Romans,
has (amongst all other) been the greatest that either has been attempted in
our age, or heard of in any other; either between city or city; or nation
against nation: there have been some, who (rather building their discourse on
the vain and The duty of (...) Historiographer; and how things that are past
should be written.
improbable report of others; then their own judgments) have (according to
the manner of orators) made a history of their hearsay, and have filled their
discourses not only with vanity, but Joseph himself had a hand in the wars
of the Jews.
historical veri^e. For this cause, I Joseph the son of Matthias, by birth
an Hebrew, and a citizen and priest of Jerusalem: who in the beginning of these
wars bare arms against the Romans, and afterward (being thereunto forced by
necessity) was present at all those things, which were attempted and
prosecuted in those wars; have thought good to discourse in the Greek tongue
(in favor of all those who acknowledge the sovereignty of the Roman Empire)
all that, which heretofore in my own language I have imparted to those
Barbarians that inhabit the East. For at such Nero, After Neros time all things
full of trouble.
seditions reigned every where: so that by reason of the opportunity of these
times many men went about to make themselves kings, and the soldiers whetted
on with the covetous desire of gain, desired Joseph had written this history
in the Hebrew tongue before.
Arabians, and those of our nation inhabiting beyond Euphrates, together with
the Adiabenites, to obtain the true knowledge of those events by mine
industry; whilst the Grecians, and diverse of those, who have not born arms
with the Romans, being distracted with factions, and deceived by adulation,
should be ignorant hereof. Yet some of these there be, who (notwithstanding
their false informations) The glory of the Romans is diminished if you deroga^
from their labou^s at the siege of Jerusalem.
the Romans valor in conquering the Jews, they nothing at all respect the
continuance of the wars, nor the multitude of the Roman soldiers, nor the
honor of their captains, whose titles are much embased if they (having
labored so much to conquer Jerusalem) should have any thing derogated from the
honor and prosperity of their attempts. For mine own part I am not resolved
to contradict those who shall enhance the glory and noble actions of the
Romans, neiher to extol and dignifie the deserts of mine own nation, but my
resolution is in all truth and sincerity to set down each occurrent, without
respect or partiality toward either part. In performance whereof I will
fashion Titus Caesar himself can justify, who destroyed the same, and who
during all those wars still pitied the Titus his piety toward the Jews.
people, for that they (as he well perceived) were kept in awe by ^he
seditious: And who oftentimes of his own accord deferred the surprisall of the
City, purposely protracting the siege, to the intent that in the mean time
the authors of the sedition and bloody wars might have leisure to repent and
submit themselves. Now if any man think that I write this, as one that
exclaimeth against the tyrants and their the eueries, or that in bewailing the
miseries of my lost country, I accuse their villainies, All calamities that
happened sithence the beginning of the world being compared with those the Jews
suffered are of no moment.
and thereby transgress the limits of a history, let it be imputed to my
grief and so pardoned.

And to increase our sorrow, no forrainers but our own familiar friends and
countrymen have been the actors of our tragedy. This considered, if any man of
too severe and stoicall judgment shall reprehend this my lamentation, let such
a one attribute the deeds I recount, to the history which I write; and reserve
the lamentations and sorrows thereof to me, who am the historiographer:
although in my mind I may justly challenge the smoothe tounged Grecians, for
that (notwithstanding these our so miserable, and so memorable wars happened in
their days, in respect whereof all other former troubles The Grecian
Historiographers ouerpasse the wars of the Jews with silence.
Who may rightly be called a Historiographer.
ears of the Greeks and Romans. For as touching their own learned men, their
mouths are always open to gains and controversies, and to this purpose their
tongues still run on pattens: marie if they come to a history wherein they
should both tell truth, and with great labor enquire of those things that are
past, here are they mum, the travel is too tedious, the bit is in their teeth,
so that they leave

Since therefore the Grecians make no account of the truth of history, it
behooves us both to esteem and honor it. Now to discover unto you the
original of the Jews, what their estate has been in times past, and after
what manner they departed out of Egypt, to show what countries the^ conquered,
and what colonies they planted, were in my judgment both impertinent and to
little purpose; considering that diverse of mine own nation have before my time
made and written an exact history of the Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, took
the City of Jerusalem, and possessed the same for the space of three years,
and six months: and finally how Antiochus Epiphanes the first author and
fountain of the wars of the Jews.
he was dri^en out of that country by the Asmo^eans. After this I will set
down the dissensions that happened amongst Antiochus successors for the
kingdom; and how by this means they drew Pompey and the Romans into the
managing and meddling with their affairs. How Herod likewise the son of
Antipater, being assisted by Sosius, utterly overthrew and canceld their
felicity and authority: and Augustus Caesar's time and after the death of
Herod, and during the government of Quintilius Varo, a sedition ^s raised among
the people: and how in the tw^ year of Neros reign the war began to take
head and continuance. That likewise which happened in Cestius time, and what
The Epirom^ of the warre^ of the Jews.
warlike executions the Jews performed in their first attempts and reuolts,
how they strengthened the Cities and forts about them, and how Nero (hearing of
the great ^er throw which his army received under Cestius their General, and
fearing least he should lose all) made Titus Vespasian the General of his
army: who being attended by his eldest son, came into Iudaea accompanied with
as great a company of Romans as he could possibly gather: what number of their
allies invaded and spoiled Galilee, what Cities they surprised in that place,
e^r by forcible assault, or by any other composition. Besides all these things,
I will express what order and discipline the Romans observe in their wars, and
wherein they Nero died; and how (at such time as Vespasian had undertaken the
expedition to Jerusalem) he was withheld from the action, to receive and enjoy
the imperial dignity: How at that instant when he retired himself into Egypt
to establish that estate, the Jews began to mutiny among themselves: how many
tyrants arose amongst them, who hatched much civil discord and The signs and
changes after Neroes death.
debate in their government. Again, how Titus departing out of Egypt, came
the second time into Titus besieges Jerusalem
and provision of the City, the situation and platform of the Temple, and
the altars therein: the rites and ceremonies which were used upon festival
days: the 7. purifications and offices of the priests: the garments also of
the high priest; and the holy sanctuary of the temple. All which I will recount
without any dissimulation, or swaruing from the truth of history. After this I
will relate what cruelty the The manners and sacrifices of the Jews.
tyrants used against their own countrymen, and what humanity the Romans
showed toward strangers, and how oftentimes Titus (who desired the safety
both of the City and Temple) provoked and invited the seditious to mutual
amity. Furthermore I will report how the people of the Jews (after these many
The humanity of the Romans toward the Jews.
Caesar's will, and what an infinite mass of sacred treasure was devoured by the
fire. But to shut up the history, I will annex the surprisall of the City,
The burning of the temple, and the overthrow of the city. The Romans triumph
over the Jews. The cause why he wrote this history.
and what signs and wonders happened before the same: the captivity also of the
tyrants themsel^es, and the number of those that were led away into captivity:
and what misery every one of them end^red how the Romans continuing their
wars utterly raced the fortresses of their captives: finally, how Titus in
travailing through the whole country, established a for me of government
therein; and afterward returning into Italy, triumphed with much honor. All
these things have I comprehended in seven

THE FIRST BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 1. book.
1 The destruction of Jerusalem by Antiochus. 2 The succession of Princes from
Jonathan, until Aristobulus time. 3 Of Aristobulus, Antigonus, Judas Essaeus,
Alexander, Theodore and Demetrius. 4 Of the war attempted between Alexander,
Antiochus and Aretas, and of Alexandra and Hircanus. 5 Of the war between
Hircanus and the Arabians, and of the Expugnation of Jerusalem. 6 Of the war
of Alexander with Hircanus and Aristobulus. 7 Of the death of Aristobulus, and
the war of Antipater against Mithridates. 8 How Antipater was accused before
Caesar, and how Hircanus was high priest, and Herod beg^ to make war. 9 Of
the dissension of the Romans after Caesar's death, and of Malichus his deceits.
10 How Herod was accused and set free. 11 Of the war of the Parthians against
the Jews, and of Herod's flight and fortune. 12 Of Herod's war for the
recovering of Jerusalem after his return from Rome, and how he warred against
the thieves. 13 Of Josephus death, brother to Herod; and how Jerusalem was
besieged by the s^e Herod, and how Antigonus was slain. 14 Of the treacherous
practices of Cleopatra against Herod, and of his war against the Arabians,
and of a great earthquake. 15 How Herod was confirmed in the peaceable
possession of the kingdom of Iudaea by Augustus Caesar. 16 Of the Cities and
monuments repaired and builded by Herod, and of his felicity and liberality
toward strangers. 17 Of the discord betwixt Herod and his two sons Alexander
and Aristobulus. 18 Of Antipaters conspiracy against his father Herod. 19 How
Herod should have been poisoned, and how the treason was discovered. 20 How
Antipaters practices against Herod were known, and punished. 21 Of the golden
Eagle, and of Antipater and Herod's death.
CHAP. I.
How Jerusalem was destroyed by Antiochus.

AT such time as Antioch^ surnamed Epiphanes, made war against Sextus
Pompeius for the whole government of Syria, there arose a sedition among The
year of the world, 3802 before Christ's birth 162. Ant. li. 12. ca. 6.
Antiochus being stirred up by (...) so^ inuadeth Iudaea, and surpriseth
Jerusalem. Ant lib. 15. cap. 4.
the Jews; wherein every one endeavored himself to have the sovereignty over
others; and those of chiefest authority and nobility amongst the rest, Onias
(who was one of the high priests) having gotten the upper hand, did drive the
sons of To^ias out of the City; who flying to Antiochus for refuge, besought
him in all humility that he would lead his forces into Iudaea, offering
themselves to be his guides in that expedition and voyage. Antiochus (who long
before that time desired such an occasion) easily condescended to their
requests; and leuying a great army, entered their country, and took the city
by force, and ^ue the most part of them, who fauou^ed The year of the world.
3802. before the birth of Christ. 162. The high priest On^ flies to Ptolomey.
Ant. lib. 1^. cap. 7.
Ptolomy and giving his soldiers liberty to sack the cit^e, he himself
spoiled the temple also; and for the space of three years and six months,
forbad al sacrifices and ceremonies, which before time were accustomed and used
in that place: Whereupon: Onias the high Priest fled unto Ptolomey, and having
obtained a grant of a piece of ground from him, within the liberties and
precinct of Heliopolis, he built a town and temple in that place, resembling
the city and sanctuary in Jerusalem.

But neither was Antiochus satisfied with the unexpected surprise of the city,
nor with the pillage Antiochus alters the customs of the Jews.
and slaughter of the citizens, but was so far transported by his passions, and
incensed with the remembrance of those evils which he sustained during the
siege of the city, that he compelled t^ Jews to forsake the customs of their
country; commanding them from that time forward to vs^ no more Bacchides being
made chief of the garrisons by the appointment of Antiochus, what with
Bacchides cr^eltie toward the Jews. Ant. lib. 1. cap. 7. 8.
his innated cruelty, and the impious commandment that was left him, omitted
no occasion to further his wicked impiety, insomuch as he particularly
tormented such as were of noble birth, and quality: so that each day for the
most part; he represented unto them the fresh face and memory of the
desolation of their city, till all of them at the last being provoked and
whe^d on through the grieuousnes of that which both themselves and others
endured, addressed themselves with confidence to prosecute the^ revenge. A^
length Matthias the son of Asmoneus one of the Priests, who was borne in a
village called Modin, accompanied with his five sons and his Matthias
confederated with others makes war again^ Antiochus.
Bacchides: and fearing the power and multitude of the enemies garrisons,
speedily retired himself into the mountains. Thither resorted diverse of the
people unto him, for which cause he waxing more confident and courageous, came
down from the mountains, and ouercomming the captains of Antiochus, drove
them out of the borders of Iudaea. At such time therefore as through his happy
success he became potent, and was by common consent of the people (for that he
had delivered them from the subjection of strangers) made their ruler: he
died, leaving his eldest son, who was called Judas to succeed him in the
government. Who fearing least Antiochus would still continue wars against him,
gathered together an army of his countrymen, and was the first amongst the
Jews that made a league with the Romans; and drove back Antiochus Epiphanes
at such time as he enforced himself

Scarcely was the city brought to the former estate, but Antiochus died, who
left a son and Antiochus dies, and leaves the kingdom to his son
Antiochus, who gathers a huge power and inuadeth Jury. Ant. lib. 12. cap.
14. 15. Eleazar dies being slain b^ an Elephant.
the Jews, who having gathered together fifty thousand footmen, and almost
five thousand horsemen, and fourscore Elephants, entered by the mountains of
Iudaea, and took a town named Bethsara, near which Judas met him in a place
called Bethzacharie, where the passage was something straight: and before the
armies joined battle, Eleazar Judas brother seeing one Elephant higher then
the rest; bearing a great tower on his back, and adorned with golden
furniture, thinking Antiochus had been there, ran from his company, and
breaking the ranks of the enemies, came unto the Elephant; but he could not
reach him (whom he deemed to be the king) he was so highly mounted; for which
cause wounding the Elephant in the belly, the Elephant fell upon him, and
pressed him to death: which act of his had no other success but this, that by
attempting Antiochus Eleazar preferred honor before life.
had been there, Eleazar had achieved nothing else in this his valiant
attempt; but yet he adventured his life under hope to perform some valiant
exploit. And this act of his was a presage unto his brother of the event of the
whole war that ensued. For the Jews fought stoutly, and a long time, but yet
Antiochus army (being both more in number and more prosperous) obtained the
vic^rie; so Judas therefore after the loss of many of his company, fled unto
the Gophonites The year of the world. 3802. before Christ's birth 162.
Antiochus departing from Jerusalem leaves* sufficient garrison there. Ant.
lib. 12. cap. 18. ludas fights with Atiochu^ captains, and is slain.
with those of his side who escaped: And Antiochus went to Jerusalem, from
whence after some stay he departed for want of necessaries, leaving a
sufficient garrison; as for the rest of his army, he led them for the winter
time into Syria. Yet notwithstanding the kings departure Judas rested not, but
encouraged by many of his nation, who daily came unto him, and gathering also
together those who escaped out of the former battle, at a village named Ada^a
he fought with Antiochus captains, where after much and many approbations of
his valor in assaulting and slaughtering a great number of his enemies, he
himself at length was slain, and within a few days after his brother John
also was slain and betrayed by their trecheries, who favored Antiochus.

CHAP. II.
Of the succession of Princes from Ionathas until Aristobulus.

AFter him succeeded his brother Ionathas, who carefully studied for the peace
and security Ant. li. 13. c2. 1. The year of the world 3805. befoer Christ's
Nativity. 159. Ionath as taken by Tryphons subtilue is slain
of his people, and fortified himself by the friendship of the Romans, and was
reconciled to Antiochus his son; yet did none of all these things profit him
or acquit him from danger. For the tyrant Tryphon (who was tutour to Antiochus)
laying wait for him, and seeking to spoil him of his friends, took Ionathas at
such time as he came with a small company to Antiochus who was at Ptolemais,
and binding him, lead an army against Iudaea: from whence. being repulsed by
Simon Ionathas brother and overcome by him, in displeasure and revenge thereof,
he slew Ionathas.

But Simon valiantly bestirring himself in the government and guide of the
affairs of the commonwealth, took Zara, Ioppe, and Iamnia (which were
bordering towns): and ouercomming Ant. lib. 15. cap. 9. The year of the
world, 3823. before Christ's birth 141.
the garrison at Accaron, he destroyed the city, and assisted Antiochus
against Tryphon who besieged Dora, before that expedition which he made against
the Medes. Yet would not the greedy mind of the king be satisfied,
notwithstanding that Simon had thus faithfully served and assisted him in the
death of Tryphon; but that within short time after, he sent unto Cendebeus (who
was the general of the army) commanding him to sack and spoil Iudaea, and
to take Simon, Simon encou^treth with Cendebeus, and overcomes him. Ant. lib.
13. cap. 14. Simon by the treachery of his son in law Ptolemaeus is taken and
slain. John otherwise called Hircanus the son of Simon.
and make him a slave. But Simon though aged in years, fought both youthfully
and valiantly, and sent his sons with the most resolute men he had, before
against Antiochus, and himself with the residue of his army, assaulted another
quarter of their enemies camp; and having laid many Ptolemaeus his son in law,
he was murdered at a banquet, who imprisoning his wife and two sons, sent
certain men to kill the third son, whose name was John, otherwise called
Hircanus. But the young man understanding the success of his fathers voyage,
hasted unto the city accompanied with a great multitude; for he greatly hoped
that the people would remember his fathers prowes, especially because
Ptolemaeus iniquity was hated of all men; Ptolemaeus also hasted to enter the
city at another gate: but he was speedily repulsed by the people who had
already received Hircanus. For which cause he presently retired himself into
a Castle named Dagon situate beyond The year of the world. 3831. before the
Nati^itie of Christ. 133. Hircanus obtains the honor of the hie priesthood
which his father had. Ptolemaeus cruelty against Hircanus mother and brethren.


After that Hircanus had obtained the office of the high Priest, which was left
him by his father, and had offered sacrifices unto God, he led forth his forces
with all speed against Ptolemaeus, hoping to help and deliver his mother and
brethren that were detained prisoners with him: and assaulting the Castle,
notwithstanding that in all other things he had the better hand, yet was he
overcome by just grief and compassion. For at such time, and so often as
Ptolemaeus perceived himself to be in danger, he brought Hircanus mother and
brethren upon the walls, and beat them where he might behold them in their
torments, threatening to cast them down from the wall except Hircanus would
presently depart. For which cause Hircanus was more moved with compassion and
fear, then with anger and wrath. But his mother being no ways dismayed with
stripes Ptolemaeus, dearer then immortality it self; if so be he might
receive just punishment for the villainy which he had impiously committed
against their house. But when John had perceived the resolute mind of his
mother, and heard her entreaty, he was moved to assault the Castle, and
straight way seeing her beaten and torn, he relented with compassion, and was
even filled with grief. By which means the siege continued long, The year of
the world. 3831. before Christ's birth 133. Ptolemaeus murthereth Hircanus
mother and brethren. The ye^ of the world. 3839. before Christ's birth 125.
Antiochus upon ^e paime^t of three hundredth talents raises his siege.
Ptolemaeus ^liuered from the siege by this accident and occasion, put John's
mother and his brethren to death, and afterward fled to Zeno the tyrant of
Philadelphia, who was also surnamed Cotylas.

In the mean while Antiochus being grievously vexed at that which Simon had
done unto him, sent his army into Iudaea, and besieged Hyrcanus in Jerusalem,
who opening David's Sepulcher (who had been one of the richest among all the
kings of Iudaea) took more then three thousand talents of money from thence;
and wrought so much with Antiochus, that upon the payment of three hundredth
talents of money, he made him raise his siege and depart the country. This
Hyrcanus was the first of all the Jews that with his own goods maintained
outlanders and Antiochus had bent his power and forces against the Medes; he
took handfast of that opportunity he had offered him, to revenge himself,
and presently assaulted the towns of Syria, assuring himself he should find
them (as indeed they were) void of soldiers to defend them. Whereupon he
took Medaba and Samea, with the places thereunto adjoining, Sichem and
Garizim, which border upon the Chuthaeans, who inhabit the places adioining to
the temple, that is made after the imitation of that which is at Jerusalem.
Moreover, he Ant. lib. 13. cap 15. Aristobulus and Antigonus besiege Sebaste.
took many Cities of Idumaea, and amongst the rest Doreon, and Marisa: and
coming into Samaria (where now Sebaste is situate, which was builded by
Herod) he besieged it on every side, and left his two sons Aristobulus and
Antigonus, to continue the siege, who diligently besieged the place. There was
such a famine in the City, that they were constrained to eat unaccustomed
Antiochus surnamed Spondius, who Sebaste overthrown and spoiled.
willingly assisted them, but he was overcome by Aristobulus and Antigonus, and
was pursued by the foresaid brethren unto Scythopolis, whither he then retired
himself: but they retiring again unto Samaria, besieged the City, and at last
taking it by force, destroyed the same, and led away the inhabitants captives.
Whilst thus fortune favored them more and more, they cea^ed not to pursue
their good success, but led their army to Scythopolis, and taking it, they
divided and spoiled all the country.

CHAP. III.
Of Aristobulus, Antigonus, Judas Essaeus, Alexander, Theodorus, and

THis felicity and good hap of John and his sons, was accompanied with the
envy of The seditios overcome in war. John after he had happily governed the
country for 30. years space dies.
many of his countrymen, and this discontent of theirs was the cause of a
mutiny. For diverse of the Jews rising up in arms against them, were so much
ouerruled by their ambitious passion, that they could not contain themselves
from the prosecution of an open and bloody war: wherein notwithstanding they
were put to the worst. From that day forward John passed the remainder of his
life in all felicity and happiness; and after he had governed the common weal
for the space of thirty three years, he departed this life, leaving behind
him five valiant sons. He was a man truly happy, and so favored by fortune,
that he had no occasion The year of the world. 3861. before Christ's birth 103.
Aristobulus, after his fathers death translated the principality into a Ant.
lib. 13. cap. 19.
kingdom; and was the first that put a crown on his head; four hundredth,
eighty and one years, and three months after the deliverance of the people
from the captivity of Babylon. As for Antigonus (who was his second brother,
and whom in appearance he seemed to love most entirely) he made him partaker of
his dignity, and committed the refidue of them to prison. He Aristobulus
sa^misheth his mother. Aristobulus loved Antigonus very deerly.
John had so^y committed to her dispose) and was so far given over to all
kind of cruelty, that he not only kept her prisoner in bonds: but also put
her to death by famine. But the revenge of this his impiety was this, that he
slaughtered his own brother Antigonus whom he entirely beloved; and made both
a competitor and partner with him in the kingdom. For by reason of those
scandalous slanders, which his envious and malignant courtiers contrived and
invented against him, he commanded him to be put to death. Naithelesse upon
their first information The year of the world. 3861. af^ Christ's birth 103.
Aristobulus (ouermastered by brotherly affection) gave them no credit, the
rather for that he was certainly assured, that all things for the most part
which were objected against him, were rather enforced upon envy, then
alleged on good ground.

But when as Antigonus returned from the war, attended with many testimonies
of his valor and prowess, upon that festival time, wherein according to the
custom of our country, we celebrate the feast of Tabernacles; it happened at
that very time, that Aristobulus fell sick and Antigonus in honor of his
brother ascended up into the temple. Antigonus falsely accused to his brother.
was diseased. Antigonus therefore about the end of those festival days being
attended by his armed men, ascended up into the Temple to offer sacrifice, and
the rather resorted he thither in greater pomp and majesty, because he
intended to honor his brother. Hereupon certain cursed and wicked detractors
repaired to the king, buzzing in his ears, that this great guard of Antigonus,
and that his hautie resolution and kingly presence was rather for a sovereign,
then a subject: inferring hereby, that he entered the City in this Equipage,
with an intent to murder him, not contenting himself to have the only honor
of the kingdom, except he might reduce the power and possession thereof into
his own hands. Aristobulus though unwillingly, yet at last being won to
believe them, desirous in seeming not to Aristobulus commands his guard that
if Antigonus came armed they should kill him.
suspect, to show himself provident, commanded his guard to hide themselves in
a certain obscure place under the ground: as for himself he took up his
lodging in a certain Castle which in times past was called Bari, and
afterward Antonia; giving his archers this commission, that if Antigonus came
unarmed they should let him pass, if otherwise, that they should kill him. He
sent certain messengers also to Antigonus, requiring him to repair unto him
disarmed. But The Queens cunning Stratageme against Antigonus.
acted by those, that with her conspired against him. For she persuaded those
that were put in trust to discharge this message, to discover nothing of that,
which the king had commanded them: but to signify unto Antigonus, that his
brother having intelligence, that he had made himself many accomplished and
complete armours, with other fair and worthy furniture for the war in
Galilee (which by reason of Antigonus sudden departure from that place and his
own instant infirmity he might not behold) would count it no little favor
and felicity to behold and see him in his warlike ornaments. Which when
Antigonus understood (who by reason of his brothers disposition suspected no
mischief) he armed himself, and resorted unto him, intending to delight and
content him with his musters. But no sooner arrived he in the straight which
Antigonus suspecteth not his brother.
is called the tower of Straton, but the guard of Aristobulus set upon him, and
slaughtered him, yielding by this means a demonstratiue and certain
testimony, that detraction distracteth and destroieth all good nature and
friendship, and that amongst all our most accounted affections, there is no one
so defenced and fortified as may abate the edge of envy.

At this time also who would not wonder at a certain man called Judas? who
being by birth an Essean, was blessed with this felicity in his prophecies,
that his predictions were neither touched with mistaking, or tainted with
lying. This man perceiving how Antigonus passed through the temple, cried out to
his familiars who attended him in no small number (for ordinarily diverse Judas
the prophet foretells Antigo^ death.
of his disciples did attend upon him:) Ah said he, how happy were it for me at
this present if I were dead, since that truth dies before me; and some one of
my predictions are found faulty and Antigonus yet lives, who should this day
have dwelt with death. The place which was destinated for his departure is the
tower of Straton, which is distant from this place some six hundredth stounds,
and yet notwithstanding there are but for hours of the day to be past: now
therefore is the time wherein my divination shall be falsified. Having spoken
to this effect, the old man sat him down being altogether disconsolate and
pensive, until such time as within a while after it was told him that
Antigonus was slain in a place under ground, which was called the tower of
Straton, being of the same name with Caesarea which is situate upon the sea
coast; which was the occasion that Judas staggered in his divination. The
sorrow which incontinently seized Aristobulus, for committing this heinous
murder augmented, and increased Aristobulus through the grief he conceived at
his brothers death falls sick. A servant spilleth blood in the same place
where Antigo^us was slain.
his sickness in such sort, that his soul was continually troubled with the
thought of his sin, Antigonus had been slain, wherein as yet there appeared
some signs and stains of the bloodshed of Antigonus, on which he powered out
the blood of the murderer Aristobulus. Which when they perceived who stood
hard at hand, they began to cry out with a loud voice, as if the servant The
year of the world. 3862. before the birth of Christ. 102.
had purposely spilled the blood in that place. Aristobulus hearing this cry,
demanded the cause thereof, and the more that each man fled and feared to
discover the same unto him, the more instantly sought he to understand the
truth; so that at length after he had used threats and violence, he was
certified by some one of that which had past. Whereupon his eyes were suddenly
filled with tears, so that in vehement agony of mind, he at last cried out
and said: It is impossible, but that the great eye of the divine majesty
should see my wicked acts, and the sudden vengeance The eye of God discovers
every sin.
of my brothers bloodshed should pursue and overtake me. How long; O thou
impudent body, will thou detain a soul already condemned and adjudged to my
mother and dead brother? How long shall I thus lingeringly languish in spending
a parcel of my blood unto them? Aristobulus dies milerably.
Let them take it all at once, and let not the divine vengeance laugh any
longer to see the effusion

His wife after his death delivered his brother Alexander from prison, and
anointed him king, who was both the eldest and seemed to be the most staiedst
among the rest of his brethren. Who growing by this means to be both proud and
potent, put one of his brethren to death, for aspiring Ant lib. 13. cap 9.
Alexander advanced to the kingdom v^eth much cruelty.
and hunting after the kingdom: as for the other that remained alive, in that
he contented himself with a private and contemplative life, he kept him near
about him. He made war also against Ptolomey that was called Lathyrus, who
had surprised the City of Asoch, and put a great number of his enemies to the
sword: naithelesse Ptolomies side obtained the victory, who retiring himself
into the country of Egypt, by reason that his mother Cleopatra pursued him
with open war; Alexander forcibly entered the City of Gadara, and the fort of
Amathunt (which Alexander is overthrown by Theodore.
Theodore Zenos son had hoorded up his chiefest and most precious mooueables,
who suddenly setting upon him recovered all that which was his, and furthermore
laid hands on the kings carriage: in seazing which, he slaughtered many Jews,
to the number of ten thousand. But Alexander after he had recovered this loss,
invaded the frontier towns upon the sea coast, and wan Raphia, and Gaza, and
Anthedon, which afterward by king Herod was called Agrippias. But after he had
conquered and overcome these places, the common sort of the Jews raised a
mutiny against him during The sedition of the Jews against Alexander upon a
festival day.
a certain solemn and holy feast: for all mutinies and seditions are commonly
raised at banquets: and it is thought that he could not have prevailed against
those treacheries, had he not been assisted by the Pisidians and Cilicians,
whom he hired to help him; for the Syrians he refused to Theodorus was
Alexander assaileth the castle of Amathunt and raseth i^.
daunted with his prosperous success, he finding the Castle without any to
defend it, rased it unto the ground. After this, he presently assaulted Oboda
king of the Arabians, who having laid ambushments in the country of Galaad, in
a place fit for such a purpose, discomfited him and his whole army being driven
thence into a deep valley, where they were pestered with a multitude of Camels.

But Alexander escaped unto Jerusalem, where the people who had conceived a
hatred against him being encouraged by his great loss and slaughter of men,
began again to rebel: but then Demetrius comes to help ye Jews.
that when he demanded of them what he might do to win their favors, they
answered; if he would die, for that scarcely they would pardon him if so be he
were dead, who had committed so many heinous crimes. And thereupon the Jews
sent unto Demetrius surnamed A^aerus for Ant. lib. 13. cap. 20.
help, who in hope of great rewards came and joined his forces with the Jews
about Sichem: where Alexander met them both with a thousand horsemen and six
thousand footmen, that were hired (having at that time ten thousand Jews his
favorites) and of the contrary part there were The war betwixt Demetrius
and Alexander, wherein Demetrius is conqueror.
sent messengers one unto another army, persuading one another men to forsake
their colors and captains: for Demetrius hoped that Alexanders hired men
would have forsaken Alexander and come unto him, and Alexander hoped that the
Jews that followed Demetrius would have left Demetrius and come to him. But
when both parties perceived that the Jews continued obstinate in their
purpose, and the Greeks kept their fidelity, the two armies encountered; in
which encounter Demetrius had the upper hand (although Alexanders hirelings
evidently showed The ye^e of the world. 3^62. before Christ's birth 10^ The
Jews revolt from De^trius.
strength and courage.) But the end of this victory was such as neither party
expected, for they who sent for Demetrius, after his victory did forsake him;
and fortune changing her colors six thousand Jews fled unto Alexander into
the mountains, whither for saferie he had betaken himself. This reuolting
much displeased and discouraged Demetrius, for he now thought that Alexander
uniting his forces was able to bid him battle, and he feared that all the Jews
would at that present follow Alexander: for which cause he returned home. Yet
the rest of the Jews having thus lost the help of Demetrius, would not for
all this desist from their rebellion; nay they so long warred with Alexander,
till at last (the most of them being slain) he drove the rest into the city
of Bemeselin, and when he had surprised and sacked the city, he led them
captives into Jerusalem. But immoderate anger turned his cruelty into
impiety, for having crucified eight hundredth captives Ale^a^ders immoderate
wrath, who crucified eight hundredth captives. Alexander cease from war.
in the midst of the city, he killed their wives, and the children he
massacred before their mothers faces: and this pitiful spectacle he beheld
with pleasure, drinking and making merry with his concubines. Whereat the
people were so terrified, that the night after eight thousand of the contrary
part fled out of the country of Iudaea, who stayed in banishment during the
life of Alexander. Thus, after he had by those actions sought for the
tranquillity of his kingdom, which he obtained not but with long time and
great difficulty, he ceased to make war against his country.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the war of Alexander with Antiochus, and Aretas, and of Alexandra,
Hircanus.

AFter this Antiochus (who likewise was called Dionysius the brother to
Demetrius, who was the last of all the race of Seleucus) raised up new broiles
against Alexander, who Alexander fears Antiochus Demetri^s brother.
fearing him because he had prepared war against the Arabians, drew a deep
trench along that ground which lies between Antipatris, and the sea coast of
Ioppe: and before the trench he builded a very high wall, and raised towers of
wood to hinder his enemies passage. But all this could not keep out Antiochus,
but that burning the towers, and filling up the trenches, he entered and passed
over them with his forces. And not tarrying at that time to revenge himself of
him who had thus forbidden him passage ^he presently marched forward against
The king of the Arabian^ inuade^ Antiochus souldie^ unawares. The king of
Arabia puts Antiochus forces to flight and kills a great number of them.
They of Damasco, and A^ctas against Alexander.
ten thousand) rushed hastily upon Antiochus soldiers, and found them
unprovided: so that a hot skirmish began betwixt them, in which the soldiers
of Antiochus, whilst he lived, showed themselves valiant (though they were on
every side massacred by the Arabians) but so soon as he was slain (who was
always ready to assist those that were in danger) all of them fled: and the
greatest part of them were slain in the battle and in flight: as for those
that escaped, they fled into the town of Cana, where they all (except a very
few) died for hunger. After this the people of Damascus being incited by the
hatred they bare to Ptolomey the son of Mineus, sent for Aretas, and
established him King over Coelesyria: who warring against Iudaea, and
ouercomming Alexander in battle, retired him^lfe upon composition. Alexander
having taken Pella, resorted once more to the town of Gerasa, in that he was
desirous of Theodorus riches; and took the place, notwithstanding that it was
fo^ified with three walls: and that upon every wall there was planted a
garrison. He took Gaulan and Seleucia, and that town which is called the
valley of Antiochus. Moreover having taken Gamala, which was a most strong
castle, and imprisoned the governor thereof who was called Demetrius, because
he was a wicked person, he returned into Iudaea; after he had spent three
years in warr^s: where for his prosperous success he was joyfully received of
his nation. But no sooner ceased he from war but he fell sick, and Alexander
sick of a quartane feu^r. Ant. lib. 13. cap. 2^. Alexandra Alexanders wife
through the opinion of virtue obtains the kingdom.
falling into a quartaine ague, he thought that he should drive away his
sickness, if he employed himself in some business: for which cause being not rid
of his disease, he applied himself to Alexandra his wife, fully acou^ting that
the Jews would in all things obey her, because that she always by misliking
and seeking to hinder his cruelty and iniquity had woone the hearts of the
people. Neither was he doceiued, for she being admired for her piety amongst
them obtained the principality: the rather for that she was well acquainted
with the customs of her country, and even from her childhood detested them,
who violated the holy law. She had by Alexander two sons, the eldest was
called The year of the world. 3862. before Christ's Nativity. 102. Hyrcanus
first made high priest, and afterward king. The Pharisees getting in favor
with the Queen are made her chief governors, and enjoy all honors. Alexandra
willingly obeieth the Pharisees. The Pharisees by their enuies and acculatio^s
are the death of many good men.
Hircanus, whom by reason of his years she proclaimed high priest; and because
of his dull nature she thought that though he were in princely authority, yet
he would molest no man: and therefore also made him king. As for the youngest
son Aristobulus, because he was of a hot spirit, she was willing that he should
live a private life.

Now there was a certain sect among the Jews which were called Pharisees, who
joined themselves with the Queen: these people were thought to be of the
godliest sort, and to be more skillful then other in interpreting the
scriptures: and for that cause Alexandra favored them the more, because she
was superstitiously given to religion. These having by little and little
insinuated themselves into the favor of a simple woman, now did domineere at
their pleasure, displacing, deposing, imprisoning, and restoring to liberty
whom they pleased, for no other purpose, but Alexandra bare all charges. This
Queen was always desirous of high attempts, and daily studied to increase her
wealth: she levied two armies, and hired a great many strangers, whereby she
did not only strengthen her own country, but also made her self to be
feared of other nations. She ruled others, but her self was ruled by the
Pharisees, who at last killed Diogenes, who was a gallant man, and highly in
favor with king Alexander; affirming that through his counsel the king
commanded those eight hundred before mentioned to be crucified: and further,
they persuaded the Queen Alexandra, that she should put to death all others,
through whose counsel Alexander her husband had been incited against those
eight hundred. The Queen being blinded with superstition, thought it unlawful
to deny any thing which they requested: so tha^ they put to death Aristobulus
expostul^teth with his mother.
came to Aristobulus, who persuaded his mother to spare them for their
dignity, and banish others, whom she thought had deserved punishment: who
having obtained their liberty, dispersed themselves through the whole country.
Now Alexandra sent an army to Damascus, and because Ptolomeus daily vexed the
city, she took it without doing any thing worthy of memory: she did solicit
Tigranes king of Armenia with gifts and promises (who with an army had
besieged Ptolemais, wherein Cleopatra was) but he for fear of troubles in his
own country, in Aristobulus proclaims himself king. Alexandra imprisoneth
A^stobulus wife and children. The year of the world. 3873 before the Nati^itie
of Christ. 95. Alexandra dies, and Hyrcanus succeeds her in the kingdom.
Ant. lib. 14. cap. 1. The brethren contending for the kingdom are accorded
upon certain conditions. Ant. lib. 14. ca. 2. 3. 4
that Lucullus had entered into Armenia, withdrew himself from thence.

In the mean time Alexandra being sick, her youngest son Aristobulus with
his servants (which were many in number, and all trusty for the heat their
young years) got all the castles, and Alexandra (pitying the complaints of
Hircanus) imprisoned the wife and children of Aristobulus in a castle near
unto the North part of the temple, which in old time was called Baris (as we
said before) afterward Antonius being Emperor, it was called Antonia, as in
like manner Sebaste and Agrippias other cities, were named of Augustus and
Agrippa. But Alexandra died before she could revenge Hircanus of the wrongs
which Aristobulus had done him. This Queen reigned nine years, and left
Hircanus in possession of al, whom during her life time she had advanced to the
kingdom. But Aristobulus being both stronger in power, and more esteemed in
authority, encountered with his brother about Jericho, where many of Hircanus
soldiers forsaking their king fled unto Aristobulus: for which cause, both he
and the remna^t of those that followed him, were forced Aristobulus wife and
children were imprisoned in that place: and least any worse mishap should
betide him, he concluded a peace, upon condition that Aristobulus should be
king, and that he as brother to the king, would content himself with other
dignities. Upon these conditions they were made friends in the Temple, where in
the presence of all the people, they in most friendly sort embraced each other:
which when they had done, they changed houses, and Aristobulus went into the
kings palace, and Hircanus unto Aristobulus his house.

CHAP. V.
Of the war between Hircanus and the Arabians, and of the taking of
Antipater persuades Hyrcanus to fly to Aretas king of Arabia, and to crave
his assistance to recover his kingdom.


NOw a sudden fear invaded all the enemies of Aristobulus when they saw him
(contrary to all expectation) made king; and especially Antipater above all
others, whom Aristobulus a long time had hated. This Antipater was an Idumaean
borne, and for his nobility and riches was the chiefest and best reputed of
his nation. This man persuaded Hircanus to fly unto Aretas king of Arabia, and
crave his help to set him in his kingdom. Furthermore he The year of the
world, 3873 before Christ's birth 95. Antipater with Hyrcanus fly from
Jerusalem by night to Aretas king of Arabia. Aretas furnishes Hyrcanus with
50000 soldiers. Scaurus captain of the Romans.
persuaded Aretas likewise to receive Hyrcanus, and to help him to recover his
kingdom, speaking much against the manners of Aristobulus, and praising
Hyrcanus: adding that he being king of so famous a nation ought to assist those
who were unjustly oppressed; and that Hyrcanus had manifest injury offered
him, being forced to forsake his kingdom, which by the right of succession was
due unto him. After he had thus made his way, he in the night time took
Hyrcanus and fled with him forth of the City: and making all haste possible,
they arrived at a town called Petra, with safety (which is a town where the
kings of Arabia were accustomed to keep their court) there he delivered
Hyrcanus into the kings hands, and through many gifts and entreaties obtained
the favor that he might be conducted into his kingdom. And to the effecting
of the same, Aretas gave him an army of fifty thousand horse and foot: which
power since Aristobulus Scaurus a captain of the Romans by taking opportunity
at those troubles, had notraised the siege. For Pompey the Great (who warred
againg Tigranes) sent him out of Armenia into Syria, who coming to Damascus,
found it newly taken by Metellus and Lolius, who dismissing them from thence,
and finding how matters stood in Iudaea, The year of the world. 3899. before
Christ's birth 65.
hasted thither in hope of a booty. So soon as he entered into the confines of
the country both of the brethren sent ambassadors unto him, desiring him to
take their parts: but Aristobulus having sent him three hundredth talents he
neglected to do Justice; for having received that sum, Scaurus sent messengers
unto the Arabians and Hyrcanus, threatening the displeasure of the Romans
Scaurus receibeth 300. talents from Atistobulus and commands the Arabians and
Hyrcanus to depart out of the country. Antipater and Hyreanus seek for
Pompeies help. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 6. 7.
and Pompey, except they would presently raise their siege: for which cause
Aretas being Scaurus repaired unto Damascus. Yet sufficed it not Aristobulus,
that he had escaped from being taken, but that gathering all his forces
together, he pursued his enemies: and joining battle with them about Papyron,
he slew six thousand of them, in which number was Cephalon Antipaters brother.
But Hyrcanus and Antipater being destitute of the Arabians help, were driven
to hope for succor even at their adversaries hand. For which cause, as soon
as Pompey after he had entered Syria came to Damascus, they in humble manner
came to him, and giving him many gifts protested unto him that which before
they had done to Aretas; earnestly requesting him, that he would consider the
violence offered by Aristobulus: and restore Hyrcanus to the kingdom, to whom
both by years and manners it was due.

Mean while Aristobulus slept not, but having corrupted Scaurus, came in as
royal pomp as he could; but not abiding to debase himself, and thinking it a
disparagement in more abject manner then beseemed a king to seek his own
commodity, returned from Diospolis. Whereat Pompey furnished both with the
Syrians and Roman army, sets forth against Aristobulus. Pompey commands
Aristobulus to descend. Aristobulus resorteth to Pompey.
Pompey being angry at the request of Hyrcanus and his followers, he went
against Aristobulus, accompanied both with the Roman army and the Syrians, who
assisted them. When they had passed Pella and Scythopolis, and came to Corea
(where the confines of Iudaea begins) as they passed through the midst of the
country, they understood that Aristobulus was fled to Alexandriu^ (which was a
Castle richly built and situate upon a very high hill.) Pompey arriving in
that place sent messengers unto him, commanding him to descend; but he because
he was called in question about the kingdom, determined rather to hazard
himself, then obey. But when he saw Pompey: where having alleged many
reasons to show that he had just title unto the crown, he returned again into
the Castle. And afterward being urged by his brother to come and plead his
title, he came and returned thither again, without any contradiction from
Pompey. Thus wandered he betwixt hope and fear, and doubting how the matter
would go with him, he came to Pompey as it were to entreat him to pardon all,
and returned again unto the mountain, least he should seem to derogate any
thing from the majesty of a king; yet because Pompey willed him to depart from
his Castles and to warn his governors thereof to do the like (whom he had
commanded to disobey, except they received letters written by his own hand) in
this he fulfilled Pompeies mind: yet being angry and discontented, he
departed into Jerusalem, and now fully determined to fight with Pompey. But
Pompey not thinking it best to let him have time to prepare Aristobulus
intends to fight with Pompey. Hedio * Idumaea.
himself, followed him with all speed, and so much the willinger, because
that near unto Ierico he had news of Mithridates his death, even in the
fruitfullest place of * Iudaea, where there are great store of palms and
balm. This balsome is a shrub whose stem being cut with sharp stones droppeth
balm out of the wounds thereof, which men gather as it droppeth from the
wounds thereof. After he had rested there that night, he in the morning hasted
to Jerusalem: The year of the world, 3903. before Christ's birth 61. Pompey
besieges Jerusalem. Aristobulus humbly presents himself to Pompey. Ant.
lib. 14. cap. 7. 8. Pompey vieweth the city which way it might most easily be
battered. Sedition within the city betwixt Hircanus and Aristobulus friends.
Pompey and his enter the city and search the kings house. Aristobulus with his
friends fly to the temple. Pompey fills up the trench, and observes the
seventh day. Pompey builds towers upon his platformes.
Aristobulus being daunted, in humble manner came unto him, and promising him
money, and to yield himself and the City into his hands, he by this means
appeased Pompeies anger. But he performed no part of his promise; for
Aristobulus his associates would not suffer Gabinius (who was sent for the
money) to enter into the City: For which cause Pompey being moved to
displeasure, put Aristobulus in hold, and coming near the City, he took a
view at what place it might be easiliest entered, for he did not lightly
perceive how he might batter the walls, they were so strong. Moreover, there
was a huge ditch before the wall, and hard by he beheld the Temple so
strengthened, that although the City were taken; yet it might be a second
refuge for the enemy. Whilst thus he long deliberated what to do, there arose
a sedition within the City, wherein Aristobulus confederates thought it meet
to fight, Hyrcanus would that the gates should be opened to Pompey. At last
Aristobulus friends having the worst, fled into the temple, and to the end that
they might fight it out to the last, they cut down the bridge, by which men go
out of the City, into the temple. When the rest had received the Romans into
the City, and delivered unto them the kings palace, Pompey sent a captain
called Piso with soldiers to seize the same; who leaving agarrison in the
town (seeing he could persuade none of them that were in the temple to peace)
prepared all places about it to batter it. All which time Hyrcanus and his
friends showed themselves ready to help them with counsel, and to do
whatsoever they were commanded. Pompey at the north side filled the ditch and
valley with all kind of matter which his soldiers carried, although that by
reason of the huge depth, and for that the Pompey (observing the seventh day,
wherein the Jews religion forced them to abstain from all labor) caused it
to be filled upon those days; forbidding the soldiers to fight at that time,
to the intent he might fill the ditch more conveniently (for it is lawful for
the Jews only to fight for their bodies upon the Sabbath.) At last when the
ditch was filled, and the towers were built upon the rampire, he beat the
walls with those engines which he brought from Tire; but they were beaten
back by those who resisted from the top of the walls, who darted diverse stones
at them. Against the violent power whereof, the towers that were builded in
that quatter, being of a great and goodly building, resisted as valiantly and
as long as they possibly could. But the Romans found but hard measure in this
place, and Pompey admired the constancy of the Jews; who being The Jews
intermit not sacrifice in the midst and heat of the siege.
and most diligently observed all honor and divine service: yea in the very
taking of the place, although every day they were killed at the altar, yet did
they not cease from the lawful rites of their religion. At last in the third
month of the siege, whereas scarcely one tower was beaten down, they brake
into the temple, and the first that attempted to climb over the wall was
Faustus Cornelius Sylas son, and after him two Centurions Furius and Fabius
with their regiments; who compassing the temple about (while some sought to
hide themselves, and other some resisted) they slew them all. There were many
priests also among the rest; who, although they saw the enemies with naked
swords rushing upon them, yet being nothing at all dismayed Twelve thousand
Jews slain in the temple. Pompey and his followers enter the sanctuary.
were slain, but very few Romans: yet many were hurt, and amongst all that
massacre there was nothing so lamentable, as that the holy sanctuary (which
never any man saw before that time) was revealed to strangers. Finally Pompeius
accompanied with his followers, came into the temple, where it was lawful for
none but the high priest to come, and saw the candlesticks, lamps, table,
censors, and all the golden vessels, and whatsoever was within the temple.
Moreover; he Pompeies continency.
thousand talents of holy money: yet did he not take away these things, nor any
thing else belonging to the temple. But the day after it was taken, he commanded
the Sacristans to purge and make clean the temple, and to offer solemn
sacrifice. He likewise proclaimed Hyrcanus high priest (who had in all things
showed himself very forward, and especially at the time of the Hyrcanus made
hic priest
siege:) as also for that he hindered a multitude of swains (who were addressed
for war) from joining themselves with Aristobulus: and therefore like a good
captain got he the good will of The year of the world. 3903 before Christ's
birth 61. Pompey causes the chiefest conspirators to be beheaded. Pompey
delivers many goodly cities from the subjection of the Jews.
the people more by love, then by fear.

Amongst others that were captives there was Aristobulus father in law, who
was also his uncle: as for those that had been the chief cause of these wars;
Pompey caused them to be beheaded. He rewarded Faustus likewise, and those who
fought-valiantly with him, with very rich gifts, and imposed a tribute upon
Jerusalem, and took from that nation the Cities which they had gotten in
Coelesyria: and appointed them to be governed by him who then was president for
the Romans; making them keep within the bounds of their own country. And in
favor of Demetrius of Gadara (a libertine of his) he reedified Gadara, which
the Jews had destroyed: he delivered the Mediterranean Cities from their
government (for they had not as yet destroyed them, because they were suddenly
prevented) namely, Hippon, and Scythopolis, and Pella, and Herod was altered,
who builded most sumptuous buildings in that place, and called it Caesarea. All
these Cities he restored unto the inhabitants and made them under the rule of
Syria. And of this place and Iudaea, and of all places from the borders of
Egypt unto Euphrates, he made Scaurus governor, leaving him two legions of
soldiers. Which done, he took his journey to Rome by Cilicia, leading
Aristobulus and his family captives, who had two daughters Aristobulus and his
family carried to Rome.
and two sons, the elder whereof called Alexander escaped in the way; as for
the younger whose name was Antigonus, he with his sisters was carried to Rome.

CHAP. VI.
Of the war of Alexander with Hyrcanus, and Aristobulus.

AT that time Scaurus took his journey into Arabia, but by the difficulty of
the place he was so hindered, that he could not come to Petra, yet wasted he all
the country adjoining Ant. lib. 14. cap 9. The Arabian is reconciled to
Scaurus. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 10.
to Pella; although whilst he stayed to do this, he endured much evil: For
there arose agreat famine in his army, notwithstanding that Hyrcanus by
Antipaters means sent them victuals. Scaurus also sent the same Hyrcanus as
his familiar friend unto Aretas, to persuade him that by disbursing some sum of
money, he should work his peace: Upon whose motion Aretas condescended and
gave him three hundredth talents, and so Scaurus with his army departed out

In the mean time Alexander the son of Aristobulus (who in the way to Rome
escaped Alexander Aristobulus son gathers a great power against Hyrcacanus.
The year of the world. 3904 before the Nativity of Christ's 60. Alexander
gathers 10000 footmen and 1500. horsemen Antipater with his forces goes out
to meet Alexan^nder.
from Pompey) gathered together a great army, and desperately set upon
Hyrcanus, wasting all Iudaea, which he hoped quickly to win; yea the wall
which was destroyed by Pompey at Jerusalem had been builded up again as he
hoped, had not Gabinius (who was sent into Syria to succeed Scaurus) who had
oftentimes before showed his valor, at that time also with an army come
against Alexander. Who fearing the worst, assembled all the forces that he
could to make resistance, so that he had ten thousand footmen, and a thousand
and five hundredth horsemen: he fortified also the commodious places of the
country, to wit, Alexandrium, Hyrcanium, and Machaerunt, which were near unto
the mountains of Arabia. Gabinius sent Marcus Antonius before Antipaters
company, and other companies of the Jews, whereof Malichus and Pitholaus were
made chief, joined themselves with Marcus Antonius; and presently after them
followed Gabinius, with all his company, who all went to meet Alexander.

But Alexander perceiving himself unable to encounter with all their united
forces, fled: but drawing near unto Jerusalem, he was constrained to hazard
the fight; where losing to the number of six thousand (whereof some three
thousand were taken alive, and other three thousand Alexander fights with his
enemies, and loses six thousand men. Marcus Antonius a captain.
slain) he escaped with the rest. But Gabinius as soon as he came to the
castle called Alexandriu^, understanding that many had forsaken their places,
he by promising them pardon sought to unite them unto him before the war
began: but when he perceived that they hammered on no abject Marcus Antonius
did many things worthy of renown, and although he had always and at all times
showed himself valiant, yet there especially his valor appeared. Gabinius
leaving some to win the Castle went unto the Cities, and strengthened those
that were not yet assaulted, and reedified those that were destroyed, and by
his commandment Scythopolis and What cities the Jews received to inhabit.
Samaria, and Anthedon, and Apollonia, and Iamnia, and Raphia, and Marisa, and
Dora, and Gadara, and Azotus, and many more began to be inhabited; so that
their inhabitants joyfully The year of the world 3804. before Christ's
Nativity. 60. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 11. Alexanders mother strives to pacify
Gabinius with rewards. The change of ye government of the Jews. Ant. lib. 14.
cap. 12. Aristobulus escaping from Rome raises new troubles.
Alexander being terrified and made desperate, he sent Ambassadors to him,
beseeching him to pardon his offenses, promising to render unto him the castles
of Macherunt and Hyrcanium, which were in his power, and besides them
Alexandrium: All which Gabinius by counsel of Alexanders mother destroyed,
least they might be occasion of new wars. This woman accosted and flattered
Gabinius, for that she feared least her husband and the rest of the captives at
Rome should be any ways indemnified. After this Gabinius carried Hyrcanus to
Jerusalem, and committing the temple unto his charge, he made others of the
nobility rulers of the commonwealth, and divided the whole nation of the Jews
into five parts and governments, whereof one was established at Jerusalem,
another at Doris, the third at Amathunt, the fourth at Jericho, the Aristobulus
escaping from Rome raised new troubles, who gathering a great army partly of
those that desired a change, partly of them that loved him before, took
Alexandrium; and began to compass it again with a wall: but hearing that
Gabinius had sent Sisenna, Antonius, and Seruilius against him with an army, he
went to Macherunt; and forsaking those that were not fit for war; he took
with him almost 8000. armed men, amongst whom was Pytholaus governor of them
that were revolted, who Aristobulus fights with the Romans.
with 1000. men fled out of Jerusalem. But the Romans followed and pursued
them, and joining battle with them; Aristobulus with his men fought valiantly,
till being by force overcome, the Romans slew five thousand of them, and
almost two thousand fled into a mountain; and the other Aristobulus, were
forced to Macherunt; where the king hiding himself the first night amongst the
ruins, hoped that having respite he The Romans obtain the victory, and carry
away Aristobulus and his son to Rome.
might gather another army, and fortify the castle: but having for two days
sustained the forces of the Romans although unable to do it; at last he was
taken, and with his son Antigonus, who had bin imprisoned with him at Rome, he
was carried to Gabinius, and from thence to Rome, and the Senate put him in
prison: but his sons they sent into Iudaea, because Gabinius writ that he had
so promised Aristobulus his wife upon condition the castles might be yielded.
Now Gabinius being prepared to war against the Parthians, Ptolomaeus hindered
him, who returning from Euphrates went into Egypt, leaving Antipater and
Hyrcanus his friends to dispose of al things belonging to the war: for
Antipater helped him with money, weapons, corn, and men, and he persuaded the
Jews Gabinius to pass. Now in the other part of Syria, at the departure of
Gabinius there began a commotion, and Alexander Aristobulus son once Alexander
Aristobulus son once more provoke the Jews to rebellion.
more incited the Jews to rebellion, and having gathered a mighty power
purposed to destroy all the Romans that were in that country: which Gabinius
fearing (who was returned out of Egypt at the beginning of these tumults) he
sent Antipater before, who persuaded some of the rebels to be quiet, yet 30000.
remained with Alexander. For which cause he was very forward to fight, and went
out to battle; the Jews came against him, and near unto Itabyrium they
fought, where 10000. were slain, and the rest were put to flight: and Gabinius
returned to Jerusalem through the counsel of Antipater: who having established
that estate, went from thence and overcame the Nabathaeans in battle: he
likewise permitted Mithridates and Orsanes privily to depart; who were The
Jews overcome by the Romans. Gabinius overcomes the Nabathaeans in battle.
Ant. lib. 14. cap 13. Marcus crassus takes away the rest of the gold of the
temple.
Crassus who was appointed to be his successor, had Syria delivered him, who
toward the maintenance of the Parthian wars took all the gold that was in the
temple of Jerusalem, and the 2000. talents which Pompeius had forborne to do:
who passing over Euphrates was both himself and his whole army utterly
overthrown: of which thing it behooves us not to speak in this place. After
the death of Crassus, the Parthians endeavored themselves to enter Syria; but
Cassius who succeeded him in the government, repulsed them: and having gotten
the upper hand he speedily resorted into Iudaea, and taking Tarichea; he carried
away about 3000. men captives; and put Pytholaus to death, for gathering a
company of seditious people unto Aristobulus his part. He that caused and
consailed his death was Antipater, who was married unto a noble woman of Arabia
Cypris, by whom he had four sons, Phasaolus and king Herod, Joseph, and
Pheroras, and one daughter called Salome, who sought the friendship of al
potentates round about him by courtesy and hospitality, and especially he got
the good will of the king of Arabia by affinity, unto whose Antipaters wife a
noble woman of Arabia.
fidelity he committed his sons, because he had undertaken the wars against
Aristobulus. But Cassius made a truce with Alexander, and in the mean time
went to Euphrates to hinder the passage of the Parthians, of which we will
speak hereafter.

CHAP. VII. The year of the world, 3917 before Christ's birth 47.

Of the death of Aristobulus, and the war between Antipater and Mithridates.

AFter that Caesar had forced the Senate and Pompey to fly beyond the Ionian
sea, and by that means made himself sole Master of all at Rome, he set
Aristobulus at liberty; Ant lib. 14. cap. 14. Caesar delivers Aristobulus
from his bonds. Aristobulus and his son slain by Po^peies friends
and with two legions of men sent him in haste into Syria, hoping through his
means speedily to win both it and also all places adioining to Iudaea: but
both the hope of Caesar and the forwardnes of Aristobulus was ouerthrown
through envy: for he was poisoned by Pompeies favorites, and even in his own
country his body lay unburied, which notwithstanding Antonius sent it unto
the Jews commanding them to bury it in the kings sepulcher. His son
Alexander also was beheaded at Antiochia by Scipio, being first according to
the tenor of Pompeies letters accused before the tribunal seat of such things
as he had committed against the Romans. Ptolemaeus the son of Minaeus, who
ruled Chalcis which was under Libanus, having taken his brethren sent his son
Ant. lib. 14. cap. 15. Ptolemaeus son marieth Antigonus younger daughter, and
for that cause is slain by his father. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 16.
Philippio with them to Ascalon, and he violently taking away Antigonus and his
sisters from the wife of Aristobulus brought them to his father, and falling in
love with the youngest, took her to his wife: for which cause he was afterward
put to death by his father. For Ptolemaeus having slain his son, married
Alexandra; and for that affinity sake, was more careful for her brethren.
After the death of Pompey, Antipater sought all means to get Caesar's favor,
and when Mithridates

Moreover he incited the potentate of Syria, and Ptolemaeus who inhabited
Libanus, and Iamblicus and another Ptolemaeus to assist him; for whose sakes
the cities of that country did willingly undertake the wars. And now
Mithridates strengthened by Antipaters means came to Pelusium, Mithridates
goes to Pelusium, and thereby obtains Antigonus help.
and because they would not suffer him to pass, he besieged the city; in
which siege Antipater showed his valor: for making a breach on that side of
the wall, where his quarter was, he first of all with his company brake into
the city, and so Pelusium was taken. But the inhabitants Onias country who
were Egyptians and Jews, suffered him not to pass any further: yet did
Antipater handle the matter so discreetly with them, that they did not only
suffer him to pass, but also provided victuals for his army. Whereupon the
citizens of Memphis would not fight, but Mithridates victory against the
Egyptians.
yielded of their own accord unto Mithridates, so that passing through Delta,
he fought with the other Egyptians in a place called the tents of the Jews,
and being with all his company in danger, he was rescued by Antipater, who
marching along the river side, set upon and discomfited the left wing of the
enemies battle, and rushing upon them that pressed upon Mithridates, he slew
many, and pursued the rest that fled till he got their tents, and al with the
loss of fourscore men. But Mithridates Antipater performs many noble
exploits and exposes himself to all danger for Caesar's sake. Caesar makes
Antipater a free citizen of Rome.
flying lost eight hundredth men, and being against all hope preserved out of
those wars, was without all envy a true witness before Caesar of all that which
Antipater had both done and deserved. Whereupon Caesar redoubled his courage
with praise and promises unto him, and made him forward to hazard himself for
him. In a word, he proved and showed himself a stout vvarrior, and having many
vvounds in every part of his body he bare a badge and testimony of his valor
and virtue. Afterward when the state of Egypt was quiet he returned into
Syria, where he made him a citizen of Rome, and granted him the immunities
thereof: and did so honor him in other things and use him so friendly, that he
made him a pattern for all to imitate: and for his sake he confirmed Hyrcanus
in the high Priesthood.

CHAP. VIII.
How Antipater was accused before Caesar: of the Priesthood of Hyrcanus: and
how Herod made war.

AT the same time Antigonus the son of Aristobalus repairing to Caesar,
against his will Antigonus Aristobulus son comes to Caesar to accuse Pompeies
friends for his fathers death.
was a cause of Antipaters greater felicity: for coming to complain of his
fathers death, (who was as it was thought through Pompeies envy poisoned) and
to accuse Scipio of cruelty which was used against his brother; whereas he
should have abandoned all passion which moved him to mingle hatred with his
miseries, contrariwise he accused Hyrcanus and Antipater as though they had
unjustly driven him and his brethren out of their native soil, and grievously
The year of the world. 3917. before the birth of Christ's. 47. Antigonus
fallely accuses Hyrcanus and Antipater.
Caesar's forces, not for good will; but for fear of ancient enmity, and that
hereby they might acquit themselves of the good will they bare to Pompey. At
these words Antipater (casting away his vesture) showed the number of his
wounds, saying, it was not needful to use words to prove what affection he had
borne to Caesar, for his very body would show it, although he himself held
his peace: adding, that he admired the impudent boldness of Antigonus, who
being son to an enemy of the Romans, and a fugitive from the Romans, and
still continued his Antipater casting off his garment shows his many wounds.
fathers purpose of novelty and sedition, should dare to accuse others before
the Roman Emperor; demanding of him how he durst hope to obtain any good
thing, who ought to be contented with his life only: alleging, that he
craved not maintenance for that he wanted,

Which when Caesar heard, he said that Hyreanus was most worthy to be high
priest, and bid Caesar creates Hyrcanus hie priest, and to Antipater he gives
the gouer^ment of Iudaea. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 16. Antipater repaireth ye walls of
his country. Antipater charge his subjects to obey Hyrcanus.
Antipater wish what dignity he would have: who leaving that to the pleasure
of the giver, he was made governor of all Iudaea. And moreover, he obtained to
reedifie the rased walls of his country, and Caesar commanded that those
honors should be engraued in the Capitol, that it might be a token in time to
come of Antipaters Justice and virtue. Antipater having attended Caesar out of
Syria, first of all repaired the ruined walls of his country which Pompey had
raced: and going thorowout all the country, he threatened the obstinate, and
persuaded the seditious to obedience, admonishing them, that if they obeyed
Hyrcanus, they might live in wealth and Hyrcanus in steed of a king, a tyrant,
and the Romans and Caesar in steed of friends, deadly enemies: for that they
would not suffer his power to be overthrown, whom they themselves had
established for king. But notwithstanding he spoke these words, yet (because he
saw Hyrcanus more dull, and not of so seruent Phasaelus and Herod Antipaters
sons, Herodes fortitude. Herod banisheth ye thieves out of Syria.
a spirit as the care of a kingdom required) he himself settled the estate of
the country, and made Phasaelus his eldest son governor of the army, and
the Lord of Jerusalem and of his own living, and sent Herod his youngest son
to govern Galilee (although he was very young:) who being by nature of a
valiant courage, found out a present occasion to show his brave mind: Ezechias
which was captain of thieves, who as he understood was wont to pray upon the
confines of Syria with a great multitude; and put him to death with many other
thieves: which thing was so grateful unto the Syrians, that in all towns and
villages they made songs of Herod, as though he had restored them to peace, and
to their possessions.

At length the glory of this fact came to the ears of Sextus Caesar, who was
Caesar the Emperors kinsman, who then ruled Syria. Phasaelus also did strive
to overcome the towardness and Phasaelus obtained the favor of the people of
Jerusalem.
good reputation of his brother, by daily increasing and winning to himself
the good wills of the inhabitants of Jerusalem: so that during the time he
governed the City, he did nothing insolently through might or power; for which
cause the people honored Antipater as their king, and reverenced him as Lord
of all, yet was his fidelity and good will nevertheless toward Hyrcanus.
Hyrcanus, although before time he were moved something at the glory of these
young men, Hyrcanus animated by envious men against Antipater and his sons.
and especially with the prosperous success of Herod, being often annoied with
frequent messengers; who spread his praise for every thing he did: yet in
particular he was stirred up by many envious persons, who are wont to haunt
the courts of Princes, who were grieved that Antipater and his sons ruled
without offense. These men told Hyrcanus that he only enjoyed the bare name
of a king, and that Antipater and his sons ruled all, and that he so long
would permit and wink at them, til that at last they would make themselves
kings; for they now did no more so much as pretend themselves to be
procurators. But leaving that title, they took upon them the dignities of Lords
and masters, without any regard or reverence toward him: for Herod had put
Herod if he were not a king, but a Herod called to his answer before the
council.
private person, was to be brought into judgment, there to answer the matter
and show the king a reason, and satisfy the laws of his country; which
permitted no man to be put to death before by law he was convicted. By these
persuasions Hyrcanus grew angry: so that not concealing his wrath he caused
Herod to be sent for to answer the matter: who both for that his father
advertised him thereto: and because he trusted to the equity of his cause,
first leaving a garrison in Galilee, The year of the world. 3922. before
Christ's birth 24.
Hyrcanus dignity, if he should lead forth many; or that for want of defense
he should expose himself to the envy of his adversaries. Sextus Caesar also
fearing the young man least any evil should betide him amongst his enemies,
sent unto Hyrcanus manifestly Hyrcanus absolueth Herod
warning him to free Herod from the crime of murder. For which cause Hyrcanus
who loved Herod, and was willing so to do of his own accord, did acquit him.
Whereupon, he supposing that he had escaped against the kings will went to
Damascus unto Sextus, purposing not to obey, if hereafter he were sent for.
Naithelesse, Hyrcanus was once again incited by bad people against Herod, who
certified him that he was gone away in a rage, and that he would enterprise
Hircanus once more incited by the wicked.
something against him: which Hyrcanus believing, knew not what to do, seeing
his enemy

Shortly after Sextus Caesar proclaimed him General of the army, both in Syria
and Samaria: so that now he was greatly to be feared, not only for that he was
highly in favor with the comminaltie, but also for the forces which he
commanded. So that hereupon Hyrcanus fell into an extreme fear, verily
persuading himself that Herod with his whole army would presently come Herod
gathering a great army comes to Jerusalem to depose Hyrcanus. Herod
dissuaded by Antipater from attempting against Hyrcanus.
against him. Neither was his suspicion in vain, for Herod angry at the
pretended crime whereof he was accused, came with a great army to Jerusalem
intending to depose Hyrcanus; which he had effected, had not his father and his
brother gone forth to meet him, and pacified him, entreating that he would
account that terror (wherein he had put his enemies) and his own indignation
for a sufficient revenge, and that he should spare the king, by whose favor he
came to be so potent: Herod pacified herewith, supposing it to be sufficient
for him to obtain the thing he hoped for, to have showed his forces unto his

At this time began Civil war among the Romans near unto Apamia, for
Caecilius Bassus Bassus murthereth Sextus Caesar by treason. Marcus Sextus
successor.
for the love he bare to Sextus Pompey slew Sextus Caesar at unawares, and made
himself governor of his army, and other captains of Caesar's to revenge his
death, made after Bassus with all their forces, unto whom Antipater by his two
sons sent aid both for Caesar's sake that was slain, as for Caesar's sake that
was yet alive: for he was an entire friend and welwiller unto them both, and
these wars continuing long, Marcus came out of Italy to succeed Sextus.

CHAP. IX.
Of the dissension amongst the Romans after Caesar's death, and of the
treachery Malichus.

AT this time arose great and bloody civil wars amongst the Romans, at such
time as Caesar was traitorously slain by the treason of Cassius and Brutus,
after he had ruled the Empire 3. years and seven months. By reason of which
murder their troubles daily increased, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 2. Julius Caesar
sla^ne by Brutus and Cassius. Cassius leuieth money in the cities.
and the nobility being at variance amongst themselves, every one followed
that course, that they thought most expedient for themselves. Whereupon Cassius
presently marched into Syria to take possession of the government of the army
which was about Apamia, where he made Marcus and the legions that were at
variance, and Bassus friends: and raised the siege from Apamia, and leading the
army in his own person, he forced every city to be tributarie: so that
Antipater, who feared his displeasure, appointed his sons and other of his
friends presently to gather the money; and especially among the rest he gave
this charge to one Malichus a friend of his, being by necessity enforced
thereunto. But Herod first of all got Cassius Herod Cassius friend. Cassius
severe in his exactions.
his favor, who brought a hundredth talents which he had collected out of
Galilee, which was his part or province: for this cause Cassius accounted him
as a dear friend. As for the rest he accused them of negligence, and was
angry at the other Cities: So that for that cause he destroyed The year of
the world, 3922. before Christ's birth 42. Malichus forgetful of Antipaters
kindness.
Malichus, for that he had been so careless and negligent in gathering the
tribute money. But Antipater presently (disbursing unto Cassius a hundredth
talents) saved both him and all the rest of the Cities. Yet Malichus after
Cassius was departed, did no more remember how beneficial Antipater had been
unto him, but oftentimes did treacherously lie in wait for to murder
Antipater, who hindered and withstood his villainous pretense; notwithstanding
that himself had often confessed that Antipater had saved his life. Antipater
fearing both his power and subtlety passed over the river Jordan to gather an
army that he might revenge those treacheries. But Malichus being discovered, by
his impudency overcame Antipaters sons: for through many oths and Antipater
gathers an army against Malichus.
excuses he won Phasaelus chief of the garrison in Jerusalem, and Herod also
who was master of Antipater. Whereupon Antipater entreating Marcus (who was
General of the army in Syria, and had determined to kill him) he was saved.
The reason that Marcus would have put him to death, was because Malichus sought
to make an alteration.

Now Caesar being young, and Antonius warring against Cassius and Brutus;
Marcus and Cassius having gathered an army in Syria, in consideration that
Herod had stood them in steed where Octauius Augustus succeeds after Caesar.
Cassius promises Herod after the war to make him king of Iudaea. Antipater
poisoned by Malichus.
need required, they made him Procurator of all Syria; giving him a band of
horsemen and footmen. Moreover, Cassius promised him that if the wars had a
happy end, he would make him king of Iudaea. But it so came to pass, that the
power and expectation which all men had of Herod, was the cause of Antipater
his fathers death. For Malichus being hereby put in fear, hired Antipater, by
which means he died, being thus unjustly rewarded for his good will toward
wretched Malichus. He was a worthy man and fit to govern, who had recovered
the kingdom being lost, for Hyrcanus. Malichus (who perceived that the people
were ince^sed against him, because they suspected that he had poisoned
Antipater) pacified and moderated their displeasure by denying the fact; yet to
the intent he might be stronger, he gathered about him a guard of armed men,
for he thought that Herod Herod intends to reuege his fathers death.
would not let the matter slip so, but that he would presently come with an
army to revenge his fathers death. But by the counsel of his brother Phasaelus
(who sent him word that he should not openly be revenged upon Malichus, least a
sedition might arise amongst the people) he patiently permitted it so to be,
and suffered Malichus to purge himself, and permitted him to be freed from
Malichus who feared this approach of his, had solicited Hyrcanus to give order
that no strangers should intermingle themselves among the people who were at
that time purified.

But Herod contemning both him that commanded and his commission, entered the
City by night: whereupon Malichus once more came unto him, and wept for
Antipater. Herod although Malichus joins with Hyrcanus. Cassius charge
Herod by letters to revenge his fathers death.
he could very hardly bridle his displeasure, yet dissembled he the same: and
sent letters unto Cassius, wherein he complained of his fathers death: the
memory of whose hate being refreshed by Herod, willing him to revenge his
fathers death: which that he might the better effect, he secretly commanded the
captains of his regiment that they should assist Herod. Now for that after
the surprisall of Laodicea, all the best of the City came to Herod bringing
gifts and crowns, he appointed this for a fit time of his intended revenge.
Now Malichus suspecting that Herod would work revenge at Tire, purposed
secretly to get away his son, who was there a pledge, and he himself
purposed to fly into Iudaea: But despair of his own safety urged him to
greater matters; for he hoped to incite the Jews to take arms against the
Romans, for that Cassius was now busy in the wars against Antonius: so that he
thought he might easily depose Hyrcanus, and so make himself king. But he was
prevented by the destinies: for Herod suspecting his purpose, invited him and
Hyrcanus to supper: at which time he made a The decree of fate laugheth at
human hope Herod's tribunes murder Malichus.
sent him to the captains to foretell them that they mightlie in wait for
Malichus: who remembering what charge Cassius gave them, came forth of the
City unto the shore next adjoining unto the town, all armed with swords;
where compassing Malichus round about, they killed him with many wounds.
Hyrcanus hereat astonished, fell in a swoun, and being scarcely come to
himself, he demanded who killed Malichus? One of the captains answered, that
Cassius gave that commandment: whereupon he answered, truly Cassius has
preserved me and my country, The year of the world. 3923 before Christ's birth
41.
in killing him who was a traitor to us both: but whether herein he spoke as he
thought, or that for fear he approved the fact, it is uncertain. And thus was
Herod revenged upon Malichus.

CHAP. X.
How Herod was accused and revenged.

AFter Cassius was departed from Syria, there arose another sedition amongst
them in Jerusalem: for Felix came with an army against Phasaelus, thinking so
to be revenged Ant. lib. 14. cap. 20. Foelix comes with an army against
Phasaelus. Phasaelus overcomes Foelix and touches Hyrcanus with ingratitude.
upon Herod for killing Malichus. It chanced that Herod at that time was at
Damascus with Fabius a Roman Captain, who coming to assist Phasaelus, by the
way fell sick; so that he could not succor him: but it so fell out that
Phasaelus without any help, did of himself overcome Felix, and therewithal
reproved Hircanus as ungrateful, who had both favored Felix, Malichus his
brother to take and keep his castles (for already had he seized many of them,
and especially one of greatest strength called Massada) yet all these did not
protect him from the violence of Herod, who was no sooner recovered of his
sickness, but presently took all the rest, and Massada: and at Hircanus
humble suit, permitted him to depart from thence. He also chased Marion the
tyrant of the Tyrians out of Galilee, who occupied three castles in that
country: as for all the Tyrians that he took, he spared their lives, and sent
some away with rewards, whereby he got the good will of the city, and the
hatred of the Tyrant. This Marion was made Tyrant of Tyria by Cassius, who
through the means of such like instruments had gotten into his hand all Syria:
and Marion for the hatred he bare to Herod, took with him Antigonus
Aristobulus his son, and by Fabius his means whom Antigonus had gained unto
himself for money, he also got Ptolomaeus to assist him in this expedition.
Now Ptolomaeus who was father in law to Antigonus, furnished him with all
necessaries: Herod likewise preparing himself against them, gave the^ battle
Antigonus Aristobulus son put to flight by Herod.
in the entrance into Iudaea, and got the victory: and having put Antigonus to
flight, he returned into Jerusalem, where he was honored by all men for his
desert in that victory, so that even they that before despised him, by reason
of his affinity newly contracted with Hyrcanus, sought his friendship and
familiarity. This Herod long before this time had a wife which was a noble
woman of that country named Doris, and had by her a son named Antipater: but
he the^ married Mariamme Alexanders daughter who was Aristobulus his son, and
Hyrcanus his niece, by reason whereof he came to Doris Herod's first wife of
good birth by whom he had Antipater.
be familiar with the king. But when Cassius was slain near unto Philippi,
Caesar departed into Italy, and Antonius into Asia, at which time the chief of
the Jews came and accused Phasaelus and Herod, alleging that they by force
got unto themselves the rule and disposition of the country, and left Hyrcanus
only the bare name of a king. But Herod being the^ present, so won and wrought
himself into Antonius favor by a great sum of money, that he permitted not his
enemies to speak one word more; who thereupon returned home. Afterward a
hundredth men of the most honorable amongst The chiefest Jews repair to Caesar
to accuse Phasaelus and Herod. Ant. lib. 14. cap 21.
the Jews, repaired to Daphne near Antiochia unto Antonius (now doting on the
love of Cleopatra) who being chosen from amongst the rest, because of their
eloquence and nobility of birth, propounded an accusation against the two
brethren. Messala presented himself to return them answer, being assisted by
Hycanus by reason of the affinity that was between him and Herod. Antonius
having heard both parties demanded of Hyrcanus whom he thought to be fittest to
govern their commonwealth? who answered, Herod and his brethren. Whereat
Antonius was exceoding Antipater, when he came with Gabinius into Iudaea) and
thereupon he made them both Tetrarchs, leaving unto them the rule of all
Iudaea: which when the Jews Ambassadors misliked, he took fifteen of the^ and
put them in prison, where he almost killed them, and rejected and derided the
rest: whereupon there arose greater tumults amongst them in Jerusalem. At last
the Jews sent another embassage The Jews once more complain against ye two
brothers. Antonius makes the two brothers Tetrarches. Antonius commands in
Tire. Sedition in Jerusalem against the brethren. Antonius slew the captives.
of a thousand men unto Tire, where Antonius soiorned with an intent to come to
Jerusalem with violence. Antonius hearing their exclaimes, sent out the
Magistrates of Tire against them, commanding them to kill all they could catch
of the Jews, charging them also to confirm their authority, whom he himself
had constituted Tetrarchs. But Herod and Hyrcanus went before them toward the
sea shore, admonishing the^ earnestly to be contented, least they by this their
indiscreet Antonius sent out certain armed men, who killed many of them, and
wounded the rest. Hyrcanus after this desaster both caused the dead to be
buried, and the wounded to be cured: notwithstanding all this, they that
escaped would not contain themselves in peace, but they so troubled the city,
that Antonius in his displeasure slew those that he had in hold.

CHAP. XI. The year of the world. 3923. before the birth of Christ. 41.

Of the war of the Parthians against the Jews: of the slight of Herod and
his fortune.

TWo years after this Barzapharnes governor of the Parthians, accompanied
with Pacorus the kings son, seized upon Syria; and Lysanias who succeeded his
father Ptolemaeus Ant. lib. 14. cap. 21. Lysanias persuadeth Batzapharnes to
depose Hyrcanus and enstate Antigonus.
son of Minaeus, promising a thousand talents and five hundredth women,
persuaded him to put Antigonus in possession of the kingdom of Iudaea, and
depose Hyrcanus. Pacorus induced by these promises went himself along the sea
coast, giving commandment to Barzapharnes to pass through the midst of the
country; but amongst the rest of the places Pacorus (notwithstanding that the
citizens of Ptolemais and Sidon had given him entertainment) wherefore he gave
part of his horsemen unto one, who was the kings butler, called Pacorus as
himself was; commanding him to pass into Iudaea, and learn what their
enemies meant to do, and to help Antigonus where need required. Who as they
waste the country about Carmelus, many Jews came of their own accord and
joined with Antigonus, showing themselves very prompt to fight; for which
cause he sent them before to take a place called Drymos, where having fought
with his enemies and put them to flight, he pursued them with all speed as
far as Jerusalem: and his number being augmented; he came unto the kings
house. But Hyrcanus and Phasaelus met them with a strong A sore fight in the
market place betwixt Antigonus and Hyrcanus. Daily slaughters in Jerusalem.
company, and fought with them in the market place: where the enemies were
forced to fly, and Herod shut up in the temple; and he appointed sixty men
to keep them, which he placed in the houses next adjoining: but the people
bearing a grudge to the two brethren, burnt them with fire: vvhereat Herod
being angry (for that his men were consumed with fire) set upon the people
and killed a great many of them; and every hour one laid wait for another; so
that every day some was murdered.

Now the feast of Pentecost drawing nigh, all places about the temple and all
the whole city was filled with people of the country, whereof the most part
was armed, and Phasaelus kept the walls, and Herod with a small company kept
the kings palace, who assaulting their enemies upon a sudden as they were in
the suburbs, killed a great many of them, and put all the rest to flight.
Phasaelus entertaineth the Parthians, and with him five hundredth horse.
part of them he couped up in the city, others he shut in the temple, and the
rest between the Antigonus requested that Pacorus might come and conclude a
peace betwixt them. Phasaelus moved by these his prayers received the Parthian
into the city, and entertained him into his house accompanied with five
hundredth horsemen, who came under a pretense to make peace; but in effect he
resorted thither to help Antigonus: he craftily conspiring against Phasaelus,
persuaded him to repair unto Barzapharnes as an Ambassador to treat a peace;
notwithstanding that Herod altogether dissuaded him, vvilling him to kill the
traitor, and not to Pacorus treason and subtlety. The year of the world.
3924. before the Nativity of Christ. 40.
trust his subtlety: adding that the Parthians were naturally unfaithful.
Pacorus departing out of the city, took Hyrcanus with him that he might be
the less suspected, and leaving some horsemen with Herod named Or free.
Eleutheri, he followed Phasaelus with the rest. When they came near unto
Galilee, they found the inhabitants at variance and up in arms, and met with
Barzapharnes Antigonus Herod in Jerusalem, and Phasaelus in the camp are in
danger of their lives.
had given the Parthians more then five hundredth women of those that were
amongst them, and that oftentimes they had been laid wait for, and that they
had been lately taken, but that delay was made till such time as Herod was
surprised in Jerusalem, for fear least he hearing what was become of them
might provide for himself. Now they might perceive that these were not only
words: for they might behold their keepers not far off; yet would not
Phasaelus forsake Hyrcanus, notwithstanding that Offilius often exhorted him to
fly (unto whom Saramalla the richest Barzapharnes, and to vpbraid him to his
face that he had trecherously laid vvait for him: but especially for that in
regard of money he had suffered himself to be corrupted, vvheras he himself
would have given more for his life and liberty, then Antigonus had done for
the kingdom. At these words the Parthian with oaths and protestations craftily
freed himself from suspicion, and no sooner repaired he to Pacorus but
presently the Parthians, who stayed behind, and had charge so to do, laid
hands on Phasaelus and Hyrcanus, who openly exclaimed against their falsehood
The year of the world. 3924. before Christ's birth 40. Herod is laid for to be
betrayed.
and perjury.

In the mean time a butler was sent out for that purpose, who sought to
surprise Herod, and by some stratageme to toul him out of the City, who
wrought by all the means he could, according as he was instructed. But Herod
who was always wont to mistrust the perfidious practices of barbarous
nations, being certain that those letters which discovered the treasons, were
fallen into the enemies hands, would not go forth; though Pacorus pretended a
just cause, inciting him to ride out and meet them that brought the letters:
wherein was contained neither the taking of Phasaelus, nor the treasons, but
only what Phasaelus had done. But long before this Herod by others understood,
that his brother Phasaelus was taken, and Mariamme a very wise woman Hyrcanus
daughter, with many entreaties persuaded Herod not to go forth: but that he
Pacorus was consulting with his accomplices how he might privily effect his
treasons (seeing it was not possible openly to circumuent a man of so great
wisdom) Herod in the night time whilst his enemies neither knew nor suspected
his intent, took Herod in the night time flies into Idumaea.
his nearest kinsfolk and fled into Idumaea: which being once known, the
Parthians followed him. For which cause he made his mother, his brethren, and
the young maiden despoused, and her mother and youngest brother to keep on
their journey, and he with his servants warily assaulted the Parthians; and
having in every assault killed a great number of them, he hasted toward Herod
more hotely pursued by the Jews then the Parthians. Herod's victory Herodium.
the Castle of Massada, and in his retreat sustained more harm by the Jews,
then by the Parthians: who as they had been always troublesome, so now some
threescore furlongs from the Herod obtaining the victory, killed a great many
of them, and in remembrance of that valiant act, he builded upon that place a
most rich palace for the king, and erected there a most strong tower, which by
his own name he called Herodium. And when he fled many joined with him, but
when he came to Thresa a town of Idumaea his brother Joseph met him, and
persuaded him to lessen the number of his followers: for Massada would not
receive such a multitude (for the number of the multitude was above nine
thousand:) for Massada.
which cause Herod according to his counsel dismissed those that were unfit
for his turn, and sent them into Idumaea, giving them necessaries for their
journey. As for those that were chosen men and fit for his purpose, he retained
them with him, and so was he received into the Castle, where leaving eight
hundredth soldiers to defend the women, and provision sufficient for those

Now the Parthians at Jerusalem began to sack the houses of them that were
fled, and the Petra, a city of Arabia. The year of the world. 3925. before
Christ's birth 39.
kings palace; they only abstained from Hyrcanus money, which did amount to
more then three hundredth talents: as for other men's goods, they found not so
much as they expected; for Herod long before that time suspecting the
infidelity of the Parthians had carried all his riches and jewels into
Idumaea; and every one of his followers did the like. When the Parthians had
taken the spoil, they were so impious that they left no place of the whole
country free from their tyrannous war. They destroyed the City Marsa also,
and bound Phasaelus and Hyrcanus, and delivered them to Antigonus to be
scourged, who presently with his teeth bit off Hyrcanus ears, to the end that
if by some alteration he chanced hereafter to get loose, he might be no more
high Antigonus ^weth off Hircanus ears.
priest: for none might offer sacrifice that wanted any member of his body. But
Phasaelus his fortitude prevented the cruelty of Antigonus, who having neither
weapon nor his hands at liberty, beat out his own brains against a stone and
died, demonstrating himself by that act, to be the true brother of Herod, and
that Hyrcanus had degenerated: he died manfully by a worthy death, and
answerable to so famous a life. Yet some reported that he recovered after that
hurt, and that Antigonus sent a Surgeon under pretense to cure the wound,
who filled the lame with venomous medicines, and so killed him. Well, be it as
it was, it was in him a gallant resolution. It is reported likewise, that
understanding before his death by the means of a certain woman that Herod
was escaped, he spoke these words: Now I shall die with a courage, who leave
behind me one that will take vengeance of my enemies, and so he died. Although
the Parthians Phasaelus words before he died. The Parthians establish Antigonus
king.
had not yet received the women (which was the chief thing they looked for)
yet leaving them, they established Antigonus in Jerusalem, and lead Hyrcanus
prisoner into Parthia. But Herod with all speed hasted into Arabia, as if his
brother had been yet alive, to the intent he might borrow money of the king of
Arabia, wherewith only he hoped that the cruelty of those barbarous Parthians
might be mitigated toward Phasaelus: for his opinion was, that although the
Arabians had now forgotten his fathers friendship and were hard hearted, yet at
least he would lend him money seeing it was to redeem his brother, whose son
he meant to leave in pawn for it. The year of the world 3925. before Christ's
Nativity. 39.
Herod took with him a son of his brothers into Arabia that was seven
years old, and purposed to have given three hundredth talents for his
ransom, and had made the Tyrians intercessors for him to the Parthians: but
fortune prevented his endeavors, so that his love and care for his brother
prevailed nothing. He found also that the Arabians had now cast away the league
of amity: for Malichus their king sent to him as he was yet in the way,
charging him with all speed to depart out of his dominions, framing an excuse
that the Parthians had sent Ambassadors unto him, to request him to drive him
out of his country; but indeed the cause was, that he would not repay that
which Antipater had deserved, nor recompense his sons now comfortless, for
those good turns that he had received at their fathers hands: and those who
counseled him to this, were such as offered to forswear those sums, which
Antipater had put them Herod perceiving the Arabians Animaters to impudence.
Herod perceives the Arabians to be his enemies.
to be his foes, for that which he thought would have procured him friendship,
answered the messenger according as grief moved him, and took his journey
toward Egypt: and the first night he lodged in a country temple, to the
intent that those of his company that were behind him might overtake him. The
next day coming to Rhinocolura, his brothers death was told him; where after
he had there mourned his fill, he went forward.

Now the king of Arabia (though too late) repented himself of that which he
had done to Herod, and sent speedy messengers after him, to will him to
return, repenting himself that he had so injuriously entreated him. When
Herod was come to Pelusium, the watchmen of the City would not permit him to
pass: for which cause he himself in person went to the governors, who
Cleopatra received him very honorably, intending to make him the general of
her army which she was preparing at that present. But he neither regarding the
offers and request of the Queen, nor yet discouraged by the hard winter
season, nor the dangers of the seas, took his journey toward Rome; and being
in great danger of shipwreck near unto Pamphilia, both he Herod in great
dangers repaireth to Rome.
and the rest of the passengers were enforced to cast away the most part of
their loading: with much ado he arrived safe at Rhodes, which had been sore
molested by Cassius vvarres; there was he entertained by certain of his
friends Ptolomaeus and Saphinius, and although his money grew scant, yet there
he builded a great galley with three ranks of oars, and in it (being
accompanied with his friends) he sailed to Brundusium, and from thence went
presently to Rome. Where first of Antonius, declaring unto him both his own
calamity, and the miserable desolation of his whole country; and how
leaving his dearest friends besieged in a Castle, himself in humble manner
through the stormy Herod repairing to Rome, has conference with Antonius.
vvinter seas was come unto him, humbly craving succor at his hands: Whereupon
Antonius compassionating his calamity, and remembering his familiarity with
Antipater, and contemplating the virtue of Herod who stood before him,
determined upon the present to make him king of the Jews, whom before he
himself had made Tetrarch: for he loved not Herod so well, but he hated
Antigonus as much: for he held him both for a seditious person, and for an
enemy to the Ant. lib. 14. cap. 13. Herod ^ndeth both Caesar and Antonius
favorable unto him.
Romans. Now to the accomplishing of this, he found Caesar far more ready
then himself, who called to mind the service that Antipater did in Egypt
under his father, and his entertainment Herod's courage and valor. For which
cause, he procured the Senate to be assembled, at which time Messala and after
him Aratinus in the presence of Herod recounted his fathers deserts and
fidelity toward the Romans, declaring Antigonus to be an enemy, not only
because that not long before he had Herod praised before the Senate. Herod
made king by the (...) Roman Senate.
revolted, but for that now lastly in despite of the Romans he had by the
assistance of the Parthians usurped the kingdom. Upon which considerations
the Senate being moved, and Antonius affirming it to be expedient for the
Roman vvarres, that Herod should be created king, the whole Senate
condescended: and after the Senate was dismissed, Antonius and Caesar went
forth with Herod between them, and the Consuls went before accompanied with
other Magistrates to offer sacrifice, and to register the decree of the Senate
in the Capitol. And Antonius feasted Herod

CHAP. XII. The year of the world, 3925 before Christ's birth 39.

Of Herod's war after he returned from Rome to recover Jerusalem, and against
the thieves.

AT this time Antigonus besieged those that were left in the Castle of
Massada, who had great store of victuals and wanted nothing but water. For
which cause Iesophus Herod's Ant. lib. 14. cap. 23. Antigonus gets Massada.
brother purposed to fly unto the Arabians with two hundredth of his dearest
friends, for that he had intelligence that Malichus repented him that he had
given Herod no better entertainment. Yea he had forsaken the Castle had not
great store of rain fallen that very night, wherein he intended to fly: for
the wels and cesternes being now filled with water, there was no cause
Antigonus soldiers, and killed The wars between Antigonus soldiers and Joseph
Herod's brother.
very many of them; sometime in open war, and sometime by policy: yet fought
they not always with fortunate success, but returned sometimes with loss.
In the mean time Ventidius (who was General of that Roman army which was
sent to expulse the Parthians out of Syria) after he had repulsed them resorted
into Iudaea, under pretense to succor Joseph and the rest that were Ventidius
the Roman general takes money from Antigonus.
besieged, but in effect to get Antigonus money. When as therefore he drew
near unto Jerusalem and had received the money he looked for, he departed
with the greatest part of his army, leaving Silo behind him with a few to
color his pretense: and Antigonus hoping for a second supply from the
Parthians, feed Silo not to molest him for the present, seeing he was in great
possibility. By this time Herod having sailed from Italy to Ptolemais, and
gathered a Antigonus, being assisted with the forces of Ventidius and Silo,
whom Delius who was sent from Antonius, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 24. Herod against
Antigonus.
persuaded to establish Herod in his kingdom. But Ventidius was busy in
appeasing the broiles that the Parthians had made in the Cities, and Silo was
corrupted by Antigonus: yet did not Herod want aid, for every day the
further he marched into the country, the more his army increased, for all
Galilee (a very few excepted) yielded unto him. Whereupon he purposed first of
al to go to Massada, to deliver his friends that were there besieged, but
Ioppe hindered his purpose; Herod intends that after he has taken Massada and
Ioppe to besiege Jerusalem
which for that it was an enemy town, he thought it best to take it before
he went further, least that vvhilest he was going to Jerusalem, his enemies
should have a place behind him to fly unto. Now Silo joined armies with
Herod, rejoicing that he had found occasion to resist, because Herod with a
loose wing of his army and a small company of men, terrified, and presently
put to flight, and saved Silo also who had much ado to make resistance
against them. This done and Ioppe taken, he hasted to Massada, and the people
of the country (some of them for his fathers sake, othersome for his own, and
many for both) joined themselves unto him: many also came unto him for hope,
because he was now king; so that now he had a very puissant army: but
Antigonus hindered his journey by planting certain ambushes in places
convenient where Herod was to pass, and yet for all this he little harmed
him.

Herod having easily taken Massada, and rescued his friends from thence, he
went to Jerusalem, where both Siloes soldiers, and many of the City came
and followed him, being now Herod begirteth Jerusalem with a siege, and
proclaims the cause of his coming.
terrified with the greatness of his forces: there pitching their tents at
the west side of the town, they that guarded that part assaulted them with
darts and arrows; and others issuing by troops forth of the City,
assaulted the forefront of the army. Whereupon Herod caused one to go about
the walls of the City, and to proclaim how that he was come for the good of
the whole City, and that he would not take revenge of any, though he were his
open enemy; and that he would pardon even them that had been most seditious.
But when Antigonus his followers with loud exclamations hindered the criers
voices from being heard, least any man should alter Siloes subtlety being
corrupted by ye Jews.
his mind: Herod presently commanded his men to beat the enemies off of the
wall, who with their arrows speedily forced all that were in the towers to
fly. At this time Silo was detected to have been hired with money: for he
solicited many soldiers to cry out, that they vvanted all Herod went unto
the captains that served under Silo, and called many of the soldiers
together, requesting them not to forsake him at that exigent, whom Caesar,
Antonius, and the whole Senate Herod gathers great store of provision.
as they knew had sent thither, promising them that within one day he would
relieve all their necessities. When he had thus entreated them, himself went
about the fields, and brought them so much provision that he cut off all Siloes
excuses: and forecasting least hereafter there should The year of the world,
3925. before Christ's birth 39.
Antigonus hearing this, presently sent certain of his men to lie in ambush in
the fields, and suddenly to set upon those that came for provision and kill
them, and so hinder them from carrying any victuals to the camp: who obeying
his commandment, went with a great number of soldiers to Jericho, and placed
themselves upon the mountains, with an intent to epsy if any body carried
provision Herod accompanied with ten troops comes to Jericho.
to the army. In the mean time Herod rested not; for taking with him ten
companies (five of the Romans, and five of the Jews, amongst whom were mixed
three hundred that were hired, and besides them a few horsemen) he came to
Jericho, where he found the city without inhabitants, and five hundredth with
their wives and families had placed themselves upon the tops of The Roman got
a great pray.
the King leaving a garrison at Jericho, returned. He sent likewise the Roman
soldiers to the cities which were on his side, to wit, Idumaea, Galilee, and
Samaria, that they might abide there till winter was past. Antigonus also
through Silo his means (whom he by money had made his friend) obtained that a
part of his army might (during the winter time) abide at Lydda, for Antonius
sake, and the Romans being now discharged from wars, abounded in all things.

All this time Herod was not idle, for accompanied with two thousand footmen
and five hundredth horse, he went about Idumaea, and sent also his brother
Joseph, least by Antigonus his means the people should rebel. And he himself
having carried his mother and the rest of his kindred, Antigonus. And when he
was come to Sephoris, notwithstanding it snew mightily, he easily took it; for
the garrison before he assaulted Ant. lib. 14. cap. 24. Herod takes the city
of Sephoris.
it fled; and finding there great store of provision, he refreshed his
soldiers, which now with winter weather were sore tired, and then sent them
against the thieves, that lay lurking in dens and caves, who making often
incursions upon the country, molested the inhabitants no less then if they
had been an army of enemies. And sending before three companies of footmen,
and one troop of horsemen, into a village called Arbela, himself forty days
after came thither with the whole army. For all this the thieves feared him
not, but arming themselves, came Herod sets forth against the thieves.
Herod's to flight: but he with his right wing presently succored them, and
recalled his men that fled; and rushing violently upon his enemies, he a little
assuaged the forces of the enemy, till at last the forefront of their battle,
not able to stand any longer, fled. Herod pursued them even unto Jordan, and
killed many of them; those that escaped fled over the river; and thus he freed
Galilee from that fear, save that yet he had left some lurking in the caves,
and therefore he was constrained there to make a longer abode. Wherefore first of
all he gave the soldiers the fruit of their labors, and distributed to
every one of them an hundredth and fifty drachmes of silver, and unto the
Captains more, and so sent them where they should pass the winter. Also he
writ unto his youngest brother Pheroras to provide necessaries for them in the
market; and to build a wall about the castle of Alexandrium, which he performed.

In the mean while Antonius passed the time about Athens, and Ventidius sent
for Silo and The year of the world. 3926. before Christ's birth 38. Ant. lib.
ca. 25. The description of the caves where the thieves kept.
Herod to assist him in the war against the Parthians, charging them, that
before their coming they should settle the estate of the Jews. Now Herod
gladly and willingly sent Silo unto Ventidius: and in the mean time he with
his army went against the thieves in the caves. These caves were in very
steep mountains, so that there was no way to come unto them, save only by
crooked and very narrow passages and these mou^tains were all rocks of stone
clean throughout, hanging over the valleys; so that the king a great while
was doubtful what to do, seeing the place was so difficult to come to. At
last Herod devised a way scarsly heard of before; for he put Herod seeking to
save some of them, caused a crier to bid them come unto him: but there was not
one that willingly came unto him, and those that were forced chose rather to
die, then to be his captives. So that an old man having seven sons and a
wife, who all requested that they might go forth to the king, and save their
lives, killed them all after this manner: Himself stood before the door of the
cave, and bad them come forth one by one, and always as one of them came forth
he killed him. And The year of the world. 3926. before Christ's birth 38.
Herod being in a place where he might behold this spectacle, being moved with
compassion stretched forth his hand and requested him to spare his children but
he being nothing moved to compassion by Herodes words, vpbraided Herodes base
mind, and having butchered his sons, he also killed his wife, and casting the
dead bodies down into the valleys, finally he cast himself likewise down
headlong.

Herod having thus taken the caves, and slain those that were in them, leaving
a part of his army, so much as he thought might suffice to repress any that
should attempt any rebellion, and making Ptolemaeus chief over that part;
returned into Samaria, carrying with him three thousand footmen, and six
hundredth horsemen against Antigonus. After whose departure those that Ptolemey
captain of Herod's soldiers slain.
were accustomed to trouble Galilee, and molest it, having now (as they
thought) opportunity, Ptolemaeus at unawares and killed him: and waste'd the
country, retiring themselves into marish grounds and secret places. Which when
Herod understood, he presently came to succor the country, and killed the most
part of the enemies; and having taken all the castles by force, he exacted a
hundredth talents for recompense of that revolt to be paid by the cities. Now
the Parthians being put to flight, and Pacorus slain, Ventidius being willed
thereto by letters from Antonius, sent unto Herod a thousand horsemen, and two
legions of footmen to assist him against Antigonus. Now Antigonus writ letters
to the general of the foresaid company named Machaera, desiring him to help
him, and complaining that Herod iniuried him, promised him a sum of Machaeras
iniquity.
money. But he thinking it not best to forsake him that he was sent to succor,
especially seeing that Herod would give more, would not be suborned by him: yet
counterfaiting himself to be Antigonus Herodes counsel, he went to discover,
notwithstanding that Herod dissuaded him from it: But Antigonus perceiving his
intent, shut him out of the city, and like an enemy drove him away from the
walled till such time as Machaera was ashamed of that he had done; and so
returned to Amathunt unto Herod. and being in a rage that things fell out
against his expectation, he killed all the Jews he found, not respecting
whether they favored Herod or Antigonus Herod hereat was moved, and thought
to be revenged upon Machaera as upon an enemies yet he brideled himself and
hasted to Antonius to let him understand Machaeras cruelty. Machaera
remembering how he had offended; followed the king, and with many entreaties
besought him to be friends and obtained it. Yet Herod kept on his journey to
Antonius, and hearing that he was The year of the world. 3927. before Christ's
birth 37. Antonius admireth Herod's valor.
now with a great army besieging Samosata (which was a very strong city
near unto Euphrates) he made the more haste; thinking it now a sit time to
show his virtue, and that hereby he might win Antonius favor the more. So
soon as he came to Antonius he ended the siege, killing a great number of
enemies, and has for his labor a great part of the spoil: and Antonius though
before that he admired his virtue; yet then was his opinion increased; so that
he had a greater hope of his honor and attaining to the kingdom. So Antiochus
was constrained to render the City.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the death of Joseph: how Herod besieged Jerusalem: and how Antigonus

IN the mean season Herodes affairs in Iudaea went backward: for he left his
brother Joseph governor of all, commanding him to do nothing against
Antigonus till his return. For he little trusted to Machaeras help, because
of the parts he had plated before. But Joseph understanding his brothers to be
far off, not regarding what charge was left him, went to Jericho accompained
with five companies which Machaera sent with him, thinking now in harvest time
to have taken away their come: but being assaulted by the enemy upon the
mountains and in difficult places, himself was there slain, showing himself
in that fight a worthy and valiant man: and there was not one left alive of all
the Romanc soldiers; for they were all Antigonus not contented with the
victory became such a tyrant, that he caused the dead corpse of Joseph to be
scourged, and having the dead bodies in his Antigonus cruelty against Joseph's
care as
power, he cut off Joseph's head, although Pheroras his brother offeted fifty
talents to redeem the same.

After Antigonus had obtained this victory, there was such a change in
Galilee, that those who favored him, took the chiefest of Herod's favorites,
and drowned them in a ponde. Also The year of the world 3927. before Christ's
Nativity. 37.
Machara repaired the walls of a certain Castle called Githa. All this while
Herod heard nothing of this news; for after Samosata was taken, Antonius made
Sosius governor of Syria, leaving order with him, that he should help Herod
against Antigonus, and so he departed into Egypt: Sosius sent two companies of
soldiers with Herod into Iudaea to help him, and he himself with the rest
of the army followed. When Herod was at Antiochia near Daphne, his brothers
death was manifested unto him in a dream: Herod certified of his brothers
death in a dream.
And whilst he was troubled thus, so that he leapt out of his bed, even at the
same instant the messengers who brought tidings of his death, entered into the
house: and weeping a little for grief, as it were deferring his sorrow till
another time, he went toward his enemies; so that he hasted above his
strength. When he came unto Libanus; he took eight hundredth inhabitants
Antonius sent, he put his enemies in such a fear, that they in the night time
fled and forsook the Castle. And now he hasted to Jericho to be revenged upon
those that killed his brother, where there befell him a most strange accident,
from the which being against all hope delivered, he persuaded himself that God
bare an especial love unto him. For when many nobles that night had supped
with him, supper being ended, and every one being gone forth, incontinently
Herod took this as a Praesagium both of the dangers and prosperous success
he was to have in his wars. And the next morning early he removed Herod's
dining room fell after he had forsaken it, and gone to bed.
from thence, and about six thousand of the enemies descending from the
mountains assaulted the vaunt guard, but they durst not join battle with the
Romans, but molested them standing a far off with stones and darts, and they
wounded many: so that also Herod himself passing along, was wounded in the
side with a darte. Antigonus desirous to show himself most potent, as well in
multitude of men, as also in courage, sent Pappus a friend of his with an army
into Samaria, who there got the victory of Machaera. Herod went about the
enemies country and took there five towns, and destroyed two thousand of the
inhabitants, and firing the houses, he returned to his army near unto a
village called Cana.

Every day there came flocking unto him a very great number of Jews, both
from Jericho and from other parts of the country, some of them hating
Antigonus, other some loving Herod for his valiant deeds: for many without any
reason desired an alteration. Whilst thus he hasted to fight, Pappus with his
men neither fearing the multitude, nor strength of their ^nemies, came fiercely
upon them, and offered battle. The battle being begun, the others awhile
abstained, only Herod remembering his brothers death ventured more then the
rest, to the end to be revenged upon them that were the authors thereof: and so
he easily overcame the enemies army; and still assaulting the fresh men; he put
them all to flight. There was a mighty slaughter: for many being forced to
fly into the village from whence they came, he pursued them and slew an
infinite number. Lastly; rushing amongst the enemies that fled, he brake into
the village, where Herod by the benefit of his good fortune had even then come
to Jerusalem, had not The number of the carcasses hinder the soldiers passage.
winter storms hindered him, which was the only cause that he at that time got
not a full conquest; and that Antigonus was not utterly overthrown, who through
fear and desperation was Herod toward night having given his friends leave
to depart to rest their weary bodies, being himself heated with his armor,
after the manner of soldiers went to wash himself, accompanied only with one
page. And before he came to the bath, one of his enemies met him having a sword
drawn in his hand; and then another; and afterward a third; and after them
more: and these escaped out of the battle, and came to the bath to hide
themselves, and seeing the king there, they were sore afraid, and sought to
hide themselves, and so passed by him being astonished and amazed, although the
king at that time was naked and The year of the world, 3928 before Christ's
birth 36. Herod beheadeth Pappus Antigonus captain.
weaponlesse, in so much as none were present there to surprise them; they
escaped; and Herod was very well contented that he had no harm by them. The
next day after he beheaded Pappus who was the General of Antigo^s his army,
and sent his head to his brother Pheroras, who was ruler of his army, in
revenge of his brother that was slain: for Pappus was he that slew Joseph.

The winter being past, he with his army came to Jerusalem, and besieged it,
pitching his tents before the temple, where it was easiest to take the City,
and where before time Pompey had entered Ant. lib. 14. cap. 1^. Jerusalem
besieged.
it (which was about the third year after Herod was made king in Rome.) Now
when he had quartered his army as he thought best for his purpose, and cut off
the suburbs, he caused three rampires to be raised, and towers to be builded
upon them, and leaving there his trusty friends Alexander, who was son to
Aristobulus, who (as we before made mention) was despo^sed unto him, and he
wedded her even in the time of the siege, as who should say, now he contemned
his enemies: after his marriage rites were performed, he returned to Jerusalem
with a far greater army: Sosius also seconded him with a great army of footmen
and horsemen, whom he sent before him through the midst of the country; and
he himself came after by Phoenicia; Now when all his whole army was assembled
together, to the number of about some 11. legions of footmen, and six thousand
horsemen, beside the Syrians that came to help him, which were no small
number, he laid his assault and battery to the northermost wall; and the
rather because he thought himself warranted by the decree of the Senate,
whereby he was declared to be king. Sosius also was warranted by Antonies
letters, whereby he commanded him to help Herod with all the army that was
under his government* Mean while those Jews that were within the The year of
the world. 3929 before Christ's birth 35.
City* were diversely troubled: for a multitude of the weaker sort gathering
themselves together about the temple, grew to this resolution; that whosoever
should fortune to die in this attempt should be most happy and beloved by God.
But those who were hardiest amongst the^, joining themselves together, robbed
and took away from the rest what they could, but in especial The Jews
valiantly defend themselves.
they took victuals from that part that was next the City: so that they
neither left meat for horses nor men, and the valiantest of them all being set
to defend the walls against those that besieged them, hindered the adversary
from erecting their rampires; so that they still found some new device to
hinder the force of their engines: neither did they any ways prevail so much
as by their Herodes chosen men valiantly scaling and Herod's soldiers after
five months siege enter the city Slaughter in Jerusalem.
clearing the walls, brake into the City; and a^er them Sosius his Centurions.
Those places that nearest adjoined the temple were the first of all that they
intercepted, and the whole army entering the city, it was lamentable to see how
in every corner ye people were massacred: for the Romans being displeased that
the siege continued so long time, became more cruel, and Herod's army
endeavored to let no one of the adverse part escape. By which means many were
slain, both in the narrowest places of the streets, as also in their own
houses: yea even then also when they fled into the temple, without respect of
age or womanhood. For although the king entreated the soldiers to spare the
people, yet for all that they never restrained their cruel hands, but like mad
men they raged against all men, women, and children. At that time also
Antigonus, neither Sosius hi^ Sosius takes Antigonus.
feet, beseeching him to be merciful unto him; but Sosius nothing
compassionating his calamity, cruelly derided him, and called him Antigona:
yet did he not permit him to depart free as a woman, but put him in prison.

Now when Herod had conquered his enemies, he endeavored to the uttermost to
appease the fury of the soldiers; for all the whole multitude were desirous
to see the temple, and the holy vessels therein: but he resisted them,
appeasing some by threatenings, reclaiming others by The year of the world.
3929. before the birth of Christ. 35.
Sosius, and obiecting against him, that the Romans would desolate the City
both of men and money, and leave him king of a place without subjects: adding
further, that he esteemed not the empire of the whole world to be a recompense
for such a massacre of his Citizens. Hereunto Sosius replied, that in equity
the soldiers were to have the sacking of the town, in recompense of that
labor they had spent in the siege. But Herod gave him this answer, that he
had rather recompense every man out of his own treasury; and by this means
he redeemed as it were the relics of his desolate country: and in the end
performed Sosius a kingly reward: so that no man went away without money Herod
liberally bestows money upon the soldiers. Antigonus beheaded. Ant. lib. 14.
cap. 1.
This done, Sosius dedicated a golden crown unto God and so departed, leading
Antigonus captive with him, to the intent to present him unto Antonius. This
man desirous to continue his life, and entertaining himself with this cold
hope even until the last, received in the end that reward which his faint
heart desired, and was beheaded.

Herod being now king, made a distinction between the Citizens; and those who
had favored him, he used very honorably; and put those to death, who had
followed Antigonus: and when money failed, he distributed all his kingly
ornaments, and sent them to Antonius and his company. Yet did not he quite
redeem himself from all annoiances: for Antonius being now Cleopatra her
love; in all things yielded unto her desire: and Cleopatra having raged so
against her own kindred, that she had not left one of them alive, now turned
her fury upon strangers, and accusing the nobility of Syria unto Antonius,
she persuaded him to put them Cleopatras cruelty against her kindred.
to death, that she might thereby the easier obtain their possessions.
Afterward her covetous mind sought to effect the like against the Arabians,
and the Jews also, in so much as she secretly went about to cause the kings of
those places, Malichus and Herod to be put to death. Antonius made a show as
though he would have granted her request, yet he thought it great impiety to
kill good men and so great kings: yet notwithstanding he no more accounted them
his friends, but took a great quantity of ground from the limits of both
their countries, and a vineyard in Jericho where balm grew, and gave her all
the Cities on this side the river Eleutherus (Tire and Antonius unto Euphrates,
who set forward to make war against the Parthians, and afterward Cleopatras
covetousness.
by Apamia and Damascus she came into Iudaea: where Herod (having something
pacified her angry mind with great gifts) obtained to pay her yearly two
hundredth talents for that part of his country; which Antonius had given her,
and seeking by all means possible to get himself an interest in her favor,
he conducted her unto Pelusium: and not long after Antonius returned out of
Parthia, and brought Artabazes the son of Tigranes captive, and gave him unto
Cleopatra: for all the money and riches which he had got and the captive
likewise, were bestowed on her.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the treacherous practice of Cleopatra against Herod* of Herod's war
against the Arabians, and of a very great earthquake.

ABout such time as the Actiacum war was on foot, Herod prepared himself to
attend Antonius; for that for the time present all troubles were pacified in
Iudaea: and he had The year of the world. 3934. before Christ's birth 30. Ant.
lib. 15. cap. 5. Clapatras subtle treason against Herod.
already gotten the castle of Hyrcanion, which Antigonus sister had in her
possession. But Cleopatra c^aftily prevented him in this his iourny; so that he
could not go with Antonius: for she desiring the ruins of both the kings (as
was before mentioned) persuaded Antonius that he should Herod to make war
against the Arabians; whom if he overcame, then she should be made Queen of
Arabia; and if so be he himself were overcome, then she should be Queen of
iudaea: intending hereby that one of these potentates should ruinate the other.
But this practice of hers was greatly to Herod's gain: For first of all making
head against those of Syria that were his enemies; with all the power of
horsemen he could make, which was very many, and meeting them at Diospolis he
overcame them, although they valiantly resisted: who having the overthrow
stirred up a mighty army of the Arabians to help them, so that an infinite
company was gathered The year of the world. 3934. before Christ's birth 30.
Ant. lib. 15. cap. 6.
together about Coelesyria, expecting the Jews near unto a city called
Canatha. Where king Herod meeting them, purposed not to fight unadvisedly, but
to compass his own army round about with a wall: but his army remembering
their former victory, would not be counseled, but violently assaulted the
Arabians, and at the first onset put them to flight. Herod pursuing his enemy
was greatly endaungered by the treason of the inhabitants of Canatha (who were
set on by Athenio, that was one of Cleopatras captains, who had always
borne him ill will) for the Arabians encouraged by their help, returned
again to battle, and they two joined their forces together, and set upon
Herod in stony and difficult places, and put his army to flight, and The
Arabians defeat Herod's army. The Actian war between Antonius and Augustus.
killed many of them; and those that escaped fled unto a little village hard by
called Ormiza; where the Arabians compassing them about, took both the men and
their tents with all their furniture. Not Herod's soldiers, he came and brought
help, but too late and to little purpose: but the cause hereof was, for that
the captains of his army would not obey his commandment: for if they had
been obedient, Athenio had not had the opportunity to work him that injury;
yet was he revenged upon the Arabians; and daily made incursions upon their
borders, and ceased not to invade and spoil them, until by many he cried
quittance with them for their one victory.

While thus he pursued his enemies; a great calamity befell him in the seventh
year of his reign, and in the midst of the Actian war: for about the
beginning of the spring time, there Another calamity of Herodes.
chanced a great earthquake, which slew an infinite multitude of beasts, and
thirty thousand people: yet the army had no harm, for it lay in an open
place. With the report hereof the Arabians Herod perceiving his countrymen
terrified by the sudden approach of their enemies, and not only broken, but
wearied with the greatness and continuance of Herodes oration to his dismayed
soldiers.
their calamities, rowsed up their drouping spirits that were tired with
suspect, and encouraged them after this manner. I see no reason of your present
fear, neither do I admire, that you were terrified with the punishment of Gods
indignation: but it is a cowardly mind to be daunted by the coming of your
enemies, who are but men, and whose violence, if your selves please, ye may
Athenio found opportunity to hurt us: but now since Fear gives confidence.
I perceive in your minds a certain remisnes and a forecast, it is an evident
token unto me of assured victory. It behooves you therefore not only before the
conflict to continue your accustomed minds, but also in the conflict, to show
that ye are men, armed both with hearts and ^dines, to (...) end that our
impious enemies may well see, that neither any humane calamity, nor divine
punishment can daunt the courage of the Jews, whilst the breath is in their
bodies: and that never a one of you all will suffer the Arabians to domineere
over your goods and possessions, whom many be overcome, can war enforce more
have against us, then the earthquake has done? Truly The y^re of (...) world,
3934. befo^ Christ's birth 30.
Herodes peroration.
courageous spirit of our nation, we be stirred up to revenge that impious
violating the law of all nations, and so every one march on to fight, not for
his wife and children, or country; but to revenge the murder of our
Ambassadors who will lead our army, and know better then we that are alive to
direct the same. For mine own part (if you will be ruled by ^e) I will be the
first that will lead you, and will hazard my self for you: for you know full
well that if your valor be not eclipsed by some headlong rashness, there is
nothing that may make head against

After he had by these or such like persuasions sounded his soldiers, and
found them in some Herod sacrifices to God before the battle. Herod
assaileth the enemy.
sort encouraged thereby, he offered sacrifice to God. And presently after with
all his army, he passed over Jordan, and pitching his tents at Philadelphia,
not far from his enemy, he made a show to assault a castle that was between
them and him, and so skirmished with them a far off, desirous to draw them to
the battle: for the enemies had sent to intercept the castle, but Her^s
forces gave them the repulse, and in despite of them kept the hill. Thus every
day made he an offer to fight, brauing the Arabians, and s^eing that they would
not come to the shocke (for they were in a great fear, and Athemus their
general for very fear was ready to give up the ghost) he assaulted them in
their trenches; and cast down their rampire, so as they were constrained to
Herod besieged them: and although they were already to be put to the sword,
yet was there such pen^e of water, that for drink they were all like to perish.
For which cause they sent Ambassadors to the king, offering him fifty talents
to let them go: but he contemned the^, and so much more ^est was he by reason
that their want of The Arabi^ through extreme thirst are enforced to yield to
the Jews.
water was so great, that coming out by flocks of their own accord, they
offered themselves to the Herod conflicting slew about seven thousand. Having
in this sort weakened the Arabians; that he had now extinguished all the strong
men, the countrymen admired him, and were so much daunted at his puissance,
that they wished him for their ruler.

CHAP. XV.
How Herod was exalted unto the kingdom.

INcontinent after this his prosperous success, there did betide unto him a
sea of cares and Ant. lib. (...) cap. 7.
Anto^s, whom Caesar had now lately ouerthrown at the battle which was fought
at Actium: yet was he more a^aid then hurt by this his suspicion: for Caesar
accounted not Antonius fully conquered, so long as Herod and he kept together.
For which cause the king timely foreseeing those dangers that might ensue, went
to Rhodes where at that time Caesar abode, in which place in the habit of a
pri^te man, and without a crown, but with a kingly courage, he presented
himself before him, and with unfeigned constancy spoke unto him in such manner
as follows. I was (O Caesar) made king of Iudaea by Antonius his means, and I
must confess that I have been a king, who what in me lay have served his
turn, and sought his profit: yea I must not deny but that (had nor the
Arabians Herod's oration to Augustus, Caesar.
hindered me) I had with all the power I could have made, seconded and assisted
Antony against Herod speaks. freely before C^.
of arms, yet. I confirmed him by my co^ the best I could, in^cating often
times unto him* that there was one only way to redress his adue^itie, to wit,
by the death of Cl^ra, whom if he killed, I promised him to assist him with
money, strong holds, and an army; yea and with mine own person against thee:
but the love of Cleopatra and God who had already designed The year of the
world. 3934. before Christ's birth 30 Caesar's an^ to Herod.
the victory unto thee, stopped his ears. For which cause, O Caesar, I am
conquered with Antonius, and have forsaken my crown and dignity with his
fortunes: and am come unto thee hoping that at thy hands I may obtain pardon.
To this Caesar answered: Live in safety, and reign now with greater security
then before; for thou deseruest to rule others, who with such constancy did
defend and maintain thy friendship. At this time endeavor thy self to
continue faithful toward them that are more fortunate then Antonius was: for,
for my part I have conceived a great hope and expectation of thy valor and
prowess; yet did Antonius well, in that he rather obeyed Cleopatra then thee:
for by his follies, have we now purchased thy friendship. That thou have begun
to do well, it thereby appears, because Ventidius has signified unto me,
that thou have sent him succors against his enemies. For which cause by this
my present decree, be thou Antonius. By this speech he exhorted the king not to
misdoubt of his friendship, and withal put a crown upon his head, and made a
decree, and sealed it, testifying how he had remitted all things done by Herod,
and confirmed him in his kingdom, and rehearsed many things therein, greatly
tending to Herodes praise. Herod (having first pacified Caesar with many
gifts) requested him to pardon Alexander, one of Antonius his friends, who
earnestly and in humble manner desired the same: but Caesar being very angry,
answered, that he for whom he entreated, had greatly and many times offended,
and so repeld Herod with this answer.

Afterward Caesar travailing into Egypt through Syria, was entertained by
Herod with all Caesar, when near unto Ptolemais he took a view of the
soldiers with Caesar, and made a banquet for him and all his friends, and
feasted the whole army likewise. And inasmuch as they travailed to Pelusiu^
through dry grounds, when they returned again, he provided water for them,
and furnished the Herod's gratulation toward Caesar.
army with all necessaries: so that both Caesar and the soldiers thought the
kingdom a small recompense for his deserts. For which cause after he came into
Egypt, and that Antonius and Cleopatra were now dead, he did not only increase
his honor, but also restored unto him that portion of his country which was
taken away, and given to Cleopatra: and beside that, Gadara, and Hippon, and
Samaria, and other cities, about the sea coast, to wit, Gaza, and Anthedon and
loppe, Caesar increases Herodes Dominion.
and Stratons tower: and moreover gave him four hundredth Galathians, which
before were Cleopatra Caesar's liberality, as the courageous mind of him unto
whom he was so liberal: after the first Actian solemnity, he added unto
Herodes dominion Trachon, and Batanaea, and Auranitis bordering upon it. For
this cause Zenodorus (who for money hired Lysanias his house) continually sent
thieves out of Trachon to rob the people of Damascus, who in humble manner went
to Varus (who was at that time governor of Syria) entreating him to inform
Caesar of their calamity. Caesar understanding thereof, writ back again,
commanding him to extinguish all the thieves: whereupon Varus with an army went
to those places which were most suspected, and rid the country of the
thieves, and took the territory from Zenodorus, and Caesar (least it should
again be a refuge for thieves to spoil Damascus) gave it to Herod, and made
him ruler over all Syria. And ten years after returning Herod made governor
of Syria.
Herodes counsel, and after Zenodorus his death he gave him all the country
between Trachon and Galilee. But that which Herod esteemed above all the rest,
was that Caesar loved him best of al next unto Agrippa: and Agrippa loved him
most of all men next unto Caesar. Thus now he touched the very top of
felicity: and so increasing in high mind, he employed himself chiefly to
piety.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Cities and buildings reedified and built by Herod, and of his
liberality toward strangers, and of his felicity.

IN the fifteenth year of his reign he repaired the temple, and enclosed
twice so much The ye^re of the world. 3947. before Christ's birth 17. Ant. lib.
15. cap. 10. 12. 13. 14. Herodes buildings.
ground as was before about the temple with a strong wall, whereon he bestowed
great costs and charges to beautify it: as the great porches will testify,
which he built about the temple, and a Castle on the north part thereunto
adjoining, which he builded even from the foundation. The Castle was so rich
and sumptuous, that it was equal unto the kings palace, and in the honor of
Antonius, he named it Antonia. He builded himself a palace also in the upper
The year of the world. 3947. before the birth of Christ. 17.
part of the City, and in it two houses, huge, and richly adorned: so that the
temple was not to be compared unto them. And calling them by his friends names,
he termed one of them Caesarea, and another Agrippa; whose names and memories
he did not only solemnize, and write in his private houses, but also
throughout all the whole country, and in every part of the City. For in the
country of Samaria he compassed a town with a wall, which was about twenty
stounds, and called it Sebaste; and he sent thither six thousand inhabitants,
giving them a most fertile soil and demeasnes. There also amongst other
buildings, he erected a very huge temple, and dedicated it to Caesar, and gave
the inhabitants of that place especial privileges. About the temple was there
a piece of ground containing three stounds and a half. For this monuments
sake, Caesar added unto his dominion another country; for which cause he
erected The fountain head of Jordan
certain fountains, and many think this to be the head of the river Jordan,
which whether it be true or no, we will declare hereafter.

At Jericho also (between the castle of Cyprus, and the other ancient kings
houses) he erected other buildings fairer, and more commodious for them that
came thither, calling them after the names of his friends. Finally there was no
convenient place in the whole kingdom, wherein Caesar: and having in every
place of his own kingdom, devised and dedicated temples unto him, he in Syria
also where he ruled did the like, founding in very many cities temples, which
he called by the name of Caesar. And perceiving that amongst the cities of the
sea coast, there was one called Stratons tower, the which being very old was
ruinated; and for the situation thereof, deserved reparation and cost, he
repaired it all with white stone, and built a very roial palace therein,
vvherin chiefly he showed a mighty mind. For this city standing in the
midst between Dora and Ioppe, there was no port nor haven in that coast: so
that whosoever sailed from Phoenicia into Egypt, were in great danger, by
reason of the violent winds that blew from Africa, which blowing but a very
easy gale, enforce the water with such a violence against the rocks on the
shore, that the waves rebounding back again Herod makes a greater port then
that of Piraeum.
and within it made most safe stations for ships. And although the nature of
that place was altogether contrary to his intent, yet he so overcame that
difficulty, that the sea could do that building no harm, and it was so
gallant and beautiful to behold, as though there had been no let any way to
hinder the adorning thereof. For having measured out such a place (as we have
spoken of) for the port, he laid a foundation in the bottom twenty else
deep of stone, whereof most of them were fifty foot long, nine foot
thick, and ten foot broad, and some bigger; An apt description of a haue^.
and all the bottom of the haven where the water came was laid with these
stones. Which done, he raised a wall of two hundredth foot; whereof a hundredth
foot was builded to break Caesar's kinsman. There were very many vautes also
to conduct such things into the town as were brought into the haven, and about
them a paued place for them to walk in, that came out of the ships: The
entrance thereunto was on the north side; for by reason of the situation of
the place, the northwinde there is the calmest. Before the entrance, were three
great colossus held up on every side with pillars: they which are on the left
hand are propt up by a tower which is a solid rock of stone. But at the
entrance on the right hand were two huge stones joined together, which make a
greater tower then the other. There is also a house adjoining unto Caesar,
wherein was placed Caesar's colossus, fully as great as Jupiters at Olympus: for
it was made after that example, equal to that at Rome, and that of Iunoes at
Argos. The City he builded for the inhabitants of that province, and the port
or for haven to seafaring men. The honor and credit he attributed to Caesar,
and by his name called it Caesarea. He also made other buildings, as the
Market, the The year of the world. 3947. before Christ's birth 17. Caesarea in
time past called the tower of Straton. Ant. lib. 15. ca. 10. 12. and lib. 17.
cap. 5. Agrippium, Antipatris. Cyprus. Phasaelus tower.
Theater, and the Amphitheater, which are worth the memory. And he every fifth
year ordained certain sports, and called them after the name of Caesar. And
himself first proposed very ample rewards in the 192. Olympiade; insomuch that
he not only gave royal gifts to the victors, but also to the second and third
after them. He repaired Anthedon also, which was destroyed by the wars, and
called it Agrippium, and loving Agrippa very dearly, he caused her name to be
engraven over the portall that he builded in the temple. Neither was he
unmindful of his parents, for in the richest soil of the whole kingdom, he
built a City for a monument of his father: and by his name called it
Antipatris, being a very rich soil, both for trees and rivers. At Jericho
also he built a very gorgious and strong Castle, and called it Cyprus in
honor of his mother. He likewise builded a tower in memory of his brother
Phasaelus at Jerusalem, and Phasaelus his tower (of the compass and beauty of
this tower we will speak hereafter.) He also called another city Phasaelus,
which is situate in a valley beyond Jericho toward the north.

Having thus eternized the memory of his friends and kinsfolk, he did not
forget to do the like to himself, for he built a Castle on a mountain near
Arabia, having on one side a strong Herodium.
place of defense, and this Castle he called Herodium after his own name. By
the same name also he called a tomb, which he builded sixty stounds from
Jerusalem, artificially made in manner of a woman's dug, which he richly adorned:
for within compass of the top of it, he caused round turrets to be placed: and
round about it he builded princely houses, gallantly adorned both within
Herodium a castle resembling a city.
and without. He also brought water from a great way off, with great cost and
charges, and made a pair of stairs of pure white marble, to go up, which had
two hundredth steps. For the Herod's bounty to all men.
He builded the wall of Biblus; and seats, porches, temples, and markets at
Berytus and Tire: at Sidon and Damascus he builded a Theater, and a water
conduit at Laodicea a sea town. At Ascalon he builded fountains or lakes very
sumptuous, and baths with pillars, that for greatness and gallant work were
miraculous. To other places he gave woods, and ports: and unto many cities he
added fields, as though they had been fellow cities of his kingdom. Also
toward the Herod famous through the world.
which he extended unto them of Lycia and Samia? or the magnificent gifts which
he used toward all the people of Ionia; yea all things which their hearts could
desire: whereby he relieved all their necessities? Nay, both the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians, and Nicopolites, and the Citizens of Pergamus in Mysia received
very many benefits at his hands. He paued also a large The year of the world.
3954 before Christ's birth 10.
street in Antiochia of Syria, which was in length twenty stounds, and that
with fair marble. This street before that time was so full of dirt, that no
man could go through it; and all along Herod seeing them decay only for want
of maintenance, and that this was the only remainder of all the ancient
monuments of Greece, he not only in his own person at that time became one of
the proposers of rewards in that Olympiade which he assisted when he went to
Rome; but also gave a yearly stipend to maintain the same, least for want it
should be left off. It is not to be told what debts and tributes he remitted;
for he delivered the Phasaelites and Balaneotes, and other towns of Cilicia,
from the payment of a yearly tribute: Herod a great hunter.
withal; so that many were astonished to see him exercise himself, who
admired him The year of the world. 3954. before Christ's Nativity. 8. Herod
besides the virtue of mind and body had the blessings of fortune.


CHAP. XVII.
Of the disagreement between Herod and his sons Alexander and Aristobulus.

But his private and domestical sorrows seemed to envy him his public
felicity, and Ant. lib. 15. cap. 3. 8. and lib. 16. cap. 13.
Doris) and married Mariamme the daughter of Alexander, who was Aristobulus
son, which caused troubles in his house, both before, but especially after he
returned from Rome. For he banished his eldest son Antipater, whom he had by
Doris, out of the city, only for his childrens sake that he had by Mariamme;
licensing him Herod expelseth Antipater out of the city, and kills Hyrcanus
his wives grandmother
only at festival times to come unto the city in regard of some suspicion of
treason intended against him. And afterward he slew Hyrcanus his wives uncle,
notwithstanding that he returned out of Parthia unto him, because after he
suspected that he intended some treason against him; whom Barzapharnes, after
he had taken all Syria, took away prisoner with him. But his own countrymen
Herod, he had not been killed: but the marriage of his niece caused his death:
for, for that cause, and especially for the love of his native soil, he came
thither. That which moved Herod to kill him was, not for that he sought the
kingdom, but because he had right unto the kingdom. Herod had five children
by Mariamme, two daughters, Herod's children by Maririamme.
and three sons. The youngest was sent to Rome to study, where he died. The
other two he brought up like Princes both for their mothers nobility sake, and
for that they were borne after he was king. But that which above al other was
most forcible, was the love he bare to Mariamme, which from day to day
tormented him more violently in such sort, that he felt not any part of those
griefs which this his best beloved enforced against him. For Mariamme hated
him as much as he loved Mariamme hatefully vpbraideth Herod with Hyrcanus
death.
Hyrcanus her uncle, and unto her brother Aristobulus. For Herod spared him
not, although he was a child; but after he had made him high Priest in the
seventeenth year of his age, he presently put him to death; after he had so
honored him: who when he came to the Altar clothed in sacred attire upon a
festival day, all the people wept: and the same night was he sent to Jericho,
and drowned in a lake by the Galatheans, who had received commission to
perform the murder. These things did Mariamme daily cast in Herodes teeth,
and vpbraided both his mother and sister, with very sharp and reproachful
words: yet he so loved her, that notwithstanding Herod's mother and sister do
falsely accuse Mariamme to him.
all this he held his peace. But the women were set on fire, and that they
might the rather Herod against her, they accused her of adultery, and of many
other things which bare a show of truth: obiecting against her that she had
sent her portraicture into Egypt unto Antonius; and that through immoderate
lust, she did what she could to make her self known unto him, who doted upon
women's love, and was of sufficient power to do what wrong he pleased.

Hereat Herod was sore moved, especially for that he was jealous of her whom
he loved, bethinking himself upon the cruelty of Cleopatra, for whose sake
king Lysanias and Malichus king of Arabia were put to death; and now he
measured not the danger by the loss of his wife, but by his own death which
he feared. For which cause being drawn by his affairs into the country,
Herod secretly charge Joseph to kill his wife.
he gave secret commandment unto Joseph his sister Salomes husband (whom he
knew to Mariamme, if so be Antonius should have killed him. But Joseph not
maliciously, but simply to show her how greatly the king loved her, disclosed
that secret unto her: and she when Herod was returned, and amongst other talk
with many oaths swear that he never loved woman but her; indeed (quoth she) it
may Herodes suspicion betwixt Joseph and his wife.
well be known how greatly you love me by the commandment you gave to
Joseph, whom you charged to kill me. Herod hearing this which he thought to be
secret, was like a mad man, and presently persuaded himself that Joseph would
never have disclosed that commandment of The year of the world. 3954. before
Christ's birth 10. Herod commands both Joseph and Mariamme to be slain.
Mariammes sons inheritor, of her displeasure.
his, except he had abused her; so that hereupon he became furious, and leaping
out of his bed, he walked up and down the palace: vvhereupon his sister
Salome having fit opportunity, confirmed his suspicion of Joseph. For which
cause Herod growing now raging mad with Jealousy, commanded both of them to
be killed. Which done, his wrath was seconded by repentance, and after his
anger ceased, the affection of love was presently renewed: yea so great was the
power of his affection, that he would not believe she was dead, but spoke unto
her as though she were alive, until in process of time being assertained of
her funeral, he equalled the affection he bare her during her life, by the
vehemency of his passion for her death. Mariammes sons succeeded their
mother in her wrath, and recogitating what an impious act it was, they
accounted their father as a mortal enemy, both before and after they went to
study at Rome, and especially after The year of the world. 3956. before
Christ's birth 8.
mind increase. And they being now mariageable, one of them married the daughter
of their aunt Salome, who accused their mother; the other married the daughter
of Archelaus king of Cappadocia. And now to their hatred was there joined a
liberty to speak more freely against them, and by this occasion of their
boldness many were animated to calumniate them: so that some did openly tell the
king that both his sons sought to work treason against him, and that the one
of them prepared an army to help the other to revenge the death of their
mother; and that the other (to wit, he that was son in law to Archelaus)
purposed to fly, and accuse Herod before Herod's debate with those sons he had
by Mariamme. Ant lib. 16. cap. 4.
Caesar. Herod giving ear unto those calumniations, sent for Antipater whom
he had by Doris, to the end he might defend him against his two sons, and
sought to advance him above them. But Antipater, he wrought himself into
favor: for he knew how to flatter his father, and raised many slanders upon
his two brethren, partly invented by himself, partly diuulgated by some of his
favorites, whom he set a work about that matter, till that at last he put his
Antipater by disgracing his brothers, is declared his fathers heir.
brethren out of all hope of having the kingdom. For he was now by the kings
Will and Testament declared king, so that he was sent as a King unto Caesar in
a kingly habit and pomp, only he wore no Crown: and in time he so prevailed,
that he wrought his mother into Mariammes steed; and with flatteries and
calumniation so moved the king, that he began to deliberate about Alexander
with him to Rome, and accused him before Caesar, that he had given him poison.
But he with much Herod accuses Alexander before Caesar.
ado having obtained liberty to plead his own cause, and that before an
unskillful Judge, yet more wise then Herod or Antipater, he modestly held his
peace in all things that his father had offended in: and first of all he purged
his brother from danger of that crime, and taking the whole matter upon
himself, he in very good sort acquitted himself thereof. And afterward he
inueighed against Antipaters subtlety, and complained of those injuries which
had been offered him, having besides the equity of his cause sufficient
eloquence to acquit himself: for he was a vehement orator; and knew well how to
persuade. Last of al, he objected that his father having a desire to put both
him and his brother to death, had laid an accusation upon him: where at the
whole audience Caesar was so moved, that not regarding the accusations that
were laid unto A reconciliation between Herod and his sons.
them, he presently made Herod and them friends, upon these conditions, that
they in all things should be obedient unto their father; and that their father
should leave the kingdom to whom he pleased.

Hereupon Herod returned from Rome, and though he seemed to have forgiven his
sons; yet laid he not his jealousy and suspicion aside. For Antipater still
urged his argument to make Herod hate his other two sons, though for fear of
him that reconciled them, he durst not openly show himself an enemy unto
them. Afterward Herod sailed by Cilicia, and arrived at Elaeusa, Archelaus
kindly entertaineth Herod and his sons.
where Archelaus received him very courteously, thanking him for the safety
of his son in law, and very joyful for that they were made friends: for he
wrote unto his friends at Rome with all Alexander, when he came to plead his
cause. And after this entertainment, he conducted Herod unto Zephyrius,
giving him gifts to the value Herod's worthy oration to the people, wherein he
distributeth honors to his three sons.
of thirty talents, and so took his leave of him. Herod so soon as he came
to Jerusalem assembled the people together, and being assisted by his three
sons, he showed unto them the cause of his going to Rome, and blessed God, and
thanked Caesar, who had appeased the discord of his house, and that had made
his sons friends which he esteemed more then his kingdom: and I (quoth he)
will make their friendship firm. For Caesar appointed me king, and gave me
leave to choose whom The year of the world. 3956. before the birth of Christ. 8.
And now I here constitute al three of my sons kings: which purpose of mine
first I beseech Almighty God, and secondly you to favor: for the one of them
for his years, the other for their nobility of birth, have right to the crown
and kingdom; which is so large, that it may suffice many: so that you for your
parts reverence them whom Caesar conjoined, and I their father ordained, giving
them not unfit, nor unlike honors, but such as they have deserved. For a man
cannot do a greater pleasure unto him whom he honors above his years, then
he shall give discontent unto him whom he dishonors. For which cause I will
constitute to every one of them such friends and welwillers, as with whom they
be most conversant, and of them I will require pledges of a concord and unity
amongst them. For I know that discords and contentions arise by malice of those
who are conversant Herod gives not the kingdom to his sons, but the honors
of the kingdom.
present: for I give not my sons the kingdom, but the honor and dignity
thereof; and they shall have pleasure as though they were kings themselves, yet
I my self will bear sway, although I am unwilling to do it. Let every one of
you consider my age, my course of life, and piety: for I am not so old that
any one may quickly despair of me, nor I have not accustomed my self to such
kind of pleasure, as is wont to shorten young men's days; and we have been so
religious that we are in great hope of long life. But if any one despise me,
and seek to please my sons, such a one will I punish. I do not forbid them
to be honored, whom my self have begotten, for that I envy them: but because
I know well that such applauses nourish pride and arrogancy Herod conuerteth
his speech to his sons.
affection: then reverence Caesar who rconciled us: and last of all obey me who
request, and entreat that at your hands, which I might command, namely that
you remain brethren. And I will now give you both kingly attire and honor,
and I pray God that if you will continue and remain friends, I may continue in
this mind.

After he had thus spoken, he saluted them very lovingly, and dismissed the
people, some praying that it might be as he had said: others (who desired
alteration) made as though they had Herod by his words did not utterly
extinguish the hatred between^ his sons.
heard nothing. Yet for all this, the dissension amongst the brethren was not
appeased; but each of them mistrusting worser events, departed from one
another. For Alexander and Aristobulus stomached the matter, that Antipater had
his desert confirmed: and Antipater was grieved that his brethren should have
the second place after him; yet he could craftily so carry himself, that no
man could perceive his hatred toward them. And they derived of a noble race
spoke all they thought, and many endeavored to set them on, and others as
friends insinuated themselves into their company, to learn what news: so
that Alexander could not speak a word, but presently it was carried to
Antipater, and from him to Herod with an addition; so that when Alexander
Antipater suborned men to set him on, that so his lies might be shadowed with a
color of truth: and that if he could prove any one thing true, all lies and
tales else diuulgated might thereby be justified to be true. Now all Antipaters
familiars were either naturally secret, or else he stopped their mouths with
bribes, least they should disclose his intents: so that Antipaters treason
against his brother Alexander.
one might justly have termed his life a secrecy of malice. All Alexanders
friends were either corrupted by money, or flattering speeches, wherewith
Antipater overcame al, and made the^ thieves and proditors of such things as
were either done or spoken against him: and himself doing all things he dealt
so warily, that at last those calumniations came unto Herodes ear: and he
counterfeited By whatmeans Antipater corrupted his brother Alexanders friends.
Anupater whet^eth Herod and his courtiers against Alexander.
Alexander, and prete^ding good will toward his brother, at first fainedly
reproved the^, and afterward seriously alleged their sayings as accusations:
so that hereby Herod was very wrath, but turned all as though Alexander went
about treason, and sought to kill his father, and nothing made so much credit
be given to these calumniations, as that Antipater colorably excused his
brother. Herod ince^sed herat, every day withdrew his affection more and more
from the two brethren, and daily increased his love toward Antipater. The
nobility also were inclined after the same manner, The year of the world,
3956 before Christ's birth 8.
partly of their onwe accord, and partly for that they were so commanded: so
did Ptolemaeus the chiefest of all the nobility, and the kings brethren, and
all his kindred; for all men's expectation was upon Antipater. And that which
grieved Alexander the more, was, that all these mischiefs wrought to his
overthrow, were done by the counsel of Antipaters mother; for she being a step
mother, was cruel, and hated them being borne of a Queen, far more then a
step mother does her sons in law. And although all men followed Antipater
for the hope which they had of him, yet were they also compelled thereunto by
the kings command, who gave an especial charge to their dearest friends,
that none should follow Alexander or his brother: so that he did not only
terrify those of his own kingdom, but also those of other foreign nations.
For Caesar had given no such authority: for he gave him license to take any
one that was a fugitive from Antipater by little and little moved Pheroras
their uncle and Salome their aunt against them, daily consulting with his wife,
whom he should incite against them.

Now Glaphyra Alexanders wife increased their malice every day, recounting her
own nobility and bearing her self above all that were in the whole kingdom:
for she derived her petigree by Glaphyra Alexanders wi^e increased his
conceived suspicion by her words.
the fathers side, from Timenus; by the mothers side from Hystaspis his son
called Darius: inueying Herodes wives, and his sister, who were chosen for
their beauty, and not for their nobility of birth. For Herod (as we have
said) had many wives, both for that it was lawful by the custom of their
country, and because Herod delighted in many; and all of them hated
Alexander, for Glaphyras pride and contumelious speeches. And Aristobulus made
Salome his enemy, although she was his wives mother: for she was before moved
by Glaphyras speeches, and he often vpbraided his wife with her base birth,
still telling her that he had married a private woman, and his brother
Alexander a Queen. And his wife often Aristobulus obiecteth to his wife her
base birth. Ant. lib. 16. cap. 7.
with weeping tears told this to her mother: adding moreover, that Alexander
and Aristobulus threatened, that if they got the kingdom, they would make their
other brethrens mothers weaue with their maids; and that they would make them
notaries of villages, deriding that they Salome moved hereat, could not
contain her self, but told all to Herod, who easily believed her, because
she spoke against her son in law. Moreover, another accusation was laid to
their charge, whe^eat the king was greatly moved: for he was informed that
Alexander and Aristobulus did often bewa^le their mother, and lament her hard
hap with Alexander and Aristobulus often times bewail their mother, and by
that means provoke their father.
sighs, and cursed him: and that often when he bestowed some of Mariammes
clothes upon his latter wives, they threatened that in short time in steed of
princely attire, they should wear a black habit. Whereupon Herod, though he
feared the constant minds of the young men, yet because he would not take away
all hope of amendment, he called them unto him (for he was to sail to Rome)
and as a king threatened them in few words, and like a father gave them many
admonitions, and requested them to love their brethren, promising them
forgiveness of their former The two brothers excuse themselves before their
father Herod.
people opportunity and recourse unto him: for that there would always be
some that would maliciously invent tales to tell, whilst there was any one that
would give them the hearing and believing thereof. For they knew that Salome
was their enemy, and Pheroras their uncle, and both of them bare cruel minds,
and were hard hearted; and especially Pheroras; who was fellow with his brother
of all, saving only the crown, and had his own revenues amounting to a
hundredth talents a year, and received all fruits of the whole country beyond
Iordane, which was given him by his brother. Herod also had obtained of Caesar
to make him Tetrarch, and bestowed Pheroras fell in love with his maid, and
forsook a princess: whereat Herod being angry married his daughter unto his
brothers son, who was afterward slain by the Parthians; but Herod presently
pardoned Pheroras offense. Diverse before this time were of opinion that in the
life time of the Queen, he would have poisoned Herod; and Herod although he
loved his brother very well; yet because many who had access unto him told
him so, he began to misdoubt: and so The year of the world 3956. before
Christ's Nativity. 8.
Pheroras friends, and none of them confessed it: yet they confessed that he
was determined to fly unto the Parthians with her whom he was so in love
withal, and that Costabarus Salomes husband was privy thereunto, unto whom
the king married her after her first husband for s^pition of adultery was put to
death. Salome her self also was not free from accusation: for Pheroras accused
her that she had contracted matrimony with Syllaeus, who was procurator to
Oboda king of Arabia, who was a great enemy of the kings, and she being
convicted both of this and all things else, whereof her brother Pheroras
accused her, yet obtained pardon as likewise Pheroras did: so that the whole
tempest of all their family was turned against Alexander, and light upon his
head.

The king had three Eunuchs whom he loved dearly, and every one known by
their offices: Alexander with great gifts overcame. Which the king
understanding, by torments Alexander corrupts his fathers Eunuchs, and
tells them ^e (...) to succeed in the kingdom.
forced them to confess it, and declared with what promises they were thereto
by Alexander induced, and how he had deceived them: affirming that there was no
trusting to Herod, who was a shameless old man; and that he died his hair,
to make himself seem young: and that he in despite of him would be his
successor, and then he would be revenged upon his enemies, and make his friends
happy, and especially them: and that the whole nobility did secretly obey
him, and the captains of the army and governors did privily come unto him.
Hereat Herod was so terrified that he durst not presently diuulgate their
confessions, but night and day he sent spies to learn what was said or done,
and whom he suspected, them he presently killed: so that Herod seareth his
son Alexander.
enemies, and credit was given to every lie, and no man was so soon accused,
but presently he was punished; and he who presently before accused others, was
now accused himself, and carried to be punished with him whom he accused. For
the kings perils shortened the time of trial for their lives, and he became so
tyrannous, that he afforded not a good look unto them that were not accused,
and showed himself most fierce and violent even to his dearest friends: so
that he banished many out of his kingdom, and railed against such as he had no
power over. Antipater increased Ant. lib. 17. cap. 8. Hrods cruelty.
this mischief more and more, and gathering together a great company of his
friends, he omitted no kind of calumniation. The king likewise was terrified by
the rumors and tales of Herod casts Alexander into prison and tortured his
friends.
Alexander before him with a drawn sword: For which cause he suddenly took
him and cast him in prison, and tortured his friends, many of which died in
torments, because they would not confess more then in conscience was true:
others not able to endure the torments, were forced to confess that Alexander
and his brother Aristobulus thought to have wrought treason against their
father, and that they expected their time till he went a hunting; resolved in
themselves that having killed him, they would presently fly to Rome. Although
these and such like calumniations were nowaies probable, yet extremity of
pain forced men extempore to invent them, and the king willingly believed
them, as it were comforting himself thereby in that he might not be thought to
have imprisoned his son vn^stly. Alexander perceluing that it was impossible
for him to abolish his fathers suspicion, Pheroras, and Salome, who were the
chief; auouching that before that time he had had the use of her body in the
night time: and how though he himself was unwilling, yet she forced him
thereunto. Now the books came unto Herod's hands, which charged the greatest
amongst the nobility with most heinous matters. Archelaus fearing his son in
law and daughter to be in great danger, Alexander during his imprisonment wrote
^oure books against his enemies
speedily came into Iudaea, and ingeniously appeased the kings wrath: for, so
soon as he came unto Herod, he cried, where is that wicked son in law of mine,
or where may I see the face of that wre^h that goes about to murder his
father, that I may tear him in pieces with mine own hands, and marry my
daughter anew to a better husband? for although she be not privy to his
counsel, Alexander yet to live: for I came thus hastily out of Cappadocia,
thinking he had been put to death, to talk with thee concerning my daughter,
whom I married to him for thy sake and honor. Wherefore now let us take
counsel what to do with them both, and seeing thouart too father like and not
able to punish thy son, thy ^echerous son; let us change Archelaus king of
Cappadocia.
roumes, and let me be in t^y place to revenge thee: with such like inuections
he deceived Herod (though otherwise firm in his purpose.) Then Herod showed
him the books that Alexander The year of the world. 3956. before Christ's
birth 8.
had writ, and reading every chapter with deliberation, Archelaus took
occasion fit for his purpose, and by little and little laid all the fault on
Pheroras, and those that were accused in the book. And perceiving the king to
give ear unto him, let us (quoth he) consider whether the young man was not
circumuented by the treachery of so many lewd persens, and not thou by the young
Archelaus and Herod consulte upon Alexanders books.
man: for there appears no cause why he should fall into such wickedness, who
now enjoyed the kingdom and hoped to succeed thee therein, had he not been
persuaded thereto by other men, who seeing him a young man, entised him unto
such naughtines. For we see that through such men, not only young men, but
also old men, and most noble families, yea and whole kingdoms are ruinated.
Herod upon these speeches began somewhat to relent, so that he appeased his
wrath toward Alexander, and increased it toward Pheroras; for he was as it
were the subject Archelaus friendship, that he was lead by him to do what he
pleased, leaving Alexander, he in humble manner came to Archelaus, Herod is
incensed against his brother Pheroras.
seeking impudently for succor at his hands, of whom he had not deserved any
favor. Archelaus answered him, that he knew no ways to obtain his pardon,
who was guilty of so heinous crimes, and convicted manifestly to have
practiced high treason against the kings own person, and to be the cause of
all these miseries that had now befallen the young man, except that he would
lay aside all subtle dealing, and denying of his fact, and confess the crimes
whereof he was accused; and so in humble wise go unto his brother who loved him
dearly, and crave pardon; promising him that if he would so do, he would do
him what good he could. Hereupon Pheroras obeyed Archelaus his counsel, and
putting on a black attire, he in pitiful manner and with tears Pheroras
attired in a mourning garment with tears falls before Herodes (...) and
craves pardon. Pheroras by Archelaus means pacifieth Herod.
prostrated himself at Herodes feet, and craving pardon obtained it,
confessing himself to be a most wicked and vile person, and to be guilty of
all that which was objected against him, and that the cause which moved him to
do al those things, was the frantic and mad fits he fell into for the love
of that woman. Now when Pheroras became his own accuser, and a witness
against himself, then Archelaus endeavored to mitigate Herodes wrath toward
him, and excuse his faults with fit examples: for he alleged that his brother
attempted greater matters against him, whom notwithstanding for natures cause
he pardoned: adding that in every kingdom as in mighty bodies, always some
part began to swell, which notwithstanding was not presently to be cut off, but
to be cured by easy means.

Archelaus using many speeches unto Herod to this purpose, at last quite
appeased his wrath Pheroras, still counterfaiting himself to be angry with
Alexander, affirming that he would take his daughter away with him, till at
last he forced Herod of his own accord to entreat for the young man,
requesting him again to despouse his daughter unto him. Archelaus after much
entreatie answered, that he was willing the king should bestow his daughter
upon any save Alexander: for he greatly esteemed the law of affinity. Herod
replied, that if he did not divorce his daughter from Alexander, he should
think that he bestowed his son upon him: for they had no children, and his
daughter was dearly loved of the young man; so that if he would permit her to
stay still there, for her sake he would pardon all Alexanders offenses. Heereto
Archelaus with much ado agreed, and so was reconciled unto his son in law,
and he unto his father. Yet Herod Archelaus compels Herod of his own
accord to be entreated for Alexander. Herod dismisseth Archelaus and his
friends with great presents. Ant. lib. 16. cap. 11. Eurycles the Lacedemonian
secretly accuses Alexander to his father, and is the cause of his death.
affirmed that he must needs be sent to Rome to speak with Caesar, for he had
written the Caesar. Thus Archelaus craftily delivered his son in law from
danger, and after this reconciliation was made, they spent the time in
feasting and mirth. Upon Archelaus departure, Herod gave him seventy talents,
and a throne of pure gold adorned with precious stones, and Eunuchs, and a
concubine named Pannychis; and rewarded every one of his friends according to
their deserts. And all the kings kindred by the kings appointment and consent,
bestowed rich gifts upon Archelaus, and both he and all his nobility
accompanied him to Antiochia.

Not long after there came one into Iudaea far more subtle then Archelaus, who
both disanulled the reconciliation made for Alexander, and caused his death
also. This man was a Lacedemonian borne named Eurycles, who by money sought to
have obtained the kingdom. This man Herod rich gifts as it were for a bait of
that he intended; he had so behaved himself in Greece that it could no longer
tolerate his excess: and Herod again rewarded him with far greater gifts
then those were that he gave him: but he esteemed his liberality as nothing,
except he bought it with the blood of Princes. For which cause he circumuented
the king, partly by flattering him, partly by praising him fainedly, and
especially by his own craft and subtlety: and quickly perceiving his
inclination, he both in word and deed sought to please him (...) so that the
king accounted him amongst his chiefest friends. For both the king and all the
nobility The year of the world, 3956. before Christ's birth 8.
honored him the more for his country sake, in that he was a Lacedemonian. But
he very easily perceiving the feeble stay of Herodes house, and the hatred
between the brethren, and how the king was affected toward every one of them,
he first of all entertained himself at Antipaters house, making a show in the
mean while of good will toward Alexander, pretending and protesting Eurycles
by fained friendship deceives Alexander.
that in times past he had been Archelaus companion, and by this means he
quickly crept into favor with him as an approved friend: which was the cause
that he was suddenly entertained for a faithful man. He presently likewise
brought him into friendship with Aristobulus, and having sounded every man's
disposition, he accommodated himself unto all humors: and to begin withal he
became Antipaters pensioner, and a traitor to Alexander. And he often used hot
words to Antipater, as it were childing him, that he being eldest of the
brethren so slenderly looked after them, Alexander, admiring him who was borne
of a Queen and husband to a Queen, and yet would permit such a one who was
descended of a private woman to succeed in the kingdom, especially seeing he had
such occasion and opportunity to effect the contrary: for he might assure
himself of Archelaus his help in any thing. Alexander supposed he had spoken
as he thought, because he counterfaited friendship with Archelaus, so that he
misdoubting nothing disclosed unto him all his mind concerning Antipater,
saying, that it was no wonder though Herod disinherited them of the kingdom,
since before time he had slain their mother.

Eurycles counterfaiting himself both to pity them, and to be sorrowful for
their mischance, entised Aristobulus to speak the like: and having animated
them both to complain in this sort against Antipater and disclosed to him all
their secrets, forging also the treachery which those two brethren intended
against him, which was to dispatch him with their swords. For this cause
Antipater gave him a great sum of money, and commended him to his father, and
being hired to effect the death of Alexander and Aristobulus, he himself
became their accuser: Whereupon he came unto Herod and told him how in regard
of those benefits which he had received at his hand, he would now bestow his
life upon him, and the light of this world for recompense of his hospitality;
affirming that Alexander had lately stretched forth his hand with his sword
drawn to kill him, and he only was the cause that he performed it not by
staying his hand, and promising him to assist him in the matter: adding that
Alexander used these speeches. That Herod was not contented to enjoy a kingdom
which was another Mariammes death, but he would also leave the kingdom
belonging unto their ancestors, unto a pernicious bastard Antipater: and for
that cause he would revenge Hyrcanus and Mariammes death: And that it was not
convenient to receive the kingdom from such a father without blood; and every
day he had occasion given him so to do: for he could speak nothing without
calumniation. For if any mention were made at any time of any ones nobility,
presently he was vpbraided without cause, for his father would presently say,
there is none noble but Alexander, whose fathers base birth is a shame and
discredit unto him. And that going a hunting if he held his peace, his father
was offended; if he praised, then it was said he mocked: so that in every
thing he found his fathers affection turned from him, and that he was only
favorable to Antipater: so that he would Archelaus would work his safety, to
whom he might easily fly. And after he would go to Caesar (who as yet knew not
Herod's manners) for he would not stand before him then, as he did before being
terrified because his father was present: neither would he only speak of his
own wrongs, but of the wrongs of the whole nation, who were oppressed by
exactions even unto death. And then he would lay open in what pleasure, and
after what sort the money gotten with blood was consumed; and who and what kind
of men they were that were thereby enriched; and what was the cause of the
affliction of the city: and that there he would bewail the death of his
uncle, and his mother, and unfold all Herodes wickedness: which being once made
manifest unto the world, no man would account him a murderer of his father.
Eurycles having falsely reported this of Alexander, fell Antipater, affirming
that he only loved his father, and hindered such practices.

The king yet not thoroughly appeased for that which had past, grew into an
exceeding agony, Another false accusation of Alexander and his brother moves
Herod to indignation.
and Antipater once again suborned other false witnesses against them, who
affirmed that they were wont to have secret talk with Iucundus and Tyrannius,
who sometime were generals of the kings horsemen, who were then displaced for
some offense they had committed. Whereupon Herod being very angry, presently
tortured them: and they affirmed that they were ignorant of The year of the
world. 3956. before Christ's birth 8.
all that which was laid to their charge. But there was found and brought unto
the king a letter, as though it had been written by Alexander, unto the
Governor of the Castle of Alexandriam; requesting him, that he would receive
him and his brother Aristobulus into the Castle, when he had killed his father,
and to assist them both with weapons and other necessaries. Alexander affirmed
that this letter was counterfeited by Diophantus the Kings Secretary, who was
Diophanrus the kings notary writes fained letters in Alexanders name.
both bold, and could counterfeit any ones hand; and having counterfeited
many, was at last for the same put to death. Herod caused the Governor of the
castle to be tortured, but he confessed nothing that was laid against him: and
although he had no good proof of any thing, yet he commanded his two sons
to be kept in hold. He likewise called Eurycles (who was the bane of his
house, and the breeder of all the mischief) author of his safety, and one who
had Archelaus, and faining that he had reconciled Alexander and Herod, he
received there a piece of money. From thence he went into Achaia, and spent
that which he had euilly gotten in as bad manner as he got it. Lastly, he was
accused unto Caesar, that he had caused dissension in all Achaia, and spoiled
the Cities: for the which cause he was banished. And this was the punishment
which was inflicted upon him for Alexanders and Aristobulus troubles.

It is not amiss here in this placeto compare Euaratus of Cous unto this
Eurycles; who being a dear friend unto Alexander, and arriving about the same
time that Eurycles did, being Cous Euaratus
put to his oath, swear that he heard the young men say nothing: yet his oath
nothing prevailed Herod would only hear and give ear unto accusatitions; and
he highly esteemed them that would believe them with him, and show themselves
moved thereat. Moreover, Salome increased his cruelty toward his sons: for
Aristobulus minding to bring her into the same trouble with himself, who was
his mother Ant. lib. 16. cap. 12.
in law and his Aunt, sent unto her, willing her to look to her self, as
though the King was minded to put her to death. Who being now called into
question for the matters whereof she was before accused, to wit, that she
purposed to marry with the kings enemy Syllaeus the Arabian, to whom she
privily revealed the Kings secrets: and this was the utter ruin of the young
men, wherewithal they were over thrown as it were with a violent tempest. For
presently Salome went unto the King, and told him what Aristobulus had
admonished her of: Herod by Salomes counsel imprisoneth his sons. The year
of the world. 3961. before Christ's birth 3.
places. Then sent he Voluminous, who was the General of his Army, and Olympus
one of his familiar friends, unto Caesar, to carry him the informations against
his sons in writing: who sailing to Rome, after their arrival delivered the
Kings letters. And Caesar was very sorry for the young men, yet he permitted
the father to do what he would with his children: and so wrote unto him, that
he should have license to do what he thought good yet he signified unto him,
that he should do better to call his Nobles together, and let them make inquiry
concerning the treasons; and then if he found them guilty of these things
whereof they were accused, to put them to death.

Hereupon Herod according to Caesar's letters and appointment, came unto
Berytum, and Ant. lib 16. cap. 13. Herod gathers a council against
Alexander and Aristobulus.
that Caesar in his letters appointed, Saturninus and Pedanius Ambassadors, and
with them Voluminous. Procurator next the kings kindred, and Salome and Pheroras:
and then the nobility of Syria, Archelaus only excepted; who because he was
father in law to his son, Herod suspected him to be partial. But he
suffered not his sons to come into judgment for he knew that the very sight
of them would have moved all men to compassion. And moreover, if they were
permitted to speak for themselves, that then Alexander would easily have
acquitted them both: for which cause they were kept in Platane, in a Castle of
Sidonia. The king beginning his oration, was as vehement, as though they had
been present against whom he spoke; and he was half afraid Herod accuses
his sons in open judgment.
to object any treason against them, for that he had no proof thereof: and
therefore he prosecuted

At last (when no man contradicted him) he began to lament, as though by
ouercomming in such sort, himself was also overcome, and thereupon requested
every one to give their vedict. And first of all Saturninus condemned his
sons; but not to die saying, that he had three sons present, Herodes
sentence against his sons.
and he thought it not lawful to adiudge other men's sons to death. The two
Legates also affirmed the same, and many followed their advise: But Voluminous
was the first that pronounced The year of the world. 3961. before the birth of
Christ. 3.
Herod, some for hatred they bare him, but none for any indignation against
the young men. Then all Iudaea and Syria expected an end of this tragedy; yet
no man thought Herod to be such a Tyrant, as that he would have put his two
sons to death. Herod caused his sons to be brought to Tire, and from thence
by ship he conveyed them to Caesarea, bethinking himself what death he should
put them to. In the mean time there was an old soldier of the kings named
Tyro, who had a son belonging Tiro an old soldier exclameth against Herodes
cruelty.
to Alexander, and highly in his savor, and he himself greatly loved the two
young men: who being very much grieved in mind at that which had past, went
about crying, that justice was trodden under foot, truth oppressed, that nature
was confounded, and the life of man full of iniquity; and whatsoever else
grief put into his mind, who nothing esteemed his own life. Tiro came boldly
unto the king, and said unto him: O king, thou seem to me most unhappy, who
do give credit unto wicked and vile persons against thy dearest sons. For
Pheroras and Salome thou beleeuest before thy own children, whom
notwithstanding thou have often found to have deserved death; and thou do
perceive that they do this to the intent to make thee want lawful successors,
and leave thee none but Antipater, whom they with all their hearts would have
king, because they can rule him as they list. But bethink thy self (O king)
how all thy soldiers will hate him for the death of his two brethren; for
there is no man that does not pity the two young men, and many of the
Nobility are displeased hereat. After he had spoken this, he named them who
were displeased: whereupon the king presently commanded them, and him, and his
son to be laid hold on; and presently one of the kings Barbers named Tryphon,
Tyro with his son are by the kings command laid hands on. Ant. lib. 16. cap.
13.
Herod: Tiro persuaded me to kill thee with my razour, promising me, that if I
would so do, Alexander would give me great rewards. Herod hearing this, caused
Tiro, and his son, and the barber to be tortured, and they denied all, and
the Barber affirmed nothing more then he had already said. Then he commanded
Tiro to be more tormented. Whereupon his son moved with compassion toward
Another false accusation against Tyro. Herod commands his sons to be
strangled, and to be buried with Alexander their mothers uncle.
his father, promised to disclose all the matter unto the king, so that he
would pardon his father: who being released of his torments, presently declared
how his father through Alexanders means and procurement, was purposed to have
killed him. Many that were present thought this was a devise of the young man,
to free his father from torments: and yet others were persuaded that it was
true. Upon this Herod made a speech unto the people, wherein he inueighed Tiro,
and made the people arm themselves and kill both them and the Barber with
staves and stones. Now he sent his sons unto Sebaste, which was not far
from Caesarea, and there he caused them to be strangled: and having quickly
dispatched the matter, he caused them to be brought into the Castle
Alexandrium, there to be buried with their mothers uncle. And this was the end
of Alexander and Aristobulus.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Antipaters conspiracy against Herod his father.

But Antipater now hoping without all controversy to succeed in the kingdom,
was Ant. lib. 17. cap. 21.
had caused his brethrens deaths. And on the other side, he stood in no little
fear of his brothers children, whom he perceived now to begin to grow to
years: for Alexander had by Glaphyra two sons Tigranes and Alexander: and
Aristobulus had by Berenice daughter to Salome, five children, to wit, three
sons, Herod, Agrippa, and Aristobulus, and two daughters, Herodias and
Mariamme. Herod, after he had put Alexander to death, sent away Glaphyra with
her dowry into Cappadocia, and married Berenice Aristobulus his wife unto
Antipaters uncle: For Antipater devised this match to become friends with
Salome, whom he before time hated and envied. He also by his great gifts sought
to get Pheroras favor, and the friendship of such as were friends unto Caesar,
sending to that end great sums of money to Rome. He Anupater strives by
gifts and bribes to creep into men's favors.
Saturninus and all the rest great riches in Syria. But the more he gave, the
more he was hated of all men; for every one judged that he did not consume such
wealth, for that he was liberal, but that he lauished it out for fear; so
that he got not the love of them, upon whom he bestowed it, and they to whom he
gave nothing, were so much the more his enemies. Yet he became every day more
bountiful, seeing against his expectation, Herod made much of their children
whose parents he had slain, intending to show how much he repented their
deaths, by the pity and compassion he took upon their children. For
assembling together his friends, he caused the The year of the world, 3961
before Christ's birth 3. Herod grievously bemoned his sons, expressing the same
by his ^ation toward their children. Herod betrotheth his nephews.
children to be placed by him, and the tears standing in his eyes, he said:
Hard, cruel, and sinister fortune took away from me the fathers of these
children but I pity to see them orphans, and natural affection commends
them unto me. Wherefore I will endeavor, that seeing I have been an
unfortunate father, I may be a wiser and happier grandfather, and leave them
who are most dear unto me, to reign after me. Wherefore brother Pheroras, I
betroth thy daughter unto Alexanders eldest son, that for that cause thou
may be careful to provide for him, and assist him: and unto thy son
Antipater I assure the daughter of Aristobulus, that so thou may be a father
to her who wants a father; and my son Herod, whose mothers uncle was high
Priest, shall marry with her sister. And this is my will and pleasure touching
this matter, and let no man who loves me seek to alter this. And I beseech
Almighty God, for the good of my country,

Upon this Antipater was amazed, and all the Orphans well perceived how
sorrowful he was. For now he thought himself dishonored by his father, and
that his good fortune was endangered, seeing that Alexanders, son was like to
have both Archelaus and Pheroras the Tetrarch to assist him. Moreover he
considered how he was hated, and how the people did compassionate the children,
for that they were fatherless, and affected them, remembering their fathers who
were dead, and were terrified at his wickedness. Wherefore he attempted all means
possible to break off the marriages, yet he feared to insinuate any thing to
his father cunningly, Alexanders son (beside Archelaus his favor) were by
marriage made son in law unto Pheroras. Wherefore he earnestly besought him,
that seeing he had a great many daughters, to change the marriages: for the
king had nine wives, and by seven of them he had children: Antipater by Doris,
Herod by Mariamme daughter of the high Priest, and Antipas and Archelaus by
Malthace the Samaritane, and his daughter Olympias, Herodes children by his
seven wives.
whom his brother Joseph married; and by Cleopatra of Jerusalem Herod and
Philip; and Pallas Phasaelus: he had two other daughters also, Roxane and
Salome, one of them by Phaedra, and the other by Elpis. He had likewise two
wives by whom he had no issue, his cousin, and his niece: and beside these he
had two daughters by Mariamme, sisters to Aristobulus and Alexander. Wherefore
Antipater seeing his father had such choice of daughters, he requested the
marriages to be altered.

The king well perceiving his mind and purpose toward the Orphans, was very
angry: and calling to remembrance the misfortune of his sons, whom he had
put to death, he greatly feared Herod is persuaded by Antipaters flatteries to
break off the marriages.
least Antipater by some false accusations should overthrow them, and so with
sharp words did drive him off for that time; yet afterward he so flattered
Herod, that he got the marriages to be altered. And first of all he joined
Aristobulus daughter with Antipater himself, and his son Pheroras daughter.
Here one may see what Antipater could do by flattering speeches: for Salome in
the like matter could not speed although that she was his sister, and procured
many times Iulia Caesar's, wife to speak for her, that she might marie with
Syllaeus the Arabian: yet was not she permitted so to do. But Herod swear that
he would account her as an utter enemy; except she would desist from that
purpose, and afterward against her will he married her unto one Alexas a friend
of his: and one of her daughters to Alexanders son, and the other to
Antipaters uncle. As for Mariammes daughters, one of them was married to
Antipater his sisters son, the other unto Phasaelus his brothers son. When
Antipater had quite overthrown the hope of Ant. lib. 17. cap. 3. Antipater
builds upon the kingdom.
the Orphans and joined affinity, as he thought good, he now held himself on
a sure ground; and adding confidence to his malice he became intolerable to all
men. And seeing he could not avoid Pheroras now assisted him, as one that was
confirmed and established for king. Also the women in the court fell at
variance, and raised a new broyle: for Pheroras wife with her mother, and
Adeba^ betwixt the Ladies in yt court.
her sister, and the mother of Antipater did use themselves very insolently in
many things, abusing also two of the kings daughters very contumeliously: to
which matter she was chiefly set on by Antipater who hated them, having the
others at his command, only Salome hindered their agreement who went unto the
king, and told him that their meetings were not for his The year of the world,
3961. before Christ's birth 3.


The women understanding how she had informed the king and that Herod was
offended thereat; they came no more together openly, and abstained from their
wonted familiarity, and in the kings hearing fained themselves to fall out one
with another. Antipater also made the same show, so that he stuck not openly
to offend Pheroras: notwithstanding they had meetings and banquets in the
night, and the unity was the more confirmed because they perceived themselves
to be noted: for Salome knew all this, and told it unto the king. The king was
very angry, and especially against Pheroras wife, whom chiefly Salome blamed:
and having called together his kindred and friends, he laid many accusations
against her before them; and told them how contumeliously Ant. li. 17. ca. 4.
she had behaved her self toward his daughter, and that she hired the
Pharisees against Pheroras, he asked him whether he had rather have him for his
brother, or have his wife. And he answering, that he had rather die then lose
his wife: Herod doubtful what to do turned him to Antipater, and commanded
him never to talk with Pheroras, nor his wife nor any one belonging Herod
forbids Antipater of his brothers company, or to have conference with his
wife.
unto them after that time. But he obeyed his fathers command openly in show,
but secretly lay in their house: and fearing that Salome should perceive it, he
by his friends in Italy caused himself to make a voyage to Rome, by letters
brought to Herod, wherein it was commanded that shortly after the receite
thereof Antipater should be sent to Rome unto Caesar. Wherefore Herod using no
delay sent him presently, furnishing him with all things necessary, and a
great sum of money: giving him likewise his last Will and Testament to carry
with him to Caesar, wherein was Antipater should be king; and after him Herod
the son of Mariammes daughter of the high Priest. But Syllaeus the Arabian
neglecting Caesar's commandment, at the same time failed to Rome there to
contend with Antipater about matters, which were before in controversy between
him and Nicholaus. He had also a great contention with Aretas his king, whose
friends he had slain, and also Soemus the most potent in all the town of
Petra: and seeing Fabatus Caesar's procurator, he used his favor also against
Herod. But Herod giving Fabatus a greater sum of money alienated him from
Syllaeus, and by his means dispatched that which Caesar commanded: and because
Fabatus restored nothing unto him, he accused him that he was procurator, not
Fabatus Caesar's governor discovers Syllaeus secrets.
for Caesar but for Herod: wherewith Fabatus was moved, and being as yet in
great estimation with Herod, he did disclose Syllaeus his secrets, and
signified unto the king how that Syllaeus corrupted Corinthus one of his guard,
whom he willed to be taken and kept in hold. And the king followed his
counsel: for this Corinthus though he was always brought up in the kings
court, yet was he borne in Arabia. Wherefore he presently took him and two
other Arabians that were found with him; one of them was Syllaeus friend; and
the other Phylarchus, who upon their examination confessed that Corinthus for a
great sum of money was hired to kill the King. After this they were sent
unto Saturninus the governor of Syria, and from him to Rome.

CHAP. XIX.
How Herod should have been poisoned, and how it was known.

Herod still urged Pheroras to forsake his wife: for he knew not how to punish
her, having Herod banisheth his brother Pheroras and and his wife.
Pheroras taking this injury patiently departed into his Tetrarchie, taking an
oath that his banishment should endure so long as Herod lived, and that whilst
he lived he would never come any more at him. Insomuch as he would not come at
this brother to visit him when he was sick, notwithstanding he was often sent
for, when (as he thought) he lay now on his death bed, and would gladly impart
something unto him: but contrary to all hope he recovered, and afterward
Pheroras fell sick. At which time Herod showed his patient and humble mind:
for he went unto him, and very kindly sought help for him, but he was too
far spent, for a few days after he died: and although Herod loved him
until his dying day, yet was it bruted abroad that he poisoned Pheroras died
and was buried in Jerusalem
him. Herod caused his body to be brought unto Jerusalem, and commanded all
his nation to mourn, and buried him with a sumptuous funeral. And thus one of
the murderers of Alexander and Aristobulus came to his end: but shortly after
the revenge of that wicked fact did fall upon Antipater, who was the chief
author thereof: it did but begin with Pheroras. For certain that belonged to
Pheroras came in mournful wise unto Herod, and complained unto Ant. lib. 17.
cap. 5.
him how that his brother Pheroras was poisoned, and that one of his wives gave
him meat that was not seasoned after the accustomed manner: which when he had
eaten, he presently fell sick. And The year of the world. 3961. before Christ's
birth 3. A witch of Arabia.
that two days before his death there came a witch out of Arabia, who was sent
for by his mother and his sister to give Pheroras a love potion, and she in
steed thereof through Syllaeus inducements gave him poison, for she was of
Syllaeus acquaintance.

The King daunted with so many suspicions caused diverse of Pheroras maids and
libertines to be put to torments, and one of them impatient therein, exclaimed
in this wise: O thou God ruler The confession o^ the women in their tortures.
of heaven and earth, revenge us upon Antipaters mother, who is the cause of
these our evils! When the king understood thus much, he ceased not to search
out the truth; and then the woman disclosed Antipaters mothers familiarity
with Pheroras, and his women, and their secret meetings: and that Pheroras and
Antipater after they came from the king used to drink with them all night
long, not suffering any servant nor maid to be in the room with them; and one
of the Libertines Antipater had compacted to go to Rome, and Pheroras beyond
the river Jordan. For they were often wont to say, that Herod having killed
Alexander and Aristobulus, now he would come to them and their wives: and that
it was unlike that he would spare any one, who spared not Mariamme and her
sons: and therefore it was best to fly as far as it was possible from such
a beast. And that Antipater was wont often to complain unto his mother, that
now he grew gray-haired, and his father waxed young and lusty; and that it
might so chance, that he should never live to be king, or if ever his father
died, he should enjoy the pleasure of the kingdom but a short time. And
moreover, the heads of Hydra, that is to say, Alexanders and Aristobulus sons
began to spring up again: and that his Mariamme: wherein he was persuaded that
he doted, if so be he thought his will should be of force; for he would take
such an order, that he would leave none of all his progeny alive, and that
Herod was the greatest hater of his sons of any father in the world: and was
not therewithal contented, but he also hated his own brethren. Furthermore,
that he not long ago gave him an hundredth talents that he should have no
conference with Pheroras: and when Pheroras asked wherein they hurt him,
Antipater answered, I would to God that he would take away all men else, and
leave only us two naked, so that he would grant us life: but, quoth he, it is
impossible to escape this dangerous beast, who will not suffer men openly to
show friendship to one another. Lastly, though we now secretly meet, yet if we
bear the hearts and hands of men, the Pheroras was determined to fly with them
into Petra. Herod believed all their saying^, and the rather for that which was
said concerning the hundredth talents. For he said nothing of them to any one
but to Antipater.

And first of all he bent his fury against Doris Antipaters mother: and taking
from her all the ornaments which he had bestowed upon her, and bought with many
talents, he banished her. Doris Antipaters mother is spoiled of her Jewels, and
thrust out of the palace.
When his wrath was somewhat appeased, he released Pheroras maids from
torments: and now he became timorous and fearful, and prone to any suspicion,
torturing many that were innocent, for fear he should let any escape that were
guilty. Hereupon he set upon Antipater the Samaritane, who was procurator for
his son Antipater; who through torments confessed that Antipater had procured
poison out of Egypt to kill him, by the means of a friend of Antiphilus,
which poison Theudion Antipaters uncle took of him, and delivered to Pheroras:
whom Antipater charged to dispatch Herod whilst he was at Rome, far from
suspicion, and that Pheroras gave his wife the poison to keep. Wherefore the
king calling for her, commanded her to bring forth that which was delivered
unto her. And she making as though she would have gone forth to fetch it, cast
her self down from a house top, thereby to prevent the torments, which if she
were connicted, they would inflict upon her. But by the providence of God (as
it should seem) it came so to pass that she fell not on her head, but upon her
side, and so escaped death to the end that God might inflict punishment upon
Antipater. And being brought unto the king, so soon as she began to come to
her self (for she was amazed with the fall) the king demanded Pheroras is
dead, to save Antipater, who has caused all our overthrows? Pheroras wife
freely confesses what was become of the poison.
Hear O king and God be witness of the truth hereof, who cannot be deceived.
When I sat weeping by Pheroras as he lay a dying, he called me unto him and
said, see wife how much I am deceived concerning my brothers love toward me,
for I hated and sought to kill him, who The year of the world 396^. before
Christ's Nativity. 3.
Antipater in thy keeping for my brother, and make it away before my face, that
I carry not with me to hell a guilty conscience for that crime. So I brought
it as he willed me, and the most part of the poison I cast into the fire, where
it was ^onsumed, and kept a little thereof to my self, for fear of mischances,
and of thee: And having thus said, she brought forth a box which had in it a
very little of the poison. And then the king tortured the brother and mother of
Antiphilus, and they also confessed that Antiphilus brought a box out of
Egypt, and that he received poison from his brother, who practiced physic at
Alexandria. The ghosts also of Alexander and Aristobulus went all about the
whole kingdom, and became as it were spies, to give notice of such things as
were uncertain; Mariamme the daughter Gods justice leaves nothing unpunished.
of the high Priest was acquainted with these conspiracies, for her brethren
being tortured, did confess it. Wherefore the king revenged the mothers fault
upon her child: for having writ in his will, that Herod her son should
succeed Antipater in the kingdom, now for her fault he blotted that out.

CHAP. XX.
How Antipaters malicious practices against Herod were known and revenged.

AFter all this Bathyllus joined himself with Antipater, as it were to add
the last hand unto all his practices. This Bathyllus was one of his libertines,
who brought another sort of poison, to wit, of Aspes, and the poison also of
other serpents, that if the first proved too weak and took not effect, that
then Pheroras and his wife should make an end of the King with these. And
beside these shameful practices of his against his father; he also had
letters which he had counterfeited against his brethren. For Archelaus and
Philip, two of the kings sons were at that time at Rome to study, who were
very toward young men: and for that Antipater feared they might be some
hinderance to him, in that which he expected, he hasted by all means possible
to make them away. And the better to effect his purpose, he counterfeited
Antipaters treasons against Archelaus and Philip his brothers
letters in his friends names that were at Rome, and he for money got others
to write, that these two young men used in taunting wise to rail against their
father, and openly to complain of the death of Alexander and Aristobulus: and
that they took it in bad part that they were sent for home (for their father
sent word that they should come away) and thereat Antipater was m^st troubled.
For he before his departure from Iudaea to Rome procured such like letters to
be forged against them at Rome; and so delivering them to his father, that he
might avoid all suspicion; seemed to excuse his brethren, affirming some things
that were written to be lies; other things to be offenses, whereunto young men
were prone. At which time he gave great sums of money to them in whose names
he had counterfeited the letters against his brethren: hereby as it were hiring
them to be secret. He gave them also rich apparel, and Tapistrie of curious
Antipater gives a great sum of money to those that counterfeit letters
against his brothers.
and rewards which he bestowed, he might have all things kept close: so that at
his return he made his father account that he had spent two hundred talents,
the greatest portion whereof was consumed in following the law against
Syllaeus. Antipaters small faults were all hid by a greater: for all they that
had been tortured gave evidence against him, how that he practiced his
fathers death, and the letters witnessed how again he went about to make away
other two of his brethren: and yet for all this, none of those who came out of
Iudaea to Rome, bare him so much good will as to give (...) intelligence what
troubles were in the court at home, although it was seven months after (...)
was convicted, before he came to Iudaea from Rome. Peradventure they who were
minded to tell him all, were forced to hold their peace by the ghosts of Ant.
lib. 18. cap. 8. Antipater is solicited By Herod with many kind words to
hasten his return.
shortly return home, and that Caesar had dismissed him very honorably. The
king desired greatly that the Traitor were in his power, and fearing that if he
had an inckling of any matter, that he would look to himself, fained great
kindness toward him, and sent back again unto him very loving and familiar
letters, willing him to hasten his return: for if he made have, it might be he
should obtain pardon for his mothers offense for Antipater understood that she
was banished.

About this time he received a letter at Tarentum, whereby he understood the
death of Pheroras; The year of the world, 3961, before Christ's birth 3.
Pheroras so much, as though he had lost one to effect his treachery. Moreover
he feared least that which had passed should come to light, and least the
poison should be found: yet when he came to Cilicia, and there received his
fathers letters, which before we mentioned, he then made great have homeward:
yet when he came to Celenderis, he began earnestly to think upon his mothers
mishap, his mind as it were presaging some sinister fortune. And the wiser sort
of his friends about him counseled him not to go to his father, till such time
as he were certain for what cause his mother was banished and divorced. For
it was to be feared, that he should be accused also of the same that was laid
to his mothers charge. But the vnwiser sort being more Antipater, admonished
him to make have, least that his long delay should breed any suspicion in his
father, and least thereby he should give occasion unto malignant people to
raise up slanders. For (said they) if any thing has passed against you, it was
in your absence, and were you in presence no man durst do nor speak against
you; and it were a very unwise part, for uncertain suspicions to deprive
himself of certain felicity, and not to return speedily unto his father,
and receive the kingdom at his hands, who had him in whom only his hope was.
This counsel (for fortune would have it so) Antipater followed, and so arrived
in the haven of Cesarea passing Sebaste, where contrary to his expectation, he
fell into a great sorrow and admiration: for all men eschewed his Antipater
hated in Caesarea
company, and no man durst come near him. For although that he was always
hated of them, Antipater had done was known in every City, and to every
man, only Antipater himself was ignorant thereof. For there was never any man
brought thither with more majesty then he, when he was to sail to Rome, nor
never any man more basely entertained at his return. And now understanding of
the massacre at home, he craftily made himself ignorant thereof; and
notwithstanding that he was almost dead for fear, yet in his countenance he
counterfeited confidence. For he could not now possibly make any escape, nor
rid himself out of those present dangers: and yet he heard no certain news
of matters at home, nor there: for the king by an edict had forbidden all men
to give him notice thereof: So that many times he comforted himself thus,
that either all matters concerning Varus the ruler of Syria was there within:
then he boldly going in to his father, came near unto him, as though he would
have saluted him. But Herod stretching forth his hand and shaking his head,
cried out, O thou that have attempted to murder thy father, dare thou yet
presume to offer to embrace me, Antipaters entertainment at his fathers hands.
who art guilty of so many treacheries! God confound thee, wicked wretch, and
come not near me till thou have cleared thy self of all that which is laid
against thee: for thou shall have justice, and Varus shall be thy judge, who is
by good fortune now here. Go and premeditate how to acquit

Hereat Antipater was astonished with fear, that he was not able to reply any
thing but so went his way. Presently his mother and his wife came unto him, and
told him all the proofs of treasons against him. Then he calling his wits
together, be thought himself how to answer every point. The next day the
king caused an assembly of his friends and kinsfolks, and to them admitted
Antipaters friends: and he and Varus sitting in judgment, commanded all
proofs to be Antipater is judged before Varus.
brought, and witnesses to appear: amongst whom were certain of Antipaters
mothers servants, lately apprehended, who had letters from her to carry unto
him, to this effect. For as much as all those things are now known unto thy
father, beware that thou return not unto him before thou have obtained some
warrant of thy safety from Caesar. These and others being brought in,
Antipater also came in with them, and prostrating himself before his fathers
feet, he said: I beseech thee, O father, bear no preiudicate opinion against
me, and lend me an open ear whilst Herod's accusation against Antipater.
I purge my self: for if you please to give me leave, I will prove my self
guiltless. But Herod with a vehement voice commanding him to hold his tongue,
spoke thus unto Varus. I know Varus, that both thou, or any other just and
indifferent Judge, will adiudge Antipater to have deserved death: and I fear
me least you also should disdain me for my bad fortune, and think me worthy
of all calamity, who have begotten such sons as you see. And yet this should
move thee so The years of the world, 3961. before Christ's birth 3. Herodes
kindness toward his children.
Caesar's favor: but they whom I had so much honored, and exalted unto the
crown, became traitors against mine own life, whose death was much available
to Antipater. For his security I sought therein, because he was a young man,
and the next that should succeed me: but this cruel beast being more then full
gorged with my sufferance and patience, has emptied his stomach even upon my
self, and thinks my life too long, and is grieved that I live to be old, and
has attempted to make himself king, not any other way but by murdering his
father. And Herod loved Antipater above the rest, and bestowed many benefits
on him.
for what cause did this come so to pass? for that I recalled him out of the
field, where he was contemptible, and casting them off, whom I had begotten of
a Queen, appointed this to be heir Varus, my error: for I incited them
against me, because that for Antipaters sake I deprived them of their right.
For wherein had I so well deserved of them, as at this man's hands? unto whom,
being yet alive, I committed the sway and rule of my kingdom, and openly in my
will and testament declared him to be my heir and successor: whole charges I
with mine own money have still supported, notwithstanding that I had bestowed
upon him the yearly revenues of fifty talents. And lately, when he was to
sail to Rome, I gave him three hundred talents, and commended him unto Caesar,
as the only man of all my house, who had preserved his fathers life. And what
was their offense, if it be compared with Antipaters? and what proof was
there of that, for which they suffered? none but that which this fellovv
trecherously invented. Nay, I may boldly say so of him, who has attempted to
murder his father, Varus, that he deceive not thee: for I know this beast, and
I even now see by his fained tears how probable a tale he will tell. This
fellovv once warned me, that vvhilest Alexander lived I should bevvare of him,
and not put every one in trust with my person. This is he who was wont to
go before me into my bedchamber, and look about in every corner, least some
should have lain in vvait to have effected any treason against me. This is he
who vvatched me in my sleep, and through whom I thought my self secure:
who comforted me when I mourned for them that were put to death. This is he
who censured the good vvil of his brethren when they were alive. This was
my defender and cha^pion. O Varus, when I remember his crafts and subtilties,
and all his counterfeitings, I scarcely think my self alive, admiring how I
escaped the hands of such a traitor: and seeing that Fortune And thus his heart
being surcharged with sorrow, he was forced to break off his speech: and
presently he commanded Nicholaus, one of his friends, to show all the proofs
and evidences.

All this while Antipater lay prostrate at his fathers feet, and lifting up
his head, he cried aloud: Thou thy self, O father, sufficiently purgest me.
For how should I be one who sought to Antipaters answer and excuse.
murder thee, when thy self do confess, that I always have preserved thee
from all dangers? Or if, as thou say, I did it fainedly, was it probable that
I would be so circumspect in other affairs, Antipater calls Rome and Caesar
to witness.
out of my country! what an head did I give to envy, and what opportunity to
malicious and deceitful people? Yet, O father, it was for thy sake, and about
thy affairs that I went to Rome, that Syllaeus might not triumph over thy old
age. Rome can witness my piety, and Caesar the Prince of the whole world, who
did often call me a lover of my father. Receive here, O father, his letter,
farrer (...) then these fained calumniations against me: let these plead my
cause, let these show my The year of the world. 3^61 before Christ's birth 3.
affection toward thee: remember how unwilling Iovas to sail to Rome knowing
I had here in thy country many secret enemies. Thou like an unwise father have
cast me away: thou force (...) to give envy time to frame accusations against
me but now I will come to the proofs of th^se matters. Behold here I am,
who notwithstanding a murderer of my father, yet did I never suffer any
misfortune by sea nor land: is not this O father, a sufficient argument of my
innocence? For I know father, that before God and thee I am condemned: and
being condemned, I beseech thee, give not credit to reports extracted by
torments: let me be bumed, inflict all torments upon me, spare not my wicked
bodie^ For if I be a murderer of my father I must not die without torments:
crying out aloud after this manner, and weeping he moved all that were
present, and Varus also to compassion; but Herod only abstained from tears,
for his anger gave attention Nicholaus by the kings command begins a most
heinous and bitter accusation against Antipater.
to the truth. And presently Nicholaus at the kings commandment making a long
speech of Antipaters craft and subtlety, took away all hope of mercy, and
began a very bitter accusation, ascribing all mischief which had befallen
that kingdom unto him, and especially the death of the two brethren; who
through his calumniations were made away: affirming also that he used
treacherous practices against those, who were yet alive, fearing least they
should seek to succeed in the kingdom: for he who had prepared poison for his
father, would much less spare his brethren. And then coming to the proof of
his pretense to poison his father, he declared in order all evidence thereof,
aggravating his offense by Pheroras; as though Antipater also were the cause
why he purposed to murder his brother; and how he had corrupted the kings
dearest friends; and so filled the wholecourt with wickedness. And when he had
accused him of many other

Then Varus when he had commanded Antipater to make answer unto those
things; and Nicholaus peroration.
that he said nothing more, then God is a witness of my innocence, he called
for the poison and gave it to one that was condemned to die, who having drunk
thereof presently died. Then Varus The venom tried upon a condemned man.
talked secretly with Herod, and what was done there in that council he wrote
unto Caesar. Yet notwithstanding when Herod had sent Antipater to prison, he
sent messengers unto Caesar to show him his hard fortune and calamity. After
this it was proved that Antipater wrought treason against Salome. For one of
Antiphil^s servants came from Rome and brought letters in the name of Acmes,
who was one of Iulia her maids, which she writ unto the king, telling him that
she found a letter of Salomes amongst Iulias letters, and so for good will she
had Salomes contained many bitter inuectiues against Herod, and many
accusations. But these letters were written and fained by Antipater, who for
money had persuaded Acmes so to do, as we have said: for the letter which she
writ to Antipater An other proof against Antipater.
evidently showed it to be so, for she wrote as follows. I have written unto
thy father as you requested me, and sent also other letters and I assure my
self he will not spare his sister, if he do but read the letters: and you may
do well, seeing I have performed all your requests, that now you would be
mindful of your promise. This letter against Salome and others being found to
be counterfaited, the king began to doubt that Alexander was made away by such
counterfaited letters: and he was very angry that he had almost put his sister
to death, through Antipaters devise. Wherefore he no longer delaied to punish
him for all, yet he was hindered by a great sickness Herod intends Antipaters
punishment, and therefore blotteth his name out of his Testament.
from accomplishing his purpose. He also sent letters unto Caesar concerning
Acme the maid, and Salomes false accusation, and changed his testament, and
blotted out the name of Antipater, and in his room vvrote Antipas, leaving out
Archelaus and Philippus who were the elder brethren, because Antipater had
accused them. And he bequeathed unto Caesar a thousand talents beside many
other rich gifts: and to his wife and children, and kindred, and libertines
about five hundredth, and gave every one a great gift either in ground or money,
and honored his sister Salome with most rich gifts. And thus he corrected his
will.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the golden Eagle, and of Antipaters and Herodes death.

Herod's disease increased, partly through age, and especially for his g^ese and
sorrow: for he Ant. lib. 17. cap. 8.
was now three score and ten years old, and his mind was so troubled by the
death of his children, that though he were in health; yet he took no pleasure
in any thing: and his sickness was so much the more grievous unto him, because
that Antipater was yet alive; for he purposed to put him to death when he was
recovered of his sickness. To increase his calamity, there arose a tumult
amongst the people. For there were in the city two sophisters, who made The
year of the world 3963. before Christ's Nativity. 3.
Judas who was son unto Sepphoraeus: the other was called Matthias son unto
Margalus. These two were followed by a great many young men, so that when they
expounded the law they had an assembly like a great army, all young men. These
two hearing that the King partly by grief, and partly by his disease was very
like to die, spoke unto their acquaintance, saying, that it was now a fit time
wherein God might be revenged, and those Judas and Matthias persuade the
people to pull down the golden Eagle.
things which were made against their country laws taken away: for it was a
great offense to God to permit the Images or shapes; or likeness of any living
thing to be in the temple. This they said, because the king had set a golden
Eagle upon the chiefest porch of the temple, which the Sop^sters now willed the
young men to take away, saying that it was meritorious, although danger The young
men that pulled down the Eagle are brought before Herod; and are examined.
by whose commandment? they answered by the commandment of their country
laws. After this it was asked them why they who were presently to die were so
joyful? they answered, for that after death they hoped to enjoy many good
things and eternal bliss. The king hereat greatly moved with anger, overcame
his disease and went forth and made a speech to the people, wherein he
inueighed against them as Church-robbers, and that under pretense and color of
their country laws and religion they attempted great matters, and adjudged
them as impious The young men with the ringleaders condemned to die.
people worthy of death. The people fearing that he would torture many to
learn who favor that act, requested him that first the authors of that
crime, and then those that were found guilty therein should receive punishment:
and that he would remit the offense to all the people besides. The king with
much ado entreated, caused the young men that let themselves down in cords, The
king trobled with many diseases. Ant. lib. 17. cap. 9.
for he had a vehement ague, and an itch over all his whole body, which was
intolerable, and a daily colicke; and his feet were swollen, as though he had
the dropsy: his belly was swollen, and privy members putrified, so that
worms bred in the putrified places. He was also short winded, and he was
grievously tormented with difficulty of breath, and a conuulsion of the whole
body: so that some said that this was a punishment laid upon him for the death
of the two Sophisters. Herod notwithstanding he was afflicted with so many and
grievous sicknesses, yet was he desirous to live, and sought remedy whereby he
hoped for health. At last he passed over Jordan, where he Herod seeks remedy
in his sickness at the hot bathes.
used the vvarme waters of Calliroe which run into the lake of Asphaltites,
and are so sweet that

As he returned, when he came to Jericho, he was in very great likelihood to
die of melancholy, and there he devised a wicked fact: for he caused the
chief men of every town and village in all Iudaea to be assembled together,
and then he shut them up in a place called the Hippodrome: Herod full of
melancholy. The ambassadors signify Acmes death, and bring letters that
authorize Herod to punish Antipater.
and calling unto him Salome his sister, and Alexas her husband. I know, quoth
he, that the Jews will make feasts for joy of my death, yet if you will do my
command, I shall be mourned Acmes Iulia her maid, was by Caesar's command put to
death, and Antipater condemned to die: yet Caesar writ, that if his father had
rather banish him, he would condescend thereunto also. Herod with this news
was something refleshed, yet presently with pain he was overcome: The year of
the world, 3963 after Christ's birth 1.
Achiabus his cousin ra^ hastily unto him, and stayed his hand: and presently
there was made great lamentation throughout Herod overcome with pain would
have slain himself. Ant. lib 17. cap. 16.
the kings palace as though the king had been dead. Antipater having speedy
news hereof, was glad, and took courage, and promised the keepers a piece of
money to let him go. But the chiefest of them did not only deny to do it, but
also went presently to the king, and told him all what Antipater requested.
Herod hearing this, lifted up his voice with more strength then was meet for a
sick man, and commanded his guard to go and kill Antipater, and bury him in
the Archelaus his eldest Antipaters death.
son, who was brother to Antipas, for king, and appointed Antipas for
Tetrarch. Five days after the death of his son Antipater, Herod died ^hauing
reigned thirty and four years after he slew Antigonus, and thirty seven
years after that the Romans had declared him king. And in all other things he
was as fortunate as any man: for he being but a private person, got the crown
Ant. lib. 17. cap. 12.
and kept it, and left it unto his posterity: but in his household affairs he
was most unfortunate. Salome before it was known that the king was dead, went
forth with her husband, and released all those that were in hold, whom the king
commanded to be slain, saying, that the kings mind was now altered, and
therefore he gave them all license to depart: and after their departure the
kings death was made known to the soldiers, who together with the other
multitude were assembled Ptolemaeus keeper of the kings seal made a speech
unto them, and began to say that Herod was now happy; and comforted the
multitude, and so Herodes death signified to the soldiers.
he read unto them a letter which the king left, wherein he earnestly requested
the soldiers to favor and love his successor. After the Epistle read, he
recited the kings testament, wherein Philip was appointed heir of Trachon, and
the places thereunto adjoining; Antipas designed Tetrarch, and Archelaus king.
Him also he commanded to bear his ring unto Caesar, and withal notice and
intelligence of the estate of the kingdom, whereof he had been governor, fast
sealed in writing: for he appointed Caesar to be ouerseer of all his
ordinances, unto whose pleasure he left the performance of his testament.

This was no sooner read, but presently the skies were filled with the voices
and cries of Archelaus proclaimed king after his fathers decease.
the people, who did congratulate Archelaus, and the soldiers and the people
came in companies unto him, promising their favor and furtherance, and desired
God always to assist him. This done, every one was busied about the kings
funerals, where Archelaus spared no cost, but buried the King with all royal
pomp possible. The Beer whereon he was carried was adorned with gold and
precious stones: upon it lay a bed wrought with purple, whereupon was laid the
dead corpse of the King covered also with purple, with a crown on his head, and
a diadem of pure gold; and a scepter in his right hand. About the Beer were
his sons and kinsfolk: and the guard, and bands Herodes pompous funeral.
of Thracians, Germans, and Gauls all went before in order, as though they had
gone to wars. The rest of the soldiers in warlike order did follow their
Captains and leaders, and 500. servants and libertines carried perfumes. And
thus the corpse was carried the space of two hundredth Herod.

THE SECOND BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 2. book.
1 Of Herod's successor Archelaus, how he entered into the Temple, and the
mutiny that arose for the revenge of those that were executed for taking away
the golden Eagle. 2 Of the fight and massacre in Jerusalem between the Jews
and Sabinians. 3 Of Varus his deeds concerning the Jews that were crucified. 4
How the Jews had an Ethnarcha constituted over them. 5 Of the false supposed
Alexander, and how he was taken. 6 Of the death of Archelaus. 7 Of Simon the
Galilean, and the three sects of the Jews. 8 Of Pilates government. 9 Of the
pride of Caius, and of Petronius the President. 10 Of the reign of Claudius
the Emperor, and the reign and death of Agrippa. 11 Of diverse tumults in
Iudaea and Samaria. 12 Of the tamults in Iudaea under Foelix. 13 Of Albiuns and
Florus Presidents of Iudaea. 14 Of Florus cruelty toward the Jews of
Caesarea and Jerusalem. 15 Of another opperession of those of Jerusalem through
Florus his means. 16 Of Politianus the Tribune, and Agrippa his oration to the
Jews, wherein he exhorted them to 17 Of the beginning of the rebellion of the
Jews against the Romans. 18 Of the murder of Ananias the high Priest,
Manahemus, and the Roman soldiers. 19 Of a great slaughter of the Jews in
Caesarea, and throughout all Syria. 20 Of another grievous slaughter of the
Jews. 21 Of the massacre of the Jews at Alexandria. 22 Of the massacre of the
Jews by Cestius. 23 Of the battle of Cestius against Jerusalem. 24 Of the
besieging of Jerusalem by Cestius, and the massacre there. 25 Of the cruelty
of them of Damascus toward the Jews, and of Josephus his practices in Gablee.
26 Of Josephus his dangers and evasion, and the malice of John Giscaleus. 27
How Josephus recovered Tiberias and Sephoris. 28 How the citizens of Jerusalem
prepared themselves to war, and of Simon Gioras tyranny.
CHAP. I.
Of Herod's successor Archelaus, and how he entered into the Temple, and the
mutiny that arose for the revenge of those that were executed for taking down
the golden Eagle.

ARchelaus being appointed successor in the kingdom of Herod late dead,
necessity The year of the world. 3964. after the birth of Christ. 2. Ant lib.
17. cap. 11. The lamentations and banquets Archelaus man.
constrained him to go to Rome, which journey gave occasion of new thanked them
for their diligent care used in his fathers funerals, and for that they
exhibited honor The year of the world. 3964. after Christ's birth 2.
Caesar, who by his fathers testament was Lord and master of all: and for that
cause he withstood the soldiers at Jericho, when they would have crowned him.
But he promised, that if he were confirmed king by those who were in
authority, he would largely recompense both the soldiers and the people
Archelaus promises his subjects all favor.
for their good will; and that he fully purposed to be better unto them then
his father was. The multitude hereat greatly rejoiced, and made present trial
of his mind and purpose; for some cried out, requesting that the tribute might
be no more exacted. Others desired that the yearly paiments might cease. Others
requested to give all prisoners liberty. Archelaus in favor of the people
granted all their requests: and then offering sacrifices, he banquetted with
his friends: Asedition about the pulling down of the Eagle, and the agents
thereof. Ant. lib. 17. cap. 12. Archelaus bounty toward the seditious.
mischance, whom Herod had put to death for pulling down the golden Eagle from
off the porch of the Temple. This sorrow was not secret, but the whole city
did resound with laments for them, that were thought to have lost their lives
for the temple and their country laws. They also cried that revenge was to be
taken upon them, whom Herod for that fact rewarded with money. And that first
of all, he who by Herod was constituted high Priest, was to be rejected, and
another more holy and devout to be put in his place. Archelaus, although he was
hereby moved to revenge, yet because he was presently to take such a iourny,
abstained from it, fearing least that if he brought the multitude into hatred
of him, they might hinder him. Wherefore he sought rather Archelaus dispatched
many messengers unto the^) whom they spitefully entreated, making a show that
if they had been more in number, they would not have been appeased. Therefore
when the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which the Jews call Easter,
wherein an infinite number of sacrifices were appointed; an innumerable The
feast of Easter solemnly kept and much sacrifice offered.
multitude of people came out of all villages thereabout for devotion sake to
that solemnity, and they who so lamented the death of the Sophisters, remained
in the Temple, seeking by all means to nourish their sedition. Which Archelaus
fearing, sent a band of soldiers and a Archelaus persuaded himself that the
multitude would not be appeased without slaughter: wherefore he sent unto them
the whole army, the footmen into the city, and the horsemen into the field,
who inuading the seditious people as they were sacrificing, Three thousand of
the Jews slain at the feast of Easter.
slew of them almost three thousand, and scattered the residue into the
mountains near adjoining. There were also criers who followed Archelaus, and
proclaimed by virtue of his command, that every one should depart home to his
house: so every one notwithstandinding the Popla, Ptolemaeus, and Nicholaus
his friends, went unto the sea coast, leaving Philip for Governor of the
kingdom, and over his household: with them departed Salome and her children,
and the kings brethren and kindred, under pretense to assist Archelaus to the
crown, but indeed it was to inform Caesar of that which was done in the
Temple against the law.

When they came to Caesarea, they met with Sabinus Governor of Syria, who was
coming toward Iudaea to take into his custody Herod's treasure: whom Varus
forbad to go any further, Sabinus comes into Iudaea to sease ye fortresses,
and keep the treasure. Ant. lib. 17. cap. 13. Antipas elected king by Herodes
former testament strives with Archelaus for the kingdom.
being sent for by Archelaus, and Ptolemie requesting him thereunto. And so
Sabinus for the love of Varus, neither entered the Castles, nor shut up Herod's
treasure from Archelaus, but promised that he would let all alone till Caesar
understood thereof. But so soon as one of them Archelaus, to Rome; he still
remaining at Casarea, now hasted unto Jerusalem and took the kings palace,
where calling for the chief of the guard, and the Purueyors, he exacted of
them an account, and sought to take into his custody the Castles and strong
holds. But the Captains of the garrison, mindful of the charge which
Archelaus gave them, kept unto themselves the custody of all, affirming that
they kept them more for Caesar then Archelaus. At this time Antipas made a
claim to the crown alleging that Herod's first testament was of more force
then the last, and that he in the The year of the world, 3964. after Christ's
birth 2.
Salome and many more of his kindred, who sailed with Archelaus, promised him
their aid. He took with him his mother, and Ptolemaeus brother unto Nicholaus,
persuading himself that they for their trustiness and loyalty unto Herod,
would stand him in great steed: for this Ptolemaeus was Herod's dearest friend.
He had also great confidence in Irenaeus Antipas accuses Archelaus by letters
to Caesar.
his orator, because he had an excellent grace in pleading, in so much as he
refused the counsel of them who sought to persuade him to yield unto
Archelaus, both for his age, and for the last testament of his father. Now he
was well beloved of all his kin^ed at Rome, because they hated Archelaus, and
especially those that desired to live at liberty, and either to be governed by
the Romans, or else to have Antipas for their king. And to further him the
more, he used, Sabinus letters unto Caesar, wherein Archelaus was accused, and
Antipas commended. Therefore Salome, Caesar. And after them Archelaus delivered
all that which he had done in writing, and withal his fathers ring by
Ptolemeus; and the reasons of that which he had done he sent enclosed unto
Caesar. Caesar pondering with himself what both parties alleged, and the
greatness of the kingdom and large reuennes, and number of Herod's children,
reading also the letters of Varus and Sabinus, he called the chief of the
Romans to council. Wherein Caius the son of Agrippa and his daughter Iulia,
by his assignment, Caesar calls a council of Roman nobility.
sat in the first place (this Caius was Caesar's adopted son) and so he
licensed the parties to plead their rights. Then Antipater Salomes son being
the most eloquent of all Archelaus adversaries, offered himself to be his
accuser, for that Archelaus seemed now in words to contend for the kingdom,
which he had already possessed himself of: and that he did now trouble Caesar's
ears with vain cauillations, whom he would not wish to judge of his lawful
succession. Antipaters vehement accusation against Archelaus.
For after Herod's death he suborned some to put a diadem upon his head, and
then sitting in a throne of gold in kingly manner, he partly changed, partly
advanced the orders of the soldiers, and granted unto the people their
requests, which could not be effected but by a king. He had also set at
liberty maniemen, who for great crimes were imprisoned by his father: and
having done all this, he came now unto Caesar, to crave the shadow of the
kingdom, the substance and body whereof he already occupied: so that herein
he left nothing unto Caesar but a bare title. Moreover, he alleged that
Archelaus did but counterfeit sorrow for his fathers death, faining himself to
mourn on the day time, and in the night he would be drunk and rioted.
Finally, he said, that the sedition of the people came by hatred thereof. But
the force and drift of his speech Antipater spares no vehemence in accusing
Archelaus.
Herod foreseeing his cruelty, never judged him worthy of the kingdom, till
such time as his memory failed him: and that now being more sick in mind then
body, he knew not whom he named his successor in his last will, especially
for that he had nothing wherein he could blame him, whom in his former will he
appointed his successor, when he was in health both of mind and body. Yet
(quoth he) put case Herod in his extremity knew what he did, yet (said he)
Archelaus has deprived The will changed during Herod's sickness Antipater
against Archelaus Nicholaus defends Archelaus.
himself of all kingly dignity, having committed many things against the
laws. For (said he) Caesar, who before he received any, has murdered
somanie? Antipater having spoken much to this effect, and at every accusation
taking witness of his kindred that stood by, ended his speech.

Then Nicholaus stood up, and first of all he showed that the slaughter of them
in the Temple was necessary. For they, for whose death Archelaus was now
accused, were not only enemies of the kingdom, but also of Caesar: and for
other crimes objected, he showed how that they were done even by the counsel
and persuasion of the adversaries. He also requested that the second testament
might be of force, for that therein Herod requested Caesar to be a confirmer of
his successor. For he who had such remembrance, as to leave the performance of
his will to the discretion of him who was Lord of all, did neither mistake
himself in appointing his heir, nor yet was deprived Nicholaus had ended his
speech, and declared all that he thought might make for Archelaus; Archelaus
coming into Archelaus humbles himself at Caesar's feet. Caesar's bounty and
humanity toward him.
the midst of the Council, prostrated himself at Caesar's feet, whom Caesar
courteously taking from the ground, showed that he was worthy to succeed his
father. Yet did he not pronounce a definitive sentence: but the same day the
Council being dismissed, he deliberated with himself, according to the
evidence he knew, whether any of those nominated in the two wills should
succeed their father in the kingdom, or that the kingdom should be
distributed amongst the whole The year of the world. 3964. after Christ's birth
2.
family: for he thought that they for number wanted succor.

CHAP. II.
Of the fight and massacre at Jerusalem between the Jews and the Sabinians.

BEfore such time as Caesar determined any thing concerning this matter,
Malthace the mother of Archelaus fell sick and died; and many letters came out
of Syria, signifying Ant. lib. 17. cap. 14. Sedition in Jerusalem.
that the Jews had rebelled. Which Varus foreseeing after the departure of
Archelaus Sabinus coming afterward to Jerusalem, was the cause that the Jews
began a new broyle. For one while he forced the garrisons to render to him
the Castles, another while he rigorously made search for the kings treasure;
and he was not only assisted by those that Varus left there, but also he had a
great multitude of his own servants all armed to further his avarice. And in
the feast Sabinus seazeth the kings treasure, and labors to get possession
of his fortresses.
of Pentecost (so called because of the number of seven weeks) the people
assembled themselves together not for religion sake, but for anger and hatred:
so that there was an infinite multitude of people which came out of Galilee and
Idumaea, and Jericho, and the countries Three camps of the Jews.
the Romans on every side. Sabinus greatly fearing them, both for their
multitude, and for their courage, sent many letters unto Varus earnestly
requesting him with all speed to bring succor: for if he did not, the whole
legion would be extinguished. He himself got Sabinus gets into the highest
tower of the strongest castle. A skirmish between the Jews and Romans.
him into the highest tower of the Castle Phasaelus, which is so called by the
name of Herodes brother, whom the Parthians killed: and from thence he gave a
sign unto the soldiers to issue out suddenly upon their enemies: for himself
was in such a fear that he durst not come The Romans fire the porches.
cast headlong from the wall: others despairing of life killed themselves with
their own swords: Sabinus got.

But this loss of men and money stirred up many more Jews, and those more
warlike then the first, against the Romans; who besieging the kings palace
threatened all their destructions, unless they would presently depart from
thence: promising Sabinus and the legion leave to depart if he so liked. Part
of the kings soldiers, who of their own accord fled unto them, did assist
them. But the most warlike and valiant amongst them were three thousand of
Sebaste, whose Rufus and Gratus, one leader of the footmen, and the other over
the horsemen; both which, although they had had no soldiers with them, for
their valor of body, and counsel might yet have been a great help unto the
Romans in those wars. The Jews earnestly continued the siege, and assaulted
the castle walls, crying upon Sabinus to depart, and not to hinder them now
after so long time, to have their countries liberty. Sabinus though with all
his heart he wished himself away, yet durst he not trust them; but he
suspected that their courtesy was but a plot to entrappe him: and on the other
side hoping that Varus would come and help him, he The year of the world.
3964. after the birth of Christ. 2. Ant lib. 17. cap. 15.
Herod, gathering together and having armed themselves, came and fought with
the kings forces, whom Achiabus the kings cosen resisted in the strongest
villages, always eschewing to fight in the open field. At Sephoris also a
town of Galilee, Judas the son of Ezechias the captain of the thieves, who
before was taken by king Herod, and had waste that country; gathered
together a great multitude, and brake into the kings armory, and armed all his
company, and fought against them who affected the royal dignity. Also beyond
the river, Simon one of the kings servants being fair and of a huge stature,
put a crown upon his own head, and gathering together a company of thieves
went about Simon one of the kings servants takes the kingdom upon him.
there, and so got great pray by burning the houses: and he had surely fired
all buildings of account, had not Gratus captain of the kings footmen made
haste to meet him with the bowmen of Trachon, and the most warlike men of
Sebaste, where many footmen were slain. But Simon though he fled into a
straight valley, yet he ouertooke him, and cut him overthwart the neck, and so
he fell down. In like manner other of the kings palaces near Jordan by
Bethara were burned, by a multitude of others gathered together in bands from
beyond the river: At this time a shepherd named Athrongaeus presumed to usurp
the crown: he was thereunto induced by the courage he bare, and the disdain
of death. With this resolution he armed his four brethren, and every one of
them had a company armed, and they were as his captains and champions to make
incursions: Athrongaeus a shepherd usurps the kingdom.
head; and thus he continued a long time wasting the country, and killing
especially the Romans, and also the kings soldiers; so that none of the Jews
escaped if they were in hope to gain by them. They also presumed to meet a
company of the Romans at Ammauns, who carried corn and armor unto the legion,
where they killed with darts one Arius a Centurion, and forty of the most
valiant amongst them: and the rest being in the like danger, through the help
of Gratus with his soldiers of Sebaste, escaped. When they had done many
things in this manner against the inhabitants and strangers, at last three of
them were taken: the eldest by Archelaus: and the two others who were eldest
after him, fell into the hands of Gratus and Ptolemaeus: and the fourth yielded
The end and issue of the war.
himself unto Archelaus upon composition: and thus at last they came to their
end. And all

CHAP. III.
Of Varus his deeds concerning the Jews that were crucified.

WHen Varus had received the letters of Sabinus, and of the nobles with him,
fearing the whole legion, he hasted to succor them: Wherefore he came to
Ptolemais with Ant. lib. 17. cap. 16. Varus assisteth the Romans against the
Jews.
two other legions and four comets of horsemen, where he willed the kings
forces, and the nobles to meet him. Moreover as he passed by Berytum, they
accompanied him with Aretas also the King of Arabia for the hatred he bare to
Herod, was come with a great number of horsemen and footmen. As Soon as the
host was assembled, Varus incontinently directed part of his army into
Galilee adjoining thereto, and appointed a friend of his the son of Caius for
their governor, who presently put them all to flight against whom he was sent;
and having taken the castle of Sephoris he fired it, and made the inhabitants
therofbond Varus takes diverse cities and castles of Iudaea.
slaves. Varus with the rest of the army went into Samaria, and took it; yet
he did the City no harm because he found that amiddest al those tumults
they had been quiet. When he had pitched his tents at a village called Aun,
which was in the possession of Ptolemaeus, the Arabians sacked it, for they
hated them who loved Herod. From thence they went to Sapp^o an other strong
borough, which they in like manner sacked and destroyed, with all the fruits
and revenues Ammaus burnt. Varus comes, to Jerusalem with his army, and with
his only presence dismaieth the Jews.
was no end nor hinderance of their avarice. Also Varus commanded Ammaus to
be burned, being angry for the death of Arias, and the rest that were slain
there: and the inhabitants thereof were scattered, every one by flight seeking
to save himself. From thence he went to Jerusalem, and at the sight of him
the Jews fled and scattered themselves some here, some there, all about the
country: they that remained in the City excused themselves, that they were not
consenting to that tumult, but that for the celebration of the feasts sake,
they permitted the^ to come The year of the world. 3966. after Christ's birth 4.
into the city, affirming that they had rather been besieged together with
the Romans then to have conspired with those of the sedition: and so they laid
the cause of that tumult upon others. But first, Josephus Archelaus his cousin,
with Gratus and Rufus came to meet him, leading the kings army, and the
Sebastians and the Roman soldiers adorned in their accustomed apparel.
Sabinus durst not be seen of Varus, and therefore got him out of the town
before, and went unto the sea coast. Varus divided his army, and sent it into
the fields against the Authors of that tumult, Varus crucified two thousand of
the seditious.
and those that were brought unto him who were in less fault, he committed to
prison, and those who were the chiefest he crucified, to the number of two
thousand.

And understanding that in Idumaea there yet remained ten thousand of armed
men, he presently sent the Arabians home, because he perceived that they did
not war as those that came Achiabus counsel, yielded themselves to Varus.
And he pardoned the common soldiers, and sent the Captains to Caesar to
answer the matter. Who pardoning the most of them, yet punished some that were
the kings kinsmen (for some of them were a kin to Herod) because they
altogether Varus mercy and bounty to the Idumeans.
rebelled against their king. Varus having thus quieted the estate of Iudaea
and Jerusalem, leaving the same legion that was there before, departed to
Antiochia.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Jews had an Ethnarcha constituted over them.

NOw Archelaus had a new process at Rome against the Jews, who before the
sedition Ant. lib. 17. cap. 17. Ethnarch a ruler o^ governor. The Jews call
Archelaus in question.
with the leave of Varus were gone to Rome to crave the liberty of their
country. These who came as Ambassadors in their countries behalf, were
fifty in number, and they were assisted by more then eight thousand Jews that
lived at Rome. Wherefore Caesar called a Council of the Nobility of Rome in
the Temple of Apollo, which was situate upon mount Palatine, and joined to
Caesar's private palace, which was most sumptuously adorned, and the multitude
of Jews, appeared with the Legates against Archelaus and his friends. Archelaus
kindred neither came with him, nor with the rest of the Jews: with him they
would not join for envy; and with the Jews they durst not for shame. Amongst
them also was Philip the brother Archelaus, whom Varus sent in courteous manner
to assist his brother; or if that it pleased Caesar to divide Herod's kingdom
amongst his children, that then he might have a part. The adversaries were
commanded to show what Herod had committed contratie to the laws: First of all
they answered, that they found him not a King, but the most cruel tyrant that
ever was, and that he murdered many, and those whom he left alive endured such
misery, as they thought themselves A bitter accusation of the Jews against
Herod and his sons.
far vnhappier then those who were so butchered. For (said they) he was not
only contented to tear his subjects bodies with torments, but also defacing
and ruinating the elde^ of his own country, he adorned and reedified the
cities of strangers: and permitted fortainers to massacre the Jews without
revenge. And in steed of their ancient and wonted happiness; and their laws
inuiolated, their country was by him made so poor, and so filled with
inquitie, that within Herod reigned, they had sustained more murders and
massacres then all their ancestors had, from the time of their departure out of
Babylon, until the beginning of his reign: being then pouoked to take arms
when Xerxes was king of Persia. Yet they by enduring Herod's tyranny and cruelty
such misery, being now accustomed thereunto, would willingly be subject to
such a successor of his as they knew would make them live in most bitter
servitude: for they when Herod his father was dead, presently called Archelaus
king, notwithstanding he was the son of such a tyrant, and with him mourned
for the death of Herod, and offered sacrifice for the prosperity of his
successor. But he to show himself Herod's son, began his reign with the
slaughter of three thousand citizens; and because he had so well deserved the
kingdom, he offered so many men to God for sacrifice, and on a festival day
filled the Temple with so many dead bodies. Wherefore The Jews beseech the
Romans to have compassion on the remainder of the Jews.
they would think the remnant of the Jews worthy of compassion, and not to
abandon and expose the residue of their nation: as a pray unto the^, by whom
they should be most cruelty (...): but that it might please them to adioyne
their country to the borders of Syria, and to let (...) be ruled by the Romans,
and so they should find that the Jews, who now were accounted (...) and
rebellious; under peaceable and quiet governors, to be a peaceable nation: and
with The year of the world. 3966. after Chr^s Nativity. 4. Nicholaus
defendeth^ Archelaus before Caesar and the ^est.
Nicholaus stood up against them, and first of all acquitted the kings of the
crimes laid to their charge: and then reproved his contrymen, for that they
would not be easily governed, and by their own nature would not except they
were forced, obey their kings: and he also blamed the kinsmen of Archelaus, who
joined with his accusers. Caesar having heard what both parts could say,
dismissed the Assembly. And within a few days after he gave Archelaus half of
the kingdom under the title of an Ethnarch, promising him moreover to make him
king, if he behaved himself well: the other half he Caesar makes Archelaus
Ethnarch of Ju^ie. The distribution of the kingdom to Herod's children. Those
cities that were under Archelaus subjection.
divided into two Tetrarchies and gave them to the rest of Herod's sons, one
unto Philip; the other unto Antipas, who contended with Archelaus for the
crown. Antipas his part lay from Galilee beyond the river Jordan, the revenues
whereof was two hundredth talents a year. And Philip Zeno his house near
Iamnia, the revenues whereof amounted to one hundred talents a year. Archelaus
had in his Ethnarchie Idumaea and all Iudaea and Samaria, which was freed from
the fourth part of their tribute, because they rebelled not with the rest. And
these Cities were given him, over which he was Lord, Stratons tower, Sebaste,
Ioppe and Jerusalem. The rest, Gaza, and Gadara, and Hippon Caesar took from
the kingdom, and joined them to Syria. Archelaus yearly revenues amounted to
four hundredth Talents a year. Caesar also (beside that which Herod left her)
made Salome Salome Princess of Iamnia, Azotus and Phasaelis.
Lady of Iamnia, Azotus and Phasaelis; and the Palace at Ascalon, all which
amounted to threescore talents a year. But Caesar made her house subject unto
Archelaus his Ethnarchie. And having distributed unto the rest of Herod's kindred
that which in his testament he left them, Pheroras sons: and having divided
Herod's patrimony amongst them, he also distributed that which Herod
bequeathed unto him, amounting unto a thousand talents, leaving himself only
some jewel of small value, which he reserved in honor and remembrance of the
dead.

CHAP. V.
Of the false supposed Alexander, and how he was taken.

AT the same time a certain young man, a Jew borne, brought up by a Libertine
of Alexander whom Herod put Ant. lib. 17. cap. 18. A certain young man fai^ing
himself to be that Alexander whom Herod slew, deciueth many.
to death, went to Rome, having one of his countrymen for his companion, who
knew very well all the estate of the kingdom: by whom he receiving
instructions, affirmed, that they who should have put him and Aristobulus to
death, being moved to compassion, let them go, and took two others in their
room like them. With this tale he deceived many Jews living in Creete, where
he was honorably received, and from thence he failed to Melos, where he was
yet entertained with greater pomp, and enriching himself he used such means,
that he got his oasts (which gave him entertainment) to sail with him to Rome:
and after arriving at Dicaearchia, he received all manner of rich gifts of the
Jews which dwelled there, Alexander that they that had seen Alexander, and
knew him well, would have sworn he had been Alexander. Wherefore all the
Jews at Rome desired to see him, so that an infinite multitude followed him
whithersoeuer he went in the streets, and they so doted upon him, that they
carried him in a horslitter, and at their own proper cost and charges prepared
for him a royal train.

But Caesar well remembered Alexanders visage (for Herod accused him before him)
and Caesar desires to see the young man.
although before he saw him he judged that it was some that presumed because of
his likeness unto Alexander, to say that he was the same, yet he made as
though he believed all; and sent one Celadus, who knew Alexander well, to will
this young man to come unto him. Who no sooner Aristobulus, he answered, that
he was alive: yet he upon purpose ^aried behind and lived in Cyprus, fearing
some treason: for they being asunder could not so easily be intrapped. Celadus
taking him apart from the rest of the company, told him that Caesar would save
his life, if he did truly confess, by whose counsel he fained himself to be
Alexander. He accepting The year of the world, 3966 after Christ's birth 4.
Caesar makes the counterfeit Alexander a gallery slave, and executes his
counselor
of this offer, followed him to Caesar, and declared himself to be a Jew, who
for ^re sake (being very like him) counterfeited himself to be Alexander:
affirming that (...) had received such great gifts of the Cities by which he
passed, that he thought if Alexander had been alive, he should not have
received the li^e. Caesar laughed at this jest, and made false Alexander (for
the ability of his body) a galley-slaue, and put him to death, who induced
him thereto. And as for the Jews of Milo, he thought that they had punishment
sufficient, if they lost all that which they had laid out, and bestowed upon
him.

CHAP. VI.
Of the banishment and death of Archelaus.

ARchelaus being now made Prince, remembered the discord past, and in revenge
thereof he tyrannized not only over the Jews, but also over the Samaritans:
and in the ninth year of his reign the Jews and Samaritans sent Ambassadors
against Ant. lib. 17. cap. 1^.
him unto Caesar: and finally he was banished and sent to Vienna, a City of
Gallia, and ^ll his patrimony was confiscate unto Caesar. Before he was
summoned to appear before Caesar, he reported that he had a marvelous
dream: for he saw nine great ears full of corn Archelaus banished for his
tyranny, and his goods confiscated.
devoured by oxen; and presently sending for Prophets and Chaldaeans, he
demanded what that dream betokened. Some interpreted it one way, and some
another: but one Simon an Essean told him that the ears of corn betokened
years, and the oxen signified the changes and mutations Archelaus dream of
the oxen and ears of corn.
was to reign so many years as there were ears of corn in number; and then,
after he had abidden many mutations he should die. Five days after this
interpretation; Archelaus was sent for to Rome, to answer that before Augustus,
whereof he was accused. I also thought it worth rehearsing to set down the
dream of his wife Glaphyra daughter to Archelaus king of Cappadocia, who was
first married unto Alexander brother unto this man, and son to king Herod, by
whom he was put to death, as we have said before: after whose death she was
married to Iuba Archelaus refusing Mariamme marieth Glaphyra.
King of Lybia, and he being dead, she returned home to her father: and living
in her widowhood at home with her father, Archelaus the Ethnarch beholding her,
was so inflamed with her love, that presently being divorced from his wife
Mariamme, he married her. Who shortly after she Alexander her first husband
standing before her and saying unto her, It had been enough for thee to have
married the king of Lybia, but thou not contented therewith, come again to
my house, greedy of a third husband; and which is worse Glaphyra saw Alexander
in her sleep.
of all, now married to mine own brother. I will not conceal nor dissemble this
injury which thou dostme, but I will recover you against your will. And she
scarcely lived two days after she had recounted this dream.

CHAP. VII.
Of Simon the Galilean, and the three sects amongst the Jews.

AFter that Archelaus his dominions were made a province, a certain Roman
knight called Coponiu's was made governor thereof, receiving authority from
Caesar to punish Ant. lib. 18. cap. 1^. The year of the world, 3973. after
Christ's birth 11
and put to death. In his time a Galilaean named Simon incited his countrymen
to revolt, reproving them for paying tribute to the Romans, and for being
subject to any mortal men, but God. This Simon was a Sophister, having a sect
of his own devising, nothing like other sects. For there are three sects of
Philosophers amongst the Jews, one is that which the Pharisees do follow;
another which the Sadduces do follow; the third is that which the Esseans
follow, which Three sects among ye Jews, of which the Esseans were the best.
is the most famous of the three. The Esseans are Jews borne, but they are
most friendly to one another, who beside al other pleasures do eschew
witchcraft: neither do they suffer themselves to be The Esseans doctrine of
marriage. Among the Esseans goods are common.
they be young, as their kinsmen, whom they do diligently instruct in their
manners and opinion^; not for that they condemn marriage and propagation of
mankind; but for that they think men should avoid women's intemperance, for
they think that none of them keep themselves truly to one man. Also they
contemn riches, and all things with them are common, and no man amongst them
is richer then other. And they have a law amongst themselves, that whosoever
will follow The year of the world. 3973. after Christ's birth 11.
The Esseans hospitality.
The Esseans apparel.
together again, and being covered with linen clothes, so they wash their
bodies with cold water: and having thus purged themselves, they have a secret
assembly, unto the which no man that is not of their sect is admitted: and so
they come into the refectorie as into a holy temple, all sitting down with
silence, and the baker sets every man in order a loaf, and the cook every
man a mess of pottage of one sort. Then before meat the Priest gives thanks,
and no man may taste any meat before they have made their prayers to God
Likewise when dinner is ended, they pray again: for both before and after they
give thanks unto God the giver of all, and then putting off that apparel as
sacred, they apply themselves unto their work till evening. This done, they
do Their religion and labor.
The Esseans in compassion and helping others have free choice, in other things
they are ruled by their governor. The Esseans swear not.
pleases help those whom he thinks deserve help: and when they please,
give meat to them that are in need. Yet may not they give any thing to their
kindred without the leave of their Governor. These men give not place to anger,
but refrain from wrath, keep their promise, and maintain peace, and account
every word they speak of more force, then if they had bound it The Esseans
vows and covenants.
man, nor iniure any one for another man's command, but that he will always hate
the wicked, and assist the good, and ever keep his faith to all, but
especially to his superiors. For no man can obtain the power of principality
without the will and good pleasure of God: and that if he be put in authority
over others, he never will abuse it to the prejudice of those that are under
him, and The year of the world. 3973. after Christ's birth 11 The Esseans
circumspect in Justice.
neither exceed the rest in apparel, nor in any other ambitious pomp) that
he will always love the truth, and ever endeavor to confute liers: and that he
will keep his hands from stealing, and his soul pure from all unjust gain:
and that he will not conceal any mysteries, or secrets from his companions,
nor reveal them to any strangers, although he should be thereto compelled by
death. Adding moreover, that they will never deliver any doctrine, save that
which they have received; and that they will avoid theft, and diligently keep
the books of their doctrine, and the names of Angels. And with these oaths
they try, and as it were arm those who enter into their order. Those of their
congregation, who shall be condemned; they thrust out of their company: and
whosoever is so punished, for the most part dies a miserable death; for having
once taken this oath, it is not lawful for him to take meat of any stranger;
so The Esseans reverence the Sabboths.
the Sabboths: And they do not only abstain from dressing meat upon that day,
but also they may not remove any vessel out of his place, nor go to the
privy. Upon other days they dig a pit a foot deep into the ground with the
hatchet, which (as we before said) every one at his entrance into their order
has given him, and then covering themselves diligently with their garment,
least they should do injury to the light of heaven, in that pit they ease
themselves; and the^ cover their ordure with the earth they took out of the
pit: and this they do in most secret places.

And although this purging of their bodies be natural, yet do they by washing
purify themselves after it, as after great uncleanness. Furthermore they
amongst themselves are divided into four orders, according to the times which
they have taken to follow this exercise of life: and they who are iuniors, are
so far different from the seniors, that if they do but touch one of them,
they The Esseans live long time.
torments. They prefer an honorable death before life. And the wars which
the Jews made against the Romans, showed what courage and hardines they have
in all things. For being then compelled by breaking of the members of their
bodies, and fiery torments, and all kind of tortures The Esseans constancy in
the war with the Romans. The year of the world. 3979. after Christ's birth
17.
which were laid upon them to revile the lawmaker, and to eat any meat
forbidden: yet could they not be forced to any of these; neither would they
entreat the torturers, nor show any sorrow amidst their torments. Nay in the
very midst of their griefs and pains they scoffed at their tormenters, and
laughing joyfully yielded up their souls, as though they hoped to receive them
The Esseans esteem the soul immortal, but they believe not the resurrection
of the dead.
freed from a long bondage they joyfully mount aloft. And of the good souls
they say, as did the Grecians; that they live beyond the Ocean seas in a place
of pleasure, where they are never molested with rain, nor snow, nor heat, but
have always a sweet and pleasant air coming out of the Ocean. But the wicked
souls (as they say) go into a place very tempestuous, where there is always
as it were winter weather, always full of lamentations of those, who for ever
are to be punished. But I judge that the Greeks are of this opinion, when they
say there is an Isle for the virtuous The Grecians opinion of the soul of man.
whom they call Heroes and halfe-gods: and that the souls of the wicked go to
a place in hell, where as it is fained, some to be tormented, as Sysiphus,
Tantalus, Ixion, and Tytius. Which they did first invent for this purpose,
because those who are of good disposition, are made better in this life by hope
of some reward in the life to come: and the wicked are (as they thought) hereby
restrained for fear of eternal torments, which if they continue in wickedness
they shall endure. This is the Esseans Philosophy touching the immortality of
the soul, wherein they propose an inevitable allurement to those who have once
tasted of their Philosophy. There are also some The year of the world 3979.
after Christ's Nativity. 17. The Esseans prophecy. There is a college of the
Esseans that differs from the former in the point of marriage.


There is another college of these Esseans agreeing with the former, both in
apparel, meat, and kind of life, and observe the same laws and ordinances;
only they differ in the opinion of marriage, affirming that they who abstain
from marriage, do cut off the greatest part of man's life, to wit, succession of
mankind. For (say they) if all men should follow that opinion, presently all
mankind would perish: yet notwithstanding these people are so continent, that
for three years space they maketrial of the women they are to marry, and when
they have proved them fit to bear children; then they marry them. None of
them must lie with their wives when they are The second sect of the Pharisees.
and custom of this sect. Of the two former sects; the Pharisees are said to
be most skillful in interpreting the law, and are of opinion that all things
are to be attributed to God, and Fate: and that every man may of his own
power do good or ill, yet (say they) destiny helps in every action ^d that
the souls of men are all incorruptible, but only the souls of good men go
into other bodies, and the souls of wicked men are sent into everlasting
pain. But the Sadduces deny Fate and Destiny, and affirm that God is the
author of no evil; auowing likewise that The third of the Sadduces.
a man has free will to do well or ill, and every man may choose whether he
will be good or bad: and they generally deny both pains and rewards for the
souls after this life. The Pharisees

CHAP. VIII.
Of the cities which Philip and Herod builded, and of Pilates government.

ARchelaus his Ethnarchie being now made a province, the rest of his brethren,
to wit Philip Ant. lib. 18. cap. 5. The year of the world. 3997. after the
Nativity of Christ. 35.
and Herod who was surnamed Antipas, governed their Tetrarchies. And Salome
dying left unto Iulia by her testament the Toparchie which she ruled, as also
Iamnia and a Tiberius Caesar after the death of Augustus was made Emperor of
Rome, after that he had reigned seven and fifty years, six months, and two
days, Herod and Philip remaining in their Tetrarchies: Philip builded a city
near unto the head of Jordan in the country of Paneade, and called it
Caesarea; and another he built in the lower part of Gaulanitis, and named it
Iulias. Herod in Galilee built the City called Tiberias, and another in
Peraea on this side Jordan, which also he named Iulias. Pilate being sent by
Tiberius to be governor over the Jews, caused in the night time the statua of
Caesar to be brought into Jerusalem covered: which thing within three days
after caused a great tumult among the Jews; for they who beheld it, were
astonished, and moved, as though now the law of their country were profaned:
for they hold it not lawful for any picture or Image to be brought into the
The people would not condescend to Pilate to alter their country laws.
out of the fields adjoining, and they went presently to Pilate then at
Caesarea, beseeching him earnestly that the Images might be taken away out of
Jerusalem, and that the law of their country might remain inuiolated. When
Pilate denied their suit, they prostrated themselves before his house, and
there remained lying upon their faces, for five days and nights never moving.
Afterward Pilate sitting in his tribunal seat was very careful to call all
the Jews together before him, as though there he would have given them an
answer: when upon the sudden a company of armed soldiers (for so it was
provided) compassed the Jews about with a triple rank: the Jews were here at
amazed, seeing that which they expected not. Then Pilate told them that except
they would receive the Images of Caesar, he would kill them all; and to that
end made a sign unto the Pilate admiring the constancy of the Jews in their
religion sends statuaes from Jerusalem. The year of the world. 3998. after
Christ's birth 36.
Pilate admiring the constancy of the people in their religion, presently
commanded the statuaes to be taken out of the city of Jerusalem.

After this he caused another tumult amongst them, for they have a sacred
treasure called Corban, which Pilate used to bring water in unto the City,
four hundredth furlongs off: for this The year of the world, 3998 after
Christ's birth 33. Pilate beats the seditious with clubs. The year of the
world. 4001. after Christ's birth 39. Agrippa Aristobulus son hates Tiberius
and insinuates himself into Caius Caligulas friendship. Tiberius reigned 22.
years six months, and 3. ^daies.
cause the people murmured; so that when Pilate came to Jerusalem, they flocked
about his tribunal, crying and exclaiming. Pilate fore seeing that tumult,
caused soldiers secretly armed to mingle themselves amongst the people in
private apparel, and commanded them not to use their swords, but to beat
those with clubs, whom they saw make such clamours. And when he had thus
plotted the matter, sitting in his Tribunal, he gave a sign unto the
soldiers, and presently the Jews were beaten, and many of them, partly with
blows, and partly trodden upon by the multitude, died miserably. The multitude
amazed a^ the calamity of those that were slain, held their tongues. For this
cause Agrippa son to Herod the Tetrarch, whose father Aristobulus Herod the
King put to death, went to Rome, and accused him to Caesar. Tyberius not
admitting his accusation, he remained still at Rome, and sought the favor of
other potentates there, and especially Caius the son of Germanicus, he being
yet a private person: and upon a certain day being with him at a banquet, he
stretched forth his hands, and openly began to beseech Almighty God that
Tyberius Caesar might quickly die, that he might see him Lord of all the world.
Tyberius having notice here of by one of his familiar friends, caused Agrippa
to be imprisoned; where he endured a hard and straight imprisonment, until the
death of Tyberius, which was six months after. After he was dead (having
reigned 22. years, six months, and three days) Caius Caesar who succeeded
him in the Empire, freed him from prison, and gave him the Tetrarchie of Caius
Caesar gives the Tetrarchie to Agrippa Aristobulus son, and makes him a
king. Ant. lib. 18. cap. 14. Herod and his wife remain in Spain. The year
of the world 4002. after Christ's birth 40.
Philip, who was now deceased, and the title of a king. When Agrippa came into
his kingdom, Herod the Tetrarch began to envy his estate; and Herodias his
wife still urged him forward to hope that he should be made a king: for (said
she) thou want that dignity only for slothfulness, Caesar: for if
Agrippa be made a king, being before but a private man, how can thou doubt to
be made a king, who art already a Tetrarch? Herod herewith persuaded, went unto
Caius Caesar, who greatly reproved his avarice, in so much as he fled into
Spain; for Agrippa followed him to Rome to accuse him before Caesar: and Caius
gave unto him Herod's Tetrarchie. And so Herod remained in Spain with his wife.

CHAP. IX.
Of the pride of Caius, and of Petronius the President.

Caius Caesar so abused himself and his authority, that he would be thought to
be a God, Ant. lib. 18. cap. 15. Caius Caesar calls and reputeth himself a
God. The fear the Jews had of Petronius army.
and be so called. Also he put many Noble men of his country to death. He
likewise extended his impiety even unto Iudaea: for he sent Petronius with an
army to Jerusalem, commanding him to set his statuaes in the Temple, and if
the Jews refused to receive them, that those who withstood him he should put
to the sword, and lead the rest away captives. Almighty God did otherwise
dispose this proud commandment. But Petronius accompanied with three legions,
and many assistants out of Syria, came with all speed from Antiochia to
Iudaea: many of the Jews would not believe any war toward, notwithstanding
that they heard a general report thereof: and they ^at believed it, could not
bethink themselves of any means to resist. Suddenly all were in a great
fear: for the army was now come to Ptolemais, which City is situate by the
sea shore in Galilee in a large field, and on the East side it is compassed
about with mountains, The description of Ptolemais.
Memnon, having adjoining unto it a place of the compass of an hundredth
cubits, worthy of Sand like glass near Memnons sepulcher.
admiration. This place is as it were a round valley covered with sand like
glass, which when many ships coming together take away for ballace, so that
they empty the place of it, that place is presently after covered with the
like sand again. For there are winds, which as it were upon purpose carry this
sand from the higher places round about it thither, and whatsoever is within

Now the Jews with their wives and children gathered themselves together in
the field where the City Ptolemais is situate, and humbly besought Petronius,
first not to violate their country laws: and next, to be good unto them.
Petronius seeing the multitude of them who humbly The year of the world. 4002.
after the birth of Christ. 40.
Caesar's statuaes at Ptolemais; and himself went from thence to Galilee, and
at Tyberias called all the Jews and their Nobility together, recounting unto
them the force of the Roman army, and Caesar's threatenings: adding moreover,
that the Jews supplication was indeed a contumely, seeing all nations under
Petronius certifieth ye Jews of the Romans power and Caesar's threats
the dominion of the Romans (the Jews only excepted) had already placed
Caesar's statuaes in their Temples amongst the rest of their Gods: and herein
they did as it were revolt from the Empire, and iniure the President. They
answered, that it was against their laws and custom of their country: for it
was not lawful for them to have the image of God, much less the image of a
man; and that they were not only forbidden by the law, to have an image in
their Temple, but also to have it in any other profane place. Petronius
suddenly answered: Well, I must do my Lords command, Petronius said, Are ye
then prepared and minded to fight against Caesar? The Jews answered, We
every day offer sacrifices for Caesar and the Romans. But if Caesar would
needs place his image in their Temple he must first offer their whole nation
for sacrifice: for they would willingly with their wives and children offer
themselves to any that would kill them. Hereat Petronius greatly marvelled,
being moved to compassion when he beheld the constancy of the Jews in their
religion, The constancy of the Jews.
and so great a multitude prepared to die for it. And for that time they
departed, nothing being Caesar's command, and spoke publicly to the people,
sometime admonishing them, otherwhile threatening them, and putting them in mind
of the power of the Romans, and Caesar's indignation, and that he must of
necessity do as he was commanded. Petronius once more assembleth the Jews,
and threatens them. Petronius sends to Caesar and signifies the Jews
supplication.
But they were moved by none of these. And Petronius fearing the ground would
be left untilled (for it was now seed time, and all the people had remained
idle in the City for fifty days space) calling them together, he said, that
he would go abo^ a thing which might greatly endanger himself. For (said he) I
will either (God working with me) appease Caesar's wrath, or else I will lose
mine own life to save such a multitude as you are. And dismissing the people,
who made daily prayers to God for him, he led the army from Ptolemais unto
Antiochia, from whence Caesar in all have, recounting unto him with how great
an army he went into Iudaea, and that all the whole nation made supplication
unto him: whose request and humble suit if he denied, he must utterly destroy
the men and their country; for they had constantly remained in their country
religion, and vehemently resisted any new law. Caius writ an answer of these
letters unto Petronius, threatening that it should cost him his life, because
he made no more haste to execute his command. The messengers that brought
these letters were tossed in Petronius receives letters of Caesar's death.
a tempest upon the sea three whole months together, and others coming after
them to bring news of Caius his death, had a prosperous wind; so Petronius
received the letters of Caius Caesar's death twenty and seven days before the
other threatening letters came.

CHAP. X.
Of the Empire of Claudius, and of the reign and death of Agrippa.

Caius Caesar being slain by treason when he had reigned three years and six
months, The year of the world, 4005. after Christ's nativity, 43 Ant lib. 19.
cap. 3. Caius reigned three years and six months. Agrippa is chosen both
betwixt the Senate and Claudius for an arbiter.
Claudius was made Emperor by the army which was at Rome. The Senate by the
instigation of the Consuls Sentius Saturnius and Pomponius the second;
commanded three legions of Soldiers to keep the City, during the Council
holden in the Capitol: and for Caius Caesar's cruelty they determined to fight
against Claudius, intending to reduce the Empire to the ancient government,
that as before time, so for ever after, those should Agrippa came to Rome, and
the Senate sent unto him, requesting him to come and be one of their Council.
Claudius also desired him to take part with the army, intending to use his
help where need required. Agrippa perceiving that Claudius was already as it
were Emperor for his power, he took part with him, who presently sent him as
Ambassador to the Senate, to tell them his purpose; how that first of all, the
soldiers whether he would or no, set him in that dignity: and it had been in
him an indiscreet part to have forsaken such an offer at the soldiers hands,
who did it for good will: The year of the world. 4005. afterChrists birth 43.
nay, if he had refused it, his life should be in continual danger; for it was
sufficient cause of envy that he had been elected Emperor. Moreover, he
purposed to rule, not as a tyrant, but as a most mild prince: for he would be
contented only with the title of an Emperor, and do nothing without the
common consent of them all. And although he was not naturally inclined to
modest and courteous behavior, yet he had a sufficient example to beware that
he abused not The Senates answer to Agrippa.
his authority, by Caius Caesar's death. Agrippa bare this message to the
Senate, who answered (as though they trusted unto their soldiers and learned
Counsel) that they would not thrust themselves into wilfulbondage. Claudius
receiving this answer, sent Agrippa again to tell them, that nothing could
cause him to betray them, by whom he was made Emperor: and that he was forced
to make war against them, with whom he was very loath to Agrippa did also
this message unto the Senate: and one of the soldiers that were for the Senate
drew his sword, and said, Fellow soldiers, what should move us to massacre our
friends, and kindred, and parents, who follow Claudius, especially seeing we
have an Emperor with whom we can find no fault, unto whom we should rather go
forth with entreaties then with arms. When he had said this, he passed through
the midst of the court, and all the soldiers followed him.

The Senate being thus left desolate, and the Lords aba^doned of their force,
began to be in great fear: and seeing it was no standing out for them, they
followed the soldiers, and went unto Claudius. The Senate follow the soldiers
to Claudius.
Claudius for his fortune sake, having their swords drawn, and they almost
killed five before Caesar understood the outrage of the soldiers: and they had
done it, had not Agrippa ran and told him of the matter, saying, that if he
did not presently appease the soldiers fury, now raging against the Citizens,
that all his Nobility would presently be extinguished, and he should be left
an Emperor of a desolate place. When Claudius heard this, he repressed the
soldiers fury, and very honorably received the Senate into his camp, and
went forth presently Claudius honorably entertain^th the Senate Agrippas
kingdom.
with them, and offered sacrifice to God, as the manner is, for the good estate
of the Empire. Also he presently made Agrippa King of all his fathers
dominions, giving him likewise that which Augustus gave Herod, to wit,
Trachonite and Auranite, and beside them another The year of the world. ^08.
after Christ's birth 46.
it in the Capitol. Moreover he rewarded his brother Herod, who was his
kinsman, with the kingdom of Chalcis, and married him to the Queen Berenice.
Agrippa received greater revenues of his kingdom then he could desire, which
he spent not vainly, but in building such a wall about Jerusalem, as had he
finished it, the Romans could never have taken it: but before Ant. lib. 19.
cap. 5. Agrippa after he had reigned three years in Caesarea dies. Herod
after he had reigned in Chalcis dies. Ant. lib. 19. cap. 7. 8. Alexanders and
Aristobulus Genealogy
he could end that work he died in Caesarea, having reigned three years with
the title of a king, and other three years before in the state of a Tetrarch.
He left behind him three daughters which he had by Cypris, Berenice, Mariamme,
and Drusilla, and one son by the same wife named Agrippa: who, because he was
very young, Claudius reduced the kingdom into a province, Cestius Festus
Governor thereof. But after him Tyberius Alexander, who nothing violating the
laws of the nation, ruled them in peace. After this, Herod king of Chalcis
departed, leaving behind him two sons, which he had by his brothers daughter
Berenice, to wit, Berenicianus and Hircanus: and by his first wife Mariamme,
Aristobulus. His other brother also Aristobulus died a private person, leaving
one daughter Iotapa. And these were the posterity of Aristobulus king Herod's
son, and Herod had Alexander and Aristobulus by Mariamme, whom he put to
death: but Alexanders posterity reigned in the greater Armenia.

CHAP. XI.
Of diverse tumults in Iudaea and Samaria.

AFter the death of Herod who reigned in Chalcis, Claudius created Agrippa the
son of the former Agrippa, king of Chalcis in his uncles kingdom: and
Cumanus was The ye^re of the world, 4011. after Christ's nativity, 49.
made ruler of the other province after Alexander, under who^ there were many
tumults and new calamities, which befell the Jews. For when they were
assembled together at the feast of unleavened bread in Jerusalem, the Roman
soldiers standing in the porch of the temple (for always armed men kept that
place upon festiual days, least the people gathered together should The year
of the^ world, 4011. after Christ's birth 49. A filthy fact and speech of a
soldier against the Jews on a festival day. Cumanus (...) the peoples rage.
Some ten thousand men thronged to death.
Cumanus; requesting him to punish the soldier for this misdemeanour: and some
of them rash young men; and as it were prone to sedition, began to revile the
soldiers, and threw stones at them. Then Cumanu; fearing that the whole
multitude of the Jews would violently rush upon him; called unto him many
armed soldiers, and sent them into the porch of the temple. The Jews being in
a great fear fled and left the temple, and there was such a throng that as
they rushed out to fly, above ten thousand people were pressed and trodden to
death: so that this festival day was turned into woeful lamentations and
mournings in every place. This calamity was increased afterward by a company
of thieves: Stephanus servant unto Caesar, carried some household stuff, which
the thieves took from him in the high way. But Cumanus sending for those in
the villages next adjoining, to make inquiry of these thieves, commanded them
to be bound and brought unto A soldier cutteth the book of the holy scripture
in pieces and burns it. The year of the world. 4014, after Christ's birth 52.
The soldier executed that burned the Bible. A Galilean slain in Samaria.
him, because they had not taken the thieves: in one of which villages a
certain soldier finding the book of the holy scripture, cut it in pieces and
burnt it. Hereupon the Jews gathered themselves together from all places, as
though their religion were now violated, and drawn by the force of their
superstition as with an engine, all of them at one call went to Caesarea to
Cumanus, there beseeching him that the soldier who had so blasphemed God, and
their law; might not escape unpunished. But Cumanus perceived the Jews would
not be appeased without some satisfaction, wherefore he condemned the soldier
to death, and sent him to execution before their

At last there arose a tumult between the Galileans and Samaritans; for at a
village called Geman, situate in the great field of Samaria, a certain
Galilean of the number of the Jews that came to the feast was slain: for
which fact many Galileans ran to fight with the Samaritans; and the nobility
of the country went unto Cumanus, requesting him before any more harm were
done to go into Galilee and punish the authors of this evil. But Cumanus being
busied in greater affairs, sent them away without granting their request. When
this murder was known in Jerusalem, all the multitude left the solemnity of
the day; and went into Samaria without any guide, refusing to be restrained by
the nobility. Of this their tumult and sedition the son of Dinaeus called
Eleazar, and one Alexander were captains; who with violence Eleazar and
Alexander two princes of the Jews exercise much cruelty.
age, and burning the towns. When Cumanus heard this, he took a cornet of
ho^semen called the Sebastians; to come and help them that were thus
oppressed, and so took and killed many of them who took part with Eleazar.
Now the nobles of Jerusalem came out to the rest of that multitude which so
wasted Samaria, clothed in sackcloth and ashes upon their heads, beseeching
them not so to seek revenge upon the Samaritanes, as thereby to move the
Romans to destroy Jerusalem, and to be merciful to their country, the temple,
their wives and children, and not at once hazard all, and overthrow their whole
country and nation in revenging the death of one Galilean. The Jews hereby
were pacified, and departed. At the same time many conspired together to rob
and steal (as most commonly people by long peace grow insolent) so Conspiracy
in robbery.
Numidius Quadratus being governor of Syria, to revenge them of those that so
robbed and spoiled their country. There was also the nobility of the Jews,
and Ionathas the son of Ananus who was high Priest, who defended the Jews
against the Samaritanes accusations, affirming the Samaritanes to have been
cause of that tumult in killing the Galilean: and after that Cumanus was cause
of the rest of their calamities, who refused to punish the murderers.
Quadratus for that time sent away both parties, promising the^ that when he
came into their countries, he would diligently Quadratus governor of Syria
hears the Samaritanes and Jews. Quadratus gives sentence betwixt the Jews
and Samaritanes.
enquire of the matter, and coming from thence to Caesarea, he crucified all
those whom Cumanus took alive. And departing from thence to Lydda, he heard
the Samaritans complaints, Ionathas and Ananias, and his son Ananus, with some
other of the nobility of the Jews to Caesar, and also the chief of the
Samaritans. He likewise commanded Cumanus and Celer the tribune to go to Rome,
and yield account unto Claudius for that which they had done in that country.

This done, he went from Lydda to Jerusalem, and finding there the multitude
celebrating the feast of unleavened bread, without any tumults or disorders, he
returned to Antiochia. Caesar at The year of the world. 4014. after Christ's
birth 52. Claudius sentence against some Samaritanes, Cumanus and Celer.
Rome hearing the allegations of Cumanus, and the Samaritanes (Agrippa was also
there earnestly defending the cause of the Jews, as also Cumanus was assisted
by many potentates) he pronounced sentence against the Samaritans, and
commanded three of their chief nobility to be put to death, and banished
Cumanus, and sent Celer the tribune bound unto Jerusalem, that the Jews might
draw him about the city, and then cut off his head. This done, he sent Felix
brother to Pallas to rule Iudaea, Samaria, and Galilaea. And he preferred
Agrippa from Chalcis unto a greater kingdom, making him king of that province,
whereof Philip had been ruler, to wit Trachon, Batanaea and Gaulanitis, adding
thereunto Lysanias kingdom, and the Tetrarchy; whereof Claudius dies, and
Nero succeeded him The year of the world. 4015. after the Nativity of Christ.
53. Nero kills his brother, his mother and wife.
Varus was governor: And having reigned thirteen years, eight months, and
thirty days, Claudius departed this life, leaving Nero to succeed him, whom
by the persuasions of his wife Agrippina Britannicus by his former wife
Messalina, and a daughter called Octauia, whom he married unto Nero: he had also
another daughter by Agrippina named Antonia. How Nero abused his wealth and
felicity, and how he slew his brother, mother and his wife, and afterward
raged against all his kindred, and how in a mad vain he became a player upon a
stage, because it requires a long narration, I will speak nothing thereof.

CHAP. XII.
Of the tumults in Iudaea under Felix.

WHerefore I will begin to recount what Nero did against the Jews. He made
Aristobulus Herodes son king of the lesser Armenia, and joined unto Agrippas
kingdom four The year of the world, 4018. after Christ's nativity 56. Ant.
lib. 20. cap. 1^. Felix surpriseth Eleazar the captain of the thieves and many
others, and sends them bound to Rome. Another sort of thieves who at (...)
days went about the city to murder men. Ionathas the high priest with many
others slain. Ant. lib. 20. cap. 12.
cities, and the ground belonging unto them; two of them Abila and Iulias were
in the country of Peraea, the other Tarichaea and Tiberias were in Galilee:
and he made Felix governor over the rest of Iudaea. This Felix took Eleazar
captain of the thieves, after he had robbed and spoiled the country twenty
years, and many more with him, and sent them bound unto Caesar, and he
crucified a great number of them, who either were thieves and his confederates,
or else such as assisted him. The country was no sooner cleansed from these,
but presently another sort of thieves arose in Jerusalem called Sicarij, with
short swords, who at high noone in the midst of the city killed many in every
place: and especially at the celebrating of holy feasts they mixed themselves
with the multitude, having short swords under their coats, and therewithal
Ionathas the high priest, and after him every day some were slain: and the
city was put in a fear worse then death it self; for each man every moment
expected death, as though it had been amidst open wars: likewise every one
cast a diligent eye upon those that came near him; also no man trusted his
familiar friends: and yet were they murdered, whilst they were looking about
them to escape danger. So cunningly did these thieves cover and conceal their
actions. Moreover there arosean other sort of mischievous people, who did not
so much harm with their hands as the first, but with their impious counsel
more, and did no less trouble the quiet estate of the city then did the
thieves. These people being vagabonds Felix perceiving that their action tended
to rebellion, sent an army of horse and footmen against these people, and
killed a great many of them.

But a certain Aegytian a false Prophet, caused a far greater massacre among
the Jews then that was: for being a Magician, he came into the country, and
calling himself a Prophet he gathered An Egyptian Prophet gathers welny
^0000. men.
unto him almost thirty thousand Jews, who were by his magic arts seduced;
and leading them from the wilderness to mount Oliuet, he determined from thence
to go to Jerusalem, and to drive back the forces of the Romans, and to use
his authority over the people. He had for his guard those that came to follow
him. Felix foreseeing his intent, met him with his legions Felix overthrows
the Egyptian. The thieves and magitians work much mischief to many men.
multitude dispersed themselves every one in his country. These being thus
repressed, the other part (as it happens in a sick body) began to rise: for
some of the Magitians, and the thieves being gathered together, they brought
many unto misery, and as it were exhorted them to liberty, threatening present
death to those that obeyed the Romans, so that they forced them who were
contented with their subjection to the Romans, to disobey them. These people
being dispersed all The year of the world. 4020. after the (...) of Christ. 50.


At this time arose another tumult at Caesarea, by a sedition raised between
the Jews that Ant lib. 20. cap. 13.
dwelt there, and the Syrians. The Jews challenged the city to be theirs,
because it was founded by Herod, who was a Jew. But the Syrians denying not but
that the builder of the city was a Jew, yet they affirmed that it belonged to
the Gentiles: for (said they) it had not been lawful for the founder to have
placed in it shrines and statuaes, if he had meant that it should have belonged
A fight between the Jews and Syrians about Caesarea.
to the Jews. So that hereupon there arose a great controversy amongst the
Jews and Syrians, in so much as the one fought against the other, and every
day those that were the hardiest of Felix Sedition and slaughter among the
Jews. The year of the world. 4024. after Christ (...) 62.
saw this, by a straight edict he banished those who were most seditious out of
the City, and those that obeyed not, he sent soldiers and slew them,
suffering their goods to be taken by the soldiers. Nero to plead their right
and title. Festus succeeded Felix, who diligently persecuted them that troubled
the country, and destroyed many thieves.

CHAP. II.
Of Albinus and Florus, Presidents of Iudaea.

But Albinus, who succeeded Festus followed not his steps: for there was no
iniquity so great wherein he was not plunged. Furthermore, he did not only
take away by force Ant lib. 20. cap 11. Albinus president of Iudaea full of all
wickedness.
men's goods from them under color of justice, and at his own pleasure exact a
greater Albi^s with money, to permit them to be seditious, and the common people
that could not be in quiet, joined themselves with Albinus favorites: and
every one of them had a The seditious bribe Albinus to wink at their robberies
troop of thieves after him. But Albinus himself was over them all as a
tyrant, and prince of thieves; and he used the help of his guard to rob the
meaner sort: so they whose houses were sacked and spoiled, were glad to hold
their peace; and they who yet had escaped, were glad to be very officious
toward those who deserved death, for fear they should suffer the like. In
general,

Notwithstanding that Albinus was of such behavior, yet Gessius Florus who
succeeded The year of the world. 4028. after Christ's birth 66. Ant. lib. 20.
cap. 16. Gessius Florus succeeded Albinus and proved worser then Albinus.
him, so behaved himself, that in comparison of him, Albinus might have been
thought a good Governor. For Albinus did all things secretly and craftily, but
Gessius committed any iniquity how great soever so openly, as though he
gloried in his impiety; and behaved himself, nor as a ruler of the country,
but as a hangman sent to execute malefactors; omitting no manner of theft, nor
any means whereby he might afflict the people. Where he ought to have showed
pity, there was he a tyrant; and where he ought to have been ashamed, there
lice showed himself shameless. No man ever could invent more means to
obscure truth, and devise more ways The covetousness of Florus spoileth whole
cities.
pleasure, but he wasted and spoiled whole cities at once, and destroyed the
people in great multitude. Nay, he was not ashamed by the public voice of a
crier, to proclaim it through the whole coutrie lawful for any one that
would, to rob and steal, so that they would bring him a part of their booty.
In brief, his cruelty was such, that the country was almost left desolate,
people forsaking their own native home, and flying into strange lands. And
during the time that Cestius Gallus was governor of Syria, no man durst go to
him to make any complaint against Florus. But The year of the world. 4018.
after Christ's birth 66. Cestius Gallus appeaseth the people and requires a
mitigation of Florus severity.
when at the feast of unleavened bread Gallus came to Jerusalem, there met him
a multitude of the Jews above three hundred thousand, all beseeching him to
help and succor their afflicted country, and banish Florus, who was the
very plague of their nation. Yet Florus was so impudent, that being with
Gallus, and hearing these cries against him, he was no whit moved thereat, but
laughed at it. Cestius for that time appeased the people, promising that
hereafter he would make Florus more gentle unto them, and so returned to
Antiochia. Florus conducted him to Caesarea to stop his mouth with lies,
devising with himself how to make the Jews rebel, and that he thought was the
safest means for to cloak his villainies: for if they continued in peace and
obedience, he feared that some of them would accuse him before Caesar: marie if
he could make them revolt, then he hoped that their great fault would shadow
his impieties. Wherefore to bring about The beginning of the war of the
Jews, the 12. year of Neros reign.
and brought letters to testify that decree before Nero. This was the
beginning of the wars of the Jews, in the twelfth year of Nero his empire,
and the seventeenth of Agrippas reign, in the month of May.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Florus cruelty against the Jews of Caesarea and Jerusalem.

FLorus had no just cause for any of these calamities which he inflicted upon
the Jews. The Ant. lib. 20. cap. 15. The causes of the war of the Jews. The
year of the world. 4030. after Christ's birth 68. Florus perjury and decoit
toward the Jews.
piece of ground, offering him far more then it was worth: but the Landlord of
the soil did not only contemn their request, but also to their great grief
in that place builded tauerns; so that he left them a very straight and narrow
passage to go to their synagogue. Some young men among the Jews, being very
zealous, resisted the workmen, and would not suffer them to build. Florus
hearing this, commanded the Jews to let the workmen go forward in their
work. The Jews not knowing what to do, especially one John a Publican,
offered Florus eight talents to hinder the building: he promised for that money
to fulfill their request: and now having it, ^e presently departed from
Caesarea, and went to Sebaste without perfourming any thing, giving as it were
The conflict of the Jews with the Caesareans
were prone to sedition; began contumeliously to revile the adversaries. For
the most seditious of the people of Caesarea were also prepared to fight with
them, and had caused that to be done before the synagogue, only to pick a
quarrel, and so they fought together. Iucundus General of the Florus
imprisoneth twelve of the chiefest Jews in Caesarea.
threescore furlongs. Twelve of the chief of them, together with John the
Publican, went unto Florus; being at Sebaste, to complain of the injury done
unto them, requesting him to assist them, and modestly put him in mind of the
eight talents they gave him. But he presently commanded them to be bound and
imprisoned, because they had presumed to take and carry their law from
Caesarea. Hereat those of Jerusalem were greatly moved, yet they showed it not.
Florus as upon set purpose giving occasion of rebellion, sent for seventeen
talents out of the sacred Caesar's affairs. At this the people was much
troubled, calling and crying upon the name of Caesar, praying that he would
deliver them from Florus his tyranny. Some of them being seditious, began to
curse Florus bitterly, and took Another cause of war raised by Florus.
a basket and carried it about, and begged an alms for Florus; which they did
in derision, as who should say, he were as miserable as beggars that have
nothing. Florus for all this left not his covetousness, but was more earnest to
rob the inhabitants of their goods. So that when he should have gone to
Caesarea to have quieted the sedition; and removed the cause of tumults, as
also he had received The year of the world 4030. after Christ's Nativity. 68.
money so to do; taking an army of horse and foot, he came to Jerusalem, that
with the help of the Roman soldiers he might effect his pleasure, and terrify
the whole city.

The people to pacify his wrath, went out in courteous sort to meet the army,
showing themselves ready to give them the best entertainment they could, and
to receive Florus with all honor and reverence. Florus understanding of them,
sent before him one Capito a Centurion, Another occasion of the war. Florus
scorneth the gratulation of the Jews.
with fifty horsemen; commanding them to depart, and not to mock him with a
pretense of honor, whom they had so hainously abused. And that if they were as
good as their words, they should flout and reproach him to his face; and not
only in words, but in deeds show; that they desired liberty. Herewithall the
multitude being terrified; and also for that the horsemen that came with Capito
assaulted them with violence; every one fled before they saluted Florus, or
Florus for that night lodged in the kings palace. The next day he caused a
tribunal openly to be placed, and the high priest and all the chief of the
Jews resorted thither, and stood before the tribunal. Then Florus sitting in
the tribunal seat, commanded Florus in his tribunal requires them to be
yielded unto him, who had spoken ill of him.
them to bring forth presently all those, that had used any opprobrious words
against him, threatening to be revenged upon them except they did it. The Jews
made answer, that the people intended nothing but peace and quietness,
requesting that they that had offended in words might obtain pardon. For it
was no marvel in so great a multitude, if there were some rash and foolish
young men: and that it was impossible to discern all that offended, seeing
every one was now penitent for that which was done, and at least for fear
would deny it. And that if Florus wrath was increased, and presently he
commanded the soldiers to sack The outrage of Florus soldiers
the market place (which was in the higher part of the City) where things were
sold, and put all they met or found unto the sword. The soldiers, who were
desirous of gain, having now authority from their ruler, did not only sack
the place they were sent unto, but also all houses, and murdered the
inhabitants. All streets and gates were filled with them that sought to fly,
and the dead bodies of them that did light into the soldiers hands: no sort of
spoiling was omitted. They also apprehended many of the nobility, and brought
them to Florus: and he causing them to be whipped, afterward hanged them up. And
there were slain that day, of men, women and Florus soldiers kill 630. Jews
in one day.
Florus then doing that none before durst ever presume to do: for he caused
knights before the tribunal seat to be whipped, and after hanged them up, who
though they were Jews borne, yet received they that dignity from the Romans.

CHAP. XV.
Of another opperession of the Citizens of Jerusalem, by Florus his means.

AT the same time king Agrippa was gone to Alexandria, to entertain Alexander,
whom Nero sent to be ruler over Egypt; his sister Berenice in the mean while
remained in Jerusalem, Berenice requi reth Florus to pacify his displeasure
against the Jews.
who seeing the cruelty of the soldiers, was much grieved: and often sent the
lieutenants of her horsemen and her own guard unto Florus, requesting him to
abstain from the slaughter of the citizens. But he neither regarding the
multitude of them that were slain, nor the dignity of her that entreated, but
only his private gain, and what he could gather by oppression and rapine,
denied her request: so that the rage of the soldiers extended it self also
against the Queen. For they did not only before her face beat and kill all
that came in their way, but The fury of the soldiers against Bero^ nice.
they had also killed her, had she not fled into the palace, where she watched
all night, keeping a trusty guard about her, fearing that the soldiers would
break in upon her. She came to Jerusalem Berenice then observing, stood also
barefoot before Florus his tribunal seat, to entreat him: whom he not only
contemned, but also put her in danger of her life. This was done the sixteenth
day of May. The day after, the The people exclaim against Floru^
multitude gathered together in the upper part of the City in the market
place, and with great cries murmured that so many were slain, and especially
used contumelious words against Florus; The year of the world, 4030 after
Christ's birth 68. Florus renueth the discontents of the people.
which the nobility and high priests (fearing their deaths) apprehended,
beseeching them to abstain from such words as had already caused that
calamity in the city, and not to provoke Florus unto greater indignation. And
so the multitude was pacified for their sakes who entreated, and hoped that
hereafter Florus would desist from such cruelty. Florus, when he saw the
multitude quieted, was sorry: and that he might again provoke them, he
assembled together the nobility and high Priests, telling them that it would
be an argument that the people did not seek alteration any more, if they would
go in courteous wise and meet the soldiers which were coming Florus
subtlety and treason.
from Caesarea, whereof were two legions. Having thus assembled the Jews
together to go meet the soldiers, he also sent and commanded the Centurions
not to salute the Jews, who came to meet them: and if therefore the Jews were
offended, and gave any hard speeches, they

Then all the Priests and Levites brought forth the holy vessels and ornaments
of the temple, and with Harpes, songs and musical instruments came before the
multitude, beseeching them to endeavor, that the honor and pomp of the temple
might still remain, and not to incite the Romans The exhortation of the
priests and princes to the people.
through contumelious words to sack the temple. There might you see the chief
of the high Priests with ashes upon their heads, and clothes rent, so that
their naked breasts were perceived; and calling every noble man by his name,
and speaking unto all the multitude, requested not Florus al occasion of
persecution, and saved their country from ruin, and themselves from further
calamities. Adding, that it was a great shame that such a multitude should be
led away with a few seditious persons, and that it was more fit that so many
should force those few seditious people to obey them, and join with them in
opinion.

With these persuasions they did mollify the malice of the Jews, and also
persuade many of the seditious people, some with threats, and some with
reverence of themselves to be pacified. And so they going before all the people
followed, and went out to meet the Roman soldiers. And Florus, by whose
consent this was done: and presently the soldiers apprehending them, did beat
them with clubs, and the rest flying, the Roman horsemen The event shows
Florus intent and counsel. The slaughter of the Jews.
pursued them, and trod upon them with their horses. Many were slain by the
Romans, and more were killed in the throng, one of them tumbling upon another.
There was a great throng in the gates of the city: for every one hastening and
striving to get in, hindered themselves and others. Many died most miserably in
that throng, and some were stifled, and some pressed to death being trodden upon;
so that their neighbors coming to bury them, could not know them. The
soldiers also cruelly assaulted them, killing all that they could come unto,
and forced the people to go in by the entrance called Bezetha, who desired to
recover the temple and the castle called Antonia.

Florus taking the soldiers with him, pursued them thither, striving to get
the castle; yet did he The seditious for (...) least Florus should sense their
spoils fly to the temple. Florus takes the spoils, and enters the temple.
Florus seeing the Jews inexpugnable in the temple, surceaseth his violence,
and leaving a band behind him goes to Caesarea.
not prevail: for the people made resistance, and threw down stones from the
house top; and killed many of the Romans, who being overcome with darts cast
from aloft, and could not resist the people, who on every side came against
them, retired themselves unto the rest of the army at the kings palace. Those
that were seditious, fearing that Florus would again assault them, and by the
castle Antonia make an entrance into the temple, they got upon the galleries
that reached from the porch of the temple unto Antonia, and beat them down,
hereby to repress the covetousness of Florus. Who greedily gaped after the
sacred treasure, and striued to enter by Antonia into the temple to take them:
but seeing the porches beaten down, he offered no more violence. And calling
together the high priests and nobility, he said that he was content to depart
Florus as he was requested, changing the garrison with the rest of the army
departed to Caesarea.

CHAP. XVI. The year of the world. 403^. after Christ's birth 68.

Of Politianus the tribune, and how Agrippa made a speech unto the Jews,
exhorting them to obey the Romans.

FLorus yet devised an other way to stir the Jews to rebellion: for he
reported unto Cestius that the Jews were revolted, impudently belying them to
have committed that which indeed they endured at his hands. The nobles of
Jerusalem and Berenice certified Cestus Gallus president of Syria co^ulteth
with the princes what were bestro be done. Politianus is sent to Jerusalem and
meets with Agrippa.
Cestius of all that Florus had done: he receiving letters from both partics
deliberated with his nobles what to do. Some cosisailed Cestius to go into
Iudaea with an army, and punish the Jews if they were revolted; and if they
were not, then to confirm them in their obedience. Yet it pleased him better
to send some about him thither before, to bring him true news of their estate,
and Politianus the tribune, who in his way met with Agrippa about Iamnia as he
returned from Alexandria, and told him all, for what, and from whom he was
sent. Where also were present the Priests and chief of the Jews, to welcome
Agrippa. And having saluted him as courteously as they could, they presently
bewailed the misery which had befallen their nation, and the cruelty of Florus.
Which although Agrippa disallowed, yet made as if he were angry with the Jews
who^ he greatly pitied, purposing hereby to bridle their affections, that they
persuaded, that they had had no injury, might abstain from revenge. So that
all the better sort, who for their lands and livings desired quietness, well
perceived that the kings reprehension was not of malice but for their good.

The people of Jerusalem went out to meet them threescore furlongs off, and
received Agrippa and Politianus very courteously, yet the women lamented the
death of their husbands slain, The multitude of the people go out to meet
Agrippa and Politianus.
Agrippa to have compassion on their nation; entreating also Politianus to go
into the city, and behold what Florus had done: And so they showed him the
market place desert, and the houses destroyed, and by the means of Agrippa
persuaded Politianus to go round about the city as far as Siloa, only with
one man, and behold with his eyes what Florus had done, and that they were
obedient to the Romans in all things, and only were enemies unto Florus who
had used them so cruelly. Politianus assembleth the people, and inciteth them
to peace, and after returns to Cestius. The Jews require the king yt there
might be some ambassadors sent to Rome to conplaine of Florus to Nero.
Politianus having gone about the whole city, ascended into the temple, well
perceiving many arguments of the Jews fidelity toward the Romans, and
calling the people there together, he praised their loyalty, and exhorted them
still to continue in like obedience, and worshipped God Cestius. The multitude
of the Jews came to Agrippa and the high Priests, requesting them to send
Ambassadors against Florus unto Nero, and not to give an argument of rebellion
by not complaining of such murders: for Florus would make him believe that
they had rebelled, except they went unto him to show that Florus gave first
occasion; and it was certain that the multitude would not be quieted if any
one hindered that Embassage. Hereupon Agrippa thought that it would be an
hateful matter to send Ambassadors to Rome to accuse Florus; and on the other
part he perceived, that it was to no purpose to contradict the Jews, who were
ready now to rebel: wherefore calling the people together he made a speech
unto them, and seated his sister Berenice in an eminent place in the house of
the Asmonaeans. The porch wherein he called the^ together, was in such Agrippas
oration to the Jews.
manner following.

If I had perceived that you were bent to fight against the Romans, or that the
better part of the people were not inclined to peace, neither would I have come
unto you, nor have presumed to have counseled you in any thing. For it is in
vain to give counsel of such things as are expedient, where all the auditors
are already determined to follow that, which is contrary to the counsel
given them. But for that some are ignorant what misery wars induce, because by
reason of their young years they have not known it, others are moved with a
rash and unadvised desire of their liberty, others are drawn by avarice and
hope of gain in that hurlyburlie: I thought it good to assemble you all
together, and declare unto you what means is to be Agrippa strives to make
the common sort flexible and attentive.
that they will not be recalled, may for all my words continue in the same
mind still. And I will speak nothing at all except you will all keep silence. I
know that many do seek to aggrauate the injuries that are done by the rulers
of the country, and do highly commend and extol liberty: yet before I
begin to declare unto you who you are, and against whom ye purpose to The
ye^re of the world. 4030. after Christ's birth 68.
bear arms, I will first divide and separate such causes as you think
inseparable. For if you seek only to revenge your selves upon those that have
injured you, why do ye then so extol liberty? or if you think it not
tolerable to obey any other; why then, these complaints against your rulers are
superfluous? For although they were never so mild, still would subjection be
intolerable. Call all things to mind, and consider what a small cause of war
is given you. And first of all weigh with your selves, the crimes and offenses
of your rulers: for you ought to show your selves humble, and dutiful to them
that are in authority, and not exasperate and provoke them It be hooueth to
honor the magistrate and not to provoke him by injury.
to wrath by reproachful speeches. For in reuiling them for small offenses, you
do incite them against you whom you so revile: and that where as before they
did only do you a little injury, and that secretly, now being moved through
bad speeches, they openly set upon you and destroy Caesar, against whom you
would take arms. For they command no cruel governors to come to you, nor
can they who are in Agrippa excuses Caesar and the Romans
the furthest part of the West, easily know what is done in the East, nor hear
thereof. And truly it is a thing most against reason to take arms for so small
cause, especially when they against whom you take arms, know nothing of the
matter. It is an easy way quickly to have redress for these matters you now
complain of. For there will not be always the same governor, and it is
credible, that they who succeed this, will be more gentle and courteous. But if
you once begin Depulsion of the Jews liberty which they so vehemently seek
for^.
to make war, it is not easy to end it or to sustain it without great
calamities. And let them who so thirst after liberty, diligently advise
themselves, that they do not bring upon their backs a greater bondage. For
slavery is a cruel thing, and it seems a lawful cause to make war, least
you be brought into it: yet he that is already in bondage and reuolteth, is
rather a perverse slave, then one who desires liberty. You should therefore
have endeavored to have resisted the Romans, when first Pompeius entered into
this land: but then our ancestors and their kings far exceeding you in
riches, strength of body, and courage, were not able to withstand a small part
of the Roman forces; and do you think who are their successors, and far
weaker then they, having succeeded them in subjection, that you are able to
resist all the whole power of the Romans?

The Athenians, who sometime to conserve the liberty of Greece, set their own
city on fire, Xerxes whom they forced to fly with one ship (which Xerxes made
the earth nauigable, and the sea firmeland, who had such a navy that the seas
had not roo^ for one The example of the Athenians and others who obey the
Roman empire.
ship to sail by another, nor al Europe able to receive his army) who also
had such a victory over Asia, near the little Isle of Salamina, yet now are
subject unto the Romans, and that kingly city is now ruled at the Romans
beck. The Lacedaemonians also having gotten such a victory upon the
Thermopyles, and under their general Agesila^ ^acked Asia, acknowledge now the
Romans for their Lords. The Macedonians also who still imagine they see Philip
and Alexander promising them the Empire of the whole world; now patiently bear
this change, and obey them whom fortune has made their masters. Many other
nations, who for their The Lacedaemonians. The Macedonians.
power and strength have far more cause then you to seek their liberty, yet
patiently endure The comparison of the Romans force with the Jews weakness. The
Romans have brought the whole world under their government, and have ^ought
another world beyond the Ocean.
the Egyptians or Arabians? And do you not consider the bounds of the Roman
Empire? Do you not consider your own inhabilitie? Know ye not that your
neighbor nations have often by force taken your city? and that the forces of
the Romans have passed through the whole world unconquered, and as it were
searching for something greater then the world? Whose dominions toward the
East is extended beyond Euphrates, and toward the North beyond Ister, and
toward the South beyond the wilderness of Lybia, and toward the West beyond
Gades, having found an other world beyond the Ocean, and with an army entered
Britain which is have greater cause then you to seek their liberty? What
shall I say of the fifty Cities of Asia? do The (...) of the world 4030. after
Christ's Nativity. 68.
Fifty Cities of Asia obey the Romans.
never sailed on before? What think you the Bythinians, Cappadocians, and
those of Pamphilia, Lydia, and Cilicia, could say for their liberty, who
notwithstanding now peaceably pay tribute unto the Romans? What of the
Thracians? whose Country is five days journey in breadth, and seven in
length, far more hard and stronger then your Country, where frost would
hinder them that should assault them, yet do they obey two thousand Romans who
are in garrison. After them, the Illyrians whose country reaches unto
Dalmatia, and Ister, are kept in obedience The defense of France.
amongst them three hundredth and five nations, who have amongst them as it were
the very fountain offelicitie, and with their goods and commodities enrich
the whole world: yet do they pay tribute unto the Romans, and account their
happiness to be builded upon the felicity of the Romans, and that neither for
want of courage nor Nobility of blood, who fourscore years

Neither could the Spaniards, though gold grew in their Country, keep
themselves from The Spaniards subject to the Romans.
being subject to the Romans. Nor the Portugal^s and the warlike Cantab^ians,
for all the distance of sea and land between them and Rome. The Ocean, whose
waves beating against the shore, terrifieth the inhabitants adjoining, could
not stay them but they past it: and carried an army beyond the pillars of
Hercules, and passed the tops of the Pyrenaean mountains, which reach unto the
clouds, and so made also those people subject unto them: and for all that they
were so warlike a nation, and so far from Rome, they left only one legion
for garrison. Which The Germains mul^de, virtue and huge stature.
they whose country is so large, having hearts far bigger then their bodies,
and souls that contemn death, who are more cruel then brute beasts; yet are
they now limited by the river Rhene, and kept in subjection by eight legions of
Romans: and those that were taken were made slaves, and the rest chose rather
to save themselves by flight then fight. And you who have such confidence in
the walls of Jerusalem, consider the walls of Britanie; whose country though
compassed with the Ocean, and almost as great as our whole world, the Romans
sailing into it have conquered, The Britains subject to the Romans.
and four legions keep that Island so populous. What should I say more, when
the Parthians a most warlike people, who lately reigned over so many nations,
and abound in so much The Parthians
at Rome, who with peace shadow their captivity; and almost all the nations
under the Sun trembling and dreading the Roman puissance: and will you only
war against them? Do you not consider what befell the Carthaginians, who
boasting themselves of that great Hanniball, sprung from the noble race of the
Phaenicians, at last were destroyed by Scipio? Neither could the Cyrenaeans,
The Carthaginians made subject by Scip^os hands.
who took their beginning from the Lacedaemonians, nor all the race of the
Marmaridans, which is extended as far as the Deserts, which are very scarce
of waters; nor the Syrtes, nor the Nasamonians, nor the Moors, nor the
innumerable multitude of the Numidians, have been able to resist the power of
the Romans; who by force of arms have conquered the third part of the The
Romans govern the Moors.
world, the nations whereof can hardly be numbered, which from the Sea
Atlanticke and Hercules which they did in Egypt, hard by, which reaching unto
Aethiopia and rich A^abia, and bordering The year of the world, 4030 after
Christ's birth 68.
Alexandria, which is easy to be counted by the tribute which is paid of
every person by the Poule: living in their country, yet disdain not to live
under the dominion of the Romans, notwithstanding, that they have a great
entisement to rebel, to wit, Alexandria which is both populous Alexandria
acknowledges the power of the Romans.
and very rich, in length 30. furlongs, in breadth ten, and pays more tribute
in a month then you do in a whole year; and besides their money find all Rome
with Come four months in the year: and it is on every side compassed about
either with a wast wilderness, by which no^an pass, or the fierce sea, which
is boundless; or with great and strong ryuers, or muddie and durtie quagmires,
and marish grounds, all which little auailed them to withstand the force of the
Romans. For two legions only placed in the City, keep all the great country
Egypt, and

What sociates will you have from some Country not inhabited to aid you
against the Romans? For all those that at this day dwell in any place of the
world, that is inhabited, obey the Romans. Except peradventure some of you hope
for help from beyond Euphrates; thinking that your Countrymen of Adiabena will
help you: but they will not entangle themselves in these dangerous wars, for
an unreasonable cause; nor if they would consent to so dishonest a deed, the
Parthians will not suffer them. For they are careful to maintain their league
with the Romans, and would think it violated, if any under their dominions
should war against them. It remains then that you must only trust that God
will help you, but God does a^sist the Romans: for it is impossible that such
an Empire should continue without the help of God. Consider that this Gods
favor towa^ds the Romans.
contempt of Religion, although you were to war against far weaker then
your selves, yet were it hard to be dispensed withal* and it may so come to
pass, that, that whereby you hope to make God your partaker, thereby you may
make him your enemy: for if you observe the custom of Sabaoths, and in them
do nothing, it will not be hard to conquer you. For so your ancestors have
made experience by ^peius, who ever deferred all his enterprises until that
day, wherein his enemies were idle, and ^de no resistance. Now if in war ye
transgress your country laws, I know not then for what you should rebel. For
truly all of you at this time are of that mind, that your Country laws shall
not be changed. And I pray you how will you request help The last argument
that proves the Jews destitute of Gods and man's help, and unapt to make
war. Whilst the ship is yet in the Port, it is good to prevent the ^uture
tempest.
at Gods hands, if wilfully ye break his laws? All that begin war, either
trust in humane riches, or divine succor: and they that war, having no
probability to hope for any of the^e, wilfully Agrippas prophecy of the Jews
future misery.
wherein any Jews remain. For there is no nation nor people in the whole
world, amongst whom some of your Country are not, who all shall be most
cruelly put to death if you rebel: and for the wicked counsel of a few men,
all Cities shall flow with blood of the Jews; and no man shall be punished
for killing Jews, because of your offense. And if the Romans do not execute
all this outrage after your rebellion, then think how impious a thing it is,
to rebel against so mild governors. Take compassion, if not of your children,
and wives, yet at the least of this City, which is the mother City of all
your nation. Spare these holy walls, and sacred Temple, and keep unto your
selves the law and sacred things of the Temple: assure your selves that if the
Romans again overcome you, they will not spare these things, seeing you were
no more grateful unto them, for

I protest before God, your holy Temple, and all the Angels of heaven Agripp^
protests that he has omit ted no counsel that he thought expedient for the
Jews.
and our whole Country, that I have kept back no counsel, which I think
profitable for you. Now if you consider of those things which are profitable
for you, ye shall live with me in peace, but if you follow your private
affections, I will not be partaker of the miseries and dangers; you thrust
your selves into. When he had thus spoken, he wept, his sister Berenice
standing by him, and by his tears mitigated a great part of their fury. Then
they cried that they meant not to bear arms against the Romans and Caesar, but
against Florus, for the injury he had done them. To The year of the world.
4030. after the birth of Christ. 68.
Agrippa answered, but your deeds show that you fight against the Romans: for
you have not paid your tribute to Caesar; and you have burned the porches
belonging unto Antonia; now if you would hide your rebellion, repair with
speed the porches, and pay your tribute: for this fort belongs not to Florus,
nor the money. Herewith the people were content, and ascending into the temple
with Agrippa and Berenice, they began to reedifie the porches, and the
nobility and captains gathered the tribute in every village, and quickly
brought forty talents (for so much money was behind.) And thus Agrippa
appeased the beginning of these wars. After this, he began to persuade the
people to obey Florus, till such time as an other were sent to supply his
place. Herewith the multitude was so moved, that they contumeliously reviled
the king, and threw stones at him, and dro^e him out of the City. The king
seeing that their sedition Agrippa the king is by the people driven out of the
city with stones.
the potentates to Florus, who was at Caesarea, that he might choose whom he
would amongst them to gather the tribute through the whole country. And so he
departed into his own kingdom.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the rebellion of the Jews begun against the Romans.

AT this time, some of the chiefest rebels assembled to gither, suddenly
assaulted a Castle called Massada, which at unawares they took, and killed all
the Romans, and in their Eleazar son of the high priest Ananias; a bold and
desperate young man, captain of the soldiers, persuaded them who offered
sacrifices, not to offer any but those, that were given by the Jews: And this
was the ground and cause of the wars that ensued. For they rejected Caesar's
sacrifices, that were The Jews refuse Caesar's sacrifices for the prosperity
of the Roman^.
wont to be offered for the good of the Romans. And although the high priests
and people of account requested them not to omit that custom of sacrificing
for their kings and governors; yet they refused so to do, trusting greatly to
their faction: all the strength of the City that desired alteration, were of
their minds, and especially Eleazar, who at that time was General, as is
before said. Wherefore all the potentates; h^gh priests, and chiefest of the
Pharisees assembled themselves, and perceiving into how great danger those
rebels daily brought the City, they determined And first of all, they greatly
complained of their rash and unadvised rebellion, and that they sought to
stir up so great wars against their country, inueighing against the cause
that moved them thereto, as being without reason: telling them that their
ancestors for the most part, adorned the temple with the gifts of Gentiles;
never refusing the offerings of strangers; and not only not to have refused
their offerings (for that were an impious fact) but also placed in the temple
the gifts that they sent, which were yet to be seen. And that now only to
provoke the Romans to war, and denounce it against them, they began to alter
religion: and beside other dangers also, to make the City seem guilty of
impiety; as though it were such a one wherein none Against those who refuse
foreign sacrifices.
law against any private person, he had just cause to accuse us of inhumanitie.
But now the Romans were despised, and Caesar himself accounted profane: and
it was to be feared, that if the Jews disdained to accept of Caesar's
offerings, Caesar would hinder them from offering any. And that the city of
Jerusalem would presently be accounted as an enemy to the empire, unless they
presently accepted Caesar's sacrifice; and before such time, as they heard these
news against whom this outrage was attempted. And having thus spoken, they
brought forth the most learned amongst the priests to recount from time to
time how their ancestors had always accepted of the sacrifices of strangers.

But none of the rebels gave ear to any thing that was said, and the Levites
came not to serve None of the seditious gave ear to those that were in
authority. Ambassadors sent to Florus and Agrippa against the seditious.
Florus: the chief whereof was Simon the son of Ananias: other some were
sent to Agrippa, of which the noblest Saulus, Antipas, and Costoharus, who were
also akinne unto the king, requesting them both to come with an army into the
City, and suppress the sedition which was raised, before it went further.
Florus was glad of these tidings, and desiring nothing more then ^e, gave no
answer to the Ambassadors. The year of the world. 4030. after C^sts birth 68.
But Agrippa willing to spare both parts as well the good as the rebels, and to
preserve the Jews for the Romans and the temple for the Jews, considering it
not mee^e for him to busy himself in such affairs, sent 3000. horsemen to aid
the people against the rebe^. Which horsemen were of Auranitis, Batanaea, and
Trachon, and made Darius their captain, and Philip son of Ioachim General of
all the army. These coming into the city, the nobility with the high priests
and the rest War in Jerusalem between the seditious and those that ^auored
peace.
of the people that desired peace, received this succor in good part; and
occupied the higher part of the city; for the rebels kept the lower part, and
the temple: so that they incessantly fought with darts and slings, and
shooting of arrows, and sometime one rushing upon another, suddenly they
skirmished together. The seditious were more valiant, but the kings soldiers
were more skillful in wars; who chiefly endeavored to get the temple, and
expel out of it those who profaned Eleazar endeavored beside that which they
had alrea^y, to get also into their hands the higher part of the City.
Wherefore during the space of seven days, there continued a great conflict
betwixt them, and either part kept that they had. When the celebration of the
feast came, called Xylophoria, wherein every one carries wood to the temple
to Xylophoria a^east.
keep a fire continually upon the altar; the rebels would not suffer their
enemies to do their devotion. Now many of the thieves who carried poyniards
under their coats, went amongst the weaker multitude, and boldly followed
their old practice. The kings soldiers were overcome, The kings soldiers are
overcome.
and forced to leave the higher part of the City, and the rebels presently
coming in, set the palaces of Ananias, Agrippa, and Berenice on fire, and
foor^hwith went to the place where all charters were kept, purposing there to
burn all bonds and obligations of debtors, thereby to Ananias the high priest,
and Ezechias his brother, and they, who (as is before spoken) were sent
Ambassadors unto Agrippa: and so the seditious were satisfied that day with
the victory, and firing of the houses aforesaid. The next day, The Jews take
Antonia and burn it.
which was the fifteenth of August, they assaulted the Castle Antonia, and
besieging it two days, they took all that guarded it, and killed them; and
placed in it a garrison of their own company. Agrippas soldiers were fled:
and dividing their company into four parts, they began to cast down the walls:
none of them that were within durst come out for fear of the multitude, but
went up to the turrets of the palace, and killed all those that offered to
come up, and many of the thieves under the walls with things that they cast
down. This conflict continued day and night, for the rebels thought that those
which were within could not hold out for want of victuals: And they within
thought that the seditious being wearied, would soon give over. In the mean
season, one Manahemus the son of Judas of Galilaea (that most crastie subtle
Sophister, who reviled the Jews in Cyrenius time for paying tribute, and would
be subject to any but to God) taking with him certain nobles went unto
Massada, where king Herod's armorie was, and breaking into it, he armed the
common Manahemus the chief of yt rebels gives the kings faction and friends
license to depart. The Romans forsaking the Stratopedon, fly into the Kings
sorts.
should be victors, when they saw another wall, were amazed. And the kings
soldiers were sent Manahemus and others that were chief of the rebels,
requesting them to have license to depart. Which Manahemus granted only to the
kings soldiers, and those of his own country; who presently accepting
thereof departed, and so left the Romans in great fear. For they were not able
to resist so great a multitude, and they thought it a shame to entreat that
they might depart, thinking that it were dangerous for them although it were
granted. Wherefore leaving the lower place which was called Stratopedon,
because it might easily be taken, they fled into the Kings towers, whereof one
was called Hippicos, the other Phasaelus, the third Mariamme. The rebels The
year of the world, 4030. after Chr^sts birth 68.
that were with Manahemus, brake presently into the lower part that the Romans
had forsaken, and killed all that they found there, and when they had sacked
it, they set it on fire: and this was done the sixth day of September:

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the death of Ananias the high Priest, Manahemus and the Roman soldiers.

THe next day following Ananias the high Priest, was taken in one of the water
Conduits The death of Ananias the high priest, and Ezechias his brother.
of the Kings palace, where he hid himself, and was there killed with his
brother Ezechias by these thieves: and the rebels besiedged all the Towers
round about, and kept diligent watch, least any of the Romans should escape.
But Manahemus both for his good success Ananias the high Priest, became proud
and cruel, and thinking none so wise as himself, in those affairs became an
intolerable ryrant. Now two of Eleazars companions rose up and communed
together, that it did not become them that rebelled against the Romans (only
to recover their l^bertie) that they should be traitors thereof to their own
companions, who were of the same condition, and that they should endure a King
or Lord over them, who although he be no severe man, yet he was of more abject
and base condition then they. If it were so, that it were expedient to have one
ruler over all the Eleazars followers assault Manahem in the Temple.
rest, they had rather have any one then Manahemus: and being thus agreed, they
set upon him in the Temple, where he was praying with great Pomp, apparelled
like a King, and having about him Eleazar his followers set upon Manahemus, the
people did also throw stones at him, and so stoned him, hoping that by his
death the sedition would be extinguished. The guard of Manahemus at first, made
some resistance; but when they perceived the whole multitude against them,
every one shifted for himself, as he could, and those that were taken were put
to death, and they that escaped were afterward sought for: only a few of them
fled unto Massada, amongst whom was Eleazar the son of Iairus, who was
Manahemus kinsman, and afterward Manahem with the princes slain.
in Massada became a tyrant. But Manahemus fled into a place called Ophlas,
where he basely hid himself, and being taken he was drawn out from thence,
and after many torments put to death, and with him all the Nobility that had
assisted him, as also Absalomon, who was his only helper. And in this matter
(as I have said) the people greatly helped, hoping hereby Manahemus, to the end
to extinguish sedition, but to the intent to rob and spoil more freely.

The people with many entreaties, besought them to let the Romans alone, whom
they did befiege, but they were so much the more earnest against them, till
they being no longer able to The Romans unable any ^on ger to resist, yield
themselves.
make resistance, with the consent of Metilius their Captain, and some other
of more authority, sent unto Eleazar, requesting him to give them license to
depart with their lives, and leave their munition to the Jews. Who accepting
their petition, sent unto them Gorion the son of Nichodem^s, and Ananias the
Sadducee, and Judas the son of Ionathas, to confirm the promise of their
lives. Which done, Metilius led away the Soldiers: and whilst the Romans had
their weapons, none of the rebels durst attempt any of their treachery against
them: but so soon as every The Roman^ against all covenant and law, are all
slain save Metili^.
nothing, Eleazar his guard set upon them, and killed them, who neither made any
resistance, nor any entreaty for their lives, only putting them in mind of
their promise and oath. So they were^ll slain save only Metilius, who greatly
entreated for his life, and promising that he would become a Jew in religion,
and be circumcised, they spared him. Yet was this a small loss to the Romans,
who only had then but a very few slain of their great and almost infinite
army: and this seemed the very beginning of the Jews captivity. When they
saw themselves to have given sufficient cause of wars and too great, and that
the City was now so filled with iniquity, that the wrath of God did hang over
it, though there had been no fear of any harm to them by the Romans, yet
the whole City mourned, and was sorrowful, and quietly minded, lamented as
Slaughter on the Sabbath day.


CHAP. XIX. The year of the world. 4030. after Christ's birth 68.

Of the great massacre of the Jews at Caesarea, and in all Syria.

AT the same hour on the self same day, it happened as it were by Gods
providence, that the Inhabitants of Caesarea did massacre the Jews that
dwelled amongst them; so that at one time above twenty thousand were slain,
and not one Jew left alive in all Caesarea. For those that escaped, Florus
took and brought them forth bound unto the people. After this massacre done at
Caesarea, the whole nation of the Jews waxed mad, and dividing themselves into
companies, they wasted and destroyed in short time all the borders The Jews
spoil the villages and burn the Cities of Syria.
of Syria, and the Cities thereabout, to wit, Philadelphia, and Gebonitis,
Gerasa, Pella, and Al Syria full of miserable calamities.


And these were the conflicts between the Jews and strangers. But afterward
making incursion upon the borders of Scythopolis, the Jews there dwelling were
their enemies. For they conspiring with the citizens of Scythopolis, and
preferring their own commodity and security before their kindred and
consanguinitie, joined with the Gentiles against the Jews, who for all that,
were suspected for their forwardnes. Finally the Scythopolites searing that
they would assault Jews against Jews.
the city by night, and excuse their reuolting by their great misery, they
commanded all the Jews, that if they would show themselves trusty unto the
Gentiles, they with all their children should go into a wood hard by: who
forthwith did as they were willed, suspecting nothing, and the Scythopolites
were quiet for two days after, and did nothing: But the third night they sent
Simon, who The Scythopolitans kill thirteen thousand Jews.
was the son of Saul a man of regard: he was a man of great courage, and
strength of body* which both he used to the great hurt of his own nation: for
he daily killed many Jews, who dwelt near unto Scythopolis, and he alone
often scattered diverse companies, and put whole armies to flight, who had an
end worthy for his deeds, and murdering of his Countrymen. For when the
Scythopolites had compassed the wood about, so that none could escape their
hands, they killed the Jews in every part thereof. Simon drawing his sword,
made no resistance to any Simon daily kills many of his countrymen in
Scythopolis.
of his enemies: for he saw that it was bootlesse to strive against such a
multitude. Then pitifully I receive (O Scythopolites) a worthy reward for that
which I have done, who to show my fidelity toward you, have killed so many of
mine own countrymen, and it is a just plague that a strange nation should be
false unto us, who impiously forsook our own brethren. I will do therefore as a
profane person, killing my self with my own hands, and this death will be a
sufficient punishment for my offenses, and a full argument of my magnanimity,
that none of my enemies may boast of my death, nor insult over me.When he had
thus spoken, he beheld al his family with compassion and rage mixed together: he
had a wife and children, and aged parents. And first taking his father The
year of the world. 4030. after the birth of Christ. 68. Simon kills his
parents, his wife and children, and at last himself.
by the hair of the head; stood upon him, and thrust him through; after him he
killed his mother, who was willing to die; after them his wife and children,
every one of them as it were offering their bodies to the sword, desirous to
prevent the enemies. When he had slain all his kindred, himself remaining
alive, he stretched forth his arm that they might see what he would do, and
thrust his sword into his own body up to the hilts. A young man, who for his
magnanimity and strength of body was worthy to be pitied, had yet a just and
deserved end, for trusting foreign nations.

CHAP. XX.
Of another grievous slaughter of the Jews.

AFter this so great a massacre of the Jews in Scythopolis, other cities also
did rise against An other slaughter of the Jews. The cities in arms against
the Jews.
and two thousand at Ptolemais, and the Tyrians killed diverse and kept many in
prison: likewise they of Gadara and Hippon slew the most valiant, and those of
least courage they cast into prison. Also all other cities who either feared or
hated the Jews, rose up against them. Only they of Antiochia, Sidonia, and
Apamia spared them that dwelt with them, and neither killed nor imprisoned any
of them: perhaps they stood in no fear of them, if they should have risen,
because their city was so populous: yet I think they spared them only for
pity sake, because they saw that they were quiet and not seditious. The
inhabitants also of Gerasa did no harm to the Jews amongst them, but when
they desired to depart, they conducted them safely unto the Agrippa much
cruelty was showed against the Jews: For he being gone to Cestius Gallus at
Antiochia, left the rule of his country to one of his friends named Varus;
kinsman unto king Sohemus; and there came unto him seventy of the chief
nobility of the country Batanaea; requesting a garrison to repress those that
should attempt rebellion amongst them. Varus sent certain of the kings
soldiers armed, and killed them al as they Varus kills. 70. Jews in in
their journey.
were coming to him. But he did this impiety without Agrippa his consent,
only for auari^ce, and a^ ^t were emboldened by this fact, he ruinated the
whole realm; still continuing such cruelty and impiety against his nation,
til such time as Agrippa understood thereof, who for Sohemus sake durst not put
him to death, but dispossessed him of his place. In the mean while the rebels
took the fort called Cyprus which is situate above Jericho, and after they
had killed the garrison; they The Romans yield up their castle in Marichunte to
the Jews.
and persuaded the soldiers left in garrison to yield the Castle, who, fearing
that if they denied, they should be compelled thereto, delivered it unto them;
upon condition, that they might quietly depart, and they of Macherunt placed a
strong guard within it.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Jews were slain at Alexandria.

THe citizens of Alexandria had always a quarrel against the Jews that lived
with the^, since the time that that famous Alexander used their help against
the Egyptians; and therefore permitted them to inhabit in Alexandria, and to
have the same privileges Alexander: who also gave them a certain place in the
city to dwell in, that there they might live more commodiously: the Gentiles
having nothing to do amongst the^, permitted them also to call themselves
Macedonia^s. And afterward, when Egypt was brought under the rule of the
Romans, neither Caesar nor any one else; did diminish the Jews dignity in
that place, which Alexander had given them. So that now there was daily
conflicts between them and the Greeks, and although the Judges on both parts
still punished them that were in fault, yet the sedition more and more
increased, and when all cities else were filled with troubles, there the tumult
was more vehement. For when the Alexandrians had called together Nero, certain
Jews mingled themselves amongst the Greeks, and so went into the Amphitheater:
who being espied by their adversaries, the Greeks Sedition in (...) between
the Greeks and Iewe^
cried out, that the Jews were enemies, and came as spies, and so laid violent
hands upon them* Some of them ^led, only three of them were taken by the
Greeks, whom they drew to a place to burn them alive. All the Jews of the
city came to succor them, and first they threw stones at them, and then
taking firebrands, they ran in a rage into the Amphitheater, and threatened to
burn all the people there assembled: which they had done, if Tiberius
Alexander governor The year of the world. 4030. after Christ's birth 68.
Tiberius Alexander exhorts the seditious Jews to keep peace.
of the city had not appeased their fury; who did not at the first use force
of arms against them, but sent their nobility to persuade them to cease, and
not incite the Roman army against them. But the seditious Jews refused his
admonition, and mocked Tiberius: who seeing that they would not otherwise be
appeased, sent two legions of armed Romans against them which were in the
city, and with them five thousand other soldiers, who by chance came out of
Lybia to this massacre of the Jews, and Tiberius gave them charge not only to
kill them, but also to fire their houses and take their goods. The soldiers
presently went into the place called Delta (for there the Jews were gathered
together) and did as they were commanded, and not without bloody victory.
For the Jews gathering themselves together, put those amongst them that were
best armed in the forefront, who held out for a long time; but when they began
to fly, they were massacred A cruel victory wherein (...) thousand Jews are
slain.
extinguished, had not Alexander moved to compassion by their entreaties,
commanded the soldiers to leave off, who being obedient unto him presently
departed: but the people of Alexandria were hardly withdrawn from that
massacre, because of the hatred which they had conceived against the Jews: and
with much ado were withheld from tyrannizing over the dead bodies. And this
befell the Jews at Alexandria.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the massacre of the Jews by Cestius Gallus.

CEstius Gallus now thought it time to bestirre himself, forasmuch as the
Jews were now hated every where, and taking with him the twelve whole legions
out of Antiochia, two Huge companies of the Romans.
thousand chosen footmen, and four companies of horsemen out of every one of
the other legions, and with them the kings forces, that came to help him, to
wit, two thousand horsemen of Antiochia, three thousand foot all bowmen, and
three thousand footmen sent by Agrippa, a thousand horse, and four thousand
which Sohemus brought, whereof the third part were horse, the rest foot, and
for the most part bowmen; he went toward Ptolemais: and many joined themselves
to them out of every city, who though they were not so skillful in war as
Agrippa himself was there with Cestius, being ruler of those he brought. There
Cestius taking a part of the army went to Zabulon (which is the strongest City
of Galilaea, called also Andron, and parts the borders of the Jews from
Ptolemais) and when he found it desolate (for the inhabitants thereof fled into
the mountains) Z^bulon (...) strong City of Galilee, spoiled and burnt.
who left it full of all riches, giving license to the soldiers to sack it;
he afterward set it on fire, although he admired the beauty thereof: for it
was builded like Tire and Sidon, and Berytum, and after spoiled all the
territories about it. Likewise, when he had burned all the villages therabouts,
he returned unto Ptolemais. The Syrians, and especially those of Beryth stayed
still behind to get boo^ies: which when the Jews understood, and that Cestius
was departed, they took courage and came and set upon them, and killed of them
two thousand. In the mean while, Cestius departed The Jews kill two thousand
Syrians.
them to keep the town if they could get it; and if the townsmen made any
resistance, that then they should stay till he came with the rest of the army.
Some of them went by sea, some by land, by which means they did easily take
Ioppe: so that the people thereof neither had time to fly, nor to prepare
themselves to fight; and setting on them, they killed all men with their
families: The Romans take Ioppe and burn it, and kill eight thousand and four
hundredth.
and thus sacking the town, they set it on fire, and there were slain eight
thousand; and four hundredth. In like manner he sent part of his horsemen unto
Narbatena in the Toparchy near Samaria, who spoiled the country, killed a
great number of inhabitants, robbed and burned the villages, and carried away a
great booty with them.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Cestius his battle against Jerusalem. (...) and other Cities of Galilee
do friendly entertain the Romans.


HE sent also Caesennius Gallus General of the twelfth legion into Galilee,
and gave him as great an army as he thought sufficient to conquer that nation,
whom the strong^st city of Galilee called Sephoris courteously entertained, and
other Cities followed their exexample. They that were seditious, and gave
themselves to robbing, fled into the mountain The year of the world. 4030.
after the birth of Christ. 68.
Gallus incountred with his army; who, so long as they kept the higher part of
the mountain, casily resisted the Romans; and killed above two hundred of
them: but when they saw the Romans had occupied a higher place then that
wherein they kept, they easily were overcome: for not being armed, they could
not stand out, and if they should have fled, they could not have escaped the
horsemen, so that only a few hid themselves in difficult places, and above two
thousand of them were slain. Gallus perceiving all Galilee in peace, and not
minded to revolt, Two thousand seditious slai^ in Galilee by the Romans.
Antipatris spoiled and burned.
returned with his Companies unto Caesarea; and Cestius with his whole Army
went unto Antipatris: where understanding that a great multitude of Jews were
gathered together in the Tower called Aphecy, sent some before to skirmish with
them: but the Jews would not abide Cestius went from thence to Lydda, and
found the City desolate, for all the people were gone unto Jerusalem because
of the Feast of Tabernacles: and when he had killed fifty persons whom he found
there, he fiered the Town, and went on further: and going by Bethoron he
pitched his Tent in Gabaus, Lydda burnt.
which is fifty furlongs distant from Jerusalem: When the Jews saw themselves
in danger, Cestius planteth his army fifty furlongs from Jerusalem.
they left the solemnity, and prepared themselves for war: and having a
great multitude, they went to fight, observing no order, altogether with
indiscreet cries, not regarding the Sabbath, which they hold in great
estimation: and the same fury, that made them leave their devotion, made them
also victorious in that battle; for they assaulted the Romans with such a
courage, that they brake their battle array and killing all that resisted,
they pressed into the midst thereof, and The assault and victory of the
Jews against the Romans.
Cestius army had been in great danger. So there were slain five hundredth
and fifty Roman soldiers, and four hundredth of them were foot, and the rest
were horsemen, but of the Jews but two and twenty. The most valiant in this
combat were Monobazus and Cenedaeus, kinsmen to king Monobazus of Adiabena,
and next to them Paraides Niger, and Silas a Babylonian, who fled unto the
Jews from king Agrippa, whom he had lately served: and so the Jews being
repulsed; returned into Jerusalem; The courage of the Jews against the Romans.
and Simon the son of Giora invaded the Romans, as they were returning
toward Bethoron, and slew many of the rereward, and took many carts, and
much baggage withal, which he brought into the City. Cestius stayed three
days in the field, and the Jews kept the high places, espying which way he
went, purposing not to be quiet if the Romans departed.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the siege of Jerusalem by Cestius, and of the massacre.

AGrippa perceiving the Romans to be in great danger, for that all the
mountains were covered with an infinite number of Jews, he purposed to try,
if through few words he could persuade them to desist from war, or if any
refused, to receive those that were willing. Wherefore he sent unto them
Borcaeus and Phoebus, whom they well knew, assuring and promising them pardon
from Cestius, and from the Romans, of all that they had already done, if they
would now lay down their arms, and join with them. But the rebels fearing
that all the multitude in hope of safety would join with Agrippa; determined
to kill the Legates, The rebels kill one of the kings Ambassadors, an o there of
them escapes being wounded. Cestius draws forth his whole army against the
Jews.
Phoebus before he spoke any word, and Borcaeus being wounded, escaped. But the
people were angry hereat, and with stones and clubs drove them into the town
that were the authors of this fact. Cestius perceiving them at odds amongst
themselves, thought that he had now a fit opportunity to assault them, and so
came upon them with his whole army: and putting them to flight, he pursued
them unto Jerusalem. And when he had pitched his Tents in the place called
Scopus, he departed seven furlongs from the City, and did nothing against the
City for three days space, perhaps hoping that they within would relent, and
then sending a great many soldiers into the villages adjoining to setch Corn,
the fourth day, which was the thirtieth of October, he came against the City
with his army in battle array. The people of the Jews were kept in awe by
the rebels, who terrified by the Roman discipline, forsook the outmost parts
of Cestius passing Betheza, burned Caenopolis and the new market place, and
coming unto the higher part of the City, he pitched his Tent near the kings
Palace: and if at that time he had violently issued in at the walls, he had
taken the City and ended the wars. But Tyrannus Priscus, General of the
footmen, and many other rulers and Captains of the horsemen, being hired with
money by Florus, hindered that his purpose, whereby the wars were so prolonged,
and a thousand calamities befell the Jews. In the mean time many of the
chiefest among the Jews, and Ananus the son of Ionathas, The year of the
world. 4030. after Christ's birth 68. Diverse Jews call for for Cestius as (...)
they intended to open their gates unto him.
called Cestius, as though they would have opened him the gates: but he was
angry and scarce trusted them, till at last they delayed the time so long,
that the rebels perceived this treason, and cast Ananus down the wall, and with
stones drove his accomplices into their houses. Which done, they retired
themselves into the towers, from whence they beat back those that scaled the
walls. The Romans for five days space assaulted the walls on every side, but
all in vain; and the sixth day, Cestius with many chosen soldiers and Bowmen
assaulted the Temple on the North side. The Jews valiantly made resistance out
of the porches, and often repulsed the Romans approaching the walls: yet at last
they with the multitude of their adversaries darts, were forced to give back.
Then the Romans that went before having their shieldes upon their heads,
leaned against the wall, and they in the second place held their shields
against theirs in the first, The Romans cover themselves with their shields,
and vndermin the walls and burn the Temple gates.
and so in order until the last, thereby making as it were a covering as the
Romans call it, or defense, that all their shot and darts could do them no
harm; so that the soldiers did safely undermine the walls, and attempted to
fire the gates of the Temple.

Now the seditious people were heereat greatly amazed, and many fled out of the
City, as though it would presently be taken. And the good were hereby
encouraged, as much as the rebels were dismaide, and came unto the gates to
open them unto Cestius, who had well deserved at their hands. And truly had he
but a little longer continued his siege, he had taken the City. But I think
that God being angry with the wicked, would not suffer the wars to be ended
at Cestius sudden departure makes the thieves more confident.
that time: for Cestius neither regarding the good will of the people, nor the
desperation of the rebels, removed his army from thence, and having received
no loss, very unadvisedly departed Cestius went to the Tents which he had
fortified in Scopion. The next day he went further into the Country; whereby
he more encouraged the rebels, who following him, killed many of his rereward.
Afterward either end of the army being well strengthened, the Jews assaulted
them that were behind, and the last durst not cast any darts against them, who
wounded them on their backs, thinking that an infinite multitude had followed
them; and they were not able to resist those that assaulted them on each side,
being as it were heavy, and not daring to break their order; on the
contrary, seeing the Jews so active and apt to skip to and fro: so that the
Romans endured much harm at the hands of their enemies, and did them none. And
thus were they beaten all the way along, and many of Priscus Captain of the
sixth legion, and Longinus the tribune, and Aemilius Iucundus Captain of a
troop of horsemen. And so with much ado, they came unto Gabio where they
first pitched their Tents, casting away much of their baggage, which might any
way hinder them. Cestius stayed there two days, doubtful what to do: the
third day he perceived his enemies to be increased, and all places about to be
filled with Jews: whereby he saw that his slow haste was to his disadvantage,
and the number of his enemies would still increase if he made any longer abode
there. Wherefore that he might fly speedily, he caused the soldiers to cast
away all those things that might any way be a hinderance unto them, and killed
their Mules and Asses, and cattle, saving only those that bare munition,
fearing that if he should not destroy them, the Jews might make use of them
against him, and so he led the army toward The Jews pur sue their enemies,
and bring them into a desperate estate.
all the army of the Jews were spread upon the eminent places, whereby the
army was to pass, expecting to welcome them with arrows. Where the footmen
amazed, and bethinking how to help themselves, the horsemen were brought into
great danger: for they could not keep their ranckes for darts and arrows,
neither could they go to hurt their enemies, the ascent unto the top of the
mountains was so steep: and they were compassed on each side with rocks and
deep valleys, so that if any went out of the way, he fell down and was
killed, in so The mourning and lamentation the Romans and the Jews exhortation.
much as there was no way to fly nor to resist. Now not knowing what to do,
they began to weep, and cry out as men in desperation: and the Jews answered
them with an encouraging one another Cestius had there perished, had not the
night come on and helped them, which by her darkness gave leisure to the
Romans to fly into Bethoron. In the mean while the Jews kept all the places
thereabouts besieged, and guarded the passages. Cestius seeing it not possible
to march openly, thought it best to fly, and chose almost 400. of his
strongest soldiers, and Cestius stratageme.
set them in very eminent places, commanding them that when they were aloft,
they should cry as they did before, that the Jews might think that the whole
army was there, and so he with the rest The year of the world. 4030. after Ch^
birth 68.
Cestius: who having fled a great way in the night, made more haste the next
day, so that the soldiers for fear left their rams and instruments to beat
down the walls, and slings, and much other munition, which the Jews taking,
after used against them. And thus they followed the Romans unto Antipatris, and
seeing they could not overtake them, they returned, bringing with them the
warlike instruments, and rifling those that were slain, and taking whatsoever
the Romans had left behind, and so singing songs of victory, they returned unto
Jerusalem, having lost very few of their company, and slain five thousand, and
three hundredth and eighty of the footmen of the Romans, and their helpers; and
nine hundredth and fourscore horsemen. And Nero.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the cruelty of those of Damascus against the Jews, and of Joseph's
affairs The year of the world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69. Diverse of the
noblest Jews forsake the City, as if they had been a ship ready to sink.
in Galilee.

INcontinently after Cestius adverse fortune, many of the chiefest amongst the
Jews daily fled and forsook the City, as a ship presently ready to sink.
Costobarus and Saul two brethren, and Philip the son of Ioachim General of
Agrippas army, fled out of the City and yielded themselves unto Cestius. As
for Antipas, who was also besieged with them in the kings palace, he would not
fly with the rest, and so was killed by the rebels. But Cestius sent Saul and
the rest of his company into Achaia unto Nero, to let him understand the cause
of their flight, and to show how Florus had caused all these wars: for so he
hoped that Nero would bend his wrath against Florus, and quit him from danger.
Then the people of Damascus understanding the death of the Romans, devised how
to destroy the Jews which inhabited amongst them: and they thought it was
easy to be accomplished, for that the Jews were already assembled in the
common bathes, for fear of some such matter: yet they mistrusted their women,
who all, except a few, were Jews in religion. Wherefore they took great heed
to conceal their intent from them, and so assaulting the Jews altogether in a
narrow place, and having nothing to defend The Damascen^s kill ten thousand
Jews in one hour.
them, they put them all to the sword, who were in number ten thousand. The
rebels that so pursued Cestius, returned into Jerusalem, and ceased not to
join all unto them that favored the Romans, either by force or by flattery,
and assembling themselves in the temple, they determined to choose a greater
number of captains. Wherefore Joseph the son of Gorion, and Ananus Joseph
the son of Gorion and Ananus the high priest appointed to gouerne^e the City.
the high priest were appointed rulers of the City, and especially to see the
walls thereof repaired. Eleazar the son of Simon was put in no authority,
notwithstanding that he had in his custody all prays and spoils taken from
the Romans, and Cestius his money, and a great part of the public treasure,
because they perceived him through authority to wax proud, and his attendants
become stately. Yet in time Eleazar by money and craft, persuaded the people to
obey him in all things. And they requested other captains to be sent into
Idumaea, who were Jesus the son of Sapphas, and Eleazar the son of the new
high priest: and they commanded Niger who was Peraides, and was then Governor
of Idumaea. And they neglected not to do the like by other regions: for Joseph
the son of Simon was sent to Jericho and Manasses beyond the river, and John
the Essean to Tamna, every one to rule the government of his country as a
Toparchy. Lydda, Ioppe, and Ammaus were annexed to John the Essean, and John
the son of Ananias was appointed Governor of Gophnitis and Acrabatena. And
Joseph the son of Matthias was made ruler over both Galilees, Joseph the
Historiographer governor of both Galilees.
unto which was joined Gamala the strongest City in that coast.

As for other Governors, every one discharged his place according to his
wisdom and dexterity. When Joseph came to Galilee, which was committed to his
protection, his first care was to get the good will of the inhabitants, knowing
that it might much profit him, although in other Joseph makes 70. Elders
rulers in Galilee, and appoints seven in every City to determine the causes
of less weight.
if he made them partakers of his authority: and likewise get the love of the
common people, if he did esteem of those things which they should think well
of: He chose seventy of the most auncientest wise men amongst them, and made
them rulers over all Galilee, and elected seven judges over the lesser towns
to judge inferior matters^ for he reserved all great affairs and criminal
causes to his own hearing. Moreover, having ordained a form of justice that
those seventy should follow, he took counsel how to work their outward
security: And being assured The year of the world, 403^ after Christ's birth
69. Joseph fortifieth the convenient cities with walls.
that the Romans would come into Galilee, he compassed those places with strong
walls that were fit for his purpose, to wit, Iotapata, Bersabea, Selamis,
Pereccho, Iapha, and Sigoph, with the mountain Itaburium, Tarichea, and
Tyberias. Moreover, he fortified the caves near the lake Genesar, which is in
the lower Galilee, and in high Galilee Petra, which is also called Achaberon
and Seph, Iamnith, and Mero; in Gaulanitis also Seleucia, and Soganes, and
Gamala: he only permitted them of Sephoris to build their own walls, because he
perceived them to be rich and pro^e to wa^ of themselves. Likewise John the
son of Leuias at Joseph's command, built the wall of Giscala himself alone,
but in all other places that were fortified; Joseph put to his helping hand,
and told how they should be done. He levied also an army of a hundredth
thousand, who were all young men, whom he armed with old armor, which he
gathered from all parts of the country: Joseph instructs the Galileans in
war.
and appointed likewise rulers over them. He taught them also how to give the
sign in war, and how to sound the trumpet both to call them to combat, and
to retire: how to march in length, and cast in a ring, and always to succor
them that were most in danger: and to be short, Joseph teaches the Galileans
how they should obey in the wars.
he taught them whatsoever might either encourage them, or make them active:
but especially he exercised them in feats of arms, imitating in particular
the order of the Romans, often telling Euerle one of the cities of Galilee send
the half of their multitude into warfare, the rest they keep to prou^de them
victuals.
how many were to fight. For threescore thousand footmen, and two hundredth and
fifty horsemen, and beside these four thousand, and five hundredth whom he
hired, were always in readiness, and six hundredth chosen men to guard his own
person. And the hirelings only excepted,

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Joseph's dangers and escape, and of the malice of John of Giscala.

Whilst Joseph thus ordered the estate of Galilee, there arose a traitor borne
in Giscala, the son of Leuias whose name was John, a most subtle and
deceitful treacher, who by vile John a notable (...), and a thirsty murderer
under hope of gain.
whereby for a while he was hindered from putting his villainies in practice:
who could lie at his pleasure and easily give credit unto lies, who thought
deceit to be a virtue, which he used even toward his dearest friends: and a
great counterfeiter of humanity; yet for the hope of gain became a cruel
murderer. He always aimed at high matters, with an aspiring mind, and at
first nourished his hope with small villainies. For first he was a thief after
his own manner, and lived in woods and solitary places; at last he got him a
company of audacious people like to himself, at first small, but afterward he
greatly increased it. He had also a great care to choose no idle persons, but
such as were strong of body, valiant of mind, and skillful in martial
affairs: of these he gathered four hundredth, the most of them out of Tire,
and the villages thereabout* and Joseph took delight in his industry, he
persuaded him to suffer him to build the walls of that place where he was borne,
which was now desolate; and to accomplish this, he gathered great sums of
money of the richer sort. Then he devised another shift: for having persuaded
the Jews that were dispersed over all Syria, that they should use no oil,
save only that which was made by their own nation, he caused diverse The year
of the world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69. John imploieth the money he got
against him, by whose means he gained it.
Joseph, that then he might come to be ruler over Galilee, he commanded his
followers to rob and spoil more then they did before, and so to trouble the
country, that he might either kill the governor, if he sought to redress it,
at unawares; or if he let all alone, to accuse him of cowardice to the people
for so doing. Moreover, he had already given out speeches, that Joseph went
about to betray Galilee unto the Romans, and devised many Joseph's overthrow. It
happened that at that time, some of the village of Dabarita, who watched in the
field, set upon Ptolemaeus, who was factor for Agrippa, and his Agripp^
president robbed.
sister Berenice, and spoiled them of all carriage, wherein was much costly
apparel, and many silver cups, and six hundredth pieces of gold. And for that
they could not do this secretly, they brought all the whole booty to Joseph at
Tarichea: who reproving them for offering violence unto the kings servants,
commanded the things to be kept at the house of Aeneas, who was one of the
richest men in the town, who should restore them to the owner when time served:
wherein thinking to do himself great good, he wrought himself much danger.
For the thieves being offended that they received no part thereof, and seeing
that Joseph would restore to Agrippa and his sister Berenice that which they
had labored to get, they went round about the villages in the night, and spread
this Joseph was a traitor to his country, and with the same rumor filled the
cities thereabout: So that early in the next morning, a hundredth thousand
armed men An hundredth thousand armed men come out against Joseph.
came against Joseph. Finally, the multitude assembled themselves together in
the theater at Tarichea: the greatest part cried out in their choler and fury,
that the traitor might be deposed, othersome that he might be burned, and John
himself incited many, and with him one Jesus the son of Sapphas, who at that
time was governor of Tiberias. All the friends of Ieseph and his guard being
terrified with such a multitude, fled, four only excepted. But Joseph in the
mean while was a sleep: and had he slept a little longer, they had set his
house on fire. Whereupon he arose, and the four that remained All Joseph's
friends and guard save four fly from him.
with him, counseled him to fly: but he not dismayed in that he was left
alone, nor for that Joseph's oration to the seditious.
and then obtaining license to speak, he said. I was never minded to send
back that money to Agrippa, nor to keep it unto my private use. For (God
forbid) that I should ever hold him for my friend, who is your open enemy, or
that I should so seek mine own profit, that I should thereby damnifie you
all. But (O ye men of Tarichea) forasmuch as I perceived that your city
especially had greatest need to be fortified, and that you were not able to
build the walls, and for that I feared the people of Tiberias, and others
adjoining, who still gaped after this pray, and wealth that was taken from
Agrippa; I determined to get those spoils for you to reedifie your wales. If
ye mislike this, I will bring out the treasure, and give it to be divided
amongst you: but if you like thereof, then it appears, how you molest him who
is your benefactor.

This speech of his well pleased the people of Tarichea, and displeased them of
Tiberias; so Joseph, and fought one against another. He now having many
partakers (for the people of Tarichea were almost forty thousand) spoke more
boldly unto the multitude, and rebuked their temeritie, affirming that it was
necessary to strengthen Tarichea with that present money, and that he would
also provide to strengthen other cities, and that they should not want money,
if they would agree and conspire together against them, from whom they should
take it; and not to offer violence unto him who would endeavor to get it. So
the rest of the multitude being deceived, though they were angry; The year of
the world, 4031. after Christ's birth 69. Another stratageme of Joseph's against
the Jews.
yet departed; and two thousand armed men offered to set upon him: but he being
already retired into his house, they stood without, threatening him. Wherefore
Joseph used another devise likewise to repress these, and getting up into the
top of the house, he beckned unto them with his hand to keep silence; and then
said that he was ignorant what they requested at his hands: for he could not
hear one for another, because their voices were confounded through the
multitude, but if they would send some into the house to talk friendly with
him, he would do whatsoever they requested. The nobles and magistrates hearing
this, presently went into the house: whom, when he had lead into the innermost
part of the house, having shut the doors, he caused to be beaten, so long till
that all their bowels appeared: the doors in the mean time being made fast,
the people stayed before the house, thinking that the cause of their long
tarrying was, to allege Joseph opening the doors put them forth amongst the
people all bloody as they were: whereat they were so terrified, that leaving
their weapons behind them they ran away. Hereat John took occasion to increase
his envy, and having ill success John's envy and treason against Joseph.
in this policy, he still attempted other plots to bring Joseph in danger,
and counterfeiting himself sick, he requested Joseph to permit him to go to
Tyberias, and use the hot bathes for to recover his health. But Joseph not
having yet perceived his treason, wrote letters in his behalf to the governor
of the town, willing him to be John's oast, and to let him want nothing that he
needed: which he had in good sort. And two days after his arrival there, he
went about the business, which he came to effect, and entised some with money,
others with flatteries, to revolt from Joseph. Silas whom Joseph had made
governor of the City understanding this, he presently by John persuades the
Tiberians to revolt from Joseph.
letters gave notice thereof unto Joseph: who receiving them in the night, went
unto Tyberias, and was there early in the morning, and the rest of the
multitude came out to meet him: but John notwithstanding he judged that he
came against him, yet still he counterfaited himself sick in bed, and sent a
man of his acquaintance to excuse his absence for not coming to meet Joseph.
Then Joseph assembled the Tiberians together in a place to speak unto them,
concerning that which was written unto him: and John sent armed men thither
with commandment to kill Joseph. John sends certain armed men to kill
Joseph. Joseph flies in a little boat by the lake.
The people perceiving them to draw their swords, cried out: and Joseph at
their cry looking about him, and perceiving their swords even almost at his
throat, he leptdowne a little hill upon the shore, which was six cubits high,
upon which he stood to speak unto the people, and going into a boat with two
of his guard which he found there, he went into the midst of the lake, and
Joseph fearing that a great conflict would ensue, and so the whole city for a
few men's fault be destroyed, sent to his soldiers, charging them only to
work their own safety and no more, and to kill none, nor reprove any for
that wicked fact: who forthwith obeying his command, ceased from fight.

But they that inhabited about the city, and heard of the treason, and by whom
it was attempted, armed themselves and came against John: but he before they
came, fled into Giscala, where John flies into his country Giscala. The
Galileans flock to Joseph against John.
he was borne. In the mean while all Galilee came and joined with Joseph, and
there were many thousands of armed men gathered together, affirming that they
came against John, and to fire that city which had received him. Joseph
thanked them for their good will, saying, that he had rather conquer his
enemies by policy, then by fire or sword; and therefore requested them to be
John, and did not forsake him within five days next following, should lose all
their livings, and their mansions should be sacked, and their houses and family
set on fire. Hereupon three thousand presently forsook John, and came and cast
down their weapons before Joseph's feet, prostrating themselves before him: so
that there only remained with John, but one thousand of fugitive Syrians. By
whom John being assisted, again went secretly to work, having so ill success
by plain dealing: and so privily sent messengers to Jerusalem, who told that
Joseph had gathered a great army, and that except he were quickly prevented,
he would come and usurp the dominion over that mother city. But the people
understanding before of John's hatred, did not regard it: yet diverse rich men
and magistrates who envied Joseph, secretly sent money unto John to hire
soldiers John's treason against Joseph.
Joseph; and determined amongst them to displace him: and thinking that their
decree was not sufficient to effect it, they sent moreover five hundredth and
four thousand armed men, and four of their principal nobility amongst them,
to wit Ioazar the lawyer, and Ananias the Sadducee, and Simon and Judas the
sons of Ionathas, all very eloquent and learned men, to withdraw the peoples
minds from Joseph, giving them charge, that if he of his own accord came unto
them, that then they should permit him to speak for himself: but if he
refused so to do, that then they should hold him as an enemy. Joseph's The
year of the world, 4031. after the birth of Christ. 69.
friends at Jerusalem gave him intelligence, how that an army came against him,
but for what cause they knew not, for that it was kept secret. And hereupon
before he could prevent it, four Cities did revolt from him, to wit,
Sepphoris, Gamala, Giscala, and Tyberias, the which he soon after easily
recovered, without any force of arms: and having taken the four Captains
Four Cities of Galilee submit themselves to Joseph's enemies.
and Counselors of his enemies, he sent them unto Jerusalem; against whom
the people being incensed would have killed them, and those that brought them,
had they not fled betime.

CHAP. XXVII.
Tyberias and Sepphoris were recovered by Joseph.

NOw John for fear of Joseph, kept himself within the walls of Giscala: and a
few days after Agrippa, who came not at the Tiberias is recovered by Joseph
and saved by a stratagem.
day appointed, and yet a few Roman soldiers showing themselves, they
revolted from Joseph. Joseph understanding this at Tarichea, having sent his
soldiers to fetch Corn, thought it not good to go alone against the rebels;
neither did he think it best to delay the time any longer, fearing that
whilst he delayed, King Agrippa would come and possess the town: for the
next day because it was the Sabbath, he could do nothing. Wherefore he thought
to overcome the rebels by policy, and so he commanded the gates of Tarichea
to be kept shut, that his intent might not be revealed unto them of Tiberias.
Then taking all the boats that were in the lake, in number two hundredth and
thirty, and in every one of them four sailors, he hastily Joseph with seven
soldiers comes to Tiberias, and terrifieth his enemies.
the rebels perceived him, and thought that the boats had been full of armed
men, they cast down their weapons, and held up their hands to him, beseeching
him to spare the City. Joseph after many threatenings and bitter speeches,
first for that having undertaken wars against the Romans, they with civil
wars consumed their own forces: secondly, for that they sought his life who
had wrought their safety, and that they were not ashamed to shut the gates
against him, who had builded the City walls: yet (said he) if any would come
and talk with him, and confirm a league of their fidelity unto him, he
would not refuse them. So ten of the chiefest amongst Joseph by a sub till
policy tolleth out the chiefest of Tybetias, and carries them away in boats
to Tarichea.
them came unto him, whom he carried away in a fisher boat far from the
City, and sent for fifty senators as though he requested their promise also.
And devising new causes, he still under pretense of agreement, sent first for
one, and then for another, as he thought good, till he had loaded all the
boats: which done, he commanded the boatemen with all speed possible to go
to Tarichea, and put them in prison, so that he carried away all the council,
which were in number six hundredth and two thousand people, all whom he
brought to Tarichea in boats. But they which remained in the City, cried with
one voice that one Clitus was cause of that revolt, and therefore besought
Joseph to punish him for all. Joseph told them that he would put Clitus the
author of the sedition, drawing his sword with his right hand cut off his left.
none of them to death, but commanded one of his guard called Leuia, to come and
cut off Clitus his hands: but he fearing to trust himself amongst all his
enemies, refused to do execution. Clitus Joseph was angry, and ready to come
out of his own boat to do it himself, besought him to grant him one of his
hands: which Joseph did, upon condition, that he should cut off the other
himself. So Clitus drawing out his sword with his right hand, cut off his
left, being afraid of Joseph; and after this he returned to Tyberias to bring
it again under his subjection: and within a few days after, he took Giscala
and Sepphoris, which were revolted, having given the spoils thereof to his
soldiers, but yet afterward he restored all that was taken away unto the
people, and so he did to the Inhabitants of Tyberias and Sepphoris: and by
this means got the good will of them all.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the people of Jerusalem prepared themselves to war, and of the tyranny
of Simon Giora.

Until this time, there were broils in Galilee, and now ceasing from civil
dissension, they prepared themselves against the Romans. And the potentates of
Jerusalem, and Ananus The troubled estate of Jerusalem.
the high Priest, with all speed renewed and repaired the walls, and made all
sorts of instruments for war, arrows and other weapons; so that all the
City was busied herein, and trained The y^re of the world. 4031. af^ Christ's
birth 69.
Ananus omitted that which was necessary for war, and labored to reconcile the
seditious faction of them that were called Zealous: but how he was overcome,
Simon the Son of Giora commits great rapines and murders in Acrabatena and
Idumaea.
and what his end was, we will declare hereafter. Now one Simon the son of
Giora in the Toparchie of Acrabatena, having gathered together a multitude of
seditious people, robbed and spoiled all; and not only brake into rich men's
houses, but also did beat them grievously, openly exercising his tyranny. But
when Ananus and the rest sent an army against him, he fled Ananus and the rest
of his enemies were slain: and then he wasted Idumaea with the rest, so that
the governors of that place were feign to put a garrison in every village: so
great was the number of them, that were slain by these thieves. And thus stood
the affairs of the Jews.

THE THIRD BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 3. book.
1 Of the coming of Vespasian general of the Romans into Iudaea, and of the
two massacres of the Jews, and how the Sephorites yielded themselves to
Vespasian. 2 The description of Galilee, Samaria, and Iudaea. 3 Of the help
sent unto them of Sepphoris, and of the military discipline amongst the
Romans. 4 How Placidus assaulted Iotapata. 5 How Vespasian invaded Galilaea,
and at his only presence how the Galileans fled. 6 How Gadara was taken. 7 How
Iotapata was besieged, and of the situation and battery thereof. 8 Of the
siege of Iotapata by Vespasian, and of Joseph's diligence, and of the excursions
of the Jews against the Romans. 9 How Vespasian did beat the walls of
Iotapata, with a Ram and other warlike engines. 10 How Iotapata was again
assaulted. 11 How Traian and Titus took Iapha. 12 How Cerealis overcame the
Samaritans. 13 How Iotapata was taken. 14 How Joseph being taken saved his own
life. 15 How Ioppe was taken again. 16 How Tyberias was yielded. 17 How
Tarichea was besieged. 18 Of the lake called Genesar, and the fountains of
Jordan. 19 How Tarichea was delivered.
CHAP. I. The year of the world. 4031. after the birth of Christ. 69.

Of Vespasians coming into Iudaea, and of the two massacres of the Jews.

AFTER that Nero understood of his evil success against the Jews, he was
seized with fear and astonishment; yet he dissembled it as much as necessity
Nero is amazed and afraid at ^ie valiant acts of ye Jews
would permit him. In the mean while he set a good face on the matter, and
made as though he were of more courage, saying, that that which happened, was
rather by the fault of his general, then by the valor of their adversaries:
thinking that it behooued him, who was emperor, not to show Vespasian, whom he
thought only meet for that purpose, a man who from his infancy had been
trained up in wars, even until he was gray headed, Nero sends Vespasian to
govern in Syria and direct his wars.
who had appeased the people of the West, and helped them being troubled by the
Germans, and recovered it for the Romans: as also he did Britannie which was
unknown before; and for that cause made his father Claudius triumph without
taking any pains for it. Nero considered all these, and his prudence grounded
in old age with his experience, who also had sons in the Nero sent him to
govern the armies in Syria, greatly encouraging him with fair speeches and
promises, as at that time need required.

Thus he departed out of Achaia; where he was with Nero: and he commanded Titus
his son to lead the fifth and tenth legions from Alexandria, and he himself
crossing over to Hellespont, Vespasian and Titus gather great forces against ye
Jews.
went after by land into Syria, where he assembled all the Roman forces, and
all the help of the kings adjoining that were confederates. But the Jews
after Cestius unfortunate success became proud of their victory, and could
not contain themselves, but like men tossed at fortunes pleasure, they still
gave more occasion of war, and gathering all their warlike forces together,
they The Jews besiege Ascalon.
in this expedition, were three men excellent above the rest for strength and
wisdom, to wit, Niger of Peraea, Silas the Babylonian, and John the Essean.
Now the City of Ascalon had very strong walls, but few men to defend it; for
it had only one company of footmen, and one band of horsemen, whom Antonius
governed. The Jews made such haste, as though they had dwelt hard by. Antonius
persuading himself that they would assault him, caused his horsemen Antonie
fights with the Jews.
to i^ue forth of the City, and neither fearing the multitude, nor the malice
of his adversaries, he valiantly abode the first assault of the enemies, and
beat them back that attempted to assault the wall. So the Jews who were
vnkilfull, having to do with them that were expert, and they The Romans
overcome the Jews and make a great slaughter of them.
about the field, which was in every place for the advantage of the horsemen.
This greatly helped the Romans to kill so many Jews: for they that fled were
easily overtaken by the Romans, and killed; and others compassing diverse of the
Jews about, slew them with darts: so that the Ten thousand Jews slain.
Jews ten thousand, and two of their leaders, John, and Silas. The rest, many
being wounded, followed their General Niger, who fled into a little town of
Idumaea, named Salis: many of the Romans also were wounded in that fight. But
the Jews were not daunted with this misfortune, The year of the world. 4031.
after Christ's birth 69.
but the grief thereof much increased their courage: neither were they
dismayed with the former loss of so many men within so short time; but rather
calling to mind their great victory they had before, were drawn to undergo
yet another mishap. Shortly after, before the men's wounds were healed, they
gathered together all their forces, and went again to Ascalon in greater
number and fury, but with the same success and skill in warlike affairs
which they had before. For Antonius having warning which way they meant to
come, placed an ambush in the way, and the horsemen setting upon them at
unawares, they killed above eight thousand of Eight thousand Jews slain at
Ascalon.
them, before they could prepare themselves to fight: and all the rest fled,
and Niger with them, showing as he fled many arguments of a valiant mind: and
for that the enemies pursued them, they fled into the safest tower of a town
called Bezedel. Antonius knowing it to be in vain Niger had been burned. But
he lept into a deep vault in the Castle, and so escaped: and three days after
he showed himself unto his soldiers, who sought for him weeping, that they
might bury his body, for they thought him dead, who^ against all expectation
seeing alive, they were very glad, as though by Gods providence he escaped to
be still their leader. Vespasian came to Antiochia, which is Vespasian with his
whole army comes to Ptolemais.
the mother City of all Syria, and brought his army with him, which for
greatness and happy success, doubtless was the third in the whole world; and
finding that king Agrippa did expect his coming, he hasted with all his forces
from thence to Ptolemais. At this place there The Sephorits do courteously
entertain the Romans.
came unto him the Citizens of Sephoris a City of Galilee, who had no thought
at all of rebellion: Vespasian came, submitted themselves unto Cestius Gallus,
and received from him a garrison of soldiers; and now also courteously
entertaining Vespasian offered their help against their countrymen. To whom
Vespasian at their request gave a guard of horse and foot, so great as he
thought was able to resist the force of their enemies, if the jews should
attempt any thing against them. For he thought it would be a great help unto
him in his war to come, to have Sephoris the greatest City of Galilee
situate in a strong place on his side, which otherwise might be a safeguard to
the whole nation.

CHAP. II.
The description of Galilaea, Samaria, and Iudaea.

THere are two places named Galilaea, the one is called high Galilaea, and the
other low Galilee; and they are both compassed with Phoenicia and Syria. On
the west Ptolemais The description and situation of the higher Galilee
with the limits of his territory does part their borders, and the mount
Carmel, which in time past belonged unto Galilee, but now unto the Tyrians.
Unto which adioineth Gabaa, which signifies the horsemens City: so called for
because king Herod's horsemen were sent thither to inhabit. On the South part it
joins to the Samaritanes and Scythopolitanes unto Jordan. On the East part it
bordereth upon Hippene, and Gadaris, and Gaulanitis, which are the borders of
king Agrippa his country. On the North it bordereth upon Tyria. The length of
lower Galilee The length and breadth of the lower Galilee.
reaches from Tiberias unto Zabulon; near which is Ptolemais by the sea
coast. In breadth it reaches from the Village Xaloth situated in a great
field unto Bersabe, where also begins the breadth of high Galilee, and
reaches unto the village called Baca, bordering upon the Tyrians; and the
length thereof is from a village near Jordan named Thella unto Meroth. And
being of such bigness and environed with so many nations, yet did they always
resist foreign forces: For the Galileans are from their childhood warlike, and
never are daunted by fear or penury, for their country is most fruitful,
set with all manner of trees, and very fertile, notwithstanding The fertility
of Galilee.
the inhabitants take small pains in tilling the ground. All parts thereof are
tilled by the inhabitants and there is no waste part.

There are many Cities, and in every place there are villages populous and
rich: so that The description of the country beyond the flood.
wild fruits. Peraea has a good soil and large fields, beset with diverse
trees, especially olives, vines, and palm trees: and it is abundantly watered
with brooks running from the mountains, and springs that continually come
down, when in the dog days they are almost dry. The length of The year of
the world 4030. after Christ's Nativity. 68.
The description of the Region of Samaria.
For both of them are full of mountains and fields, and good for tillage; full
of trees, abounding both with wild apples and others: for they are of their
nature dry, but have rain enough, and have passing sweet waters, and
abundance of good grass; and great store of milch beasts, and which is a
great argument of wealth, both places are very populous. The confines of these
countries is Anauth, a village otherwise called Borceos, which lies on the
North part of Iudaea. The The description of Jury whose middle part is Jerusalem.
The division of Iudaea.
Idumaea, and Engadda, and Herodium, and Jericho, besides these Iamnia and
Ioppe command the places adjoining. Moreover there is Gamala and Gaulanitis,
and Batanea and Trachonitis, which are portions belonging to King Agrippa his
kingdom. This country begins at mount Libanus, and the fountains of
Jordan, and reaches in breadth unto the lake near Tiberias:

CHAP. III.
How aid was sent unto the people of Sephoris, and of the military discipline
of the Romans.

I Have already spoken of Iudaea as briefly as might be, and with what
countries it is environed. Now Vespasian sent help unto the inhabitants of
Sephoris, to wit one thousand Vespasian sends help to the Sephorites, but
fills Galilee with sword and fire.
horsemen, and six thousand foot, Placidus the tribune being their governor:
the horsemen divided themselves into two companies, and lodged in a great
plain, and the footmen Joseph, who was quietly bent, and also spoiled all that
was without the cities, and always repulsed the inhabitants, if at any time
they took courage to revenge themselves. Notwithstanding Joseph assaulted the
city Sephoris hoping to take it, which he before such time as it revolted unto
the Romans, had compassed with so strong walls; that the Romans themselves could
not have taken it; so his hope was frustrate: for neither by force nor fair
means would the Sephorites yield unto him. Hereat the Romans being angry,
troubled the country more then before, who now neither night nor day ceased
from destroying it, but robbed and spoiled all they found, and all men able to
bear arms they slew, and made the rest Joseph had walled.

Titus came to Alexandria being winter sooner then he was expected: and so
received there the soldiers that he sent for, and having a prosperous journey,
he quickly came to Ptolemais, Titus brings a mighty army into Iudaea.
and finding his father there with two of the chiefest legions, to wit the
fifth and tenth, he also adjoined that fifteenth legion that he brought with
him. And there followed them eighteen companies, five out of Caesarea, one
troop of horsemen, and five companies of horsemen out of Syria: ten of these
companies of foot had in every one of them a thousand men, the rest only six
hundredth and thirteen, and in every troop of horsemen were a hundredth and
twenty. The kings also brought great aid: for Antiochus, Agrippa, and
Sohemus, brought each of them 2000. Malchus king of Arabia brought 5000. foot,
and 1000. horse, and the most of his footmen were archers; so that the whole
army together with the kings aid, amounted unto the number of threescore
thousand horse and foot together: besides them that followed the camp, who
were a great multitude, and not inferior unto the soldiers in warlike
discipline: so that one may admire the Romans, who so train up their servants
in time of peace, that they are very fit for wars. So that whosoever well
beholds their military discipline, he shall perceive that they gained not
this their goodly Empire by chance and fortune, The year of the world, 4031.
after Christ's birth 69. The diligence and labor of the Romans in providing
things necessary for the wars.
but by virtue: for they do not only then begin to use weapons when they come
to fight, but they practice military discipline before they need, and they are
not idle in time of peace, but always practice themselves therein without
ceasing. Their exercises are like war it self, and every soldier is every
day exercised in every sort of weapons, even as though they were fighting
against the enemy; so that hereby they easily endure the burden and travail
of wars. For their disorder does not make them forget what to do, neither
does fear dismay them, nor continuance of fight and war weary and tire
them. So that whosoever they fight against, who are not so well provided in
these affairs, as they are, they always overcome them: And one may well call
their practices amongst themselves, conflicts without bloodshed; and their wars
indeed, conflicts with bloodshed. They are not easily overcome at unawares, for
in what enemie-countrey The industry of the Romans. The order of the Romans in
their camp.
rashly, neither do they pitch their tents in marish or high places, after a
disordered manner, for if the place be unequal, they make it plain. And they
proportion their camp four square: for they have many smiths, and all kind of
workmen needful, which do still follow the army, to accomplish such business.
And in the innermost part of the camp they make tabemacles, whose outside
resembles a wall, with towers equally distant one from another, and between
them engines of war to cast stones, and such like, that all kind of shot may
be in readiness. They also build four gates large and wide, both for their
cattle easily to come in at, and also for themselves if need require, to enter
in or issue out speedily. Within the camp, there are streets divided into
certain spaces: in the midst their rulers, and amongst them all the generals
tent like a temple, so that The reverence and obedience of the Roman soldiers
to their captains.
commanded. In the morning all the soldiers come unto their captains to
salute them, and the captains to the tribunes, and they all to the general,
and he gives them a watch word, and tells How the Romans forsake their camp.
they expect the sound again, as though they were to run a race, and at their
departure they burn their camp, because it is easy to build the like again,
and also least afterward it may advantage their enemies. When the trumpet has
sounded the third time, which is a sign to set forward, then they hasten those
that are slow, least they forsake their order. And a crier stands on the
right hand of the general, asking thrice, if they be prepared to fight, and
they as often answer that The armor of the Roman footmen. The furniture of
the Roman horsemen.
that guard the general have lauelin and a shield: the rest are armed every
one with bucklers and pikes. Moreover they carry a saw, a basket, a fardle, a
hatchet, also a cord, a syeth, and a chain, and victuals for three days, so
that the footmen are as much laden as their cattle. The horsemen carry at
their right side a long sword, in the left hand adart; and a long shield
hanging against the horse side, and a quiver with three darts with broad edges,
which are as big as a spear: they have also helmets and breastplates like
the footmen. And the generals horsemen that guard his body do nothing differ
from the rest. That company always leads that the lot falls The Romans
attempt nothing unadvisedly or rashly.
never do any thing unadvisedly in battle, but manage all things according to
counsel; so that they either do not err, or if they do, their fault is
easily amended. For they think that bad success after deliberation is better
then good fortune without it; and they think that therein fortune did but
flatter them, to work them some great despite, by reason they have not
deliberated: but that which is premeditated, although it have evil success,
yet it makes them wary against another time. And none of them accounts that
good success, which comes by chance, The year of the world. 4031. after
Christ's birth 69.
The Romans grow more diligentby fear.
their generals are more severe then their laws: who only by rewarding the
good purchase favor, least they seem cruel in punishing the wicked. Moreover
they are so obedient unto their rulers, that in peace they honor them, and in
war the whole army seems one body The obedience of the Roman soldier is
no small occasion of his victory.
united together: they so keep order, and are so ready to turn here or
there, and so attenti^ to any command, and so diligent to note signs made
unto them, and so quick to labor with their hands, that they are always apt
to do any thing, but slow to endure. In so much that they How far, the
Roman government extends.
so well fulfilled by the Army, what marvel is it if their Empire in the East
reach unto Euphrates, in the West unto the Ocean, in the South unto Afric, in
the North unto Rhine and Danubius, seeing that one may justly affirm the
possession less then the possessors. Thus I have spoken, not to praise the
Romans, but to comfort the conquered, and to terrify those that desire
alteration: and perhaps it may teach them who want good discipline, and are
ignorant of the manners and customs of the Romans in their military affairs.
But I return to my purpose.

CHAP. IIII.
How Placidus assaulted Iotapata.

IN the mean time Vespasian living at Ptolemais with his son Titus, prepared
his army. Placidus draws his forces against Iotapata, and being repulsed,
flies.
But Placidus was already entered into Galilee and run through it, where he
slew almost all he found who were of the weaker sort of people and cowards: And
seeing that those of courage always fled into these Cities that Joseph had
fortified, he turned his forces against Iotapata, which was the strongest of
them, thinking it might easily be taken by a sudden assault, and that he
thereby should get great glory, and that by taking it, great profit might
ensue, in that the people seeing the strongest City surprised, they would not
fly to any again. But it fell not out as Placidus when he saw himself
repulsed from the town, he fled.

CHAP. V.
How Vespasian invaded Galilee, and how at the very sight of him

VEspasian desirous to take Galilee himself, departed from Ptolemais, making
such iournies as soldiers ought to keep, which the Romans are wont to follow.
And he commanded Vespasian directs the To man's march.
those that came to help him, and the bowmen because they were lighter armed,
to go before and repress the enemies incursions, and search the wood and
forest fit for ambushes, where by they were to pass: after them followed part
of the Roman footmen and horsemen: and after them there marched ten by ten
out of every hundredth, bearing with them their armor, and the measures of
their camp. After them followed men, whose office it was to mend the ways,
where they were bad, and cut down the woods that were in the way, least with
Romans hold for chief of all, because it is the King of all birds, and is most
valiant and strong: The year of the world. 4031, after Christ's birth 69. The
Eagle by the Romans is held the ensign of the Empire and a sign of victory.
wherefore they think it a sign of dominion, and victory over all them
against whom they bear it. After these sacred ensigns followed the trumpets
sounding in warlike manner; and after them the army marching six in a rank,
and as the custom is a centurion went by them to keep order: the servants
were all with the fooremen and baggage. After the last company who were hired,
followed armed footmen and horsemen in great number. And thus Vespasian with
his whole army came unto the borders of Galilee, and there pitched his Tents;
he stayed the soldiers who were very eager to fight: as it were boasting and
showing his army to terrify his adversaries, and giving them time to repent,
if any one would alter his mind before the war began, yet did he prepare to
besiege the walls and fortresses. The only sight of him made many rebels fly,
and daunted the most of them. For Joseph's soldiers who had pitched his Tents a
little from Joseph being left with a very few, knowing he was not able to abide
the enemies; and that the Jews were discomfited, and that if he put any trust
in them, they would for the most part revolt unto Joseph forsaken by his
friends flies to Tiberias.
the enemies; for that time abstained from all war, and thought to get
himself out of danger, and so accompanied with them that remained with him,
he went to Tyberias.

CHAP. VI.
How Gadara was besieged and taken.

VEspasian went unto Gadara, and took it at the first assault: for all able
men fit for war Cestius. And they burned the City and all towns and
villages adjoining: some of them being already desolate, and the inhabitants
of the rest were made slaves. Joseph fled into the City which he made choice
of for his safeguard, and filled it with fear. For the people of Tyberias
thought he would never have fled, if there had been any hope of withstanding
the Romans: wherein they judged not amiss, for he did foresee what event
those wars would have, and that their only safety consisted in changing
their rebellious minds. He himself, though he hoped to obtain pardon of the
Romans, yet had he far more rather have died Joseph is afraid of the Romans
and writes to Jerusalem.
his Country committed to his charge. Wherefore he determined faithfully to
write all his estate, and the estate of the Country unto the nobility at
Jerusalem, and not to extol the enemies forces too much, least they should say
he was a coward; nor yet putting them in any comfort, least perhaps they now
penitent for that they had done, again by his letters should be incited to go
forward in their rebellious course: willing them presently to write an answer,
whether they thought it good to enter into league with the Romans; or if they
would make war, then they should send a sufficient army against the Romans:
and having written to this effect, he presently sent men away to Jerusalem to
bear these letters.

CHAP. VII.
Of the siege of Iotapata.

VEspasian was very desirous to take Iotapata, for that he knew many of his
enemies were fled thither, and for that this was the strongest refuge they had.
So he sent before footmen and horsemen, to plane the ways which were full of
ragged stones, so that it was hard for footmen to pass, and altogether
impossible for horsemen: who within four days effected that which they were
commanded, and made a large way for the army to pass: And the fifth day which
was the one and twentieth of March, Joseph before they came entered into Joseph
comes to Iotapata from Tiberias.
the City, coming thither from Tyberias to encourage the Jews who were
dismayed. A certain Vespasian that Joseph was come thither, willing him to
hasten thither, for if he could take Joseph he might easily take al Iudaea.
Hereat Vespasian was very glad and took it as good fortune, that the most
prudent and potent of his enemies, should (God at that time so working) put
himself as it were in hold, and so presently he sent Placidus before with a
thousand horsemen, and with him Captain Ebutius, a man both strong, valiant and
prudent, and commanded them to compass the City with a siege, least Joseph
should privily escape from thence. The Iotapata besieged.
day after he himself followed with the whole army and about noone came to
Iotapata, and leading The year of the world. 4031. after the birth of Christ.
69.
his army unto the North side of the town, he pitched his tents upon a hill
seven stounds distant from the City. Upon purpose placing himself within the
view of his enemies, that the very sight of his army might terrify them:
which he also did; for presently every one was in such a fear, that none
durst go out of the City. The Romans being wearied all that day, would not
assault the city: wherefore they environed the town with two squadrons, and the
third that consisted in horsemen, was placed without to intercept all passage,
that none of the Jews could pass any whither. Hereby the Jews now in
desperation took heart; for in war nothing is more forcible then necessity.
The next day began the battery, and every Jew kept his quarter: and kept
themselves in order, and resisted the Romans before their walls. But when
Vespasian sent all the bowmen, and those who cast darts and other things to
beat them off of the walls, and Nothing is more effectual in war or more
desperate then necessity.
Joseph fearing the city, accompanied with all the people issued out of the
town, and assaulted the Romans fiercely, and did drive them from the walls,
showing courage and strength; and they themselves suffered as much harm as
they did unto their enemies. For as they were encouraged with desperation, so
were the Romans with shame, who were armed with military knowledge and
strength, and the Jews only with anger. And the fight continued all day even
until night; A fight between the Romans and the Jews continued a whole day,
and broken off by night.
wherein many Romans were wounded, and only thirteen slain: and of the Jews
there were six hundredth wounded, and seventeen slain. The next day also they
met the Romans, and resisted them more stoutly then before, taking courage for
that they the day before had resisted them, contrary to their expectation: and
all the Romans fought more valiantly, ashamed as it The situation of Iotapata.
descend straight down like a wall: so that one can scarcely see the bottom.
There is only access unto it on the North part, where it is seated upon a
mountain going overthwart; which Joseph enclosed with a wall, to the end it
might be no passage for the enemies: all the rest of the City is environed
with high mountains, so that it cannot be dis^rued by any before they be hard
at it. And Iotapata was thus strengthened.

Vespasian determined both to strive against the nature of the place, and
hardiness of the Vespasian intends to begin a sharp siege.
Jews; and therefore called all his captains together, and consulted with them
to begin a hot siege: at last they resolved to rear a mount in that place
where the City was easiest to be entered. He sent his whole army to provide
wood to do it, who cut down the mountains near unto the town: and great
store of vvood and stone being brought, setting hurdles before them to bear
off the darts and arrows, he began to raise a mount; so that they received
little or no harm by darts cast from off the walls: others brought earth from
places thereabout, and no man was idle. The Jews cast continually great
stones and all kind of darts upon that which defended them; which though they
pierced not thorough, yet they made a great noise and terrified the workmen.
Which Vespasian seeing, caused all engines that did cast stones and darts,
which were in number a The Jews break out and beat down the bulwark.
this the Jews rested not, but running out in companies as thieves, they took
away that which defended the workmen, and then assaulted them having no
de^e: and when they had beaten them away, destroyed and fired all that the
Romans had wrought for their own defense and safeguard. At last Vespasian
perceived that these domages happened for that there was space left between
all these works, whereby the enemies had access to do them such harms:
wherefore he united them together, and so hindered the privy excursions of the
Jews. When the Joseph afraid to do nothing for the Joseph fixes stakes in
the ground and fastneth unto them raw O^ hides to raise the wall and beat off
the shot.
safeguard of the town, called all workmen necessary together, and commanded
them to make the wall there higher; but they said it was impossible for them to
work for the number of shot in that place. Then Joseph made this devise to
defend them, he fixed stakes in the ground, and fastened unto them hides of
Kine and Oxen new slain, by which they were defended from shot, and fire; so
that they laboring night and day raised the wall twenty cubits high,
erecting also upon it many towers: and by this means made it a strong defense.
Whereat the Romans, The year of the world, (...) after Christ's births 69.
(...).
who before thought themselves sure of the town, were now greatly dismayed
both by this devise of Joseph's, and also by the hardiness of the Jews.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the siege of Iotapata by Vespasian, and the diligence that Joseph used, and
how the Jews made excursions against the Romans.

THis stratageme and the carriage of the Jews greatly moved Vespasian, for
now they receiving courage in that defense, made assaults upon the Romans of
their own accord, and every day skirmished, running out in companies, and,
like thieves, taking away Vespasian would not permit his soldiers to fight any
longer: but determined now to besiege it and take it by want of victuals,
purposing either to make them come and yield themselves for lack of Vespasian
restrains his soldiers from fight and besieges the city.
food, or if they held out, to famish the^: and that it would be more easy to
take it by force, if ceasing a while from assaulting it, he afterward set upon
it, they being in anguish for the danger they were in. Wherefore he commanded
all passages to be kept, that none could go out of the City. But they had
great store of corn, and of all other things else, except salt and water,
whereof they stood in great want, for there is never a fountain in the city,
and they have little rain in summer time, so that the inhabitants were in
great distress; for now there was hardly any water left in the city. Joseph
perceiving there was abundance of all things else, and that the citizens were
Joseph delivers his soldiers water by measure.
now they began to saint, as though they had suffered extreme drought. The
Romans perceived this, being upon a high hill, over against the place whither
all the Jews came together to recome water, and they with their shot killed
many that came thither, insomuch that Vespasian hoped that within short time
their water would be spent, and they constrained to yield. But Joseph to
frustrate this hope, commanded a great many garments to be laid in water and
hanged upon the walls, so that the water might run down upon every side. When
the Romans saw this, Joseph's stratagem.
they were much grieved and afraid, for that they wasted so much water in
mockery, and before had thought that they had wanted water to drink. And now
Vespasian scorning to win the city Joseph devised also another way to get
such necessaries that he wanted out of the country, for there was a^alley out
of the way, and therefore not regarded by the Romans, wherefore Joseph sent men
into the country to his friends for such things as the city wanted, by this
way, commanding them Another policy of Joseph's.
when they came near the watchmen, to hide and cover themselves with hairie
skins, that the watchmen might think them to be dogs, and this he used a
good space, till at last the watchmen perceived it, and so set a guard there to
stop the passage. When Joseph perceived the City could not hold out long, and
fearing his own life, if still he continued there, he treated with the chief
of the city that he might fly. But the people perceiving his intent, flocked
about him, and The people beleeched Joseph that he would not forsake them.
be fought him to take pity upon them, and not forsake them, who had no hope
but in him, affirming that for his sake they were all courageous and bold to
fight; and if they were taken, yet he would be a comfort unto them, telling him
that it did not become him to fly from his enemies, nor to forsake his
friends, neither as it were to leap out of a ship shaken with a tempest, into
the which he came when the seas were calm, for so by this means he would
soon overthrow the city, and once gone, no man afterward could or durst
resist their enemies; for in him was all their hope.

Joseph kept it to himself that his purpose was to work his own safety, for
he told them the thing which he intended was for their good, affirming that
though he stayed still in the city, yet Joseph's prudence.
he could do them little good, and if the city should chance to be taken,
then he and they were Joseph herewith could not persuade the people, but they
flocked faster about him, and both young and old of all sorts came and
prostrated The year of the world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69. Joseph stays
in Iotapata.
themselves at his feet, weeping, and beseeching him to take such hap as should
befall them, whether it were good or bad, not for that they envied his escape,
but for that they hoped they should receive no harm if he remained with them.

He then bethought himself that if he stayed with them, he fulfilled their
request; and if he denied, he feared they would force him. Wherefore being
partly moved by compassion, he determined Where as there is no hope of help
there was i^ the last remedy.
to stay, and being now, as all the city was, desperate, he told them that now
it was time to fight, seeing there was no hope of safety: and that it was a
goodly matter to spend their lives renowmedly, and do some noble act to leave a
remembrance unto their posterity of their valor: and so went about it. And
issuing out of the city with the most valiant amongst them, when he had killed
the watchmen, at the first encounter he came even unto the Romans tents, and
tore Vespasian perceived The audacious courage of the Jews in their extreme
desperation.
the Romans greatly endoinaged by such excursions and very loath to s^e for
shame, and not able to follow them being so laden with their armor, and that
the Jews always did some exploit before they retired themselves into the
city; he gave commandment unto his soldiers to ^ue their assault, and not to
fight against men who desired to die, affirming that no men were stronger then
those in despetation, and that it they found none to assail, their courage
would soon be; alaid like unto a flame of ^ne, when the matter that nourishes
it, is consumed. Moreover the Romans must seek victory more warily, for that
they fought not for necessity, but only to The Jews with their slings are
repulsed by the Arabia^ archers
increase their dominions: and after that oftentimes they beat the Jews by the
Arabian archers,

CHAP. IX.
How Vespasian did beat the walls of Iotapata with a Ram, and other warlike
Engines.

VEspasian thinking himself as it were besieged, both for the long time which
he had continued A Ram.
he butteth with his head. It hangs on another beam with ropes, like the
beam of a pair of balances: the beam it hangs on lying a cross is held
up with two props, which being drawn back by force of many men, and then
jointly with all their forces shooued forward, it strikes the wall with the
head of iron: And there is no wall nor tower so strong, but though it abide the
first strokes of the engine, yet can it not hold out long. The general of the
Romans thought good to use this means to take the city by force, for that the
siege was dangerous, by reason Joseph seeing them still beat one place, and
that presently the wall would fall, devised Joseph's devise how to break the
force of the Ram.
away to resist the force of the Ram, and so he filled sackes with chafe,
and let them down off the wall just against that place, where the Ram stroke
ordinarily, and so brake the force of the blows, the looseness of the chafe
making no resistance; and so drowning or abating the violence of the stroke. By
this means the Romans were hindered, for whither soever they brought Joseph and
his soldiers sought to help themselves by fire works, and so they fired all
that was made of dry wood in three several places, and withal the engines,
and fortes, and mounts of the Romans, who now had much ado to defend
themselves: first, because that they were terrified with the valor of the
Jews: and secondly, The year of the world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69.
Joseph burns the engines, and turns off the Romans. Eleazars strength and
courage.
because every one had work enough to defend himself against the fire, which
seasing upon Samaeus called Eleazar, who deserved eternal memory: this man
was borne at Saab in Galilee. This Eleazar took up a great stone, and cast it
down with such force upon the Ram, that he brake off the head thereof; and
nothing fearing, lept down amongst the midst of his enemies, and brought it
away into the City: at last being unarmed, and as it were a mark for his
enemies to shoot at, he received in his body five arrows; and as though he
had not felt them, so soon as he had gotten up the wall where all might see
him, he boldly stood still, and so through grief of his wounds having the head
of the Ram in his arms fell down. Next unto him two brethren of Ramath in
Galilee showed themselves valiant, named Netiras and Philip, who assaulted
Netiras and Philips valor against the Romans.
Joseph and those that were with him perceiving, took fire and burnt the
engines, works, and defenses of the fifth and tenth legions that were fled, and
those that followed destroyed al engines, and other matter that was left. In
the evening the Romans again erected the Ram against that part of the city
which before they had beaten, and so began a fresh to shake the wall in the
same place that before they had battered: and one of the Vespasian wounded in
the sole of the foot by an arrow.
Jews shot an arrow from the wall, and wounded Vespasian in the sole of the
foot, yet the wound was not great, for that the force of the arrow was spent
before it came to him, having come a great way off.

This fact greatly troubled the Romans, who seeing Vespasian bleed, presently
spread these news Titus who feared his fathers death: so that the whole army
partly for the love of their general, and partly for the fear of Titus his
son, were greatly troubled: but Vespasian presently freed the army from al
perturbation; and his son Titus from fear. For the grief of the wound being
past, he showed himself to all that were sorrowful for him, and incited them to
fight against The war renewed against the Jews.
the Jews more earnestly then before; and now every one as it were to revenge
their general, despised all danger, and assaulted the walls one exhorting
another. Joseph and his associates, notwithstanding that many of them were
killed with shot, darts and arrows; yet they forsook not the walls, but with
fire and sword, and stones fiercely assaulted them, that being defended with
hurdles Joseph upon the wall was stroke^ with a stone, and his head carried from
his body by violence of that blow three furlongs, as though it had been cast
out of a sling: and the next day a woman great with The force of the Roman
darts.
child was stricken on the belly with one of those stones, and the child carried
forth of her from the place where she was stricken three furlongs; so great was
the force of this engine: Therefore the violence of the engines was more
terrible, and likewise the noise of darts, arrows and other shot. And many
were slain on every side, and the bodies of those that were killed, stricken
against the wall made a noise: and within the city was heard a pitiful
lamentation, and weeping among the women; and without a heavy mourning and cry
of them, that were wounded to death; and all that part of the wall where the
fight was, flowed with blood: so that now the multitude of dead bodies had so
filled the ditch before the wall, that the Romans might easily pass over them
into the city, and the mountains about did echo with the cries of the
citizens: and all that night long nothing vvanted, that either might by the eye
or ear move terror.

CHAP. X. The year of the world 4031. after Christ's Nativity. 69.

How Iotapata was again assaulted.

IN the morning Vespasian brought his army to enter the breach, having given
them but little rest after their whole nights labor, and desirous to make the
Jews that defended Vespasian leads on his army to enter the City.
the breach to forsake their place, before such time as he entered: he took
the most valiant of his horsemen and unhorsed them, being armed from the head
unto the foot, and placed them in three ranks, that they, being so armed,
might besiege round that part of the wall that was battered, and to take long
pikes in their hands, so that as soon as the bridges were set, they should
first enter the breach. After them he placed the strongest of his footmen:
the rest of Joseph perceiving his intent, placed Joseph's subtle policy.
old men and children, and those that were already wearied upon those parts of
the walls that were not battered: and himself with the stowtest in the City
went to defend the breach, and placed six men before them, whom he choose out,
himself being one of them, to sustain the first brunt of their enemies
assault: commanding them likewise to stop their ears, to the end that they
The cries of women and children in the battle.
as though the City were now taken, so that a man would have judged them
already amidst their enemies swords; and not only in danger to fall into
their hands. Wherefore Joseph commanded the women to their houses, least their
cries should effaeminate his soldiers minds, willing them likewise to keep
silence, and threatened them if they did not: and so he marched unto the
breach; which place fell unto his lot, and gave no heed to them that sought to
scale the walls, but only beheld a far off the force of the arrows.

When all the trumpets began to sound, and the air to be obscured with the
multitude of arrows, Joseph's companions remembering the charge given them,
stopped their ears; and armed their bodies against the shot of arrows: And so
soon as the bridges were set against the wall, The war of the Romans with the
Jews upon the bridge
had not any fresh men to second them that were tired, and the Romans still as
they were wearied, sent fresh supply; and joining together their long shields,
exhorting one another, they became as it were a wall or defense invincible; and
the whole army like one body did beat back the Jews, and so set foot on
the walls. Then Joseph in this desperate case, devised some way to repel this
present calamitle, wherefore he commanded the Jews to fetch scalding oil,
which they had ready, and power it upon the Romans yet seething, who also cast
the pans upon them. This The Jews power scalding oil upon the Romans.
wall, and tumbled down: for the scalding oil easily got between their flesh
and armor, and scorched them like fire being easily heated, and long
continuing hot by reason of the fatness; and the Romans being laden with
helmets and briest plates could not fly, so that some lept down off the
bridge, and others for grief died; others would feign have retired themselves,
but could not, because their enemies followed them so hard. But neither the
Romans wanted virtue and valor in adverse fortune, nor the Jews prudence and
good advise. For the Romans notwithstanding The ye^re of the world. 4031. after
Christ's birth 69.
Vespasian saw that his The Romans retire without obtaining their purpose.
men in that fight endured much misery, toward evening he caused them to
retire, many being Vespasian had comforted his soldiers, for that which had
happened, and perceiving that they were angry and desired to fight to revenge
themselves, so that they needed no exhortation; he raised the Rampire higher,
and erected three towers fifty foot high, covering them aloft with iron, that
so by reason of their Vespasian erecteth higher platformes and towers.
weight they might stand steadfast, and not be consumed by fire: and these he
placed upon the Rampires, and in them Archers, and men that cast darts and such
like, who not being perceived of them that were upon the wall because of the
highness of the towers, and the covering thereof, easily wounded them who were
placed thereon. So the Jews when they could not a^oide the arrows, nor be
revenged upon them whom they could not see, nor yet ^e the towers being The
Citizens of Iotapata valiantly sustain the siege.
to enter. And the people of Iotapata thus resisted, notwithstanding that many
e^rie day were slain, and that they did their enemies no harm without great
danger to themselves.

CHAP. XI.
How Iapha was taken by Traianus and Titus.

AT this time Vespasian understood that Iapha a City near Iotapata minded to
rebel encouraged The taking in of Iapha by Traiane.
so to do, for that they understood how they of Iotapata had held ou^
contrary to all expectation: wherefore he sent thither Traianus goue^our of
the tenth legion, The Jews shut up by the Romans between two walls are slain.
hands, who were most greedy to destroy them. For many came to the gates, and
called those that kept them by their names, pitifully entreating that they
might come in: which whilst they did, Twelve thousand Jews slain.
Romans, but the Jews their own Countrymen. Traiane thinking that the City
was now destitute of fighting men, or if any were within, that they durst not
resist being thus terrified, reserved the taking of the City for the general,
and sent messengers unto him, requesting him to send his son Titus to make an
end of the victory. Vespasian fearing that yet there would be some
resistance, sent Titus with five hundredth horsemen, and a thousand foot, who
hastening thither, placed Titus with his forces comes to Iapha.
Traianus on the left side of the town, and himself on the right, so the
Romans on every side scaled the walls, and the Galileans having awhile
resisted, presently left them. Then Titus and his followers leaping down
presently got into the City, and began a vehement fight with them A sharp
skirmish within the town between the Galileans and the Romans.
that were assembled therein, some valiantly issuing out of narrow streets,
and assaulting them, and the women casting such things as they could get upon
the Romans from the tops of their houses, and thus they held battle six
hours. When their fighting men were all slain, then the old men and children,
and all the other company both in the streets, and in their houses were soon
The year of the world. 4031. after the birth of Christ. 69.


CHAP. XII.
How Caerealis conquered the Samaritans.

THe Samaritans also were partakers of this calamity, who assembled themselves
together The assembly of the Samaritans on the mountain Garizin.
Vespasian foreseeing this, thought it good to prevent them: and although all
the region of Samaria had garriso^s in it, yet for all the great multitude
assembled, it was thought that the garrisons were able to keep the^ under.
Wherefore he sent thither Caerealis the Tribune of the fifth legion with six
hundredth horsemen, and three thousand footmen. Caerealis thought it not the
best way to go unto the mountain, and fight with the whole multitude, because
a great many of their enemies were upon it: wherefore he commanded his
soldiers to beleger the mountain about at the foot thereof, and so keep
them there all the whole day. There happened Want of water in the mountain
Garizin.
and the people had not provided themselves of victuals, so that many in one
day, only for want of drink dyed of thirst, the rest preferred death before
the misery they endured, and so fled unto the Romans, of whom Caerealis
learned that those that yet remained on the mount, were even dismayed by the
misery they endured. Wherefore he ascended the mountain; and compassing
about the enemies with his army, he first exhorted them to yield, willing them
to save themselves, promising them all their lives, if they would cast down
their weapons: but nothing prevailing with them, he set upon them, and killed
them all, in number eleven thousand and six Eleven Thousand and six hundredth
Samarita^s slain^*
hundredth: and this was done the seven and twentieth day of June: and these were
the miseries that befell the Samaritans.

CHAP. XIII.
How Iotapata was taken

THe Citizens of Iotapata endured this hard siege contrary to all expectation,
and in the seven and fortith day the Romans mounts were raised higher then
their walls: on this same day, one of the City fled unto Vespasian, and told
him in what case the city stood, A fugitive certifieth the weak estate of
the citizen^ of Iotapata, and how few they were.
and how few citizens were left, and that with daily watchings and fighting
they were far spent, whereby they were not able to resist any more, and that
they might be taken by policy, if they were followed: for in the last part of
the night, being weary, they ceased from their labor, and Vespasian to
assault them at that time. But Vespasian knowing how faithful the Jews were
one unto another, and how they contemned all punishment, gave little credit
unto this runaway: for a little before one of Iotapata being taken, could not
by any torments be compelled to confess, or disclose the estate of the City,
whom the fire nothing moved, and so at last he was crucified, laughing and
scorning death: yet a probable conjecture which he had, persuaded him to give
credit somewhat unto this traitors words: and for that he knew no great harm
could befall him, if he so assaulted the City, as the traitor willed; he
commanded the man to be kept, and made all his army in readiness to assault
the town. So at the hour appointed, he made toward the walls with silence.
Titus being the first, accompanied with one Domitius Sabinus a Tribune and a
few of the fifteenth legion, who killing the watchmen, Sextus Caerealis and
Placidus with their companies; so the Castle was taken, and the enemies were in
the midst of the town, and it was fair day light, and yet the towns men
knew nothing, being now fast a sleep after their great labors and watchings:
The Romans enter the city whilst the Iew^ are a sleep.
and they that did watch could see nothing, there was so thick a mist by
chance that morning, and the rest never wakened till death was at their door,
and that they perceived their calamity and destruction. The Romans mindful of
all that had befallen them in the time of the siege, did neither spare nor
pity any one: but driving the people out of the higher part of the city into
the lower The year of the world, 4031. after Christ's birth 69. The Romans are
touched with no mercy nor compassion
Joseph's guarde seeing this that they could not fight, gathered themselves
together in a corner of the city, and slew themselves, that the Romans might
not kill them. But some of the watchmen, who first perceived the city to be
taken, fled into a tower, and resisted a while (this tower was situate on the
North side of the city) and at last being environed with their enemies toward
evening yielded, and offered themselves The fight of the Jews with the Romans
in the tower.
to be slain. And the Romans might have boasted that that victory had been
without bloodshed on their part, had not Antonius a centurion been slain
trecherously. For one of them who fled into the caves (as many did) requested
Antonius to give him his hand, in token that Antonius slain by a Jew through
treason.
out of caves and dens that had fled thither, and slew all but women and
infants: so that they took away a thousand and two hundredth Captives: and the
number of them who were slain during the siege, and at such time as the city
was taken, amounted unto forty thousand. And Vespasian Forty thousand Jews
perish during the siege and in the former battles.
commanded the city to be destroyed, and the castles to be burned, and so
Iotapata was taken the thirteenth year of Nero his reign, in the first of
July.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Joseph was taken, and how he redeemed his life with deeds and words.

But especially above all others the Romans made diligent search for Joseph,
both for the hatred they bare him, and also because Vespasian greatly desired
to get him, for that he^ being taken, the greatest part of the wars were then
ended; so they sought him amongst the dead, and amongst those that were hid:
but he (fortune favoring him) when the city was taken, escaped from the
midst of his enemies, and lept into a deep Well, which had a large Joseph
lept into a deep trench and lies hidden in a cave.
cave on the one side, the which they above could not perceive; where he found
forty principal men who had provision for many days. The enemies being in
every place, he in the day Vespasian sent two tribunes to him to promise him
safety, and bring him before him; the Tribunes names were Paulinus and
Gallicanus: But Joseph would not accept their offer, fearing that because he
had been the author of all the euilles that the Romans had endured, that
therefore they sought him out to punish him: till Vespasian sent unto Joseph
Nicanor Vespasian by Tribunes sends Joseph assurance.
the third tribune one of Joseph's acquaintance. Nicanor recounted unto him how
mild the Romans were toward them whom they had conquered, and that the
Roman Captains rather admired him for his virtue, then hated him. Moreover
that his General intended not to punish Nicanor the tribune known to Joseph.
him (which if he pleased he might do whether he yielded himself or no) but
to save him, who was so valiant a man: adding also that if Vespasian meant ill,
he would never have employed his friend in such a message, to use friendship so
noble a virtue to so evil a purpose, as to work treson: and that he, though
Vespasian had been so minded, wouldneuer have consented to have betrayed his
friend. Joseph after Nicanor words began to study, as doubtful what was best
to do. Whereat the soldiers being angry began to cast fire into the cave: but
Vespasian hindered them being desirous to take Joseph alive. Nicanor ceased not
to entreat him, and he perceiving how his enemies began to wax angry, and
calling to mind the dreams he had in the night, wherein God foretold him of
all the Jews calamities, and what should betide the Roman princes (for
Joseph's dream of the slaughter of the Jews.
he could interpret dreams, and whatsoever God obscurely showed, being
instructed in the holy Joseph filled with the spirit of God secretly prays.
saw in his sleep, he prayed secretly to God, after this manner. O creator
(quoth he) seeing that it pleases thee to ruinate the nation of the Jews,
and that all good fortune is gone unto the Romans, and that thou have chose^ my
soul to foretell future events, I yield unto the Romans tosaue my life,
protesting that I mean not to go to them to play the traitor unto my
country, Joseph consents to Nicanor.
but as thy minister; and having thus spoken, he yielded himself unto Nicanor.
But they, who fled The year of the world 4031. after Christ's Nativity. 69.
The Jews violence and expostulation against Joseph.
Joseph was, perceiving that Joseph yielded unto the Romans, flocked all about
him, and cried out. How are our country laws violated? Where are those
promises of God made unto the Jews? where are those gallant minds that
contemn and despise death? Art thou O Joseph desirous to live, and see thy
self to become a vile bondslaue? How soon have thou forgotten thy self? How
many have thou persuaded to embrace death for their liberty sake? Truly thou
have but a shadow of valor and prudence in thee, if thou do hope that they
will save thy life, against whom thou have so behaved thy self: or if they
would save thee, to desire life at their hands. But seeing the Romans offer
has made thee forget thy self; yet we to preserve the honor and credit of
our country; will lend thee our arms and swords, and so if thou be
vvilling to die, die like the general of the Jews: which if thou refuse to
When they had thus said, they all threatened to kill him with their swords, if
he did yield unto the Romans. Joseph feared their violence, and persuaded
himself, if he died before he had put them in mind of Gods commandments,
that then he should die a traitor unto God: wherefore he began to make a
Philosophical discourse unto them concerning this present estate, what was to
be done.

Wherefore (O my friends, quoth he) are we become murderers of our selves?
Wherefore do we make war between things so united, as are the soul and the
body? Will any man say that Joseph's oration to his country men.
my mind is changed? Why the Romans know that it is a thing most honorable to
die in wars, not any way, but according to the law of arms, to wit by the
conquerers hand? If I entreat the Romans to spare my life, then am I worthy to
perish with mine own sword and hand: but if they think It is a goodly matter to
die for liberty, but yet to die fighting.
a coward who refuses to die when need requires, but also he who will die
when no need urges. Moreover what withholdeth us from offering our selves unto
the Romans? truly fear of death. Shall we therefore make that certain our
selves, which we fear at the Romans hands? But some will say, how if not, then
we are made captives: consider what liberty we now have. You will say it is the
part of him that is valiant to kill himself: nay truly it is the part of a
vary coward. For I think him to be a timorous seaman; who perceiving a
tempest coming before it The similitude of a sayler. It is against the common
course of nature for a man to kill himself, yea and a hanoue sin against God.
is no living creature that of his own seeking would willingly die: for every
one feels in himself the strong and forcible law of nature, whereby they
desire to live: and for this cause we judge them for our enemies, that seek to
take it from us; and punish them; that do take it indeed. And do you think it
is not a great contempt of God for a man to despise his gift? For we of him
received our first being, and from him let us expect our ending. The body is
mortal, framed of corruptible matter; but our souls are immortal, and there
is a little part of God placed in our bodies. If any one abuse that which
another man puts him in trust with, presently we think him a perfidious and
wicked man: and shall we think that if we cast away out of our bodies that
which The soul is immortal and aportio^ of God placed in our bodies.
and shall not we then be held for impious, who fly from so good a master as
God is? Do ye not know that they, who according to the law of nature depart out
of this life; and render that to God which they received of him, when he who
gave it requires it; shall leave behind them a perpetual name to their
posterity and family? And that unto those souls who are obedient unto their
creator, when he calls them, he gives a holy and sacred mansion in heaven,
and from thence after a revolution of the heavens, departing; are again
commanded to dwell in chaste bodies? And that they who have wrought their own
death, go unto dark hell: and that God punishes God reuenge^ him on the
autors of injuries. The custom of ancient Jews and how they dealt with those
that slew themselves. Joseph's peroration.
this their offense upon all their posterity. Hence it is that God is
displeased therewith, and it is selves: for it is no disgrace to receive our
lives at their hands, who are witnesses of so many valiant The year of the
world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69.


Joseph spoke much to this effect to dissuade his companions from killing
themselves. But they stopping their ears with desperation, wherewith they had
armed themselves to die, came furiously Joseph is in great danger to be slain.
toward him with their swords drawn, vpbraiding him, that he was a coward,
and every Joseph calling one by his name, and looking upon another with a
countenance like a governor, holding another hand, and entreating the rest
(distracted in such danger) at last escaped from being killed at that instant:
for still as one came near him to strike him, he turned his face upon him like
some cruel beast; and some of them who remembered how he had been their
captain in their extremity, with reverence of his personage trembled, so that
their swords fell out of their hands: and many lifting up their arms to strike
him, of their own accord let their weapons fall. Joseph notwithstanding his
desperate estate, yet Another policy of Joseph.
was he not void of counsel, but assisted by Gods providence, he hazarded his
life, and spoke unto them as follows. Seeing (quoth he) that ye are all
determined to die, let us cast lots who shall kill one another, and he unto
whom the lot falls shall be killed by him who next ensues, They all liked
well of this, and always he upon whom the lot fell was slain by him Joseph's
fellows die by lots, and Joseph and another are reserved.
that followed, as though they were now to die with their captain, for death
was more acceptable, because they thought Joseph should die with them. Now it
happened by the providence of God that Joseph remained alive only with one other,
and then persuaded him who was left alive, to live and not seek death, for
fear the lot should fall upon himself: and for that if he suruiued, he should
be polluted with the murder and slaughter of his own nation. Thus Joseph
delivered both from the wars of the Romans, and also of his own nation, went
with Nicanor unto Vespasian. All the Romans came about him to see him, and
pressing about their general they Joseph resorteth to Vespasian with Nicanor.
striving to come near to behold him better, and they who were a far off
cried to kill their enemy: but those that were near him and beheld him,
remembering his prowess, were astonished to see that change. And there was no
captain nor ruler, but although before they were all moved against him, yet
now beholding him, they all began to pity him: and especially Titus, who being
of a gentle disposition admited Joseph's vaiour, his constancy in adversity,
and his age, and thereby was moved to take compassion upon him, remembering what
a manner of man he had An example of Titus grace and mercy toward Joseph.
been during the wars, and what he now was being fallen into his enemies
hands: calling also to mind the force and power of fortune, and how small a
stay the chance of wars had, and that no humane affairs had any stay or hold
in them; wherefore he drew many men's minds to pity him, Titus was the chief
author of Joseph's life: yet Vespasian caused him to be carefully kept, as
though he meant to send him to Caesar. Which Joseph hearing requested that he
might speak a word or two with him alone, then all but his son Titus
departing and two of his friends: Thou Joseph has private consete^ce with
Vespasian. Joseph foretells Vespasian of his future honors.
O Vespasian (quoth he) think only that thou have Joseph for thy captive,
but I am a messenger unto thee of greater matters from God, otherwise I knew my
country laws, and how it behooued the generals of our nation to die, and not
to be taken alive by their enemies. Will thou send me to Nero? Wherefore? As
though Nero should still live and thou not succeed him? Thou O Vespasian art
Caesar and the Emperor of Rome, and Titus also thy son, and keep me in
bonds with thee, for thou art not only my Lord, but Lord of all the world, and
sea, and land: and all mankind. And if I now feign these things in this state
that I am of my own mind against God, let Joseph's truth in all things.
me be reserved unto a greater punishment. After he had thus spoken, Vespasian
gave small credit unto his words, and only thought that Joseph feined these
things of himself to save his life: yet by little and little he began to give
credit unto him, because God put it in his mind to hope for the Empire, and
foretelling his reign by many signs and tokens, he also found Joseph to tell
the truth in other matters. For one of Vespasians friends answered, that it was
marvel that he knowing that, could not prophecy the event of the wars
against Iotapata, and what was like to befall himself, that so he might have
avoided those evils. Joseph answered, that he foretold the The year of the
world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69.
Vespasian secretly enquired of these matters, and finding by the relation of
the captives that it was true, he began to give more credit unto that which
Joseph had told him concerning himself. So he commanded Joseph to be kept
prisoner, yet did he Joseph is kept bound, yet rewarded by Vespasian. Cesarca a
great City by the Sea side, inhabited for the most part by Greeks.
give him apparel and diverse other things in most kind manner: and Titus did
greatly honor him. The fourth day of July Vespasian returned unto Ptolemais,
and from thence he came into the Sea coast unto Caesarea, which is the greatest
City of Iudaea, whose Inhabitants are for the most part Greeks: so the
Inhabitants received the army and the General with all friendship possible,
both for that they loved the Romans, as especially also for that they hated
them, who were destroyed; so that many entreated Vespasian to put Joseph to
death. But Vespasian judging this a rash Scythopolis.
by reason it is situate on a plain by the sea coast.

CHAP. XV.
How Ioppe was taken again.

IN the mean time a great multitude being gathered together, who either were
seditious Ioppe the retreat of the seditious and thieves.
persons, or thieves, or such as had escaped out of the ruinated Cities, began
to reedifie Cestius, before time had destroyed: and seeing that they could not
rob nor spoil the Country which was already wasted, and left desolate by
wars, they purposed to become pirates, and so building ships for that
purpose, they robbed the Phaenicians, Syrians, and Egyptians, not suffering
any to pass those seas without danger. Vespasian understanding their intent,
sent horsemen and footmen thither: who finding the City not guarded, got into
it in the night time: which the Inhabitants perceiving were so afraid, that
they durst not make any resistance to expel the Romans, but they al retired
themselves unto their ships, and there stayed all night a flight shot from the
shore. Ioppe is naturally no road for ships (for it is situated upon a
turbulent shore) and on either side has very high and eminent rocks, which
trouble the seas, and make huge waves in this place (if we may believe the
fable, one may see Of Andromeda, read 4. Ovid Metamorph.
the rocks, and so causes a dangerous sea, that it were far more safe to
be in the midst of the seas, then at that shore when the same wind
blows.) The Inhabitants of Ioppe rode there all night, and by break of day
the North wind began to blow fiercely, and drove some of A huge tempest
drowneth those of Ioppe in the Sea.
the ships one against another, and others against the rocks, and many
striving against wind and weather, and seeking to get into the midst of the
Sea for fear of the rockie shore, and their enemies there, were drowned; and
they that escaped, neither had any place of refuge, nor hope of safety; for
the tempest did drive them from the sea, and the Romans from the City, so
that the air was filled with the cries of people expecting to be drowned, and
with the noise and sound of ships beaten one against another. So some of the
Inhabitants of Ioppe were Four thousand and two hundredth bodies cast out.
the Roman soldiers there ready standing killed them. There were four
thousand and two hundredth dead bodies cast upon the shore. So the Romans
having without any fight taken the City, they destroyed it: and thus was Ioppe
taken, and twice destroyed by the Romans in a short time. Vespasian builded
there a Castle, and placed in it some few horsemen and footmen, to the
Vespasian takes Ioppe and encampeth in the Castle.
end that none of the Jews should come thither again to play the Pirates, and
that the footmen might keep the Castle, and in the mean time the horsemen
might go forth, and spoil all the towns and villages, and territories
belonging to Ioppe, which also they did. When the Fame it self declares the
destruction of Iotapata.
Joseph was slain in the destruction of the City, for whose death all
Jerusalem sorrowed, and every one mourned for their lost kindred; all bewailed
the supposed The year of the world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69. Joseph is
said to be slain in Jerusalem.
Joseph thirty days spa^, and hired many musicians to sing funeral songs for
him. At last truth discovered it self, and the true news of the destruction
of Iotapata with the accidents there: also how Joseph was not slain but lived
with the Romans, and that the Romans honored him more then a captive could
expect. Then the Jews began as much to hate him now living, as before they
mourned for him when they supposed him dead. And some said he was a coward,
others that he was a traitor unto his Country, and the whole City breathed
out reproachful speeches against him. These heavy tidings increased their
rage, and this their adversity (which unto wise men had been a warning to
provide least the The hatred, malice and wrath in Jerusalem against Joseph
like befell them) made them more outrageous; so that always the end of one
mischief was the Joseph. And this was the estate of the Citizens of Jerusalem.

CHAP. XVI.
How Tyberias was yielded.

VEspasian was desirous to see the kingdom of Agrippa (for the King had
entreated him Vespasian com meth unto Agrippas kingdom, and recreateth
himself there, and feasteth twenty days.
to go thither, partly to feast him and his whole army, partly to repress
some troubles arising in his kingdom, in the time of his absence) and so
departed from Caesarea upon Agrippa his kingdom) and fully determining utterly
to destroy the Jews which inhabited there abouts, he thought it good to lead
his army against these two places, especially that he might reward Agrippa for
his good entertainment, by surrendering these Cities unto him. Wherefore he
sent his son Titus to Caesarea to bring the soldiers there unto Scythopolis,
which was the greatest of all the ten Cities, which also is near unto
Tiberias, whither himself being come he expected his sons coming: and
departing from thence with three legions, he pitched his Tent in a place called
Enabris, where the seditious people of Tiberias might Valerianus the Decadarch
to entreat a peace with them, and sent fifty horsemen to accompany him: for
he Valerianus peaceably speaks to the townes-men.
understood that the people desired peace, and against their will were forced
to war, by some of the seditious amongst them. Valerianus coming near unto
the city walls, lighted from his horse; commanding all his company to do the
like, that they of Tyberias might not think that they came to fight, but in
peaceable manner: but before he spoke any one word, the boldest and strongest of
the seditious persons came out armed against him, having one Jesus the son of
Tobias, who had been a Captain of thieves, for their governor and leader.
Valerianus not presuming The seditious sally out and put the Romans to flight.
to fight without authority from his General, although he had been certain
of the victory; again he considered that it was great danger for so few to
fight against a whole multitude, and Jesus and his followers took, and brought
into the City, rejoicing as though they had taken them in fight and not by
treason. But the Senators and chief of the City, fearing what might ensue of
this The Citizens of Tyberias prostrate them selves before Vespasian and
obtain pardon
fact, went unto the Romans and together with king Agrippa came unto Vespasian,
and prostrated themselves at his feet, beseeching him not to despise them, and
not to think that the whole City were partakers with those few wicked
persons, that so had merited his displeasure, requesting him to spare the
people who always had honored the Romans, but rather that he should punish
the authors of that revolt and misdemeanour: who also had withheld the whole
City, even until now to yield it self unto the Romans. Vespasian moved by
their entreaties, pardoned the Valerianus his horse, and that he perceived
Agrippa was sorrowful, for fear that the City should be destroyed, and so
by them Vespasian promised the towns men pardon. Then Jesus and his associates
thinking it not safe for them to abide there, fled unto Tarichea. The next day,
Vespasian sent before him Traianus with certain horsemen into the Castle; to
see if all the multitude desired peace, and finding the people to bear
peaceable minds, he with his whole army came unto the City. And the
Inhabitants opening the gates of their city, went out to meet him with great
joy, all crying out that The year of the world. 4031. after the birth of
Christ. 69. The Tiberians entertain Vespasian with acclamations.
Vespasian commanded a part of the wall on the south side to be pulled down,
and so entered in: yet did he not sack the city, nor ruin the walls, for
Agrippaes sake, who promised that from thencefoorth the Citizens would be
quiet. And so he pacified that City greatly troubled with sedition.

CHAP. XVII.
How Tarichea was besieged.

VEspasian departed from Tiberias, and pitched his Tents betwixt it and
Tarichea, and encamped Vespasian besieges Tarichea.
Joseph had enclosed it with a wall on every side, where it was not compassed
by the lake. But the wall though it were strong, yet was it not so strong as
that of Tiberias: for Joseph builded that in ye beginning of the rebellion,
having men and money at will; but that of Tarichea was built only by the
remainder of his liberality. The Taricheans had great store of ships in the
lake adjoining, to the end that if they were overcome by land, they might fly
by water: and therefore they had prepared their ships for a battle by water
if need should be. Whilst the Jesus and his followers not dismayde either
with the multitude or military discipline of his enemies, issued out of the
city, and slew the workmen, and destroyed a part of the work: and perceiving
the Romans armed and assembled together against him, he fled again unto his
company without any loss or harm received. But the Romans pursued The Romans
drive the Jews to their ships.
them so fast, that they forced them to take their ships, and so being gone as
far from the shore, as that yet they might easily reach them with the shot
of an arrowe, they cast anchor and disposed their ships in warlike manner, and
fought against the Romans who were on shore. Vespasian understood that a
great multitude of them were gathered together in a place near unto the city:
wherefore he sent his son Titus against them with six hundredth horsemen, who
finding the number of the enemies to be infinite, certified his Father, that he
needed more forces: O ye Romans, I will first put you in mind who you are and
of what nation, that Titus Oration to his terrified soldiers. Jews are not to
be feared.
so you considering what your selves are, may also consider who they are with
whom we are to fight; never yet was there any enemy in any part of the world
that could escape our hands. The Jews themselves though already overcome, yet
do they endure and manfully bear out their misery: if therefore they
constantly endure wars, and fight valiantly being in adversity; what should
we do who are in prosperity? I rejoice to see you show good countenance, yet
I fear least so huge a multitude of our enemies discourage some of you: let
every one therefore once again consider, who himself is and with whom he is
to fight: and that although the Jews be bold Victory consists not in the
multitude, but in the courage of a few that fight valiantly.
come to help one another, not being pestered; whereas huge multitudes do more
hinder one another then do good, and do themselves more harm then their
enemies. So the Jews are lead with desperation, rage and fury, which in deed
in prosperous success are of some force, but in a desperate fortune they are
quickly daunted: but we are led by virtue and obedience and fortitude, which
both are of force in prosperity, and also are good in adversity. Moreover we
have greater occasion to fight then the Jews have: for they fight only for
their country and liberty, The year of the world, 4031. after Christ's birth
69. The Romans have greater cause of war then the Jews
It becomes soldiers to obey their captain.
of you depart from me: persuade your selves that God will assist my force, and
boldly presume

Titus having thus spoken, as it were by Gods providence, al his soldiers took
heart and courage, so that now they were sorry to see Traianus come with four
hundredth horsemen more, before the fight was begun, as though their victory
should be less renowned, because he came to help them. Vespasian also sent
Antonius and Silo with two thousand archers, to take the Vespasian sends new
supplies to Titus.
mountain that was just opposite unto the town, and to beat them that
defended the City off from the walls, and they did as they were commanded. Then
Titus with all force possible, first rushed with his horse upon the enemies:
and all followed him with a huge cry, scattering themselves in such order as
they occupied as much ground as the Jews, and so appeared more then The Jews
fly into the City.
one fled as fast as he could into the city. And Titus killed some as they
fled, others as he met them, and those he ouertooke, and many one for haste
tumbling upon another; and prevented all that fled unto the walls, and drove
them back again into the field, till at last the multitude prevailed, and so
they got into the city. Now at their return into the city there befell a
great dissension: for the inhabitants considering their own estate, and the
event of all former wars, and especially of this last fight, misliked of war
and desired peace: but the strangers that had fled from other places thither,
and were in great multitude would needs contend therein; and so A bitter
dissension and sedition in the city.
one part began a mutiny against the other, as though they would presently one
have taken arms Titus being not far from the wall, heard these tumults
within the city, and cried out unto the Romans; This is the hour (fellow
soldiers) wherein God has given the Jews into our hands: why do we defer
the time any longer? why do we not take the victory offered? do you not
hear the crics within? they who escaped our hands are at variance amongst
themselves: the city is ours if we make haste, and making have take courage:
for nothing worth Titus Oration to the Roman soldiers.
renown can be achieved without danger: and let us not only prevent our
enemies concord which necessity will soon effect, but also our own forces
before any fresh aid come unto us, that beside the victory we have, being so
few over so huge a multitude, we may also divide the spoil of the city
amongst us. No sooner had he thus spoken, but presently he mounted upon his
horse, and rode into the lake, and so passed into the city, and all the
soldiers followed him. Jesus with his followers leaving his quarter, which was
his to defend, fled into the fields, others flying toward the lake fell into
their enemies hands, who came that Jesus with his followers flies into the
fields.
way against them, and so were massacred even as they were getting into their
ships, other some were slain as they did swim to overtake the ships that
were new launcht from the shore: and there was a great slaughter of men all
over the City. For the strangers that fled not, made resistance, and the
townsmen did not offer to defend themselves; for they abstained from fight,
hoping for pardon in that they were not against those proceedings: till at last
Titus having slain the wicked, took compassion upon the townsmen and saved
their lives, and caused the slaughter to cease. They who fled into the lake
seeing the City taken, ran away as far as they Titus sent horsemen to let
his father understand what he had Titus certifieth his father of his exploits
and victory.
done. Whereof he having intelligence, being very glad for his sons valor
and magnanimity, and for the achieuing of such a victory, whereby a great
part of those wars was ended, he commanded presently the City to be guarded
round about, to the intent that none might escape away alive. And the next day
he came down unto the lake, and commanded ships to be built to pursue
those that had escaped by it: and having many workmen and great store of
matter to build them withal, his command was presently The year of the
world. 4031. after Christ's birth c 9.
effected.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the lake of Genezar, and the fountain of Jordan.

THe lake of Genezar takes his name from the country adjoining unto it, the
breadth thereof is forty furlongs, the length a hundredth. The water of this
lake is sweet and good to drink, and is more subtle then ordinarily pure
waters of marish places are, and it is very clear near the shore; and more
temperate to drink, then either that of the river or fountain, but it is
always more cold then one would judge such a lake to be of that largnes: for
the water being set in the sun, does not lose his coldness, which the
inhabitants have used to do in The fountain of Jordan.
water is called Phiala, by reason of his roundnesse, for it is as round as a
wheel, and the water still keeps within the brinke of Phiala, never
increasing or diminishing, and no man knew that this was the head of Jordan,
till Philip the Tetrarch of Trachon found it to be so: for he casting strawes
into Phiala, found them afterward carried unto Panium, which before that time
was thought to be the fountain of Jordan. Panium, though it be naturally
beautified, yet by Agrippa The description of Genezar. The fertility of
Genezar.
a hundredth and twenty furlongs unto the city of Iulia, and in the way
deuideth the lake Genezar, and passing a great way further into the wilderness,
at last it ends in the lake called Asphaltites. Upon the lake Genezar there
bordereth a country of the same name, naturally beautiful and admirable: for
there is no kind of plant which grows not there, and the inhabitants have
replenished it with plants and trees of all sorts, and the temperature of the
air well agrees with so diverse trees, for there are an infinite company of
Nut trees, which of all trees especially require a cold soil: there are also
abundance of palms which desire great heat: likewise great store of figs and
olives, which require a temperate air, so that one may justly say, that
through the bounty The length and breadth of Genezar.
it to be an arm of Nilus, because it has fishes like a Cork bred in a lake
near Alexandria. The length of this country along the lake bearing the same
name, is thirty furlongs, and the breadth twenty. And this is the nature of
the lake Genezar, and the country about it.

CHAP. XIX.
How the Taricheans were destroyed.

VEspasian having finished his ships, and furnished them with as many men as he
thought sufficed against them whom he was to pursue, he embarked upon the lake,
and himself also went against them. The Taricheans could not possibly make any
escape by land, although A fight by sea against the Taricheans.
they would, and they were not able to fight hand to hand with the Romans, for
their small pyrate boats were not able to withstand their enemies great
vessels; and beside that, they were not sufficienly manned, ^o that they feared
to encounter with the Romans who pressed altogether upon them: yet
notwithstanding sometime they came about the Roman ships, and cast stones at the
boats, the ships meeting one another. They that were in the water and did lift
up their heads to The year of the world. 4031. after Christ's birth 69.
Vespasians victory in the lake of Genezar against the Tarichea^s. The end of
the battle by sea, in which there died six thousand and five hundredth men.
swim were prevented with arrows, or overtaken with the Roman boats: and if in
desperation they came swimming toward their enemies, their hands or heads were
presently cut off. And thus some perished one way, and some another, til at
last they fled and arrived upon the shore, their ships being compassed round
about. So the Romans killed many upon the lake, and many upon the land, and one
might then have seen all the lake stained with bloudful of dead bodies, for
not one escaped alive. A few days after in that country there was a very
odious stinch, and a horrible spectacle: for the shores were all full of boats
that had suffered shipwreck, and dead bodies swollen in the water, and those
dead bodies taking heat did putrify and so corrupt the air all about, that
not only the whole country and inhabitants thought it a miserable affliction,
but also the Romans who were the authors thereof. And this was the end of that
war by water. And the number Vespasian sat in a tribunal seat, and
separated the strangers from the inhabitants, for that they seemed to be the
authors of that war: yet he deliberated with the captains and governors,
whether he should likewise pardon them: but they told him that their lives
might endomage him; for said they, if thou send those men away and let them
live, they cannot live Vespasian con^ulteth with his chieftains about the Jews.
peaceably because they want a biding places, and are able to disturb and
disquiet those to whom they shall fly. Vespasian for this cause judged them
unworthy to live, assuredly knowing that if they were let go, they would
fight against them who pardoned their lives, yet he deliberated what death to
put them to. But he thought with himself the inhabitants would not patiently
abide so many to be massacred, who had fled unto them for succor: wherefore he
sought to use no Vespasian and enclosed them all in an Amphitheater, and so
killed one thousand and two hundredth of them, who were all old men or young,
and unable for service: of the rest that were all Nero at Isthmos near
Corinth. The rest of the multitude he sold, in number thirty thousand and
four hundredth, beside others that he gave The destruction and sale of the
Jews.
unto Agrippa: for he permitted him to do what he would with those that were of
his kingdom: But Agrippa sold also those who were given him. The rest of them
were fugitives and seditious persons of Trachon, Gaulanitis, and Hippenis, and
many of Gadara, whose contempt of peace justly procured these wars. They were
taken the sixth of the Ides of September.

THE FOVRTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 4. book.
1 How Gamala was besieged. 2 How Placidus took Itaburium. 3 How Gamala was
destroyed. 5 How Titus took Giscala. 5 Of the beginning of the destruction of
Jerusalem. 6 Of the coming of the Idumaeans unto Jerusalem, and of their
deeds. 7 Of the Massacre of the Jews by the Idumaeans.
CHAP. I. The year of the world 4031. after Christ's Na^iuitie. 69.

How Gamala was besieged.

AFter that Tarichea was conquered, all those that from the time that Iotapata
was surprised til this instant, had revolted from the Romans, did now again
The victory of the Romans against the Jews.
unite themselves unto them: so that the Romans had now gotten into their hands
all Castles and towns, Giscala only excepted, and Itaburium a mountain so
called. With these two rebelled Gamala a town over against Tarichea, and
situated upon the lake, belonging to the kingdom of Agrippa, and also Sogane
and Seleucia, and these two last were both belonging unto Gaulanitis,
Semechonitis a lake. The fountain of Jordan.
whose marshes reach even unto Daphne, which Country is very pleasant of it
self, and famous for that it entertaineth the stream called little Jordan,
and at the foot of the golden mountain deriueth it into great Jordan. Agrippa
in the beginning of the rebellion, united Sogane and Seleucia unto himself:
but Gamala by reason of the situation apt to resist, did not yield unto him,
for it is far stronger then Iotapata. For from an exceeding high mountain,
there descends a hill very difficult for any to pass, rising high in the
midst, and then descends The situation of Gamala.
lower and lower both before and behind, so that it represents the figure of
a Camel, which the Hebrews call Gamal, and so thereof it took the name,
though the Inhabitants do not keep The City of Gamala inexpugnable and
strong.
In that place the City was very well inhabited on the descent of the hill,
and toward the South part it stood on so steep a hill, that it seemed as
though it would have fallen every hour, and the South hill served the
Inhabitants in steed of a Castle, being unwalled: for it was an exceeding high
rock, and reached down even unto the bottom of the valley in the town, and
at the walls thereof there was a fountain. Although this City were of his own
nature invincible, yet Joseph compassing it with a wall, and with ditches, and
mines made it more strong. Wherefore the Inhabitants of this place put far
more confidence in their walls, then they of Iotapata did; yet Agrippa to
besiege them. Vespasian departed from Ammaus, and pitched his Tents before
Tyberias, and so went unto Gamala, (Ammaus is interpreted hot waters, for there
is a fountain Vespasian besieged Gamala
of hot water which cures many diseases) and the City was so situate, that he
could not besiege (...) round about: wherefore he placed men to keep watch in
such places as it was passible, and obtained the highest mountain, where his
soldiers pitching their Tents, lastly entrenched themselves. On the East part
of the City in the most eminent place there was a Castle, where the fifteenth
and fifth legions labored against the town, and the ^th legion filled up the
ditches and Agrippa went unto the walls and spoke unto them that defended them,
willing them to yield unto the Romans, but one of them with a sling stroke him
on the right arm and One with a sling wounds Agrippa.
hurt him, and his familiar friends came about him to defend him. Then the
Romans for anger that the king was hurt, and for fear of such mischances to
themselves, made them earnest to assault the town, persuading themselves that
they would use strangers and their enemies hardly, if it lay in their lot,
seeing they had so evil entreated one of their own nation, for persuading
them unto that was profitable for them.

Having quickly entrenched themselves by reason of the multitude that labored
in that business, and by reason that they were accustomed unto such like
work, they began to place the engine against the town walls. Chares and Joseph
were two of the most potent men in the town, The Romans besiege Gamala and
assault the same.
the walls, they fled into the City. Then the Romans did batter the walls with
Ramms in three several places, and where the wall fell there they issued in
with trumpets and a great noise, and cries, The year of the world. 4031. after
Christ's birth 69.
and fought with the townes-men, who in the first conflict so valiantly
resisted them, that they permitted them not to enter any further into the
town; at last being overcome both in strength and number, they all fled into
the highest part of the City, and from thence they turned again upon the
Romans, who pursued them and drove them down into the valleys and killed
many, and diverse in that straight passage were trodden to death by their
fellows. The Romans seeing that they neither could fly, nor resist their
enemies above their heads, fled into their houses, The Romans fall down with
the ruins of the Jews houses.
which adjoined unto the plain, and so filled them, that being ouercharged,
they fell down and lighted upon other houses beneath them, which did bear
them down also, and they likewise others situated beneath them. Many of the
Romans this way perished; for being amazed, and not knowing what to do, they
fled into other houses, notwithstanding they did see them shak and Many Romans
slain and spoiled.
totter: and many seeking to escape, were maimed by some part of the ruins
that fell upon their bodies, and many were choked in the dust. The Citizens of
Gamala rejoiced thereat, thinking that this aid was sent from God, and not
regarding their private commodities, they ceased not to compel the Romans into
their houses; and if any were in the narrow streets, them they slew with darts
from above out of the high places. Thus the ruins affoorded them stones
enough, and their slain enemies swords and armor, which they took from them,
being now half dead, and used them against themselves: many died, who cast
themselves headlong from off the houses being ready to fall, and those that
sought to fly, could not easily escape, for being ignorant of the ways, and
there being such a dust that one could not see another, one of them killed
another: And so with much ado finding passage, they went out of the City.
Vespasian who was always amongst Vespasians fortitude and war like valor.
the midst of these hurlyburlyes, was greatly moved to see the buildings fall
so upon his fouldiers, and forgetting his own safety, he secretly retired
himself with only a few into the higher part of the City, where he was left
in great danger, having very few about him (for Titus his son was not there,
being before this time sent unto Mutianus in Syria) and now he could not fly
safely, nor yet had it been for his honor if he could. Wherefore remembering
all that he Vespasians fight with the Jews.
had done even from his childhood, and his own virtue, he encouraged his men,
and with them joined arms, and covered themselves with their shields, and so
as it were moved with some divine motions defended themselves from all darts,
arrows, and stones, which were cast from aloft upon them, and so remained
there not terrified either by the number or might of his enemies, till at last
they wondering at his divine virtue and courage, assuaged their fury. And now

Many Romans perished in that fight, and amongst the rest Ebutius a Decadarch,
who not only in that fight showed himself valiant, but also in many wars
before, and had done the Jews much harm. Also in that fight a certain
Centurion named Gallus, accompanied with ten Gallus with ten soldiers lies
hid in a certain house.
soldiers, hid himself in a house, and at supper time he heard the people of
that house talk, what the Citizens of Gamala were purposed to do against the
Romans (this Gallus and they with him were Syrians) and in the night time he
slew them all, and after escaped safe unto the Romans. Vespasian Vespasian
comfort his soldiers.
perceived all his army sorrowful for that mischance, and so much the more,
for that they never as yet had so bad a breakfast, and especially for that they
had forsaken their general, and Wherefore he told them that it behooued them
patiently to abide that which was common to all men, affirming that there was
no victory without bloodshed, and that fortune was mutable: and that he had
already slain many thousand Jews, and now had paid a small bribe The
inconstancy and mutabilitie of fortune.
for his happy success unto adverse fortune. And that as it did not become
any but vaineglorious people to boast in their prosperity, so it behooued none
but cowards to fear and tremble in adversity: For, said he, fortune is very
mutable both to the good and bad, and he is a valiant man that is not moved by
adversity: for he having all his wits about him, can even in the midst of
his troubles see where any fault is, and amend it. Yet (quoth he) this has not
befallen us through the but you being eager of the victory, you did not respect
your own safety. It is not the manner The year of the world. 4031. after the
birth of Christ. 69. The Roman soldiers do all things with discretion.
With these and such like speeches he comforted his soldiers.

The people of Gamala were of great courage, and much emboldened with their
prosperous success, which notwithstanding did not happen through their valor:
but presently perceiving The Romans once more attempt the assault of Gamala.
by the valleys where no guard was, and by secret vaults underneath the ground;
and they who for fear least they should be taken remained in the City
perished for hunger: for all the victuals were reserved for them that fought.
And they still continued in this calamity.

CHAP. II.
How Placidus took the mountain Itaburium.

DVring this siege, Vespasian made another expedition against them, who kept
the mountain Itaburium, situated between the great field and Scythopolis,
which is thirty furlongs The height of the mountain Itaburium.
high, and inaccessible on the North side. In the very top of this mountain
there is a plain twenty furlongs over enclosed with a wall, all which wall
being of so huge a compass, Joseph had built in 40. days: they received all
necessary provision from beneath, for they had only rain water. Unto this
place a huge multitude were gathered, and Vespasian sent Placidus against them
with six hundredth horsemen, who could no ways get upon the mountain:
wherefore he exhorted many of them to peace, putting them in hope of pardon:
likewise diverse of the Placidus for the nonce gave them fair speeches, hoping
to get them down into the plain: and they as though they would have obeyed
him followed him thither, meaning when they came there, suddenly to Fraud paid
with fraud.
assault him: yet Placidus his devise took place. For when the Jews assaulted
him, he fained himself to fly, and the Jews having pursued him a great way
from the mountainne, he turned again upon them, and wounded many on the backs
as they fled, and killed some, and hindered Placidus victory.
the rest of the multitude from ascending the mountain: so the rest left
Itaburium, and fled unto Jerusalem, and the inhabitants (now water failing
them) yielded unto Placidus, and delivered the mountain unto him.

CHAP. III.
How Gamala was destroyed.

NOw the most presumptuous amongst the Gamalians fled and hid themselves, and
the weaker sort did perish through famine: yet the most courageous that were
left amongst the^, defended the wall till the seven and twentieth day of
October. Upon which day three soldiers of the fifteenth legion, toward break
of the day, undermined the highest tower in their The Romans undermine a
certain tower, and it falls with a great noise.
quarter, and entered into it; those that kept it neither perceiving them when
they came in, nor when they went out (for it was in the night time.) These
soldiers being wary least any noise should be made, removed five of the
greatest stones, and presently leapt away, and incontinently Joseph was stricken
with a dart from a part of the wall that was fallen down, and there died. They
who were within the City were terrified with the noise hereof, and ran up
and down as though all the enemies were already entered into it. And Chares
Joseph's companion being sick yielded up the ghoast, fear increasing his
disease, and helping to shorten his life. The Romans, remembering the bad
success at the last assault, did not enter the The year of the world, 4031.
after Christ's birth 69. Titus with two hundredth horse, besides chosen footmen
enters Gamala.
City till the three and twentieth day of the foresaid month.

Then Titus as it were vexed at the misfortune of the Romans in his absence,
accompanied with two hundredth horsemen and certain chosen footmen, entered the
City no man resisting him, and he being passed into the same, the watchmen
then first perceiving it, cried to arms. Those within the city fearing that
Titus was entered, some took their children, some their wives, and fled into
the castle with pitiful cries and weeping: others met Titus, and were all put
to the sword: and they that could not get into the castle not knowing what to
do, fell amongst the Roman watchmen: then the skies were filled with the cries
of men dying, and the lower places of the City flowed with blood. Vespasian
led his whole army against those that were fled into the The top of the Castle
of Gamala stony and hard to be climed.
castle, which was of a huge height, and scarcely to be come unto, being all of
stone and full of ditches The Romans victory by Gods providence.
the Romans arrows amongst them into the castle, and the Jews arrows from
the Romans, and the wind was so violent, that it was not possible for them to
stand upon those high places; and so not being able to stand, nor to see those
that came against them, the Romans ascended and took the Castle, some
resisting for their defense, others yielding themselves. The Romans now called
to mind their fellows who perished in the first assault, and so became more
cruel. Many despairing of their lives, cast their wives, their children, and
themselves headlong down those Nine thousand Jews slain in Gamala, and only
two women escape.
that were sisters, and daughters unto Philip, who was son unto Ioachimus a
worthy man, and governor over all Agrippas army under him; and these two were
saved only, because at such time as the city was taken, they hid themselves:
for they spared not infants, but many took them and cast them down from the
castle. And thus was Gamala destroyed the 23. day of October, which began to
rebel the 21. day of September.

CHAP. IIII.
How Titus took Giscala.

NOw all the Cities and strong places of Galilee were taken, Giscala only
excepted: the inhabitants whereof desired peace, for that they were husbandmen,
and their riches The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70.
consisted in the fruits of the earth; but there were many thieves in the
City: to which vice also many of the Citizens were addicted. These people were
incited to rebel by one John a witch, and a deceitful person, son unto one
Leuias; who was of strange manners and bold to presume any thing, and
wonderfully atchieuing all he took in hand, and he was known unto all men for
one that desired war to make himself mighty. This man was ringleader of the
seditious persons in Giscala, and for fear of them the people who perhaps
otherwise would have John a poisoner and a deceitful man inforceth the
Citizens of Giscala to rebel.
sent legates to the Romans to request peace, were hindered and forced to stay,
till the Romans came to war against them. Against these people Vespasian sent
Titus, and with him a thousand horsemen, and the tenth legion toward
Scythopolis: and he with the rest went to Caesarea to refresh them after their
great labor, at the charges of the towns adjoining, judging it necessary to
comfort their bodies, and encourage their minds to sustain manfully the wars
that were to ensue: for he foresaw that he should have much ado to win
Jerusalem, both for that it was wont to be the kings seat, and also because
it was the chief and head City of all the nation. Vespasian foreseeth his no
small trouble in the siege of Jerusalem.
And his care in this point was so much the more increased, for that he
perceived that many out of all parts fled thither; and that it was naturally
strong; and also compassed with almost invincible walls: and beside this, the
boldness and desperate courage of the inhabitants, who although

Titus (coming on horseback unto Giscala) perceived that it might easily be
taken, yet knowing Titus his compassion toward those of Giscala.
that if it were taken by force, all the people should be destroyed by the
Romans (and now he was weary of bloodshed) he compassionating the well disposed
people which were otherwise like to perish together with the wicked, attempted
to take it by condition. Wherefore the walls being The year of the world 4032.
af^ter Christ's Na^iuitie. 70. Titus his merciful oration to those of Giscala.
Which offer (said he) I now also make unto you, and am not yet incensed
against you, because that which you do is for your liberty: but if (quoth
he) you do still persevere in this impossible course, my displeasure shall be
kindled against you. And if so be that they refused his kind offer, they should
presently perceive the Roman sword to be sharpened for their destruction, and
incontinently should find that their walls were but a mockery, and no ways able
to resist the None of the townsmen were admitted to make any answer, not to
come unto the walls: for the thieves were masters of them; and a guard was
placed at every gate, least any one should go forth to submit themselves,
John's answer to Titus exhortation.
or any horsemen should be received into the city. Then John made answer that
he liked well of the conditions offered, and that he would either persuade or
compel the inhabitants to accept of them, yet he requested that that day might
be granted unto the Jews: for it was the seventh day wherein it was not
lawful for them to entreat of peace, nor make war. For as the Romans knew
the Jews every seventh day ceased from all work, and which if they
profaned, they who caused it to be so abused, though it were Titus himself,
were as great offenders, as they who Titus might prevent by placing a strong
guard and watch in every place thereabout) and that he thought it a great
privilege to be suffered to keep the custom of his country; and that it was
his part who offered peace and safety to them that expected it, also to keep
their laws whose safety he granted. With these and such like speeches John
sought to delude Titus, being not so religious about the keeping of the
Sabbath, as careful for his own safety: for he feared that the city would
presently be taken, and he left alone, and so he determined in that night to
fly, as the only way to save his life. Truly God would have it so, that John
should then escape John reserved by Gods providence to be at the siege of
Jerusalem.
to be the overthrow of Jerusalem, and that Titus should not only grant him
the time he John perceiving no Romans to keep watch about the town, having
now opportunity fled not only with the armed men about him; but also with
many of the chief of the city, and whole families, whom he promised to
conduct unto Jerusalem. The fear of those Jews that fled with John.
But John fearing captivity, and careful for his own safety, having carried
them twenty furlongs out of the city forsook them: who being so left
desolate began grievously to lament. For every one thought himself as near
his enemies, as he was fa^ from the city and his friends, and still every
step they thought their enemies at hand ready to take them, and ever they
looked back as though their enemies heard the noise they made as they went,
and so came against

But John's exhortation took effect, wherein he cried unto them to save
themselves, and hasten unto such a place, where they might be safe and revenge
themselves of the Romans, for the outrages which they that remained behind
were like to endure: and so the multitude that fled, every one as he was able
dispersed themselves. Titus early in the morning came unto the walls to know
whether they accepted of his offer. Then the people set open the gates, and
with their wives The citizens of Giscala entertain Titus with all obedience.
and children came to meet him, all crying that he was their safety and
worker of their welfare, and that he had delivered their city out of
captivity: also they certified him how John was fled, John, but they could
not take him, for before they came he had gotten into Jerusalem: yet they slew
almost two thousand of them that fled with him, and brought back again
three thousand women and children. Titus was angry that he suffered John's
deceit to escape unpunished, yet his anger was something appeased, for that
he perceived John's purpose prevented, in that so many of his company were
slain, and so many brought back for captives. Thus he peaceably entered The
year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70. Titus mercy to his enemies.
It is better to leave an enemy in susp^nce through fear, then with the guilty
to confound the innocent.
the city, commanding the soldiers to break down a little piece of the
wall, as it were to take possession of it, and so punished the seditious rather
with threats, then torments. For he thought that many were accused only for
private hatred, and so were in danger to suffer being innocent: and he thought
it better to let the wicked live in fear, the^ with them to destroy the
guiltless. Thinking moreover that hereafter they would be more quiet either
for fear of punishment, or for shame of their former offense, for the which
they were pardoned: and that if any man suffered unworthily, he could not
afterward complain. Then he placed there a garrison both to repress the
seditious, and also to confirm them that desired peace. And thus was Galilee
conquered after it had much toyled the Romans.

CHAP. V.
Of the beginning of the destruction of Jerusalem.

SO soon as John was entered into Jerusalem, all the people flocked about him
and those that came with him, enquiring what calamity had be fallen them
without the city. Some of them being yet out of breath, and not able to
speak, by signs discovered their necessity: yet amidst these their miseries,
they boasted that it was not the Roman power that forced them to fly, but that
they of their own accord fled thither to war against the Romans in a safer
place, then that from whence they fled was; for none but unadvised and rash
headed men would fight for such a city as Giscala and other places that were
not able to resist, seeing that it behooued them all to reserve their vigor
and strength to defend the Metropolitan city. They also signified unto them
how Giscala was taken by the Romans, and that they departed in good John
nothing ashamed in that he had so shamefully The courage of John and those that
fled with him, stirs up the Jews to make war against the Romans.
forsaken them of Giscala who fled with him; went first to one and then to
another, enciting them all to war under a vain hope, alleging the weakness
of the Romans, and extolling their own puissance, deceiving the simple people,
and persuading them that though the Romans sought to revenge, yet could they
never enter the walls of Jerusalem, who had so much ado, and endured such
affliction in entering the little burges and villages of Galilee, against whose
walls they had broken all their engines. These words of his encited many young
men to sedition, but all the wiser sort foresaw what was like to ensue, and
even now mourned their lost city. And in this case were Intestine discord in
Jury.
they of Jerusalem: yet before this sedition in the city, the country people
began to be at discord amongst themselves. For Titus departed from Giscala unto
Caesarea, and Vespasian went from Caesarea to Iamnia and Azotus and took them
both, and leaving there garrisons, he returned to Caesarea, bringing with him a
huge company of them who had yielded unto him. All cities were at civil wars
amongst themselves, so that when the Romans did not war upon the^, one part of
the Jews in every city fought against the other, and there was a great
dissension between those that desired peace, The Jews turn their weapons
against themselves.
and the seditious people: and at first this discord began only in private
houses, but in the end every one joining with them that were of their mind,
they now began in companies to rebel openly.

Thus every place was troubled with civil discord, and every where rash young
men, who desired wars, prevailed against wise and grave old men, who
foreseeing the calamity like to ensue, The thieves trouping together in
Jerusalem spoil the country.
they in their robberies showed such cruelty, that the harm and injury they
did unto their own countrymen, was altogether equal to the miseries which
befell them by the means of the Romans; and they who by these miscreants were
spoiled, wished rather to have fallen into the Romans hands. But they who kept
the city, either because they were loath to weary themselves, or else for
that they hated the citizens or people, did nothing or very little succor the^
that fell into thieves hands. At last the thieves assembled themselves together
from all places, and joining companies, they brake into Jerusalem. This city
had no governor, and according to the custom of that country, received all
that came thither that were their countrymen; and so much more willingly to
commit murders, not only privily, or in the night upon mean men, but even on
the day The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70. Rapines and
spoils committed by day time.
Antipasse, who was borne of the blood royal, a man so eminent amongst them,
that the public treasure was committed unto his charge and custody, and put
him in prison: and after him they took Sopha a worthy man, and son to
Raguel and Laeuia, both of them of the kings household, and after them all that
seemed to bear any sway, or were in authority amongst the people. Great fear
fell upon the Inhabitants, and every one provided to save himself, as though
the City were even now surprised by the enemies. But these people were not
content thus to have imprisoned those The nobility of the City are taken and
slain by the thieves.
potentates, neither did they think it safety for themselves any longer to
detain such men alive: for many came daily unto them to visit them, and unto
their houses, who were able to revenge their injuries: and moreover they feared
that the people would make a head against them, being John a cruel murderer
(who was the son of Dorcas) he accompanied with ten more, all having swords
went unto the prison, and slew as many as they found there. To excuse this
cruel fact of theirs, they alleged this, to wit, that all they who were
slain in prison, had conference with the Romans concerning the betraying of
the City into their hands, and that for this cause they had slain them, being
traitors to their Country: they also boasted that this fact of theirs had
preserved the City, and that therefore they had well deserved of it. The
people was The thieves at their pleasure make a high Priest.
brought unto such slavery and terror, that the choosing of the high Priest was
in their hands to elect whom they pleased so much was their insolence
increased. Thus they not respecting the families, out of which it was only
lawful to choose the high Priest, they now elected strangers A high Priest
chosen by the^ contrary to the ancient custom.
for they who not deserving it, attained to such dignity, were as it were
obliged unto their will in all things, by whom they were so exaited. They also
devised many lies, to make those that were in authority one at variance with
another, thereby as it were to hold them occupied, who were able to refist
their enterprises, til that being now satisfied with the blood of the Citizens,
they began to commit impiety against God himself, and with profane and
vnpure feet to enter into the sanctuary. Then the people was incited against
them by Ananus his means, who was one of the priests, and the most ancient
and wisest of them all, who perhaps had laued the City, had he escaped the
hands of these miscreants. But they used the Temple as a Castle and defense of
themselves against the people, and made the Sanctuary a place for them to
exercise

Then calling one of the holy tribes named Eniachin, they cast lots, and it so
fell out that the lot fell upon one, whereby their iniquity was discovered,
this man whose lot it was to be high Priest Phanes, who was the son of
Samuel, a man not only unworthy of that dignity, but who had been so rudely
brought up, that he never knew what the high Priest meant, this Phanes Phanes a
country clown made a high Priest.
was borne in a village called Aphthasis. Him, against his will they fetched out
of the field, and as it had been in a stage play, they graced him with another
man's person, and presently gave him instructions how he should behave
himself, putting upon him the sacred attire of the high Priest, as though that
so great impiety had been but a sport. The rest of the priests beholding a
far off the holy laws to be scorned, scarcely contained themselves from
tears, and even groaned for sorrow, that their sacred dignities were so
abused. The people could no longer endure this their tyranny, but now every
one addressed himself to depose these tyrants. And those that were The best
Citizens exhort the people to revenge.
most earnest herein, were Gorion Joseph's son, and Simeon the son of
Gamaliel, who went about Jesus the son of Gamala, and Ananus the son of
Ananus often in public Sermons reprehended the people, and vpbrayded them with
their sloth, in that they made no more haste to destroy those Zealous people
(for so those wretches termed themselves, as though they had been devout
followers of goodness and not impious malefactors.) The people The year of
the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70. The Zealous the most wretched occasion
of these violences Ananus sharp inuectiue against the Zealous.
Ananus stood up amongst the midst of them, and having often turned his eyes
to the Temple, and beholden it till the tears ran down his cheeks, Oh said
he, how far better were it for me to die, then to live, to see the house of
God thus filled with impiety, and the Sanctuary wherein none should come but
me high Priest, profaned with the wicked feet of impious persons, being
clothed in Priests apparel, and bear the name of the most authority amongst
all names? and do I yet live, and do I to save my life, and to be
gray headed, abstain from dying a glorious death? Nay, rather I alone will go
against these murderers, and as though I were in Ananus twitteth the Jews with
their fear
great, and nourish their power and authority by your patience? did not you by
despising those who before were in authority being but a few, make all these,
who are many in number, tyrants over your selves? have not you keeping your
selves quiet, they being armed, turned their swords upon your own heads; and
as then it behooued you to resist their enterprises, when first they injured
The cruelty of the thieves.
when they destroyed houses and whole families. And this was the cause that at
last, the rulers and potentates themselves were set upon, and none would
succor them when they were drawn through the midst of the City, and these
murderers butchered them in prison whom you thus betrayed. I will not recount
what men they were and of what birth, but I say they being neither accused nor
condemned, having no man to hear them, they were most cruelly murdered, as we
have seen any: for they were before our faces led to be slain, as the
fattest amongst a whole herd of beasts, all we beholding this: and yet no man
opening his mouth nor lifting up his hand. And will you also endure, will you
suffer the holy Sanctuary to be profaned before your eyes? and will you,
having so emboldned these miscreants as ye see now, your The Temple the
strongest fortres of the City.
a Temple, but now in deed it is a fortress or Castle of defense. What do ye
now think such a tyranny being established over you; and your enemies being
even upon you, what do you deliberate to do? Do you expect the Romans to come
and help you, to save the Temple and sacred mysteries? Our City is now at
that stay, and we have so behaved our selves, that our very enemies pity us.
O ye wretches! will you not arise, and as the very bruit beasts do, will
you not revenge your selves upon them that have thus wounded you? Will not
every one of you call to mind the massacre of his friends, and what calamity
he himself has suffered, and so encourage your selves to be revenged? For
ought I can see, you have all lost that sacred and sweet and Wars are
intended for liberty.
to be once overcome by strangers, but to be slaves unto the basest of our own
nation, it argues that we have no spark of generositie in us, and that we
bear base and servile minds. And seeing The comparison of the Romans and Jews
and their properties.
whom the Romans (although they had conquered us) would not have touched? The
Romans never durst presume to pass beyond the limits of profane places, nor
ever violated they our sacred laws and customs, but always reverenced the
sanctuary, beholding it The year of the world. 4032. after the birth of
Christ. 70.
An answer to their contrary opinion who object the number and boldness of
the enemy.
increased, and every wicked person flies unto his like; and they are so much
the more embol dened, for that as yet no man did once offer to resist their
enterprises: and be sure that if they have time they will make use of the
higher place, and that to your damage. But (believe me) if you would but once
offer to go against them, their very consciences would abate their hautie
minds, and the remembrance of their misdeedes would put them so far out of
tune, that they will not make any benefit of the higher place. Perhaps God in
his vengeance will turn their own darts against them for their impiety, and
consume them therewith. Let us but only show our selves, The Epilogue of
Ananus Oration to the people.
and we shall dismay them; yet it is an honor for us if need be, to sacrifice
our lives for the defense of the holy temple. My self will assist you with
hand and advise, and you shall see that

Ananus thus exhorted the people against the Zealous, yet he knew well that it
was great difficulty to overcome them, being lusty young men, many in number,
of great courage, and the more desperate for the remorse of conscience of ye
horrible crimes, and execrable deeds which they had committed, for they
despaired of all hope of pardon for their misdeeds. Yet Ananus thought it
altogether intolerable, that the common wealth should be so ouerruled. After
this exhortation the people cried out that they were ready to go against the
thieves, and to do as they were requested. Whilst that Ananus selected out
the most able men for war, and set them in order, the Zealous came and issued
out upon him, and (having intelligence of all his intents and proceedings
Ananus disposes his soldiers against the Zealous.
Ananus quickly gathered together the people, who were more in number then the
thieves, yet were they not so well armed as they; but what they wanted in arms
their courage did supply. For the Citizens were armed with fury, stronger then
armor; and they which were gone out of the temple, with a more desperate
boldness, then all the multitude how great soever it was. For the Citizens
thought it no abiding for them in the City except they could drive away the
Zealous: and the Zealous thought that they could not escape torments and death it
self, except that they were victors. So at last they joined battle each under
their captains and leaders, and first of all both parties cast stones one
against another: and if any part fled, then the conquerors pursued them Ananus
with his company entered the temple by force with them, and brake the rank of
his enemies. Then they in the utter temple were in The fight of the Citizens
and Zealous in the temple.
Ananus would not offer violence to the sacred gates, and beside that the
enemies cast darts from aloft: for he thought it a great offense against God,
although he might have got the victory, to introduce the people not being
purified. Wherefore he elected six thousand of the chief of all his men well
armed, and appointed them to keep the porches, and others to succeed in their
places while they took rest. And many of the better sort of the Citizens being
by the chief of the City placed to keep watch there, hired other poor folk
to watch in their steeds. But John, who, as before we have The year of the
world, 4032 after Christ's birth 70. Iohnful of deceit, and a betraier of the
citizens.
told, fled from Giscala, wrought the ruin of all these. This man being full
of deceit, and above all measure desirous of rule, long ago intended to
overthrow the common wealth. This man from that time counterfeited himself to
be against the thieves, and so day and night accompanied Ananus and the rest,
both in their consultations, and when they went to visit the watch; and he
disclosed all their secrets unto the Zealous: and there was nothing decreed by
the people but he gave the thieves intelligence thereof before it was put in
practice; yet he seemed to be very dutiful unto Ananus, and the rest of the
nobility, hereby hoping to conceal his treachery. But it fell out contrary
to his expectation; for this his too much reverence caused him to be suspected,
because they noted him to play the parasite: and for that uncalled he daily
intruded himself into their consultations, he was misdoubted to bewray their
secrets. For Ananus perceived that John's deeds did carry suspicion of treason,
yet could they not easily remove him, his craft was such: beside this, he was
boulstred out by many noble men, who were employed in these affairs. Wherefore
they thought it good to request of him an oath of friendship; which he denied
not, but added moreover that he would be true unto the people, John swears to
be faithful to the people.
and neither disclose any deed or secret counsel of theirs unto the enemies,
and that he with heart and hand would truly endeavor to suppress the rebels. So
Ananus did no more mistrust him because of his oath, and admitted him afterward
to all their counsels, nothing suspecting him. Nay they now trusted him so far,
that they sent him for an Ambassador unto the Zealous, to persuade them to
peace: for they were very careful least the temple through their deeds should
be defiled and profaned, or that any of the Jews should there be slain. But
he as though he John contrary to his oath reuealeth their secrets to the
Zealous.
had sworn unto the Zealous and not unto the Citizens, entered boldly amongst
them, and standing in the midst of them, he recounted unto them that he had
often for their sakes undergone great danger in suffering none of the
townesmens secrets to be concealed from them, but declared unto them all that
ever Ananus and his confederates determined against them; and that even now he
was like together with them to fall into extreme danger, except it pleased God
as it were miraculously to assist them. For, said he, now Ananus without delay
will send unto Vespasian, and he will send his army in all haste and take the
city: and that he had appointed the next day following for purification to
purify the people, that so under pretense of piety he might let them into the
City, or else they might enter in by force: and that he could not see how
either John stirs up the Zealous against the Citizens.
they were able to endure a long siege, or to encounter with so huge an army:
adding moreover, Ananus purposed so soon as they were unarmed to set upon
them. Wherefore if they had any care of themselves, they should either entreat
the watchmen that besieged them to be good unto them, or else get some succor
from some place without the temple. For (said he) he that amongst you hops
for pardon if you be overcome, does not remember what has past, and what he
has done; but let them persuade themselves, they that have been injured will
not forget and forgive so soon, as he that injured them is sorry for his fact.
Nay many times the repentance of malefactors makes them more hated then
before, and the wrath of men that are injured is increased by authority, and
license to do what they please. And they might be sure that the friends and
kinsfolks of them that were slain, would always lay wait to requite the
injuries; and that all the John terrified the Zealous, yet durst he not openly
tell them what he meant by foreign help, notwithstanding he meant the
Idumaeans. And that he might more inflame the thieves he went unto the chiefest
of them, and secretly told them that Ananus was cruelly bent against them, and
breathed out many threatenings against them in particular.

CHAP. VI.
How the Idumeans came unto Jerusalem, and what they did there.

AMongst the Zealous there were two principal, Eleazar the son of Simon, who
above Eleazar one of the Zealous causes the Idumaeans to besent for.
upon; and Zacharias the son of Amphicalus, who both descended from the line
of the priests. These two understanding, that beside the general threatenings
their deaths were especially vowed, and that the faction of Ananus to get him
into authority, had sent to call the Romans (for this John had fained)
deliberated with themselves what to do, having so short time to provide. For
they supposed that presently the people would assault them, and they bethought
The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70. The Zealous require help
from the Idumaeans.
themselves that now it was too late to seek for foreign help: for they
might endure all calamity, before they could give notice hereof unto any that
would help them. Yet at last they determined to call the Idumaeans to aid
them, and so they wrote a brief Epistle unto them, letting them understand how
Ananus, having seduced the people, meant to betray the mother city of their
nation unto the Romans, and that they fighting for their liberty, were by him
besieged in the temple: that the time wherein they expected safety was very
short: and that if they did not presently send succor, they were like to fall
into Ananus and their enemies hands, and the City to be brought in subjection
under the Romans: and also committed many things to be spoken by word of mouth
unto the rulers of Idumaea. For which purpose were chosen two principal men
eloquent and apt to persuade, and that, which was in this case required,
Ananias. These presently came unto the governors of Idumaea, and they reading
the Epistle, and hearing that which the messengers were to say unto them, like
mad men assembled all the people together The nature and manners of the
Idumaeans.
in post haste, and proclaimed wars, so the people in an instant gathered
themselves together, and were all armed to fight for the liberty of their
mother city: and twenty thousand being assembled together under the
government of four captains, came with all speed to Jerusalem: the names John
and James, sons of Sosa, and Simon the son of Cathla, and Phineas the son
of Clusoth. Ananus and his watchmen knew not of the going of those two
messengers, Twenty thousand Idumaea^s come to Jerusalem.
nor of the watches in the city, but they understood of the Idumaea^s coming,
and so shut the gates and placed watchmen upon the walls: yet they thought it
not good to go out and fight with them, but first with peaceable words to
persuade them to concord, and peace. Wherefore Jesus the eldest of the priests
next after Ananus stood in a tower opposite against them, and spoke in this
manner.

Though many and diverse tumults and troubles have molested this city, yet did
I never so much admire any of them, as to come with such fury and readiness to
help these wicked people, Jesus oration and exhortation to the Idumaeans.
against all expectation:

for (said he) you are come against us to help most vile persons, and that so
rashly, as it behooued not you to have done, if your Metropolitan city had
requested your help The disproofe of the Zealous fiction, who intended the
overthrow of the city, and objected the betraying thereof.
fained at men's pleasures, but from the thing it self. What should move us now
to yield unto the it self. True it is, I think peace better than wars, yet
being once provoked to wars, and the fight The year of the world. 403^. after
Christ's birth 70. Peace is better then death.
being begun, I had rather die a glorious death then to live in captivity. Do
they inform you that we have secretly sent the chief of our city to the
Romans, or that by common consent of all the people we have done it? If they
say that we did it secretly; let them then tell what friends of ours we sent, or
what servants of ours were ministers to effect this treason. Did they take any
messenger of ours, and find letters about him? How can that be hid from all our
citizens, with whom we do every hour converse? And is it possible that a few,
shut up in the temple, who could not come out into the city, should know our
secrets, all the whole city knowing nothing? or do they now first know it
when they are like to b^ punished for their impiety? never suspecting any of
us to be traitors, so long as they were in no fear. If they say that it was
done by common consent of all the people, why then all men were there when the
speech was made unto the people,

If fate had so decreed that our city should be betrayed unto the enemy,
assure your selves that they, who do thus accuse us, would have betrayed it
themselves; who have committed Jesus exhorts the Idumaeans that since they
are come, they should oppose themselves against the Zealous.
already all sort of impieties, treason only excepted. It is your part,
seeing you are come hither in arms, first (as reason and justice requires) to
assist your mother city against them who tyrannize over us, and violate our
laws: who treading down our laws make Jesus requires the Idumaeans to judge
the differents between the Zealous and them.
to help them whom they had just reason to fear as reuengers for their
impieties: yet if you make The end of Jesus oration to the Idumaeans.
confederates with the Romans, you may keep all passages; and then seek to
defend your Metropolis,

Jesus spoke thus unto them. But the Idumaeans being angry, were not moved
hereby, and so much the more for that entrance into the city was denied them,
and their generals were exceedingly wrath, thinking it slavery to lay down
their arms, especially at the command of another.

Then one of the captains named Simon the son of Cathla, having with much
ado The year of the world 4032. aftter Christ's Naiuitie. 70. Simons answer to
Jesus oration.
That he now did not wonder that those who maintained liberty, were enclosed
and besieged in the Temple, seeing that they of the City now shut their gates
against his followers, the City being common and free for all men; and that
perhaps they were ready to open the City gates for to receive the Romans. And
he spoke unto the Idumaeans from a tower, and commanded them to cast down their
arms, which they took only for the liberty of the city, when they durst not
trust their own nation to keep the same; yet would have them judges of the
discord: and that accusing others for killing some not convicted, they
themselves do condemn all the whole nation of ignominy; and that they had
now shut the City gates against their own Countrymen, which was common for all
strangers to come unto for religion sake. Did we make haste toward you, to
fight The Idumaeans are displeased because the City gates were locked against
them.
The reproaches the Idumeans object against the high priests and Citizens.
endure this your mockery, that perceives how impossible your allegations
are? For who can justly accuse those that ye keep shut up in the Temple,
because that they presumed to punish traitors, whom you grace with the title of
noble and innocent, because they were your co^federats? Only in this they are
blame worthy, that they did not begin with you, but left alive such members of
that conspiracy. Except also you will say that the Idumaeans shut you out of
your City,

CHAP. VII.
Of the massacre of the Jews by the Idumaeans.

ALl the whole multitude agreed with a loud cry unto these speeches of Simon.
And Jesus departed sorrowful, seeing that the Idumaeans would agree to no
reason, and that thereby their City should suffer double wars. For the
Idumaeans wrath was not yet assuaged, who took the matter in great disdain
that they were not permitted to enter into the City, and also for that they
thought the Zealous very strong, and they themselves were ashamed that they
could not come to help them, so that many repented that they were come
thither. Yet would they not for shame return, nothing being done by them, and
so rashly The Idumaeans pitch their tabernacles near the walls.
placing their tabernacles near unto the City walls, they determined to stay
there. But that night there fell a most huge tempest: for there was a great
stormy wind and an exceeding great Ananus and his followers persuaded
themselves that they had now overcome them without war, and A huge storm.
that God had fought for them against the Idumaeans. But they were false
Prophets, and what they judged was to befall their enemies, that fell upon
themselves. In the mean while the Idumaeans lay as close together as they
could, and covered their heads with their shields, so that by this The Zealous
consult to break open the gates to assail the watch, and let in the Idumaeans.
means the rain did them not so much harm. The Zealous were pensive for the
Idumaeans more such an army shamefully to perish, who came at their request to
help them. But the wiser sort The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's
birth 70.
dissuaded the rest from this, seeing both a stronger watch placed to keep
them in, and the City walls diligently guarded because of the Idumaeans: and
moreover, persuading themselves that Ananus ceased not but went up and down;
first from one watch, and then to another; yet that night he did not so, not
for slothfulness, but because that the destinies had so decreed that thereby
both he and the watchmen should perish. For about midnight the storm
increasing, the watchmen fell into a sound sleep.

Then the Zealous determined to file the bars and bolts of the gates in
sunder; to effect this, they took the instruments which were consecrated to
the temple, and this attempt was much furthered The watchmen are oppressed with
sleep.
by the huge wind and thunder, which made such a noise that they could not be
heard: so issuing out of the Temple, they went privily to the walls, and opened
that gate near unto Ananus would make some resistance, they first of all drew
their swords, and then together with the Idumaeans came in: and if at that time
they had The Idumaeans by the means of the Zealous enter by night.
assaulted the City, they had without any let or hinderance destroyed all the
people therein: so great was their rage at that time. But first of all they
hastened to asist their fellows, whom they left besieged, and requested the
Idumaeans not to leave them in danger, for whose succor they were come, nor
permit them to incur greater damage: for having first surprised the watchmen,
it would be more easy for them to assault the City: which if they did not,
but first set upon the Citizens, they would presently assemble together, and
oppose themselves against them; and not permit them to ascend up unto the
Temple. The Idumaeans consented unto this, and so they passed thorough the
City into the Temple. And the Zealous remaining in the Temple, carefully The
Idumaeans join themselves with the Zealous in the Temple.
expected their coming, at whose arriual they took courage, and joining with
the Idumaeans, came out of the inner Temple, and set upon the watch: and some
being slain who were fast a sleep, the rest were awaked by the cries of
others, and so betook themselves to their arms to defend themselves, being
yet amazed. And at first thinking that they were only the Zealous that gave the
assault, hoped only by their multitude to suppress them; but seeing others
without the Temple also aslailing them, they perceived that the Idumaeans were
broken in: so the greater part of them being dismaide, laid down their
weapons and cried, and only a few of them, young men well armed, and of good
courage encountered with the Idumaeans, and for a good space defended their idle
fellows: others went and advertised the Inhabitants what was done, yet none
durst come to help them, because they now knew that the Idumaeans were got in,
but every The immanitie of the Idumaeans and Zealous against the Citizens of
Jerusalem.
and thunder made all more dreadful. The Idumaeans spared none, because that
they were naturally cruel and fierce to shed blood, and angry that they were
so beaten with the tempest, they used them most cruelly, by whose means they
were shut out of the City, sparing neither those who requested favor, nor
them who made resistance, for they slew many even as they were entreating them
to remember that they were of their own blood, and requesting them to spare
them for reverence of their Temple. There was no way to fly, nor any hope of
escape: being driven up into a narrow room, they hurt themselves more then the
enemies did, by crowding and treading upon one another, for there was no place
to fly, nor their enemies ceased not to kill Ananus and Jesus the high Priests
executed.
corpse, sometime they vpbrayded Ananus with the peoples favor toward him,
sometime Jesus with the words he spoke upon the wall unto them, and were so
impious as that they cast away their dead bodies unburied, notwithstanding that
the Jews in this point are so religious, that Ananus death the first cause of
the destruction of the City. The praise of Ananus the hie priest.


I think I do not greatly miss the mark, if I affirm Ananus his death to
have been the destruction of the City, and from that time forth the walls
of Jerusalem to have been overthrown, and the common wealth of the Jews to
have perished in that day when they beheld their priest and Governor slain,
even in the midst of the City. He was a man that led a laudable and most
just life: and being in great dignity, honor, and reputation; yet would he
not The year of the world. 4032. after the birth of Christ. 70.
Ananus lived, they had yielded with him unto the Romans. For he was an
eloquent Orator and could persuade admirably: whereby he had now gained unto
his side those that hindered him, and caused the wars; whom if they had had
for their captain against the Romans, it had not been so easy for the Romans
to have conquered them. With him was joined Jesus inferior to Ananus, yet
excelling all the rest. So that I think Almighty God having decreed the
total ruin of the City, being now violated and filled

THE FIFTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS
The Contents of the Chapters of the 5. book.
1 Of another massacre, and of the return of the Idumaeans, and the cruelty
of the Zealous. 2 Of the civil discord amongst the Jews. 3 Of the yielding of
Gadara, and the massacre there. 4 How certain towns were taken, and the
description of Jericho. 5 Of the lake called Asphaltites. 6 How Gerasa was
destroyed, and of the death of Nero, and of Galba and Otho. 7 Of Simon of
Gerasa Prince of a new conspiracy. 8 Of Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian.
9 Of Simons acts against the Zealous. 10 How Vespasian was chosen Emperor. 11
The description of Egypt and Pharus. 12 How Vespasian redeemed Joseph from
captivity. 13 Of Vitellius his death and manners. 14 How Titus was sent
against the Jews by his father.
CHAP. I. The year of the world, 4032. after Christ's birth 70.

Of another massacre, and of the return of the Idumaeans, and the cruelty of
the Zealous.

SVCH was the end of Ananus and Jesus. After whose death the Idumaeans and the
Zealous massacred the people, as though they had been a flock of The cruelty
of the Idumaeans and the Zealous.
pernicious beasts, and every one was slain wheresoever he was found: and
taking the nobility and younger sort of men, they kept them bound in prison,
hoping that by deferring their deaths, some of them would become partakers with
them. Yet none was thereby moved, but every one desired Twelve thousand of
the nobility executed.
were twelve thousand young noblemen slain by this means: and thus being hated
for these massacres, they mocked and flouted the magistrates, and made no
account of their judgments. So that when they determined to put one Zachary
the son of Baruch to death, a noble man and one of the chief of the city
(for they perceived that he was an enemy to their wickedness, and loved the
virtuous, and one that was rich, by whose death they hoped not only to have
the spoil of his goods, but also to be rid of such a one who might be able to
resist their bad purposes) they called seventy of the best amongst the common
people together as it were in judgment, yet they having no authority; and
before them they accused Zachary, that he had betrayed the Zachary condemned
to death by the Zealous.
common wealth unto the Romans, and that for that into he had sent unto
Vespasian: but neither showed any evidence nor proof thereof, but only they
affirmed it to be so; and therefore would have credit given unto their words.
When Zachary perceived that under pretense of being called into judgment, he
was deceitfully brought into prison; and having no hope of life, yet he spared
not to speak liberally his mind: but began to scorn the rage and pretense of
his enemies, and purged himself of the crimes whereof he was accused, and
converting his speech against his accusers, he laid open all their iniquities,
and much lamented the miseries and troubles of the City.

In the mean while the Zealous gnashed their teeth, and could scarcely contain
themselves from drawing their swords, and were desrious that their pretended
accusation and judgment Seventy judges absolve and acquit Zachary.
that he was to be absolved and freed as vnguiltie, and rather chose to die,
then to cause his death who was innocent. This sentence being pronounced, the
Zealous began to shoute and cry with a loud voice, and they all were angry at
the judges, who did not understand to what end that counterfeit authority was
given them. Then two of the boldest amongst them set upon Zachary, and killed
him in the midst of the temple, and mocked him saying, thou have now our
Zachary slain in the midst of the temple.
sentence and absolution, far more certain then the other was; and presently
they cast him down from the temple into the valley underneath: and then
contumeliously with the hilts of their swords they did beat the Judges out of
the temple; yet they did not kill them, to the end One of the Zealous
discovers their cruelty and barbarous dealing to the Idumaeans.
misliked these proceedings: who being assembled altogether, one of the Zealous
secretly told them all that their faction had done from their beginning; and
that the Idumaeans had taken arms, because they were informed, how that the
Metropolitan city was by the priests betrayed unto the Romans; but as they
might perceive there was no proof nor sign of any such matter: and that in
deed the Zealous who pretended themselves conseruers of the city, were mere
enemies; and The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's Nativity. 70.
Ananus himself slain, and almost all the people in one night: whereof many
of them ere long would repent, and that they might now themselves perceive the
cruelty of them, who requested their aid to be more then barbarous: so that
they blushed not to commit their villainies openly in the sight of them who had
saved their lives; and their misdemeanour and impiety would be imputed unto
the Idumaeans, because they neither hindered their mischievous practices, The
Idumaeans depart out of Jerusalem.
vulgar sort, and presently leaving the city, they went unto Simon; of whom we
will speak hereafter, and so they departed home.

Their departure was against the expectation of both parts: for the people not
knowing that the Idumaeans were penitent for that they had done, reioiced as
now delivered from their enemies: Gorion a noble man of great birth and
dignity, one who loved the people, and was very bountiful and a lover of
liberty: so that there was Gorions death and Niger Peraita.
none amongst the Jews like him, who for desire of liberty and his other
virtues was put to death. But neither could Niger Peraita escape their hands, a
man who in the wars against the Nigers prayers took effect as the end
testified.
themselves. Niger being thus slain, they were freed from the fear that they
had of him, how that he would resist their wickedness. There was no part of the
common people, who were not by some forged tale or other put to death. For some
were slain, for that long since

CHAP. II.
The civil discord amongst the Jews.

IN the mean while the Romans addressed all their courage against the city of
Jerusalem, The soldiers incite Vespasian to resort to Jerusalem.
and seeing them at great variance amongst themselves, thought this to be for
their great advantage. Upon this they incited Vespasian their general,
affirming that it was Gods providence (who fought for them) that the Jews
should be at civil wars amongst themselves, and that therefore he should not
ouerslip so good an opportunity: for the Jews would quickly be friends again
one with another, either by the wearines of civil wars, or else repenting
themselves of that which they had done. To whom Vespasian answered, that they
were ignorant The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70 Vespasian
expects victory by the civil dissension of his enemies.
what was to be done, being rather desirous as it were in a theater to show
their forces and strength, then with him to consider what was profitable and
expedient. For (said he) if we presently assault them, our coming will make
concord amongst our enemies, and so we shall bring upon our selves their forces
yet firm and strong: but by expecting alittle while they should have less
ado to conquer them, their chiefest forces being destroyed by their own
civil wars. And that God was more their friend then they were aware of, who
without their labor and pain delivered the Jews into their hands, and will
give us the victory without indaungering of our army. And that therefore it
was rather their parts to be as it were beholders of that tragedy, then to
fight against men desirous of death, and troubled with the greatest evil that
possi^le could be, to wit, domestical sedition, and civil wars. And if any
think that the victory is not famous being

The captains all consented, and thought this advise of Vespasians best: And
presently it appeared Many citizens to fly the Zealous resorted to Vespasian.
how profitable his counsel was. For every day manie^led unto him to escape
the hands of the Zealons: yet it was hard and dangerous to ^ie, because all the
ways were guarded with watchmen. And if any man upon any occasion whatsoever
were taken upon the way, he was presently killed, as one who intended to have
fled unto the Romans: yet he that feed the watchmen with money, escaped away
safely; and he that did not, was counted as a traitor: so that only richmen
could escape, and the poor were left to the slaughter. The multitude of dead
bodies that The Zealous tytannize both over the living and the dead.
that had now determined together, with their country laws, to abolish the
law of nature, yea and by their impiety to pollute the sacred divinity with
injustice, let the dead bodies rot above the ground, and whosoever attempted to
bury any one of them that were slain, whether he were friend or kinsman,
were presently put to death, and left unburied as men forsaking their city,
and flying to the enemy. To be brief, nothing so much increased their
calamity as mercy, for the wicked people were herewith, as it were, provoked
to wrath, whose displeasure and cruelty was For there was an old prophecy,
that when sedition reigned amongst them, and their own hands had first
violated the temple of God and holy things; that then

CHAP. III. The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70.

How Gadara was yielded: and of the massacre there.

But John, who long ago desired to be in chief authority, as tyrant over
all the rest, thought it not sufficient to be in as great reputation as his
fellows; wherefore by little John's pride and ambition.
and little joining unto himself the most impious of all the Zealous, he
divided himself from their union and fellowship: So that now every one
perceived (in that he always neglected what others commanded, and
imperiously commanded what himself thought good) that he affected
principality; and many joined to him for fear, some for favor (for he had a
smooth tongue, able to persuade them unto what he would) many also followed him
thinking The greater part of the con trarie faction fall from John.
that if he once prevailed, he could not easily be overcome: and again, if he
were deposed, that he would pick quarrels against the^ in the end, because
that they resisted him in the beginning. So every man determined rather to
suffer all misery in war, then to submit himself, and perish like a slave.
Thus the sedition was divided, and John was chief of the faction against the
Zealous: so between them they appointed garrisons in every place; and if by
chance they combatted together, they did little or nothing hurt one another,
but their chief contention was who should The tempest of three miseries
assailed Jerusalem at once.
rest unto the communaltie. In brief, many leaving their native soil, fled
unto strangers for succor, and found amongst the Romans safety, who with
their own nation lived in continual danger. There was also then begun the
fourth evil, which wrought the ruin of the whole nation. Not far from the
City there was a Castle called Massada, builded by the ancient Kings of
Jerusalem, very strong to lay their treasure in, and their munition for war,
and to retire themselves thereunto in time of need, for the safety of their
persons. This Castle was taken and kept Of those desperate rebels that kept the
Castle of Massada.
Slaughter and desolation through Jury. A Similitude.
again, and spoiled in every part of Iudaea. And as in a body, if the
principal member thereof be sick, all other parts of it are afflicted: so
Jerusalem being filled with tumults and discord, those that were without the
City found license to rob and spoil: and all they that had their towns
destroyed where they were wont to inhabit, went into the wilderness. Then they
assembling and uniting themselves together, not so many as an army, yet more
then a company of thieves, they brake into the towns and temples; and as in
war it comes to pass, they purposed to assault them, by whom they had
suffered such injury; but they were prevented, for the thieves understanding
of their coming, fled with the spoil they had gotten. And there was no part
of Iudaea that did not perish together with Jerusalem their mo^her City. Those
that fled unto The sugitiue^ beseech Vespasian to assist the City and reserve
^he rest of the people.
the Romans certified Vespasian hereof: for although the seditious persons did
keep and observe Vespasian both to help the oppressed city, and to take
compassion upon the relikes of their nation: affirming that many had been
butchered for wishing well to the Romans, and many being yet alive, were yet in
great danger. And Vespasian moved to compassionate their calamities came with
his army nearer Jerusalem, as though he would have besieged it, but in deed
his intent was to deliver it from the siege, hoping in the mean time to
conquer that part of the Country The ye^re of the world. 4032. after Christ's
birth 70.
that was yet untouched, and so to leave nothing to hinder him when he should
begin the siege. Wherefore coming unto Gadara, the strongest place and mother
City of all the Country beyond the river, he entered into it the fourth day
of March: for the chiefest of the City unknown unto the seditious people, had
sent Ambassadors to him, partly desiring peace, partly to save their goods and
lives, and promised him to yield the town into his hands: for there were many
rich men dwelling in Gadara: and their enemy knew not of their Embassage, till
they saw Vespasian at the City gates. And so despairing that they were able to
keep the City, by reason they had in the town many enemies, more in number
and stronger then themselves; and moreover seeing Vespasian even now almost at
the City: and thinking it a shame to fly and not be revenged of their
enemies; they took Dolesus (who was both a nobleman and chief of the City,
The Gadarensian^ entertain Vespasian with joy and acclamations.
people of Gadara went forth and received Vespasian joyfully, who also
confirmed a league betwixt them and him, and left them a company of horse and
footmen to defend them against the incursions of the fugitives their enemies:
for they themselves before the Romans requested it destroyed the City walls,
that so they might show themselves to desire peace, in that destroying their
walls if after they desired to rebel they could not.

Vespasian then sent Placidus with five hundredth horsemen, and three thousand
footmen to pursue those, that were fled out of Gadara, and he with the rest of
his army returned to Caesarea. But the fugitives perceiving themselves to be
pursued by Placidus, before he could overtake Placidus con^ct with the
fugitives.
they ^re willing, partly by force they compelled them to arm themselves, and
so rashly they came against Placidus. Placidus and his army seemed a little to
give back, to the intent to draw them further from the wall, and then having
compassed them about in a fit place, they wounded them a far off with darts
and arrows. Then the Jews seeking to fly, were prevented by the horsemen,
and they who offered to fight, were by the Roman footmen all put to the
sword, never showing any sign of valor. For the Jews assaulting the Romans
being all environed and quite covered with their shields as with a wall, and
not being able to break into their battle, they were slain by the Romans
darts: but their darts could do the Romans no harm, and so like fierce and
savage beasts they wilfully ran upon their enemies sword, and so were slain,
some having all Placidus was careful to intercept their passage unto the
town, and to hinder their recourse unto it, and brought those back again
that fled toward it, using his darts, and killing those that were next him;
and those who fled a far off for fear, he caused to return; till at last the
strongest amongst them brake away, and got unto the town walls: And those that
were within the City knew not what to do, for they would not shut the
fugitives of Gadara out of the City, because they desired to let their own
Citizens in; and again they perceived that if they let them in, they thereby
should work the overthrow of the City, as it fell out indeed they did. For
the gates being set open for them to come in, the Roman horsemen almost brake
into the town with them, yet the gates were shut before they could get in.
Then Placidus with all his soldiers assaulted the town, and fighting a
Placidus takes and burns Bethenabris.
sore fight which continued even until the Evening, at last he got the walls,
and the town, and slew the weaker sort: for the stronger fled, so the
soldiers sacked the houses and then fired the town. They who escaped thence
incited the whole Country to fly with them, reporting their calamities with
the most, and affirming that all the Roman army was at hand: and so they put
all the Inhabitants there in great fear; and having assembled a great
multitude, they fled unto Jericho, which place they put their confidence in,
for that it was strong and populous. Placidus having horsemen, and being
encouraged with his former victory pursued them unto Jordan, and whom soever
he ouertooke he slew, and at the river he fought with all the multitude there
gathered together, and staying, because that the river being waxed deeper by
abundance of rain,

Wherefore necessity forced them to fight because they could not fly, and
placing themselves Placidus victory over the fugitives.
along the banks of the river, they there received the horsemen, and warded
their darts; yet many for fear fell into the river; so the Romans slew there
thirteen thousand, and the rest not able to resist, cast themselves into the
river; which were an infinite number: also the Romans took two thousand and
two hundredth men alive, and a hugh booty of Sheep, Asses, Camels, and O^en.
This massacre though it was no greater then the former, yet it seemed to the
Jews far greater, because that many all over the country flying were killed,
and Jordan was so filled with The year of the world. 4032. after the birth of
Christ. 70. Placidus makes use o^ his good fortune against the Jews.
Placidus having so good success, went into the towns and villages adjoining,
and took Abila, Iulias, Besemoth, and all the towns even unto the lake
Asphaltites, and placed in them garrisons of them that fled unto him: and
afterward preparing ships and furnishing them with soldiers, he pursued them
that were fled by water, and overcame them: and so all the country beyond
Jordan yielded unto the Romans, and even unto Machaeron all places were by them
conquered.

CHAP. IIII.
How certain towns were taken, and the description of Jericho.

AT this time came news of the troubles in Gallia, and how that Vindex
together with the Troubles in France.
nobility of that countreyhad revolted from Nero, whereof we have made mention
in another place. This news caused Vespasian to be more earnest to end the
wars of the Jews: for even then he foresaw the civil wars that ensued, and
the danger of the whole Empire: and he thought that if he could before the
beginning of those troubles end the wars in the East part of the world, that
then Italy was not in so ^uch danger. But Winter hindering him, he in the mean
time placed gar^sons in all towns and villages about the whole country, and
placed decurions in every City, and repaired many places which he had before
destroyed. And Vespasian visits all Iudaea.
himself in the way to their Metropolitan City he there entrenched his army,
and then leaving the fifth legion there, he with the rest went into the Toparchy
of Bethlep^on, firing it and all places thereabout; as also the borders of
Idumaea: but he reserved there certain Castles in fit places, and fortified
them. And having taken two towns in the midst of Idumaea, to wit, Begabri
and Caphartopha, he slew there above ten thousand men, and took almost a
thousand; and Vespasian comes to Jericho.
his captains named Traian met him with the soldiers he brought from beyond
Jordan, which place he had conquered. But the multitude before the Romans came,
fled from Jericho into the high country over against Jerusalem, and many that
stayed behind were there slain. So he found the City desolate, being
situate in a plain under a great mountain that is barren, which is of a huge
length: for it reaches on the Northside unto the borders of Scythopolis, and
on the South unto the borders of Sodom and the lake Asphaltites. It is all
rockie and not inhabited,

The country between these two mountains is called the great field, reaching
from the village The great field.
Gennabara unto the lake Asphaltites, being in length two hundredth and thirty
furlongs, and in breadth a hundredth and twenty, and in the midst it is
divided by the river Jordan. There are Two lakes Asphaltite and ye Tiberian
lake.
also two lakes of contrary natures, Asphaltites and Tiberins, for one of them
is salt and barren, but that of Tiberias sweet and fertile. This plain in
summer time is burned with the heat of the sun, and the air is infected in all
places thereabouts, save only about those which adioine to Jordan: A large
fountain near Jericho.
plentifully waters the fields therabout, and runs with a great stream out
of the ground near unto the old City: which Iosue the son of Nun general of
the Hebrews took by war, the first of all that he took in the land of
Canaan. It is reported that in the beginning the waters of this fountain did
destroy all fruits of the earth, and also made women be delivered before their
time, and to infect all places with diseases, and the plague; and afterward by
Helizaeus the successor of Heli^ The year of the world, 4032. after Christ's
birth 70. A miracle wrought by Helizaeu^.
Fruitful and pleasant gardens about Jericho.
sides, which are diverse in the taste of their fruits; the fattest whereof
being pressed, do yield a juice like honey, nothing inferior to other honey:
yet there is great store of honey in that country, and the juice of balm,
which is more pr^ous then all fruits growing. There grow also Cypres trees and
myrobalans: so that one may justly call that part of the earth divine, where
what fruit soever is most dear and precious is in most abundance. Also in all
other fruits it surpasses The cause why the ground about Jericho is fruitful.
hereof I judge to be the pleasant waters and warm nourishing air, which as
it were inuiteth all things to spring up, and then increases them: and the
moisture causes all things to take firm root; and also defends them from
drought in summer time, when that country is vexed with such intolerable
heates, that all things are as it were scorched, so that nothing then will
grow; yet if they be watered with water drawn before sun rise, by the blowing
of a mild and temperat wind they are refreshed, and it receives a contrary
nature: in winter time it is as it were luke warm and temperate to them that
go into it. The air of that place is so temperate, that when it snoweth in The
air temperate and warm.
other parts of Iudaea, and is extreme cold, the inhabitants in this place do
only wear a linen garment. This country is distant from Jerusalem a hundredth
and fifty furlongs, and threescore

CHAP. V.
The description of the lake Asphaltites.

IT is worth the labor to describe the lake Asphaltites, which is salt and
sterile; yet whatsoever is cast into it how weighty soever it be, it swimmeth
above the water: so that one though he would upon purpose, cannot scarcely
sink unto the bottom. Vespasian coming An admirable property of the
Asphaltite lake.
day changes color, and shines diversely, according as the beams of the sun
do sundry ways fall upon it. And in many places it casts up pieces of black
bitumen, in greatness and shape like a bull without a head, and these floate
above the water. They that get their living upon this water, finding this
bitumen that is thus gathered together, draw it to their boats, and it is so
tough and clammy, that having filled their boats herewith, it is not easy for
them to get them away, but their boat is as it were fastened: so it hangs
upon the rest of that mass of bituminous matter, till it be separated from it
by the terms or urine of a woman. This bituminous The land of Sodom is near
unto the lake Asphaltite.
sometime both fertile and rich: now all burnt, being (as it is reported) for
the impiety of the inhabitants consumed with lightning and thunder. To be
short, one may here behold as it were the sign and relics of that fire, that
by Gods appointment destroyed the place: for one may yet see as it were the
fashion and tokens of five cities, and trees and fruits springing up in the
ashes: The year of the world. 4032. after Christ's birth 70. Ter^ul. in
Apologet. cap. 39.


CHAP. VI.
How Gerasa was destroyed: of Neroes death; and of Galba and Otho:

VEspasian desirous to be besiege Jerusalem on every side, builded castles at
Jericho and Adida, L. Annius takes Gerasa.
them. And he sent L. Annius to Gerasa, giving him many footmen, and part of
his horsemen, who at the first assault took the City, and slew a thousand
young men, who thought to have fled, and lead whole families captive, giving
the soldiers the spoil of their goods: and so firing their houses, he went
to other places adjoining. They who were able fled, and the weaker sort who
could not fly were slain; and whatsoever came in their way they consumed it
with fire. Thus all places both mountains and plains being wasted and
oppressed with wars, the inhabitants living at Jerusalem had not whither to
go, when they desired to fly from the Zealous by whom they were kept in. And
they who were against the Romans, were kept in themselves, the City being on
every side enclosed and compassed with the army.

After that Vespasian was returned unto Caesarea, and with all his army
purposing to go to Jerusalem, news was brought him that Nero was slain;
having reigned thirteen years and eight Vespasian has tidings of Neroes
death.
days. Touching whom I will not recount how he did dishonor the Empire,
committing the whole sway of all the commonwealth unto two most wicked men, to
wit, Nymphidius and Tigillinus, and of least worth amongst all the Libertines:
and how he being taken by the treachery of these two men; was forsaken of all
his Senators; and so fled only with four trusty Libertines into the suburbs
and there killed himself: and how that long time after, they that deposed him
were punished for that offense: and how the wars ended in Gallia, and that
Galba being created Emperor, returned to Rome out of Spain: and how he was
accused Galba.
by the soldiers, and by them killed in the market place, as one of base
condition: and how Otho was declared Emperor, and led his soldiers against
Vitellius his army: also Otho. Vitell^.
Vitellius his broiles and his fight before the Capitol: and how Antonius
Primus, and Mutianus slew Vitellius, and so appeased the Germane troops and
civil wars: Of all these I have refused to speak, because I hope that both
the Greeks and Romans have written these things at large, yet I have
briefelye recapitulated all to continue my History.

After Vespasian heard these news of Nero, he deferred the siege of Jerusalem,
expecting Vespasian de^erreth his siege at Jerusalem.
who should be created Emperor after him. And when he was certified that
Galba reigned, he determined to do nothing; but lie quiet till such time as
he also should write unto Titus both to salute him, and also to know his
pleasure concerning the Jews. Likewise King Agrippa went with Titus for the
same cause unto Galba. But as they were passing by Achaia with long ships in
winter time, as the custom is, news Galba is slain, and Otho governs.
was brought that Galba was slain, having reigned seven months and seven
days. After whom succeeded Otho, who governed the Empire three months.
Agrippa not terrified with this alteration, still kept on his journey to Rome.
But Titus (as God would have it) returned from Achaia unto Syria, and so to
Caesarea unto his father. They both were as it were in suspense what would
ensue; and who should be Emperor, the Empire being so full of troubles, and so
they neglected the wars against the Jews, fearing their own country, and
therefore thinking it an unfit time to assault strangers.

CHAP. VII. The ye^re of the ^ld. 4033. after Christ's birth 71.

Of Simon of Gerasa author of i new conspiracy.

FOr all this the war at Jerusalem was increased. For there was one Simon the
son of Giora borne in Gerasa, young in years, and inferior to John, who now
already had gotten the dominion over the city; yet was he in strength and
boldness more excellent then John. This Simon being for this cause also d^en out
of the country of Acrabatena, where he was governor by the means Ananus the
hie priest, he came to the thieves that seized upon Massada. This Simon at his
first coming, was so suspected to the thieves that they only permitted him
Simon of Gerasa resorteth to the thieves.
and the women that came with him to dwell in the lower part of the castle, and
they them selves kept Simon assemble^ all robbers in the mountainous places.
about Massada. So he feared not to persuade them to attempt greater matters:
for being desirous of rule, after he heard that Ananus was dead, he departed
into the high places of the country, and with the voice of a crier promised
and proclaimed, that all bondslaues that would follow him should have their
liberty, and all other should be richly rewarded; and so he gathered together
all the wicked and desperate people in the country. And having now a large
army, he robbed and spoiled all the towns and villages there about; and his
number daily increasing, he also now presumed to come into the plain
countries: so that now cities stood in awe of him, and many potentates now
feared him for his strength and prosperous success. And his army did Simon
was not daunted at this, but boldly incountred The fight between Simon and the
Zealous.
the rest to retire themselves into the town, yet having men sufficient he
would not besiege the town; but first of all he purposed to subdue Idumaea,
and so accompanied with twenty thousand armed men, he hasted toward the
borders thereof.

The princes of Idumaea understanding this, presently assembled five and
twenty thousand armed men, and leaving at home sufficient garrisons to defend
their country against the incursion of the Sicarij, which held the fortress
of Massada, they accompanied with this train, went out and expected Simons
coming into the borders of their country, where having met him they joined
battle, and fought a whole day, yet neither party got the victory. Then Simon
returned to Nain, and the Idumaeans home. Not long after Simon with a greater
army then before, assaulted the Eleazar, to them that kept the castle Herodium
not far from that place, to solicit them to yield it unto him. The garrison
there presently received him into the castle not knowing the cause of his
coming. But so soon as he began to persuade them to treason, they all pursued
him with their drawn swords, and he not having any place to fly unto, cast
himsel^e from off the castle wall into the valley underneath, and so presently
die^. The Idumaeans something fearing Simons forces, before they would offer
him battle, thought it best to epsy what Eleazar Simo^s fellow casts
himself headlong into the trench and presently dies. James of Idumaea the
betraier of his country.
number of men he had: to effect which business one Jacob a ruler amongst them
offered himself, meaning indeed to betray his country to Simon. So departing
from Olu^us where the Idumaeans Simon, and first of all promised him to betray
his country unto him, receiving of him an oath, that for reward of this deed he
should always be next in dignity unto Simon himself, and so he presently
promised to help to subdue all Idumaea. For this cause he was welcome to Simon
and feasted liberally, and had great promises if he performed that which he
offered: and then returned unto the Idumaeans, and fained that Simons army was
far greater then indeed it was. And so at last terrifying the governors of
his country, and the people, he by little and little persuaded them to receive
Simon, and without any more fight yield unto him the whole sovereignty over
the^. ^cob studying to bring this his purpose to pass, privily The year of
the world. 4033. after Christ's birth 71.
sent messengers to Simon; willing him to come with his forces, and promising
him to subdue the Idumaeans for him, which also he did. For when the army of
Simon drew near, he first of all got upon his horse, and together with his
associates that were partakers of his treason, he fled unto the enemy. Then
fear fell upon the Idumaeans, and every one without any more ado departed
home. Thus Simon against his own expectation, entered Idumaea without
bloodshed: and Simon beyond all expectation enters Idumaea without bloodshed.
first of all assaulting a little village called Chebron, upon a sudden he
took it, and in it an exceeding great booty, a great quantie of Corn and
many fruits, which all he carried away. The inhabitants report that this
Chebron is not only more ancient then all Cities of that land, but also then
Memphis ^n Egypt: for they affirm it to have been built two thousand and
three Hebron an ancient City where Abraham's house was. A Turpentine tree that
has continued since the creation of the world.
hundredth years since. They also say that this was the place where Abraham the
father of the Jews

Simon having obtained this place, from hence he invaded all Idumaea, and not
only robbed and spoiled all towns and Cities thereof, but also he wasted and
destroyed many territories: for besides his army, there followed him forty
thousand; so that he could not find victuals sufficient for such a multitude.
Moreover, besides this calamity that he brought upon Idumaea, he exercised
great cruelty and outrage upon the Country, and so caused a greater spoil
therein. And like as after locusts the trees and woods where they have been,
are left without leaves: so wheresoever Simon had been, all the country from
whence he came he left desolate. And either by fire or overthrowing it by
ruinating places where he came, or else by treading upon it with the feet of
Simon spoiled all Idumaea.
his army, or by devouring such as they found, they left nothing standing nor
growing either in field or town: and only by passing through fertile places,
he made the fields harder then barren ground; and left no sign in places which
he had destroyed, that ever they had been tilled. Hereat the Zealous were
again moved, yet durst they not fight with him in open field, but placing
ambushes in the way he was to pass, they took Simons wife, and many of her
servants, and so came The Zealous take Simons wife.
again into the City, rejoicing as though they had taken Simon himself. For
they persuaded themselves that Simon would presently laying arms apart, come
in humble wise and entreat them to restore unto him his wife. But Simon was
not moved with compassion for the loss of his wife, Simons immanitie and
cruelty
The Zealous and back Simons wife.
God who governed all, that he would break down their walls, and use all that
he found in the City after that fashion, and that he would spare no age, nor
respect the innocent more then the guilty. These his threats did not only
terrify the people, but also the Zealous, in so much

CHAP. VIII.
Of Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian.

NOt only in Iudaea, but also in Italy at this time were civil wars: for
Galba was slain in Sedition through the whole Roman Empi^e.
the midst of the market, after whom Otho was created Emperor, and fought
against Vitellius, who affected the Empire, whom the German legions had
elected: So the battle being fought near unto Bebrias, a town in Gallia
Cisalpina, the first day Otho got the Valens, and Caecinna the Generals of
Vitellius his army. But the day following they overcame Otho; and so many
being slain on both parts, and news being brought that Vitellius his army
had gotten the victory, Otho being at Brixels slew himself when he had ruled
the Empire three months and two days. Then Othoes soldiers came unto
Vitellius his Captains, and joined with them, and so Vitellius came to Rome
with his army. In the mean time Vespasian the Vespasian onc^ more inuadet^
Iudaea.
fifth day of June departed from Caesarea, and went unto those parts of Iudaea,
which were yet unconquered: and first of all he went into the high Countries,
and subdued the two Toparchies of The year of the world. 4033. after Christ's
birth 71. Capharis submits to Cerealis.
Acrabatena and Gophnitis, and after them two towns called Bethel and Ephrem,
and placed garrisons in them, and so went unto Jerusalem, killing many that he
found in the way, and he took many captives. And one of his Captains called
Cerealis, with a part of his horse and footmen wasted all the higher Idumaea,
and in the way as he went he took Caphetra a Castle and burnt it, and
besieged an other called Capharis, enclosed with a strong wall: for the which
ca^ he deemed that he should have made long abode there: but contrary to his
expectation, the Inhabitants opened the gates unto him, and came and yielded
themselves, beseeching him to be good unto them. When he had overcome them,
Cerealis went unto Hebron an ancient City, and set Cerealis burns the
ancient City of Hebron.
it on fire: this Hebron as I have already said, was situated upon the
mountains, not far from Jerusalem: and breaking into it by force, he slew
all them that he found there, and fired the

CHAP. IX.
Of Simons acts against the Zealous.

WHen Simon had received again his wife from the Zealous, he went into Idumaea,
to rob and spoil that which he had left, and chasing the Inhabitants up and
down, at last he forced them to fly unto Jerusalem, and he himself followed
them thither: and besieging the walls, he killed all the workmen he took, that
returned out of the fields from their labor. T^s Simon without the city, was
more terrible to the people then the Romans; and the Zealous within John in
authority: and John in reward thereof permitted al things to be don which they
requested. There was no end of robbing and spoiling rich men's houses, and of
slaughtering both of men and women; and now to injury any person was a
pastime. And having with bloodshed obtained their pray in security, and
without all fear after they had gotten what they The Zealous fill the whole
City with iniquity.
liked, they now began to lust after women: yea, they became themselves
effeminate through luxuriousness, dressing their hair and clothing themselves
in women's apparel; and they anointed themselves with sweet ointments, that
their beauty might be pleasing; and annoynting their eyes wanton-like, they
now did not only imitate the attire of women, but also their impudency, and
became so shameless, that they now thirsted after unnatural pleasures, as
though they had John's hands, Simon crueller, murdered; and whosoever escaped
the tyranny within The way of flight was quite cut off. The discord between
the Zealous and the Idumaeans.
the City, was slain by the tyrant without. So now there was no way to fly
unto the Romans. Furthermore the army of John began to be divided, for all the
Idumaeans separated themselves from the other people, and there began a mutiny
against the tyrant, partly envying his puissance, partly hating his cruelty.
And so assaulting him, they slew many of the Zealous, and compelled the rest to
fly into the Kings house, builded by Grapta father of Izata king of Adiabena.
The fight of the Zealous with the Idumaeans in the Temple.
and so seized upon John's treasure: for John lived in that palace and thither
carried all his spoils. Then those Zealous that were dispersed in the City,
came unto them that were in the Temple, and John purposed to send them against
the townsmen, and the Idumaeans. But they feared not so much their forces,
although they knew them to be the better warriors, as they did fear that now
being desperate, they would steal out of the Temple in the night, and so slay
them and fire the City. Wherefore assembling themselves, they deliberated with
the priests how to avoid their assaults: but it pleased God to turn their
own counsel to be their destruction, and that they should provide a remedy of
safety, far worse then death it self. For to depose John, they devised to
introduce Simon, and as it were to entreat yet another to tyrannize over them.
So this counsel Matthias the Priest, was sent unto Simon (whom before they
stood in great fear of) now to request him to come into the City. With them
also came such as had fled from Jerusalem, for fear of the Zealous, entreating
him in like manner, because they desired to return to their wives and families.

So he entered into the City proudly, promising them to be their Lord, and all
the people Simon enters the City with a great army.
cried with loud voices as he came into the City, that he was their preserver,
and giver of life and liberty. Being now within the City, presently he
deliberated with them about him to establish The year of the world. 4033.
after the birth of Christ. 71.
his dominion, thinking as well them that called him into the City, as those
against whom he was called, his enemies. Then John and the Zealous with him
finding no way to come out of the temple, and having lost all that he had in
the City (for Simon and his followers at his entrance took all that belonged
unto him) began now to despair of his safety. And Simon being Simon
assaulteth the temple wherein the Zealous kept.
assisted by the Citizens assaulted the temple, and the Zealous placing
themselves upon the porches and in towers of defense; made resistance, and
hurtmany of Simons followers. For the Zealous were upon the higher ground on the
right hand, and so had the vantage against Simon. And although by reason of the
place wherein they were, they prevailed against Simon; yet they builded four
high towers, that from thence they might shoot darts and arrows against
Simons army. One of these towers they built upon the East side of the temple;
another on the north; The office of the priests to sig^e the beginning of the
seventh day by the sound of a ^umpet.
Simon perceiving many of his soldiers languish, was more remiss in his
business: yet when his number increased, he came nearer: for a far off many of
his men were slain with the shot of those engines.

CHAP. X.
How Vespasian was elected Emperor.

AT this time the Romans were in great danger: for Vitellius was now arrived
out of Germany Vitellius incampeth his army in Rome.
with his army, bringing beside them an infinite multitude with him; so that
his army was so great, that the place appointed for soldiers could not
contain it: in so much that his army occupied all the whole City, and every
house was filled with armed men. And they beholding the Romans wealth greater
then ever they saw any, and admiring their abundance of gold and silver, not
able to contain themselves they began to rob and kill whomsoever that sought
to withstand them. And this was the estate of the affairs in Italy. Vespasian
having wasted all about Jerusalem, returned unto Caesarea, and there he
understood of the troubles at Rome, and how Vitellius was Emperor. Hereat,
though he knew as well to obey as to Vespasia^ knew both how to govern, and
how to obey.
The captains consult with the soldiers openly of a change.
indignation did exclaim against the soldiers at Rome, who lived in pleasure,
and never heard so much as the report of war; and that notwithstanding this,
it was lawful for them to create whom they pleased Emperor, and under hope of
gain they disposed of the common wealth at Vespasian was so much more worthy
of the Empire then Vitellius, by how much they, who created Vitellius Emperor,
were in very many respects much inferior unto them. For (said Vespasians
shame^astnesse and modesty.
they) we have endured no less toil then those that came out of Germany:
neither are we less valiant then they, who bring a tyrant with them out of
Germany. And that no body would Vespasian: for the Senate and the people of
Rome would not rather endure Vitellius his insatiable lust, then Vespasians
chastity and temperance; nor a cruel tyrant, rather then a good and courteous
Emperor; nor the son should by them be elected Emperor before the father. For
true valor in an Emperor is a great defense of peace. Therefore if the Empire
were due to aged experience, they had Vespasian; if to valiant youth, they had
amongst them Titus: and that they might reap commodity by both their ages.
And that they would not only assist him with the forces of the Empire having
there three legions, beside the help of the kings; but also all the East The
year of the world, 4033. after Christ's birth 71. The causes that moved the
people to elect Vespasian Emperor.
part of Europe was out of Vitellius his danger. Moreover, they had in Italy
some that would assist Vespasian, to wit his brother and his son, whereof the
one (they hoped) would get many young men to follow him, and the other was now
made prefect of the City, which was no small step to attain unto the
Empire. Lastly it might so fall out, that the Senate would declare him
Emperor, whom now the soldiers being as it were their conseruer, had
neglected.

This was first talked amongst the companies of the soldiers: at last
exhorting one another thereto, they came and saluted Vespasian by the name of
Emperor, and requested him now to preserve the Empire being in great danger to
be lost. Albeit Vespasian had always bin careful for The soldiers elect
Vespasian Emperor.
the good of the common wealth, yet he refused to be Emperor: deeming himself
indeed to have deserved it: yet he rather did choose to live a private life
wherein was security, then in the height

CHAP. XI.
The description of Egypt and Pharus.

MVtianus and the rest of the captains who had incited him to the Empire,
together with the whole army cried alowd, willing Vespasian to lead them
against their common enemy. Vespasian thought it best, first to settle the
estate of Alexandria, knowing that Egypt for the supply of corn was the
greatest and best part of the Empire: which if he once were sure of, he hoped
that although Vitellius were stronger then he; yet he could bring him under
perforce, because the people would not endure that for his sake the City
should be famished: which would have come to pass, except they had supply of
corn out of Egypt. Moreover he desired to join unto himself those two
legions that were at Alexandria. He also thought that that country might be a
defense and refuge for him, if any adverse fortune should betide him. For the
country is not easy to be entered by an army, and the sea coasts have no
havens nor harbors for to receive ships; on the West it bordereth upon the
dry and barren part of Libya; The bounds of Egypt.
on the South upon the frontiers which separateth Syene from Aethiopia, and the
streams of The length and breadth of Egypt.
from Pelusium unto Syene: and from Plinthine unto Pelusiu^ they sail three
thousand and six hundredth furlongs. And Nilus is nauigable even unto the town
Elephantine. Further, by reason of the downfals of Nilus also the haven at
Alexandria is dangerous to come unto in time of peace: for the entrance into it
is very straight; and beside that, the way goes not directly on, but is made
crooked by great stony rocks, and the left side is compassed artificially, but
on the right side is the I Will Pharus, having a tower upon it exceeding great; so
that the light in it is seen of A most high tower in the Island Pharos giving
light to those that fail three hundredth stounds off.
the mariners three hundredth furlongs off, that long before they come near it
they may provide Vespasian did not unadvisedly seek to establish the estate of
Alexandria, and dispose thereof for his own profit, being to begin his Empire.
Wherefore presently he sent letters to Tiberius Alexander, who was governor of
Alexandria and Egypt, and told him of the soldiers resolution; Tiberius
Alexander governs Alexandria and Egypt.
and how that he seeing he could not avoid it, but that he was forced to take
upon him the Empire, that now he requested him to help him in what he could.
Alexander receiving Vespasians letters, Vespasian, which both of them did
willingly, understanding Vespasians virtue by reason that he governed so near
them. And so he having now leave, prepared all things to furnish himself like
an Emperor and to be received like a prince.

CHAP. XII. The year of the world. 4033. after Christ's birth 71.

How Vespasian delivered Joseph out of captivity.

IT is incredible how quickly this news was carried into all parts of the
world, to wit, Vespasian by common voice is created Emperor and crowned.
that Vespasian was declared Emperor in the East; and now all cities rejoiced
and made triumphs, and offered sacrifices for his fortunate success. Moreover
the legions in Moesia and Panonia, who not long before were revolted from
Vitellius by reason of his cruelty, did now willingly swear obedience to
Vespasian. Vespasian returned by Berytum to Caesarea, where many Ambassadors
came unto him, bringing him crowns, and applauding and reioicing at his good
fortune, who came out of Syria, and al other places therabout. There was also
present Mutianus Vespasians side, and fortune for the most part enclining as he
desired, he began to think with himself that it was Gods providence that he
was made Emperor, and that a just destiny had brought him to that estate. And
so he called to mind all tokens and signs (as there had happened many, which did
foretell that he should be Emperor) and amongst the rest he remembered that
which Joseph had told him; who, Nero being yet alive, presumed to call him
Emperor, and so he admired the man whom as yet he kept in hold. And calling
Mutianus and the rest of his friends together, first of all he told them how
valiant Joseph had been, and what a Vespasian consulteth with his captains
about Joseph's liberty.
do he had to win Iotapata only because of him; and then his prophecies
which at that time he Joseph, he commanded him to be let loose. This fact of
his made the captains under him hope for great reward at his hands, seeing he
had been so kind to a stranger. Titus being there present said, It is meet O
father, that as you acquit Joseph from captivity, so you also take away the
shame of that which he has already endured. For if we do not only untie
Joseph discharged out of bonds and rewarded.
his chains, but also break them in sunder, he shall be as though he had
never been in bondage: for this is the manner used for redress, when any one
being guiltless is committed to bonds. Vespasian hereto agreed, and so one
came with an axe and hewed his chains in pieces. Joseph rewarded for his
prophecy, and so hereafter he was esteemed worthy to be believed.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Vitellius his death and manners.

WHen Vespasian had answered the Ambassadors, and justly disposed of all the
rulers of Vespasian bethinketh himself. to return to Rome
his army, according to every ones merit, he now came to Antiochia, and there
did deliberate whither to go first, and it seemed best to him to go to Rome,
rather then to Alexandria: for he knew that Alexandria was quiet and firm, but
Rome was troubled by Vitellius. Wherefore he sent Mutianus into Italy with
many footmen and horsemen, who fearing to Antonius Primus who was governor of
Moesia brought from thence the third legion remaining there, and came to war
against Vitellius. Vitellius sent Caecinna to meet him with a great army, who
departing from Rome, presently met with Antonius at Cremona a town of Gallia,
situate upon the confines of Italy, and there beholding the discipline and
multitude of the enemies, durst not fight with them: and thinking it very
dangerous to fly, he plotted treason, and so calling unto him the Centurions
and Tribunes vnde^ his government, he persuaded them to go and Caecinna
persuades the soldiers to forsake Vitellius and honor Vespasian.
join with Antonius, debasing Vitellius his power, and extolling Vespasians:
affirming the first to have only the bare name of the Emperor; and the last
to have also all virtues meet for an Emperor. Moreover that so it would be
better for them to do that of their own accord, Vespasian was able without
their assistance to subdue all the rest: but Vitellius was not able with their
help to keep that he had: speaking much to this effect, he persuaded them to
all that which he would have done. And so he with his whole army joined with
Antonius.

The same night the soldiers repenting themselves of that they had done, and
also fearing that Vitellius should get the upper hand who sent them against
Antonius, drew their swords, and The year of the world. 4033. after Christ's
birth 71. Caecinna is apprehended for treason.
would have slain Caecinna. And had done it, had not the Tribunes come and
entreated them to the contra^e: wherefore they did not kill him, but kept him
bound, meaning to send him to Vitellius as a traitor. Primus Antonius hearing
this, came with his army and assaulted them who were revolted from him, and
they a while resisted; yet at last, forced to retire, they fled unto Cremona.
And Primus, accompanied with horsemen, prevented their courses, and so slew the
most of them before the city; and afterward setting upon the rest, gave his
soldiers the spoil of it, wherein many merchants of other countries and many
townsmen were slain, and all Vitellius his army, thirty thousand and two
hundredth men: and Antonius lost in that battle four thousand and five
hundredth of those, whom he brought with him out of Moesia. And delivering
Caecinna from prison, he sent him to bear news hereof to Vespasian: who
coming unto him was praised Sabinus who was Vespasian honors Caecinna with
unexpected honors, and is acqu^ed of treason. Sabinus takes the capitol an^
leaves Vitellius.
at Rome hearing that Antonius was at hand, greatly rejoiced, and took
courage: and gathering together the companies of the watchmen in the night
time, he took the Capitol, and in the morning many of the nobles came and
joined with him: and Domitianus his brothers son who was a great cause and
help to obtain the victory. Vitellius little esteemed Primus, but he was
angr^e against Sabinus and those that had revolted with him, and as it were
naturally thirsting after the blood of the nobility, he set all the army he
brought out of Germany with him, to assault the Capitol, where many valiant
deeds were showed on both parts: and at last the Germains being most in number,
got the Capitol hill. And Domitian with many brave noblemen, as it were by the
providence of God escaped safe, the rest of the multitude were there slain.
And Sabinus was Vitellius, and there by his commandment put to death: the
soldiers taking away all the gifts and treasure in the temple set it on fire.
The day after came Antonius, and Vitellius his soldiers met him, and fighting
in three several places of the city, they were all slain. Then Vitellius
came drunk out of his palace, and being full gorged with delicate meat, he
was drawn through the midst of the people, and after many contumelies slain,
having reigned eight months, and Vitellius slain
five days: who if he had lived longer, I think verily the Empire had not
been sufficient to have maintained this gluttony. There were slain above
fifty thousand of other people. And this was done the third day of October.
The day after Mutianus with his army came and entered into Rome, and repressed
the soldiers of Antonius, who still sought about in every place for Vitellius
soldiers, and many other of his fauorits, and slew whom they thought good, not
examining any Domitian, he declared unto the people that he The people of Rome
proclaim Vespasian Emperor.
was to govern the city till his father came. The people being delivered from
fear, proclaimed Vespasian Emperor, and made feasts and triumphs both under
one, for his establishing in the Empire, and for joy that Vitellius was deposed.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Titus was sent by his father against the Jews.

WHen Vespasian came to Alexandria, news were brought unto him what was done
at Rome. And Ambassadors came unto him from all parts of the world to
congratulate Vespasian now being established Emperor of all the world, and the
commonwealth of the Romans being contrary to his expectation freed from
troubles, he now began to think upon the relics of Iudaea. And so he
himself, winter being ended, prepared to go to Rome, and in the mean time he
hastened to dispose of all things at Alexandria. Moreover, he sent his son
Titus with certain chosen men to destroy Jerusalem. Titusrepaireth to Jerusalem.
Who departed from Alexandria unto Nicopolis by land, which is distant from it
twenty furlongs, and there he did ship his men and so sailed along the river
Nilus by Medensia unto Thmuin, and there landing his men, he came to the city
called Tanis. And the second place he rested in was the city Heraclea, and the
third Peleusiu^: and there resting and refreshing his soldiers two days space
Jupiter Cassian, and the next day at Ostracine, where there is no water, but
all that the inhabitants do use, they bring from other places. After that he
rested at Rhinocolura, and from thence in four days he came to Raphia, where
begin the Titus comes to Caesarea and gethereth his forces there.
borders of Syria, and the fifth day he lodged at Gaza, and from thence to
Ascalon, and so to Iamnia and Ioppe, from whence he went to Caesarea, purposing
to gather the rest of the soldiers there.

THE SIXTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS
The Contents of the Chapters of the 6. book.
1 Of the three seditions in Jerusalem. 2 How Titus went unto Jerusalem to see
their strength, and how he was in danger. 3 How the Jews did issue out upon
the Romans pitching their Tents. 4 Of the fight within the City upon the feast
of unleauened bread. 5 Of the deceit the Jews used against the Roman
soldiers. 6 The description of Jerusalem. 7 The Jews refuse to yield, and
assault the Romans. 8 Of the fall of the tower: and how two of the walls were
won. 9 How Castor the Jew did floute the Romans. 10 How the Romans did twice
get the second wall. 11 Of the mounts raised against the third wall, and a long
Oration of Joseph, persuading the Jews to yield, and of the famine within the
City. 12 Of the Jews that were crucified, and how the towers were burnt. 13
How the Romans in three days space built a wall about Jerusalem. 14 Of the
famine in Jerusalem: and how they built another tower or mount. 15 Of the
massacre of the Jews, both within and without the City. 16 Of the sacrilege
about the Temple: and the dead bodies that were cast out of the City: and of
the famine.
CHAP. I.
Of the three sorts of seditions in Jerusalem.

TItus being thus come out of Egypt by the desert into Syria, he departed The
ye^re of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. A three fold sedition in
Jerusalem.
from thence unto Caesarea: for there he purposed to set his army in order.
And whilst yet he was with his father Vespasian at Alexandria, disposing of
the Empire that God had given him, it happened that the sedition at Jerusalem
was divided into three parts, whereof one part fought against another, and one
may say, it was a good turn that they were so equally divided. We have
already sufficiently declared who were the Authors and beginners of the
faction of the Zealous, whose tyranny over the City was the ruin thereof: and
one may well call this a sedition raised out of a sedition; which, like a
cruel and savage beast in penury and want of others, turned his cruelty
against his own bowels. So Eleazar the son of Simon, who John every day
did; yet in truth, for that he envied that a more tyrant of later time then
himself should be his ruler, desirous to obtain the principality, and make
himself mighty, he revolted from the rest: and with him Judas the son of
Chelcias, and Simon the son of Ezron, two of the most potent amongst the^.
Besides the^, was also Ezechias the son of Chobarus a Nobleman, and all these
had many of the Zealous following them, and getting in The year of the world.
4034. after Christ's birth 72.
possession the inner part of the Temple, they set a guard in the entrance and
in the sacred gates, trusting in their abundance of all necessaties: for there
was great store of sacred provision, and they thought it no impiety to use it,
yet fearing their small number, they permitted many of the company that were
killed, to remain in the places where they were slain. John was superior in
multitude and number, but inferior by the inequality of the place: and having
his enemies above his head, he could not without danger make incursions, and
yet for anger he would not cease to persecute his enemy: notwithstanding that
thereby his part had more harm then those of Eleazar's side, yet he still
assaulted them though to his own cost: thus many assaults were continually
made and many darts cast, and all the Temple was profaned with murders. And
Simon the son of Giora (whom the people being in despair, invited to be
their leader, John and his followers, because they were assailed by those above
them: yet he being as it were beneath John and his adherents, he sustained as
much loss at their hands, as John himself did at theirs above him. So John
had double wars, and as Eleazar harmed him because of the higher place
wherein he The fight between John and Eleazar.
was, so likewise did he damage Simon for the like cause: and easily without
any labor did repulse all his assaults, which he made being in the lower
ground, and terrified by engines those that cast darts at him from the top of
the Temple: for he used all engines to cast darts and stones, and Simon and
John skirmish in the temple.
killed many not only of his enemies, but also of them that were offering
sacrifices. For although that they were carried headlong unto all vice, yet
they permitted those that would, to offer sacrifice, Great slaughter in the
temple.
that holy place, were slain even as they offered sacrifice, and so imbrued
the Altar with their blood, which all the Greeks and barbarous people did
reverence: and strangers and the Priests being now profaned, were forced to be
amongst the dead bodies, and the place about the Altar stood full of blood of
men that were slain. O miserable City! what did thou suffer at the Romans
hands, to be compared unto this, although they entered with fire to purge thee
from

The seditious people being divided into three companies, Eleazar and his
followers, who had the keeping of the holy first fruits, and all the sacred
oblations, came against John, when they were drunk. And they who followed John
spoiling the people, assaulted Simon, and the City did succor Simon.
Wherefore when John was assaulted on both sides, he turned some of John
assaulted on both sides.
his soldiers against Simon, and the rest against Eleazar: and against Simon
he used darts cast from the porches of the Temple: and against Eleazar he
used engines for shot. And always so often as they above his head ceased (as
they often did being either weary or drunken) he freely assaulted Simon and
his men. Also as far as he drove them into the City, so far did he fire
all, and burn houses full of Corn and other necessaries: and that which he
left unburned, Simon at his return (when John was gone into the Temple) set on
fire: As if upon purpose to the great advantage of the Romans, they had
consumed all that was provided against the siege; so did They of Jerusalem had
well nie burnt all their Corn.
they destroy their own forces and strength. To be short, all was consumed
with fire about the Temple, and the City was made a plain ground to fight in,
and all the Corn was burnt that might have sufficed the City many years, and
so they were taken by famine, which they A wretched calamity in Jerusalem.
with these calamities, prayed for the good success of the Romans, and
desired some foreign war to deliver them from their civil disagreement.

And forthwith great fear and terror fell upon them all: besides, it was no
time as now to take The year of ^he world. 4034. after the (...) of C^st. 7^.
Lamentation and mou^ng in (...).
who every day had new causes and occasions of sorrow given them: yet durst
they not publicly lament for fear; and so not daring to show their grief,
they secretly sorrowed, and now ^o man observed any reverence to them that were
alive amongst them, nor took any care to bury the dead. The cause of both
which was, that every man despaired of himself. For whosoever The cruelty of
the sed^ in Ier^alem.
continued their fighting, and troad upon them, and as it were encouraging
themselves by the dead under their feet, they became more cruel, still
devising one pernicious practice or other; and presently executing whatsoever
they devised without any commi^eration; omitting no way to murder, and leaving
no tyranny unattempted: so that John abused the holy things o^ the temple John
made use of the wood that was kept for holy uses to make engines of.
to make engines of war. For before time when the priests and people had
determined to underprop the temple and build it twenty cubits higher, king
Agrippa with great cost and charges brought them very goodly timber sufficient
for their purpose from mount Libanus. And this work being prevented by wars,
John took them, and seeing them fit for his purpose, he erected

For after that Titus had now gathered together part of his army, and by
writing appointed The order of Titus army.
the rest to meet him at Jerusalem, he departed from Caesarea, having three
legions that lately under the conduct of his father Vespasian had wasted all
Iudaea, and the twelfth legion that sometime under Cestius were overcome, and
put to flight by the Jews: who though they were otherwise Titus commanded the
fist legion to meet him at Jerusalem, and go by Emmaus, and that the tenth
legion should march by lericho: the rest he took with himself accompanied
with the kings forces that came to help him; having now more help then
before; and many also out of Syria. Titus also brought men with him to supply
the number that was wanting, being sent by Vespasian with Mutianus into Italy:
For he brought two thousand chosen men from the legions at Alexandria, and
three thousand followed him from Euphrates, together with Tiberius Alexander
his chiefest friend, and one next him in most authority, who before was
governor of Egypt, and as then thought a fit man worthy to be governor of
the army; for that he was the first that did entertain the Emperor being new
elected, who faithfully joined with Vespasian,

CHAP. II.
How Titus went to Jerusalem to see their strength, and how he was in great
danger.

TItus being now to go into the country of the enemy, caused all those that
came to help Ti^us comes to Iudaea.
him to march in the foremost place: after whom followed they that were to mende
the ways, and to pitch the tents: and after them they which carried the
baggage of the rulers Titus himself accompanied with chosen men, and with him
many that bare his colors: next, the horsemen going immediately before the
engines. And the Prefects and Tribunes with certain chosen men, and their
companies followed. After them the Eagle with many other ensigns: and the
trumpets went before them. And after them followed the army marching six in a
rank: then the multitude of servants that followed every legion did drive
their baggage before them: lastly came the hirelings and those that were
appointed to guard them. Marching in such comely and warlike The year of the
^ld, 4034 aft^ C^ birth 7^.
Titus repaireth to Jerusalem, to found the dispositio^s of the people.
he went to Jerusalem, to view how strong it was, and of what courage the Jews
were, to see if peradventure at sight of him they would yield without any
further war for fear. For Titus understood (and it was true) that the people
desired peace, but they were oppressed by the seditious, and so durst not
attempt any thing being not able to encounter or resist the rebels. Titus
riding Helens toombe; and brake his rank of horsemen into two parts, and
opposed themselves, hindering those horsemen that were yet in the high way to
Titus in danger.
come and join with the rest that had crossed the way, and so did single out
Titus accompanied only with a few men. So he could go no further for the ditch
of the town wall on one side, and for the garden pales on the other side: and
there was no hope for him to return unto his soldiers, the enemies being
between him and home. And many of his soldiers not knowing their General
Titus fights valiantly with his enemies.
to be in any danger, but supposing him to have been amongst them still, fled
away. Titus seeing that he had only his own valor to trust unto, turned his
horse against his enemies, and Titus, and he had no armor at all (for as we
have already said, he came to epsy and not to fight) yet had he not one wound,
but all past him; as though upon purpose every one had striuen to have mist
him. But Titus with his sword made way, and cut many upon the face that opposed
themselves against him, and so they falling down he with his horse past over
them. The Jews seeing Titus his valor, cried and exhorted one another to set
upon him; but whithersoeuer he turned, the Jews fled, and would not abide by
it: Titus puts his enemies to flight, and returns in safety to his camp.
likewise those soldiers that were in the like danger with him, came of either
side him and behind Titus before they were so enclosed and oppressed. So of two
of the most valiant amongst them one was slain, and his horse likewise: the
other was slain, and his horse taken by the Jews. And Titus with the rest of
his followers came safe into the camp. And the Jews getting the first
victory, rashly took courage, and that encouragement being of moment, made
them very confident a long time after.

CHAP. III.
How the Jews did issue out upon the Romans pitching their tents.

SO soon as the legion that was to pass by Ammaus, was joined to the rest of
the army Caesar presently the next morning removed, and came to Scopos, where
he might perfectly view the City and the temple on the North part, where the
ground adjoining unto the City is very low, and is properly called Scopos,
being distant seven furlongs from the City: and there Titus commanded two
legions to encampe themselves, and the fifth Titus camp was 7. stades off the
City.
legion to retire three furlongs further off, to the intent that the soldiers
who were wearied with travailing all night, might entrench themselves without
fear or danger. No sooner had they began their work, but presently the tenth
legion came, who were to pass by Jericho, which Vespasian had already subdued,
and had placed there a garrison. This legion was commanded to encampe six
furlongs from Jerusalem, near mount Oliuet, which is opposite to the East part
of the The seditious agree among themsel^es.
themselves. They began also to question one with another what fury caused
them to suffer themselves to be enclosed with three walls to their prejudice and
loss of their lives: and seeing such preparation of wars toward, that they
should be as it were beholders of that which was done, keeping themselves
quiet; and not providing to resist the assaults of their enemies: and some The
year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72.


Thus they being assembled together, exhorted one another, and presently arming
themselves, they issued out of the city, and assaulted the tenth legion, and
with a huge cry set upon the Romans The citizens assail the Romans.
that were entrenching themselves in the valley. The Romans being every one
appointed to do some business for the furtherance of that work, and for that
cause the most of them having laid down their weapons (for they thought the
Jews durst not have made any excursions, and although they would, that yet
they were hindered being at variance amongst themselves) they were troubled
above measure, and presently leaving the work, some fled; many arming
themselves to fight, were slain before they were prepared to resist. The
multitude of the Jews was daily increased The Jews drive the Romans from
their camp.
themselves, and also they did easily stay the Jews from pursuing them. Yet
the number of them that pursued them still increasing, they were also more
troubled, and so at last forced to forsake the field, and leave their tents:
and the whole legion had been in greater danger had no^ Titus, having present
news hereof, speedily came and succored them, and vpbraiding their
cowardlinesse recalled them from flight; who with them, and the chosen men he
brought, encountering

A little after midday Titus guarding the rest with those that he brought to
succor them, and placing others, to prevent the excursions of the Jews, he
commanded the rest to ent^ench The fight of the Jews with the Romans.
themselves in the top of the mountain. The Jews thought the Romans had
fled, and their sentinel upon their walls making a sign unto them by shaking
his garment up and down, a great multitude of them ran so violently upon the
Romans, as though they had been savage beasts, Titus in the midst of the side
of the mountain remained alone, having but a few with him; notwithstanding
his friends, who for the love they bare to their Emperor, stayed with him, and
abode the danger, did earnestly persuade him to fly from the Jews, who
desperately ran The Romans are dispersed by the Jews, and driven to the
mountain
upon their own deaths, and not to endaunger himself for them, who ought
rather to abide it the^ he: And that he should think upon his own estate, who
was not a soldier, but general of them all, and Lord of the whole world, and
that he should not abide when all others fled so fast, and in such danger. But
he made as though he heard them not, and opposed himself against them that
offered to assault him; striking them upon the faces, and killing them that
made resistance, Titus crossing them as they went hindered their Titus valor
against the Jews.
pursuit. In the mean time those that were encamping themselves above, seeing
them beneath put to flight, were discomfited, and all fled, thinking that they
were not able to resist the Jews, and imagining that Titus was likewise fled:
for had they thought that he had stayed by it, they never would have forsaken
their quarters; yet being now terrified they knew not wherefore, some fled one
way, and some another without any order, till some seeing the Emperor in the
midst of the Fear and trouble among the Romans.
battle, and fearing the mischance that might be^ide him, they with loud
cries signified it unto the whole legion. Then the Romans turning again for
shame, and accusing themselves guilty Titus assaulted them that were opposite
The Jews fight in their retreat and are driven into the valley.
against him, and so commanded the rest to go and finish their trenches. And
he with those that before were with him to defend the workmen, did now also
keep the Jews from molesting them. So if I may speak without ^atterie or
envy, Caesar himself did twice preserve The year of the world. 4034. after
Christ's birth 72.
the whole legion from destruction, and gave the soldiers opportunity to
entrench themselves.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the fight within the City upon the feast of unleavened bread.

DVring the intermission of the foreign (...); they fell to their former
sedition again, which caused ciuillwars amongst them. And against the feast of
vnleuenedbread, which is the fourteenth day of April (for upon this day the
Jews say that they were delivered out of John enters and seaseth the inward
temple, and all the furniture thereof, puts the Zealous to flight, and
raises a mighty sedition.
the bondage of Egypt) Eleazar and his companions opened the gats, to the
intent (...) all that John used this festival day as a means to effect his
deceit; and caused many of his company that ^vere unknown, to enter in
amongst the people with weapons under their garments, giving them charge wh^
they were within to get possession of the temple: and so soon as they were
within they cast off the garments, and showed themselves to be in armor.
Presently a great tumult arose within the ^ple for all the people that were not
of the sedition thought themselves betrayed: and the Zealous thought this
^reason only practiced to prejudice them, and so leaving the gate which before
they kept, and leaping down from the towers, they never offering ^o fight,
fled into the vaults about the temple. And the people flocking about the altar,
and others who were driven into the temple, were killed with clubs and swords,
and so trodden upon. And many were slain upon private h^ed under pretense Sim^:
and thus the sedition A threefold sedition divided into two parts. Whatsoever
about ^alem (...) hollow or troubled with valleys is filled up.
that was before divided into three parts, was now brought only into two.
Titus being desirous to bring his army nearer the city, sent a certain
number of horsemen and foot, which he thought sufficient to hinder all
excursions of the Jews from Scopos, and another company he sent to plain all
the grounds betwixt him and Jerusalem, who ^ting down all hedges and pales,
and fences and wood (though they were fruit trees) filled the valleys and made
it all plain ground, and Herodes monument, which adjoined to the ^ake of
Serpents called sometime Bethora.

CHAP. V.
Of the deceit the Jews used against the Roman soldiers.

ABout this time the Jews devised this stratageme against the Romans. The most
courageous amongst the seditions people went out unto the places called the
women's towers, and counterfaited themselves to be driven thither by them within
the city that desired peace, Titus inspected some deceit colored with this
kind inuiting The alacrity of the soldiers among the Romans contrary to Titus
(...).
him to enter, because he did not see any reason for it. For the day before
having by Joseph off^red them a peace, he understood that the^ minds were far
from any peaceable cogitations: wherefore he now commanded the soldiers to
keep their quarters and not to remove; yet some of them appointed to work in
the trenches taking their weapons ran unto the gates, and the Jews who
seemed to be driven out of the city first fled; at last when they came unto
the gates of the towers, they enclosed the Romans round about, and assaulted
them upon their backs: The year^ of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72.
The victory of the Jews.
And after a long conflict receiving many wounds, and giving as many, at last
they put them to flight that enclosed them, and so the Jews departed, and
followed them unto Helens monument, pursuing them with darts. And then the
Jews returned rejoicing in their good fortune; and deriding the Romans for
being so deceived, lifted up their shields and bucklers, shouting and rejoicing.

The Roman soldiers were received of their Captains with threatenings, and of
Caesar with The Jews lead only with desperation do al things with advise and
counsel, devising deceites, and fortune favors their practices because they
are ordered, and trusty to one another. And now the Romans, whom for their
obedience and discipline fortune was wont to favor, do contrariwise offend
herein, and for their rash and unadvised fighting are overcome: and which is
worst of al, in Caesar's presence offering to fight without their Captains.
Truly the milita^e Caesar's sharp Oration to his soldiers.
law and discipline will be grieved hereat, and my father not a little sorrowful
to hear of this. For he who from his infancy unto old age, has been trained
up in arms, yet did he never offend in this sort: and what shall we say to
our law which punishes the least offenses against them committed with death,
when our whole army does disobey their Emperors command? But (quoth he) they
who so arrogantly have disobeyed our command, shall presently understand that
Titus having thus spoken in anger unto the Captains, evidently declared unto
them what and how he purposed to punish them. And they presently despaired; as
though by and by they were justly condemned to die. But all the other legions
flocking about Titus, besought him to pardon their fellow soldiers, and to
remit the offense of the rashness of some few, for the obedience sake of all
the The Roman soldiers beseech Titus for their fellows in arms.
rest: affirming that their future valor should be a sufficient recompense
for this their offense. Caesar was herewith pacified, partly thinking what was
most profitable, partly for the entreaty of the rest: for he purposed to
punish one man only, and to rebuke the rest, and signify unto them his
displeasure, and so he was reconciled unto his soldiers, straightly charging
them to be more wise hereafter: and after he devised how to be revenged upon
the Jews for this deceit. When Titus being desirous safely to conduct the
baggage and the rest of the multitude in safety, he placed the strongest of
all his soldiers every one in his rank seven by seven, and caused them to
march from the North part of the City unto the West, all along without the
City walls, placing the footmen in the forefront, and in the last place the
horsemen three in a rank, and between them both the Archers. So the Jews not
able now to make any excursions, Titus soldiers being thus disposed of, the
baggage of the three legions; and the multitude passed along without How and in
what places Titus befieged Jerusalem.
any danger. And Titus himself being now within two furlongs of the City
walls, pitched his Tent against that corner of the wall that is called
Psephinos, where the compass of the wall from the North bends into the West:
the other part of the army entrenched themselves against that

CHAP. VI.
The description of Jerusalem.

THe City was compassed with a threefold wall on every side, save only on
that part The treble wall of Jerusalem.
where it was enclosed with valleys inaccessible: for on that side it had only
one wall. It was built upon two little hills, one of them being opposite unto
another, and separated one from another with a valley, which was wonderfully
replenished with houses. David in times past called it a Castle. The Castle of
David.
(This David was the father of king Solomon, who first builded the Temple in
that place) but we at this day call it the high market place. The other hill
called Acra, is the place where the lower part of the City stands. Opposite
against this hill, there was also another lower then this Acra was: Acra
sustaineth the lower part of the City.
which was first divided from it with a large vallie, but afterward at such
time as the Asmoneans reigned they did fill up this vallie, to the intent that
they might join the City to the Temple, The year of the world. 4034 after
Christ's birth 7^. The fountain Siloa.
and cut down the top of Acra and so made it lower, that it might not hide the
Temple. The vallie by which we have said the two higher hills are separated one
from another, is called Tyropoeon, reaches unto Siloa (which is a fountain
abounding with sweet water.) Without the City were two hills, compassed with
deep valleys, and being enclosed with high rocks, they were on every side
inaccessible. The most ancient of the three walls by reason of the vallie about
The older wall
it and the hill whereupon it stood, could not easily be taken: and beside the
opportunity of the place, it was very strongly built, at the cost and charges
of David, Solomon, and other kings. This wall beginning at the tower called
Hippicos, reaches unto that called Xystus, and afterward being joined unto the
Palace, it ends in the West porch of the Temple: on the otherside toward
the West it begins at the same tower, and passing by the place that is
called Salomons pond, and reaches unto the place called Ophlan, where it is
joined unto the East porch of the Temple. The second wall begins at the The
second wall.
gate that is called Genath, which is a gate of the former wall, and it only
compasses the North part of the City and reaches unto Antonia, a Castle so
called. The third wall begins at the The third wall
tower Hippicos, from whence it goes into the North part, and from thence it
comes unto the tower Psephina, over against the Sepulcher of Helena that was
Queen of Adiabena, and mother of king Izates, and passing along by the Kings
caves, it turns toward the tower near the monument of Fullo, and in the
vallie called Cedron it joins with the old wall. Agrippa compassed that part
of the City that he built with this wall, it being before all open without
defense. ^ezetha the fourth hill.
against Antonia, but separated from it with very deep ditches, which were
made of purpose, least that the foundation of Antonia being joined unto it, it
might be easier to come unto, and seem lower: for the deepenesse of the ditch
makes the tower seem much higher then otherwise it would. This place being
added unto the City, is called in that Country language Bezetha, which
signifies the new City. And the Inhabitants desiring that part to be
fortified, Agrippa father to this Agrippa that finished the wall, did begin
that wall before mentioned, and fearing least Claudius Caesar hearing how
sumptuous a wall he built, should mistrust Agrippas cost in building the wall.
that he purposed to revolt, he only laid the foundation of it, and so left
it unfinished.

For the City could never have been taken by force, if he had finished that
wall as he began it, it being builded with stones twenty cubits long, and ten
cubits broad, which could neither easily be vnderminded, nor battered with
engines: and this wall was built ten cubits high, and no doubt had been
raised higher, had not his liberality who began this building been hindered.
Yet again by the Jews industry the same wall was raised twenty cubits
high, the battelments hereof were two cubits high, and the tower three
cubits, and in all it was twenty and four cubite high, as before. Upon the
wall were three towers twenty cubits broad, and twenty cubits high built
four square very strongly, and was builded of as firm a foundation as the
wall it self, which for the building and fair stone, was not inferior to the
temple above. Within The third wall had 50. towers
third wall had fourscore and ten (...) these towers, and between every
tower were two hundredth cubits space. The middle wall had fouerteene towers,
and the old wall had threescore, and the compass of the whole City was three
and thirty furlongs. And although the third wall was admirable, yet the tower
of Psephina, which was built upon a corner of the wall, between the North and
the West part of the City, had a certain excellency of more wonder, against
which Psephina was seventy cubits hie.
part Titus had encamped himself: for it was seventy cubits high, so that
from thence upon a clear Sunneshine day, one might discover Arabia, and see
the uttermost parts of all the dominions of the Hebrews unto the sea, and it
had eight corners. Just opposite unto this was the Herod builded upon the old
wall, which in bigness, beauty, and strength, did surpass all others in the
whole world.

For king Herod, beside his natural liberality and desire to adorn this
City, did also for his Herod called three towers by the names of three his
most dearest friends.
own pleasure so beautify this building, that it might excel all other, and
dedicated them to three most renowned personages; whose names they also did
bear, to wit, to his brother, his friend, and to his wife, she being (as is
aforesaid) put to death for jealousy; the other two being slain in wars
after they had fought valiantly. The tower Hippicos called by the name of his
friend had The year of the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72.
Hippico. 85. cu^its high.
Phasaelus 90. cubits hig^.
height was almost fourscore and ten cubits: And it resembled the tower Pharus
at Alexandria, wherein continual light is kept to guide the seamen that sail
thither, saving that it had a greater compass then it. And in this house now
at this time did Simon lodge, who tyrannized over the people. The third tower
was, according to the Queens name called Mariamme the wife of Herod, Mariamme
a goodly tower 55. cubits high.
twenty cubits high, all solid, and other twenty cubits broad, having more
magnificent and beautiful houses and lodgings then the rest. For the king so
thought it mere that the tower called by his wives name, should be more
beautiful then they, who only bare the names of other men, like as they were
stronger then this that bare the name of a woman. This tower was in all 55.
cubits high.

Notwithstanding these three towers were of such height, yet by reason of their
situation they seemed far higher: for the old wall whereupon they were
built was placed upon high ground, and the top of the hill whereupon they
stood was ab^e thirty cubits high, whereby their height was much increased.
The greatness also was admirable, for it was not ordinary stone which men
might bear, but all white marble, whereof every stone was twenty cubits
long, and ten cubits broad, and five cubits thick: and they were so coupled
one to another, that every stone by it self seemed a tower; and so cunningly
conjoined by workemens hands, that every tower seemed one stone. And these
were placed on the North side of the City; and adjoining to them within the
City; was situated the kings palace, surpassing all that can be spoken of
it: The kings palace.
which for greatness and excellent work may be compared to all that were in
the world. It was The kings palace burnt by the thieves and rebels.
set on fire: for these things were not burnt by the Romans, but by the
seditious thieves (as is before said) at the beginning of this rebellion, who
consumed all with fire even from the Castle Antonia from whence the fire came,
and destroyed the kings palace, and the couers and tops of the three towers.
The temple was, as is before said, built upon a hard mountain, and at the
first The temple builded upon a most strong hill.
the plain upon the top thereof was scarcely big enough to contain it and
the temple yard, the hill being very steep. But when king Solomon, who also
built the temple, had compassed the East part thereof with a wall, he also
placed a porch upon the rampire, and so for many ages after it lay unfenced on
other parts, wherefore the people every day bringing earth thither, at last All
the sacred treasures spent in the building of the temple.
were employed therein, as well in the buildings of the higher as of the lower
part of the temple; the foundations whereof, were laid three hundredth cubits
deep, and in many places more: yet could not all the height of the foundations
be seen, being now buried in valleys that were filled The year of the world,
4034 after Christ's birth 72.
up to make them equal with the straight streers of the City. The stones of
this building were of forty cubits: for the abundance of treasure and
liberality of the people did effect that which was scarcely possible: and that
which all men thought could never have come to pass, in time and by industry
came to perfection.

The building was answerable unto these foundations. For all the porches were
double, and every one was supported by pillars, each of them being five and
twenty cubits high, and all of The porches were builded of white marble stone
sustained by pillars.
one piece and of white marble: the top whereof was all of Cedar, whose natural
beauty for the good conioyning of this wood and polishing thereof, did astonish
all that beheld it, being adorned neither with painting nor carved works.
These porches were thirty cubits broad: and the compass of them altogether,
with the fort of Antonia, was six furlongs. All the ground whereon A peculiar
place destinated for women for religion sake.
a wall. And so it was necessary there should be two doors: and against the
first gate there was opposite unto it one gate on the North side, and another
on the South, both separated from the rest, whereby one entered into the place
allotted for women; for it was not lawful for any to pass by any other gate
unto the women, neither could they go beyond their own door because of the
wall: for that place was common both to the women of that nation, and also to
all strange women that came for religion sake. There was no gate on the West
part, but a wall that reached all along in that place: Between the gates were
porches opposite one against another, reaching from Some of the gates were of
gold, some of silver, and one of Corinthian brass.
foreparts thereof were, one only excepted that was covered with Corinthian
brass, far surpassing in beauty the other that were covered with silver or
gold. In every gate there were two doors, each one thirty cubits high, and
fifteen cubits broad: and after the entrance where they were made larger,
every one had on each side seats thirty cubits long, and large like a tower,
and forty cubits high, each one supported with two pillars twelve cubits
thick. And all other gates were of like greatness, but that which was
covered with Corinthian brass, which was the entrance into the place allotted
for the women, and opened into the East gate of the temple, doubtless was
bigger then the rest: for it was fifty cubits high (the gates whereof were
Alexander Tiberius his father had melted, to cover all the nine gates. And
there were fifteen stairs, that went from the wall that separated the
women, unto the great gate of the temple: for these stairs were shorter by
five degrees, then those that went to other gates. The temple it self was
situated in the midst of all, to wit, the holy Sanctuary, The sacred
sanctua^ie.
and had twelve stairs to go unto it. The forepart whereof was in height and
breadth a hundredth cubits: and behind, it was forty cubits outright: and
before, it was as it were two shoulders on each side rising up in height
twenty cubits. The first gate here of was seventy cubits hie, and twenty
five vvide, and had no door: for it signified that heaven was spread al over
and might be seen in every place: and all the foreparts were gilded with
gold, and all the first building did temple did seem to be lower then it was
without, and it had golden gates five and fifty cubits The year of the world.
4034. after Christ's birth 72.


It had hangings also of the same length, which was a Babylonian veil, all
wrought with violet and purple silk and scarlet, admirable to behold: the
permixtion of which colors had a mystical The Babylonian veil of admirable
workmanship. The signification of the veil.
meaning, bearing as it were the signification of the whole world. For the
scarlet does seem to express the fire, the silk signifies the earth, the
violet shows the air, and the purple declares the sea; partly in their
colors resembling them, partly also as having their beginning from them: for
the purple is engendered in the sea, and the silk is produced by the earth. In
this tapestry work was curiously wrought and deciphered all the speculations of
the heavens, only the celestial signs excepted. Being entered within, you
come into a lower place of the temple, which was three score cubits high, and
as many in length, and twenty in breadth. Again this place was divided Three
admible works. The candlestick, the table and censor.
and famous throughout the world, to wit, a candlestick, a table, and the
altar of incense: upon the candlestick seven lamps were placed, which
signified the seven planets (for so many did there come all out of one stem
of the candlestick) upon the table were standing twelve loaves of bread,
signifying the twelve celestial signs, and revolution of the year. By the
altar of incense, out of which proceeded thirteen odours, coming partly from
the sea which is inhabitable, and partly from the earth, which is inhabited, is
signified that al things are in the hands of God, and subject to yield him
obedience. The inner part of the temple contained twenty cubits, which
likewise was separated from the other part by a veil, and nothing was within
it: and this place was the holy of holies, and no man might enter, look into
it, nor violate the same. On each side of the The outward court of the temple
covered with many plates of gold.
for any one to imagine any workmanship that it wanted: for it was al covered
with a massiue plate of pure gold, which shined far more bright then the
morning sun, so that it dazeled the eyes of the beholders, as does the sun
when it is gazed upon. And a far off it seemed unto strangers that came
thither like a white mountain: for where the temple was not gilded with gold,
there was

The priests that came unto the altar and temple had no infirmity; and they
were clothed in a fine linen garment, and abstained from wine, and lived in
abstinence for reverence of religion, The priests in the old testament
abstained from wine and were sober
least they should sin whilst they offered sacrifices. The high priest also
ascended with the priests into the temple; yet not always, but only every
seventh day, and in the Kalends of every mouth, The hie priests garment.
pomgranates of gold, first one and then another: the bells signified thunder,
and the pomgranates lightning. Upon his breast he wore a vesture of five
colors, to wit gold, purple, scarlet, silk and violet, which also (as we have
said) the vailes of the temple were wrought withal. He had likewise a The year
of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. The precious stones in the high
priests garment.
rotchet of the same, wherein was more gold, and in shape it was like the
garment he wore on his body down to the thighs: it was also buttoned with
two golden buttons, made in the form of Aspes, wherein was enclosed the
greatest and most precious Sardonych stones that could be found, bearing the
names of the twelve tribes of Israel engraven in them. On the other side did
hang 12. precious stones, three and three in a rank, divided into four rows.
In the first was the Rubie, the Topace and the Emraud: in the second the
Carbuncle, the Iaspar and the Sapphire: in the third the Acate, the Amethyst,
and the Diamond: in the last the Onyx, the Beryl, and Chrysolite; in every one
of which one name of the twelve tribes was written. Upon his head he wore
^miter of silk, which was crowned with Hyacinth: and aloft of it was another
crown of gold, wherein was engraven sacred letters, to wit the four vowels.
He did not always use this garment, but an The description of Antonia.
on every side was inaccessible: this first was builded by king Herod, to
show the greatness and magnificence of his mind. For first of all the rock at
the foot thereof, was all covered with thin, and slender stones like slates,
which did both adorn it, and would also easily slide down, if any one
walked upon them. Before the battlements of the fort there was a wall three
cubits Antonia not much unlike the city.
every corner one, whereof they that were on the South and East side were
threescore and ten cubits high, the other two were only fifty, so out of
these two highest one might have a perfect view of all the whole temple. Where
it ioyened unto the porches of the temple, there was on either side a pair of
stairs, for the soldiers to come down out of it into the temple. For always
the Roman soldiers lodged there, and guarded the temple in armor upon
festival days, least Herodes palace, which served for a castle over the
higher part of the city. The hill Bezetha was divided from the city as is
before mentioned, which being the highest of all, was joined unto part of the
new city, which did obscure the view of the temple on the North side. And
thus I have here spoken sufficiently of the city and the wall in this place,
because we mean hereafter to describe them more at large.

CHAP. VII.
How the Jews refused to yield, and how they assaulted the Romans.

THe most warlike of all the people joined with Simon, being in number ten
thousand, beside the Idumaeans: and those ten thousand had fifty captains of
their own fellows, yet all subject unto Simon. The Idumaeans that took his
part were five thousand, and had Fifteen thousand follow Simon.
ten captains, the chief of whom were Jacob the son of Sosas, and Simon
the son of Cathla. And John, who kept the temple, had six thousand armed
men, over whom were twenty captains: and then there came unto him two thousand
of the Zealous, and four hundredth, who before had followed Eleazar and Simon
the son of Iairus. So these warring one against another, the people was their
booty, and the multitude that were not seditious as they were, was their pray.
Simon kept the higher part of the city, and the greater wall even unto Cedron,
and all that part of the old wall which is between Siloa and the palace of
Monobazus, Simons camp against John.
who was king of Adiabena, that lies beyond Euphrates: he also kept all the
hill Acra (which is the lower part of the city) unto Helenas palace, who was
Monobazus his mother. But John kept all the temple and the space about it,
Ophla, and the valley Cedron: and that which was between these two places
which Simon and John kept, was all consumed with fire, and made a place to
fight in. For although the Romans tents were pitched near unto the walls of the
city, yet did not this sedition cease, but having recovered some security a
while at the Romans first coming, presently they returned unto their former
wont. And dividing themselves again, The year of the world. 4034. after
Christ's birth 72.
The sedition took the City and the Romans overcame and took the sedition.
them into it. For the seditious did take the City, and the Romans did
overcome and take the seditious, which was far stronger then the walls: so
that one may ascribe all their miseries to their own nation, and equity and
justice unto the Romans, as every one shall clearly see by that which ensued.

The City being in the estate before said, Titus with chosen horsemen went up
and down Titus circuring the wall, seeks which way he should attempt his
battery.
without it, to epsy where he might most easily assault the walls. And being in
doubt a long time John the high Priest: for only in this place the first wall
was lower then in other places, and it was not compassed here with the second
wall, for this place was not fortified, because that those parts of the new
City were not much inhabited. So that from this place the wall might easily be
assaulted: whereby Titus was persuaded that the higher City, and the Temple,
and Antonia, might easily be taken. As he was thus viewing the place, one of
his friends called Nicanor came unto him, who was shot in the left shoulder
with an arrow, because he desired to come near Joseph, who went thither of
purpose to persuade the Jews which were upon the wall to yield. (For Nicanor
was very eloquent) Caesar Nicanor is wounded with an arrow in the left
shoulder.
John. still kept where he was, fearing Simon; yet were his followers very
earnest to assault the Romans. But Simon being next unto the siege, did not
rest, but placed all along that part of the wall men with darts, which before
were taken from Sesleis Governor of the Romans, and found in the Castle of
Antonia. But the darts did the Jews small pleasure, by reason that few of them
knew how to use them, only some who were taught by certain that had fled from
the Romans, could use them a little. Yet did they assault the Roman soldiers
that were building the mounts, with The darts did the Jews little good because
they were not expert in using them.
arrows and stones; and also made excursions upon them by companies, and
fought with them. But the Roman workmen were defended by hurdles that were of
purpose set before them: and The son comes, so the Jews upon the walls
knovving what they meant, avoided the stones and so received no harm. cast
from the walls; and finding that they had Rams long enough, they set them up,
and Titus The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. ^tus comman
death the wall to be battered in three places
commanded the wall to be battered in three places, to the end that the
battery might not be hindered. The noise that these rams did make, was heard
round about the City; and the Citizens cried mainely out, and the seditious
persons were also sore afraid. And seeing themselves all in like danger, they
now determined to join all together in resisting the Romans: and the seditious
cried one unto another, saying, that they rather assisted the enemies then
resisted them: and therefore exhorted one another, at least for that time to
become friends, if not for ever, only to resist the Romans. And Simon sent a
crier unto the Temple, licensing all such as would to come unto the walls: which
also John did permit, notwithstanding he mistrusted Simon: so they forgetting
their old quarrel, joined al together, and resisted the Romans, and guarding
the walls round The seditious forgetting their ha^ed and discords join in one.
they cast much fire upon the engines of the Romans, and against those that
did rule them; and

Titus was still at hand to succor them that stood in need, and placing
horsemen and Archers about the engines, he repulsed the Jews who came to cast
fire, and repressed them that cast darts, and shot arrows from the towers, and
so gave the rams time and opportunity to beat the walls. Yet for all this the
wall was not shaken with the rams, save only that the ram of the fifth legion
The ram shakes a corner of a tower.
did shake the corner of a tower; but yet the wall stood firm, and was not
harmed by the shaking of the tower: for it was far higher then the w^ll, and
so could not draw down any part of the Alexandria hindered it, who for the
opinion that they had of themselves did fight stoutly: for they were Titus
puts the Jews to flight and drives them into the City.
accounted to have been the most valiant of all in this battle; till such
time as the Emperor with certain selected horsemen came and set violently
upon the enemies: and he himself slew twelve men that did resist him, for
whose deaths the rest fearing fled, and were forced to retire themselves into
the City, and so saved the engines from being fired. It chanced that one of
the Jews was in this fight taken alive, and Titus commanded that he should be
crucified before the wall, that perhaps the rest being herewithall terrified
might yield. After Caesar was retired, John the John Captain of the Idumaeans
by the shot of an arrow that wounds him in the breast dies.
Captain of the Idumaeans talking upon the wall with one of his friends,
being stricken in the

CHAP. VIII.
Of the fall of the tower: and how the two walls were taken.

THe night following, there was a great tumult amongst the Romans. For Titus
the Emperor had commanded to be builded three towers, fifty cubits high a
piece, each one upon a several mount, that from thence he might the more
easily beat the enemies from off the walls: but one of these towers in the
midst of the night fell down Titus understanding the matter, caused the
truth thereof to be presently proclaimed throughout the camp; and so the The
year of the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 71.


The Jews valiantly bearing and enduring all other dangers, were sore troubled
by reason of these towers which Titus had erected; for they were slain and
vvounded from thence with small engine shot, darts and arrows; neither could
they build themselves any so high, nor was there any hope to destroy them: for
neither could they be thrown down for their weight, nor fired because they
were covered with iron: and so they flying out of the reach of the shot, did
not seek to hinder the ram from battering their walls; which never ceasing, at
last prevailed somewhat. So the great ram, which the Jews called Nicon,
because it overcame all, at last battered the wal; and the Jews being weary
with fighting, for that they had watched all the night before, for Nicon that is
to say Vistor, the Romans great ram.
sloth, or else because they persuaded themselves that the wall was
superfluous, they having two The Romans get the first wall.
passed and entered the first wal, went and opened the gates and let in the
whole army. Having thus gotten the wall the seventh day of May, they destroyed
the greatest part thereof; and also the North side of the City which before
Cestius had waste.

Titus removed his camp from thence, and went unto the place called the
Assyrians camp, and seized upon all between that and Cedron; and being
without the shot of an arrow from the second wal, he began again to assault
it. Then the Jews dividing the wall betwixt them to defend each others part,
they resisted most valiantly. And John and his partakers defended all Antonia,
and the North part of the temple from Alexanders toombe: and Simon defended all
John's toombe unto the gate by the tower Hippicos. And many times issuing out at
the gates they fought hand to hand with the enemy, being always repulsed by
the discipline of the The Jews conflict with the Romans. The Jews boldness.
Romans, only for want of knowledge in warlike affairs; and still in all
fights upon the wal they got the best: for the Romans were assisted by
fortune and knowledge, and the Jews with desperate boldness which came of
fear; for they are of stout courage in adversity. Moreover, the Jews were
moved to fight in hope that way to save their own lives: and the Romans to
get a speedy conquest. Neither party was vvearie, neither did they ever cease
from assaulting one another: all the day long the Jews in whole companies
made excursions against the Romans, and they omitted no kind of fight
beginning at sun rise, and continuing all night long, far more terrible to
them both then in all the day before: the Jews feared least that the Romans
Simons followers did greatly reverence and fear him, insomuch as if he should
have commanded any of them to have killed himself, he would presently have
done it. The The custom of the Romans to conquer.
Romans were encouraged to fight by their wont and custom in getting the
victory, and that they were not wont to be overcome: again their frequent
and daily vvarres and continual exercises and large dominions gave the like
courage, and especially Titus their General still present in all their affairs
greatly sturred them forward: for every one thought it a heinous crime to be
a coward in the presence of such a captain as Caesar was. Caesar himself
beholding and looking Longinus one of the horsemen coming out of the Roman
army, preased Longinus breaks into the midst of the Jews army, and
disturbeth it.
into the midst of the Jews forces, and casting them down that stood in his
way, by this violence he slew two of the strongest of the enemies amongst them,
striking one of them over the face, and slaying the other with his own dart
he rooke from him: who for this deed was greatly honored, having broken
through (...) strong army of the Jews, that were placed before the walls, and
cast darts at him on either side. Many of the Romans by this his example were
entised to do the like. The Jews now regarded not what they suffered, but
only devised. which way to Titus had as much care to preserve his soldiers,
as he had to get the victory; affirming these rash assaults to proceed of
desperation: and that only was to be accounted for virtue, when one did
warily not endanger himself to atchieue any worthy action, and willed them
rather to show themselves men where there was no danger.

CHAP. IX. The year of the world, 4034 after Christ's birth 72.

How Castor the Jew derided the Romans.

THen Titus commanded the ram to be set up against the tower on the North
part of the City, wherein a crafty and politic Jew accompanied with ten men
had hid himself, all the rest being fled: this Jew was named Castor. These
men having lien still a while Castor a subtle and politic Jew.
there in their armor, at last being afraid and the tower beginning to shake,
they start up: and Castor stretching forth his hand, did as it were humbly
crave favor at Caesar's hands, and with a lamentable voice besought him to
spare him. Titus seeing the man's simplicity, as he thought, and persuading
himself that the Jews did now repent them of their enterprise, he caused the
Castor to speak his pleasure. Castor said, that he desired to come and make a
league of peace. And Titus answered, that he would grant it, if so be all the
rest would do so likewise; and that he would presently confirm a league of
peace between him and the City. Five of Castors fellows seemed to be willing,
and to request the like; but the other five counterfeited to withstand them,
crying out a loud, that they would never be slaves unto the Romans, seeing they
might die in liberty. Whilst Castor and his fellows were debating the
matter, the battery ceased. In the mean time Castor privily sent word unto
Simon, willing him whilst the battery ceased to deliberate what was expedient
to be done in this necessity: for he a while would deceive the Roman Emperor,
and hold him in suspense. And in the mean time he seemed to exhort his
companions Titus: and they as it were angry hereat, drew their swords and
stroke upon their corselets; and they so stricken seemed to fall down, as
though they had bin slain. Titus and his soldiers were amazed at this their
obstinacy; for being on the lower ground they could not well perceive what was
done: and so they woondred at their desperation, and also pitied their
calamity. At this time one stroke Castor in the buttocke with a dart, and
Castor pulling it out of his flesh, showed it unto the Emperor; and complained
of it, as being injured. Titus presently with sharp words corrected him that
shot it, and forthwith would have sent Joseph to promise Castor pardon and
peace. But Joseph denied to go, affirming that Castor only dissembled, and so
hindered his friends that would have gone. At last one Aeneas, who had fled unto
the Romans, offered himself to go. Castor invited him, as though he would give
him some Aeneas opened the skirt of his garment, thinking Castor would have
cast him down something of worth: and when he came underneath the tower,
Castor took a great stone and threw it down upon him; yet hurt him not because
he was aware of it, and avoided the stone; but it wounded another soldier
standing by. Then Caesar considering Mercy in wars hurtful.
this deceit, began to think that pity and mercy in wars was hurtful, and
that cruelty was not so easily deceived; and so being very angry at this
deceit, he caused the wall to be beaten with the ram more then before. Castor
and his fellows perceiving the tower to shake, they set it on fire, and so
passed through the flame, and conveyed themselves into a mine of the tower; so
that again the Romans admired their courage, thinking that they had burned
themselves.

Titus assaulting the wall on this part, took it five days after that he had
taken the first; and causing the Jews to fly from thence, he accompanied with
a thousand chosen men about him, Titus takes the second wall.
entered in where the woolmen, and coppersmiths, and merchant tailors dwelt,
which place was the new City, having only narrow and straight ways to go unto
the wall. And had he presently beaten down a great part of the wall, or
according to the laws of arms destroyed that which he had gotten, he had
obtained the victory without any loss on his side. Yet now hoping the Jews
would yield, seeing that if he pleased he might take them by force, he gave
the more ample and easy passage to retire: for he did not think that they
whose good he sought, would have been traitors unto him.

CHAP. X.
How the Romans did twice take the second wall.

WHen Titus was entered the city, he suffered none of them that were taken to be
slain, nor the houses to be burned, but permitted the seditious (if they were
so minded) to fight, and that without the prejudice of the people: and also
promised the people to restore unto them all their goods. For many besought him
to spare the City for them; and the temple for the city. The people were glad
hereof: and many of the warlike Jews thought the humanity The year of the
world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. They interpret war like Titus humanity for
cowardice.
of Titus to proceed from cowardice; and judged that Titus, for that he
despaired to win the rest of the city, did now cowardlike propound these
conditions. They likewise threatened all the people, that whosoever should speak
one word concerning peace, and yielding unto the Romans, should presently die:
and some of them did resist the Romans from out of their houses, and others in
the narrow ways: and others going out at the higher gates, began a battle,
wherewith the watchmen being troubled, fled from the wall, and forsaking the
towers, they retired themselves into their camp. The Roman soldiers within
the city cried out, because they were enclosed with the enemies, the gates
being shut, and assaulted without by those who apprehended The Romans are
driven out by the Jews.
their companions to be in great danger. The number of the Jews increasing,
and prevailing, for that they knew the ways and turnings of the streets, many
of the Romans were slain, and violently Titus succored them. For placing at
the beginning of every street archers, and himself being where most need was,
he so did drive away the Jews with darts and arrows: and with him Domitius
Sabinus, who in that fight was proved a stout warrior, who so long continued
beating the Jews with arrows, till all the soldiers were escaped away.

Thus the Romans having got the second wall were beaten from it again: And the
citizens fit for war were hereat encouraged, and were drunken with this
good fortune, thinking The Jews courage increases.
that now the Romans durst no more offer to come into the city, and that they
could not be overcome if they did arm themselves to fight. For God, because of
their iniquity had darkened The people in want, and many die for hunger.
against the Romans, rejoicing at the death of the rest, as freed from a
heavy clogge; and this was the affection they bare unto their Citizens. And
so they armed themselves, and resisted the Romans, who now again did attempt
to enter the breach: and they threw down Titus his assault, but were forced to
retire, as before: and he having gotten the wall Titus once more gette^ the
second wall.
destroyed all the North part thereof, and placed a garrison in the towers and
fortresses of the South part.

CHAP. XI.
Of the mounts raised to batter the third wall: and a long Oration of Joseph's
to persuade the people to yield: and of the famine in the City.

TItus now determined to batter the third wall, and he thought to continue that
siege but Titus caused them to be led every one in order Titus surceasing the
siege commands money to be distributed to all his soldiers.
into a place, where the Jews in the city might perfectly behold them, and
caused his captains to distribute money to every one. And the soldiers (as
their custom is) all armed, and drawing their swords out of their sheathes,
marched along, the horsemen leading their horses gallantly adorned, and a great
part of the suburbs glistered with gold and silver. This spectacle was
grateful and so they thought it better to be presently slain in wars, then
to be put to death shamefully, The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's
birth 72. Destiny had decreed that the innocent should perish with the nocent,
and the city with the seditious.
if they desisted from fight. Destiny also hindered this, whereby it was
decreed that the Titus perceiving that for ought he could do, the Jews were
still obstinate, he divided his army into two parts, and about John's tomb he
began to raise mounts, and against Antonia, hoping that ways to take the
higher part of the city, and by Antonia to sease the temple, which except he
could effect, he could not safely take the city: and against either of these
places he raised two mounts, every legio^ making one. The Jews and Simons
followers did hinder the work that was begun before John's tomb, and John
likewise with a great number of the Zealous hindered them that made the mounts
over against Antonia: who not only did fight with the advantage of the higher
ground, but also had The Romans in their labor are hindered by the Jews.
they had three hundredth engines called Balistaes, and forty engines to cast
stones, wherewith they greatiy annoyed the Romans, and hindered them from their
work.

Titus foreknowing that fortune would favor him, and that the city was like
to perish, he hasted to take it, never ceasing to persuade the Jews to yield:
and with his deeds he joined counsel. For he knew that many times words
prevail more then violence of arms, and exhorted them to save themselves, and
yield the city unto him: and told them of Joseph, how that he should make a
speech Titus bounty toward the Jews.
unto them in their own language, for he hoped that they would hear their
own countriman. Then Joseph going about the city without the danger of shot,
cried unto them to spare themselves, the city, the temple, the people, and not
become more hard hearted against them, then Joseph's Oration the Iewess.
them: and they who were nourished within them, and might only save them, did
vvilfully cause their destruction: and bad them consider that their strongest
walls were battered down; and only now the weaker remaining vnbattered, he
willed them to consider, how they were not able to withstand the Romans forces.
And that it was no news to the Jews, nor strange, to be subject unto the
Romans. For although it be a good and commendable thing to fight for liberty,
yet that was to be done in the beginning: but he that was once subject, and
would rebel, having a long time lived under the obedience of the Romans,
seemed rather to be desirous of a shameful death then a lover of liberty.
Moreover, that they should disdain to be subject unto Fortune and God for the
Romans.
Also that even by the law of nature, as well by the example of beasts as of
men, we are taught to give place unto them that are stronger then our selves,
and be contented that they should get the victory that are valiantest in
arms. And this (quoth he) was the cause that your ancestors who were far
more strong and politic then you, and had better means to resist; yet did
they submit themselves unto the Romans, which if God had not been pleased
withal, he would never have permitted them to have done. And how could they
hope to resist, seeing the city was as it were already taken? And that the
citizens supposing their walls were whole, yet Famine in the City.
did every day waste the people, and would also in short time destroy the
warriors amongst them. For suppose that the Romans would cease, and not besiege
the city, nor offer with drawn swords to assault it: yet is there a civil
war within the city, which the Jews cannot overcome or auert, it every day
increasing: except they would also fight against hunger, and they alone
overcome adverse fortune. Further he added, that it was best, before
intolerable calamities befell them, to change their opinion, and whilst they
had time to be counseled by good advise. And that the Romans would not punish
them for that which was already past, except they persisted obstinate even
unto the end. For they are (quoth he) kind, courteous, and gentle to their
subjects, and do prefer their commodity before revenge. And they thought it an
advantage to have

As Joseph did thus advise them, many standing upon the walls did rail against
him, many vpbrayded The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. The
Emperor strives to be at peace with the Romans. Joseph tippeth up the ancient
Histories, and some ^aine.
him, and others shot at him. Joseph seeing he could not auert the^ from their
imminent calamities, recounted unto them all their own Histories making for his
purpose. O wretches (quoth he) and ungrateful to them that help you: you
fight against the Romans, and bear arms against them, as though this way you
had conquered some others that came, as they now do, against you. When does God
the maker of all things deny his help unto us if we be oppressed? Will ye not
remember your selves? For what cause did you enterprise these wars, and how
great a friend and assister of yours do you daily offend? Do ye not remember
the myraculous works of your ancestors, and this holy place; and how in times
past it was by the enemies destroyed? But I quake and tremble to recount the
works of God to such unworthy hearers: yet hearken, that you may know that
you do not only resist the Romans, but also God himself. Nechias at that
time Pharao, came, and with an infinite army took away Queen Sara, the
mother of our nation. And what did our first father Abraham in this case? Did
he with Nechias a king of Egypt.
weapons and arms revenge this injury? having under his command three
hundredth and eighteen Captains, and under them an infinite multitude? Or did
he rather desist from war, perceiving God not to accompany him? Wherefore
lifting up pure and undefiled hands toward this holy place, which now you have
defiled and profaned, he chose God an invincible helper to aid him. And was
not the Queen the second night after sent home again unto him untouched? And
the Egyptian adoring this holy place, which ye have polluted with murders of
your own nation, and trembling at the visions he saw in the night time, fled,
rewarding the Hebrews with gold and silver, whom he perceived to be so
beloved of God. Shall I recount unto The Hebrews under the tyranny of Egypt
four hun dreth years.
unto the Egyptian tyrants and kings, and able to have revenged themselves by
force of arms, yet did they rather expect and stay Gods leisure? Who knows
not, that then Egypt in revenge of the Hebrews, was filled with all kinds of
serpents, and infected with all diseases, and the earth became so barren, that
Nilus waxed dry, and the ten plagues followed one another without ceasing;
whereby our ancestors were safely delivered without any bloodshed: for God
conducted them as willing to reserve them for his Priests. When the Assyrians
had taken away from The sacred Arc taken away by the Assirians and restored to
the Jews.
us the holy Arc, did not Palestina and Dagon repent that fact? did not all
the nation of them that took it, weep and lament therefore? For their privy
parts being putrified, their bowels and the meat they did eat ran out
there, and so with unclean hands they were forced to bring it Senacherib king
of Assyria, coming with all the power of Asia and incamping himself before
this City, overcome by humane force? Did not our ancestors leaving Senacherib
king of Assyria.
arms, fly to prayers, and by an Angel God in one night destroyed an
infinite army? And the next day the Assyrian rising, found a hundred
fourscore and five thousand of his men dead, and so fled with the rest from
the Hebrews being unarmed, and not pursuing him? You The captivity of Babylon.
know also that in the captivity of Babylon, where the people lived the space
of seventy years, they got not their liberty till such time as God put in
Cyrus heart, to suffer them to go into their own country. Who still assisting
them, they again as the priests in old time were wont, did Zedechias our king,
contrary to the admonition of the Prophet Jeremy, did go forth, and fight
with the king of Babylon then besieging the City, both he and all his were
taken, and this City destroyed. The destruction of Jerusalem by the King of
Babylon.
Yet consider how far your Captains are inferior unto that King, and your
selves unto the people of those times. For Jeremy crying up and down the
City, and saying that God was offended at their iniquity, and that except
they did yield the same, it should be taken by force; yet did not the King nor
any of the people lay hands upon him. And you (that I may omit your iniquity
Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes besieged the City, God being highly displeased at
our ancestors, who going out in arms against him Joseph's bitter inuectiue
against them.
were all slain, the town spoiled, and this holy place for three years and
six months made desolate. What should I show unto you any more examples. Who
first incited the Romans themselves The year of the world. 4034 after Christ's
birth 72.
Aristobulus, and Hyrcanus brought Pompey into our City: and so God subdued
them unto the Romans, being now unworthy of liberty? And at length having for
three months space endured a siege, being not so great offenders as you are,
and better able to abide the siege then you, yet did they yield themselves. Are
we ignorant of the end of Antigonus the son of Aristobulus, who inuading the
kingdom, brought our nation again into subjection. God so laying this bondage
upon them, for that he was moved at the iniquity of our nation? And Herod the
son of Antipater brought Sosius and the Roman army, and besieged the City
round six months space: and at last for the greatness of their iniquity was
taken and punished for their offenses, The Jews sins against the laws.
have you left undone, that he detesteth not? How far greater is your
impiety then theirs, that did suddenly perish for their sins? For you making
small account of secret sins, to wit, stealing, deceit, and adulteries, do
violently take away men's goods by open force, and murder whom ye please; an^
have devised new ways to sin. Moreover, you have made the holy Temple a
place of all these your impieties, and the seat that the Romans did adore, is
by our own nation The Romans use the same manner of overthrow against the Jews
as the Assyrians did.
obtained that in one night so many of the Assyrians should be destroyed? Or
do the Romans commit such impiety as the Assyrians did, that you may hope of
the like revenge against them? for he having received a piece of money to save
the City, did, not regarding his oath, seek to destroy the same. The Romans
do only request the tribute that our ancestors were wont to pay unto them:
which if they have, they will never destroy the City, nor touch our holy
things. They will also permit you to enjoy freely your families and
possessions, and suffer our laws to remain inuiolate. It is altogether
madness for you to hope that God will so punish just men, as he did sinners
God knows when to revenge.
Pompey and Sosius came against the city, or when Vespasian wasted Galilee, or
lastly now, when Titus came to assault it. But neither Pompey nor Sosius
suffered any harm, yet both of them took the City. Vespasian so gained by
The fountains that before time were d^y now flow to Titus.
warring against us, that he has hereby got the whole empire. And the
fountains which before gave you no water, yield it to Titus in great
abundance. You know that before his coming the fountains without the City
and Siloa were so dried up, that water was sold by measure, yet now they flow
so plentifully, that they do not only serve all the army, and their cattle
also; but besides that, do water all the gardens about. What this wonder
foretells, you have already experience. God is wont to show mercy to those
who con fesse and be penitent.
greatly labor to show your selves vicious, as others do to show themselves
virtuous. Yet for all this, there is time to amend, and Gods wrath will be
appeased, if ye acknowledge your sins, and be wives and parents, who shall all
presently be consumed, either with sword or famine. I know that The year of
the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72. Joseph's love and constancy
toward his country.


Joseph crying thus unto them with tears trickling down his cheeks, the
seditious were nothing moved, but told him that it was not safety for them to
yield. But the people were persuaded to fly, and some selling their
possessions, and that they had for small prices, they did swallow down the
gold, for fear the thieves should take it from them. And so when they had
escaped The people fly with their money.
unto the Romans, they emptying their bellies found it again, and so had money
to buy them necessaries. Titus also permitted many to go away whither soever
they pleased, which thing caused John and Simon were as diligent to stop the
ways least the Citizens should escape, as they did hinder the Romans from
entering into the City: so that whosoever did but give any suspicion of flight,
he was presently by them put to death. The richer sort, whether they staid or
fled, were slain for their wealth and possessions. The A wonderful famine in
the City.
famine of the city, and the desperation of the thieves both increased alike,
every day more and more; so that now there was no more corn found. Wherefore
the seditious persons brake into the houses and searched every corner for to
find corn; and if after their search they found any, then they did beat the
owners for denying it at the first; and if they found none, they tortured the
householders, as having more cunningly hidden it: And whosoever was yet strong
of body and well liking, The argument of store of meat.
him they presently killed; for hereby they deemed him to have store of food, or
else he should not have bin in so good plight of body as he was. And they that
were pined with famine, were by these barbarous seditious people slain, who
esteemed it no offense to kill them, who would shortly after die though they
were left alive. Many both rich and poor secretly exchanged all that they had
for one bushel of corn, and presently shutting themselves in the secretst
room of their house, some of them did eat the corn as it was vnground:
others made bread thereof as necessity and fear required. No man in the whole
City sat down to eat his meat on a table, but greedily taking it not boiled
from the fire, they even raw as it was did eat it. Most miserable was this
manner of living, and a spectacle which none without tears was able to behold;
for the strongest A miserable kind of living, and a spectacle of great
compassion.
still got the most, and the weakest bewailed their misery: for now famine was
the greatest calamity The soldiers enter the houses, and take the meat
vnchue^d out of the Citizens mouths.
came in; and taking them by the throat, they took the meat out of their
mouths already chewed, and ready to be swallowed down. The old men were
driven away, and not permitted to keep

These miscreants did not yet for all this feel either hunger or thirst: for
then these their impieties had been more tolerable; but they did it only to
exercise their cruelty, preparing six days food for themselves aforehand.
Wherefore meeting such as had escaped the Roman watch in the night, and gone
into the fields to gather weeds or herbs, when they again came into the City,
and thought they had now escaped the danger of their enemies; they there took
from them the herbs they had gotten with hazard of their lives, denying to
give them any small part of that for The year of the world, 4034 after Christ's
birth 72.
which they had undergone such danger: and they required them for Gods sake to
do it; yea they thought it a benefit, if being thus robbed and spoiled, they
did not also perish by the swords of these miscreants. These calamities the
baser sort of people endured at the hands of the common soldiers: but the
nobles and chief men of the city were led unto the tyrants, and accused
before The honorable and rich are drawn before the tyrants.
them of betraying the City unto the Romans; and so by some forged treason or
other put to death. And many times their suborned accusers would testify
against them, that they purposed to fly unto the Romans. And those that Simon
robbed, he sent unto John; and those that John spoiled, he sent unto Simon: and
so they did as it were one drink unto another the blood of the people, and
divide their dead carkases between them; insomuch that they disagreed only
for their desire of rule and domination: but both conspired to do mischief
and commit iniquity. The dissension betwixt John and Simon was for rule, their
concord was in wickedness.
For he that did not give to the other part of that which by cruelty he had
extorted from the miserable Citizens, was accounted impious: and he that
received not part, did now grieve as sustaining loss, in not having a share in
cruelty and impiety. I am not able to recount all their iniquities: but
briefly, I think that never any City endured the like, nor never any people
since the memory of men were so cruel and barbarous: and finally, to the
intent that their impiety unto strangers might seem the less, they spoke
evil of the nation of the Hebrews, and cursed them, and openly confessed
themselves to be slaves, people of diverse countries, united together in
wickedness, bastards and abortiues of their nation. They overthrew the City,
and forced the Romans (though against their wills) to accept of this sorrowful
and heavy victory; and almost drew the fire into the temple, as though it
staid from it too long. Neither did they weep or lament

CHAP. XII.
Of the Jews that were crucified, and the rampires burnt.

THe mounts and rampires that Titus built did greatly advantage him: and
although his soldiers endured some loss by the Jews who were upon the wall;
yet he sent part of his horsemen, and commanded them to lay wait for the Jews
that came out of the City into The poor peoples misery.
thereupon betide their dearest friends, not enduring to leave them behind to
be murdered by the thieves. Famine did now embolden them to go forth of the
City; and now it only remained for them to go forth privily, and be taken by
the enemies. And being taken, necessity forced them to fight for fear of
torments; for they now thought it too late to request mercy: after the fight
they were beaten and tortured al ways possible, and then crucified before the
City walls. Titus Titus crucifieth many Jews before the walls.
deemed this calamity most miserable: for every day five hundredth Jews and
sometime more were taken; and yet did he not think it expedient to dismiss so
great a multitude, nor to keep The Jews catried the kindred of those that were
fled out of the City to the Romans, and showed them the tortures they suffered.
hearts were hereby more hardened; so that herewith they terrified the rest of
the multitude: for they catried the kindred of them that had fled unto the
Romans to the walls, and bad them behold how those were used that had fled
unto the Romans: the same sight they also showed unto them

Hereupon Titus cut off many of the captives hands, and so sent them into the
City unto Simon The year of this world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72.
and John, that their calamity might testify them to be captives, and not
such as had fled and yielded unto the Romans; willing to admonish them at least
now to yield, and not compel him to destroy the city: telling that in so
doing, even now at the last they should save their own lives, country, and
temple, which had not the like in the world: and he continually went about the
Rampires hastening the workeme^ in their business, as though he presently meant
to effect that in deeds which in words he had spoken. The Jews that stood upon
the walls, cursed both him and his father, reuiling them, and affirming that
they contemned death; and that they did choose rather to die then to become
bondslaues: and that whilst life lasted they would as much as lay in The Jews
both curse Caesar and his father.
them harm the Romans, neither having care of themselves nor of there
country; which Caesar sent them word were both presently to perish. Moreover
he said, that the whole world was a

At this time arrived also Antiochus Epiphanes, and with him many armed men;
and beside them, guarded with a company called the Macedonians, who were all
of like age and little older then young men in their youth, all trained up in
arms and armed after the Macedonian manner, whereof also they took their
name: yet for the most part not able to answer the expectation that men had of
the Macedonians. For the king of Comagene was the most fortunate and happy of
all kings, that were subject unto the Roman Empire; till such time as he Titus
hereat smiled and answered, that that was a labor not only for the Romans,
but for all in common. After he had said thus, presently this young man
Antiochus, as he was accompanied with his Macedonians, assaulted the wall, and
himself with his strength and dexterity avoided the darts of the Jews, and
cast his darts at them: but all his young men (only a few excepted) The
insolence of Antiochus and the soldiers.
were there slain: for ashamed of their boasting speeches, they continued
longer in fight then it was expedient for them; at last many being wounded
retired themselves, now perceiving that the Alexanders fortune. The Romans the
12. day of May began to build their Rampires, and laboring full ieuenteene
whole days, with much ado The Romans in 17. days build four huge bulwarks.
they ended them the nine and twentieth day of the said month. For they builded
four most huge rampires, one of them over against Antonia, which was builded
by the fifth legion opposite to the midst of the Struthian waters: another was
builded by the twelft legion, 20. cubits distant from the other. But the tenth
legion which was of more account then the two former, erected a mount opposite
to the pond called Amygdalon on the North side: and the fifteenth legion made
the fourth, thirty cubits distant from the other, over against the monument of
the high Priest John. The mounts being thus finished, John undermined that
which was over against Antonia, and underpropped it with posts of wood, and
filling the mine with wood, bitumen and pitch, he fired it: Simon and his
associates did set upon the other Rampires: for thereon were planted Rams,
where with the Romans began to beat the walls. Amongst the rest a certain man
named Tepthaeus of Garsus a city of Galilee, and Megassarus one of Queen
Mariammes servants, and with them one of Adiabena the son of Nabateus, who
for his fortune was named Three valiant Jews.
Agiras, which signifies lame: these three taking firebrands ran unto the
engines, and there was The Romans environed with fire lose the mounts they had
built.
and notwithstanding that on every side they were assaulted with darts and
arrows; yet did they not give back, nor seek to avoid the danger, till such
time as the fire had taken hold of the engines. The flame mounting on high, the
Romans now came running out of their camp to succor their fellows: and the
Jews upon the wall with darts and arrows hindered The year of the world.
4034. after Christ's birth 72.
them, fighting with them that sought to quench the flame, nothing sparing
their own bodies. The Romans began to draw away the Rams, their shelters
being fired. And the Jews amidst the flames sought to keep them there: yet
for all this the Romans saved their Rams. From thence the fire caught hold of
the Rampires, and those that would have prevented it were burned: and the fire
so increased, that it could not be extinguished; so the Romans now environed
with a flame, and despairing to rescue their works, retired themselves into
their camp, and left them on fire. But the Jews were so much the more
earnest, their number still increasing by new supply coming out of the City,
so encouraged by this their victory they rashly adventured unto the Romans
camp, and assaulted the guard there. Whichguard was a A most bitter law among
the Romans against those that forsook their places.
company placed round about before the camp in armor, and there was a law
made, that Titus came from Antonia, where he had been to view a place to build
an other rampire, and he Titus accuses his soldiers of negligence.
suffer, being now as it were broken out of prison: and so he with certain
chosen men assaulted the enemies on one side; and they though stricken upon the
faces, yet did they not give back, but stoutly resisted him, and so joining
the battle, the dust was so thick, that none could see one another, nor any
hear what was said for the cries and noise, so that now no man could discern
his friends from his foes. The Jews persisted still in the battle, not for
that they trusted to their force, or thereby prevailed, but because they were
desperate. The Romans on the other part took courage, and fought stoutly for
shame, and for that Caesar himself was in danger amongst them. So that I
think that had not the Jews retired themselves into the The Jews retire
within the city.
city, the fury of the Romans had then consumed the whole multitude. The
Romans were now sorrowful for the loss of their rampires, who in one hour
had lost that, which with such labor and so long time they had been making,
and many of their engines being now displaced, they despaired to take the city.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the wall which the Roman army built about Jerusalem in three days space.

TItus now deliberated with his captains what was to be done, and they that
were most Titus consulteth with his captains.
that as yet the Jews had only fought with one part of the army, but they
were not able to withstand the force of the whole army, but would be all
consumed with darts and arrows. The wiser sort again persuaded Titus to build
rampires: but others counseled the contrary, to hold themselves quiet there,
and only to keep all places about, that no food should be conveyed into the
city, and so famish the city, and never fight with the enemy. For that the
Jews being now desperate, and desiring to be slain, would not be overcome by
force; or if not, to slay others which was worse of all. But Titus thought it a
shame to lie there idle with so huge an army, and do nothing, yet he deemed it
superfluous to fight with them, who would willingly fight to be slain* and he
could not make any mounts because he wanted matter, and it was most difficult
of all so much the longer: so that he feared that the countinuance of time
would diminish the glory of The year of the world. 4^34. after Christ's birth
72. Titus determines to enclose the City with a wall.
And if any one think that work difficult, and not to be achieved, let him
consider that it did not become the Romans to make a base or slender piece of
work: and that no man in the world could without labor effect any great
matter, but God only. Having with these speeches encouraged his Captains, he
caused them to lead the soldiers, and dispose them all in these businesses.
The soldiers had as it were some divine force and The Romans with ceasles
labor build the wall.
Colonel to please the Captain, and the Captain to please Caesar, who every
day went round about, and beheld the work: and so beginning at the place
called the Assyrians camp, where he was encamped, he drew a wall all about,
even unto the new City, and from thence by Cedron and mount Oliuet, and so
turned toward the South, and enclosed the mountain to the rock called
Peristereonos, and the hill next adjoining thereunto which hangs over Siloa:
and from thence bending his work into the West, he brought it down all along
the valley of the fountain: from thence ascending to the monument of Ananus
the high Priest, where Pompey pitched his Tents, and so brought it about by the
North side of the City: and coming a long Herod toward the East, and so
joined the wall unto his camp where he began. This wall was nine and thirty
furlongs about. Without this wall he builded also thirteen forts, every one
ten furlongs in compass. One wall of 39 stounds, whereof one contains eight
surlongs or there about. The Romans plant their courts of guard in several
Castles.
And all this whole work was finished in three days space, which desired
months to have been builded in: so that the celeritie in the building thereof
does make it scarcely credible. The City being thus encompassed with a wall,
and guards placed in every fort, Titus himself did still go round about the
first watch, to see al things in good order: the second watch he allotted unto
Alexander; and the third unto the Captains of the legions, and the watchmen
appointed every one in his turn to sleep in: and so all night long some of
them went about the Castle.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the famine in Jerusalem: and of the building of the second rampire by the
Romans.

THe restraint of liberty to pass in and out of the City took from the
Jews all hope The houses and ways full of dead men.
of saftie; and the famine now increasing, consumed whole households and
families, and the houses were full of dead women and infants: and the streets
filled with the dead bodies of old men: And the young men swollen like dead
men's shadows, walked in the market place, and fell down dead where it
happened. And now the multitude of dead The dead li^ unburied in the streets.
them, being now uncertain what should betide themselves. And many endeavoring
to bury others, fell down themselves dead upon them as they were burying
them. And many being yet alive, went unto their graves and there died. Yet for
all this calamity was there no weeping nor lamentation, for famine overcame
all affections. And they who were yet living, without tears beheld those, who
being dead, were now at rest before them. There was no noise heard within the
City, and the still night found all full of dead bodies: and which was most
miserable of all, the thieves at night came and took away that which covered
the dead bodies nakedness, and went laughing away, and in their bodies they
proved their swords, and upon pleasure only thrust many thorough yet
breathing. Yet if any have desired them to kill him, or to lend him a sword to
The cruelty of the the eues against those that lie a dying
Titus going about the walls, beheld all the ditch filled with dead men's bodies,
he lamented, and lifting up his hands to heaven, he called God to witness,
that it was not his doing. The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth
72. Thus lifting up his hand to heaven, calls God to witness that the fault is
not his. The Romans show the Jews their abundance of victuals. Titus pitying
the remainder of the nation, labors to save them. The blindness of the
Jews.
Such was the estate of the City. Now the Romans, when none of the seditious
durst make any more excusions, passed their time in joy and mirth: for they
neither suffered famine nor sorrow, having abundance of Corn, and all other
necessaries out of Syria, and the provinces adjoining: and many standing before
the walls, and showing their abundance of victuals unto the Jews, did so much
more increase their famine. Yet were not the seditious people moved at these
calamities: wherefore Titus pitying the relics of the nation, and minding at
least to save them that were left alive, hasted to take the City, and so he
began anew to build mounts, although he scarcely found matter to do it
withal. For all the wood near unto the City was consumed in the first
works, so that now the soldiers were forced to fetch more wood nintie
furlongs off; and only against Antonia, were erected in four places four
mounts greater then the former. Caesar

CHAP. XV.
Of the massacre of the Jews both within and without the City.

AT last Simon having tormented Matthias put him to death, notwithstanding that
by his Simons cruelty against Mat thias and his sons.
means he had obtained the City. This Matthias was son unto Boethus a
Priest, whom the people for his fidelity toward them greatly esteemed of, who
seeing the outrage of the Zealous toward the people, John being now joined with
them, persuaded the people to call in Simon to help them, conditioning nothing
with him before, for that they misdoubted no evil. And when he was come into
the City, he held him for his enemy as well as the rest: notwithstanding,
that by his only advice he was received into the City, as though Matthias
had only done that of simplicity. Wherefore calling him before the people, he
accused him that he did favor the Romans, and so condemned him to die, not
suffering him to clear himself; and put to death likewise his three sons
with him, for the fourth was before this time fled unto Titus. Matthias
requested Simon that he might be put to death before his sons: but Simon in
regard Ananus one of the cruellest soldiers about Simon.
for so Simon commanded Ananus his executioner who was the son of Bamadus.
This man was the most cruel of all Simons followers, who even when he was to
kill Matthias, derided him, asking what they could now help him, to whom he
sought to fly, and not permitted their bodies to be buried. After them Ananias
a Priest the son of Masbalus a nobleman, and chief Ananias the Priest with
fifteen of the noblest people slain. Joseph's father taken. Judas consulta
tion with his companions.
secretary to the council, a valiant strong man and borne at Emaus, and with
him fifteen of the chiefest men in the City were put to death. They took
also Joseph's father and kept him in prison, and with the public voice of a
crier proclaimed, that no man should talk with him nor visit him, pretending
fear of treason: and whosoever bewailed his estate, were put to death without
any Judas the son of Judas, who was one of Simons Captains seeing this (who
also kept a tower that Simon committed unto his charge, perhaps moved with
compassion toward them that perished without desert, yet rather fearing his
own life) assembled together ten of his most trusty companions, and said; How
long shall we endure these calamities? Or what hope have we of life in being
trusty to a most impious man? Behold now famine does take our City. The
Romans are almost within our walls, and Simon is cruel and faithless, even
toward them that have well deserved at his hands: with him we are in fear of
punishment; if we fly unto the Romans, we shall assuredly be received into
favor. Wherefore let us deliver the wall unto them, and save our selves and
our City. Neither can Simon hereby sustain any great loss, in being punished
a little sooner, then otherwise he should be, being now desperate The ten men,
to whom in this manner he brake his mind, agreed hereunto, and so he in the
morning sent the rest of the soldiers under his rule into diverse places, that
they might not perceive his intent, and he at the third hour of the day
standing upon the tower called the Romans. But some of the Romans proudly
contemned their offer, and other scarcely Judas with his companions is slain
by Simon.
believed them, and the rest made no speed to come. In the mean time while
Titus with certain armed men came unto the wall, Simon had notice of their
intent; and so speedily got the tower, and slew the^ that were within in the
sight of the Romans, and cast down their bodies over the wall. And The year of
the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72. Joseph wounded in the head with
a stone, and the rumor is spread through the city.
Joseph going about the wall, and coming thither (for he never ceased from
requesting the Jews to remember their estate) he was struck upon the head with
a stone, and so amazed with the blow fell down: who being fallen down,
presently the Jews made excursion out of the City, and had carried him away
into the city, had not Titus sent men to defend him: and whilst they fought,
Joseph was carried away, scarcely knowing what was done. The seditious with
loud cries rejoiced, as having slain him whose death they chiefly desired;
and so they reported within the City. Hereupon the people were most
sorrowful, verily believing him to be slain, by whom they had confidence to
fly unto the Romans.

When Joseph's mother who was in prison heard this, she said unto those of
Iotapata that were her keepers, that she verily believed it, for that he was
never taken alive by the Romans: yet secretly Joseph was quickly healed of his
wound, Joseph recouereth upon his wound.
and recovered; and showing himself he cried unto them, that ere long they
should find that he would be revenged on them for his wound; yet he ceased not
to exhort the people to obey the Romans, and yield: but the seditious seeing
him alive were astonished, and the people conceived good hope. Many (present
necessity urging them) leapt off the walls and fled unto the Romans; diverse
with stones going forth under pretense to fight with the Romans, yielded
themselves, Many that fled from famine at home met with more speedy death
among the Romans.
who had harder fortune there then within the City; and were now more harmed
by plenty of victuals which they found amongst the Romans, then with their
famine they suffered in the City: Titus hearing of this Two thousand Jews
embowelled in one night.
cruelty, had caused the authors here of to have been compassed round with
horsemen, and slain with darts, had the multitude of the offenders been
known; many more of them should have bin punished, then of the Jews that were
so murdered. Wherefore he called together the leaders of the soldiers that
came to help him, and the Roman captains (for some of the Romans also did
Titus displeased at this cursed act.
commit this fault) and said unto them in anger, that if any of his soldiers
did commit any such acts for uncertain gain, and were not ashamed that their
armor should be made of gold and silver: or if the Arabians in these wars
against strangers did what they pleased, and presently cause the infamy of
their vile facts to redound unto the Romans, they committing such murders
Avarice is not terrified with any punishment.
by fear of punishment, and cruel people have naturally a desire of lucre and
gain, and no one calamity may be compared to the desire of wealth; yet
sometime it is bridled and restrained for fear. But now God who had given over
the people to perdition, suffered all things to be turned to their destruction:
for that which Caesar did so straightly forbid, was still secretly committed
against the poor Jews that fled for mercy unto the Romans. So that now
whosoever fled out of the City, the soldiers first looking about them, least
any of the Romans should see them, ripped

CHAP. XVI. The year of the ^ld, 4034 after Christ's birth 72.

Of the sacrilege committed about the Temple: and the dead bodies cast out of
the City: and of the samine.

WHen John could rob no more, nor get any spoil from the Citizens, whom he had
robbed of all they had, he presently fell to sacrilege, and took many gifts
that were bestowed John falls to sacrilege, and takes away many presents out
of the temple.
upon the temple, and carried away sacred vessels for divine service, as cups,
plates, tables, and the cruets of gold that Augustus and his wife sent. So that
now a Jew robbed and spoiled the temple of all gi^ts wherewith the Roman
Emperors and other nations had honored it: affirming unto his associates,
that without fear they might use the holy things of the temple, seeing
Mannaeus the son of Lazarus flying to Titus out of the gate that was
committed Titus that from the time that the Romans army was placed near the
City, from the fourteenth day of April, until the first of July, were
carried out of that gate he kept, a hundredth, fifteen thousand and fourscore
dead bodies; yet was not he the keeper of the gate, but being appointed to pay
for the burying of the dead at the charges of the City, was forced to number
the dead bodies. For others were buried by their parents, and this was their
burial, to cast them out of the City, and there let them lie. And certain
noble men flying unto Titus after him, reported that there were dead in all the
city 600000. poor folks which were cast out of the gates, and the others that
died were innumerable: and Six hundredth thousand dead carcasses cast out of the
city.
that when so many died that they were not able to bury the^, that then they
gathered their bodies together in the greatest houses adjoining, and there shut
them up. And that a bushel of corn was Cow dung and dirt gathered together is
the Jews food.
loathsome to behold, was their meat. The Romans hearing this, were moved to
compassion; yet the seditious within the City who beheld this miserable sight
were nothing moved, nor repented not, but suffered them to be brought to that
calamity: for their hearts were so blinded by the providence of God, that they
could not see what hanged over their heads, and over the City.

THE SEVENTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the 7. book.
1 Of the breach made in the walls: and how the mounts were fired: and how
Sabinus assaulted the wall. 2 How the Romans assaulted Anto^a, and were ^pulsed
by the Jews. 3 Of the exceeding valor of Julian a Roman soldier. 4 Joseph's
speech, persuading the Jews to yield their City: and how the Jews fled unto
the Romans. 5 Of another battle, the Rampires being again builded: and of
the excursions of the Jews. 6 How the Romans were by the device of the Jews
consumed with fire. 7 Of the famine amongst the Jews. 8 Of a woman that for
hunger did seethe her own son. 9 How the wall was taken, and the Temple
burnt. 10 How the Temple was set on fire against Titus his will. 11 Of the
Priests: the treasure house: and the porch. 12 Of the signs and tokens which
appeared before the destruction of the City. 13 Of Titus his rule and
government: and how the priests were stain. 14 Of the pray of the seditious,
and the burning of the inner part of the City. 15 How the higher part of the
City was assaulted: and how some of the Jews fled unto Titus. 16 How the rest
of the City was taken. 17 Of the number of the captives, and them that were
slain. 18 A brief histor^e of the City of Jerusalem. 19 How the soldiers
were rewarded. 20 Of Vespasians sailing: and how Simon was taken: and of the
spectacles, and shows made upon Vespasian birthday. 21 Of the calamity of
the Jews amongst the Antiochians. 22 How Vespasian at his return was received
by the Romans. 23 Of Domitians acts against the Germans and Frenchmen. 24 Of
the river Sabbaticus: and of the famous triumph of Vespasian and Titus. 25 How
Herodium and Machaera were taken by Bassus. 26 Of the Jews that were slain by
Bassus: and how Iudaea was sold. 27 Of the death of King Antiochus: and how the
Alans brake into Armenia. 28 How Massada, the strongest Castle of all, was
taken and destroyed. 29 Of the death of the Sicarians that fled into Alexandria
and Thebes. 30 How the Temple which Onias built at Alexandria was shut up. 31
Of the Massacre of the Jews at Cyrene.
CHAP. I.
Of the breach made in the walls: and how the mounts were burned: and how
Sabinus assaulted the wall.

THE misery of Jerusalem every day increased, the seditious being by reason
The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. The multitude of
carcasses heaped in the city is hideou^ to behold.
of their misery more and more incited against the people: for now the famine
their enemies, and (as it seems to me) hereby vpbraiding God in that he so
deferred to punish The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. The
Jews vpbraided God in that he so long delayed to punish them. Iudaea desert
and desolate.
them. For the greatest part of them did now fight more earnestly then before,
not for hope of safety, but as despairing of all. The Romans though much
troubled to get wood to build withal; yet did they in one and twenty days
finish their mounts, having cut down all the woods near the city by nintie
furlongs. It was miserable to behold that country and place, before all beset
with trees and fertile plants, now to lie plain like a desert, all cut down:
neither was there any stranger that before time had seen Iudaea, and the
beautiful suburbs of Jerusalem, who now beholding it could abstain from
tears, or not lament the woeful change so far different from the former? For
now this war extinguished utterly all signs of beauty: neither could one
coming suddenly now know the place which he well knew before.

When the mounts were ended, both the Romans and the Jews greatly feared: the
Jews for The Jews and Romans are equally afraid.
these were overthrown, they knew not how to erect more wanting matter: and
now their bodies were wearied with labor, and their minds with many griefs
and molestations. But the Romans were more grieved at the calamity of the
city then the citizens within: for the Jews notwithstanding these miseries
did nevertheless stoutly defend their walls: but the courages of the Romans
failed, when they saw that the Jews policy made their mounts unprofitable,
that the strength The Romans most of al fear the desperatnes of the Jews.
of the walls resisted their engines, that the Jews boldness overcame their
strength in sight; and especially seeing that the Jews having endured such
calamity, famine, and misery, were still more courageous then before: so that
they deemed their strength not to be overcome; and that their minds were
invincible, who were hardened and encouraged by misery. For who were able
John's followers who were in the Castle Antonia, fearing what might ensue if the
wall were battered, prevented it in what they could, before the Rams were set
up: and taking firebrands in their hands they assaulted the mount; but deceived
The Jews with firebrands set upon the engines, but losing their hope return
back again. The valor and violence of the Jews decreaseth.
with a vain hope they retired themselves. For first of all they seemed to
disagree amongst themselves; so that they came from their walls one after
another, and some space between every one; so that they came softly and
fearfully; and briefly, not after the manner of the Jews: for they wanted
courage, rashness, and a flocking together at once, which is proper unto all
that nation, and so came more soberly, and with less courage then they were
wont. They did also find the Romans more courageous then of late, who so
defended their mounts with their bodies The Jews retire arguing one another of
cowardice.
another of cowardlines, and achieved nothing.

The first day of July the city was assaulted, and the Jews being now
retired, the Romans set up their Rams, notwithstanding that they were
assaulted from Antonia with stones, fire and sword, and whatsoever their
enemies in that extremity could find. For though the Jews had great
confidence in their walls, as that they could not be battered; yet did they not
permit the Romans The assault of the city the first day of July
to place their Rams against them. And the Romans being persuaded that the
Jews so labored, because they knew their walls to be weak, and least Antonia
by the breach of the wall should be hurt, did strive to place the^ against the
walls. But the wall would not yield unto the Ram, yet did the Romans safely and
without danger (notwithstanding that many darts were cast at them from off the
walls) persist to beat the wall with their Rams: who being below and seeing the
stones broken with the force of their engines, they shielded themselves with
their bucklers: and so some The Romans undermine the wall.
place which John had undermined to destroy the mounts, the mine settling) fell
down. So that fell out otherwise then either part expected: For the Jews who
indeed had cause to be sorrowful for the mine of the wall, and for that they
did not prevent that mischance, were joyful and courageous, as though Antonia
did yet remain firm and ^ong: And the Romans rejoicing for The year of the
world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. No man dare ascend the wall that John built.
John had built within, yet they judged it easier to be taken then the former;
but no man durst ascend it, for that he who first assaulted it, was certain to
die. Titus* thinking that by hope and persuasion his soldiers might be
encouraged, and knowing many times promises and exhortations made men forget
danger, and sometime to contemn death it self; he called together the most
valiant of all his soldiers, and spoke thus unto them as follows. Fellow
soldiers, it is manifest cowardlinesse to exhort men to enterprise a thing
without danger, both in them that are exhorted, and in him that exhorts Titus
exhortation to the most valiant and strongest.
for exhortations are only to be used in doubtful affairs, wherein it is
praise worthy for every man to adventure himself. So that I confess it is
hard for you to ascend the wall, yet will I show you that it is a glorious
death to die in such a fight, and especially it becomes them that The patient
minds of the-Iewes and their constancy in misfortunes.
away unrewarded. And first let this move you which terrifieth others, to wit,
the patient mind of the Jews, and their constancy in adversity. For it is a
shame for the Roman soldiers who in time of peace practice themselves in
warlike fears, and are accustomed in war to get the victory, now to be
overcome by the Jews; and that in the end of the victory, we having also God
to help us: for all our harms proceed from the Jews desperation; and their
destruction and calamity by Gods favor and your valor is every day
increased. For what else is betokned by their sedition amongst themselves,
their famine, the fall of their walls without our engines to batter them, and
the siege it self; then the wrath of God toward them, and his favor toward
us? Wherefore it is unseemly for you either to give place to your inferiors,
or to betray Gods favor The wrath of God against the Jews is the Romans
furtherance.
and furtherance. It is not a shame that the Jews, who, were they conquered,
sustained no great reproach as being accustomed to serve and obey others, should
so valiantly contemn death, least they should hereafter suffer or endure the
like; and many times boldly to adventure and make excursions even amongst the
midst of us, not for hope they have to overcome us, but only to shewtheir
valor: and that we, who have conquered almost the earth and sea, to whom it is
an infamy not to be victorious, to lie idle, and never make any valiant
assault upon our enemies, but being thus armed, to expect till fortune and
famine deliver them into our hands? Especially seeing that by undergoing a
little danger, all will be ours. If we get into Antonia, we have taken the
City. For suppose that we were then to fight against them, that are within the
City (which I do not think) we having gotten the highest part of the City,
being above our enemies head, are Titus speaks of the life to come after a
poetical manner.
him that dies in war, is presently received into the most pure ayrie
element, and from thence carried and placed amongst the sta^es of heaven, and
the good and valiant ghosts do always assist his posterity? And that all
that in peace do die of some disease and sickness, their souls are kept in
the bowels of the earth in darkness: notwithstanding, that they be most just
and pure, and presently they are forgotten, and their life and memory together
with them extinguished. Seeing therefore that we are all certain to die, and
that to die by the sword is a more easy death The reward of valiant men.


Titus having thus spoken, the rest of the multitude feared the greatness of
the danger: but one of them that warted in the companies named Sabinus, a
Syrian borne, a man of excellent strength and courage; yet of so small stature,
that if one had seen him, they would have deemed him unfit to have been a
soldier: for he was of very small stature and of black color, but he The
year of the world, 4034. after Christ's birth 72. Sabinus a man of low stature,
but valiant both in hand and heart. Sabinus with cleauen men Approaches the
wall.
had a mind far bigger then his body, and strength scarcely able to be
contained in so little room. This Sabinus rising up said: I offen my self
unto thee, O Caesar, first of all to ascend the wall, and that with a willing
mind, requesting that thy fortune may assist my strength and mind: yet if
fortune shall hinder my enterprise, know that I die not against my expectation,
but that I will gladly give my life for thee. When he had so said, he took
his shield in his left hand, and holding it above his head, with his drawn
sword in his right hand, about the sixth hour of the day he went unto the wall:
and eleauen men followed him, who only envied his virtue. But Sabinus with a
divine seruour of spirit went before them all: notwithstanding, that on every
side the Jews upon the wall cast an infinite number of darts at him, and
rolled down upon him huge Sabinus meeting the darts and pestering arrows, yet
did not remit his force; till such time as he had gotten unto the top of the
wall, and put the enemies to flight who terrified with his strength and
courage, and indeed The power of fortune.
thinking that more had come up after him, fled. Wherein, who may not justly
blame fortune, and accuse her; as envying at virtuous acts? For this man
failed not of his purpose, yet was he stricken with a stone, and thrown down
flat upon his face most violently with a great noise: so that now the Jews
seeing him alone, and lying upon the ground, returned again, and shot at him
on every side: and he kneeling upon his knees, and covering himself with his
shield, did first of all revenge himself upon his enemies, and wounded many
that came near him, till that with wounding them he was so weary, that he
could strike no longer; and so at last was slain Sabinus with three companions
slain.
with arrows: a man who for his valor deserved better fortune, and died as
valiantly as his enterprise

CHAP. II.
How the Romans assaulted Antonia, and how they were driven back from thence
by the Jews.

TWo days after, twenty of the watchmen which guarded the mounts, two
horsemen, and one trumpetter gathered themselves together: and about the ninth
hour of the The Romans invade Antonia.
night, they came by the ruins into Antonia without any resistance: and
finding the first watchmen a sleep, they slew them, and got the wall, and
commanded the trumpetter to sound; by which sound, the rest of the watchmen
were awaked, and fled for fear before they saw what company of the Romans
were gotten upon the wall: and the sound of the trumpet persuaded them, that a
great multitude of enemies were come up the wall. Caesar hearing the sound of
the trumpet, presently armed his soldiers; and accompanied with his chief
Captains, and a company of chosen men, he ascended the wall. The Jews fled
into the inner Temple, and the Romans also brake in amongst them by the mine
that John had made to destroy the mounts of the Romans. And the followers both
of John and Simon did courageously drive them back: for they thought it the
utter ruin of all, that the Romans were now gotten into the holy place, which
indeed A most stout fight about the entrance of the inner Temple.
fought it out at handie blows with swords: and in that conflict no man could
discern on which side any one fought; for the soldiers on both parts were
mingled together, and for the streightnes of the place, could not keep their
rooms: for there was such a noise that no man could hear one another, and
many were slain on both parties: and the dead bodies of those that were slain
and their weapons falling with them, did hurt many that troade upon them; and
who soever had The straightness of the place was incommodiu^ for the fight.
the worst, presently cried out pitifully, and the victors shouted for joy:
neither was there any place to fly or follow; the fight was such, that now one
had the better, and now the other. Moreover,

CHAP. III. The year of the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72.

Of the exceeding valor of Julian the Roman soldier.

THere was one Julian a Centurion borne in Bithynia of good parentage, who (as
my self Iulians famous fortitude.
well knew) was most valiant of all, both in strength of body, and skill, and
courageous mind. This Julian seeing now the Romans to have the worst (standing
by Titus in Antonia) he presently leapt down, and all alone pursued the Jews,
who had the victory into the inner temple. And the whole multitude fled,
deeming him by his force and courage, not to have been a man. But he amongst
the midst of them, slew whomsoever he light on, one of them for haste casting
down another. So that this his deed seemed admirable unto Caesar, and
terrible Julian running falls upon the pauement.
his armor in the fall making a great noise: whereat his enemies, who before
fled, now turned again upon him. Then the Romans in Antonia fearing his life,
cried out: but the Jews many at once struck him with swords and spears. And
he defended many blows with his shield, and many times attempting to rise,
they struck him down again: yet as he lay, he wounded many, neither was he
quickly slain, because that all parts of his body, which being wounded might
cause present death, were armed, and shrunk in his neck a long time til the
rest of his body being cut off, and no man helping him his strength failed.
Caesar was very sorrowful to see a man of Iulians death.
so great force and fortitude slain in the sight of such a multitude: and that
the place wherein he Julian; and others that might have helped him, durst not
for fear. At last when Julian had a long time striuen with death, and wounded
many of them that slew him, he was with much ado killed, leaving behind him a
renowned memory, not only amongst the Romans and Caesar, but also amongst his
enemies. Then the Jews took his dead body, and did beat back the Romans,
and shut them in Antonia. In this battle one Alexas and Gyphthaeus Valiant
soldiers among the Jews.
two of John's company fought valiantly, and of Simons company Malachias and
Judas the son of Merton, and James the son of Sosa, captain of the
Idumaeans; and two brethren of the Zealous the sons of Iairus, Simon and Judas.

CHAP. IIII.
Joseph's speech, persuading the Jews to yield their City: and how many of
them fled unto the Romans.

AFter that Titus had commanded his soldiers to pull down the foundations of
Antonia, and make an easy entrance for the whole army: He called Joseph unto
him (for he understood that day being the seventeenth of July, that the Jews
were wont to celebrate a certain feast to God, which they called
Entelechismus, and that it was not solemnized for want of men; so that the
people greatly mourned therefore) and again commanded him to tell John that,
whereof before he had sent him word, to wit, that if he desired to fight, he
should have liberty to come, with what multitude he pleased; so that the City
and the temple might Titus wills John to come out to fight least with him the
city and temple should perish also.
from sinning against God: sending him also word, that if he so pleased, he
would grant him leave to celebrate the festiuitie which had been now long time
omitted, and that by what company he pleased. Joseph to the intent that not
only John might hear this offer of Titus, but also the rest of the people, he
stood in an eminent place, from whence he might be heard, and in the Hebrew
tongue he recounted unto the Jews Caesar's pleasure, earnestly requesting them
to spare their country, and forbid the fire now ready to take hold of their
temple, and to offer the accustomed sacrifices unto God. When he had thus said,
the people were very sorrowful, and every one held his peace not knowing
what to say. But the tyrant John having used many railing speeches John raileth
against Joseph.
against Joseph, at last he answered that he need not fear the destruction of
the temple and

Then Joseph with a loud voice cried out, true it is, you have kept it pure,
and vnprophaned for God, and the holy things you have kept inuiolate, neither
have thou committed any iniquity against him, from whom thou expectest help,
but have offered solemn sacrifice unto him. If any man should take from thee
thy daily food, no doubt thou would account him thy enemy, can thou then
hope that God whom thou have deprived of daily sacrifice, will assist thee in
these wars? Do thou impute these offenses to the Romans? why they even now
do defend our religion, The year of the world, 4034 after Christ's birth 72.
and command sacrifice to be offered, which thou have forbidden. Who does not
bewail this unexpected change, and lament our City? strangers and enemies
correct thy impiety, and thou a Jew borne and brought up in our law, art
more cruel then they. But consider John, it is no shame to repent thy
wickedness in extremity: and at the last cast, if thou be desirous to save thy
country, thou have a good example of Iechonias, sometime king of the Jews,
who when the Iechonias sustained a voluntary banishment in Babylon.
Babylonians warred against him, of his own accord, went out of the City
before it was taken, and willingly endured captivity with all his family and
kindred only, least he should betray these holy places unto his enemies, and
behold the temple fired. And for this act of his, he is of sacred memory
amongst the Jews, and has thereby gained immortal credit amongst all his
posterity. This is a good example, O John, although danger be at hand: and I
will promise thee also pardon The City by the ordinance of fate and Gods will
was to be over thrown,
this, who seek to persuade contrary unto the determination of Gods
providence, and strive to save them whom his sentence has condemned. Who is
ignorant of the writings of the ancient prophets, and their prophecies, now
hanging over this wretched city? For then it is foretold by them to be
destroyed, when we murder our own nation: and now not only the city, but
also the temple is full of your dead bodies. Certainly it is God, God it is
that together with the Romans, brings in fire to purge this city filled with
iniquity.

Joseph thus crying with tears and lamentations, he could speak no more for
sobbing: And Joseph's speeches interrupted with sighs.
the Romans compassionating his sorrow and affliction were astonished. But John
and his confederates were so much the more incited against the Romans, and
sought to take Joseph; yet his speech did move many of the nobles, and diverse
fearing the seditious watchmen, remained still where they were, making full
account both of their own destruction, and the subversion of the City. Yet
some there were, who, finding opportunity, fled unto the Romans: amongst whom
were two priests, Joseph and Jesus, and three sons of Ismael the priest, who
was beheaded at Cyren, Some of the nobility among the Jews escape to the
Romans.
and four sons of Matthias the priest, and one of the other Matthias, who
escaped unto the Romans before his father was put to death by Simon Giora, with
his three sons, as is before said: and many other nobles revolted with the
priests, whom the Emperor received very courteously, Titus recalled them from
Gophna, and commanded Caesar's humanity toward the Jews. Those Jews that
were sled besought the besieged with (...) and sighs to submit themselves.
them to go about the walls with Joseph, and show themselves unto the people;
then many of the Jews fled unto the Romans. And after they had gathered
themselves together, standing all before the Romans, they besought the
seditious with tears, first to receive the Romans into The temple after the
manner of a Castle.
and the temple it self resembled a castle, and they now with their weapons
having their hands imbrued with the blood of their countrymen, presumed to
enter into the Sanctuarixe where none ought to come, and they became so
injurious against their own laws, that look what indignation the Jews
ought to have conceived against the Romans if they had so profaned the holy
places, the same they caused the Romans to have against them, for doing the
like. For there Titus pitying the seditious once again spoke unto John and his
adherents, saying: O ye impious people, have not you environed the temple
about with a cloister? have not Titus speaks to John and his companions.
you your selves in Greek and our language engraued in tables, forbidden all
men to enter into those limits? did not we license you to kill any man that
should pass them, notwithstanding that he were a Roman? Why then ye wickd
wretches do you tread upon dead men's bodies within The year of the world.
4034. after Christ's birth 72. Titus in despite of the Jews strives to save
the temple.


CHAP. V.
How the battle was renewed, the Rampires being again builded, and of the
excursions of the Jews.

Joseph having delivered these words of Titus unto the Jews, the seditious
thinking that they proceeded not of good will but of fear, began to be more
proud hereat. Then Titus seeing that they neither pitied themselves nor the
temple, determined again to fight, though very loath so to do; yet could he
not bring all his a^ my against them, the room Titus chose thirty out of
every hundredth most strong and able men and bids them charge the besieged.
was so little. Wherefore out of every hundredth he made ch^ice of thirty of
the strongest amongst them, and over every thousand he appointed a colonel,
and made Cerealis their captain or general, commanding him at the ninth
hour of the night, to assault the watchmen of the enemy. Also he himself
would have gone down with them armed, but his friends and the captains about
him foreseeing the great danger that he might fall into, would not permit him:
Titus herewith was persuaded, telling the soldiers that the only cause he went
not with them was this, that he staid behind to view and judge every ones
valor and virtue, and to the intent that none behauing himself valiantly
should go away unrewarded, nor any coward escape unpunished, but that he
himself would be a beholder of every man's virtue, and a witness thereof,
who was their Lord either to reward or punish. Then Titus beholds from a
window in Antonia what his soldiers perform.
he went unto a watchtower in Antonia, from whence he beheld what was done.
But they whom Titus sent, did not find the watchmen asleep as they hoped, but
with a cry assaulted the Romans that came against them: and at this noise they
awaked their fellows: who came in John standing by encouraged them to fight,
some with blows, other some with threatenings, They fought most commonly
with handie blows; yet fortune often changed: for neither part had either
far to fly, or any The events of battails are changed very shortly.
space to follow them that fled. The Romans in Antonia cried unto their
fellows, that fought the battle now for hope of victory, presently
encouraging them to stand to it, when they began Titus, and they with him
beheld all that was done; so at last in the fifth hour of the day the fight
ceased, having continued from the ninth hour of the night, neither party
forsaking the place where first they began battle, neither any part having
the victory. Many Romans there fought courageously, and amongst the Jews
these that follow: Judas the son of Merton, Simon the son of Josias, and
Jacob and Simon Idumaeans; this the son of Cathla, but James was the son of
Sosa: and all these were of Simons company, and of John's followers Gyphthaeus,
and Alexas; and of the Zealous Simon the son The ye^re of the world. 4034.
after Christ's birth 72. Four mounts raised near unto the temple.
of Iairus. But the seventh day the rest of the Romans pulling down the
foundations of Antonia, made a large entrance for the rest of the army. And
the legions coming unto the wall, presently began to raise mounts, one against
the corner of the inner temple, which was scituat north and east: and another
against the gallery on the north side between the two porches: and the other
two, one against the porch on the west side of the outward temple; the other
against the north porch. So with much toil and labor they finished this work,
ferching wood to build it withal a hundredth furlongs off. And many times they
were endomaged by treachery, not being wary by reason of their victory: and the
Jews despairing of themselves every hour more and more were encouraged. For
many of the horsemen going either to get wood or hay, whilst they were about
it, they took the bridles from Titus seeing that this fell out, deemed (as in
The Jews surprise the Romans horses.
deed it was) that his men's horses were stolen rather by their negligence, then
their enemies valor: wherefore he thought by the severe punishment of one, to
make others look better to their horses. And so he condemned to death one of
the soldiers that had lost his horse, by whose punishment the rest of the
soldiers being terrified, kept their horses better. For after that, when they
went about any business, they never left their horses in the pastures, but kept
always with them. Thus the Romans assaulted the Temple, and builded there
mounts.

The day following certain of the seditious, who now could get no more booties
in the City, and now also began to taste of hunger, assaulted the Romans that
were placed toward mount The fight of the Iewe^ and Romans near unto the
mount ^lcon.
Oliuet about the eleventh hour of the day: for they hoped to take them
unawares, as being now Pedanius, the Jews being put to flight and driven into
the valley, pursued them with his horse as fast as Pedanius a strong and expert
horsman.
he could gallope, and ouertooke a young man one of his enemies, being of a
heavy body, armed all over, and taking him about the anckle, he carried him
violently away: thereby showing the Caesar as a present. Titus admiring
Pedanius his strength, and punishing the captive for having attempted to
assault the wall, he now hasted to assail the temple, and commanded The captive
punished.
the workmen quickly to dispatch their mounts. In the mean time the Jews
being ill handled in the former wars, and war still increasing to the
overthrow of the temple, they did, as the custom is in a putrified body,
prevent the plague from going any further by cutting off the corrupted members.
For that part of the porch that reached from the North unto the East, joined
unto Antonia, which they firing separated it twenty cubits from it, having now
with their own^ hands begun to cast fire into the holy place. Two days
after, which was the four and twentieth The Jews burnt ye porches of the
temple.
day of the foresaid month, the Romans set the porch on fire, and the fire
having gone fourteen The Jews are too slack in putting out the fire.
were made one against each other.

About this time a certain Jew of low stature, and to see to a contemptible
person, every way an abject, both by reason of his base parentage and
otherwise, named Jonathan, who going to the monument of John the Priest, dared
the strongest amongst the Romans to come and fight Jonathan provoke the
stoutest Roman to a single co^bate.
a single combat with him. The Romans that beheld him disdained him: yet some
amongst them (as commonly it is seen) were afraid of him: others wisely
deemed, that they ought not to Pudens, disdaining his insolency, and perhaps
also for that he was of little stature, came against him, and fighting with
him, fortune The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72. Pudens
fighting with Jonathan is slain by him. Priscus the Ce^urion kills Jonathan
with an arrow.
Jonathan slew him; and setting his foot upon the dead body, with his left
hand he flourished his shield, and with his right his bloody sword, and
striking his weapons one against another, he insulted over the Roman army,
and over the dead body, vpbraiding the Romans, so long till Priscus a
Centurion, as he was thus vanting, shot him through with an arrow, and so he
fell down dead upon the body of his enemy: at which deed, both the Romans
and the Jews raised a confused cry or noise. So Jonathan here showed how
quickly revenge pursued the felicity of warlike victory, falling out
contrary to all reason.

CHAP. VI.
How the Romans through the deceit of the Jews were consumed with fire, and
of one Artorius.

THe seditious that kept the Temple, did now every day openly in fight resist
the Romans that kept the mounts, and the seven and twenty day they devised
this stratageme. They filled the void part of the East porch of the Temple
with dry wood and brimstone, and The Jews fill the void part of the East
porch with dry wood, sulphur and bitumen.
bitumen, and then fled out of it as not able longer to resist. Wherefore many
of the Romans rashly pursued the Jews that fled, and with ladders got into
the galleries. But the wiser sort considering that the Jews had no just
occasion to fly, kept their place. The porch being now full of Romans that
were got up into it, the Jews gave fire to the wood and brimstone, and upon a
sudden The Romans calamity in the fire.
were here at amazed, and those that were amidst the flames became desperate;
and environed with the flames some sought to run back into the town, other
some unto the enemies; others killed themselves, so preventing the fury of the
fire; and presently the flame ouertooke those that sought to fly. Caesar,
though offended at the soldiers for having ascended into the porch unbidden,
Caesar has compassion of the Romans that were in the fire.
yet seeing them die so woefully in the flames, he compassionated them. And
although that the fire could not be quenched, yet the poor soldiers dying
amongst the flames were hereat comforted, in that they perceived him to be
sorrowful for them, for whom they had lost their lives. For they beheld him
crying to their fellows to help to extinguish the fire, and he himself
labored

At last a young man named Longus, was an honor to all this misery, and
notwithstanding that every one that there perished deserved particularly to be
remembered, yet he showed himself Longus kills himself.
the most valiant of them all. The Jews were desirous to kill this man for
that he was strong, and willed him to come down unto them, swearing unto him
to spare him. But his brother Cornelius, who stood on the other side, entreated
him not to discredit his own honor and the Romans, whom he obeyed: and he
lifting up his sword on high, that either part might see, slew himself.
Artorius from amidst the fire escaped by this devise, he called unto him one
Lucius his fellow soldier and chamber fellow; I will (quoth he) make thee
heir of all my inheritance if thou will catch me in thy arms. Lucius
willingly endeavoring to do it, Artorius cast himself Lucius dies but
Artorius saves himself by a stratagem
down upon him, and so escaped with his life, but Lucius upon whom he fell was
bruised against the pauement, and so died. This calamity a while did greatly
grieve the Romans, yet it made them more wary afterward, and acquainted them
with the Jews subtilties, whereof before being ignorant, they sustained great
damage; so the porch was burnt unto the tower which John built, during his
wars against Simon: and the Jews, after the Romans that were ascended into
it were consumed, pulled down the rest. The next day the Romans fired the
North porch, The porch of the Temple fired.
even unto the foresaid East porch, which contained the corners of the wall
builded over the valley

CHAP. VII. The ye^re of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72.

Of the famine amongst the Jews.

SVch were the affairs about the temple, but an infinite multitude perished
within the city through famine, so that they could not be numbered, for in
every place where any show The intestino wars of the Jews that were welnie
famished with hunger.
or sign of food was, presently arose a battle and the dearest friends of
all now fought one with another, to take the food from other poor souls,
neither did they believe them that were now a dying for famine, but the thieves
searched them, whom they saw yielding up the ghost, thinking that they dying
for famine, had hid about them some food, but they were deceived The Jews eat
their own girdles, shoes, the leather of their Targets and old ^ay.
shoes, and the skins that covered their shields, so that a little of old hay
was sold for four Attiques. But what need is it to show the sharpness of this
famine by things that want life? I will recount an act never heard of, neither
amongst the Greeks, nor any other barbarous people, horribly to be rehearsed,
and incredible, so that I would willingly omit this calamity, least posterity
should think I lie, had I not many witnesses hereof, and perhaps should incur
reprehension, not fully recounting all accidents of them that are dead.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a woman that for famine killed her son, and dressed him for meat.

A Certain woman named Marie, dwelling beyond Iordaine, the daughter of
Eleazar of the town of Vitezokia, which signifies the house of Hysope,
descended of noble and rich parentage, flying with the rest unto Jerusalem, was
there with them besieged, her other goods the tyrants had taken from her, which
she had brought from beyond the river into the City, and whatsoever being
hid, escaped their hands, the thieves daily came into her house and The others
speech before she slew her son.
thou continue amongst the Romans, thou shall be made a slave, yet famine will
prevent bondage; or else sedition worse then them both. Be therefore meat for
me, a terror unto the seditious, a tragical story to be spoken of by
posterity, and that which is only yet heard of amongst the calamities of the
Jews. Having thus sp^en she slew her son, and did sees the one half of
him, and eat it, the rest she reserved couere^ Presently came the seditious,
smelling the sent of that excecrable The seditious challeng^ the meat which
the desolate mother had dressed.
for them, and presently uncovered that part of her son which she had left
uneaten, at which sight they trembled, and a horror fell upon them. But the
woman said this is truly my son, and my doing, eat you of it, for I my
self have eaten thereof. Be not more effeminate then a woman, nor more
merciful the^ a mother. If religion make you refuse this my sacrifice, I have
already eaten of it and will eat the rest. Then the seditious departed hereat
only trembling, and scarcely permitting this meat to the mother. Presently
the report of this heinous crime was bruted all about the City, and every man
having before his eyes this excecrable fact, trembled as though himself This
unnatural fact was soon after recounted unto the Romans, and some of them
would not believe it, others pitied them within The calamity recounted to the
Romans.
the City, and many hereat increased their hatred toward that nation.

Caesar before Almighty God protested, that he was not the cause of this,
having offered the Jews peace, free pardon and forgiveness for all their
offenses past, and that they did rather make choice of war then peace, of
sedition then quietness, of famine rather then wealth and The year of the
world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72.
4. Reg 6. Ant. lib. 9. cap. 4.
who for all their miseries would not yet cease from arms. Having thus spoken
he considered the desperation of the enemies, and that they would not recall
themselves, who had already endured all such calamities, which might if it had
been possible have altered their opinions rather then have endured them.

CHAP. IX.
How the wall was taken, and the temple burnt.

THe eight day of August two of the Roman legions having finished their mounts,
they began to place their rams against the East galleries without the temple,
having six days together without intermission already beaten the wall with
their strongest rams, and nothing prevailed, the stones being so strong, that
the rams could not move them: others of the Romans labored to dig up the
foundations of the porch, that was on the North side, and after much toil,
they only could pull away the outward stones, and the inner stones did still
support The Jews overcome the Romans and ^eaze their ensigns.
their ensigns, which the Jews had taken from them, esteeming the loss
thereof a great shame unto them. At last the Jews got their ancients, and
slew them, that came up to rescue them; and the rest terrified with their
deaths that were slain, went down again, and no one of the Eleazar son
unto the tyrant the brother of Simon. Then Titus perceiving that he spared the
temple of the Jews to his loss, and to the death of his soldiers, he
commanded fire to be put unto the temple gates, presently Ananus of Emaus the
most cruel of all Simons followers, and Two of Simons guard revolt from him.
Archelaus the son of Magadatus, fled unto Titus, who for their cruelties
committed, determined to put them to death: yet they hoped for pardon, for that
they had now forsaken the Jews when they had gotten the better hand. But Titus
affirmed they came not of goodwill, but for necessity, and that they did not
deserve to live forsaking their country now set on fire for their offenses:
yet his promise bridled his wrath, and he dismissed them, but they were not so
much esteemed Titus promise restrains his wrath.
as the rest. The Roman soldiers did now put fire unto the temple doors, and
the silver plates wherewith they were covered being molten, the flame quickly
fiered the wood, and increasing took hold presently on the next porch. The
Jews seeing themselves environed with None of the sewes goes about to
extinguish the fire.
flames, were now altogether discouraged, and their strength failed them, and
being amazed no man sought to extinguish the flame, and so they stood still
beholding the fire, yet not lamenting that which was set on fire, more then
desiring to save the rest: and so that day and all the next night the fire
increased, for the porches were burnt by little and little, and not all at once.

The next day Titus caused part of his army to quench the fire, and calling
unto him his captains, and six that were the chiefest amongst them, to wit,
Tiberias Alexander General of the Titus calls the chieftain^ before him.
Sextus Cerealis commander of the fifth legion, Largius Lepidus of the tenth,
Titus Frigius of the fifteenth, with whom was also Aeternius Fronto commander
of the two legions that came from Alexandria and Marcus Antonius Iulianus
Governor of Iudaea, and with them the colonels and captains, he deliberated
with them what was to be done concerning the temple. Some councelled to use the
custom of wars, for that the Jews would never live peaceably their temple
standing, all their nation wheresoever living assembling themselves thither at
The year of the world, 4034. after Christ's birth 72.
certain times. Others persuaded Titus that if so be the Jews yielded their
temple, and sought not for it, then to save it: but if they fought for it, to
burn it: for now it seemed a Castle and not a temple: and if any man were
offended hereat, it should not be imputed to the Romans or to their general,
but to the Jews who constrained them to do it; and he offended not, they
forcing him to fire it. But Titus affirmed that although the Jews fought for
their temple being men without Titus counsel as concerning the temple.
conscience, yet it should not be destroyed: for he would not so be revenged of
their iniquities: neither would he ever fire so goodly a building; for so it
would redound unto the loss of the Romans; as also it would be a credit unto
them, if it were left remaining. And now Alexander, Fronto, and Cerealis,
perceiving Caesar's mind were of his opinion, and so he dismissed the
convocation, and commanded the soldiers and captains to rest, that they might
be more able to Caesar before his men retired (beholding the fight from
Antonia) with certain chosen horsemen came Titus with his chosen horsemen comes
to rescue the Romans.
to succor them: whose force the Jews not sustaining, but the first of them
being slain, the rest fled: and the Romans departing, they returned, and
fought against them; and when the Romans Titus returned into Antonia, purposing
the next day to assault them with all his army, and win the temple. But the
sentence of God had already determined, that it should be consumed with fire,
and now the fatal The temple was burnt by the Romans the tenth of the month of
August, on which day before time it was burned by the king of Babylon.
day was come after many years, which was the tenth of August: upon which day
also the king of Babylon did once before fire it, yet was it now first set a
fire by our own countrymen, who were indeed the cause thereof. For the
seditious being quiet till Titus was departed, then again they assaulted the
Romans, and so fought with the guard that were without the temple, laboring to
extinguish the flame, who putting the Jews to flight, came unto the temple.

CHAP. X.
How the temple was burnt against the will of Titus.

THen a certain soldier, who expected no command, nor feared to do so
execrable a fact, being moved with some divine fury and lifted up by his
fellow, took in his hand a flaming firebrand, and cast it into the golden gate
which entered into the rooms on the North part of the temple, and the flame
presently arose: which caused a great cry amongst the Jews, expressing their
calamity, and every one hasted to extinguish the fire; now neither accounting
of their lives nor forces, having lost that for which they so fought. News
hereof was A soldier contrary to Caesar's will burned the temple.
presently brought unto Titus by one who came from the fight, who then was
resting in his tabernacle, and he presently arose and ran unto the temple to
hinder the fire, and all the captains after him; whereat the soldiers being
terrified followed, and there arose a great cry and tumult in that army being
unordered. Caesar both with voice and hand made a sign unto the soldiers,
that were fighting to quench the fire. But they did not hear him, there was so
great a noise, neither did they perceive the sign he made unto them with his
hand, because that some were distracted with fight, others with anger: and the
soldiers issued in, not restrained neither by commands nor threatenings, but
every one went whither fury carried him, and thronging together at the
entrance, many pressed one another to death: and many being amongst the fiery
ruins of the galleries perished as miserably as those that were overcome. When
they came Caesar's command, and so exhorted his fellows that were before him to
fire the temple. The seditious now had no hope to The burning of the temple.
withstand them, but either fled or were slain; and many unarmed and unable
people wheresoever they were found, were slain: so that about the altar was an
innumerable company of dead bodies Great slaughter in the temple.
heaped together, and their blood flowed down the temple stairs: and their
bodies that there were slain rouled down Caesar seeing he could not restrain
the surie of the madbraine soldiers, The year of the world. 403^. after
Christ's birth 72. Titus strives to save the inward temple.
Liberalis the Centurion of his guard to beat those with a trunchion that
would not be obedient, and drive them away. But their fury and the rage of
war, and the hatred they bare against the Jews overcame in them all Caesar's
commands, and fear of them that forbad them. Many were incited so to do
hoping of some booty, thinking that all the temple within was full of money,
because they saw the gates of gold. Moreover a certain Caesar sought to queneh
the flame, fired the poastes above the doors, and presently the flame
appearing within, Caesar and the Captains departed, and so every one stood
looking upon it, and no man sought to extinguish it. Thus the temple was burnt
against Titus his will. And although enerieman will judge it a lamentable case
that such a building surpassing all that ever was seen or heard of, both in
greatness, workmanship, costlinesse and plenty of all things; in this yet we
may comfort our selves, in that the destinies had so determined. For neither
living creatures, nor places, nor buildings can avoid their destiny. One may
How many years there were between the first building of the temple under king
Solomon and the destruction under Titus.
also admire the exact and just revolution of time: for it was now destroyed in
the same month, and on the same day that the Babylonians first destroyed it:
and from that time that Solomon began the first temple unto the destruction
of the second temple, which happened the second Vespasians reign, were a
thousand, a hundredth and thirty years, seven months, and fifteen days: and
from the building of the latter temple which Aggaeus built in the second year
of the reign of King Cyrus, unto the destruction thereof now in Vespasians
reign, were six hundredth thirty nine years and five and forty days.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Priests: the Treasure house: and the Porch.

WHen the temple was thus consumed with fire, whatsoever the soldiers found
therein they The cry and howling of the murdered Jews.
up the ghost: and by reason of the height of the hill, and the building
together, one would have thought the whole city had been on fire. Then a most
lamentable cry was raised between the Roman legions, and the seditious now
environed with fire and sword, and of the people that were taken in the higher
part of the city, and had fled unto the Romans, lamenting their calamity; and
they of the city answered the tears and cries of them in the hill, and many
whose eyes death The temple filled with fire and blood.
the multitude of blood there shed surpassed the fire. Many that were slain
were covered with them that slew them, and all the ground was ouerspred with
dead bodies, so that the soldiers ran upon the dead bodies to pursue them that
fled. At last the thieves having driven the Romans without the temple, they ran
into the city, and the rest of the people that were left, fled into the
outward porch. And many of the priests first used spits, and then their seats
made of lead in steed of darts against the Romans; at last nothing at all
prevailing, and the fire falling upon them, they Two noble men cast themselves
into the fire.
either have fled unto the Romans, and there have been saved, or else have
endured like fortune with the rest, they notwithstanding cast themselves into
the fire, and so were burnt with the temple: one of them was named Meierus the
son of Belga, the other Joseph the son of Dalaeus.

The Romans thought it in vain to spare the buildings about the temple, seeing
the temple The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72,
was already consumed, and so set fire on them all, the porches, galleries,
and gates; two only excepted, one on the East side, and the other on the South
side, both which afterward they raced unto the ground: they burnt also certain
chests called Gazophylacia, or money boxes, wher^in was great store of coin,
and rich garments, and other precious things, and indeed all the Jews
treasure, for the richest of the city had brought all their wealth thither.
There came into the porch that was left standing many men, women and children
to the number of six thousand. And before Caesar and the captains did
determine any thing what should be done with them, the furious soldiers fired
the porch wherein they were, and so they all perished in the flames; save a
few, that Six thousand in the porch consumed by fire.
leaping down to avoid the fire, were slain in the fall, so that no one
escaped of all that multitude. A certain false prophet was cause of all their
deaths; who the same day preached in the False prophets suborned by the
seditious.
to defend their city. Men easily believe and are credulous in adversity, so
that if any deceitful person promise deliverance out of calamity, he that
suffers misery is in full hope thereof.

CHAP. XII.
Of the strange signs and tokens that appeared before the destruction

THese miserable people were thus easily persuaded by impostors who did belie
God, yet would they not believe, nor give any ear or regard unto certain
tokens, and signs of the The blindness of the people The first prodigy. A
comet like unto a sword. The second prodigy was that a bright light shined
about the altar and temple by night. The third prodigy was of a co^ ye brought
forth a lamb in the midst of the temple. The fourth the brazen gate of the
temple opened it self.
ruin of their city but as it were blinded, neither having eyes nor souls,
they counterfaited themselves not to see what God foreshewed them. One while
there was a comete in form of a fiery sword, which for a year together did
hang over the city: an other time before the first revolt and war, the
people being gathered together to the feast of unleavened bread (which was the
eight day of April) the ninth hour of the night, there was so much light
about the altar and temple, as though it had been bright day, which remained
half an hour: this the ignorant people interpreted The fifth armed chariots
and men seen in the air. The sixth a voice in the inward temple The Seventh
prodigy Jesus a country man's cry and death.
the inner temple to offer their wonted sacrifice, at first they felt the
place to move and tremble, and afterward they heard a voice which said, Let us
depart hence. And that which was most wonderful of all, one Jesus the son of
Ananus a country man of the common people, four years Some of the nobility
disdaining misfortune, took him and scourged him with many stripes, but The
year of the world. 4034, af^r Christ's birth 72.
Albinus (being then Judge) asked him what he was, or of whence, or wherefore
he said so, but he made him no answer. Yet he ceased not to bewail the
misery of Jerusalem, until Albinus thinking him to be out of his wits,
suffered him to depart. This man even until the time of war never went to
any Citizen, nor was seen speak to any one, but still as it were studying of
some speech: he cried woe, woe unto Jerusalem. Neither did he ever curse any
one, though every day one or other did beat him, nor thank any one that
offered him Jesus for seven years space and five months cried about the City.
A stone shot from an engine kills Jesus.
voice neither waxing hoarse nor weary, till in the time of the siege,
beholding that which he foretold them, he ceased, and then once again upon
the walls going about the City, with a loud voice he cried; Woe, woe unto the
City, Temple and people and lastly he said, woe also unto my self; which
words were no sooner uttered, but a stone shot from out an engine smote him,
and so he yielded up the ghost lamenting them all.

If any one do diligently consider all these, he shall find that God has a
care of mankind, and does every way foreshew betime, what is most expedient
for them, and they through their own madness, to have voluntarily perished in
their wickedness. For the Jews when the Castle Antonia The Jews interpret
the signs to their own good liking, are their Countries ruin and the cause of
their own calamity.
But that which chiefly incited them to war, was the doubtful prophecy
likewise found in the holy Scriptures: that at the same time, one in their
dominions should be Monarche of the whole world; and many wisemen were deceived
in this interpretation; making account that he should be one of their own
nation, yet indeed thereby was foretold Vespasians Empire. But men cannot
prevent destiny, though they foresee it. Thus the Jews interpreted some of
the signs as they pleased, and at others they laughed, till by the ruin of
their Country, and their own woeful overthrow, their iniquity appeared.

CHAP. XIII.
How Titus was made Emperor: and of the death of the priests.

AFter the seditious were fled into the City all the Temple and places
thereabout being set on fire, the Romans placed their ensigns in the Temple
over against the East gate, and there celebrating sacrifice, with great cries
declared Titus Emperor, and the Romans Gold was sold for half the price.
got such prays and booties, that they sold gold in Syria for half the value.
And amongst those Priests that kept on the wall, a child being thirsty,
desired peace of the Roman watchmen, saying, that he was thirsty. So they
pitying both his years and his need, gave him their hands The craft of a boy.
watchmen were able to overtake him, and they vpbraided him with falsehood. But
he answered, that he had done nothing, but that which he and they intended:
for they did not give him their hands to secure him to remain with them; but
only to come down and take water which he had done. The Roman watchmen
greatly admired the subtlety of him that was but a child. The fifth day the
Priests being almost famished came down, and the watchmen carried them to
Titus, The Priests ^raue pardon, but Titus commands them to be led to
execution.
whom they besought to grant them their lives: But he answered them, that the
time of pardon was past, seeing that was destroyed, for the which he might have
pardoned them, and that it was meet that the Priests should perish with the
Temple: and so he commanded them to be put to Titus, who for his The seditious
summon Titus to a parley.
natural meekness, his friends also persuading him thereto, thought at least
to save the City (judging indeed that now the seditious had altered their
minds) and so he stood in the West part of the inner Temple: for there was a
gate built above a gallerie, and a bridge that joined the Temple and City
together, which was then between Titus and the tyrants. Many soldiers on The
year of the ^ld. 4034. after Christ's birth 71. Titus Oration to the Jews by
an interpreter.
both parts flocked about their rulers; the Jews about Simon and John, hoping
for pardon: the Romans about Titus; desirous what he would say unto them: and
Titus by an Edict commanding the soldiers to be quiet, and to shoot no
arrows, spoke unto them first by an interpreter, thereby showing that he had
the upper hand, and said O ye men of Jerusalem, are you not now glutted with
the calamities of your Country? Neither calling to mind our power, nor your
own infirmity, but with a rash fury have destroyed your people, City, and
Temple: your selves also having instly deserved to perish, who since Pompey
first conquered you, have never ceased to be seditious, and at last have openly
borne arms against the Romans. Did you trust unto your multitude? You have
seen that a small parcel of the Romans army has sufficiently resisted you.
Or did you expect foreign aid? What nation is not under our dominion? and who
would rather make The Romans humanity incited the Jews against them.
you Kings of your own nation: and after all this, we kept your laws
inuiolate, and suffered you to live as your selves desired, not only in your
own Country, but also amongst other nations; and which is the greatest of all
our benefits bestowed upon you, we permitted you to gather tribute and gifts,
to the maintenance of your Temple and sacrifices to God; of all which we
neither Nero his negligence you became forgetful of your duty, and like some
member in the body broken or shrunk, you being still tumultuous, at last were
taken in a greater offense, and were encouraged with immoderate desires to hope
for unlawful liberty. My father came into your Country, not to punish you
for your misdemeanour toward Cestius, but by good counsel and warning to
reprehend and quiet you. And whereas if he had come to destroy your nation, he
ought first to have cut down the very root, and to have come unto Nero was
dead, you did as treacherous subjects are wont to do, taking occasion by our
civil dissension, to revolt from us: and whilst my father and I were gone
into Egypt, you prepared your selves to war against us; neither were you
ashamed to trouble them that were designed Pinces, who^ notwithstanding you had
found most gentle Captains unto you. At last when the Empire fell unto us, and
all things being now quieted, all nations with gifts and presents came to
congratulate us: Behold again, the Jews showed themselves our enemies, and
you sent an Ambassador beyond Euphrates, only to nourish your you expect,
seeing your temple is destroyed? nay, even now yo^ stand armed, not so much as
counterfeiting The year of the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72.
submission in the last cast. O wretches with what hope? Is not your people
dead, is not your temple destroyed, and your city now in my hands, yea your
lives also? But do you think death the renown of fortitude? I will not strive
with your obstinacy: yet if you will cast down your Titus grants the Jews
li^e, on condition they should lay aside their weapons and submit themselves.
weapons, and yield your bodies, I will spare your lives: And like as in
private house I will show my self unto you a gentle master; and after I have
punished that which otherwise is incurable, I will reserve the rest for my
self.

To this they answered, that they could not receive pardon at his hands, having
vowed the contrary: wherefore they requested license to depart with their wives
and children by the camp, which he had environed with a wall, and so to go into
the wilderness, and leave the City unto the Romans. Titus was hereat greatly
enraged, that they being in a manner captives, should impose The soldiers set
the city on fire.
for he would now in all things use the law of arms: and so he permitted the
soldiers to sack the City, and set it on fire. And that day they did nothing,
but the next day following, they fired the councell-house, the palace Acra,
and Ophla, and the fire came unto Queen Helens palace, which was situate in
the midst of Acra: also the houses and streets of the City full of dead bodies
were set on fire. The same day the sons and brethren of king Izates, and with
them many nobles of the people assembled together, befought Caesar to pardon
them: and he though incensed Caesar constant in his resolution.
against them all; yet not changing his manner, received them to mercy, and
put

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the pray of the seditious, and how the inner part of the City was fired.

THe seditious went unto the kings palace, where many had left all their
wealth, because it was a strong place, and driving the Romans from thence, they
slew all the people there assembled, amounting to the number of eight thousand
and four hundredth, and carried The seditious resorting to the kings house take
away the treasure.
Simon, and not having there any thing to say, Simon delivered him to one of
his captains called Ardala to be slain, and he brought him where the Romans
might behold him with his hands bound behind him, and a veil before his eyes,
meaning there to behead him: but he whilst the Jew drew out his sword fled
unto the Romans. And Titus would not put The punishment of a Roman soldier
taken by the Jews.
him to death, because he had escaped from the enemies: yet deeming him
unworthy to be a Roman soldier, who suffered himself to be taken alive, he
took from him his arms, and discharged The Jews are arrogant in midst of
their calamity.
with joy beheld the City on fire, affirming that they desired death; for that
the people being slain, the temple destroyed, and the City on fire, they
should leave nothing unto their enemies. Yet Joseph in that extremity labored
to save the relics of the City, much inueighing against their cruelty, and
earnestly exhorting them to save themselves: yet he nothing profited in all
this, but The Jews refuse to submit themselves to the Romans, yet are they
unable to wag^ war with them.
was derided for his labor: for neither would they yield unto the Romans for
their oths sake, neither

Thus dispersed all over the City, they lurked in the ruins, lying in wait
for those that sought to fly unto the Romans, and many of them were taken, and
all of them were slain; for famine had so weakened them, that they could not
fly, and they cast their dead bodies unto dogs. And any death were easy in
respect of famine. So that many fled unto the Romans, having no promise, The
year of the world, 4034. after Christ's birth 72.
no nor hope to be pardoned by them, and upon purpose fell into the hands of
the seditious; who never ceased from murder, and now there was no place in the
whole City void, but was filled with dead bodies, who either perished by
famine or sedition. But the tyrants and factious The tyrants uttermost hope was
in their vaults.
thieves put their last refuge in the vaults, where they hoped whatsoever
happened to save themselves, hoping that there they could not be found, and so
after the City was destroyed, to escape, which was only their vain fantasy.
For they could neither be hid from God nor the Romans, yet at that time they
trusted in those caves, from whence they fired the City more then the Romans,
and cruelly murdered them that having escaped the flames, came and fled into
secret places, and spoiled them, also if they in any place found any meat
though all bloody, yet they took it and did eat it, and now one of them began
to fight with an other about the spoil they Rapine and slaughter in the vaults.
of dead men.

CHAP. XV.
How the higher part of the City was assaulted: and how many Jews fled unto
Titus.

Caesar perceiving that the higher part of the City could not be won without
mounts, Simon during his wars with John had built. About this time the
captains of the The Idumaeans consult in their assembly about their submission.
Idumaeans assembling together, deliberated to yield themselves, and sent five
of their company unto Titus beseeching him to confirm a peace unto them, and
he hoping that the tyrants would yield after them, who were the greatest part
of his army, with much ado granted them life, and so sent them unto their
fellows, but Simon had notice of their departure, and presently slew those
Titus, and taking the captains (the noblest of whom was James the son of Sosa)
he put them in prison, and also kept and guarded the Idumaeans, who now having
no governors knew not what to do, yet the guard could not hinder them from
flying, for although many of them were killed, yet diverse fled and escaped, and
all were received by the Romans. Titus courtesy being such, as that he
remembered not his former edict to the contrary, and now the soldiers hoping
for gain and having already gotten sufficient, abstained from murders, for
leaving only the common people, they sold the rest with their wives and
children for a small price, many being exposed to sale and few coming to buy
them: so that he having made an edict that none should fly unto him alone,
intending thereby to bring their families with them, yet he now received them
also appointing some to enquire who had deserved punishment, Forty thousand of
the people saved. Jesus a priest the son of Thebathus. Phineas the treasurer
of the temple taken.
the people were saved, whom the Emperor dismissed and permitted to go whither
they pleased. The same time a certain priest the son of Thebathus named
Jesus, was promised pardon upon condition that he should deliver certain holy
things given unto the temple, and so he came and brought out of a wall two
candlesticks, like unto them that were in the temple, tables, goblets, cups,
all made of solid and massiue gold: also, the veil and the ornaments of the
priests, and the precious stones about them, and many vessels made for
sacrifice. Moreover, the keeper of the holy treasure called Phineas brought
forth the garments, and all things that did belong unto the priests, and much
purple and scarlet, which were laid up in store to make tapestrie or hangings,
amongst which also was some Cinnamon, Cassia, and many other odoriferous Caesar.

CHAP. XVI. The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth 72.

How the rest of the City was taken.

THe seventh day of September the mounts being finished, which was the
eighteenth day after they were begun, some of the Romans placed theie rams
and engines to batter Some of the seditious kept in Acra, the rest in the vault
of the clue.
them, and some of the seditious who now despaired to keep the city, left the
walls; and fled into A^a, others hid themselves in certain vaults, and many
hindered the Romans and resisted them for placing their rams against the walls,
who were overcome by them being both more in number then they were, and also
stronger and more valiant. The Jews being now all discouraged The fear and
amazement of the seditious.
needed. For even before such time as the enemies had entered the wall, they
stood in doubt whether they might fly or no, and they who a little before were
proud and arrogant malefactors, did now ^emble and quake, so that it was
pitiful to see such a change in them, though they were wicked persons. And
they endeavored to assail the wall that Titus had built, to compass the whole
city vvithall, but seeing themselves forsaken of all those that were wont to
be trusty unto them, every one fled whether necessity did drive him.
Presently news were brought them that all the west wall of the city was
beaten down, others affirmed that the Romans had entered, and that they had
seen the enemies in the towers, fear daseling their eyes, and prostrate upon
The tyrants do inieble themselves, and of their own accords for sake the
towers from whence by nomeanes but famine they might be driven.
departed out of their towers, wherein they could never have been taken but
by famine, and the Romans having so much labored at the lower walls, did now
by fortune take these, which their engines could never have shaken, for there
were three inexpugnable towers, that could not be battered with the engines,
whereof before we have made mention. So the tyrants having forsaken these, or
rather being by Gods will driven from hence, presently they fled unto the
valley Siloa, after the fear was past they again took heart and went unto
the wall that was in that place, yet not using such courage and violence as
their need required, they were beaten by the The Romans enter the town and
obtain the victory.
so terrible as the beginning. Yet did they not believe that was the end,
because they got the wall without any bloodshed, but admired, seeing no man
did offer to resist them. And now issuing into every street, they slew whom
soever they found without any respect, and fired houses, The houses and ^ilie
of best reckoning are left full of dead bodies.
and all the people that had fled into them, and destroying many whereas they
entered (...) to get a pray, and they found whole families dead, and houses full
of dead bodies, consumed by famine. Thus terrified with that heavy sight, they
departed out, not taking any thing away, yet for all

Titus entering into the City amongst the rest admired the strong holds
thereof, and the rockie towers which the tyrants like mad men deprived
themselves of, and seeing the height, firmenes, bigness, and the joining of
the stones together, and their breadth and hight, he said: surely God has
assisted us in the fight, and he it was that did withdraw the Jews from these
fortresses. For what could men's hands and engines prevail against them? And
having spoken much to this effect, communing with his friends, he set them at
liberty whom the tyra^ts had left bound in the The year of the world. ^034
after Christ's birth 72. These munitions of the city and defense of the tower
which the tyrants abandoned for fear, impregnable. Fortunes monument. The old
and weak Jews are slain, and the strong and Iustie relerued.
castles, and when he destroyed the rest of the city and walls, he left those
towers standing as a monument of his good fortune and victory, by the which he
had gained them, though vnexpugnable. The soldiers now being weary with
killing the miserable Jews, and yet a great multitude remaining alive, Caesar
commanded, that only the armed Jews and they that resisted should be slain,
and the rest left alive. But the soldiers also killed old folks and weak
persons, (...) king all able men and lusty, they carried them into the temple,
and shut them there in the place appointed for the women. Caesar left one
Fronto a libertine and his friend to keep them, giving him also charge to make
inquiry, who had deserved punishment; whollew all the the and seditious, one
of them bewraying another, and reserved certain chosen young men of (...)
stature and beautiful withal for the triumph, and all the rest that were above
s^uenteen years old, Titus also sent many of ^em unto diverse provinces to be
slain in the theaters with beasts; or swords: and they that were under
seventeen years of age were sold. And during the time that Fronto kept them,
ten thousand died for hunger; partly for that their keepers hating them, would
not give them any meat; par^y for that Titus distributeth the Jews.
some refused meat when it was offered them. For there was now scarcity of come
by reason of the great multitude of the people.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the number of the captives, and them that were slain.

THe number of all the captives that were taken during the whole time of war,
was The number of the captives, and such as died during the siege of the city.
four score and seventeen thousand: the number of all that died and were
slain during the siege, was eleven hundredth thousand, the most of them being
Jews by nation, but not inhabitants of that place. For being assembled
together from all parts to the feast of unleavened bread, presently and on a
sudden were environed with war, and first of al a plague amongst them by
reason of the straightness of the place, and immediately after famine worse
then it. And that the City was capable of so many men it is evident, for that
Cestius before numbered them, who desirous to signify the flourishing estate
and strength of Jerusalem unto Nero, who contemned our The Romans searching the
graves and vaults find much treasure.
with all. There also were found more then two thousand, whereof some slew
themselves with their own hands, other some killed by others, the rest perished
with famine. The stinch of dead bodies was so great, that many minding to go
and search the foresaid places, and being entered into them, were forced to
retire: yet others for lucre sake treading on the dead carcasses, searched the
dead bodies, if they could find any thing: for much riches were hidden in the
vaults, and covetousness omitted no way to gain. Moreover many were taken out
from thence, whom the tyrants had John and Simon apprehended in the vaults.
bound, who even in their extremity ceased not to tyrannize: yet God plagued
them both according John being now almost famished with his brethren in a
vault, besought the Romans to save his life. And Simon having long striuen with
necessity, as we shall hereafter make mention of, at last yielded himself,
who was kept for the triumph, and John was condemned to perpetual prison. Then
they destroyed the walls, and fired the outward parts of the City.

CHAP. XVIII. The year of the world. 4034. after Christ birth 7^.

A brief history of the City of Jerusalem.

THus was Jerusalem taken the second year of Vespasians reign, on the eight
day of September, and having been already five times before surprised, it was
finally again destroyed. First, Asochaeus king of Egypt, and after him
Antiochus, then Pompey, and after Jerusalem being five times spoiled was at
that time once more sacked.
them Herod with Sosius took the City and yet destroyed it not. But before
them the King of Babylon destroyed it, when he had inioyed the same, a
thousand three hundredth and threescore years, eight months and six day
after it was first built, but he that first built it was one of the Princes of
the Cananeans, in his own language called the just king. For he indeed was so,
David the king of the Jews having driven out the Cananeans, gave it unto his
people to be inhabited, and after four hundredth threescore four years and
three months, it was destroyed by the Babilonians: and from king David who was
the first Jew that reigned there until the time that Titus destroyed it, were
a thousand one hundred seventy and nine years, and from the time that it was
first erected until it was by him destroyed, were two thousand one hundred and
seventy seven years: yet neither the antiquity nor riches, nor the same
thereof now spread all over the world, nor the glory of religion did any thing
profit or hinder it, from being destroyed. Such was the end of the besieging of
Jerusalem. When there was none left to kill, nor any thing remaining for the
soldiers to get, and that now their was nothing, against which the soldiers
Caesar commanded them to destroy the City and Temple, only yet leaving
standing certain towers, that were more beautiful and stronger, then the
rest, to wit, Phasaelus, Hippicos, and Mariamme, and the wall that was on the
West side, meaning there to keep a garrison, and that The Roman wholly ruinate
both the City and the temple
they should be monuments of the Romans virtue, who had surprised a City so
well fortified as it appeared by them. All the rest of the City they so
plained, that they who had not seen it before, would not believe that it had
been ever inhabited. This was the end of their madness, who were always
given unto sedition in Jerusalem, a most worthy City and famous amongst all
nations.

CHAP. XIX.
How the soldiers were rewarded.

CAesar determined to leave the tenth legion for a garrison in Jerusalem, with
some troops of horsemen and other companies of footmen, and all wars being
now ended, he purposed to thank the whole army for their valiant acts, and
reward the most courageous for their deserts. And placing a great tribunal in
the midst before the camp, standing in it, with the chief peers about him,
from whence the whole army might hear him, he gave them hearty thanks for
that of their good will toward him, they had patiently Titus thanketh his
souldier^ for that they had continued their love toward him.
the dominions of their country: likewise they had now given al nations to
understand, that neither the multitude of enemies, nor strong holds, nor
greatness of Cities, nor rashness, nor barbarous cruelty of their
adversaries could ever resist the forces of the Romans, nor escape their
hands; notwithstanding, that in many things fortune favored them, adding that
it was a credit for them to have ended those wars that had continued a long
time; which was all that they hoped for at their coming, and which was most
glory of all unto them, that those Captains whom they had elected to be the
Roman Emperors, were well liked and embraced of all men, all standing to
their appointment; and acknowledging themselves beholding to them that Titus
promises recompense to his valiant soldiers.
and due desert, who had behaved themselves most valiantly, and most hasarded
themselves, and effected worthy deeds, and whosoever was more forward the^ the
rest should have a reward according to his desert. And that he would be more
diligent in honoring the^ that had bin his companions in that war, then in
punishing their offenses; then presently he willed them to whom it
appertained, The year of the world. 4034. after Christ's birth^ 72. Titus
larges to his soldiers.
to nominate them who had valiantly behaved themselves in those wars, and had
performed any worthy exployt, which being done, he called every one by his
name, and praised them, as greatly rejoicing at the valor of his Countrymen,
crowning them with crowns of gold, and put chains of gold about their necks,
and gave them large spears of gold, and ensigns made of silver, he also
preferred every one of them, and gave them of the spoil, precious garments,
with gold and silver very plentiously: and thus having rewarded every one
according to his merit, and praising God with all his army, he descended
with great applause out of the tribunal, and went and offered sacrifices for
the victory, and having gathered a great multitude of Oxen about the Titus
sacrifice for his victory
Altar to sacrifice them, he offered them all, and there with feasted his
army, and himself three days with all his nobility, dismissing all the
soldiers to depart whether they would, or thought The twelfth legion under
Cestius leading gave place to the Jews.
Cestius his government they fled from the Jews, being before at Raphanaeas,
which he sent unto Mal^o that is situate by Euphrates, in the confines of
Armaenia and Cappadocia, and the other two ^e kept with himself, as sufficient
to guard him into Egypt, which were the fifth and fifteenth legions. And
coming to Caesarea by the Sea coast, he the^ laid up all his spoils, and
caused the captives to be kept, because that the winter season permitted him
not to sail into Italy.

CHAP. XX.
Of Vespasians voyage by Sea: and how Simon was taken: and of the spectacles,
and shows made upon his birthday.

Whilst Titus was busied in the siege of Jerusalem, Vespasian in a Merchants
ship sailed to Rhodes, and from thence departing in a Gally, having visited all
Cities by the which he Vespasians sailing and journey.
passed, being joyfully received of them all, he went from Ionia into Greece,
from thence unto Corcyra, and then unto Iapygia, and afterward by land. Thus
Titus being returned from Caesarea on the Sea coast, he came unto Caesarea
Phillippi, and there he made a long abode, proclaiming Shows at Caesarea.
all sorts of pastimes wherein many captives perished, some being cast unto
wild beasts, others forced in great companies to fight one against another;
being in this place he understood Simon the son of Giora was taken. This
Simon at such time as Jerusalem was besieged, was in the higher part of the
City, when the Roman army had entered the walls, and began to waste Simon
gets down into the vault and hops to escape from thence in saftie.
it, and with his most trusty fellows, and certain Masons, having provided
them all necessary tools, and victuals that might have sufficed them all for
many days, he accompanied with them, and went into a secret cave, unto the
end thereof, and there he caused them to dig further, hoping so to get out
at some place where he might safely escape away. Yet this his hope had not so
good success as he expected, for they had but dug a little way, ere
victuals failed them: notwithstanding, that they had made very great spare
thereof. Then Simon thinking to fear the Romans, clothed himself in white,
and a purple cloak buttened about him, and so came out of the earth in that
place where the Temple had been builded before time. And they Simon would not
tell them, willing them to Simon i^ taken by the Roman^
call their Captain unto him, and presently some of the soldiers ran to call
him, and so he came, (at that time Terentius Rufus was Captain of the
soldiers) Terentius having learned the truth of all, kept him bound, and
related unto Caesar the manner of his taking, and thus Simon was by the power
of God delivered into his enemies hands, who hated him above measure, and so
was justly hereby punished, for having so cruelly tyrannized over his own
Countrymen, not taken by their force, but yielding himself unto them, having
cruelly butchered many, under pretense of false criminations: to wit, for
having revolted unto the Romans.

But impiety cannot escape Gods vengeance, neither is the divine justice of so
weak force, but Sin cannot shun Gods justice. A great multitude of the
seditious taken in vaults.
punishment upon men, when they think they have escaped all, for they were not
presently punished, which also Simon felt, after he fell into the Romans
hands: his coming out of the earth, made a great many more of the seditious at
that time to be taken in the Caves. When Caesar was returned into Caesarea by
the Sea coast, Simon was presented bound unto him, who commanded him to be
reserved for his triumph, which he purposed to make at Rome. After making The
year of the world. 4034. after the birth of Christ. 72. In a show in Caesarea
2500. Jews die.
Caesar came to Berytus (which is a City in Phoenicia, and a colonie of the
Romans) and here also he made some long Titus celebrateth Vespasians birthday.
aboade, and celebrated the birth of his father, with far greater solemnity
then the former, as well in making diverse shows unto the people, as in great
expenses and sumptuousnes, and causing many captives to perish as before.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the calamity of the Jews at Antiochia.

AT the same time the rest of the Jews were in great misery, the City of
Antiochia was incited against them, both for certain criminal causes laid now
unto their charge, as also for certain offenses before committed, which
necessarily I must recount, before I speak any thing of the rest. The nation
of the Jews is mixed almost amongst all nations of the world, and especially
amongst the Syrians, by reason of their vicinitie, and many of them were at The
nation of the Jews intermixed among all the people of the world.
Antiochia because it was a great City, and the kings that succeeded
Antiochus, permitted them Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, destroyed Jerusalem,
and sacked the temple, but the kings successors restored all the brass that
was taken from the temple unto the Jews, offering in unto their Synagogue in
Antiochia, and permitted them to have the same liberties in the City, that the
Greeks enjoyed, and the other kings also of latter times used them after the
like sort: so that their number greatly increased, and they enlarged their
temple and enriched it, with sundry offerings, oftentimes winning A number of
Jews in Antioch.
many Pagans to be of their religion, and so as it were made them also a part
of their nation. Now about the time that the wars began, and Vespasian was
newly arrived, the Jews began to be generally hated of all men; then one of
them named Antiochus, reverent for parentage, whose father was chief of all
the Jews in Antiochia, at such time as the people of Antiochia were assembled
A Jew called Antiochus is the cause of their mighty miscrie in Antioch,
Antiochus to enrage them the more, did now offer to sacrifice according to the
custom of the Pagans, thereby Antiochus perfidious to his Citizens. Antiochus
forbids to sanctify the seventh day.
as it were assuring the Antiochians, that he hated the Jews and their
customs, wiliing them also to compel all the rest of the Jews to do the
like, for whosoever refused so to do were traitors. The Antiochians followed
his counsel, but few Jews would obey them, yet they that denied Antiochus
receiving a charge of soldiers from the captain of the Romans, became most
cruel against his countrymen; and would not permit them to keep holy the
seventh day, but upon it to do all labor and business, that they were
accustomed to do upon any other day, and urged them hereto, that within short
time the seventh day was not only violated amongst them of Antiochia, but also
in other places and Cities round about. The Jews at Antiochia having then
endured the foresaid misery, now fell into as great calamity Another
calamity at Anuoch.
as that was, whereof I intending to speak, was forced to relare the former.
For it happened that the fouresquare market was fired, and the public places,
where all writings and registers were kept, as also the kings houses, and the
fire so increased, that with much ado it was hindered from firing the whole
City. Of this fact Antiochus accused the Jews, thereby sufficiently inciting
Collega the younger, had much ado to pacify the people, notwithstanding that
he requested them to permit him to inform Caesar of all that was past. For
Vespasian had The year of the world, 4034. after Christ's birth 72. A sort of
wicked men by means they were indebted, burn the market place and the public
records.
already sent Caesennius Portus to be governor of Syria, but he was not as yet
arrived there. Then Collega making diligent inquiry of the matter, found out
the truth, and not one of the Jews accused by Antiochus was guilty, for
certain impious people had done all this mischief, being indebted, thinking,
that if they had burnt the ma^et place, and the public writings, that then
their debts could not be required at their hands. Yet the Jews lived in great
fear, and expected the event of those forged accusations.

CHAP. XXII.
How Vespasian at his return was received by the Romans.

AFter that Titus had received letters from his father, that he was arrived in
Italy, and all The year of the world, 4035. after Christ's natiuite. 73. The
City of Rome entertaineth Vespasian with all willingness and pomp.
Cities wherein he as yet came, welcomed him very joyfully, and that
especially Rome had entertained him with great pomp and triumph, he was now
eased of the care he had before, and very joyful for his fathers welfare, and
good fortune. For all the people of Italy did reverence Vespasian, though
absent, as though he had been present with them, desiring to see his expected
arrival, whose coming they so heartily wished for. For the Senate remembering
what calamities had befallen the City in the change of princes, desired to
receive their Emperor dignified with the honor of old age, and martial
renown, whose presence only would be to his subjects profit and safety. And
the vulgar sort also troubled before with civil The Romans issue out to meet
with Vespasian.
knowing his skill in martial affairs by that which himself had already
done, and finding their other captains, under whom they warred, ignorant and
unskillful, they wished for his coming, thereby to be delivered from the
disgrace, wherein they lived, desiring to receive him by whom they might both
be honored, and preserved from danger. The nobility seeing him so beloved of
all men, could no longer wait his coming, but went and met him, he being far
from the City and accompanied him, and no man stayed his coming, but in whole
multitudes they went to meet him, they were so desirous to see him: so that
more went to meet him then stayed at hom^

When news was brought that he approached near unto the City, and how
friendly and courteously he had entertained all men, the people with their wives
and children stayed in the way he came, to salute and see him, and wheresoever
he came with joyful applauses, and acclamations they cried, calling him their
conseruer and benefactor, and he who only was worthy to be the Roman
Emperor, and the whole City was as it had been a temple all hung with
garlands, and full of sweet odors and perfumes, and the multitude of people
being such that he could scarcely get into the palace, he offered sacrifices
unto his household gods for his safe return, and Vespasian celebrateth
gratulatory sacrifice for his safe arrival.
all the people were feasted by their tribes, kindred and neighbors,
sacrificing unto God, and requesting that Vespasian might long continue their
Emperor, and his son after him, and that the Empire might never depart from
his lineage. The City of Rome having thus received Vespasian,

CHAP. XXIII.
The exploits of Domitian against the Germans and Frenchmen.

BEfore such time as Vespasian was gone to Alexandria, or that Titus besieged
the City of Jerusalem, a great part of Germany was revolted, with whom the
Frenchmen that bordred upon them renouncing their allegiance they were in great
hope to free themselves from the yoke and governments of the Romans. The first
motives that caused the Germans to The causes of the revolt of the Germans and
French from the Romans.
but a very little hope of success, then the hatred of their nobles, who knew
that none could by force bring them into subjection but only the Romans, and
chiefly thereunto encouraged by the opportunity they had. For they seeing the
Empire greatly afflicted with civil wars, by reason of the often changing of
Emperors, and knowing that all the world under their dominions was now in
suspense, they thought that by reason of their troubles and civil wars fit
opportunity was The year of the world. 4035. after Christ's birth 73. Ciuilis
compels the Germans to subjection.
Cassius and Ciuilis two of the most potent amongst them, who long before
desired alteration, and now finding opportunity, showed what minds they bare,
who now taking courage, made trial what the common people thought of this
point, and the greatest part of them manifestly condescended hereunto, and
perhaps the rest were not unwilling. At this time as it were by Gods
providence, Vespasian sent letters unto Petilius Cerealis (who before time had
been governor of Germany) and declared him Consul, commanding him to go
into Britain and take the rule of the country. He forth with obeyed
Vespasians command, and hearing that the Germans had revolted, he came
against them, they having now levied an army, and gave them a great overthrow,
killing many of them, and forced them to their due obedience unto the Romans.
Notwithstanding if he had not come Caesar Domitianus hearing of it (not as one
of his years Domitianus Titus brother.
would have done, being very young) undertook that expedition to go and
conquer them, but having his fathers courage, and being more skillful then his
age required, he presently went against them, who terrified with the report of
his coming, yielded unto him, thereby gaining this, that without bloodshed
they were brought under subjection as before. Now all things in Gallia being
well disposed of, so that it was not easy for them although they would, to
rebel any more, Domitian returned again to Rome, being a credit unto his age
and country.

At the same time also the Scythians rebelled, and the Sarmates assembled in
great multitudes, The Scithians and Sarmates rebellion against the Romans.
and passed over the river Istrum, and with great violence and cruelty coming
unexpected, Fonteius Agrippaes Lieutenant, who had been Consul, meeting them,
bad them battle, and sought very valiantly, which done, they went all over
the countries adjoining, wasting, robbing, and spoiling them. When Vespasian
heard thereof, and how Maesia was all wasted, he sent Rubrius Gallus to be
revenged upon them, who having slain many of them in fight, he forced the rest
to retire into their own country. The general of the army having thus ended
that war, provided to prevent them, if hereafter they did attempt the like,
for he built far more stronger forts then were before, so that the enemy
could no way pass out of their own country, by which means the wars in
Maesia were quickly ended.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the River Sabbaticus, and the famous triumph of Vespasian and Titus.

TItus the Emperor having some while remained at Berytus (as is before said)
and being returned from thence, he showed many spectacles in all the cities of
Syria, wherein he Titus celebrateth many sumptuous pastimes in all the cities
of Syria.
came, reserving for that purpose the Jews, that were captives, to let all men
understand of their overthrow: in his journey, he beheld a river worth the
recital, which runs in the midst Titus was coming to their city, they
could not contain themselves within their walls for joy, The flood Sabbaticus.
but all went out to meet him, and not only men, but also women and children,
expecting his coming thirty stounds off, and when he approached near unto
them, they holding up their hands to him saluted him, with great joy, and
having received many courtesies from him, they returned with him, and amongst
other acclamations, they often besought him to banish the Jews out of Titus
coming to Antioch. The prayers of the citizens against the Jews.
Titus returned no answer, making as though he heard not what they requested.
Yet the Jews doubtful what he would do, and what his intent was, were all in
exceeding great fear. For Titus did not tarry at Antiochia, but passed from
thence to Zeugema toward Euphrates, where Vologesus the king of Parthians
messenger came unto him, bringing him a golden crown for his conquest of the
Jews, which he receiving, feasted the kings Ambassadors, and so returned to
Antiochia, where the senate and people besought him to come into the theater,
where The year of the world. 4036. after Christ's bir^ 74.
all the people were assembled expecting him, and he accorded so to do, and
again they besought him to expel the Jews out of their city, but he answered
that their country whereunto he might have banished them, was now destroyed, and
there was no place that would receive the^, so the Antiochians seeing that they
could not obtain their former petition, they requested an other thing of him,
to wit, that he would take away the brazen tables, wherein were engraven the
Jews privileges: but Titus would not grant that, but leaving the Jews in the
same estate he found them, he departed Titus lamenteth the loss and desolation
of Jerusalem.
from thence into Egypt, and as in the way he passed by Jerusalem, comparing
the desolation of that place with the beauty and goodly buildings that were
before it was destroyed, he lamented and pitied the overthrow thereof, not
insolently rejoicing as an other would have done, for having destroyed so
fair and strong a city, but cursing the seditious who forced him to destroy
it, not The Romans find no small part of the riches of Ierualem.
purposing to make his virtue known by the calamity of wretches. For as yet
great part of the treasure of the City was found in the ruins, and some the
Romans found of themselves, but the most they got, the captives told them of,
which was gold and silver and other precious things buried by the owners in
the earth, being uncertain what would betide them. Titus going forward in his
journey speedily past the wilderness, and came to Alexandria, and determining
now to sail unto Italy, he sent the two legions that accompanied him unto the
places, John and Simon and seventy other goodly Jews are reserved by Titus to
be sent into Italy.
from whence they came, the fifth into Maesia, the fifteenth into Panonia,
commanding John and Simon captains of the prisoners and others to the number
of seven hundredth all of goodly stature, and beautiful, to be carried presently
into Italy, meaning to use them in his triumph. When he was now arrived at Rome
as he desired the people were so affected toward him, as if he had Vespasian
also honored his son Titus meeting him in his own person with great joy,
all the citizens likewise received him with exceeding joy, seeing that now the
father and his two sons were met: Within a few days after, they purposed to
make a triumph in common, but the Senate had decreed them a private and
peculiar triumph, for their valiant deeds, and in the day prefixed for the
same, no man in all the city remained at home, but every one got a place to
stand in that they might see the Emperors, leaving only room between them
for their passage. All the soldiers before it was daylight, every one with
his captain in companies, came and expected the Emperor, not at the palace
gates, but near the temple of Isis, for the Emperors that night lodged there,
and at day break Vespasian and Titus came forth both crowned with laurel, and
in purple garments made after their country The triumpha^t attire of Vespasian
and Titus.
fashion, and they went unto Octauians walks, where the Senate, captains and
knights expected their coming. Before the porch was made a tribunal, and in
it placed seats of Iuorie, which they ascending sat down in, and presently
all the soldiers with loud voice declared their valor and fortitude. The
Emperors were unarmed and clothed in silk, and crowned with laurel.
Vespasian having received their praises, they offering still to speak now in
his commendations, he beckned with his hand, and made a sign unto them to be
silent, which being done, he arose up, and covering the greatest part of his
head with his garment, he performed his solemn vows, and Titus also did the
like. That done, Vespasian spoke unto them all in general in few words, and
Their vows and dinner before their triumph.
so dismissed the soldiers to go to dinner, which according to the custom
the Emperor was to provide for them, himself departed from them to the
triumphant gate so called, for that all triumphs passed that way, and they did
eat meat and put on triumphant apparel, having offered The magnificence of
the triumph.
riches, and varieties, and novelties of nature. For almost all things that
ever were in any place amongst men that lived in felicity, either rich or
beautiful, and pleasant to behold, all of them were that day showed and seen
in that triumph, giving a testimony of the large dominions of the Romans. For
there was such store of works of gold, silver, and yuorie, that one would not
have deemed them, to have been made only for the pomp of that day, but to
been so The most precious garments.
plentiful, as if they had flowed all about the city, some carried fine
tapestrie made of all sorts of workmanship, and all of precious matter. And
diverse sorts of living creatures were there to be The year of the world. 4036.
after Christ's birth 74.
The building of the Pageants.
bigness, so that the people that beheld them wondered how it was possible,
that men should carry them, for many were builded with three or four lofts one
above another, surpassing all that can be imagined of them for work and cost,
for many of them were hanged about with Tapestrie of gold, and all things
annexed unto them, whereon they were carried, were made The year of the world,
4037. after Christ's birth 75
battered down with Rams, and Castles and strong holds destroyed, and the
walls of populous Cities to be ruined, and the army entering the walls, all
places filled with massacred men, and how those that were not able to fight,
yielding themselves, asked mercy, the temples set on fire, and after al else
was wasted, the houses thrown down upon the owners heads, and a river
representing sorrow, not flowing as it was wont into tilled places, and to
serve the use of man nor for cattle to drink, but into a Country which was
in every part burning, and environed with flames, A table of gold of the
weight of a great talent.
went the Captain of the City, representing the manner how it was taken. After
all these followed many ships, and in every place were carried the spoils
taken in war, amongst all which, those that were taken in the Temple of
Jerusalem, were most excellent, for there was a golden table weighing many
talents, and likewise a golden Candlestick; the use whereof was now not such
as we were wont to put it unto, for in the midst of the stem thereof was
fixed a base, and out of it proceeded many small branches, framed like a three
forked spear, every one being at the The last of the spoils was the law of
the Jews.
top made like a Lamp, which were seven in number, showing the honor of the
seventh day, which is called the Sabbath amongst the Jews. After all this, was
carried the Jews law, which Vespasian, and after him Titus, and with him
Domitian, gallantly adorned and mounted upon an excellent horse, and so they
went al to the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and there was the end of all this
pomp, where they made some abode. Simon the son of Giora, is drawn with a
halter about his neck, through the market place


For it was an ancient custom of their Country, to repose themselves there
till some came and brought news unto them, of the death of him, who was
General of their enemies. This as then was Simon Giora, who was also carried
in the triumph, and having a rope fastened about his neck, was drawn all along
the market place, where they that drew him did kill him. For it is the custom
of the Romans there, to put malefactors to death that are condemned. After
word was brought that he was dead, all the people made joyful exclamations,
and so they began Vespasian built a Temple and dedicated it unto peace, which
he did in so short a space as it was admirable, and having bestowed Vespasian
builds and dedicateth a Temple to peace.
great cost upon it, he also beautified it with diverse pictures, and carved
works. And he placed in that Temple all things that men of former ages had
come to see, from the uttermost parts of the earth. And he placed there all the
golden vessels, and other necessaries that the Jews used in their Temple,
doing them great reverence. But their law and the Tapestrie or purple veiles

CHAP. XXV. The year of the world. 4037. after Christ's birth 75.

How Herodium and Machaerus were taken by Bassus.

Caesar sent Lucius Bassus into Iudaea to be Lieutenant there, who receiving
an army of Cerealis Vetilianus, he took the Castle and garrison of Herodium,
being yielded unto him. After this, gathering together all his army, who were
dispersed in diverse places of the Country, he with the tenth legion purposed
to war against Machaerus, for he thought it necessary to destroy that
Castle, least that for the strength it might move many to rebel, for by reason
of the situation of the place, they that were in it, had certain hope of their
safety, and those that sought to assault it, were in great danger; for it was
built upon a rock that was exceeding Macherus has a very high prospect, and
it is environed on the North and South with valleys of the like measure, Herod
inuironeth Mache rus with a great wall and towers.
that the former is, whereby it is impossible to win the Castle, but that
vallie which is on the East side, is at least a hundred cubits deep, and it
ends upon a mountain near unto Machaerus. King Alexander seeing the nature
of the place, did there build a Castle, which afterward Gabinius in the war
against Aristobulus destroyed. But Herod when he was King, judged this place
Wonderful store of arrows and other engines in this tower.
as it were striving with nature, that the places which he had made
inexpugnable, he by Art might make places more strong then that was. He also
laid up there in store, arrows and engines, and made all provision wherewith
the Inhabitants might be able to hold out a great siege.

In the Kings palace, there grew the herb called Rue, which was very
admirable for the greatness, Rue of admirable greatness
for there was no fig tree taller or broader then it, and it was reported
that it had continued ever since Herod's time, and had endured longer, had not
the Jews, Inhabitants of the place cut it down. In the vallie that lies on
the North side of the City, there is a place called Baaras, where also grows
a root of the same name, the color whereof resembles the flame, How Baaras
is to be gathered.
and it shines at night like the Sun beams, and is not easy to be pulled
up, till that one cast upon it the urine of a woman or her flowers, which done,
whosoever touches it is sure to die, except he carry the root hanging on his
hand. It is also gathered another way without danger, after this manner. They
dig all round about it, so that they leave a very little of the root
covered with earth, and then they tie a dog unto it, which striving to follow
his master, who makes Another fashion how to dig the root.
were in his stead that seeks to get it, so that afterward none that handles
it or takes it, need to stand in any fear thereof. This herb notwithstanding
all this danger, is diligently sought out for the virtue it has. For it drives
away devils (which are the spirits of wicked men) out of men's bodies, if it be
but applied unto them, whereas otherwise if they had no help, these devils
possessing their bodies would kill them. Out of that place also do spring
certain hot waters, very different in taste one from another, for some are
bitter, some sweet, there are also sources of could waters, one near unto
another in a plain, but which is most admirable, there is a cave hard by, Hot
bathes.
not very deep, environed with an eminent rock above, from the which their
comes as it were two dugges or paps, hard by one another, and out of the one
of them their flows very cold

Bassus having viewed this place on every side, resolved to besiege it, and
endeavored to fill up the valley that was on the East side, and so make away
unto it, which he began to do, hastening to raise a very high mount, and so
make it easy to be taken. Those that were inhabitants, The year of the world.
4037. after the birth of Christ. 75. The Jews that were for^ners dwelt in ^he
lower City.
constrained Jews that were strangers, to go into the lower city, judging
them an unprofitable multitude, and so caused them to endure the first brunt of
the enemies, and they themselves kept the Castle both for that it was strong,
and also to preserve themselves, hoping that by yielding the place unto the
Romans, they might obtain pardon of them; yet first they purposed to make
trial if they could avoid the siege: and therefore very courageously, every
day they made excursions, and fought with them they found, and many were slain
on both parts. Fortune and opportunity sometime caused one to be victors,
sometime another, for the Jews got the best when they could assault the Romans
at unawares, and the Romans overcame, when The conflict of the Jews with the
Romans.
they were aware of the Jews coming and armed themselves. But the siege was
not ended by these skirmishes: yet a chance befell, that forced the Jews to
yield their Castle. Amongst Eleazar a young man, and very hardy and bold in
any enterprise, Eleazar a Jew strong in hand and fierce in bold attempts.
who oftentimes made excursions and sought to hinder the Romans work, who
always in every fight did greatly endomage the Romans, and by his valor and
aduenturous courage, he gave them that were his fellows opportunity to
assault the Romans, and to fly again and retire in safety, himself being
always the last that so retired. It happened one day that the fight being
ended, and both parts parted, he as it were contemning all men, and thinking
that none of his enemies durst undertake to combat with him, stayed without
the gate speaking to them that were upon the wall, giving great attention unto
them. Then one Rufus an Egyptian one of the Roman army, espying this
opportunity ran upon him so suddenly, that he at unawares took him all
armed as he was, and they upon the walls stood amazed, whilst Rufus led him
unto the Romans camp. Then the General of the Romans caused him to be led
Eleazar is taken, and stripped naked and whipped.
into a place, where they in the city might see him, and there to have all his
clothes taken off him, and whipped; and the misfortune of this young man did
greatly discourage the Jews, and all the city was resolved into tears for
the calamity of that one man. Bassus seeing this, he devised this council
against them; for he sought to move them so to compassion, that for to save
him they should yield their castle, which fell out as he desired. For he
presently commanded a cross to be erected, as though he would presently have
crucified Eleazar, which sight greatly moved Eleazars calamity moves the
Jews to submit themselves.
them in the Castle to sorrow: so that now with loud cries they lamented,
saying that this calamity was insupportable. Then Eleazar besought them not to
despise him, who was now to die a most miserable death, and moreover to provide
for their own safety in yielding the castle unto

Then they moved with his words, and many also within the City entreating for
him (for he came of a great parentage and had many kinsfolks though contrary
to their natures) compassion took place in them: and so sending some of their
company speedily, they desired to parley, affirming that they would yield
their castle upon condition that they might safely depart away, and Eleazar
might be likewise restored unto them. Which offer of theirs the Romans
accepted, and the Jews in the lower part of the City having intelligence of
this covenant, resolved themselves to fly away in the night, but so soon as
they had opened their gates, those that had agreed with Bassus gave him
intelligence thereof, either envying that their countrymen should escape, or
else fearing that Bassus would punish them for their flight: yet for all this
the most valiant of One thousand seven hundredth Jews slain by the Romans
Bassus thinking it meet to keep his promise unto them of the castle,
permitted them safely to depart, and restored Eleazar unto them.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Jews that Bassus slew: and how he sold Iudaea.

THis done, he prepared to carry his army into the pasture called Iardes, for
he had notice Iardes a wood environed by the Romans.
that many Jews were there assembled together, who had escaped from Jerusalem
and Machaera during the siege. So coming unto the place and finding it to be
as it was reported unto him, he first of all environed it with horsemen, that
if any one of the Jews sought to escape, the horsemen might withstand them,
and he commanded the footmen to cut down the wood, into the which they fled to
hide themselves. And so through necessity they were constrained to fight,
hoping by a courageous fight to find opportunity to fly: wherefore The year
of the world, 4037. after Christ's birth 75.
Judas the son of Iairus (of whom we have already made mention, who during
the siege of Jerusalem was commander of a company there) hid Three thousand
Jews slain.
himself in a certain cave, and secretly escaped from thence. At that time
Caesar writ unto Liberius Maximus his Governor, and unto Bassus, to sell
Iudaea: for he did not build in all the country any City but appropriated it
unto himself, leaving there only eight hundredth soldiers, and giving them a
place to dwell in called Emaus, thirty stounds distant A tribute imposed by
Caesar on all the Jews.
in former times they weere wont to pay unto the temple of Jerusalem: and this
was the estate of the Jews at that time.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the death of King Antiochus: and how the Alanes invaded Armenia.

IN the fourth year of Vespasians reign, it happened that Antiochus king of
the Comagenes with all his family fell into great misery upon this occasion.
Cesennius Petus governor of Syria (either for envy, or for that indeed it was
so, for it is not well known) Cesennius Petus president of Syria, accuses
Antiochus before Caesar.
sent letters unto Caesar declaring unto him that Antiochus was determined to
reuolte from the Romans, together with his son Epiphanes, and had made a
league with the king of the Parthians, and that therefore it was necessary to
prevent them in time, least that if they first began to revolt openly, they
might trouble all the Roman Empire with wars. Caesar did not neglect these
news, for that the neerenesse of both the kings countries one to another,
seemed to require that they should be quickly prevented: for Samosata the
greatest City of Comagena is situate upon Euphrates, which might both easily
receive the Parthians, and be a strong hold for Vespasian believing it,
permitted him to do what he thought expedient, and he forthwith, Antiochus
thinking nothing, suddenly entered into Comagene, with the sixth legion, and
certain other companies of footmen and troops of horsemen, accompanied with
Aristobulus king of Chalcidis, and Sohemus king of Emesa, who came to assist
him. So they entered the country without any fight, for none of Antiochus is
suddenly invaded by Cesennius.
the inhabitants offered to resist. Antiochus daunted with these unexpected
news, did not so much as think of any war against the Romans, wherefore he
determined to leave the whole kingdom in that estate that then it was in, and
with his wife and children depart from thence, hoping hereby to clear himself
unto the Romans, from that which they suspected of him: and going almost a
hundredth and thirty stounds from the City into a field, there he placed a
tabernacle. Petus sent men unto Samosata to take it, and left them to keep the
City, and he Antiochus chooses rather to depart out of his country with his
wife and children then to fight with the Romans.
with the rest of the soldiers purposed to go against Antiochus. But for all
this the king though by necessity urged thereunto, yet would he not fight
against the Romans, but bewailing his misfortune, enduted patiently all
whatsoever, but his sons being Iustie strong young men, and skillful in
martial affairs, could not easily abstain from fight in that their
distress. Wherefore Epiphanes and Callinicus his two sons had recourse unto
their forces, and in a great fight that dured a whole day they showed their
valor, and departed receiving no loss. But Antiochus after this fight would
not any longer abide in his country, but taking his wife and daughters
Antiochus flies with his wife into Cilicia. Epiphanes flies to Vologesus the
king of Parthia.
he fled into Cilicia, and thereby discouraged his soldiers, who despairing to
keep the kingdom for him, revolted unto the Romans. But Epiphanes and the
rest were forced to seek to Vologesus, of whom they were received, not as
fugitives, but with great honor, and according to their degree, as though they
yet possessed their ancient dignity. And Petus coming to Tarsus of Cilicia,
he sent a Centurion to carry Antiochus bound unto Rome. But Vespasian
permitted not a king Antiochus taken.
to be so brought unto him, thinking it meet to consider the old friendship
between them, The year of the world. 4037. after Christ's birth 75.


Epiphanes, and they with him hearing this, were eased of the great care they
took for their father, whom they greatly feared to be fallen into some danger,
and now they also conceived some hope to be reconciled unto Caesar. Whereof
Vologesus writing unto Caesar (for they were not Antiochus reconciled to
Caesar. The Alans enter Media to spoil the same.
contented to live out of the Roman Empire, notwithstanding that they were
honorably entertained) Caesar. courteously gave them leave, and they came to
Rome, and their father was presently sent for unto them from Lacedemon, and so
they remained at Rome in great honor. The nation of the Alexander had made in
such wise, that it was shut up with iron gates, obtained leave to pass, and so
came into Media, the Medes nothing fearing any such matter, and sacked and
spoiled all their populous and wealthy borders, being full of cattle, none
daring to resist them: for Pacorus king of that country, for fear fled into
the strongest hold he had, and left all his goods behind him, and with much
ado redeemed his wife, and concubines whom they had taken, for one hundredth
talents. Having therefore license to rob and Armenia wasted.
spoil, for that no man resisted them, they came into Armenia, and wasted all
the country there about, and Tyridates was then king of that country, who with
an army coming to fight against

CHAP. XXVIII.
How Massada a most strong Castle was taken.

BAssus dying in Iudaea, Flauius Sylua succeeded in his place, and now
perceiving that all the country else was conquered save one only castle, he
with all the forces he could make, The year of the world, 4038. after Christ's
birth 76
went against it. This castle is called Massada. The captain of the Sicarians
named Eleazar, who first invaded it, was a very strong and valiant man, borne
of the tribe of Judah, who persuaded a great many Jews as is before said, not
to inrole themselves when Cyrenaeus was Censor and sent to tax Iudaea. For at
that time the Sicarians had conspired against them that obeyed the Romans, and
in all things used them like enemies, taking and driving away their goods, and
firing their houses, affirming that they did not any thing differ from
strangers, who betrayed the liberty of their country rather then they would
fight for it, and that they had rather have them war on the Romans side. But
that was only an excuse to hide their avarice and injurious dealing, as The
time among the Jews which was most fruitful in all manner of impiety.
undone, yea though one endeavored to invent some new villainies, yet could he
devise none that was not then practiced, all labored with this malady both,
in particular and in common, and every one did strive with other, to surpass
his fellow in impiety against God, and injustice toward his neighbor. The
mighty vexed the weaker sort, and the meaner sort destroyed the potentates,
and took their riches away from them; they gaped after rule and dominion,
these after mischief.

The Sicarians were the first that were so cruel and injurious against their
neighbors, for not John Giscala.
provoked thereunto, neither by deed nor word, they slew and injured all men
without cause, but John showed them to be very moderate. For he did not only
slay all that counseled that which was good and profitable, as his greatest
enemies, and especially dealing thus with the citizens, but also many ways
iniuried his country, like one who had impiously also contemned God himself.
For he did ear forbidden meats, and violated his countries temperancey so that
it was no The year of the world. 4038. after Christ's birth 76. Simon son of
Giora.
wonder to see him observe no justice nor fidelity toward men, who had now
infringed the laws* of God. Again what villainy did Simon Giora leave undone,
or what injury did he abstain from to offer unto* ^hier bodies* who had
chosen him for their ruler? What did kindred and friendship* then prevail any
man, save only this, that it made them be more cruelly used, and every day, to
be more tyrannously butchered, then otherwise? For they thought it a heinous
offense to abuse strangers, and a glory to exercise cruelty upon their most
familiar friends. The Idumaeans were followers of this fury, who killed the
high priests, and left not any one of (...) (...) ^he city, The Idumaeans. The
Zealous.
whereby God might be honored, and induced all injustice possible, wherein the
Zealous excelled. For they committed all mischief, leaning nothing unattempted
that had ever before that time been practiced, yet they took their name from
them that imitated good and godliness, but The end of the Jews answerable to
their lives.
accounting the greatest impiety to be goodness. But their end was as they
deserved, and God punished their desert with his just vengeance. For even unto
the latter end of their lives, they endured all the miseries that is possible
for man's nature to abide, being killed with diverse sorts of torments. Perhaps
one will say that their punishment was not so greatas they deserved, but what
punishment could be devised sufficient for their defert? But I cannot now stand
to lament those who perished by these men's cruelty, wherefore I will return
to that where I left.

The Roman captain came against Eleazar, and them that kept Massada with him,
who were Sicarians, and he brought an army with him, and presently subdued all
the confines and borders Silua the captain of the Romans besieges Massada.
round about, and he placed i^ every fit place garrisons, and environed the
castle with a wall, least any of them that were besieged should escape, and
that they that besieged them might* there keep a continual guard. Moreover he
placed his camp in a fit place for the siege, even there where the rock that
the castle was built upon, joined unto the other mountain, which was an unfit
place to get necessaries in. For not only victuals were fetched far off by
great labor of the Jews who were commanded to do it, but also water for the
whole army somewhere else, for there was no fountain near that place. This
done Silua attempted the siege, wherein it was requisite for him to use both
art and labor, by reason of the strength of the castle, which is thus
situate. It is environed round with a huge stone very high on every side,
and the valley underneath The situation of Massada.
is so deep, that one cannot see the bottom, all rockie and inaccessible, to
all living creatures, The journey by the rock called the Snake.
seems as if it were broken insunder, and by little and little often
returns again unto it self, and it is by little and little extended in
length, so that he that goes that way, can make no haste but must step with
one foot first upon them, and the other upon another, and must stand upon one
foot whilst he remoueth the other, and he that falls is sure to be slain in
the fall, for there is such a hollow place on either side between the rocks,
that it is able to terrify the boldest man alive. When thou have gone thirty
stoundes by this way, then thou come to the top of the hill, which is not
steep at the top, but has a plain above it, and Ionathas the high priest was
the first that Herod after him bestowed great labor and cost in building that
place, for he environed it all with a wall, seven stounds circuit all of white
stone, twelve cubits high, and eight cubits broad, and placed upon it seven and
twenty towers, that were fifty cubits high, by the which men passed into the
houses that were round about the wall within, for the king appointed the top of
the hill for tillage, because it was a more fertile and fatter soil then any
ground else, so that if at any time they within the castle wanted provision The
top more fruitful, and fatter soil the the plain. Herod's palace
from other* places, yet they might not be famished, having this to find them.
He also builded in this place a palace for himself, the way to which was on
the West side within the Castle wall, whose prospect was toward the North, and
environed the same with a most strong wall, and in the corners thereof he
built four most firm towers three score cubits high, very sumptuous from the
Kings palace, which they that were without could not perceive, the way above
ground The year of the world. 4038. after Christ's birth 76. A ^ower to the
Westside.


The provision within the Castle was admirable both for the magnificence
thereof, and also for the long time it had continued, for there was corn
sufficient for many years, and Wine and Great store of provision in the Castle.
Oil and diverse other provision and heaps of dates. All which Eleazar found
ready there, having deceitfully obtained the Castle with his Sicarians, which
provision was all as sound and as fresh, as though it had newly been laid up
in store: notwithstanding, that from the time it remained Fruit for a hundredth
years kept vncorrupt
air about the Castle, which by reason of the height of the place is most
pure, and free from all earthly corruption. Therewas also found all manner of
Armor in great quantity, which Herod made, and would have armed ten thousand
men, also unwrought iron, brass, and lead, so that one may judge that
provision to have been reserved for some great cause. It is reported that
Herod prepared that Castle for his refuge, when he doubted two great
dangers, first that the people of the Jews would depose him, and make them
Kings whose ancestors had before reigned.

The other which was more dangerous then the first, was, for that he feared
Cleopatra Queen Herod suspecting a double peril, builded this place for a
refuge.
of Egypt, who not concealing her intent, did often request Antonius that
Herod might be slain, Antonius doting so upon her, did not fulfill her
request. Herod for these occasions having b^ilded Massada, left it furnished
as the last bulwark for the Romans to make war against the Jews. For the
General of the Romans, having now compassed all the place without it with a
wall, (as is before said) to the end that none might escape, he did very
wisely, and so began to assault the Castle, finding one only place that would
bea^e a mount. For behind the tower that There was but one place about Massada
to raise a mount to batter one.
on the West side stopped up the passage into the Castle and palace, there was
a great rock very large and long, yet not so high as Massada by three hundred
cubits. This rock was called Leuce, which signifies white. When Silua had
gotten this rock, and ascended it, he commanded Vespasian, and after him Titus
devised two batter walls with, and so they made a tower threescore cubits
high all plated about with iron.

Now the Romans with many shot did drive the Jews off from the Castle walls,
not suffering them to lif^ up their heads. And Silua having builded a mighty
Ram, caused the wall to be continually beaten therewith, but it could
scarcely enter upon it, and the Sicarians quickly prevented that, building
another wall within, which could not be broken with the Ram being The City
battered with a large Ram, and by Siluas appointment.
made two rayles, and then filled the space between the two rayles with earth,
and with other planckes they kept the earth from falling down; so that they
made a work like the wall of a house, and for that it yielded unto the blows
of the Ram (being soft earth) the Ram could not prevail against it; but
rather made it more stronger then before by ramming the mortar together.

Silua perceiving this, judged that he might sooner destroy the wall with fire
then with his engine Firebrands da^ ^ed against the wal^.
and so he commanded the soldiers to cast upon it many ^uming firebrands, and
the fire did quickly take hold of the wall, because it was for the most part
built with wood, and easily also pe^ced through it, by reason it was not clean
wrought together, and there was a great

At the very beginning of the fire, the North wind did greatly annoy the
Romans, for the fire The North wind diuerting the flame, turns it upon the
Roman^.
blowing furiously from above against them that were Romans, it did drive it
extremely upon them, so that they were in great despair, fearing their
engines would be burnt, and presently the wind changing and blowing from the
South, (as it were by Gods providence) it turned The year of the world. 4038.
after Christ's birth 76.
the fire again upon the wall, and now all of it even unto the foundation
thereof, was there most cruelly on fire. And the Romans having. Gods
assistaunce, returned again unto their Camp joyfully, purposing the next
morning betimes to assail their enemies, and that night to place stronger
watches, least any of the enemies should escape. But Eleazer thought not to
fly, neither would he permit any one of his company so to do. And seeing
now the wall was fierd, and not knowing any way else to help himself,
considering likewise what the Romans would do unto their wives and children
if they should take them, he deliberated of all their deaths, which he in that
extremity judged to be the best way they could take. And so he assembled the
most valiant of all his company, and exhorted every one of them thereunto
after this manner.

Valiant companions, we long ago resolved our selves neither to serve the
Romans, nor any other save only God, for he alone is the true and just Lord
of all men. Behold the time is now Eleazars Oration to his companions.
come, that exhorts you to show your resolute minds: let us not therefore
dishonor our selves, and besides our slavery, suffer also intolerable
torments if we be taken alive by the Romans. For we were the first that
revolted from them, and the last that war against them. And I verily think
that God has given us this benefit, that we may die well and in our own
liberty, which Eleazar conte^ Gods wr^t* ^o be k^led against the people.
he denied to others who were overcome contrary to their expectation. We are
certain to be conquered as soon as it is day light, but to die valiantly
with our dearest friends, is a glorious resolution unto valiant men, and of
this our enemies cannot debar us, who do labor to take us alive, and carry
us away captives, and we are not able to vanquish them in fight. For truly
The punish (...) ^ese (...) which (...) ^es ^n (...) attemp^ against the ^es
(...) grave (...) ^en l^ (...)* maintained.
against our own nation. For the which I request you, let us not be punished by
the Romans, whose forces are invincible, but by our selves let us satisfy the
ire of God, and so it will be more tolerable for us; even by that means our
wives shall die undefiled, and our children shall not taste of servile
captivity. After whose deaths, we will one help another to die with
credit, conseruing our liberty, which is the best sepulture of all, yet let
us first fire our Castle, and burn our treasure: for it will be no small
grief unto the Romans, if they neither get our bodies alive, nor can find
any one jot of our riches for recompense of their labor. Let us only leave
our victuals

Eleazer having thus spoken, they that were present did not all accord unto
him, for some joyfully hasted to execute his advise, thinking it so glorious a
death. But they who moved with compassion toward their wives and families,
were some thing effeminate, or else abhorred to kill themselves. One looking
upon another with tears, did show his mind to disagree from that which Eleazer
persuaded. Which when Eleazar perceived, and that his counsel through fear
was defeated, fearing also that they who courageously had accorded thereunto,
should be with drawn by the tears of the others, he did not so end his
exhortation, but standing up, and with

How much am I deceived, who thought that valiant men fighting for their
liberty, would Eleazars Ora^n as touch^g the immor talitie of the soul.
rather choose to die then live, but ye do show your selves nothing to excel
any ordinary men, who fear to die, notwithstanding, that thereby you may
escape great misery, and calamity, when in this point you ought not to have
expected any admonition thereunto, no^ to The year of the world, 4038. after
Christ's birth 76.
The ancient customs which have endured ever since men had reason, the divine
doctrine of our nation, which has continually been confirmed by the deeds of
our predecessors, do instruct us, that it is misery to live, and not to die.
For death freeth our souls from prison unto their most pure and proper place,
where never after they shall be touched with any calamity. Which whilst they
are bound in a mortal body, and do participate of his A soul tied in a
mortal body.
miseries, may probably be affirmed to be dead. For it is an unseemly
conjunction for that which is divine, to be coupled and connexed unto that
which is mortal. True it is that our souls can do much being joined to our
bodies, for they use the bodies as their instruments secretly producing The
power of the soul.
in them motion, and many other actions passing the nature of mortal things.
But when the soul is loosed from that heavy burden which does weigh it down
even unto the earth, which Sleep the argument of the immortalni^ of the soul.
may be an evident argument unto you of this which I speak, where the soul
not distracted takes a most pleasant and sweet repose; and ^ommunicating with
God, it is with him present in euene place by reason of affinity, and
foretells many future events. Wherefore should we then fear death, who love
the rest that we take in sleep? were not he a mad man that The professors of
wisdom among the indians burn themselves.
time, though against their wills* yet do they hasten to unloose the soul bound
in this mortal body, though not urged thereunto by any calamity or
necessity, but only for desire of immortality, telling others that they will
depart out of this life; neither does any one seek to hinder them, but all men
esteeming them most fortunate; send by them commendations and other messages
unto their friends departed: so firm is their belief that the souls of them
that are dead have communion and conversation together: And so they having all
instruction what to say to An exhortation to contemn death drawn from the time
and place.
they bewail themselves, not those who are dead and have attained
immortality. Shall not we then be ashamed not to believe so firmly as the
Indians do? despising through our own sloth our country laws which are to be
emulated of all men? Nay supposing that by our law we had bin instructed
contrariwise, to wit, that to live in this life is bliss, and to die is
calamity: yet notwithstanding this present necessity, this present time had
been a sufficient motive to cause us to embrace death rather then life, seeing
that by Gods appointment, and of necessity we must now die. In times past it
appeateth God so provided, that he shortened their days of our own nation
Example taken from the Jews that were stain in Caes^a.
forces, but a more potent cause hereof there was which made them conquerours.
Which of the Romans slew the Jews that inhabited at Caesarea? whom the
inhabitants thereof upon the Sabbath day, they being assembled in one place
together with their wives and children, did massacre, notwithstanding that they
had no intent to revolt from them, nor never lifting up their hands in their
own defense, nothing fearing the Romans, who only accounted them of our
nation their enemies that revolted from them. But some may object the Jews at
Caesarea, and the inhabitants thereof were always a^ variance, and that now
they revenged their old quarrel having gotten opportunity. What then shall we
say of the Scythopolitans? who bare arms The Calamity of the Jews in
Scithopoli^.
being more our enemies then the Romans were, where they of Damascus although
they The year of the world, 4038. after Christ's birth 76. Eighteen thousand
Jews slain in Syria, and threescore thousand in Egypt.
could not devise any probable cause for it, yet did they massacre all the
Jews living amongst them, who amounted to the number of eighteen thousand
beside their wives and families. And as we have heard it reported, the number
of the Jews slain by the Egyptians, were above three score thousand: It may
be that finding no adversity in a strange country, they were put to death by
their enemies. But they that in their own country fought against the Romans,
wanted nothing that might have caused a perfect hope of a full victory over
the Romans, they had weapons, armor, walls, and strong holds inexpugnable,
their valorous courage in fighting for liberty shunned no danger, and
encouraged men to revolt, which all, having a while served their turns, at
last was a cause of their greater misery. For all were taken and subdued by
the enemies, as though they had been built and made to make their enemies
victory more famous, and not to The calamity of those Jews who were taken by
the Romans.
do them service. And we may justly deem them happy who were slain in the
war, for they died in liberty. Yet who does not pity the multitude of them
that fell into the Romans hands; or who would not hasten to die, rather then
endure the like misery that they suffered? Some of them being tortured, and
some with fire and stripes perished; and others half eaten of wild beasts,
were reserved alive for their second food: and they are most miserable of all
that are yet alive, who often wish for death and cannot find it. Where is now
that gorgeous City? where Jerusalem the Metropolitan city razed from the
foundations.
is it that was once the mother City of all the nation of the Jews? so
strengthened with such strong walls, so fortified with towers and castles to
defend the walls, scarcely able to contain the provision made for war, having
in it so huge a multitude of men to fight for it; what is it now become,
wherein God himself was thought to dwell? It is now razed down even unto the
We are borne to die, and the most strongest cannot avoid the same.
children abused before our faces is no necessity, proceeding from man's
nature, but they only are forced to endure it, who when they might have died
without it, did refuse for fear. We first of all trusting to our strength,
rebelled against the Romans; now lastly they exhorting us to obedience, we
denied, which of them then will not be enraged against us, if they can take us
alive? Most miserable shall those young men be, whose strength will endure many
torments, and those old men will move compassion whose aged years cannot
suffer tortures; one shall Eleazar tells the Jews of the Romans tyranny. It
is a happiness among the Jews to die free.
see his wife carried away from him, and another his son, having his hands
bound behind him cry unto his father for help: who now whilst they are free
from the thraldom of their enemies,

Whilst Eleazar was yet speaking, and desirous still to continue his
exhortation, they all interrupted him, every one now in a fury bent to follow
his advice, made haste to effect it, and as though they had been urged by some
bad spirit thereunto, every one labored to prevent one Eleazars speech,
every one retained his good affection toward his friends: yet permitting
reason to take no place, and persuading themselves that thus they had well
provided for their children, they all at once The year of the world. 4^38.
after Christ's birth 76.
The Jews gathering all their goods together cast the^ into the fire. Ten
chosen by lot to kill the rest of the Jews.


In this manner they died, thinking they had left no one alive to have fallen
into the Romans hands, Eleazars cosins, who in learning and wisdom surpassed
all other women, and five children, who all hid themselves in a cave wherein
water was reserved to drink, whilst the rest were busied in this massacre,
who were in number 900. and 60, beside women and children. This calamity
happened the fifteenth day of April. In the morning The Romans expect the fight.
the Romans expecting that the Jews would fight with them, made bridges from
their mounts unto the walls, and so assaulted the walls, and seeing none of their
enemies appear, but all the walls wasted and on fire, and deep silence in
every place, they could not conjecture what was done, and at last they made a
cry at once, as though they had been beating the walls with a Ram, thereby
to see if they could make any enemies come out. The women in the vaults heard
The Romans admire at the Jews fortitude and obstinate contempt of death.
fire, and passing through it, they presently came into the palace, where they
beheld all the dead bodies, yet they did not insult over them as their enemies,
but admired that so many should be so obstinately minded to despise death.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the death of the Sicarians that were fled unto Alexandria and Thebes.

THe Castle being thus taken, the general of the Romans leaving a garrison
there, went unto Caesarea, for there was no one enemy left in all that
country, but now all Iudaea The murderers authors of new calamity.
was destroyed through continuance of long wars, and many of that nation though
far distant from it, tasted of those troubles, for it so fell out that
afterward many Jews perished in Egypt at Alexandria, for those Sicarians who
had escaped thither, were not content to be safe and free from danger, but
there also they attempted alteration, and to defend their liberty against the
the Romans, esteeming themselves nothing inferior unto them, and that only
God was their Lord. And some of the nobler race of the Jews, seeking to
withstand that their enterprise, were by these Sicarians slain, which was no
sooner done, but they exhorted the people The Jews assemble and consult about
the murderers
these Sicarians, showing them to be the authors of all the misery that had
befallen the Iewe^ and that now notwithstanding they were escaped, yet they
were not certain of their lives, for that if they were known, the Romans
would presently put them to death, and draw them also into the like misery,
who were not partakers of their wickedness. Wherefore they admonished The
year of the world. 4038. after Christ's birth 76.
the multitude to beware least they drew themselves into the same danger,
wherein they were, and to make satisfaction unto the Romans for themselves by
delivering such people unto them. The Jews were persuaded by these speeches,
and foreseeing the danger that might ensue, they furiously assaulted the
Sicarians, and took of them six hundredth, and shortly after those who there
escaping, fled into Egypt and Thebes, were taken and brought back again,
whose hard hearted obstinacy was so great, that none can without admiration,
hear of. For notwithstanding Diverse sorts of torments and tortures inflicted
on them who re^use Caesar's soueraintie.
that all torments and tortures that could be devised were inflicted upon them,
only to force them to confess that Caesar was their Lord, yet no one of them
would say so, nor make any show thereof, but all perseuered in their former
opinion, as though the body tormented had been dead, and not alive. Moreover
their children were most to be admired, for not one of them Caesar Lord. So
much did their boldness overcome the torments inflicted upon their bodies.

CHAP. XXX.
How the Temple of Onias at Alexandria was shut up.

AT that time Lupus was governor of Alexandria, who with all speed by letters
gave Caesar notice of these troubles. And Caesar, seeing that it was necessary
to beware of the Jews, who were naturally inclined to sedition and
unquietness, fearing also that they would once Lupus to destroy the temple,
which Onias erected in Egypt, which was builded and named upon this
occasion. Onias the son of Simon one of the high priests, being driven out of
Jerusalem, Antiochus Onias by Pto^es consent builds a city and temple in
Egypt.
king of Syria then warring against the Jews, he came unto Alexandria, and was
courteously entertained by Ptolomaeus who was then also enemy unto Antiochus,
affirming that he would annex unto his country the people of the Jews, if he
would agree to that which he required. The king according to all that could be
granted, he requested him to permit him to build a temple in some place of his
country, and that he might worship God therein according to the custom of
their country: for so the Jews would hate Antiochus the more, who had
destroyed their temple at Jerusalem, and be frindly unto him, and many of them
did fly unto him for religion sake. Ptolomaeus agreed so to do Onias building
a castle, made also a temple unlike to that of Jerusalem, but he erected a
tower like that of Jerusalem with stones, that was threescore cubits long, and
he built an Altar after the fashion of that of his own country, and adorned
it with all manner of gifts (save only a candlestick) which had in steed
thereof a lamp to give light, which he caused to be hung before the Altar in a
golden chain, Onias temple built in Egypt.
and he environed all the temple with a wall made of brick, and the gates he
made of stone, and the king granted unto it great revenues of money and ground,
to the intent that the priests might have abundance of all things which they
required.

But Onias did not this with a good conscience, but for that he was at variance
with the Jews Esaias foretold that a certain Jew should build a temple in
Egypt. And thus that temple was build, and Lupus having received the Emperors
letters went unto the temple, and taking away certain gifts from it, he shut
it up: And after him Paulinus who succeeded in his steed, left not one gift
there (for he threatened Lupus shuts the Jews out of the temple.
the priests if they did not bring forth all) and permitted not any that came
thither for to sacrifice to come near it, but shutting up the gate thereof, he
left no sign of divine service there, and from the time it was built till the
time it was shut up; were three hundredth thirty and three years.

CHAP. XXXI. The year of the world, 4038. after Christ's birth 76

Of the Massacre of the Jews at Cyrene.

THe boldness of the Sicarians, like some infectious disease infected also the
towns about Cyrene. For one John, a weauer, and a wicked man having escaped,
persuaded many simple people to follow him, and led them into the wilderness,
promising to show them signs and visions, and thus he deceived the simplest
sort of the Jews, but the noblest of them of Cyrene understanding his deceit,
gave Catullus notice of his preparation and departure, A part of Ionathans
companions were taken and slain, the rest kept captive alive and brought to
Catullus.
who was then Governor of Lybia, who sending horsemen and footmen, did easily
Catullus. But their leader Ionathas at that time escaped, yet being diligently
laid and sought for, over all those Countries, he was at last taken, and
being brought unto Catullus, he sought to delay his own punishment, in
offering an occasion of iniquity unto Catullus. For he accused the richest
amongst the Jews, to have been his aduisers to do this matter. Catullus was
glad of those allegations, and exaggerated his accusations very much with
tragical terms, so that he seemed to have made an end of the wars against the
Jews, and which was worst of all to be content to credit, whatsoever was
maliciously spoken, he himself instructed the Sicarians to framescandalous
accusations, and commanding them to nominate one Alexander a Jew, whom he had
long hated and his wife Berenice, he put them first of all to death, and after
them all that Three thousand Jews slain by Catullus.
without controwle, because he confiscated their possessions unto Caesar. And
least that any Jew living in any other place should complain of his injustice,
he extended his malicious lies against others further off, and persuaded
Ionathas and certain others that were taken with him, to accuse the most
trusty and faithful Jews at Rome and Alexandria: one of whom who were thus
falsely accused, was named Joseph, who writ this History. But this devise of
Catullus had not such Joseph by Catullus persuasion is accused by Ionathas.
success as he hoped, for he came to Rome, and brought Ionathas and the rest
bound with him, thinking that no more inquiry would be made of the false
accusations invented by himself.

But Vespasian suspecting the matter, made diligent inquiry to know the truth,
and finding these crimes injuriously imposed upon those men, at Titus
entreaty, he acquitted them, and punished Ionathas according to his desert; who
being first whipped, was afterward burned alive. And Ionathas being first
beaten is burnt alive.
Catullus at that time, by reason of the mildness of the Emperors, had
nothing said unto him, but not long after he fell into a grievous disease, and
was cruelly tormented, not only in body, but also in mind. For he was greatly
terrified, and still imagined to see the ghostes, of them whom he had so
unjustly slain, ready to kill him, so that he cried out; and not able to
contain himself, lept out of his bed as though he had been tortured with
torments and fire. And this disease daily increasing on, his guts and bowels
rotting and issuing out of him, at last he died in this manner, leaving behind
him an evident argument, that the divine justice does punish impious
malefactors. And this is the end of the History, which we promised to be set
down The conclusion of the seven books of the wars of the Jews.
with all fidelity, for them that are desirous to know the event of the
wars, between the Jews and the Romans. And as for our style, we leave it
to the judgment of the Reader, but touching

The end of the seventh and last Book of Flauius Josephus; of the Wars of
the Jews.
THE FIRST BOOK
ISuppose (O thou worthiest amongst worthy men Epaphroditus) that I have
sufficiently testified unto them, who shall read those The history of the
antiquity contains the events of five thousand years
a History containing the occurrences of five thousand years. And for that I
see their are diverse, who (being too much addicted and seduced, by the
scandalous blasphemies and reports, which some of those who are Iewdly affected
toward us, have published against us) have misconceited The causes that moved
him to write this book
among the Grecians, have thought our ancestors worthy to be enrowled in
their writings: I have for these causes held it a part of my duty to write some
short treatise hereupon; both to reprove the evil intent and affected lying of
those our calumners, as also to correct their ignorance, by teaching those who
are desirous to know the truth, what the original of our motion is. For proof
whereof, I will reduce no other testimony then those, who from antiquity have
been judged worthy of credit among the Greeks, laying open before their
eyes, that they who have slanderously and falsely written against us, are
convicted by their own mouths: I will also enforce my self to express the
causes, wherein very few Grecians have made mention All things among the
Greeks are modern, but such things as were done among the Egyp tians,
Chaldies and Phaenicians, are of happy memory and venerable antiquity.
which is right and gather the same by the effects. For all that whatsoever is
set down by the Greeks is new, and of late memory, and has been brought to
execution, in a manner but yesterday: I mean the foundations of Cities, the
inventions of Arts, and the descriptions of Laws,

But among the Egyptians, Chaldeis and Phoenicians (for I presume not to
compare my countrymen with them) as they themselves confess, the memory of
their writings is most ancient and infallible. For all these nations dwell in
such countries as are not subject to the corruption of air; and have carefully
provided, that none of those things that have been done by them should sleep
in obscurity, but should be kept in memory in the public writings of the
learnedest Innumerable corruptions invaded Greece.
memory of things forepassed, is defaced. But they always who have
established new estates, have each of them supposed in their own behalf, that
whosoever was of theirs, he was the first of the world. Yet notwithstanding
they have had the knowledge of the nature of letters very late, and have
attained the same with very great difficulty. For they that speak of the
most ancient use of the same, do boast and glorify themselves, that they
have received the knowledge The Phoenicians and Cadmus the first inuentors of
letters.
thereof from the Phoenicians, and Cadmus. Yet notwithstanding there is not any
one of them that can show any record of that time, either in their temple, or
in their public registers: whereas after there arose a great doubt and
question, whether those letters were in use during their time, who sithence
have for the space of many years continued the siege before Troy. And in
sooth, Homers poesy, which Among the Greeks there is not any writing more
ancient then Homers poem.
as it is most manifest has bin in allowance and continuance since the time of
the siege of Troy: and yet it is reported, that he left no part of that his
poesy in writing, which was composed of diverse songs, and only sung by roate,
by which means it came to pass that there are so many contradictions in the
same. And as touching those who have undertaken to write histories among them,
I mean Cadmus the Milesian, and Acusilaus the Argiue; and after him if there
were any others, they were not alive, but very little time before the passage
of the Persians into Greece. Furthermore, they who among the Greeks were the
first that introduced Philosophy, and the Pherecydes the Svrian, Pythagoras,
and Thales, these all of them confess with one accord, that being instructed
by the Aegiptians and Chaldeis, they have published some few writings, which
are supposed to be the most ancient that are among the Greeks, and it is
hardly believed also that they were written by them. What reason therefore have
the Greeks to be so proud, as if there were none but themselves only, who knew
the affairs of antiquity, and could exactly express their truth and verity?
Or who cannot easily conjecture by their own writers themselves, that their
writings were only upon hearesay and supposition, and that their style was
only tied to their vain conjectures. Hence comes it to pass, that in their
books they cauell and reprove one another, and make no conscience to maintain
and write contradictions in one and the same things.

But it may be said, that I task my self to a fruitless labor, if I should
go about to inform those who are better experienced then my self; in how many
points Hellanicus differs from Acusilaus as touching the Genealogy: in how
many places Acusilaus has corrected Herodotus; or how Ephorus has approved
that Hellanicus was a liar in the greater part of that which he recites.
Ephorus has been reproved by Timaeus, and in general all them have taxed
Herodotus. Neither has Timaeus vouchsafed to accord with Antiochus, or
Philistus, or Callias, in the histories of Sic^ly. Neither have they who have
written the histories of Athens, or those who have entreated of the Argoliques,
followed others. What need I reckon up those who in particular have entreated
of Cities, or of succinct and short matters: whereas in the description of the
Persian war, and those exploits that were performed therein, those of
greatest authority are Thucidides is accused by some for a liar in diverse
places, notwithstanding that he Thucidides writ a most exact history of his
time. The causes of discord among the Jews.
seems to have described the history of his time most exactly. But the
causes of this discord are diverse, and it may be that they who shall narrowly
pry into them, shall find more. For mine own part those two which I shall
here set down in my opinion are of greatest weight. The first, and in my
judgment the chiefest is, that amongst the Greeks, from the beginning we have
not been industrious to keep public registers of such matters as happened in
any time or place, which has made them err, and given those a privilege to
lie, who afterward would look to write any thing of such matters as were
acted long since. Neither are the other Greeks only to be touched with this
negligence for not making account of such registers, but amongst the Athenians
also (who are reputed to be glorious for the antiquity of their country, and
who are exercised Draco, who lived but a little time before Pisistratus
tyranny. What need we speak of the Arcades, who vaunt themselves of their
antiquities? For they have learned the use of letters with very great
difficulty, and sometime after this: whereas therefore there was not any
writing published before that time which might instruct* those that would
learn or reprehend those that Another cause of their discord recorded by the
Grecian Historiographers.
ordinarily promise no less, but they labored to express how (...) they
were, and fixed their whole study thereon, as the only means whereby they hoped
to obtain reputation above the rest. Some of them therefore addicted their
styles to ^ables, othersome by flattering praises thought to currie favor with
kings and Cities. The rest enforced their studies to accusations by obtaining
the work of the writer thereof, under trust to get the more credit thereby. In
effect they have followed that coursd in composing their hitorie that was
^uerie way different The sign of a true history.
from the true nature thereof. (For the assured sign of a perfect and true
history is, whereas all

Seeing therefore that both the Egyptians and Babylonians long time since used
all diligence in writing, in so much as their priests were hereunto enjoined,
who did most curiously entreat of all such points: the same also did the
Chaldeis amongst the Babylonians; and the Phoenicians also (inhabiting amongst
the Greeks) used laws (both concerning private and public affairs) A
custom which the priests observed.
honors, but the party who claims the dignity of priesthood, must by many
witnesses prove his Genealogy, and that he is descended from priests. This
custom is not only of force in Iewrie, our own country, but wheresoever
else any of our nation inhabit, as in Egypt, and Babylon, and in any other
place, where continually the priests in their marriages have this respect not
to marry with any woman that is not of their own line, and they send unto
Jerusalem the name and petigree of the woman whom they have married, and all
testimony hereof which they can deduce from her ancestors. Now if wars
molest our nation (as often they have) in the time of Antiochus surnamed
Epiphanes, of Pompey the great, Quintilius Varo, and especially in this our
age, then those priests who survive make new Genealogies, and pedigrees out of
our holy writ for the foresaid women, that are not devoured by the fury of
war. For they come unto The priests amongst the Jews are every one registered
with the name of their fathers and this custom has continued 2000 years.
token of the priests integrity, that every priest during the revolution of
two thousand years are registered together with the names of their fathers, and
if any one do err or falsify any of the things beforesaid, he is then
interdicted from the altar, and from exercising any priestly function. So that
in the writings of such men all things must of necessity be true, and as they
ought to be, for that neither all men are permitted to write, nor yet any
dissonance and disagreement is found in their writings. For such things as past
in ancient times quite beyond the memory of men, were only written by our
Prophets, who had the knowledge thereof by inspiration from God himself, but
other things of latter time are only recorded by those, who lived in the age
wherein the things they writ of were done. The books amongst us containing the
histories of Two and twenty books of holy writ.
two and twenty books, to which books it is impiety to deny credit.

Five of these books were written by Moses, comprehending Genealogies, and the
beginning of mankind, and such notable events as happened even from the beginning
of the world until his death, which is little less then three thousand
years. After the death of Moses until the time wherein Artaxerxes lived, who
was king of the Persians, and son to Xerxes, the Prophets of our Artaxerxes
until our time have happened are also set down in writing, yet the books
wherein they are registered, do not deserve so much credit, as the former of
ancient times, for that there was no certain successor of Prophets in this
age. Moreover it is evident, that to the former works we give as great credit,
as to the things we our selves write, and notwithstanding they have been so
long written, yet in all that time no man durst presume, either to alter or to
blot out any thing therein contained. For all Jews even from their cradle do
believe these books to be sacred, holy, and divine, and therefore do give all
credit The Jews and Greeks are compared together.
would any loss in his goods, or fortunes, thereby to preserve all the
writings of their nation from perdition: and the reason hereof is, that every
one esteems the verity of their Histories to depend upon the will of the
writer. And this they do also of their most ancient Historiographers and not
without cause, for they every day see men of their own times, writing
Histories of matters past long before in former ages, wherein neither themselves
were present, neither yet Some others have written of the wars of the Jews.
them have diuulged Histories of such things as of late befell our nation, when
themselves never have been in the place where such matters past, as they did
write of war, nor have lived in any neighbor place where they might have
probable report how matters past, but only making a few centones or broken
news, they most impudently arrogate unto therr patcht, stuff the name of a
History.

I my self have composed a most true History of those wars, and of enerie
particular thing there done, as well I might, having been present in all those
affairs. For I was captain of the Joseph was present in all the wars of the
Jews.
Galileans amongst our nation, so long as any resistance could be made againg
the Romans, and then it so fell out, that I was taken by the Romans, and being
prisoner unto Titus and Vespasian, Titus, when he went to the siege of
Jerusalem. So that nothing could then pass whereof I had not notice. For
beholding the Roman army, I committed to writing all things with all possible
diligence. My self also did only manage all matters disclosed unto the Romans
by such as yielded themselves, for that I only did perfectly understand them.
Lastly, being at Rome, and having now leisure all buisines being past, I used
the help of some (for the purity of the Greek tongue) and so I published a
history of all that had Joseph did write the history of the Jews wars being
at Rome.
happened in the foresaid wars, which History of mine is so true, that I fear
not to call Vespasian and Titus Emperors in those wars to witness for them. I
first gave a copy of that book to them, afterward to many noble Romans, who
also were present in those wars, I sold also many Julius Archilaus, Herod
the honest, and the most worthy king Agrippa, who all do testify that my
history contains nothing but truth. Who would not have been silent, if in
any thing either for ignorance or flattery I had changed or omitted any
particular? yet notwithstanding all this, some ill disposed persons endeavor to
discredit my history, as though they were disputing pro and contra amongst
children in schools, being sometime on a sudden too for a feined accusation,
and otherwise to feine a slanderous and sudden detraction, never considering
that Joseph sold his books to many.
he who promises other men a true relation of matters past, must either be
privy unto them by his own knowledge, as having been present in the
affairs, or else have that which he speaks from other men's mouths by report
of them who know them both, which I have done. For I Some do derogate from
Joseph's history.
therein contained, and an eye witness of the rest; so that nothing was said
or done whereof I had not notice. How then can any man excuse them from
impudency and malice, who labor against me to prove my relation false? They
perhaps allege that they have read the commentary containing the Emperors
acts, yet for all this they were not present in any action, repugnant

Thus have I (as I thought it necessary) made a digression to show how they
are able to perform their word, who discrediting my history, promise to set
down truth in writing. I have also sufficiently (as I think) demonstrated,
that the registring of things is more ancient amongst other nations, then
amongst the Greeks. I will now first of all dispute against those, who with
all might and maine labor to prove our nation of no antiquity, for that (as
they say) no Greek Two things which Joseph entendeth.
writer makes any mention of it. This done, I will bring forth proof and
testimone of the antiquity hereof out of other writers, and so I will show
that their tongues are no slander, who seek to discredit our nation. First
therefore our nation, neither inhabiteth a country bordering upon the sea,
neither are we delighted in merchandise, nor for this cause wearied with
pilgrimages from place to place. But our cities are situate far from the sea
in a most fertile The Jews careto bring up their ^heildre^. The ancient Jews
had no need to traffic with the Graecians.
children, and to keep our country ^awes, and how to leave unto our
posterity the knowledge of piety, which work we think all our age ought to
be employed in. Beside all this before mentioned, we have a form of living,
different from all other nations, all which concurring together, we had no need
to traffic with the Greeks as the Egyptians, and the Phaenitians do, who
give themselves to bargaining and merchandise only for coueteousnes of money.
Neither were our ancestors delighted in thefts and robberies, nor did our
fathers make war upon any nation for desire of larger possessions,
notwithstanding our country was furnished with many thousands of strong
warlike men. Wherefore the Phaenicians sailing unto the Greeks to traffic
The Romans were lately known to the Greeks. Certain Historiographers report
Spain to be only one city.
Europe: for neither Thucidides nor Herodotus, nor any other of that time,
makes any mention of Rome, notwithstanding that so long since it was so
mighty, and made so great wars; yet at last with much ado the Greeks heard of
it. Yea their most curious writers, and namely Ephorus, were

Put case therefore that I denied the Greeks to be of any antiquity, and to
prove my assertion Arguments to prove the Jews of more antiquity, then the
Greeks.
whose records the Greeks cannot deny. For all Egyptians in general are our
enemies, and amongst the Phaenicians they especially of Tire; Which I cannot
justly say of the Chaldeis, who have been princes over our nation, and because
of their affinity and alliance with our countrymen have in their Chronicles
made mention of the Jews. Yet when I have proved what I now auerre, and
refelled the slanderous reports against us, I will then also show who amongst
the Greeks speak of us, that so the Greeks may also be deprived of this shift,
and refuge, to excuse their malicious lies falsely forged against our nation.
And first of all I will begin with the writings Manethon an Egyptian writer.
of the Egyptians, who as they well know, do nothing at all favor us.
Wherefore Manethon an Egyptian borne, skillful in the Greek tongue, as by his
works appear (for he writ in Greek) compiling a history of the customs and
religion of his forefathers, collected (as himself reports) out of the
Egyptians holy writings, often reprehendeth Herodotus, who being indeed
ignorant, did much help the Egyptians. This Manethon in his second book of
the Egyptian customs says thus (I will set down his own words, because I
use them for a witness.) Timaus, in whose reign God being angry with us,
contrary to all expectation, an obscure people taking courage, came from the
East, and pitching their Tents in our country conquered it by force, no man
resisting them, and committing our princes to bonds, did finally burn our
cities, and destroy the temples of our Gods, and behaved themselves most
cruelly against all the Inhabitants, killing many of them, and making slaves of
the rest with their wives and children: finally they chose a King amongst
themselves, who should be then of our Country, his name was Saltis, who
coming to Memphis, made both the higher and lower Province tributaries,
leaving garrisons in strong holds, and fortifying those places in Saltis
subdued the Egyptians.
the East: Likewise foreseeing that the Assyrians were more mighty then he,
and would invade his Country, he found out in this Province a City called
Saite fit for his purpose, being situate on Saltis came in Harvest time; to the
intent that he might both pay his soldiers, and be a terror unto other
people, and after he had reigned nineteen years he died.

After him succeeded another King called Baeon, who reigned four and forty
years, next to him Aphinas, who reigned thirty six year and seven months,
then Aphocis, who reigned threescore and one years, and then Iandas who
reigned fifty years and one month, after them all reigned Assis, nine and
forty years and two months, and these six were the first Kings amongst
them, ever destroying and warring upon the Egyptians, and laboring to
extinguish their race. This nation was called Hiscos, which signifies Kings
shepherds, for Hic in the sacred Kings shepherds.
Sos a shepherd or shepherds, according to the common speech, and Hicsos is a
compound word. Some say these people were Arabians, but in other coppies I find
that Hicsos, is not interpreted kings shepherds, but shepherds that were
captives, for Hic and Hac, also when it is pronounced, does in the Egyptian
tongue signify a captive, and this latter exposition seems to me to be the
truest, for it is more agreeable with the history. Wherefore Manathon
reports these foresaid kings and sheapheards to have ruled Egypt five
hundredth and eleven years, and after these the king of Thebes, and the king of
the residue of Egypt, uniting their forces together, invaded the said
sheapheards, and held on great and long wars against them, and that the said
sheapheards were overcome by the king Alisfragumthosis, Manathon reports
these shepherds environed round about with a huge wall, to the end that all
their whole provision might be fortified, and all their praises which they got,
defended. Moreover that Themosis son of the said Alisfragumthosis endeavored
by force to subdue them, and for this cause besieged them with four hundredth
and four score thousand armed men, and at last despairing to take them by
siege, he couenanted with them that they should safly depart out of Egypt
whether they would, and that they upon these conditions together with all their
families and goods and cattle departed out of Egypt into the wilderness, and so
into Syria, being in number two hundredth and forty thousand, and that fearing
the puissaunce of the Assirians who at that time reigned in Asia, they Manathon
in an other book of the Egyptians affairs says, that in the holy writings he
sends the foresaid shepherds called captives, wherein he says most true.
For our auncesters were wont to feed cattle, and so leading a pastoral life,
were called shepherds, neither are they unjustly called captives for our
forefather Joseph told the king of Egypt that he was a captive, and long time
after he called his brethren into Egypt by the kings command; but we will
hereafter examine this point more straightly, I will now cite the testimony of
the Egyptians concerning this point, and also relate the words of Manethon
touching the time when this befell, who says as follows.

After that the nation of shepherds were departed out of Egypt unto Jerusalem,
king Themosis Chebron succeeded him who reigned thirteen years, and after him
Amenophis twenty years and seven months, next, his sister Amesses one and
twenty years and nine months, then reigned Mephios twelve years and nine
months, and Mephamuthosis twenty five years and ten months, Thimosis nine
years and eight months, Amenophis thirty years and ten months, Orus
thirty six years and five months, after him his daughter Achencheres,
Rathotis nine years, Achencheres twelve years and five months, an other
Achencheres twelve years and three months, Armais four years and one
month, Armesis one year and four months, Armesesmiamus threescore and six
years and two months, Amenophis nineteen years and six months. Moreover
that Sethosis having made ready a huge army both of foot and horse, and also
a Navy at Sea, left Sethosis king of Egypt, made his brother Ar mais Governor
of his Country.
the government of Egypt unto his brother Armais, and permitted unto him all
other kingly authority, only forbidding him to wear a Diadem, and to
oppress the Queen, mother to his children, commanding him also to abstain
from the rest of the Kings concubines. And Sethosis himself went to Cyprus and
Phaenicia, against the Assirians and Medes, and subdued them all, partly by the
sword, partly by fear of his power and greatness, and being proud of all
Armais whom he left in Egypt, did without fear commit all that he forbad
him to do, for he oppressed the Queen violently, and daily lay with the rest
of the Kings concubines, and being thereto councelled by his friends, he put a
Crown upon his head and rebelled against his brother. Also that he who was
then ^hiefe of the Egyptians holy customs, sent letters unto Sethosis
containing all that had happened, and how Armais had rebelled against Where
upon Egypt took his name.
him, who returning to Pelusia, came and enjoyed again his own kingdom which
by his name was called Egypt: for Manethon writes that this Sethosis was named
Egyptus, and his brother Armais Danaus.

Thus far Manethon, out of whom it is evident by computation of the foresaid
times, that our nation was delivered out of Egypt, three hundred nintie and
three years before Danaus, and inhabited this Country of Iudaea so long,
before Danaus came unto Argos: notwithstanding, the Inhabitants of Argos boast
that their City is most ancient. Wherefore Manethon recounteth two things for
us out of the Egyptian letters, first that we came from another place to them,
Manethon shows the Jews coming into Egypt and their departure.
afterward went out of their Country again, and that so long ago, as it was
almost a thousand years before the Troyan wars. Touching those things which
Manethon professes himself, not to have gathered out of the writings of the
Egyptians, who did write out of certain tales and reports, I will hereafter
show, how they are alleged without any reason for them. For I will once
again leave these, and go to the testimony of the Phaenicians, which they
writ concerning Solomon built a ^emple in (...) 143. years and eight months,
before the Tyrians builded Carthage.
they are worthy of memory. Amongst these Records it is written, that king
Solomon built a Temple at Jerusalem, a hundred forty three years and eight
months, before the Tyrians erected Carthage. So they have registered the
building of our Temple, for Hiramus king of the Tyrians, was our kings Salomons
friend, obliged unto him for his fathers sake, who for this cause also of his
own liberality, gave Solomon a hundred and twenty talents of gold toward
the building of the Temple, and cut down the most goodly wood called Libanus,
which he bestowed upon him, to make the roof of the Temple withal: for which
bounty, Solomon gave him again many liberal gifts, and among the rest a
Country of Galilee named Zabulon: but Salomons wisdom The friendship of the
Tyrian king, and o^ king Solomon. Problemes of Hiramus and Solomon.
the other to be answered, and Solomon in his answers appeared most witty,
as also he did in many things else; and even until this day, many of their
Epistles sent one unto another, are kept amongst the Tyrians. And that I do
not fear the authority amongst the Tyrians, I will prove by the testimony of
Dius, a man who by common consent has faithfully written the Phaenician
History, wherein he writes as follows.

After the death of Abibalus, Hiramus his son reigned in his stead, who
increased the number of his Eastern Cities, and enlarged Jerusalem, he also
joined the Temple of Jupiter Olimpius, situate in an Island unto it, filling up
the water with earth, and adorned it with golden gifts. After this ascending
into Libanus, he cut down the wood to build Temples, and that the Solomon,
sent unto him certain riddles to be expounded, and he again the like unto
him, couenanting together, that he who could not tell the meaning of one an
others riddles, should pay unto the other a some of money, and that Hiramus
confessing he could not expound Salomons riddles, did pay unto him much money:
Lastly that one Abdemonus a Tyrian did expound the said riddles, and writ more
unto Solomon, which if Solomon could not interpret he should pay unto Hircanus
a sum of money, and this testimony Dius bears us concerning the foresaid The
testimony of Menander the Ephesian.
matter. But I will now recount the words of Menander an Ephesian, who has
registered the acts of al kings both at home and abroad, endeavoring to make a
true history out of the writings of enerie country. This man writing of the
Tyrian kings, and coming to Hiramus he says thus of him. Abibalus dying,
there succeeded in the kingdom his son Hiramus, who lived 34. years: The
Genealogy of king Hiramus.
this king with a rampire conjoined Eurichorus, and erected there a pillar of
gold in Jupiters temple, and went into the woods, and cut down the Cedars of
Libanus to make couerings for the temples, of which, pulling down the old, he
erected new and dedicated the temple of Hercules and Astartus, but that to
Hercules in the month of Peritius, and then the other to Astartus, when he
w^an army went against the Tyrians, who did not pay him tribute, whom when he
had subdued, he returned again.

At this time also lived Abdemonus a servant unto the king, who was wont to
expound the parables, which king Solomon of Jerusalem sent unto king Hiramus:
now how long it was from this kings time till the building of Carthage, we may
thus calculate. After the death of Hiramus, his son Beleastartus succeeded
him, who lived forty and three years, and reigned ^en: after him his son
Abdastartus, who lived twenty years, and reigned nine; but this king was
treacherously slain by the four sons of his nurse, the eldest of whom
reigned twelve years. Next whom Astartus the son of Beleastartus, who lived
forty and four years, and reigned twelve: after him ruled his brother
Astarimus, who lived fifty and four years, and sat in the kingdom nine,
then he was slain of his brother Phelletes, who reigned eight months, and
lived fifty years, and was slain by a priest of Astarta named Ithobalus, who
lived three score Badezorus, who lived forty five years, and reigned six
years, to him succeeded his son Mettinus who lived thirty two years, and
reigned nine. After him Pigmalion who lived fifty six years, and reigned
forty; in the seventh year of whose reign, his sister Dido builded a City
in Africa, and named Carthage built in Affricke by Dido Pigmalions sister.
it Carthage: so that from the time of king Hiramus unto the building of
Carthage, is by this computation a hundredth fifty five years, and two
months: and for as much as the temple of Jerusalem was built in the twelfth
year of Hiramus his reign, the computation of the time since that year
until the building of Carthage is 143. years, and 8. months. What need we
allege more, seeing this testimony of the Phoenicians? The truth is now
sufficiently made manifest, for our ancestors must needs have come into this
country we inhabit, before

I will now speak of that which the Chaldeis writ of us in their histories
which do much agree in all other matters with those of our nation. And first
let Berosus be my witness, who was a Berosus the Historiographer a Chaldean.
Chaldean borne, yet a man famous and known unto all that love learning, for
he in the Grecian tongue did write Astronomy, and the Chaldeis Philosophy.
Berosus imitating the most ancient histories writes of the diluge, and how
mankind was therein extinguished, and he in all things imitateth Moses. He
also speaks of the Arc wherein our forefather was preserved, and affirms
that it was carried unto the tops of the mountains in Armenia: after this he
prosecuteth the Genealogy of all that reigned from Noe, until Nabulassarus
king of the Babylonians Nabulassarus father to Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon and Chaldea. Nabuchodonosor conquered the rebels.
Nabuchodonosor into Egypt, and to our country with great power, who finding
them rebels, subdued them and burnt the temple at Jerusalem, and so departed,
carrying with him all our nation into Babylon: whereupon our City was desolate
seventy years until the reign of Cyrus king of the Persians. Moreover, he
affirms that the Babylonian kept Egypt, Syria, Phoenicia, and Arabia,
exacting more of his subjects then ever any king of Babylon or Chaldea had done
before his time. And the words of Berosus must needs be to this effect:
Nabulassarus his father hearing that his substitute in Egypt, Caelesyria, and
Phoenicia had rebelled, he himself not being able to take such pains,
committed these affairs unto his son Nabuchodonosor, and gave unto him a
part of his army, for that Nabuchodonosor fighting with the said Champion,
overthrew him, and subdued the country which of old belonged unto them, and
at the same time his father Nabulassarus fell sick in Babylon, and died, having
reigned twenty Nabuchodonosor succeeds in his fathers kingdom.
nine years. But Nabuchodonosor long after understanding his fathers death, he
disposed of Egypt and other provinces as he thought good, and taking the
captives of Iudaea, Phoenicia, and the Syrians that lived in Egypt, he
committed them to certain of his friends, to be brouglit Nabuchodonosor
builded a palace.
temples: and moreover near unto his fathers palace he builded another far
greater, and more

This he relates of the forementioned king, and many things more in his book
of the affairs of the Chaldeis, wherein he reprooueth the Greek writers, who
falsely affirm that Semiramis the Assyrian Queen built Babylon, and that they
falsely report those wonderful works Semiramis did not build Babylon.
about Babylon, to have been by her made and finished. We must needs think
that the Chaldean Berosus writ of the king of Babylon, who subverted both
Phoenicia and al Syria, with them also accords Philostratus in his history
in the siege of Tyria, and Magasthenes also in his fourth book of the affairs
of India, The king of Babylon excelled Hercules in strength and noble valorous
deeds.
where he labors to prove, that the said king excelled Hercules in strength
and valor, affirming that he subdued the greatest part of Affrique, and
Spain, and that the temple of Jerusalem was burnt by the Babylonians, and
again reedified by Cyrus; we will prove it out of Berosus, who in his third
book says as follows. Nabuchodonosor having begun the third wall, fell
sick and died, when he had reigned forty three years, and his son
Euelmaradochus succeeded him; who for his iniquity and lustful living, was
treacherously slain by his sisters husband named Niriglissoroor, after he had
reigned two years. He being dead, the traitor Niriglissoroor usurped
Laborosardochus, and he reigned nine months, who for that he seemed to be of
very corrupt manners, was slain by his own friends: after whose death they
who slew him consulting The walls of Babylon built of brick and bytumen.
together, did make one Nabonidus a Babylonian, king. At this time the walls of
brick and bytumen about the river of Babylon were built. In the eight year of
this kings reign, Cyrus coming with an army out of Persia, conquered all
Asia, and came with his forces against Babylon, but the king of Babylon having
notice of his coming, levied an army meeting him in the way, and joined
battle with him, but being overcome in the fight, he accompanied with a very
few of his men, was forced to fly into Borsippa. Cyrus now besieged Babylon,
and purposed to destroy the outward walls thereof, by reason that it was too
strong and too hard to win, and so he Cyrus expelled Nabod^us from Babylon.
returned to Borsippa to besiege Nabonidus the king of Babylon who was fled
thither. But Nabonidus not abiding the event of war, yielded himself unto
Cyrus, who dealt mercifully with him and gave him a territory in Carmania, but
expelled him out of Babylon, so Nabonidus led the rest of his life in that
province. This history agrees with ours, for in our writings we find that
Nabuchodonosor in the eighteenth year of his reign did destroy our temple,
and that it so remained threescore and ten years: Also that in the second
year of king Cyrus, the soundations thereof were laid again, and that it was
finished and reedified in the second year of king Darius his reign. This
done, I will also relate the histories of the Phoenicians, that we may abound
The testimony of the Phoenicians touching the Jews Antiquity.
with proof of that we say, for they make a computation of the years after
this manner. In the reign of king Ithobalus, Nabuchodonosor besieged Tire
thirteen years, after whom Baal reigned E^nibalus the son of Balachus
judged two months, Chelbis the son of Abdaeus ten months, Abbarus the high
priest three months, Myttonus and Gerastus sons of Abdilimos judged six
years, after whom Balatorus reigned one year, and after his death the Tyrians
called Merbalus from Babylon, and made him king, and he reigned four years,
and he then dying, they sent also to Babylon for his brother Iromus, who
reigned twenty years, in whose reign Cyrus obtained the Persian Empire, so
Nabuchodonozor besieged Tire.
Nabuchodonozor began to besiege Tire in the seventh year of his reign, and
in the fourteenth year of king Iromus his reign Cyrus was made Emperor of
Persia.

Wherefore both the Chaldeis and Tyrian Historiographers agree with us
concerning our The Chaldaeis and Tyrians agree with the Jews history.
temple. So that the antiquity of our nation above mentioned is now made
manifest, and without all controversy. And that which is already alleged to
this end, may be sufficient for them, who are not upon purpose contradictions.
It is therefore requisite (to satisfy them who give no credit to the writings
of other nations, and contend that the Grecian histories only are to be
believed) to bring many testimonies from the Greeks themselves, who have as
opportunity served, made mention of our nation and known it. Pythonis a
Samian borne both of great antiquity Hermippus writings and testimony of
Pythagoras.
notable things of him, and especially Hermippus a man most diligent in
searching of histories. This Hermippus recounteth in his first book of
Pythagoras, that the said Philosopher (having one of his familiar friends named
Calliphon dead, who was a Crotonian borne) reported this man's soul to be
perpetually with him, and that the said soul commanded him not to pass the
place where his ass fell, and that he should abstain from unclean water,
and that he should with all diligence eschew blasphemy, and then it follows,
this he did and said, imitating the opinions of the Jews and Grecians, and
applying them to himself. For it is certainly reported, that this man gathered
much of his philosophy out of the Jews laws. Our nation in Theophrastus does
witness in his book entitled de legibus: for he says that the Tyrian laws
forbid to swear by any strange sacrament, and Theophrastus* Corban the gift
of God. Herodotus the Halicarnassian touching the Jews circumcision.
amongst these strange and foreign sacraments, he reckons the oath called
Corban, which oathe is used only amongst the Jews, and in our language
signifies the gift of God. Herodotus of Halicarnassa knew our nation also, and
in a manner makes mention of it, for speaking of the Colchains; he says thus
in his second book. The Colchians, Egyptians, and Aethiopians only amongst
all other nations did use circumcision in the beginning, for the Phaenicians
and Syrians living in Palestina do confess themselves to have learned this
custom from the Egyptians, Herodotus therefore affirms the Syrians in
Palestina to use circumcision, and it is manifest that of all that inhabit
Chaerilus an ancient Poet his testimony of the Jews.
Palaestina, the Jews only use it, which he knowing writes so of them.
Chaerilus also an ancient Poet makes mention of our nation, and affirms
that our countrymen warred under Xerxes against the Greeks, and numbering them
of the countries that followed him, he lastly spoke thus of our nation. A
people strange followed this royal throng,
There language was th^vnknowne Ph^nician tongue:
In the hills of Solymus theirs dwelling was,
Near to a lake for greatness which did pass:
Their heads ware shau'd, and for the heads attire;
They ware an hors-skin dried at the fire.


It is evident as I think that he speaks of the Jews, for the mountains of
Solimus are in our country, and that lake also called Asphaltites, which is
the greatest and vastest of all lakes that are in Syria, and thus Chaerilus
makes inention of us. And that the Jews were not known Asphaltites the lake.
only to the Greeks, but also admired of them, it is easy to prove not out of
the obscurest writers* but by the testimony of their wisest Philosophers: For
Clearchus disciple unto Aristotle, and the de somno, says that his master
Aristotle spoke thus of a certain* ^ew, and reporting Aristotle's words he
says thus: It were too tedious The testimony of Clearchus disciple of
Aristotle touching the Jews
to recount all things else which he alleges, but I will set down that only
that may cause the man to be admired. Hyperochides* answered that they all were
very desirous to hear it, then quoth Clearchus according to Aristotle's
precepts in his Rhethoricke I will first recount of what nation the man was
least I seem to oppose my self to him set down the foresaid precept, do
Hyperochides if so you please, then he said, this man before mentioned was by
nation a Jew (borne in Coelesyria) one of the sect of the Indian Philosophers,
and they are called (as I here reported) amongst the Indians Calani and
amongst the Syrians, Jews, taking their name from the place where they
inhabit, called Jury; the name of their city is hard to pronounce, for they
call it Jerusalem. This man entertained many strangers, and he came from out
of the higher country down unto the sea coast, and he was very cloquent and
of great courage. We at that time lived in Asia: when this divine man came unto
the place where we were, and began to confer with us, and with other
Philosophers, making trial of their knowledge, and for that many learned men
were assembled about him, he at last for this cause more willingly imparted
some of his knowledge unto them. Thus far Aristotle in Clearchus: recounting
moreover at Haecateus Abderita a Philosopher, and one brought up with king
Alexander, and dwelling with Ptolomaeus of Lagus, did not only briefly make
mention of us, but also writ a whole book of our nation the Jews, out of the
which I will briefly note some few points that occur, but first I will show of
what antiquity he is. For he records the time when Ptolomaeus Hecataeus
Abderita brought up with king Alexander.
near unto Gaza faught with Demetrius, which happened the eleventh year after
Alexanders death in the hundredth and seventeenth Olympiade, as Castor writes,
who speaking of this Olympiade says: that in this time Ptolemaeus Lagus
overcame Demetrius the son of Antigonus Demetrius was called Polior^etes, and
all men confess that Alexander died in the hundredth and fourteenth Olympiade,
so that it is evident that at that time wherein Alexander lived, our nation
flourished. And Hecataeus says that after that battle fought at Gaza,
Ptolomaeus was made Lord of the places bordering about Syria, and that many men
hearing of the clemency of Ptolomaeus, followed him into Egypt, and conuersed
with him, amongst the which one was called Ezechias the Jews high priest, a
man about threescore and A thousand and five hundredth priests receive the Jews
tenths.
six years old, and of chiefest notice and dignity of all his nation, and
most prudent and ^loque^t, one also who in all affairs had more experience
then any man else, he likewise reports that the number of the Jews priests
who receive their tenths, and rule al in general is a thousand and five hundred
or there about, and again making mention of the same Ezechias, he says, this
man

After this Hecataeus shows what manner of people we are, and how religious in
our laws, and how that we rather will sustain all torments and death it self
then violate them in any thing, and that we account it a worthy thing so to do:
adding moreover that being much hated of our neighbors and having suffered all
contumelies both at the hands of the Persian kings, and their officers, yet
that we could not be forced to change our opinions, but that we are
continually exercised to to give a reason thereof. He also records an example
of our constant minds, for Alexander (quoth he) being at Babylon, and purposing
to reedifie the temple of Bell, he commanded The Jews constancy against
Alexander. The largnes of Jury.
all his soldiers to carry timber to the building hereof, and the Jews only
disobeyed his command, for the which they endured many stripes and torments,
till such time as the king freed them from it: and they (quoth he) returning to
their own country, destroyed all the temples and altars that they found
there, and some of them were by the officers therefore punished, other escaped
free, adding that we may justly be admired for these things, and that our
nation is exceeding populous, likewise that many of us were carried captives
into Babylon, and there served the Perfians. Moreover that many more were
dispersed into Egypt after Alexanders death, Fifty stounds are almost six
German miles.
for a tumult begun in Syria: He also records the greatness of our country,
and the fertility thereof; they inhabit (quoth he) a country that has
almost thirty hundredth thousand acres of most fertile ground; for Jury is of
this largeness, and that in time past we inhabited a large and very Altar made
of vnhewen stones joined together, and it is twenty cubits square every way,
and The Priests do dwell in the Temple and drink no wine.
this sort. Therein inhabit Priests both night and day, celebrating certain
purifications, and they drink no wine in the Temple.

Moreover, he showed how our nation warred under Alexanders successors, and he
reports that which he heard of a certain Jew in the army, and I will set
down the Authors own words. As I went (quoth he) to the red Sea, a certain
Jew one of the horsemen that conducted us, named Mosollamus, who was a
courageous man, and one who excelled all archers else both Greeks and other
nations; This Jew (every one hasting on forward of his journey, and being
willed by Are ye so mad, as to think that this bird not having the foresight
to preserve her self from this death, is able to direct us in the success of
our journey? Had this bird foreknowne future events, she would have eschewed
this place for dread, that Mosollamus a Jew should have stricken her with But
we will now leave the testimony of Hecataeus, for every one that list may
read his book, and there understand this more at large. I will not omit the
testimony of Agatarchides, Agatarchides his testimony of the Jews.
a man of no evil in his own opinion, yet indeed one who has used detraction
to our own nation. This man speaking of Stratonice, how leaving her husband
Demetrius, she came into Syria, and how Seleucus would not marry her as she
hoped, (who having an army at Babylon warred against Antioch, and had taken
the City) and that she fled into Seleucia, where as she might have made a
more speedy escape by water, but that she was forwarned in a sleep so to do,
and that she was there taken and died, etc. Agatarchides having used this
Preface, and inueighed against Stratonices superstition, he uses an example of
our nation in this manner. The people The Jews Sabbath.
that are called Jews inhabit a most strong City, which they call Jerusalem,
these people are Ptolomaeus Lagus entered it with many people and a great
army: who greatly tyrannized over them, and so they found by experience that
the solemnity appointed by their law was prejudicial unto them: such like
Churches as this, did teach them and all nations else to fly unto dreams,
which their law teaches, never considering that humane policy cannot
prevail against that which must necessarily happen. Agatarchides thought this
which he reports of us to be ridiculous, but they who weigh it with
indifferency shall perceive, that it is great commendation to our nation, who
rather suffer their Country

I think I am thus able to show, that many writers omitted to make mention of
our nation, not for that they knew us not, but for envy. For Jerome who writ a
book of succession, in the Why certain writers omit to speak of the Jews.
same time that Hecataeus lived, who was a friend unto King Antigonus, and
being president of Syria, never mentions us in all his History;
notwithstanding he was brought up almost in our Country. But Haecataeus writ a
book of us; so different are the minds of men, for one of them thought our
nation worthy to be diligently recorded; the other through malice was hindered
from speaking the truth: yet the Histories of the Chaldies, Egyptians, and
Phaenicians, may suffice to prove our antiquity, together with the Greek
writers; for besides those before mentioned, Theophrastus also, Theodotus,
Manaseas, Ariphanes, Hermogenes, Euemeus, Conon, Zopyrion, Demetrius Phalereus,
Philon the elder, and Eupolemus did not much err from the truth, and therefore
reason it is that they should be borne with al^ for they were not so skilful as
to search our writings with so much curiosity. Being come thus far it
rests, that I now present one point more, The last part, against certain
detractions and ^aunders.
slanderous reports of diverse, concerning our nation, to be false and void of
truth, and I will use the testimony of those writers, who record, that the
lying Historiographers at such time as they committed to writing the foresaid
detractions, did also even against themselves register such like slanders, as
they did against us. And I doubt not, but that all those who are conversant in
Histories can testify, that the like has been done by most writers for
certain private hatred, or such like respects. For some of the Gentiles have
attempted to deface the honor and reputation of the most renowned Cities, and
to defame the manners of their Inhabitants. Thus did Theopompus to Athens, and
Polycrates to Lacedaemon; and the Author that writ Tripoliticum (for it was not
Theopompus as some suppose) used the City of Thebes very hardly, and Timaeus
in his Histories of the foresaid places does many times detract both them and
others. And this they do, The cause of malice between the Egyptians and Jews.
that their fond babbling may make them famous, and so indeed it does amongst
fools, that are known to have no sound judgment, but wise men will condemn
their malice. To be short, this is the cause of so many slanderous reports
forged against our nation: Some to gratify the Egyptians have attempted to
deprive the truth, and so have neither reported the verity concerning our
ancestors coming into Egypt, nor touching their departure from thence, and
they have had many causes of malice and envy urging them hereto. And chiefly
for that our progenitors in their country waxed mighty, and so departing to
their own Country, were made happy and fortunate. Secondly, the diversity
of our two religions, made great discord The Egyptians Idolatry.
God excels unreasonable creatures, for they commonly worship such brute
beasts for gods, and every one worshipeth diverse kinds, vain and foolish
men, who from the beginning have been accustomed to such sottish opinions, as
would not permit them to imitate us in our divine religion, and conformable to
reason: and yet seeing many favor and follow our religion, they were hereby
incited to such hatred, that to derogate from us, they feared not to falsify
their own ancient Records, not considering that in so doing, they were led
through a blind passion, to wit, against themselves. Moreover, I will prove all
I have now spoken, to be true by one man's words, whom a little before (being a
famous Historiographer) we have produced as a witness of our antiquity.

Manethon therefore, who professes himself to have gathered the Egyptian
History out of their holy writings, having by way of a Preface, recounted how
our predecessors came into Egypt Manethon an Egyption Historiographer.
with many thousands, and there conquered the Inhabitants, he afterward
confesses that loosing all their possessions in Egypt, they got that Country
which is now called Iewrie, and in it builded a City named Jerusalem, and a
Temple; and thus far he imitateth ancient writers. And then usurping to
himself authority to lie, protesting that he will in^ert into his History,
^aine reports diuulged amongst the common people, he reports things of the
Jews all together incredible, intending to mix with our nation the Lepers of
the Egyptians, and other sick people of other Countries, who (as he says)
being abominable to the Egyptians, made an Manethons fabulous reports of the
Egyptian Lepers.
escape from thence; affirming also that they had a King named Amenophis, which
is a fained name, Themusis reigned when they departed out of Egypt, from whom
the time that other kings did reign, until the two brethren Seth^ and
Hermeus, accomplisheth the term of three hundred fourscore and thirteen
years. He also says, that the eldest of these two Sethon, was called
Egyptus, and the other Herm^as was called Danaus, whom his brother Sethon
expelled, and afterward reigned fifty ^ne years, and after him Rampses his
eldest son, reigned threescore and six years. Having therefore confessed our
ancestors to have departed out of Egypt so many years be^e, now lastly he
Amenophis was their king, who was a contemplator of the gods, as Orus their
king before him was, and that one Amenophis a Priest the so^e of Papius, did in
all things most excellently accomplish his desire, which Priest seemed to
participate of some ^ne nature, for he excelled in wisdom, and could foretell
things to come, and that he gave the king his surname, that he might also see
the gods, if so be he would (...) to cleanse the country from Lepers, and other
unclean people. Whereat the king rejoicing, gathered together all the impotent
people Amenophis greatly feared, least the indignation of the gods would fall
upon the king and himself (who had persuaded and councelled the king to do
violence unto the foresaid Lepars) likewise that he said, that because he used
the help of unclean persons, they should obtain dominion over Aegyp^ for
thirteen years; yet durst he not presume to signify this unto the king, but
he killed himself, leaving this written in a book where men might find it:
and the king having notice hereof, fell into great sorrow and heaviness. This
done, he speaks as follows. So the king being requested for their
quietness and defense to assign them a City Osarsiphus, and bound themselves
with an oath to obey him in all Osarsiphus capt^ine of Aua^is.
things, and he presently made a law that they should neither worship the gods
of the Egyptians, nor that they should abstain from those beasts which the
Egyptians count holy, and that they should marry with none but such as they
judged to be their friends.

Having ordained this and many things else contrary to the Egyptians religion,
he commanded them wi^h great labor to enuiron their City with a wall, and to
make preparation to war against king Amenophis, and he himself making choice
of some priests and a few other unclean Themusis, The war of the banished
against the Egyptians.
declaring unto them their own and their fellows injuries, and requesting
them to levy an army to fight with them against Egypt, promising them free
entrance into Auaris the country, where their forefathers inhabited, and that
he would furnish them with all necessaries, telling them that they should now
fight in so happy a time, as that without all doubt they might conquer the
country. The shepherds hereat rejoicing, all of them armed themselves to the
number of two hundred thousand, and leaving their City they came to Auaris.
But Amenophis king of Egypt hearing of their invasion, and remembering what
Amenophis the son of the priest Papius had left in writing, was in great
fear, and presently assembling together the people of Egypt, and consulting
with the princes of his country, he sent all holy beasts, and all that
Sethones (who also by his father Rampses was called Ramesses) being but five
years old unto the custody of a friend of his, and then accompanied with
three hundred fighting men he met his enemies, but would not fight with them,
fearing least he should fight against the pleasure of the gods; and so he
retired himself unto Memphis, and taking Apis and the rest of the Egyptian
gods, he with all his troops of Egyptians took ship, and fled into The
Egyptian king fled into Aethiopia, and was by the Ethiopian king courteously
entertained.
Aethiopia. For the king of Aethiopia upon courtesy obeyed him, and for this
cause he entertained him and his followers, and provided all necessaries for
them, for that fatal thirteen years banishment, and this was done in
Aethiopia. In the mean time the inhabitants of Jerusalem came down into the
country with the unclean Egyptians, and did so tyrannize over the
inhabitants, Osarsiphus by name, made laws for them, and statutes to govern
them. This priest was called Osarsiphus, taking his name from the Osarsiphus
was afterward called Moses.
God of Heliopolis called Osiris, who being now thus conversant with this
people, changed his name and called himself Moses.

Thus the Egyptians report of the Jews and many things else, which for
brevity sake I omit. Manethon furthermore writes, that afterward Amenophis
the king came with a great power out Rampses with him, accompanied with a great
army, and that ioining battle with the shepherds and polluted persons, he
gave them an overthrow, and pursued them unto the borders of Syria. And this is
Manethons report: but for as much as he writes old wives Manethons lies are
confuted.
tales, dotages, and lies, I will by manifest reason convince him; first
distinguishing that whereof I am to speak hereafter. He of his own accord
grants and confesses, that our ancestors at first were not Egyptians, but
strangers, that came thither from another place and conquered Moses who indeed
was our conducter out of Egypt, and lived many ages before, was no Lepar. He
therefore first of all sets down a ridiculous cause of this forementioned
faction, which was, that king Amenophis was desirous to see the gods. Which
gods trow ye? he could already see the Ox, the Goat, the Crocodile and the
Munkey, but the God of heaven how could he see? And why had Amenophis this
desire? forsooth because a certain king one of his predecessors had seen
them, he therefore knowing by him what things they were, and how he came to the
sight of them, needed no new device to accomplish his desire: but perhaps the
foresaid prophet was a man of great wisdom, by whom the king had confidence
to attain his desire: but if so he had been, how

The king (quoth he) hearing this, and stricken with fear did not for all this
expel those Lepars Manethons words repeated.
he ought to have exiled, but at their request gave them (as he says) a City
wherein before time the shepherds did inhabit called Auaris, whereinto they
being come, they made a priest of Heliopolis their prince, who devised laws
for them, commanding them neither to adore the gods nor to abstain from
offering violence to such beasts, as amongst the Egyptians are Amenophis came
against them with three hundredth thousand, and yet for that he would not strive
againct the decree of the gods, he fled into Aethiopia, and carried with him
Apis and other holy beasts, and that the inhabitants of Jerusalem coming down
invaded the land, fired the towns and Cities, slew their nobles, used all sort
of cruelty possible, and that the priests name who made laws and statutes for
them to live under, Osarsiphus by name, deriuing the same from Osiris the god
of Heliopolis, and that this man changing his name was afterward called Moses.
Moreover, that Amenophis having lived in banishment thirty years, came with a
strong power out of Aethiopia, and fighting with the shepherds and polluted,
he slew many of them, and put the rest to flight, pursuing them unto the
borders of Syria. Manethon remembers not, that here again he tells a very
unskillful tale, for although the Lepars and impotent persons were offended
with the king, for appointing them to hew stones; yet is it to be thought that
they receiving their own desire at the kings hands, to wit, a City to dwell
in, that now they again became the kings welwillers. Supposing also their
hatred still continued toward him, they rather should have attempted revenge
by treason against him, then toward all their nation wherein

We have therefore cause to thank Manethon, in that he clears us, and
affirms his own countrymen (yea a priest) to be authors of this impiety,
and that by oath bound themselves so A con^utation of Manethons words alleged.
to do. But is it not against all reason that neither any of their countrymen
nor kinsmen rebelled Manethon himself says, he met them at Pelusia with three
hundredth thousand men. And this they that went to war well knew. But what
reason had they to conjecture that the kings mind would change and he fly?
Then he says the army of Jerusalem getting the granaries of Egypt into their
hands, did much harm: and this he vpbraideth them withal, as who should say
they were not requested to come as enemies? or as though these matters be to be
cast in soldiers teethes, that are strangers and sent for, from out of
another country, when as the Egyptians themselves had before their coming
done the like, and bound themselves by an oath to perform the same. But short
time after Amenophis fought with his enemies and got the victory of them, and
put them to flight, and pursued them unto the borders of Syria. As though that
Egypt were a contrie The Epiloge that the Iewet came not of the Egyptians.
of Jerusalem having now by the laws of arms possessed that, and knowing
Amenophis to be yet alive, would not have fortified that part of the country,
where by he might have invaded them, having all opportunity to do it? or at
least they would have gotten more help from one place or another. Amenophis as
he says pursued them even unto Syria through the sandy and dry places, as
though it were easy for an army that had nothing else to do, but to march on
forward to pass leasurely thorough them. To conclude therefore, our nation,
neither came of the Egyptians as Manethon confesses, neither was it mingled
with the deseased of that country, for it is probable that many of those sick
people perished in the stone works, many in the great fight and battle; and
the rest of them in the flight. It now remains that I refute that Moses.

The Egyptians do all agree that this man was a divine person and one to be
admired, but they commit great impiety in laboring to challenge him for their
contriman, saying that he was a An answer unto Manethous slanders touching
Moses.
a priest of Heliopolis banished with the rest for leprosy. For he is recorded
to have lived five hundredth and eighteen years before this time, and to have
guided our ancestors out of Egypt into that country wherein we now inhabit,
and his own words testify his body to have been clean from that disease of
leprosy, for he commands all lepers to be expelled out of the Moses was not
a leper.
towns and villages, and to live a part by themselves, also to be clothed in
some torn garment, and that whosoever touches them or comes under the same
roof with the^, is to be accounted an unclean person. And if so be a leper
happen to be cured of that disease, he appointed certain Osarsiph, which
nothing agrees with the transmutation of Moses was saved from the water. For,
Moy in the Hebrew tongue signifies Water. But I have now sufficiently as I
think declared how Manethon Moses took his name of Moy which in the Egyptian
tongue signifies water.
whilst he followed the ancient writers, did not much err, but when he fell
to old wives tales, he then either absurdly feined them of his own head, or
else for hatred he bare to our nation, believed them. I now think it not
amiss to examine alittle the words of Chaeremon, who professing himself to
write the Egyptian history, makes mention of the sameking Amenophis
Rhamesses as Manethon does, and he reports that Isis appeared to Amenophis in
Against Chaeremon the historiographer
his sleep, checking him for that her temple was destroyed, and that
Phiritiphantes a holy scribe told the king, that if he would expel all
polluted and unclean persons our of Egypt, that then he should not be any
more terrified with these night visions. Moreover that hereupon he making
search for all sick and diseased persons, he banished them out of his land, to
the number of two hundredth and fifty thousand, and that their captains were
called Moses and Joseph holy scribes, also that these Egyptian names were so
that Moses was named Tisithes, and Joseph Petesephus, and that they came unto
Pelusium where they found three hundredth and fourscore thousand left thereby
Amenophis, whom he would not permit to come into Egypt, also that they al
entering into a league together suddenly invaded Egypt, and Amenophis not
biding the brunt fled into Messenes, who afterward drove the Jews into Syria,
being in number Messenes son of Amenophis.
200000. and this done he recalled his father Amenophis out of Aethiopia. And
thus Chaeremon says.

But I imagine that which I have already said, to be sufficient to declare the
vanity of both these two men. For if that which they report were true, it were
impossible that they should so much differ, but they labor to devise lies, and
write not any thing agreeable to other men's writings. Manethons history, and
Chaeremons compared together.
For Manethon faineth that the cause of the banishment of the lepers was the
kings desire to see the Gods, and Chaeremon says that it was for that Isis
after appeared unto him in his sleep. Manethon also says that Amenophis gave
the king that council so to cleanse the country, and Chaeremon says that he
that councelled the king was called Phiriphantes: the number also of lepers
Manethon says they were almost fourscore hundredth, Chaeremon says two
hundredth and fifty thousand. Moreover Manethon writes how that these lepers
were first sent to a place to hew stones, and afterward came to Auaris to
dwell, and that they having already begun wars in Egypt, that then they sent
for help from Jerusalem. And Chaeremon says that they having left Egypt
found at Pelusia two hundredth and fourscore thousand men, whom Amenophis had
kept there, with whom they joining again, returned and invaded Aeigypt, and
then Amenophis fled into Aethiopia, and which is worth the noting, he sets
not down what countrymen or to what purpose this great army was, whether
Egyptians or strangers, neither does he show any reason why the king would
not carry them into Egypt. Moreover Chaeremon feineth a dream of the lepers
and Isis, and reports that Joseph Moses was expelled, whereas Joseph lived
four ages before Moses, every age containing at least a hundredth and seventy
years. Rhamesses also Amenophis son according to Manethons The difference
between Manethons and Chaeremons history.
history, being a young man fled into Aethiopia, and was banished with his
father, and afterward assisted him in the wars: whereas Chaeremon reports
that he was borne in a cave after his fathers departure, and that he getting
the victory did drive the Jews into Syria who were in number two thousand. O
felicity in lying, for he neither told what nation those three hundred and
fourscore thousand was, nor yet how a hundred and fourscore thousand of them
perished, neither were they slain in the fight, or fled unto Rhamesses, and
which it is most to be admired, one cannot gather out of his words whom he
calls Jews, or whether he attribute this name unto the two hundredth and
fifty thousand lepers, or unto the three hundredth and fourscore thou

But it is folly to oppose my self against them who have sufficienly
contradicted themselves, for had other men controlled their writings they had
been the more to be borne withal. I will add Lysimachus unto the two former,
who has the same lie that they have, yet far more absurd Lysimachus is
reproved for lying.
a fiction then theirs. For he says that at such time as Bocchoris reigned in
Egypt, the people of the Jews being scabbed and infected with leprosy, fled
into the temples to beg maintenance, and that so many men were with this
disease infected, that a dearth and scarcity fell upon Egypt. Likewise that
king Bocchoris went unto Ammon to know of the Oracle what caused the death, and
that answer was made that if he would expel all lepers and unclean persons
According to Lysimachus, ye ^abbed and leprous Jews were to be conveyed into
the wilderness, and cast into the sea.
from out of the temples into the desert, that then the famine would cease, and
that he should drown these lepers, as if the sun disdained that they should
live, and that then he should purify Bocchoris having this answer from the
Oracle, he called together, the Priests and sacrificers, and having gathered
lepers and unclean people together, he delivered them to soldiers to be
conducted into the desert, and that then they should be lapt in lead and cast
into the sea. Moreover they being drowned, other diseased people there gathered
together, and were carried into the wilderness to Moses councelled them to
go all one way, as thick together as they could, till such time as they came
to some place inhabited, and that he then commanded them never hereafter to be
friendly to any man, but always rather to give bad council then good, and to
destroy all Temples, and Altars of the gods they came by, unto which council
they all agreeing, iournyed together through the wilderness, and after much
sorrow came to places inhabited: Using men by whom they past injuriously,
fiting Temples and robbing them: at last in this manner, they came unto that
place which they now call Iudaea, and there building a City, they began to
When the Jews got Iudaea and built Jerusalem


This fellow found not that king, which the two former speak of, but he
joined a more new name, and leaving the dream and the Prophet, he goes to
Ammon, to know an answer of the old, touching the scabbed and lepers, for he
says, that a multitude was gathered together at the Temples, but he leaves
it uncertain, whether the Jews only were infected with this disease, for he
says the people of the Jews, which people whether were they strangers or
those that were borne in that Country? Why do thou call the^ Jews when they
were Egyptians? If they were Lysimus his opinion confuted.
strangers why do thou not tell of whence they were? Or how came it to pass
that the King having drowned so many of them in the Sea, and left the rest in
the wilderness, that still so many Nothing is to be said against an impudent
li^.
Jerusalem signifies otherwise in our language, then it does in the Greek.
And therefore what should I stand to inueigh against a lie so impudently told?
But my book has now been long enough, making a new beginning and therefore I
will endeavor to finish the residue of this work.

THE SECOND BOOK
WRITTEN BY FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS AGAINST APION OF ALEXANDRIA, AND DEDICATED TO
EPAPHRODITVS.
THrice Honored and beloved Epaphroditus, I have in my former books so far
forth as I was warranted by truth, both protested and approved the Antiquity
of our nation, out of the writings of the Phaenicians, Chaldies and Egiptians:
and for the further confirmation thereof, I have produced the testimony of
diverse Greek Authors. Furthermore I have opposed my self against Manethon and
Cheremon, and diverse others. At this time likewise I will undertake to
contradict all the rest of those writers, that have published any thing against
us; for in respect of Apion, who pretends himself to be learned, I grow
half Apion wrote something very coldly.
suspicious, whether it be a matter answerable to my discretion and judgment,
to vouchsafe him any reply at all. For as touching the one part of that which
he has written, it seems to be one and the same, with that which the rest
have written, and as touching the other, it is very cold and barren. The
greater part thereof is farced with follies and detractions, and betrayeth his
ignorance, approving him to be a man both loose in conditions, and turbulent
in his life. And for as much as diverse men are so disfurnished of judgment,
that they rather suffer themselves to be won by these follies, then to be
wearied and wrought by that which is written with better consideration, vainly
doting on detractions, and growing discontent to give ear to other men's well
deserved praises. I have thought it necessary to examine such a man's labors,
the rather, for that he has written against us, as if he intended to accuse us
before a Tribunal, and convict us by

Truly it is no easy matter to lay open the ambiguous and doubtful speeches
which Apion uses, neither to understand perfectly what he intends to
express. But like a man that is grievously distracted and confused in his
foolish lying, he grows almost to that point, to recapitulate that, which
has been heretofore set out, and serched for, as touching the departure of our
forefathers out of Egypt: and afterward he falls to accuse the Jews that
inhabited Alexandria, and thirdly, he intermixeth his blameful blasphemies,
against the ceremonies accustomed in our temple and depraueth our laws and
ordinances likewise. Now, that our predecessors have not Apion concerning Moses
and the Jews.
sufficiently approved the same, but also produced far more then was requisite.
I will therefore briefly report and repeat that which Apion alleges: For in the
third book of his Egyptian history, he writ thus. Moses as I have heard it
spoken by the most ancient Egyptians was borne at Heliopolis, who being
instructed in the fashions of his Country, converted such prayers which were
wont to be said in open places and abroad, and caused them to be practiced and
accustomed, in private Cloisters such as were within the City, and ordained
that in praying they should turn themselves toward the rising Sun. For such
is the situation of the City Heliopolis, and instead of Obelisques or
Pyramides, he erected certain pillars, under which there were certain
engraven See here what eloquence this learned man used.

Now as touching this lie of his, their need no words to refute the same, since
it is clearly refelled by the effects. For when Moses built that first
tabernacle in honor of God, he had no such intent, nor fashioned any such
form, neither ordained his successors to do the like: and after this, when
Apions fiction concerning the temple, and Moses is (...).
Solomon builded the temple in Jerusalem, he never thought of any such
curiosity as Apion forgeth. He says that he has been informed by those of
antiquity, that Moses was a Heliopolitan, for you must understand that Apion
himself was young, and believed the relation of the aged sort of his
acquaintance which conuersed familiarly with him: yet cannot this learned
Gramarian justify where Homer was borne, neither from what country Pythagoras
came, although in respect, they lived but yesterday: and as touching Moses who
lived so many ages, and so great a number of years before them, he decideth
the matter so easily, and gives credit to the reports of antiquity so
slightly, that it appears most manifestly that he is but a liar. As touching
the time wherein he says that Moses led away the blind, Leprous, and lame,
this diligent The computatio^ of the time is different among the
Historiographer^*
author accords very willingly with that which he himself has said. For
Minethon says, Tethmosis, three hundredth ninety six years before Danaus fled
out of Greece. Lisimachus, he says, that this thing happened during king
Bocchoris time, that is to say, one thousand and seven hundredth years; before
that time Molon also and some others have alleged their opinions. But Apion
who pretends to be a man of more credit then the rest, has precisely and
exactly set down the time, auerring that our departure was about the seuent^*
Olimpiade: nay more in the first year thereof, wherein as he says Carthage
was builded by the Phoenicians. Now has he only and purposely made mention of
Carthage in this place, supposing it to be an infallible argument of the truth
of his allegation; yet conceiteth he not that he makes a rod for his own
tail, and draws an argument against himself, by which himself may be
convinced. For if we may give credit to the Phoenician Hiram lived more then
one hundredth and fifty years before the foundations of Carthage. The truth
whereof I The friendship between Hiram and Solomon, whereof we made mention in
the first book against Apion in the beginning.
have heretofore approved out of the records of the Phoenicians, who report
that Hyr^m was Salomons friend, who builded the temple in Jerusalem, and that
he furnished him with much timber and other matter toward the finishing of that
building. Now Solomon builded the temple six hundredth and twelve years after
the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt: and after he had inconsiderately
reckened the number of those which were driven out of Egypt in like manner as
Lysimachus had done, namely of one hundred and ten thousand men, he yields a
most admirable reason, and such as may be easily believed from whence he
pretends that the name of Sabath was derived. For (says he) after they had
travailed for the space of six days, there The Egyptians do call a disease
about the privy parts, Sabatosis.
Sabatosis an Ulcer that grows about the groine.

Who can otherwise choose but laugh at this fopperie? or contrariwise, who would
not hate such an impudent custom in writing and coining of lies? For he
reports as far as a man may conjecture by his writings, that all the Jews
who were to the number of one hundred and ten thousand persons, had these
Ulcers in their secrets. Now had all of them been haulte, lame, blind, and
sickely, as Apion reports, they could not have iournied one day: but since
they travailed through the desert and vanquished all armies that resisted them,
it is no likely matter that all of them were sick of a disease in their privy
parts every seventh day, neither Apion says, that they arrived in Iudaea
within the space of six days.

Again he writes that Moses ascending up the mount Sinai, which is betwixt
Arabia and Apions fiction of the six days journey is confuted.
Egypt, hid himself in that place for the space of forty days, and
descending from thence, gave laws unto the Jews. But how I pray you was it
possible for him to remain forty days in a desert without water? or how
could all the Jews within six days travel from Egypt into Iewrie? As for
his Grammatical divination of the word Sabbath it sauoureth too much of
impudency, Sabbo and Sabatum do greatly differ, for Sabatum in the Jews
language, signifies, rest from work; but Sabbo in the Egyptian tongue
betokens a disease about the privy parts as Apion says. See here what
cauilling fictions this Egyptian Apion uses concerning Moses, and our
departure out of Egypt; wherein he counterfeiteth and coineth absurdities
unthought of by any others. Shall we then wonder if he belie our forefathers,
who makes no bones to belie himself, for being brone at Oasis a town in
Egypt Apion denies his country and origin.
and counterfeiting himself to be an Alexandrian, he ratifieth his nations
wickedness. No marvel then though he term them Egyptians whom he hates and
raileth against, for if he had not been persuaded that the Egyptians were
wicked base people, he would never have denied himself to be their countriman:
for such as prowdly boast of their famous country, esteem it a credit to
bear the denomination thereof, and reprehend such as without just cause make
themselves of their nation. Wherefore the Egyptians are one of these two ways
affected toward us Jews, for either they claim us to be their countrymen as
glorying of us and their country, or else for that they and their country
being infamous, they desire that we should be partakers of their ignominy. But
indeed this worthy Apion seems so to inueigh against us, as thereby Apion
raileth against the Jews, as thereby rewarding the Alexandrians. The sea coast
of Alexandria.
rewarding the Alexandrians for bestowing their Cities upon him, and knowing
them to be at variance with the Jews of Alexandria, he as it were casts a
bone between them, and raileth not only on the Jews of that City, but of
all wheresoever: but he belieth both of them most impudently. But let us
examine those heinous and enormous matters, and (as he says) such as are not
to be suffered, of which he accuses the Alexandrian Jews. Coming (quoth he)
out of Syria, they seated themselves near the sea coast, where there was no
haven near unto the surges of the water.

Now if this place which they inhabited were ignominious, yet it follows not
that the Jews own country was so also: yet herein Apion raileth against
Alexandria, which he makes his own country, for the sea coast is part of
Alexandria, and as all men judge the best place thereof Alexander gave them
that place to inhabit, and the Macedonians did allot them as great privileges
as the Alexandrians had. I know not what Apion would have said, if the Jews
had dwelt about Necropolis, and not about the kings seat: their tribes being
even at this time called Macedonians. If therefore Apion have read the Epistles
of king Alexander, and Ptolomaeus Lagus, or others their successors kings of
Egypt, or seen the pillars that are erected in Alexandria, containing The
liberties and privileges granted unto the Jews
the privileges that Caesar the great granted unto the Jews; if I say he knew
of these, and yet did presume to write the contrary, then he was a bad fellow:
but if he was ignorant hereof, he was then an unlearned person. The like
ignorance also discovers he, where he wonders Seleucus the founder made them
also Citizens, the like may also be said of the Jews of Ephesus, and at the
other Ionia, who by the kings gifts enjoy the same privileges with the rest of
the Citizens. The Romans also of their clemency have granted the name of their
nation which is no small gift not only to private persons, but to great nations
in general. To be short, the ancient Spaniards, the Tyrrhenes, and Sabines,
are called Romans; or if Apion will take away this denomination of the City
wherein men inhabit, let him cease to call himself an Alexandrian, for he
being borne in the heart of Egypt, can no wise be an Alexandrian, if the
privilege of the City be taken from him, as he

For Alexander laboring with all diligence to build that City, did not make
choice of us for want of people to furnish the same withal, but for that he
bestowed the liberty thereof upon us Alexander.
as a reward and testimony of our virtue and fidelity, endeavoring indeed to
honor and credit our nation thereby: for Hecataeus reports that Alexander
for the Jews good service and fidelity, bestowed upon them the country of
Samaria, and freed them from paying tribute for it. The same good affection
toward the Jews of Alexandria Ptolomaeus Lagus continued after 1 Ptolomaeus
Lagus.
him, for he delivered into their hands the strong holds of Egypt (for that he
judged that their valor and fidelity would keep them) and intending to make
himself Lord of Cyren and other places in Lybia, he sent certain Jews to
inhabit the same. After him Ptolomaeus Philadelphus did not only release and
set free all captives, of our nation in his country, but also did many 2
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus.
times remit their paiments of money, and (which was the principal point of
all) he desired to be instructed in our laws and holy scriptures, and for this
cause sent unto us, requesting that we would The seventy interpreters.
more diligence, he committed the care hereof not to any but Demetrius
Phalerius, Andreas and Aristeus, Demetrius being the only mirror of learning
in his age, the other two being Esquires of his own body, neither would he have
ever desired to have bin instructed in our laws and customs, if he had
despised us and had not rather admired us. But Apion know that almost all the
Macedonian kings his successors in order, did peculiarly affect our nation. For
Ptolomaeus the third which was also called Euergetes, co^quering Syria by
force, did no sacrifice unto the gods of Egypt for his victory, but came to
Jerusalem and there after our manner sacrificed many hosts unto our God 3.
Ptolomaeus Euergetes.
and to him dedicated gifts worthy of such a victory. Ptolomaeus also surnamed
Philometor and his wife Cleopatra, committed the rule of his whole kingdom unto
the Jews, and Onias and Dositheus both Jews, Apion detractes, whereas he rather
ought to have admired them, and have thanked them for delivering Alexandria
whereof he makes himself a citizen.

For when there was a rebellion in Cleopatras kingdom, and all was in peril
to be destroyed, 4. Ptolomaeus Philometor.
these two men delivered Alexandria from civil wars: But Apion says that
after this, Onias came and brought a little army into the city, at such time
as Thermus, the Roman Ambassador was there present. True it is, and that fact
of his was most just. For Ptolomaeus Physcon after the death of his father
Ptolomaeus Philometor, coming out of Cyrene, endeavored to expel the Queen
Cleopatra, and the kings sons, to the end that he (contrary to all justice)
might possess the kingdom, and this was the cause why Onias took arms
against him in Cleopatras behalf, not forsaking his fidelity unto kings in
the time of necessity: yet God himself did manifestly witness his justice in
this actiom. For when Ptolomaeus Physcon presumed Onias his army, and took
all the Jews their wives and childrenthat 5. Ptolomaeus Physcon ceased to to
persecute the Jews.
were in the City (and bound them, and stripping them naked, cast them before
Elephants to be destroyed, and to the intent that the Elephants might the
rather tread upon them, made the said beasts dronken) all things fell out
contrary to his expectation, for the Elephants forsaking the Jews which were
cast before them did fall upon Ptolomaeus his friends that stood by, and slew
many of them, which done, there appeared unto Ptolomaeus a most horrible vision
forbidding him to harm the Jews, and his chiefest best beloved concubine also
(whom some call Ithaca; other Herene) came unto him and besought him to abstain
from such impiety, wherrupon he being sorry, did penance for that he had
already committed, and that Apion (who speaks well of no man) accuses the
jews of impiety for bearing arms against Physcon, whereas indeed he ought
rather to have commended them for it: But Apion extolleth Cleopatra the last
Queen of Alexandria, only for that she was unjust, and ungrateful unto us,
when he rather ought to have reproved Of Cleopatra the last queen of
Alexandria.
her, in whom all impiety and wickedness reigned, both concerning her own
kindred, and her husbands who loved her, and also generally against all the
Romans and the Emperors his been factors, who killed her own sister Arsinoe
in the temple who had not any wife offended her: shealso trecherously slew her
own brother, and destroyed her ancestors Gods, and sepulchers, and receiving
the kingdom from the first Caesar's gift, she ingratefully rebelled against his
son Antonie with her poisoned drinks, and amorous enchauntments, she made him
rebel against his country, and to be unconstant to his own friends, depriving
some of kingly dignity, and compelling others to be instruments of her
impiety. And what else shall Anthony the husband of Cleopatra.
we say of her, who in the battle by sea sorced Antonius her own husband
(who also had many children by her) to yield himself, the Empire, and army
unto her, and become one of her followers? Lastly when Alexandria was taken by
Caesar, she was so cruelly minded, that not remembering her own estate, she
accounted this her safety, if with her own hand she might kill the Jews,
that she might be cruel and trothlesse to every body.

Is it not a glory think you to us that (as Apion reports) in the time of
dearth and famine, wheat was so plentiful in Jury, that it was not sold by
measure? But Cleopatra was punished as she Caesar himself to witness of our
fidelity, and the service we did him against the Egyptians, the Senate also
and their decrees, and the writings of Augustus Caesar, wherein our deserts are
testified. These letters Apion ought to have read, and to have examined all
testimonies of us, which were left first by Alexander, and then by all the
Ptolomees, and what the Senate of Rome decreed, and the mighty Emperors. And
if so be Germanicus could not get corn to suffice all the inhabitants of
Alexandria, that was a token of scarcity and dearth, and The Jews have been
always trusty to their princes.
trust, to wit, the keeping of the river, and whole countey, as not being
thought unfit for their purposes. But Apion thus urges us; if (quoth he) the
Jews be citizens how hap they worship not the same God, nor have not the same
religion that they rest of the Alexandrians have? To whom I thus answer, how
happens that you Egyptians do so eo^tend and war against one another only
for diversity of religion? shall we hereupon conclude that you are all
Egyptians, or The Egyptians do worship beasts not agreeable to man's nature.
not all men? because you worship and with great diligence nourish beasts
against nature? yet our nation seems one and the same. If therefore amongst
you Egyptians such difference of The discord of the Jews and the Alexandrians
in religion.
cause of sedition, for we are known to be peaceable amongst our selves. But
indeed as every one may perceive, the people like Apion himself are authors
of sedition in Alexandria. For whilst the Greeks and Macedonians held
Alexandria, they and we lived peaceably to gether, and they permitted vsquietly
to use our own solemnities, but when the number of The cause of discord
between the Jews and Alexandrians.
Egyptians increased, by confusion of time, sedition also by their means
increased. But our nation remained vnpermixted. They therefore were authors of
those troubles, not ha uing the government of the Macedonians, nor the wisdom
of the Greeks; but using their Egyptian manners, and renewing their old hatred
against us. And that wherewith all they Apions fiction touching the Jews being
authors o^ sedition at Alexandria is confuted.
hit us in the teeth befalls them, for most of them not having the
privileges of the city themselves, call us strangers that have them. For
none of the ancient kings bestowed the liberty of the city upon the
Egyptians, neither have any of the Emperors of Rome bestowed the privilege.
But Alexander himself brought us into the city, the kings after him increased
more privileges, and it has pleased the Roman Emperors to ratify and
confirm them. But Apion detracteth us for not erecting statues to the
Emperors, as though the Emperors knew not hereof, or that they needed Apion
to speak for them, whereas he should rather admire the Romans magnanimity,
and modesty, who compel not their subjects to violate their ancient laws
and The Romans magnanimity toward the Jews. The Jews may have no Images.
religion, but content themselves with such honors as the giver may with
piety and equity give

The Greeks and diverse other think it not amiss to erect statues, for they
delight to have the pictures of their ancestors, wives and children, and some
of the beloved servants also, what marvel then if they accord to yield the
like honor to Princes and Emperors? But our sawmaker not as prophesying the
Romans power not to be reverenced: but foreseeing that it was neither
profitable to God nor man, forbad us make an Image of any living creature, much
more of a not living God (as we will prove hereafter). But he permitted vsto
reverence all good men, with any honor else not due to God, and all those we
give unto the Emperors, and people of Rome, and make our continual sacrifice
for them, and not only upon work days do this, at the How Emperors and
magistrates ought to be honored. The lie of Possidonius and Apollonius
concerning the Iewesis confuted.
proper cost of all the Jews, but upon such days as we offer no other
sacrifice, no not for our own Apion alleges against the Jews of Alexandria:
yet can I not but admire at them who gave him this occasion namely Possidonius
and Apollonius Molon who a ccuse us for not worshipping the same Gods that
others do, although they lie all alike, slaundering our temple most absurdly,
and yet for all this they do not believe that they herein commit any impiety:
whereas it is a most ignominious thing for any free man to lie upon any
occasion, much more of a temple famous over all the world for sanctity. For
Apion affirms that the Jews in that sacred temple placed the head of an Ass
and worshipped it most religiously. And this (quoth he) was manifestly An
answer to the objection of the Asses head.
known at such time as Antiochus Epiphanes spoiled that Temple, who found that
Asses head all that our City (as others also have) has by the variable event
of war, been vexed and troubled, Antiochus surnamed the god, and Pompey the
great, and Licinius Crassus, and now lastly Titus Caesar, have all vanquished
our Temple, yet did they never find in it any thing as Apion affirms, but
sincere piety, not lawful for us to disclose to strangers. And as touching
Antiochus, many writers of good credit report, that he never had any just
cause to spoil our Temple, but that he was drawn unto this fact for want of
money. Not for that he was our enemy, but for that as from his friends and
fellows, he sought supply, and found nothing in that place that was worthy
of derision, and thus do Polybius Megapolitanus, Strabo the Cappadocian,
Nicholas Damascene, Timagenes Castor the Chronicler, and Apollodorus avow, who
all do witness that Antiochus wanting money, brake the league he had with
the Jews, and robbed and spoiled their Temple being full of gold and silver.
Apion ought to have considered this, had he

But we esteem those to be Asses which all our wisemen do, to wit, them who
bear burdens imposed upon them, and if coming into a field they fall to eat,
and do not that which they ought to do, we use to beat them with many
stripes, and force them to till the ground, and do Who are accounted Asses
amongst the Jews and other wisemen.
other drudgerie. But Apion was either the greatest Ass that ever was in
telling alie, or else having begun to do it, he could not compass his
enterprises, in that he found not any just cause of detraction against us. He
adds an other fable of the Greeks detracting us, to the which I will
Certain Histo riographers endeavor to cover and hide Antiochus hi^ periutie
and sacrilege.
truth of us and our Temple: endeavoring to currie favor with Antiochus, and
to cover and hide his sacrilege, used against our nation, for that he wanted
money, believing us even in things that are to come. And Apion as prophesying
of the rest, says that Antiochus found a bed in our Temple, and in it a man
lying, and a table set before him, furnished with all fowls that use either
sea or land, and that the man was hereat astonished. And that so soon as
Antiochus came into the Temple, he adored him as though he hoped for great
help from the King, falling down at his feet, and with a stretched out arm,
craving license to speak: which the King Antiochus his calamity, saying: He
was a Grecian, and that travailing in the Country to get his living, he was
suddenly seized upon by certain Out-landishmen, and brought unto the Temple,
and shut up therein, and that no man might see him, and that he was there fed
or fatted with all dainties that could be provided, and that at first this
dainty fare made him joyful, but afterward he began to suspect it, and lastly
he was hereat amazed, and then demanding of a Jew that administered unto him,
for what cause he was therekept, he understood the Jews purpose, and law not
to be revealed, for the fulfilling whereof he was there nourished, and that
the jews were wont to do the like every year upon a day appointed: and to
take a Grecian stranger and feed him a year, and That the Jews ought once a
year to sacrifice a Grecian.
Antiochus, that the time allotted unto him by the Jews to live, was now
almost expired, and therefore requested for the reverence he bare to the
Grecian gods, to save his blood from being spilt by the Jews, and to free him
out of that iminent calamity.

This fable is not only stuffed full of al tragical cruelty, but also mingled
with cruel impudency, yet for all this the first deuisers hereof do not free
Antiochus from sacrilege, as they hoped hereby to do, who writ it purposely
to flatter him. For that which they report of the Greek found Antiochus
therefore was most impious, and not assisted by Gods favor in that enterprise,
(whatsoever these liars mutter) as it is easy to learn of the fact of him
committed. For we do not only differ from the Greeks in religion, but a
great deal more from the Egyptians and other nations, and what nation in the
world is there, that sometime does not travail through our Country? Is it then
probable that we only renew that conspiracy against Apion reports? Or why
did he not name this man whosoever he was? Or why did not the king carry him
with trumpets into his Country? Seeing that in so doing he might have been
esteemed full of piety, and a great fauorer of the Greeks, and greatly
strengthen himself against the hatred of the Jews by their aid? But I omit
to speak more of this, for insensible people void of all reason, must not be
reprehended in word, but by deeds: for all men that have seen the building of
our Temple, can testify what it was and the undefiled purity thereof. For it
had four porches about, and every one of them by our laws The description of
the Temple and porches.
had several keepers, and into the outward porch all people, yea strangers
might enter without breach of our laws, (women only excepted that have their
monthly course.) Into the second

For in the morning when the Temple was opened, the Priests that were to
sacrifice the hosts which were given them, entered into the Temple; and at no
one again when it was shut, yea it was not lawful to carry any vessel into
the Temple: but therewas only there an Altar, a What was in the temple.
Table, a Censer, and a Candlestick, as is in our law mentioned, and there is
no other secret Four Tribes of Priests and of every tribe more then five
thousand men.
one waits on certain appointed days in their turn, and their time of
waiting being expired, others succeed them in sacrificing, and the day before
they are to finish their waiting, they deliver up unto their successors the
keys of the Temple, and all vessels belonging thereto, in the full number that
they received them: and nothing is brought into our Temple, pertaining either
to meat or drink: yea, and are forbidden to be offered at our Altar, those
things only excepted, whereof we make our sacrifice. What then shall we say of
Apion, who examining nothing of all these, has raised such incredible reports
of us? How ignominious a thing it is for a Grammarian,

This therefore is great impiety, and a voluntary forged lie, to seduce them
that will not examine the truth. For they have attempted to slander us by
those impieties before mentioned, not to be spoken of. And again, like one
full of all piety, he derideth the vanity of these fables, and reports that
at such time as the Jews for a long time together, warred against the
Idumaeans, Zabidus departing out of a City of Idumaea where Apollo was
worshipped, came Apollo the Dorians god, and bring him Another fable devised by
Apion of Zabidus.
unto their Temple, if so be that all of them would there assemble themselves
together, and that afterward Zabidus did make a most excellent kind of wooden
instrument, and placed in it three ranckes of Candles, and put it upon him, and
so walked like a star gliding on the ground (for that shape he resembled to
them that were a far off from him.) And that the Jews hereat (seeing this
strange vision) admired and were astonished, and standing a far off, they
were all silent, and how by this shift Zabidus easily got into their Temple,
and took away the golden Asses head, (for so he writes plainly) and so to
have returned speedily to Dora. Wherefore we may say that Apion leads an
Ass, to wit, himself with fooleries and lies, for he names places that are
not, and sets down Cities to himself unknown, for Idumaea is a Province
Apions Dora is a City of Phaenicia and not of Idumaea.
slanders, for it is four days journey from Iudaea.

Why therefore does he so rashly accuse us for not worshipping the same gods
that other nations do, seeing (as he says) our predecessors did so easily
believe that Apollo would come unto them, and that he walked upon the earth,
with stars upon his back? Perhaps indeed they had The gates of the temple.
by two hundredth men, and it was too impious a thing to leave them open; is it
then credible that this candlebearer could easily open them, who alone was
judged to have the asses head? So that now it remains doubtful whether
Zabidus did bring back again the asses head, or else Apion took it of him and
brought it again to our temple, that there Antiochus might find it, and so
Apion might have another occasion of lying. He also belieth us concerning the
oath which he Apions lie concerning the oath is confuted.
and especially the Egyptians, and so his former lies and these should have
had better correspondence with the beginning, if our ancestors had been
expelled by their predecessors out of Egypt, not for their wickedness, but
for their own calamity. But we are so far from the Greeks that we scarcely
ever think of them: so that no man can say that there is any enmity between
us and the Greeks. But contrariwise many of them have embraced our religion,
and some of them therein perseuered, others again have forsaken it; yet none
of them will say that he heard this oath spoken amongst us, but it should seem
that only Apion heard of it, in that he himself indeed forged it. Truly his
great wisdom and providence is worthy to be admired (as shall Apion
vpbraided the Jews with captivity.
from the foundation thereof, and not to serve the Romans. In effect who can
resist their valor? Truly no man but Apion would ever have flowted us
herewith, seeing that few Cities so flourish and reign over other, that they
again at no one time have been brought into subjection. For many nations are
subject to others, only the Egyptians are freed from the captivity of such
as rule Europe and Asia, for that (as they say) the gods flying into their
country, were saved by entering into the bodies of beasts. Yet have they not
indeed had any one days liberty since

I will not stand to reckon how often the Persians have wasted their City,
destroyed their temples, and slain their supposed gods. For it is not decent
that I should imitate herein Apions foolishness, neither am I calling to
memory what befell the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, the last of which, are
recorded to have been most valiant, and the first to have been most devout
and religious: neither will I reckon up those most godly kings, amongst whom
Craesus was one, who notwithstanding fell into great calamities. Moreover I
will not recount how the Castle of Athens was set on fire, and the temples of
Ephesus and Delphos likewise and many others. There is now one Apion a new
accuser of the Jews, who vpbraideth them with their calamities, forgetting
Sesostris, whom (he says to have been king of Egypt.) We could report and
boast of our kings, David, and Solomon, who subdued many nations unto them: but
it is not fit David's and Salomons power.
here to speak of them. But Apion was ignorant of that which all the world
knows, to wit, that the Egyptians have served first to the Persians, and
afterward to the Macedonians, and that as bondslaues: where we remaining in
free liberty reigned over all Cities round about us 120. years, even unto the
time of Pompey the great; and when all the other kings were subdued by the
Romans, only our kings for their fidelity and friendship toward them were
dear unto them. Oh but this sticks upon Apions stomach, that we have not
had any famous men of our nation, who have invented arts and sciences, and
been excellent in wisdom, such as Socrates, Zeno, Cleanthes and others, whom
he sets down were: and which is most to be admired, Apion puts himself
in the number of these famous men, and says that Alexandria is blessed and
happy, that has deserved to have such a Citizen as he is: and great reason
that he himself Apion praises himself.
should testify that of himself, which all men else perceive in him, to wit,
that he is an impudent deceitefull fellow, both of corrupt life, and manners.
So that any Alexandrians had just cause to be sorry that they ever had any
better opinion of him. But that our nation had men Apion inueighing against our
sacrificing, shows himself to be an Egyptian; Why the Jews do sacrifice
common beasts, and do not eat swines flesh.
for were he either a Grecian, or a Macedonian, he would be herewith offended:
for both Greeks and Macedonians do vow, to sacrifice Hecatombes to their
gods, and use priests in the banquets; and yet for all this, the world is not
desolate of living creatures, as Apion fears.

But were all men so mad as the Egyptians, it would indeed be desolate of men,
and filled with cruel beasts, which they (supposing them to be gods) do
diligently nourish. If any man should ask Apion whom of all the Egyptians he
judged to be a wiseman and most religious toward their gods, no doubt he would
answer that the priests are. For they say that their first kings in the
beginning gave them these two commandments in charge, first to seek wisdom,
and next to worship the gods: they also are all of them circumcised, and
abstain from swines flesh, and no other Egyptian sacrifices with them unto
their gods. Apion therefore was surely blind, when in steed of detracting us,
he speaks ill of them, to gratify whom, he took all this pains. For the
Egyptians do not only use those customs which Apion in us disalloweth The
Egyptian priests circumcised, and eat no swines flesh.
but also do teach others to circumcise themselves as Herodotus reports. So
that I verily Apion was justly punished for blaspheming his country laws, and
religion. For being forced to circumcise himself to avoid a great disease, he
was hereby nothing helped, but for all this his privy members rotting, he in
extreme grief and misery gave up the ghost. For Apions death.
wise men ought to persevere in their country laws in all piety, and not to
deride and detract others: but Apion forsook his own religion, and slaundered
and belied ours. And this was Apions end, and here also should end this book;
but that Apolonius, Molon and Bysimachus, and certain others, partly for
ignorance, partly for madness, have most injuriously belied our lawmakers
Moses, and the laws he made, detracting him as a deceitful Magician, and then
as The defense of Moses against Apolonius and Lysimachus.
the author of all malice and impiety amongst us, and for such as teach no
virtue nor goodness at all. I will therefore as far as in me lies declare
both our conversation in general, and in particular.

Apolonius does not continually inueigh against us as Apion does, but only
here and there; sometime affirming us to be somewhiles hated both of God and
man, sometime to be cowards; othersometimes contrariwise complaining of our
nations boldness. Saying moreover, that Wherein Apolonius accuses the Jews.
we are more sottish then any barbarous nation, and that therefore we only
have had none of The lovers of order and common laws are excellent in
meekness and virtue.
under certain rules and ordinances, and kept them inuiolate, and were the
first founders of them, were more to be commended for humanity and virtue,
then they who live under no rule nor ordinance at all, and every lawmakers
endeavors so to challenge antiquity for their own ordinances, them. I
therefore auerre that our lawmaker is more ancient then any lawmaker
mentioned. For Lycurgus, and Solon, and Seleucus of Locris, and those the
Greeks admire, are modern, of late Moses more ancient then all other
lawmakers, (...). This word law is not in Homer.
times in respect of him, as it is well known. For the Greeks themselves
confess, that in times past they wanted the name of law. This Homer can
witness who in his whole works never mentions this word, law, for the people
of those times were not governed by laws, but by indefinite sentences, and the
princes pleasure, using customs but not written, and all tearing and changing
them also as occasion served.

But our lawmaker being very ancient (for this is every way manifest, even by
our adversaries own confessions) showed himself both a good prince and
connceller unto his people for making laws to direct and govern men's lives,
he persuaded them voluntarily to embrace them, The life of Moses.
and firmly to persist in them with all wisdom. And first of all let us
consider the works of his Moses makes God his guide and counceller
laws he had set down were agreeable to the will and pleasure of God, the
chiefest care he now had was how to persuade his people the same, which he
himself now knew, for they who direct their lives according to the will of
God, avoid all sin as our lawmaker did, being neither Magician nor deceiuer
as his enemies injuriously report, but such a one as the Greeks do boast Minos
and others after him to have been, for some of them affirmed their laws to be
made by Jupiter, others by Apollo and Delphos Oracle, either so believing
themselves, or else thinking that the people would be easily so persuaded. Now
who of all the lawmakers made the best laws, and who The Origin of laws
amongst the Greeks
now occasion is offered to speak of them: there are therefore an infinite
company of nations and laws amongst men, and some nations are ruled by
Monarchs, othersome by the common consent of the people. But our lawmaker
doing neither of these, did as one should say therein declare his common wealth
to be divine, chiefly assigning all power and principality over us to God,
causing all men to fix their minds and cogitations on him, as the only giver
and author of all goodness, giving them to understand, that whatso ever in
their necessity they entreat him for, he hears their prayers, and
understands what every man does in private, yea his very cogitations, and
that he is one, unbegotten, and in all times immutable and eternal, differing
in a most excellent shape from all mortal creatures, and this we

And thus the wisest Greeks that ever were, judged of God, who how learned they
were (he giving the ground of all their knowledge) I now omit to rehearse, and
that these things before rehearsed are best and most agreeable to the nature and
magnificence of God, many do witness, as The opinion of the wisest Greeks
concerning, God.
Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, and Plato, and after them the Soicks, and almost all
other Philosophers have so thought of the divine nature. But they delivering
this their Philosophy in short speech, durst not publish the truth of their
doctrine among the people, already seized upon by Moses compared with other
lawmakers.
superstitious opinions. But our lawmakers works and words so agreed, that he
satisfied at large al his people, and they that ever were to be borne of them,
and their successors, inspiring as it were Two methods of morality and
discipline.
For all our actions, speeches, and what else soever, are all referred to
divine piety. Which he left not touched without any more discourse of it. For
these two are the methods of all discipline and morality, whereof one frames
and directs the speech, the other the manners and actions; Moses commanded
all the Jews to come and hear the law.
emminent men amongst them, do profess herein that they are ignorant, causing
those that are learned and skillful in their laws, to sit as it were in
commission with them to direct them. Whereas every one of our nation being
demanded of our laws, can answer as readily as he can tell his own name,
for every one of us learning them as it were so soon as we come to the use
of reason, we have them as it were written and printed in our minds, and by
this means both we offend more seldom, and when we offend, we are sure to
be punished.

And this especially is that which has caused such an unity and concord
amongst us. For to worship one God all after the same manner, and nothing to
differ in manner and conversation The concord of the Jews in religion.
one from another, is the only way to establish amity and concord in a
commonwealth. For keep our laws, and observe all other things belonging to
their office withal integrity: for our What sort of people are to be made
priests
punish the offenders. What monarchy then or kingdom can be more holy then
this? Or how can God be better honored then amongst us, where all the people
are prepared to piety, and the priests commanded so to rule and govern the
Commonwealth, as if they were celebrating some festiuitie? And whereas other
nations cannot celebrate their mysteries, which they term sacrifices, in a few
days, we with joy and pleasure and immutable wills, do celebrate our sacrifice
continually without intermission: It rests now that I set down our precepts
and laws, as arguments Of God and of the divine providence.
of that which I have said. The first is of God of whom our law says, God
has all things, he is most perfect, most blessed, he is sufficient both for
himself and all things else, he is the beginning, midst, and ending, famous
amongst all things for his works, and benefits, more manifest The works of
God.
is holy, for we see his works, the light, the heaven and the earth: the
Sun, the moon, rivers, and sea, so many different shapes of living
creatures, and increase of fruits: All these God himself made, not with hands
or work, nor as one needing any to help him, but he seeing them to be good,
they were presently made. He is to be followed of all men, who ought to
worship him by the exercising of virtue; for this is the most holy way to
please him. We have one Temple, as also one God, which Temple is common to all
men, as he is the common God of all men. For similitude always pleases, him
do all our priests honor with sacrifice, and he amongst them has the first
place, who by birth is the chiefest and he first sacrifices to God, sees the
The sacrifices of the old testament.
sacrifices not pertaining to gluttony or drunkenness, for God is not pleased
with such sacrifices, but is rather injured, and superfluous expenses are
thereby made.

But God loves them that are temperate, and orderly, and of good behavior,
and especially requires in us that sacrifice, an inviolable chastity. In our
sacrifices offered for our common good, we first of all pray in common, and
then every one for himself, because we are all fellows, and he that
delights herein more then in his own life, he is most acceptable to God.
We pray and vow unto God, not requesting riches of him, for he of his own
accord bestows Purifications used in sacrifice
And this is our speech and opinion of God, who himself is our law. And what
concerning marriage? Our law only allows natural copulation between man
and wife, done to the intent to get children. But that men should abuse one
another against nature, it altogether disalloweth and punishes such offenders
with death. It commands us to marry, not respecting Of marriage.
the dowry, neither must we take women violently and by force, nor allure them
by deceitful persuasions, but that we rather obtain his good will, who may
grant and use ordinary means to persuade. It also appoints that a woman
shall be in all things inferior to the man, neither The punishment for him
that does ravish a virgin.
man this authority. With her the husband only may lawfully accompany, and it
is abomination for her to make trial of another man, and who so attempteth
this, can no wise avoid death, the like penalty attends him, if he offer
violence to a virgin despowsed unto an other man, or if he by persuasions do
overcome a married woman or other, that has children under her, and all this
our law commands: It has also interdicted all women from concealing their
children being borne, or otherwise to destroy them, for so she should be a
child killer. destroy souls and mankind: Who so therefore uses carnal
copulation and corruption is unclean by our laws, and women after lawful
copulation must wash themselves, judging that a part of their soul was by this
act defiled, and she being puffed up was wounded in her body, and therefore
The purification for the body.


Our law has also provided for the burial of the dead, that our funerals
should neither be Of the funerals of the dead
touching the burial of their dead, permitting all men at any ones death to
assemble themselves together, and bewail the dead: It also commands every
one (yea even the dead man's own family) to purify themselves after the
burial, and to go a farreoff, as seeming to be unclean. It also appoints
punishment for them that have committed murder, either wilfully or against
their will. It binds every man to obey his parents next after God, and
commands that those children that do not show themselves grateful unto
them: or in any thing, do, The honor due to parents.
grieve them, that they should be stoned to death: It also commands all young
men to reverence old men, because God is elder to us all. It permits not
friends to council any impiety; for God is not their friend who does not
disclose them: and if friends fall out that do know one another Against these
and usury.
away that he himself placed not, and no man must take that which is not his
own. No man for lending must take usury; and many such like things our law
commands, concerning cause of communion between us and others.

It is also not amiss to recount how our law maker provided for the
entertaining of strangers amongst us: For he seems so to have provided, that
to our knowledge we neither corrupt our own laws, nor deny to impart them
to others: but he entertaineth all liberally that will come and live under our
laws, judging the community of man's life, not so much to consist in the
nation whereof we come, as in the unity of our minds and conversation. He
forbids others that How we ought to use our enemies.
to deal with our enemies, that we neither destroy their Country with fire,
nor out down their fruit trees. We are also forbidden to rob and spoil those
that are slain in fight, and deal injuriously with our captives; and
especially if they be women: yea he so endeavored to teach us humanity and
mildnes, that he provided, that we use even unreasonable beasts courteously,
and only employ them to serve our lawful need and no further: for he
forbids us to kill any tame thing bred in our houses, and that we should not
kill the old beasts and their young together, and although many wild beasts
enemies to mankind do assist us in our labors, yet he commanded A repetition
of the precepts of the law.
is for the most part death: as if any man commit adultery, ravish a virgin,
use the sin against nature with another, or suffer himself to be so abused.
We also have laws concerning our servants, and our measures, and weights, and
unlawful bargains and sales, or deceit, if either one take any thing that is
an other man's, or which is not his own; all these are to be punished not as
other nations punish them, but much more grievously. But whosoever either
iniurieth his parents, or commits impiety against God, he shall presently
be destroyed: but they that observe this law are rewarded not with gold or
silver, nor with a crown beset with precious stone, but every one The reward
of such as keep the law.
deeds did not make it manifest, for many of our forefathers, only for that
they refused to speak against our laws, or otherwise then our laws
permitted, have most manfully and constantly endured all torments and death it
self. If our nation were unknown to all the world, and that this our
voluntary observation of our laws, were not manifest to all people, if any
man should report unto the Greeks, that either he had read this which I have
declared, or else that he had The continuance of the laws amongst the Jews.
found people in a strange land, such as we be, having so pius and honest
opinions concerning That divine Plato amongst the Greeks, a man who in honest
life, virtuous speech, and Plato admired amongst the Greeks.
Plato himself confesses, that he dare not by reason of the common peoples
ignorance set down the true opinion of God. But many think Platoes words full
of variety, and licentiousness, and admire Lycurgus; and every one
commends the City Lycurgus the lawmakers amongst the Lacedaemonians.
of Sparta, for that it so long time perseuered in his laws. It is therefore
an evident demonstration of virtue to remain in their laws. But if those who
so admire the Lacedaemonians do compare them with us, and the time during the
which their laws were in force, with the time of our common wealth: they shall
find that ours has continued more then two thousand

But we, who have felt many thousand mishaps by reason of the often change of
princes in Asia; have not in these our last miseries and evils forsaken our
law. Neither can any man say, that liberty and licentious life is the cause,
why we so diligently observe them, seeing that who so please may see sufficient
proof, that they tie us to more strict life and laborious, then those of the
Lacedaemonians did them. For they neither tilled the earth, nor used any The
Jews compared with the Lacedaemonians.
handy craft, but ceasing from all labors and pains taking, lived in their
City far and faireliking, having both their meat and all other necessaries
provided and prepared for them by The streit laws of the jews.


Let now Lysimachus or Molonus pass, and such as they be, wicked, lying
writers, and Sophisters, deceivers of young men, and detracters of our own
nation, as though we were the wickedest people living. As for me, I will not
examine the laws of other nations: for it is our custom Moses forbids to
deride and blaspheme false gods only for the name of God impured unto them. The
number of Gods amongst the gentle infinite.
us from blaspheming such, as other nations hold for gods, only for the name
of God attributed unto them: yet may we not leave the objections of our
accusers unanswered, seeing that which we are to speak against them, is not
our own device, but many before us have spoken it. Who then of all the wise
Greeks will not condemn the most famous Poets, and especially the lawmakers,
who at first brought and settled such vain opinions of the gods amongst the
common people? affirming the number of them to be so many as they thought good,
and to be borne at diverse times one of another; allotting to every one his
proper place, as unto other living creatures, some to be under the earth,
others in the sea, and the ancientest amongst them in Hell, fettered and bound,
and those whom they place in heaven, in words, they do term The fable of
Jupiter and Pallas.
Against these vanities all excellent and wise men do worthily inueigh, who
beside this already rehearsed too in derision, add, how some of the gods are
young, and some old, and some infants, others are gods of arts and sciences,
and one is a Smith, another a Weauer, another Jupiter.
God of all, whom they call father; contemned and drowned certain women whom
he himself had deceived and gotten with child, and that he could not deliver
the children borne of these women from calamity, for that destiny had obliged
him, not see their deaths without tears. This is all good stuff, as also is
that which follows, to wit, adulteries committed in heaven, so What is the
cause of such error concerning God.
God? Truly I am persuaded, for that their first lawmakers were themselves
herein to seek, and ignorant of the nature of God, and that they did not
faithfully deliver unto their common wealth, so much as themselves knew
concerning this point: but as thought it had bin a thing of least moment, did
wilfully let it pass, giving license to Poets, and permitting them to deifie
and make gods whom they pleased, and that the Orators should write of the
common wealths affairs, and tell what them liked of strange gods. Moreover,
the painters and image-makers amongst Poets and pain ters cause the multitude
of gods:


Appolonius Molon was one of these proud fools, but those Grecians that
followed true Philosophy, knew all that is already said, and the cold reasons
of this allegory, and therefore Plato well seeing, affirms that Poets are
not to be permitted in a common wealth, and sends Plato decreed that no poet
should be permitted in a common wealth.
Homer away very honorably crowned and anointed, least that he with fables
should destroy or deprave the true opinion of God. For Plato of all others
especially imitated our lawmakers, as he did herein also, commanding all his
Citizens that all of them should perfectly learn his laws, and that for no
casualtie, any strange foreign custom should be admitted into their City,
but that their common wealth should be pure, and they persist in the
observation of their laws. But Appolonius Molon not respecting this,
inueigheth against us, for not receiving into our society men of strange
opinions or religion, whereas not only we do so, but commonly all Greeks,
yea and the most prudent amongst them. The Lacedaemonians did expel all
strangers, The Lacedaemonians did expel al strangers.
nor impart their religion unto them, but we though not desirous to learn
other nations religigion, yet do we not deny to impart ours to strangers that
desire to embrace it, which if I be not deceived is a token of magnanimity,
and clemencle in us, but this shall suffice concerning Apollonius was ignorant
how matters stood with the Athenians, who boast The Athenia^s manners.
that their city is free for all nations, for they did most severely and
without all mercy punish those that did but speak any word against their God.
For what was the cause of Socrates his death? he neither betrayed the city to
enemies, nor destroyed their temples, but only swore by a strange oath, which
as he said (whether in jest or in earnest) a devil taught him, and for this
offense was Socrates a citizen of Athens.
he put to death, by drinking hemlocke: his accusers alleging, that he
corrupted young men, and contemned the laws, and religion of his country. And
this Socrates sustained being a citizen of Athens.

Anaxagoras was of Clazomenia, and for that he affirmed the sun which the
Athenians worshipped for God, to be a fiery stone, he was by the sentence of
some few condemned to die. They Anaxagoras.
Diagoras of Melus should be rewarded with a talent for his labor, only for
that this Diagoras was said to deride their mysteries: Protagoras also had
been by them taken and put to death, had he not made quick escape, only for
that they supposed him to have written certain doubts of the Athenian Gods.
And what wonder is it that they A talent is 600 crowns.
so used these famous men, who spared not to use the like cruelty upon women?
For they killed a priest, for that some accused her to worship strange Gods,
and their law appointed, that who so did introduce strange Gods into their
city, should be punished with death. It is therefore evident, that they who
enacted such straight laws, did not believe the Gods of other nations to be
Gods, for had they believed in them, they would not have deprived themselves of
the benefit of many Gods. The very Scithians (who delight in manslaughter, so
that they very little differ from bruit beasts) yet do they think themselves
bound to maintain their own laws, as best, The Scithians.
Anacharsis a famous Greek, that came unto them, only for that he seemed to
attribute too much unto the Grecian Gods, yea thou may find many amongst the
Persians, who for this cause have been tortured: And it is evident that
Appolonius approved the Persian laws, for when the Greeks admited their
fortitude and concord of opinions concerning God, The Persians manners.
I mean the fortitude they showed in the burning of their temples, this
Appolonius in all things imitated the Persians, violating other men's wives, and
putting out their childrens eyes. Whereas our laws adiudge him to death that
so uses unreasonable beasts: And neither the fear and terror of potentates,
nor the favor of them whom all men reverence, could ever cause us to The Jews
co^stancy in their laws.
forsake or abandon these laws, neither do we exercise fortitude, to the end
to deprive other men Against the lawmakers of the Gentiles.
avoid reproach for their inhospitalitie, and neglecting marriage? Or the Elians
and Thebans for accompaning with men, contrary to the law of nature, which
fact most shameful, they deemed good and necessary. Yea not content to do so
themselves, they also ascribed the like unto their gods to be done by them
(which the Greeks also now of late have done) and for this cause they refused
to The injustice of lawmakers.
marry with their own women, judging their satisfaction to be contrary to the
prescript of nature: The Jews strict observation of the law.
be in a strange country where there is a tyrant king, yet does not he so
fear him that he would for his command any jot transgress our laws; if
therefore we do valorously endure thus much for our laws, all men must needs
grant our laws to be very good, but if they say we suffer all these
calamities for to maintain wicked or naughty laws, what punishment are they
not worthy of, who having (as they say) better laws then we, do so easily
forsake them, whereas we do The Jews laws are of great antiquity.
he shall find that ours are of more antiquity then theirs by many ages. For
our laws established amongst us have been imitated of all other nations: For
though the first Greeks did colourably observe laws, yet all their
Philosophers did imitate ours, and our opinions of God, and The laws of the
Gentiles.
in humility taught others communion of life, and conversation, yea the common
people did long since imitate our piety, neither is there any nation either
Greeks or Barbarians, who have not after some manner observed a Sabbath as we
do, and fasting days, and candlestickes with light, all which they learned of
us, yea many do also observe our customs concerning their meats, and our
unity and concord, wherein we excel all other nations, our community also
and industry in arts and labors, and sufferance for our laws. And which is
most to be admired, our law, not having any to force us to observe it, has so
obliged our hearts, that as God is of all the world honored without
compulsion, so are our laws amongst us all, we not forced thereunto: And
whosoever does diligently consider his own nation and family, shall find that
which I have reported, to be true: I will now generally reprehend the
voluntary malice of all men, for The Epilogue of this book.
or if they do not so mean, let the^ hold their malicious tongue from any
further calumniatiation: For I do not take upon me the defense of this cause,
for that I bear any hatred to any man, but for that I and all Jews do honor
and reverence our lawmaker, and believe that whatsoever he prophesied proceeded
from God, yea although our selves did not know the goodness of our laws yet
the multitude of them that imitate them were a sufficient motive to enduce us
thereunto. But I have at large and with all sincerity discoursed our laws,
and commonwealth in my books of our antiquity. And I now again have made
mention of them neither in contumely of other nations, nor in praise of our
own, but only to reprove such as have most maliciously The cause why Joseph
writ these books against Apion. A brief rehearsal of all that is above. said.
and impudently belied us, contrary to the known truth: And I think I have
already fully performed

Our adversaries affirm us to have come of Egyptians, I have showed that our
forefathers came into Egypt out of some other place. They allege that we were
expelled Egypt for The intention of the Jews laws.
their misery, in that they were infected with disease; I have proved that
they came from thence to their own country, by means of their own prowess
and force, of their own accord: Others labor to defame our lawmaker as a
wicked person, whose virtue many of ancient times, and so long time as has
been since him, do witness. It is not needful to speak more largely of our
laws: for they by themselves appear pious and good, and such as do not inuit
or incite us to the The origin of the Jews laws.
do. For what can be better then inuiolate piety? What more just then to obey
the law? what more profitable and commodious, then to be at unity and peace
amongst ourselves, and neither to forsake one another in calamity, nor injury
one another in prosperity, to contemn and despise Apions and Moions go, and
all others that with them are convicted of lying and slaundering. And this
bookeis written to the Epaphroditus who love the truth, and to others who by
thee will, or are desirous to know the same.

DESIDERIVS ERASMUS
I Have not grudged virtuous Father, to dedicate unto thee a days labor,
Joseph writ of the seven Machabees, brethren: And would it had lain in my power
more abundantly, to have answered your expectation: I have now (for that I
counted the Greek copy) by the Latin coniectured the Greek, and altered
some things, yet but very few. Joseph does not falfely boast himself to have
attained to the excellency of the Greek tongue, and this book will
sufficiently witness the same, wherein he showed both great vanity, and
Emphasis, in so much as he seems to have handled that famous work with
eloquent style and ornament of discourse. Saint Jerome for this cause entitleth
this book great eloquence, Suidas (...) out of them both we amend

Farewell
FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS
CORRECTED BY DESIDERIVS ERASMUS, MOST LIVELY SETTING DOWN THE MARTYRDOM OF
THE MACHABEES.
I Am upon the instant request of Polybius of Megalopolis, to commit Reason
has dominion over our passions.
and aspire only to celestial things, he must first exercise sobriety,
banish gluttony, with his page lasciviousness, and all other such like vices
as may possess and captive the mind, he must likewise mount-vp unto the top
of virtues tower, that after he may from thence war against the vices of this
body, fear, and grief, the first whereof assaulteth us when we begin, and
the last when we have begun. There are many examples of the valiant soldiers
of God, which I would use, but that the ornaments sprung from the womb of one
woman may suffice me, which she brought forth not at one birth, but with the
same piety and zeal. And first I will speak of Eleazer, the cause and
example of their passion, and then I will relate what tortures and torments
their The death of the seven brethren and their mother.
mother endured, yet cannot man but only God determine, who amongst them was
first, and

But before I begin to declare the death of nobility, I will a little entreat
of reason, which as I have affirmed is no small motive to martyrdom. Reason it
is, that makes us observe fasts and use The description of reason and wisdom.
dignities and honors, which all men generally aim at, yea reasons gift it is
that we do resist the heat of lustful desires. Hence comes it, that having
once overcome such things as the flesh delights in, we find our selves a
little able to resist, we also learn to despise pains and torments, and so
resolve to suffer all things that shall be imposed upon us. Which that it may
more plainly appear, Grief and pain cause or hinder passion.
one of the which we do always refuse, and the other we always desire; yet
where pleasure arises and is presently by reasons rule put away, the mind is
there strengthened; and pain compared with glory is through hope of a greater
reward contemned before it come, and being come, our mind is ashamed not to
suffer that which it was before resolved to do, for reason therefore is the
guide of all our actions, and by it we despise torments and detest vice, which
like Reason resembles a skillful gardener.
of all corrupt and hurtful humors, only leaving that to remain in use,
which may someway be profitable unto us.

Thus reason purifieth us by passion, encouraging to suffer, and in our
suffering and agony strengthening us. Who is not desirous to eat of the flesh
of wild beasts and fishes? And who lusts not to eat of feathered souls?
nay, do not the dainty dishes gotten either in Sea or land inuit us to eat
of them? What then causes us to abstain from them? that all men desire them,
yet no man eats them? Even in this thing the mind is taught to overcome it
self in delightful objects, and so to bridle all pleasure, that when occasion
of martyrdom is offered, the mind setting aside all vanities, will not for a
little pleasure forget his accustomed virtue. For this An instance of Joseph's
chastity.
Joseph justly praised in that he was not overcome by lust, which reigns in a
youthful body, this reason so works with sound advise and mature counsel,
that it again recouereth lost friendship and gets new, and suffers no
cruelty to be committed. Of this we have also the example of Moses who had he
not just occasion to be angry against Dathan and Abiram, reason (no doubt)
would have caused him to have smothered all grief of mind. Did not our father
Jacob with great vehemency reprove his sons Simon and Leui, that without
reason they had used such cruelty, saying, cursed be your anger? which anger
and wrath of theirs, had it been bridled with reason, neither had they been
cursed, nor the other had perished. For this cause God the maker of mankind,
when he fashioned us and our manners, having finished all lineaments of the
body, he now placed the mind to be in it, and to rule it, leaving it certain
precepts

But some will ask me wherefore we offer to commit wickedness, seeing that
reason rules our passion? But it is a ridiculous thing to think that reason
so rules, for reasons rule cannot hinder the appetite from desire, but only
correct desire and so prevail that it suffer with patience the loss or
abstinence from such things as it desired. For example sake, reason cannot
hinder thee from being angry, but it can so work that thou commit no impiety
when thou art angry, in like manner it cannot hinder thee from desiring filthy
pleasure, yet can it cause thee not to yield unto it.

Reason therefore cannot utterly extinguish vice, but only bridleth it.
Witness in this the An instance of David's chirst.
example of holy David, who fighting against strangers with great success and
being at evening weary and faint, he came unto his princely tabernacle, that
was guarded by his soldiers, where Samuel. 2. 28.
he found them all at meat, yet himself being thirsty, durst not drink,
notwithstanding water was hard by, only for that religion dissuaded him, for
he had vowed not to drink before he had conquered his enemies. He also forbad
his men to drink, so that they might fight more courageously, if not for that
they were valiant, at least for that they might so have drink. Whilst thus
his thirst increased, three young men of strong bodies armed themselves, and
taking with them a vessel to put water in, they went unto the enemies camp,
and there assaulted the watchmen, who for fear of death fled, and so they past
through the camp till such time as they came David David in his thirst refused
to drink the water he so desired.
so bridled his humane appetite, that by reason he quenched his desire, and
showed an excellent token of patience, teaching how the fear of God was to be
preferred before all things. For taking the water he had much wished for, and
which had been gotten with such danger, he presently powered it on the ground,
as a sacrifice to God, choosing rather to die for thirst, then to offend the
divine majesty: yet reason is not so forcible, that it is able without due
consideration Seleucus and Nicanor.
of our forefathers, that Seleucus king of Asia enriched our priests, and being
a man of another religion did ascribe all his actions and worthy deeds, to the
religion and faith of our ancestors. But wicked men's madness could not
herewith be satisfied. For one Simon hating the Simon a traitor to his country.
high priest Onias, and finding no ways or means to be revenged of him in his
own country, he went unto Appolonius Governor of Syria, Phoenicia, and
Cilicia, and before him in a public assembly told him, that he could help
the king to an infinite treasure, for (quoth he) there is hidden in Jerusalem
an infinite deal of gold and silver, which by right belongs unto king
Seleucus: Appolonius hearing this, praised and commended Simon, and confiscated
the gold and silver to the treasure house of Seleucus, and having authority
from the king to get it, he levied Appolonius captain of Syria came with an
army to Jerusalem.
an army, and so accompanied with Simon came unto our country, purposing if any
violence were offered, to use the defense of his soldiers. When the treasure
house of our temple was now a sacking, Onias wept bitterly and said, that it
was a heavy sight to them to whom this treasure was committed, to see it, or
any part of it taken away. But Appolonius neither respecting the tears and
entreaties of the old men, women, nor children, pressed into the temple, they
all praying God to punish him and to defend their temple. Being now with a
great guard of armed men entered into the holy temple, there appeared certain
angels on horseback with weapons in Angels upon horses shining with fiery
brightness.
their hands, and shining with a fiery flame about them, and they daunted the
courage of this Appolonius, who presently fell down flat upon his face, and
lying so a great while, at last he came a little to himself, and rising up he
leaned upon his shoulder who kept the temple, not being able to stand alone, he
was so terrified with the vision he had seen. When he came a little to
himself and was in some hope of recovery, he stretched both his hands toward
heaven, and himself despairing to obtain pardon for his offense committed,
he besought the Hebrews (to spoil whose temple he came) to make intercession
for him, himself with tears craving pardon for his offense, and not only
acknowledging his fault, but also confessing himself to have deserved death,
and all punishment possible. Holy Onias seeing this, and fearing Onias by
prayers obtained Appolonius his life.
also that if Appolonius should then die, the Hebrews would be suspected to
have made him away, he made prayers to God for him, and so obtained his enemies
life. Appolonius presently Seleucus to let him understand what had happened,
but when he came he found Seleucus dead, and Antiochus reigning in his steed, a
man of tyrannous nature, who bare an ancient grudge to Onias the high priest,
and therefore made Jason his brother high priest in his steed. Jason promising
Antiochus in lieu of this good turn to pay him three thousand six hundredth and
Antiochus his rage against the Jews.
threescore talents of silver every year.

This Jason being now made high priest and chief amongst all the nation of the
Jews, he presently forced all the people to impiety, and to forsake
religion; so that to build bathes he hindered the defense and building of the
temple, and all Doctors of our nation conspired with him in this iniquity. But
hereat God was presently wroth, who being displeased, it was not needful to
seek foreign enemies, for Antiochus himself was incited to rage against
them. Who warring Ptolomaeus king of Egypt, he heard it reported that the
Jews did deem him to be dead, yet was he very gallantly entertained by the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and presently after the fight, he made an edict, that
who so amongst the Jews refused to offer sacrifice to the gods, that he should
presently die upon the wheel. But the godly minded of our nation did little
esteem this edict, yea the women circumcising their infants (as our law
requires) did afterward cast themselves down headlong, to the end that they
might so obtain a present death without longer delay. Antiochus perceiving that
the severity of his edict could not compel the Hebrews to forsake their
religion, but that men voluntarily did choose death; he sitting in an eminent
place from whence all the Jews might behold him, calling all of them together
he caused swines flesh to be sacrificed upon the altar, and to be offered to
every Hebrew to eat. Amongst Eleazar a priest well instructed Eleazar is
brought unto Antiochus. (...) Macch. 6. Antiochus his exhortation to Eleazar.
in learning and the fear of God, a man of aged years, and of a very
reverent countenance, one that was known to all men and famous for his
virtue. To this man Antiochus said thus: Be advised by me holy old man, to
eschew those torments prepared for such as are obstinate, preserve thy reverent
age and contemn not the benefit of this life, take the sacrifice and eat of
the swines flesh: for it is contrary to all wise men's advice to credit the
Jews opinions, and to refuse

Eleazar being permitted to speak, thus replied to Antiochus, who both
exhorted and forced him to breach of his laws. We Antiochus do not follow a
vain report, but we observe Eleazars answer to Antiochus.
Eleazar constancy.
the foundation of my salvation, the defense of the believer, the ground of
faith, never will I lift up my hands contrary to thy precepts; never will I
believe any thing to be just, which is repugnant to that which thou have taught
me, I will not loose the merit of so many years, nor relinquish the faith I have
hitherto embraced. The chaste, pure, and devout company of fathers shall receive
me into their number where I shall not fear (O impious king) thy threats. But
thou have changed the name of king to tyra^t, yet thou shall never allege
against me my deed, my consent, my word.

Whilst Eleazar full of constancy and liberty spoke thus, the soldiers that
stood there about hailed him to be tortured, and stripping him naked, they
hanged him up, and whipped him, and Eleazar cruelly whipped.
whilst on either side he was beaten, a crier with an impious voice still cried
unto him, obey the Eleazar was not overcome by torment, but suffered all
tortures, as though he had been in rest and sleep, and did manfully and
without fear endure all torments, and fixing his venerable eyes upon heaven,
he knew in whom he believed, and to whom he sacrificed his soul, and beholding
the flesh on each side rent and torn from his body, and the blood issuing out
in great abundance, he admired his own patience, and thanked God the author
thereof. At last feeling in himself the frailty of all flesh (which is
scarcely able to endure so sharp torments.) he fell upon his face, which with
stripes was all rent and torn, still glorifying God, as he did before his
fall. Then one of the soldiers to gratify the king, did like a mad man spurn
and tread upon him, thereby to increase his torments more. But Eleazar both
strong in body and mind, did like a right champion of the true God, never
shrink at those pains, Eleazar will thou neglect to obey the king, and to
free thy self from torments? eat of the flesh of swine, and redeem thy self
from all thou endurest. Eleazar although in this martyrdom he had been
silent, yet could he not without answering endure to hear so profane
counsel, but as tormented with this speech, he cried out. We sons of the
Hebrews Abraham) into thy bosom.

The soldiers seeing his constancy, did by the kings command cast him into
the fire, and powered stinking and loathsome liquors into his nostrils. All
which this reverent old man did Eleazars last words in the fire.
most willingly suffer, and so was consumed with the flame: yet when nature
began to fail, he spoke after this manner, lifting up his daseled eyes to
heaven. Thou art he O God, from whom Reasons victory.
to follow it. If therefore reason and the inferior powers be at variance, we
must subject them to reason if we will make a perfect victory. With this guide
of reason our father Eleazar was A similitude taken from the rock.
O priest more sacred then all other priests, who did not pollute thy sacred
lips with profane meats, impiety found no entrance that way, from whence so
many prayers to God had proceeded. The tyrants cruelty could not prevail
against thee, thou therefore art made an example Eleazars praise.
for all priests of God to imitate. Such a one behooued it a priest to be, more
strong then torments, more able to suffer then the torturers to inflict
punishment, more forcible then princes commands, yea and more potent then the
fire, wherein thou did perish: and finally thou wast ordained to be crowned
with the laurel of martyrdom for thy sufferance. Thou have surpassed all
antiquity, thou shall be an example to all posterity. If then feeble old age
wherein al strength and heat of body was extinguished, now unfit to suffer
torments (as being already broken with

Therefore he that is wise and valiant is able to conquer his passions; for
that he does well deli berate, and when he comes to his agony can put his
determination in execution. Neither is the wisdom of this old man so much to
be admired, seeing children and as it were infants have so deserved
commendations in this point, that they did work astonishment in their
tormentors; for the courage and cruelty of Antiochus, being overcome by the
wisdom of old age, was Antiochus caused seven noble young men of the Hebrews
and their mother to be brought to Antioch. 2. Macch. 7.
Salomona who now grew well in years, to be brought before him: so they
according to his command were brought, being of excellent beauty and worthy
children of so virtuous a mother; yea they resembled angels, their faces
shining like the clear light of the Sun, their eyes sparkled in most comely
and decent manner, as testifying that they surpassed in virtue al other of
humane race and condition. She was descended of most virtuous and noble
parentage, and so she her self had continued and lived; but that excellent
feature I wish your good (O admirable youngmen) The kings exhortation to the
seven brethren.
for so both your beauty of body and noble parentage persuade me: do not
therefore like mad men resist my command, avoid not only torments, but death
also. For I desire not only to exalt you unto honor, but also to increase
your riches and possessions; contemn the superstitious and superfluous belief
of your Countrymen, and embrace our religion: Which if you refuse to do (as I
hope you will not) I will devise all torments, whereby I may by a lingering and
paineful death consume you. And to the end to terrify them the more, he
commanded Antiochus said.

Consent unto me, O prudent young men: for if that I command you to commit a
sin; yet do you not offend in doing it, seeing you commit it only upon
compulsion. But the young The young men's constancy.
youths inflamed with a divine spirit and sense, contemned so many kinds of
torments, and despised the tyrants threats and flatteries, and most godly (for
they gave him no just occasion) My self being unwise, what should I have made
choice of? Whether to endure those torments, or accept of the promised
benefits? Whether should I have been moved to pity mine own age, or to
compassionate my mother? God would not have denied pardon for this deed I
being forced thereunto, and by doing it though against my will, I shall get the
Kings favor. But where reason and advise takes place, and has The seven
brethren reply unto Antiochus.
these brethren I will declare, who as it were all with one voice denied to
eat of the sacrificed swines flesh, as they were commanded. Wherefore (said
they) O tyrant do thou persecute us that are innocent? We both desire and
wish to die, and will until such time as death expels life, firmly keep
that which God commanded and Moses taught us. And thou tyrant, do not seek
to seduce us by protesting feined love toward us: thou lover of injustice,
master of cruelty, deviser of iniquity, the pardon which thou do offer is
to us more painful then punishment: we are armed with contempt of death, and
esteem not thy words, as being by our late master Eleazar taught to despise
the^. Why then do thou esteem such pusillanimitie to be in us young me^,
seeing of late thou foundest such courage in an old man? We follow him, thou
can

The tyrant greatly moved, to see that he could neither prevail by fair
promises nor by threatenings, he caused them to be beaten with bulls peasels: and
first of all he commanded Macchabeus Antiochus commanded Macchabeus to be
racked.
suffering (so great the force of virtue is) so that they desired more to leave
beating him, then he requested they should leave. This done, he was put upon a
wheel, and a weight hanged at his feet, and so stretched round about it, that
his sinews and entrails brake, and so his pains increased: yet he being
overcome with pain, his mouth was not for all this stopped or hindered from
calling upon God, who beheld all; and reproving the tyrant who devised those
torments for the innocents, and taking strength, he is said to have cried out
after this manner. Bloody tyrant, who persecutest the majesty of God, I whom
thou thus tormentest, am no Witch, nor one who have murdered and killed another
man, but one who dies for justice observing the law,

As he thus spoke a fire was kindled, and he as he was upon the wheel
racked, was so thrown into the fire: and thus he was by flames and torments
so burned, that his bowels appeared; his mind nothing moved when his flesh
yielded overcome with pains, who amidst his The death of the elder brother.
pangs cried thus unto his brethren: (O beloved brethren) learn of me an
example of virtue, As thus he spoke, he was taken out of the flame, and fleane
alive, his tongue was pulled out of his mouth, and he put into a frying pan,
and so he departed out of this life to the great admiration of all that beheld
him; and the joy of his brethren and mother; and went before them to heaven,
there to prepare a kingdom for himself and them. The second brother bought


After him the second brother called Aber was hailed by the soldiers, and
before the tyrant asked him whether he would relent, he caused all those torm
ents to be showed him, thereby to terrify him: but he nothing thereat moved,
and denying to eat of that foresaid sacrifice,

But hereat the tyrants rage increased, and the Martyr by suffering such
torments, was made more constant, crying alowde: O how pleasant is that death
unto me, which is caused by all sorts of torments for Gods sake; yea so much
the more pleasant, for that I assuredly hope to find reward Thus he remaining
constantly in his faith, and animated by his brothers example, departed unto
heaven.

Then Michir the third son was brought, whom all men now pitied for the
death of his two Machir the third brother is brought.
brethren, and many exhorted him by his brothers examples to desist from his
opinion, and so avoid punishment: but he being hereat angry, thus replied. One
father begot us, one mother bore us, one master instructed us, we are all of
one mind, and all alike affected, do therefore no longer prolo^g the time in
vain, I came hither for to suffer and not to speak, use all your tyranny
possible against this body: for you have no power at all over my soul.The
tyrant hereat moved to see this third

Next after followed Judas the fourth brother, whom all the people persuaded
and entreated to obey the king: but he contemning their prayers and
exhortations, said thus with all constancy: Judas the fourth brother is
brought.
Your fire shall neither separate nor sever me from the law of God, nor from my
brethren, who in steed of this mortal life enjoy life everlasting. I denounce
unto thee, O tyrant, destruction and overthrow, but to such as believe
salvation: make trial of me therefore thou cruel wretch, and see if God will
forsake me, who has with open and stretched out arms, received my three
brethren that are gone before me, and whom the womb of so holy a mother at
several times brought forth unto glory. The cruel tyrant hearing this, was
much moved, and lept down from his chair to torment this martyr himself,
that so he might overcome him, and in his fury commanded his tongue to be cut
forth: but he hereat not terrified said unto Antiochus. This cruelty When he
had thus spoken, his tongue was cut out of his mouth, and he bound to a

Then Achas the fifth brother before he was haled to torments, spoke in this
manner. Behold The death of the fourth brother Achas. The fifth brother
presecnted himself to torments before he was called.
(thou tyrant) I come to be punished before thou command me, hope not
therefore any jot to alter his mind, who as thou see desires to be
tormented. The blood of my four innocent brethren which thou have shed, has
condemned thee to hell fire: I am to make them up the number of five, that by
it thy pains may be increased. Tell me (bloody wretch) for what offense by us
committed do thou thus punish us? for what impiety do thou so persecute
us? what villainy Whilst thus he spoke, his executioners by the kings command
took him and cast him into a brazen pot, and was pressed down in it, his head
to his feet: and afterward he suffered all other torments, which his brethren
had endured; yet not amazed hereat, he suddenly started up and thus bitterly
inueighed against the tyrant: Cruel tyrant, how great benefits do thou
against thy will bestow upon us; yea the more thou art incensed against us, the
more acceptable to God shall thou make us: yea I should be sorry if thou
should show mercy upon me. This short affliction gains And thus he
finished his agony and died.

When the tormentors laid hands upon the sixth brother who was called Areth,
whom the tyrant permitted either to choose honor or else punishment: but he
agrieued at this offer, said. Although tyrant I be younger in years then my
martyred brethren, yet my constancy of mind to theirs is not inferior, for
we were all nourished up togetheraltoger, her instructed, and we will all The
valor of the sixth brother
die together in the fear of God. Hasten therefore to thy devised torments, and
that time which thou could spend in exhorting me, spend it in devising
tortures for me. Antiochus hereat confounded, commanded him to be bound to a
pillar with his head hanging down, in such wise as humors running into it
might cause ach, and this done, he caused a fire to be made so far: Off him,
that it could not burn him, but roast him. He also commanded as he hung to be
pricked with awles, that so the heat might pierce into the holes that they made
in his flesh. Whilst thus he was tormented, much blood like froth gathered
about his head and face, and he then spoke in this manner. O noble fight, O
valiant war! O strife between piety and impiety. These men have past their
agonies, whose crown of martyrdom is the punishment of their persecutors: I
do most willingly follow my brethren, that as by blood I am conjoined unto
them, so by death The sixth brother sharply reproves Antiochus.
and so the precept of God remains firm in us. And as he thus spoke, one
took hold of his tongue with a hot pair of tongs, and he suffering the same
torments that his brethren had done, and fried in a frying pan, he gave up the
Ghost.

Six of the brethren being now dead by diversity of torments, only one of
the seven remained alive with his mother, named Jacob, younger in years (but
not in constancy of mind) Jacob the seventh brother brought to torments.
wherefore he called the child unto him, and into a place where no instruments
of torment were, and taking him by the hand he said thus unto him, hoping to
win him by fair speeches. By thy brethrens calamity thou now well have
learned what is prepared for thee if thou disobey me, deliver thy self
therefore from these torments, and I will give thee what honor my kingdom can
afford: thou shall be a Magistrate and general of my army, and one of my
counselors. But perceiving himself not to prevail, he caused the young man's
mother to be called unto him: who coming and standing near her son, the
tyrant said thus unto her. Where are now O worthy woman all thy children?
Behold of such a number, if thou please, the destiny affoords The mother
having heard what the king said, she inclined her self unto the king: which
done, that the king might not understand her, she spoke in Hebrew to her child
as follows. Pity thy mother O son, and comfort thy sorrowful mother, who
bare thee nine months in my womb, and gave thee suck three years, and with
great industry have brought thee vpto this age. I pray thee, dear son,
consider the heaven and earth, and all that in them is, and know that God
created them all of nothing, who also of nothing made mankind. Fear not this
Ethnicks pains and torments, but imitate thy brethren, and contemn death,
that in the day of mercy I may receive thee and thy brethren again in heaven.
As his mother thus admonished him, he in the Hebrew tongue requested to be
unbound, for that he had a secret to disclose unto the king, Cruel tyrant and
I now know thee not only to have been cruel against my brethren, but even
cruelty itself. Wretch that thou art, who gave thee this purple? and who
exalted thee to this kingdom and dignity? even he whom thou in us do
persecute, whose servants and worshippers thou killest and tormentest, for
which thy wickedness thy self shall suffer eternal fire and torments which
shall have no end. Thou art of higher dignity and authority in this world then
other men, yet he that made other men made thee also of the same nature that
they are of al men are borne and must die alike. He that kills another
shows that himself may be killed: thou tearest and tormentest thy own
picture, and image All men are borne and must die alike.
fire, but they who have already suffered this, have received everlasting joy
for their reward; and thou shall anuswere for all the punishment inflicted upon
them. Think not that I expect any favor at thy hands, I will follow my
brethren, and remain constant in our The tyrant hearing thy swas wroth, and
caused him to be tormented: but his mother in torment comforted him, and with
her kind hands held his head, when with violence of the tortures blood issued
out of his mouth, nose and privy parts, the tormentors not ceasing till life
in him was almost spent, but they (by Gods appointment) gave over, and so he
took strength again to endure more then any of his brethren had done; at last
his hands and arms being cut off, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and cried.
O Adonai, O Sabaor be merciful unto me, The death of the youngest brother.
and receive me into the company of my brethren, let thy wrath now cease and
grant them mercy, who by us do make intercession to thee, having said thus,
his tongue being pulled out, he of his own accord went into the fiery frying
pan, and so to the great admiration of Antiochus died.

Behold how evident it is, that reason can rule our affections, seeing that
children hereby, Reason mistres of our affection.
showed more constancy then the tyrant could show cruelty. For it was reasons
force that wrought in them that determination to suffer all torments, rather
then to forsake the way of salvation. These constant young men do fitly
resemble inexpugnable towers, and them, who after a great tempest and
shipwreck, do safely enter the harbor of salvation, who guiding their course
amidst the boisterous waves, at last obtain the wished shore. For every one
of them A similitude of the waves. The seven brethren exhort one another to
suffer death manfully.
strengthened the other by advice and good counsel, and none of them was like
an effeminate person, loath to suffer martyrdom. None used delay herein, but
one followed an others example. Let us therefore die for our law, and imitate
the three children, whom the Assyrians fury condemned to the fiery furnace,
whose patience spread their fame even unto heaven. Whilst thus one of them
exhorted the other, it came to pass, that none of them offended, but each
Isaac, who understanding that it was Gods will he should be sacrificed, he
refused not to submit his body to his fathers sword. Let us (quoth they) yield
our souls to him, of whom we received both soul and body: It is a small
matter for us to suffer loss of these members, seeing that we shall in lieue
of them receive everlasting bliss. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob do joyfully
expect us, as coheires of their kingdom, let us glorify that womb wherein we
were for ten months space, let none of us be more coward then the other, nor
none of us degenerate from the other. We that were all begotten of one father,
and sucked of one milk, must in all things resemble one another, we had one
teacher, and one law inuiolate. And in this True brotherhood.
the other tormented, but all rejoiced at the others death. O children whose
dignity far surpasses the royalty of Kings and Princes, whose glory and
virtue is unspeakable! None of you were terrefied with fear, but you so
hastened to your deaths, as though you had only been to go to bliss and
felicity, you were truly brethren, who even by death were linked together.
God has greatly in you magnified our nation, and in you showed us all an
example of fortitude: A pledge and sign of brotherly amity.
whom therefore I think he caused to be so many in number, as were the days
wherein he created the world, so that seven brethren may resemble the seven
days, wherein in all things were made. And why should we so admire this
fortitude in these young men, when a woman armed her self with contempt of
death? who indeed is not to be called a mother, but to be

For the mother seeing her children dead, was with a kind and godly zeal
inflamed also to suffer, and no marvel, seeing that the very bruit beasts,
if they perceive violence offered to their The mothers grief.
young, do oppose themselves to perils in their defense, and protect them with
their wings, teeth, and talents: yea and every one that is any way able to
make resistance, opposes her self to the enemy to defend her young. And not
only bruit beasts do this, but even Bees do defend not only their young,
but also their honey, threatening their sting to them that offer to taste
thereof, and more esteeming the good of their young then their own lives. But
this zealous mother directed by the spirit of God, and reasons loare, hasted
that her children might die before your mother, and if this be a commendation
in them that beside the shape of body receive nothing The mother suffered
seven torments before she was tormented.
whilst they were torn in pieces: yea I say little, affirming that thou with
patience did behold these sights, for even thou thy self did exhort them
thereunto, thou reioycedst to see one of them torn in pieces with fleshhookes,
the other to be racked upon the wheel, and the third to be

You children were not overcome by the fabulous Sirens enchauntments, who to
honor God doubted not to leave your mother without children: And she sprung of
noble stock, chose rather to want you all for a short time, then to incur
eternal damnation, wishing rather that the bodies of her children should be
tormented then their souls. Well she knew, that nothing was more frail and
infirm then our bodies, which though persecution be wanting, are often killed
with agues, and abundance of blould or fluxes: And who is ignorant of
shipwreck incident to sailers, hazard of life unto them that travail, and
sudden death to those that live in ease? Sudden casualtie by fire, and by the
hands of thieves, and a thousand other ways to dispatch our lives? Noe did
persist inuiolate amongst such stormy waves: for as it A similitude from the
Deluge.
withstood the force of the Deluge, and being built strongly with firm bords,
did not suffer any thing within it to perish: so thou sufferedst not the tyrant
to overcome the holy Ghost which thou had received in thy heart.

Behold of what force and efficacy reason is, which often time makes us men
inferior to women. For neither was Daniel so terrified at the sight of the
Lions, nor the three children with the fiery furnace, as this woman was grieved
at the death of every one of her children before she came The mothers speech
exhorting her seven sons to suffer.
stouter then the never yielding rocks, did neither forsake her children in
their torments, nor in their death, but in a manner compelled them to perish,
and never sorrowed thereat. For being apprehended together with her seven
sons, she considering Eleazars martyrdom, did thus exhort them in the Hebrew
tongue. O my most dear and loving children, let us hasten to that Eleazars
aged body endured, call to mind our father Abraham of worthy memory, who
having but one only son, did sacrifice him being willed by God so to do,
and feared not to bring him to the Altar whom he scarcely in his age obtained.
Isaak also was willing to be sacrificed by his father, knowing that God was to
be obeyed in all things, the like may be said of Daniel and the three children:
believe me we are rather tried then tormented. For whatsoever this world
affords, is mortal and like a shadow.

Thus did this mother arm her childrens minds with fortitude, and she a woman
wrought A golden saying of the mother of her seven children
in men manlike minds. Last of all, her children being all dead, she a worthy
mother of so many Antiochus now waxed hot, and he commanded this worthy
mother to be tormented, who was as the tyrant willed stripped naked, and hanged
up by the hands, and most cruelly whipped, her dugges and paps were pulled off,
and she put into the red hot frying pan, being most willing to follow her
childrens The mother followed her sons in torments.
steps in torment, and lifting up her eyes and hands to heaven, she prayed for
all women with child, and so yielded her chaste soul to God. But Antiochus was
stricken with fire from heaven. O mistress of justice, who followed thy
triumphing children, O conqueror of tyrants, and a looking glass for all
Martyrs: O example of patience, not only to women but to all men, that The
light of the just. 1. Cor. 15.
your passions, none could with dry eye read or behold them, all people would
flock about to see it, all people would praise and esteem him to have offered
a great gift, who to Gods glory had painted that noble stratageme. And if any
skillful workman should engraue this Tragedy upon a sepulcher or in his house,
doubtless he should be freed from all plague and misfortune. But where could
a stone be found able to contain so many torments? Therefore the old man
Eleazar, the mother and her seven sons; are for their nobility graced with a
sepulcher, and great reverence is done unto them of all men, yea even by men
that are not of our religion: and there is a constellation of eight stars
ordained as an argument of their justice, and Angels did execute their
funerals. The tyrant himself was astonished to see the constancy of such
godly minds. And thus have they found such favor in the sight of God, that
they have obtained remission of the sins of our nation: for presently after,
the tyrant was destroyed, and Israel there was freed from his tyranny.

But Antiochus seeing the greatness of their faith and their contempt of
death, gathered an army of footmen out of the Hebrews, by whose help he
terrified his enemies, and got great Antiochus levied an army of footmen from
amongst the Hebrews.
renown. O blessed seed of Abraham! behold what benefit the agony of the
mother, and her Antiochus being mad and his entrails devoured Antiochus dyed
stinking exceedingly. 2. Match. 9.
with worms, he smelling most like carrion, gave up the ghost: and was ever
after death punished for his offense. For when he could not make the Citizens
of Jerusalem to forsake their law, he made war against the Persians, and
there received that which he deserved.

It now remains that we briefly repeat all that is before said. For in her
agony, this sacred An Epitome of the life of the seven sons and their mother.
mother said thus unto the standers by. Whilst it was lawful for me, I kept my
self a virgin, and then I married and lived a chaste wife, and forsook not my
own house, I brought forth such this, and many things else she recounted. And
what more? She set before her childrens eyes the example of the Prophets, how
Abel by his brother was slain, Isaak to be offered insteade of a sacrifice, how
Jacob was banished, Joseph kept in prison, Daniel cast before the Lions, the
three children into the fiery furnace, she rehearsed also unto them the book
of Esaias, where it is said: Although thou do go through the fire, the flame
shall not burn thee. That of David; Solomon, who proposes the tree of life to
such as do the will of God, not omitting that of Ezechiel, These dry and
withered bones shall live again: Also that of Moses Canticle, I will kill and
restore to life, and the length of your days is in my hand. Unhappy tyrant
what did thy caudrons red hot, and thy torments profit thee, what auailed it
thee to cut away their eye lids, and to pull out their tongues, thou thy self
for so doing do now endure far worse then all these. And they whom thou
killedst (believe The joy of the blessed in everlasting life.
me) enjoy everlasting comfort, and are now secure of bliss and revenge. For
they who suffer for Gods sake shall have happy success, when God the Father
of all things shall reward them with life everlasting that follow him. Thus
have I consecrated these worthy memorials, which

The end of all Josephus works.
FINIS.
A Tahle of the chiefest and most memorable things, which are handled in this
Work.
A
AAron Moses brother 47. a. comes to meet him, ibid. a. holds up Moses
hands, 57. a. elected high priest, 65. c. his sons, 66. a. high priesthood
confirmed to him, 80. g, h, i. gives his stool to Eleazar, 82. h. his death,
ibid. h. Aarons rod fructifieth, 81. a. Abdon Judge of Israel, 120. k. renowned
for his issue, ibid. k. Abel second son of Adam, 5. a. is commended, ibid. a,
b. is stain by his brother, and why, ibid, b, c. Abias leuieth an army, 211, b.
overcomes Jeroboam, 211. f. dies, 212. g. his issue, ibid. Abiathar escapes
Saul's hands, 149. d. tells David of his families slaughter, 150. g. asks
counsel of God. 157. b. dispossessed of the priesthood, 191. d. help Adonias,
186. l. Abigal pacifieth David, 152 k, l, m. after married to David, 153. b.
Abihu Aarons son burned, 67. a. and why, ibid, a. Abimelech king of Gerar
enamoured of Sara, 16, i. plagued for taking her, ibid, i. made a covenant with
Abraham, ibid, l. expels Isaac his country, 21. b. after makes a league
with him, ibid. c. d. Abimelech Gedeons bastard son, 117. c. kills, 69. of
his brethren, and usurps, ibid. e, f. practices against the Sichemites, 118.
i, k. slaieth them, and sacketh their City, ib. l. burned the Sichemites, fled
to the rock, 118. l, m. takes Tebez, 119. a. is wounded and slain, ibid.
Abiram rebellious, 79. a, b. he and those that were with him swallowed up, 80.
g. Abisai overcomes the Idumaeans, 167. c. sent against the Ammonites, 169.
a. Abisai, 183. c. Abisace nourishes David, 186. i. Abner Saul's uncle, 132. l.
questioneth with Saul, ibid. m. General of his army, 147. c. makes Isboseth
king, 160. g. reuolteth from Isboseth, 161. a. kills Azael, 160. persuades
the Governors to create David king, 161. c, d. is slain, 162. g. Abraham son
of Thares, 11. c. tenth from Noe, ib. e. taught the Egyptians religion and
arts, 13. b, c. first preacher of the word, 12. i. his wisdom, ib. an
Astronomer, 12. k. and 13. c. an Arithmetitian, ibid. c. his house, 12. l.
oppressed by famine, ibid. m. divided the land with Lot, 13. c. rescueth Lot
and the Sodomites, 14. h. A son promised him, 14. k. and 15. b. foretold his
progeny to be evil entreated, 14. k, l. circumcised himself and Ismael, 15.
b. entertaineth Angels, and entreats for the Sodomites, ib. d, e. intended to
offer his son, 18. h. k. marries Chetura, 19. provides a wife for his son,
ib. d. dies, 20. l. is commended, ibid. Absence of David excused, 147. c, d.
Absolon kills Amnon, 173. a. fled to Gessur, 173. c. revoked from banishment,
and how, ibid. d, e. affects the kingdom, 174. k. proclaimed king, ibid. l.
passes over Jordan, 177. d. his overthrow, 178. h. slain by Ioab, ib. i.
Abundance foretold, 40. l. Abundance of silver, 204. h. Abundance of victuals
foreshewed, 228. i, k. effected, 229. d. Abundance of victual showed, 722. g,
h. Acclamation of the people, 451. c. Accusation of Laban against Jacob, 25. b.
of Jacob against him, ib. d, e. of Putifars wife against Joseph, 32. g. of Doeg
against Achimelech, 149. a. of Aristobulus and Hyrcanus, 353. b, c. of
Antipater against his brethren, 595. f. of Herod and Nicholaus, 602. m. 603. a.
604. h. of Antipater against Archelaus 609. d. of the Jews, 612. k. Achab son
of Amri king of Israel, 214. h. follows impieties, ibid. took to wife
Iesabell, ibid. seeks Elias, 215. c. coueteth Naboths vineyard, 217. b. his
repentance, ibid. f. twice overcomes the Syrians, 219. a, b, d. reproved for
dismissing Adad, 220. h, i. imprisoneth Micheas, and why, 220. i. 221. b.
rejected his advice, 221. e. f. wounded, dies, 222. g, h. Achabs 70. sons,
232. Achar stole the spoils dedicated to God, 102 m. hid them in his tent,
103. a. found guilty, and put to death, ibid. c. d. Achaz of Judah sacrifices
his son, 241. a. serves Idols, ib. a, b. 242. g. ouerthrown in battle, 241.
c. hireth Theglaphalasar, 241. f. shuts the temple gates, 242. h. dies,
ibid. Achias reproved Solomon, 204. l. foretold Jeroboam to be king over 10.
tribes, 205. c. Achis a king of the Philistines, 148. h. leads out David
against the Hebrews, 156. k. dismisseth him, and why, ibid. l, m. Achitophels
counsel against David, 176. a. hangs himself, 177. b. Acmes letter to
Antipater, 446. m. 447. a. executed, 450. g. Acquaintance of Rebecca with
Abraham's servant, 20. g. Act of Saul most malicious, 149. d. an Action how said
to be good, 140. h. Action of Saul and his people, 139. e. Acts of the
Israelites, 109. b, c, d, e, f. Acts of Simon against the Zealous, 692. h. etc.
Act most cruel, 723. c. d. Actian war, 584, h. Adad king of Damasco
overcome, 167. a. Adad king of Syria proposes conditions to Achab, 218. h, i.
k. overthrown, 217. a. his second expedition, ibid. c. taken prisoner, is
dismissed, ibid. d, e. discomfiteth and slaieth Achab, 222. g. h. asks
counsel of Elizaeus, 229. c. his death foretold, 229. f. Adam created, and
how, 3. f. placed in paradise, 4. g. forbidden the tree of knowledge only, 4.
h. transgresses, ibid. i. cast out of Paradise, 5. a. begot Cain and Abel,
ibid. a and other children also, 6. g. his age and death, ibid. g, h. and 7. b.
prophesied of a twofold destruction, ibid. h. Adar a month of the Hebrews,
99. e. Ader enemy to Solomon, 205. a. spoiled the lands of the Israelites,
205. c. Adoni-bezec taken, 109. c. punished, confesses Gods justice, ibid. c.
Adonias affects the kingdom, 186. i. flies to the Altar, 187. d. requires
Abisace, 291. a, c. slain, ibid. c. Adversities befell the Israelites, 113. c.
and why, ibid. c. Advice of Raguel allowed, 58. i. of the Elders rejected, 206.
i. of young men accepted, ibid. l. Adulteress her policy, 32. g, h.
Adultery, 71. b. punished, 94. h. Adultery of Elies sons, 125. b. Adultery
of David, 169. d. Affairs of Joseph, 639 b. Affection of Joseph toward his
brethren, 38. l. of Jonathan to David, 144 m. Affinity of Jacob with Rachel,
23. b. of Saul and Jonathan with David, 144. i. 145. b. of Demetrius with
Ptolemey, 326. h. Affliction of the Hebrews, with the causes thereof, 41, b,
c, d. 46. g. l. 47. e. Africa from whence it took his name, 19. c. Agag king
of the Amalechites taken, 139. c. spared, and why, ibid, c. put to death, 140.
l, m. and why, ibid. Agar Saraes handmaid, 14. m. contemned her mistress, and
why, ibid. m. fled, commanded to return, 14. m. and 15. a. promised happiness,
17. c. brought forth Ismael, ibid. a. cast out with her son, 17. b.
comforted, ibid, c. Age of Isaac at his offering, 18. g. when he died, 27. d.
Age of the fathers before the flood, 7. a, b, c. Age of Abraham, 20. l. of
Jacob, 40. m. Aggaeus the prophet encourages the Jews, 271. b. Agreement of
the seditious, 700. m. 710. h. Agrippa offers 100. fat Oxen, 413. c.
reconciled to the Ilyensians. 414. g. confirms the Jews privileges, 415. c.
writes to the Ephesians, 422. h. Agrippa becomes poor, 472. i. k. borrows
money, 473. b, c, e, admitted to Caesar's presence, d. accused by Eutichus, 474
h, m. 475. a. b. imprisoned, ibid. hates Tiberius, 618. h. gets Caius
friendship, ibid. his happy fortune foretold, 476. g. h. certified of Tiberius
death, 498. g. departs to his kingdom, ibid. l. his request of Caius, 482.
i. his speech to the Senate, 504. h. 619. f, 620. g. hangs up his golden
chain, 507. d. his acts, 509. a, b, c, etc. 510. 511. c. saluted for a God,
510. in his death, 511. c. 610 k. his children, ibid. d. Agrippas request to
the Empress. 5 ac. m. obtains Philips tetrarchie. 52^. a. gets a portion
of Galilee, 522. g. deposes Joseph. 524. i inlargeth the city of Caesarea,
525. a. his kindness to the Berytians, etc. f 525. b. etc. his Epistles to
Joseph, 550 m. Agrippa excuses Caesar, etc 628. h. his oration, 627. c. 628.
629. 630. driven out of the city, 631. b. And that came to the Romans. 6, 7 c,
f. Aid of the Idumaeans, 677. a, b, c. Ainan or Aitaken and burnt, 103. e. f.
Ainites discomfit three thousand Israelites, and slew 36. 103. a. after put to
flight and slain by Iosuah. ibid. c. Air temperate, 688 i. Albirius governor
of Iudaea, 524 i. full of wickedness, 623. d. pacifieth the country, 524. l.
executes malefactors. 525. c. Alcimus high Priest, 313. accuses Judas and his
brethren, ibid. c. his popularitie, 314. g, h. kills of all Judas faction,
ibid. h. dies suddenly, 315. d. Alexander Polyhistor, 19. c. Alexander King of
Macedonia, 284. i. overthrows Darius army, ibid. subdueth Darius, 285. a.
marches toward Jerusalem, ibid. e, f. honorably received by the high Priest
and the rest, 2^5: f. 286. g. his sacrifice in the temple, ibid. h. i. adoreth
the high Priest, 286. g. his death and successors, 287, e, f. Alexander warreth
against Demetrius, 320. g. labors to win Jonathan, ibid. l, m. slaieth
Demetrius, 321. f. marieth Ptolomies daughter, 323. d. sends presents to
Jonathan, 325, a. discomfited and slain, 326 g. Alexander Zebina obtains the
kingdom, 337. b. slain, ibi. b. Alexander king of the Jews, 341. a. 563. a.
besieges Ptolemais ibid. c. his overthrow, 342. k. besieges Gaza, 343. c.
sedition raised against him, 563. c. 344 h. overcome, ibid l. 563. f. citions
cast at him, 341. h. crucifieth 800. Jews. 345. a. 564. b. his sickness and
advise to his wife, 346. i, k, l. 564. l. his death and funeral, 347. a, b.
Alexander son of Aristobulus, 356. i. overcome, ibid. l. 668. l. beheaded,
359. b. Alexander Herodes son, 413. b. marries Glaphyra, ibidem. his
defense, 418. k. 419. a, b, c, etc. reconciled to his father, 419. e. 427. f.
bribeth the Eunuchs. 593. b. imprisoned, 427, a. 593. b. accused of treason,
ibid. 431. g, h, etc. writes books 593. c. condemned, 434. h. 596. m.
strangled, 435. c. 597. d. false Alexander, etc. 460 g. 613. d. condemned to
tug at an oar, 460. g. 614. f. g. Alexander exercises cruelty, 261. d.
Alexandra governs the kingdom, 347. f. imprisoneth Aristobulus wife and
children, 564. l. commits charge to the Jews, 348. g. her embassage to
Tigranes, 348. h. her death, ibid. 565. d. Alexandra solliciteth Antonius, and
why, 384. h. excuses her self, ibid. suspected by Herod etc. 385. b.
pretending to fly is betrayed, ibid. c. certifieth Cleopatra of Herodes
treachery, 387. b. strives to acquit her self, 398 m 399. a. seeks to get
Herod's castles, 399 c. put to death, 400. g. Alexas marries Salome, 437. c.
dismisseth the Nobles. 450. m. Alliance of Abraham with his wife, 16. l. of
lacob with Laban, 23. c. 25. f. of Saul and Jonathan with David, 145. b, of
Judah with the Israelites. 241. d. Allowance of Micheas, 221. f. Allusion of
Jonathan, 147. f. Alacrity of the Romans. 702. m. Allegiance renounced, 748.
l. Altar of incense, 63. b. Altars of Idolators to be destroyed, 90. h. one
Altar to be erected, etc. and why, 90. l. Altar builded by Iosuah, 102. g.
Altar erected by the two tribes and half, 107. c. and why. 108. i. Altar of
gold, and of brass where placed, 198. g. h. Altar in Bethel. 207. claue in
twain, ibid, f. Altar erected by David, 185. b. Amalechites war against the
Israelites, 56. gh. overcome by the Israelites, 57. b, c spoiled, and their
utter ruin foretold, ibid, d, and 98. g. overcome the Israelites, 115. f. are
destroyed, 139. b, c. d. burn Siceleg, 157. a. Aman honored by all but the
Jews, 278. h, i. his petition for the Jews ruin, ibid. k. his hatred against
Mardoche, 282. k. his treachery discovered, 281. e, f. judged to the gallows,
ibid, f. his goods bestowed on Mardoche, 282. g. Amarames Moses father, see
Amram. Amasias king of Judah, 236. h. reuengeth his fathers death, 237. c.
overcomes the Amalechites; ibid. c, d. reproved, and why, 237. d, e.
commands Ioas to yield him homage ibi. f. his army flies, and he taken
prisoner, 283. g. is slain, ibid. h. Amaza slain, 181. c. Amazement of the
seditious, 743. a, b. Ambition, 162. h. of Adonias, 185. i. of John, 685: a. of
Eleazar, 697. c. f. An Ambush laid for the Ainites, 103. e. Abushes of Saul for
David, 144. g, h, etc. 145. d, e, f. 146. g. h. of Adad for Ioram, 227. a.
Ammon Lots son, 16. h. Amnon deflowreth Thamar, 172. i, k. Ammonites oppress
the Israelites, 119. b, c. and are overcome, ibid. f. iniute David's
Ambassadors, 168. k. revenge wrought on them, 169. b, c, d. war against
Iosaphat, 223. e. kill one another, 224. h. Amorites overcome, 82. l. their
country possessed by the Hebrews, 83. b. Amos a wicked King, 248. i. is
slain, ibid. Amphitheater built by Herod, 401. c. 406. h. Amram Moses father,
41. m. prays to God, 42. g. casts Moses into the river, 42. k, l. and why,
ibid. Amri King of Israel, 214. g. slew Thaman, ibid. his impictie and death,
ibid. Ananias death, 633. a. Ananus high Priest, 524, i. had five sons his
successors, ibid. Ananias high Priest, 524. l. Ananias high priest slain, 722.
i. Ananus stoneth James, 524. k. Ananus governor of Jerusalem, 639. d. his
iruectiue against the Zealous, 674. h. disposes this soldiers, etc. 675 c, d.
slain, 680. l. Ananus a cruel soldier, 722. k. Achimelech entertaineth David,
148. g, h. delivers him Goliahs sword, ibid. h. accused to Saul, 149. a. and
slain, ibid. c. Ancestors conceal not honest things, (...). h. Angels guarded
Elizeus, 227. c. Angels (i. sons) of God, etc. 6. k. Angel resists Balaam,
84. g. Angels promise Abraham a son, 13. d. e. enter Lots house ibid. f.
foretell the destruction of Sodom, 15. e. Angel appeared to Agar, 14. m. 17.
b, c, d. to Jacob, 22. k. l. 26. g, h, i, k. to Manoach his wife, 120. m.
foretells her Sampsons birth, ibid. m. works a miracle, 121. c. 227. c.
Angersee wrath. Anilaeus receives charge from Artabanus, 485. c, d. kills a
noble man, 486. h. reproved and accused, ibid. h, i. takes Mithridates
prisoner, 487. a Anna wife of Elcana prayed to God for a son, 125. d. bare
Samuel and consecrated him to God, ibid. d, e. Annius takes Gerasa, 689. b.
Answer of Simon to Jesus oration, 679. a. Answer of Isaac, 18. i. of Balaam
to Balac, 83. m. of God to Iosuah, 103. c. of Achab to the Syrians, 218. k. of
Caesar to Herod, 586. g, of Antipater to Herod, 603. d, e. of John 671. b, c.
of Eleazar to Antiochus, 803. b. of Alexander, 286. g. Antaeus against whom
Hercules made war, 19. c. Antigonus copartner in the kingdom, 339. d. his
death complotted, ibid. e. effected, 340. g. 562. h, i. Antigonus accuses
Hyrcanus and Antipater, 360 i. 571. a. promises the Parthians money, and why,
370. l. restored to the kingdom. 373. a. cutteth off Hyrcanus ears, ibid. a.
570. l. declared an enemy to the Romans, 374. i. k. 577. e. vpbraideth Herod,
375. e. gets Massada, 578. g. repulseth Herod's power, ibid. f. surpriseth
Herod's victualers, 376. h, i. cruelly handles Joseph's careas, 580. m.
submits himself to Sosius, 381. a. put to death, 382. d. 383. a. Antiochus
the great vexes the Jews, 296. g, h. recouereth cities of Caelesyria, ibid.
i. his Epistle to Ptolomey, 296. his Edict in honor of the Temple, 297. b. his
Epistle to Zeuxis, ibid. c, h. Antiochus Epiphanes departs Egypt, 303. c.
spoileth the temple of Jerusalem, ibid. d. 558. m. abrogateth Gods laws, 304.
g. 559. a. inforceth the Jews to Idolatry, ibid. g. h. tortureth Eleazar,
803. d, e. ^slayeth him, 804. h. forbids the Jews to use their laws, 304.
m. 305. a, etc. inuadeth Iudaea again, 507. a. departs into Persia, ibid. b.
besieges Elymais, 311. a. falls sick and dies, ibid. b. 559. c. Antiochus
Eupator created king, 311. e. marches into Iudaea; 312. g. 559. e. fights
with Judas Machabees, 312. i. marches against Philip, ibid. l. enters a
league with Judas, 313. a. slaieth Philip, ib. c. displaceth Onias, 526. i. is
slain, ibid. d. Antiochus son of Alexander, 327. a. crowned king, ibid, f.
discomfiteth Demetrius, 328. g. favors Jonathan, ibid. Antiochus marries
Cleopatra, 333. d. puts Tryphon to flight, ibid. e. warreth against
Hyrcanus, 335. a, b. c. permits a truce, ibid. slain, 336. g. Antiochus
Gryphus overcomes Alexander, 337. b. his war against his brother, ibid. b.
slain. 344. g. Antiochus Cyzicenus warreth against his brother, 337. b. 341.
d. put to flight, 337. e. slain, 344. g. Antiochus Eusebius puts Seleucus
to flight, 344. h. slaieth Seleucus brother, ibid, dies, ibid. l. m. Antiochus
Seleucus slaieth his uncle, 344. g. burned, ibid. Antiochus Dionysius king,
345. e. thrust out of his kingdom, ibid. slain, 346. g. Antiochus perfidious
to his Citizens, 747. c, d. e. Antiochus king of Comegena accused, 754. his
choice, etc. ibid. k. l. reconciled to Caesar. 755. a, b. Antipas Herod's son,
449. d. claims the kingdom, 608. m. accuses Archelaus, 609. a, b. has part
of the kingd. with Archelaus, 459. d. Antipater the Idumean, 350. m. incenseth
the princes against Aristobulus, 351. a. relieueth Gabinius, 357. d. his wife
and children, 359. a, etc. gathers soldiers for Caesar's service, ibid. d.
made a Citizen of Rome, and Governor over Iudaea, 360. h, i, k, l. 570. l.
makes his sons governors, 361. f. persuades Hyrcanus to fly, 565. f. 666.
a. his exploits, 570. k. poisoned. 367. a. 577. c. Antipater banished, 589. b.
aduaneed, 416. l. enciteth his father against his brothers, 417. a, d. his
congratulation, 419. f. plotteth against his brethren, 423. e. 591. e, d. cause
of mischief, 426. k. governs the kingdom, etc. 436. l. practices his
fathers death, ibid. m. 601. e. could not deceive his Aunt, 437. b. hates his
brothers children, 437. c. his treasons, 601. d. accuses Syllaeus, 601. e.
440. i. studieth to win favor, 547. e, f. conspireth against his father,
597. e. accused by Herod, 443. e. etc. 602. m. answers his fathers
objections, 444. g. hated of all, 602. h. 446. g. has liberty to justify
himself, ibid. h. 603. d. put to death. 450. g, h. 606. h. Antipater accuses
Antipater, 441. e. Antipater accuses Archelaus, 453. e. 609. b. c. Antipatris
built, 420. m. burned, 637. a, b. Antiphilus letter to Antipater, 446. l.
blamed. 447. c. Antiquity of the Jews proved, 768. l. m. 769. a. etc. see
Arguments. Antiquities when written, 528. h. Antonia described, 708. h, i. not
unlike a City, ibid. i. Antonius writes to Hyrcanus, 368. l. m. writes in
the Jews behalf, 369. c. makes Tetrarchs, 370. h. loves Herod, 374. makes
Herod king, ibid. k. requires Aristobulus. 384. i. gives Cleopatra a portion
of Iudaea and Arabia, 389. b. conquereth Armenia, ibid. e. Aphrica, once called
Lybia, ^9. b, c. Apollonius accuses the Jews, 790. l. Apollonius sent to rob
the temple, 802. h. acknowledged his offense, ibid. i. General of Antiochus
army, 306. k. discomfited and slain, ibid. k. Apollonius Darius put to flight,
324. h. i. Apology of Achimelech, 149. b. of Aristobulus, 353. d. Apostasy of
the priests, 284. l. Apostates from the Jewish religion. 303. a, b. Apparel,
615. c. Appion wrote coldly. 782. i. of Moses and the Jews, ibid. his fiction
refuted, 783. a. b. etc. denies his country, 784. g. raileth against the
Jews, ibid h. his objection of the Asses head answered, 786. m. vpbraideth the
Jews, 789. c. praises himself, ibid. accuses the Jews, 480. g. Apples of
Mandragora, 24. (...). Apprehension of John and Simon. 744. m. Apsan governed
Israel, 120. i. his children, ibid. i. Arabians Ismaels posterity. 17. a. c.
slay Herod's soldiers 390. m. kill the Jews ambassadors. 391. c. overcome,
393. b. receive thieves, 429. a. brake the league made, 577. a. defeat Herod's
army, 584. g. are overcome, 585. c. an Arbiter betwixt the Senate and Claudius,
619. f. Archelaus accused, 442. i, k. promises his subjects favor, 608. g.
appointed k. 451. a, b. 606. k. etc. lamenteth, 607. f. suppresseth the
sedition, 452. l. m. 453. a. repaires to Rome, ib, b. approved; etc. 455. a.
accused, 458. k. excused, 459. b. accused and banished, 461. a. etc. 614. h.
his dream, ibid. i. Archelaus k. of Cappadocia, 427. c. his ingenious speech,
593. e. f. conferreth with Herod, 594. g. reconcileth Alexander to his father,
428. g. made Herod and Pheroras friends, 428 h. 594. h. i. excuses himself,
432. h. Aretas king of Arabia. 342. e. overthrows Alexander, 346. g. puts
Aristobulus to flight, 351. e. furnishes Hyrcanus with 50000. soldiers, 556.
g. Aretas accuses Syllaeus, 440. f. discomfiteth Herod's army, 470. k. l.
Arguments for the Jews Antiquity, 768. l, m. 769. a. etc. 770. g. etc. 771.
a. etc. 772. g. etc. 773. a. etc. 774. g. etc. 775. a. Arioch a captain of the
Assyrians, 13. c. Aristaeus obtains the Jews liberty, 289. b, c.
Aristobulus first king, etc. 339. c. imprisoneth his brethren, famisheth his
mother, ib. 561. f. his punishment, 340. i, k. 562. m. compels the Ituraeans
to be circumcised, ibid. l. slays Antigonus, 340. g. his miserable end, 340.
l. 563. a. Aristobulus accuses the Pharisees, 347. d. his attempt, 348. i.
seaseth the Castles, ibid. k. strives for the kingdom with Hyrcanus, 350. k.
agreed. ibid. k. his war against Aretas and Hyrcanus, 352. l. his presents to
Pompey, 352. m. promises Pompey money. 354. i. led to Rome, 3^6. g. poisoned,
359. c. Aristobulus, why not sent to Antonius, 384. i, k. his death contrived,
385. f. drowned, 386. i. Aristobulus Herod's son, 413. b. accused, 417. e.
etc. reconciled, 419. e. objected to his wife her birth, 592. i. condemned,
434. h. 596. m. strangled. 435. c. 597. d. Aristobulus hates Agrippa, 473. a,
b. entreats Petronius, 481. b. Aristobulus' governs Armenia, 522. g. his
subtlety, 546. h. Aristocracie the best kind of government, 92. h.
Arithmeticke, 13. c. Arius king of Lacedaemon, 302. h. sends letters to
Onias, ibid. Arc of Noah, 6. l. the length and breadth thereof, ibid. l, m.
where it rested 7. d. Ark of God surprised, 126. l. carried into the temple of
Dagon, 127. c. carried to Bethsama, 128. m. brought to Jerusalem, 165. c. f.
Arc transferred into Ceriathiarim. 129. b. Arc carried into the temple, 197.
e. f. placed in the sanctuary, and so it the tables of stone, 198. g. 100000.
^med men against Joseph, 641. c. Arms of the Egyptians, etc. 52. h. Armor of
Goliath, 142. h. Armor of Saul, 143. a. Armor of the Roman footmen. 648. k.
the Armies order when the tabernacle removed, 72. l, m. an Army sent against
the Madianites, 87. b. Army of Senacherib destroyed, 246, k. an huge Army of
the Canaanites, 105. a. Army of Susac 209. d. of Iosaphar, 220. l. of Ozias,
239. c. Army of the Romans, 647. e. f. Army of Herod overthrown, and why, 470.
l. m. Arnon a river, etc. 82. h. Arrival of the Israelites at Raphidim, 55. c,
d. of Raguel in Sinai, 57. e. of the Arc at Bethsama. 128. m Arrogancy of
Amasias, 237. e. of Ozias, 239. d. e. of the Jews, 74^ c. Arsaces k. of
Parthia, 330. l. takes Demetrius, ibid. slaieth Antiochus, 336. g. Asprenas
gown defiled. 494. h. he is cut pieces, 496. h. Art of forging, who first
invented 5. f. Artabanus king of Media, 465. c. obtains Parthia, ibid.
restored to his kingdom, 469. e. Artabanus requires Izates assistance, 516.
g, h. recouereth his kingdom, ib. k. Artaxerxes k. of Persia, 266. l. no man
to approach his throne, unless he were called, 277. g honors Mardoche, 281.
b, c. hangs Ainan, ibid. (...). sends letters for the Jews safety, 282.
i. Artorius saves himself, 733. c. his promise to L^ius, ibid. Aruntius
signifies the Emperors death, 497. c. Asa king of Judah, 212. g. his piety,
ibid. 1. hi^ victory, ibid. k. inciteth the king o^ D^masco against Basa, 213.
d. dies, 214. h Ascalonits punished, and why, 299. d. Aser the son of Jacob,
24. k. what it signifies, ibid. k. his sons, 40. g. Asinaeus beset by the
governor. of Babylon, 484. i, k. his friendship sought, 485. a, b. receives
charge from Artabanus ibid. c, d. poisoned. 486. l. Asphaltite lake, 688. l.
admirable property thereof, ibid. Assault of Ieru^lem, 726. l. of Antonia,
728. (...). Assault for how much sold, 75. b. Asses head sold, 227. Ass
speaks to Baalam, 84. g. Asses how many taken at one booty, 87. e. Asses of
Cis lost, 131. f. 132. g. found, ibid. l. Asses he^d objected, 786. l. m.
Assembly of the Hebrews thrice in the year, 90. m. Assembly of Samaritans on
mount Garizim, 657. b. Assurance of Joseph, etc. 658. i. k. Assistance of God
promised, 89. c, d. of Saul to the men of Iabes, 134. i. Assyrians Lords over
Asia, 13. d. overthrew the Sodomites, ibid. f. of whom took their name, 19. c.
overcame the Israelites, 240 i. 242. g. 243. c. transported them, 240. i. 242.
g. 243. c. vanquished the Syrians and them of Damasco, 241. f. and 242. g.
their destruction foretold, 240. l. effected, 247. b. Astrologicall
predictions, 477. c. an Astronomer, who, 12. ^k, and 13. c. 6. h. Astronomy
invented, 6. h, and 12. k. and 13 c. Athali^ rooteth out the royal blood, 233,
e, f. and put to death, 234. k. Athni^la Judge of Israel, 113. e, f.
overcomes Schisar, ibid. f. recouereth the Israelites liberty, ibid. f.
Athrong^s ^surpeth the kingdom, 456. m. 611. c. taken, 457. b. c. Attendance
on Saul, 133. e. Attire of Vespasian and T^us, 750. i. Aua^ice, 162. h. of
Antiochus, 333. f. of Sabinus, 455. c. not terrified with pu^ishment, 723. c.
Authority how purchased. 40. k, l. Authority of Moses, 74. m. Authority of
Mardocheus, 283. c. of the Pharisees, 346. l. Authors of the sedition punished,
80. g. h. Authors of iui^es punished, 659. c. Azarias the prophet exhorts to
virtue, 212. l. Azarias the high Priest, 239. c. Azael king of the Assyrians,
217. a. Azaels tyranny f^retold, 219. f. 230. g. inuadeth Iudaea, 236. g. hired
to depart, ibid. ^deth the Israelites, 235. b. destroys their country, ibid.
b. Azotians plagued, and why, 127. e, f.
B
Baal God of the Tyr^, 233. d. his priests slain, ibid. Baaras a root, 752. k.
his property. ibid. Baasa king of Israel, 212. h. rooteth out Ier^boams race,
ibid. his i^pietie, 213. a. a prophecy against him, ibid. surpriseth Ramath,
ibid. dies. 213. d. Pabas sons preserved, 400. l. accused, 401. (...), b.
slain, ibid. Babylon, the place where tongues were confounded, 9. d. what it
signifies, ^bid. e. bes^eged and taken, 262. h. Babylonians require Anilaeus,
487. e, f. stay, the Jews, 488. g, h, i. Babylonian veil, 707. a. Bacchides
sent against Judas, 313. e. uses tyranny and treachery, 314. g. fights with
Judas, 316. h, i. is slain, ibid. murthereth those of Judas faction, 318. g.
practices against Jonathan, ibid. i. reuengeth himself on the fugitives, 319.
d. makes peace with Jonathan, ibid. e. Bagoses general of Artaxerxes army,
283. f. offe^ outrage to the Jews. ibid. Bakers dream expounded, 33. a, b.
hanged. ibid. b. Bala Rachel^ handmaide, 24, h, i. bare Nep^halim and Dan,
ibid. i, k. Baalam a diuiner or prophet, 83. e. denies to go with Balacks
ambassadors, ibid. e, f. com^eth to Balac, 84. i. prophecyeth good to befall
the Israelites, 84. i, k. his counsel to Balac and the Madianites, 85. b, c.
Balac sends an embassage to the Madianites, 83. e. also to Balaam, ibid. e.
r^proueth him, and why, 84. l. follows Balaams counsel, 85. d. Balin a king
of Syria, 13. e. Ballas a king of Assyria, 13. e. Balm, 203, b. 223. e.
Balthazar his pride, 261. his vision of the hand, ibid. slain, 262. h. Banaia
slaieth an Egyptian, 183. f. kills a Lion, 184. g. substituted in Ioabs
place, 191. f. Banishment of Gain, 5. d. of the diuiners, 154. l. of Absalon,
173. d. of Antipater, 589. b. of Doris, 441. c. of Pheroras, 599. c. Banquet of
Laban and Jacob, 25. f. of Samuel to Saul, 132. i. and of him to David, 141. c.
of Saul, 147. c. of David to the people, 165. f. of Artaxerxes, 277. a, b. of
Ptolemey. 294. g. of Archelaus, 451. c. of Herod, 469. c. Barak appointed
general, 115. b. puts Sisara to flight, ibid. c, d. flew Iabin, and
governed Israel forty years, 115. e. f. Bareas one of the five kings of
Assyria, 13. c. Baruch Ieremies secretary, 252. c. dismissed, 256. h.
Barzapharnes seized upon Syria, 575. a. instateth Antigonus, ibidem. Barzillais
excuse to David, 180. l. Battle between Iosuah and the Chananites, 105. b.
between the Beniamites and Israelites, 111. e. between Saul and the
Philistin^s, 157. e, f. between Ioab and Absalom, 177. f. Battle of Herod,
390. i, k. Battle between the Romans and Jews, 455. e, f. Battery of
Iotapata, 653. c, d, e. of Jerusalem, 709. b. 710. g. Bathes, 752. l. Bathes of
Calliroes, 449. 605. e. Bathuel son of Nathor, 12. g. f^ther ^f. Rebecca and
Laban, ibid. g. Beam of gold, 358. h. Bearing of arms inhibited, 136. i.
Beasts venomous, a plague of Egypt, 48. (...). Beauty of superior bodies. 6.
h. Beauty of body not to be respected, 141. b. Beauty of Sa^, 13. (...). of
Rachel, 23. b. of Joseph, 31. a. of David and his brethren, 141. a, b, c. of
Bethsabe, 169. d. B^d of Iron. 83. c. Beginning of the war of the Jews, 624.
h. Behavior of Rachel toward Jacob, 23. b. Bellies of the Jews ripped for
gold, 723, d. Beneficence of Xerxes, 272. l. m. Benefits of God recited, 54. i.
k. l. Benefits of Herod, 588. i. k. l. Benia^in Jacobs son by Rachel, 27. e,
goes into Egypt, 3^. g. what happened to him there, 36. m. attached and
imprisoned, 37. a, b. Beniamites expert in shooting, 111. e. overthrew the
other tribes twice, ibid. d. e. 25. thousand slain, and why, 112. g. only
six hundredth escape, ibid. g. take them wives by force ibid. l. m. Berenice
her request to Florus, 625. e. Berosus, a Chaldaean writer, 771. d. Berosus,
12. k. his testimony of Abraham ibid. of Senacherib, 246. k. of
Nabuchodonosor, 260. i. Bersabe the pit of swearing, 16. b. Beseleel a
workemaster of the Tabernacle, 60. l. 66. i. Bethel, what it signifies, 23. a.
Bethsabe defiled by David, 169. d. bare him a son, 170. l. brought forth
Solomon, 171. e. certifieth David of Adonias etc. 186. k. Birthday of
Vespasian celebrated, 744. a. of P^rao, 33. b. Birthright of Esau sold, 28.
(...). Birth of Mose^, 42: k. l. Birth of Sampson, 121. c. B^nesse of the
wat^rs, 53. d, e. changed, ibid. (...). B^phemie against God, 90. l.
Blasphemer of God to be stoned, ibid. l. Blaspheming of Goliath, 142. h, i, k.
Blessings of God upon the Israelites, 54. h, i, k. Blessing of Isaac on Jacob,
22. g. h. of Jacob on his sons, 40, l. m. Blessing of Moses to the Israel^es,
97. f. Blindness of the ene^, and how, 226. h. 227. d. Blindness of the Jews.
7^2. h. 738. i. Blood royal destroyed, 223. f. Bodies celestial, their
beauty and order, 6. h. Body of Jacob translated into Hebron, 40. m. of ^is
sons brought thither also, 41. a. Bodies of Saul and his sons hung up, 158.
i. Boldness of the Jews, 711. c. Bondage of the Israelites, see servitude.
Bones of Joseph translated, 41. b. 50. g. Book of Moses laws, 90. h. when to
be read, 96. b. holy book, 98. a. found and read, 249. a, b. Books of holy
writ, how many, 766. m. Book of Jeremy, 251. c. burnt, ibid. d. Boos friend
to Naomie and Ruth, 124. h. exhorts his kinsman to marry Ruth, ibid. m.
espouseth Ruth, 125. a. begets Obed, ibid. a. Booty of Oxen and Camels,
154. i. of sheep, etc. 686. m. Borders of Galilee, 646. k. l. of Iudaea, 647.
b. of the possession of the nine tribes and an half, 106. h. etc. Borrowed
things must be repaied, 95. c, d. Botches, a plague of Egypt, 48. m. Bounds of
land not to be removed, 92. i. Bounds of the nine tribes and halfes
possessions, 106. h, etc. Bounds of Egypt, 694. i. Boules or ewers, 197. b.
Bounty requited, 203. c. Bounty of Ezechias, 243. a, b. Bounty of Alexander
to the Jews, 286. i. Bounty of Herod to all men, 588. i, k, l. of Caesar to
Archelaus, 609. f. of Titus, 714. h. Brazen Altar, 197. a. vessels pertaining
to the same, 197, a. Brazen gate of the temple opens of it self, 738. k.
Breach of Gods law, loss of his favor, 690. i, k. Breach of oath, 245. b, c.
358. h. of faith, 352. h. Breadth of the Arc of Noah, 6. l, m. Bread of
proposition; or show bread, 70. g. Brethren, Cain and Abel, 5. a. Brethren of
Joseph hate him, and complot his death, 28. l. 29. f, e. sell him, ibid, c. and
30. h, i. persuade their father that he was devoured of beasts, ibid, l. repent
of the evil they did to Joseph, 35. c. return out of Egypt, ibid. d. go
thither again; 36. g, h. stayed in their journey, and accused of theft, ibid.
k; l. died, 41. a. 7. Brethren tormented and put to death, 806. g. 807. b. 808.
g, etc. Briberie of Elies sons, 12^. b. of Antonius, 381. d. of Ventidius,
374. m. 578. h. of Silo, ibid. 578. l. of Antipater, 597. e. f. Brothers of
Abraham, 11. f. of Joseph, 28. k. of Antipater, 591. d. see brethren. Brothers
bewail their mother, 592. k. excuse themselves, ibid. k. l. Broile at
Caesare^, 5^3. a. at Jerusalem, 610. h. B^ilding of the temple, 195. c.
inhibited, 266. i. permitted. 268. m. 269. a. Bulwarks builded by the Romans,
719. d. Burial of Sara, 19. a. of Abraham, 20. l. of Isaac, 27. d. of Jacob,
40. m. of Samuel, 151. f. of Iadon, 208. i. of Herod, 45 ^Word. d, c. Burning
of the temple; 255. c. 463. b. 736. h. Burden required to be eased, 206. g.
Bush of fire about Moses, 46. g. Bushel of corn sold for a talent, 724. k.
Business of Moses, 57. f. Butlers dream expo^ded, 32. l. Bu^cherie of the
thieves, 522. i, k.
C
Caecinna persuades* the soldiers to revolt, 695. e, f. apprehended, 696. g.
fre^d and honored. ibid. h. Caerealis conquereth the Samaritans, 657. b, c.
Cae^ confirms Hyrcanus in the priesthood, 360. h. departs out of Syria,
361. d. his testimony of the Jews, 363. e. slain, 572. l. 366. h. delivers
Aristobulus, 570. g. Caesar slaieth Cassius, 368. k. Herod's friend, 374. i.
overcomes Antonius, 393. (...). confirms Herod in the kingdom, 396. h.
gives him, 800. talents, ibid. k. Lord of Egypt, 397. e. enlarges Herod's
dominions, ibid. 406. h. 407. d. 586. i, k. made Pheroras Te^arch, 407. d. gave
Herod re^nues, 420. g. offended with Herod, 430. g. allows Herod to punish
malefactors, 433. d. makes Archelaus king, 455. a. confirms Herod's
^estament, 459. d. ^als a council, 609. b. makes Archelaus an Ethnarke, 613.
a. Caesarea built by Herod, 405. c, d. was called Stratons tower, 588. g. a
great City, 661. i. Cain Adams first son, 5. a. slew his brother, ibid. b.
nor bettered by Gods chastisement, ibid. d. builded a City, 5. b. invented the
use of the plough, ibid. b. father of hypocrites, 6. g. Caius succeeds
Tiberius, 471. c. certi^eth the Senate of Tiberius death, 478. i. makes
Agrippa king, ibid. k. 618. i. banisheth Herod, 479. d. usurps divine honor,
479. f. 480. g. 618. k. his statue, etc. ib. k. writes letters to Petronius,
483. c. calls himself Jupiters brother, etc. 489. a. b. etc. causes many to
be murdered, 490. k. sacrifices, 494. h. builded a haven, 501. e. slain,
495. b. 501. e. Caleb and Iosuah appease the people, 74. h. Callimander slain,
338. g. Calling of Moses, 46. g, h. of Elizaeus, 217. a. Cal^tie of the
Israelites, 41. c. 53. a, e, f. 54. g. 111. d. etc. m. 112. g. 126. g.
foretold, 251. c. and 252. k. Calamity of Herod, 584. h. of Syria, 634. i, k.
Calamity in Jerusalem. 698. l, m. 724. h, i, k. etc. Calamity of the Romans,
733. b, c. of the Jews recounted (...) the Romans, 734. l, m. Calamity of the
Jews at Antioch, 747. b, c, e. Calamity of the Jews taken by the Romans,
760. g, h. Calumniation, 425. b. Calves of Jeroboam, 207. b. Cambyses
inhibiteth the building of the temple, 266. l, m. Camp of the enemies spoiled,
229. c. Camp of the Romans how ordered, 648. h, i. 3. Camps of the Jews,
610. i. Candlestick of gold, 63. a. 198. g. Capharis submits to Caerealis,
692. g. Captain over a thousand, 143. f. Captains of Solomon, 193. d, e. 2.
Captains of Ochozias destroyed, and why, 224. f. 225. (...). the 3. preserved,
ibid. a. Captain trodden to death, 229. d. Captivity of Babylon
foreprophesied, 247. c. 150. i, k. effected, 255. c, d. 715. d. Carcases hinder
the passages, 581. e. Carcases innumerable, 87. e. Carcases cast out of the
City, how many, 724. i, k. Care of God for the Israelites safety, 47. a. for
his servants, 216. l, m. Carthage built, 771. c. Carelessness of Abner touching
Saul's safety, 153. e. Carpenters how employed, 195. b. Cassius resists the
Parthians, 358. m. exacteth of the Iewe^, 700. talents of silver, 366. i.
Cassius Longinus governor of Syria, 512. m. Castle fortified, 318. l. 356. k.
rased, ibid. Castle of David, 763. f. Castor a subtle Jew, 7^2. g. Catalogue
of Jacobs sons and nephews, 39. e, f. 40. g. Catalogue of Gods benefits on
Israel, 54. i, k, l. Catalogue of the commandments, 59. f. 60. g. Cattle
gotten in war, 87. e. 103. f. 106. l. Catullus slaieth 3000. Jews, 763. b,
c. Cause of error concerning God, 796. i. Causes of discord, 765. e. 766. g.
Causes of malice between Egyptians and Jews, 776. h, i. Causes of the
Israelites ruin, 41. c. Causes of the wars of the Jews, 624. i, m. Causes
of Vespasians election, 694. g. Causes of writing the Antiquities, 1. d. e.
Caves of the thieves described, 579. e. Ceasing of Manna, 102. h. Celebration
of the passover, 249. f. 272. Celles about the temple, 195. e. Cendebaeus put
to flight, 334. g. 560. i. Cenizus delivers the Israelites, 113. e.
vanquisheth (...), ibid. f. judged Israel fo^ie years, ibid, f. Censors
affixed to the brazen Altar, 80. i. and why, ibid. Censors of gold, 197. b.
Centu^ion of Florus, 625. a. Cesennius president of Sy^ia, 754. accused
Antiochus, ibid. Cesterne dug to be enclosed, 96. k. Cestius G^ppeaseth the
people, etc. ^24. g. i. burnt Zabulon and Ioppe, 636. k, l. consulteth with the
princes, etc. 627. a. his siege against Jerusalem, 636. m. 637. b, d. Chaereas
and his accomplices conspire Caius death, 490. g. h. why incited against Caius,
ibid. k conferreth with Clement, etc. 491. c. 492. g. intends to kill Caius,
ibid. expects occasion to assail Caius, 493. b. slaieth Caius, 495. b.
honored, 500. h. sends Lupus to kill Caius wife, ibid. k, l. executed, 505.
f. 505 g. Challenge of a single cumbate, 142. h. Chaldaeans mutine against
Abraham, 12. k. Cham Noah^ son, 9. a. his progeny, 10. l. discovers his
fathers nakedness, 11. c. Chambers of pleasure, 200. k. Champions of David, 183.
c. etc. Chanaan Jacobs inheritance, 28. g. Chanaanites put the Israelites to
flight, 76. k. wholly to be extinguished, 97. f. 106. k. ten thousand slain,
109. b. made tributaries, 202. l. Charges of the temple to be supplied, 272. k.
Chariots of labin, 115. a. of Solomon, 199. f. Chariots armed seen in the
air, 738. Chartisement bettered not Cain, 5. d, e. Chastity of Joseph, 3^. a,
b. 801, c. Chance medley, 88. k. Change of the Jews government, 569. a, b.
Change of names w^nce, 10. k. Cherubim, 62. k. in the temple, 196. h. Chetura
Abraham's second wife, 19. b. bare to Abraham six children, ibid. b, c.
Chieftaines of Achis, 15^. l. cause David to be dismissed, ibid. l. of Solomon,
193. d, c. Children are to learn the law. 91. c. 70. Children of Achab slain,
232. m. Children of Herod, 598 i, k. Children not to be punished for the
fathers offense, 96. m. Children male done to death, 41. d, e. Children of
Chanaan, 11. b. Children of Abraham, 17. d. 19. b, c of Jacob, 24. i, k, l. 27.
c. Children of Roboam, 209. b. Children unlike their fathers, 130. k. 247. c.
230, i. k. Chodollogomor an Assyrian Captain, 13. c. overthrew the Sodomites.
ibid. Choice of the Esseans in compassion and helping, 615. d. Chore mutineth
against Moses, 77. b. affects the office of high Priest, ibid. d. 80. h. he
and his company consumed with fire, ibid. l. Chosby a daughter of Madian, 86.
h. enticed Zambrias to Idolatry, ibid. h. i. slain with him. 87. a. Christ
crucified, 466. l. m. Chronicles of the Tyrians, 244. g. Churlishnes of Nabal,
152. i. Chusais opposition to Achitophel, 176. i. his counsel accepted, 176. l.
certified David of the victory, 178. l. Chuthites removed unto Samaria, 243.
c. plagued, and why, 244. h. i. claim kindred of the Jews, ibid. i. k.
Circumcision commanded and instituted, 15. b. one sacred City in Canaan, 90.
l. and why, ibid. Cities of refuge, 88. i. k. 90. l. 106. ^l. City of of
David, 164. i. Cities of the Beniamites burnt. 112. h. City of the Priests
burnt, 149. d. Cities builded of Solomon. 201. d, e. Cities under Archelaus
subjection, 613. b. Cities taken from the Jews. 345. c. chief Cities of
Galilee. 549. c. Cities in arms against the Jews, 635. b. 4. Cities of
Galilee revolt from Joseph, 643. 2. Citizens of Iabes bury Saul and his sons
bodies, 158. i, k. Citizens taken prisoners, 252. c. Citizens of Giscala
entertain Titus. 671. ^. Citizens resort to Vespasian. 684: i. Civil wars of
the Israelites. 111. d. Civil wars of the Romans. 691. f. Claudius chosen
Emperor, 498. l, m. unwillingly accepted it, 502. ^carried on men's shoulders,
503. denies to give over the dignity, ibid. f. confirmed by Agrippa. 504. g.
persuaded to use the Senators mildly, 500. g. 620. i. gives Agrippa Iudaea,
etc. 506. i. his edict in favor of the Jews, ibid. 507. a. commands
Agrippa to desist from building, 509. c. grants the Jews custody of the high
Priests vestment, 5^3. b. c. finds the Samaritanes guilty, 520. m. 521. a.
622. g. his wives, 52^. d, e. his death, 521, d. 62^. h. Clemency becomes a
king, 152. l. Clemency of Joseph. 534. i. of Archelaus, 608. h. of vaiu^. 612.
h. Cleopatra Demetrius wife, 333. d. obtains Tryphons army ibid. rebelleth
against Ptolomy, 338. h. prepares an army against her son, 342. m. takes
Ptolemais, 343. a. comes to Antonius, 370 g. murthereth her brother and
sister, 388. l. 389. a. her corrupt dealing, ibid. m. beggeth Iudaea and
Arabia, 389. a, b. her chieftaine overthrows Herod, 390. l. her treason
against Herod, ^83. f. Cloud on the Tabernacle, 72. k. in the Sanctuary, 198.
h. a Clown made high Priest, 673. c. Clytus author of sedition, 539. d.
cutteth off his own hand, ibid. 643. d. Colonie of Nemrode, 11. a. Colonies
established by Abraham, 19. b. and 20. k. Combat betwixt David and Goliath,
143. c, d. Combat of Saul against the Ammonites, 134. l. Combat challenged,
732. l. Comet like a sword, 738. i. Comfort of Jonathan to David, 173. c.
Command of Saul for war, 134. k. Commandment of God transgressed, 4. i, k.
208. g, h. Commandment for the Arc, etc. 186. g, h. ten Commandments, 59.
f. Commendation of Abraham, 20. l: of Jacob, 40. m. of Joseph, 41. a. of
Iosaphat 204. c. Commination against the Israelites, 199. f. against Iezabel.
Commiseration of the Galaadites, 134. h. Commotion of the Jews, 483. f
Companies of the Romans, 636. i. Companions of Daniel cast into the furnace,
259. f. preserved, ibidem. Companions of Jonathan slain, 763. a. Comparison of
Moses with other lawmakers, 791. e. Comparison of the Roman forces with the
Jews, 628. m. Comparison of the Romans and Jews, etc. 674. m. Computation of
time different, 783. a, b. Compassion of Joseph, 38. l. of Thermuthis, 42. m.
of the people, 134 h. of the three kings, 226. i. of Elizaeus, 226. l. 230. g.
of Caesar, etc. 418. i. of the people, 537. c. of Antonius, 577. d. of Tyroes
son, 597. c. of Titus, 670. m. 733. c. Complaint of David to Jonathan, 146.
k. l. Complotting of Joseph's death, 29. b. Concord in wickedness. 718. g, h.
621. c. Concord of the Jews in religion, 792. k. Concubine of Gedeon, 117. c.
of Saul, 161. a. of Solomon 204. k. of Roboam, 209. b. Conditions of peace
unjust, 133. g. Conduct of Moses, 50. g, h, i. Conduit under ground from
Antonia, 411. d. Confederacy, 11^. e, f. 16^. a. 167. l. m. 223. e. 230. m.
29^. ^. Conference, 353. d. 577. d. Confession of Achar 103. d. of the women,
600. g. Confidence of Adad, 228. l. of Ioram, 227. f. of Ochozias, 224. l.
Confirmation of Moses, 46. i. of Saul. 132. l. Conflict of the Jews with the
Caesareans, 624. k, l. of Placidus with the fugitives, 686. i. of the Jews
with the Romans 711. c. 753. a. Confusion of tongues, 9. d. Confutation of
Manethons words, 778. m. of Lysimachus, 781. b, c. of Apion, 783. e. of
Posidonius and of Apollonius, 786. k, l. Congratulation, 419. f. 451. c.
Conquest of Ganaan made difficult, 73. effected, 105. b. etc. Consent of
parents, etc. asked in marriage, 20. i, k. and 24. m. Conspiracy of Chore and
his followers, 77. c. Conspiracy, 236. g. 238. h. 232. k. 248. i. 402. h, i.
489. f. 597. d. Conspiracy in robbery, 621. e. Conspirators punished, 458. g.
Constancy of the Esseans, 616. k. of the Jews, 619. b. 727. b. 774. k. l.
797. c. of Eleazar, 803. d. Consultation about the Arc, 128. h. Consultation
against Joseph, 543. c. of Herod with Archelaus, 594. g. of Cestius with the
princes, 627. a. of Titus, 720. l. of Vespasian, 693. d. of Judas, 722. l.
Contempt of religion see piety coutemned. Contempt of Saul, 133. e. Contempt
of God wherein it consists, 1^0. h. l. Contempt of death, 4^8. g. Contempt of
God, loss of a kingdom, 140. i. Contents of Ieremies book, 251. c, d.
Contents of the Antiquities, 1. c. 3. c. Contention of the Samatitanes and
Jews, 322. m. 323. a. Contention between Abraham's and Lots shepherds, 13. c.
Contention, whence, 591. b. Continuance of the laws among the Jews, 794. k,
l. Core a certain measure, 75. b. Corn of the Philistines spoiled, 122. h.
Corn provided by Herod, 403. f. Corn burnt in Jerusalem, 698. l. Corruption
of Ventidius, 374. m. of Scaurus, 566. h. 578. h. of Silo, 578. l. of
Antipater, 591. c, f. of Alexander, 593. b. 130. l. Corruptions among the
Greeks, 765. a. Cost of Agrippa in building the wall, 704. i. Costabarus
usurps, 400. h. preserved by his wives intercession, ibid. k. Cou^enant of
God with Noah, 8. i, k. Covenants of the Esseans, 615. f. Covenant of Abraham
with Abimelech, 16. l. of Laban with Jacob, 25. c. f. Covetousness of
Cleopatra, 583. d. of John, 533. f. of Florus, 623. f. Council called, 596. l.
609. b. Council held against Joseph, 547. f. Counsel to be sought at Gods
hands, 20. m. Counsel of Rebecca to Jacob, 23. c. of Joseph to king Phar^o,
34. g, h. of Raguel to Moses, 58. g, h. of Balaam to Balac, 85. c. e. of
Achirophel, 176. i of Chusai. 176. l. of the Elders, 206. i. of the young men,
ibid. l. of Salome, 596. k. Counterfaiting of Euricles, 595. b. Counterfaiters
of letters feed, 601. d. Country of the Amorites possessed by the Hebrews,
83. b. Country beyond the flood described, 646. m. Countries inhabited, 10. g.
11. a. etc. Courage of the Jews, 713. b, c. 653. d. of Eleazar, 654. f. of
John, etc. 672: i. k. Courtesy of Rebecca to Abraham's servant, 19. f. and 20.
g, h. of Rachel to Jacob, 23. b. of Raguel to Moses, 45. c, d. of Abigal to
David, 152. k, l. of the Witch to Saul, 1^. c. Court of the Tabernacle, 61: a,
b. etc. Court of Jeroboam, 207. a. Courtiers of Saul sound David, 144. h.
Cowardice of Vonones, 466. of the Jews, 726. k. a Cow brings forth a lamb,
738. k. Cow dung the Jews food, 724. k. Craft of a boy, 739. d, e. Crassus
warreth against the Parthians, 358. m. robs the treasury in Jerusalem,
ibid. h. 569. e. slain, 358. m. 569. c. Creation of the world, 3. c. Creatures
made, 3. d, c. and first named, ibid. f. Cry of seditious Chore and his
accomplices, 77. e. Cries of women and children, 655. d. of the Jews, 737. d.
Crown of Gold, 368. l. Crows feed Elias, 214. k. Cruelty of Azael foretold,
230. g. effected, 236. g, i. of Athalia, 233. e. of Manahem, 240. h. of
Manasses, 247. c, f. of Nabuchadnezzar, 251. c. of Bacchides, 559. b. of
Alexander, 564. g. of Antigonus, 580. m. of Cleopatra, 583. c. of Herod, 612.
l. of the Damascens, 639. c, d. of the thieves, 674. i. of the Idumaeans and
Zealous, 682. g. of the seditious, 699. b. of the thieves, 721. e, f. of Simon,
722. i. Cumanus spoileth villages, 519. a. fears the peoples rage, 621. a.
corrupted, 520. i. banisned 521. a. Cunning of David in playing on the haipe,
141. e. Cups of gold, 197. b. Curse against him that builds Jericho, 102. l.
Custom of the country, 24. g. Custom observed in sacrifices, 68. l, m.
Custom of war, 97. c, d. Custom in Samaria, 228. l. Custom laudable in a
king, 280. l. Custom to punish slaiers of themselves, 659. f. Custom of the
Romans, 711. d. Custom of the Priests, 766. i, l. etc. Cutthroates among the
Jews, 523. c. Cyprus a Castle, 588. g. Cyrenaeus taxes Iudaea, 462. l. Cyrus
lung of Persia, 26^. b. overthrows Balthazar, and ta^th Babylon, 262. h.
dismisseth the Jews, 265. a, b, etc. permits to build C^e and Temple, 265.
b, c. his decree touching the temple, 271. c, d. Cyzicenus king of Syria, see
Antiochus.
D
Dagon fell down, 127. c. Dares of creasion six, 3. d, e. the seventh
sanctified, ibid. e. the day lengthened, 104. m. Dalila foundeth Sampson, 123.
a. betraieth him, ibid. b, c. Dar^aseens kill 10000. Jews, 639. c, d. N.
Damascenus testimony of Abraham, 12. k. Damasco, country of Abraham, ^2. k.
Damsels entice the Hebrews to idolatry, 8^9. d. and 86. g. Dan the son of
Jacob, 24. k. what it signiseth, ibid. k. his issue, 40. g. Daniels austere
life, 258. g, h. expounds Nauchodonosors dream, 259. c, d. advanced to
honor, ibid. 262. g, f, e. his fellows cast into the furnace, 259. f.
interprets the writing, 262. g. cast into the Lions dentie, 262. l. his
vision of the Ram and Goat, 263. d, (...). his predictions of the Roman Empire,
264. h Datius king of the Medes, 261. b. surpriseth Babylon, 262. h. causes
Daniels enemi^ to be cast to the Lions, 263. a. Darius son of Hystaspis makes
a vow. 263. a. performs it, 268. l, m. propounds three questions, 267. b.
his letters for building the temple, etc. 268. m. 269. a. he restores the
vessels, etc. ibid. b. his Epistle to the prefects of Syria, 171. c. Darius
king of Persia overthrown; 285. 2. Darkness separated, etc. 3. d. Darkness
of Egypt, 49. a, b. Dart of Saul, 153. c, d. Darts profit not the Jews. 709.
d. Dathan rebellious, 79. a. he with his companio were swallowed up, 80. g.
Daughters of Salpades inheritance, 88. c. Daughters of the Madianites, 85. d.
allure the Hebrews to Idolatry, 86. g. David anointed king, 141. b, c.
seized with Gods spirit. 141. d. caseth Saul's vexation, ibid. d, e, f. kills
a Lion and a Bear, 142. k. m. overcomes Goliab, 143. c, d. kills six
hundredth l'hilistines, and marries Michol, 144. k. l. vanquisheth the
Palestines, 145. d. discovers Saul's affection toward him, 146. h.
complains to Jonathan, 146. k, l. receieth Goliahs sword, 148, g, h.
counterfaiteth madness, and why, 148. i. his care of his parents, ibid. k.
defends Cilla, 150. h. flies to the Ziphians, 150. k. escapes Saul's hands,
and how. 151. a. twice saves Saul's life, 151. b, c. and 153. c, d. testifies
his innocence, ibid. c. and 154. g. spares Nabals flocks, 152. g. incensed
against Nabal, and why, ib. i. is appeased, ibid. l. m. vpbraideth Abner, 153.
d, e. dwells at Siceleg, and spoilet the Satrites, etc. 154. i. recouereth
his vites, and slaieth the Amalechites, 157. b, c. lamenteth Saul and Jonathan,
etc. 159. c, f. chosen king by one tribe, etc. 160. g. requires Michol, 161.
b, c. purges himself of Abners death, 162. i. k, l. surpriseth Jerusalem,
164. h, i. vanquisheth the Palestines, 165, b, c. transporteth the Arc, and
how, ibid. c, e. intended to build a temple, 166. h. gave God thanks, ibid. k.
reuengeth his Ambassadors, 169. b, c, d. marries Bethsabe, 170. l. repents
his sin, 171. b. mourns for his son, 171. ibid. c, d. expelled his
kingdom, 177. b. his entertainment at Mahanaim, 177. c. commands to spare
his son, 177. f. bewaileth Absalons death, 179. a. grants Amasa pardon,
179. c. his concubines sequestered, 181. c. distributeth offices, 182. b.
delivered out of peril, ibid. l. persuaded to abstain from war, ibid. lus
38. champions, 183. c. etc. sends Ioab to muster the people, 184. h. of three
punishments offered, chooses the plague, 184. k. prays for the innocent
people, ibid. l. commanded to build an Altar, ibid. m. gathers store of iron,
etc. 185. d. counseled Solomon to honor God, ibid. f. grows old and numbe,
186. h. numbreth the Levites, 187. e. confirms the kingdom of Solomon, ibid.
commends Solomon to the tribes, 188. h. his counsel to Solomon, 189. c.
wills Solomon to punish Ioab, 189. d. commends Berzillais sons to
Solomon, 189. his age, reign, and virtues, ib. f. Dancing of the maidens of
Israel, 243. e. of David's before the Arc, 165. e, f. Danger of the
Israelites, 50. i, k, l. 51. d. c. of David, 144. m. 145. c, f. 150. i, k, l,
m. 151. a, b. of the Sephorites* 534. a. of ^cims son, 532. g. of Joseph.
537. c. 538. g. 539. a. 641. c, d. of Herod, 577. c. of Titus, 700. h. Dead ^e
unburied, 721. d. c. Dead body raised, 236. m. Dealing of Laban with Jacob,
25. d, c. Dealing of Saul with David colorable, 144. g, h, i. Death of the
fathers, 6. k. 7. a, etc. Death of the seven brethren, 800, k, l. 801. a. 802.
g. 803. etc. Death of Abraham, 20. l. of Isaac, 27. d. of Rachel, ibid. c. of
Jacob, 40. m. of Joseph, 41. a. of Moses, 99. b, c. of Samuel, 151. f. of
Solomon, 206. g. Death of the first begotten, 49. d. Death of the leader
discomfort to the soldier, 222. h. Dearth of victuals prophesied, 214. k.
Debate comp^itted, 157. d. c. Debate of the Jews and Samaritanes, 322. m. 323.
2. Debate of Herod with his sons, 590. b. Debate betwixt the Ladies, 598. m.
Debora a prophetess, 115. a. encouraged Barac, ibid. c. Decease of Herod,
605, i, k. Declamation of Sentius, 499. a, b. Deceit of Florus, 624. k. of
John, 676. g. of the Jews, 702. l, m. Deciding of hard controversies referred
to Moses, 58. i. Decree of the Romans, 315. c. of Cyrus, 271. c, d. Decree of
destiny, 714. g. Dedication of the Tabernacle and Priests, 66. l. Defense of
Moses, etc. 790. i, k. Defense of Nicholaus, 609. c. 613. a. 459. b. Defy of
the enemy, 142. i. 145. b. Deflouring of Dina, 26. m. of Thamar, 172. i. k.
Deflouring of a Virgin, 94. i. Deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, 50.
g. l. from danger, 51. d, e. f. Deluge or flood, 6. i. the cause thereof, ibid.
when it happened, 7. a, b. destroyed all save those in the Arc, 6. decreased, 7.
d. Demetrius exhortatorie letter, 290. g. Demetrius Seleucus slaieth Lysias and
Antiochus, 313. d. makes himself king ib. d. sends Nicanor against Judas,
314. i. sends Bacchides against Jonathan, 319. b. makes peace with Jonathan,
320. i. 321. b. fights with Alexander, and is slame, 321. c. Demetrius
Nicanor overcomes Alexander, 326. g. obtains the kingdom, ibid. incurreth
the ^tred of his soldiers, ibid. l. discomfited, 328. g. taken prisoner, 330.
l. put to flight, refused by his wife dies, 337. 2. Demetrius Eucaerus king of
Damasco, 344. overcomes Alexander, ibid. l. m. besieges his brother Philip.
335. c. Departure of Israel from Egypt, 49. d, c. and 50. g. of Cestius, etc.
638. h, i. Depulsion of the Jews liberty, etc. 628. i. Description of tho
thieves caves, 579. c. of Prolemais, 618. l. of Galilee, 646. k. of the
country beyond the flood, 646. m. of Samaria. 647, a. of Jury, 647. b. of the
lake Genezar, 665. c. of Jerusalem, 703. e, f. of Jericho, 687. d, etc. of
Antonia, 708. h. of the Temple and Porches, 788. g, h. good Deserts of David,
145. b, c. not to be forgotten, ibid. d. 577. a. Desire of gold, 423. b.
Desolation through Jerusalem, 685. c. Desolation lamented, 750. g. Destiny,
714. g. Destruction of Sodom, 16. g. of Senacheribs host, 246. k. Destruction
of all things foretold, 6. h. Destruction of Iudaea, 245. b. Destruction of the
Jews, 666. k. Destruction of Jerusalem, 715. c. see Jerusalem. Determination
of God, 730. h. Detractions of writers concerning the Jews, 776. g, etc. 777.
f. etc. 778. i, k. 779. a. etc. Devise of Joseph against the Ram, 653. e, f. of
Artorius, 733. c. Devotion of the Israelites, 129. b. a Dew descended from
heaven, 55. a. called Manna. ibid. a. Diadem of Asia refused, 325. c.
Difficulties of the Hebrews, see dangers. Dignity royal concealed, 133. a.
Diligence of the Romans. 648. g. Dina the daughter of Jacob, 24. l. ravished by
Sichem; 26, m. desired in marriage by (...) but denied, ibid. m. and 27. a.
Diophantus counterfaiteth letters, 596. g. Discipline of the Roman 6^8. g, etc.
Discomfiture of Saul's army. 157. f. Discontents renewed, 626. g. Discord in
Jury, 672. h. Discord domestical, ^73. b, c, d, e. 416. h, i. 423. d. Discord
whence arises, 591. b. Discord between the Idumaeans and Zealous, 692. k.
Discord of the Jews and Alexandrians, 786. Discourtesie showed, 19. (...).
Discretion of Gedeon, 117. c, of the Roman soldiers, 669. a. Disease called by
the Egyptians Sabatosis, 783. d. Diseases of Herod, 605. d. Dismission of the
Israelites, 237. c. Disobedience of Saul, 139. c, d. of the Israelites, ibid.
c, d, c. f. Iadon, 208. h. of Jonas, 238. l. Disobedience, 94. m. 95. a. cause
of calamity. 110. g, etc. 111. a. etc 113. d. 114. g. ibid. m. 125. b. 126. g.
etc. Displeasure of God against Baalam, 84. g, h. against Saul and his people,
139. c. against the Chuthites, 245. i. against Senacherib, 246. k. Displeasure
of Titus, 723. c. d. of Balac against Baalam, 84. l. of Saul against David,
144. m pacified, 145, c. of Florus against the Jews, 625. c. of the
Israelites, 130. m. Disposition of the army, 72. i. Disproofe of the Zealous
fiction, 677. c, of Apions, 783. d, c. 786. h, i. a Dissembler, 640. l.
Dissension at Tarichea, 664. k. between John and Simon, 718, g. Distinction of
the Hebrews government, 135. b. Distribution of the Jews, 744. h.
Distribution of the spoils and pray, 57. b, c. 87. c. 103. f* 104. g.
Distribution of Herodes kingdom. 459. d. Distress of the Israelites, 53. d,
e, f. Division of the land of Canaan, 106. h. Division of the land between
Abraham and Lot, 13. i. Division of the Tabernacle, 62. i. of the Temple, 196.
g. of Iudaea, 647. b. of the priests, 187. f. Diuiners banished, 154. l. Devil
seeks to abolish the Bible, 304. h. Doctrine of Elias confirmed, 216. h, i.
Doctrine of the Esseans, 614. m. Doeg master of the kings mules, 148. h. 149.
a. accuses Achimelech, and why, ibid. a. slaieth the priests, ibid. c, d. Dogs
lick Achabs blood, 222. h. devour Iezabels carcas. 232. k Domitian subdueth
the Germans, 749. b. Doris Herod's wife, 368 i. thrust out of the palace, 441.
i. spoiled of her Jewels, 600. k. Dorites place Caesar's statue in the
synagogue, 407. f. Dortus crucified, 520. k. Dowry of Salpades daughter, 88.
l. Dream of Joseph, 28. l, m. and 29. a, b. of the Butler, 32, k. of the
Baker. 33, a. of Pharao, ibid. b, c. of a Madianite, 116. k, l. of
Nabuchodonosor, 258. k. of Herod, 581. a. of Archelaus, 614. i. of Glaphyra,
ibid. k. Drowfinesse of Abner and his soldiers, 153. c. Duty of a king. 141.
c.
E
Eagle of gold, 447. f. pulled down, 448. h. 604. m. 605. a, b. Eagle the
ensign of the Romans, 640. k. 650. g. a sign of victory, ibid. g. 7. full
Ears of come, 7. thin or withered, what, 33. c. f. Earth created, 3. c, d.
richly endowed, ibid. covered with darkness, 3. c. cursed for man's sake, 4. l.
called a virgin, and why, 3. f. swallowed up Dathan and Abiram, 80. g.
Earthquake, 239. c. 130. g. Earthquake kills 10000. men. 391. b, c. 584. i.
Easter or the Paschall solmnized, 102. h. Ebutius against Joseph, 536. h.
Eclipse, 448. m. Edict in behalf of the Jews, 365. c. Edict of king Pharao,
41. d. of Cyrus, 265. b. Edict of restraint, 60. l. Edict of Saul broken, 137.
f. of Nabuchodonosor, 259. c. Edom, a name given to Esau, 28. h. his country,
ibid. h. Education of Jacob and Esau, 20. m. 21. a. of Moses, 43. c. Effects of
Gods spirit, 141. d. Effects of the evil spirit, 141. d. Egypt described,
694. i, k. length and breadth thereof, ibid. of whom so called, 770. h. an
Egyptian Prophet gathers 30000. 622. l, m. Egyptian priests circumcised, 790.
h, i. Egyptians pay the fifth part of their profits, 40. l. sold their
possessions, etc. ibid. i, k. to what things addicted, 41. b. war against the
Aethiopians, 43. e, f. require Moses for their captain, 44. h. afflicted with
plagues, 48. and 49. weep at the departure of the Hebrews, 49. e. pursue
them, 50. h. drowned in the red sea, 51. f. worship beasts, 786. g. h. Eglon
subdueth the Israelites, 114. g. killed by Ehud. ibid. k. Eliud kills Eglon,
114. i. puts the Moabites to flight, ib. k, l. Eye of God discovers sin,
563. Eyes pulled out, 123. c. 255. a. Ela son of Basa, 213. d. slain by Zamri,
ibid. Elcana father of Samuel, 125. c. loved Anna, ibid. c. Elders resolved to
make David king, 161. d. Elders counsel rejected, 206. i. ^0. Elders rule
Galilee, 639. e, f. Eleazar high priest praised, 2. h. Eleazar Moses son, 46.
m. Eleazar Aarons son, 80. i. affixed his censor to the Altar, and why, ib.
i. succeeds his father, 82. ^dieth, 108. m. Eleazar kills an Elephant, 312.
i. slain, 559. c. Eleazar vpbraideth Hyrcanus, 338. k. Eleazar an archtheese
surprised, 622. i. Eleazar exercises cruelty, 621. Eleazar one of the Zealous,
676. m. caused the Idumaeans to be sent for, ibid. m. 677. a. Eleazar kills
himself, 690. l. Eleazar taken, 753. b, c. whipped, ibid. exhorts the Jews to
submit. 753. c. Eleazar captain of the Sicarians, 755. d. besieged in Massada,
756. i. shows the Romans tyranny, 760. k. Eleazar brought unto Antiochus,
802. m. whipped, 833. d. his answer to Antiochus, 804. g. his death, ibid. h.
Election of a king, 92. h, i. Eli high priest, 123. c. had wicked sons. 125.
b. his and their end foretold, 126. g. hearing of the Arc lost, died, 1^6. l.
his Genealogy, 127. a. Eliab a workman of the Tabernacle, 60. l. 66. i. Elias
fed by crows, 214. k. entertained by the widow of Sareptha, ibid. l. restores
the widows son, 215. a. prophecieth rain to Achab, ibid. b, c. 216. i, k.
reprooueth the superstition of the people, 215. f. confirms his doctrine, and
slaieth Baals priests, 216. g, h, i. flies from Iezabel, ib. l. prophecieth
revenge to Achab and Iezabel, 217. c. reprooueth Ochozias messengers, 224. k.
prays, that fire consume his captains, ibid. m. 225. a. and foreshewes his
death, ibid. b. is taken from men, 225. c. Elimele^h goes to Moab, and why,
123. c. his, and his sons death, 123. c, f. his heritage seized. 124. l, m.
Elizaeus calling, 217. a. foretells of water, and of victory, 225. f.
relieueth a poor widow, and how, 226. m. advises Ioram to beware of Adad.
227. a, b. discovers his ambush, ibid. b. leads the Syrians into Samaria,
227. c, d. fore^els plenty of victuals, 228. i. also Adads death, and Azaels
cruelty, 229. f. 230. g. visited by Ioas, 236. k. foresheweth his treble
victory, ibid. k, l. his death and event thereof, 236. l, m. Eloquence of
Moses, 46. i. 54. h. Ambassadors of David abused, 1^8. k. of Ezechias ill
entreated, 242. l, m. of Jonathan to Demetrius, 327. b. of Herod, 605. f.
Ambassadors to Pompey, 353. b. Ambassadors sent to Joseph, 541. a, 543. a.
hope to get Tiberias, 545. d. their false accusations, 546. i. Embassage of
Moses to the Idumaeans, 81. c. to Sehon, 82. l. Balacs to the Madianites, 83.
c. his and their first and second to Balaam, ibid. c. and 84. g. Embassage of
the nine tribes to the two other, 107. c. of the Galaadites to Saul. 134. i. of
the Syrians to Achab, 218. g. Embassage of Balad, 247. b. of the Jews. 272. k.
of the Jews to Rome, 458. i. Emmor king of the Sichemtes slain* 27. 2.
Emperors of Rome, why called Caesar's, 202. g. Emperors strife to be at peace:
with the Jews, 714. m. 715. a. Empire of Rome in an uproar, 691: c. Empire of
the Persians, 773. a. End of captinitie, 265. a. End of Antiochus Epi.
miserable, 311. b. End of the Jews answerable to their lives, 756. h. Engines,
239. d. fired, 312. g. 719. f. 726. i. Enemies of the Israelites to be
destroyed, 90. g. and why, ibid. Enemies how to be used, 794. i. Enemies to be
buried, 95. c. Endeavor of Agrippa, etc. 627. f. Enlargement of the kingdom of
Israel, 238. k. Ennerus Abraham's friend, 14 k. Enoch son of Iared, 7. b.
taken up to God, ibid. c. 225. c. Enos Cains first son, 5. c. Enosa first
City builded, 5. c. Inquiry for Ionathans kindred, 168. h. Ensign of the
Romans, 649. f. 650. g. Entertainment given to Antipater, 502. k. to Vespasian,
663. a. Enumeration of the countries subjected to the Romans, 628. k. etc. 629.
a. etc. 630. g. Envy of the serpent, 4. h. of Abimelech, 21. b. of Leas to
Rachel, 24 i. and of her to Leas, ibid. i, k. of Joseph's brethren, 28. l. of
the Egyptians toward the Israelites, 41. b. of Saul against David, 143. c, f.
of Herodias, 478. m. of John, 642. h. Ephod, 64. a. Ephraim son of Joseph,
34. i. Ephraimites get Bethel, 109. c. displeased with Gedeon, are appeased,
116. c. slain by Ieptha, 120. h, 1. Epicrates sells Scythopolis, etc 33^. g.
Epilogue of the Antiquities, 527. f. Epitaphs, 159. f. and 162. k. 250. i.
Erection of the tabernacle, 61. (...). Error of Epicures confuted, 264. i. Esaias
the Prophet, 245. f. comfort Ezechias, 246. g. foretold Senacheribs
overthrow, and death, ibid. g. assures Ezechias of life, 247. a, b.
foresheweth the captivity, ibid. c. Esau son of Isaac, 20. m. called Seir,
and why, 21. a. foretold to be author of a nation. 20. m. his wives, 21. d.
went a hunting, ibid. e. denied the blessing, and why, 22. h. foretold to be
mighty, yet his brothers vassal, ibid. h. wept for loss of the blessing, 22.
h. sells his birthright, 28. h. Eschol Abraham's friend, 14. k. Esdras the
lawyer, 271 k. assembleth the Jews in Babylon, 273. c. repaireth to Jerusalem,
etc. ibid. d. his prayer for the Levites, 274. g. reads the law, ibid. l. m.
Esseans a sect, 229. c. 463. f. 614. l. swear not, 615. e. have their goods
common, 614. m. their religion and labor, 615. d. in compassion and helping
their choice, 615. d. observe the Sabbath, 616. i. live long, ibid. i. they
prophecy, 617. a. their opinion of the soul, 616. l. believe not the
resurrection, ibid. Essen, what it is, 64. h, i. Esther made Queen, 277. f.
resorteth to the king, and why, 279. f. 280. g. accuses Aman, and why. 281. c,
f. Estate of Solomon declined, and why, 204. i. Ethnarch a governor, 612. i.
Ethnickes punished, and why, 294. m. 295. a. Eve created, 4. g. tempted,
transgresses, ibid. i. her punishment, 4. m. cast out of Paradise, 5. a. her
children, ibid. a. Evening, what, 3. d. Event of the battle, foretold, 155. c,
d. Event of battle changes, 731. c. Euilmerodach releaseth Iechonias, 261.
dies, ibid. Evidence against Antipater, 601. c. Eunuchs of what gift
deprived. 97. a. Euphrates a river of Paradise, 4. h. called also Phora, ibid.
Euricles wins Herod's favor, 430. i, k. relates Alexanders words to Herod,
430. m. 594. l, m. gets money by craft, 430. m. 431. a. 594. m. 595. a.
plays the Amphidexter, 595. a, b. c. 596. g, h. of Exactions a mitigation
craved, 490. i, l* denied, ibid. Example to do evil, 139. c. 209. b. Example
of the Athenians, etc. 628. k. Excursions, see incursions. Excuse, of David's
absence, 147. d. of Malchus, 577. a. of the two brethren, 592. l. of Antipater,
603. d. c. Execration of Saul, 137. c, f. Exercise of the Romans, 648. g, h.
Exhortation of Moses to the people, 50. m. Exhortation to maintain liberty,
500. g. to contemn death, ^9. d. Exhortation to be obedient to Gods will, 89.
c. Exhortation of Saul to war, 134. k. Exhortation of Solomon to the people,
199. c. of Azarias, 212. l. of Iosaphatto his subjects, 223. c* of Ezechias to
the Priests 242. i, k. of Matthias to his sons, 305. f. of the princes to the
people, 626. i. of Samuel to the people, 129. c. of Titus, 727. a, b. of
Antiochus. 802. (...). 803. a. 805. b Expedition of the Palestines against the
Hebrews, 136. i. 142 g of Iosaphat against the Syrians, 220. l, m. of the
Arabians against Ioram, 230. m. of Amasias against Ioas, 238. g. of Ozias, 239.
b. Expenses of Solomon, 193 e, f. Explication of the names of Jacobs sons, 24.
i, k, l. Exploits of Titus, 664. k, l. of Domitian, 748. l, m. 749. 2.
Exposition of dreams see interpretition. Expostulation of Samuel with the
people, 135. c, d. Expostulation against Joseph, 659. 2. Extremity of the
Jews, 75. b. Ezechias king of Judah praised, and why, 242. i. his ambassadors
to the Israelites, 242. l. offers a solemn sacrifice, 243. 2, b. reformeth
Gods service, bid. subdueth the Philistines, 243. c. has his recourse to God,
245. f. prays, and is heard, 246. g. h. fell sick, ibid. m. his life
prolonged, 247. a. entertaineth Balads ambassadors. ibid. b. his death, 247. d.
Ezechiel prophecieth of captivity, 250. k. taken prisoner, 251. c.
foreprophecieth the destruction of the Temple, etc. 252. k.
F
Fable devised by Apion, 788. l, m. Fable of Jupiter and Palace, 795. f. Fact
of Herod devised, 605. f. Faction in Tiberias, 531. b. Faction of Chore, 77.
e. of the people, 214. g. Faculty of persuasion, 46. i. Factious fly from
Ioh, 685. b. Fadus governor of Iudaea, 512. i. slew Tholomaeus, 513. a.
kills Theudas, 518. i. Fall of Adam and Eve, 4. i. Fall of the walls of
Jericho, 102. i. Fall of Ochozias, 224. k. Fall of a tower. 710. l. m. False
prophets, 252. i. k. 253. a. suborned. 758. h. Fame of Salomons virtues, 203.
c. of Iosaphats, 224. i. Fame of Herod, 588. i. k. Family of the priests
destroyed, 149. c. d. Famine of Canaan; 12. m. and 21. a. 34 k. and 35. e. of
Egypt, 34. i. increased, and why, 40. i. of the Jews 75. a, b. in the days
days of Eli* 123. c. inflicted on the Israelites, and why, 182. i. of (...),
227. f. and 228, g, h. 253. c. in Iudaea, 403. c. in Jerusalem, 714. l. 717. b.
724. i, k. 734. g. Fasting of the Israelites, 129. d, e. of the Jews. 279. d.
Father of Josephus taken, 722. k. Fathers before flood, 7. a, b, c. trained up
their sons in virtue, 6. h. and 7. a, b, c. their age before the flood, 7. a,
b. c. their death ibid. why lived longer then we now, 8. l. Fathers after the
flood, 11. e. f. Favor of God to Isaac, 21. b. of the keeper to Joseph, 32. i.
of Pharaoh to Joseph, 34. h, i. of God to Jacob, 39 d. of God to Moses, 42. m.
to the Israelites, 50. m. and 51. a. and 84. k. to David, 141. b, c. 144. l. of
Xerxes to the Jews, 242. l. of Antiochus to Jonathan, 318. g. Fear surprising
the Madianites, 116. l. 117. a, b. 137. d. 224. h. Fear of Saul touching
David, 144. l. 148. k. Fear of the Jews. 618. k. 743. f. Fear gives
confidence. 392. k, l. Feast of Pascha instituted and celebrated, 49. e, c, d.
69. (...). 519. a. Feast of Azymes, 49. (...). 243. b. 608. i. Feast of
Tabernacles, 69. c. 199. e. Feast of Penticost, 69. f. Feast of David to the
people, 155. m. of Ezechias, 243. a. Feast of Lots, 283. (...). Feature of
David, 141. (...). Felicity of Solomon, 203. (...). Felix governor of Iudaea,
521. a. punishes thieves, etc. 522. f. surpriseth Eleazar. 622. i.
overthrows the Egyptian, ibid. m. accused, 503. d, e. Fellows of Joseph,
660. i. cast lots, ibid. Fertility of Gablee, ^46. l. of Genezar, 665. c. d.
Festival solemnized, and why, 309. 2. Festus discomfiteth a deceiuer, etc 523.
(...). Fiction of the Zealous disprooued, 677. e. Fiction of Apion refuted,
783. a, e. 786. i. Field of God. 26. g. the great Field, 687. f. Fight by sea,
665. f. Fight of the Hebrews with the Chanaanites, 76. a. of the Syrians with
the Jews, 623. b. betwixt the Romans and Jews 652. b. 658. g. of Vespasian
with the Jews, 668. i, k. of the Citizens with the Zealous, 675. (...).
between ^imon and the Zealous, 690. i, k. between John and Eleazar, 698, h.
at the feast of unleavened bread, 702. g, h, etc. in the temple, 728. l. of the
Jews and Romans, 732. h, i. Finishing of the Temple, 271. f. Fire from heaven
kindles the sacrifice, 66. m. consumes Salomons sacrifice, 199. c. and Elias,
226. f. also the two Captains and their souldi^s, 224. m. 225. a. First
begotten among the Egyptians slain, 49. d. First fruits, 69. f. 93. d. First
begotten his right, 94. g. Five kings of Sodom, 12. e. Flaccus disfauoreth
Agrippa, 473. b. Flight of the Hebrews, 76. k. 157. f. of the Palestines, 165.
b. of the Syrians, 228. m. of the Philistines, 130. h. Flocks of Nabal spared,
152. g. Florus occasion of the Jews revolt, 464. h. 624. g, h, i. k. 625.
(...). 464. h. succeeds Albinus, 525. c. 623. e. worser then Albinus, ibid.
(...). cause of the wars, 527. e. 624. l, m. imprisoneth 12. of the chiefest
Jews, 624. l. his deceit, ibid. i. scorneth the Jews gratulation, 625. a.
requires his obtractors to be yielded, ibid. b. his subtlety and treason,
626. takes the spoil, etc. 626. l. derided. 624. m. Flood see Deluge. Floods
of Paradise, 4. h. Food of Manna, 55. a, b, c. descended from heaven, ibid. a.
ceased, and when, 102. h. Footmen of the Romans, 648. l. m. Force of the Romans
darts, 654. k. Forces of the Romans, to the Jews, 628. l. Force of enemy,
262. i. of slander, 340. h. Forces weakened, and restored, 236. i. Forces
against the Madianites, 87. b. Forces of Susac, 209. d. Forgetting of religion,
cause of calamity, 109. b. 110. h. 111. a, b, etc. 112. a, b. etc. 113. d.
114. g. m. Form of the Jews commonwealth, 272. h. Fortitude of David, 144. i,
k. of Vespasian, 660. i. of Julian. 729. a. Fortress of the City, 674. k.
Fortune favors the Romans, 714. k. Foundations of the Temple, 195. c.
Fountain of covenant, 39. c. Fountain head of Jordan, 587. b. 665. b. 667. b,
c. Fountain near Jericho. 687. f. Fountain of Siloa, 704. g. Fountains
flowed to Titus, 716. k. Fraud of the false Prophet, 208. h. Fraud paid with
fraud, 669. d, e. Freemen not to marry servants, 93. e. Fained friendship of
Eurycles, 595. a, b. Friendship between Isaac and Abimelech, (...). c, d.
Friendship betwixt Jonathan and David, 146. l. confirmed with an oath, 147. a,
b. of Antiochus with Ptolomy, 247. c. of the Romans with Judas, 315. d. of
Hiram with Solomon. 770, l. 783. c. Frogs, a plague of Egypt, 48. i. Fruit
forbidden tasted, 4. i. k. Fruit of the Egyptians spoiled, 49. 2. Fruits of
trees under four years grouth, 92. i, k. Fruits fall into ashes, 689. a.
Fruit kept vncorrupt 100. years, 757. b. Fugitive Jews fly to Antiochus,
311. f. a Fugitive discloseth the state of Iotapata, 657. Fugitives request to
Vespasian, 685. f. Fuluia Saturninus wife deceived, 468. h. Funeral of Jacob,
40. m. of Samuel, 151. f. of Abner, 162, i, k. of Herod, 451. a. 606. k.
Funerals of the dead, 794. g. Furniture of the Roman horsemen, 648. l. m. Fury
of Florus soldiers, 625. f.
G
Gabaens lust and villainy, 110. l. and 111. a. would not deliver the authors
thereof, ibid. c. destroyed, and their City burnt, 112. h. Gabeonites send
ambassadors to Iosuah, 104. g. persuade Iosuah to make a league with them
ibid. h, i. appointed to public ministeries, ibid: i, k. Gabinius overcomes
Alexander, 356. l. 569. c, d. repaireth Cities in Jury, ibid. takes
Aristobulus, c. 357. overcomes the Nabathaeans, ibid. f. 569. e. Gad the
son of Jacob, 24. k. what it signifies, ibid. k, his children, 40. g. Gadara
besieged and taken, 650. i. Gadareans accuse Herod, 407, a. entertain
Vespasian, 686. h. Gaal assisted the Sichemites to gather their fruits, 118. h,
i. banished out of Sichem, ibid. k. Galaad a pillar, 25. f. Galaadites besieged
by Naas, 134. g, h. and succored by Saul, ibid. i, k, l. Galba foretold to be
emperor, 477. c, slain, 691. c. a Galilean slain, 221. c. his death cause of
a tumult, ibid. c. Galilaeans murdered, 519. f. revenge themselves, 520 g.
theirfaith and love toward Joseph, 534. k. desire to invade Tiberias, 535. b.
entreat Joseph to stay, 541. e. their testimony of Joseph, 544. flock to
Joseph, 642. k. Galilee described, 646. k. the length and breadth thereof,
ibid. l. Galley built by Herod, 577. c. Gamala faithful to Rome. 532. g. 533.
a. how situated, 667. c. inexpugnable, ibid. c, d. taken, 670. g, h. Games
Circensian, 490. i. Ganges, called also Phison. 4. h. Gardens, etc. about
Jericho, 688. h. Garden of pleasure, 4. d. Adam placed th^in, ibid. g. Garment
of Joseph, 32. h. Garment of linen and woollen, 91. b. Garment of the Priests,
197 c. Garment of the high Priest, 707. e, f. Garrison of the Philistines
won, 136. h. Garrison placed in Syria, 167. d. in Idumaea, ibid. c. Gedeon
called and encouraged, 116. h, i, k. his men and means, ibid. k, l, m.
obtains the victory and how, 117. a. kills Oreb and Zeb, and pacifieth
Ephraim, ibid. b, c. Gehon a river of Paradise, 4. h. called also Nilus, ibid.
h. Germans Caesar's guard, 496. g. resort to the Theater, 497. c. their fury
pacified, ibid. Germanicus poisoned, 466. h. Genealogy of Noah, 6. m. of
Abraham, 11. e. of Eli, 127. a, of Sadoc, 191. d, e. of Alexander and
Aristobulus, 620. l. Generals of armies, 100. k. 147. c, 160. h. 191. f, 245,
c. 255. b. 283. f. Genezar the lake described, 665. c. the length and breadth
thereof. ibid. d, e. Gerson Moses son, 46. m. Ghost of Samuel, 155. b.
certifieth Saul of his end, ibid. c. Giants engendered, 6. k. horrible to look
on. 109. c. Giants extinguished, 13. e. Gifts of the princes of the Tribes, 67.
f. of the kings to Solomon, 199. f. Gifts of Herod, 588. i, k. 594. m. of
Antipater, 597. e. f. 601. d, e. Gimona Prophet, 213. a. foretells the
miseries of Basa and his race, ibid. b. Gischala burned, 531. f. Gladness of
Anna, 125. e. Glaphyra wife of Alexander, 424. k. Archelaus daughter, ibid.
increases suspicion, 592. h. examined, 431. f. sent back to her father, 437.
c, d. 597. e. her dream, 461. c. Gleanings to be left for the poor, 92. m.
Gluttony of Vitellius. 696. i. God created the world, 3. c. rests the
seventh day, ibid. (...), speaks to Adam, 4. k. punishes him, Euah, and the
Serpent, 4. l. m. sends the Deluge, 6. k. and 8. h, i. wills the Earth to
be inhabited, g, h. appears to Jacob, 39. d. his providence in saving Moses,
42. l. m. and 43. a, b: appeared to Moses, 46. a. feeds the Israelites, etc.
55. a. comfort Samuel, 131. a. certifieth him whom to create king, 132. i.
sends him to Bethlem, 140. m. appears twice to Solomon, 198. h. 199. c.
speaks to Elias, 226. l. Gods favor to the Romans, 630. h. 714. k. knows
when to revenge, 716. i. k. Godliness of Ancestors remembered, 42. g. Gods of
Laban dug up. 27. b. Gods of other countries, 91. b. Godolias Captain of
the fugitives, 256. g. slain, 256. k. Gold in great quantity, 57. b. 87. e,
f. 102. m. 103. f. 106. sold for half the price, 734. d. Golden statue
erected, 259. c. Golden Eagle, 447. f. Golden chain, 507. e. Goliath the
Philistine, 142. h. chalengeth a single combat, ibid. h, i. encountered and
slain, 143. c, d. Gomar Iaphets son, 10. h. his progeny, ibid. h. i.
Gonorrhaea a running of the raines, 70. k. Good deserts not to be forgotten,
145. c. Goodlines of personage not respected, 141. a. b. Goods that are found,
95. f. Goods of mind, body, and fortune, 199. a, b, and 200, g, h. 589. a.
Goods of Archelaus confiscate, 614. h. i. common, 614. m. of Aman, 282. g.
Go^ons death, etc. 683. c. Government of the Romans how far, etc. 649. a, b.
Government of the tribe of Judah, 109. a. of Governments the best kind, 92. h.
Governments of the Hebrews distinct, 135. b. Government of the Jews changed,
569. a, b. what Governors to be chosen, 58. h. 91. d. the Governor Moses
commended, 99. e. f. Governors of Solomon, 193. d, e. Governor of both
Galilees, who, 639. c. Grapes not to be forbidden the gatherers, 93. a.
Grasshoppers one of the plagues of Egypt, 48. m. Gratuitie of Solomon, 201. a.
Gratulation of the Jews scorned, 625. a. Gratulation of the Bethsamites, 128.
m. of Herod, 586. i. of the people, 451. c. Gratus conflict. 456. l. see
fight. Graves of concupiscence, 73. c. Grief causes or hinders passion, 801.
a. Ground about Jericho fruitful, 688. i.
H
Habit or form of Elias, 224. l. Habitations of Isaacs sons, 28. g. Hail, one
of the plagues of Egppt, 48. m. Hall for assemblies, 290. i. Hand of Moses, 46.
k. Hand of Jeroboam withered, 207. e. restored, ibid. f. Handmaids of Jacobs
wives, 24. h, i. m. Harbors, 405. d. ill Harvest of the Egyptians destroyed,
49. a. Hatred of Joseph's brethren, 28. l. of the Egyptians to the Hebrews, 41.
b. of Saul against David, 143. (...). of Absalon against Amnon, 172. m. of the
soldiers against Demetrius, 326. l. of sons to the father. 425. f. Haven of
Caius, 501. c. Haven described, 517. d. Heaven created, 3. c, d. and how
placed, ibid. Hebrew slave when to be freed, 95. e. Hebrews Original, 11.
(...). of whom so called, ibid. e. their insupportable servitude, 41. c. 46. g.
l. 47. e. chiefest of them meet Moses, 47. a. persuaded to obey, ibid. a, b.
celebrated their Passover, 49. c, d. departed out of Egypt, ibid. d. and 50.
g. go through the red sea, 51. d. sing songs of praise, 52; g. h. fight with the
Chanaanites, 76. a, i, k. overthrow the Amorites, 8^ l. m. possess their land,
83. b. reuok from the laws of their fathers, 86. g. overcome the Madianites,
87. b. bound by oath to keep the law, 98. k. overthrow the Canaanites, 105. b.
bring the Arc into battle, 126. i. feed on bloody flesh. 138. g. see
Israelites. Hebron a place of burial, 19. a. 20, l. 27. d. 28. g. 40. m.
Hebron the city taken, 109. c. David's royal fear, 164. i. Hecataeus, 12. k.
writ a volume of Abraham, ibid. k. Height of the mountain Itaburium, 669. c,
d. Heirs of David, 166. i. Helena Queen of Adiabena, 513. f. repaireth to
Jerusalem, 515. c. Heliopolis appointed for Jacob, 40. i. Help of God, when
most ready, 51. a. Help of God to be sought for, 54. l. Heralds, 97. c.
Hercules his war, 19. c. Herod made Governor of Galilee, 361. f. executes
Ezechias, 362. f. called in question, ib. k. 571. g. faueth himself by flight,
363. b. kills Malichus, 367. e. 577. f. expels Antigonus out of Iewrie,
368. h. (...). 574. h. marries Mariamme, ibid. accused, made Tetrarch, 370. g,
h. 574. l. assailed by the Parthians, 372. k. flies to Malchus, 373. c. made
king, 374. k. leads his army against Antigonus, 375. b. 574. (...). his
proclamation, 375. b, c. 578. l. overcomes the Galileans, 376. k. 378. m.
subdueth the thieves, 377. a, b. 579. d. repaireth to Antonius, 378. g.
wounded, 379. b. besieges Jerusalem, 379. e. hinders the spoil of the City,
381. b. bribeth Antonius, ibid. d. prefers his favorites, 382. k. l.
honors Hyrcanus, 383. f. makes Ananel high priest, 384. g. takes the
priesthood from Ananel, 385. b. contriueth Aristobulus death, 385. f. his
counterfeit sorrow, 386. l. goes to Antonie, 387. c commits his wife to
Joseph, etc. ibid. c, d, e. instateth Cleopatra, etc 389. c. leuieth an army,
390. h. overcomes the Arabians. 393. b. 585. c. dismayed at Antonies
overthrow, 393. f. practices Hyrcanus death, 394. g. banisheth Antipater, 589.
b. repaireth to Caesar, 395. d. his speech to Caesar, ibid. entertaineth Caesar
and his army, 396. l. incensed against Mariamme, 397. d. against Phaeroras,
594. b. comes to Jericho, 579. b. takes Sephoris, 578. c. his buildings and
works, as Theaters, 401. Castles, 402. l. 404. k. 405. b, c. 405. c, d. 406. h
407. e. 420. l, m. 438. h. 586. m. 588. g, h. distributeth come among the
people, 403. e, f. remits the third part of tribute, 407. (...). swears the
people, 408. g. reedifieth the temple, 409. a, b, etc. saileth into Italy, 412.
m. gives wives to his sons, 413. b. his liberality, 413 d 414 g. opens
David's Sepulcher, 423. a. crediteth all tales, 426. h. weary of his life, and
why, 427. d. fortunate abroad. and unfortunate at home, 416. l. beheadeth
Pappus, 582. g. accuses his sens before Caesar, 417. c. 418. g, h. 590. k.
gives ^are to accusers, 431. a, b. accuses his sons, 433. e, f. 596. l.
strangleth them, 597. d. accuses Phaeroras wife; 439. e. sends Antipater to
Caesar, 440. h. tortureth the bondwomen, 441. b. puts away his wife, 442 i.
calls Antipater from Rome, 442. m. 601. f. brings him in question, 443. d.
imprisoneth Antipater, 446. l. makes his will, 447. d, e. 450. k. certified of
his brothers death, 581. a. commands the nobles to be slain, 449. c. his
liberality, 449. b. 583. b. bemoneth his sons, 598. g. betrotheth his
nephews, ibid. g. 599. b. loved Antipater above the rest, 603. a, b. blotteth
him out of his testament, 604. l. puts him to death, 606. g. his own death
and burial, 450 k. etc. 606. h. Herod fortifeth Cities, 464. i. builds
Tiberias, 495. a. Herod dismisseth Aretas daughter. 470. i. marries Herodias,
ibid k. repaireth to Rome, 479. c. accused and banished, ibid. d, e. 618. i.
Herod created king of Chaleis, 506. k. kills Silas, 511. d. his authority to
create the high priest, 513. e. Herodias enu^eth Agrippa, 478. m. banished.
479. e, f. Herodium, a Castle, 588 h. High priests ornaments, 63. f. 64. e,
etc. garment, 707. f. High priests since Sadoc. 255. (...). Hill of witness,
25. f. Hiram his league, 164. i. his Ambassadors to Solomon, 194. l. promises
him wood, ibid. l. receives great quantity of wheat, etc. 195. a. proposes
hard questions, 201. a. Hircanus high priest, 334. i. besieges Ptolomey, ibid.
makes peace with Antiochus, 335. d, e. takes money out of David's monument,
ibid. f. surpriseth Cities of Syria, 336. h. conquereth the Idumaeans, ibid. i.
besieges Samaria, 337. d, e. takes it, 338. g. 561. a. discontented with the
Pharisees, 338. i. follows the Sadduces, 339. a, b. his death, ibid. Hircanus
Joseph's son, 300. g. treason intended against him, ibid. l. accused, and why,
301. a. his apology, ibid. h. his jests, ibid. c. assailed by his brethren,
301. f. afflicts the Arabians, 302. i. his buildings, ib. i, k. kills
himself, ib. l. Hircanus high priest, 566. a. 347. c. content to live a
private life, 3^0. k. his Embassage to Scaurus, 352. k. repaireth the walls of
Jerusalem, 360. l. honored by the Athenians, 361. a. foretold of his death,
362. m. his Ambassadors brought into the Senate, 365. d. taken prisoner, 371.
f. highly hon^red, 383. c. his death, 394. l, m. Hire of an harlot, 91. a. Hire
not to be detained, 96. m. History of Dina, 26. m. Histories recited, 715. a,
b. History of Antiquities, 764. i. Historiographers refuted, 776. k, l. 777.
f. 778. i, m. 780. g, (...) 781. b. hide Antiochus perjury, 787. c. Holy
ointment, 66. b. Holocaust or burnt sacrifice, 68. i. Homer, auncientest Greek
writer, 765. b. Homicide committed, 91. f. and 92. g. Honorable drawn bef^
tyrants, 718. g. Honoring of strange gods, look Idolatry. Honors of Joseph,
34. g, h. and 39. b. Honor of the Magistrate, 91. e. 628. g. Honors change
manners, 149. d. Honor of Mardocheus, 281. b, c. Honor due to parents, 794.
g, h. Horses taken, 106. l. Horsemen of Solomon, 193. f. Horseman brought
letters to Joseph, 542. (...). Horsemen of the Romans, 648. l, m. Hospitality
of the Esseans, 615. b. Host, look army. Household Stuff, 106. Houses full of
dead men, 721. d. 743. d. Humanity becomes a king, 152. l. Humanity of
Balaam, 83. e, f. of the three kings, 226. i. of Caesar, 609. f. of Titus, 730.
k. Humanity of Titus counted cowardice, 713. e. Humanity of the Romans
incited the Jews against them, 740. h. Hunger kills many, 713. c. Hurt of
the General dismaieth the soldiers, 222. h. Hymns sung to God, 243. a.
I
Iabasites besieged, 134. g. promised assistance, ibid, i. bury the bodies of
Saul and his sons, 158. i, k. praised, 160. g. Iabin a king of Chanaan, 114. m.
subdueth the Israelites, ib. m. his army put to flight, 115. c. Jacob the son
of Isaac, 20. m. his greatness foretold, ib. m. held his brothers heel, 21.
a. steals the blessing, 21. f. flying to Laban, sees a vision, 22. k, l.
voweth a sacrifice to God, ibid. k, l, m. arriueth at Charran, 23. a. talks
with Rachel and Laban, ibid. b. etc. requires Rachel, etc. 23. f. deceived,
24. h. departs privily from Laban, etc. ibid. m. accuses Laban of ill
dealing, 25. d, e. makes a covenant with him, ibid. e, f. sends messengers
to his brother Esau, 26. g. is reconciled to him, and how, ibid. i, k, l.
wrastleth with an Angel, ibid. i, k. sacrifices, 27. b. bewaileth Joseph, 31.
l. sends his sons into Egypt, etc. 34. k. and 35. e. would not depart with
Benjamin, 35. e, f. reloiceth at Joseph's prosperity, 39. b. his journey into
Egypt, ibid. e, f. meets Joseph, and talks with Pharao, 40. h, i. blesses
his sons, and dies, ibid. l, m. Iaddus high priest, 284. h. meets
Alexander, 285. e. and in what manner, ibid. shows him Daniels prophecy,
286. h. Iadon prophecieth against the Altar at Bethel, 207. e. restores
Ieroboams hand, ibid. f. breaks Gods commandment, 208. h. slain of a Lion,
ib. i. his prophecy detracted, 208. l. Iael kills Sifara, 115. d. Iair
governs Israel, 119. b. was rich and had thirty sons, ibid. b. James
accused and stoned, 524. k. James, etc. betraies his country, 690. m. Iapha
taken, 656. i. Iaphet Noah's eldest son, 9. (...). his issue, 10. g, h.
covered his fathers shame, 11. c. Jason warreth against Onias, 303. a. Iauan
and his progeny, 10. i. Iauelin of Saul. 153. d. I^ziel a prophet, 223. f.
assures Iosaphat of victory, ibid. f. Ibes, enemies unto Serpents, 44. i, k.
Ichabod when borne, 126. m. and why so called, ibid. m. Idolaters plagued, 87.
a, b. Idolatry of the Israelites, 86. h, i. 207. d. of Solomon, 204. i. of
Ioram. 230. h. of Iezabel and Achab, 214. i. of Amasias, 237. d. and 238. h. of
Acha^ 241. a. of Jeroboam, 207. b, c. of the Egyptians, 776. i. Idols to be
destroyed, 90. h. Idumaea the country of Esau, 28. g. Id^maeans revolt, 230.
i. admit circumcision, 336. i. pardoned by Varus, 612. h. 20000. come to
Jerusalem, 677. c. shut out of the city, 670. a. object reproaches against the
citizens, ibid. pitch their tents near the walls, ibid. d. enter the city by
night, 680. h. depart out of Jerusalem, 683. b. consult of their submission,
742. i. Jealousy, 71. b. Jealousy of Herod, 590. g. Iebusites expelled, 164.
i. Iechonias made king of Judah, 251. reuolteth, 252. h. taken prisoner, ibid.
released, 261. a. Iehu king of Israel, 217. a. 231. b. slaieth Ioram and
Ochozias; 232. h, i. despises Gods laws, 235. b. dies, ibid. Iehu the
Prophet, 223. b. reprooueth Iosaphat, and why, ibid. b. Ieptha Judge of Israel
made a vow, 119. d, e: overcomes the Ammonites, ibid. f. sacrifices his
daughter, 120. g. kills 40000. of the Ephranites, ibid. h, i. Jeremy
foretells the captivity, 250. i, k. keeps at Jerusalem, ibid. k.
prophecieth the destruction thereof, 251. b, c. admonishes Ioachim, ibid. a.
persuades the Jews to yield, 253. c. imprisoned in a pit, ibid. his counsel
to the king, 254, a. set at liberty, 256. g. Jericho the city surueyed, 100.
m. the walls thereof fell down, 102. k. destroyed, ibid. l. never to be
reedified. ibid. l. Jeroboam rebelleth, 205. c. foreshewed to reign over ten
tribes, ibid. d. fled into Egypt, ibid. e. recalled, 206. h. proclaimed king,
207. a. persuaded the people to Idolatry, ibid. b, c. his hand withered and
was restored, 207. e, f. his impiety, 210. (...). his punishment
foreprophecied, ibid. k. his expedition against Abias, 211. (...). dies. 212.
g. Jeroboam the son of Ioas, 238. i. warred against the Syrians and enlarged
his kingdom, 238. k. dies, 239. a. Jerusalem taken, 164, h. David's royal
city, ibid. i. surprised, 209. e. besieged, 245. c. 253. c. 254. k. 582. g.
taken and burned, 2^5. b, c. surprised, 288. g. tributarie to Rome, 355. e.
taken by Sosius, 380. l, m. 582. k. described, 703. e, f. 704. g, etc. second
time burned, 741. b. six times spoiled, 745. a, b. Iesse begat David, 125. a.
Jesus high Priest, 269. e. Jesus high Priest, 302. m. depose, 303. a. Jesus
captain of thieves, 535. c. Jesus conspireth against Joseph, 537. c. his talk
with him, 547. a. Jesus exhortation to the Idumaeans, 677. c. 680. l. Jesus his
exclamation against Jerusalem, etc. 738. m. 7^9. a. b. his death, ibid. Jewels
of great price, 20. g. Jews more ancient then the Greeks, 768. l, m.
arguments thereof, ibid. came not of the Egyptians, 779. b, c. when got Iudaea
and built Jerusalem, 781. b. trusty to their princes, 786. g. why eat not
swines flesh, 790. g. Jews impiety reproved, 209. e. their captivity, 255.
b, c. 257. d. depart from Babylon, 269. c. in danger to be exterminated, 276.
l. lament, 279. a. fast and pray, ibid. c, d. revenge them on their enemies,
283. b. led away captive. 288. g. set at liberty, 289. c. tormented, 304. h.
slain on the Saboth, 3^5. d. brought out of Galaad, 310. i. discharged of
tribute 332. l, m. terrified, 342. e. l. Lords of Syria, etc. 346. h, i. shut
their gates against the Romans, 354. h. honored by kings of Europe and Asia,
363. e. slain, 371. i. favor Herod for his bounty, 444 i. complain to Agrippa,
414. i. Jews embassage to Caesar, 421. e. 50000. slain, 488. i. cause of the
wars, 512. g. Jews slain about the Temple, 519. a, b. plagued, 530. k.
constrained to make to war, ib. m. revolt from the Romans, 540. h, i. valiantly
de end themselves 582. i. 3000. slain, 608. k. call Archelaus in question,
612. i. will not consent to Pilate to alter their laws, 617. e. their fight
with the Samaritanes, 623. b. sedition and slaughter among them, 623. b. their
request to Agrippa, 627. d. refuie Caesar's sacrifices, 631. i. take Antonia,
632. i, k. spoil the villages and cities of Syria. 634. g. Jews against
Jews. ibid. k. slain, 634. 635. 636. g, etc. overcome the Romans. 637. c.
besiege Askalon, 645. d. 10000. slain, 645. f. 8000. slain, 646. g. repulsed,
653. (...). power scalding oil upon the Romans, 655. e, f. 12000. slain, 656.
l. 40000. perished at Iotapata, 658. h. fly into the city, 664. i. 9000.
slain, 670. i, k. turn their weapons against themselves, 672. k, l. drive the
Romans from their camp. 701 b. showed the tortures of the fugitives, 718. l.
m. curse Caesar, 715. a. embowelled for gold 723. c, d. vpbraid God. 726. g.
afraid, ibid, h. surprise the Romans horses, 732. h. burn the porch of the
temple, ibi. eat their girdles, shoes, etc. 734. h. overcome the Romans, 733.
c. arrogant in calamity, 741. e. refuse to submit themselves, ibid. f. 40000.
saved, an infinite number sold 742. l. slain in Syria and Egypt, 760. g. burn
their goods, 761. a, b. the number of captives and slain, 744. i. Iezabel
builded a temple to Bell, 214. i. ordained Priests and Prophets, ibid. i. killed
the true Prophets, 215. c. complotted Naboths death, 217. c, d. persecuted
Elias, 216. l. her death foreshewed, 217. (...). devoured by dogs, 23^. k. l.
Image of a godly prince, 249. c, d. Image of Gold, 259. (...). Imitation in
sin, 139. c. 207. d. 209 b. 240. i. 248. i. Immanitie of the Idumaeans and
Zealous, 680. k. of Simon, 691. d. Immunitie granted to the Jews, 295. d.
Impiety of Elies sons, 125. b. of Basa, 213. a. of Achab and Iezabel, 214. i.
216. k. l. of Amri and his predecessors, ibid. g, h. of Achaz, 241. a. 242. g,
h. of Ochozias, 224. k. of Ozias, 239. d. of Phace^as, 240. (...). of Oseas,
242. h. of Manasses, 247. e. of Ioaz, 250. k. of Ioachim, ibid. l. Impiety
cause of calamity, 113. c. d. 114. g. m. 126. g. 209. b. 210. k. 212. h. 213.
f. 214. g. h. 217. c. 231. c. 239. e. f. 240. g. 121. c. 242. h. i. 248. g.
250. k. l. 251. c, d, e. 252. k, l. m. 253. a, b, etc. 254. g, h, etc. 255 a.
etc. Imprecation for building Jericho, 10^. l. Imprecation of Saul, 137. e.
Incest 71. b. of Lot, 16. h. of Ammon. 172. i, k. Inchanters banished, 154. l.
Enclosure before the temple, 197. d. Inconstantie of fortune, 668. l. m.
Inconveniences under a king, 131. c. d. Encouragement of Moses, 46. (...). of
Joshua, h. 98. m. Incredulity punished, 229. k. d. Incursions of the
Amalechites, 115. f. of the Philistines, 150. h. of Ader, 205. c. Indebteds
acts and devices, 748. g. Indulgence cause of sin, 139. f. Industry of the
Romans, 648. g, h. Ingratitude of the Sichemites, 117. f. of the Israelites,
135. d. of Nabal, 152. i. m. of Demetrius, 326. g. of Malchus, 577. a.
Inhabitants of Nob slain, 149. d. Inhabitants of countries, 10. g, etc. and
11. a, etc. Inheritance of Jacob and Esau, 28. g, of Salpades danghters, 88. l.
Inhibition of Cambyses, 226. l, m. Iniquity, 580. h. of the Jews, 726. l.
Injuries of Florus, 464. h. Injury to David's Ambassadors, 168. k. to Thamar,
172. k, l. Injustice of lawmakers, 797. d, e. Innocence of David, 151. d. 153.
d, e. Insolence. 237. c. 239. d, e. 240. h. 719. c. Institution of
circumcision, 15. b. of the Passover, 49. c, d. Instruments of Music, 197.
c. Interpretation of Joseph's dreams, 24. a, b. of the Butlers, 32. l. of the
Bakers, 33. a, b. of Pharaohs, ibid. e, f. of Nabuchodonosors, 259, c, d. of
the hand writing, 262. g, h. Interpreters royally entertained, 293. b. Intent
of Florus inanifested, 626. k. Intention of Saul against David, 144. h. l. 145.
f. 146. l. Intestine discord, 672. k. Inuectiue against murderers 163. c.
against the Zealous, 674. h of Joseph against the Jews, 715. f. Inuentor of
Music, who, 5. f. Inuentor of the art of forging, ibid. first Inuentors of
letters, 765. a. Invocation of God in trouble, 54. l. Ioab general of David's
army, 160. discomfiteth Abner, ibid. i. slaieth Abner, 162. g. discomfiteth
the Syrians, 169. a. reconcileth Absalon to his father, 174. h. i. Ioab and the
army enter the city mournfully, 179. (...). his Oration unto David etc. ibid.
c. sent out against Siba, 181. d. kills Amaza. ib. e. rebuked, proposes
conditions of peace, 181. g, h. one of Adonias coadiutors, 186. i, k. slain,
191. f. Ioachas king of Israel subdued, 236. h, i. and why, ibid. his
repentance and prayer, ibid. Ioachim king of Judah, 250. l. paid tribute, ibid.
251. a. reuolteth, and is slain, 251. a, b, not buried, ibid. c. Ioachin king
of Judah, 251. c. see Iechonias. Ioas king of Israel, 236. k. called Elizaeus
his father, ibid. k. his treble victory, 236. m. 237. a. Ioas saved, and how,
233. f. created king of Judah, 234. g. his piety during Ioiadas time, 234. m.
repaireth the temple, 235. c, d. his impiety after Ioiadas decease, ibid. e.
stoneth Zacharias, ibid. e, f. bought his peace, 236. g. dies, ib. Ioatham his
works about the temple, 240. k. acts of war, ibid. k. 241. a. Ioaz king of
Judah taken prisoner, 250. k. his impictie and death, ibid. k, l. Iobel a maker
of tents, 5. f. Iochabel Moses mother, 42. i. secretly hid him three months,
ibid. k. appointed to be his nurse by Pharaohs daughter, 43. b. Iodes kills
Eglon, 114. k. subdueth the Moabites, and rules Israel, ibid. k, l. Joel and
Abia govern the common weal, 130. k. Ioiada high priest, 233. m. crea^teth
Ioas king, 234. g. swears king and people to serve God, ibid. l. deceaseth,
235. d. John releaseth Ismaels captives, 257. b. refused counsel, ib. c. John
high priest slaieth his brother, 283. f. punished, 284. g. John Ionathans
brother slain, 318. i. John Baprist slain, 471. a. John's acts in Gischalis,
533. c, f. his treason, 534. l. secketh to murder Joseph, 535. a. he and the
Embasladours resort to Jesus, 544. g. his followers forsake him, 551. b. a
trecher and murderer, 640. k. flies into Gischala, 642. k. persuades the
Tiberians to revolt, ibid. h, i. moves to rebellicu, 670. k, l. reserved to
be at the siege of Jerusalem, 671. d. swears to the people, etc. 676. h.
breaks his oath, ibid. i. assaulted on both sides, 698. k, l. puts the
Zealous to flight, 702. g. seaseth the temple, ibid. raileth upon Joseph, 729.
c. apprehended, 744. m. is condemned to perpetual prison, ibid. John captain
of the Idumaeans, 710. l. slain, ibid. l. Jonas cause of a tempest, and why,
238. k, l, m. devoured of a Whale, and cast out, 239. a. preaches to the
Ninevites, ib. 2. Jonathan Saul's son, 136. h. entered the enemies camp, and
slew them, 137. b, c. breaks the edict, ibid. f. counsels David to fly,
144. m. pacifieth Saul's displeasure, and certifieth David thereof, 145. b, c.
discovers Saul's hatred to David, and how, 147. d, e, f. renueth his covenant,
150. k. Jonathan governor of the Jews, 318. g, h. reuengeth his brothers
death, 318. l. assaileth Bacchides by night, 319. c. puts Apollonius to
flight, 324. h, i. appeaseth Demetrius, 326. i. puts Demetrius to flight,
329. a. renneth friendship with the Romans, etc. 329. b, c. etc. fights with
Demetrius, 330. g. repaireth Jerusalem, etc. ibid. i, l. taken by Tryphon, 331.
b. 560. h. slain, 332. k. 560, h. Ionathans letters to Joseph, 542. h. m.
Jonathan challenges a Combat, 732. l, m. slaieth Pudens, 733. a. Ioppe a
retreat for thieves, 661. c. taken, ibid. e, f. Ioram king of Judah, 226. l.
served Idols, 230. h. murthereth his brethren, ib. k. dies miserably, 230. m.
Ioram king of Israel, an impious man, 225. c. asks aid, ibid. c. in
distress with two other kings, ibid. e, f. relieved, and how, 225. f. 226. g.
overcame the Moabites, ibid. h. besieged, 227. f. threatens Elizaeus, 228. h.
certified of the enemies flight, 229. b. his expedition to recover Ramath, 231,
a, b. Jordan yields the Israelites passage, 161. e, f. his fountain, 667. b.
Iosaphat king of Judah his piety, 220. i, k. his expedition with Achab, 220. l,
m. reproved, 223. b. renueth the true service of God, ibid. c. prays, and
why, 223. c. obtains victory, and how, 224. g, h, i. his ships cast away,
ib. i. aydeth Ioram, 225. c. dies, 226. k. Joseph son of Jacob, 24. l.
envied of his brethren, 28. l. dreamed a dream, ibid. l, m. sold by his
brethren, 29. c. and 30. h, i. resisted his mistress twofold temptation, 31. a,
b. and c, accused and cast into prison, 32. g, h, i. expounded dreams, 32. l.
33. b, e, f. counseled the king how to prevent famine, 34. g, h. advanced to
honor, and married a wife, ibid. h, i. sounded his brethren, and why, ibid. l.
sent them away but detained Simeon, 35. d, e. banquetteth them and Benjamin,
36. h, i. staieth their journey and accuses them, ibid. i, k, l. attacheth
Benjamin, 37. a, b. makes himself, known to his brethren, 38. l, m. resorteth
to Pharao with his brethren, etc. 40. burieth his father, ibid. m, gives
charge concerning his bones, 41. a. dies, ibid. Joseph preuenteth calamity,
and how, 298. g, etc. Ambassador to Ptolomey, ibid. i. tributes of Coelesyria
committed to him, 299. b. his wealth and children, ibid, e. sends his son
Hyrcanus to Ptolomey, 300. k. his death, 304. g. Joseph Herod's brother slain,
a, b. 378, k. Joseph Herod's uncle, 387. b. slain, and why, 388. i, k, l.
Josephus of the priestly line, 423. d. 529. b. studious from his infancy,
ibid. d. expert in the Greek and Hebrew tongues, 528. g. a Pharisee, 529. f.
his shipwreck, 530. g. dehorteth the Jews from sedition, ibid. remains in
Galilee, 533. b. procures the safety of the kings goods, ibid. would not be
bribed, 534. h, i. surpriseth Jesus, 535. f. his care of religion, 536. g.
transporteth corn into Galilee, 536. k. labors to restore Ptolomies goods,
537. b. moves the people to compassion, 537. d. his Oration, ibid. f. escapes
from danger, 558. g. dismisseth the Tarichaeans, 538. k. politikely takes
Tiberias, 539. b. dismisseth the Tiberians, ibid. e. his dream, 541. d. his
answer to Jonathan, 542. l. besetteth the ways of Gulilee, 543. d. obiecteth
treachery to the Ambassadors, 544. k. pacifieth sedition, 545. b. sends 100.
Ambassadors to Jerusalem, ibid. b. certifieth the Galileans of Ionathans
treachery, 547. d. takes Simon, 548. i. surpriseth Tiberias, ib. m. 549. a.
prosecuteth his History, 551. 2. assaileth the walls of Sephoris, 552. k.
puts the kings soldiers to flight, 552. m. his accident, 553. a.
discharges captives, ibid. f. entertained by Vespasian, 554. g. envied, etc.
ib. makes seventy Elders rulers in Galilee, 639. e, f. fortifieth the Cities
with walls, 640. g. instructs the Galileans in war, ibid. comes to Iotapata,
650. l. defends Iotapata, 651. f. 653. e. f. 656. g. burns the engines,
654. g. leapt into a trench, 658. i. consents to Nicanor, ib. m. his speech
to his fellows, 659. b. resorteth to Vespasian, 660. k. foretells Vespasian
of his future honors; 660. l. rewarded by Vespasian, 661. a. imprisoned, ibid.
delivered, 695. c. wounded in the head, 723 a. his speech to the people, 729.
f. 730. g. present at the wars of the Jews, 767. c. sold his books to
many, ibid. Josias restored Gods service, 248. k, l. rooteth out Idolatry,
ibid. l. causes the book of the law to be read, 249. d. burns false
prophets bones, ibid. c. celebrateth the passover, 249. f. and 250. g. is
slain, ib. i. Iosuah captain over the Israelites, 56. l. with Caleb appeaseth
the people, 74. h. appointed the successor of Moses, 88. g. passes over
Jordan, 101. e, f. builds an Altar, 102. g. compassed about the City of
Jericho, 102. h, i. burns the City, ibid. k, l. pronounces them accursed
that reedifie it, ibid. l. prays unto God, 103. b. takes and burns Ainan,
ibid. e. makes a covenant with the Gabeonites, 104. i. slays five kings,
ibid. l, m. slaieth the kings of Chanaan and their army, 105. b. sends men to
measure the land, ibid. e, f. deuideth it by lots, 106. h. etc. his Oration to
the two tribes and half, 106. m. exhorts the people to keep the law, 108.
l. dies, ibid. m. Iotapata besieged, 650. l, m. 651. d. valiantly defended,
651. c, f. 652. g. etc. 653. a. etc. 654. g. 655. a, b. etc. 656. g. taken,
657. f. 658. g. Iothan son of Gedeon, 117. e. vpbraideth the Sichemites, ib:
e, f. advises them to reject Abimelech, 118. g. Journey of the Hebrews, 49.
e. 50. i. 51. d. 52. h. 53. a, e. Joy of Jacob, 39. b. 40. g. of the
Egyptians, 40. l. of Anna, 125. e. of the Jews, 269. a. etc. Iron bed of Og,
83. c. Iron work forbidden, 136. i. Isaac promised, 14. k. and 15. b, e. is
borne, 16. l. why he was called Isaac, ibid. l. legitimate son of Abraham,
17. d. makes a covenant with Abimelech, 21. c. should have been offered, 18.
k. married Rebecca, 19. d. and 20. k. dies, 27. d. Isachar, son of Jacob,
24. l. what it signifies, ibid. l. his sons, 39. f. Isboseth Saul's son
proclaimed king, 160. g. his army discomfited, ibid. i, k. reproved Abner, and
why, 163. a, b. traitorously slain, 163. a. Isha, what it signifies, 4. g.
Isis priests hanged, 467. f. 468. g. Islands, etc. called Cethim* 10. k. Ismael
slew, Godolias, 256. k. takes many prisoners, 257. a. Ismael Abraham's son,
15. a. circumcifed: ibid. c, c. 17. a. his state and progeny foretold, 15. b.
his name, what, 15. a. banished, and why, 17. b. his sons. 17. c. Israel, a
name given to Jacob, and why, 26. k. Israelites servitude, 41. c. their male
children done to death, 41. d. grievously afflicted. 46. g, l. and 47. c.
celebrated the Passover, 49. c. d. departed our of Egypt, ibid. d, c. 50. g.
are exhorted to put their trust in God, ibid. k, l, m. go through the red sea,
51 d. sing songs of praise to God, 52. g. h. distressed in the desert. 53. a.
murmur, and why, ibid. e, f. fed with Manna forty years, 55: c. incensed
against Moses, and why, ibid. c. d. wander in the wilderness forty years, 74
k. assail the enemies, 76. g. war against the Amalechites, 56. h. and get
great spoils 57 h. i. come to Sinai, ibid. d. hear God speaking to them, 59.
c. builded the Tabernacle, 60. l. assail their enemies and are overcome, 70.
g, h, i, k. put the Amorites to slight, 82. l, m. slay Sehon and Og, 83. a, b,
c. serve strange Gods, 86. h. commanded to destroy their enemies, 90. g. h
bound to keep the law, 98. k. enjoyed the fruits of the earth, 102. h. took
Jericho, 102. l. also Ainan, 103. c. overcame the Canaanites, 105. b. divided
their land amongst them, 106. h, etc. reproved for sparing the Chanaanites,
110. g. twice overthrown, 111. d, c. s^ay all the Beniamites save 600. 112. g.
give them 400 virgins for wives, ibid. l. their punishment, prayers, and fast,
129. b, c, d, e. their report to Samuel of his sons, 130. m. ^e fire a king,
ibid. rescue Jonathan, 138. k. spare the cattle of the Amalechites, 139. c, d.
revolt from Roboam, 206. l. the godly return to him, 209. a. their
translation, 240. i. 242. g. dispossessed of their country, and why, 243. e,
f. 247. e. Issue of Isaac fore told, 15. b. what should effect, ibid. b. of
Abraham by Chetura, 19. b. of Jacob, 24. i, k, l. Issue of the war, 611. c.
Ittan a place of recreation, 204. g. Iubal inuentor of Music* 5. f. Judah the
son of Jacob, 24. i. his counsel to sell Joseph, 30. h, i. urges his father
to send Benjamin, 35. s. makes a speech before Joseph, 37. c. etc. and 38. g.
his children, 39. f. Iudaea made tributarie, 250. k. described, 647. a, b.
length and breadth thereof, ibid. b. desolated, 726. g. Judas Machabaeus, 306.
i. slaieth Apollonius and discomsiteth the Syrians, ibid. k. m. his oration to
his soldiers, 307. twice discomfiteth Lysias, 308. g, h, k. purged the Temple,
308. l. 309. a. warreth with the neighboring nations, 309. c. b. succoureth
the Jews in Galaad, 309. f. 310. g. his admirable victory, ibid. k. besieges
the Castle in Jerusalem, 312. c. and why, ibid. his league with Antiochus, 313.
a. slaieth Alcimus partakers, 374. h. puts Nican^o flight, 315. a.
couenanteth peace with the Romans. 315. c. abandoned of his men, ibid. f. is
slain, 316. i. 560. g. Judas the Essean a Prophet, 340. h: 562. l. Judas the
Archtheefe, 456. i. Judas Galilaeus sect, 464. g. Judge corrupted with money,
368. k, l. Judges ^ualities, 91. d. their office, 223. c, d. placed in every
city of Judah, ibid. c. Judgment Teat in seuer^ll cities, 130. k. Julian his
valor and death, 729. a, b, etc. Julius Ant. for the Jews, 422. k. Jupiter
Enyelius relics, 9. e. Justice is Gods power, 91. e. Justice of God, 244. m^
leaves nothing unpunished, 601. 2. Justice oppressed, 130. l. Justice
neglected, 566. h. Justice of the Esseans, 616. g. Justification of Samuel,
135. c. Iustus incitoth the people to rebellion, 531. c, d. reproved, 549. b.
his country Tiberias, ibid. accused, 553. c. condemned to death, 550. i. his
book when published, 150. k. desires to command Galilee, 552. i. Izates king
of Adiabena^ 514. i. learneth the service of God, ibid. dissuaded from
circumcision, 515. a, b. writes (...) the Parthians, etc. 516. i. calls upon
God, 517. f. delivers the kingdom to his brother, 518. (...). h. dies,
ibid.
K
Keeper of the prisons entreatie of Joseph, 3^. i. Kind of living most
miserable, 717. c, d. Kindness of Agrippa, 544. g. kinds of sacrifice, two, 68.
h. i. Kindness pretended, 601. f. Kindness of Herod, 603. a. sat Kine and lean,
what they signify, 33. d, e, f. (...) King desited, 130 m. Kings field, 14. i.
33. e, f. 5. Kings of the Madianites slain. 87. e. of a King to be elected,
what things are required, 92. h. i. the Kings of Canaan war against the
Hebrews, 105. a. they and their whole (...) put to the sword, ibid. b. 31.
Kings overcome by the Hebrews, 105. c. Kings of Egypt why called Pharaohs,
201. f. and 102. g. Kings of Alexandria called Ptolomies, 202. g. King of Moab
sacrifices his son, 226. i. King enjoined by oath to serve God, 234. l.
Kingdom of Solomon rent, 204. m. 205. d. a Kingdom how continued, 141. c.
Kingdom promised to Iehues posterity, 233. e. Kingdom of Herod divided,
459. d. Kingdom not given, but the honors thereof, 591. b. Kingdom of
Agrippa, 620. k. Kindred, 20. i. 23. e. Kinsman, 25. c. Knowledge of celestial
bodies, 6. h. Knowledge of good and evil, 4. i.
L
Laban Bethuels son, 21. g. consents to Rebeccaes marriage, 20. k.
entertaineth lacob, 23. d, c. appoints him master of his shepherds, ibid. f.
deceives him, 24. h. 25. d. pursues after him, 25. a. makes a covenant with
him, ibid. b, e, f. his goods, 24. m. 25. e. Labor of the Esseans, 615. d. of
the Roman soldiers, 648. g. ceaseless, 721. a, b. Ladder of Jacob, 22. k. l.
Ladies at variance, 598. m. Lake Asphaltites, 13. f. described, 687. c. the
property thereof, ib. Lake of Genezar, 665. a. Lakes Asphaltites and Teberias,
687. e, f. Lamech his wives and issue, 5. f. Lamech Methusalas son, 6. m. 7.
a. Lamentation of Esau, and why, 22. l. Lamentation of Jacob, 30. l of the
Hebrews, 99. c. Lamentation of thirty days, 94. l. m. Lamentation for Abner,
16^ i. for Aristobulus, 381. l. Land of the Amorites possessed, 83. b. Land
marks not to be removed, 92. i. Land of Canaan divided by Lots, 106. h. etc.
Land of Sodom where, 688. m. Lap of Saul's garment, 151. b. Largess of Titus
to his soldiers, 746. g. Largeness of Jury, 774. l. Lauer how sustained,
196. k. round lauers, ibid. m. a Law most cruel, 41. c. Laws made by Moses,
90. i. Laws of adultery and iealoufie, 71. b. of the seventh year, 71. c, f.
of the fathers forsaken, 86. h. of the plough, 92. k. of like for like, 96. i.
of violence, ibid. h. of war, 72. h. i. 97. c, d. against wal-breakers, 412.
l. against forsakers of their places, 720. h. Laws of the Jews of great
antiquity, 798. f. Lawmakets of the Gentiles, 797. d. Laws of the Gentiles,
798. g. Lea Labans daughter, 24. g. substituted in Rachels place, ibid, h hare
to Jacob four sons, ibid. i. k. League of Isaac with Abimelech, 21. c. of
David with Hiram, 164. i. of him with Solomon, 195. a. of Hyreanus with the
Romans, 336. i, k. Learning of Daniel, 258. g. of Joseph, 529. d. Legacies of
Herod, 450. k, l. Legions of the Romans, 647. e. 699. c, d. Lending upon
usury unlawful. 9^. c. Length of the Arc of Noah, 6, l. m. Length of the
Temple, 195. c. Lenity of Saul, 135. a. Lenity of Magistrates, 139. f.
Leapers driven out of the City, 70. k. l. 229. b. 239. f. and 240. g. Leprosy
of Ozias. 239. f. Letters of David, 170. g. of Senacherib, 246. g. of
Artaxerxes for the security of the Jews, 282. i. of Ptolemy, 290. m, of
Eleazar. 291. b. of Demetrius, 326. k. Leui son of Jacob, 24. i. slew the
Siche^ites, 27. a. his sons, 39. f. Levites wife, 110. h, i. abused, dies,
etc. 111. a. b. tribe of Leui sacred to God. 70. h. Levites sing hymns, 224.
g. numbered, 187. e. Liberality of the enchantresse, 155. c. of Herod, 588. k.
of Helena, 515. e, f. of Izates, ibid. Liberue of the Israelites, 50. g. l.
restored, 113. c. Liberty of speech, 220. h, i. 585. e, d. Liberty a precions
thing, 499. b. Liberties granted to the Jews, 784. i, k, l, m. Library of
Ptol. Philadelphus, 288. k. Lice a plague of Egypt, 48. k Lic of Posido^us,
etc. confuted, 786. l. Li^ of Appion concerning our oath, 789. b. Life of
Moses. 791. a. b. Life of subjects like to their princes, 209. b, c. Light
created, 3. d. called day, ib. d. Lightnings horrible, when. 59. a. Lightnings
on the enemies, 130. g. Limits of the nine tribes and halfes possession, 106.
h, etc. Limits of a kingdom enlarged, 238. k. Line of Achab rooted out, 233.
a. Line of Joseph, 529. b. Linen and woollen garment, 91. b. Logion or
rational of the high priest, 64. h. Longinus breaks into the Jews army, 711.
(...). Loss of the Arc, 126. l. and why, ib. Loss of Saul's kingdom
foretold, 140. i. and why, ib. of the Empire of Asia, 239. a. Loss of the
General dismaies the soldiers, 222. h. Lot son of Aram, 11. f. had choice
of the land, 13. c. led away captive, ibid. f. rescued, 14. h. receives
Angels, 15. e, f. fled to Zoar, 16. g. committed incest, ib. h. Lots wife, 16.
g. Lots cast, 103. d. 106. h, etc. 133. c. 238. l, m. Lots cast to kill one
another, 660. h, i. 761. a, b. Love of women blinds, 86. g. and causes to
serve strange gods, ib. g, h. 204. i. 205. d. Love of Jonathan toward David,
144. m. 146. l. 147. a, b. of Joseph to his country, 717. a. Lovers of Order,
etc. 790. l, m. Lust of Putifars wife, 31. a, c, of the Gabaens, 110. l, m.
111. a. of Caius, 50^. e. of the Egyptians, 13. a. Lusty Jews reserved, 744.
h. Lybia of whom called Africa, 19. b, c. Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians,
795. a. Lysias General of Antiochus army, 307. b. inuadeth Iudaea, ibid. i.
overcome, 308. h. once again inuadeth Iudaea, ibid. i, k. Lysimachus kills
Apollodotus, 343. c. betrayeth Gaza, ib.
M
Machaeras kills many Jews, 377. e. fortifieth Geth, 378. l. his iniquity,
580. h. Madness counterfaited, 148. i. Madianites Embassage to Baalam, 83. and
84. g. their daughters seduce the Hebrews, 85. d. put to flight and slain,
87. c. subdue the Israelites, 115. f. kill one another, 117. a. Madus and his
progeny, 10. h. Magicians could not expound the dream, 258. k, l. 259. g.
Magicians deceive many, 522. l. work much mischief, 622. Magistrates to be
obeyed, 89. d, e. to be honored and reverenced. 91. d. 628. g. 786. l. their
duty, 223. c. d. Magog author of the Scythians, 10. h. Magnanimity of Herod,
420. l. of the Romans, 786. i, k. Magnificence of Solomon, 202, m. 204. h. of
Ezechias, 243. a, b. of Herod, 588. i, k. of Vespasians triumph, 750. l.
Maidens of Israel sing and dance, 143. e. Malchus king of Arabia, 577. a.
repelled Herod, ib. a. repented him of that dealing, 578. g. Male children done
to death, and why, 41. d, c. Maledictions of Moses, 97. f. and 98. a.
Malefactors executed. 525. c. Malice of Pharao, 49. a. of Doeg and Saul, 149.
c, d. of the Ziphians, 150. l, m. of the Egyptians to the Jews, 776. (...)
Malichus lays wait for Antipater, 366. k. poisoneth him, 367. a. slain,
ibid. e. Mambres Abraham's friend, k. Man created, 3. f. called Adam, and why,
ib. f. imposed names on the creatures, ibid. f. placed in Paradise, 4. g.
transgresses, ibid. i. cast out of Paradise, 5. a. author of his own death,
8. h, g. Manahem foretells Herod's reign, 408. i. Manahem king of Isreal's acts,
240. h. bought his peace, ib. h. dies, 240. i. Manahemus chief of the rebels,
632. m. slain, 633. e. Manasses marries Sanabalats daughter, 284. h.
retains his wife, ibid. k, l. enjoys his desire, 285. d. Manasses Joseph's
son, 34. i. king Manasses impiety, 247. c, f. sed away prisoner, 248. g.
repenting is restored, ibid. g. his acts. 248. h, i. dies, ib. Mandate of
Cyrus. 265. c. Manethon an Egyptian writer, 768. m. shows the coming and
departure of the Jews, etc. 779. i. his fabulous reports, 776. k. his lies
confuted, 777. f. his words repeated, 778. i. Manna, what, 55. e. food of the
Israelites, 55. c. how much to be gathered, ibid. b. when it ceased, 102. h.
Manner of purification, 81. f. 82. g. Manners of the Egyptians, 41. b, c. of
the Esseans, 614. m. 615. e. of the Idumaeans, 677. b, c. of the Athenians,
797. a. of the Persians, 797. c. Manoachs wife saw an Angel, 120. m. foretold
of a son, and instructed, ibid. m. 121. a. is seen of both, 121. b, c.
Manslaughter, 88. k. Mara, what, 53. c. March of the Romans, 649. e, f. Mariam
Moses sister, 42. l. watched him, ibid. k, l. fetched his mother, 43 a. her
death, 81. f. Mardochaeus Esthera uncle, 277. d. discovers the traitors, 278.
g, h. his lamenting, and why, 279. a, b. ^red, 281. c. d. Marriage, when to be
contracted, 93. e. Marriage with an harlot forbidden, ibid. e. Marriage with a
bondwoman, 94. l. Marriages made, 598. g, h. broken, ibid. k. Mariamme wife of
Herod, 384. l. committed to Joseph, 387. c. accused, excused her self, 388. i,
k. displeased with Herod, 396. l. coldly entertained Herod, 397. b, c.
vpbraided Herod, 589. d. accused, and put to death, 399. a. 589. c. 590. g.
Marphad sacked Syria, 13. e. killed Giants, ibid. e. Marsus Governor of Syria,
510. k. displeased, ibid. Mar^iall discipline, 640. h. 648. g. Masons, how
employed, 195. b, c. Massacre of the Jews, 634. g, etc. 635. a, etc. 636. b,
etc. 722. i, k, etc. Massada a strong Castle, 755. d. for what occasion
builded, 757. c. battered with the Ram, 757. d. Matter for the building of the
tabernacle, 60. k, l. Matter committed in trust, 96. k, l. Matthias refuses to
commit Idolatry, 305. b. slaieth an Apostata, ib. rooteth out Idolatry, 305.
e. his death, 306. h. makes war against Antiochus, 559. b. Matthias raises
sedition, 448. g; etc. burned, ibid. (...). Matthias cruelly handled, 722. i.
Measures found out, and by whom, 5. e. Medimnus, a certain measure, 75. b.
Meeting of the Hebrews thrice a year, 90. m. Melancholy of Herod, 605. e.
Melchisedech king of Solyma, 14. h, i. entertaineth Abraham, etc. ibid. i.
prayseth God, and receives the tenths, 14. i. Men thronged to death, 621. a,
b. Menelaus high priest, 303. warreth against Jason, ibid. Mephiboseth obtaines
the possessions of Saul, 168. h. purges himself of Sibas slanders, 180.
(...). restored to the half of his possessions, ib. l. Merchandise brought to
Solomon, 203. e. Merchants of Arabia buy Joseph, 30. h. sold him to (...), ib.
m. of Tharsis, ^24. i. Mercy hurtful in war, 712. k. Mercy of Varus, 612.
h. of Titus toward Joseph, 660. m. to his enemies, 672. g. Meroe a strong
City of Ethiopia, 44. l. Messengers sent to David, 146. g. to Nabal, 152. h.
Mesopotamia troublesome to travelers, 19. d. Mesopotamians submit themselves,
169. c. Method of morality and discipline, 791. f. 792. g. Methusala Enochs
son, 6. m. 7. a. how long he lived, 7, c. Mice devour the fruit, etc. 127.
f. Micheas reproves Achab, and why, 220. h. how rewarded, ibid. i. foretells
Achabs death, and Sedechias punishment, 22^, c. d. his allowance, ibid. f.
Michol daughter of Saul, 144. g. given to David in marriage, ibid. l. conueieth
David away, 145. f. deceives Saul's messengers, 146 g. h. restored to David
261. b. mocked at him, 165. f. Midwiues of Egypt. 41. c. Mildnes of David, 151.
d. Military discipline, 640. h. 648. g. a Mind furnished with virtues. 141. b.
Ministeries of the Gabeonites, 104. k. Miracles, 46. g k, l. 207. c, f. 216, i.
214. l, m. 121. c 226 l, m. Miracle of the Suns going back, 247. b. Miracle of
Helizaeus, 688. g. Misa king of Moab, 225. d. put to ^ight, 226. h, i.
sacrifices his son, ibid. i. Misdemeancur of the wicked, 6. k. of Samuels
sons, 130. m. of a soldier. 621. a. Misery of the Israelites, 41. e, 42. k.
47. c. 54. l. foreprophecied, 210. k. of the Jews foretold, 249. b. of Iudaea,
463. b, c. of the Jews prophesied, 630. l of the people, 718. i. k. 725.
(...). three Miseries assail Jerusalem, 685. c. Mithridates king of Parthia,
345. d. Mithridates king of Pontus slain, 354 h. Mithridates warreth with the
Egyptians. 360. g. commends Antipater to Caesar, ibid. Moabites put to
flight, 114. k, l. war against Iosaphat, 223. c. kill one another, 224. h.
Modle of the Temple, 188. k. Modle of the Tabenacle proposed to Moses, 60. m.
Moderation of Saul, 133. c. of David, 151. d. Moderation in abundance hardly
kept, 237. e, f. Monarchy of the Assyrians destroyed, 247. b. Money taken out
of David's tomb, 290. g. 335. f. distributed, 713. e. Monobazus king of
Adiabena, 513. f. Moon made, 3. e. her end and motion, ibid. c. Monument of
the priesthood confirmed, 80 i. Monument of Rachel, 132. l. of Jonathan, 332.
l. of David; 335. e. of John the high Priest, 709. b. orning, what, 3, d. Moses
the son of Amram, 42. i, k. foretold to afflict the Egyptians estate, and
advance the Israelites, 41. d. cast into the flood, 42. k, l. taken out
thereof, ibid. m. called Moses, 43. b. adopted by Pharaohs daughter, spurned
the crown, ibid. b, c, d. conducted the Egyptians against the Ethiopians, 44.
g. etc. his victory, 44. the Jews lawmaker, 2. k, l. more ancient then other
lawmakers, 791. a. flies to Raguel, and why, 45. b. c. marieth his daughter,
ibid. d. sent to deliver the Israelites, 46. k, l. confirmed in his calling,
ibid. g. h, i, k. persuades Pharao to dismiss the Israelites, 47. b, etc.
works miracles, ibid, c, d, e. instituteth the Passover, 49. c, d.
conducteth the Israelites, 50. g, i. exhorts them, ibid. m. prays to God,
51. c. leads them through the red sea, 51. d. praises God, 52. g, h.
sacrificed to God in Sinai, ibid. h. beseeches God to sweeten the waters, 53.
d. puts the people in mind of Gods benefits, 54. h, i. imploreth Gods help,
ibid. l. striking the rock brings out water, 55. e. encourages the
Israelites, 56. i, k. lifting up his hands, etc. 57. a. ascends Sinai, 58. l.
how long remains there, 60. h. fasted ib. asks counsel of God, etc. 68. h.
numbreth the people, 72. h, i. sends spies to search the land, 73. e.
retireth the people into the desert. 76. l. sends forces against the
Madianites, ^7. b. appoints Iosuah his successor, ibid. f. exhorts the
people to obedience, 89. a, b, etc. swears them to keep the law, 98. k. 99.
a. exhorts Iosuah, 98. m. commands the Jews to hear the law, 792. h, i.
dies, 99. e. Mother eats her child, 228, g, h. 734. i, k. Mother of the
seven brethren, 805. a. 808. k. 810. g. etc. Moueables of all sorts, 103. f.
Mourning of Ruben for Joseph, 30. i. of the Romans, 638. l, m. of them in
Jerusalem, 699. a. Mourning for thirty days, 94. l, m. Mourning for Moses
death, 99. b, c. for Saul and his sons, 158. k. for Abners, 162. i. for Herod's,
451. c. Mountain of Sinai, 45. f. 47. f. Mounts builded, lost, 719. e, f.
Mounts raised near the Temple, 732. g. Multiplication of Jacobs posterity,
42. h. Multitude of business, 57. f. of dead carcasses, 725. f. Mundus defiles
Paulina, 467. a, etc. banished, ibid. Murmur of the Israelites, 53. f. 74. g.
Murder of Simeon and Leui, 27. a. Murder of Azael, 160. k. of Abner, 162. g.
of Iorams brethren, 230. k. of infants foretold, 230. g. Murder of Saul
punished, 159 f. of Isboseth, 163. d. Music by whom invented, 5. f.
Mutabilitie of fortune, 668. l. m. Mutiny of Chore and his accomplices, 77. b,
c, etc. Mutiny about the golden Eagle, 448. h. Mutiny against Archelaus, 452.
g, h, etc.
N
Naas king of the Ammonites. 133. c. his outrages offered the Israelites, ibid.
e, f. proposes hard conditions of peace, 134. g. grants to the inhabitants
of Iabes a truce, ibid. h. is slain, 134. l. Nabals flocks spared, 152. g. his
currish answer to David's men, ibid. i, died for grief, 153. a. Nabathaea the
country of Ismaels posterity, 17. c. Nabathaeans spoiled, 330. i. Naboth
falsely accused, 217. d. stoned to death, ibid. d. Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon, 250. m. vanquisheth Nechao, ibid. 251. a. exacteth tribute and slaieth
Ioachim, 251. a. establish Ioachin king, ibid. e. besieges and destroys
Jerusalem, 254. i. 255. a. dreameth a dream, 258. k. erecreth an Idol, 259. c,
conuersed with beasts, 260. g, h. conquereth the rebels, 771. e. builded a
palace, 772. g, h. besieges Tire, 773. b. his death, 260. h. Nadab, Aarons
son, burned, and why, 67. a. Nadab Ieroboams son, 212. g. his impiety and
death. ibid. g. Name of Saul famous, 134. l. Naming of the creatures, 3. f.
Names of Regions and Nations, 10. g. Noami her sorrow, 123. e, f. returns
into her country, 124. g. her counsel to Ruth, ibid. i, k. Norbanus for the
Jews, 422. k. Narration of the Arabian wars, 432. l. Nathan the Prophet, 166.
h. forbids David to build the Temple, ibid. h. reproved David, 170. m 171.
a, b. Nativity of Jacob and Esau, 20 m. two nations proceed of them ibid. m.
Nation of the Jews mixed with all people, 747. b. Nations whence descended,
10. g, etc. and 11. a. etc. Nature forbids a man to kill himself, 659. c. f.
Nature of the Idumaeans, 677. b. Navy of Solomon, 202. k. Naum the Prophet,
240. l. foretells the overthrow of the Assyrians. ibid. l. Nazarites, 81. d.
Nechao his exploits, 250, h. is overcome, ibid. m. 251. a. 252. l, m.
Necessity, a sharp weapon, 651. a. Neglect of Gods service cause of all
evil, 207. e, f. Negligence of Saul's guard, 153. c. d, e. Nehemias his sadness
and why, 275. c, d. inciteth the people to build the walls, etc. ibid. e. his
ardent care in building them 276. h. his death. ibid. k. Nemrod, 9. b, c. Son
of Chus, 11. a. Nephanus and Sabach David's captains, 182. m. 183. a. Nephews
of Jacob, 39. e. of Herod, 598. g, h. Nepthalim the son of Jacob, 24 k. his
sons, 40. g. Nero proclaimed Emperor, 521. e. his murders, ibid. e, f. 622.
h. amassed at the acts of the Jews. 645. a. sends Vespasian to govern
Syria, 745. b. Nicanor labereth to surprise Judas, 314. g. slain, 315. a.
Nicanor known to Joseph. 658. k. Nicanor wounded, 709. b. Nicaule Queen of
Ethiopia, 202. h. resorteth to Solomon ibid. l. wondreth and praises Salomons
wisdom. 202. m. and 203. a. gives him presents, ibid b. Nicholaus Oration.
414. i. etc. Nicholaus the Historiographer reproved, 423. c. Nicholaus accuses
Syllaeus. excuses Herod, 432. i. k. prosecuteth the kings accusation, 444. k.
445. a, etc. excuses Archelaus, 454. k. 609. c. defends Herod and Archelaus,
459. b. 613. a. Nicon, the Romans great Ram, 711. a. Niger slain, etc. 683. c,
d. Nilus, 4. h. makes Egypt fertile, 40. i. how far nauigable, 694. k.
Niniue admonished, 239. a. her destruction prophesied, 240. l. effected, 247.
b. Nisan a month with the Hebrews, 49. c. Noah the son of Lamech, 6. m.
admonishes the wicked, ibid. k, l. builds the Arc, 6. l. saved with all his
household, ibid. m. sends out a Crow and a Dove, 7. d, (...) the tenth from
Adam, 6. m. sacrifices to God, 7. c. prays to God, 8. g is heard, ibid. h.
Gods covenant with him, ibid. i, k. his age, 7. c. his three sons, 9. a. his
kind of life, 11. c. was dru^ken and derided, ibid. c. Nob a City of the
priests burnt, 149. c, d. Nobility slain by the thieves, 673. a. 12000.
slain, 682. i. Nobility of the Jews fly to the Romans, 730. i. Nobles
repair to David, 163. d. Nobles shut up by Herod, 449. c. 605. c, f. released,
450. m. 606. h. Nothing attempted by the Romans rashly, 648. l, m. 669. a.
Number of the children of Israel, 49. f. from twenty to fifty years of age,
66. b. of David's soldiers, 163. c, f. of workmen, 195. b, c. of Jews that
returned from captivity, 266. g. 269. d. of high priests, 526. g. 527. a. of
the captives and slain in Jerusalem, 744. i, k, etc. Nuptial feast, 24. g.
O
Obed Edoms felicity, 165. c. Obed begat Iesse, 125. a. Obeda king of Arabia,
344. k. discomsits Alexander, ibid. Obediah, hides the prophets, 215. d.
Obedience of Abraham, 17. c. Obedience to magistrates, 89. d, c. Obedience of
the Roman soldier, 648. i, k. 649. a, b. Obimes Ieroboams son, 210. i.
falls sick, and dies, ibid. i, k. Obodas king of Arabia, 425. c. given to
idleness, ibid. c. 428. m. Obsequies of Herod, 451. a. Obseruers of Gods laws
rewarded, 2. i, k. Occasion of the Jews wars, 625. a. Occasion of victory,
what, 649. a, b. Occasion of violences, 674. g. Occurrences of kingdoms, and
commonweals, 2. g. and 85. a. Occurrences of Jeremy, 250. k. Ochozias king of
Israel, reproved, and why, 224. k, l. his soldiers consumed, ibid. m. 225. a.
his death foretold, ibid. b. Ochozias king of Judah, 231. a. visits Ioram,
232. g. slain, ibid. i. Ode of praise, 52. g. Office of Judges, 91. d, e. of
an Historiographer, 390. h, i. of the priests, 693. a. Offspring of Noah,
Abraham, etc. look progeny. Og king of Galadine, 83. b. is slain with his
ar^y, ibid. c. his high stature and great strength, ibid. c. Oil in the pot
multiplied, 214. l, m. 226. l, m. scalding Oil thrown on the Romans, 655. c,
f. Olda the prophetess, 249. b. Old man kills his wife, etc. 377. c. Old
and weak Jews slain, 744. g. h. One sacred City, one temple, and one Altar,
90. l. Onias high priest, 286. m. Onias high priest, 297. paid not his tribute,
ibid. Onias high priests son, 313. c. wins the favor of Ptolomey, 322. m.
builds a temple in Egypt, ib. l, m. 559. a. Onias stoned to death, 351. f.
352. g. Ophni son of Eli, 125. b. his impiety and wickedness, ib. b. is
slain, 126. k. Opinion of the Esseans and Grecians, of the soul, 616. l, m.
Opinion of the Pharisees and Sadduces, 617. b, c. Opinion of the wisest
Greeks, etc. 791. c. Oppression of the Israelites, 113. d. 114. g. ibid. m.
115. e, f. 119. c, d. 120. l. of the Jews, 623. e, f. 624. g, h. etc. 625. a,
b. etc. Oracle of God to Iosuah, 103. c, d. Oracles of the Prophets to be
r^uerenced, 222* i. Oration of Abraham, 18. h. of Ruben. 34. m. and 35. a. of
Judah, 37. c. etc. and 38. g, h. of Joseph, 37. a, b. of M^ to the people, 59.
b. to the seditious, 77. f. 78. g. etc. of Zambrias, 86. k. of Moses before his
death, 89. a. etc. of the Gabeonites, 104. h. of Iosuah, etc. 106. m. of
Phinces, 107. c. of Samuel; 129. c. 133. b. of Saul, 148. l, m. of Abias, 211.
c. of Herod, 391. c. 392. g, etc. 584 i. 585. c. of Nicholaus, 414. i. 415.
444. k. 590. m. of Agrippa, 627. c. of Joseph. 641. c. 659. b. etc. of Titus,
663. d. 671. a. of Ananus, 674. g. etc. of Jesus, 677. c. of Caesar, etc. 703.
d. of Joseph to the Jews, 714. i. 715. a. etc. 716. g. of Titus to the Iewe^,
740. g, etc. of Eleazar, 758. h. Orchards, 688. h. Order of the Romans, 648. h.
Order of superior bodies, 6. h. Order of the Army, etc. 72. l, m. Order of
Carpenters, Masons, etc. 195. b, c. Order of the Cities of Galilee, 640. i, k.
Order of Titus army, 699. c, e, f. Ordinance of Artaxerxes, 278. g. 280. g, h.
Ordinances of the fathers transgressed, 86. h. Oreb slain, 117. b. Original of
the Hebrews, 11. c. Original of the Troglodytes, 19. b. Original of the
Israelites mischiefs, 243. f. Original of the Grecian laws, 791. c, d.
Original of the Jews laws, 798. k, l. Ornaments of the high priest, 63. f.
64. g, h, etc. Ornaments of Salomons palace, 200. k. Oronna or Orphona a
Iebusite spared, 164. k, l. gives David his floor, 185. a, b. Oseas king of
Israel overcome, 24^. h. made tributarie, ibid. i. taken prisoner, 243. c. his
subjects transported, and why, ibid. e, f. Oath how in time past taken, 19. d.
Oath taken to observe the law, 98. k. 249. d. Oath when and how to be kept, 112.
k. Oath of Jonathan to David, 147, a, b. Oath of Senacherib falsified, 245. b.
Oath observed, 440. l, Otho Emperor, 691. f. slain, ibid. Overthrow of the
Sodomites, 13. d, e. of the Amorites, 82. m, l. of the Hebrews, 76. g, k. and
157. f. of Antonie, 393. f. Outrages of Elies sons, 125. b. of Naas offered
the Israelites, 133. e, f. of Azael, 235. b. 236. g, h, i. of Florus soldiers,
625. c. Outward court of the temple, etc. 707. c. Oxen seven, what do
signify, 33. f. how many taken at once, 87. c. not to be muzled, 93. a. ox
that strikes; 96. i. Oza suddenly stricken dead, 165. d. and why, ibid. Ozias
king of Iudaes warlike exploits, 239. b, c. acts and studies, ibid. c, d.
stricken with a leprosy, and why, 239. e, f. enjoined to depart the City,
ibid. and 240. g. his death and burial, 240. g.
P
Pacorus sends horsemen to Antigonus, 370. l. 575. a. his persuasion to
Phasaelus, 371. his treason and subtlety, ibid. b, c, d. 575. d. Pageants
built, 751. a. Painters cause multitude of gods, 796. k. Palestine, whence
took his name, 11. a. Palestines overcome the Israelites, 120. l. 126. h.
invade the Israelites, 136. i. are overcome, 137. d, e. 143. d, e. 16^. b, c*
Palace in Tiberias burned, 533. c. Palace built in Jerusalem, 404. k. (...)
Palace of Solomon, 200. h. Palace of the king, 705. c. burned, ibid. c. Palm
trees, 687. f. 688. h. Pamphilian sea divided it self, 52. h. Pappus beheaded,
582. g. Paradise, 4. g. where situate, ibid. g. h. adorned with all sorts of
plants, ibid. g. Parents compelled to murder their children, 41. (...).
Paricid a public injury, 445. l. Parricides, 246. k. Parthians restore
Antigonus, 379. l. 576. complot treachery against Phasaelus, 371. c. surprise
him and Hyr^anus, ibid. f. lay a plot for Herod, 372. g. lose Armenia, 469. d.
Parts of the Temple, 196. g. Pascha or passcouer of the Hebrews, 49. c, d.
celebrated, 243. b. 249. f. 272. g. Passage of the Israelites over Jordan, 102.
g. Passages stopped up from the Hebrews, 50. k. Patience of Joseph, 32. i.
Paulina deceived and defiled, 467. a. etc. Peace bought, 236. g. 240. h. Peace
of the Israelites, 193. c. of the Jews, 220. k. Peace better then death, 678.
g. the Peers government best, 92. h. a Penalty most cruel, 41. e. etc.
Penalty of a woman married for a virgin, etc. 93. f Penalty published; 134.
k. what it wrought, ibid. Pencioner to Saul, David, 141. c. Penitent obtain
mercy, 716. l. Penury of water, 585. c. see want. People of Israel afflicted,
41. c, d. 42. g, h. 46. g, h. 47. d, e. departed out of Egypt, 50. g. exhorted
to put their trust in Go^ ibid. l. m. and to obey the will of God, 89. a, b.
etc. drive away the cattle of the Amalechites, 139. c. require mitigation of
their burden, 206. h. revolt from Roboam, 206. l. are transported, and why,
243. e, f. fly with their money, 717. a. People enjoined by oath to serve God,
234. l. 249. d. People of Judah bless God, 224. h, i. and why, ibid. h. Peoples
love to Joseph, 547. b. People permit not Pilate to alter their laws, 617. c.
People exclaim against Florus, 625. s, die for want, etc. 713. c. Perfection
of mind respected, 141. b. Perjury of Florus, 624. i. Peroration of Herod,
585. a. Perplexity of the Israelites, 50. k, l. Persuasion of Jeroboam to
Idolatry, 207. c. Persuasion of false Prophets dangerous, 222. k. Persuasion
of Rapsaces, 245. d, e. Pestilence one of the plagues of Egypt, 48. l.
Pestilence destroys Senacheribs army, 24. k. Pestilence a great affliction,
253. c. Petra a City of Arabia, 576. i. Petro^us charge for placing Caius
statue, 480. k, etc. executes it not, and why, 480. l. 481, a. b. certifieth
the Jews of Caesar's threats, 619. a, c. writes to Caius, ibid. d. 619. c.
receives letters of Caius death, 483. d. 609. d. his letter to the Dorites.
508. h Phaceias king of Israel, 240. i. his impiety and wickedness, ibid. i.
slew 120000. Jews, 241. a. took Achaz son prisoner ibid. c. was slain,
242. h. Pharao enamourd of Sara, 13. a. plagued ibid. a, b. Pharaoh his
dreams, 33. b, c. delivers Joseph from bonds, ibid. d. aduanceth him to
great honors, 34. h. rejoices at the arrival of Joseph's brethren, 39. a.
inquireth of Jacobs age, 40. i. restored the profits of his subjects lands,
ibid. k. Pharao kills the male children, 41. d, e. would have killed Moses,
43. e. and 45. b. his death, 46. m. Pharao counseled to dismiss the Hebrews,
47. c, d. not moved with miracles, lays heavier taskes on them, ibid. c, d.
advised once more, ibid. e, f. drives away Moses, 49. b. dismisseth the
Israelites, ibid. d* his host drowned, 51, c, f. Pharisees a sect, 329. e. 617.
b. greedy of revenge, 347. d. exempt from swearing, 408. h. would not swear
obedience, 439. c. 463. d. their opinion, 617. b. Pharos a tower, 692. l.
Phasaelus his government, 362. g. vanquisheth Felix, 367. m. 574. g. 36^ a.
made Tetrarch, 370. h. 574. l. obtains the favor of the people, 570. taken
prisoner. 371. f. dasheth out his brains, 373. b. Phasaelus Tower and City,
588. g. h. Pheroras made Tetrarch, 407. d. accuses Alexander and Aristobulus,
416. l. refuses the kings daughter, 423. f. blamed for Alexanders offense,
428. h. pardoned, ibid. 594. c. deceived, 438. l. refuses to put away his
wife, 440. g. banished, 599. a. falls sick and dies, 440. l. m. 599. c. his
wife accused, 441. a. she confesses the poison. 442. g. Philip rebelleth
against Antiochus, 312. l. is slain, 313. c. Philip king of Syria, 344. h.
besieges Demetrius, 345. c. Philip Herodes son, 458. i. has part of the
kingdom, 459. d. repaireth cities, 464. k. Philo Iudaeus defense, etc. 480. h.
Philistines overcame the Israelites, 120. exacted tribute of them, ibid. l.
126. h put to flight, 130. g. muade the Israelites, 136. i. are overcome, 137.
d. e. and 143. d, e. discomfir Saul's army, 157. e. f. overcome by David, 166.
l. by Ozias 239. b. by Ezechias, 243. c. Phinees the son of Eleazar, 87. a.
slaieth Zambrias and Chosbi, ibid, a. overthrew the Madianites, 87. e. his
Oration to the two tribes and half, 107. e. succeeded Eleazar, 108. m.
foretold the Israelites their victory, etc. 111. f. Phinees Elies son, 125.
b. his wickedness and impiety, ibid. b* is slain, 126. k. his wife then bare
Ichabod, ibid. m. Phison a flood of Paradise, 4. h. called also Ganges. ibid.
h. Phora, 4. h. Phraates king of Parthia slain, 465. b. Phul king of the
Syrians, 240. g. for money made a peace, ibid. h. Piety profitable, 213. a, b.
Piety of Ancestors remembered. 42. g. Piety contemned cause of calamities,
113. c. 114. g. m. 126. g. etc. 135. e. 242. h, i, k. Piety of Asa, 212. i. of
Iosaphat, 220. k. of Iotham, 240. k. of Ezechias, 242. i. of Josias, 248. k, l.
and 249. a, b. etc. of Matthias, etc. 305. a. Pigeons doung sold, 227. f.
Pilate succeeds Gratus, 464 m. brings Caesar's statues to Jerusalem; 466. g.
i. not admitted, 617. e. crucifieth Christ, 466. l, m. puts Samaritanes to
flight, 468. i, k. accused. ibid. sends the statues from Jerusalem, 617. f.
beats the seditious, 618. g. Pillage taken, 224. h. Pillars raised, 6. i. a
Pillar called Galaad, 25. f. Pitcher of water, 153. d. Pit to be fenced, 96. k.
Pit of swearing, 16. l. Pits bituminous, 13. c. Pity of Joseph toward his
brethren, 38. l. Placidus repulsed at Iotapata, 649. c. his victory, 669. g,
(...). burns Bethenabris, 686. l m. Placing of the vessels, etc. in the
temple, 196. m. and 197. a, b* 198. g, h. Plagues of Egypt, 48. g, h, i, k, l,
m. and 49. a. Plague in David's time. 184. l. Plague inuadeth Iudaea, 399. d.
Platformes erected, 656. h. Plants sprang at first out of the earth, 3. d.
Plants not of four years grouth, 92. i. Plato admired, 795. a. permits not
Poets, etc. 796. k. Pledge to be restored to the poor, 95. d. Plenty
foresignified, 33. c, f. 34. g, i. Plotting of Antipater, 423. c. the Plough
found out, and by whom, 5. b. Poem of six measures, 98. a. Poem of Homer,
675. b. Poets cause multitude of gods, 796. Poison tried, etc. 446. k, l. 604.
i. Policy of Rebecca, etc. for her son, 21. e, f. of Jacob to pacific his
brother, 26. g, h, i, k. of the Gabeonites, 104. h. of Joseph, 538. h. 539. a.
542. i. of Jonathan, 545. e, f. of Joseph, 643. d. 652. k. 655. b. 690. h.
Politianus meets with Agrippa, etc. 627. enciteth the people to peace, ibid. d.
Pompey governor of Syria, 352. m. marches against Aristobulus, 353. f. 354,
g. 566. k. besieges Jerusalem, 354. i, 567. k, l commits Aristobulus to
prison, ibid. 567. c. takes the temple, 355. a. bestows the Priesthood on
Hyreanus ibid. 356. spoileth not the Templ^. ibid. d. 567. carries Aristobulus
to Rome, 568. h. headeth conspirators, ibid. Popedius accused, 491. 2.
Popularitie of Alcimus, 314. g h. Porch of the temple 195. e. fired, 733. f.
Port of Caesarea. 305. e. Port made by Herod, 587. d. Portion of Salpades
daughters, 88. c. Portion of Iudaea. 647. b. Possession of Chanaan prophesied
of, 40. l. Posterity of Ismael, 17. a, c. Posterity of Giants extinguished,
13. c. Posterity of Iethro possessed of land. 109. d* Posterity of Noah
replenished the world. 9. f. Posterity of Esau, ^8. h, i. of Jacob, 40. l.
Poison not to be used, 96. h. Power given to save, 38. h, i. Power of God
every where, 219. d. Power of kings, wine, and women, 267. c. f. 268. h. Power
of the soul, 759. a. Power of David and Solomon, 789. c. Practice of S^on and
Leui, 27. a. Pray that the Israelites go in war, 57. b, c. 87. e, f. 102. m.
103. f. Prayer of Noah, 8. g. of Amram, 42. g. of Moses, 51. c. 79. b, c, etc.
of Iosuah, 103. b. of Sampson, 122. l. of Solomon, 198. i, l. of Samuel and the
Israelites, 129. d. e, f. Praise of Abraham. 20. l. of Jacob, 40. m. of Joseph,
41. a. of Iosuah, 57. c. and 108. m. of Moses, 99. e. f. of Samuel, 15^. f. of
Saul, 156. h. of David, 189. e. of Solomon, 206. g. of Iosaphat, 224. i. of
Nehemias, 276. k. of Ananus, 680. m. of Eleazar, 804. k. Praise given to God,
52. g, h. Prediction of things to come, 98. a. Preparations for war burned,
312. g. Presents of Abraham, 19. d. of Jacob. 36. g. of the Egyptians, 49. d.
of Abigail, 152. k. of the Mesopotamians, 168. c, d. of the Queen of Ethiopia,
and of kings, 203. b, c, f. of Ptolomey to the interpreters, 295. b. of Herod,
594. l. Preservation of Moses, 42. m. 43. c. of Daniel and his companions, 259.
f. Preservation from bloodshed, 152. l, m: Presidents in every City, 91. d.
and what manner of men they ought to be, ibid. d. Pride of Amasias, 237. d, e.
of Ozias; 239. d. of Senacherib, 245. c. of Nabuchodonosor, 260. g. of
Balthazar, 261. c. of John, 685. a. Priests vestures, 61. c, d. e. Priests
abstain from wine, 707. c. 775. a. Priests executed, and why, 739. c. high
Priests number and succession. 526. g, etc. 527. a, etc. Priesthood confirmed
to Aaron and his sons, 80. i. Priesthood to be transported, foreshewed, 126.
g. Princes of Syria, 270. m. Principality affected by Adonias, 186. i. by
Costabarus, 400. i. 685. a. 691. c. 697. f. Priscus slaieth Jonathan, 733. a.
Prisoners dismissed, 241. d, c. Privileges granted to the Jews, 295. d. 364,
g. etc. 365. a, etc. 784. l, m. Problemes of Hiram, etc. 770. l. Prodigies
preceding Ierusalems destruction, 738. i, k, etc. 739. a, etc. Professors of
wisdom burn themselves, 759. c. Progeny of Iapheth, 10. b. of Canaan, 10.
m. 11. b. of the sons of Sem, 11. c, d. of Cha^s sons. 10. l. of Jacob, 39.
c. of Aaron, 526. g. of Herod, 471. d. 472. g, h, i. Prohibition of arms and
yron-worke, 136. i. Profit how great redounded to king Pharao, 40. i, k.
Promise of Gods assistance. 89. c, d. Promotion of Joseph, 34. g, h. 39. b.
Prophecy of Jacob touching his posterity, 40. l, m. of the sacred Secretary,
41. d. of Balaam, 85. a, b. of Samuel, 126. g. 140. i, k. of Achias, 204. l, m.
205. d. of Iadon, 207. c, f. of Olda, 249. b. Prophecy of the captivity and
delivery, 253. a, b. Prophet Moses, a good governor, 99 e, f. Prophet Nathan,
166. h. 170. m. Achias, 205. c. Iadon, 207. c. Samaeas, 209. c. Azarias, 212.
l. Elias, 214. k. Gimon. 213. a. Elizaeus, 225. c. Esaias, 245. f. Jeremy, 250.
i. Ezechiel, 251, c. Jonas. 238. l. Naum, 240. k. Aggaeus and Zacharias, 271.
b. Micheas, 220. h. false Prophet discrediteth the true, 208. l. ^21. d. false
Prophet decerueth the people, 522. l. Prosperity of Joseph, 32. b. of Solomon,
202. m. 203. a, b, etc. 206. g. of Jeroboam, 239. a. Prosperity makes proud,
237. d, c. 239. d. Prospect stopped up, 524. g. Providence of God in saving
Moses, 42. k, l. m. 43. a, b. of the Israelites, 99. a. Provision of victuals,
164. g. 578. m. 579. a. Provision for the priests, 276. k. Provision of things
necessary for war, 648. g, h. Proves against Antipater, 445. b, c, d. 604.
h, i, k, l. Prudence of Joseph, 33. c. 34. g. of Solomon 199. a. of Josephus,
652. l, m. Ptolemais described, 618. l. besieged. 342. g. taken, ibid. l.
Prolomey Lagus obtains Egypt, 287. c. seazeth Jerusalem by a stratageme,
ibid: 288: g. led the Jews away captive, ibid. g, h. Ptolomey Philadelphus
caused the Jews laws to be translated etc. 2. h. his library, 288. k. his
proclamation, 289: c. his liberality, 290. k, l. his Epistle to Eleazar, etc.
290. l, m. his gifts given to the temple, 291. d, c. 292. g. etc. 293. a, etc.
his banquet, 294. g. Ptolomey Euergetes king of Egypt, 297. f. incensed
against Onias, ib. Ptolomey Philopater warreth against Antiochus, 296. h. his
death, ibid. P^olomey Epiphanes king of Egypt, 302. h. his children, ibid.
Ptolomey Philometor circumuented, 303. h. succoureth Alexander, 325. b. his
death complotted, ib. c. refuses the Diadem of Asia, ibid. c. his fight and
death, 3^6. g. Ptolomey slaieth Simon, 334. h. imprisoneth Hyrcanus mother and
brethren, ibid. his cruelty against them, 560. m. murthereth them, 561. a.
Ptolomey Physcon, 337. a. the Syrians request to him, ib. Ptolomey Lathyrus,
337. f. aydeth Antiochus, ibid. comes to aid the Ptolemaidans, 341. f.
besieges Ptolemais, and why, 342. g. overthrows Alexander, ibid. k. driven
out of Egypt, 343. a. Ptolomey Mennaeus fined, 353. b. adopteth Antigonus,
368. h. Ptolomies wife robbed, 536. m. is slain, 580. g. Punishment of Adam
and Eve, 4. l, m. of the Serpent, ibid. m. and 5. a. of Sodom, 15. c 16. g, h,
of a false witness, 91. f. of Homicide committed, ib. f. and 92. h. of Saul,
140. i. of Iadon, 208. i. of Senacherib, 246. k. of Nabuchadnezzar, 260. g.
Punishment for honoring false gods, 204. l, m. 241. b, c. Punishment of
Aristobulus, 340. i. Punishment for rauishers of virgins, 793. c. Purgations of
women, 25. c. of Purification the manner, 81. f. 82. g. Purifications used in
the sacrifices, 793. d. Purification of the body, 793. e, f. Pursuit of Laban
after Jacob, 25. a. of the Egyptians afte^ the Hebrews, 50. h. Putifar an
Egyptian Lord bought Joseph, 30. l, m. Pythonissa of Endor, 154. m.
Q
Quadratus Governor of Syria, 621. c. decideth the Jews and Samaritanes
debate, ibid. f. Quails fell amidst the Hebrews camp, 55. a. 73. c.
Qualities of the Egyptians described, 41. b. Quantity of Gold, 203. d.
Queens house or palace, 200. i, k. Queen of Ethiopia, look Nicaule. Queen
Vasti refuses to come to the banquet, 277. a, b. deposed, ibid. c, d. hard
Questions dissolved, 201, a, b, c. Questions of Artaxerxes. 267. b. Quintilius
Varus Governor of Syria, 443. b. pacifieth the seditious, 455. b. delivers
the legion, 457. c. assisteth the Romans, 611. c. takes Cities and Castles,
611. c, f. crucifieth the seditious, 612. g.
R
Rachel daughter of Laban, 23. a. brings Jacob to her father, ibid. b, c, d.
steals away her fathers gods, 24. m. how she hid them, 25. c. taught by Jacob
to contemn them, 24. m. dies in childbed, 27. c. Race of the Chanaanites to
be rooted out, 106. k. Race of Giants remained, 109. c. Race of Achimelech
murdered, 149. d. Rage of Antiochus, 802. k. Raguel a priest of Madian, 45. c.
father in law to Moses, ib. c. comes to Moses in Sinai, 57. c, f. Rahab hid
the spies, 101. b, c. requires of them an oath, and why, ibid. c, d. her and
all hers saved, 102. l. Reign of David, 189. c, f. of Solomon, 206. g of
Iosaphat, 226. k. of Herod, 450. l. of Tiberius, 618. h. of Caius, 619. f. of
Agrippa, 620. l. of Claudius, 622. g, h. Railing of Goliath, 142. h, i, k.
Rainbow a sign of atonement, 8. k. Rain foreprophecied, 216. i. k. Raising
of a dead man, 236. m. a Ram offered in Isaacs steed, 18. l. m. Ram, an engine,
653. d. described, ibid. shakes the tower, 710. h. Rampier^ builded by the
Romans, 719. d. Rapines committed by day. 673. a. Rapsaces chiestaine of the
Assyrian army, 245. c. persuades lizechias to submit, ibid. d, c. Rasis
warreth against Achaz, 241. b. seazeth Elath, ibid. b. slain; 242. g.
Rational, 64. k. Rauishment of Dina revenged, 27. a. punished, 94. h. Raiment
of Joseph, 31. f. a proof against him. 32. h. Raiment taken in war, 106. l.
Reading of the law, 274. l, m. Reason described, 800. m. has dominion over
passions, ibid. k. Rebecca daughter of Bathuel. 12. g. sister to Laban, ibid.
g. shows courtesy to Abraham's servant, 19. c. 20. g. procures his
entertainment, ibid. h, i. married to Isaac, 20. k. brought forth two twins,
21. a. her device for her son, ibid. c. Rebellion of Chore, 77. b. of Siba,
181. c, d. of the Antiochians, 327. c, d. of the Jews against the Romans,
631. b. Rebellion of Scythians and Sarmates, 749. c. Rebellious punished, 80.
g. Rebels kill an Ambassador, 637, d, c. Rebels conquered, 420. g.
Reconciliation of Absalon, 147. h, i. of Herod and his sons, 590. k, l. of
Pheroras with Herod, 428. h. Records of the Greeks for the Jews antiquity,
768. l. 769. etc. Reformation of Gods service, 243. b, c. Religion contemned
cause of calamity, 110. i, k, l. 111. c. 112. i. 113. c. see piety contemned,
Religion renewed, 213. a. Religion of the Esseans, 615. d. Relics of Jupiter
taken away, 9. e. Remissenes in punishing cause of sin, 139. f. Renown of
Salomons virtues, 202. c. Repairing of the Temple, 235, c, d. Repairing of the
City Jerusalem. 239. b. c. Repentance of the people, 74. l. of Achab, 217. l.
of David, 171. a, b. of Ioachas, 236. i. Report of Joseph's death, 662. g.
Report of the behavior of Samuels sons, 130. l. Repose, 3. e. Request of
Jonathan, 327. b. of the Jews, 612. l, m. of the Romans to Caesar, 703. c.
Requital of courtesy, 20. g. 45. c. required. 101. c. performed, 102. l.
Resolution of Joseph's brethren, 29. d. Restitution of things borrowed, 95. c.
Restoring of God service, 234. l. m. Return of Jacobs sons, 35. of the spies,
73. f. 101. a. of Vespasian, 746. h. Revenues of Priests, 81. c. of
Mephiboseths lands, 168. h, i. Revenues of Agrippa, 511. c. of Archelaus, 613.
b. of Pheroras, 592. l. Reverence of the Sabbath, 616. i. Reverence of the
Roman soldier, 648. i, k. Revolt from the Jaws of the fathers, 86. h. Revolt
of the ten Tribes, 206. l. 207. a. Revolt of the Germans, 748. l. Reward of
learned preachers, 220. i. 253. d. Reward of valiant men, 727. e, f. Reward of
such as keep the law, 794. l. Rewards oppress Justice, 130. l. Riches of the
Madianites, 87. e, f. of the Ainites, 103. f. of David, 189. f. of Solomon,
202. l, m. 203. a, b. 204. g, h, i. of Ozias, 239. c. Riddle of Sampson
propounded to the Thamnites, 121. f. dissolved, ibid. Ripping of women's wombes
foretold, 230. g. River of Arnon, 82. h, i. River Sabaticus, 749. c. Robbers
punished, 406. l. Robberies in Trachona, 406. i. winked at, 623. d. Roboam
entreated to ease the peoples burden, 206. de^ied their petition, ibid. l.
abandoned of ten tribes, 206. l. forbidden to make war, 207. a. builded
strong cities, 208. m. his wives and children. 209. a, b. impiety, ibid.
makes brazen shields, ^10. dies, ibid. h. Rock, veeldeth forth water, 55. c.
Road of the Philistines, 150. h. Rod of Moses turned into a serpent, 46. i.
deuoureth the Egyptians rods. 47. d. Rod of Aaron fructifieth, 81. a. the
Romans government how far it extended, 649. a, b. Romans overcome the Jews,
569. b, c, e. sack Jericho. 579. b. get a great pray, ibid. b. skirmish with
the Jews. 610. i, k. fire the porches, ibid. k. have subdued the Athenians,
etc. 628. k. l. yea the whole world, ibid. m. and 629. a, and c, fly into the
kings forts, 632. m. are slain, 633. d. burn Ioppe, etc 636. l. burn the
temple gates, 638. h. overcome the Jews, 645. e, f. retire without their
purpose, 656. g. enter Iotapata, 657. e, f. moved with no compassion, 658. g.
their warlike discipline, 647. e, f. 648. g. etc. attempt nothing rashly ibid.
l, m. 669. a. drive the Jews to their ships, 663. c, d. assault Gamala, 667.
f. 668 b, c. many slain, 668. h. win Gamala, 670. (...), i. fight with the
Jews, 701. c. their fear and trouble, ibid. c. overcome the seditiou^, 709,
a. get the first wall, 711. b. driven out by the Jews, 713. a hindered by the
Jews, 714. h. plant their courts of guard, 721. c. fear the desperatenes of
the Jews, 726. h. undermine the wall. 726. m. invade Antonia, 728. k. set
Jerusalem on fire, 741. b. enter Jerusalem, 743. d. find treasure in the
vaults, 744. l, ruinate City and Temple. 745. c. dining Room fell down, 581.
c. Ruben the son of Jacob, 24. i. why so called, ibid. his sons 39. c. his
disswasion, 29. d, e. and his persuasion, 30. b. intended to save Joseph, 30.
i. pleads before Joseph, 34. m. and 35. a. Rue of admirable greatness, 752. k.
Ruin of the Israelites sought, 41. c, d. Ruin of the Amalechites foretold,
47. d. Rulers of Jerusalem, 639. d. Rumor of Herod's death, 387. d. Rumor of the
Emperor, 478. h. 497. d. Ruth her love to Naomi, 124. g. married to Booz, ibid.
l. m. 125. a.
S
Saba chief City of Ethiopia, 44. l. called Meroe, and why, ibid. l. Sabach
and Nephanus, David's captains. 182. m. 183. c. Sabbath, 3. called a day of
rest, and why, ibid. c. Sabinus repaireth to Jerusalem, 453. c. and why, ibid.
608. l. 610. h, i. Sabinus pursues those that slew Caius, 496. h. allows not
of Claudius* 505. c. kills himself, 506. h. Sabinus took the Capitol, 696.
h. slain, ibid. i. Sabinus valiant, 728. g. slain. ibid. h. Sacks of chafe,
653. f. Sacred sanctuary, 706. l. Sacrifice acceptable to God, 140. h.
Sacrifice of Cain and Abel, 5. b. Sacrifice of Noah, 7. c. of Jacob, 27. b.
Sacrifices of the Princes of the tribes, 67. e. f. Sacrifice of thanksgiving,
68. i, k. Sacrifice for sin, 68. k. Sacrifice of Penticost, 69. f. Sacrifice
of Solomon at the dedication of the Temple, 199. d. Sacrifice of Samuel, 129.
f. Sacrifice of Ezechias, 243. a, b. Sacrifice of Herod, 585. b. Sacrifice of
the old testament, 66. h. 793. c. Sacrifice consumed of it self, 66. m.
Sacrilege of Achar, 102. m. punished with death, 103. d. of Crassus, 359. m.
569. c. of John, 724. g. Sadoc sent to David, 176. m. being pursued, is hidden,
177. a. Sadoc established high Priest, 191. f. 192. g. Sadduces. a sect. 329.
e. 463. e. 617. c. their opinion, 617. b, c. Safety of David respected, 144.
m. Sale of the Jews, 666. k. Salmanasar king of Assyria, 242. h, i.
overcomes Oseas, and why, ibid. h, i. takes Oseas prisoner and transporteth
the Israelites, 243. e, f. spoiled Syria and Phoenicia, 244. g. Salome accused
Mariamme, 397. d. accuses Alexander, etc. 416. k. entiseth her daughter, etc.
424. h. denied to Syllaeus in marriage, 425. c, d. excuses her self, ibid. a.
m^th Alexis, 437. c. discovers conspiracies, 439 b. releaseth the Nobles,
450. m. 606. h. princess of Iamnia, 613. b. dies, 464. l. Salomons
coronation, 189. a, b. king of Israel, 190. m. requires wisdom of God, 192.
k. marries a wife, ibid. i. decideth the two women's debate, 193. b, c.
builds the temple, 195. d. prays to God, 198. i, k. 199. a. exhorts the
people to praise God; ibid c. builded a palace, 200. h. dissolueth hard
questions, 201. a. repaireth the walls of Jerusalem, ibid. d. builds Cities,
201. d, e, f. makes the Chanaanites tributarie, 202. builds a navy, ibid.
k. remunerateth Nicaule the Queen, 203. c. marries strange wives, 204. i.
commits Idolatry, ibid. i. his punishment decounced, ibid. l, m. had
enemies raised against him, 205. a. dies, 206. g. Saltis subdued the
Egyptians, 769. a. Samaria besieged, 227. f. of whom so called, 214. g. taken,
243. e. described, 647. a. Samaritans hinder the building of the temple, 266.
h, i. 270. l. their offer rejected, ibidem, k, Jews enemies, 272. h. kinsmen
to the Jews when, 286. k, l. disdain the Jews, 304. i. send letters to
Antiochus, ibid. k. contend with the Jews, 322. m. 323. a. accuse the Jews,
520. h. their strife with the Jews, 621. f. 11000. slain, 657. c. Samaeas
reprooueth the Jews impiety, 209. e. comfort the people, ibid. Samaeas his
admonition, 362. m. honored, 363 a. Sampson kills a Lion, 121. d. marries a
wife, ib. e. propounds a riddle, ibid. e, f. his acts against the
Philistines, 12^. h, i, k, l, m. prays, and why, 122. l. betrayed by Dalila,
123. c. the slaughter of the Philistines, and of himself, ibid. d. Samuel his
pa^ents, 125. c. consecrated to God, ibid. e. God called him t^ise, ibid. f.
foreshewed the death of Eli, and his sons, 126. g. offers sacrifice, 129.
m. comfort the people, ibid. his victory, and recovery of lands, 130. h,
i. commits the common weal to his sons, ibid. i, k. troubled, and why,
131. a, b. bidden to create a king, ibid. c. shows the peoples estate under a
king, 131. c. annoinieth Saul king, 132. k. iusti^ieth himself, and why, 135.
c. strives to reconcile Saul to God, 139. e. kills Agag, 140. l, m. tells
Saul of Gods displeasure, 140. i. annointeth David king, 141. a, b, c. his
death, burial, and praise, 151. f. Sanabal^ath governor of the Samaritans,
284. h. follows Alexander, 285. b. builds a temple, ibid. Sanctuary, 62.
h. 196. g. 198. h. Sanctuaries or places of refuge for whom, 88. k. Sand like
glass, 618. l. Sara daughter of Aram, 11. f. Abraham's wife; 12. a, m. her
beauty, 13. a. king of Egypt enamoured on her, ibid. a. brings Agar to
Abraham, 14. m. her age when she conceived Isaac, 15. c. preserved from
Abimelech, and how, 16. i. brought forth Isaac, ibid. caused Ismael to be
expelled, etc. 17. b. affects. Isaac, ibid. b, d. her death, 19. a. Saraeus
high priest took prisoner, 255. d. Saturninus president of Syria, 428. l. 429.
a. permits Herod to enter Arabia, ibid. b. his indifferent sentence, 434. h.
Saul seeks the lost Asses, 132. g. anointed king by Gods commandment, ibid.
i, k. confirmed therein, 132. l. hides himself, 133. c, d. saluted by the
people for their king, 133. d. promises the Iabasites assistance, 134 i, k.
kills k. Naas, 134. l. sacrifices, and is reproved, 136. l. overcomes the
Philistines, 137. e. would have slain Jonathan, 138. i, k. always a
conqueror, ibid. i. takes and spares Agag, 139. c, d, e. slaieth the
Amalechites and raseth their Cities, ib. b, c. offends God, ibid. d, e.
loses his kingdom, and why, 240. h, i. denied pardon renteth Samuels garment,
ib. i, k. slew the Philistines, 143. d. resolves to kill David, 144. g, h, l.
darteth his Iauelin at David, 145. e. prophecieth, 146. i. questioneth about
David's absence, etc. 147. c, d, e. makes an oration to his captains, 148. l.
m. pursues David, 150. k, l. and 151. a, b. condemns himself, and
justifies David, ib. d, e. pursues David again, and his life saved, 153. c,
e. banisheth diuiners, 154. l. by a sorceresse is foretold the event of the
battle, 155. a, b, c. praised, 156. h, i. is slain, 158. g, h. Scarcity
foresignified, 33. e, f. how to be prevented, 34. g, h. among the Israelites,
73. a. very great in Claudius his time, 75. a, b. in Samaria, 227. f. 228. g.
Scarcity of corn, 744. h. Scaurus makes peace with Aristobulus, 352. k.
president of Coelesyria, 356. g. his war against Aretas, ibid. h. 566. h.
bribed, ibid. Science of the celestial bodies, 6. h. Schisar king of the
Assyrians, 113. d. oppressed the Israelites, ibid. d. Scopas general of
Ptolomies army, 296. i. discomsited, ibid. overcomes the Jews, 296. k.
Scythopolitans kill 3000. Jews, 634. l. Sea of Pamphilia divided it self, 52.
h. red Sea divided at the stroke of Moses rod, 51. d. returning to his course,
drowneth the Egyptians, ibid. e. brazen Sea, 196. k. Sebas, 183. d. Sebaste a
haven, 443. b. Secretary of priest foretells Moses greatness, 41. d, e.
wills him to be s^lled, 43. c. Security promised to Rahab and hers, 101. c,
d. Sects of the Jews, 329. e. 463. d. 614. l. Secrets of Syllaeus disclosed,
599. d. Sedechias a false prophet, 221. d. contradicts Micheas, ibid. d, e.
Sedechias king of Judah, 252. h. reuolteth, ibid. seduced, 252. i. 253. a, etc.
neglects the Prophets counsel, ibid. surprised, 154. l, m. his eyes put out,
255. a. his death, ib. f. Sedition against Moses, 73. a. 76. m. and 80. k, l.
of Chore for the priesthood, 77. b, c, d. Sedition against Roboam, 206. l. 243.
f. of the Samaritans against the Jews, 288. h, i. among the people, 302. i. of
the Jews, 480. g. betwixt Senate and people, 503. f. Sedition at the passover,
452. l. between the Jews and Samaritans, 519. f. for the golden Eagle, 608.
h. in Jerusalem, 610. h. 6^3. b, (...). between Greeks and Jews, 635. c. a
threefold sedition, 697. e. took the City, 709. a. Seditious more impious
then the Sodomites, 724. h. Seditious. 623. b, c. beaten, 618. g. bribe
Albinus, 623. d. fly to the temple, and why, 629. l. gave not ear to those in
authority, 631. f. put the Romans to flight, 662. l. agree among themselves,
700. l, m. 710. h. challenge the sodden child, 734 l. summon Titus to parley,
739. f. take away the kings treasure, 741. c, d. their utmost hope, 742. g.
kept in Acra and in Vaults, 743. a. Seed of the woman, 4. l. shall bruise the
serpents head, ib. l. Seeds at first grew out of the earth, 3. d. Seeds not to
be mixed together, 92. l. Sehon king of the Amorites denies passage to the
Hebrews, 82. i. overthrown by them, ibid. l, m. is slain, 83. a. Seir, what
it signifies, 21. a. Seir Esaus dwelling place, 26. l. Seleucus Nicanor
priuiledgeth the Jews, 295. d. Selecus Soter reigns in Asia, 302. g. Sem
Noah's third son, 9. a. covers his fathers shame, 11. (...) his progeny,
ibid. d. Semecho^tis a lake, 667. b. Semiramis built not Babylon, 772. h.
Senaar a plain, 9. a. Senabarus one of the five kings of Assyria, 13. e.
Senacherib surpriseth the Cities of Judah, 245. b. besieges Jerusalem, ibid b,
c. his army stricken with the pestilence, 246. k. himself slain, ib. Senate
persuades Claudius to resign, 503. b. Senates decree, etc. 360. m. Senates
answer to Agrippa, 620. g. their repair to Claudius, 620. i. Sencelesnesse of
Achaz, 242. g. Sentence against Herod's sons, 596. m. Sephora Moses wife, 46.
m. Sephoris walied, 464. i. spoiled, 551. d. entertaineth the Romans, 636. m.
Sepulcher of David, 190. g. of Memnon, 618. l. Serpents tempting of Eua, 4. i.
his subtlety, ibid. h. his punishment, ib. m. and 5. a. enemy to man, 4. m.
wherein his strength lies, and how easily killed, ibid. m. Serpents very
hurtful destroyed, 44. i, k. Servants of Elizeus 227. b. Servants of Solomon
happy, and why, 203. c. Servant of Abraham takes his oath, 19. d. his prayer,
and ear in discharge of his message, 19. c. and 20. g, h, i, k. Serui^e of God
neglected, 242. h. Service of foreign Gods, 204. i, k. 237. d. 242. h. Service
of Antipater, 577. c. Services of the Gabeonites, 104. k. Servitude of the
Egyptians great, 40. k. of the Hebrews insupportable, 41. c. 46. g, l. and 47.
c. Servitude of the Israelites, 113. d. and why, ibid. e. 114. g. m. 715. a.
etc. Seth son of Adam, 6. h. a virtuous man, ibid. h. left a godly issue,
ibid. h. his age and death. 7. b. Sethosis king of Egypt, 770. Seven men of
Saul's kindred punished, 1^2. k. Seventy Jews with John and Simon sent into
Italy, 750. h. Seventy interpreters, 293. b. 785. a. Severity of Herod, 407.
a. Sextus Caesar governor of Syria, 362. g. writes in Herodes behalf, ibid.
l. selfeth the presidents place, 363. b. slain, 366. g. 572. k. Sheepshearing
of Nabal, 152. h. of Absalon, 172. m. Shows at Ca^sarea, 746. i. Ships of
Solomon, 203. e. of Iosaphat, etc. 224. i. Shipwreck of Josephus, 530. l. Siba
manureth Mephiboseths lands, 168. h. accuses him and gets his goods, 180.
i, k. Siba son of Bochri, 181. incenseth the people to rebellion, 181. c.
besieged by Ioab, 182. g. his punishment, ibid. h. Sibils prophecy of Babel,
9. c. Sicarians, 755. d. besieged, 756. i. authors of new calamity, 761. e.
taken, 762. g. Sichama Iosuahs habitation, 108. k. Sichem defloureth Dina, 26.
m. desires to marry her, ibid. m. is slain, 27. a. Sichemites slain, 27. a.
Sichemites constitute Abimelech their ruler, 116. c. banish him, 118. h. are
slain and their City sacked, ibid. k, l, m. etc. Sickness of Ieroboams son,
210. i. Sickness of Ochozias, 224. k. Sickness of Ioram, 130. k, l. Sickness of
Adad, 229. f. Sickness of Ezechias, 246. m. Sickness of Herod, 447. d. Sicle.
66. g. Siege of Jerusalem. 164. g. 245. a, (...). deferred, 689. d. Signs of
the law, 91. c. Sign of Ezechias recovery, 257. a, b. Signs before the
destruction of Jerusalem. 738. i, k. etc. 739. a. etc. Sign of a true
history, 766. g, h. Signification of the golden head, 259. c. Silas captain
of the kings guard, 552. m. Silas grows into hatred, 509. a. Silon corrupted
with money, 376. g. Silua besieges Massada, 756. i. Simei pardoned. 190. g.
punished. 192. g, h. Simeon the son of Jacob, 24. i. why so called, ibid. i.
he and Leui slew the Sichemites, 27. a. left as a pledge with Joseph, 35. d, e.
his sons, 39. e, f. Similitude 117. f. 271. a, b 685. c. Simon succoureth the
Galileans, 309. e. takes Bethsura, 328. l. declared high Priest, 331. c, d.
animateth the people against Tryphon. ibid. c. his authority, 332. m. raceth
the Castle of Jerusalem, 333. a. makes war against Antiothus, 333. f. 334.
g. traitorously slain, 334. h. 560. k. Simon degraded, 442. i. Simon affects
the crown, 456. k, l. 611. b. Simons counsel against Joseph, 540. k. m. Simon
the Galilean, 614. l. deviser of a sect, ibid. Simon kills many of his
countrymen, 634. l. m. his parents and wife, etc. 635. a. Simon the son of
Giora commits rapines and murders, 644. g, h. Simon of Garasa, 690. g.
assembleth the thieves, ibid. spoyleth Idumaea, 691. b, c. assaulteth the
temple, 693. a. his camp, 708. l, m. apprehended, 744. m. 746. l. kept for the
triumph, ibid, drawn through Rome with a halter, 751. d. Singing, look song.
Single combat, 142. h. Sin escapes not unpunished, 153. a. Sins of the
Jews against the law, 716. g, h. Sin cannot escape Gods Justice, 746. m.
Sisara captain of Iabins host, 115. a. put to flight and slain, ibid. d, e.
Situation of the land of the Amorites, 83. b. Situation of the higher Calilee,
646. k. Situation of Iotapata, 651. c. Situation of Gamala, 667, c. Situation
of Massada, 755. d. Six thousand Jews consumed with fire, 738. g. Skirmish of
the Romans with the Jews, 610. i, k. Skirmish between the Galileans and
Romans, 656. m. Skirmish of Simon and John, 698. h, i. Slaughter one of
another, 117. d. 137. d. 224. h. Slaughter on the Sabbath day, 633. f. Slavery
of the Hebrews see servitude. Slaughter of Achimelech and his family, 149. c,
d. Slaughter of Ochozias servants, 233, a. Slaughter of Baals priests, 233. d.
Slaughter of Azarias, 420. g. Slaughter of the Tapsians, 240. h. of the army
of Judah, 241. a^ Slaughter of the Moabites, 166. l of Antigonus faction, 382.
of the Jews, 623. b. in the temple. 736. m. 698. i. in the vaults, 742. g, h.
Slanders touching the Jewish nation answered, 776. g, etc. Sleep of Abner and
his soldiers reproved, 153. d, e. Sodom once a goodly City, 13. d. her
destruction foretold, 15. c, burnt, 16. g. Sodomites overcome by the Syrians,
13. d, e, f. taken and rescued, ibid. f. and 14. h. their sins, 15. c, d.
stricken with blindness, 16. g. destroyed, ibid. g. Sohemus discovers the
king^ secrets, 397. a. advanced, ibid. a. put to death, 398. l. Soil of
Peraea, 646. m. Soldiers ought to obey their captains, 664. h. Soldiers take
meat out of the Citizens mouths, 717. d, e. Soldiers rewarded, 449 b. 745. d,
e. Soldier shows his privy members, 519. b. Soldiers require a Monarch,
504. m. repair to Claudius, 505. c. Soldiers dismissed, and why, 237. c.
Soldiers of the Romans obey their captains, 648. i. k. Soldiers that came
unto David number l, 163. e. f. Soldiers with their captains consumed, 224. m.
225. a. a Soldiers filthy fact, 621. a. a Soldier burns the book of the
scripture, 621. b. is punished ibid. c. Solemnity of the Passover, 49. d. 69.
e. Solemnity of the new moon, 147. c. Solemnity of transporting the Arc,
165. c, d, e, f. Solyma the place where Melchisedech was king, 14. i. after
called Jerusalem, ibid. i. and 164. k. Song of praise, and thanksgiving of the
Israelites 52. g, h. Song of Moses, 97. f. Song of the women and maidens of
Israel, 143. e. Son of Vision, 24. i. Sons of Noah, 9. a. Sons of Abraham,
16. l. 17. a. and 20. l. Sons of Isaac, 20. l. 28, g. Sons of Esau, 28. h, i.
Sons of Iesse, 141. b, c. Sons of Saul slain, 157. f. Sons of David, 164. l.
Sons of Jacob hate their brother Joseph, 28. l. go into Egypt for to buie
corn, 34. k, l. 36. g, h. imprisoned and accused of theft, 35. b. and 36. k,
l. carry presents with them, ibid. g. depart into Egypt with their father, 39.
e. Sorceresse of Endor, 155. a. raised Samuels ghost, ibid. b. three Sorts of
sedition, 697. e. Sosius has charge of the army, 378. k. leideth an army
against Jerusalem, 380. g. takes Antigonus, 582. m. Sovereignty to whom to be
given, 141. b, c. Soul immortal, 659. d. 758. m. 759. a. tied to a mortal
body, ibid. Spear of Goliath the Philistine, 142. h. Spectacle of compassion,
717. c. d. Spies sent into Chanaan, 73. d, e, sent to Jericho, 100, l. survey
the City, ibid. m. promised Rahab to save her and all that was hers, 1^1. c,
d. Spirit of God forsakes Saul, 141. d. and an evil spirit troubles him,
ibid. d, e. Spirit of God entered into David, 141. d. Spoils gotten in war,
57. b, c. Spoils dedicated to God, 102. in. 224. h. Spoil of the temple, 236.
g. Spoils committed in the day, 673. 2. Spoils, etc. carried in triumph, 757.
c, d. Sports of Olympus, 421. b. Stars made, 3. d. their end, courses and
motions, ibid. State of Jerusalem troubled, 643. m. 644. g. Statue of gold
erected, 259. e, f. comanded to be worshipped, ib. f. Statue of Caius 480. k,
l. 618. k. Statue of diverse metals, 259. c, d. beaten to powder, ibid. Statues
of Caesar, 466. h, i. Jews refuse to admit them, ib. Stature of Og, 83. c.
Stature of Saul, 133. d. Stature of Goliath, 142. h. Sterilitie foreshewed, 33.
e, f. Stock of Basa destroyed, 213. f. Stone taken out of the mountain, 259.
c, d. Stole of the Priest, where kept, 410. 1. S^e of provision, 757. 2. Store
of all sorts of mooueables, 103. f. Store of corn gotten, 229. c. d. Store of
victuals, 578. m. 579. a. Store of engines and arrows, 752. f. Storm, 689. e.
Stratageme of Moses, 44. i, k. of the Ephraimites, 109. e. of Ioab, 169, a. of
Ptolomey, 288. g. of Joseph, 538. h. 539. a. of Cestius, 638. m. of Joseph,
642. g. 651. f. 652. i. 653. f. of the Jews, 733. b. Stratons tower, or
Caesarea, 402. l. 588. g. Streights of Engaddi, 151. a. Strength of Sampson,
121. d. and 122. m. Strength of Eleazar, 654. g. of Netiras, etc. ibid. Strife
among the Priests, 523. c. Stripes thirty nine, 93. c. Stuff to build the
Tabernacle of, 60. k. l. Subjection of the Israelites to the Moabites, 114. g.
to the Chanaanites, ibid. m. to the Palestines, 120. l. to the Assyrians, 242.
g. Subtlety of the Serpent, 4. h. Subtlety of Jacob, 21. f. of Lea and
Rachel, 24. k. of Laban, ibid, h. of Pharao, 41. e. of king Naas, 133. f. of
Michol, 146. g. of Saul, 151. c, d. of a woman, 173. d. of the false prophet,
208, h. of Silo, 578. l, m. of Florus, 626. g. Succession of hie priests, 526.
g. h, etc. Successor of Moses, who, 88. g. Successors of Alexander, 287. e, f.
Successors of David, 166. i. Successors of Nabuchodonosor, 261. 2. Sum of the
Israelites taken, 184. h. Sum of gold, silver, etc. toward the building of
the temple, 188. l, m. Sun made, 3. d. the end, course and motion thereof,
ibid. e. Sun stood still, 104. m. Superstition of the people reproved, 215.
f. 216. g. Supplication of Moses to God, 54. l. Supplication of Ioachas, 236.
i. Supplication of the Jews sent to Caius, 619. c, d. Supplication of the
Israelites, 129. d, e. Supplies sent to Titus, 664. i. Surprisall of the Arc,
126. l. of Rabatha, 171. f. Susac inuadeth Iudaea, 209. d. spoileth Jerusalem
and the temple, ibid. e. Sustenance fails the Israelites, 53. a, e, f.
Swearing among the ancient Jews, 19. d. and the manner thereof, ibid. e.
imposed, and why, 249. c, d. Sword of Goliath, 143. d. 148. h. Sycophants of
Agrippa, 510. m. Syllaeus governs the kings affairs, 425. c. desires Salome
to wife, 425. c, d. accuses Herod to Caesar, 429. d. deferreth the payment of
Herod's money, ibid. a. condemned to die, 433. b. Symoborus one of the five
kings of Assyria, 13. e. Syrians war against Achab, 218. g, h. discomfited,
219. a. 228. m. 229. a. led away captive, 24^. g. Syrians against David, 169.
c.
T
Tabernacle builded, 60. l. erected in the desert, 61. a, b, c, etc. dedicated.
66. l. and when, ibid. k. place^ in Siloe, 105. c. Table set in the Tabernacle,
60. l. Tables of the ten commandments, 58. l. 59. c. 60. k. placed in the
Arc, 62. i. Table of gold, 197. a. Talents of gold, 203. l, m. Talents, 566.
h. 569. c. Talent how much, 797. h. Tales credited, 426. h. Talions law, or law
of like for like, 96. i. Talk betwixt God and Cain, 5. c. Talk of Jacob with
Rachel, 23. b, c. Talk of Laban with Jacob, ibid. d, e, f. Talk of David with
Goliath, 143. b. Tapsians put to the sword, 240. h. and why, ibid. h. Tarichea
besieged, 663. b. taken, 664. l, m. Taricheans vanquished by sea, 666. g. Task
of the workmen of Solomon, 195. h. Task more grievous imposed, etc. 47. c.
Taxation of the Jews, 462. l. Tears of Esau, 22. h. Tediousness of the
Hebrews journey, 53. a. Teglaphalassar king of Assyria, 240. i. led away the
Israelites captive, ibid i. slaieth Rasis, and takes the Syrians prisoners,
242. g. gold and silver given him, ibid. g. Temperance of Saul, 133. c. Tempest
after Samuels prayer, 135. f. Tempest caused by Jonas, 238. l, m. Tempest
drowned those of Ioppe, 661. d, e. Tempest of miseries assailes Jerusalem, 685.
c. Temple when builded, 195. c, d. height, length and breadth thereof, ibid.
e. with all the other things belonging thereunto, 196. 197. etc. when
consecrated, 197. e. spoiled, 209. e, f. cleansed, 242. i, k, 238. h. repaired,
248. m. 249. a. burned, 255. c, d. began to be builded, 270. g. finished, 271.
f. dedicated, ibid. 272. g. desolate three years, 308. m. repurged, ibid. 309.
a. burned, 463. b. the strongest fortress of the City, 674. k. builded on a
strong hill, 705. c. consumed with fire, 736. h, etc. one Temple to be builded,
and why, 90. l. Temples of Idolaters to be destroyed, 90. h. Temple on mount
Garizim, 286. m. laid desolate, 336. h. Temple builded by Herod, 407. c. Temple
of Apollo, 421, a. Temple of Isis pulled down, 468. g. and why, 467. a, etc.
Temple builded by Vespasian, 751. e. Temple of Onias shut up, 762. i, etc.
Tempting of the Serpent, 4. i. of Joseph's mistress, 3^. a, b, etc. Tents, a
place so called, 24. m. Ten commandments, 59. f. Tenths of the fruits, 91. a.
Tenths for the poor, Levites and festiuals, 93. c. Term of man's life, 12. g.
Term of exile for chance-medlie, 88. k. Terror among the enemies, 137. d. 224.
h. 228. l, m. Testament of Herod, 447. d. altered, 604. l. Testimonies of the
Jews antiquity, 771. a. 772. l. 773. b, c, d, f. 774. h. 775. c. Thanksgiving
of the Israelites for their deliverance, 52. g, h. Tharbis the kings daughter
of Ethiopia, 44. m. enamoured of Moses, ib. m. 45. a. yields the City of
Saba, and is married to Moses, ibid. 2. Thares Abraham's father, 11. e. went out
of Chaldaea to Charran, 12. g. his age and death, ibid. g. Thargal a captain
of the Assyrians, 13. e. sacked Syria and extinguished the Giants, 13. e.
Theater buil^ by Herod, 401. b. Theft committed, how punished, 95. e.
Thermuthis Pharaos daughter, 42. m. takes Moses out of the water, ibid. m.
adopteth him for her son, and preserves him from death, 43. c, e. Theudas
the Magitian, 518. l. his persuasion to the people, ibid. Thieves confident,
638. h, i. Thieves app^ehend Ananias kindred, 525. a. Thieves taken by Herod,
377. b. Thieves murder in the day. 622. k. work much mischief ibid. m Theeu^.
spoil the country, 672. l. make a high priest, 673. (...). Thee^e punished,
412. l. 428. k, l. Things unclean, 70. i. Thirst oppresses the Israelites,
55. c, d. Thirst of the Arabians, 585. c. Thirst of Sampson, 132. k, l. of
David, 801. e. Thobel a warrior, 5 f. invented the art of forging, ibid. f.
Thola a Judge of Israel, 119. b. Tholomaeus the Archtheefe. 513. a. ten
Thousand thronged to death, 621. a. Thraldom of the Chanaanites, 202. i. Three
admirable works, 707. b. Three valiant Jews, 719. e, f. Threefold sedition
divided into two parts, 702. i. Thirce in the year the Hebrews ought to
meet. 90. m. Throne of Solomon, 200 m. Thucydides history, 765. e. Tiberians
meet Joseph, 534. m. their letters to Agrippa, 538. l. intend war against
Joseph, 548. h. submit themselves to Vespasian 66^. i. m. 663. a. Tiberias
builded, 465. a. in danger of ruin, 551. e. recovered, 643 b. Tiberius
Emperor, 464. m. rejects Vonones suit, 466, g. punishes Isis Priests, 467.
f. thrusts the Jews out of Rome, 468. h his league with Artabanus, 469. c.
his death, 471. c. 478. g. h. why he deferred to give audience to Ambassadors
and prisoners, 474. h. etc why changed not governors, ibid. h. addicted to
the Mathematickes, 476. l. 477. a. b. recommendeth the Empire to Caius, ibid.
d. his funeral, 478. k. Tiberius a governor of Iudaea, 518. k. crucifieth the
sons of Judas, ibid. l. Tiberius a governor of Egypt, 694. l. Tidings of
Neros death, 689. c. Tigranes inuadeth Syria, 348. h. Tigris a river of
Paradise. 4. h. called Diglat, ibid. h. Tillage practiced by Noah, 11. c.
Timber precious 203. c. Time of the Israelires deliverance, 50. g. Time of the
building of the temple, 195. c. Time of the Jews return, 265. a, b. and 269.
b, c, etc. Time of the Israelites transportation, 243. c. Time of the kings
reign of David's line 255. b. Time when Jeremy lived, 250. k. Time of the
destruction of Jerusalem and Temple, 255. c, d. 736. i. k. 737. b. 742. i, etc.
743. a. etc. 744. g, etc. 745, a, b, c. Timotheus twice overcome, 310. h, i.
Titus his mighty army, 647. e. wins Iapha, 656. m. takes Tarichea, 664. m.
enters Gamala, 670. g. repaireth to Jerusalem, and why, 700. g. puts his
enemies to flight, ib. k. in what places besieged Jerusalem, 703. d, 3.
circuiteth the walls, 709. b. commands the^ to be battered, 710 g. puts
the Jews to flight, ibid, k. takes the second wall, 712. l. 713. d. sur
cease the siege, and distributeth money, 713. (...). crucifieth many Jews,
718. k, l. accuses the soldiers, 720. i. calls. God to witness, 722. g.
dares John to fight, 729. c. strives to save the temple, 731. a. beholds
the soldiers, ibid. c, d. restrains his wrath, 735. c. grants the Jews
life upon condition, 741. a. promises recompense to the soldiers. 745. f.
celebrateth pastimes, 749. c. lamenteth Jerusalem, 750. g. Torment of Eleazar,
803. d, e, etc. 804. g, (...). Torment of the mother and seven brethren, 806.
g, h. etc. 807. a, etc. 808. g. etc. 809. a, etc. 810. g, etc. 811 a, etc.
Tortures laid upon many. 426. k. Touch of conscience, 340. k. Tower of Babel,
9. a. Tower of white marble, 302. k. Towers erected, 201. d. 239. c. 656. h.
Tower of Antonia. 410. l. Towers of Herod. 704. m. 705. a, b. Trachonites
compelled to civility, 428. i, k. rob again, ibid. k. subdued by Herod, 429.
b. Traiane takes Iapha, 656. i, k, m. Training up of soldiers, 640. h. 647.
f. 648. g. Traitor apprehended, 440. k. Transgression of vocation punished,
239. f. Transgression of Saul, 139. c, d, e. Transgressors of Gods laws
threatened to be punished, (...). i, k. 140. i, k, l, m. Translation of the
Bible, 294. h, i. Translation of the Priesthood foreshewed, 126. g. Translation
of the Israelites, 240. i. 242. g. 243. e, f. and when, ibid. Transportation of
the kingdom, 140. i. Transportation of the Arc, 165. c. Trauuler to be
directed in his way, 96. g. Trauailers not to be forbidden ripe fruit, 93. a.
Treason intended and discovered, 278. g, h. 325. b, c. Treason practiced, 213.
d. 236. g. 238. h. 240. g. h. ibid. 235. b, c. 5^3. f. 591. e, f. 601. a. 626.
g. 642. h. Treasury of the temple emptied, 236. g. 242. g. 245. b. T^re taken
away, 456. g. T^le wall, 703. e. Tree of life, 4. g. Tree of knowledge, ibid.
Trees fruitful not to be cut down, ^7. e. Trembling of the earth, 239* e.
Tribe of Ruben. Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses require the land of the
Amorites, 88. a, b. promise to help their brethren, ibid. h, i. required to
perform it, 101. l. are dismissed, 105. l. m. builded an Altar, 107. c. their
answer to Phinees, 108. i. Tribe of Dan oppressed, 113 b. seek a place to
inhabit, ibid. b, c Tribe of Leui sacred to God, 70. h. Tribe of Iudahs
accusation and excuse, etc. 181. a, b. ten Tribes revolt, and why, 206. k, l,
m. 207. a. transported, and why, 243. e, f. Tribunal of Solomon, 200. i.
Tribune a captain over a thousand, 143. f. Tribute exacted of the Israelits,
120. l. of the Canaanites, 202. i. Tribute imposed, 166. l. 167. c. e. 225. c.
240. k. 242. i. 250. k. 251, a. 754. h. Triple golden crown, 64. k. Triumph of
Titus and Vespasian, 750. i, k, etc. Troglodytes of whom descended, 19. b.
Trophies of Herod, 401. f. etc. Trouble of mind, 141. d, e, f. 148. k. Trouble
of the sorceresse, 155. b. of Saul, ibi. d, e. Troubles in France, 687. b.
Truce breaker. 245. c. 252. h. Truce granted the inhabitants of Iabes, 134. h.
two Trumpets of silver, 72. k, l. Truth of Joseph's history, 195. a. 550. m.
Truth of Gods promise, 198. i. Truth of Gods Oracles, 229. c, d. 249. c. Truth
of Eliahs prophecy, 232. h. Truth prevails, 268. k, l. Tryphon requires
Antiochus, 327. a, b. overcomes Demetrius, ibid. f. breaks covenant, 330.
m. plotteth Ionathans death. 331. a, b. his demands of Simon, 332. h.
obtains the kingdom, 333. b, c. slain, ibid. c. Tumults in Jury, 456. i.
617. d. in the Army, 710. m. for a. Galileanslaine, 621. c, d. Turpentine tree
that, etc. 691. b. Twins brought forth at once, 20. m. and 21. a. Tyranny of
Antiochus, 304. g, h. of Herod foretold, 38^. f. effected, 407, a. 612. l. of
Caius, 489. a. of Varus, 532. h, i, l. 612. g. Tyrannies breed mischief, 499.
e, d. Tyrants enfeeble themselves, 443. c. Tyro imprisoned, and why, 434. k.
597. c. accused of treason, 435. a. b. 597. b, c. he and 300 captains are
slain, ibid. b.
V
Valerianus his speech, 662. i. Valley of benediction, 224. i. Valor of
Sampson, 110. l. and 12^. d. of David, 144. g. of David's soldiers, 164. h. of
Herod, 580. k. of Netyras and Philip, ^54. h. of Vespasian, 6668. i. of Titus,
701. e. of the Jews decreased, 726. i. Vardanes persuades Izates, 516. m.
slain, 519. e. Variance of women, 423. e. Varus tyranny, 532. h, i, l.
assisteth the Romans, 611. e. see Quintilius. Vengeance to be taken on the
Amalechites, 98. g. Ventidius fisheth for money, 374. m. 578. h. sends for
Silon 376. m. overcomes the Parthians, 377. c. Virtue of the mind respected
of God, 141. b. Virtue of Abraham. 20. l. Virtue of David, 189. c, f. Virtue of
Solomon, 193. g. 202. l. 203. a, b, c. Vespasian arriueth at Tire, 553. b.
gathers forces against the Jews, 645. c. comes to Ptolemais, 646. h.
helps the Sephorites, 647. c fills Galilee with sword and fire, ib. c. d.
directs the Romans march, 649. c. inuadeth Galilee, 650. g. besieges
Iotapata, 651. d. wounded in the sole of the foot, 654. h. leideth his army to
lotapata, 655. 2. takes it, 657. f. takes Ioppe, 661. c, f. comes to
Agrippa, 662. i. overcomes the Taricheans, 666. g. consulteth whis
chieftaines about the Jews, 666. (...). i. besieges Ga^la, 667. d. e.
comfort his soldiers, 668. l. expects victory, etc. 684. g. visits
Iudaea, 687. c. has tidings of Neroes death, 689. c. inuadeth Iudaea, 691. f.
elected Emperor, 693. c. 694. g. 695. a. his virtues, etc. ibid. d, e, f.
discharges Joseph, 695. c. proclaimed Emperor. 696. k. Vessels of gold and
silver given to Solomon, 203. f. Vessels of gold and silver taken, 87. (...).
Vessels pertiming to the temple, 196. k, l, m. 197. a, b, c. Vessels of the
temple carried away, 255. c, d sent back, 265. d, e. Vestments of the high
priest in Antonia, 468. m. Vestures of the priests, 63. c, d, e, f. 197. c.
Vexation of Saul by an evil spirit, 141. c. Victory wherein it consists,
663. f. Victory makes proud, 237. d, e. Victory of Placidus, 686. m. of the
Jews, 703. a. Victory of Moses and the Egyptians, 44. k. Victory of Iosuah
over the Canaanites, 105. b, c. Victory of the Israelites over the Beniamites,
112. g. h. Victory of Saul over the Ammonites, 134. l. over the Amalechites,
139. b, c. Victory of David over Goliath, 143. d. of him against the
Palestines, 145. d. 165. b, c. Victory of Ioab, 169. b. Victory of Achab
against the Syrians, 219. a, d. Victory of Amasias, 237. d. of soas, ibid. a.
238. g. of Vespasian, 666. g of the Romans, 667. a. 670. h, i. Victuals failed
the Israelites, 53. a, e. 227. f. Victuals very plenty, 229. c, d. 57^. m.
579. 2. Villainy most horrible, 110. l. and 111. a. a Village called Abraham's
house, 12. l. Villages burned, 457. e, f. Vine of gold, 352. m. 353. a.
Vineyard planted by Noah, 11. c. Vineyard of N^oth, 217. b. Vines to be pl^d,
92. k. Violence not to be used, 96. g. Virgins of the Madianites taken, 87. e,
f. Vision of Jacob, 22. k, l, and 26. g. Vision of Joseph, ^8. l, m. Vision of
Pha^, 33. b. Vision of Amram, 4^. g. Vision of Nabuchodonosor, 258. k, l.
Vision of the Goat and Ram, 263. d, e. Vision of Archelaus, 461. d, e. Vision
of the hand, 261. c. Vitellius comes to Jerusalem, 468. l. remitteth the
tribute, ibid. makes Jonathan high priest, 469. b. warreth against Aretas,
470. l. 471. b. Vitellius Emperor, 691. f. cheampeth his army in Rome, 693. c.
forsaken of his soldiers, 695. e, f. 696. h, i. slain, ib. i. Ulcer one of the
plagues of Egypt, 48. m. Uncle of Saul, 232. m. Inconstancy of man's love,
133. 2. Unjust death, 426. h. Injustice, 149. c, d. 215. f. 216. g. 426. h.
Voice in the inner temple. 738. l. Vologesus king of Parthia, 519. a. incited
to kill Izates, 517. c. compelled to return, 518. g. Voluminous president of
Syria, 429. a. arbiter between Syllaeus and Herod, ibid. his sentence, etc.
434. h. Voluptuousaesse of the Israelites, 86. h, i. Vonones discomfited. 465.
f. submits himself to Syllanus, (...) 466. g. Vow of Ieptha. 119. c. Vow of
Anna, 125. d. Vows of the Esseans, 615. f. Voyage of Vespasian by sea, 746. i.
Vrias Bers^bes husband, 169. e. refuses to repair to his wife, and why, ibid.
e, f. is flame, 170. 2. (...) M^iama husband, 47. (...). holds up Moses
hands, ib. a. Use of the plough by whom found our, 5 ib.
W
Ways paued, 204. 2. Weight of gold brought, 203. d. Waights found out, and by
whom, 5. e. Wall built about Jerusalem, 721. a. first Wall taken, 711. b.
second Wall taken, 712: l. Walls of Jerusalem finished, 276. i, (...). Walls
of Jericho fall down, 102. b. Walls of Babylon, 772. k. Want of water, 657.
c. Want of water and victuals, 53. a. 225. d. 227. f. etc. 403. 2. Warrantize
of security promised Rahab, 101. c, d. War how to be undertaken, 97. c, d.
War intended for liberty, 674. m. War between Antonius and Augustus, 5^4.
h. War between the seditious and peaceable, 632. g. War of the Egyptians
with the Ethiopians, 43. c, f. War of the Amalechites against the Israelites,
56. li. War of the Philistines against the Israelites, 142. g. 154. l. War
of David* 165. a, b. 166. l. War of Adad against Achab, 218. g. civil War
of the Israelites, 111. d, c. 112. g, h. 160. h, i, k. 207. (...) 211. e, f.
Water powled on the earth, etc. 46. k. Water turned into blood, 48. g. h. Water
failed the Israelites, 53. a. changed, ibid. Water of Bethieems well, etc. 183.
c. Water delivered by measure, 652. i. Weariness of the Hebrews 53. a. Whale
deuoureth Jonah, 239. a. Witch of Endor, 155. a. Witch of Arabia, 600. g.
Wicked man punished, 153. a. 230. k, l. Wickedness most horrible, 110. l, m.
111. a. Wickedness cause of calamity, 111. a. and 112. g. etc. 113. (...)
114. g. m. 126. g. etc. Widow of Sareptha, 214. l. Widow of Obedias, 226. l.
Wife of Putiphar enticeth Joseph to lie with her, 31. a, b, c. ascuseth him to
her husband, 32. g, h. Wife of the high priest, 71. d. Wife of the dead
brother, 94. i, k. Wife of the Leuit villanously abused, 111. 2. Wife of
Phinees, 126. k. Wife of Jeroboam, 210. i, k. goes to ask counsel, and why
ibid. i, k. Wives of Herod, 437. e. Will of God to be obeyed, 8p. c, d. Winding
stairs, 196. g. h. Wisdom of the lawmaker, 2. l, m. of Joseph, 33. c, d. 34.
g, (...). Wisdom of Solomon, 193. h. 202. m. 203. a. Wisdom of Daniel, 258.
g. a false Witness his punishment, 91. f. false Witnesses suborned, 217. d.
Wives of Solomon numbered, 204. i, k. i^ed him to co^ Idolatry, ibid. k. Wives
of Herod, 437. e. Wives of Esau, 21. d. 22. i. Wives of Jacob, 24. i, k. Wives
of Lamech, 5. f. Woman created, 4. g. tempted and fell, ibid. h, i. punished,
4. l, m. Woman married for a virgin, etc. 93. f. two Women accuse one another,
193. 2. Women seduce Solomon, 204. i. Women at discord, 423. c. Women care
their own children, 228. g, h. 734. i, k. Women sing songs, 143. c. Women's
terms, 25. c. Word of God not without fruit, 242. m. Workmaisters of the
Tabernacle, 60. l. Workmen building the Temple, 195. b, c. Works of God, 793.
b. World made in six days, 3. (...). Wrestling of Jacob, etc. 26. i, k. Wrath
of God against the Egyptians. 51. c, f. Wrath of Saul against David, 144. m.
Wrath of David against Nabal, 152. i. Wrath of God against the Jews, 727, b,
c. Wrath of Florus, 625. 2. Wrath of Herod, 590. g. 592. k. 662. h. Wrath of
Vitellius, 696. h. Wrath pacified, 552. g, h. 564. g. Wrath bridled, 735. c.
Writers why they omit to speak of the Jews, 775. c. Wrongs done by the
Amalechites, 98. g. Wrongs done by the Ammonites, 168. k.
X
Xantique a month, 69. d. Xerxes king of Persia favors the Jews, 272. l.
m. his letters to the Princes of Syria, ibid. m. 273. a. grants Nehemiahs
request. 275. d.
Y
Year of Iubilee, 72. g. 7. Years plenty and scarcity, 33. d, e, f. great
Year, 8. l. Years between the building and destruction of the Temple, 737.
b. Years of the captivity of Babylon, 265. a. Young men pull down the Eagle.
487. h. 605. b. put to death, ibid. d, e. Youthly course of Manasses, 247, e,
f. Youthly course of Amos. 248. i.
Z
Zabulon burned, 636. k. Zabulon Jacobs son, 24. l. what it signifie^, ibid.
his sons, 40, g. Zacharias stoned to death, 235. f. and why, ibid. Zacharias
son of Achaz slain, 241. c. Zacharias king of Israel slain, 240. g.
Zacharias encourages the people, 271. b. Zacharias condemned by the Zealous,
682. k. acquitted, ibid. l. slain in the Temple. 682. l. Zacharias one of the
chief of the Zealous, 676. m. Zamaris the Babylonian Jew. 438. h. Zambrias
marieth Chosby, 86. i. speaks against Moses, ibid. (...) slain together with
his wife, 87. a Zamri king of Israel, 213. f. rooteth out Basas posterity,
ibid. burns himself in the palace, 214. g. Zaraeus king of Aethiopia, 212.
k. overthrown, ibid. Zeal of Phinees, 87. a, b. Zeal of the people, 248. m.
Zeal of Elias, 215. f. 216. g, h, i, m. Zeal of Matthias and his sons, 305.
a. the Zealous occasion of violences, 673. f. 674. g. why so called, ibid.
fight with the Citizens, 675. c. require help of the Idumaeans, 677. a. their
fiction disproued, ibid. d, c. tyrannize over the living and dead, 684. k. take
Simons wife, 691 c. fight with the Idumaeans, 692. l. Zeb killed by Gedeon,
117. b. Zelpha Leas handmaid, 24. i. bears to Jacob Gad. and Aser. ib.
Zenodorus lives by spoils, 406. i. accused by Herod. 406. l. his country
given to Herod, 428. i. Ziphians promise to deliver David, 150. l. m. labor
again to betray David, 153. b. Zoilus a tyrant of Straton, 341. c. Zorobabel
prince of the Jews. 265. e, f. 269. c. obtains praise and rewards, 268. l.
and why, ibid.
FINIS.
Printed at London by Peter Short, dwelling on Bred-streethill at the sign of
the Star.

1602.


