CERTAIN Sermons preached of late at Ciceter, in the county of Gloucester,
upon a portion of the first Chapter of the Epistle of James: wherein the two
several states, of the rich and poor man are compared and examined, the
differences in quality, and duty betwixt them showed, both directed to such
Christian parts and offices, as the sufficiency of the one may, and ought to
perform, and the wants of the other do necessarily require.

Penned at the earnest requests of diverse well affected Inhabitants of the
place: and now published as well for the use of others, as for the further
profit of that particular congregation.

By Philip Jones, Preacher of the word of God in the same Town.

Allowed by authority.

Imprinted at London by T. D. for Thomas Butter 1588.

To the right Reverend Father in God, John, now Bishop of Gloucester, and
Commendatarie of Bristow, Philip Jones wishes the increase of all good graces
fit for the discharge, and answering of so great a calling in this life and in
the next, the fruition of those joys, which are everlasting in Christ Jesus.
PAVL that chosen vessel unto God, Act. 9.15.
being appointed a principal instrument or minister, for, the bearing of his
name, before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel, having passed
through the hands of many keepers, Centurions, Soldiers, high priests, and
governors, at last appeared in Cesarea before Agrippa the king, who being
desirous to hear him and his cause, and having for that purpose given him
lawful liberty to speak for him self, he thought and pronounced him self
happy, Act. 26.2.3.
in that he was called and permitted to answer before him of all the things
whereof he was accused of the Jews, chiefly, because he had knowledge of all
customs and questions which were then amongst them. In like manner I at this
time (right Reverend) cannot but take my self if not in the same degree
happy, yet in some proportion fortunate, in meeting with this present
opportunity for the use of free speech to, and before you, not in the
customs, and questions of the Jews, but in the things that concern a better
state and government seen, and exercised sufficiently. For I esteem it no
small adiument, or furtherance of an honest cause, to have such a Judge of the
controversy as both in quality is willing to hear, and in judgment able to
determine according to reason and equity: although at this time it is not my
intention, to solicit you as a Judge in a common quarrel, but to purchase
you as a Patron to a scholars work: little I confess in quantity, and far from
any exact or exquisite thing, whether you respect the phrase and style, or the
manner of ha^dling thorowout the whole tractate: by reason whereof, I could
fully have satisfied my self, either in the close reserving thereof among my
papers, or otherwise in the private communicating of the same with my friends:
but being pressed with the importunities of many good brethren, who being
present at the preaching, have made report of the fruit and benefit they thereby
reaped, and therefore would take no answer, but the grant of a public use of
the same, for their further comfort, and the profit of others, I could not in
conscience or courtesy, deny so reasonable a request proceeding from such
Christian and commendable minds. And having at the last, for their contentment
in this one part (though leaving them discontented, for the rest,) yielded to
the multitude of reasons, wherewith they urged me, I have taken this course,
and made this choice in the publishing to use your Reverend name, and patronage
for the same. Whereunto besides sundry effectual motives inducing me, (which
for some respects I here suppress) one is of good consequence, meet in this
place to be introduced, and specified: and that is, an earnest desire
wherewith I have for a season travailed, to have you thoroughly acquaynted with
the state, and truth of certain actions of mine, which by reason of the
practices of such adversaries, Ezra. 4.1.
as Judah and Benjamin sometimes had, in a matter not much different in nature
though somewhat in circumstance, are so far from being entertained with
lawful favor, as that they are prosecuted with extreme displeasure under
you, yea and by you, (as of late in your heat and passions openly appeared) to
the great encouragement of the common enemy, and no little discomfort of many
that profess sincerely and discreetely. I crave pardon if any syllable
sounding to offense, be in my words to your self or others toward whom my
meaning perhaps may seem to reach: for, I carry no purpose to rippe up,
particular matters or to make the name of any man odious by complaint, but
only a care, and conscience to maintain a good cause, to deliver the truth
of things, and to preserve from wrack a Christian account, and reputation,
which according to Solomon makes fat the bones. Prou. 15.30
Which things I find my self animated in this sort (or otherwise if
occasion be offered) to undertake upon this surmise, that to your self, (I
mean your self, simply considered, and not by others inchaunted) there
cannot be a thing of more prompt acceptance then an honest mean used to remove
such unkind and causeless opinions, as upon privy suggestion have been (too
easily) conceived, and to scatter such mistes of accusations, as by the
inventions of malignant spirits, have been plotted, and preferred against my
temperate course. I speak nothing but that which is common in the knowledge of
the world, Acts 26.26.
as not don in a corner: the dealings of some men (I will not say monsters,
being such so many so impudent, so malicious, and so furious against us, as
that a way to prevent their mischiefs, and a time to breath our selves are
hardly recovered, from their ordinary vexations. Whereunto when I add in my
private consideration, the immoderate and fierce proceedings of your self, your
courts, and officers, by interrupting the use of my ministry, and stretching
the arms of authority to the uttermost* I may not say beyond law, reason, and
christian conscience) to the increase of my disquietinges, and the full measure
of my molestations, I see small cause in common sense, of taking any heart or
spirit to fulfill my course, and to grow on in that spiritual work, whereof
a beginning of great hope is already made, and a foundation laid amongst them,
who at this present do enjoy the benefit of my attendance: when as those who
after a sort naturally (by the community of office) should lend their shoulders
and hands, to bear of the blows, and injuries of hypocrites and the brood of
vipers, do contrary to the course of nature, and duty, join (as it is
feared) with them, to strengthen their practices, and to give more life to
their devises, for the utter spoil and overthrow of many good and singular
possibilities, which thing has made me of this opinion, that either you have
egregiously forgotten (my reverence to your place and person premised) or that
you do wittingly neglect the advice, or rather charge of the most reverend, and
honorable, the Archbishop of this province, (who^ for duty and honors sake,
in respect of many his special favors toward my self I here ree^mber) sent
and directed to you by letter, to do nothing, that might te^d to my discourage
or troble, bearing my self in that lawful, and answerable sort wherein I have
always squared, and measured the several parts of my ministratio^: and
whether I have done so or not, I refer the judgment to the testimonies of
all indifferent persons not surprised with malice toward us, nor transported
with parciallitie to the contrary faction, yea to your self, and your own
sentence, when the time shall come, and occasion shall yield it self, to impart
with you the true, and perfect knowledge, of all late accidents, touching both
sides, and causes. In the mean time I conceive hope of this effect, that upon
the perusing of this part of my poor daily labors, which with all submission,
and regard of duty I present you, your self of your wisdom will discern,
what great and manifest untruth the adversaries reports do carry with them,
which spare not to charge my endeavors, with bitter inuectiues against persons,
and seditious speeches against authority, and the present policy and
government of our church established. Ab vno disce omnes, Aenead. lib. 2.
by this one you may judge of al my travels: for I my self in the fear of God
do protest, and the common audience of our asse^blies, can and will witness, that
ye manner and method, used and to be seen herein, has been, and is the true
form of my daily practice and performance of duty. And I am not in the
appurtenances, and necessary adiunctes of my profession so much to seek, but
that I know according to the mind of a worthy and famous Prelate of this our
age, Ioh. Iuellus. in lib. de vit. Iuel.
and country (whose name, and memory amongst us is better then any sweet,
and excellent ointment as the wise man speaks) that the preaching of the
Gospel stands not in an idle and unfruitful discoursing of rites, Eccles
7.3.
and ceremonies, but in a sound delivery, and application of doctrine to the
conscience of a Christian to work faith, and repentance in the hearers: and
therefore I doubt not but that howsoever hitherto Doeg the Edomite has
curried favor with his master, by disclosing David, 1. Sam. 22.9.
and accusing Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, I mean howsoever some whisperers
have prevailed with your good nature (for what thing by craft is sooner
abused?) wresting the same to a hard conceit, and misconstruction of us, and
our actions, yet now upon this just, and reasonable apology for our selves,
your gravity will borrow, and carry Alexanders two ears, Bruson. lib. 3. cap.
10.
one always stopped, and reserved for the defendant so shall colors be quickly
distinguished from causes, and the truth of things shall be received, and not the
informations of those men credited, which carry in their bosoms large
consciences to dispense with any report be it never so adulterate, tending to
my prejudice. And as I doubt not of this, so I mistrust not the issue of a
further thing, to wit: that although Agrippa, notwithstanding Paul's notable and
true declaration, Acts. 26.31.32.
and the evident immerit of his bonds departed from the common hall, doing
nothing in his matter, speaking well of him, and his innocence but not
delivering him according to justice and the honor of a king, yet your reverend
discretion, having discovered the pretenses of the adversary, and having
viewed with a good eye the vprightnes of our cause, will, not in regard of us,
but of the matter directly respective to the honor of God, and the health of
many souls, execute with a good conscience, that judicial prescription,
delivered by the Lord himsefe to Moses, not as pertinent to that time, and his
policy only, Exodus 23.2.
but perpetual for all ages, thou shall not agree in a controversy, to
decline after many and overthrow the truth. And in so doing I hope the time
shall come, wherein as in the days of Solomon a man may dwell without fear
under his vine, 1. Kings 4.25.
and figtree, from Dan even to Beersheba: and thus having hope for my support I
rest for this present, commending my self to your good opinion, and speech, and
my poor labor to your protection: requesting upon the oversight, rather your
partial, then equal judgment, because of the imperfections scattered in the
same: the grant whereof I shall take and repute, not only as a sufficient
recompense and satisfaction for this pains, but a spur and provocation also
in time by the will of God, to shadow under the breadth of your wings,
matters of more substance, and greater perfection, The God and father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the sheepehearde, and Bishop of our souls, who has
furnished you with many good graces, multiply the same in you with all things
necessary for your room, and place that God by you in all your actions may be
glorified, the truth of his word and mysteries ratified, the faithful
disposers thereof cherished and couraged, the idle and ignorant ministers (the
bane of our Church) reformed, and your self in the end blessed with endless
felilicitie. London. May the 17. 1588.

The Lords unworthy servant, and your suppliant, prepared for all godly
commandments and duties. PHILIP JONES.

The text.
Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted.

Again he that is rich in that he is made low: for as the flower of the grass
shall he vanish away. James 1. verse 9.10.

The first Sermon.
YE heard in my reading the last Sabbath, by occasion of the forerunning verse,
how odious before God, and hateful in his sight, the sin of hypocrisy, and
dubblenesse of mind is: especially in religion, and in the service of God: when
men will bear fair wether with the world, and seem to carry good minds, and
upright affections toward Sion, the true Church of God, and yet secretly work
the dangerous effect of thorns and pricks to the sides thereof. As also when
men will make their profession, and religion, as it were a shipmans hose, and an
indiferent thing, swearing by the Lord, and by Malcham, Zephan. 1.5. 1 Kings.
18.21.
and halting betwixt two opinions, as the people whom sometimes Eliah the
Prophet sharply reproved because they cared not whether they worshipped God,
or Baall, and past not whether they served God altogether, or in part, with
whom many of this our age do iumpe, and join hands, who make conscience of no
religion: for whether it be the light of ye Gospel, or the blindness of popery
and superstition that preuayleth, they esteem not, so that it serve for their
commodity, and advantage, having a heart, and a heart, as the Greek word
significantly imports, (...).
one for the old law, and another for the new learning, as they term it.
But we showed, and proved both by testimonies, and examples, that as the sin
of such men is great, so is their end horrible, and their punishment grievous
many times in this life. And in the conclusion of my former lecture, it was
further declared, that as it hapeneth in the ordinary use, or rather abuse of
oaths, that the man which is a common swearer will not stick sometimes for his
profit to forswear himself, the same sin being increased by practice, and
by custom grown to an habit in him: and as it comes to pass also amongst
murderers, who making no conscience of the slaughter of innocent children, or
servants, will make no bones to proceed further, namely to imbrue their hands
in the guiltless blood of greater personages, Mat. 21.33. etc.
as appears by the parable of the vineyard let out to the husbandmen, who
having slain the houshoulders servants, did not spare to commit the like
outrage, against his son, and heir, representing the progress of malice in
the Jews, who having murdered the prophets, crucified at last the Messiah also,
Heb. 1.1. Mat. 23.32
the heir of all things, and so fulfilled the measure of their fathers: even
so it falls out in the sin of hypocrisy, that he that commonly exercises
double dealing, and dissimulation in worldly matters, will smell also of the
same in the service of God, putting no difference betwixt the holiness of
religion, and the profaneness of his ordinary dealings: so that whether he
uses prayer, or frequenteth sermons to hear, or whether he fasteth, and
gives alms, or whatsoever else is done by him in this case, it is done in
that sort as the counterfaite show of great devotion was made by the people of
Judah, who although they used to say the Lord lives, Ier. 5.2.
yet they did swear falsely, and as in that one, so in all other religious
matters, they plaide the hypocrites. And of such ye prophet David speaks in ye
excellent Psalm, containing the sum of all the benefits of the Lord, showed,
and extended to his people the posterity of Abraham, they remembered (says he)
that God was their strength, Psalm. 78 35.36.37.
and the most high God their redeemer, but they flattered him with their mouth,
and dissembled with him with their tongue, for their heart was not upright with
him, neither were they faithful in his covenant. Meaning that their double
dealing in his service was such, and so great, as that they ran unto him, and
sought him early, as though they had been very holy, and religious, but all
was for fear of punishment, and not for any hearty love, or obedience, that
they did carry toward God. Whereby together with other reasons, I confirmed
the former sententious speech of James in the 8. verse, that a double minded
man is unstable not in one but in all his ways: and so inferring an
exhortation, and direction, to pray unto God to avoid, and fly from all the
points and parts of hyprocrisie, and doubleness of heart, I ended for that
time. Yt now follows in the 9. verse. Let the brother of low degree rejoice.
etc. In which words, the Apostle in my opinion seems to return to the
argument of joy and patience to be used of us in our aflictions whereof as you
have already heard, he entreated before in the 2.3. and 4. verses of this
present chapter. Which argument he has hitherto left, and broken of, with
purpose to take away such objections as might be made and framed prejudicial
to the same doctrine and matter. For if you would for a trial as it were
strike, and race out the verses interposed betwixt this 9. and the 4. then it
would evidently appear, and ye should easily find that this present verse is
in good order and artificial method, added and applied to the 4. verse: for
there the Apostle speaks of patience, and of perfection in patience
consisting in perseverance in the time of trouble and adversity, and now in
this verse he comes back again to the same argument, and proceeds therein
for the further comfort and consolation of the afflicted. And knowing that
amongst all the crosses and calamities of this life, the cross of poverty and
of want in respect of common necessaries, is both very general and very
grievous also, yea to the weak shoulders of flesh and blood almost
intolerable, insomuch that many times, yea daily we see those of that state,
which are not prevented with the grace of God nor governed by the spirit, and
so not persuaded to rely upon the providence of God, and to content
themselves with their poor condition, do break the walls of obedience, and
run headlong into unlawful actions and thereby into the danger of the laws,
seeking to satisfy themselves by theft, and to relieve themselves by robbery,
and oftentimes murder the consequence thereof, rather then stand to the
miseries, and indigengencies of their unfortunate place, the holy Apostle
having a special consideration hereof, does hear by his counsel, and
persuasion labor to cure this malady, and to apply a salve to the sore of the
poor man, delivering his mind freely and sufficiently in the matter. And if we
do with diligence consider, and with judgment examine the contents of these
verses, we shall find yt the Apostle does hear make, and institute a
comparison betwixt those two diverse things, which oftentimes are occasions of
temptations and prouocations to some disorders and mischiefs in those men
which are within the compass of the same, namely poverty, and riches, of the
first whereof he speaks in this 9. verse, of ye other in the sequel of the
place, so that I take the disposition and order of these verses consisting of
three several points to be this. First ye Apostle does enter into a course of
schooling the poor man showing him by direction, with what mind he is to
take, and to bear the cross of his poverty and how to behave himself in
the state and time of his low degree: that is, he is not to fire his eyes, and
to look only upon the vileness, and baseness of his condition, and to dwell
still upon the consideration of his pinching necessities, but he is to take
another, and better course, namely to erecte and lift up his mind in some
heavenly meditation, to take as it were a spiritual view of that immortal
inheritance, and celestial possession, wherein he shall be joined partener with all the faithful and children of God, if he practice contentation, patience,
obedience, and godliness in ye course of ye simple life, whereby it pleases God
for a time to try and to humble him. In ye second place he undertakes ye
admonishing and aduising of ye rich man also, teaching him with what mind he is
to take, and in what sort to use the blessing, and abundance of his riches, to
wit, he is not by occasion thereof to exalt himself in his conceit, and to lift
himself up in an opinion of his happiness, as though yt his wealth should for
ever continue with him, and he with it, but he is to know that as his life is
uncertain, so is his riches, forasmuch as the Lord gives both, and takes
both away at his pleasure: so that he is not to ware proud or to grow
arrogant, upon the taste and feeling of the felicity of this life, but rather
to be meekly spirited, in ye time of his greatest flourishing, as knowing that
although he be now at this present in much prosperity, and hoysed up to the
top and mount of good fortune, yet he may suddenly be turned down to misery,
and stripped of all that now he possesses. Thirdly, and lastly, least the
Apostle should seem to speak this without his warrant and evidence, he does in
the latter part of the tenthe verse, produce a reason as an amplification of
the doctrine, to fortify his assertion withal, which is done by way of
similitude consisting of the quality and nature of a common flower of the
grass, representing the weak state, and short durance of humane prosperity:
then which flower ye know your selves there is nothing more mutable, and
subject to a change, by reason of the small force, and substance that it has
to abide, and stand, in his beauty: for although it spread it self gloriously
in the morning, and seem to be the thing, wherein nature has labored to show
all her skill, yet the heat of the sun when it rises ouermatcheth the
glory thereof, and makes it quickly to wither, and come to nothing. Such is
the rich man, and his riches. So that by this only division, and resolution of
the verses ye may well conceive what notable, and necessary matter is lodged
and contained in them. Being such, as does concern all estates, and respect
all degrees, high and low, rich and poor, the noble personage and the poorest
cotager, all and every one may herehence learn a direction for his life, and
furnish his mind with a sufficient treasure of instructions, how and after
what manner to dispose of himself, and his doings in the best sort to the
glory of God, and the everlasting comfort of his soul. The poor man because
of his wants and defectes is not to despair: the rich man by reason of his
abundance, and fuperfluities is not to presume of himself, and his ability:
the honorable is to temper his high degree with humbleness of mind, the Iazar
or miserable creature, to mitigate, and qualify his smart by the use of
patience, as hereafter in the process of our speech ye shall see, by the
grace of God, more at large.

Concerning therefore the first of our parts, although the Apostles phrase be
here singular, seeming to speak of some special or particular person, yet by
co^ferring other places with it of the same form of words, and by considering
the reach of the doctrine to extend generally to all, I doubt not but they are
plurally to be taken, and conserved. For the proposition being indefinite, and
the consequence of the place so jointly, and sensibly depending upon the
precedence it cannot be but equivalent, and the same with an universal speech.
To acquaint you with my meaning in plain terms, albeit the Apostle does hear
say let the poor man, or brother of low degree rejoice, it is all one, or as
much as if he had said, let al poor men, and all breethren of low degree
rejoice, because that, which he requires at the hands of one of that sort, he
looks for of all, and if ye do with diligence note, and with judgment
consider the scripture speeches, ye shall in many places light upon words of
the same course and nature, delivered in such singular manner and yet importing,
and including universal constructions. In that the common name of a poor man
is not hear used, but the appellation of a brother, it may teach us, what is
to be thought of such a one upon whom it has pleased God to impose, and lay
the cross of poverty, in which case to be taught, and informed, I take it to
be very requisite, and necessary for many of us: for we in our common judgments
are very carnal, and in our opinions foolish, who use to measure the worthiness
of a man by the appeara^ce, and upon the sight and view of his misery do by
and by pronounce him a wicked person, a vicious liver, a man accursed, and
punished in such sort deservedly for his sins, when as the purpose of God in
the visiting of many with his crosses, is not so much to notify, and confirm
to the world the deserte in them of such afflictions, but either to make proof
and trial of their faith, or else to convert their humiliations to other good
purposes, serving for his glory and their bettering. I confess yt there is not
one man amongst the sons of men consisting al of corrupt and mortal matter so
holy, and righteouse as that he deserves not any punishment or correction, if
the Lord would straightly mark iniquities, and do nothing but that, which
the rules of his justice do prescribe, who then should stand; as the prophet
speaks: Psalm. 130.3.
but forasmuch as it has pleased God in the abundance of his love, to take
away the curse of the law due for sin by the death of his son and not to
impute sin to him that believes, and seeing the very faithful themselves
are subject to crosses and afflictions sundry ways, and in greater measure
subject then the children of unbelief, it cannot be that troubles and
calamities should always be demonstrations of the wrath of God, or testimonies
of great sins in those, whose shoulders lie under such burdens. But we are
otherwise to think, that sometimes God does discipline his children by the use
of his rod for some secret sins, and imperfections which themselves do not
epsy: sometimes he does before hand prevent their sins the fruit of that
corruption, which lies hid in them and would otherwise break forth, except
by sickness, poverty, imprisonment, hunger, or such like means they be
admonished, and restrained: sometimes he has respect to his own glory,
beginning with judgment at his own house, least he should seem to approve
those sins in his elect, which his justice does more sharply punish in the
reprobates: sometimes he does suffer Satan that roaring Lion and his ministers,
to have after a sort power over the states, and bodies of his children for the
experiment of their constancy, and the instruction of others: and sometimes
also he does use the dangers, and extremities of the saints, as occasions to
show forth his own power, glory, mercy, wisdom, and righteousness in his
church, by miraculous deliverances, bringing them into manifest perils, and yet
finding means to preserve them beyond the hope and opinions of men. These
together with other intentions in the works of God if they be well considered,
will bridle the ouerlashing humor of carnal judgment, and leave no root of
cause in the mind of any man, to take such persons for sinners, and despised
of God, whose lives are hear subject to some external difficulties. In the
holy story of Job, we read, that when his three friends, hearing of the evil
that was come unto him, came from their places to see him, and to lament his
case with him, and beheld the great and strange misery whereunto he was
brought, and the lamentable plight wherein he stood, they were so carried away
with the stream of a false imagination, and conceit concerning him that
whereas before they took him for an upright, and just man, and high in the
favor and love of God, they now upon the appearance judged him to be an
hypocrite, and spared not rashly to affirm, that he was in that sort and
measure justly plagued of God for his his sins: for Eliphaz ye Temanite wished
him to remember and call to mind who ever perished being an innocent, or where
ye upright were destroyed. Job. 4.7.
I have seen it, said he yt they which plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, do
reap the same, so co^cluding, that Job could not be innocent or upright or
free from wickedness, because the fruit and effect of such misfortunes, and
calamities was fallen upon him. And I doubt not but yt in the same Eliphaz is a
pattern of al carnally minded, and ignorantly conceited worldlings, who use
commonly to draw arguments from the afflictions of the children of God,
ce^suring thereupon yt they are not good, nor honest, nor such as they would
seem to be, because they live not in such a free, and happy, and glorious
state of life, as others do. Wherein they discover themselves to be as brutish,
Now called Malta.
and barbarous, as those barbarians of the I Will of Melita, whereinto Paul
happened after his escape from shipwreck, who upon the leaping of a Viper upon
his hand, Acts. 28.4.
from the fire, condemned him by and by for a murderer, and for such a one as
vengeance would not suffer to live. This is in common yt rash verdits of our
Atheistes, Epicures, Libertines, and profane Gospellers, who respecting
nothing but the outward accident, and not considering by reason of their
natural blindness the course of God in his works commit sin in their
sentences, speaking good of evil, and evil of good, Ier. 5.20.
ill of the righteous, and well of the covetous whom God abhors. They may
learn to correct their erroneous judgments both by the sequel of that place
of the Acts before cited, and by the answer of Job, who to purge himself, and
to defend his innocence against the ouerhastie opinions of his friends
affirmed that ye Lord knew his way and tried him and that he should come forth
like the gold: Job. 23.10.
meaning yt although the world was ignorant of the true cause of his misery,
yet ye knowledge thereof was with the Lord, who used the same as a mean to bring
to pass his greater profit. Let us make some use then of this matter for our
selves, and know assuredly, yt as on the one side it is no sufficient reason to
prove the virtue, and goodness of a man because he has wealth and riches in
possession, so on the other side it is no necessary conclusion to condemn a
man for wicked, and unrighteous, because he is afflicted with poverty and
lack of sufficient relief for himself, the remembrance, and consideration
whereof, will work in us a charitable, and Christian opinion concerning our poor
brethren, not to think that they are the worse men in the sight of God because
of their hard hap in that case, they are our brethren still, in profession,
and essence, flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone, of the same proportion in
making, and of the same mettle in substance, whereof we our selves be we
never so dainty, are created, and therefore they are not to be used of us with
such contempt and indignity as they receive generally of the world: forasmuch
as it is not their poverty that does either alter their nature which is still
common with ours, or prove them to be disfauored of the Lord, Heb. 12.6.
the case so standing, that whom God loves he chasteneth, and he scourges
every son that he receives, and the affliction of a base estate, is many
times to the man rather an argument of the love of God then a testimony of his
wrath: as appears expressly by the words of the Prophet David, who being
grievously afflicted himself, and knowing the purpose of God therein
sufficiently, does pronounce a blessing to those that did pity his case, and
conceive a good opinion of him, and of all those, which should be in the like
sort visited: for he breaks forth into this effectual speech, Psalm. 41.1.
blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in
the time of trouble. Meaning such a one as does not condemn that man for
accursed whom God does afflict with poverty knowing that there are many
causes, why his hand is in such sort heavy upon a man. Secondly by this
appellation and title of brother which the Apostle does here apply to the
poor man, we may learn by his example how to use our words, and temper our
speeches concerning men of base place, and state. To give them the best style
that we can, and to avoid the intemperate humors of many disdainful persons,
who cannot frame their tongues to any indifferent words respecting their
inferiors, but revile them, and taunte them, and load them with such
contemptuous terms, as are nether comely in their own mouths, nor in any
sort fitting the persons toward whom they use such immoderation. Prou. 17.27.
Solomon affirms that he that has knowledge spares his words. James. 4.11.
And our Apostle James will have us in no case to speak evil one of another. A
third matter there is also in these words, which is not to be omitted without
note and observation, namely that in the Apostles directions here to the poor
man, and in the use of his name, he does not call him the poor brother, or
beggarly brother, but the brother of low degree, although in so doing it may
seem that part of his meaning is to increase and magnify the glorious
exaltation of such a man to the kingdom of God, which by a comparison made
with a precedent baseness, is made so much the more high and magnificent, by how
much the more low and simple his condition was before in the world, because
that contrary things being one set against another, are then most clearly and
perfectly seen what they are, yet I doubt not but that the commodities of the
low estate of a poor man, are here insinnuated, and regarded by the use of
the phrase: for the low degree of a man, although it be accompanied with some
wants in respect of the abundance of the richer sort, who are commonly
destitute of nothing serving to the outward prosperity of this life, yet it is
free from those hazardes, and perilles, whereunto the high estate of the welthy
is continually subject. For they may in good sense be compared to high trees
situated and planted in the tops of mountayns, which by reason of their
place lie open to every wind that blows, and every storm that aryseth, yea
a little puff of the air makes them to shake, and to tremble: but the poorer
sort are with good probability resembled to low shrubbes, or bushes growing
in the valleys under the wings, and defense of the hills, which by reason of
their low growth, are safe from the raging storm, and beating tempest, they
are not assaulted with the feercenesse of every whirlewinde, they are not
beaten with the drops of every scouring shower, they stand and spring in
quiet, and safetye, when the high Cedars must needs receive every wether, and
refuse none, and therefore are many times by contrary and furious winds rent
and torn, and so prevented of further increase. And many times we see great
and mighty trees by violence of the wind overthrown broken and plucked up by
the roots, seldom or never does the like overthrow happen to a low and
little bush. Again the higher and statelier the tree is the more terible is his
fall, and the more sign, and impression thereof does he make in the earth: the
bush or bramble suppose he be rooted up and thrown down he falls without
any harm, and perceth not. And again if a great tree fall, all the bows and
branches, that are on his falling part are bruised, and crushed under him: but
so is it not in the shrubbe: for as his leaves be few and his branches small,
so is his danger the less, and his harm none at all. All which things the
rich man for his admonition, and the poor man for his comfort, are to apply
to themselves. The rich man whether we consider him in respect of his
conceit, or simply of his place, he is a high tree, in his conceit many times
he is such a one, as stands within the threat of the prophet Esaias. Esaias 2.12.13.
The day of the Lord of hosts is upon all the proud and hautye and upon all that
is exalted, and shall be made low, even upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are
high, and exalted, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan, and upon all the high
mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up: meaning in that place by
the high trees, and hills, such manner of men as are lifted up in pride, and
grown loftely minded by reason of their wealth gathered by coueteousnesse,
thinking themselves thereby to be towers, and walls, as it follows in the
fifteenth verse of that chapter, that is strong, and mighty of themselves,
not able to be overthrown. And doubtless many such high trees, I mean many
high spirited men there are amongst us, who being ravished, and carried away
with an opinion of themselves, are altogether forgetful of their mortal state,
they think with the king of Babell, that they shall live for ever, they say
with Nimrodde and his company, Genesis 11 4.
let us build and get us a name, they trust in their goods, and boast
themselves in the multitude of their riches, they think their houses and their
habitations shall continue for ever, even from generation to generation, Psalm.
49.6.11.13.
and call their lands by their names. But what says the prophet concerning the
end of such men, this their way utters their foolishnes, for their beauty
shall consume when they shall go from their house to the grave. And in the
prophecy of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 31.^.
there is a notable place to this purpose, where the prophet speaking of the
king of Ashur, affirms that once he was like a Cedar in Lebanon, with fair
branches, and thick shadowing bows, and shot up very high, and his top was
amongst the thick bows, his height was exalted above all the trees of the
fieeld. verse. 11.12.
etc. but what follows in the place, thus says the Lord I have cast him away
for his wickedness, his branches are fallen, his bows are broken, all the
people of the earth are departed from his shadow, and have forsaken him, yea
he is gone down to hell. This is the end of such a high tree, and the
effect of such loftiness, verifying that famous sentence of Solomon in his
Proverbs, Prou. 16.16.
that pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. Which
thing, is of some consequence to be learned of all men for warning, and to be
considered of such men for amendment, as are subject to this sin: who if
they cannot, and care not to reform them selves by that which already has
been spoken yet they are to remember further the judgment of that high tree,
that proud king Nebuchadnezar, who in the prophecy of Esaias is compared with
Lucifer, Esaias. 24.13.
which said in his heart, I will climb up into heaven, and exalte my throne
besides the stars of God etc. But what follows? thou shall be brought
down to the ground and to the sides of the pit, and more of his destruction
ye shall find, if ye read the chapter. Now in place and degree, the rich
man also is a high tree, and by reason thereof subject to many inconveniences:
every sharp wind of alteration in the common wealth, of invasions of the
enemy, and of other grievous accidents drives upon him: and not so only, but
in other respects his height is also dangerous. Wisd. 6.5.8.6.
For an hard judgment shall they have that bear rule, so says the wise man:
and again, for the mighty abides the sorer trial: and again, the mighty
shall be mightily tormented, but he that is most low is worthy of mercy.
Verse. 6.
The poor man being a low shrubbe or bushe is not so subject to the Are, to
mutations, to judgments, he escapes in safety when the rich man is rifled,
crushed, and by his mighty fall, like a great stone from the top of the
building is dashed into many pieces, and so his fall made unrecoverable: and
therefore it is better in my opinion to be Abstemius his mule, Abstemij fabula.
though carrying great burdens of wood every day with peace and safety, then
be his palfrey cladde in purple, adorned with furniture of Gold, and fed
with the best prouinder, and subject to the fearres and wounds, received
commonly in the wars. And this being considered I do not see why the brother
of low degree that is, the poor man, should not according to the Apostles
words, rather be glad then any way pensive, forasmuch as he stands far of
from thundering, and gunshotte: as his state is low, so are his mischiefs few,
as his degree is not high, so his fall is not to be feared: but be it that he
does fall, yet being within the compass of the Lords protection, it is no
otherwise then the prophet David speaks, Psalm. 37.24.
though he fall he shall not be cut off, for the Lord puts under his hand,
the Lord supporteth, and shoreth him up so that in his fall there is no harm.
The special doctrine then that this consideration, and matter yields, is not
only a comfort to the poor man, to hold himself contented with his state,
because of the benefit, and commodity of safetye which it bears in diverse
respects, but a persuasion and counsel also to the rich man, not to be carried
away with the ytching vayn of ambition, not to hunt with greediness after
promotion, not to be possessed with such vayneglorious humors, as were the
Scribes, Mat. 23.6.7.
and the Pharisees, who loved the chief places at feasts and the highest
seats in the assemblies, and greetinges in the market, and to be called of men
Rabbi, verse. 12.
Rabbi. It is an inreuocable decree, that whosoever will exalte himself shall be
brought low, and humbled. Somewhat it was that Iotham the youngest son of
Ierubbaal, standing in the top of mount Gerizim, Judges. 9.8.
after that Abimelech the Tyrant had usurped the kingdom and slain his
brethren the sons of Ierubbaal about 70. persons upon one stone in
propounding his parable to the men of Shechem affirmed, that when the trees
went out to consult about the electing, and annoynting of a king over them, it
was neither the olive that would leave his fatness, nor the fig tree his
sweetness, nor the vine his wine, none of these trees, being indeed worthy of
preferme^t would advance themselves to the government and kingdom, but the
contemptible bramble and scratching bryer whereunto Iotham likened the same
Abimelech, he in the pride of his heart and the arrogancy of his stomach,
would needs take upon him the state and be Lord over the rest, not contenting
himself with that place, which nature and birth had assigned him: but his
high conceit went before his fall and his ambitious spirit was rewarded with a
miserable destruction. And therefore in this case the answer of David to
Michal his wife, who despised him because of his dancing, and rejoicing and
praising of God before ye Arc, is generally commended I will be yet more vile
said he the^ thus, 2. Sam. 6.22
and will be low in mine own sight, and of the very same maid servants which
thou have spoken of shall I be had in honor. So that the first step to true
honor in deed is the practice of lowliness, and a mind free from the
infection of an ambitious appetite, by the use whereof, although a man may
peradventure sometimes by the patience of God aspire to dignities, and offices
of high place, yet the same is nothing else, but a mean and preparatiue to a
greater mischief, and overthrow. So that my meaning in this matter may be
easily conceived, which is, not to condemn a lawful authority, nor to
dissuade any man from the undertaking of such rooms of credit and estimation
as are of great necessity in the common wealth, and profitable for the peace
and prosperity of the same, but my purpose only is by occasion of my terte to
reprove the extremity, which consists in a thyrst and hunger to be aloft and
to exceeded the common state of men: when a man following the unbridled sway of
his proud conceit does disdain the society, and company of his honest
brethren, as not brooking any equality: saying with Adonijah the son of
Haggith I will be king, 1. Kings. 1.5.
and with Aaman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, all the honor, and glory
that I have, does not avail me, Hester 5.13.
as long as I see Mordecaye the Jew sitting at the kings gate. This is it that
I speak of, and against a climing humor, a brambles spirit, a disposition
inclining to pre-eminence, not with intent to do any common good to the
country, but with purpose only to feed, and satisfy the root of
arrogancy, and ambition, to command all men, and to be subject to no man.
Which I take to be reproved by him, whose life was the spectacle and president
of all humility, ye receive honor one of another, John 5.44.
and seek not the honor that comes of God. Which is a thing generally
found in these days, and therefore requires a general warning. For even
amongst us there are those, who although they are not furnished with any
excellent gift or grace of God, and have nothing in them deserving
commendation, save only a little more money, and wealth then their neighbors
have, yet they are so unreasonably led away with the force of this insolent
conceit, as that they vouchsafe not a good look toward those, who albeit they
possess not so much wealth, yet they practice more virtue, and honesty, then
themselves. And there are many petty Absalom also flourishing amongst us,
nothing but the crown and kingdom, I mean the Magistracye, and room of
Justice can content them, insomuch that there is no rest of their continual
laborings, till they come to sit down in the chair of David, in that
reverend place which requires a great measure of judgment, wisdom,
experience, knowledge, and conscience, from all which things they are as far,
as they are near unto the gall and bitterness of presumption. So that I see
the date of that ancient prophecy of the holy Apostle out, and expired, who
long ago foresawe, ^. Tim. 3.1.
that in the last days there should come perilous times, men should be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud etc. intemperate, ferce, no
lovers at all of them yt are good, heady, high minded lovers of pleasure more
then lovers of God: the full accomplishment of which prophecy whosoever sees
not, sees nothing. But as the Apostle prophesied of such men, so may we
prophecy of the end of them, not undertaking the spirits of prophets, but
collecting by the ends of other men, who in our remembrance were in such sort
affected, and therefore even in this life tasted the bitter fruit of their
own works and qualities, that the reward whereof the Apostle here speaks,
and promises remaining for the brother of low degree, which is exaltation, and
great glory, shall be no part of their recompense, because they smell not of
the sweet spirit of humility, which is the beginning, and step to that high
degree of true honor, and felicity, which is proper only to such, and
reserved only for such, as do deck themselves inwardly with lowliness of
mind and humble them selves under the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5.5.6.
to whom there is a promise of exalting made in due and convenient time. The
Apostle having thus used the name of the poor man, does now proceed to his
purpose, namely to direct him to that thing, which in the time of his poverty
he is to practice, and that is joy, for so it follows in the verse. Let the
brother of low degree rejoice. He might have said let him not be sorry, or
let him not be impatient, or let him content himself, or any such like
thing, which might well have agreed both with his intent and with the poor
man's quality, but he uses here a word of greater effect and force, Let him
rejoice, whereby he does labor to remove all sorrow and sadness from the mind
of the poor man, wishing him not to be heavy in heart, nor doleful in
conceit, but rather to pluck up his spirit, to be of good cheer, and
comfort, yea to conceive gladness in the time of his greatest smarte of
poverty, upon consideration of the high degree of glory and felicity
whereunto it is the purpose of God to exalte him, wherehence every one, that is
subject to the cross of poverty may draw out for himself a singular
consolation, and learn withal how he is best to behave himself, when his
shoulders are crushed with the same burden, and yoke, how to support, and
strengthen himself, least he fall into these dangerous mischiefs and
inconveniences, which the mayor part of that sort, being destitute of grace
and government, do daily run into: his best course is, to fix his eyes, by
the use of his hope and faith upon the crown of righteousness, which ye Lord the
righteous Judge has laid up, and will give to al those that love his appearing,
and in a joyful expectation of the same, do with quietness sustain, and
with patience go through this special affliction, knowing that it pleases God
sometimes to use the same as a mean or instrument to bring a man to the
knowledge of himself, to faith, repentance, prayer, obedience, and other
Christian duties, and at the last to the end of his faith, which is the
salvation of his soul. So that although I must needs confess that on the one
side the drinking of this bitter cup, and the feeling of the miseries of this
state may discourage a man, and drive him to the door of faintnes, and almost
despair, yet on the other side the remembrance of the promised glory of God
to come, and assuredly to be showed may as a sweet and pleasant draught
extinguish the former bitterness, and turn the strong stream of impatiencie
into a quietness of contentation, to effectuate thereby that same practice of
joy whereunto he is here, as it were by the hand of the Apostle led and
conducted in the mides of his calamity. And for the better help and
furtherance of the poor man to this good use and practice, and to cause him
both the more readily, and the more plentifully also to conceive this joy he is
with some diligence to ponder with himself the most loving course that it has
pleased God to take with him over and above the manner of dealing he uses with
and toward the rich man. For whereas he is most usually in the leaves of the
scriptures reproved, threatened, condemned, and wished to mourn and lament, the
poor man contrariwise is comforted, encouraged, commended, and willed to
rejoice, as in this place. In the fifth chapter of this Epistles, Verse. 1.2.
James singes another manner of song to the richer sort: go too now ye rich
men weep and houle for the miseries which shall come upon you, your riches are
corrupt, and your garments are motheaten, your gold and silver is cancred, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire. etc. which words I could wish were written in some place object to
the eyes of al of that sort, that seeing of themselves they will not remember,
yet by this means they might always be admonished of their great abuses
committed in the blessings of God, and of the plagues which those abuses will
bring upon them without speedy, and hearty repentance. But for our use, I note
thus much by comparing these two places together: that the common sort of rich
men are wonderfully deceived in their opinion, and do mightily err in their
conceit, who imagine that the only true joy and pleasure consists in the
possession of riches, and in the enjoy of wealth, to be able to tell much
money, to produce good store of gold, to be able to buy, and build, and by
continual purchase to join land to land, house to house, and Lordshippe to
Lordshippe, so to live, and dwell as princes of the earth, this is the mother
of joy amongst them: by occasion whereof they sing and rejoice and slay oxen,
and kill sheep, Esai. 22.13.
and eat flesh, and drink wine, and say, let us eat and drink for to morrow
we shall die: but this joy proceeding not from God nor his spirit, who is the
Author and fountain of all Christian and lawful rejoicing, is no true joy,
but rather a madness and frantikenes, when as men forgetting themselves, and not
considering the vanity of their minds, the brevity of their pleasures, and
the uncertainty of prosperity, and carnal wealth, do rejoice in their
boastings, James 4.16, Act. 7.41.
and in the works of their own hands, yea in a thing of naught and say,
have not we gotten us horns by our own strength? Amos 6.^3.
I deny not but that riches being well used, and applied to their right ends,
namely to the furtherance of Gods glory, the preferment of his word, the
profit of his Church, the relief of the poor, and such other good and holy
purposes a man in the performance of these duties, may rejoice with thanks to
God, that it pleased him to work in his heart such acceptable motions, and to
dispose him to the exercise of the fruits of his faith for the discharge of
his conscience, and the provocation of others to the like obedience, but to
think that where wealth and prosperity is abused, being converted to the
nourishing of pride, prodigality, banqueting, covetousness, oppression,
usury, reuengement, and such like wicked actions, the pleasure which men take,
and the joy which they conceive to be good or honest, or any way commendable,
is an opinion very absurd, and unworthy the brain of a Christian. And yet
there are such amongst us, who being hoodwinked with the veil of carnal
conceit, do as it were clappe their hands, and throw up their cappes at
their good fortune, triumphing in the increase of their wealth and making
bankets because of their abundance, and go no further, either to the
acknowledging of the goodness of God, from whence all good things proceed, or
to the directing of their riches to such uses as by duty, and conscience
they are bound unto. In such cases they ought rather to weep and howl as
James speaks, because all good sense and feeling is taken away from them, and
their hearts not moved by the blessings of God toward them, to be
thankful to him for the same, and to fructify in good works to the praise
of his name, and the good of his Church. Again on the other side also, the
poor man is not free from error, nor to be excused in his opinion, who by
reason of the wantes of his state, and the manifold miseries which by
compulsion he is driven to sustain, does quite banishe from his heart all
joy, and gladness, applying no comfort to his mind, no peace to his spirits,
no solace to his soul, but passing his time in miserable carfulness, and
languishing by the force of his imagination. He is in this case for his
correction, and remedy, to have recourse to the word of God, and to derive out
for himself those sweet promises, which are directly made and leueled therein
toward him, to keep him from all such mischiefs, as without the help and
stay thereof, he might dangerously fall into. Solomon that prince of peace, and
of wisdom also, in his book of Proverbs, or notable sentences, affirms
that a little with the fear of the Lord, Prou. 15.16
is better then great treasure, and trouble therewith, as commonly it happens
to the richer sort, who take not so much pain to get as they are disquieted
with carke, and care, to preserve and increase that which they have gotten, and
therefore the spirit of God by the Apostle condemns them, 1. Tim. 6.10.
as men having pierced themselves through with many sorrows, reaping an evil
conscience, as the fruit or harvest of their covetous labors. Psalm. 37.
The Prophet David also in that excellent Psalm which contains matter of
encouragement, and consolation, to such as mark and grieve at the prosperity
of the ungodly, and do after a sort stagger in faith because of the contrary,
which is affliction, and crosses, wherewith the children of God are always
compassed, he does amongst other things minister a comfort to the heart, and
conscience of the weak, like and equal with that of Solomon, verse 16.
pronouncing that a small thing unto the just man is better then great riches
to the wicked, and mighty. The reason is, because the just man, although he be
poor in condition, yet he is rich in spirit and mind, because he depends
upon the promise and providence of God, and contenteth himself with his small
portion. But the unrighteous man, though possessing much external wealth is
nothing so blessed nor happy as the poor man because he is never satisfied:
he is like unto the horseleech, who has two daughters crying, Prou. 30.15.
give, give, he is like unto the barren womb, and the grave which will never
be full, and like to a man that has the dropsy, who the more he drinks,
thinking thereby to extinguish his thyrst, the more he does increase the
drienesse thereof, so the covetous rich man, the more he has, the more he
wants, and the more he abounds, the more he thinks himself destitute,
and therefore cares not what unlawful means he uses to make his
commodity, having no feeling of conscience, and no sparkle of the fear of God
in him. And therefore it is that the holy Apostle Paul resolutely affirms in
this matter, that godliness is great gain, 1. Tim. 6.6.
if a man carry a contentation, and a moderation of mind. For therein
consists the true sufficiency of this life, and without it, there is nothing
else but the very plague of greedines, Ibid. 10.
and of insatiable avarice, which is the root of all evil. And to these
places we may add also that same protestation of the Prophet, made for the
increase of his own comfort, and of others in such sort minded as him self,
being grounded upon the trial and experience which he himself had gotten in
the course and race of his whole life, Psalm. 37.25.
professing that he had been young, and was then old, yet he never saw the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. Which is a speech full of
sweet encouragement to the faithful man, knowing thereby, that howsoever it
pleases God for his trial to afflict him with poverty, and external wantes,
so that he has not the like fullness and measure of relief as the ungodly
man has, yet he is never forsaken of the love and favor of God toward him,
but is in such sort regarded, and blessed of him, that although he lead a
poor life, and is not furnished with plenty of temporal things, yet that
carnal want is answered, and recompe^ced, with store of spiritual graces,
which are the only true treasure, and riches which cannot perish, whereof ye
Apostle no doubt speaks to ye Corinthians, when he says concerning himself,
and other his fellow workers, that they were as sorrowing, and yet always
rejoicing, as having nothing, 2. Cor. 6.10.
and yet possessing all things. And our Apostle James also urges the same to
the consciences of the rich, after this sort. Hearken my beloved brethren,
James. 2.5.
has not God chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich in
faith and heirs of the kingdom which he has promised to them that love him?
Thereby conuincing the rich men of the world, of parcialitie, and evil
judgment in their thoughts by their own confession, because they knew that
God had promised ye inheritance of his kingdom to the poor, and had adorned
them with the riches and excellency of faith, Math. 5.3.
and yet they used respect of persons, yea, they despised the poor, and
oppressed them by tyranny, and drew them before judgment seats. The like
argument also Paul uses in another place of the Corinthians, where speaking of
the state of the Church of God in Corinth, which consisted but of mean, and
simple persons, who notwithstanding confounded, and overthrew ye wisdom of
the Scribe, and the eloquence of the disputer, and the understanding of all the
Philosophers of Greece, 1. Cor. 1.26.27.
he remembers the same Church thereof in these words. Brethren you see your
calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the mighty
things, and vile things of the world, and things that are despised, has God
chosen, yea things which are in man's judgment nothing, to bring to naught
things that are. So that the poor man upon the consideration of this, that
although he swimmeth not in the outward commodities of this life, as the
wicked do, yet possesses in good measure the graces, and blessings of the
spirit, whereby that which is otherwise wanting, and defective in his state is
furnished in his mind, hereupon with good reason, and justly he may separate
all sorrow, and lamentation from his heart, and dispose him self to some
comfort, and christian rejoicing, and testify with the Prophet, Psalm 4.7.
Thou O Lord have given me more joy of heart then the sons of men have had
when their wheat, and their wine did abound: Let worldlings therefore triumph
in the ruff of their pleasures, verse 6.
and say who will show us any good? that is plant their joy and felicity in
riches, and in frequenting the vain delights of this life, let the poor man
solace himself with the light of the Lords countenance, and with the
remembrance of his favor, which he may assure himself to be greater riches,
than all the Gold of Ophyr which is in India, 1. Kin. 9.28. 2. Chron. 9.14.
or the Silver which Solomon had from the Kings of Arabia.

The second Sermon.
WE are not to pretermit in this matter an examination of the latter part of
that notable protestation of the prophet David cited the last day out of the
thirty and seven Psalm, where for the consolation of the poor, just, and
righteouse man he professes that as he had never seen himself forsaken of
the Lord, so also he had never seen his seed left so barely, or driven to
such extremities, as that they were forced to beg their bread: a thing,
which the poor man is with some diligence to consider as making for the better
ingendring of his contentation and comfort: for whereas the increase of the
poor man's misery consists many times in the view of his wife, and children,
whose mind by reason of them is so much the more oppressed with care, by how
much the less he sees any ordinary means to leave them after his death in
any good or reasonable state, it cannot be, but that when he shall find out
a remedy for this special grief he shall with great alacrity apply
himself to the conceiving of this joy, whereof he is here by the Apostle James
remembered. This salve or remedy, the prophet David will quickly give him, for
he speaks to the conscience of the poor man, where the wound or sore lies,
protesting in the word of a prophet, and man of God, that the seed of the
righteouse man was never seen by him begging bread. Which words are not so to
be taken, as though the issue of the righteouse man, should be always left
in such sufficient case in respect of outward things as that they should never
want any thing serving for supplying of corporal wants, but the sense of the
words is, that the aflictions of this life, and the use of the Lords trials is
not always permanent, nor continually remaining in the seed and posterity,
of a righteouse man, but that all the corrections of the Lord used toward
them are momentany and for a time, and endure not always: so that although
himself does dye, and be untimely taken away from his children, yet the Lord
who provided for him in the time of his life will be careful for his posterity
after his death, so that they shall enjoy his good blessings, and be preserved
for evermore. Psalm. 37.28.
Whereas on the contrary the seed of the wicked man shall be cut off. versu
eode^. Psalm. 109.10.
His children shall be vagabonds, and beg their bread, coming out of their
destroyed places: his posterity shall be consumed, and in the generation
following his name shall be put out: yea ye iniquity of such childrens fathers
shall be had in continual remembrance with the Lord, so that according to the
tenor, and course of the threat contained in the law, the jealousy, and fire
of the Lords wrath shall be kindled so hot, and shall burn so furiously, and so
continually against them that their iniquitites shabe visited upon the
children, Exodus 20.5.
upon the third, and fourth generation, of them that hate him: but on the
contrary the beams of his mercy, and the sun shine of his favor shall
stretch, and be extended unto thousands to them that love him, and keep his
commandments. The performance of which gracious promise, if there be any that
stand doubtful of, and therefore seem to distrust the former profession of
the prophet David, because they see that the offspring of many good and
righteous men do not enjoy the same promised blessing, but are oftentimes left
very simplye, and driven to many inconveniences, insomuch that without the
help and relief of others, they might not only beg but famish and perish,
and come to a lamentable end, they that pause upon this matter, and suspend
their judgment, as not crediting the truth of the promise, nor the report of
David, are first to consider, that it is a part of the performance of the same
premise, that it pleases God by his special providence to move the hearts of
good men to show compassion upon the desolate and fatherless children of a
righteouse man, to be taken up of them, and preserved by them from the common
miseries and mishappes of the world, whereas on the contrary the same prophet
has constantly affirmed, that for a full punishment of the sins of the
wicked, Psalm. 109.12.
it shall so come to pass after them that there shall be none to extend mercy
unto them, neither any to show pity upon his fatherless children. Again
they are in this matter to carry a good eye, and sound judgment, and to compare
scripture with scripture, and to consider what the Lord speaks to this
purpose by his prophet Ezekiel, where he makes this promise conditional. If a
son shall see the sins of his father, and fear, Ezekiel. 18.14.11.16.
and not do the like, etc. he shall not dye in the iniquity of his father, but
he shall surely live: but if the son be cruel, a shedder of blood, an
adulterer, an oppressor, an usurer, yt hat^ taken interest, if he does these
things, says the Lord, shall he live? he shall not live: seeing he has done all
these abominations he shall d^ the death, and his blood shall be upon him: for ye
see how this matter stands. Verse 10.11.12.13.
You must needs confess, yt seeing God does not afflict nor punish any man
injuriously or unjustly therefore the affliction, and misery which the
posterity of a righteouse man are sometimes subject unto, proceed not from any
rigor, or too much severity in God, but from the desert of their own actual,
and personal sins, God is not so cruel or preposterous in his justice as to
punish one man for the sin of another: ye shall use this proverb no more
says the Lord, the fathers have eaten sour grapes, verse 1.4.
and the childrens teeth are set on edge, but the soul that sins that soul
shall dye: and therefore the sense of the law in Exodus is this: God will
visit the iniquity of fathers upon their children: true, if they hate him, if
they proceed, and persevere in the sins of their fathers: otherwise if they
forsake their fathers sins, they shall not feel their fathers plagues. And
again. God will show mercy unto thousands: true, to the^ that love him, that
keep his commandments, that do continue and go forward in their fathers
obedience and holiness: but if they break of ye course, and practice of their
fathers virtue, they shall cut themselves of from the taste of their fathers
blessings: so yt although amongst us many times it comes to pass, yt the
children of a good man, of a zealous protestant, of a christian unspotted in
his life, are destitute of releif, and left to themselves, and run into
mischeifs, they prosper not, they play the unthrifts, they spend all, they
continue not ye name, and honest room, and report which their fathers had, we
are not to think yt there is any fault in ye promise of God or defecte in his
providence but rather we are to assure our selves, that ye apostacy of ye
children from ye steps of their good father has plucked upon them that just
plague which their sins have deserved, and so are the authors of their own
destruction. A third regard there is also to be had in this matter, and ye
consists in ye ignorance, and vnsufficie^cie of our judgments, for we many
times are deceived in our opinions, taking ye man for just and righteous which
is not so in deed: so yt by reason of ye want of perfect knowledge in this case,
we are carried away with ye main curre^t of false sentences, and with doubt and
distrust in the promise of God. Therefore we are to set a watch before our
hearts, and to keep the door of our lips taking heed how, and what we
do think and pronounce concerning the seed and posterity of men, and the
state of their fathers: for many a man have been taken for honest, zealous,
well disposed, a good Gospeller, and a man upright in his actions who
nevertheless has played the hypocrite in all these things, and carried a
visor before his face to blind the eyes, and to abuse the judgments of the
world: so that it is no marvel, that whereas we took him for a man of great
integrity and godliness, being in our opinions deceived, his issue and
generation after him tracing in the same steps of hypocrisy and iniquity
with their fathers, are visited with the sharp rod of the Lords indignation,
growing into necessity, impotencie, beggary, and such like miseries, the
fruits and reapings of their own dissolute sowing. Ye see then how the words
of the prophet David are to be taken and how the poor man is therhence to
collect, and apply to his sick conscience, his salve of comfort. Let him
content himself with his low degree: let him serve the Lord in pureness of
spirit, let him rely in all things upon his good providence and according to
his ability provide for the good education of his children, and then let him
commit himself to the Lord, and commend his children to his protection: he
gives to beasts their food, Psalm. 147.9.
and to the young Ravens their sustenance. The fowls of the heaven that sow
not, reap not, Mat. 6.26.
and carry not into any barnes are fed by your heavenly father. The Lillies
of the field do spring, and are clothed in such sort, that Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of them, how much more will he cloth, and feed
you, your wives, your children, your family, your posterity for ever, if ye
be not like Gentiles without faith, but like good Christians without
immoderate thought, not as those whose whole delight is seated and planted, in
Mammon which is riches, and made so drunken with the pleasures of sin, that
God and all godliness is quite forgotten, and out of mind, but as those that
first of al seek his kingdom and the righteousness thereof, to whom there
is this sweet and singular promise made, by him in whose mouth there was never
found guile, Verse. 33.
that all other necessaries whatsoever belonging to the preservation, of our
bodies, and natures shall be by him sufficiently provided, and ministered
abundantly for our use, and comfort. Yt will not be amiss in this matter for
the benefit of the poor man, and his better inducement to contentation and
joy, to go a little farther, and to consider how much his estate is commended
in the course of the scripture, and preferred before the state of the rich
man. For I assure you for any thing that I can read to the contrary, that the
quality of a low degree being in many places compared with the condition of a
rich man, the first by reason of some special advantages which it carries,
receives most commonly the worthier place, and better commendation then the
other. I will not stand upon this point, that it pleased the son of God
Christ himself, to make choice of a poor estate upon earth, rather then of a
rich, and of an estate so poor, as that by his own confession, the Foxes had
holes, and the birds of the heaven had nests, Mat. 8.20. 2. Cor. 8.9.
but he himself had not whereon to rest his head, so that in his person we may
see and find the condition of poverty sanctified unto us, and not in him
only but in his Apostles also, who left and forsook all that they had, and
followed him, insomuch that Peter's particular song to the creeple, Acts. 3.6.
might have been song of all of them, silver, and gold have I none, the
observation of which point might serve somewhat to the matter, but I will leave
examples, which do rather beautify then prove, and record that which is
expressed, as taught, and commanded by Christ, serving very fitly to the
purpose, in a place of Matthew, where he directing a certain young man a course
to grow to a perfection in the commandments wished him to go and make sale of
all that he had, and give it to the poor, Mat. 19.21.
and to come and follow him. By which words we may gather how the state of
poverty was commended by Christ unto him, as a better trade, and condition of
life the^ ye possession of great lands, which then he retained. I will not say
that this is a thing necessarily belonging to our time, and that the precept or
counsel there given by Christ to the young man is general, as binding us and
others now to the prescription thereof, as though, that without the sale of
our goods and the undertaking of a voluntary poverty, noe man might perform
ye measure of fear and service which God requires, for so say our
adversaries, Canisius Catechis. titul. de council. fol. 336.
but I know yt the same direction was special for ye time, and personal for ye
young man whose inward disease Christ searched, and touched by ye sharpnes
thereof, co^taining a rule or pattern of perfect love, which he was to look
into, and to frame himself accordingly, who before bragging of that
sufficiency and full obedience which was not in him, had lied egregiously to
Christ, in affirming that he had kept all the commandments of the second table
from his youth and lackt nothing, whereof he was immediately in the presence
of Christ at that time convicted, being so far from the practice of any such
perfect and absolute love, as that upon the speech of Christ. he departed
heavy and sorrowful, because he had great possessions: whereby he apparently
bewrayed, how many leagues he was of from a consummate obedience, in that he
preferred his couetouse affection, before the love that he falsely pretended to
carry toward his neighbor. But although the same direction reached for that
time to him only and perticulerly, yet I doubt not but the same may serve now
as a peculier rule, for such a one as shall be found culpable in the same fault,
and offend in the same error with him. But suppose not, yet my collection is
probable, that the two several conditions of poverty, and riches being there
set one against another in that young man, the first in regard of the
profit of the man, is preferred before the latter: for otherwise to what end
serves that same consequent judgment of Christ upon the sight of that young
man's behavior, pronounced to his disciples, and that with an asseueration.
Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and the Evangelist Mark reports the speech to have been delivered
in manner of admiration, Mark. 10.23.
how hardly do they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God? meaning
that the very possessing of riches is such a pulbacke or rather plague unto a
man, as that it keeps him from such good actions, and Christian courses,
which otherwise not being in that sort burdened, he might cheerfully
perform and prosecute with delight, for the discharge of those several
duties, whereunto he is bound by the word and law of God. And yet this is not
all that is there uttered by Christ to the purpose, but he proceeds further
and affirms the matter not only hard but impossible also that a rich man
should be saved: insomuch that the passage for a Camel through the eye of a
nedle is easier and more possible, then the entrance of a rich man into the
kingdom of God. A hard speech I confess, and yet the speech of him whose
truth and knowledge may not be called in question, being himself the very
truth, but ye may say to me, as the disciples said then unto Christ, being
exceedingly amazed at the words, who can then be saved: I answer, such as
are not in mind proportionable, nor in quality like to that poor man, from
whom the occasion of this speech grew and was taken, for I acknowledge that
riches it self considered simply, are the good creatures of God, and in their
nature they are not evil, but commodious, and profitable diverse ways: but in
that place Christ indeed speaks of such rich men, as in their wealth are
idolaters, Col. 3.5.6.
for which things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience: such as incline their hearts not to the testimonies of God but to
coueteousnesse, Psalm. 119.36.
making their gold their very God, not by profession, but by a kind of cursed
confidence planted therein. And the truth of this approves by the former place
of Mark, where it is evident that Christ speaks of such as put their trust
in their riches, Mark 10.24.
the very same words being there expressly used. So that not riches but
coueteousnesse is here condemned as the thing that produces an impossibility
for an entrance to salvation, and as it were a bar and obstruction that
keeps fast the door opening a passage to the kingdom of God.
Notwithstanding ye see, how that Christ in that place of Matthew although he
taxes only that gross sin which depends upon riches, yet he pronounces
the difficulty or impossibility against the rich man without any special
limitation: because indeed we are so perverse in heart, and in nature so
corrupt, as ye without an extraordinary grace, and government, it is impossible
that we should not presume of our wealth, and wax proud thereof, and forget
God and so run into those mischeifs, in ye whirlepoole whereof the common sort
of rich men are miserably plunged. For we see what the universal case almost
of all our rich men is, having their thoughts estrainged from God, and all
love of godliness banished from their hearts: being set out in colors in the
person of that rich man, the parable of whom is known of al his kinsmen, but
his sin is avoided of few of the^: who upon ye large increase of his fruits:
Luke. 2.16.
and the plenteouse blessing of his grounds, did not dispose himself to
return the duty of tha^kfulnes to god for ye same, but applied his heart to
the delight, and pleasure therereof, being occupied with care for the
amplifying of his barnes, and the gathering of his goods, and the procuring of
the ease of his soul, to eat and drink, and take pastime not considering in
whose hands and power that soul of his rested, who for the abuse of his
plenteousnes, and profane security plucked the same from him, when he thought
himself far from any such plague or peril. This is the exact image and mirror
of the most rich men of our time, who being deprived of all spiritual, and
Christian sense, and wholly possessed with a spirit of carnal greediness,
seek only the things of the world, coveting to be rich in themselves, Verse
21.
but not in God, using all unlawful practices, and ungodly policies, to hale,
and pull corruptible pelf into their hands, whereby they bewray themselves to
be no better then greedy dogs, as the prophet speaks, Esaias 56.11.
which think that they have never enough. And from this filthy fountain,
springs the foul streams of their irreligious lives, their proud co^ceits,
their voluptuous desires, their profane epicurisme, their brutish
forgetfulness of God, his honor, his word, and their own duties every way. Let
us look for example upon the state perticulerly of our own country and take a
view of the ordinary course of life in those who amongst us sit in ye highest
rooms, and by reason of their wealth, bear the stroke in government, and other
matters, where shall we find more Atheism, barbarousnesse, confusion,
looseness, outrage, sacrilege, and what you will else then among them? For
their own part they think that they may sin by authority being as men
not subject to the checkes or controlements of any, their lykings be laws,
and their wills reasons: and as they them selves live without law, so do their
families without order: their houses being not lodgings for Christians, but
harbors for Savages: not exercised with any one point of good discipline, or
piety: but suffered to stand as monuments of misrule, and spectacles of all
kind of lewdness: their children fed, but not taught: their servants and
retinue, as far from the fear of God, and the fruits thereof, yea from
humane civility, as they are near to the contempt of God, the irreuerence of
his word, and the dishonor of his name by their common swearings, and
blasphemies. And I would to God that this were the fault only of the
Libertines of our age, who carry no note at all, nor mark in the matter of
zeal and sincerity, but this abuse, and oversight (which may justly provoke
tears,) is crept within the doors and roofes of such as make great show of
religion, and are reputed of the number of the best Professors, and favorers,
whose houses are not in such sort purged and reformed from these common
corruptions, as in soul I wish, and themselves in conscience are bound unto.
Which thing I take to be most requisite for their consideration, and most
worthy of their christian attendance and carefulnes, yt so al stumbling blocks
of offense, and occasions of slander to our common cause may be removed,
whereby ye enemy that speaks evil of us as of evil doers, 1. Pet. 2.12.
may by our good works which he shall see, glorify God in ye day of visitation,
so that I hope you now conceive by the premises, the full sense and reason of
the former allegation or speech of Christ, pronou^cing the impossibility of
entrance into the kingdom of God against the rich man, standing in the
difficulty of applying himself, by occasion of his wealth, to the practice of
good things: and in the impediments which do accompany the possession of
riches, withholding a man from the free course of christian duties, and
obedience, which otherwise he might in good measure yield himself unto, the
experience whereof is very large, and plentiful amongst us, forasmuch as we
find not one rich man almost amongst a hundred well given, religious,
zealous, a lover of the truth, a regarder of his soul, and salvation, more
then of his lust and pleasure, but from the least of them to the greatest,
Iere. 6.13.
with one mind and consent they draw after couetousneesse, following the way
of Caine, and cast away by the deceit of Baalams wages: Jude 11.
so that we may run to and fro by our streets, as by the streets of
Jerusalem, Iere. 5.1.5.
in the days of Jeremy, and seek and enquire in our open places if there be
any one man amongst our great me^, that executes judgment, and seeks the
truth, but we shall not find him: they have altogether broken the yoke, and
burst the bonds, and have not known the judgment of the Lord, so that in
this case I cannot resemble our time better, then to the time wherein Christ
lived, wherein the mysteries of the kingdom of God, were hid from the wise and
prudent, and men of understanding, Mat. 11.25.
and were opened to the simple yea unto babes, and wherein the great men, the
princes, the Scribes, and the Pharisees, and the richer sort despised Christ,
and counted the preaching foolishnes but the poor by his own testimony, Mat.
11.5.
and trial received the Gospel, and were not offended in him. I will not here
(although good occasion is offered) enter into a rehearsal of the common
speeches of our great worldlings, and Atheistes, who swelling with pride, and
almost renting asunder with disdain and rancour, because of the liberty of
the Gospel, and the passage of the word (maugre their hearts and beards,) do
break out into that same wicked answer of the Pharisees to their officers,
concerning Christ: who being amazed at the grace of his words, and stricken
in their hearts with the efficacy of his doctrines, were so far from doing
violence unto him, as the high Priests had commanded them, as that
contrariwise they bare witness of his power, and confessed the excellency of
his sayings, affirming, that never man spoke as he did. Ioh. 7.46.47
But what said the Pharisees? are ye also deceived? do any of the rulers or
of the Pharisees believe in him? but this people that know not the law are
cursed: these are the very formal words of the loose livers of this time, who
of purpose to disgrace as much as they can the Preachers of the word, and to
diminishe the glory of the Gospel if they could, do usually make comparisons
betwixt the base condition of such as are lovers of the truth, and diligent
hearers of the word preached, and the high degree of those that make a mock
of Christ, and apply themselves to the persecuting of him in his saints and
members: look (say they) what a sort of beggarly, and poor fellows do
follow him, such as have scarce a piece of silver in their purses, or of bread
in their houses, they are his disciples, and are become great holy folks, and
will shortly prove Preachers, and proceed Doctors: but who of us do fancy
him? do not we that be Gentlemen, rich men, rulers, and magistrates speak
evil of the man: do not we report the woorst we can of him, among our
selves, and to strangers: do not we contemn his pulpit talk, make a jest of
his threatenings, and prefer accusations, articles, and bills of enditements
against him? there are none of us that do love him, and therefore both he,
and they that hear him are deceived and accursed. Thus the Pharisees of our
time deal with us, and show themselves as it weee in print, to be such manner
of men as were the Jews, whose hearts upon the hearing of Stephens words brast
for anger, Act. 7.54.
and whose teeth gnashed upon him: and such also, as were the Priests, and
captain of the Temple, and Saduces in Jerusalem, who being not able to
contain themselves, by reason of the malicious spirit wherewith they were
possessed because that Peter and John did such, and such things in their
ministry, Act. 4.1.2.
they came upon them and took it grievously, that they taught the people, and
preached in the name of Jesus the resurrection from the dead, but they are
condemned by their own mouths as evil servants, disclayming from the love,
and knowledge of that thing, and of those men, who ought to be their joy, 2.
Cor. 2.16.
and pleasure, and would be a savor of life unto life in them, if they were
ordained to salvation. We confess that in external braueries, and in the
glory of flesh, and pomp of the world they exceed and go beyond us, but
this is not a thing that may breed a just offense in any of us, forasmuch
as the cause of faith and religion, does not hang upon the sleeves, and
authority of men, neither does consist in multitude nor in the degrees of
persons, but the same is to be judged by the eternal and immutable word of
God, which is the word of truth, Coloss. 1.5.
of life, of salvation, of reconciliation of ye spirit, the only rule and
direction of the faithful: so that although the heathen do rage, and the people
murmr, the kings of the earth band themselves, and the princes do assemble
together, yet all this may be against the Lord, and against his Christ, with
purpose to cast off the yoke of his service, Psalm. 2.2.3.
and to break the band of their obedience, for multitude is no privilege for
truth, neither is gentilitie, any warrant for godliness. The true wisdom of
God, which is the Gospel was not known of any of the Princes of the world, for
had they known it, 1. Cor. 2.7.8
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. And therefore albeit in
number we be few, in estate poor, and in birth not Gentlemen, yet in the
knowledge of God we may be noble, in faith rich, James 2.5.
and in the sight of God as precious as the honorable. Yea, in this matter the
case does so stand, that for the most part those things, which to the eyes
of the world seem most excellent, and by the judgment of man are commended,
and preferred, are notwithstanding abhorred of the Lord, whose eyes behold,
not the face and legs, but does pearce into the reins: and so likewise on
the contrary, those things which in the opinion of men are vile and of no
estimation, are nevertheless in high account before God. For he sees not as
man sees, 1. Sam. 16.7.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but he beholds the heart, so
said the Lord himself to Samuel, being deceived in the fair complexion and
high stature of Eliab, the eldest son of Ishaie. It is a notable sentence of
Solomon in his Proverbs to this purpose, Better is the poor that walks in
his uprightness, Prou. 28.6.
then he that peruerteth his ways though he be rich, and again, a poor man
is better then a liar, meaning that although a man be destitute of riches, and
yet does possess, and practice virtue, he is to be esteemed above that man,
which having much wealth, yet stands void of all honesty, so that if there
were nothing else but this only good thing following the estate of the poor
man, yet it might be a fufficient motive, to provoke him to the joy, and
rejoicing which James does here set before him, because the fear of God, and
obedience to his truth does not consist in gold, and silver, in many
possessions and noble progenies, but in a regenerated spirit, and in a heart
purified by faith. Which spirit and heart, seeing he may plentifully be
adorned with, although in the external things of the world, he be not so
full as others, there is no reason that he should pass his time with tears,
and separate all comfort from his heart, the blessed Apostle affirming for his
consolation, that the kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, nor any such
outward things, Romans 14.17.
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: and forasmuch also as
by the simpleness of his condition, and the absence of riches, being the very
chains and fetters of the mind, he may more quietly apply himself to the
service of God, and run the course of righteousness, tending to the gate of
Gods kingdom more promptly then the rich man, who by reason of the load of
his wealth, is so pressed with care, and prisonned with carnal cogitations, as
that he hardely can dispose himself accordingly, therefore the man is the
sooner, and the better to content himself with his poor, but profitable
state, and not either by grief to torment himself, or by a hungry humor to
covet that thing, which may bring with it more trouble then quietness, and more
disadvantage then commodity if he make price of the sweet freedom of his
conscience. A very reverend, Muscul. in Math. cap. 21. fol. 490.
and learned Divine of this latter age, disputing of purpose concerning this
matter, sets down briefly diverse special things wherein the state of the
poor man, is more happy and fortunate then the condition of the rich, which
although at the first blushe it may seem to be somewhat strange, because
we see how every man contendeth to avoid and flee from the door of
poverty, as from a Scorpion, and is as unwilling to come near it, as a
mariner is loath to approach a rock in the sea for fear of shipwreck, yet
upon a sober and prudent balancing of the differences, it will appear how
probable, and reasonable the matter is, and that howesoeuer men do follow
their natural and greedy appetites in coveting to be rich, yet when they
have done all that they can in that respect, they must say with Solomon, Eccl.
2.11.
that it is but vanity, and vexation of the spirit, and iumpe in judgment
with this divine, to prefer the poor man's unhappiness before their own
bliss. For ye shall see. The poor man is not so much entangled with the
cares of the world, and deceitefulnesse of riches, as the other is, Mat. 13.22.
which are expressly called thorns by Christ, because in many they do
suffocate or choke the good seed of the word, and makes them altogether
unfruitful: the rich man he is in mind troubled, in body businessed, in
his thoughts distracted, he has so many farms to visit, so many yoke of
Oxen to look unto, so many bargaynes to make, so much money to pay, and to
receive, and so many things to do, as that he can spare no time to regard
the state of his soul, nor spend an hour to provide his spiritual wealth,
and welfare, by the hearing of the word of GOD, the means of his salvation
preached, and if he do by chance come to a sermon at any time, it were as
good, or rather better he were absent: for although his body be in the
Church, yet his wits run upon his business, and his senses are occupied
about other matters, the voice of the Preacher is as an imperfect sound to his
ears: he receives the beginning of a sentence, but attendes not the latter
end: he hears the latter end, but has forgotten the beginning, and so it
comes to pass, that as he came to the temple with little devotion, so he
returns home with little profit, but the poor man is at liberty in respect
of these things, his mind is not in such sort forestalled, nor his wits with
such cares troubled, but with a free mind, and conscience prepared with the
fear of God, he does apply himself to his service, desiring to increase in
knowledge and in all good things, holding nothing so precious, as the discharge
of his duty in that case, the glory of God, and the Christian care of his
own salvation.

Again, the rich man is Cousine germane to Dives the glutton, who as he was
full in his purse, so he would needs be delicious in his fare: his wealth and
his diet must be correspondent, Luke 16.19.
he must eat and drink of the best, his table must be furnished with all the
delicate meats, and drinks that may be gotten for money, making his belly his
God, and planting a felicity in the variety of meats, and drinks, and
multitude of dishes. And here hence grow the inconveniences and mischiefs of
surfeting, drunkenness, wantonness, concupiscences, and idleness the mother of
all wickedness, for the belly being full, the bones look for rest, and not
of this only, but of the diseases of the body also, as the Gout, and
dropsy, with others of the like nature, the fruits of superfluous, and
immoderate feeding. But now the poor man as he cannot by reason of his
wantes, so he does not acquaint himself with such a gluttonous kind of life:
he contents his nature with a little, and therefore has his body sound, his
mind vncorrupt, his limbs strong for labor, his legs proportionable, and by
reason of his good course, lives long, and dies in a good age, which is the
blessing of God, whereas the gorged rich man does by his intemperance
abbreuiate the continuance of his own life, and so committes a great sin in
the breach of the sixth commandment of the law. Exodus 20.13


Further, the poor man by reason of his daily labor, and ordinary travel
in his vocation, does so weaken the forces and powers of his body for the
time, as that in the evening, and hour of rest, he refreshes himself with
great pleasure, having that sweet comfort of nature which is sleep, as it were
at his commandment: whereby he is so sufficiently revived, that in the morning
he returns again to his common business, fresh, lusty, joyful, and fit for
his work, whereas the rich man is in this point like to Ahassuerosh the king
of Persia, of whom we read in the book of Hester, Hest. 6.1.
who could not sleep in the night, and therefore called for the book of the
Records, or Chronicles of the land, that by perusing of them, he might drive
out the time of the night: our rich men consider not that it pleases GOD
many times for a punishment to them to withholde his benefit of natural
sleep from their eyes, the same being a special gift of his, for the
preservation of our nature, which otherwise without the same could not possibly
endure. The first man Adam could not sleep of himself until the Lord caused
it to fall upon him, Genesis 2.21.
as showing thereby that it is in his hands either to give it or not to give
it, to send it or to withdraw it as pleases him. And therefore in the use of
his justice, he does many times deprive the rich me^ of this comfort,
suffering them to lie tossing, and tumbling upon their beds, desiring this
ordinary refreshing, but cannot have it, and I my self have heard many of
them complaining of the want thereof, that they pass many nights, with little
or no sleep at al, taking the same to come by some hap or fortune, by the
length of the night, or some stir and noyce, not considering the justice of
God afflicting them in that sort with unrest in the night, to put them in
remembrance of ye ill spending of the day, which thing being regarded of
Solomon, Eccl. 5.11.
made him to affirm, that the sleep of him that trauaileth is sweet, whether
he eat little or much, but the satietie of the rich will not suffer him to
sleep, and again, the heart of such a man takes no rest in the night. Ib.
2.23.


Moreover, the poor man, by reason of the perpetual necessities of his life,
is so well accustomed with common afflictions, as hunger, loss, displeasure,
injuries, want of money and such like things, as that it is no trouble nor
disquietnesse unto him, when he is in any such sort pinched, because his youth,
and age, and all the days of his life has been nothing else but as it were a
school of discipline, and furnace of trial to him, and therefore whatsoever
cross happens, he does endure it with patience, and undergo it with
contentation, being well pleased with his lot, but the rich man yt has bin
acquainted with no such crosses, having lived in ease, wealth, friendship,
prosperity, quietness, pleasure and delight, and therefore not knowing what
affliction means, when he by the hand of God is never so little touched,
whether it be with an injury, enemies, hunger, loss of children, lands, or
wealth he is by and by carried away beyond the limits of all reasonable
patience, he fretteth, and fumeth and takes on like a mad man, yea,
sometimes fometh out blasphemies against God, and complains of the hard
dealing of God toward him, as though God were bound by the receite of some
benefit of his, to extend always the parts of love and courtesy for show of
thankfulness: and so thinking that God should still let him live in such a
flourishing state, as sometimes he did, when he feels but a small alteration,
though it be but a gentle admonition, he takes it in no good part, he grows
outrageous, and will not be persuaded to any moderation of mind: so that it is
impossible that the singular virtue of patience should possess his soul: but
the poor man is prepared for every occasion, come what affliction or
adversity will come it is no news to him, seeing the whole course of his
life, has been a practice of bearing and suffering.

Lastly the poor man having lived in his simple estate with a good conscience
carried in all his actions, when the time comes that he must pay his due to
nature, and go the way of all flesh, death which is common to al, is welcome
to him: he has no great will or testament to make, no goods gote^ by usury,
and opression to restore, no mass of money to leave behind him, no store of
treasure to breed in him a hatred of death, but knowing that the same is his
port of rest, and conclusion of all sorrows, he receives it quietly joyfully,
and Christianly. But oh what a terror to the mind of the rich man is the
consideration of death, how many grievous sins has he marching before him,
which makes him to abhor the end of his life: the respect of his former
felicity in this world, his wife, his wealth, his place, his cofers, his
lands, his houses, his servants, every of these perticulers ministers a
thousand occasions of desiring life to his heart, and as he lies loath to dye,
so he knows not how to prepare himself for the same, but many times it
comes so to pass, yt the man yt has passed all his life in sin, and
security, and vanity without a discharge of a good conscience toward God and
the world, is by the justice of God so far from repentance, and a Christian
end, as that what with carnal cares, and hope of longer continuance, and
other things of the like quality, whereof Satan at that time will power in
plenty, and sufficient number into his head and brains, he shall have no
remembrance of making an atonement betwixt God, and his soul, but shall die
desperately without hope of mercy, and impenitently without remorse for his
sin: this point of difference in the departure of the rich and poor man is
notably touched by the son of Sirachi, Ecclus. 41.1.2.
who in one verse cries out, O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to
a man that lives at rest in his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to
vex him, and that has prosperity in all things. But in ye next verse he
proclaymeth, O death how acceptable is thy judgment to the needy unto him whose
strength fails, and is vexed with all things, etc. Whereby is proved, that
good resolution concerning death that the poor man carries, being glad when
the end of his miseries approaches: but contrariwise ye horror, and fear of
death, which possesses the mind of the rich man, who can in no case abide to
hear speech of the same, being the thing that amongst all things else he
least brooketh, and most abhors. Now all these things being considered I
refer the judgment to your selves, which of these two is the happier man: the
rich with so many inconveniences attending his person, or the poor with so
many advantages accompanying his estate, and when ye have past your verdit,
then apply it to the present words of James for the strengthening of his
direction of joy to the poor man: for I doubt not but that the dililigent
observation of these differences, as it cannot but breed in the rich man a
kind of disliking of himself, and his condition, so it cannot but engender in
ye poor man an allowance, and approbatio^ of his poverty, and so cause him ye
more willingly to practice joy and contentation in the manifold distresses of
this life. But now by ye way if for your satisfaction you ask me this
necessary question, what manner of poor men I speak of all this while, because
yt matter is so^e what doubtful, in yt there are diverse persons, going under ye
name and title of ye poor, who by reason of their lewd, and wicked course of
life deserve no jot of these good speeches, but rather ye whip and correction,
and al manner of disgrace, being such as are unworthy in any good place to be
remembered or spoken of: I will shortly resolve you, ye that by the poor man I
do not understand the idle beggar, and rogish companion, who not applying
himself to any ordinary labor, makes a profession of beggary, and lives
altogether upon the spoil: such both by the law of God, and the commendable
laws of this realm provided in that behalf, are to be punished according to
the measure of their idleness, and quality of vagabond living: neither do I
mean by the poor man such manner of persons, as are common haunters of
alehouses, unthrifts, spendals, and drunkards, having scarce either penny in
their purses or coat to their shoulders, and yet all the week long lie at
such tippling places, having no regard for a civil behavior, nor desire to
purchase an honest and good report amongst men. Which special thing I could
wish by some severe order might be reformed in this place, wherein there are
many offenders in this case, the negligent consideration whereof is occasion of
many riots and breaches of the law in many points (and of much sin also) but
by the poor man I mean such a one as in scripture by the spirit of God is
commended unto us, and committed to our regard, the man upon whom it has
pleased God not to bestow so great a portion of riches as upon others for some
secret purpose of his wisdom, being no tall Cedar, no man of great office or
authority in the common wealth, but an artificer or handicraftes man,
laboring diligently in his manuarie trade or science, to relieve himself, and
maintain his family thereby, demeaning himself honestly as a christian, and
quietly like a subject in the fear of God, and according to the quality of
his vocation, such a one in scripture I take to be meant by ye name of a poor
man. As for our roges, and vagabonds I exclude them out of the role, and number
of poor men, commended by the spirit of God, and spoken of by us, who because
they do not labor, they should not eat, and I could wish for them also, that
by the good execution of our laws, the country might be rid of the burden and
charge of them, who by the duty, and diligence of the officers ought to be
taken and sent to our bridewelles, and mill-houses erected for the purpose,
that so by justice they might be driven to that pains and amendment of life
which of themselves they purpose not to practice. Within this compass of poor
men we may include those also, upon whose shoulders it has pleased God to lay
the cross of poverty for their trial or punishment: having been sometimes
in very sufficient state, and able both to live of themselves, and to relieve
others in necessity, but now by some casualitie, are decayed, and come behind
hand, and fallen into poverty, as either by fire, robbing, shipwreck,
sureteship or such like occasions, and therefore are compelled to rely upon a
general charity, with whom we may in like sort join the poor of our alms
houses, the old, lame, blind, maimed soldier, and other such impotent
persons, to whom there are promises made of far better states, if for the
time they can resolve themselves to hear of their miseries with a shoulder of
patience, and to trust to the good providence of God expecting a time of help
and deliverance from him. And as these men are in diverse places of scripture
persuaded to quietness and contentation, so here by the Apostle James they are
provoked to rejoicing, to cast off all mourning and complaining, and all parts
of impatiencie, to consider the commodities of their low degree, to look up
to the height and excellency of Gods kingdom prepared for them, to
acknowledge the mercies of God, to give him thanks without grudging for his
visitations, and so to live, as that by their poverty, God may accordingly be
glorified, and their afflicted bodies, and souls in the end saved: of which
matter ye shall hear more (if God permit) the next time.

The third Sermon.
Rejoice in that he is exalted. It is nothing strange that James should here
give counsel to the poor man to rejoice in his poverty, or rather in his
exaltation, although the Lord by the prophet Jeremy, does restrain, Ier.
9.23.24.
and limite al rejoicing, and glorying to the knowledge, and understanding of
his will: saying, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong
man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches ches, but let him that
glories, glory in that he understands and knows me: and our Savior would
not give liberty to the Seventy, Luke 10.20.
to rejoice because the devils were subdued to them in his name, but rather
because their own names were written in heaven: and the blessed Apostle also
would not dispose of himself to rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, as himself professes to the Galatians: Galat. 6.14.
which places overthrow not the words of James here, because ye scripture is
not as a house or kingdom divided in it self, but as God is always one, and
he never contrary to himself, for his word also is one, and that never iarres
with it self. A general rule for all our joy is given by Paul to the Corinth.
1. Cor. 1.31.
saying, he that rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord: which rule if it does
square out, and measure the use of our mirth, and gladness, then whatsoever
special thing it be that we do rejoice in, or of, it can but be lawful in it
self, and acceptable to God: for the joy of the faithful is not in such
force tied up as it were by the wings, in respects of the receite of the
graces of God, but that there is this scope given them, that look how many
good blessings they are made partakers of from God, of so many they may freely,
and without sum be glad, and joyful, provided always that the rule be kept,
to make God the foundation of their joy, and in the use thereof to have regard
of thankfulness of the benefit, and the praise of his name. If we search the
scriptures and peruse ye histories of the Church, we shall read of many things
from whence the godly in all ages have taken occasion to rejoice: as of the
deliverance of the faithful, out of the hands of persecutors, victory against
the enemies, return from captivity, the free course of the Gospel, the
obedience and constancy of the brethren, the government of a good prince, yt
peace of conscience upon feeling of ye mercy of God, and many other things,
which particulers if they happen to us, as they have of old to ye Church of
God, we may in like sort, and without al offense rejoice in the^ as they have
done. So yt hereby all the carnal reioycings of ye wicked are condemned, who
many times boast of their sin, and triumph in doing evil, making not God, but
Satan whom they serve the foundation of their joy: for when the children of
God are in some distress, and any way afflicted, then as Tyrus rejoiced at the
overthrow of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 26.2.
saying, a has gate of the city is broken, it is turned unto me, for seeing
she is desolate I shall be replenished, so do the wicked Tyrians of al times clap
their hands and are well apaid when they see the miseries of the righteous
thinking the sight of their calamity, to be a sufficient cause and reason for
their execrable melody. The proof whereof is great, and large even amongst us,
seeing it can not be denied, but that there are such scoffing mates, and riming
merchants, as were in the days of David, who made songs of his trouble, and
triumphed in his adversity, Psalm. 32.15.16.
and said, a ha, a ha, our eyes have seen the man overthrown, so these
persons, when they see never so little trouble raised up against us, that we
are molested, cited, suspended, excommunicated, indighted, inhibited, and in
such like sort diverse ways handled, they cry out there, there, so we would
have it, they make feasts one to another in token of joy, and look big upon
us, as if they would devour us, yea they deal as the Pharisees sometimes
dealt against Christ, Mark. 14.11.
who when they heard that Judas Iscariot would betray him into their hands
they were glad of it, and promised him money to do it, so these men rejoice
when they can have any occasion of advantage by the ca^non law, the
injunctions, or otherwise against us, and both by perswasio^s, and promises,
do encourage others to work our mischief: but they rejoice in their
boastings, and al such rejoicing is evil. James 4.16.
And therefore we know to our comfort, yt look as the Lord brought a most
horrible judgment upon Tyrus for triumphing at ye fall of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. cap.
26. and 27
so these men shall not escape the force of the Lords wrath, who being ielous
of his honor, cannot abide to see his servants abused, and his prophets, the
apple of his eye made jesting stocks: and as we do admonish the^, so we advise
all others, to be careful in this case of their mirthes and triumphs not to
rejoice in the wickedness of their hands, and in the sins of others, as it is
seen now a days, that there are those, which take a felicity, and pleasure
to make a man by abundance of drink loose the use of his senses, laughing at
his drunkenes, and rejoicing at that, which the souls of gods children do
moorne for, and they themselves if there were any fear of God in them should
condemn in themselus: but such is the desperatenes of this age by reason of
our corruptions, and want of good discipline, that the glory of God lies in
the dust, the way of God is evil spoken of, and sin and iniquity has gottte^
he upper hand, and trampleth upon godliness: but leaving the sorrow and
lamentation for the same, and prayer either for the redress of all things
amiss, or for the end and finishing of all things, to your Christian souls
and consciences, I will proceed with the Apostle is the text, who now
concludes with the poor man, and gives him a sight of his crown and glory,
and cause of joy, consisting in a future preferment, or promotion in the
words, in that he is exalted. It is a common use not only of the spirit of
God in scripture, but of us amongst our selves also in the time of a man's
trouble to minister comfort unto him by an argument drawn from the hope of
deliverance, and remedy in the end. If ye read the thirty and one chapter
of the prophecy of Jeremy, the whole prophesies of Micha, Nahum, Abacuck, and
so to Malachy, the last of the prophets, ye shall have sufficient proof, and
instance of this matter. And in the new testament, ye shall light almost upon
no leaf, or page, but ye shall find comforts of this quality. Mat. 5.12.
Luke 12.32. Luke 23.43 Luke 21.28. John 14.18. Acts. 27.34. 1 John. 2.25.
Great is your reward in heaven. It is your fathers pleasure to give the
kingdom. To day shall thou be with me in paradise. Lift up your heads for
your redemption draws near. I will not leave you fatherless, but will come
unto you. There shall not an hear fall from the head of any of you: this is the
promise that he has promised unto us, even that eternal life with infinite
other places of ye like importance: which course is also followed and taken of
us in our consolations to our afflicted friends, because we know that there
can not be applied to their consciences, a more special matter of comfort,
then hope and assurance of help, and relief at the ^ast. The very same manner
of encourage, meant, and cheering, James does here lay and spread before the
eyes of the poor man wishing him to be contented with his state, to practice
patience, yea joy because the time shall come wherein, although he be now in
grievous misery, and lie in the dust, yet he shall be lifted up to a supreeme
degree and height of glory, and shall be made partaker of all the honors, and
excellencies of the sons of God: so that if there be any brother or sister
among us, punished, and afflicted with any kind of cross, and calamity,
whether it be poverty, weakness, sickness, contempt, diffamation, or
persecution, or whatsoever else the regard of the present matter, we have now
in hand, may in great measure strengthen their feeble arms and solace their
heavy spirits assuring them that the said afflictions, shall not always
continue, and endure upon them, but shall have not only an end but also a
recompense of such glory at the last, as all the miseries of this present
time, are in no respect worthy of. Romans 6.11.
And least any man should mistrust the truth of his promise, and stagger with
doubt of the assurance, it is with diligence to be marked, how of purpose to
take away all occasion of such incredulity, the Apostle does here use not the
future but the present tense, he does not say in that he shall be exalted but in
that he is exalted, as though he were in present fruition already of the
joys of that kingdom: the like or rather more effectual manner of speaking is
used by Paul to the Romans, where to approve the certainty of the glory of
the faithful, he speaks after the manner of the Hebrews, Romans 6.13.
using the time past although the benefit be to come, in respect of the time
with us, for he does not say there, that God will predestinate, call, justify,
and glorify the faithful but that he has done these things already, and
that the gloryfication of the saints of God, is as it were past and gone, a
most elegant course of words, ratifying, and sealing unto the elect their true
and undoubted blessedness, and there is no question, but that ye children of God
now living and as yet carrying about them this earthly tabernacle, do
notwithstanding in their consciences feel as it were ye taste and beginning of
those exceeding joys, whereof herafter they shall have by ye mercy of God real,
and actual possession. This place does further show, what is ye proper course
of aspiring to ye excellency, and prehemine^ce of the felicity of Gods
kingdom, and what yt mea^s or ladder is to asce^d or climb up by to the gate
of perfect glory: not a dayntie, and delicate life, not a proud, and lordly
behavior, not a quiet state free from all afflictions, and perturbations, but
humility, lowlines, persecution, killing, the loosing of the life in this
world, these are the means to step up to the seat, and scepter of true and
triumphant happiness. The man that is desirous to come to a vain of gold, he
must dig for it, and descend into the bowels of ye earth, without which
descent he shall never fulfill his wish. Paul proposes before the Romans, and
by them before us, the person of Christ for an example in this matter, Romans
8.17.
who being the son of God by nature, first suffered, and then was glorified:
so that we being the sons of God by grace, and adoption, and heirs anexed
with Christ, if we purpose to be made partakers of his glory we must first be
pertakers of his cross, and take that course for our preferme^t which he did.
The regard of which matter may be a singular comfort to al ye faithful who by
reason of the afflictions of this life are after a forte battered and thrown
down in conscience, with some natural distrust of the glory to come: whose
weak faith is to have this support, yt their trouble and adversities, are the
very high ways leading to Gods kingdom, and their misery as it were the
door, by which they are to enter and pass in, so that the feeling of the
extremities of this life, is no cause why they should fear or be
discouraged, but rather is as an indenture, and firm obligation, confirming
the assurance of their future comforts, whereof God in his word has made them
large promises, and therefore as they are hereby to pluck up their spirits,
and to comfort their hearts, so on the contrary part those men that receive
their consolations in this life, and cannot abide the smart of the least
affliction, but shunning it themselves, do labor to increase the same in
others, and add to the bonds of the Saints, and play the tyrants over the
poor, flaying them and selling the^ even for shoes, and oppressing them with
all burdens, they may learn herehence what little cause they have to rejoice
in their lusts, or to take pleasure in these actions, forasmuch as the time
shall come, wherein although the poor be made here their footstooles, and
bondslaues, they like Popes riding on their shoulders, yet a suddayne change,
and great alteration, shall happen, when the poor man shall be exalted, and
lifted up to the skies, and they shall be taken by the justice of God, and hurled
into the depth of hell. And that this is true, hearken what the wise man says
concerning the matter, who speaking of the different ends of the wicked, and
righteous man, does pronounce that at the judgment of al flesh, Wisd. 5.1.2.
etc.
the righteous man shall stand in great boldness before the face of such as
have tormented him, and taken away his labors, but the wicked when they see
him shall be vexed with a horrible fear, and shall be amazed for his wonderful
deliverance: and then they shall change their minds, and sigh for grief, and
say within themselves. This is he who^ we sometimes had in derision, and in a
parable of reproach: we fools thought his life madness, and his end without
honor, but how is he now counted among the children of God, and his portion is
among the Saints, and thereupon they shall break forth into a condemnation
against themselves, and say, we have erred from the way of truth, and the
light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the sun of understanding
rose not upon us: we have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, and
destruction, and we have gone through dangerous ways, but we have not known
the way of the Lord, and further, they shall then though too late grow out of
conceit with their former vanities of the world, and pleasures of sin, which
they inioyed for a season, and shall cry out, what has pride profited us, or
what gain has the pomp of riches brought unto us, for all these things are
passed away as a shadow and as a post that passes by, etc. Surely if these
things do not move, and cannot work the hearts of our worldlings to
another conceit of themselves, and better course of life then now they hold,
I must needs pronounce they are made not of flesh, but of flint and adamant,
which beats back the blow of the hammer, and will receive no impression, but
I hope ye best of the^: and I do also pray to God for them, that a new
creation of heart may be wrought in the^, that they may be touched with a
feeling of their own sin, and sense of the necessities of ye Saints of God,
and may so run the race of this life, that the crown of righteousness stored
up for the faithful, and the high degree of exaltatio^ to ye glory of the
sons of God, spoken of here by James, may be communicated by the mercy of
God with them and us.

For ye helping forward of which matter in their behalf, I will now trace
forward in the steps of the Apostle, and go on with him to the second part,
or member of his comparison hear made, and instituted: comprehending a special
direction for the rich man, teaching and schooling him, as well as the poor
man, how he is to behave himself in his good estate, and time of prosperity,
to wit, not to build upon his wealth, as upon a rock or foundation, thinking
that there is no quality of weakness, or possibilie of decay therein, but
rather to consider the natural incerteinty, and slipperines thereof, and upon
that consideration, to cast off all his vain trust, and foolish confidence
reposed in the same, and while he has his riches in possession so to use it,
and dispose of it, as God in his word has prescribed. For such I take to be
the meaning of the Apostle in the words, Let the rich man rejoice in that
he is made low. That is, let him keep himself within the compass of his
duty, and think that as many times after peace comes war, and after fair
weather a storm, so a great mutation may happen to and upon his felicity,
whereby it may come to pass, that although he be now rich, yet he may be
made poor: although he be now mounted aloft,, and risen up to the top of
worldly glory, yet he may be plucked down again to the earth, and thrown
into the dust of misery, as many have bin before him. And therefore he is to
carry in his heart, this point of knowledge, and consideration, and therewith
to be armed in such sort, as that when this alteration shall come, he may be
prepared for it, and go out as it were to meet it: saying with Job to his
wife, shall we receive good things at the hand of God, Job 2.10.
and not evil also? or otherwise these words may be taken, and that with good
probability and sense: to wit, that the rich man although by reason of his
sufficiency and good measure of wealth, he be promoted, and advanced to some
high estate, and excellent calling, yet in his opinion he is to bear a low
sail, and to carry an humble mind still within him, to be far from any
arrogant, and proud conceit of himself, and although he be high in degree, yet
to be low in behavior, in gesture meek, and in speech courteous, which
things are able to win the general love of men, yea of enemies, and in such
sort to apply himself to the practice of humility in his greatest honor, as
that it may be seen that a gentlens of spirit, and lowlines of mind is more
regarded of him then the quantity of his wealth, or the quality of his
calling: both these constructions being so reasonable, and so agreeable with ye
purpose of the Apostle, and the duty of the rich man, we will shortly by the
grace of God dispatch for your comfort, and edifying. I hope you are not so
ignorant as not to know, nor so froward as not to acknowledge the natural
mutabilitie, and uncertainty that is in this life, and in the possession of
riches, to day a king, to morrow without a kingdom, to day a Queen, Reu.
18.7.8.
no widdowe, seeing no mourning, to morrow, a fall, death, sorrow, famine, and
burning with fire. Solomon in his Book called the Preacher, being written in
his latter days after long experience does dwell after a sort upon this
argument, proouing largely and strongly, that there is nothing of stay, and
continuance under the sun, for the very generations do pass and go away,
and all things have their end. Who would have thought reading the beginning of
the story of Job, where it is said that his substance was seven thousand
sheep, Job. 1.3.
and three thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she
Asses, his family very great, no man in all the East part of the world like
unto him, not one amongst all the Arabians, Chaldeans, Idumeans, and the rest
of the nations comparable unto him for wealth, I say who would have thought
that notwithstanding all this, he should by and by read concerning him, that
in one day he had his servants slain, his cattle stolen, his sheep
burnt, his children murdered, all that he had, spoiled, destroyed, taken away,
and nothing left him, yea his very body also made a spectakle of horror, and an
image of misery, being smitten with sore byles from the sole of his foot to
the crown of his head, and no part remaining whole about him? It is not almost
credible in humane opinion, that so sudden a change, so miraculous an
ouerturne from so good a state to so vile a case, from so much wealth to so
much woe, could possibly have happened: but the story is true, and the
accident is nothing impossible, and Job himself confessed, that as he was
borne naked, so he should die naked, and that as the Lord had given him that
wealth, so he had also taken it away from him at his pleasure. But what was
Job, an Indfidell, and a reprobate? No surely, Job. 1.1.
an upright and a just man, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil, so
says the spirit of God expressly of him, and yet this change from riches to
poverty, and from good to badde fell upon him, how much more then are the
ungodly sinners, and unrighteous men of the world subject to the same.
Judgment says Peter begins at the house of God, if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them which obey not the Gospel of God? and if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly, and the sinner appear?
1. Pet. 4.17.18.
Did Job, feel the suddenness and the weight of an alteration, and shall
those in whose heart there is no fear toward God, in whose hands there is
no innocence, and in whose mind there is no desire of any good thing, shall
they escape the plague of the same? no no, the Prophet David affirms plainly
concerning them, that they shall be consumed as the fat of Lambs, their
prosperity shall pass away, Psalm. 37.20.
as a cloud, their Bay trees shall not always be green, they stand in
slippery places, the Lord will cast them down into desolation, they shall be
suddenly destroyed, Psalm. 73.18.
perished, and horribly consumed: how many instances and examples can I give
you of this matter? but to leave all, and to remember one, who can sufficiently
express, or thoroughly describe all the glory, magnificence, pomp, pleasure,
prosperity and wealth of Nebuchadnezar the king of Babel, who had power over
all kingdoms, Iere. 2 6.7.
and all nations served him, and did put their necks under his yoke and by
reason of his conquest over Jerusalem, and over Iehoiakim the king of Judah, 2.
King 2.24.
and over the house of the Lord, his gold and silver, and treasure was
mightily increased, and yet for all this, as high as his estate was, and as
infinite as his wealth was, you know what justice happened unto him: he was cut
down by the watchman, his kingdom was taken from him, and he from it, and
he became both poor amongst men, Dan. 4.30.
and miserable among beasts. This the Lord our God to whom no man is like is
able to do, he makes poor, and makes rich, as Hanna the mother of Samuel
sometime did sing, 1. Sam. 2.7.
he exalts, and brings low, it is as easy a matter with him to make a
man a caytiffe, as a king, and a peysant as a Prince, for health, and
sickness, life and death, prosperity and beggary they are in his hands, to
give the one for a blessing, and to inflict the other for a punishment, when,
where, and how it pleases him. How many men are there even among us, within ye
compass of our own knowledge, who sometimes flourished in ye world, and braued
it out in ye best sort, and who but they? wanting nothing that might serve for
the fulfilling of their desires and the glory of their pleasures, swimming in
silks, abounding with wealth, houses, grounds, sheep, oxen, and many other
things, yet now they are stripped into their dublets, and turned as it were to
their bag and staff, not so full before as now they are miserable and empty:
this is the uncertainty of humane happiness. who therefore but a foolish or
rather mad man, will trust this world, and put any confidence in his wealth,
and proceed to ware proud thereof, as though it should for ever continue with
him, nay, suppose it do stand with a man a long time, yet although his riches
leave not him, yet he in ye end shall leave his riches, and be he as rich as
Croesus, or as Dives was, yet at the last he shall iump with Lazarus, and be as
poor as he. And therefore it is not in vain that Paul in his instructions to
Timothy, does of purpose touch this particular point of the vncerteinety of
carnal wealth. 1. Tim. 6.17.
Charge them yt are rich in this world (says he) that they be not high
minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches but in the living God. etc.
Observe the attribute: he does not say, that they trust not in wicked riches,
deceitful riches, or such like words, but in uncertain riches, which epithete,
he does their use as a special argument to dissuade men from the reposing of
any trust in the same: for it is a great foolishnes to trust to an uncertain
thing: who will leave to a broken staff in leaping over a ditch? what mariner
will hazard his ship with a rotten cable? what man will build a tower upon a weak
foundation? and what distressed person will in extremity rely upon a siccle
freinde? now if it be a consequence of want of wit in a man to do any of these
things, is it not ye like also in him yt shall pla^t his affiance in riches,
being a thing in confession, as brittle as a broken staff, as weak as a rotten
cable, as tottering as a sandy foundation, as unconstant as a wavering friend,
as mutable as the wind, and as meltable as the snow? let the rich man
therefore upon remembrance of this point if he be careful of his own good,
cast of his immoderate desire of wealth, and unchristian opinion of the
strength thereof, and content himself with lawful means in the use of his trade,
and if God does bless his labors as he has promised to the righteous man, let
him convert his sufficiency to the enlargement of the kingdom of God, his
glory, the furtherance of his word, the comfort of the Saints, and the
profit of the Church of God every way, not yielding to the affections of a
foolish heart which will carry a man to ostentation, pride, and prodigality,
and other vanities, but in all his actions seeking the honor of him, from
whom he received his blessings: let him carefully consider the uncertainty
for continuance in that he possesses, and thereupon while he has his riches,
before the evil days do come, dispose of it according to knowledge and
conscience, least when the years of dearth, and necessity do approach, then
he say as a common Gamester, and Diceplayer usually does, who having lost his
money at one unthrifty, will then swear, and take on, and profess, I would I
had rather given it to the poor, saying so when his money being gone is become
another man's, but when he had it as his own, he had no such good mind to do
it. I my self have heard many, who sometime were in good case, and state, but
now are in the contrary, wishing that when their ability was good, they had
done this, and that, to the poor, to the Church of God, to the Preacher, and
to other good uses, but when they were in their prosperity they had no such
good motion, nor gracious feeling in them. There is no doubt, but that Dives
when he once felt the torment, and knew the cause thereof, he repented ten
thousand times, that he had not relieved Lazarus in his life: but then his
repentance was too late, and had I wist, is always the natural and
essential property of a fool. For a wise man will provide a remedy for a
mischief while time serves, but a fool when it is too late. Remember
therefore the Parable of the talentes, and therein the judgment of that evil
and slothful servant, Mat. 25.26.
who not employing his one talent to the advantage of his master, had the same
taken from him, and given to his diligent fellow, and himself in the end, as
an unprofitable hireling, thrown into utter darkness. And surely in this
respect, that place of Solomon in his preacher is most excellent, who speaking
of ye miserable mind of the covetous man, not having the grace to use his
riches as he should do, Eccle. 6.1.2.
he does affirm that he had scene an evil under the sun, which was much
amongst the sons of man, namely, a man to whom God has given riches, and
treasures, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of all that it
desires, but God gives him not power to eat thereof. Which indeed is a
plague of plagues, that a man should have in his fingers and custody, that, by
the good use whereof he might do singular good in Gods Church, to his glory,
and the salvation of many souls, and yet does abuse his blessings to the
maintenance of his pride, bellicheere, wantonness, luxuriousnes, covetousness,
usury, and other sins, without any regard of that duty whereunto the
word of God does bind, and direct him. If this thing be well marked, and
advisedly considered of our rich men, Luke 16.8.9
I doubt not but that by the help of God, the same good and prudent effect
which wrought in the unrighteous steward, upon the reckoning which his master
called for at his hands, will follow in them, namely a wise, and provident
dealing while they are in office, and a purchasing of friends by the riches of
iniquity, that when themselves do want, they may be received into everlasting
habitations: but now, if we take these words in ye other sense, namely yt the
rich man is not to be proud of his wealth, not to boast thereof, nor to be
blowe^ up in any arroga^t conceit of himself thereupon, but rather to ioyn
humility with ye same, to be lowly in his own eyes, and to be so much the more
lowly, by now much ye greater his substance is, as ye constructio^ may be and
is good, so is ye doctrine profitable, for it teaches ye rich man, with what
virtue amongst the rest, his state must be accompanied and adorned, and with
what te^perature, he is to mix ye sweetness of his abundance, and ye emine^cy
of his degree, to be full, and yet to be as if he were empty, rich, and yet as
if he were poor, high in countenance, and yet as if he were low in calling, to
be of the same mind whereof the holy Apostle was, as he reports of himself,
saying, Philip. 4.12.13.
I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. I can be
abased, and I ca^ abound every where in all things, I am instructed, both to be
full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have want, I am able to do al
things through the help of Christ which strengthens me, as if he had said
in other words, when I am on the one side pinched with poverty, laden with
conte^pts oppressed with miseries, or howsoever afflicted and persecuted, I am
content I despair not, I submit my self, and refer my case to the will, and
pleasure of God, and I do with patience in mind, and constancy in behavior
endure, and undergo the burden of my crosses. And on the other side also, when
I am out of the peril of all mishappes, when my foot has escaped the fowlers
net, and my soul the Persecutors sword, so that my life and liberty is in no
hazard, or distress, and I feel the want of no good thing, then I am not high
minded, I wax not proud, I exalt not my self arrogantly, and presumptuously,
but with a sober mind, in the fear of God I take and use the benefit of his
good blessings, the euide^ces of his love returning unto him ye duties of
praise, and thanks for all things. This is a singular disposition of spirit,
and a mirror of mortificatio^ and wisdom, or rather ye chief skill and art of
the children of God to carry themselves so uprightly, directly, and equally in all occurre^ts, as neither by ye storms of afflictions to be broken and
overthrown, nor yet by the sweet draught of prosperous euentes to be made
drunk, neither to be dismayed with the sharpnes of the Lords discipline, and
trials, nor yet to surfeit with the pleasure of his favors, but so to live and
stand in both cases, as if they were one: and howsoever the world goes, or
their condition alters, to be the same manner of me^, of the same mind,
behavior, government, and quality still. Which good and constant example in
Paul, if it were of us imitated and expressed, I should think that the
ouerflowing rich man would not so much forget himself in the time of his
felicity as he does, living in pomp, and security without all fear of God,
and holy exercises: and that the needy poor man also, would not so often
acquaint himself, with unlawful actions, practiced for his violent releife,
whereby many times the peace of the country is hazarded, and broken, but
rather content himself with his mean fortune, and live within compass of
law and honesty, relying upon the good providence of God, which being
continually working for sparrowes, will not fail him if he faithfully trust
in his mercy. But ye se what the drift of my speech is by occasion of the
present words, that the rich man if he will rejoice, and be proud of any thing
it must be of humility, and not of any vain confidence in himself, or his
wealth, to avoid the vaineglorious humor of ye Pharasie, whose wealth bred
pride in his heart, and the pride of his heart ministered contempt to his
lips, Luke 18.11.
in despising, and disdeyning his neighbor the Publican. Which thing is many
times a fruit, and consequence of abundance without special moderation, and
government. For the Apostle affirms that the bounteousnesse of God leading a
man to repentance is not so taken of him but rather converted to an abuse of
the Lords patience, and sufferance, to the hardening of heart, and heaping
up of a treasure of wrath for himself against the day of wrath: Rom 2.4.5.
and in the prophecy of Jeremy the Lord himself makes complaint that
whereas by the great measure of his blessings powered with both his hands upon
his people, he had provoked them to obedience, they contrariwise followed the
sway of their lusts, Ierem. 5.7.8
and being fed full assembled themselves by companies in the harlots houses:
they rose up in the morning like fed horses, for every man neyghed after his
neighbors wife. The experience of this woeful matter we see in these days
plainly as in a diamond, wherein the good blessings of God which should stir
us up to Christian thankefulnes, are shamefully profaned, and turned quite
as it were against the hear, to an engendring, and fostering of sin, and
abomination. As we are equal with Sodom and Jerusalem in fulness of bread, so
in iniquities, Ezekiel. 16.49.
pride, abundance of idleness, and neglect to strengthen the hand of the poor
and needy. Nay Sodom, and Jerusalem, and add to the^ a third, Samaria, these
never committed half of our sins, but we have exceeded the number of their
transgressions, and have justified all their works. And did the Lord in his
displeasure make the^ carry their own shame, and confounded them, Ib. ver. 54.
and will he pass by us, and our houses, and not suffer the destroyer to come
in? has he plauged his own city wherein his name was called upon, and shall
we go free? Romans 11.21.
has he not spared the natural branch, and shall we that are graftes escape
the axe, and judgment? is it not good reason, and equity, that if we commit
their sins, we should also feel their scourges? for God is not parciall in his
justice, neither can any favor or regard pervert ye course of his
righteousness, but as sure as he lives we shall know the price of our sins,
and feel the full smart of his wrath as they have done, except we proclayme our
fast, and put on our sackcloth, and sit in ashes, crying mightelie to the Lord
for mercy, Jonah. 3.5.8 10.
and every man turn from his evil ways, and from the wickedness of his hands,
then the Lord will repent him of ye evil yt he has purposed against us, and not
do it, and ye which he has said he would do, he will not do it, otherwise ye
abuse of his blessings being continued, and ye multitude of our other sins
incresed, shall procure ye sudde^ desolatio^, which shall never be recovered, and
ye horrible destruction, which shall cause our names to be abhorred of the
generations to come. Well it remains now only to stand upon the ye third and
last part of our division, containing by amplification a reason of the former
speech of the Apostle, wherefore the rich man is not to trust to his wealth, nor
to depend upon the strength of his riches, the reason is, because the same as
Salomo^ speaks, Pro. 23.5.
is as an Eagle which sudde^ly takes her wings, and flies into ye heaven, It
is a flying thing, a thing subject to corruption and chang: no surer then ye
flower of the grass, which always perishes, and vanishes away. There are in
scripture many swift things to the uncertain qualities whereof the nature of
wealth and riches is likened, and resembled: as sometimes to a shadow, which of
it self in substance is nothing, but the bare glymse of the body being
interposed betwixt the sun and the earth: sometimes to a post, and speedy
messenger, who coming in post departs in have, either in some service from
the prince, or in carriing news to the court: Wis. 5 9.10.11.12.
sometimes to a ship which passes through the waves of the water, the trace
whereof being once gone cannot be found, nor the path thereof seen in the
floods, sometimes to a bird that flies in the air, and no man can see any
token of her flight: sometimes to an arrow which is shot at a mark which
deuideth the air for a time, but it comes together again immediately, so
that a man cannot know where it went through, and sometimes to the dust which
is blown away by the wind, al these things naturally, and lively expressing
the hopeless condition of riches, and the trustlesse prosperity of this life.
But amongst al other fit, and proper things to this purpose, the same
comparion which the Apostle uses in this place, is not the least nor the last
in conueniencie, and aptnes, making an equality betwixt the rich man, and a
flower of the grass, which although for a time it be very glorious, and
beautiful, yet all the glory thereof is weak, and all the beauty thereof
vain, and subject to a sudden change. And as in this place riches, so in
other places such things, as are in their prime, and gallantnesse are compared
with this flower, and amongst the rest the time of youth, and young years, is
termed by the name of the flower of a man's age, because then the body is
lusty, the limbs strong, the proportion comely, the blood stirring, the wits
fresh, the memory quick, all the powers perfect, and nothing in nature
wanting for inward and outward sufficiency. But most commonly in scripture,
such things as be short in continuance, and in state transitory, are resembled
to this flower, as in the book of Job, that holy, and patient man, entering
into a description of the miserable state and course of man's life from his
birth day, to his dying day, affirms that man being borne shoots forth as a
flower, Job. 14.2.
and is cut down, he vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not. Quickly
come, and quickly gone: soon ripe, and soon rotten as the proverb is. The
crying voice in the prophet Esaias, does make a difference betwixt ye state of a
grass, and of a flower, the one being of longer continuance, Esaias 40.6.7
though all be but little then the other. All flesh is grass, but the grace of
flesh, that is the beauty excellency, wisdom, and power of flesh is as the
flower of the fieeld, the flower is more orient, and elegant, then the grass,
but the grass is more durable, and permanent then the flower: both are
subject to decay, and corruption, but yet the one droppeth to the earth sooner
then the other. Which thing is to be applied to the words of our text, and to
be regarded of the rich man with some special diligence, for as much as
himself is hear by the Apostle resembled, not to the grass but to the flower
thereof, which of the two makes most speed to consumption. The holy Ghost by
the prophet David, does of purpose describe a flower, or grass, showing what
it is, and of what force, and time for continuance. For having spoken in the
former circumstances of the Psalm, of the fragillitie and weakness, of the
brevity, and shortness of man's life, proouing it to be of no longer
perpetuity, then a day, a floode, a watch, a sleep, a thought, and last of
all a grass, he does thereupon enlarge that last similitude, by expressing
the state of the same grass, in the morning (says he) it florisheth, and
grows, (...) the evening (...) is cut down, Psalm. 90.6.
and (...). Which is all one with that further description, which James makes
hear in the next verse of this chapter, where amplyfying this reason which we
have now in hand, he shows the manner of the decay of the rich man, by the
degrees of corruption, whereunto the grass is subject. For as when the sun
arises with heat, then the grass withers, and the flower falls away, and
the goodlye shape of it perishes, even so shall the rich man wither away in
all his ways: In which words he touches ye general course of increase, and
decrease in all vegetative and growing things, which as they have their
beginning, so they have also their declination, and end, and cannot always
continue in one state: so in riches there is a beginning, and that sometimes
base and simple, and as small as the beginning of a root of a grass, or of
the seed of a flower which is not great in the greatest. We see and know
amongst our selves, many who now are rich and welthy, and in sufficiency far
beyond many of their neighbors, who began the world but with a small stock,
with little or nothing, yet by the blessing of God, and their own diligence,
their stock is increased, their state bettered, and their room and place now
reverend amongst us. Which beginning and original of theirs, I could wish many
to revoke, and call back to memory, who are now so far gone with pride, and
arrogance, by reason of their present prosperity, that they forgette the place
from whence they came, the parents from whom they descended, the simple seed
from whence the great measure of their wealth has spong, and their own
unworthiness every way without Gods mercy to receive any such blessinge.
Which thing being remembered, and advisedly considered, I doubt not, will work
that good effect, which is now wanting in those, whom their fullness has made
drunk, and obliuious of their own progeny, and the graces, and favors of
God toward them extended: namely thankfulness to God for the same, care of
his honor, respect of his true service, humility, lowliness of mind, and
tenderness of heart toward those, who feel now the sharpness of that
want, and necessity, whereunto themselves in the remembrance of many were
sometimes subject. But by reason of the common neglecte of Christian duties
in this case, we see how in justice the Lord does deal with such manner of
men who sloting up for a time, as the sea or flood when it aryseth, yet at the
last are brought down to a low ebb, and iump in conclusion with that bare^
figgetree, which received a curse from the mouth of him who never blesses
unrighteous branches, Mat. 21.19.
and by and by for all his gloriouse leaves withered, and came to nothing, or
with that same gourde, which came up as a shadow to the head of Jonas for a
time, but being smitten by a worm presently dried up, Jonah. 4.7.10.
so that as it sprange in a night, so it perished in a night. Examples of our
time in this case are superfluous: for the matter is most evident, and the men
are yet living, whose states are spectacles of this justice, and whose decay
are glasses of this declination, their tree of wealth having known the force
of a curse, and their gourde of pleasures having felt the worm of vengeance,
so that as their riches already has, so themselves hourly do, according to
the words of James, in this place, vanish away as a flower of the grass.
Which thing being true I do not a little marvel, that there are so many in
the world, who contrary to their own knowledge (for in this matter they
connot plead ignorance) do make their wealth their supporte, and their
treasure their shoot anchor, not only being proud thereof, but that which is
an argument of a miraculous insensibleness, do plant their confidence in the
same, looking for help and deliverance from their rustie and corrupt
gatherings, which shall consume as a snayle that melts, and as the vntimelye
fruit of a woman, that has not seen the sun. It was a special thing
given in charge by Paul to Timothy that he should inioyne rich men in no
case to trust in their riches: 1. Tim. 6.17.
for he knew sufficiently how to a rich man a persuasion intending to trust
and repose in his wealth, is most plausible, even as we see it apparent in
these days, by the actions of those men, whom God has blessed with great
abundance, who presuming upon the same, and thinking themselves able thereby
to compass any matter, do apply them selves to oppression and tyrranny, by
excoriating or skinning the poor man, chalenging those lands, and possessions
wherein they have no interest, but make a claim, and pretenced right, of
purpose to defraud, and undo those, whom they know by reason of their wantes
not able to make their part good, by continuing the charges of law against
them. And many other vile things of like nature, are commonly put in practice
by them, not mistrusting the success of any matter they take in hand,
intending, that if briberie, and corruption, and rewards, may purchase
particularly, and pervert the righteouse course of justice they will assuredly
speed of their purpose: this is the reason that so many bad and odious suits
are now undertaken and prosecuted, overthrowing the foundations, and states of
many good men, because the opinion which the unrighteous man has of victory,
and preuaylement by his wealth, is a spur in him to tyrranny, supposing that
his gold shall bear him out, and the countenance of his money shall terrify
as many as resist him. This oppressor does little think of the words of
James in this place, proclayming the natural vncertaynetie of the rich man,
and his Mammon, or of the mighty foolishnes of his heart, or of ye judgment of
God entering into his doors, from whose hands his money shall not save him,
Ezekiel. 7.19.
nor his coin keep him in the day of his wrath. How necessary then for the
time is this doctrine, and that counsel of the holy prophet. Psalm. 62.10.
Trust not in oppression and robbery, if riches increase set not your heart
thereon, and that notable confession of Job also for example and direction,
whose life is a president for us, who sometimes in in great vehemency wished,
that his arm might fall from his shoulder, and be broken from the bone, Job.
3.24.25.
if he had ever made gold his hope, or had said to the wedge of gold thou art
my confidence, or rejoiced in that his substance was great, and that his hand
had gotten much. A confession which thousands of our days cannot make with
any truth, whose whole trust stands in the heap of their treasure, and
whole glory in the possession of their wealth, having the like vain, and
vaineglorious conceit which Haman in the Book of Hester, who instead of
acknowledging ye goodness of God toward him called his friends together,
Hester. 5.11.
and in the pride of his heart told them all the glory of his riches, and the
multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the King had promoted
him, etc.

But against such manner of men the Lord by the Prophet Amos does threaten, to
raise up an afflicting nation, from the entering in of Hamah, unto the wilderness
that is a general destruction without the escape of any, because they rejoice
in a thing of naught, Amos 6.1^.13.
and say have not we gotten us horns by our own strength? how much better
then were it for us, and all men to cast of this peevish confidence in the arm
of flesh and in the vanishing shadow of carnal things, and to trust in him,
and his mercy, who is the shield, and buckler of the faithful, the God of
all strength and salvation, and able sufficiently to save those, that rely
upon his goodness: how much more profitable for our selves, and for our souls
comfortable were it to put in use that sweet direction of our Savior, lay not
up treasures for your selves upon earth, where the mothe, and canker does
corrupt, and where thieves do dig through, Mat. 6.19.20.
and steal, but lay up treasure for your selves in Heaven, where neither the
mothe nor canker corrupts, and where no thieves can dig through to steal.
Which words if they were well considered, and diligently examined, would
appear to carry within the compass or bowels of them many good reasons to
dissuade us from all miserable endeavors of scraping together the pelf of the
world, and all idolatrous confidences in the same. I will not stand to
discourse at large of those three several enemies to whose power the nature of
all carnal treasure is subject, and must obey, forasmuch as there is nothing
which a man externally can possess, but that in time, either the mothe may
frette it, or the canker may corrupt it, or the thief may violently break in
and surprise it, whereby first the corruption, then the consumption, and last
the danger, and small security of wealth is most fully and excellently showed,
and withal the huge vanitye of men's hearts condemned, who serve with
devotion, and honor, that transitory trashe, wherein there is neither
strength to continue, nor substance to endure, nor assurance to stand without
decay and loss: but this one thing in the words may be with brevity
observed, that our Savior does there remember us of the place wherein we
live, (...)
and uses the same as a reason to withdraw our minds, from the heaping up of
treasure in the same. This earth is not our habitation, but thorowfare: we are
not here as dwellers for ever, but as soiourners for a time, as all our
fathers were, we have here no rest, Micha. 2.10 Heb. 13.14.
nor continuing City, but we must seek one to come, we must have wives as
if we had none, we must weep as though we wept not, and rejoice as though
we rejoiced not, and buy as though we possessed not, 1. Cor. 7.39.30.
and use this world as though we used it not for the fashion of this world
goes away: and therefore if there were any measure of ordinary wit and
wisdom in us, we would not so greedily apply our selves to covetousness,
nor so carnally dispose of our selves to the love of the world, and worldly
things as we do, being by our own knowledge so naturally subject to a
short durance, and so consta^tly ordained to an universal destruction, but
rather we would respect that place, which is immortal, and that treasure
which is incorruptible, and lay up for our selves in store (as the spirit
speaks) a good foundation against the time to come, 1. Tim. 6.19.
that we may obtain eternal life. 2. Pet 3.10.13.
Do we not know that the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and that
the elements shall melt with heat, and that the earth with the works that
are therein shall be burnt up? And if we do know it, is it not expedient
for us, that we look over, and beyond all these things, and by a holy
conversation, and faithful hope, expect new Heavens, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness? Is it not requisite for us to be risen with
Christ, and to seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of GOD, that when he shall appear Colos. 3.1.4.
and come in judgment with thousands of Angels, we may also appear with
him in glory? My beloved brethren, and sisters in the Lord, suffer the
words of exhortation: if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, Philip. 1.
if any compassion of mercy, look to your selves, and regard the state of
your souls: let not the precious death of Christ Jesus be made without effect
in you, grieve not the holy spirit of GOD by which you should be sealed
against the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.3^.
set your affections upon heavenly things, and not upon the things of
corruption. Let your conversation be without covetousness, to do good, Heb.
13.16.
and to distribute forgette not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased, if
all these things be amongst you and abound in you, you cannot possibly be
unfruitful in the acknowledging of Christ. Now the God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, Heb. 13.20.21.
the great shephearde of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in you
that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever, and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The errors and misprinting of words escaped in the press, are here amended,
which otherwise might mar the sense, and hinder the Reader.
Leaf: Page: Line: Error: Correction. 3 2 25 rithes riches. 6 2 18 corrupion
corruption. 8 1 22 gteater greater. 14 1 1 exceeded exceed. 15 2 22 these
those. 24 1 2 in in in 25 2 11 before being. 27 2 23 approves appears. 29
2 26 which with. 31 1 27 we were 32 1 1 external eternal. 35 2 11 his this.
40 2 13 riches ches riches. 41 1 1 for so. 42 2 15 he the 44 2 24 forte sort.
50 2 16 said say. 54 2 10 flying flitting. 56 2 27 sponge sprang. 57 1 22
bare barren. lb. 1 27 ground gourde. 59 1 10 hope heap.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson for
Thomas Butter. 1588.


