A TREATISE OF Patience in Tribulation: First, Preached before the Right
Honorable the Countess of Southampton in her great heaviness for the death of
her most worthy Husband and Son: afterward enlarged for the help of all that
are any way afflicted crossed or troubled.

By WILLIAM JONES B. of D. and P. of Arraton in the Isle of Wight.

Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Hereunto are joined
the Tears of the Isle of Wight, shed on the Tomb of their most Noble Captain
HENRY Earl of Southampton and the Lord Wriothesly his Son.

The Tomb and Epitaph.

HENRYE JAMES WRIOTHESLEY Anagram: HERE I SEE MANY WORTHIES LY:
Here ye see two but two's not all: for why
In these two Worthyes many Worthyes dye
O what a generation's here surprised
Of Noble blood which was in them comprised?


Printed at London by William Jones dwelling in Red- (...)

TO THE ^^GHT HONOV RABBLE THE COUNTESS (...) (...)HAMPTON all peace and
comfort. etc.
MOST Honorable Lady:
THe meanest servant, of the greatest Lord, the glory of his Country, and your
Ladyships wonderful joy and Honor, out of a strange amazement, begins now to
look up: and the I can do nothing beseeming such Honor, or worthy of these
judicious times; yet am I so obliged, that I cannot hold my peace, choosing to
be taxed for anything rather then for want of duty and thankefulnes. When the
Tabernacle was building, the poorer sort which brought Goats hair and Rams
skins were as well accepted, as they which brought Purple and Scarlet. This is
my comfort, that such is your Noble disposition, that you will not despise the
hearty endeavor of the poorest well willer of your Honorable Family. It was no
small joy unto me for diverse years to come in my course, and stand in presence
of that mirror of Nobility, that I might hear his wisdom, and behold his
gracious conversation: Many a storm have I endured both by Sea and Land; But
when I saw his face, his gracious countenance dispelled all ill weather, and
made me as resolute to return the next time as ever. I should willingly have
spent my days in his service; yea I have often wished that my life had been
sacrificed for his, that your Honor and this Land might have still enjoyed
such a complete ornament and pillar, (...)

But when I consider that thou ((...)) tookest (...) from us, I lay my hand
upon my mouth and humbly with all who consider his worth, to humble themselves
in (...) and fasting, that Gods Judgments (...) Land, which the falling of
such Stars (...) As for your self, Madame, who have (...) heart already with
fasting, and weeping, and (...) tation; I pray God to give you patience and
com(...) (...) plain sort, I labor to persuade your Ladyship (...) in this
sermon, which I humbly commend unto your (...) nours perusal: the rather
because you told me it did* (...) good. And though your Ladyship may think,
and we can not deny, but the stroke which cut off two such worthies at once,
was very grievous, yet as the Minister of Christ in the name of Christ, I
beseech your Honor to take to heart the goodness of the Lord toward you in
those that still remain. Your Ladyship has two loving and most worthy
Daughters, married to godly, wise, virtuous personages, you have also another
hopeful young Lady. And your Honor has a Son, who gives great hope that he
will tread in his Noble Fathers steps, and be heir of his virtues. All these
things are worthy to be remembered daily with praise; which I doubt not but your
Ladyship does. And so praying for the perpetual prosperity of your Honorable
house, I leave your Honor in the hands of the Almighty God and our merciful
Savior, who is able to do abundantly above all that we can desire or think.

Your Honors most humble servant to be ever commanded in the LORD. W. JONES.

A TREATISE OF PATIENCE IN TRIBVLATION, etc.
ROMANS 12. 12. Patience in Tribulation.

It Is St. Augustines saying, on Psalm. 37. Omnis morbus animae habet in
Scripturis medicamentum suum: Every disease of the soul has a medicine in the
Scriptures: And the most effectual medicine ordained for Tribulation is
Patience; therefore says the Spirit in my Text, Be patient in tribulution.


FIrst to open the words. The word translated (...).
tribulation; comes of a Verb which signifies to pinch, as the foot is
pinched in a strait shoe; or to press, as Grapes are squeezed in the
Winepresse: Metaphorically it is used for to afflict, or to bring into any strait
of body or mind; and so the substantive signifies any thing which is hard and
cross to the nature of man; yea any evil which we suffer in body or mind.

The evils which are here meant by tribulation, are either ordinary or
extraordinary. I call those ordinary e^its to which all mankind is subject more
or less; as labor, care, travel, sickness, diseases, aches, pains, wants,
griefs for death of friends, and other inevitable casualties.

Extraordinary evils are either persecution inflicted upon the godly by the
wicked: or wrongs which are done by men of the world for malice or covetousness,
or merely out of a mischievous disposition; or calamities, which can be impute
directly to no second cause, but to Gods own hand.

Now concerning all these kinds of evil, comprehended under the word
Tribulation, the Apostle speaking by inspiration, commands us to be patient.
The word (...), translated patience, signifies, Quietly abiding under: And we
may be said quietly to abide under any tribulation, when we neither fret, nor
do any thing against godliness, or any part of Gods Word; but walk in our
calling orderly, as if no such thing had happened unto us.

This patience in the Old Testament is termed silence, Esaias 30. 15. In silentio
and ^pe erit fortitudo vestra. In silence and hope shall be your strength. That
is, If ye quietly endure your affliction, and put your trust in the Lord, ye
shall overcome. Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou
did i^. That is, I patiently endured thy visitation. After the same manner is
Christ's patience set forth, Esaias 53. 7. He is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth. Yet let no man imagine that Christ's patience was only outward; it was
inward also: He underwent whatsoever was laid upon him, with a quiet mind. And
so must we endure all tribulation with a quiet mind: a quiet mind is the
principal thing in the definition of Patience, given both by Philosophers and
Divines. Tully says, Patientia est virtus omnis adversitatis impetus
aequanimiter portans: Patience is a virtue which suffers all adversity with a
quiet mind. August. Patientia est virtus qua mala aequo animo toleramus.
Patience is a virtue whereby we suffer evils with an equal mind: which Thomas
Aquinas expounds thus. Mala id est aduersa aequo animo, id est sine turbatione
animi. Evils, 2. 3. q. 136. ^. ^
that is to say Crosses; with an equal mind, that is, without trouble of
mind. Now whereas he says by evils, we must understand only adversities or
crosses, it is evident it is no true patience, when a man suffers the evil of sin
in himself or others with a quiet mind. Saint Bernard says well, vera
patientia est pati contra quod libeat, non praeter quod Ad Eugenium.
liceat. It Is true patience to suffer against our will, nor against godliness.
They therefore are greatly to be blamed which suffer themselves to be drawn
into any sin; as drunkenness or whoredom by lewd companions, be they never
so great.

Again, whereas it is said that, to the making up of true patience, there is
required a quiet mind, void of perturbation; it seems it is the Lords will that
we voluntarily submit our selves unto affliction. Patience perforce is no
patience: if we suffer murmuringly and with grudging, though we suffer never
so much, it is nothing worth.

Neither yet let any imagine, that we are here called to such a kind of
voluntary suffering, that we should run into affliction, and of our own accord
enter into temptation. It Was sencelesly done by Baals Priests to lance
themselves; And the Romanists cannot without sin imitate them, whiles they
whip themselves, and go in hairecloth, and lie on the ground: Who requires
this at their hands: We must quietly undergo any affliction that is cast upon
us: we must not voluntarily rush into any tribulation.

By this which has been said, it is easy to gather the Doctrine of this Text,
and it is this: All Christians must, with a quiet and godly m^nd, bear all
crosses and afflictions that befall them thorough the whole course of their
life. There is no one duty whereunto we are oftener called in Scripture, then
unto Patience; and no marvel: For there is no virtue more necessary then
patience, none more excellent. Saint Augustine in his Book of patience, Cap.
1. calls it, Magnum Dei donum: The great gift of God. And the Apostle says to
all Christians, Ye have need of patience, Heb. 10. 36. Well does he say, Ye
have need of patience; because, so many are the troubles of the righteous,
Psalm. 34. And no man can come where Christ now is, except he patiently take
up his cross daily, Luke 9. 23. It Is the Apostles resolution, Act. 14. 22. We
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.

And if ye search the Scripture, ye shall find, that tribulation has been
the lot of the righteous in all ages. The first Saint, Abel, least he should
want trouble, was assaulted by his own brother Cain. How was Noah troubled
with the wicked world? Who knows not the tribulation of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and of all their posterity in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in the Land of
Canaan, and in Babylon?

Descend lower and observe the life of Christ and his followers, and ye shall
find it full of manifold tribulation: what tongue can tell the tribulation of
the Primitive Church, and the Christians in all Ages since? Yea Paul sets it
down as a Law that shall not be broken, That, all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12.

Object. The Church has often and long been free from tribulation; as whiles
Joseph lived in Egypt: In the time of David and Solomon: And it is written, Act.
9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galile, and
Samaria. So also it is recorded in Constantines time, and in the days of diverse
other Christian Emperors the Church had much peace.

And how can we forget the wonderful peace and freedom which our own Church
has enjoyed, in the reign of our late blessed Queen Elizabeth, and our late
Sovereign Lord King James?

Answ. Though the Church and people of God, have sundry times been free from
public persecution by the hand of Authority, as in Queen Mary's days. As
also from open invasion, as in 88. Yet never was there wanting some Ismaels and
Esaus in the Church, to persecute all Isaacs and Iakobs. So it was in Saint
Paul's time, as he testifies, Gal. 4. 29. As he that was borne after the flesh,
persecuted him that was borne after the spirit; so is it now: and so has it
been ever since; and so it is now, and so shall it be until the dissolution
of all things: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.

They shall not always be banished, imprisoned, wracked, tormented, burnt,
etc. But they shall be always hated, reproched, reviled, slandred, nicknamed,
derided, made laughing stocks, and table talk, and music for drunkards and
wantons, and swearing swaggerers, and every idle, riotous, and unthrifty
companion. The mouth of the Lord has said it, Esaias 59. 15. He that departs
from evil makes himself a prey; that is to say, He makes himself a scorn
and derision to all that are round about him: which are not resolved to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world. Sheep among wolves can have no rest: No more can the
children of God among the children of this world. It Is worthily observed by
Saint Augustine, in Psalm. 55. Nunquam deerit persecutio Christiano: si ergo pro
Christo pressuram non dum pateris, vide ne pie in Christo viuere non dum
coeperis. Persecution shall never be wanting to a Christian, if therefore as yet
thou suffer no tribulation for Christ's sake, suspect thy self that thou
have not yet begun to live godly in Christ Jesus. If thou live so privately
that none abroad take notice of thee: yet, if thou walk with God, with an
upright heart, the Devil will raise up some storm against thee in thine own
Family: Thou shall be sure to find, either a mocking Cham, or a rebellious
Absolon, or a spiteful Doeg, or a cursing Shemei, or a false hearted Ioab, or
a scoffing Michol. Lastly, if all the world would let thee alone; yet, if thou
be a child of God, thou shall in no case want some tribulation long: Some
sickness or weakness shall take hold upon thee: Some anguish of heart, or
grief of mind shall trouble thee; Crosses will come one in the neck of
another: Thou shall lose thy goods by Sea, by Land, by Fire, by Thieues: Thy
hopeful Corne-fields shall be blighted; thy sheep and thy fatlings shall die
in thy pasture; thy loving friends, nay thy beloved children shall be taken
from thee: some, whiles they hang on the breasts; others when they are grown up
and are of great hope: Nay more, thy dearest Rachel shall be taken out of thy
bosom; or the Lord will take away from thy head, thy glory, thy sweet
companion, thy staff thy comfort. Some way or other thou shall surely be
afflicted: for the Spirit of Truth has said it, Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives.

Seeing then it is so plain, that all Gods children must thorough much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of heaven: it follows directly, that all
that will be saved, must of necessity be armed with patience. For how shall
we be able to keep faith and our holy profession, if we be not heartned with
patience and quiet minds to bear all tribulation?

The want of this Grace of Patience has been the cause, why many (who made a
good profession) when persecution, or some other tribulation arose, have
started back and behaved themselves like mere worldlings. Wherefore least any
of us in time of tribulation should fall away, and give up all that we have
heard, like the hearers which are compared to the stony ground, Luke 8. 13. Let
us even now whiles it is called to day, begin to use the best means that we
can to settle our souls in patience. There be very many means prescribed by
Divines; among which may it please you to take notice of these five?

The first is Prayer. In his own strength (says Hannah) 1. Means.
shall no man prevail, 1. Sam. 2. 9. But, our help comes from the Lord our
God which made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121. 2. Now the sanctified means to
obtain any good thing, as help, strength, patience in tribulation, is Prayer,
as Christ says, Matthew. 7. 7. Ask and it shall be given you: again, John 16.
23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. On
the other side S. James says plainly, Chap. 4. 2. Ye have not, because ye
ask not. Many surely have not patience in tribulation, because they are not
earnest in prayer: wherefore, if we affect this great and rare gift of
patience, let us be instant in prayer. Every Book is full of the commendation
of prayer; but he that would reap any benefit by prayer, must resolve with
himself to enter into a set course of prayer, as David and Daniel did, and
continually upon every occasion lift up his heart unto God, and be very
thankful for the least favor.

The second means is humbleness of mind. If thou 2.
would be patient in tribulation thou must labor for Humility, which is
the groundwork of all Grace. God gives Grace to the humble, says James and
Peter. He which is of an humble Spirit, has that within him, which will quench
the furious passion of impatience, as soon as it begins to burn out.

If thou have cause of grief or vexation given thee by a froward wife, a
strange husband, a rebellious child, a dissolute servant, an unjust or
foule-mouthed neighbor, a faithless friend, or a cruel enemy; thy humble
spirit will tell thee, that thou have behaved thy self more untowardly toward
thy heavenly Father: and if he strike thee with sickness, with want, or any
other calamity; if he take from thee thy children, thy friends, thy wealth,
thy Honor; If thou have an humble mind, it will tell thee this, It is Gods
great mercy that thou thy self art not confounded and cast into hell. It will
make thee say with David, in that great trial when he fled from Absolon, 2
Samuel 15. 26. Here am I., let him do to me as seems good unto him.

The third means to work patience, is the joint exercise of Faith, Hope, and
a good Conscience. He that by (...).
faith lays hold on the forgiveness of sin, and reconciliation with God by
the blood of Christ: And withal by the eye of hope enters within the veil,
and beholds the glory prepared: This man shall be able quietly, constantly,
Heb. 6. 19.
and patiently to endure all crosses, afflictions and tribulation, which God,
the Devil, and all the world can lay upon him; especially if he join unto
faith and hope a good conscience. For the cabbinet to lay up, the jewels of
faith and hope in, that they may stand us in stead at every assault, is a good
conscience. Faith indeed first breeds a good conscience, and then a good
conscience does (as it were) nourish faith; so that he which sticks not to
make shipwreck of a good conscience, will quickly fall away from faith, and
then every tribulation will make him impatient.

This threefold cord of faith, hope, and a good conscience, is that which
heretofore has kept the Saints and Martyrs constant and patient in all their
afflictions. They were put upon troubles and tribulation, intolerable inhumane
judgment; yet were they more then conquerours through faith, hope, and a good
conscience. Because they believed their sins were forgiven, and in the course
of sobriety, righteousness and godliness, waited for the blessed hope and
glorious appearing of their Savior Christ, nothing could dash them out of
countenance.

Would thou be patient in tribulation? then must thou do as thou hear
the Saints have done. Thou must first believe, according to the tenor of the
Gospel, that thy sins are forgiven, and withal consider what a wonderful
benefit this is; then can thou not choose but be patient in any tribulation.
It is most certain, thou never did truly esteem the favor of God in
Christ; thou did never soundly ponder what an inestimable benefit the
forgiveness of sins is, if thou can not be contented therewith, and willing
with patience to endure any tribulation which the Lord shall lay upon thee.
Moreover, if thou have respect unto the recompense of reward, thou will esteem
reproach, loss of Honor, wealth, friends, worldly contentment, greater treasure
then all the commodities in the world.

Lastly, a good conscience is a strong supporter in all manner of tribulation;
did not the Heathen say, -- Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire mali. --


It is a brazen wall against all assault to be guilty of no sin.

What made Joseph so patient in prison? His conscience was not clogged with
guilt: what made his brethren so much moved at the first touch? They had evil
consciences. Even so any tribulation will make thee impatient, if thou have not
purged thy conscience from dead works: but if thou resoluest in all things to
walk honestly, whatsoever it cost thee, thou shall be able to bear with a
quiet mind whatsoever befall thee.

The fourth means to cause patience, is to set thy self 4.
to endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 3. It is
good for a man to bear the yoke from his youth, Lament. 3. 27. Tribulation
works patience, Romans 5. 3.

The fifth means of patience, is to enter into serious 5.
meditation concerning the ground, carriage, use, and issue of all tribulation.

The principal meditations wherewith our hearts may 1. Medit.
be taken up, are four. First, that all tribulation comes from God. Secondly,
that in all tribulation he deals wisely and lovingly. Thirdly, that he sends
tribulation for some good end. Fourthly, that he is ready always to afford
help for the present, and to deliver in fit season. All these well weighed are
able to make us patient in any tribulation. To speak to them severally.

First, That all our afflictions from the one end of our life unto the other,
both great and small, come upon us from God himself, is plain by the constant
confession of the Saints, and the evidence of Scripture. Job says, Job 1. 21.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away.

If ye read the Text, ye shall find that the Sabeaus took away his Oxen and
Asses: the Chaldeans his Camels; yet Job makes this confession, The Lord has
taken away. Psalm 119. 75. David says to God, Thou have afflicted me; yet we
know it was Saul and his followers, and Shemei and Absolon, etc. that afflicted
David. So the Israelites say, Hos. 6. 1. Come let us return unto the Lord: he
has torn, he has smitten us. Amos 3. 6. Shall there be evil in a City, and
the Lord has not done it? Job 5. 6. Affliction comes not out of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground.

Here ye see it is a confessed truth, All tribulation comes from the Lord.
Which being so, what fitter exhortation can I add, then that Heb 12. 5. My
son despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked
of him, verse 9. We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we
gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father
of Spirits? Mark how David in a great tribulation behaues himself, only upon
this consideration, that it was the Lords doing, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, and
opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Here ye see David professes he
was silent in affliction, because he considered it was Gods doing. Nothing is
more forcible to repress the violence of grief in the day of trouble, then to
call to mind that we have to do, not with mortal men, but with the Almighty
and everliving God. For how comes it to pass that the greater part of the
world is overtaken with impatience, when trouble lights upon them; but because
they do not recount, that they wrangle and brawle with God himself?
Therefore, whiles some cast their crosses and afflictions upon fortune, some
impute them to the malice or cruelty of this or that man, some ascribe them to
one cause, and some unto another, and scarce one of an hundred absolutely
acknowledges Gods hand; they freely fall to grieve, complain, fret and murmr
without measure.

But David clean contrary, that he may silence all rebellious motions, turns
his eye to the Lord, and considering him in his wise providence, as the author
of all his trouble, resolves to be silent and put it up with a quiet mind. And
so accordingly let us know, that in any affliction that befalls us at any time,
this is the principal work of faith, to humble us under Gods hand, and make
us rest in his doing with silence, as Saint Peter counsels, Chapter 1. 5. 6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.

Besides (as Calvin notes) which is the second Meditation, 2. Medit.
it must be observed that men do then subject themselves, to God in tribulation
with quiet and patient minds, when they are persuaded that, as God does all,
so he does it as a wise Judge and loving Father. For many wicked men in
tribulation acknowledge Gods hand; yet because they reckon of him as a cruel
Tyrant, they cease not through impatience to blaspheme his holy name. But David
does so acknowledge Gods judgments upon himself, that he takes them as from
the hand of a wise God, and loving Father; and therefore rests well pleased and
patient whatsoever he does, saying, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou, O Lord, did it: Thou, I say, which, as thou art the Almighty God, so
thou art also wise, loving, and tender Father unto me.

Even so, if we, when we are cast into the bed of sorrow, and furnace of
tribulation, would seriously meditate upon the wisdom and love of the great
God (from whose hand we say we take the visitation) assuredly we should
possess our souls in patience.

A man that is persuaded of the love and skill of a Physician or Surgeon,
which is but a man like himself and may be false, or deceived; will put
himself into his hand most readily, and be content to be launched and se(...),
or to take down bitter pills and fulsome potions, and to do or suffer any
thing according to his direction, in hope of bodily health. How much more would
we be patient in any tribulation, if we were thoroughly persuaded, that our
God (without whose providence one hair falls not from our head) did administer
these bitter things unto us, in wonderful wisdom and great love to our
souls? This made David so patient, Psalm. 119. 75. I know O Lord (says he)
that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted
me. Therefore was he so quiet; and when his spirit began to lash out in a kind
of discontented humor, because Gods hand was upon him so heavy and so long:
mark how he checks himself, saying, Psalm. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down, O
my soul, and why art thou disquicted within me? Hope thou in God: for I shall
yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God. Here note, I
pray you, what the ground of David's patience in his tribulation, when his
enemies reproched him, saying, Where is thy God? it was this, he was fully
persuaded that God was his God, that is to say, his wise Guardian, his mighty
Protector, his loving father, and that he did all that he did to him most
wisely, most lovingly, with respect unto the amendment of his life, and the
salvation of his soul. Even so, if we also would believe Gods Word, which tells
us, that God as often as he suffers any tribulation to fall upon us; in
wisdom, love, and faithfulness causes us to be afflicted, we would be quiet
under his mighty hand; yea, we would solace our souls with the peaceable
fruit of affliction in the end. This made Saint Paul say in the name of all
believers, Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulations. This made David say long
before, Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my sorrowful thoughts within me,
thy comforts delight my snule. Where note, he says not, when my tribulations
and sorrows are over, but even in the midst of the multitude of them, I
feel sound spiritual comfort, because I know that thou art the only wise
God, and my merciful Savior and Redeemer, which bring all these things
upon me. Thou did cause Saul to persecute me, and mine own son Absolon
to rise up against me; Thou baddest Shemei to curse me, and many others to
reproach and revile me; Thou have often cast me upon the bed of sickness;
thou, I say, which art the only wise God, and my loving Savior, did all
these things; therefore I am so far from fretting, that I find comfort, even
whiles I See more in the treatise of faith.
am exercised under thy hand.

The like comfort will arise unto any one of us, in any trouble or tribulation,
upon the like consideration; to wit, that God (who is the author of all
afflictions) sends them upon us, in singular wisdom and love for our good:
which that it may make the deeper impression, I will come to the third
Meditation; which is, touching the special 3. Medit.
ends for which God does suffer tribulation to fall upon us. The ends are
three. First, Gods own glory. Secondly, The example of others. Thirdly, Our
own special good; upon which I will chiefly insist.

First, One way whereby God is said to be glorified in his Saints, is when they
patiently suffer tribulation for his names sake. Thus did the Martyrs glorify
God, whiles they cheerfully suffered for the truth.

The second end, is the example of others. Therefore does God bring strong
Christians to be tried by afflictions, that they which are weak (seeing their
patience and constancy) may be encouraged to be quiet in the day of trial.

The third end is for our own good, and that four ways. First, To try us.
Secondly, To purge us. Thirdly, To quicken us. Fourthly. To heap more glory
upon us. That for these four ends God sends tribulation upon us, it is evident
by Scripture. For the first end, which is trial, it is said, 1 Pet. 4. 12.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; But rejoice, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.
2. 3. Moses says to the people of Israel, The Lord led thee these forty years
in the Wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy
heart, whether thou would keep his commandments, or no.

Quest. But did not God sufficiently know them without this kind of trial.

Answ. Yes surely: for as David says, Psalm. 139. 2. He understands our
thoughts a far off. But we know not our selves, before we be tried by some
tribulation. Some think they are strong, and that nothing can disquiet them;
but when God lays his hand upon them, they are troubled above measure. Others
think they have no strength, that they shall not be able to stand in the
evil day, and therefore grow exceeding sad: But when they are brought to the
lists, they are found stronger then many which made great boast.

Again, the world is prone to censure all that labor to live godly in Christ
as hypocrites, as Satan said of Job. Therefore the Lord, to clear his children
of this grievous imputation, tries them with afflictions, that their
uprightness may shine out, as Jobs did.

The second benefit of tribulation is purging our souls, Esaias 1. 25. God says
to his Church; I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy
dross. Esaias 27. 7. Has he smote Israel, as he smote those that smote him?
Answ. Verse 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all
the fruit, to take away his sin. Here the Spirit declares the different ends,
for which God strikes his children, and the wicked; The wicked he strikes to
destroy them: His children he strikes too, but it is to purge away their
sin. So again, God says of some of the Israelites, Zach. 13. 9. I will
refine them as silver, and will try them as gold. When these mettalls are cast
into the fire, the dross only is consumed, they came out more pure. So Gods
children, when they are cast into the furnace of affliction, come out more
pure. Thus was David purged by affliction, as he confesses, Psalm. 119. Nay one
of the most notorious sinners that ever was, Manasses, was purged by
tribulation, 2 Chronicles 33. 12. When he was in affliction he besought the
Lord, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and when he
was brought to Jerusalem into his Kingdom, he took away the strange God, and
repaired the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and
thank-offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord: what an alteration is
here wrought by tribulation? The like effect it has in every one in whom God
has any portion. Neither has any man almost from the beginning been soundly
turned from his sinful ways, but by some affliction of body or mind. Ask
your own consciences, ye that are truly converted, whether your conversion
were not occasioned by tribulation.

The third end of tribulation, is to quicken all Saving graces in us, Psalm.
119. 72. David says, It is good for me that I have bin afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes: why, but did not David know Gods Statutes before?
Yes: but by affliction he was put in mind to walk the way of the Lord more
diligently. Affliction made him more frequent and earnest in prayer: Affliction
made him put his trust in God more confidently: Affliction made him more
watchful over his own ways, and more careful to keep them in compass
which were committed to his charge: Affliction made him more compassionate
toward others that were in any tribulation: Affliction made him more humble.
In a word, by affliction, God did so frame and fashion him that he made him a
man after his own heart; therefore well may he say, as he does; It is good
for me that I have been afflicted. The like good end does God aim at when he
afflicts any of us, as it is plainly declared, Hebrews 12. 10. He chastens
us for our profit, that we may be made partakers of his holiness.

The fourth end of our tribulation is, that we may be the more glorified in
heaven. Romans 8. 17. If we suffer with Christ, we shall be glorified together,
1 Pet. 1. 7. The trial of our faith, though it be tried with fire, shall be found
unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Thus ye see how many excellent ends of tribulation the Lord propounds, which
being duly considered, are able to make us not only patient in any
tribulation, but also joyful and thankful. I cannot omit what S. Augustine
says of tribulation, having respect only unto the last end, to wit, the
multiplying of our glory according to the measure of our tribulation. His words
be these: That I may after this languishing life see Christ in glory, and be
partaker of so great a good; what though sickness weakens me, labors oppress
me, watchings spend me, cold benumne me, heat inflame me? Nay, though my whole
life be spent in sighs and sorrows; what is all to that rest which shall
ensue in the life to come? Why Non est ad astra mallis e terris via. Senec.
do we complain of want of rest seeing we have undertaken a journey
wearisome and troublesome? Besides, there is no other way to heaven; as Christ
was ordained first to suffer tribulation, and then to enter into his Glory,
Luke 24. 26. So all that are Christ's are appointed to afflictions, 1 Thessalonians. 3.
3. Again, Romans 8. 29. Whom God did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, that is, Not only in regard of holiness,
but also of tribulation: For the servant is not greater then the Lord; If they
have persecuted me, they will persecute you also, says Christ, Ioh. 5. 20.
And yet again, Luke 9. 23. Whosoever will come after me, must take up his
cross daily. Now no man can be said to take up his cross, but he that is
patient in tribulation. The cross of it self is not the way to the Crown;
but the patient bearing of the Cross. Saint Paul says fitly, If a man strive
for masteries, he is not crowned, except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5.
Wherefore, if we desire the joys of the Kingdom of Heaven, let us be content
to walk patiently without murmuring and fretting, through the stony lane of
tribulation. The Israelites liked the Land of Canaan very well, but when they
felt hardship in the Wilderness, they murmured, and the Prophet says, They
provoked the Lord, and he slew them by thousands. If we commit the like sin,
how shall we escape the like judgment? when David sent Ambassadors to the
King of Ammon, to comfort him after his Fathers death, he evil entreated them,
and David was exceeding angry. Behold afflictions are the Lords Ambassadors,
which he sends unto us for many good ends; wherefore if we grudge and repine,
if we mourn without measure, and fret and chafe at them, surely we shall
greatly provoke the Lords indignation against us.

Let us therefore hearing these things, be persuaded to be patient in all
manner of tribulation, the rather, because God has promised to be with us in
all trouble, and to help us to bear it, and in very good time to deliver us
out of all our tribulation. This is the fourth Meditation. The 4. Medit.
first clause whereof; viz. That God will be with us, and help us in trouble,
may be proved: First, By the promises out of Gods Word: Secondly, By examples,
instances, and experience. The Scripture is full of promises of Gods
comfortable presence; I will cite only that of Esa. 43. 1. Thus says the
Lord, fear not, for I have redeemed thee, and when thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee: when thou walk through the fire thou shall not
be burnt: For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior. Fear
not, for I am with thee. Here, by fire and water we may understand all manner
of tribulation into which Gods children fall: In all which the Lord promises to
be with them; and how can they miscarry with whom the Almighty is?

But perhaps some will say, This is indeed a large and gracious promise; but it
was made only to the people of Israel.

Answ. Paul speaking to the Romans, which were Gentiles, as well as we, says,
Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have
hope. More plainly, Heb. 13. 5. the Spirit teaches every one to apply unto
himself that promise which was made only to Joshua, I will not leave thee,
nor forsake thee: whereby it is sure, 2 Samuel 10.
that what promise soever thou find in all the Scripture made to a believer,
thou (if thou beleeuest) have as good interest in it, as he to whom it was
made. Wherefore, when thou fallest into any tribulation, comfort thy self with
the promise of Gods presence; because he says, I will not leave thee. Neither
has God only promised his presence, Josh. 1.
but also afforded it unto his children. Esaias 63. 9. It is said of Gods people,
In all their affliction, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them; In his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old. More particularly, how often does David say,
That God was with him in the needful time of trouble, and that he was his
rock, his fortress, his refuge, his strong help, that he delivered him out
of all his troubles: and Psa. 23. 4. he makes this comfortable profession,
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me. Not to multiply examples; how confidently does
Saint Paul say in the name of all believers, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of
all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation: Again, verse 5. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us; so our consolation also abounds by Christ.
Russinus lib. 1. cap. 36. brings an excellent example of God presence in
affliction. One Theodorus was, for the profession of the Christian Faith,
wracked and tortured about two or three hours most cruelly; yet nevertheless
that godly man was all the while joyful, and cheerfully sang Psalms unto God.
After he was let loose, some of his friends asked him whether he felt no pain
upon the rack: He said, some small pain he felt; but there was with him a
fair young man, as he seemed, who still wiped the sweat from his face, and
refreshing him as it were with cool water, caused that he felt less pain
then when he was let down. All that are in tribulation now adays, do not
behold the presence of the Lord, as Theodorus did; but all that believe are
partakers of the Lords spiritual presence, whereby he inables them to do or
suffer any thing, according to that, Phil. 4. 13. I am able to do all things,
thorough Christ Jesus that strengthens me. Upon which word Bernard well
notes, that man by Nature impotent, by Grace is made omnipotent: verily, he
that believes is made able to do or suffer any thing. For all things are
possible to him that believes, Mar. 9. 23. And no marvel; for Faith draws
whom the Lord of Life and Glory, and makes him present in every place, in every
affliction, and how can there want comfort in his presence, where is fullness
of joy for ever? It was the persuasion or spiritual sight of this presence of
the Lord, that helped the Saints in all their tribulation. This made Moses, not
fear the Kings wrath, Heb. 11. 27. He endured, as seeing him who is
invisible. This supported David when he was in his enemies Country, and his
own men spoke of stoning him. 1 Samuel 30. 6. What was it but the presence of
the Lord, that strengthened both the three children before the fiery furnace,
and Daniel in the Lions den? This made Peter sleep sweetly in prison the night
before he should be slain, Acts 12. This made Stephen speak boldly to his
fierce enemies, Asts 7. This made Paul and Silas sing Psalms in prison at
midnight, Acts 16. This made many believers, which were tried by mockings,
scourgings, and wrackings, despise the pain and the shame, Heb. 11. In like
manner, if we could persuade our selves that the Lord, according to his
gracious promise, is with us in all our tribulation, it would make us quiet,
and strongly comfort us. O the joy of the Lords presence, is able to bring
mighty things to pass: what cannot he do, and turn to our good; which called
light out of darkness, and made all things of nothing; if we would but give
glory to his Word, which says, He is with us in trouble, and always at hand
to help us in all our tribulation. Fear not, for I am with thee, says the
Lord to every one that is in trouble. Esaias 43. 1.


For the confirmation of this difficult point, That God is with them that are
in tribulation; mark what Christ says, John 16. 33. These things have I
spoken, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have
tribulation; But be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. Again, he
says, Matthew 28. 20. Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world: which words by Hieronym. and Chrysostom are understood of Christ's
presence to all believers unto the worlds end. But the manner of his presence
is spiritual: viz. He is present by his Spirit: of this Spirit it is that he
says, John 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of Truth, which
dwells with you, and shall be in you. Again, Ioh. 16. 7. It is expedient for
you that I go away: for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto
you, but if I depart I will send him unto you. By these places it is evident
what kind of presence Christ promised to his Church and every believer unto the
worlds end; Even the presence of his Spirit, which is the Comforter; and if any
ask how Christ by his Spirit does comfort believers in tribulation, and make
them patient: I answer, three ways. First, The Spirit teaches them to apply
unto themselves, the precious promises of presence and assistance, as Esaias 43.
2. When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee, Psalm 34. 7. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him. Psa. 37. 5. Commit
thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he will bring it to pass. These
and many such promises does the Spirit teach believers to apply unto their own
souls, declaring also how God has made good such promises from time to time,
to all that trusted in him.

Secondly, Christ by his Spirit helps believers in tribulation, by pouring into
their hearts the gifts and graces of the Spirit, whereby they are made patient;
as namely, joy, courage, patience, confidence, peace of conscience, the spirit
of supplication; yea, the Spirit helps all our infirmities, and makes
intercession unto God for us, Romans 8. 26.

Thirdly, The Spirit works patience in us, By bearing witness to our spirits
that we are the children of God; if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ: so that if we suffer with him, we shall also be
glorified together: Romans 8. 16. These be strong comforts, able to make any man
patient: wherefore, if we love our souls, let us now, whiles we have time get
these comforts about us, that when we fall into any tribulation we may have
comfort at hand. They that are of ability will always have in a readiness
hot waters, and cordialls against qualmes and sudden fits. How much more ought
we to be wise in providing against the qualmes of our souls, considering that
we are daily subject to some tribulation or other? Now, the principal
cordial for the soul in all distress, is the comfort of the Holy Ghost,
which Chriss has promised to all believers. Let all believers therefore,
soundly stay their hearts in all tribulation upon this Comforter, which as he
is invincible in himself, so is he able to overcome all evil whatsoever to
which we are subject. If this Comforter be with us, we need not fear what
befalls us, whether tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword, in all these we shall be more then conquerors.
Yea, we need not fear poverty, reproach, sickness, desolation, torment,
death; this Comforter has consolation in store, which will comfort us in
despite of all these evils in their greatest extreamitie.

Nature and Art can work only by means: But the Spirit, which is the
Comforter of believers in all tribulation, can work with means, and without
means, yea and against means: Psalm. 112. 4. Unto the upright there arises
light in darkness. I may add joy in sorrow, peace in trouble, abundance in
want, life in death.

When any believer is called out by God to be tried by tribulation, the Spirit
forthwith either furnishes him with sufficient strength, or abates the strength
of the affliction: as we see in Joseph, Moses, the three children, the
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs in all ages. Let us therefore, hearing these things
out of the Word of Truth, labor daily to find them verified in our selves, that
we may be patient in tribulation.

Now follows the latter clause of the fourth Meditation: viz. That God in all
tribulation will give a seasonable and gracious issue. If their were no end of
tribulation, it were in vain to persuade to patience. But nothing is more
often mentioned in Scripture then an end of trouble. Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. Ioh. 16.
20. Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. How often
does David confess that the Lord delivered him out of all his tribulation? Ob.
Yea, but David and others complain that it is very long before the Lord helps
them; and the same complaint do many in these days take up, insomuch that
they begin to faint under the burden of sickness, want, disgrace, etc. before
they be delivered.

Ans. This is true, the Lord sometimes deferres long before he helps us in
tribulation; but he does it in wisdom, if we had eyes to see it. To some he
defers to grant their suit, that he may make them more earnest in prayer, which
is an exercise wherein he greatly delights.

Secondly, He deferres some, to make them more sweetly taste the benefits when
it comes, whereas if it were presently granted, it would be quickly forgotten.

Thirdly, God delays to send help in trouble, to put us in mind how we have
put off from day to day to turn to him.

Fourthly, Most commonly God prolongs the time of our tribulation, because it
has not fully accomplished the work for which he sent it. Our vain
imaginations are not cast down; our rebellious lusts are not mortified; our
minds are not humbled; our compassion toward others in affliction is not
stirred up; our hearts are not weaned from this world: wherefore if the hand of
God at any time be upon thee, presently enter into examination with thy self,
and deal impartially with thy soul, and humble thy self mightily, if thou
expect deliverance: For God delights not in thy tribulation, but delays only
until thou art prepared for deliverance.

Object. I have examined all my ways, and humbled my self greatly, and been
very earnest in prayer long, and yet I see no end of trouble.

Ans. Perhaps thou do make too much have, whereas the course which God
prescribes, is to wait patiently the Lords leisure. Hab. 2. 4. The vision is
yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie: Though
it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. The
thing to be observed hence is, that no man must indent with God concerning the
time of deliverance, but must patiently endure the Lords leisure and pleasure.
The best means to hasten relief in tribulation is, to throw thy self down
before God, saying, Here I am Lord; do with me what thou will; I am content
to wait thy leisure, and to tarry until thou in thy wisdom see it fit to
release me.

Object. I see no means of redress, though I tarry never so long, I am in
great want, and debt, and weakness, and have many to relieve, and have no
friends left.

Mark what the Spirit says, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and be doing
good; so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Again,
verse. 25. I have been young and now am old, yet never saw I the righteous
forsaken. Remember moreover, how the Lord provided for the widow of Sarepta, 1
King. 17. His hand is not now shortened.

Lastly, if thou keep faith and a good conscience, and resoluest that thou will not use any indirect means to help thy self or thine; but depend upon
God, thou shall be sure with poor Lazarus to be received into the Kingdom of
Heaven when thou dyest; this will make amends for thy tribulation.

But, me thinks, I hear some Rachel complaining, that she has lost a gracious
son, and can have no more; yea, as worthy an husband as the world can yield,
how should she bepatient? Ans. 1. Thou have not lost that which God has found.
2. God has given thee his Son to be thy husband, will not this make amends
for thy son and thy husband? Is not he better-then ten sons and husbands.

In a word, let thy tribulation be what it may; let there be never so many
impediments, never so strong adversaries, never so weak means: Nay, let thy
case be desperate in the eye of man, yet if thou can believe and wait, the
Lord will surely in good time send thee help from his holy place, as he has
done to all Saints which did put their trust in him. How can it be otherwise;
seeing his Name is still wonderful, his Power alsufficient, his wisdom
infinite, his Truth infallible, his Love immutable, his Promise and Grace as
large as ever, and our Mediator Jesus Christ making intercession for us, the
same for ever? David, Ps. 37. 37. bids us, mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright: for the end of that man is peace. And it is worth the marking
also, which Saint Paul says of himself, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. No man stood with
me, notwithstanding the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, and I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom.

Upon what ground does Paul speak this? surely, because he believed. So then,
if we believe Gods promises made in the Word, we also may say as boldly as
he, The Lord will deliver us from every evil work, and will preserve us unto
his heavenly Kingdom.

Seeing then all our tribulation comes from the Lord, and he deals with us
most wisely and lovingly; and never sends any tribulation, but for some good
end; as namely, his own glory, the example of our weak brethren, or our own
good, in trying, purging, quickening us, and heaping more glory upon us: And
lastly, seeing he is with us in all tribulation, and helps us to bear it,
and has promised to give a gracious issue; we shall show our selves to be
very unreasonable men, if we will not from hence forth set our selves to be
patient in tribulation.

I will conclude with S. James 5. 10. Take my brethren, the Prophets, who have
spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of
patience. Behold we count them happy which inaure: Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy. Wherefore whatsoever your tribulation be, Be
ye also patient unto the coming of the Lord. To whom be glory for ever and
ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
TEARS OF THE Isle of Wight, shed on the Tomb of their most Noble, valorous,
and loving Captain and Governor, the right Honorable HENRY, Earl of
Southampton: who dyed in the Netherlands, Nouemb. 10/20 at Bergen-vp-Zone.

As also the true Image of his Person and Virtues, JAMES; the Lord Wriothesley,
Knight of the Bath, and Baron of Titchfield; who dyed Nouemb. 5/15 at
Rosendaell. And were both buried in the Sepulcher of their Fathers, at
Tichfield, on Innocents day. 1624.

They were lovely and pleasant in their lives; and in their death they were not
divided. 2 Samuel 1. 23.

-- Quis tali fando
Temperet a lachrymis? --
Honoris, Amoris, Doloris Ergo.

HENRYE JAMES WRIOTHESLEY Anagram: HERE I SEE MANY WORTHIES LY.
Here ye see two but two's not all: for why
In these two Worthyes many Worthyes dye.
O what a generation's here surprised
Of Noble blood which was in them comprised?


Printed at London by William Jones dwelling in Red(...)

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON; All Peace and
Happiness.
My very Honorable good Lord:
IT has pleased God to make your Lordship Heir unto your most Noble Father,
and therefore I think you have most right to these Tears, which were shed for
him, and your renowned Elder Brother. If I did not know by mine own
observation, that your Lordship was a diligent Obseruer of all your Fathers
Virtues (touching which also, you have a daily Remembrancer) I would exhort you
to behold the shadow of them delienated here, by those which much admired him
living, and shall never cease to honor his Memory, and love those that do any
Honor unto him. The Lord increase the Honor of your House, and rejoice over
you to do you good, until he have Crowned you with Immortality.

Your Lordships at command, W. JONES.

TO THE READER.
COming lately to London, I found in public and private, many Monuments of
honor, love and grief, to those Great Worthies; the Earl of Southampton, and
his Son, which lately deceased in the Low Countries, whiles they did Honor
to our State and Friends. And because it cannot be denied, but we of the Isle
of Wight (of whom that Noble Earl had the special Charge and Care) were most
obliged unto his Honor: I thought it very meet to publish these Tears, which
(for the greater part) were shed in the Island long since for private use, and
adjudged to darkness; but that my self (being bound by particular duty to do
all Honor to these Gracious Lords) entreated that they might still live, which
not without importunity I obtained. And now they are set forth, neither for
fashion, nor flattery, nor ostentation; but merely to declare our love and
respect, to our never sufficiently Commended Noble Captain. So take them
without curiosity; and farewell.

Thine W. I.

Upon the Death of the right Noble and Honorable Lord, HENRY, Earl of
Southampton, Baron of Tichfield, Knight of the most Honorable Order of the
Garter: Captain of the Isle of Wight.
Mors vltima, linea rerum.
Quis est homo qui viuet and non videbit mortem? Ps.
Ye famous Poets of this Southern Islle,
Strain forth the raptures of your Tragic Muse;
And with your Laurea't Pens come and compile,
The praises due to this Great Lord: peruse
His Globe of Worth, and cke his Virtues brave,
Like learned Maroes at Mecenas grave.
Valor and Wisdom were in thee confined;
The Gemini of thy perfection,
And all the Graces were in thee combined,
The rich man's joy and poores refection.
Therefore the King of Kings does thee embrace,
For aye to dwell in just Astraeas place.
Naught is Immortal underneath the Sun,
We all are subject to Deaths restless date,
We end our lives before they are begun,
And marked in the Eternal Book of Fate.
But for thy Self, and Heir one thread was spun
And cut: like Talbots and his valiant Son. H. 6. 32. 1454.

Planet of Honor rest, Divinely sleep
Secure from jealousy and worldly fears,
Thy Soul JEHOVAH will it safely keep:
I, at thy Vrne will drop sad Funeral Tears.
Thou A'leluiahs unto God alone,
And to the Lamb that sits amidst his Throne.
I can no more in this lugubrious Verse:
Reader depart, and look on Sidneys Hearse.
FRA. BEALE;

Upon the much deplored Death, of the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of
SOUTHAMPTON, etc. Captain of the Isle of Wight. And of the Right Honorable,
JAMES, Lord WRIOTHESLEY, his most hopeful Son, and worthy Image of his
Virtues.
HENRY SOUTHAMPTON, Anagram; The Stamp in Honor.
'TWas near a fortnight, that no sun did smile
Upon this cloudy Orb; and all that while
The Heavens wept by fits, as their pale fears
Presented to them matters for their tears:
And all the winds at once such gusts forth sent
Of deep-fetch't sighs, as filled where they went,
The shoares with wracks; as if they meant the state
Of all the world, should suffer with that fate.
We of the lower sort, loath that our wings
By proudly soaring into Gods or Kings
Reserved designments, should be justly feared,
Fearing to search, stayed till the cause appeared.
Yet simply thought that Nature had mistaken
Her courses, so, that all her ground were shaken,
And her whole frame disioynted; wherewithal
We looked eich hour the stagg'ring world should fall.
Till by a rumor from beyond sea flying,
We found the cause: SOUTHAMPTON lay a dying.
O had we found it sooner, e're the thread
Of his desired life had quite been shred*
Or that pure soul, of all good men beloved
Had left her rich-built l^dge to be removed,
Yet to a richer Mansion! We had then
Prevented this great loss. Our prayers amain
Had flow'n to Heaven, and with impetu'ous strife,
And such united strength, su'ed for his life,
As should have forced th'allmighties free consent.
Not that we envy, or shall e're repent
His flight to rest; but wishing he had stood,
Both for our own, and for our countries good,
To Have closed our eyes; (who only now survive,
To wail his loss; and wish we so may thrive,
As we lament it truly.) That a race
Of men unborn, that had not seeene his face,
Nor known'n his virtues, might without a verse,
Or with less anguish, have bedewed his hearse,
But he was gone ere any bruit did grow,
And so we wounded, ere we saw the blow.
Thou long tongued Fame, that blabbest all thou
But send'st ill news to fly, where ere thou goe'st,
Like dust in March, what mischief did thee guide, know
This worst of ills, so long from us to hide?
That, whilst we dreamed all well, and nothing thought,
But of his honorable battails fought,
And brave atchieuements, by his doing hand,
Over any news could come to countermand
Our swelling hopes, the first report was spread,
Should stricke us through, at once: Southamptons dead.
Had it com'n stealing on us, and by slow
Insensible degree's, ben taught to go,
As his disease on him, 't had so prepared
Our hearts, against the worst that could be dared,
That, in the vpshott, our misgiuing fears
Would have fore-stall'd, or quallified our tears. Vti vulgo accipi(...)
fatum; pro (...) seris, (...) (...).

But thus to wound us! O distastrous * luck!
Struck dead, before we knew that we were struck.
Whence it is; that we so long a loofe did hover,
Nor could our wits, and senses soon recover,
TO express our grief, whilst others vainly strove
In time to outstripp us, who could not in love.
" Light cares will quickly speak; but great ones, crazed
" With their misfortunes, stand a while amazed.
Even my self, who with the first assayed
To lanch into this deep, was so dismayed,
That sighs blew back my Bark, and sorrows tide
Drove her against her course, and split her side
So desp'rately upon a rock of fears,
That down she sunk, and perish't in my tears;
Nor durst I seek to putt to Sea again,
Till time had won on grief, and scoured the Maine.
Even yet, me thinks, my numbers do not flow,
As they were wont; I find them lame, and slow.
My buisie sighs break off eich tender link,
And eyes let fall more tears, than Pen does ink.
O how I wish, I might not writ at all;
Not that I do repine, or ever shall,
To make SOVTHAMPTONS high prized virtues glory.
The eternal subject of my well-tuned story;
But loath to make his exequies and hearse
The argument of my afflicted verse.
Me thinks, it never should be writ, nor read,
Nor ought I tell the world, SOVTHAMPTON'S dea
A man above all praise: the richest soil
Of wit, or art, is but his lusters foil,
Falls short of what he was, and seru's alone,
To set forth, as it can, so rich a stone,
Which in it self is richer; of more worth,
Than any wit, or art, can blazon forth.
In peace, in war, in the country, in the Court,
In favor in disgrace, earnest and sport,
In all assayes, the blanke of every Pen,
THE STAMP IN HONOR, and delight of men.
Should envy be allow'ed, rather than speak,
What she must needs of him, her heart would break.
Religion, wisdom, valor, courtesse,
Temperance, Justice, Affability,
And what the School of virtues ever taught,
And mere humanity has ever raught,
We are all in him; so couch't so duly placed,
And with such liberal endowments graced,
In such a perfect mixture, and so free
From self- conceiptednesse, or levitie,
As if He only were their proper Sphere,
And They but lived, to have their motion there.
" Such greatness with such goodness seldom stood;
" Seldom is found a man, so great, so good.
Nor do I fall upon his worth, so much
To blazon it, as to give the world a tuch
Of what by his sadd fall, it self has lost.
" Great benefitts are know'en, and valued most
" By their great wants. We never knew to prize
Southampton right, until Southampton dy'es.
Yet had he died alone, some ease't had been,
His real living Image to have seen.
In his ripe Son, grow'n to the pitch of Man,
And who, in his short course, so swiftly ran,
That he outwent his Elders, and ere long
Was old in Virtue, though in years but young;
" Put on his Gown betime, and in his Down
Put on his Arms, to beautify his Gown.
But o, sad Fate! Prepost'rous Death would have
Him too, because so ready for the grave.
The Father was his aim; yet being loath
To leave the Son, now seen, he would have both,
And like a Marshall, or a Herald rather,
Surpised the Son to usher up the Father.
O that I could suppose my self to be
True Poet, raped into an ecstasy!
And speaking out of a redundant brain,
Not what is simply true, but what I feign,
That I might think the story I impart
But some sad fiction of that coining art!
How pleasing would th'adult'rate error be?
How sweet th'imposture of my Poesy?
What ever true esteem my life has gained,
I would have false, that this were also feigned.
But Grief will not so leave the hold it had,
But still assures me, it is as true, as sad.
You bonds of Honor, by th'allmighties hand,
Sealed, and delivered, to this noble Land,
To save her harmless from her debt to fate;
How is it, that you so soon are out of date?
You promised more, at your departure hence,
Than to return with your dear lives expense
Defaced, and cancelled. You most glorious stars,
Great ornaments both of our Peace and Wars,
Than which, there moves not, in Great Britains sphere,
Saving the Mouers self, and his Great heir,
A brighter couple; When you left our shore
In such great luster, you assured us more,
Than to return extinct. O vain relief!
To fill that state wirh joy, your own with grief.
You were not with Dutch joy received their,
As now, with sorrow, you are landed here.
OF if the period of your lives were come,
Why stayed you not to yield them up at home?
Where, the good Lady, Wife, and Mother both,
For right-diuided love, and true-plight troth,
And all the graces, that that sex has won,
Worthy of such a Husband, such a Son,
With de^re imbracings might have clipped your death,
And from your lips, have sucked your yielding breath,
And kneeling by your beds, have stretched your thighs,
And with her tender fingers closed your eyes.
Where many Olive branches, of ripe growth,
Might by their tears have testified how loath
They were to part, either from slip, or stock,
And many Noble friends, whose high minds mock
The frowns of stars, might with endeered spirits
Have rendered you, the tribute of your merits.
Why rather went you to a strange dull clyme,
Rich only in such trophies of the time,
In such post have, there to resign them, where
The foggie air is clogged with fumes of beer,
Amongst a people, that profainely think,
They were borne but to live, and live to drink,
A stupid people, whose indocil hearts
Could never learn to value your great parts,
As much unworthy of you, as unable
To judge of worth, the very scum and rabble
Of baptized reason? O why went you hying
To give to them the honor of your dying?
Yet with this point of grief, some comfort striu'es:
They only knew your deaths, but we your lives.
Or if you needs must to the state be sent,
Why did you not return the same you went?
The whole went hence: the better parts we lack;
And but the courser parts alone come back,
And scarcely parts; since in a state far worse:
We sent SOUTHAMPTON, but receive a corse.
Alas; what have Great HENRY'S merited,
That they by death should thus be summoned?
HENRY the great of France; and HENRY then
Of WALES the greater, Cynosure of men;
And now SOVTHAMPTONS HENRY, great in fame,
But greater far in goodness, than in name?
Had he but left his like, nor higher styled,
More blameless death had been, my self more mild
But since their lives scarce one, to make a doubt,
Traduce me, Envy, I must needs fly out.
Imprudent state of ours, that did not scan
Rightly, what'twas to hazard such a man,
To save ten thousand Holands, or of him
For Europes self, to venture but a lim!
" The building is more subject to decay,
" When such a pillar is removed away.
But, o I err: Dear Country, I confess,
Grief, and distraction make me thus transgress
All rules of Reason: Your designs are good.
O pardon me. And yet he might have stood,
Pardon again. Alas I do not know
In this distraction, how my verses flow,
But whilst I am my self, if ever thought
But tempt my heart, or tongue, but whisper, ought
Against your dread hests, may my bold tongue with wondor.
Rot as it lies, and hart-strings crack asunder.
But thou accursed Netherland, the stage
And common theater of blood and rage,
On thee I Will vent my uncontrolled spleen,
And stabbe the to the heart, with my sharp teene.
Thou whose cold pastures cannot be made good,
But with continual shour's of reeking blood;
Nor fields be brought to yeald increase again,
But with the seeds of carcasses of men.
Whose state, much worse than vs'rers, only thriues
By th'large expense and forfeitures of lives;
Yet bankerupt-like, who day lie for thy store
Without regard of payment, borrowst more.
Wherein in threescore years, more men of worth
Have perish't, than the whole country has brought forth
Since the Creation; and of lower sort
More have been forced to trauile through the port
Of ghastly death, unto the common womb,
Than well that lirtle bottom can entombe;
How art thou worthy, that to save thy harms
Or work them, this Ita christianus orbis vbique (...) solet.
new world should rise in arms,
And bandy factions? That for thy dear sake,
Kingdoms should join, and Countries parties take?
Cursed be thy Cheese and Butter; (All the good
That ^'re the world received for so much blood)
May maggots breed in them, until they fly
Away in swaims; May all thy Kine go dry
Or cast their Calves; and when to Bull they gad,
May they grow wild, and all thy Bulls run mad.
Better that all thy Salt and senny marshes
Had quite bin sunk, (as some whole-peopled parishes
Already are; whose towers peer over the flood,
To tell the wandering Seaman where they stood.)
Than that these Worthies only, should have crossed
The straights of death, by sailing to that coast.
Whose loss not all that State can recompense:
Nay; should their worths be ballanc't, not the expense
Of Spaines vast Throne, loss of the Monarchs self
And all his subjects, and the glorious pelf
Of both the Indies, whence his trifles come,
Nor of th'triformed Gerion of Rome,
With all his boystrous Red-caps, and the store
Of diuers-colour'd shauelings, that adore
That strange Chimera, with the lavish rent
That feed's them all, were half sufficient.
You Leiden-Doctors, how were you mistook?
How did your judgment step besides the book?
Where was your Art? that could not find the way
To cure two such, in whose known valor lay
Your Countries weal. For whom you should have show'n
The utmost of that Art, that e're was known
Or practiced, amongst artists; and have strove
To Have turned the course of Nature, and to have drove
Things to their pristin state, reducing Men
Merely to Elements, and thence again
Moulding them up anew, preserving life
In spite of death, and sharp diseases strife.
Dull leaden Doctors: (Leiden is too good,
For you, poor men, that never understood
More ways of Physic, than to give a drench
To cure the big-swolne Dutch, or wasted French.)
Pardon you neighbor Nations: what I had
Of reason's yours; but grief has made me mad.
How durst you to such men such boldness show,
As to practice with those parts you did not know?
Or meddle with those veins, that none should strike
But those, that had been practiced in the like?
Alas! you knew not how their bodies stood;
Their veins abounded with a Nobler blood,
Of a far purer dye, and far more rife
With active spirits, of a nimbler life,
Than e're before, you practiced on. May all
The sicknesses that on our nature fall,
And vex rebellious man for his foul sin,
Seize on you all throughout, without, within,
For this presumptuous deed, and want of skill;
And may such potions as have power to kill,
Be all your physic; yet, corrected, strive
To wear you out, and keep you long alive.
But, O, me think's I rave? It Is time to end,
When, against the rules I love, I so offend.
Pardon, you learned Artists: well I know
Your skill is great, and you not spared to show
The utmost of it. Yet when all is assayed,
The debt to God and nature must be paid.
You precious Vrus, that hold that Noble dust,
Keep safe the wealth, committed to your trust.
And you, dear Relics of that ample worth,
That whilom through your crenices shined forth,
That now have put off Man, and sweetly lie;
T'expect your Crown of Immortality;
Rest there reposed, untouched, and free from care,
Till you shall meet your souls, with them to share
In that rich glory, wherein now they shine,
Disdaining all, that is not like them; Divine.
Where I assured, again, to see, and greet you,
Resolve to weep, till I go out to meet you.
Ita non cecinit, at vere, pijssimeque flevit. Ille dolet vere, qui sine test
dolet.
Certain touches upon the Life and Death of the Right Honorable HENRY, Earl
of Southampton, and his true Image, JAMES, the Lord Wriothesley his eldest
Son.
TO THE READER.
REader, believe me, it is not Gain, nor Fame
That makes me put in my neglected Name;
Mong'st learned Mourners that in Sable Verse,
Do their last Honor to this doleful Hearse.
Nor did these Lords, by living bounty, tie
To Them, and to their Heirs my Poetry:
For, to speak plainly, though I am but poor;
Yet never came I knocking to their door:
Nor ever durst my low obscurity,
Once creep into the luster of their die.
Yet since I am a Christian, and suppose
My self obliged, both with Verse and Prose;
Both with my Pencills, and my Pens best Art;
With eye, tongue, heart, and hand, and every part
In each right Noble well-deseruing Spirit,
To honor Virtue, and commend true merit.
Since first I breathed and lived within the Shire,
That gives a Title to this honored Peer;
Since twelve long Winters I, my little Flock
Fedin that At Thorley, in the I Will of Wight.
Isle that (wal'd with many a rock;
And circled with the Maine) against her shore,
Hear's the proud Ocean every day to rore;
And sitting there in sunshine of his Glory
Saw his fair Virtues, read his life's true Story.
Who see's not, I have reason to make one,
In this Isle's, Churches, Countries common moan?
Or thinks that in his loss I have no part,
When the whole Kingdom seems to feel the smart?
Let him that list his griefs in silence mutter,
I cannot hold; my plaints I needs must utter:
I must lament, and sigh, and write, and speak,
Lest while I hold my tongue, my heart should break.
W. PETTY.

I. To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Southampton.
THe changing World, and the Eternal Word;
Nature, Art, Custom, Creatures all accord
To prove (if any doubted) that we must
(Since All have sinned) all die and turn to dust.
But (dear SOUTHAMPTON) since deserved praise
Came thronging on Thee faster then thy days;
Since thy Immortal Virtues then were seen
(When thy grave head was gray) to be most green;
We fools began to hope that thy life's date,
Was not confined to our common fate.
But that thou still should keep the worlds fair Stage,
Acting all parts of goodness: that Each Age
Succeeding ours, might in thy action see,
What Virtue, (in them dead) did live in Thee.
II.
But oh vain thoughts, though late, we find alas;
The fairest flowers that the earth brings forth are grass:
Wealth, Honor, Wisdom, Grace, nor Greatness can
Add one short moment to the life of Man.
Time will not stay: and the proud King of feanes;
Not moved by any Presents, Prayers or tears;
Does trample down frail flesh, and from the womb
Leads us away close prisoners to the tomb.
III. To both the Lords.
ANd you brave Lords, the glory of your Peers,
More laden with your Honors then your years;
Dear to Your Sovereign, faithful to the State;
Friends to Religion, ill men's fear and hate:
Death, as his Captives, here has laid full low,
And left your friends long legacies of woe.
Grief to your Country, to your house sad losses,
To Our Armies dread, to our designements crosses.
IIII. To the Living.
TEll me (ye living wights) what marble heart,
Weying our wants, does not with sorrow smart
To see those glorious Stars that shined so clear,
In our disconsolate dark Hemisphere:
To see these Pillars, whose firm Basies prop't
Our feeble State; the Cedars that oretop't
The ayric clouds, yielding to Birds a Neast,
Shadow and shelter to the wearied Beast:
Now by Death's bloody hand, cut down, defaced,
Their Light ecclipsed, and their height abased?
V. To Death.
YEt boast not (cruel Tyrant) of thy spoil,
since with thy conquest thou have won the foil:
For they (O happy Souls) divinely armed
Could not (though hit) be with thine arrows harmed.
Thus robbed, not of Being, but of Breath,
Secure they triumph over stinglesse Death;
And while their pure immortal part inherits
The heavenly bliss, with glorified Spirits;
Their dust does sleep in hope, and their good name
Liue's in the eternal Chronicles of fame.
VI. To the Hollanders upon the return of the Lords Corpse.
HOlland: it is known that you unto our Nation
Have long bin linc'kt in friendly Combination:
It Is known, that we to you have daily, duly,
All offices of love performed truly.
You still have had protection from our Forts,
Trade to our Towns, and harbor in our Ports;
When big-swolne Spain you threatend to devour,
We to your weaker joined our stronger power.
And our old soldiers willingly, vnprest,
Ran to your wars as fast as to some feast:
We manned your Cities, and instead of stones,
Helped you to build your Bulwarks with our bones.
Nor had your Castles now vnbattered stood,
Had not your slime ben tempered with our blood.
All this we did: and more are still content,
With men, munition, money to prevent
Your future ruin; Hence with wary speed
Our state sent over to your latest need.
Ten Noble heads, and twice ten thousand hands,
All pressed to execute their wise commands:
Among them our good Southampton, and his joy,
Dear James in heart a man, in age a boy.
But oh your fatal fields, unhappy soil,
Accursed Acheldama, foul den of spoil,
Deaths Hospital, like Hell the place of woe,
Admit all comers, but nere let them go;
Churl's to your aid, we sent strong living forces,
And you in lieu return us liuelesse corses.
Ah Noble Lords: went you so far to have
Your Death, and yet come home to seek a grave?
VII. To the young Lord.
BRight star of Honor, what celestial fires
(...) thy youthful blood; that thy desires
Mount up so fast to Glories highest Spheres,
So far beyond thine equals and thy years?
Whilst others Nobly borne, ignoblie stain
Their blood and youth with manners base and vain,
Thou to thy Fathers holy lessons lending
Thine ear; and to his liue's fair pattern bending
Thy steps; did daily learn for sport or need
Nimbly to mount and man thy barbed steed;
Fairelie thy serious thoughts to write or speak,
Stoutly upon thy foe, thy lance to break.
It did not with thine active spirit suite
To wast thy time in fingring of a Lute,
Or sing mong'st Cupids spirits a puling Dittie
To move some femall Saint to love or pity.
It Was Music to thine ear in ranged batle
To hear sad Drums to groan, harsh Trumpets ritle:
Or see, when clouds of blood do rent in sunder,
The pouders lightning, and the Canons thunder.
And when thou might at home have lived free
From cares and fears in soft security,
Thou scorning such dishonorable ease,
To all the hazards both of land and sea's,
Against Religions and thy Countries foes,
Frankly thy self and safety did'd expose.
O Sacred virtue thy mild modest glances,
Raised in his tender heart, these amorous trances,
For thy dear love so dearly did he weane
His youth from pleasures, and from lusts unclean:
And so in thy straight narrow paths still treading,
He found the way to endless glory leading.
VIII.
But soft (sad Muse) it is now no fitting task,
The praises of his well spent Youth t'vnmaske,
To sing his pious cares, his studious night's,
His thriftie days, his innocent delights,
Or tell what store of useful observations
He gained at home and mong'st the neighbring Nations.
Leave we this virgin theme untouched, untainted,
Till some more happy hand so lively paint it,
That all Posterity may see, and read,
His living virtues when he is cold and dead.
IX.
(SWeet Youth) what made thee hide thine amorous face,
And cheeks scarce downie in a steely case,
And like young Cupid under Mars his shield,
Among men of arms to brave it in the field?
Thought thou (o fondling) cruel death would pity
The fair, the young, the noble, wise and witty,
More then the foul and foolish, base and old?
Oh no: the tirant bloody, blind and bold,
All the wide world in single combat dares,
And no condition, sex or age he spares.
X.
YEt some supposed since in open fight
Thou had so often escaped his murdering might,
That sure he feared to throw his fatal dart
Against thine innocent faith-armed heart:
Yet sooth to say; it was thy sweet lovely youth
That so often moved flint-harted Death to ruth.
Though now entangled in thy locks of amber
The enamored monster dogs thee to thy chamber,
And there (alas) to end the mortal strife,
He ravish thee of beauty and of life.
XI. To Nature.
NAture, although we learn in Graces school,
That children must not call their mother fool.
Yet when we see thee lauishly to burn,
Two or three lights when one would serve the turn. Sil^.

When we perceive thee through affection blind,
Cocker the wicked, to the good unkind.
Ready the stinking rankest Weeds to cherish,
When Lillies, Violets, and sweet Roses perish:
We cannot choose but tell thee it is our thought,
That age or weakness (Nature) makes thee dote.
XII. Natures reply to the Censure.
Vain men, how dare ye, in your thoughts unholy;
Me, (nay your Maker) to accuse of folly?
And all impatient with your plaints importune
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, Death, Destiny, and Fortune?
When it is not these poor Instruments that cause
Your Crosses: but the never changing Laws
Of your Almighty, merciful Creator;
Who sitting supreme Judge and Moderator
Of men's affairs: does govern and dispense
All, by his All-disposing Providence;
And equally his glorious ends aduances
By good or bad, happy or hapless chances.
XIII. To the Right Honorable, Elizabeth, Countess of Southampton.
GReat and good Lady, though we know full well,
What tides of grief in your sad breast do swell:
Nor can in this our simple mourning Verse,
The thousand'th part of your deep cares rehearse.
Yet as the lesser rivulets and fountains,
Run hastening from the Fields, the Meads, and Mountains,
Their silver streams into the Sea to pour,
So flow our tributary tears to your;
That from the boundless Ocean of your sorrow
Our eyes new springs, our hearts new griefs may borrow.
XIIII. Eidem.
COuld we as easily comfort, as complain;
Then happily this our charitable pain,
Might merit from your grieved heart some thanks:
But oh, our griefs so swell above the banks
Of shallow custom, and the feeble fences
That are opposed by Reason, Art, or Senses;
That if Religion ruled not our affections,
And pacified our passions insurrections;
We should in mourning miss, both mean and scope,
And sorrow (Pagan-like) sans Faith or Hope.
XV. Eidem.
MAdam, though we but aggrauate your Crosses,
Thus sadly to repeat your former losses:
Whilst you sit comfortless, as all undone,
Mourning to lack an Husband and a Son.
Yet may it give your grieved heart some ease,
To sail with company in sorrow's Sea's;
To think in them you are not tossed alone,
But have the Kingdom partner in your moan:
To think that those for whom you weep, are blessed,
Lodged in the heavenly harbor, where they rest
Secure, nere more to grieve, to want, to fear,
To sin, to Die, or to let fall a tear.
So though heavens high Decree have late bereft you
Of two at once, yet has his bounty left you
Many fair daughters, and a son to inherit
Your Love, our Honor, and his Fathers Spirit.
W. P.

The least part of the shadow of Southamptons worth.
GReat Lord; thy loss though I surcease to mourn,
Since Heaven has found Thee: yet I Will take my turn
to wait upon thy Obsequies a while,
And traile my Pen, with others of my File:
And tell thy worth; the effects where of we felt,
That in the lists of thy command have dwelt.
Religions Champion, Guardian of that Isle;
Which is the Goshen of Great Britains soil:
How good, how great example died in thee,
When the Heir of both, preuents thy destiny?
And scarce a pattern's left for those behind
To view in one so Great; so good a mind.
Thou Man of Men, how little does thy Name
Need any Muses praise, to give it Fame:
Whose liu'ry gayn'd by merit, thou have worn,
And begged or bought esteem did hold in scorn:
But wast in darkest luster, chillingst cold
A perfect Dimond, though not set in gold;
And whether thy regard were good or ill,
Did (constant) carry one set posture still.
Needs must the world grow base, and poor at last,
That Honors stock so carelessly does wast,
How prodigal is she, that would send forth
At once, Two Noble Persons of such worth,
As Great Southampton, and his Martial Heir?
When scarce one Age yields such another pair.
Combined in resolution, as in fate,
To sacrifice their lives for good of State:
How forward was his youth, how far from fears:
As great in hope, as he was young in years.
How apt and able in each warlike deed
To charge his foe, to manage fiery steed?
Yet these but Essays were of what was he,
We but the twilight of his spirit did see.
What had his Autumn bin? we yet did spy
Only the blossoms of his Chieualry.
Death envious of his actions, hastened Fate
Atchieuements glory to anticipate.
In both whose periods, this I truly story
That earths best essence is but transitory.
You valiant hearts, that grudged not your blood
To spend for Honor, Country, Altars good:
Your high attempt, your Noble House do crown
That those to dye in Bed of Fame; not (...)
(...)e still admired, esteemed, beloved; for why
Records of Virtue, will not let you die:
Your Active Souls in fleshly gyues restrained,
Have Victory, and Palms of triumph gained:
Your Belgic Fever, does you Being give,
And Phoenix-like, you burn, and dye, and live.
Qui per virtutem peritat non interit. AR. PRICE.

Upon the Life and Death of the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Southampton:
And the Lord Wriothesly his Son Henry Wriothesly Earl of Southampton,
Anagram: Thy Honor is worth the praise of all Men.

GREAT WORTHY, such is thy renowned Name,
Say what I can, it will make good the same.
On such a theme I would even spend my quill,
If I had means according to my will:
And tho I want fine Poets Wit and Art,
I gladly streine the sinews of my heart:
And prostrate at the Tomb of these two Lords
My tongue, my pen, and what my Fate affords.
HENRY WRIOTHESLEY Earl of Southampton. Anagram: Virtue is thy Honor; O the
praise of all men!
SOme men not worth, but favor does advance
Some vulgar breath, some riches do inhance:
Not so the Noble Squire, of whom I treat,
^^ught makes him honored, but Virtues great
Cardinal, Moral, Theological,
Consider well and behold in him all
Yet notwithstanding all his Virtues, he
Lies now in dust and darkness: Hereby see
How Death can rent the hopes of worthy Squires,
And dash their proiects, and cross their desires.
Yet shall not Death triumph in Virtues fall,
For this his Name is still esteemed of all.
Death struck his Body; only that could die,
His Fame is fresh; his Spirit is gone on hie.
JAMES WRIOTESLEY, Baron of Tichfield, Anagram; Boyles in Field, to reach
worthy's Fame.
O Rare bright Spark of ancient Chiualry,
In tender years affecting warlike Glory!
O Noble Impe of that thrice Noble Sire,
What was it that thus kindled thy desire?
Surely 'twas thy presaging Spirit: For why!
Having small time thou would do worthily.
Thou took'st thy flight, because in heaviness
Would not see drowned a world of Worthiness.
Upon the sudden and immature Death of both the Lords.
HEre we see verified, All flesh is grass;
And the glory thereof like flower of grass;
The flower fades long before the grass:
So worthiest Persons before other pass.
A comfortable Conclusion.
THo Death on them has showed his utmost power,
Heavens King has crowned them with the Immortal flower.
GVILIELMVS IONE'S,
Capellanus mestissimus feci^ invit a Miner*
FINIS.

