A contrary (to a certain manis) Consultacion: That Adulterers ought to be
punyshed with death. With the solucions of his arguments for the contrary.
Made by George Joy.

Whosoever commits adultery with another man's wife, let them both dye the
death. Leui.xx. and

Deu.xxij. For thus shall thou quench this wickedness out of the common wealth
of this realm. AFter that a certain little book was put forth in latin, to
sustain the publyque judgment of them, that know the tongue entytled. The
counsel geuyng, that adultere^s should or ought no^ to be punyshed: I was
desired to write a contrary consultacion. That Adulterers ought to be
punyshed, and that in English, that all men might know, how parellous was
the title of the latyne book, and how ungodly the author thereof had perverted
and wrested the holy scryptures to make the^ seem to serve his detestable
error. But not long after this latin writer recanted and altered the title of
his book, permittyng al his false arguments, weak reasons and his vain
probacyons for his part to stand still, nether reca^ted ne removed. Which
monstrose book having yet so many false arguments, nothing now
correspondynge the new title, when it was read, I was the more importunelye
of many desired to confute it, and to put forth m^ book in English. All be
it some there were, which seemed to be offended, that I answered not in latyne,
which ought rather to have been offended with so false and unlearned a book to
be put forth of any of their famylie, and also to have estiewed the dedicacio^
thereof, that afterward, as he was compelled to recant the title, so is he not
able to defend his book, ne to iustyfie his arguments made for Adulterers not
to be punyshed. And of what learning and judgment, and how affected were
they (thyncke ye) which perusyng the book before it was printed, praised it so
hyghly? Oh wicked flatery. How sweet is this evil? The professors of Gods
word and the dyscypels of Christ, this writer would not to move, to counsel
nor to excyte the magystrates to punysh adultery. Where I ask this man by the
way, whether god almighty be not ever one, and the same God, whose will, as it
is immutable, constant and ferme, so are his just judgments and
commandments constante perpetual and i^uariable: as the Psalm.xviij.
and.cxviij. and his.v. book of Moses expressly declares. Again, whether
adultery be not as earnestly forboden to us, at it was and is to the Jews? And
whether adultery be not now as great and as detestable a sin before God, and
al godly men, as it was then? Is not adultery now as great a corrupcyon,
iniurye, sclaunder, and hurt to Christ's church and to all common wealths, as
it was in times past^ And to be short. Whether it reigns not grow, rote,
sprede, and take place every where as rankly vnshamefacedly, and as commonly
now as ever it did, sith there is no punyshement ministered for it, neither of
the ecclesiastic nor secular sort? Forasmuch the^ as all this is truth let
neither the seclare magistrates wink at this offense, let no man defend the
crime, nor the professors of Gods word cease to spe^e, ne to write excitinge
and exhorting all estates to their abounde^ duties and offices, enjoined them
of God, puttinge the word into their mouths, and sword into their hands,
least for our negligence and winkinge at so greuouse offense, God as he has
done in times past, punyshe both the realms, and the head rulers with all
the whole subjects thereof. When therefore chanced upon this book, so entytled:
That Adulteres should not be punished, and perceyuinge the title to be
directely against Gods word, against all good ^iuill ordinances, natural and
written laws, me thought it was an ungodly and an euilll counsel, which is
ever worst of all to the counselor him self And therefore ^beinge the just
desyers of many, I addressed me to give a contrary counsel. For never was
there any time ne nation more corrupt with this crime of adultery, then such,
as under the color of the Gospel, where no punishment is ordined, ru^ne into
the licenciouse liberty of the flesh, chaste matrimony contempned. Insomuche
that as we may conjecture by the scriptures, it pro^ostiketh the world to draw
fast to an end, and provoke the hasty wrath of God suddenly to destroy all,
and to come to judgment. And therefore I se it to be more godly counsel, to
punish justly this great crime so wide spread into so great hurt and
corrupcuion of the churches and common wealth. Right heavy may every Christen
heart be to se sin and wickedness take such strength and courage in a Christen
realm, that any man under any pretense of holiness and charity should stand
forth to defend the cause of so notable sinners unpunished. To whom this
patron of Adulterers gives his sinful counsel, I can not tell, he is so
sliper a serpent of so variable colors of contradicions, correccions I would
say, now counsellinge the preachers, and then dissuadinge the Discipels of
Christ, and ^naue aduertisinge the Magistrates, now to have them punished,
and then to have them not punished^ now with the word, and then with the
swearde. To give this counsel to auye private man or preacher, he spends his
pen in vain. For no private person usurps the office of a public
Magistrate in punishinge this open crime with death. And yet I herd of a man
in this realm, which taking the man with his wife, slew him. Whom the law
could not punish for so doing. Nume.xx^
And Pinhas the son of Eleazar the Priest (...) the Israelite, and the
Madianite woman both through with his spear, as they lay. And God allowed it
for a just deed, that pacifyed his wrath. So hainously hates God the sin. If
this writer be so malepert, as to give his counsel to the kings majesty, and
to his counsel, he condempneth him self two manner wise by his own words,
ones he takes the autotorite out of their hands to punyshe them with death,
calling it the cruel seueryte of Moses law now abrogated, and may no more
be put in ure. Another is this: He says: That if the tranquyllite of the common
wealth requires death for the offense, and the magistrates make the law, he
says not against it. But yet he constantly affyrmeth it, that law to be
neither profitable nor necessary. Whereof it follows him to consent to a law
neither necessary, nor profitable. But I argewe thus: What so ever law
perteyneth to the public tranquillite of Christ's church and conseruacion of
the common wealth, the same is both profitable and necessary. But Gods saw
is to punyshe adultery with death for the tranquillite and common wealth of his
church: wherefore his law is both necessary, and profitable. But here this
man will deny the minor, and say that law was given, but to the Jews, and is
now abrogated. But his saying is false: for this law of punishment with
death is the law of nature, whereof the ten precepts are grounded, and can
not be abrogated. Neither is there any law abrogated, which bears in it
self the honor of God, and the love to our neighbor: but to punish
adultery with death pertayneth to Gods honor in his word to be obeyed and
observed for the love of our neighbors, which else should suffer
intollerabler injuries, then to have all his goods taken from him: wherefore it
ought to be more punished then theft. Is not a man's wife, or husband, or
daughter, or servant morderer to them, then their temporal goods as horse,
kowe, etc? God is the God of the Gentiles, and tendereth the preseruacyon and
tranquilite of our common wealth and church, as greatly as he did the Jews.
Wherefore the laws of his honor, of our says, and mutual love must be
given to us, as well as to them. To take away, and to cut of putryfyed and
corrupt members from the whole body, lest they poison and destroy the body,
is the law of love to the whole body to be preserved: wherefore every law that
bears this love in it self, is the everlasting will of god, made by the same
spirit, which is one and the same of both y^ testamentes, and must needs stand
ferme and inviolable, according to his own saying by his Prophet: Psalm.xviij.
^.^xviij.
Lord thy judgments are egall ferme, fast and just. And all thy judgments
shall endure for ever. Wherefore it is plain that they are not abrogated, as
this young and new orator would persuade. Saint Paul beholding the morals and
judicials of God, affirms constantly them to be both perfect and
profitable.ij. Timo.iij. both to teach to reprove vice, to correct sin and
to instruct man. Now for as much as the judgments of God be so profitable so
perfect and so necessary, what man dare be so bold either to abrogat, to alter,
to minish, or to swade y^ Magistrates not to execute the^^ so far of should they
be to write and to affirm them to be neither profitable nor necessary, but to
be cruel blody banished from the Christen common wealths. Master Bullyngerus,
a man of an excellent knowledge and highly learned, a man of a pure judgment,
in his book of ye holy state of wedlock, and also in his.x. sermon of his ij.
decadis, constantly affirms. The punishment of dath for adultery, neither to
be abrogated nor changed, no not of the gentiles, as witnesses lex Iulia
Romano^u^. And shall we Christianes be more lice^ciose to sin then the
Heathen? Into our shame and conde^pnaciun is this written. The grauite of y^
sin, God ever expressed by the judgment and punishment annexed. What
judgment God commands to be done upon adulterers his eternal will and word
yet declares. But they y^ would either abrogate, or take away the punishment:
yea, or minish it, declare the^ selves either to make adultery no syn at al, or
vslesse to esteem it then the Heathen, or else not so great a sin now as it
was in the time of Moses. But the commandment of God is ever one and y^ same,
the trangressio^ and offense is against the same God, that yet abhors
iniquite. Now since the offense is the same, and the sore al one, why should it
not have the same punishment and the same remedy to cure it, and to expel it
out of y^ come^ weal of Christ's church? or wherefore should man dispense
with, or abrogate more the punishment of adultery, then the punisheme^tes of
theft and murther^ Nor long ago, It was thought justly to be punished with the
sword, and so put in execucion of some persons, and why is it not still
executed? Is it thought worthy in women and not in ^en? Psa (...)
God is not acceptor of persons. If this writer therefore being put a pryuate
person, so usurps not to him self only the autorite to give counsel, and
to persuade adulterers not to be punyshed, but be content to permytte to
another the same liberty to write and to counsel, I would give the contrary
counsel: even Adulterers to be punyshed iustelye by Gods word. For often and
sharpelye God commands with terrible commynacions, the rulers to minister
justice and judgment, punyshynge the enormities of those open crimes, which
as they defyle and corrupt the Christen common wealths, so by no wholesome
exhortacyon, ientle monicion, ne preaching of the word may they else be
repressed, and ^xtincted? Wherefore else has God ordined over every church and
reaulme (...) princes and magyltrates, puttinge the sword and scept^e in their
hands, but to punyshe according to his word and commandment such grenouse
distuerbers, sclaunderers and destroiers of the commone wealths. For who^ the
word can not refrain, God has ordyned the ^werde to repress. The sacred
integryte therefore of this Christ's holy church, y^ inviolable honor of holy
matrymony ordined of God: the preseruacyo^ of ye private and public peace: al
honesty: godly zeal to virtue, to the salvation of our souls and to Gods
glory should constrayne every Christen heart to counsel, to exhort and to
excyte all christen magistrates to cut of this contagyose kanker of adultery
from among us, lest in further crepynge, as it daily corrupts the whole
body of this noble realm so shall it else be at last so incurable, that as Titus
Linius of the Romans complained. Neither the vice nor yet the ^uste remedy
wylbe suffered, prouokinge the heavy wrath of God to be powered forth upon us,
as the most terryble ex^mples and stories written for our wa^^ynge threaten
us, teaching us also how detestable a sin it is before God and man, which God
so abhorred, that with as greuouse a death he as strayghtly commands it to
be punished, as any other blasphemy committed against his own majesty, or for
killing father and mother. If the Christen Magistrates therefore will turn from
them selves, and from their regions the present wrath of God imminent, as did
Pinhas and Moses from the common weall of Israel by slaying the Adulterers in
their days, ^um.xxv.
let the^ restore, promoue spedely, and stablishe purely the Christian religion
placed in her own old honor and integrite, not mixed with any humane profane
tradi^ions, all papistry clean swept out of our churches, and justly
punish open obstinate, incurable sinners, lest for these two impedimentes the
Gospel denied us, ^u.xxxiij.
as they shall be sharp thorns in our eyes, and spears in our sides: so
shall God for sufferynge such open whordom and adultery unpunished deal with
us as he dealt for the same sins with the commonaltie of his peculiare
people: first by Nohas flood, then by Nebuchadnezar, and at last by Titus
themprour. And even therefore to punish common and impenitent Adulterers with
the swearde do I counsel by Gods word borne by the judgment and counsel of
all the Godly learned writers, that now write in latyne and in other tongues.
This added: If the wyckednes be haunted without al fear of God and shame of
men, so commonly, openly and desperatelye accustomed; that otherwise it will
not be repressed. Supposed always that the Christen Magistrates and Godly
preachers thereto consent, lenite joined with charity called into their
counsel. But what charity? Not that fond charity, which so preposterously
pitieth an open indurat Adulterer, and the e^rand accustomed strong thief, that
neither for their obstinat incorrigible crimes nor for any como^zele to
christian brothre^, would have ye magistrates exec^t their just office inioined
of god, nor gods and y^ realms just laws executed. But as she laboreth by
such blind piete to deliver the strong thief from the gayelhouse, even so by
like sinistre charity coupled with as lewed ^eni^e couselleth she, fleshelye
Adulterers to live in their whordome unpunished, maintayning this syn the
original of al wickedness into the destruction of the common wealth and great
damnacion of many all shameless audacite added to their deep roted iniquite. But
that charytie and lenite, would I have called into counsel, for this just
punyshement, which is so clear eyed, that she can se what thing she may do by
Gods word, and when she may obtain her purpose, and also knows, how much she
owes to the fraylte of the weak corrigible at a time ouercomen by some great
temptacyon. And how much she owes to the desperate indurate syn^ers, which
having, or else may have their own, yet like insaciable beasts, all fear of
God despised provoke them selves and other unto this detestable fylthynes. This
charity therefore (I say) do we enbrace, which seeks the glory of God, the
kepinge of chaste wedlock: yea, rather the public wealth and peace of many
men and women to be kept pure from this vice, then the life of a few (in
co^p^rison) pestilent incorrigible persons, which justly deserve to dye by
Gods laws. Some thinck, it is to hard and to cruel a law to punyshe
Adulterers with death. But these persons bliudened with the custom of the
sin so long unpunished, either are they gyltye themselves or else al fear set
a part, consider they not the terrible majesty of him that said: Thou shall
not commit adultery. Wherefore if I had not seen this greuouse offense so
frequented with out al punishment and shame and fear of God, and this writer
so far to have erred in wrestinge the scriptures to mayntaine this wickedness
contrary to some men in private commonicacion, and also in open sermons
exhortinge the magistrates justly to punish^ adultery: I would have winked at
his fond zele and blind charity. Albe it, his blind love to him self in
pleasinge him self has openly for a show of his latyne tongue and greek set
forth his book more to exercise his style, the^ to give us any godly doctrine,
which book since it is put forth to sustain the public judgment, I can not
but say my mind for the defense of the truth, and confutacyon of lies. For I
judge eeuery professor and minister of the word to be the same to the church,
as is the good Magistrate, and citesen to the city, which as they will suffer
nothing to grow that may destroy the cite and common wealth, even so should
the professor suffer no vice, ne false doctrine nor sinner unpunished in the
church: whereby the congregation is corrupted, and grievously sclaundered, and
turned from the fear of God, who be feared and praised for ever. Amen.

But let us hear, what this writer says. Into the reproach and rebukes of
them, who^ he judges not to approve his book and title thereof: he says thus:
But I meruel at this ungodliness (shall I call it) or rather a love to them
selves, which are wont so greatly to abhor the^ that are slyden into vices,
as though their selves were Gods upon the earth, or utterly clear from the
same spots. Lo. Adultery is with this man but a little spotte, a moot, a little
sliding amiss in this ma^s eye. For what sin else is it, yt he in his book
defends? who there else ^end al his arguments then into this end, that
Adulterers should not be punished, according to his his first title an
arguments of the whole book? Behold also how spyghtfully he depraueth good
men for abhorringe adultery, and would have it justly punished. Neither is
therre now almost any man, their manners are so corrupt, but he will tell forth
other menis offenses to show them selves thereby the more pure and honest.

Here may ye se, of what spirit the man is carried into the rebukes an fool
hardy judgment, reprehending and deprauing other godly ministers, which in
pulpits dampne and abhor these open obstinate Adulterers, exhortinge the
Magistrates to punish it by Gods laws. As if they should preach against
this horrible vice, showing with Paul. What an offense it is to take the
me^bres of christ and make the^ the members of an whore to violate holy
wedlock, to pollute the temple of God, to dishonor his high majesty, to
sclaunder his holy church, to separat that as God joins, to poison the whole
common wealth, exhortinge the rulers to punish the crime. These men for so
preachinge, he calls them scornfully, Gods of the earth, and judges them
to set forth their own honesty and goodness by sclaunderyng other me^ and
telling forth their sins. No sir, we sclaunder them not, ne tell we forth
their sins. They are their own open filthy deeds, which ye defend, that
disclose them. If ye know any of us that are against your book guilty, and
would kouer our sin with rebukinge aduoutry in open pulpits, or writing or
exhortinge rulers to punish it, be you our accuser to make your matter the
beter, ye once exhorted a man to not flater, but s^arpely to rebuke vice. And
now I perceive ye did it to have the same office your self well remembringe
the comyk: That the truth gets hatered and obsequye friends, ye shall by
this book and this defense get ye many Adulterers to friend and to stand one
your side.

But this hatered, this so bitter i^digu^cio^ in private professors not only
against the vices, but against the men, I can not tell, whether it becomes
men.

Should we not hate those open sinners and their offenses, which God so
abhors and al godly men, that even the persons we are commanded to
estiewe, to neither drink ne eat with them, nor to have any conversation
with them? Then he says:

Namely them which sin of nature and not of will.

Here it would be asked this great learned oratore, whether his Adulterers syn
not of will, but against their wills, only of nature? There is no actual syn,
but it is vnluntary. Adultery is actual, wherefore it is a voluntary sin.
This were else in deed a good defense for his Adulterers to say, their sin is
so natuaall, that it is against their wills, and so not worthy punishment. At
last to mitigate their sin he says: If one commit a little greuoser syn of
weakeues, how do these men take on?

Suerly if Adulterers had no beter patron then this poet to extenuate, and
defend their cause, they are like to suffer perpetual hell torments, if they
repent not in time, albe it they here escape the Magistrates hands. For these
Adulterers whose cause he takes to defend, and we would prove them worthy to
be punished according to Gods laws, sin neither of wekenes, nor of
frai^tie, nor yet against their wills. For they have, or else may have their
own wives and the women their own housba^des. But they are such as be so
married to their own lusts, that they obey them runninge hedlongs without
any resistance, or fear of God, and his precepts into their own fleshely
desyers, yea it takes daily such rote and custom, that as in other countries
dronknes is rekened for a virtue, so is adultery now commonly but a praised
laughter, and has done one the name of praise and virtue among the wicked.
Also now this wicked excuse is now invented. That they are not ashamed to
say: after they have been long married having many children by their wives,
when their lusts, move them to another, I was married young against mywill. And
even now what reasons and business begin to arise for diuorsements? whether the
unguilty part after the diuorsement may marye another, or what shall the guilty
or unguilty do, if he or she cannot live sole, and what if both be guilty? And
who broke wedlock first? which all these shameless ungodly contencious and
wicked despicions were clearly ceased, if according to Gods laws yet excuted
in some christen churches, or after the ciui^e laws made by emprours adultery
were punished. Then he say th:

If I might freely say my mind in the fre church of the Christen, I verily and
constantly judge it, neither to be profitable nor necessary, open Adulterers
taken in adultery, to be punished with death.

Lo, here have ye this manis corrupt judgment, and his sinful sentence.
Now if the Magistrates judge otherwise (as he here after qualifieth and
quidifieth his saying) according to gods laws: so must there sentence, and
Gods sentences to, be neither profitable nor necessary. But God which is
the everlasting wisdom constitutinge his come^ wealth defended with so many
good and just laws, to be by them preserved, thought it both necessary and
profitable, whose will is so immutable, that even the Gentiles were compelled
by the law of nature to f^low the same judgments. Example ye have of Tha^ar.
Genesisxxxv^^
And what plages did God cast upon Pharao and his house for taking Sarai from
her housbande Abraham, Gene.xij.
and yet had not Pharao to do with her? Pharao doing it of ignorance. For when
he kuewe her to be another man's wife, he sent her to him again. In such
reverence had even the very heathen holy wedlock, as the law of nature,
which they dirst not violate into a testimony against us in this matter to
rise against us in the day of judgment. Again: when Abimelech took Abraham's
wife, Gene.xx.
did not God tell him, he was but a dead man? and yet had he not offended with
her. He threatened him death with all his and the king knew not she was his
wife, but took her for his sister: so fearful were the heathen kings to
violate matrimony, and what death they looked for, if they broke it. And shall we
Christians being under the Gospel and Gods laws grounded upon the law of
nature, either defend adultery or not move the Magistrates to punish it? If we
se it not punished neither by excommunicacion, nor by the sword shall the
Christen professors hold their tongues and pens, as would this writer have us
to do? Oh wiked silence. A faithful dog lyinge at his masters door, will
bark and bight to, if the thief come nighe to break in, and to rob his
master, and shall a Christen professor and minister of Gods word and of his
laws, hold his peace, saying, God robbed of his glory, his laws and
commandments broken his holy so ancient institucio^, never yet altered, now
violated contemned and trode^ under foot unpunished? yea and that among the
Christianes? This one thing dare I constantly say: That except adultery be
punished with death, as God commanded, or else now with pains as greuose: as
it shall be the greatest sclaunder to the realm and to the Gospel, so shall it
be one of the just causes, wherefore this realm shall be plaged, and that
grievously: yea, and the cause of the damnacion of many. This did faithful
Iosephe well se, Gene.xxxi^
and consider when his Lady and misteres queen of Egypt provoked him thereto,
and resisted it. This did holy Job well ponder, when he said: Job.xxxi.
If my heart has but lustyd after another manis wife, let mine own be abused.
For I know that this iniquite requires the sentence of death. Now if in the
law of nature, when as yet the punishment thereof was not written, but in menis
hertes this abominable adultery was so detested and the pains of death were
executed and threate^ed the^, much greater pains abide them, that now know
the Lords will both in heart written and in express words, and yet contempne
it and break it. So that now we are neither ignorant, how God abhors this
wickedness, and what punishment he has decreed for it. There is no externe
transgression of any of the commandments, but according to the grauite of
the sin, God ever of his justice ordined and decreed in writing the just
form in punishinge it, which pains are yet executed of them to who^ he has
given the sword. And what autorite has this young orator, or any man more to
abrogate the only punishment for adultery, the^ pains for murder blasphemy,
theft, or sinytinge of parents? Thus says the Lord God (and no man) whose
will and word is everlasting, heaven and earth sooner to perish then one jot
of his law to passeo^er. Whosoever commits adultery with any manis wife, shall
die to death, both the man and the woman, because he has broken wedlock
with his neighbors wise. Leui.xx.
The same law is rehearsed also in Deuteronomy.xx. Deute, xx.
If this man had po^dered well the high terrible majesty and eternal will
and pour almightye of him that spoke and decreed this just judgment: he
would not make so light a side slidynge of adulterye, ne take upon him to
defend their cause against Gods word, nor yet to excuse Adulterers, and to
abrogate the decre of God, ne counsel Magistrates to do contrary to Gods
word, ne rebuke and condemp^e the professors and teachers of the word for
doing their office inioined the^ of God exhortinge the rulers to punish this
e^ormite and common pestilence and destruction of common wealths. Among the
Heathen Leprianis. The Lepria^s law.
Adulterers were carried bound drawn through the city, i^. days, and
afterward as long as they lived, were despised, shamed and forsaken of al
honest persons. Among the Locrenses. Zaleucus Zaleucus.
forbode adultery under this pay^e. That the transgressor should have both
his eyes put out. And when his own son did offend, he vode the judges, as
judges put out one of his eyes. And ye other eye did him self put out as a
father. Iu the noble Germans, Germans.
before they received the christen faith: the punishment of an Adulteres stood
in the power of her housband which might at the lest thrust her only in her
smock out of his house and beat her naked with rods before all the cyty as
Cornelius Tacitus writes. Opilius Opilius his law.
Macrinius emprour of Rome used to punish Adulterers with fire, throwing them
both bownd together into the fire where after there was a common law called
lex Iulia: Lex Iulia.
which decreed Adulterers to be punished with the sword, which law stood in
strength in S. Hieroms time, which mencioneth and allows it. And the same
law de stupris and adultery did the christen emprours receive. And of
Iustiniane is it confirmed and ^ecreed lib.iixi. titu.xviij. de publicis
Iudic^s. In the laws of Bamburgh ye same imperial law is executed, and
confirmed of the Emprour Charlis.v. anno. M.CCCCC.XXX. and.M.CCCCC.XXXII. at
Auspurg and Regensburch. Now if the offense were considered but even as the
Heathen judged in the law of nature, and as yet the civil law esteem it,
how detestable a crime it is and how perniciose to the common weal, settinge al
affeccions, evil customs and the negligence of rulers a side. And would way
what plages hang over the reaulme where it is permitted unpunished, what and
how greuouse offense it is in Gods sight, al christen men would desyer it to
be punished, and thereto exhort al rulers as in times past. For verily,
adultery is the destruction, and the great dishonor of Gods first ordinance.
A da^pnable wickedness procedinge from the devil out of idleness and excess,
and out of the flesh, contrary to the spirit of God, a shameful
unfaithfulness, a voluntarye peace breakinge, a shameless periurye. Wedlock was
first of all ordined of God, a natural copulacio^, never yet altered. And the
married persons smite a perpetual cone^aunt, never to divide their bodies
ioi^ed of God into one flesh God and all the congregation with the angels
called into record. They promise faith and truth with hands and mouths the
one to the other. Now if it be so small an offense, as of frailte of nature of
weakness, against manis will, but a little spot, a slidinge amiss, as this man
extenuateth and initigateth the crime, to dissemble with God, angels, and men,
to trede under fo^e truth and faith, to forswere before God and so holy a
company, to call them all into witness of a false promise, then might he have so
iustelye stretched forth his pen to have payn^ed the defense of Adulterers
and made so many arguments for their vnpunishment in so counselling the
Magistrates. why does he not as vehemently dissuade the punishment of murder
and theft? To stele manis goods is worthy death. And what is more dear to man
then his wife, even his own body? Solomon waying theft and aduoutry together
proves Proverb.vi.
aduoutry to be much more greuose offense. If it be so, it ought more sharply
to be punished then theft. Also besides many greuose inconue^ences, this
happens. That the right ayers oftentimes be defrauded of their heretage for
ever. I passover the murders poissouinge batails, and treasons with other
infinite destruccions that have comen of adultery, and yet daily ensues. But
yet the ecclesiastic teachers, he would have the^ by no zele nor title to
move the rulers to execute justice and Gods law upon adulterers. For so to do,
he calls it such cruelty as becomes no preacher.

If the Magistrates neglecte their office in punishinge open malefactors, is it
cruelty and anger, the preachers to excite and to exhort them with Gods word
to do their duty? Wherefore else did God command the Levites to take the book
of the law and read it continually to ye kings? And that in dontful
judgments they should call the priests to show the^ what they should do
according to God his word, commaundinge the kings to judge as the priests
should teach them out of Gods law. What else are all the sermons and
comminacions of the prophets, with the parell of their lives, kindlinge and
stering the kings and rulers unto the punishementes and coreccions of the
transgressors of Gods laws? They were commanded to cry and cease not to
tell them their sy^nes in neglecting justice and Gods judgments, yea and
where the cause was urgent, necessite requiringe the defense of the religion,
their selves resisted, punished and avenged it with death doing ye office of
the seclare Magistrates. Moses was a man both holy and the myldest of all men,
the Levites were the ministers of the word. And yet Moses called them
together, moved with no little zele to avenge Gods glory, so that they went
from tent to tent, from door to door and with bloody hands slew their
brethren, and kinsfolcke to the number of 3000. ^xodi.xxxij. and.ij. ^um.xxv.
Moses him self killed the Egipcion for sinitinge one of his brethren. Again,
what blody murder made Moses and Pinhas the Le^ite upon Adulterers, ^hen
Pinhas smote both the persons through with his dagger, as they lay, and yet
were these ecclesiastik doctors, as this man calls us. Moses being a
spiritual preacher and prophet provoked the judges of Israel, saying: Let
every one slay their men, that thus have committed adultery wih Baal Peor And
yet says this writer both ignorantly and ungodly, to prove malefactors not to
suffer. That the Lord in the old testament wills not the death of sinners,
knowing not of what death God there speaks. Neither will we, ne any christian
Magistrate the perpetual death of da^pnacion of any sinner, but would him to
amend and be converted, but yet do not this wyshe and will take away the just
judgments of God, and punishment of any murderer, thief or Adulterer. God
there speaks of the death of the soul and not of the body. Neither wills
God by the text of Ezechiel his judicial laws to be abrogated, as this man
means, or else wherefore alleges he this text against the professors of the
word, that they should not iustigate the Magistrates to punish Adulterers?
The^ he makes this reason.

It is not read (says he) that Christ or any of his apostles bode or
commanded any adulterer to be punished with death ergo:

So is it not read, that Christ commanded the two thieves to be hanged yt dyed
with him: and yet did they instely suffer for their offenses according tu Gods
laws, Christ not saying against it. By this said reason a negatiuis, this man
would have noman for his crime to suffer death. For where is it read, that
Christ bode this particlare thief, or that murderer by name to suffer death?
But tell me (I pray you) said not Christ: I am not come to break the law,
but to fulfill it? Christ consequently approved and confirmed the judicial
laws saing: Whosoever kills, is bound gilty the judgment. Which he declared,
saying: who so smites with the sword, shall die with the sword. And what law
was it, whereof Paul says: (...). Timo.i. (...)
It is not ordined for the just man, but for the unjust, as for rebellers to
the Magistrates to parents, for murderers, for adulterers, etc? If the pain
and law made for adultery were abrogated, Paul would not have confirmed it,
as he did with those words yet left in his pistle, neither would he have so
threatened and feared the Corinthes, saying: Se that ye defyle not your selves
with adultery, as certain men did, for the which in one day there were slain
an hundredth and twenty thousand. Christ's Le^ite (of which ye speak so much)
was such: That for anger, for an obprobriose word, he pronounced them worthy
judgment, and to come before the counsel: wherefore he abrogated not the
judicial laws, but stablished them. For he that so narowly interpreted his
law, to not kill, that for being angry with his brothren, or for an
obprobriose word pronounces him worthy counsel judgment and hell fire,
think ye that the same law geuer does abrogate or mitigate the punishment for
the other most gre^ouse transgressions of ye greater precepts? Then argues he
thus out of the example of Christ, saying:

Christ expresses his mercy and forgeuenes both by examples and doctrine and
redempcio^, wherefore there ought non of his disciples to put any malefactor to
death, but likewise to forgive, and to follow his stepes.

Here belyke this man takes not the seculare Christen Magistrates for Christ's
Disciples, or else he would not them to put malefactors to death. But let them
be only the priests his Disciples. Who made this law, that priests should
save thieves, murderers and Adulterers? and that they should conuaye them from
the galowes? and that I should not say the truth before a judge, yea and take
an oath to, if he ask it of me? Who caused so many strong thieves to be saved by
their books? and sanctuaries to nourishe wilful theft and murder? was it not
the bishop of Romes law? But I will set an example of Christ's softenes and
le^ite against this man so full of fond pity and merciles mercy, where
Christ took cords making them into sharp whipps, wherewith in great anger and
violence he scourged out such fond pituose merchants out of the temple,
which took upon the^ so boldly without all fear of God to bring into his
church such licenciouse liberty and false doctrine, thereby rede^inge and
byinge by flatery the favor of Adulterers and thieves, when thereby Christ
taking upon him self the person of a prophet and bishop, and not of a king
ne Magistrate taught the professors of his word and his disciples to correct
the arrogant audacite of erroneouse teachers and writers, to blame and to
chasten them sharply, as it were with whippes, of which Christ's fact, it may
be well gathered, what may his successors do to such abusers of his word,
and deceyuers of his church with false doctrine. In deed there ought no
ecclesiastik Magistrate take the office of the seclare rulers upon him in
putting the malefactor to death. But whether one man may have both the
regiments in his hand I think, this man will not say against it. And then is
it true that the professor of the word and Disciple of Christ may execute
Gods work and his office, as the scripture calls it, and such kings are
called Gods: for that they sit in Gods place ministringe Gods work.
Christ him self was and is both priest and ki^ge preacher and judge, which
first showed him self to come to teach and to save ear, he would come to
judge and to condemn. But yet in his first coming he abrogated not his own
civil laws and judgments, which he eue^ then confirmed, i. Timo.i.
and his apostles did also write them to be obeyed and fered, i. Petri.ii.^^
which commanded to be kept most diligently, and al me^ to institute al
their publik and private judgments according to his word. Deuter.v^^^ xi.
It is plain, that this young writer knows not, what it is to be under the
law and under the Gospel, and who they be that are under either of them: For all that cry Lord Lord are not under the Gospel. I grant to him, that the
laws to punish adulterers and the^es, etc. are abrogated and not ordened for
chaste lyuers, true men and innocent persons living under the obedience of the
Gospel. But to these open indurate Adulterers, whose cause he defends, the
laws civil and judicials stand in their strength, and ought to be executed
upon them. This doctrine will we teach, whatsoever this man obiecteth, and will
tell the publik rulers that they do the works and judgments and justice of
God, whylis like expert and godly wy^e sourgens, they cut of from the body of
the city or common weal such corrupt and contagiose members as are Adulterers.
Although this man says constaintly:

He heals unhappily that killeihe the sick.

But a wise sourgen will (if the corrupt member be incurable or should poison,
and kill the whole body) cut of that member, and cast it into the fire as
Christ teaches us of the eye, hand, and foot that hurt the whole body. Then
he would not: That any father, pastore or preacher should be judges, to
minister just judgments and to punish open intractable sinners.

But I would, as teaches us Gods word, that all seculare judges, rulers,
kings, and Magistrates were fathers, pastors and Gods preachers, and
understood y^ scriptures as well, as did David and Solomon, and the other good
judges, and kings, whose example we have in the Bible, to whom of eleccion
and vocacion, it was enjoined of God fatherly to teach, to feed and to govern
his people. The cause why trwe indgement is perverted and justice and equite is
not truly ministered is. The judges and rulers are not fathers but tyrants
ignora^^ of God and his laws, they are not true feders, as it becomes them
with Gods word, but poysonners with menis tradicions To some men verily the
ecclesiastik censure of excommunicacion was some times as geeuouse as death.
They were of their fathers openly excluded with no little shame from all the
Christen societe in time of y^ Lords souper, of prayer and other benefits as
well unworthy to ate, to drink, or accompany Christen men, casten out by the
power of the holy Ghost unto Satan. This autorite and formidable censurs, the
kayes to bynd, and to retain syn^ers is given of God to y^ ministers of the
word, which would God it were so justly used now, as it was in Paul's time
and sense. But now sith this wholesome remedy is not executed, but abrogated
per no^ vi^um: nor yet y^ seclare sword once drawn out against this horrible
crime of adultery. Shall we not excite them both to their duty? But in what an
heavy state are impenitent syn^ers given up to Satan, into their destruction
of the flesh, saying that penitent incestuose of Paul, suffered such pains and
his sorrow so great, that it was tube feared as Paul writes, lest he should
have been swalowed up of desperacio^, if co^^fort and prayer of y^ church had
not prevented it, and what a death had it been to an hardnecked impenitent
person being in Satan's hand, refusinge all wholesome counsels, comfort and
prayers not sufferinge the kayes of losinge to turn in his heart? Such there
are among our Adulterers. For this was Paul accused of seuerite and cruelnes
of the false prophets. If there be an open accustomed Adulterer, a sclaunder
and poison to the congregation, why shall not the ecclesiastic ministers
deliver him into y^ seclare Magistrates hands to be punished with the sword,
as they have done with other offenders? Christ byddeth us to take such
impenitent and intractable persons, as heathen and publicans: and yet in so
doing make we not our selves Gods on the earth, nor set forth our own
honesty in promouinge their mischief to them that be bound to punish it as
you say. The law is, that if I ^nowe a^ny such open sy^ners against God and
the public welthe, Leuiti. v,
and hold my tongue, it is judged, that I consent thereto, and ought therefore to
be punished a like. For religion, faith and love mutual command us to not
suffer such ungodliness, which else should grow into forther destruction. This
ma^layth much for him the examples of the apostles, but he sees not the
seuerite of Peter endued with the holy Ghost smy^inge with so soden death
Ananias and Sapphira for their dissemblinge hyppocrisy with the church, which
was done lest the softenes and to^^che favor by the apostles among offenders
winking at open sinners should grow into contempt of God and his word, as
it is now come to the same by sufferynge adulterers unpunished. He seith not
Paul punishing eliman with perpetual blindness.

Then he brings in David and Solomon with their greuouse offenses under Moses
law, and yet non of the prophets (says he) were so cruel upon them, as to
punish them but with Gods word.

And what else desyer we then, that Adulterers might be punished according to
Gods word. Nathan so punished David in his reprehensio^, that he caused him
to give the sentence of death upon him self for his adultery. And what a
punishment was it to ensuer him, the sword never to go from his house for
slaying Vrias. And for his adultery god to stere up his own sons to abuse his
wives, brother to defile his sister, one brother to slay another, and to lay
David's sins in the open son, and his own son to chase his father out of
his realm. What plages, deaths and hel^ pains were inflict by the prophets
to David, his heavy complayntes in his psalms declare. Would god this good
man with all the professors of the word, would do Nathans part in sharp
rebukinge adulterye this day, and not so to mitigate the sin that the
punishment therefore of God, were now abrogated, as though it were not now so
greuouse a sin, as it was in Moses time. Solom on his kingedome was divided,
his servant raig^inge after him. What punishment came upon Jeroboam by the
monicion of the prophets rebuking the king. And yet says this man, the
prophets showed no seuerite to the kings, but al softenes and mercy. And are
not al these things written for our doctrine and ensample so to do? How
vehemente and sharp were the prophets, Elias, Isai, Hi^remy, and the other in
rebuking and condemp^ing sin? Compare your defense of Adulterers to their
sharp sermons: and they agree, as Belial and christ. Where was your Leuite,
when Eias slew the prophets of Baal, and and when Ioiada Athaliam? And what
punishment casted Eliseus upon Gihafi, and his seade for taking gifts of
Naaman? Now if Christ has abolished the punishment for Adulterers, and
expressed and decreed an easier, ye must show the place, and then we must
believe you or else we must stand to the eternal will of God, remitting you to
the first original law and ordinance of God. We should consider the
circumstances of the sin, how greuouse it is, who decreed the pain for it,
how ranckly it roteth, spredeth and eucreaseth, yea and yt emonge them that
should give the best example, and should se it punished. And then should it
be seen to al godly rulers that the sore asks a sharper corrasie, then your
book shows or makes.

For judgments and punishments are most necessary in the offices of the
magistrates, albe it they feme to some fond pituose persous, hard and cruel.
Nevertheless, except such cruel sharpnes be executed, all men are like to feel
more hard and crueller plages. It is no cruelty, which at the commanndent of
the Lord is executed for the preseruacyon of common wealths, and public
^ra^^uillite.

He makes a great difference betwixt, the old and new testameut (and yet
knows not what a testament is) and says, that in the old testament, the
grace of the Gospel was not showed to the world.

If he takes the world for all men good and bad, so is it not yet reveled to
it. For to them that shut up their eyes blindened of the God of this world and
stop their ears at the preachinge thereof, ij. (...). ix.
it is yet houered. But in the old testament to Adam, Abel, Enoch, and Helias,
etc. and to all the chosen faithful the Gospel of Christ to come, was showed.
For they were al under the grace of the Gospel and not under the law. For the
old and new covenant in Christ was all one in substance to them and us, and
differ not, but in certain accidentay added ceremonies, rites and respects of
the time and persons. For the Hebrew and Greek word which is commonly
translated into Testamentum signifies properly foedus, a couenaunte or bargin
made and ^^^^iten, testified with certain instruments, promises and
conditions write and sealled, which covenant is al one in substance to them and
us, as it appears Gene.xvij. Nomeruel though this man erreth so much in the
nocables, testame^tum and lex. For I herd him once say: It is but a friuole
curiose thing in readinge of the scriptures to expoune and declare the ^ermes.
But al learned writers will say, that the terms or words not known what they
properly signify, the sentences shall never be truly understood Then he says:

The people of Christ is a mystike divine flok, etc. and therefore must be fed
with Gods word, etc.

All this we know as well as you, and that ye ought not to feed them with such
false doctrine, as to say and write:

That the Professors and Disciples of Christ ought not to iustigate and exhort
the Magistrates to punish adultery with death. And that it is to cruel a
punishment orde^ed of God for the^ in his law, and therefore to be now
abrogated.

But whether your Adulterers (whose cause ye defend) being impemteut
in^urated, and not receyuers of the word determining rather to live with
whores then with their own wives, be of Christ's flok, and be content to be
fed with y^ word, when they perse^ute the word and say: It were beter for a
priest to have a^ C. whores, then one his own wife, of this, let al men be
judges.

Then he takes his course into manis heady rash judgments, as touching the
punishments of indurate, desperate Adulterers with death, calling it rash
and heady, saying we have no aperte scriptures, to punish them.

Lo, here is it plain, he would have the^ sin unpunished, being ignorant of
ye scriptures, which commanndeth them to be stonned to death. Where is it
manifest that he belyeth the scriptures and Gods laws, which Christ came to
confirm both with mouth and miracles. And Paul affirms the Magistrates
therefore to bear the swearde to execute the laws ordined for Adulterers. And
then to declare his high conninge, he says:

I know with how great cruelty adultery was punished by Moses in the old law.

^o this man is not ashamed ne afraid to call the just pacient merciful Lord,
and his laws cruel. Beware lest ye be so served of the same judge, as was
that vuprofitable servant, which for so esteininge his master was worthily
bound hand and foot, and cast into extreme dar^knes. God is no chaungelinge,
his will, word and judgments stand ferme and fast for ever.

But wherefore do we call it old, but because there is now comen a newer law to
the which the former must give place.

This new law to the which Gods law must give place, ye must understand it
to be this new counselors new law where with Adulterers must be newely
punished, that is to say, to have three flappes with a fox tail for breakinge
holy wedlock, orels it is as yet no law at al. For it is yet but under his
consultacion, which if it be death, it shall be by this man nether profitable
nor necessary ergo it is an naughty and wicked law. Thus ye se his fond
presumpcion to make Gods law to give place to his new law, which is yet to
be made, so that in the mean ceason they may commit adultery freely unpunished.
But if the old law concerning the punishment, for breakinge Gods
commandments had been abrogated, as this writer falsely says. Christ would
never have so often alleged it against the Pharisais for the defense and
confirmacion of his doctrine and deeds. He told them constantly: That God
commanded it, that whosoever curses father or mother should die. If this had
been abrogated by Christ's coming, christ would not have alleged it for his
purpose. Wherefore that same judicial law stood in strength after his coming,
as the other like laws judicial do, as honor thy father and mother. But this
man says: It was said to the Jews and not to us: which if it were true, so
were we not bound to honor parents, ne Magi^trates, neither to keep wedlock.

Or else (says he) if nothing be changed, wherefore are there two testaments?
wherefore has not the former continued still, if there be nothing in it, which
must be abrogated and abolished?

This man should have learned of Paul what things and laws be abrogated, and
which parts yet stand in effect, and wherefore they were abrogated as he
writes Hebr.vij. That is, even for their weakness, inutilite and imperfeccion
there declared at length. But the moral and judicial laws did bear in them no
imperfeccion, no weakness nor inutilite, but the honor of God and conseruacion
of his common weal by love mutual, wherefore they are not abrogated, as this man
blasphemeth. If he had considered the circumstance and process of Paul in yt
place, where without any respect to ye context he snacked out this autorite,
he should have seen Paul to have treated the old tabernacle compared to the
new not made with hands, the old sacrifices of beasts with their blod
compared to the later and least sacrifice of Christ's body and blood upon the
altar of the cross, Aarons pristheit to Christ's, the vtterwarde abiucyons
and iustificacions of the flesh with the new washinges and purging with
Christ's blood and iustificacion by faith only. And at last concluded th^se
old shadows of y^ true good things, then to come, to be antiquated, vanished
and abrogated, and nothing less, then Gods judgments and his ^orall
precepts, to be abrogated, as this writer would prove them for the
licenciouse liberty of these libertyue Adulterers. The judicial laws and the
ten precepts containing in them faith and love must stand for ever. Faith
and love contained in the iudicialles can not be abrogated.
For faith and love are the se^ews blood mary and life of all these perpetual
laws. And wherein these senews are contained, that law must nedis stand.
Bears it not great love to our neighbors, and to the common weal to have
open robbers, murderers and rauishers of menswiues, daughters, etc. punished?
Christ being the correccion and full perfeccion of the law, corrected not, ne
abrogated any law of M^ses, but for the weakness, inutilite, etc. Now show
us: What weakness, inutilite and imperfeccion was there in the stoninge to
death of Adulterers? ye will say, it was to cruel But harken what Christ says.
Mat.xx. and xxv.
Beware least at my goodness and justice thou take an occasion to be evil,
and least as thou iudgest me, such o^e thou find we. Agayue, Christ
corrected not, ne abrogated any law, but he constituted a better and more
perfiter instead thereof, as it is to se in the ceremonial rites and
sacrifices. Now us show what beter and per fiter law has he constituted for
Adulterers to be punished thereby, then was and is yet written in his testament?
It is great shame, that any learned man should see such a blasphemose book to
go forth in this Christen realm, which professes the word of God. He
knows not, that testamentum signifies the couenaunte which God of his
mercy and goodness to our fathers and us has smiten, and that there was no
another covenant of our salvation, iustificacion by faith and redemption made
with us, then was made with Adam, Nohe, Abraham, etc. They had Christ in
figures and shadows promised them, lokinge for him in hope as we have him in
present faith past. So that in substance the old and new covenant is al one.
As the two Cher^bims standinge upon the propiciatory lokinge two contrary ways
face to face, did behold the only one, and the same propiciatory signifiynge
Christ. So did they, and do we behold one Christ and savior. Our faces and
faith turned backward to Christ past, and to them beholdinge Christ to come.
There is as much difference in this thing, as in the same bargayne made at
sondrye times with like wages and like condition both on the masters, and
servant behalf. So that the name of new and old testamente springs not
out of the substance of the covenant but are of certain accidentary added
consideracions, which were put for certain sundry ceaso^s, places persons
and diuersi^e of nations to be at last changed. Without which addicio^s the
substance of the cou^nant it self ever abode and abides to the worlds end,
of the which law Christ sayde^ There shall not one jot ne title passover, til
al be fulfilled. And sooner shall heaven and earth perysh, then this law or
covenant be anulled. There is therefore but one covenant or testament in
substance and two in the manner of deliverance of the same. For to our fathers
was it given to worship one God in spirit, in faith in innocence of living,
they had one rightwismakinge and one redemption, and did se with us in faith
and hope one sacrifice Jesus Christ. But because the manner of the delyueraunce
varied as touching the time, persons and the figures of the verite, therefore
in two diverse respects one thing has two accidentary names, which thing
Paul considering says: Al things happened to them in figures, but not so unto
us, for we have him in verite. They reioysed in externe, and we in spiritual
things. Wherefore that geuinge of the law, whereby the religion was then set
forth by figures and ceremonies to the old fathers, is now called the old
testament. But that religion whereby Christ, which has fulfilled all things
in the law and prophets now being only al in all things is delivered and
given us in very deed without all figures, is now called the new testament.
Not therefore because the fathers had not then Christ, the grace of the Gospel
and remission of their sins, but because in comparison of the old, and for
that the very body at his presence has abolished the ceremonial shadows and
figures. And this much be said for the difference of the old and new
testamente, for the names thereof and abrogacion of the ceremonial laws. Which
this writer knows not, and therefore thus erreth in the abrogacion of the
laws and especially against that godly homily set forth by the Kings
Majesty against whordome and adultery, which is the eleventh in ordere, and
last save one.

He reprehendeth the scole divinity for deuidinge the law into.iij. parts,
ceremonies, judgments and moral precepts.

But he is deceived, for that distinccio^ was made of the most aunceet doctors,
or any scole divinity was known, if he had read them. And if he had read the
Bible orderly, he should have found in the old testament, and in the new,
that Christ made of two people one church, by suffe^ing in his flesh, breaking
down the mud wall and hedge of ceremonies, abrogaty^g but that law, which
made the variaunce betwixt the Jews and us, which were only the ceremonies
set in the commanded decrees. For what contencion, circumcision made berwixt
the Jews and Gentyles, and how it is abrogated by the decree of the apostles,
ye se in Act.xv. And as for the place this writer brings in for the
abrogacion of the indicialls and moralls Coloss.ij. as he understands it not
so does he falsify y^ text, to rake and wrest it for his false purpose. For
Paul's words make clear against him, saying:

The ceremonies were not agay^st us, and therefore they were the moral laws
(says he) which he abrogated, and whereof Paul speaks.

Full little knows this man cleaving to much to his own wit, how the
ceremonies were against the Jews, and not against us, which never had them.
If he had read and understand The place.ij Collo. he understands ^ot.
Paul Hebr.x. he should have se^e, how and in what ways they were their own
hand wrytinge against the^ selves. For the Jews in kepinge and vsinge the
ceremonies declared their own imperfeccion, and spotted consciences. For all
their sacrifices were (as Paul says) the commemoracion, accusacions and
testificacio^s against them selves in vtteringe their sy^ful lives every time
they did their sacrifices, ablucio^s, etc. Hebr.ix. and.x. For in the
ceremonies of the Jews, says Austen, there was rather the confession of their
sins the^ the expiacion. In that their sacrifices and ablucions did bewraye
them to be impure, when they would be seen most purest, and were as (says
Paul) it were their own hands wrytinge, whilis they offered and washed them
selves, thereby testifiynge against them selves to be sinners having ^ede of
offreances and purifiyngs And therefore Paul says against the Jews, and not
against the Gentiles. And even y^ same text which he so v^lerd^edly brings in
for his Adulterers and for the abrogacion of al three laws cere ^iudicial and
moralls. Paul before and immediatlye declares him self to understand it of
the ceremonies only, concludinge with this illacion thus: Let no man therefore
condemn you for meats and drinckes or for a pese of an holy day, etc. And
this man had read and understood this pistle, when he took in hand to read,
and to teach it ere he had learned it, he should have perceived Paul's mind
to have b^ne, That the dead sacrificed beasts, did as their own hand
writings declare and tes^ifye to the Jews them selves worthy death and
condempnacion, and their washinges to testify against them selves, to be
unclean persons. And thus they eatinge the duty and testimomonye of their own
condempnacion, death and impurite, showed them selves never to have satisfied
for their sins. And therefore Paul calls those ceremonies their own hand
writings against them selves. For that they sealled up to them selves their
own dampnacion and uncleanness. But here ye may perceive y^ perverse
deuillishenes and deuillish peruersite of the spirit, wherw^ this sect is
carried, which when in peruertinge the scriptures, it can not prove his
erroures, then to falsify the almighty word of god it adds to, his own
poison, where god commands nothing to be added ne taken from his word, here
he puts to y^ judicial laws, and thrusts them into Paul's pure text, and
to the hand wrytinge, saying:

Verum iudicia and chirographum. Look beter of your book both greek and latyne,
and tell us where ye find Iudicia in that place coupled with Chirographum? as I
heard your preacher, be like at your request, I will not name him, openly
preach it, that the ceremonials and judicials are both abrogated. Addinge
that the copulaty^e was true when both the parts be a like true. Which
doctrine he nor you were able to defend, when it was afterward reasoned at
the table, ye wot where. And here this man notes in the mergen of his book,
all the whole laws universal of Moses both ceremonial, judicial and moral to
be abrogated, which he resy how detestable it is, al men see it, for then
should we be al law les with his Adulterers to sin in all kind of sin
unpunished. There is no heathen miscreaunt, which naturally consents to ye
law egrauen i^ his heart whereupon the judicial and moral laws of God are
grounded, that ever dirst say or write the ten commandments of God and the
dew punishment ordined of God for breakinge them, were abrogated and blotted
out never to be observed. Nomeruel this man would set Adulterers at liberty
in so licenciouse a state. God geaunte it that he syn^e not but of ignorance
and simplicite, and not of a set maliciouse mind incensed of other against me,
which have standen against him in this cause, before he wrote his book
ad^ertisinge and counsellinge him to cease from his error, which
nothwithstandinge yet did he put forth this book openlye^ whose title he has
changed, but not the book nothing agreeable to the new title, ^e to the things
prefixed. Then he asks this question:

If Adulterers should be punished according to Gods law in Moses book, why
did not Christ command the open Adulteres to be stoned?

Here he declares his mind plainly, that ad^lterers ought not to be punished
because Christ remitted the Adulteres. How soever this man will now seek and
hunte for euasions to gloss and pot out his book saying, that he meant the use
of the law or of the malediccion thereof to be abrogated, yet as it is plain,
neither the just use execucion nor the malediccion is abrogated and abolished
from the Adulterers, but from the justified by faith in an innocent life, so do
this, and al his other arguments tend into this scope and end, that
Adulterers ought not to be punished, nether by death, nor by any other pain.
For this is his argument: Christ punished not the Adulteres, but absolved her,
and his example ought to be followed of every Christian, ergo no man ought to
punish Adulterers, but let them go quiet, absolved, unpunished. But I answer
this man in few words, as I answered him th^n, and also other which did set
him up to co^uicte me in this argument and other, if they had could at that
time. Because his father sent him then to save sinners and not to give sentence
of death as a judge, he came then himself to be judged and to be killed and
not to slaye in iudggement, he would not then take upon him the office of a
seculare Magistrate, but refused to diuyde the heretage, and then, when they
would have made him a king he came to constitute a spiritual kyngedome,
wherein he raygneth by his word for ever. This man should have considered who
they were, that brought the Adulteress to him, and for what intent, not to
have Moses law justly executed, but to trap Christ. Where he then taught all
judges and accusers of other, to be pure in them selves, lest in accusinge and
condempni^ge other they accuse and condemn them selves. Also this learned man
must learn, that if Christ had condemned her there standing alone without
sufficient wytnes, he had broken his father law, which he came to fulfill.
And then had the Phariseis and Scribes the thing they hunted fore. To this he
brings in saint Paul, exco^municating the incestuose Corinth. I answer
likewise (as I did then by mouth) Paul was no seculare Magistrate, he was a
private preacher, having power to edifye and not to destroy with death him,
whom he knew to repent and to be converted to the church by such
delyueringe to Satan. And therefore having the ecclesiastik kayes, and censure
did he bind and lose him, as Christ commanded. But how formidable is and was
that censure to that man it appears.ij. Corinth.vij. and I have said it
before. Neither was there then in that cyty any seculare Christen Magistrate
as ye se it.i. Cor.vi. to execute the law upon such offenders. Neither is it
a good argument, Christ nor Paul judged none to death, ergo Adulterers and
murderers ought not to be punished, with death. Nether is it a just argument
Magistrates neglecte their office in justly punishinge malefactors, ergo
thieves, murderers and Adulterers may sin unpunished. Then this man brings
another argument to prove Adulterers not to be punished out of the.vij. Chap.
to the TO. thus:

If we be married to the new and second housbande Christ, then are we out of
bondage and crueltye of the former housba^d which is sin, etc.

If he take and put his adulterers in the number of these new married to
Christ (or else the argument makes nothing for his purpose) so makes he a
godly marriage to marye his Adulterers to Christ, taking the members of an
herlet to couple them to Christ. But it rather thus follows. Adulterers have
forsaken Christ and have married the^ selves to their flesh and to the devil,
and therefore shall God justly destroy them. For that they are under the curse
and punishment of the law judicial.i. Tim.i. Tell us, are your Adulterers
under the law, that is married to sin not yet known to them by the law, or
under grace, that is in Gods favor justified? Before ye said the whole
universal law was abrogated, and so to be no law, left to punish them:
wherefore they must be now after you (as ye here would prove it) under grace,
under a godly grace have ye put them: even under a lawles lycenciouse liberty
to sin unpunished, married to Christ, say you: God is highly beholde^ to
such a marriage maker, and so are all Adulterers, so to couple them to Christ
their spouse. If they be not under ye law so is their old housbande, the law
and sin known by it, dead from them, and they delivered from this their
former, old wife married to Christ: which if it be so, the^ are they no more
Adulterers. Paul says with many express words that he (whose former wife is
thus dead and he losed by her death, married to Christ the new man) is such
one as is dead from sin, regeuered into Christ's death by a new birth,
buried and risen with Christ into a new life, whose old man is by repentance
and perpetual mortificacion crucified with Christ, absolved from sin, in
whom no sin reygneth ^e dwells. To these men through faith, and love and
innocence of living, is the cruel exaccion, execracion, malediccion and
dampnacion of the law abrogated, and not to your Adulterers. For they do that
as the law commands not for fear of the law, but of a ready courage and of
a faithful heart and mind, for they are married to Christ in dead. But
Adultrrers are married to sin, and therefore are they under the law to be
punished thereby. Where ye se your own text returned into your own confusion.
For ye know not, what it is to be under the law, ne what is the law in this
place, ^e who be under it, nor how we are delivered from it, and married to
Christ, nor how many kinds of liberty there are, neither understand ye Paul's
mind in these.vi. vij. and.viij. Chapter to the Romans And yet ye take in hand
to treat of the difference betwixt the law and the Gospel, shewinge nothing
less in your book, openinge a perelouse door to Adulterers to sin
unpunished, putting them not under the law.

Who is so ignorant in the scriptures, that knows not Moses laws to be
given, but for a time, and but to the Jews Even your self so ignorant, which
knows not the only ceremonial laws to be given but for a time to the^. And
the laws Judicial and moral, which contain in them Gods worship our
faith and love, to be the perpetual will of God given to al nations. And that
the transgression of the same laws must be punished according to the grauite
of the sin. Show us, where Christ tempered or minished in any words of his
the punishment for blasyhemers, false prophets for murderers and Adulterers,
and would the Magistrates to not punish them with death? bring forth your
scriptures. For we know that he has given the rulers the sword, Roma.xiij.
and that not in vain. The law of God abrogateth not the laws of nature but
confirms the^, but the law of nature punished adultery with death, as it is
before showed, or else why is the punishment of adulterye more abrogated then
the punishemente for theft and murder? are they not all a like precepts? Thou
shall not kill, nor ^tele, nor commit adultery? Adulterye was thought once of
God to be as greuouse a sin as was blasyhemy, false doctrine, witchcraft,
enchauntings, sinitinge and killinge of father and mother, and therefore was
punished a like. And is adultery now no sin or a less sin then it was in
Moses time? Then he says:

What is more true and i^ste^, then the law of God, which proceeds of it
self, righteous^es? And though god punished it sharply, yet may it not be
said he did it unjustly.

If Gods law proceeds out of righteousness, and his righteousness endures
for ever: why then will ye abrogate his everlasting rightwyse will and law to
punish adultery? will ye exalt your self above God and his righteous^es?
Sin is now as odiole to God, as ever it was and with greuoser plages are they
worthy to be punished, which know no we his will, and will not obey it. Suerly
all the rethryke ye have, can not defend your Adulterers from the just
punishment with death, but to folis and to men corrupt with the same filthy
scabbe, perchance your book may seem somewhat plausible and pleasant. In some
places ye wonl^ seem to have them punished, but not with death, and in some
unpunished, for that ye set them not under the law, and the law to be
abrogated, and the sin to be healed by Gods word with softenes, and le^ite
and mercifully to be forgeuen because they are after you under grace, married to
Christ. So that your colors of corrected contradicions and contrary
correccions fight greatly emonge the^ selves, if the state of your cause and
scope of your arguments be diligently observed. Then thus ye say:

Christ abolisheth not the former laws as unjust, but with le^ite he
tempereth the seuerite and rigore of them, so that now they be put in use not
to dampne by strength, to rule, and not to by^de, to pryke, and not to kill
Christians.

It is no point of a writer to entitle and propoune one thing, and to deduce
his arguments into another contrary end. Although the law condemp^e not just
Christians, yet can ye not deliver your Adulterers from the condempnacion, se
ueryte, rigore, bond, and pryke to kill them, prove by Gods word, that the
punishment decreed in Moses law for Adulterers is abroga^ed, and stand not in
strength, prove that Gods laws are cruel, rigorose to sharp for t^^ sin
committed. Prove where by his word they should be tempered with le^ite and
pity upon any obstinate accustomed Adulterer the^e or murderer.

Ye say, that now those laws be put in use not to damp^e, to rule and not to
bind, etc.

But what and if Gods law can neither rule nor bind, nor with prickynge nor
kyllinge bring and pluck men from their open adultery theft and murder? What
will ye then do with your soft leuite and pity to your adulterose
Christians, as ye call them? Here ye argue contrary to your institucio^ of the
use of the law concerning just men and Christians for whom the law
judicial is not ordined (as Paul says) as though the law had the saw use,
strength and effect upon just and unjust, wisely.

Then he brings in the example of the brason serpent compared to Christ,
which (the price paid for sin) should put ye law out of strength and effect
for malefactors saying: No another wise the serpe^ts styng taken away, the
serpent abides, may hiss but to stinge he can not.

Lo, the law may hiss at his Adulterers that is, give them a flap with a
foxtaile, and hurt them not. He would the just laws of God to lose their
strength by Christ's cominge (which came to fulfill them, and not to break
them) that they should not condemn Adulterers whereof Paul says, the letter,
that is, the law slayth. But he says, the law now rules: whom? Even them
that will not be ruled, and not to bind them to their own wives. What a
regiment and bond of the law this man dremeth, I can not tell. Paul says out
of Osee: That nether the stinge of death, which is sin, nor the strength and
power of the sin, which is the law, shall not be taken away, till Christ has
put al his enemies under his fete, and delivered up his kingedome to his
father. But be like this man imagines such an holy church in this world as
shall be after domes day: when all rightwisnes only shall dwell upon the
earth.ij. Pet.iij. But ye shall know, when Christ came, he paid the price for all penitent sinners, and true beleuers yt received the benefit of their
redempcio^ and not for common Adulterers that will not receive Christ and his
laws. For Christ is no gift to them, that will not receive him. Christ's blood
is no such a gift to them that thrust it from them by infidelite, trede it
under their fete, contempne so rich a redemption. Of which sort are they, that
think adultery to be no sin, ne punish worthy, but without all fear of
God and man persiste in their filthy lyuinge. Christ expowned that similitude
of the brason serpent far otherwise, then this man wresteth it for Adulterers.
He applied it to ye beleuers in him, saying: As Moses exalted the serpent in
the wyldernes, so must the son of man be lifted up on the cross, that all that believe in him peryshe not: he says not, that Adulterers (whose life
shows them not to believe in Christ) perish not, nor yet to not be delivered
from yt just punishment of the law. For they that looked not up to the serpent
Christ by faith, hanginge upon the cross, dyed of the serpents stinginge.
Neither is the stinge of the law plukt out of them that looked not up to the
brazen serpent. And therefore ye are but a peruerter of Christ's words. Then in
alledginge Austen ye condemn your self. For he speaks there plainly of the
heavy multitude and burden of ceremonial laws, and not of the judicial and
moral laws. And the^ to use your color of correccion or rather
contradiccion, ye say:

Here I will not play the patron of carnal license to cause men to sin
unpunished, which will not repent.

When ye contend to prove and defend nothing more.

Neither do ye twyche (ye say) the publyk ordinary laws, etc.

When ye do all that ye may to destroy them. If ye take away the judicial and
moral laws, as ye abolish them altogether. For he that takes away all laws
of God, whereof all laws and Magistrates be grounded, takes away the
Magistrates and the ministers of the laws.

But ye condemn (ye say) this importunite in divines, which so sharpen and
whet the civil laws beyond all neces^ite.

And then to correct your saying (a just and plain writer with a good
conscience never v^eth so many correccions) ye say:

Yea verily, beyond their profession. But is it not every Christen manis
profession, so to love the glory of God, the health, peace, integrite and
tranquilite of the Christen churches, cities and realms, and so to promoue
such open injuries and enormities to the rulers by exhortacions, sermones and
monicions, that al such putrefyed, pestelent corrupt members, destroyers, and
s^launderers of Christ's congregation may be cut of and punished according to
Gods word? Then he says:

It is the part and duty of the professors of the word, to preach the
forgeuenes in the Gospel and to inuit the people to repentance, to lead the
weak with the spirit of softenes, and the hardnecked obstinat, impenitent,
inflexible to lead them from their sins, and not from their lives.

And is it not the part of a preacher first to preach the^ the law to show
the^ their sins, ere they preach them the Gospel of forgeuenes? men must
know and acknowledge their sins with repentance, er they be forgiven. But
what and your Adulterers will neither hear law nor Gospel, nor any
repentance preached, but will be sooner led from their lives, then from their
sins? must not those obstinate, hardnecked Adulterers be k^t of with the
sword, and that by Gods word? And will not you have us to preach, and to
teach this law of God? Joan and Christ began at the law to preach the
Gospel. Wherefore else do the Magistrates bear the sword, but therwi^h to
correct and cut of them, whom Gods word can not refrain from their open
wikednes? God first to repress our affectes, commands us not to lust, ne
to desyer, or to have any concupiscence of any other thing, then our own.
Which bar, if it can not hold us yet he sets before us another bar to
bridle us from the act saying: Thou shall not commit adultery, nor steall, nor
kyl, etc. And if this bar will not hold us, then has he constituted the
Magistrates with his laws to punish the transgressors with death, which is
the last remedy to destroy the offender. But if we could keep the first and
most perfect law, so neded we not the second, nor the third. But when God did
foresee that nether the first nor the second bar could bridle such prefracte
Adulterers and murderers from the externe act, but that they would brydelles
run into the open dead unto the great destruction of the comen wealth and
intolerable corrupcion of the Christen societe, the^ he added the third and
last remedy both holsom, profitable and necessary, and not so rigorose ne
cruel, as this man writes. If it be lawful for the Magistrates to e^ecute
death upon them, why is it not as lawful for the preacher to exhort the^ to
their lawful office, if they neglecte it? God commands us not to be angrye
which natural sore and vice in us to heal it, and that it should not break
forth into the hurt of my neighbor. He commands us not to kill, which
yoke if we cast of, and slaye the man, then is there the third degree present,
even the slayer to be slain And this is the third part and last degree of the
law so adioyued and annexed in the second that the one can not be abrogated
without the other. And therefore to be sure, this man abrogateth the whole law
for his Adulterers sake. If ye suffer all adulterers and malefactors to syn,
till they be all slain with the sword of this new broched spirit, England is
like to s^arme full of thieves and Adulterers to. For what and if these sinners
will not be touched wy^h the very sword of Gods spirit, ^ut so violently
resist it, that they will turn the point thereof into the bellies of the true
teacher? Truly your spirit is al to weak to enter, where Christ's spirit takes
no place. Christ commands not to give so holy things to dogs, nor to
cast perels before swyne. But you will have your incurable Adulterers not by
fear of death to be brought to continency but by the word, which they will
neither hear, ne believe, but thrust it from them.

The original vice and sore of adultery (says he) lies deep in our
concupisce^ce which must be first cured.

I pray you in which of all the most perfitest, justified was the original
concupiscence so cured, that he nether lusted ne desired at any time contrary
to gods will? your presupposicion is impossible, whereof ye know what follows.

But and if the flesh be corrupt with concupiscence, the seuerite and cruelty
of the externe laws shall do nothing. Yisse verily, for whom the fear of god
refrayneth not, yet the fear of the law which is death, holds them from
the externe act. For what fear, the sword borne of the Magistrates smyteth
into malefactors hertes, R^man. xii^
Paul expresses with many terrible sentences, and much more fear it brings,
when it is justly without affeccions and respect of persons ministered and
truly executed, yea and that when the inward lusts and concupiscence rage,
and is not mortified.

This spiritual sore (meaning the concupiscence) says he, must be healed with
spiritual medicines, that is with the word of God.

If this be true, so would ye have no seclare Magistrates, which thing the
Anabaptists hold. For what sin is there, but it comes out of the
concupiscence of the spiritual part of man, which is his soul consenting to
sin? Whereof sin gendred, and death folowinge, the man is called flesh, and
the sins the works of the flesh. Now call them carnal or spiritual sores
as ye list. Belyke ye call lechery a spiritual sore, because the spirituality,
after they had forsaken their own wives and vowed their chastity, and
consyderinge none so like to live in adulterye as them selves, then they
deuolued the judgments of this spiritual sore of adultery from the laite
into their own spiritual courts, that one lecherouse stalland might ^law
each others bake. And now was lechery called no more a carnal sore, but a
spiritual, to be healed with a spiritual medicyne: with what thyncke ye? with
the word of God? No, for they knew it not. They laid their own syge leaves
thereto that is their daily darck confessions, penances, satisfaccions, and
misses, and as they daily sinned, so were they day by day in healinge and
never cured. But he that was foul, was every day the filthier, as Joan write
^hi^ his Apo. Then this man argues thus:

That because in many men adultery ca^ not be healed, ne Adulterers brought to
repentance, ne corrected with the word therefore yet it may not be punished
with death, but permitted. But ye should have argued thus. Because they
contempne the medicyne of the word, and persist in their wickedness, therefore
ought they to be punished with the sword. Luce.xii^.
And here he brings in the words of Christ directely agay^ste him self,
rendinge out a pese of the parable that seems for him, but the effect and
scope thereof is plain against him, which he leaves out for fear, and
peruerteth the text, saying:

The Lord forbids the roten tree to be cut done.

But the text is: The Lord not fynding fruit in the tree, commands it to be
cut down. Nevertheless at the desyer of the keeper of the vi^eyarde prayinge him
to suffer it, to be dunged at the rote this one year, and then if it brought
notfrute, to be cut down by both their consentes. And in another place Christ
not finding fruit in the fyg tree, accursed it, and it withered dead, never
more to bring forth fruit. And what then thyncke ye, is his sentence upon them,
that with no mouicions no teachinge, no dunginge wylbe fruteful, but will
despise his labor and bring forth evil fruits, seeing, he commanded the
fruteles trees to be cut down? here ye se, how he peruerteth Christ's words
saying: Chiste forbids, which he plainly commands. The^ he makes this
wise argument:

Hole men have no need of a physician, but they that are sick, ergo Adulterers
ought not to be punished with death, but must be healed with Gods word.

Such an argument may he make for all thieves and murderers, and so noman to
suffer, but be healed with Gods word which is not else but to abolish the
civil laws, and al Magistrates. Such a licenciouse common weal dream the
Anabaptists this day. But and if the sick despise the wholesome medicyne, being
a purryfyed member, then Ihon Baptiste and Christ command such trees to be
cut down and cast into the fire.

But here this man calls such obstinate, hardnecked, incurable Adulterers,
but weak brethren, and but sickly persons. Asking what physician ministers
his diligence to the sick man to slaye him, whose cure he takes in hand?

And here I ask him again: what Physician is to solishe that takes an
incurable sore in hand? or will heal that sor^ otherwise, or with any other
medicyne then Gods word prescribes him: with what medicyne commands God
the Magistrates to heal murder, adultery theft, and such like pestilences to
the common wealth? All this manis arguments brought for Adulterers tend into
the favor of such that gladly receive holsom counsel being obedient to the
word when they are monished of the preachers do fear God, amend their lives.
And make nothing for Adulterers to be not punished of the Magistrates. He
brings in many examples of mercy showed of Christ to the faithful penitent
confessinge their sins, which all make nothing for open obstinat malefactors.
Nether do those examples take away the civil justice, nor the sword from the
magistrates to be executed upon Adulterers but that the thief and murderer and
Adulterer must nevertheless suffer death although he repented him an hundred
times with him that was hanged by Christ. And much just execucion was done of
the^ in Christ's days and senses, albeit the gilty and condemned person died
a repentant just man before God, whose death Christ nor his apostles let
not as the priests do now with books and sanctuaries. And as for the roytose
son, who^ this man brings in for the defense of Adulterers. He confessed
his sin, with great repetaunce to his father, or he received him. He spent but
his own good in excess of meats and drynckes. And was no open hurt to the
common weal as are thieves, Adulterers, etc. he hurted only him self. And
therefore this example is but racked and wrested for his purpose^ I ca^ not
meruel enough at the forgetfulness of this man to see himself swerve so far
from the stacion on his cause, to prove y^ thing with scriptures nothing
pertaining to y^ title of his book. When Peter asked Christ, how often he should
forgive: he expressed his brother, y^ by weakness sins daily privately one
offending another, and not such as sin incorrigibly against the hole
congregation customably which for his obstinacy deserves not y^ name of a
christian brother. But and if I forgive my brother steling my horse or ox, yet
shall ^ot my forgeuenes deliver him from the civil judgment and from the galows:
and yet brings this man Peter's seven seue^ty forgeuenes of his brother for y^
vnpunishme^t of adulterers. He would galdly be fellow to christ in so rich and
often forgeuenes of adulterers: little remembering what god says to al iuges of
ye i^dicial laws, that when any man break his laws, thou shall punish him,
and not have mercy on him. Let not thyue eye spare him, Deute.x^^
but cut and rote him out of the common weal that other may take e^sample, and
be afraid to tra^sgresse gods laws. He looks so much of gods mercy, that he
forgets his justice and judgments, which said: That whosoever offend but one
of his little ones, that believe in him. It is expedient a mill stone be hanged
about his ^ecke and be drowned in the depest of the sea. What pains of death
then would Christ to be executed upon him, that offend the whole church and
especially, that man whose wife is kept in adultery. Then he says:

That forebecause Christ bode Peter suffer the darnel to grow with the wheat
therefore he would Adulterers, and all such criminose sinners to be permitted
unpunished among the Christen societe. Who sees not the fond ignorance;
(shall I call it) or the manifest wickedness of this man? Christ never said
this to Peter. But the householder to his servant expressing no particlare
person, but this is nt y^ matter, The kocle or darnel is there hersies and false
doctrine sown by the devil, which christ would not have plucked up; where perel
is, therewith to be pluckte up also the good corn. For if paul had been plucked
up a pharisei, he had never have been the apostle and preacher of Christ.
Wherefore Christ wills not in my wise these kocles or darnel of heretics,
and not of Adulterers and thieves, etc? to be permitted, but heretics, where
their vproting is turned into the destruction or hurt of the good and of the
whole church. It behooves (says Paul) hersies to be among you, that they
which be proved be known among you. But and if such men (if they should
continewe) would be the subversion of many good men, and of the whole church,
they must rather be smiten down with the sword and sith of justice: now
look and Adulterers corrupt not holy matrimony other menis wives daughters, etc.

What and Christ should now come again, and write in the foreheades of these
men that would so earnestly have adultery punished their own filthiness and
Adulteries? Or if he should with Moses cruel extremite stone them to death,
as many as he knows gyltie of this sin, beginning at these men that would
so fayn have adultery punished. I meruel if they should be a live.

If this be not a blasphemy to call and attribute cruel extremite to our God
of all goodness, mercy and clemency, there was never blasphemy. Is God changed
from a merciful father to a cruel law geuer? to so unjust a judge, that he
wills now not the same sin to be punished with like pains? bring forth
his words of the change to abrogacion of the pains of Adultery if ye can? or
else let his law stand ferme and fast just in it self, for ever as the holy
Ghost teaches us in his Psalms, and God also in his books of his laws,
judgments, and precepts. But is this a good argument for the defense of your
Adulterers?

God to come and write other menis secret faults in their foreheades?

God is not so cruel, as ye would have him, or else he might shame by such
ways as perfect a man as ye are your self. But here may men see the burning
charity of such me^ y^ so set forth Gods ^enite to destroy his justice and just
iudgements^ where is that charity which should cover ye multitude of sins? M.
Latemer ^temer.
in the kings days that dead is, did openly before him and his nobles
viheme^tly and continually imieye in his sermons against adultery, and did see
it so spread, that he persuaded and exhorted him, and his counsel to punish it
according to Gods law or by the swerd. The bishop of (...) David's that now
is, of lare in his sermons, and diverse other godly and learned preachers
exhorted the sin to be punished right greuosly And the learned preachers in
Germany consent all, that it ought to be punished with death, as well as
murder or theft. And yet would this patron and defender of adultery have
such men for their good zele to chaste matrimony, and for their desper of the
just execucion of Gods laws openly shamed, and his open Adulterers to sin
unpunished. I my self in private communicacion, when the question has been
asked me, consideringe the bold shameless continual frequence of the sin
without al fear and shame of God and man, have said my mind contrary to this
man, whishing the Magistrates to make it death according to Gods
commandment, whereof this man answered that law to be given to the Jews, and
not to us, and that the judgments ceremonials and judicials al, as he here
writes, ar abrogated. Whereof I perceived afterward, y^ this man was kindled
to write this his book partly against my sentence and twitcheth me therein,
albe it not by name. But here I tell him again, but nameles: That if he
knows any such crime, which he would have it written in my foreheade, let
him write it in his next answer, and so accuse me iustelye, if he can. And
I shall be ready at al times to come forth unto myue answer before any judge.
But wherefore would he not have the same done to his Adulterers defamed by
their own filthy acts. If the Magistrates be negligente and cease from
their office, should not the publyke ministers of the word exhort and warn
them of their duty? They are commanded to cry and not to cease to tell every
state their offenses. But little regards this man the terrible comminacion of
God, saying: ^zechiel.iij.
If I say to the wicked: Thou shall dye. And thou (preacher) premonishest him
not telling him it, that he may be turned from his sin. Surely he shall perish
in his sin, but his blood will I require at thy hand. This writer so wisely
understands the scriptures, that where so ever he finds, that we be
commanded to forgive our brethren and fellow servant their private mutual,
quotidian faults, these textes he wresteth to the open crimes committed
against y^ hole comonaltie and church, and would have them so forgeuen, that
the civil justice should lose her strength. We are bound verily to forgive our
detterstoward our selves, but the common debt required by the law, and they
worthy to pay it for their open murder or adultery, I being a private man, can
not dispense with it, or else wherefore are laws and magistrates ordined? If my
forgeuenes should deliver the thief from the galhose. He would not the publik
ministers of y^ word to preach that adultery, theft and murder be sins
worthy to be punished with death. The kings were commanded, that the Levites
and Priests should read to them the law, that thereby as by the just rule,
they should judge and give sentence, which al is written for theirs and our
doctrine, or else let us cancel all the old, testament, and then what doctrine is
there left of the laws blotted out of the book of God, and of menis minds?
As would ^ow a certain sect lately sprongen up, which are so perfect to the^
selves in their living, that they can not syn after they be regenerated and
once justified, for they are immediately taught, I can not tell of what spirit,
so that they need nether book written, ne externe word, preachers nor
Magistrates seclare.

Bring forth any o^e place, where christ or a^y of his apostles commanded
Adulterers to be s^ayne ^or else did consent to their death.

Bring you forth any one word for the abrogacion for the stoning or
punishment with death of the Adulterers, or where Christ commanded the
prechers to not excite the Magistrates to their office, or where we should not
consent to the just execucion of Gods just laws? Peter in his sermon
sharply rebukes the Jews for quiting and askinge the delyueraunce of a
murderer and crucifyinge the author of life. Christ and his apostles alleged
every where Moses law, and the fearful examples of death therein to confirm their
doctrine, and said that it was ordined to punish malefactors, ergo they
consented to the death of them that offend it. And Christ being God and man
did consent to the laws, which he made and to the execucion of the same, and
commanded the kings to se his justice judgments and equite ministered. And
where they were corrupted by the Phariseis. He delyueringe the^ from their
false gloses so constantly confirmed the punishment for the vtterwarde act
that even for their anger and obprobriose words to their brethren he
pronounced them worthy judgment. He told the Jews seking occasyons to kill
him, that Moses did accuse and conde^pne them. He told Peter sinitinge of the
bishops servants right ear (which bishops servants neither the bishops
them selves sense hard a right, but s^nistrely Gods worde^ biddinge him to
put up his swerd. That who so smyteth with the sword, should perysh with the
swerd, ergo Christ, and his apostles consented to the just punishment with
death of the malefactors. But what law was it, that Christ came to fulfill, and
not to break it? And what law was it, that Paul affirmed to be ordined for
Adulterers and murderers, slayers of parents, etc? It must needs be the laws
of Moses, which was death. He consented to this law judicial of Moses, y^ he
gave the sword to the Magistrates to be executed upon these adulterers and
malefactors. Then says he of him self.

Scio quid dictat lex Mosaica, etc. That is, It is I that knowth the mind of
Moses law, but as for these cruel unlearned (I know the contempt lurkinge in
the pronowne, Isti) little understand they or perceive ye office of Moses,
little know they the mystery of the will of god, which co^stituted Moses^ ye
^eder of our church. It is this learned man alone that knowth the mystery of
Gods will Lo, a merue ^oule high knowledge and a profound stra^g spirit
vsurpethe this man to him self. I never heard ne red of any learned man,
neither old nor new of this opinion. If we had not Moses the leader and usher
unto Christ, we should never come to him. Who comes to Christ, but he first
by Moses law of the precepts: knows his sins, confesses the^ and
repe^teth? The office of Moses was with the law to lead Gods people to that
degree, where Joshua takes them at his hand to bring them into the promised
land, which figured the gospel. What nation, Deuter.iiij.
says God, is there so great, that has judgments and laws so ryghteouse,
as are the laws and judgments, which I set before the this day? If Gods
laws and judgments which both be thus joined together thorowt the
repeticion of the whole law, be thus righteouse, as no nation else can make or
use: dare any Christen man abrogate, change or abolishe, yea or neglecte these
judgments of God? If any man dare do it, he must give us in their places,
judgments beter more necessary and profitable: but what are they that give us
none at al? Verily such persons, as would constitute a lawles licenciouse
liberty to sin unpunished. God never abrogated any law but he placed a beter
and perfiter in her stead, as for circumcision he gave us baptism, for the
passover lamb, the eatinge of his last souper, wherein his death is remembered
with immortal thanks. Now if the punishment for Adulterers be abrogated, let
this man show us what other stronger pain Christ has set instead thereof to
repress the sin. The spirituality did give us in sted of it a thrice goying
in shirt about the church yard before the procession to be displed at the
four corners thereof. But and if the iudicialles be al abrogated by God, so
may there no man use, ne exercise them a yen, or else we might use circumcision,
and offer up beasts again. God commands both private and publik judgments
to be instituted according to his word, Deu.vi. and.xi ^
and not after this, or any ma^s fantasy, He would have his judgments written
in our herts to fear us from y^ tra^sgressio^ of his precepts, which teaches
us not to be so light things as to be either forgoten or neglected, or to be
called, as this man calls them (exotica) that is strange as never to be
heard, ne read, ne used of us. He is not conte^t^

That we should make Moses the ledder of our church.

As though Moses church and ours were not both one church of God, led and
taught of one and the same spirit, brought into the same way, that said: I
am the way, veryte and life. And as though ihey and we had not both one
covenant and the same commandments. What thing in the very substance of our
faith was given the^ by Moses and the prophets, but the same is given us? He
taught the^ one God for all sufficient. Him only to be worshipped in spirit,
in faith and innocence of lyuinge, and to be one righteous making and one
redemption through Christ the only very Priest and ^rewe sacrifice, him to be
both God and man, to be hoped for of God, the resurreccion of our bodies and
sonles to be immortal. And what man is there now to be led under the gospel
and grace of Christ b^t the same must have Moses first his leader, as the
scolemayster to bring him up taking him forth from under the law unto an
higher lesson even unto Christ. ^ala.iij.
Then he says:

For what else is Moses, the^ prophetical shadow of Christ?

Whether he takes Moses here for his person, or for his law, yet was he not
Christ's shadow. But the ceremonial sacrifices were the figures and shadows
of Christ to come. For Christ came to fulfill the law, which non else could
do. And in the office of teachinge and declaring Gods will, it is thus written:
Deu.xix.
A prophet out of the mids of thy nacio^, eue^ out of thy brethren like unto
me, says Moses, shall thy Lord God stere up, whom see that ye hear. It was
Joshua, which in name and office figured Christ. And Moses shadowed the law in
this accion and office of leading. For as Moses dyed in the desert, and could
not bring the people into the promised land, so could not the law bring us to
perfeccion and to our promised heretage. But as Joshua after his death brought
the people into that rest, so did Christ bring his faithful into y^ eternal
rest. The opinion of a certain sect now sprongen up
Thou shall therefore know (christen reader) that there are now a certain
sprited sort of sects: of which some understand by the letters al things
written in the old testament, which men admit nothing in their reasoninges, but
that as is contained in the new testament. For that they say, the letter
slays. Another sort grant and admit both the testame^ts But by the letter
they understand the plain litterall sense and sentences. And y^ spirit, they
call what so ever their own affectes or mind, corrupt with any evil opinion
or sect, move them to utter and to teach it. With these men the spirit is,
what soever their selves feign and imagine: yea, they dare say the spirit to
be their own most impudent erroneouse corrupcion and wrestinge of the plain
scripturs. And if thou preasse upon these spirits with any never so plain
place of scripture, which confounds and co^uinceth their errors, so that
they have not to answer. Then they fle to this shift. The law of Moses is but
the cruel letter that slayth, it is abrogated, it is but a shadow. It is the
spirit that quickens. This matter must therefore be vndersta^de^ spiritually.
For what else are all that Moses wrote but y^ letter shadows, say they and
figures, yea and that even the ten commandments are but shadows of a
spiritual law. Of what spirit, think ye, speak and write these sprites?
Verily of the sprite of phrenesy and hypocrysye. For this sect abrogateth and
passes not upon carnal adultery, nor theft, etc. But al upon spiritual
adultery, theft and spiritual murder. And will have al spiritual punishment for
them. Whose spiritual pains are so subtle that they hurt not a carnal body.
And therefore do they fondely and peruersely, which in this our corrupt and
perverse world teach liberty, before they have learned them selves, and are
taught, what thing is faith. For sith the nature of man, naturallye be prone
to slide from labor to lust, it will follow the liberty of the flesh, and
headlongs fall into al voluptuousnes and mischief wrapped in the mier of
errors and al filthiness. And why? verily they want the bridles of fear, faith
and love of God and of our neighbors. Wherefore if writers were wise now a
days, before they teach men to be fre Christians from Moses laws, they
should incu^ke the fear of God into their hertes, the fear of the punishment
decreed of god for sin, and the obedience to faith and to the law: which
thing Erasmus consideringe. full diligently, did write thus most wisely
eloquently and godly saying: Moses law, because for very fear of pain and
punishment, it held men in their duty and office refrayninge the^ from their
lusts, it is seruyle, Moses face is covered, which cover or veyle was a token
of bondage. But where as the spirit of our Lord Jesus, which brings to such
secret pricks, that me^ will vnboden gladly live pure and innocently. There
there is the very lybertye. No man is compelled to believe. But who so truly
believes, the same will willinglye and redilye estiewe all uncleanness and
embrace Godly purite, and will even of feruente love accompleshe more of the
law willingly, then could be extorted of the Jews for the very fear of
punishment. But return to this man saying thus:

What else were the ten comman^dementes of God, then a certain figure of Christ
and of the spiritual law?

Here is fine figurynge. Paul calls the law of the precepts, all
spiritual. To. vij. even the eternal spiritual will of God requiringe our
spiritual affectes, and hertes^ and not our externe dedis only For the law
is cont^ary to our carnal affectes, saying: Thou shall not lust. The deeds
of the law are the fruits of ye spirit. I would know what thing was fygured
by this precept: It is I that am the Lord thy God. Thou shall have no strange
gods in mi sight? I know but one of the ten precepts to be a figure of the
very true rest and Sabbothe from sin and from our own wills as Isaie
expowneth it. For, the law and Christ have contrary operacions, as have Moses
and the Gospel, wherefore one can not be the figure of the other. The law
workethe wrath. The Gospel and Christ reconcile us to God. That law makes syn
to increase, Christ remitteth it. The law accuses and dampneth, Christ with
his Gospel delyuereth and saves. And yet says this man^

That al Moses deeds, al his wrytings yea and all his life were not else, but a
mystik figuratyue image and similitude of Christ to come.

Belyke this man is universally seen in all the scriptures and namelye in all
Moses laws and gestes, non except, that he dar so universally compare them
with Christ making the one holly ye figur of the other when the one is in
working and effect contrary to the other, as is the law to the gospel, the
letter to the spirit, and death to life. ^, Corin.iij.
But and if he would admit this division of Moses his laws into ceremonials,
judicials and morals, taking Moses for his ceremonial sacrifices, prist he it
tabernacle, etc. Then had Moses ben the shadow of Christ, as Paul treats
it in the pistle to the Hebr. or else is his saying false. For this his saying
so absolutlye abrogateth the ten precepts, The figures are al abrogated at the
presence of the body so shadowed, which is Christ. ^olossen.ij.


Moses was a minister and not a master of the church, and yet prince of all
the Prophets.

If a master be a co^maunder, a teacher and a ruler, then was Moses a master
and chief gouerner of the church of Israel, which church was taught and ruled
by the same spirit of faith and religion in Christ to come as is ours in Christ
past. He commanded the same precepts which are now commanded to us by Christ
and his apostles. And if he takes a master for y^ head of the church: so was
Moses the master thereof. And then he says:

Because the disciples of christ saw non example of Christ to put Adulterers to
death, therefore Christ's disciples may put no man to death.

Are not al christen kings and magistrates applying the^ selves to be taught
of christ and folowinge his doctrine christ's disciples? and why theu may it
not stand with Christ's disciples to minister in Christ's common weal and
execute Christ's laws? Then would he prove the whole tables of the ten
commandments to be abrogated. And why?

Because (says he) Christ brake the Iewishe ceremonial of the Sabbath day.
Should we not keep the other commandementes, as to have on strange gods. To
make us no image, etc. because christ abrogated the ceremuniall shadow and
sower bark of the Jews Sabbath? It appears here what learning this man
has, as to err in so plain a place of the scriptures. He should have learned
of Isaye, which is the very Sabbath. For the prophets are the expowners of
the law. There is it declared, what is our perpetual Sabbath and rest from
our own affectes and will, from ^he confidence in our own worckes, and to
suffer God to work his will in us. And how the externe observance of the
Sabothe, taught them, and is the spiritual rest, he should have learned, into
what respects the Sabbath is ceremonial, and where it is moral? And wherefore
Christ being the body present would cause us, and them to cease any longer
to behold the shadow, and to look upon the body being the Lord of the
Sabbath. For the ceremonial part, thereof was the scole master unto the
spiritual observance thereof. Then he brings in the text Gal. vi.
co^foundinge the private mutual daily offenses of brethren prevented, with
sin done of weakness of man, with the open obstinat impenitent adultery, and
says:

That because Paul bids them, that are more spiritual and perfect to heal
such weak brethren that of fraylte be prevented vnwarres of their flesh, or
temptore, and so fall into some fault.

Therefore we may not exhort and move the Magistrates to take away open
acocustomed obstinat hoar mo^gers, which sclaunder and poison both the
churches of Christ and the whole common weal. No sir. These your punishementes
to such Adulterers as ye defend ar to small for them. And I dout not but some
good magistrates are spiritual, and yet will they punish open indurate
Adulterers with a sharper weapen, then spirit^ lenitatis, or else the realm
should sone swarmeful of malefactors incurably.

Then he brings in the example of the Samaritans and of Christ's Disciples,
which would have had fire to have fallen down upon them, for which Christ
rebuked them.

But the offenses, were not a like. The Samaritans of ignorance not knowing
Christ to be Messiah denied him his harbor, because he went to worship at
Jerusalem. Nether came Christ then to hurt, but to save, as he there told
the^ willinge so great a punishment for so little a fa^t. The disciples then
would have had Christ to declare his almightye Godheyt upon them by miracle
where it pleased him not so to do at their instance into the hurt of any man.
And yet was he content with the tower that fill upon the.xviij. in Siloo, and
with slaughter of the Galilens destroyed of Pilate. And told them that brought
him the tydinges. That except they repented they altogether should perishe^
But let him show us, where ever Christ or his apostles let, or delivered
from the galhouse any man justly condemned by the magistrates for his open
offense either of adultery, or murder or theft. He said: who so stryketh with
swerd, shall be slain therewith, lo: is not here a plain sentence of death, out
of Christ's mouth? ergo he consented to the punishment of sin with death,
contrary to this manis dream.

I know these whordomes and Adulteries to be spread as wide as they are
unpunished, and to deserve to be with violence repressed with the most strong
bars of the laws.

Know ye so? And yet neither will ye counsel them to be punished, nor yet
other ministers to move the Princes to punish them. Be Like ye favor them
greatly, and love sin more, then Godlynes, or else have ye but a could zele
to the Christen religion, common wealth and honesty. Paul commands us to
prosecute with hatred that as evil is. If yourselfe, being a professor of the
Gospel, should now counsel the Magistrates to punish adulterers as ye do,
so do yourselfe contrary to your own book, which would all the professors of
Christ to have lenite, mercy and piety, no man by their counsel and mocion to
be punished, but forgeuen and healed with the spirit of softenes, and by
preachinge the word. And then ye say.

Albeit, it is not lawful for the prechers to put forth the power, which the
humane v^cion swadeth: yet with the spirit of lenite it must be moderated,
rekening with the^ selves, not what is lawful, but what is expedient.

As though albeit, It were lawful to the^ to move the Magistrates to punish
sin yet is it not expedient. I would ye could join these two contradictories
in this cause. Believe ye that it is not charity and dew obedience to God, for
his minister to execute Gods laws? Is it not expedient. yea and necessary,
that such common malefactors be taken out of the common weal. Greater is the
charity, that extends her to many, then to one man or woman: and which
extends her self to the preseruacion and tranquilite of the whole church and
common weal, then it which is but a fond folish piete to save an Adulterer or
a murderer, which hurreth y^ whole comonaltie, which ones delyu^red
continuinge in his mischief and wickedness increases his crimes into the great
hurt of many. Thus have thou (Christen reader) these false arguments that
Adulterers should not be punished with death soluted, with the solucio^s also,
that the professors and preachers should not move the Magistrates so to punish
this gre^ouse crime, addinge that the decree and laws of God be abrogated and
of no strength so to punish the syn. And yet are they not so abrogated, but
they y^ rulers and princes may now execute the same law, if they will, which
thing spedely with all diligence to do, god give the^ grace thereby to rote out
this pestilent and n^oste detestable crime, out of Christ's church, that holy
matrymony may be restored to her dew honor integrite and purite according to
Gods institucion. So be it.

I. Corinth. UI. Be not deceived, for neither fornicators, nor image
worshippers, nor whormo^gers, neither softe^ings nor buggerers, nor thieves nor
gredy couetuose insaciable deceytfull gatherers, nor dronckerds, nor evil
speakers, nor pyllers, and pollers shall inherit the kingedom of God. Prynted at
London by George Joy.


