B. ION: HIS PART OF King James his Royal and Magnificent Entertainment
through his Honorable City of London, Thurseday the 15. of March. 1603.

So much as was presented in the first and last of their Triumphall Arch's.

With his speech made to the last Presentation, in the Strand, erected by the
inhabitants of the Duchy, and Westminster.

Also, a brief Panegyre of his Majesty's first and well auspicated entrance to
his high Court of Parliament, on Monday, the 19. of the same Month.

With other Additions.

Mart. Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos. Printed at London by V.
S. for Edward Blount, 1604.

The Pegme at Fen-church
PResented it self in a square and flat upright, like to the side of a City:
the top thereof, above the Vent, and Crest, adorned with houses, towers, and
steeples, set off in prospectiue. Upon the Battlements in a great capital
Letters was inscribed, LONDINIVM: According to Tacitus: At Suetonius mir^
constantia, medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit, Annal. lib. 14.
cognomento quiaem Coloniae non insigne, sed copia Negotiatorum, and commeatu
maxim celebre. Beneath that, in a less and different Character, was written
CAMERA REGIA Which Title immediately after the Norman Conquest it began to
have; Camd. Bri^. 374.
and by the indulgence of succeeding Princes, has been hitherto continued. In
the Freeze over the gate, it seems to speak this verse: PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
Taken out of Martial, Lib. 8. Epig. 36
and implying, that though this City (for the state, and magnificence) might
(by Hyporbole) be said to touch the stars, and reach up to heaven, yet was
it far Inferior to the Master thereof, who was his Majesty; and in that
respect unworthy to receive him. The highest person aduaunc'd therein, was
MONARCHIA BRITANNICA and fittely: applying to the above mentioned Title of the
City, the Kings Chamber, and therefore here placed as in the proper seat of
the Empire: for, Brit. 367.
so the glory and light of our Kingdom M. Camden, speaking of London, says,
she is, totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannicique imperii seeds, Regumque
Angliae Camera, tantum inter ^mneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) inter viburna
Cupressus. She was a woman richly attired in cloth of gold and tissue; a rich
mantle; over her state two Crowns hanging, with pensile shieldes through them;
the one lim'd with the particular Coat of England, the other of Scotland: on
either side also a Crown, with the like Scutchions, and peculiar Coats of
France, and Ireland. In her hand she holds a Scepter; on her head a fillet of
gold, inter-wouen with Palm and Laurel; her hair bound into four several
points, descending from her Crowns; and and in her lap a little Globe,
inscribed upon ORBIS BRITANNICVS.
And beneath, the word
DIVISVS AB ORB.
To show, that this Empire is a world divided from the world, and alluding to
that of* Clau. De mallij Theodor. cons. Panegyri.
-- Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
And Virg.
-- Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos. Eclog. 1.

The wreathe denotes Victory and Happiness. The Scepter and Crowns sovereignty.
The Shieldes the precedence of the Countries and their distinctions. At her
feet was set THEOSOPHIA, or Divine wisdom, al in white, a blew mantle seeded
with Stars, a crown of Stars on her head. Her garments figured Truth,
Innocence and Cleerenesse. She was always looking up; in her one hand she
sustained a Dove, in the other a Serpent: Matthew. 10. 16.
the last to show her Subtilty, the first her Simplicity; alluding to that text
of Scripture, Prou. 8. 15.
Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpents, and simplices sicut columbae. Her word,
PER ME REGES REGNANT.

Intimating, how by her, all Kings do govern, and that she is the foundation
and strength of kingdoms, to which end, she was here placed, upon a Cube, at
the foot of the Monarchy, as her Base and stay. Antiqui Genium omniu^
gignendarum rerum existimaru^t Deum: et vrbib. quam hominib. vel caeteris rebus
natu^. Lil. Gre. Gy. in Synt. deor. 15. and Rosin. Antiq. To. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Directly beneath her stood GENIUS VRBIS.

A person attired rich, reverend, and antique: his hair long and white,
crowned with a wreathe of Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his
mantle of purple, and buskins of that color: He held in one hand a Goblet, in
the other a branch full of little twigges, to signify Increase and
Indulgence: His word HIS ARMIS. pointing to the two that supported him, whereof
the one on the right hand, was BOVLEVTES. Figuring the Council of the City,
Civica corona fit e fronde querna, quoniam cibus, victusque antiquissimus
querceus capisolitus sit. Ros. libr. 10. cap. ^7.
and was suited in black and purple; a wreathe of* Oak upon his head;
sustaining for his ensigns, on his left arm a scarlet roabe, and in his right
hand the ^ascicul^ v^^garum, intra quas obligata securis erat, sic, vt ferrum
in summo fasce extaret, Ros. lib. 7. cap. 3. vbi notandum est, non debere
precipitem, and solutam iram esse magistratus. Mora enim allata, and cunctatio,
dum sensim virgae solvuntur, identidem consilium mutauit deplect^ndo. Quando
autem vitia quaedam sunt corrigibilia, deplorata alia; castigant virgae, quod
revocari valet, immendabile secures praecidunt. Plut. Prob. Romans 82.
Fasces, as tokens of Magistracy, with this inscription; SERVARE CIVES.

The other on the left hand. POLEMIVS The warrelike force of the City, in an
antique Coat, or Armor, with a Target and Sword; his helm on, and crowned
with Laurel, implying Strength and Conquest: in his hand he bore the Standard
of the City, with this word, EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.

Expressing by those several Motts, connexed, that with those Arms of
Council and Strength, the Genius was able to extinguish the Kings enemies, and
preserve his Citizens, alluding to those verses in Seneca, Octa: Act: 2
Extinguere hostem, maxima est virtus Ducis.
Servare Cives, mayor est patriae, patri.


Underneath these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest lay TAMESIS.

The River, as running along the side of the City; in a skin made like flesh,
naked, and blew. His mantle of sea-greene or water color, thin, and bolne
out like a sail; Bracelets about his wreasts, of willow and sedge, a crown of
sedge and reed upon his head, mixed with water lillies; alluding to Virgills
description of Tiber; -- Deus ipse loci, Aen. lib. 8.
fluvie Tyberinus amoeno,
Populeas inter senior se att^llere frondes
Visus. cum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus. and crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.


His beard, and hair long, and ouergrowne. He leanes his arm upon an earthen
pot, out of which, water, with live Fishes, are seen to run forth, and play
about him. His word, FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA. A Hemistich of Ouids: Amor. lib.
3. el. 5.
The rest of the verse being, quid esset amor.

Affirming, that Rivers themselves, and such inanimate Creatures, have
heretofore been made sensible of Passions, and Affections; and that he,
now, no less pertooke the joy of his Majesty's grateful approach to this
City, than any of those persons, to whom he pointed, which were the daughters
of the Genius, and six in number: who, in a spreading ascent, upon several
grices, help to beautify both the sides. The first, EVPHROSYNE, or Gladness:
was suited in green, a mantle of diverse colors, embroydred with all variety of
flowers: on her head a Gyrland of Myrtle, in her right hand a cristall Cruze
filld with wine, in the left a Cup of gold: at her feet a Tymbrell, Harp,
and other Instruments, all ensigns of gladness, Hor. car. ^. ode 27.
Natis in vsum laetitiae scyphis, etc.
And in another place,
Nunc est bibendum, and Ode. 37
nunc pede libero
Pulsanda Tellus, etc.
Her word. Stat. Syl. 4. Epu. Domit.


HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES. As if this were the first hour of her life, and
the minute wherein she began to be; beholding so long coueted, and looked for
a presence. The second. SEBASIS. or Veneratio, was varied in an ash colored
suit, and dark mantle, a veil over her head of ashcolour: her hands crossed
before her, and her eyes half closde: Her word: MIHI SEMPER DEVS. Virg. Ecl. ^.


Implying both her office of reverence, and the dignity of her object, who
being as God on earth, should never be less in her thought: The third:
PROTHYMIA. or Promptitude, was attired in a short tuckt garment of
flame-colour, wings at her back; her hair bright, and bound up with ribands;
her breast open, virago-like; her buskins so ribanded: She was crowned with a
Chaplet of Trifoly, to express readiness, and opennesse every way; in her right
hand she held a squirrell, as being the creature most full of life and
quickness: in the left a close round Censor, with the perfume suddenly to be
vented forth at the sides. Her word: QVA DATA PORTA. Aene. 1.


Taken from an other place in Virgill where Eolus at the command of Juno letts
forth the wind; Aene. 1.
-- ac venti velut agmine facto
Qua data p^rta ruunt, and terras turbine perflant.


And showed that she was no less prepared with promptitude, and alacrity,
then the winds were, upon the least Gate that shall be opened to his high
command. The fourth AGRYPNIA. or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded
with waking eyes, and silver fringe: her Chaplet of Heliotropium, or Turnsole;
in her one hand a Lamp, or Cresset, in her other a Bell. The Lamp signified
search and sight, the Bell warning. The Heliotropium care; and respecting her
object. Her word SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.

Alluding to that of Ovid, where he describes the office of Argus, -- Ipse
pr^cul mon^is sublime cacumen
Occupat, Met. 1.
vnde sedens parts speculatur in omneis.
and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in her self. The fifth
AGAPE. Or loving Affection, in Crimson fringed with gold, a mantle of
flame-colour, her Chaplet of red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart:
The flame expressed zeal, the red and white roses, a mixture of Simplicity
with Love: her robes freshnes and feruency. De 4. Cons. Honor. Panegyri
Her word, NON SIC EXCVBIAE. Out of Claudian, in following -- Nec circumstantia
peila
-- Quam tutatur amor.
Inferring, that though her Sister before had protested watchfulnes, and
circumspection, yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person
of a Prince, as the love and natural affection of his Subjects: which she in
the Cities behalf promised. The sixth, OMOTHYMIA. Or Unanimity in blew, her
roabe blew, and buskins. A Chaplet of blew lillies, showing one truth and
entireness of mind. In her lap lies a sheafe of arrows bound together, and
she her self sittes weauing certain small silver twists. Her word, FIRMA
CONSENSVS FACIT.
Auxilia humilia firma, Pub. Sir. Mi.
etc.


Intimating, that even the smallest and weakest aids, by consent, are made
strong: herself personating the unanimity, or consent of Soul, in all
inhabitants of the City to his service.

These are all the personages, or live figures, whereof only two were Speakers
( Genius and Tamesis) the rest were Mutes. Other dumb complements there were,
as the Arms of the Kingdom on the one side, with this Inscription. HIS VIREAS.
With these may thou flourish.


On the other side the Arms of the City, with HIS VINCAS.
With these may thou conquer.


In the center, or midst of the Pegme, there was an Aback, or Square, wherein
this Elogie was written. Maximus hic Rex est, and lucc serenior ipsa
Principe quae talem cernit in vrbe Ducem;
Cuiu^ Fortunam superat sic vnica Virtus,
Vnus vt is reliquos vincit vtraque viros.
Praeceptis alii populos, multaque fatigant
Lege; sed exemplo nos rapit ille suo.
Cuique frui tota fas est vxore marito,
Et sua fas simili pignora nosse pa^ri.
Ecce vbi pignoribus circumstipata coruscis
It comes, and tanto vix minor ANNA viro.
Haud metus est, Regem posthac ne proximus Hares,
Neu Successorem non amet ille suum.


This, and the whole frame, was covered with a curtain of silk, painted like
a thick cloud, and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawn. The
Allegory being, that those clouds were gathered upon the face of the City,
through their long want of his most wished fight: but now, as at the rising of
the Sun, all mistes were dispersed and fled. When suddenly upon silence made
to the Musikes, a voice was heard to utter this verse; Totus adest oculis,
Clau. de laud. Still. lib. 3.
aderat qui mentibus olim,

Signifying that he now was really objected to their eyes, who before had
been only, but still, present in their minds.

Thus far the complementall part of the first; wherein was not only labored
the expression of State and Magnificence (as proper to a triumphall Arch) but
the very Site, Fabric, Strength, Policy, Dignity and Affections of the
City were all laid down to life: The nature, and property of these Devises
being, to present always some one entire body, or figure, consisting of
distinct members and each of those expressing it self, in the own active
sphere, yet all, with that general harmony so connexed, and disposed, as no
one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole: where also is
to be noted, that the Symboles used, are not, neither ought to be simply
Hierogliphickes, Emblemes, or Imprese, but a mixed Character, pertaking somewhat
of all, and peculierly apted to these more magnificent Inventions: wherein the
Garments, and Ensigns deliver the nature of the person, and the Word the
present office. Neither was it becoming, or could it stand with the dignity of
these shows (after the most miserable and desperate shift of the Puppits) to
require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter) one to write. This is a
Dog; or, This is a Hare: but so to be presented, as upon the view they might
without cloud, or obscurity declare themselves to the sharp and learned: And
for the multitude, no doubt but their grounded judgments gazed, said it was
fine, and were satisfied.

The speeches of Gratulation.
GENIUS. TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the As being the first, free, and natural
government of this Island, after it came to civility.
Brittane stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman In respect they were all Co^quests and the
obedience of the subject more enforced.
yoke,
This point of Time has done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest Gems; Teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: Set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging Joy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with show^es, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As Thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When Rather then the City should want a Founder, we choose to follow the
received story of Brute, whether fabulous, or true, and not altogether
vnvvarra^ted in Poetry: since it is a favor of Antiquity to fevv cities, to
let them know their first Authors. Besides, a learned Poet of our time, in a
most elega^t work of his Con. Tam. and ISIS, celebrating London has this
verse of her:

Aemula maternae tollens sua lumina Troiae. Here is also an ancient rite
alluded to in the building of Cities, which was to give them their bounds
with a plough, according to Vir. Aen. li. 10. Interea Aeneas vrbem designat
Aratro. And Isidore li. 15. cap. 2. Vrbs vocata ab orb, quod antiquae
civitates in orbem fiebant; vel ab vrbe part ^^ratri, quo muri designabantur,
vnde est illud. Optauitque locum regno and concludere sulco.


Brutus plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And I, thy GENIUS walked auspicious rounds
In every Primigenius sulcus dicitur, qui in condenda noua vrbe, taur^ and
vacca designationis causa imprimitur; Hitherto respects that of Camd. Brit.
368. speaking of this City, Quicunque autem condiderit, vitali genio,
constructam fuisse ipsius fortuna docuit.
furrow; Then did I forelooke,
And saw this day For so all happy days were. Plin. cap. 40. lib. 7. Not.
Hist. To which Horace alludes, lib. 1. ode. 36. Cressa ne careat pulchra dies
nota. And the other Plin. epist. 11. lib. 6. O diem laetum, not and umque mihi
candidissimo calculo. With many other in many places. Mart. lib. 8. epi. 45.
lib. 9. epi. 53. lib. 10. 38. lib. 11. 37. Stat. lib. 4. Syl. 6. Pers, sat. 2.
Catull. epig. 69. etc.
marked white in The Parcae, or Fates, Martianus calls them scribas ac
librarias superum; whereof Clotho is said to be the eldest, signifying in
Latin Euocatio.
Clotho's book.
The several Those before mentioned of the Brittane, Roman, Saxon, etc. and
to this Register of the Fates allude those verses of Ovid Met. 15 -- Cernes
illic molimine vasto. Exaere, and solido rerum tabularia ferro: Quae neque
concussum coeli, neque fulminis Iram, Nec metuunt vllas tuta atque
aeternaruinas. Inuenies illic incisa adamante peren^^ Fata etc. --
Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabites you? Shall Office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That Article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspired? Now heaven auert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be Zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber s^ake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks. "Now is not every Tide.

TAMESIS. TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when Seas of pomp overflow
The Cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than A river dividing Spain and Portugal, and by the
consent of Poets styled aurifer.
Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the flood of Joy, that comes with him,
He drownes the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may Understanding Euphrosyne, Sebasis,
(...), etc
These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.

GENIUS. Indeed, true Gladness does not always speak:
Joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the feruor of so pure a flame
As this my City bears, might loose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heat)
Know greatest JAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my The Lord Mayor who for his year, has Senior place of the rest,
and for the day was chief Serieant to the King.
eldest there, thy pomp forerunnes,
(A Man without my flattring, or his Pride,
As worthy, as he is Above the blessing of his present office, the word had
some particular allusion to his name, which is Benet, and has (no doubt) in
time bin the contraction of Benedict.
blessed to be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his Brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewd)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his The City, which title is touched before.
Empires seat:
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reuerenc'd, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: In a Prince it is
No little virtue, to know who are his.
To the Prince.
With like devotions, do I stoop to embrace
This springing glory of thy An attribute given to great persons, fitly above
other, Humanity, and in frequent use with all the Greek Poets, especially
Homer. Iliad. (...) -- (...). And in the same Book. -- (...).
Godlike race;
His Countries Wonder, Hope, Love, Joy and Pride:
How well does he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Brittane ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the Maine, and knit with every shore
In ^onds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And style this Land, the As Lactant. calls Parnass^, Vmbilicum terra.
Nauill of their peace.
This is your Servants wish, your Cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds move:
He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.
To the Queen.
And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queens, and An emphaticall speech, and well re-enforcing her
greatness; being by this match, more than either her Brother, Father, etc.
Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces do as far out-speake your Fame,
As Fame does silence, when her Trumpet rings
You Daughter to Frederik second kind of Denmark, and Norway, sister to
Christierne the fourth now there reigning, and wife to James our Sovereign.
Daughter, Sister, Wife of several Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the style of Mother,
In which one Title you drown all your other.
Instance, be The Prince Henry Frederike.
that fair shoot, is gone before
Your eldest Joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to us is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sower mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.

THE OTHER AT TEMPLE BAR.
CArried the frontispice of a Temple, the Walls of which and Gates were Brass;
the Pillars Silver, their Capitals and Bases Gold: in the highest point of all
was erected a Ianus head, and over it written.

IANO QVADRIFRONTI SACRVM. Which title of Quadrifrons is said to be given him,
Bassus apud Macro* lib. 1. Satur. ca. 9.
as he respects all Climates, and filles all parts of the world with his
Majesty; which Martial would seem to allude unto in that Hendicasillable,
li. 8. Epi. 2.
Et lingua pariter locutus omni. Others have thought it by reason of the four
Elements, which brake out of him, being Chaos: for Ovid is not afraid to make
Chaos and Ianus the same, in those verses Me Chaos antiqui (nam sum res prisca)
vocabant: Fast. lib. 1.

Adspice, etc.
^^ PLVTVS. or Wealth, So Cephisiodotus has fained him See Paus. in Boeoti.
and Phil. in Imag. contrary to Aristop. Theogn. Lucian and others, that make
him blind and deformed.
a little boy, bare headed, his locks curled, and spangled with gold, of a
fresh aspect, his body almost naked, saving some rich robe cast over him; in
his arms a heap of gold Ingots to express riches, whereof he is the God:
Beneath her feet lay ENYALIVS. or Mars, Groueling, his armor scattered upon
him in several pieces, and sundry sorts of weapons broken about him, her
word to all was VNA TRIVMPHIS IN NVMERIS POTIOR. pax optima rerum
Quas homini nouisse datum est, Si^* Ital*
pax vna Triumphis Innumeris potior.
signifieng that peace alone was better, and more to be coueted then
innumerable Tryumphes, besides, upon the right hand of her, but with some
little descent, in a Hemicycle was seated ESYCHIA. or Quie^, the first handmaid
of peace; A woman of a grave and venerable aspect, attired in black, upon her
head an artificial nest, out of which appeared Storkes heads to manifest a
sweet repose. Her feet were placed upon a Cube, to show stability, and in
her lap she held a Perpendicular or level, as the ensign of Evenness and
Rest; on the top of it sat a Halcion or Kings-fisher. She had lying at her
feet TARACHE. or Tumult, in a garment of diverse, but dark colors, her hair
wild, and disordered, a foul and troubled face, about her lay staves,
swords, ropes, chains, hammers, stones, and such like to express Turmoile.
The word was PERAGIT TRANQVILLA POTESTAS. De Malii Theo. co^s. Panegy.
Claud. Quod violent a nequit: mandat aque fortius vrget Imperiosa quies. To
show the benefits of a calm and facile power, being able to effect in a state
that, which no violence can. On the other, side the second handmaide, was
ELEVTHERIA. or Liberty, her dressing white, and som-what antique but loose and
free; her hair flowing down her back, and shoulders: In her right hand she
bare a Club, on her left a Hat, the Characters of freedom, and power: At her
feet a Catt was placed, the creatrue most affecting, and expressing liberty.
She trod on Raven, as the Augury of ill fortune: and the Soul was REDEVNT
SATVRNIA REGNA. Out of Virgil, Eclog. 4.
to show that now those golden times were returned again, wherein Peace was
with us so aduannced, Rest received, Liberty restored, Safety assured, and
all Blessedness appearing in every of these virtues her particular Triumph
over her opposite evil. This is the dumb argument of the frame, and
illustrated with this verse of Virgil, written in the under freeze. Aeneid.
lib. 11.
NVLLA SALVS BELLO
PACEM TE POSSIMVS OMNES.
The speaking part was performed, as within the Temple where there was erected
an Altar, to which at the approach of the K. appears the Flamen One of the
three Flamines that as some think Numa Po^pilius first instituted, ^ut we
rather with Varr^ take him of Romulus institution, whereof there were only
two, He, and Dialis: to whom he was next in dignity. He was alvvaies
created out of the Nobility, and did perform the rites to Mars, who was
thought the Father of Romulus.
MARTIALIS. And to him. GENIUS VRBIS. The Genius we attired before: To the
Flamen we appoint this habit. A long Crimson robe to witness his nobility,
his typpet and sl^eues white as reflecting on purity in his religion, a rich
mantle of gold with a train to express the dignity of his function. Upon his
head a Scaliger in coniect. in Varr: says Totus Pileus, vel potius velamenta,
Flamm^um dicebatur. vnde Flamines dicti.
Hat of delicate wool, whose top ended in a Cone, and was thence called Apex,
according to that of Lucan. lib. 1. Attollensque Apicem gen^roso vertice
Flamen. This Apex was covered with a To this looks that other conjecture of
Varro. lib. 4. de lingua Latina Flamines, quod licio in Capite vel^ti erant
semper, ac caput cinctum hab^bant filo, Flamines dicti
fine net of yearne which they named Apiculum, and was sustained with a Whichin
their attire was called Stroppus, in their vviues Inarculum.
bowd twigge of Pomgranat tree, it was also in the hot time of Summer to be
bound with Ribands, and thrown behind them as Scal. Ibid: in con. Pone enim
regerebant apicem, ne grauis esset summis aestatis caloribus. Amentis enim,
quae offendices dicebantur sub mentum adductis, religabant; vt cum vellent,
regererent, and pone pen^ere permitterent.
Scaliger teaches. In his hand he bore a golden Censor with perfume, and
censing about the Altar (having first kindled his fire on the top) is
interrupted by the Genius.

GENIUS. STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
Dare kindle stranger, and unhallowed fire
Upon this Altar?

FL. Rather what art thou
That dare so rudely interrupt my vow?
My habit speaks my name.

GE. A Flamin?

FL. Yes,
And Of Mars, whose rites (as we have touch^ before) this Flame^ did
specially celebrate.
Martialis called.

GE. I so did guess
By my short view, but whence did thou ascend
Hither? or how? or to what mistick end?

FL. The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
Rowsd me from sleep, and silence, where I lay
Obscured from light; which when I wakt to see,
I wondering thought what this great pomp might be.
When (looking in my Calendar) I found
The With (...) the 15. of March, which was the present day of this Triumph;
and on which the great feast of Anna Perenna (among the Romans) was yearly
and with such solemnity remembered. Oui. Fast. 3. Idibus est Annae festu^
geniale Perennae, Haud procul a ripis, etc.
Ides of March were entered, and I bound
With these, to celebrate the Geniall feast
Of Who this Anna should be (with the Romans themselves) has been no
trifling controversy. Some have thought her fabulously the sister of Dido,
some a Nimphe of Numicius; some Io; some Themis. Others an old woman of
Bouillae, that fed the seditious multitude, in Mont^ sacr^, with Wafers, and
fine Cakes, in time of their penury: so whom, afterward (in memory of the
benefit) their peace being made with the Nobles, they ordaind this feast. Yet,
they that have thought nearest, have mist all these, and directly imagined her
the Moon. And that she was called Anna, Quia mensibus impleat annu^. O^^d.
ibid. To which, the vovv that they vsd in her Rites, somvvhat confirmingly
alludes; which was. vt Annare, and Perenn^re commode liceret. Maor. Sat. lib.
1. cap. 1^.
ANNA styled PERENNA, So Ovid. ibid. Fast. makes Mars speaking to her, Mense
meo coleris, iunxi mea tempora tecum.
MARS his guest;
Who, in this Month of his, is yearly called
To banquet at his Altars; and in stald;
Nuper e^at dea facta, etc. ibid. Ovid.
A Goddess with him, since she filles the Year,
And Where is understood the meeting of the Zodiac in March, the month
wherein she is celebrated.
knits the oblique scarf that girts the sphere.
Whilst four faced IANVS turns his That face vvherevvith he beholds the
Spring.
vernall look
Upon their meeting hours, as if he took.
High pride and pleasure.

GE. Sure thou still do dream,
And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the stream
Of Phantasy: Behold here He nor She,
Have any Altar, Fane, or Deity.
Stoop; read but this Written upon the Altar, for which we refer you to the
Page. D. 3.
inscription: and then veiwe
To whom the Place is consecrate. It Is true
That this is IANVS Temple, and that now
He turns upon the Year his freshest browe;
That this is MARS his month; and these the Ides,
Wherein his ANNE was honored; Both the Tides,
Titles, and Place, we know: But these dead rites
Are long since buried, and new power excites
More high and hearty flames. Lo, there is he,
Who brings with him a The Queen. to answer which in our inscription we
spoke to the King MART MAIORI.
greater ANNE then she:
Whose strong and potent virtues have The Temple of Ianus we apprehend to be
both the house of War, and Peace; of War, when it is open; of Peace when it
is shut: And that there, each over the other is interchangeably placd, to the
vicissitude of Times.
defaced
Stern MARS his Statues, and upon them placed
His, Which are Peace, Rest, Liberty, Safety, etc* and were his actiuely, but
the worlds passiuely.
and the worlds blessed blessings: This has brought
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
Unbloody, or untroubled; has forced hence
All tumults, fears, or other dark portents
That might invade weak minds; has made men see
Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
And does (in all his present acts) restore
That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil
Of ravenous Greatness, or to steep the soil
Of raised Pesantrie with tears, and blood;
No more shall rich men (for their little good)
Suspect to be made guilty; or vile Spies
Enjoy the lust of their so murdring eyes:
Men shall put off their Iron minds, and hearts;
The Time forget his old malicious arts
With this new minute; and no print remain
Of what was thought the former ages stain.
Back FLAMIN, with thy superstitious fumes,
And cense not here; Thy ignorance presumes
Too much, in acting any Ethnic rite
In this translated Temple: Here no wight,
To sacrifice, save my devotion comes,
That brings instead of those thy Somevvhat a strange Epithet, in our tongue,
but proper to the thing; for they were only Mascul^ne Odours, which were
offered to the Altars. Vir. Ecl. 8. Verbenasque adole pingueis, et mascula Tura.
And Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 14. speaking of these, has Quod ex eo
rotunditate gutt^^ pependit, Masculum vocamus, cum alias non fere mas vocetur,
vbi non sit femina: religioni tributum ne sexus alter vsurparetur. Masculum
aliqui putant a specie testium dictum. See him also, lib. 34. cap. 11. And
A^nob. lib. 7. aduers. Gent. Non si mill ^upo^dera masculi Turis ince^das, etc.
Masculine gummes.
My Cities heart; which shall for ever burn
Upon this Altar, and no Time shall turn
The same to ashes: Here I fix it fast,
Flame bright, flame high, and may it ever last.
Whilst I, before the figure of thy Peace,
Still tend the fire; and give it quick increase
With prayers, wishes, vows; whereof be these
The least, and weakest: that no Age may leese
The Memory of this so rich a day;
But rather, that it henceforth yearly may
Begin our Spring and with our spring the prime,
And According to Romulu^ his institution, who made March the first Month and
consecrated it to his Father, of whom it was called Martius: Varr. Fest. in
Frag. Martius mensis in^tium anni fuit, et in La^io, and post Romam conditam
etc. And Ovid. Fast. 3. A te principium Romano dicimus anno: Primus de patri^
nomine mensis erit. Vox ratafit; etc. See Macro lib. 1. Sat. cap. 12. and
Solin. in Poly. hist. cap. 3 Quod hoc me^se mercedes e^oluerint magistris, quas
completus annus deberi fecisset, etc.
first account of Years, of Months, Some, to whom we have read this, have
taken it for a Tautologie, thinking Time enough expressed before, in Years,
and Months. For whose ignor^nt sakes we must confess to have taken the
better part of this trauale in noting, a thing not usual, neither affected of
us, but where there is necessity, as here, to avoid their dull censures:
where in Years and Months we alluded to that is observed in our former note;
but by Time we understand the present, and that from this instant, we should
begin to reckon, and make this the first, of our Time. Which is also to be
helped by Emphasis.
of Time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to In which he vva^ slain in the Senate.
Caesar fatal were.
Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
Make have to close, as urged by thy Fates;
Here ends my Cities office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains does greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
He merits not to offend, that hastes to please.

Over the Alter was written this Inscription:

D. I. O. M. BRITANNI ARVM. IMP. PACIS. VINDICI. MART. MAIORI. P. P. F. S.
AVGVSTO. NOVO. GENTIVM. CONIVNCTARVM. NVMINI. TVTELARI. D. A. CONSERVATRICI.
ANNAE. IPSAE. PERENNAE. DEABVSQVE. VNIVERSIS. OPTATIORI. SVI FORTVNATISSIMI.
THALAMI. SOCIAE. ET CONSORTI. PVLCHERIMAE. AVGVSTISSIMAE. ET H. F. P. FILIO.
SVO. NOBILISSIMO. OB. ADVENTVM. AD VRBEM. HANC. SVAM. EXPECTATISSIMVM.
GRATISSIMVM. CELEBRATISSIMVM. CVIVS. NON. RADII. SED SOLES. POTIVS. FVNESSIMAM.
NVPER. AERIS. INTEMPERIEM. SERENARVNT S. P. Q. L. VOTIS. X. VOTIS. XX.
ARDENTISSIMIS. L. M. HANC. ARAM. P.

And upon the Gate being shut,

IMP. IACOBVS MAX. CAESAR AVG. P. P. PACE POPVLO BRITANNICO TERRA MARIQVE PARTA
IANVM CLVSIT. S. C.

THus has both Court-Towne-and Countrey-Reader, our portion of devise for the
City; neither are we ashamed to profess it, being assured well of the
difference between it and Pageantry. If the Mechanic part yet standing, give
it any distaste in the wrye mouths of the Time, we pardon them; for their own
ambitious ignorance does punish them enough. From hence we will turn over a
new leaf with you, and lead you to the Pegme in the Strand, a work thought
on, begun, and perfected in twelve days.

THe Invention was a Rainbow, the Moon, Sun, and those seven Stars,
which antiquity has styled the Pleiades, or Vergiliae, advanced between two
Magnificent Pyramid's of 70. foot in height, on which were drawn his
Majesty's several pedigrees Eng. and Scot. To which body (being framd before)
we were to apt our soul. And finding that one of these seven lights, Electra,
is rarely or not at all to be seen, (as Ovid. lib. 4. Fast. affirms.
Pleiades incipient humeros releuare paternos:
Quae septem dici, sex tamen esse solent.
And by and by after, Sieve quod Electra Troiae spectare ruinas
Non tulit: aute oculos opposuitque manum.
And Festus Auien. Paraph. in Arat Phaen^m.
Fama vetus septem memor at genitore creatas
Longaeuo: sex se rutila inter sider a tantum
Sustollunt, etc.
And beneath -- cerni sex solas carmine Mynthes
Asserit: Electram coelo abscessisse profundo, etc.)
We ventred to follow this authority; and made her the speaker: presenting her
hanging in the air, in figure of a Comet; according to Anonymus. Electra non
sustinens videre casum pronepotum sugerit; vnde and illam disso lutis crinibus
prop^er luctum ire asserunt, et propter comas quidam Cometen appellant.

The speech.
Electra. THe long Fest. Aui. paraph. Pars ait Idae^ def^e^tem incendia Troiae,
^t numerosa suae luge^tem funerae gentis, Electram tetris moestum dare nubibus
orbem. Besides the reference to antiquity, this speech might be understood by
Allegory of the Town here, that had been so ruined with sickness, etc.
Laments, I spent for ruined Troy,
Are dried; and now mine eyes run tears of Joy.
No more shall men suppose Electra dead,
Though from the consort of her sisters fled
Unto the Hygi^us. Sed postqua^ Troia f^it capta, and Progenies cius quae a
Dardano fuit euersa, dolor permotam ab his se remouisse, and in circ^^o qui
A^cticus dicitur constitisse, etc.
Arctick circle, here to grace,
And guild this day with her Electra signifies Serenity it self, and is
compounded of (...) which is the Sun, and (...) that signifies serene. She
is mentioned to be Anim^ sphaerae solis, by Proclus. Com. in Hesiod.
serenest Face*
And see, my She is also faind to be the Mother of the R^inbovv. Nascitur enim
I^is ex aqua et serenitate, e refractione radioru^ scilicet: Arist. in Meteorol.
daughter Iris hasts to throw
Her Rose at wings, in compass of a bow,
About our state, as Val. Flac. Argonaut. 1. makes the Rainbovv indic^m
serenitatis. Emicuit res^rata di^s, coelumque resoluit. Arcus, and in summos
redier unt nubila montes.
sign of my approch^
Attracting to her seat from A name of the Sun. Stat. The. lib. 1.
torquentem corn^a Mithra^. And Martian. Capel. lib. 3. de nup. Mer. and Phil.
Te Serapim Nilus, Memphis vener^tur Osirin; Dissona sacra Mithran, etc.
Mithras coach,
A thousand different, and particular hewes,
Which she throughout her body does diffuse.
The Sun, as loath to part from this half sphere,
Stands still; and Phoebe labors to appear
In all as bright (if not as rich) as he:
And, for a note of more serenity,
My six Alcyone,. Celaeno, Taygete, Asterope, Merope, Maia. which are also
said to be the souls of the other sphaeres, as Electra of the S^nne. Proclus.
ibi. in com. Alcyone Veneris. Celaeno Saturni. Taygete Lunae. Asterop. Iouis.
Merope Martis. Maia Mercurij.
fair Sisters hither shift their lights;
To do this hour the utmost of her Rites.
Where least the captious, or profane might doubt,
How these clear heavenly bodies come about
All to be seen at once; yet neithers light
Eclipsed, or shadowed by the others sight:
Let Ignorance know, great King, this Day is thine,
And does admit no Night; but all do shine
As well nocturnall, as diurnall fires,
To add unto the flame of our desiers.
Which are (now thou have closd up Alluding back to that of our Temple.
IANVS gates,
And given so general peace to all estates)
That no offensive mist, or cloudie stain
May mix with splendour of thy golden reign;
But, as the ast freed thy London.
Chamber, from the noise
Of War and Tumult; thou will power those joys
Upon His City of Westminster, in whose name, and at whose charge, together
with the Duchy of Lancaster this Arch was erected.
this Place, which claims to be Since here, they not only sat being Crovvnd,
but also first received their Crowns.
the Seat
Of all thy Kingly race: the Cabinet
To all thy Counsels; and the judging Chair
To this thy special Kingdom. Whose so fair
And wholesome Laws, in every Court, shall strive
By Aequity, and their first Innocence to thrive;
The base and guilty bribes of guiltier men
Shall be thrown back, and Justice look, as when
She loved the earth, and feared not to be sold
For that, Hor. Car. lib. 4. Ode. 9. Ducentis ad se cun^ta pecuniae.
which works all things to it, Gold.
The Dam of other evils, Avarice
Shall here lock down her Jaws, and that rude vice
Of ignorant, and pitied Greatness, Pride,
Decline with shame; Ambition now shall hide
Her face in dust, as dedicate to sleep,
That in great Portalls wont her watch to keep.
All ills shall fly the light: Thy Court be free
No less from Envy, then from Flattery;
All Tumult, Faction, and harsh Discord cease,
That might perturbe the music of thy Peace:
The querulous Nature shall no longer find
Room for his Thoughts: One pure concent of mind
Shall flow in every breast, and not the Air,
Sun, Moon, or Stars shine more serenely fair.
This from that loud, blessed Oracle, I sing
Who here, and first pronounced, thee Britains King
Long may thou live, and see me thus appear,
As omenous For our more authority to induce her thus, See Fest. Auien.
paraph. in Arat. speaking of Electra, Nonnumquam Oceani tamen istam surgere ab
vndis, In conuexa poli, sed sede carere sororum; Atque os discretum procul
edere, detestatam Germanosque, choros sobolis lachrym^re ruin^s, Diffusamque
comas c^rni, crinisque soluti Monstrari effigy, etc.
a Comet, from my Sphere,
Unto thy reign; as that All Comets were not fatal, some were fortunatly
ominous, as this to which we allude; and wherefore we have Plinies
testimony. Not. Histo. lib. 2. cap. 25. Cometes in vno totius orbis loco
colitur in templo Romae, admodum faustus Diuo Augusto iudicatus ab ipso: qui
incipiente eo, apparuit ludis quos faciebat Veneri Genetrici, non multo ^ost
obitum patris Caesaris, in Collegio ab eo instituto. Namque his verbis id
gaudium prodidit. Iisipsis ludorum meorum diebus, sydus crinitum per septem
dies in regione Coeli, quae sub septentrionibus est, conspectum. Id oriebatur
circa vndecimam horam di^i, clarumque and omnibus terris conspicuum fuit. Eo
sydere significari vulgus credidit, Caesaris animam inter Deorum immortalium
numina receptam: quo nomine id insigne simulacro capitis eius, quod mox in foro
consecrauimus adiectum est. Hec Ill^ in publicum, interiore gaudio sibi illum
natum, seque in conasci inter pretatus est. Et si verum fatemur, salutare id
terris fuit.
did auspicate
So lasting glory to Augustus state.

The end.
B. I. HIS PANEGYRE.

On the happy entrance of JAMES our Sovereign to his first high Session of
Parliament in this his Kingdom the 19. of March. 1603.

Mart. Licet toto nunc Helicone frui. A PANEGYRE.
Heaven now not strives, alone, our breasts to fill
With Joys: but urges his full favors still.
Again, the Glory of our Western world
Unfolds himself: and from his Eyes are hoorl'd,
(To day) a thousand radiant lights, that stream
To every nooke, and angle of his realm.
His former rays, did only clear the sky;
But these his searching beams are cast, to pry
Into those dark, and deep concealed vaults,
Where men commit black incest with their faults;
And snore supinely in the stall of Sin:
Where Murder, Rapine, Lust, do sit within
Carow^ing humane blood, in iron bowls,
And make their Den the slaughter house of souls:
From whose foul reeking cauernes first arise
Those dampes, that so offend all good men's eyes;
And would (if not dispersed) infect the Crown,
And in their vapor her bright Metal drown.
To this so clear, and sanctified an end,
I saw, when reverend TH^MIS did descend
Upon his state; let down in that rich chain,
That fastneth heavenly power to earthly reign:
Beside her, stoup't on either hand, a Maid,
Fair DICE, and EVNOMIA; who were said
To be her daughters: and but faintly known
On Earth, till now, they came to grace his throne.
Her third, IRENE, helped to bear his train;
And in her office vowed she would remain,
Till foreign Malice, or unnatural spite
(Which Fates auert) should force her from her right.
With these he pas'd, and with his peoples hearts
Breathed in his way; and Souls (their better parts)
Hasting to follow forth in shouts, and cries.
Upon his face all threw their covetous eyes,
As on a Wonder; Some amazed stood,
As if they felt, but had not known their good:
Others would feign have shown it in their words,
But, when their speech so poor a help affords
Unto their zeales expression; They are mute:
And only with red silence him salute.
Some cry from tops of houses, thinking noise
The fittest Herald to proclaim true joys;
Others on ground runs gazing by his side,
All, as unwearied, as unsatisfied:
And every Windore greiu'd it could not move
Along with him, and the same trouble prove.
They, that had seen, but four short days before,
His gladding look, now longed to see it more.
And as of late, when he through London went,
The amorous City spared no ornament,
That might her beauties heighten; but so dressed
As our Ambitious Dames, when they make feast,
And would be courted: so this Town put on
Her brightest tire; and in it aequall shone,
To her great Sist^r: save that Modesty,
Her Place, and Years gave her precedence.
The Joy of either was alike, and full;
No Age, nor Sex so weak, or strongly dull,
That did not bear a part in this concent
Of Hearts, and Voices. All the Air was rent,
As with the murmr of a moving wood;
The ground beneath did seem a moving flood
Walls, windores, roofes, towers, steeples, al were set
With several eyes, that in this object met.
Old men were glad, their Fates till now did last;
And Infants, that the hours had made such have
To bring them forth: Whilst riper aged, and apt
To understand the more, the more were raped.
This was the Peoples Love, with which did strive
The Nobles zeal, yet either kept alive
The others flame, as does the Wike and Wax
That friendly temperd one pure Taper makes.
Mean while, the reverend Themis draws aside
The Kings obeying will, from taking pride
In these vain stirs, and to his mind suggests
How he may triumph in his subjects breasts,
With better pomp. She tells him first, that Kings
Are here on earth the most conspicuous Things:
That they, by Heaven, are placed upon his throne,
To rule like Heaven; and have no more, their own,
As they are Men, then Men. That all they do
Though hid at home, abroad is searched into:
And, being once found out, discovered lies
Unto as many Enuies, there, as Eyes.
That Princes, since they know it is their Fate,
Oft-times, to have the secrets of their state
Betrayed to Fame, should take more care, and fear
In public Acts what face and form they bear.
She then remembered to his thought, the Place
Where he was going; and the upward race
Of Kings, praeceding him in that high Court;
Their Laws, their Ends; the Men she did report:
and all so justly, as his Ear was joyed
To hear the Truth, from spite, or flattery void.
She showed him, who made wise, who honest Acts;
Who both, who neither: all the cunning tracts,
And thriuing statutes she could promptly note;
The bloody, base, and barbarous she did quote;
Where Laws were made to serve the Tyran' will;
Where sleeping they could save, and waking kill;
Where Acts gave License to impetuous lust^
To bury Churches, in forgo^ten dust,
And with their ruins raise the Pandars Bowers:
When, public Justice borrowed all her Powers
From private Chambers; that could then create
Laws, Judges, Consellors, yea Prince, and State.
All this she told, and more, with bleeding Eyes;
For Right is as compassionate as wise.
Nor did he seem their vices so to love,
As once defend, what THEMIS did reprove.
For though by Right, and b^nefite of Times,
He ownde their Crowns, he would not so their crimes.
He knew that Princes, who had sold their Fame
To their voluptuous lusts, had lost their Name;
And that no wretch was more unblessed then he,
Whose necessary good it was now to be
An evil King: And so must such be still,
Who once have got the habit to do ill.
One wickedness another must defend;
For Vice is safe, while she has Vice to friend.
He knew, that those, who would, with love, command,
Must with a tender (yet a steadfast) hand
Sustain the raynes, and in the check forbear
To offer cause of Injury, or Fear.
That Kings, by their example, more do sway
Then by their Power; and men do more obey
When they are lead, then when they are compelled.
In all these knowing Arts our Prince excelled.
And now the Dame had dried her dropping eyne,
When, like an April Iris, flew her shine
About the streets, as it would force a spring
From out the stones, to gratulate the King.
She blessed the People, that in shoales did swim
To hear her speech; which still began in him
And ceased in them. She told them, what a Fate
Was gently fallen from Heaven upon this State;
How dear a Father they did now enjoy
That came to save, what Discord would destroy:
And entering with the power of a King,
The Temperance of a private Man did bring.
That wan affections, ere his steps wan ground;
And was not hot, or covetous to be crowned
Before men's hearts had crowned him. Who (unlike
Those greater bodies of the sky, that strike
The lesser fires dim) in his access
Brighter then all, has yet made no one less;
Though many greater: and the most, the best.
Wherein, his Choice was happy with the rest
Of his great actions, first to see, and do
What all men's wishes did aspire unto.
Hereat, the People could no longer hold
Their bursting joys; but through the air was rol'd
The lengthened showt, as when the Artillery
Of Heaven is discharged along the sky:
And this Confession flew from every voice.
Never had Land more reason to rejoice.
Nor to her bliss, could ought now added be,
Save, that she might the same perpetual see:
Which when Time, Nature, and the Fates denied,
With a twice louder showte aga^ne they cried.
Yet, let blessed Britain ask (without your wrong)
Still to have such a King, and this King long.
Solus Rex, and Poeta non quotannis nascitur. A PARTICVLAR ENTERTAINment of the
QVEENE and PRINCE their Highness to Althrope, at the Right Honorable the Lord
SPENCERS, on Saturday being the 25. of June 1603. as they came first into the
Kingdom; being written by the same Author, and not before published.

THe Invention was, to have a Satyr lodged in a little Spinet, by which her
Majesty, and the Prince were to come, who (at the report of certain Cornets
that were divided in several places of the Park, to signify her approach)
advanced his head above the top of the wood, wondering, and (with his Pipe in
his hand) began as follows.

SATIRE. HEre? there? and every where?
Some solemnities are near,
That these changes strike mine ear.
My Pipe and I a part shall bear.
And after a short strain with his Pipe; again.

Look, see; (beshrew this Tree,)
What may all this wonder be?
Pipe it, who that list for me:
I Will fly out abroad, and see.
There he leaped down, and gazing the Queen and Prince in the face, went
forward.

That is Cyparissus face!
And the Dame has Syrinx grace!
O that Pan were now in Place,
Sure they are of heavenly race.
Here he ran into the wood again, and hid himself whilst to the sound of
excellent soft Music that was there conceald in the thicket; there came
tripping up the lawne, a Beuy of Faeries attending on Mab their Queen, who
falling into an artificial ring, that was there cut in the pathe, began to
dance a round, whilst their Mistress spoke as follows.


FA^RIE. Hail, and welcome worthiest Queen,
Joy had never perfect been,
To the Nymphs that haunt this Green,
Had they not this evening seen.
Now they Print it on the Ground
With their feet in figures round,
Marks that will be ever found,
To remember this glad stound.

The Satyr peeping out of the bush, said.

Trust her not you bonny-bell,
She will forty leasinges tell,
I do know her pranks right well,
FA^RIE. Satyr, we must have a spell,
For your tongue, it runs to fleet.

SATYR. Not so nimbly as your feet,
When about the creame-boules sweet.
You, and all your Elues do meet.

Here he came hopping forth, and mixing himself with the Faeries skipped in,
out, and about their Circle, while the Elues made many offers to catch at him.

This is Mab the mistresse-Faerie,
That does nightly rob the Dairie,
And can hurt, or help the cherning,
(As she please) without discerning.
ELFE. Pug, you will anon take warning?
She, that pinches country wenches,
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper Nails remembers,
When they rake not up their Embers:
But if so they chance to feast her
In a shoe she drops a tester.

ELFE. Shall we strip the skipping Iester?
This is she, that empties Cradles,
Takes out Children, puts in Ladles:
Trains forth Midwiues in their slumber,
With a sieve the holes to number.
And then leads them, from her Borroughs
Home through Ponds, and water furrows.

ELFE. Shall not all this mocking stir us?
She can start our Franklins daughters,
In their sleep, with shrikes, and laughters,
And on sweet Saint Anne's Night,
Feed them with a promisd sight,
Some of husbands, some of Lovers,
Which an empty dream discouers.

ELFE. Satyr, vengeance near you houers,
And in hope that you would come here
Yester-eue the Lady For she was expected there on Midsommer day at night, but
came not till the day following.
Summer,
She invited to a Banpuet:
But (in sooth) I con you thank yet,
That you could so well deceive her
Of the pride which began vp-heaue her:
And (by this) would so have blown her,
As no wood-god should have known her.
Here he skipped into the Wood.


ELFE. Mistres, this is only spite:
For you would not yester-night
Kiss him in the Cock-shoutlight:
And came again,


SATIRE. By Pan, and thou have hit it right.
There they laid hold on him, and nipt him,


FAERY^ Fai^ies, pinch him black and blew,
Now you have him (...) him rue:

SATIR^^ O, hold, Mab: I sue.

ELFE. Nay, the Devil shall have his due.

There he ran quite away and left them in a confusion while the Faery began
again,

SATIRE. Pardon Lady this wild strain,
Common with the Syluan train.
That do skip about this plain:
Elues, apply your Gyre again.
And whilst some do hop the ring,
Some shall play, and some shall sing,
We Will express in every thing,
Quasi Oriens Anna.
Oranas well-comming.

SONG.
THis is she,
This is she,
In whose world of Grace
Every Season, Person, Place,
That receive her, happy be,
For with no less,
Then Bringing with her the Prince, which is the greatest felicity of Kingdoms.
a Kingdoms happiness,
Does she private For households.
Lares bless,
And ours above the rest:
By how much we deserve it least.
Long line (...)
To exceed (whom she succeeds) our late Diana.
FAE^Y. Madame, now an end to make,
Deigne a simple gift to take:
Only for the Faeries sake,
Who about you still shall wake.
It Is done only to supply,
His suspected courtesy,
Who (since Thamyra did dye)
Has not brookt a Ladies eye,
Nor allowed about his place,
Any of the female race.
Only we are free to trace
All his grounds, as he to chase.
For which Bounty to us lent,
Of him vnknowledgde, or unsent,
We prepared this A Jewel was given her.
Complement,
And as far from cheap intent,
In particular to feed,
Any hope that should succeed.
Or our glory by the deed,
As your self are from the need.
Utter not; we you implore,
Who did give it, nor wherefore,
And when ever you restore
Your self to us, you shall have more.
Highest, happiest Queen farewell,
But beware you do not tell.
Here the Faeries hopt away in a fantastique dance, when on a sudden the
Satyr discovered himself again and came ^oorth.


SATYR. Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
At this old, and toothlesse wile.
^^dy, I have been no sleeper,
She belies the noble Keeper.
Say, that here he like the Groves:
And pursue no ^^^raine Loves,
Is he therefore to be deemed,
Rude, or sau^dge? or esteemed,
But a sorry Entertainer,
Cause he is no common strainer:
After painted Nymphs for sauors,
Or that in his Garb he sauors
Little of the nice^y,
In the sprucer Courtiery;
As the Ros^^y of kisses,
With the oath that never misses,
This, Believe me on the breast,
And then telling some man's jest,
Thinking to prefer his wit,
Equal with his suite by it,
I mean his Clothes: No, no, no,
Here does no such humor flow.
He can neither bribe a grace,
Nor encounter my Lords face
With a pliant smile, and flatter,
Though this lately were some matter
To the making of a Courtier.
Now he hopes he shall resort there,
Safer, and with more allowance*
Since a hand has governance,
That has given those Customs chase,
And has brought his own in place.
O that now a wish could bring,
The God-like person of a King,
Then should even Enuiefinde,
Cause of wonder at the mind
Of our Wood-man: But lo where
His Kingly Image does appear,
And is all this while neglected:
Pardon (Lord) you are respected
Deep as is the Keepers heart,
And as dear in every part.
See, Here the Satyr fetched out of the Wood, the Lord Specers eldest son
attirde and appointed like a Huntsman.
for instance where he sends
His Son, his Heir; who humbly bends
Low, as is his Fathers earth,
To the womb that gave you birth:
So he was directed first.
Next to you, of whom the thirst
Of seeing takes away the use
Of that part, should plead excuse
For his boldness, which is less
By his comlie shamfastnesse.
Rise up Sir, I will betray,
All I think you have to say;
That your Father gives you here,
(Freely as to him you were)
To the service of this Prince:
And with you these Instruments
Of his wild and Sy^^an trade,
Better not (...) had.
The Bow was Ph^ebas, and the horn,
By Orion often worn:
The Dog of Sparta breed, and good,
As can ring within a Wood:
Thence his name is: you shall try
How he hunteth instantly.
But perhaps the Queen your mother,
Rather does affect some other
Sport, as coursing: we will prove
Which her Highness most does love.
Satyrs let the Woods refound,
They shall have their welcome crowned,
With abrace of (...) to ground.
At that, the whole Wood and place re^ounded with the noise of Cornets, Horns,
and other Hunting Music, and a brace of (...) p^t out; and as fortunately
killd, as they were meant to be; even in the sight of her Maiesti^.

This was the first Nights show. Where the next day being Sunday, she rested,
and on Monday, till after dinuer; where there was a speech suddenly thought on,
to induce a Morrise of the Clownes there about, who most officiouslie presented
themselves, but by reason of the throng of the Country that came in, their
Speaker could not be hard, who was in the person of Nobody, to deliver this
following speech and attired in a pair of Breeches which were made to come up
to his neck, with his arms out at his pockets, and a Cap drowning his face.

If my outside move your Laughter,
Pray Jove, my inside be thereafter.
Queen, Prince, Duke, Earls,
Countesses; you courtly Pearls:
(And, I hope no mortal sin,
If I put less Ladies in)
Fair saluted be you all.
At this time it does befall,
We are the Huisher to a Morrise,
(A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
In the Country here about,
But this, the choice of all the rout.
Who because that no man sent them,
Have got Nobody to present them.
These are Things have no suspicion
Of their ill doing: nor Ambition,
Of their well: but as the Pipe
Shall inspire them, mean to skip.
They come to see, and to be seen,
And though they dance before the Queen,
There Is none of these does hope to come by
Wealth, to build another Holmby:
All those dancing days are done,
Men must now have more then one
Grace, to build their fortunes on,
Else our souls would sure have gone,
All by this time to our feet.
I not deny where Graces meet
In a man, that quality
Is a graceful Property?
But when dancing is his best,
(Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
But I am Nobody, and my Breath
(Soon as it is borne) has death.
Come on Clownes forsake your dumps,
And bestir your Ho^naild stumps,
Do your worst, I Will undertake,
Not a Ierke you have shall make
Any Lady here in Love.
Perhaps your Fool, or so, may move
Some Ladies woman with a Trick,
And upon it she may pick
A pair of reuelling legs or two,
Out of you with much a do.
But see the Hobbyhorse is forgot.
Fool it must be your lot,
To supply his want with faces
And some other Busson graces
You know how; Piper play,
And let no body hence away.
There was also another parting speech, which was to have been presented in the
person of a youth, and accompained with diverse Gentlemen's younger sons of the
Country, but by reason of the Multitudinous press, was also hindered. And
which we have here adjoined.

ANd will you then Mirror of Queens depart?
Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart
That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
And see his Day e^e it be old grow Night?
You are a Goddess, and your will be done;
Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sun
Cheares objects far removed, as well as near,
So where soever you shine, you will sparkle here.
And you dear Lord, on whom my covetous eye
Does feed it self but cannot satisfy,
O shoot up fast in spirit, as in years;
That when upon her head proud Europe wears
Her stateliest tire, you may appear thereon
The richest Gem without a paragon.
Shine bright and fixed as the Artic^^ star:
And when flow Time has made you fit for war,
Look over the strict Ocean, and think where
You may but lead us forth, that grow up here
Against a day, when our officious swords
Shall speak our action better then our words.
Till then, all good event conspire to crown
Your Parents hopes, our zeal, and your renown.
Peace, usher now your steps, and where you come,
Be Envy still stroke blind, and Flattery dumb.
Thus much (which was the least of the Entert^i^ement in respect of the
reality, abondance, delicacie, and order of all things else) to do that
serviceable right, to his noble Friend, which his affection owes, and his
Lordships merit may challenge, the Author has sufferd to come out, and
encounter Censure: and not here unnecessarily adjoined, being performed to the
same Queen and Prince; who were no little part of these more labord and
^riumphall shows. And to whose greatest part, he knows the Ho. L. (had he
been so blessed as to have seen him at his Lodge) would have stretched in
observance, though he could not in Love or zeal.


FINIS.

