THE MYSTERY OF CHRIST'S NATIVITIE.

A Sermon Preached in the Parish Church of ALL SAINTS in DORCHESTER, within the
County of DORSET, the 25. day of December 1613. being CHRISTMAS DAY.

By WILLIAM JONES, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods Word.

BERNARD. Puto me iam spernere non poterit Christus,
Os de offibus meis, and caro de carne mea.
How is it possible that the blessed Son of God should now reject me, since by
taking our nature upon him, he is become flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone.

LONDON. Printed for Richard Hawkins, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Chancery Lane, near Seriants Inn. 1614.

To the Worshipful M. THOMAS HVSSY Justice of Peace, Master JASPER MELLER
Esquire, Master LAVRENCE MELLER, M. THO. PAWLET, M. Matthew Chubb, M. Richard
Blachford, and M. THOMAS BLACHFORD, Gentlemen of Dorset-shire, my especial
kind and loving friends, Grace and Peace be multiplied through Christ Jesus
our LORD.
AS the preaching of the Gospel of Christ was not, nor is, the least gift of
grace that God gave unto his Church; but even the greatest miracle that ever
Christ wrought hecre on earth, for our Conversion unto the Math. 11. 6.
faith: So the abuse of this grace is not the least, but the greatest sin,
that can be committed. The which being truly considered; I marvel not a
little? 3. Ep. Ioh. v. 9.
why Diotrephes with his Scholars will persist in resisting of this grace; or
Simon Magus with his Champions continue in purchasing of this grace; Act. 8. 18.
or Judas with his Successors persevere in buying and selling of Christ Spouse
the Church, contrary to the Gospel of grace. But forasmuch as that I mind
not in this ensuing Treatise to tax them, Matthew. 26. 15.
or their wicked abuses: Yet my prayers unto God for them shall be; to turn
their hearts from farther renting of the garments of Christ and his Church,
least they become like unto these their predecessors, partakers not of the
least grace.

The subject or matter, wherewith I am now to present your Worships withal: is
touching the mystery of Christ his Nativity. The Text has been handed
often, and by many; Yea and of such men, who for their great understanding,
reading, witty invention, and profound Judgment, have many degrees exceeded
my self. Yet to satisfy the earnest and godly requests of some of my
especial good friends, I have enterprised, and adventured, to set forth the
same in print: hoping that your Worshippes will vouchsafe to give it the
perusal, and accept these the first fruits of my labors, with the selfsame
affection wherewith it is offered; how small and simple soever it seem to be.
And now the Lord Jesus give it his grace, that it may not be like firekinled on
his Altar in vain; Mal. 1. 9.
but that it may prove to be as the morning Incense, and as evening Sacrifice,
acceptable unto God, and profitable unto this Church.

Unto the same God will I pray always to power down his mercies upon you, to
enrich you with his graces, and to preserve your Worships for the good both of
Church and Commonwealth, unto his glory AMEN.

Your worships to be commanded W. JONES,

THE MYSTERY OF CHRIST'S NATIVITIE.
GALAT. 4. 4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son made of a
woman, etc.
WIth what solemnity we are to celebrate this day of Christ's Nativity (
Dearly beloved) the many mysteries, and excellencies therein contained, may
declare unto us. Now is He brought out of the Virgins womb, who before lived
eternally in the bosom of his Father: Now is the Word, that made the world,
borne an Infant into the world, Now the Ancient of days is become a Child: Now
Judas Lion rowsed himself to encounter the Red Dragon: Now Jacobs star arose
to be the Gentles light, and Isreal's glory: Now the Bridegroom came out of his
Chamber, to meet his Spouse: Now the Son of God became man, that men might be
made the sons of God: Now Christ came out clothed with our flesh, that we
might be invested with his spirit: Now the Lord took on him the form of a
servant, that we his servants might be made partakers of his Lordship. These
great blessings, does this blessed day conueigh unto us. Wherefore to put you in
mind, that your vnderstadings may be enlightened to know them; and your wills
inclined to serve and praise GOD for them: I have made choice of this text,
which being indeed the Quintessence of the Golpell, proposes unto us
concerning Christ his coming these circumstances. First, The time, when the
fullness of time, etc. Secondly, The causes, God sent his Son. Thirdly, The
manner, made of a Woman etc. Fourthly, The end, that he might redeem them,
etc. These points are best be seeming this time: which when briefly and rudely
I shall have discoursed upon, I will then end, and commend ye to God.

When the fullness of time was come etc. Three things, measure all durations;
Aeternitie, Immortality, Time. Aeternitie has neither beginning nor end; and
is proper only to God, who is everlasting. Immortality has beginning, but
none end; and is proper to Spirits, as Angels, and men's souls, that once were
not, and yet now cannot die. Time has both beginning and end, and is proper to
all bodies, such as are possible and corruptible substances: of whom it is said,
omniaorta occidunt and aucta senescunt: Now then Christ consisting of Godhead,
soul, and body, has these his three Natures limited by these three
quantities, his Godhead by Eternity, his soul by Immortality: and his body
by Time. Thus in respect not of his Divinity, but his Humanity, the maker of
Time was made in time, and Time says Aristotle is the measure of motion, but
Paul here shows us more strange Philosophy, that it is the measure of the
first Mouer it self. Would ye not wonder ( Dear Christians) to hear that a
Giants foot should be thrust into a childs shoe, or that the Ocean Sea
should be intruded into a bottle, and as much then may you marvel at this that
God who is infinite, should be borne in a time finite, but this doubt is thus
dissolved three things, vt supra etc. And as our Apostle says, in the fullness
thereof. As places, so time have their fullness and emptiness, some places are
empty having naught but air in them, and some are replenished with silver,
with Gold, Pearl, Precious stones, and such like treasure, like so of times,
some are void of strange accidents, and some are full of memorable and
admirable occurrents, and in such a time was our Savior borne, as the age of
the world, the year, month, day, hour, these parts of time may impart unto
us; Touching the Worlds age, know that it was the sixth. The first age was from
Adam to Noah. The second from Noah to Abraham. The third from Abraham to David.
The fourth from David to the transmigration from Babylon. The fifth from that
to Christ's Nativity, which fell in the sixth age: where note an excellent
mystery, how correspondent Gods works of our creation, and recreation are. As
in the worlds sixth day God did make man: so in the worlds sixth age he did
redeem man. In the worlds sixth day the first Adam was made, in whom we are
deformed: and in the worlds sixth age was the second Adam made, in whom we are
reformed. Here arise now two questions: why God loving man so well, had not
been borne before or presently after man's fall, since Gratia ab officio quod mor
a tar dat abest. Secondly: why God minding to die for the sins of all the
world, had not deferred his coming to the end of the world. Six is a number
neither diminute nor superabundant, but perfect, since all his parts put
together do make the whole, as 1. 2. and 3. make six: so then in the number of
perfection came the author of perfection. By six stairs did men ascend to
Salomons throne, and by six ages came the word to the throne of grace. These
scruples thus I remove. First, for Christ to have been borne before Adam fell,
had bin an action superfluous. For the end of his coming being ( vtinquit
Euang.) to seek the lost Sheep of the house of Israel; to bind up the broken
hearted, to call sinners to repentance, and by it to salvation: what needed
this seeker before man was lost? what needed this Physician before man was
sick? what needed this Savior before Adam was a sinner? Again for Christ to
have come presently after man's fall, had been also very inconvenient. Man
sinned by pride, and by pride was thrown into calamity: from which if
straightwayes he should have been freed, perhaps the spirit of loftiness and
insolency might have come upon him again. God therefore six ages lest him in
his misery, that he might know his fault, and knowing it, be humbled for the
same. Farther it was meet, that as the entrance of a King into a City, so the
coming of so worthy a person as the son of God into the World, should be
foreshewed by the predictions of such worthy messengers, as were the
Patriarckes and Prophets; which could not have been had Christ been borne in
the time of Adam. As for the deferring of his birth to the end of the World,
These reasons disprove it. First, the testimony of Abacuc. 3. where it is said
of God there, the works of his mercy should be revived in medio annorum.
Again why should Christ then be borne on earth, when men shall have no faith
to believe on him, no Charity to love him, and no Religion to worship him?
But these things shall happen in the latter days (as the Evangelists write)
and therefore the Worlds end is a season, rather for Christ to come in judgment
to revenge, then in mercy to redeem. This for the age. Now for the year. It
was the two and fortieth of the reign of Augustus Caesar the Roman Emperor: in
whose time that Christ was borne, it was in regard of the many resemblances
that were between them. As Augustus was a temporal, so was Christ a Spiritual
Monarch. As Augustus was the second Emperor of Rome, so was Christ the second
person in Trinity. As Augustus was so called, because he did amplify his
Regiment, so Christ was so called, because he does anoint us his servants: as
Augustus taxing the world received tribute from men and registered their names.
So Christ preaching unto the world had obedience yielded unto him, and noted
such as served him in the Book of life. As Augustus having vanquished his
enemies; planted peace among his people (for in his days the Temple of Ianus
was shut, that else in the time of war was wont ever to be open) so Christ
having subdued his foes, Death and the Devil, placed quietness in the
conscience of his Children, who before were distressed with many troubles; from
the age and the year, come we to the Month and the Day. Christ was borne on
the five and twentieth day of December, then being the shortest day of the
year and Sunday: as both by the fathers is testified, and by calculation may
be proved, whereof note with me either the reasons or mystries. December is the
tenth month and in it was he borne, that came to make satisfaction for our
transgression of his Fathers ten Commandments. December concludes the old
year, and gives way to a new, and Christ now born gave an end to the old
Ceremonies of the Law, and brought in, in steed thereof the new ordinances of
grace. Ten degrees went the Sun backward to signify to sick Ezechiah that
he should not die, and ten months in assuming our flesh did Christ go back as
it were for his Majesty to assure us of his mercy, the number of ten is the
first Article: compound of the figure, 1. and a cipher 0. and in the tenth
month was he borne, whose person did consist of the figure of his Divinity,
and the cipher of his humanity. In the shortest day is the Sun in his
greatest and lowest South declination, and when was the son of God ever
farther from the Aequinoction of his glory and lower in baseness, then when
he came out into the world, clothed with our flesh. In the shortest day the
Sun is said to be in his Tropic, that is so called of the Greek word (...)
to turn, and when so graciously as now in his birth did the son of God turn
unto us, Ioh. 3. 30.
says John Baptist of Christ, Ioh. 3. me oportet minui illum autem crescere,
verified as in their qualities of dignity and estimation: So also in the times
of their Natiuities. John Baptist was borne the longest day of the year, and
therefore being at the highest his time must decrease: and Christ was borne in
the shortest, and therefore being at the lowest, his time must needs increase.
In the shortest Day, the Sun begins that return, that turns joy and
comfort to living things, and Christ now put his first foot in that race, that
yields blessedness and happiness to all Christians: in the shortest day, the
cold is greatest, and therefore says Bernard, Christ chose a time trouble some
to his flesh, that we should learn not to pamper ours: on a Sunday, GOD the
Father in his power began the world: and now on a Sunday, GOD the son in
his mercy began to redeem the world. Sunday was first made before any other
time: and Christ thereon borne, is called the first begotten of al Creatures. On
Sunday God made the light, and on Sunday now produced was he, that is the true
light, lightning every one that comes into the world, as also all those that
sit in darkness and the shadow of death. To proceed yet to more particulars.
What part of the day? and what hour was Christ borne in? Luc. 2. 8. 11.
Luc. 2 records that it was in the night, when the Shepherds were watching
their flocks, that though the Angel said to them, there is borne this day to
ye a Savior, ye are to understand it spoken not of the artificial day, that
holds from Sun to Sun, but of the natural day that contains the space of
four and twenty hours. Thus in the time of darkness was he borne, that
came to dissolve the power of darkness; shining in darkness, when the
darkness could not comprehend him. Nox is so called a nocendo, because if men
then walk without light, they may easily hurt themselves: and now as a
Physician in the best opportunity came the great helper in the time of
hurting; to show that he was stronger then the devil. Christ vanquished the
devil in his own time, the Prince of the night, in the night. Farther, touching
the hour, if we may believe Cardanus that great Physician and Astronomer, it
was about ten of the clock, and fifteen minutes. For he in his Comment upon
Ptolemies quadripartite, treating Christ's Nativity, makes the eleventh degree
of Virgo to ascend in prima domo, which could not be but at that time. The
Fathers write that he was borne at midnight, as Hierom, and Bernard: which of
these opinions is truest, I will not decide. Mysteries there are in both of
them. If Cardan say true, then it fitly fell out, that the Son of a Virgin
was borne when the heavenly figure Virgo did ascend. If the Fathers say true,
then opportunately came he in medio noctis, that was to be the medium between
God and man. The greatest obscurity is at midnight; and then therefore was
produced the greatest light; he that was the brightness of his fathers glory.
Thus then in the sixth age of the World, in the two and fortieth year of
Augustus Caesar's Reign, in the month of December, in the five and twentieth
and shortest day, on Sunday, between ten and twelve at night, was our blessed
Savior blessedly born. Which season Saint Paul calls the fullness of time, as
because each part thereof, as ye see, is full of mysteries, so by reason of
other occasions that I am now to acquaint you with. And first, this then.
Whatsoever God either promised, or the Patriarckes and Prophets either in their
speeches foreshewed, in their actions prefigured, or affections desired* that
all at this time is fully fulfilled. Now accomplished are Gods promises made to
Eve, that her seed should bruise the Serpents head. Genesis 3.
Genesis 3. to Abraham that in his seed all Nations of the earth should be blessed.
Genesis 22. to David that of the fruit of his loins, Genesis 22.
he would set one on his seat that should rule as a King for ever. Psalm. 132.
Psa. 132.
Now fulfilled are the Predictions of the Patriarcks and Prophets; Genesis 49.
of Jacob when he said. Genesis 49. the Scepter shall not be taken from the Tribe
of Judah, and a Captain from his thigh, till he come, that is to be sent, and
he shall be the expectation of Nations. Of Moses when he said Deuteronomy. 18. Deuteronomy.
18.
A Prophet shall the Lord our God raise up unto ye, among your brethren, him
shall ye hear. Of Balam, when he said, Number. 24.
Numb. 24. a star shall rise from Jacob: and a staff from Israel, that shall
strike the Moabites. Of Esaias, when he said, that a Virgin should bear a son,
and call his name Emanuel. Esa. 7.
Es. 7. Of Michea: when he said, Mich. 5.
Mich: 5. And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one in respect of
thousands in Judah: and yet there shall come forth of thee one, that shall be
the ruler of Israel, and his coming forth is from the beginning, and from the
days of Eternity. Dail. 9.
Of Daniel, when he said Dan. 9. that after certain weeks of years expired
the holy of holyes should be anointed. Now fulfilled are the Figures of the
Patriarcks and Prophets Actions: Now Abraham came a stranger into Egypt: When
Christ came as a Pilgrim; where coming amongst his own, his own received
him not: Now Moses was put into a Basket. Joseph thrown into the pit, Hieremy
into the Dungeon. Daniel into the Lions Den, when Christ was sent into this
wretched World, a place of perplexities: Now the stone was cut from the
Mountain without hands, when Christ was borne of his mortal Mother, never
being begotten by mortal father: Now Aarons rod did bud and bear Almonds,
when a spotless Virgin did produce a Child: Now a woman did compass a man,
when he was contained in a woman's womb, that does himself comprehend heaven
and earth: Now a River flowed to water Paradise, when Christ was borne; with
his blood to wash away the sins of the world: Now the Mountains did distill
sweetness, when Heaven did let God to descend on earth: Now Solomon made
himself a Throne of Iuorie, when Christ made himself a body of flesh in the
Virgins womb: Now the Dove came from Noah's Arc, when the son of God came
from the bosom of his Father: Now the bush burned and was not consumed, when a
Virgin brought forth a Son, and was not corrupted: mercy and truth met
together, when Christ's Divinity and Humanity met in one person, to work our
redemption. Now the Sun was covered with a Cloud, when God clothed himself
with our flesh. Again now fulfilled are the desires of the Patriarchs and
Prophets. Abraham took great joy of this Day, Ioh. 8.
and now he saw it Ioh. 8. Expectabo salutare tuum says Jacob Gen 49. Genesis 49.
I will wait for thy salvation, O Lord and now behold his expectation
satisfied. David cried out, Psalm. 48. Ps. 48.
ostende nobis domine misericor diam tuam, and now he might say as in Psalm. 47.
Ps. 47.
suscepimus Deus misericor diam tuam in medio templi. Beg no longer Moses to
say to God as it is Deu. 18. Deu. 18.
mitte obsecro quem missurus es; for now is he come amongst us. Cry not longer
out Esaias as it is. Es. 64. Esa. 64.
Vtinam disrumperes coelos and descenderes, O that thou would cleave the
Heavens and come down, for this day came he out of a Virgins womb. The sum
of this is this: Now are Gods promises, the Patriarchs and Prophets
predictions, actions, and affections, fulfilled. And therefore most excellently
is it termed the fullness of time. Again, now was the fullness of Gods
Communication when he came to give us himself in his sons flesh; wherein as
it is. Col 2. Col. 2.
dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Now was the fullness of man's
Redemption, when a Savior was borne to begin the gracious work thereof in
preserving us, by his merits, from sin, death, hell, and the Devil: Now was
the fullness of graces promotion, Ioh. 1. 16.
We taking them out of his fulness as Ioh. says. And who can deny this to be
the fullness of time? To this let me addo, that the world was now full of
miracles: Now the Angels sang in heaven and comforted shepherds on earth: Now
a strange star guided the wisemen to Christ: Now a wel-spring in Rome did
run with Oil: Now three Suns appeared, shining first severally, and then
jointly: Now Augustus his aeternum palatium, that was prophesied never to fall
before a Virgin did bear a child, was ruinated to the ground: Now Augustus,
asking one of the Sybils whether there were any where a greater person then
himself, saw in the Sun a Virgin giving an Infant suck, to whom afterward
he dedicated an Altar, and called it, Aram Coeli, the Altar of Heaven. And
thus ye see it proved, that it was the fullness of time, when he, that as S.
Ioh. says, full of grace and truth was borne amongst us. The Jews expect yet
a Messtas to come: denying Jesus whom we believe on, to be the Worlds
Savior. And the Turks dare to compare him with their Mahomet. But this
doctrine of the fullness of time, wherein Christ was born, does most plainly
and forcibly confute them. For since all the promises and mercies of God; since
the prophesies, figures, and desires of our famous forefathers, and many
admirable Miracles, met in the time of Christ's Nativity; and that never
Mahomet had the like; nor any Creature can have the like: we are fully to be
resolved, by this fullness of time, the true Messtas to be borne. I could
spend more time in discoursing upon this time, but that greater matters, viz.
The causes of Christ's birth do now offer themselves unto me in these words,
God sent his son: Where the Efficient cause is God; the formal cause his
sending; and the material cause his Son Christ himself: God sent. Who? the
Father, the Son, or the Holy Ghost? Surely all three of them. For know, that
opera a Trinitatis sunt in-diuisa: and, unless in personal respects, evermore
in Essential actions, what one does they all do; as now in this work of
Christ's birth, the whole Trinity showed their industry. Ioh. 8. 42. 5. 36. 37.
The Father sent me says Christ, Ioh. 13. 20. Here the Father labors. I went
out from the Father and came into the World: Romans 8. 32.
Here is the labor of the Son. Ioh. 16. 28.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee quoth the Angel Gabriel to the blessed
Virgin, Luc. 5. 35.
when she was to conceive Christ: this is the labor of the Holy Ghost. Thus
the three persons, being one GOD, had each of them their action in CHRIST'S
Incarnation; and that most fitly: since it being a work of great power,
Wisdom, and goodness, it was requisite that the Father with his power, the
Son with his Wisdom, and the Holy Ghost with his Goodness, should
accomplish it. What more powerful a thing, then to join two such extremely
distant Natures as the Creator and the Creature together! It is GODS especial
power in compound bodies, to join the four Elements together; it is greater
power to join our body to our created spirits, that is to say, our souls.
But to join all these to the increated spirit, God; this is a might above all
measure.

Again what more wise thing, then that to the perfection and complement of the
whole; the beginning and the end of a work should hang together. And now note
this mystery. The Word was the beginning of the World: for by it GOD made the
World; and Adam was the last Creature of the World. The Word then becoming
Man, the first and the last, that is to say GOD and man, were united together.
Again what greater goodness can be, then that the Creator should
communicate himself to the Creatures? It is his great kindness, that God
gives himself to his Creatures by his essence, presence, and power: it is his
greater kindness that he gives himself to good men by his grace: but that he
should give himself to our nature, by Union with it, that is to say, by
assuming our Humanitic into his Divinity; this surmounts all favor that may
be said or thought upon. Thus I say the Fathers power, the Sons wisdom, and
the Holy Ghosts goodness, were all Actors in clothing Christ with our flesh.
To the doing whereof what moved them? our merits? no; ( Brethren) but their
mercies according to that of Ioh. 3. Ioh. 3. 16.
God soloued the World, that he sent his son, etc. Love is manifested three
ways: Dono, passione, opere, in giving, suffering, and working. The Father
showed his love, when he gave us his Son: the Son showed his love, when he
suffered Death for our sins; and the Holy Ghost shows his love, in setting
us forward in good works. Thus the manifestation of the blessed Trinities
power, wisdom, goodness, and mercy, are as it were the four wheels, upon
which the Chariot of Gods providence brought Christ into this world: Who came
as sent, God sent says my text. Here is a doubt worthy to be discust. Christ
was never separated from God his Father. For when Saint John saw him upon
earth, he yet acknowledged him to be in the bosom of his Father secundum id
1. Ioh. 1. 18:
cap. vnigenitus quie st in sinis patris, etc. as also that he was in Heaven,
Ioh. 3. 13.
secundumid tertio capite, nemo ascendit, etc. qui est in coelo; yea that he
was in the world before his birth, Ioh. 1. 3.
since he made the World; as it is cap. 1. and how then may it be said, that
God sent him, when he never went from him? An Interpretation shall make
evident all this. Missio, says Thomas Aquinas commenting upon this place, fuit
assumptio Carnis, non depositio maiestatis: Christ left not to be God, when
he became man; but took more unto his Godhead when he became man, viz. our
Humanity into his Divinity: that through our visible nature assumed, he might
acquaint us with his invisible excelencies, which else could never have been
known of us. As the Sun shining in his perfect brightness, can not be looked
upon; but in a Cloud or mist, having his beams refracted, may be beheld so
God, in his infinite and incomprehensible essence, being considered of us,
cannot be known of us, for he is too powerful an object for our weak
understanding; but in our Nature, by his son assumed, having his glory and
Majesty contracted, we may take a full view of him. And thus Christ his
incarnating is his proper sending. But why sent God his son the second person
in Trinity? Wherefore had not the Father, and the Holy Ghost, come to be man
as well as the Son? ( Brethren) this is a high point in Divinity, requiring
judicial and attentive ears: which if ye lend me, thus then I resolve ye.

Truly there wanted no power in any of those persons to perform this; for
they are all Omnipotent, and able to do what soever pleases them. But yet why
the son did it rather then the rest; great reasons are to be alleged.
First, It was meet that by what instruments God made the World, by the same he
should repair Heb. 1. and therefore as it is 2. Cor. 5. well was God in Christ,
by whom he reconciled the World. Heb. 1. 2. Cor. 5.
Secondly, It was fit that he who was the son in the Divinity, should also
be the son Humanity: least if the Father or the Holy Ghost had bin the
sons of men, they had then been temporal sons to the Eternal son.
Thirdly, the Father is of himself alone, and the Son is of the Father. Now
then more seemly bath predestined us says Saint Paul Romans 8. Romans 8. 29.
to be conformable to the Image of his son: that therefore had he not sent
his Son, how could we be like to his Son? had not he come that was the
Natural son; we should never have been adopted sons. The son of God
therefore was made the son of man, that we sons of men might be made the
sons of God. Sixthly, God the son is the middle Father, and God the Holy
Ghost, and therefore was fittest to be to be the mediator between God and
man. Seventhly, He that was to work our redemption was to be an intercessor
and supplicator to God for us. But these properties are more proper to a son,
then a Father: for a son is to entreat the Father, and not the Father the
son. And therefore did God best to send his son. Last of all; the Mediator
between God and man was to pacify, so to teach and guide man to be obedient
unto God. Now then Christ being the word of God and wisdom of God, as Saint
John and Saint Paul affirm: meetest was he, the son, to be man's Teacher and
Counsailor. Why God sent his Son ye see the Reasons. Now behold we in what
manner he sent him: the third thing I am to speak of. It is said made of a
woman and made under the law. What is written before in my text of him, that in
the fullness of time God sent him, points to his Divinity, and his glory:
but that now He is made of a Woman and under the Law, this shows his
Humanity and Humility: How the two Natures Godhead and Manhood were united
together in the unity of his person. Paul 1. Tim. 3. talks of a great
mystery of piety, 1. Tim. 3.
How God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, was seen of
Angels, was preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and assumed
into glory. And here behold this production of God, to be made of a woman, is
the beginning of it; opening as it were the door to the other most admirable
actions. But what a strange thing is this, that the maker of the World should
thus be made of a woman: and that the Creator should have his being from a
Creature. This rightly to conceive, ye are to note this. Christ in respect of
his Godhead, was increated; in respect of his soul he was created; and in
respect of his body he was made of a woman. As we Christians are borne, first,
naturally of our Parents, and afterward are born spiritually of the Holy
Ghost: So Christ being God, was begotten naturally of God; and now being man,
was made temporally of a woman. Verbum caro factum est, etc. says Saint John
cap. 1. Paul affirms 2. 2. Tim. 2. Heb. 2.
Tim. 2. that he came of the seed of David, and Heb. 2. that no where he took
on him the Angels, but the seed of Abraham took he on him, and all this by
being made of a woman, Of a Woman'? ye will say what reason had God to effect
so strange an action: I will tell ye; to advance his glory, and do us the
more good. O how kind did God show himself in taking upon him our frail
nature! He might have come to us as he did to Moses and the Israelites on
Mount Sinay in thundering, lightning, fire, and smoke: he might have come to
us in the substance of an Angel assumed, but yet because he loved man, to man
he came in the estate of man. O how just did God show himself to be made of a
Woman! The Devil before had conquered all flesh in the first Adam: and now the
second Adam took flesh in it to subdue the Devil. O how wise did God herein
show himself, that when one man by sin had displeased him, another man by
his righteousness should pacific him! I mean Jesus, who being God, therefore
became man to be the mediator between God and man: Which office no other
Creature neither man nor Angel could possibly have executed, since infinite
being the Majesty of him that by sin was offended, by no person but him that
is of infinite goodness it could be appeased. Christ therefore took God and
man into the unity of his person to reconcile God and man into the unity of
affection. These and such like invisible excellencies of kindness, Justice,
Wisdom, to make visible unto us, he took on him our visible nature in mercy
descending to us; since we in might could not ascend to him. Secondly, Christus
factus est, etc. As for the promotion of his own glory, so for the
procurement of our good, in many things to help us; to instruct our faith which
could not but believe, when she heard God himself to speak; to comfort our
hope which could not but be cheered, when she saw God united to our nature; to
kindle our charity, that could not but love God, sensibly perceiving how God
loved man, to draw our actions to virtue, that could not but imitate God,
giving himself for an example; and to make us partakers of his Divinity, that
as God was the son of man, so we men should be made the sons of God.
Again, Christus factus est, etc. to remove many evils from us, that the devil
the author of sin, though he were an Angel should not be preferred before us;
that man considering the dignity of his nature, how it is in union with God,
should not spot it with sin, that our presumption with the thought of
Christ's merits, our pride with the remembrance of his humility, and the
fear of death and hell with the consideration of his person, might be daunted
and abated. Further, Dei filius factus est, etc. to verify his Incarnation.
Valentine held Christ to have brought a body with him from heaven, and to have
taken no flesh from his Mother, Marcion, Apelles, Cerdonius, and Manes,
affirmed Christ to have but a fantastical body, such as Angels and spirits
assume. The Turks and Moors imagine Christ to be the breath of God, whom
because God saw that the Jews would crucify, he therefore suffered Christ to
delude their eyes, in seeming to do and suffer what he did not. But these
heresies are notably confuted in this, That he was made of a woman. For if a
woman were his true Mother, bearing him ten Months in her womb, bringing him
forth and giving him suck: then undoubtedly he was a true man, and had a true,
natural, and not a celestial and fantastical body, Last of all, Christ was
made of a Woman, to grace women kind with his birth, that before had disgraced
it self with the devils temptation. A woman in Paradise, was a mean to make
man a sinner, and a woman in Bethlem was an instrument to bring forth to man a
Savior. Wherefore an ancient Father says thus; Because the male kind is more
noble, Christ would be a man: and yet that woman should not be contemned, he
was borne of a woman. But why does Paul here name so expressly a woman, and not
mention a man? Because indeed man had no action in Christ's generation: For as
our Savior being God had a Father, and no mother: So being man he had a Mother,
but no Father. Where note, that mankind is brought forth four kind of ways.
Adam was made without man or woman: Eve was made of a man without a woman: We
are made of men and women; and Christ was made of a woman without a man. If ye
ask of what woman? I answer ye, Marie the Virgin, Whom all generations do
call blessed. Luc. 1. 48.
Of her blood or seed, by the working of the Holy Ghost was Christ made. O
what strange birth was this, that a virgin was the Mother, and God the Son!
says Bernard. It became not God to have any Mother but a maiden: and it
beseemed a maid to have no son but God.

Wonders are in this mother, and in this son. This mother was sanctified with
the fullness of grace, with the ouer-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, and the
inhabitation of the Son of God. She was, says Saint Bernard, Sinepudore
foecunda, sine grauamine granida, sine dolor puerpera. By bearing Christ, she
was the star that gave light to the Sun, the branch that bare the Vine, the
River that yielded the fountain, the daughter that brought forth her Father,
the creature that gave being to the Creator: she was I say the Mother of her
Father, and the daughter of her Son, younger then her birth, lesser then what
she contained, a maiden, and a Mother, to have a Son with God the Father:
whereas Virgins were cursed for barrenness, and wives for bringing forth with
sorrow, Marie was free from either of these: For being a Virgin she was
fruitful, and bringing forth child she felt no pains. As the Sun shines
through glass and corrupts it not: So God came made of a Virgin without
breach of her chastity. And because she conceived without sin, she was
therefore delivered without pains. Aganie, wonders are in this Son. In the
instant of his conception, and now by succession of time he was a perfect man in
soul and body, void of sin and full of grace. He had a father in heaven,
and a mother on earth, but yet a father without a mother, and a mother without
a father. Further by being made of a woman, of a Lord he became a servant, of
eternal he was made temporal, of infinite he became an infant, of high he
became low, of incomprehensible local, of intelligible, sensible: borne he
was in a woman's womb, himself bearing the World, and suck he did at a maidens
breasts, himself giving food to all things. Thus of a woman was Christ made,
and not only so, but also Under the Law: made of a woman is the humility of
his birth; made under the Law is the humility of his life: in birth, in life,
and in many other things crying out unto us, that we would learn of him, to
be humble and meek. Among the Jews diverse laws were in use in Christ's time,
the Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial, and under all these our Savior was made.
Ye will object how can this be? They ( says Paul) Gal. 5. that are led by
the Spirit, Gal. 5. 18.
are not under the Law: but Christ was led by the spirit, and was full of the
spirit, and therefore the law had naught to do with him. For answer accept
this. To be under the Law carries a double sense; to be under either the
observance of the Law, or the oppression of the Law. Now then Christ was under
the observance of the Law. For he was circumcised the eight day, presented
afterward in the Temple, and did those things that the law required: but not
under the oppression of the Law, so as the breach thereof did any way burden
him; since he was harmless and innocent* And yet in respect of our sins,
the guilt whereof in mercy he undertook, he was under the laws oppression.
Also for the punishment due to our offenses, the Law inflicted on him; it
accused him, and condemned him before the Tribunal of God of all the sins of
the World; it made his body sweat water and blood, it made his soul heavy to
the death; and on the Cross so perplexed his whole humanity that he cried
out, My God my God, why have thou for saken me. Thus the blessed maker of all
things was twice now made. First, Of a Woman, to entertain our Nature, and
secondly, Under the Law, to sustain our sins. And all this to what end? It
follows in the end of my Text, which shows the end why Christ came, etc. To
redeem those that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons. See ( Dear Christians) how proportionable Gods means are to the
effecting of his purposes! Christ was made under the Law to redeem us from the
Law, and was made the son of a Woman, that we might receive the adoption to
be the sons of God. Two general and singular blessings containing all that
Christ has done for us, are here conueighed unto us: Redemption, and
Exaltation, Freedom, and Advancement: Redemption and freedom to be exempted
from the Law; and Exaltation and Advancement to have the adoption to be Gods
sons. The Law, before Christ came, did dominari, as S. Paul says: playing
the Tyrant amongst men, as Pharao did among the Israelites; it still cried out,
keep the Commandment; with infinite curses to those that either would not, or
could not keep every jot of it. It imposed, upon men an insupportable burden,
it aggrauated sin, it terrified the conscience, 2. Cor. 2.
and as it is 2. Cor. 2. it was the administration of death and damnation. Now
then Christ made under the Law, did free men from this Law; and how but by his
fulfilling of it for us? His humility satisfied the Law for our pride, his
fasting for our gluttony, his Chastity for our wantonness, his mildness for
our wrath, his kindness for our envy, his obedience for our negligence, his
excellencies for our infirmities: that when the Law gaping so for
righteousness, as a Lion for his prey, having the morsel of Christ,
perfection and holiness, thrown into her mouth, she was presently satisfied
and appeased, and upon that does feed yet at this hour, which otherwise could
not not be contented with any thing which poor man could yield unto her.
Again, as before Christ came, we were bondslaues under the Law: So were we
Bastards in nature, degenerated from that Holiness and righteousness wherein we
were created, and thereby depirued of our Heavenly inheritance. And now our
Savior by being made of a Woman, does make us to be true sons again; for
he by clothing himself with our nature becoming our brother, as Paul terms
him primogenitus inter multosfratres, Romans 8.
by a consequent draws us in to be the sons of his father; so giving us of
his spirit to be the children of God, as he took of our flesh to be the
son of man: he by our flesh counted the Virgin his Mother, and we by his
spirit (as the Apostle says) cry Abba Father. Thus not only to make us
freemen, but also sons; the son of God came. The sum of this point is
briefly this, Christ came as Manna from Heaven to feed us being hungry, as
the cluster of Grapes out of the Vineyard, to satisfy us being thirsty, as
Oil powered out to cure us being wounded. He came as our head, that gives us
spiritual sense and motion; as our Mediator, that being God and man best
reconciles God and man; as our foundation which we build our faith; as our
door giving passage to Paradise; as our Shepherd feeding us; our sacrifice
expiating us; our Priest praying for us; as our way in example, life in reward.
He came as a man to make us gods, as a servant to make us Lords, to earth to
lift us up to Heaven. He came mortal to make us immortal, poor to make us
rich, and base to make us glorious. In a word, He that was the bread was
hungry that we might be fed: he that was the fountain was dry, that we might
be satisfied. He that was joy was sad, that we might be comforted; and he that
was the way, was wearied, that we might be directed to heaven. And thus have
ye heard the circumstances of Christ his coming: the Time, Causes, Manner,
End. The Doctrine whereof, for a conclusion; let us put to these uses. First,
Since in the fullness of time came he that was full of grace and truth, let us
also fulfill our times that we spend in godly labors: In time of prayer,
devout; in time of preaching, attentive; in time of prosperity bountiful; in
time of poverty, patient; in time of feasting, temperate; in all times
virtuous and honest, and then no time shall pass empty of duty. Next, since
God sent his Son, Let us acknowledge the benefit hereof, how much we are
bound to the Lord, that so great a person as he would bestow so great a gift
on us most unworthy Creatures, and withal provide our hearts to have such
rooms in them, as may be fit to enteraine so honorable a guest thus sent unto
us: let our repentance sweep clean the chambers of our souls, let a good
conscience be his bedding, and let graces and virtues be the ornaments of his
lodging. Next since he was made of a Woman, and under the Law, let us learn
that since he has so dignified our nature, as with it to cloth himself, to
have a care that we spot it not or defile it with sin. A poor maid married
to a King, ought to forget her base bringing up, and to forgo her clownish
qualities: and our Nature married to God must unloose the filthy actions of
her corrupt generation, and put on the new man, to be like to Christ. Further
since under the Law, let us remember what a heavy burden he took on him to
ease our shoulders, and so be the more willing to bear any cross that he
shall lay upon us. Finally, since he has redeemed us from the Law, and makes
us adopted sons: let us carry our selves as men that have Christian
liberty, scourging Sin, Death, Hell, and the Devil; that with the chains
of slavish fear would still keep us captive. Last of all, since we are his
sons by adoption, let us do our duty to our Heavenly Father: Let us love,
fear, and serve him with all our hearts souls and strength: let us be taught
with his precepts, let us be guided with his counsels, allured with his
promises, terrified with his threatenings, but especially be won with his
mercies. Then as gracious sons will he reward us with the glorious
inheritance of his Heavenly Kingdom. To the which place he that was borne for
us, bring us. Amen.

FINIS.

