The Art and Science of preserving Body and Soul in Health, Wisdom, and
Catholic Religion: Phisically, Philosophically, and Divinely devised: By JOHN
JONES Physician.

Right profitable for all persons: but chiefly for Princes, Rulers, Nobles,
Bishops, Preachers, Parents, and them of the Parliament house.

PROVERB. 4. Hearken unto my words incline your ears unto my sayings: for
they are life unto those that find them, and health unto all their Bodies.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman.

Anno. 1579.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE.


TO THE MOST high, excellent, and renowned Princess, Elizabeth, by the grace
of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defendour of the faith: and, in
earth under God of this Church of England and Irelande chief Gouernoure.
Forasmuch (most excellent Princess and sovereign Lady,) as by Divinity,
Phisike, and Philosophy, it is manifestly proved, and of the faithful,
Christian, and Catholic certainly believed, and by your highness mightily
maintained, defended, and delivered, that no grace, goodness, power, virtue,
life, health, mainteinaunce, strength, or blessedness, can be, continue, or
remain in the heavenly creatures above, upon the earth beneath, or in those
that be below under the earth, without the especial grace of God above all
heavens, do uphold, guide, and preserve the heavenly bodies, humane nature,
divine graces, and Princely rule.

The supercelestiall or not to be seen graces in God, are very

From these three all things spring.

In these three all things stand.

By these three all things are ruled.

Power makes, Wisdom guides, and Mercy preserves.

Which three as they be in God after a manner that cannot be uttered, as says
Hugo, so in working they cannot be sundred (as affyrmeth Athanasius.)

But that the distinction of the persons may be understood by the difference of
works.

Power by the mercy does wisely make.

Wisdom by the power does mercifully guide.

Mercy by the wisdom does mightily preserve.

The infiniteness of creatures does declare the power, as may be noted both
in number and greatness.

The beauty does show the wisdom by sight, moving, shape and quality to
be perceived.

And the profitablenesse, the mercy, as may be viewed in that that is
delightsome, fit, commodious and necessary.



From these three all things compounded of the four Elements through mutual
interchange do grow.

In these three do their actions consiste.

By these three they be all qualited.

Motion ingendreth, Light shapeth and shows, Influence disposes or qualiteth.

And these three, as they be in the heavenly bodies after a manner that daily
may be perceived (as affirm Hermes, Thales and Aristotle) so in working they
may be divided (as shows Ptolomeus with the rest of the Astronomers.)

Motion by the influence does lightly engender.

Light by the motion does comely shape or show.

Influence by the light does notably incline or dispose the qualities.

The course of the Orb and Planets running: ebbing and flowing of waters:
Bathes, Springs and Havens: blowing and whirling of the winds: ingendring of
Comets, blasing Stars and Meteors: increase of mineralles, growth of Plants,
sense in beasts, and the reason in mankind, do sufficiently declare the motion.

Consisting in the bodies not engendered nor corruptible, And in them that be
engendered, and that do corrupt.

The twinkling of the Stars, glittering of the Sun, and shining of the
Moon, do show the shape in forms produced of substances to be seen.

The qualities, properties, temperatures or operations of things do notably
signify the influence naturally abiding in the properties of things doing and
suffering.

Likewise the graces, faculties or spirits in mankind be Hyppocrates, Plato,
and Galen. And they be three, Reason, Courage, and Love, appetite or desire.

From these three all the actions proceed.

By these three all the powers do work.

Through these three all the parts do their duties.

Reason rules, Courage defends, and Love mainteineth.

As they are very evidently in mankind to be judged by such as know the use
of the parts, and of all others that wisely weygh or consider their operations
in their thoughts and deeds.

Reason by the love courageously rules.

Courage by the reason lovingly defends.

Love by the courage reasonably mainteineth.

The reasonable or animal spirit proceeds from the brain, as is perceived
by feeling, sense, and understanding.

The Irascible or courageous from the heart, and is showed by magnanimity,
glory and honor.

The appetitiue, natural, or loving, from the liver, as may be known by
ingendring, longing and feeding.

The two later respect earthly things subject to the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and therefore mortal subject to corruption.

But the former heavenly everlasting to possess joy or pain.



The said graces or virtues be three, Faith, Hope, Charity.

From these three all holy religion does spring.

In these three al piety stands.

By these three all good and acceptable deeds before God are maintained.

Faith planteth, Hope waters, Charity prospers, increases and fostereth.

And these as they be in the Christian mind, as say the Apostles Peter, Paul
and James, after a manner right heavenly: So in the Catholic doctrine they are
laid down for most wholesome and sure foundations, as witness the holy Doctors
Augustine, Ciprian, and Chrysostom.

Faith by the Charity does trustily water.

Hope by the faith does charitably prosper, increase and foster.

Charity by the hope does faithfully plant.

The protesting of the Catholic belief, preaching, baptism, and receiving of
the blessed Communion, does declare the faith and regeneration resting in
newenesse of life, and in forsaking the wicked deeds of the world, the
flesh, and the Devil.

The imprisonment, persecution, and death of the Saints, does declare the
hope to be seen in number of the elect upon earth, and in the obtaining and
constant looking for the joy and life everlasting in Heaven.

The aduauncing of the humble and godly, assisting of the impotent, lame and
needy, and punishing of the disobedient and wicked, declares the charity in
love, compassion, and help abiding.

each regiment, most fit for every region, as we may gather by Plato,
Aristotle, Tullie, Justinian, Paul, Pontanus, Patricius, Chelidonius
Tigurinus, Castilio, etc.

Power, Wisdom, Justice.

From these three all kingdoms are founded.

By these all Empires stand.

Through these each ruler reigns, as your Majesty most wisely considers,
delivers and handles.

Power rules, Wisdom guides, Justice preserves.

Which three as they be in government, after a manner that may very well be
uttered, so in offices, ministration, and execution they are very needefully to
be divided, as may be proved by the laws that Promotheus gave the Egiptians:
that Sole^ Solimon gave the Greeks: that Moses gave the Hebrews: that Licurgus
gave the Lacedaemonians: that Numa Pompilius gave the Romans: that Brutus gave
unto us Britons, and Howell Da sithence to the same Welchmen: that Christ our
Redeemer has given to all nations that have grace to desire it.

Power by the justice does wisely rule.

Wisdom by the power does justly guide.

Justice by the wisdom does mightily preserve.

The Sacred and Canonized Scriptures show the absolute power of Princes, as
does also the need and profit that grows of kingly government, with the
mighty armies, noble victories, and glorious triumphs, resting in the
Magnificence of the Prince, subject to no forreyne power, worthiness of the
state, ability, number, use and loyalty of the Nobility, as well of the
Clergy as of the Laity, Gentilitie, Commons, Subjects, Inhabitants and
Soldiers.

The high knowledge declares the excellent wisdom by holy Religion chiefly
declared, as do Physic, Law, Science, Arts, Counsels, Statutes, Decrees,
Leagues, Ministration, and Traffiques. And the Equity the Justice, as is best
perceived by defending of the faith, the ancient and catholic religion,
assisting of the sick and feeble, releeuing of the oppressed, and in giving to
every one his own, first to God that is Gods, to Caesar that is Caesar's, and in
doing to our neighbor as we would be done unto.

And as the graces of the Deity of the Trinity are contained without
limitation in one godhead.

The Celestial aunswerable to every Theoricall mansion.

And the Human according to the more and the less in each manhood: So are
the Theological virtues practiced in the actions and deeds of every of the
elect.

And the Kingly in the Christian rule and healthy education alone.

Of the which healthie preservation and Christian education, after I had
deliberately considered of the profit as well as of my duty, if such a
treaty were devised, agreeable no less to the holy Writ in each part, than to
Philosophy and Phisike in every point, profitable for the preservation as
well of the healthie body, as beneficial to the guiding of the persite and
godly mind: I deemed then so meet for none as for your highness the defense
and protection, because there is no Prince to whom God has given the title of
Defender of the Faith: And besides that, that he has yet in our days (as of
old) dealt so graciously and bountifully withal, as to endue with full and
absolute power and rule, for the bodily and ghostly direction and preservation
over both Ecclesiastical and Temporal causes, as your invincible Majesty
alone.

And this preservation Horace wills us earnestly to pray for, that in a body
sound, a healthie spirit may be found.

Menander likewise shows, that health of all things is the best.

Planudes the Philosopher, affirms the same more earnestlye, for it is no
life, says he, except we live in health.

Divine Plato also testifies such a Sympathia to be between the body and the
soul, that if either exceed the mean, the one suffers with the other.

Galen Prince of Physicians teaches, that if the mind be troubled, it
affects the whole body, and contrarily.

T the wisest of the Hebrews writes, that there is no profit above the
profit of the health of the body.

Paul the Apostle of us the Gentiles, plainly proves, such a consent,
fellowship and sufferaunce to be between the body and the mind, that if the
soul yield to the vices of the body, that they shall feel the griefs and
punishment thereof, not only in this mortal life both together, but also in the
everlasting life to come.

Saint Jerome that reverend Doctor and holy Father avouches, that overmuch
weakness of the body does quail the force of the mind, and makes the
sharpness of the wit to wither and vanishe.

Gregorius Magnus, (that I may conclude as briefly and effectually as I can,
although not so compendious and eloquent as I would) writes, that they that
be sound and whole, be admonished that they keep this health of their bodies,
and practice it to the health of the soul: whose wholesome counsel I do think
good to follow herein, and the same in sort to deliver to this frail age, as
well divinely and Philosophically, as Phisically, for all ages immediately and
mediately:

That the graces of the Deity may the more earnestly be desired, dreaded and
served:

The Celestial or Heavenly to Gods glory, and our profit the wiselier
foreseen, considered, applied, and prevented:

The Human rightlier understood, used, and preserved:

The Virtues divine more exercised, and the powers of christian Regiment of
every subject the willinglier obeyed: and such rash Libertines, and
disobedient persons as contemn the laws of God and your Majesty, may be
speedily stayed and reformed.

Whereof there will be no doubt, if the things natural, perfectly known and
ordered.











And therefore unto your most mighty majesty (according to my loyalty) do I
most humbly and faithfully consecrate these Princely principles, with all the
buildings therevppon erected, because that in the opinion of each godly wight,
not only the aforesaid benefits abound in your Majesty as in a grain
yard: but also that your highness right godly and learnedly can judge of
these things, and therewith has a most earnest, princely, prudent, and puissant
regard, motherly care, and loving liking toward all your loyal and liege
subjects, and all other of the household of Faith, that they may be so
defended, maintained, fed and instructed, in these your most blessed and
happy days, that for ever hereafter they may rightly glorify God,
duetifully serve their Prince, and live in all health, peace, unity, love and
wealth one with another.

The Science or Doctrine of this first Book, work, or age, as it is termed of
the Greeks not far amiss, Pardetrophia: So I entitle it, not altogether
improperly, The Art and Science of preserving Body and Soul. Which verily
had in the middle quailed (although diverse noble personages, honorable
Pastors, learned Doctors, and worthy parents did still instantly urge and
continually prick me forward) if the great goodness in your Majesty alone
tried daily toward all such as set forth the glory of God, serve your
highness, and that benefit your people, did not always put me in sure hope
to take it in good worth.

For this kind of framed foundation first laid once sure against all
assaults, and given into your most sacred hands, is the greatest care (if I
be not deceived) and your Imperial Majesty do accept this new Peer in good
part, and do give it your gracious safe conducte for a guide, that it may the
willinglier be embraced of all your beloved subjects and people of God, it shall
not only give me ability, courage, and countenance to perform the rest that I
go about, but also shall provoke diverse others to do many things (far
exceeding my wit or cunning) not to be battered, suncke or overwhelmed in your
divine name, and for the weal public: Which peradventure may make more
healthie, more godly, and of longer life your people, with their posterity,
and more acceptable, and more beloved each to other, and more serviceable to
your highness, to their Country, unto their parents, and unto themselves.

Long I beseech God the giver of all rule in all royalty may your Majesty live.

Many prosperous years Jesus Christ the wisdom of the father, grant your
highness over us to reign in all blessedness.

Always the mercy and love of God the holy ghost, defend, guide, and
accompany your excellent Majesty in all your affairs.

The very mainteiner, rewarder, and aduauncer of every grace, gift and
commendable Virtue.

The pattern of al Power, Wisdom, and Justice.

And the sampler of al godliness, mercy, and quietness.

Your highness most faithful and obedient subject, JOHN JONES.

Faults escaped in the Printing in the absence of the Author, the Copy being
in many places obscure.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. Sect. 1. Page. 10. 30 bold blood. Sectio. 2.
Page. 1. 17 Bathsayd Bathes Aid. 31 11 noted notes. 33 14 defined desired. 39
16 enemies himnes. 45 12 sunning fining. 49 14 beds besides. eadem. 27 Montuus
Montanus. 51 22 which with. 84 9 Grimbald Grimald. 88 33 read shall be. 101 2
read and lore of grace. 105 26 read knowing as he. etc. 107 10 fear Pharao.
ibid. 31 read with a full wind. etc. 113 18 deeds ends. 115 31 the then. 116
12 read vehement opinion. 117 3 vanities rashness. ibid. 5 omit the.

The Art and Science of preserving Body and Soul in all Health, Wisdom and
Catholic Religion. Liber Primus.
Sectio Prima.
CHAP. 1. What writers ought to consider, and wherefore the Author has made
this work.
COnsideringe with my self, how necessary it is (after the judgment of
right reason, daily experience, and common knowledge of al learned writers) for
him that will deliver any precepts or doctrine auailable to this learned,
expert, and cunning age, principallye to weighe whether it be possible,
profitable, and plain, which he teaches, or no, and that otherwise it is but
labor lost, deluding of the studious, and a very deceiving of the time: because
of impossible things there is no ability, of unprofitable no gain, of
riddles, Sophismes, and Oracles, but every man's construction. First Book.


Therefore least I, in these days wherein al Arts abound, might seem to take
in hand the like, De vanitate se^entiarii.
to teach impossibilities, to allow things unprofitable, and to commend
impostures, as Cornelius Agrippa has done very vainly, other obscurelye, and
some fantasticallye, besides other some that seem to write as they know in
their proper tongue English, and yet their terms must be altogether forsooth in
Latin and Greek, or in some other foreign speech, as though our language
could not comprehend so much as their fresh wits can discourse, or that
truth cannot be delivered but in unknown words and terms far set, clean
contrary not only to the judgment of our Elders, but also to the best of
our days, as in the skillful works of our country men, Chaucer, Gowre,
Surrey, Cheek, Chaloner, Record, Phaire, Wilson, Jewel, Dee, Digs, Fox,
Holenshead etc. is apparante. So that as far forth as my learning and leisure
will serve me, I do take this way: I do lay the best approved reasons,
principles and grounds that I can gather, following the example of the Be, out
of every flower aunswerable to al virtues, subject to our common phrase or
talk, for my rules: daily experience, for my proof: and lawful authority,
for my warrant.

And although the high knowledge of Philosophy, of many base wits and
unlearned, is rather had in contempt unjustly, than commended as it ought
lawfullye, I have notwithstanding chosen some of the wisest sayings of sundry
of the best sects, Li^. de doct. Christ. cap. 4.
as I have condemned diverse others of the worst, according to the counsel of
Saint Augustine, that most famous divine, who wills, that whatsoever is true
and appertinent to our faith, that we ought not to fear it, but to challenge it
for our own, from them which are no right owners thereof: that if ordinary
means, just laws, wise councels, and holy decrees, nor the heavenly
doctrine, the blessed word, may not restrain us from vice, from sin, nor
persuade us to preserve both body and Soul, wherein all felicity consists,
Sectio. 1.
as Montuus affirms, agreeable to al divine instructions: that yet at the
least, the very Infidels and Paganes following only the moral virtues, may
admonish us to refrain from disobedient and wicked wais, and to foresee both
the one and the other when as we look into their virtues void of spiritual
grace, and he find them to surmount ours that he borne under it, and that in
baptism have promised to renounce al wickedness, and to embrace al our lives
long ye fruits of ye spirit, the deeds of grace.

But because the duties appertayning to Soul and Body of each age, state,
and condition, shall be prosecuted in this and the ages following, I will
presentlye (according to the reverend rule of Physic,) show what kind of
Nurse is best to provide for infantes, that yonglyngs endued with the human
graces or spirits, Love. Courage. Reason.
the natural, vital, and animal actions, virtues, powers, or offices may have
these kept in them healthyly, as also be instructed in all the other mentioned
in the Epistle, naturally, christianly, and ciuilly. For unless we handle
first the natural diet, and political discipline meet for infants, how shall
we orderly come to the rest of our intent. For this is certain, yt unless
there be a like addition added to ye natural parts answerable to every age, as
Gale^ most excellently argues, in stead of that which wastes daily from the^
(as in my discourse of growing and living things, I have partly showed, 1. de.
4. f.
) and a framing of ye mind in all godly knowledge and holy religion, by
instruction: neither can there be a sound body long kept, nor at al a virtuous
and religious soul found, except it be by inspiratio^. By reason whereof, I do
think best that the one and the other be (as soon as may be) put in ure. The
wholesome nourishment for the healthy body convenient from ye ve^ys birth, and
the ordinary instruction for the witting mind, from the first perseverance or
understanding. And this doubtless in all such as are perfitly endewed with the
things natural expressed in the tenth Chapter of this work, Natural things.
Not natural things.
shall the better be preserved, if the things not natural, as air, meat and
drink, sleep and watch, labor and rest, emptiness and fullness, and
affections of the mind be well considered, proportioned, and duly used.

Things according to nature. Things annexed to nature.
And the things according to nature, as health, the cause of health, the effect
of health, strength, custom, and complexion, be in ye chosen Nourse, in
habit, as well as in the Infant, with the things annexed to nature, as color,
case, time, age, region, nature, sickness, diet, art, and times mutation
regarded, as in sort following shall be showed in Sections divided.

The first tends to all things in a Nurse requisite.

The second, how children every way are to be ordered.

The third, of their education, catholic religion, wisdom, obedience, and
trades, wherein infants, yea al Christians ought to be instructed, more large
perhaps than this first age requires, and more intricate, least the rest of
the other five be left unfinished, in stead of an Epitome, it is thus handled,
by the authority (at the least) of 300. Authors, and forth of 500. books,
although far briefer and obscurer, than in the^ is to be declared, if I shall
find this friendely favored, and the other heartily required. Emanuel.

CHAP. II. How the Nurse must be chosen, and which is best.
Lib de Dicta. De saenit. tu. lib. 14. De tuen^a vale. De infant. How the
Nurses must be chosen.
THe Nurse that must be gotten, shall be chosen, as says Hippocrates, Gale^,
Aetius, Montuus, and Mokerus, according to the temperature of the babe. For if
the child shall be of a perfect constitution, it must be kept by the like, or
be amended by the contrary, according to that principle which teaches, that
ye healthy are to be kept by the like (...) healthy with unlike.

(...) wise men, as well as Galen, Plutarch, lib. 1 de. sa. tu. Not h^st. li. de
ed^infan. in. libel. de Amore proli^. Gelius. ^ in noct. attic.
and Pli^^^^ (...) the mothers milk best for every one. And a^^^^ (...) to
reason, that that which in the healthy womb (...) the nauill, after the safe
delivery being translated to (...) sound pappes should best norish it by the
mouth, (...) ^^^^lian, Chrisippus, and Fauorinus further.

Ne^^^thelesse, by reason of weakness, sickness, Wherefore Nurses are gotten.
lack of (...), or being again quickly with child, the mothers as well of
Princes, Noble and worshipful children, as if the Merchaunts and Commoners,
cannot, or ought always, (although they would never so wishly) nurse their
Babes them selves in England, let Sir Thomas Moore affirm it to be (...) so
usual with every dame in Vtopia.

It shall therefore be best for such as can not Nurse their children
themselves, to follow Aetius counsel in the choice, Lib. 2. de. Vtopia. L^b.
14.
who greatly commends for a Nurse, such a woman as has brought forth not
only one, but two or three children alive and (...), Lib. 2.
through sucking of her own breasts endued with juice and sound flesh, whose
body shall neither over fat, nor over lean, as says Aegeneta, but between
both, for the mean, without doubt, in all things is best, seeing that the over
slender shows that choler or melancholy does abound, and the over fat
phlegm, and slymie humors, as all learned Physicians affirm, through the one
made over wayward and angry, through the other over sluggish and drousye.

CHAP. III. Of the age, favor, and manners of the Nurse.
THe age of the Nurse shall be between three and twenty and three and
thirty, The age of the Nurse.
as in these days of best perfection of strength, although Galen in his time
did account the years of state Acme, (...),
to be five and thirty.

Lib. 1. de inf. ^. Art. Par.
The Nurses face shall be full of savor, and comely colored, as wills
Eucarius, and there with fair, broad breasted, and well neckt, as says
Galen, without gogle eyes or loking a squint say I, as she that is not
separated from goodness.

(...). Teige.
For as the Hebrews do affirm, Tou signifies as well fair as good, as Tege
does in our own to^g, the British or Welsh.

So that good inclination for the most part is not naturallye severed from
fairness, nor natural beauty from goodness, Lib. 4. Lib. 5. de reg. de. 4
au. v^.
as affirms Castilio to the Courtier, and Osorius to the Prince of Portugal:
for this beauty and comeliness which (as Galen teaches) does not consist in
only hew or color, but in proportion and savor, does show (as says Hugo,
In trect. de opere tri. dierium.
and Bishop Curtes,) a special care in the maker, profitable four ways, for
needefulnesse, co^modiousnesse, conuenientnesse, and delightsomnesse.

But the same to feign and further with painting, as some does, Lib. 2. de
Vtopia. Lib. 3. de Inueus. ^erii.
is to be taken for a vain and wanton pride (as writes Moore,) and is a token
(as shows Saint Ciprian) of the color and shape they shall be of in hell,
although it be so vain as sithence Medea the use, as writes Polidor Virgil.
Hence Periander wills, that we praise the natural fair.

Cap. 22. Cap. 4. eccle. How to know a froward person. ^irac. 15. Art. Ph^sog.
in timeo. in c^r. 3. art. part. De fat for. Lib. quot A. in. Q.
And Menandor highly extolleth them, in this wise: Oh how delectable is simple
fairness joined with a right wise and lowly mind, with virtue says Sirach,
and with godliness says Solomon. But they that be of lofty looks,
counterfeyt, and hard favored, for the most part be high minded, stubborn and
ungracious, as writes Indagines, by ye authority (as I take it) of the sacred
letters, as well as by the knowledge of Philosophye and Physic, because the
mind, as (affirms Plato and Galen,) does agree with the body, as the body
with the mind, as Rasis, Cassius, and Hessus testify. By Vaseus approved in
Parta the monstrous king that he conquered in China, which was no less froward
than he was deformed, every where too too often tried. The passions, manners and
behauiours of the Nurse, and that she has been brought up withal, ^^^digently
to be noted and learned, before she be enterta^^^^, for they be arguments of
good and evil temperature, as well as the shape of the body, as Hessus
writes. But if he shall obtain a mean temperature, in the simple parts,
Arguments of a good temperature.
(...), flesh, veins, sinowes, chordes, panicles, bones, mar^^^ etc. and
right form in the instrume^tals, that shall be best, as Galen teaches.

And those affection are likewise best, that shall be mean, between rash and
sober, quick and slow, cruel and pitiful, 1. de t^ va. Libr. de. s^ tu,
Incoment.
angry and patient, bold and fearful, prone and vnproue to ^tion (as says
Hessus and Placatomus:) the farther any shall decline from this, the worse is
their temperature: 3. De. not. Annal^m. 5. de c^os. Sym de tu. va.
and according to the nature of the Nurse will be much inclined that which is
nourished, as Aristotle, Galen and Montuus show, and as following (by example)
shall be proved.

CHAP. IIII. How to know the temperature of the Nurse and milk.
THe milk therefore must be temperate, (as it will, if the Nurse be of a good
complexion, ripe years, and therewith healthie: How to know the best milk. 1.
de tu. va. 3. ^^ms. Libr. 4. c. 4.
) as that which in taste shall be sweet, in smell pleasant, in color white,
in substance mean between thick and thin, as Galen, Auicen and Aetius
teach: contrarily that which is evil, is either thick and cheesie, or watery
and whayey, or blew and leadie, or in taste sour, harsh, rough, salt, bitter
or sharp, or of some other evil quality of these compounded, or in smell
ungrateful: Yet Aristotle seems to praise the milk that is blewe, before
that which is white: but truly I think he meant then of some particular people
and place, In Hist not.
is Pliny does of the Ewes that seed in the country of Ponius, upon the
banks that the river Astaris does ouer-flowe, Libr. memorabio lium.
which do give black milk, as Gauodentius testifies.

3. de Aliment. 3 Primi.
Milk after birth is most thin, as Galen declares, and is therefore then
unwholesome, and of Auicen wholly discomme^ded: 1. Top.
but after in process of time it waxes more thick, so that it is better:
Libro. 4.
for of contraries we have one and the same doctrine, as Aristotle affirms,
and reason shows. The milk (as says Actius) is not to be taken of ye infant
before the fourth day, 3 Primi. Ca. de elig. nut.
nay not until two months after her delivery, as affirms Auicen, unto who^
Gordonius does consent, whose judgments herein I do not allow. For then
nature should seem frustrate, which all Philosophy is against: for nature
does nothing in vain, Pri. de us. part.
as the Philosophers affirm: neither is she taught of any as the Prince of
Physicians proves. And the sacred letter shows, that God does al things for
the best. And certain it is, that as soon as the Babe is borne, it coueteth
to suck, and will take the pappe feately into his preatye mouth, where never
any thing entered before, and will readilye also swallow the milk down.

CHAP. V. Why Nurses are to be changed: how wise men wey of writers: that
Monarkes have been marred by Nurses: and Princes by evil parents depraved.
Causes to change the Nurse.
THe Nurse if by any chance she happen to fall sick, or to take any infection,
or to be given to drink, or any other intolerable vice, must be forthwith
avoided, and another Nurse presently gotten, least the child suck up
sickness and wickedness with the milk, as old Hippocrates proves: whereof
none need to doubt, for as much as you may as well suppose that the property
and nature of the milk is of power to change and alter she disposition of the
Infant, That the milk can after ye nature of ye suckling as well as the seed.
Lib. 3. eleg. Car lib. 4. Lib. 1. Silu^rum. Whom the author coueteth to please.
as the seed is of power to fashion the mind and body, as Propertius,
Horace, and Mantuan show, as I have partelye made evident in my discourse, of
the beginning of all growing and living things, but more plainly as follows.
Yet to offend any I would be l^th, to please all I can not: the godly, wise, or
learned, I doubt not, because that to wise men in the enterprising of great
things it is enough to put forward a well willing purpose.

Lampridius writes, that Titus son to Vaspasian, Emperors depraved through
Nursing. Titus. Lib. 2. Caesar. Caligula.
by reason that he sucked a woman of a sickely state, was himself of a sickelie
nature all his life. Dyon likewise the Greek, testifyeth, that the incredible
cruelty that was in Caligula, of Monarchs the monster, issued from Pryscilla
his Nurse, who was of such a barbarous Nature, that she delighted in licking of
blood. Also in ye life of Tiberius, Tibarius.
it appears that his great drunknesse came through his Nurse and her
education, who as she was greatly given to drink, so would she give soppes in
wine to her suckling, which after it came to years, never left her conditions.
A thing passing all wonders, that neither the magnificence of his Empire, No
counsel can persuade the wicked.
the secret counsel of the most prudent Senate of the world, nor the
persuasion of the sagest Philosophers of his time, might restrain it during
all his life.

And this is tried not only in mankind yet daily, but also in brute beasts.
For the whelps are strong and swift, although fearful, that suck a Do: as
contrarily, strong and bold, which suck yt she Wolf or the Lioness.
Therefore young Lions and Leopardes (as says Montuus) are tamed with the use of
sheep milk or Goats. De tu. va. How Lions and Leoperds be tamed.
But what shall we need foreign examples, seeing there wants not sufficient
nearer home: for this I can say, mine own eyes being witness, better than
ten hear says, that in Northwales the second year of Queen Marie, I did
see a Lamb suck a Goat, and a Kydde an Ewe, by the means whereof the one was
more hearie, In Satur.
the other more woolly. The same Macrobius affirms to have seen. So that it
is clearer tha^ midday, that each creature sucketh with the milk some
properties of the Damme. Caucasus as ye Cosmographers affirm is a mountain
dividing in the midst great Asia, the which begins in Judea, and ends in
Scithia. Lib. 7.


The Poet shows the like in these rude words or verses, but not so large and
learnedly as they be in the Latin.

No Goddess was thy mother dear,
the author of thy kind:
Not Dardan was, but Caucasus,
the Tigres meat did find.
Here Virgil (you perceive) wiselye has relation as well to the parents as to
the feeding or Nursing: of Rainolds I wot not why ommitted, unless he thought
it auailed them not, the admonition which I think good to remember: and that
they use themselves well at al times, Good counsel for mothers.
during the time of procreatio^, bearing in the womb, and Nursing, and
especially the mothers: for to what a proverb is it grown with us at home,
that that which is bred in the boane will never out of the flesh: as with the
ancient Greeks a far of: (...).
An evil bird, A proverb to often true.
an evil egg.


In fine Faustine the Roman inheretrix, and wife to Marcus Aurelius Antonius
one of the worthiest Emperors, (as says Lawne,) that ever bare Scepter, to
well verifyed, who not being contented with the love of her lawful and loving
mate, like a raunging rigge, served her fickle fancy and outrageous longing
lust with a ruffenly royster, a fencer, which although after by the advice of
his most learned and noble counsel was quenched through the unknown drinking of
his most liuelye bold (as Julius Capit. writes, A strange remedy.
) yet her son Comodus followed their two evil natures or qualities (as Eutropius
testifyeth) for in blood and in all vice he exceeded, In vit. Comodi.
and daily delighted more in the company of facing Fencers, roysting ruffians,
and roging rak^hels, than in worthy councellers, valiant champions, or sage
Philosophers: so that it seems manifest, that the parents passions and
properties, were transported, graffed and increased in the child, as it
augmented before it had sucked any milk.

CHAP. VI. Of the best milk and what Teates be good, and which both grieve and
deforme the child, and that do cause it to be unquiet.
THe milk of that Nurse will be best, yt has brought forth a man child (as
says Auicen: Lib. de in. sa.
) but (according to Montuus) that has brought forth a woma^-child: Whose milk
meetest.
but to me it seems best for ye male ye males milk, for ye female ye
females, for as much as in all things we should follow nature not vitiated, (as
Montanus shows) and the breast not deformed, but of mean bigness, and white,
In common. de sum. medicament. facult. Libr. de not. puer. Lib. 4. Libr. de
decorat in pract.
with fair blew veins dispersed (as Hippocrates wills.) Auicen prayseth ye
^ays ye be sound, and mean between soft and hard. But I with Actius,
Gordonius and Fallopius, do mislike both the over great and over small breasts
together with the pappe heads or nibles. The great because, they have much
milk, and the small because they have over little. Furthermore, What breasts be
both worsh and best.
through sucking of great breasts, the children are made flat or crooked nosed,
like to him that good Traiane the Emperor was iocund with, whose words I have
turned into English, as I found them in the Latin.

If thou thy jaws do open wide,
and nose to Sun do lay:
Then may thou tell us perfitly,
what time it is of the day.
Meaning that his long hooked crooked Nose did cast a shalowe upon his teeth
like a Dial: by the Nurse to be helped, a note to the Nurse.
if she will always when the child sucketh, depresse her breaste with one
finger about the teate and the other underneath.

Of the grief that over great and olittic nibbels causes.
Moreover great pappes or teates hurt the gummes, and the small the jaws,
because that through the one they are constrained to open the mouth too wide,
ouer-stretchyng the sinews, causing grief, much like to the Crampe: through
the other, in that they can not easily of the Infant be catched, making it wide
mouthed, over wayward and angry, and as I have often noted, to weep very much.

CHAP. VII. What pleasure children have in Music, and of what force it is to
alter the affections: and how the Nurse must rule her passions: and after
what sort lust must be depressed.
Lib. 1. de sa. tu^^.
THe passions, perturbations and affections, must be therefore moderated by
Music, where unto they be prone (as testifyeth Galen,) by the authority of
Aesculapius and Hippocrates, The force of Music.
being ye easiest remedy, doubtless, foreseen of nature, to appease as well
such froward fittes of children, as melancholy passions, or amorous affections
of the elder persons, as by the sacred letters, learned writers, and daily
experience is proved. For Saul to repress the fury of that mela^cholie
spirit, heard very often David's melody.

Agamemnon also going to war against the Troianes our ancestors, doubting
the chastity of his wife Clitemnestra, left her in the guard of an excellent
Harper, who when he saw her prone to amorous toys, mitigated her burning heat
by the sweetness of his instrument, in such sort as Aegistus could not
obtain his desire, Noble musitions.
before he had slain the said Musition. Pithagoras by the pefection of his
Art quenched so the lusting mind of a ragious young man, Ecclesi. 3.2.
that within few days he made him chaste. What need many words of a matter
so evident, Orpheus, Emphion, Ampedocles, Terpander, and Metimeus, by this
means healed many sick, and mitigated the love of sundry (as Lawne
testifies.)

And therefore, to be short, the wise man wills music not to be let.

Also the puissant princes and valiant Captains as well in Camp as
fortress, skirmishes and battles, By Music man and beast are comforted.
to animate their people do use it: and the laborers, tillers, and Carters in
field and high ways, to encourage their cattle, whistle and pipe it.
Whereupon the best Nurses, but especially the trim and skillful Welsh women,
do use to sing some preaty Sonets, wherewith their copious tongue is plentifully
stoared of diverse pretty tunes and pleasant ditties, that the children
disquieted might be brought to rest: but translated never so well, they want
their grace in English, all that entiseth to vice is to be abolished.
for lack of proper words: so that I will omit them, as I wish they would
their lascivious Dymes, wanto^ Lullies, and amorous Englins. And I will show
some of Pontanus, rather for the manner, than the glee of the matter.

What Babe is this? to hide thy pappes,
o Sis make no delay,
Oh cover them and hide them, he
would snatch thy dugges away.
Come hither Tomsie pretty boy,
he makes haste, come you,
It is thine own, takte in thy mouth,
and thou sir suck anew.
Likewise if the Nurse, A good way to avoid ungodly affections. lib. 2. Peda.
sup. Psalm. Lib. 2. de prepcuaan Ipist^^t ^uid.
when any light affections may happen to annoy her, do use to repress them by
this means, singing also of Psalms (so greatly commended of Clemens
Alexandrinus, Basilius, Eusebius, and Bernarde, and of Sternold and Hopkins,
into English verse or meetre right godly and cu^ningly handled, she shall do
wisely: or other such virtuous and seemly songs, wherein some godly History,
valiant attempt, or noble act is remembered: for all immoderate passions
whylest she gives suck, must utterly be avoided, and in all other needfully to
be eschewed. 1. de. tu. sa.
Because (as Halichod affirms) it alters the spirits and natural heat,
3. Art. part.
as may hourly be seen, and that in the very face, 1. de. Offi.
(as Tullie testifies.) For they be read which rejoice, pale that be afraid,
and they blush that be ashamed, 1. Prob. 11.12.14.
(as Aphrodisius witnesses:) and no marvel, for of over joy Diagoras died,
Lib. 3 ca ^^. Lib. 7. ca. 36 Lib. 9. cap. 12.
to see his three sons win the victory at Olimpus (as Gellius records:)
of sorrow Rutilius and Lepidus (as Pliny writes:) and for shame ye singular
Poet Homer, because he could not answer the demand of a certain fisher man
(as Valerius Maximus testifyeth.) But of al passions and actions, 1 de san. tue
1.
the immoderate use and lascivious lust of Venerie Gale^ forbids Nurses, for
as much as thereof a triple damage may ensue, The discomodities of venety in a
Nurse.
as either the months to be provoked, or else the milk to change his
goodness into worse, or if she conceive, the best of the blood to be converted
of nature, for the nourishment and use of that in the womb, and the residue to
be left for milk, which is made white through the glandulous substance of
the breasts, as Hippocrates, Galen, and Auicen prove.

In Apho. De tuenda va.
Furthermore Rabbi Moses affirms, that through the lust of leacherie the
blood is corrupted, and therefore Montuus councelleth that the desires thereof
be repressed with the use of Lettuce, conserve of water Lillies, and Pigeons
eaten, strowing also the bed and chamber with Bri^ne, Lib. de med. mat.
and Tutsans (as Amatus Lusitanus wills.)

To make the matter sure, Caius Fabrius the Consul, closed the N^^se with his
child in the Temple of the Virgins, (as Guenara to^^^^^^) But this I like not
so well of, Lib. de pri.
for as much as it may not only things the goodness of the milk through over
much solitariness, but also dull the spirits.

CHAP. VIII. The definition and distinction of Temperaunce, and of the profit
and commendation thereof, with the commodity that grows of keeping the
fasting days, and who has bin always tolerated. Of the Theological and
Human graces, that of the husband as well as of the wife are to be wayed and
considered, with the benefit of prayer.
WHerefore I rather commend, Good counsel to the Nurse.
that the Nurse shall do as it becomes a woman that would be sauoured of God
and cherished of the godly, in observing her duty to the infant, and charge
to her reposed of the parents, which if she do not know how to use her self
and to moderate her lusts, Temperance defined. 3 Lib. Cicero. de finibbon and
man. Lib de florib. d^ temp.
forth of this work may easily be set, Temperaunce always being the guide.
And it is defined of the Philosopher, to be an abstinence from inordinate
tasting and touching. And of Barnarde with ye rest of the schole Doctors, it is
thus distinguished, into contine^cie, ^^brietie, and modesty.

The first consists in abstayning from inordinate eating and drinking,
whence offenses may chiefly grow (if it be not well observed) to them whom it
appertains, whether they be whole or sick, on days forbidden or not, two
manner of ^^^es. The one, in offending God and nature, burdening the (...) and
ingendring lusts (as Stobeus testifyeth. Sermo. 3. The regal graces.
Governors gods Lieutenaunts. Romans ^^. Sap 6. 1. Pet. 2.
) The (...) disobeying of Regiment, wherein also God is displea^^^ (...) that
the power, wisdom and justice of kings, princed and rulers, is the government
of God: they be his presi^^^ts, for by me (says he) Princes rule, as in the
holy volume most plainly and very often is expressed.

Which I would that some pastors, preachers and ministers would wiselyer
weye, and warn in their Synodes, Sermons, and parishes, and not to suffer
others that have no license, to preach their inuentio^s contrary to ye Queens
proceedings, as I wish that they in their houses would observe, that al other by
them might take example, to keep Lent, and such fasting days, as by the laws
of God and men are commanded, (of Courtiers and Lawyers better used than of
some divines, although the Apostles themselves ordained Lent, Lib. 6. Seven
special commodities gotten by keeping of the fasting days.
and Telesphorus Quinquagesima, as Polidor writes) whereby the body, may be
brought obedient to the spirit, yt Name better maintained, land increase more
cherished, and the more subjects be bred and nourished, with two parts in
six of household diet saved, the body healthilier preserved, and the more
people exercised: let some Libertines, busy belly bodies, never so cunningly
(void of fear or duty, Nine kind of persons not bound to fast.
) color the contrary. Howbeit nine sorts of people by laws have been always
tolerated as ye case has required, Sick, Soldiers, and Sailers: Infants,
Nurses, and women great, longing or lying in Child bed: aged persons,
prisoners, and wayfaring me^, who^ of late they named Pilgrims.

The second, from inordinate and unlawful touching or venerie, as from
coveting of goods unlawfully, as says Clemens Alexandrinus, and as in the
last Section where all actual sins are expressed, shall be showed.

The third, not only from unsitting toys, but also from al other unlawful
deeds, be it of seeing, hearing or smelling, so that through this virtue
Temperance, the actions inward and outward of us upon this earth are kept
in their mean, as the heavenly Sun through his moving light and influence in
the middle Sphere gives his mean temperature, The Theorical graces.
yielding by gods appointment to this lower world with the rest of the
celestial bodies all flourishing comfort, growth and increase. Whereupon the
divine Doctor Saint Hierome says: that be which observes Temperaunce, lives
like a reasonable treature: but he that does not, like a brute beast.

De cad. 2. Fol. 242.
And Bullinger says, unless we live and lead a temperate (...) life we are
utterly unworthy to bear ye name of Christians of ye loving bush and
therefore, that fears god obeys his Prince and laws, or regards reason,
always to be considered, as well as of the woman, because her body is subject
to the virtuous man, In trac. de dig. matr.
as the sacred Scriptures most divinely do teach, the Homilies instructs,
Peter Lawne handles, and as experience amongst all good Christians shows,
not seuering themselves as it is too commonly practiced, but rather lovingly
the one to embrace the other, The humain graces.
except a lawful and manifest cause, according to the Scriptures, and not
liberty do co^strain it, seeing yt they be both but one flesh, and two
immortal souls, the creatures that be only endued with reason, courage, and
(...) with power, Justice and wisdom, al things subject to the virtues.
that must abide the terrible sentence according to their deeds, to whom al
creatures as well heavenly as earthly serve and obey, as long as they use,
follow and practice the works of the spirit, and forsake the wicked works of
the frail flesh: Cap. 3.4.5.121
as by Tobias it is evidently expressed, and of Paul the chosen Apostle, in the
Acts, and in his Epistles at large declared, Psalm. 86. Joel. 2 32. Iere. 31.
Hebr. 4. Tim. 2.
which briefly in this last part is uttered, Prayer not being the least, for
through it, as the Prophets, Apostles, and Doctors of the Church do
affirm, namely Saint Augustine, S. Ambrose, Saint Jerome, and Saint
Chrysostom with all other holy fathers of the primative Church as well as of
latter time, as by our godly and learned Homilies and pestils daily read
therein, appears: fleshly affections are thereby not only quenched, Lib. de
ver. sect. cap. de prod.
but also God even our god which guides al things, is therewith best pleased
after the phrase of men, as the Scripture does by the figure Anthropopathia,
with Lodouicus Viues, I speak it, and therefore it shall daily and nightly he
used.

The kingly Prophet David has so willed it, of diverse in our ^ong deuoutlye
and dutifullye devised in their books of ^^^red prayers, Sir John Conway.
and (of all ye zealous sort highly to be embraced) the Meditations and self
talk of Saint Augustine latelye translated.

^. Aph. 10. Exercise profitable before meat.
And so before meat shall exercise, for Hippocrates has so willed it, that
labor should go before meat, that the body may be made more pure and
clean: for the unclean, the more you nourishe them, the more you hurt them.

CHAP. IX. In what air exercise should be: of the force thereof: which is
best: and how to know it.
This breeding, bringing up, and exercise, should be in a good air, as the
child it self must be brought up in, when as the air can more alter the body
and spirits, than any nourishment or food, as Diodorus Siculus, Of the force
of the air.
Consiliator, Martin Curtez, and Peter Martyr of Anglera affirms, As valiant
travelers and as shilful by sea and land, in England as in any part of Europe.
seeing that of the matter of it is breathing (as Galen proves) which if it
shall be evil or infected, the living creature can not long be sound (as
Rhasis, Agricola, and Benedictus Victorius testifye,) and as our valiant
travelers find true in their Nauigations to Perrow, China and Cataya.

Hence may be proved that the air is not so hurtful as some judge, especially
for them that be brought up and accustomed thereunto, Through custom bad air
does not so great hurt.
neither in Hollande, Holdernesse, Rumney marsh, Brint marsh, the Lowes in
Lancashire, and hundreds in Essex. etc. for as much as in all these and many
others that I name not, as well in foreign soil as in our own country. I
have seen as well sundry old men, as diverse healthye and lusty persons.

When is best air.
The wholesomest air as all the Philosophers and Physicians do affirm, is that
that is of pure substance, and that when the Sun arises does soon wax
hot, when it sets does soon cool (as Mont. declares) Lib. de tuen. val.
as is affirmed to be in i^ Slemarge in Irelande, Ireland a goodly and healthy
country.
being the very cause of their great health and length of life, as a hundred,
sixescore, seauenscore years and upwards, as they there informed me, the
second year of the reign of Queen Mary. And as that learned man Master
John Chaloner her highness secretary in Ireland ^a^ testifye.

There be diverse means by which the holesomnesse of the air and place may
be known, as be places free from standing waters, and quickly dispatch of the
clouds of the night, (as Palladius says) and that be likewise from the Sea,
Lib. 1. de re. tust.
(as Plato shows) because that as the Sea of his own nature is ^^try and
stormy, Lib. 1. de repub.
so the inhabiters minds do always like it (...) and flow.

Which of my self to praise or disprayse, all the land well known of the
author.
according to the nature of places to me for ye most part universally known
throughout all this land, I think not requisite, for sundry considerations
of the wise easily coniectured.

This only I wish to be noted, Ludlaw an excellent proper town and healthful
seat.
as a sign most certain of the worthiness thereof. For if it be good, the
dwellers have a good color, they be healthye, constant, well sighted, light of
hearing, of clear voice, and quick witted, as in the most part of Wales and
the Marshes may be perceived, and as at the worthy Castle and town of Ludlawe
I have judged.

Hence Hippocrates found forth that diverse countries did bring diverse
humors, changing the temperatures of me^, Lib. de act. acp^^^ and regionib. 9.
and so consequently ye manners. The same also Galen affirms, Lib. quod ani^m.
unto which may be added forth of Metula by ye authority of Mont. yt the
pleasant seat, fine building, De sanitate (...).
Why the Athenians were healthier and wiser tha^ the Thebanes.
and clean keeping of ye Nurserie, has not a little auayled to the benefit of
the body and mind, for that was the only cause (says he) that the
Athenians were wiser and healthyer than the Thebanes. All the which most
plainly shows how needefully it is to be considered, as well for the benefit
of the mind, as for the co^^^dity of the body, whether ye labor abroad, or
test within.

CHAP. X. What exercise, trades, labors, arts, and pastimes be good, meet,
and profitable, not only for Nurses but also for many others.
THe exercise or labor that the Nurse shall use especially of the upper
parts (as writes Aetius) must be mean and moderate, as that that will cause
a flourishing color but not extreme sweat (as Galen would have it,) least as
thorough too much idleness the actions of the body and mind might be over
dulled, Lib. 4. ^^. 6. De tuenda vale.
so through too much labor the blood might be over chased, and so change the
grate and goodness of the milk into worse.

What exercises he best for Nurses.
The exercises that are best, as shows Plato, Clemens Alexandrinus, Johannes
Ionius, and Osorius, is where the mind is exercised with the body, and it may
be divided both into labor and play.

The labors that be both decent and profitable for gentlewomen are these, The
Persians that were noble, disdained to work upon wool, because the glory of
their country consisted in silk and not in Wool, as other does.
most meet in my mind, and also in daily use with many, as spinning of Wool
on the great compass Wheel, and on the rock or distaffe, wherewith I would
not that any should be so dainty, as to be offended thereat, (as Siligambis
the Queen) and the rest of the Persian Ladies were with Alexander the great
(of Quintus, Curtius remembered) disdayning woollen works, but rather to
commend and use them as all ornament, and benefit of god bestowed upon our
flourishing country, sin passing all our princely neighbors.

And therefore politic princes of elder time as you may read in Dion, An old
custom much praised.
Gordonius, Fox, and Grafton, caused their own children as well as their
household, (in place conueniente and time vaca^t) ofthe woman kind, to work
upon (...), that through their example the whole land might to their great
and universal advantage be entised to do the like.

Which as I have heard, a most honorable and learned cou^cellour of late did
affirm, that in this land some time the custom was, when virtue was more
practiced, and vice less used, that the Princes daughters did present their
parents every new years tide with linen and woollen cloth, of their own
making, which landable and profitable trade in the beutifull Isle of Anglesey
in Northwales into yarne, of every woman almost is so cunningly handled daily
in the town of Bewmaris, (...) worthy country there abouts, that no Satin
thread is (...) ^^ner or stronger, although the wool in Staple, exceed not much
the Pea^e, unless my memory fail me. Not ommitting (...) as can the Persian,
Spanish, or Italian working of silks, as spinning, twisting, wening, sowing,
imbroydring, aresing, (...) seyting, drawing, rasing, purling, buttoning, etc.
or the (...) Wallons, as the making of Worsteads, Cha^lets, ^^ckadowes, Says,
Dornickes, etc. for the which exercise ^orwith and Sandwich deserves great
co^mendations: or the making of fine linne^, as in Cheshier, La^cashier,
Yorkeshiere, Lan^lnshiere, Harford shiere, Salop shiere, and Monmouth ^^^ere is
used. For the which their endeavors, diverse of our worthy dames of late,
deserve no less praise than the Lidian Lady Arachne did of old, of Pliny
and Polidor Virgil so ^^^atly commended.

CHAP. XI. A distinction of the four parts of Music, and what kind of
dancing is tolerable. How women ought to be careful in their behavior. The
benefit of exercise, with the best time to use it.
THus as you have heard what labors are meetest, to whom they appertayn, to
keep them from idleness the Nurse of all vice: so the sportes, pastimes, and
exercises most highly commended ensue.

And as for sportes and pastimes, comely dancing is most commended, as well for
preserving the healthy spirits, as also for strengthening the sound body (as
affirms Lusitanus and Montuus) furthering the viij. De sa^^. De tu. va.
branches of Prudence, as proves sir Thomas Eliot in his Governor: Lib. de
regim.
let the doggish Philosopher Demetrius, with his precise disciples, never so
brawlingly prate to ye contrary, seeing David had seaue^ sorts of dau^cers,
Regu^. 6. ca.
as the sacred writ testifyeth: Foreseeing that the Nurse remember (says
Eliot) the goodness of women's natures, which is, to be mild, fearful,
gentle, Of virtuous qualities in women. What kind of Music is tolerable, and
what is not.
tractable, trusty, of sure remembrance, and shamefast (as Viues affirms,)
using only that kind of Music called Dorios, where neither deformity is
practiced, nor wanto^nesse enticed, but rather these virtues (as shows
Erasmus and Fuchsius) as prudence, modesty, sobriety and policy, in
Bargenets, Pauions, Galiardes, Sturgions and Roundes only.

The other three parts of Music (as Lidius, Frigius, and Gouicus) because
they stir too vehement affections, and do bring d^^erse unseemly forms to
the body, I think altogether v^^^^te, but to persons and places where it
appertains, as Emmelia to Tragedies, Cordax to Comedies, Enopile to men in
armor, and Hormus to young men and women.

In the elections whereof, I would they should be circumspect, Lib. 5. What
kinds of dancing both the old and new divines disalowe.

Every man marketh women's manners, but no man looks into his own.


because Saint Augustine in the primative Church did utterly discommende the
Idolatrous and lascivious use thereof, had from ye Infidels, from ye Hetrurians
(as Liuie testifyeth) as some worthy and learned Divines do at this day,
fearing least the like evils might ensue: for a light fault in a woman that
^^^^eth credit, is every where curiously noted: and once iustlye defained,
never after recovered, nor of the virtuous so ^^^hlye esteemed: as contrarilye
such as will subdue their appetites from vanities to virtues, of the godly and
Saints he only and always accepted, by Lucretius thus commended: They
therefore that can vanquish, Lib. 5. de rec. ^^t.
and these banish, from their mind.
Would you not compte them worthy, with the Gods a place to find?


Other exercises, as walking, running easily at Bace, at grins^^le ball,
boules, riding on horseback, wagon, chariot, coach, (...) I will omit, partlye
because it may be gathered, which according to every degree be honest, mean,
and moderate, and partly because daily custom does teach, what exercises,
trades, labors, and sports become Nurses best, and what few of ^ate Coches,
and not every dalying Dame that uses not to attend upon the Queens
highness, nor by reason of fee^^^nesse.

Now what benefit does come of exercise, forth of Fulgentius, In Phil. Lib.
4. In Epit. 4. The benefit of exercise.
Valescus, and D^sidorius shall be showed. For exercise, (say they) is the
preserver of man's life, stirrer up of natural heat, quickner of sleepye
nature, consumer of superfluities, strengthner of the parts, death of
disseases, banisher of euiles, medicine of the Crachy, the gain of time, the
debte of youth, the joy of age, the helper of health, the vanquisher of
sicknesses, and of all Idleness and sin (I may say) the Conqueror, and of
appetite the very minister.

When exercise is best.
The times best for exercise (as teach Hippocrates, Galen and Auicen) is when
the meat eaten is perfitly disgested, which you may know easily by your
urine: for if it shall be clear like cunning water, it shall show in
disgestion, (as affirms Actuarius:) Lib. 1. de vri^^^. Lib. de ind. vri.
) if too high colored, over concocted (as testifyeth Egidius,) if like Amber,
sufficient, as says Doctor Record: Lib. de v^in.
but if you travel after or before, the body shall be filled with raw juice,
or replenished with pale choler (as Gale^ testifyeth. Lib. 6. de sa. tuen.
)

Lib. de Euch.
Hence most sort of sicknesses are engendered as he proves.

CHAP. XII. What meats engender evil juice, with an Argument thereof.
Meats that engender evil juice are especially of one of these three kinds,
as either Melancholyke, Flegmatique, Lib. de euch and cacho.
or Choleric (as testifyeth Galen.)

In act. par gal. Lib. 3.
Nevertheless, here might rise a question, whether such grow of the nature of
the meat, or of the receiver (as Trusianus supposes, Genesis ca. 9.
) because Moses says that whatsoever lives, is meat for us, overthrowing
thereby all Paracelsians. And Galen proves, that honnye taken of a (...)
person, does ingendre choler, 2. de Sa. and, pri. de al^m.
of a flegmaticke (...) man good blood.

Furthermore, we see that Stares feed on Hemlock, and are nourished, but
mankind poisoned, as was ye Prince of al Philosophers Socrates: whereby we may
gather, that evil humors (...) not only grow of the temperature of the meat,
but as w^l through the fault of the receyuer. For if the natural actions
contained under the latitude of health, shall overcome ye meat, it is turned
into nourishment: as poison did in Napell^^ through daily custom, in the
Stare, by reason of abu^da^ce of natural heat, A reasonable answer. Iosep
de bello. Iudaie. Pet. Mart. in Decad.
and through want in the Ierusolimites and valiant soldiers that served under
Nicuesa: in the Indies, and them of the low Countries, the one sort feeding
upon Todes, carrion, and filthy dogs: the other upon Rattes, Mice and
ordure: so that where the nature of the received does whollye overcome the
receyuer, as it did in Socrates, there it is turned into poison or unto
unnatural humors (as Fallopius teaches,) if the quantity be small, De simp.
med. fac^
or the matter and quality not exceeding, as it was in the chollericke, of
Galen before mentioned, by the Be and the Spider also verifyed, the one
gathering honny, the other sucking out poison, and that forth of one and the
same flower.

CHAP. XIII. Of the regard that Nurses must have to their feeding.
THe free and civil Nurse shall be therefore circumspect that she eat always
such meats as will engender good blood, and such be they, as are of mean
substance, neither too thick nor too thin, to hard or too britle, Pri. de
dien. Lib. de ench. Pri. cap.
too clammy nor slippery, too as Hippocrates, Gale^, and Oribasius teach.

And those also which be of mean temperature, as neither to hot nor to cold,
to moist nor to dry, to raw nor to parched, to much broyled or fried, taken in
due time and order, and void of al excess and contrary properties, that they
may the better be received, altered, and disgested (as Johannes Valuardus
testifyeth) leaving no corruption in the stomach, Lib. de San. tu.
least from hence evil humors might he engendered, ^. de Al^ment.
causing evil milk, through which (as Galen testifyeth) he saw a certain
infantes body replenished with ulcers, as I and other Physicians see daily.

CHAP. XIIII. What meats are most usually eaten over all England, and which
be best not only for Nurses and children, but also for all others.
THe meats usual with the nobles, honorable and worshipful of this our
plentiful land, Wholesome meats.
is bread made of fine wheat flower, neither to crustie nor to crummie, to
new nor to stale, to salt nor to sour, which the Nurses of the noble and
worshipful shall use with any of these meats following, as the flesh of Mutton,
young Biefe, Kid, Lamb, Veale, Pigge, Conney, Capon, Rabbet, Turkey, Hen,
Chicken, Feasaunt, Partrich, Rail, Curlewe, Pigeon, Guot, Dottrel, Snipe,
Godwipe, Dicken, Poppel, Bitter, Hearon white and gray, Towin, Yarwelpe,
Plouer, Wod^^ike, Blackbirde, Thrush, Lark, and in brief all cloven sooted
fowls, whether they be wild or tame, Cap. de agrid. ^^rel.
excepting Quails, as well by reason of hidden property, say some, as manifest
quality say other, with Mesue. Of fishes, Troute, Craves de dulce, Breame,
Barble, Chepin, Perch, Rock, Pike, Bret, Gurnet, Whiting, Smelt, Maid, God,
Loch, Sammon, Sole, fresh Ling, Sectio. 2.
or well watered, all or any of the which moderately taken, and at ordinary
times, or such other as has sins and Scales, engender god blood in any body
of sound estate, Leuit. 12.
as also by Moses to ye children of Israel was willed: and so shall drink of
Ale, Lib. de Tuen. va. De n^^. Cer.
or ^^^re al^ well brewed, by Hessus and Johannes Placatomus mentioned. But Wine
Plato did utterly forbid the Greeks. 12. De leg.


Howbeit in my judgment we may in these cold parts use it. And to the Nurse
at middle of dinner a small draught of Gascoigne wine is not hurtful. So that
she have a temperate liver, otherwise I would not at all she should be
received, and then it will turn the nourishment to lively and pure bloudde,
ingendring most profitable milk for the Infant.

CHAP. XV. How ware Nurses must be in taking of medicines, that they mar not
themselves and the child also through advise of unlawful practitioners.
THus lest we might seem over tedious in ye choice and order of a Nurse: her
sleep and watch, soliblenesse and costiuenesse, must be mean, as it will if
the premises be duly observed, with the consideration of that that follows.
But the sleep and watch of she Nurse and ye child, following both together
shall be showed, as here present we will express, that if she happen at any time
to be over solible or over costiue, she shall not without counsel of the
learned and expert Physician, as the blind can judge no colors so the ignorant
can give no counsel. Genesis 3.8. Lib. 2. Lib. 7
send to the Pothicarie nor take forthwith violent medicines of every presuming
practicioner that offers himself each where, vain Paracelsian, tatling dame,
and only or named Surgeon, or Apothicary, that intrude themselves into this
faculty, which of al other, (as says Moses, Tobias, Salomo^, Sirach, Mont.
Proper. Pliny and innumerable others) is most noble, learned and excellent,
every where now a days too common, and too shamefully suffered, not only by the
Censures of Physic, but also of the Prelates, Judges, and Justices: unless
there be no accountes to be made of their oaths, nor regard to the princes
laws, destruction of the people, or consideration of the maintenance that to
so needful and worthy men shall ensue, if such blind bittels, flattering
fellows, trotting trulles, and wilful murderers, be permitted not only to
rob the common wealth, slander the art, and prolong disseases, but also to
take the benefit due to such as therein by our law are for their merit
worthily admitted, learnedly commenced, and by our Universities approved, and
that have taken their oath to deal justly therein.

Now for as much as to your Majesty it is known, and to your most prudent
Counsel, A note for the Queens Majesty and her Counsel.
I trust in the living Lord that for his mercies sake it shall be redressed, as
in other Civil countries it is, with death, banishment, bondage, pillorie or
whipping without favor, seeing that this kind of deceit is far worse than
coostning, cutpursing, or roging, for limme and life it destroieth, by
oborting, barening, poisoning, dissecting, and unskillful dealing, let some
uphold and protect them never so much.

And therefore the Nurse upon great need shall take such medicines when she
is bound or the child, as we call after Galen, 4.13. There.
Benedicta Laxatina: Tralianus following him, (...) wholesome clensers. And when
she is over lose, such as are easy binders: and these both shall be rather used
as meats, and of meats slippery and binding, by the advice of the learned and
expert in Physic, than by uncorrected drugges and simples, or Apoticarie
ingredience, which although perhaps she might well away withal, yet the Infant
doubtless may receive no small hurt, as well presently as long after to ensue.

CHAP. XVI. What meats and medicines they be that in her need the Nurse may
use safely, to keep her solible, or any others, and also to bind.
THe things which soften the womb, and that do bind the belly (as
Dioscorides, Cornelius Celsus, Theophrastus, Mathiolus, Amatus, Lusitanus,
Fuchsius, Pineris, Turner, and Dodoneus teach) are both easiest and safest,
moderate walking immediately after meat, brothes made of fat veale, fat
Chikens, fat hens or capo^s, of of young Porke, having in the^ stuffed of these
herbs, Mercury, Mallows, Oris, Lettuce, Spinach, Endive, Solible things.
Very good Methaglin made in Wales but especially at Ludlawe. Demuls.
Buglosse, Borage, Patience, Violets, ye juice of Damask Roses etc. Cicers
also in broth, buttermilke, sweet Prunes boiled in honye water, sweet Almonde
milk drawn with the aforesaid herbs, and Barley water, Meth likewise or
Metheglin drink first and last, whose making I judge to be better in Wales and
the Marches, than that described by Placatomus. Also Medlars, Peaches, Cheries,
Grapes, Pomgranates, rasins, damask proynes so they be sweet, butter and
bread in the Morning first and last walking after, An easy and good remedy
against cos^u^enesse, stone, and strangurie.
not only good for them that be infected with the stone, but also right
profitable to prevent it and the strangury, as is well proved. Apples roasted and
eaten with a little Fenel seed cold at going to bed etc. And of binders these
may be accounted amongst the easiest and safest, pappe of water and flower, or
of fine starch: Binding things.
or of milk and fine white paper, beaten to powder and made pappe, eggs hard
roasted, or boiled hard in red wine or vinegre, meats dry of nature, and
those rather roasted than boiled, conserve of Quinces, or red Roses, Marmelad,
Sloes roasted, four Prunes boiled, taken before meat, and last at night, old
these roasted, Almonds sodde^ with honny until they be black, Coriander seed
brayed and drank does bind the belly.

We have here as well plainly as most briefly and orderly showed as much as
needefullye is possible, what regard is to be had of Nurses, their manners,
customs, diet, etc. which I hope shall effectually be considered, and
thankefully accepted, for as much as a great part of the health, strength and
wealth of her and the child, thereon depends.

CHAP. XVII. Of the kindness and love that should be in a Nurse, and of the
requiting thereof. A supposition whence often times the strife between the
child and the mother does arise.
That nurses ought to be kind, and parents thankful.
THis yet always rests, that the Nurse be courteous, loving and kind to her
suckling: for of the good affection of her foster father and family, grows
the natural love of the child and his friends to her and hirs afterward, as
in Wales, Cornwall, and Ireland is daily seen, Lib. de Amicit.
and of Tullie, willed: as contrarily many judges (no causes mentioned
hindering them of Nursing their own children, a cause supposed of the trouble
that often happens between the child and the mother, and of certain
objections.
but rather idleness, delicacie, or wantonness,) that the great and often
unkindness, disobedience, and unlawful suits between the child and the mother
issues.

For, to beget the child is no pain to her, (say they) but pleasure: to
conceive in the womb, than liking power, gods work: and to deliver it in due
time, her own safety, the eternal his providence: but to hold and hear it
in her feeble and weak arms, to swaddle it daily on her loving lap, and to
give it suck with her own most tender breasts, I affirm with Tacitus to be a
manifest and undoubted token of absolute kindness and friendship. For (as
Ennius says) when is a friend tried but in adversity? and who I pray you
has more need than the infant, who what through nature, custom, and diet
from the birth, can never after be unmindful nor unthankful for such
motherly travels, unless he or she be graceless?

Sectio Secunda.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Babe newborn, endued with the things natural, and what
they be. What kind of women should be with the sickely wife at her dangerous
travel. The benefit that some fathers get by their children crying at the
birth. How the infant newborn is to be handled of the Midwife, and what Bath
is good for it.
NOw therefore we shall proceed to the Babe new born, Whereof man is made.
endued with the things natural, as elements, complexions, humors, members,
powers, operations, and spirits, in my tables sufficiently defined and divided
(as Hipothesis to this present purpose,) in Bath-sayd said, for all them that
desire the knowledge of their composition.

Let Paracelsus with his so^^ers never so soo^^ibly fable to the contrary,
I^^stus contra^ Paracels.
of Erastus so excellentlye confused in Latin, and by Kinder in English, De
part. hom.
that I need not to stay thereupon, but to show who ought to be at the
painful and dangerous delivery, Who ought to be at the birth. Lib. 1. de
infant.
because Reynalds has not spoken of it. And that a few rather of godly,
expert and learned women (as wylleth Mo^er^s,) as I heard of a noble young
Countess of late, much to her praise, than a rude multitude, given either to
folly, banqueting, or bravery, as in the towns of the weaste countries is
too much used. But of all other the North parts of late years surpassed.

Howbeit it to such as have long and paineful travel, many are requisite,
which in cold and dry women for the most part happens. The crying of the
child at the birth profitable.
The infant if it weep a little, then (as says Auicen) it shall not be
unwholesome, nor to many fathers irksome, but rather joyful news, the case in
our common law is evident. And good if it lick a little honny before it suck
after it be bathed or washed.

Lib. de tu. sanita.
And in this, says Montuus, we differ from our elders, for we neither sprinckle
them with salt (as Galen and Auicen wills, ^. de Sani. tu.
Cap. 16.
and as by Ezechiel it appears) the Jews used, nor spread on them Myrtle
leaves, (as Gordonius appoints.)

In pract. ca. de not. infant. Padag. Lib. 3. ca. 9 Lib. de inter. affect.
But our manerly midwiues do wash them in a Bathe of warm water, of Clemens
Alexander commended for four especial causes, that is to wit, warmenesse,
clenlinesse, health, and pleasantness. And of Hippocrates for a great help
unto growsomnesse, largeness, and tallness. Which Bath if it contain ten
parts of running water, A good Bane for the Infa^t for diverse causes.
and one of new milk from the cow, and have a few malowes put in before it
be set on the fire to boil, or a little Sallet oil after it be taken off,
when it is but luke warm, in my judgment that will be best, or for lack of
Sallet oil, sweet butter, as some of the finest sort forth of Cities and
towns do use. And when you have trimmed it up, How the child new borne is to
be handled.
wipe it with very soft clothes, ayred, or through dried. Then slicke up the
foreheade, or forfronte of the tower and ampier of Reason and Sapience,
ouerclasping your hands before and behind upon the round head, treasurer of
al Science and Knowledge. After cleanse the common Eniunctuaries or purging
ways, as the eyes beholders of things celestial, and witness of things
terrestrial: the ears triers of tongs and times: the nosethrils clensers of
the brain, iudgers of smelles, and receyuers and deliuerers also of the ^^^es:
opening also gentlye the mouth, loking if it be free of tongue the glorifyer of
God, tryer of tastes, and Ambassador between man and man: proving also if it
will empty the body. Then lay it upon your lap far, tender and ^rast,
placing every limme and joint right, for as yet it will be ^^pliant as wax for
all good form. And cut not of the na^^ll string, as Ezechiel says the Jews
did, Cap 16.
but knit it with a shreede fast, and anoint it with oil of Roses, or sweet
butter, and let it fall away of it self.

Now if you be desirous of a pattern of the finest hope, as you have already
noted of the best temperature, (...) following is of the best form,
according to the judgment of Policletus, Pliny, Vitruuius, and Montuus, whom
I (...) most of all other, yet not as a translatour, but as a collectour. And
by the three dementions Geometrical it is tried (...) he, that is by length,
breadth, and thickness, beginning (...) with the head as the worthyest part,
because it is the Tabernacle and mansion of the immortal soul, of science and
all understanding, and of art before all the arts the inuentor, (...) ^riteth
Hippocrates, Plato, and Cicero, unto whom Galen (...) subscribe, Clemens
Alexandrinus, S. Augustine, Melancton, and Vasselius, with Columbus, Fuchsius,
Fernelius, Paparilla, Bullinger, and Banisterus, which head, if it agree with
(...) waste in compass, as our Prince does with her subjects in unity, then
it is right. And the face, of miracles the mirror, fit contain from the upper
part of the forehead to the lowermost part of the chin, declarer of
fruitfulness or barrenesse, (...) tenth part of all the length, it is just. And
it is divided into their equal portions: that is, from the uppermost part of
ye foreheade to the neathermost part of the brows: from the neathermost part
of the brows, to the nether most part of the Nosethrils. From the nether
most part of the Nosethrilles, to the nether most part of the chinne. (...)
which portions of the face described, agrees with the hand, from the end of
the longer finger to the wrest, and is also the length of the foot.

In Theat. mundi.
Hence appears the error of Peter Bouastiau, who affirms that it contains
but half a foot. But as the whole is equal to the face, so parts of the
fingers does agree with the mouth, as namely, the greater bone of the thumb
with the mouth wide open, and is equal to the space that is from the
neathermost part of the chinne, to the neathermost lip: and the lesser bone
is of measure with Mustaxe, which is the space between the Nose end and the
upper lip, whence the hear grows, that now a days is so much chearished
of Galants, and is termed after the Spanishe phrase Moucheacheos. The greter
bone of the long finger is like to the breadth of the forehead. The two lesser
are equal to the length of the middle finger.

The length of the nails are the fourth part of the length of the fingers. And
the thumb agrees with the little finger in length. The other two of like
length between which the middlemost finger obtayneth the greatest length, as
the man in state of best form here described: although I know seldom found in
this our age, of too untimely coopling, of the heyght of six foot after the
Geometrical foot, consisting of four little handefuls, every handefull of
four fingers, contaynyng in thickness half always of his length, so that
you measure him about the breast.

The eight part of the length is from the chinne to the top of the crown of
the head.

The sixth from the top of the breas^e to the neathermoste rooke of the ears,
and that is the measure and space of the foot.

The fourth from the top of the breaste, to the top of the head: And that
is also the measure of the Cubite and breast.

But al such as be of greter stature pleases not the Count Castilio, as he
tells the Courtiers, The Deane of the arches
by Doctor Clearke into Latin most excellentlye translated, as Giantes
which are of height 7. Cubits, nor I say Dwarfes, Pigmeis, Stil^^^^s, whom
Homer, Pliny, and Strabo affirm, to fight with ^^^^^s. These being in state
of gretest grows pass noti height two foot and a quarter, neither yet those
monsters mentioned of Hippocrates and Iacobus Siluius, that are be^^tten in
Asia, as the Nacrocephali, Phasiam, Monoculi and Ciclopedij.

To be short, although after the common opinion, the length of every one of
just proportion is the breadth his arms stretched abroad between the two
foremost fingers ends: yet if does not prove that comely greatness, defined of
Vigetius to be in valiant and puissant Soldiers, as by the Page of the late
noble Marquis of Northampton appeared, Lib. de art. mil.
and by the proper Grome of the prudente and noble Earl of Sussex, that I saw
attendaunt upon his honor at Buckstones, being both according to their
stature in each proportion aunswerable. So that we conclude, that with semelye
form must be had a goodlye body, endued with valor to the graces in
mankind aunswerable, if persons of best constitution and frame they shall be
accounted: when is the reasonable Soul is but the Image, (as says Hugo) of
the mighty creator, In oper. tri. dier.
as the seemelye body is the shadow of a wise mind. All which if you
seriously mark, you may know easilye, not only this heavenly Idea, of best
nature, shape, and temperature, endued also consequentlye always after nature
with best reason, enclyned likewise to best manners, as Hippocrates, Galen,
and Auicen do teach.

For as nature does ever make the form of the body me^te and agreeable to
the manners of the mind, Lib. quod Anim. and vsu part.
so also you may judge hereby of all counterfeites, whether they be graven,
carved, wrought in Arrays, in Embrodry or painted. A pattern doubtless for all
such workmen most acceptable, when as arts do but counterfayt nature. And
no marvel, A knowledge beneficial for diverse kind of artificers.
although men can do things right marvelous and excellent, yet is there none,
no not one, that can compare with gods working, the everlasting worker, no not
although he would excel (as says Lawne,) Apelles, Timantis, Pigmalion,
Lisippus, Xeuxis, Archites and Albert.

In theat. mund.
CHAP. XXI. What devises some dames use for forming of their brood. Of the
abuse that old Priests had in Christning, and wherein Baptism consists, and
how death comes. Of the worthiness of children, with a brief mention made
how they be provided for. The causes (as some think) why things be so dear
in these days.
HEnce therefore these over curious and dainty Dames, are not unjustly in
this place to be detected and reproved, yt be not contented with the Lords
doings, that their babes bodies be framed right aunswerable to their natural
temperature, healthy, seemly, and comelye, but they will take his omnipotent
power, and heavenly office forth of his most righteous hands, as far
skilfuller, (they think I ween) than his everlasting wisdom, using
instruments and tricks of their own trifeling and toyish invention, as
Brasers, Wastes, or bodies, made either of paper bordes, plate, or Cards, etc.
to make them slender, althought by ^^ture they be framed round and handsome.
Not knowing (...) reading gods indignation for so heathenish an action, (...)
well expressed of the divine Prophet Esaias, Cap. 5.
and to be abolished of Christians (says Viues,) because (as Saint Augustine
writes) it is the work of the Devil: neither how that thereby they shorten
their childrens lives, in hindering as well natures operation by bringing
diverse obstructions and infirmities to the parts, but also causes forth most
stinking breathes, copper faces, read noses, riueled skin, taw^ie color,
and less fruitfulness.

And no marvel, for as Tullie testifyeth, Lib. de Senect.
to strive against nature is to strive against God, of the which in the ages
following shall he further mentioned forth of Democritus and Plautus,
Xenophon. ^ Ciroped.
let Cirus the Persian Monarch and Ethnicke prince never so greatly commend it.

So that I will detayne and keep you no longer from swaddling up your Odely and
gracious babes in sufficient clothes, Cold hurtful to infants
for cold is enemy to growth, Pri. de tu. sa.
which made Galen to mislike the order of the Germans of those days, that
used as soon as their infants were borne, to put them, as the Smith does red
hot Iron into cold water, A foolish custom.
hazarding both the natural growth and strength, as he affirms.

The like foolish order I have seen some of the old Priests observe with us,
when they Christened, Baptism defined.
putting the babe to the bottom of the font, not knowing belike what worthy
Hippocrates says, that all sudden mutations be most dangerous, nor that
Baptism does not consist in the Element and abundaunce of water (as
Bonauenture and Bullinger do ^^^te,) wherein the child was overwhelmed, In.
4. Mag. Did. 1. Quast. 3 Decad. 5. John. 3. Romans 6. Act. 28.10. Sacraments
witnesses of the truth.
but in faith and ^^^neration, whereby we are borne spiritual a new, as the
^^^opian was, mentioned in the Acts: and obtaining the ^^^enesse of sins,
are adopted the children of God, and ^^^^e inheritours of the heavenly life:
as by the doctrine of the Scripture, and them that were of the primative
church, appears, if Tertullian were one, as if you read his works you may
see. Saint Augustine, Saint Ciprian, Saint Basil, and other the Catholic
divines of our time condemning all such Heretics as deny the children of
Christians to need Christning, because they prepare the way to al infidelity,
and to deny original sin, as this also is easy for all men to know, that if
the natural heat within, should be overcome of the outward cold, the
living creature must needs perish, when as of the immoderate use of Elements
death ensues, as Galen proves, where he has both reason and experience, the
sum of all natural trial for his warrant, as also in my Preface De Elementis
does appear. 2. de Elementis:


Henceforth therefore I think this will be omitted, for, who knowing the
extreme folly, A caucat in Christning.
great hinderaunce to the growth, and danger of the deep ducking, will bear
therewith? I think verily not a barbarous Scithian, but that he loves his own
child better, for as Euripides testifies, to all men their children is their
joy, Prou. 13. Psalm. 124.
and a worship to their parents (as Solomon says.) And the gift and heritage
that comes of the Lord, as the princely Prophet David witnesses.

Through the lawful number whereof well brought up, (or else as the Proverb
is, Better unborn than untaught) let no man think himself the poorer, but
rather a great deal the richer, and the worthyer member, forasmuch as only
in Isaac alone, Genes. 28.
all Israel were not only blessed and multiplied, but all the kinreds of the
earth also were sanctified. Heb. 13.
And by the sacred joining in the honorable estate of Wedlock, so highly in
the Scriptures commended, and so cunningly reasoned of Chelidonius Tigurinus,
Lodouicus Viues, and Peter Bouastiau, commonweals are well and lawfully
peopled. Lib. 5. de repub. In Eth.
Of the Athenians also practiced, as both by Plato and Aristotle is verified:
In Decad.
although the Romans (as affirms Titus Liuius) invented plays to steal
away the youth of the Sabians at the first beginning of their state, because
they wanted women to increase their Citizens as Polidorus writes, D^ inuin.
ver. lib. Iudic. cap. vlt.
as the Beniamites ^^^y the Damoyselles that came to dance in Sylo, and the
Assyrians and Babilonians boughte their wives, which amongst the Sarazens and
Arabians is still practiced, but after used marriages, regarding therewith their
Prolataries, as the Spartanes did them that begatte their men children, as
diverse Towns of war does their males therein delivered, entering them forthwith
into wages.

Also the Infants base begotten, are Orphans of the common wealth, and of them
thoroughe charitable laws provided for. Albeit such parents are greatelye to
be punished, that of adultry and fornication make small account, Adulterers
and fornicators would he worse punished than by the purse or wearing of a
white sheet. A needful law for this time.
as those also of the poorest commons, that contrary to the ancient laws ^ary,
that is, before the woman be one and twenty or three and twenty, and the man
eight and twenty or thirty: and such also that have no occupation, trade,
mystery, or stock of ten p^^^^es at the least, besides in sight and
apparel, for their mainteinaunce in sickness, without penury or beggary of
wh^^nd family, And yet I would not that any should think that I maintain
either Stews or Brothels in City, Town, June, or Country, Virginity better
than Marriage after Saint Hierome.
or any other lewdenesse for them that his single or married, but that I
prefer with Saint Hierome Virginity before Marriage, especially in this
populous age, unless it be where issue wants, and that such (...) neither
Nature nor Man has made chaste, make themselves, for the love of the kingdom
of Heaven, whether they be man or woman, spiritual or temporal, free or
bond. and then it sufficientlye appears, the great comfort, profit and
worthiness of well ordered and legitimate children: And no miserye,
impouerishement, or wretchedness to them that be able to keep them, as some
miserable Misers imagine, especially of Priests and Ministers children,
affirming, that in time the number of them will cause not only dearth and
scarcity, but that it breeds in the Church great covetousness already, and
burdeneth diverse parishes daily, to be found in them, that has no such
family, not only of the clergy, but also of the laity, the more pity.
Howbeit the Proverb is plain, that God never sent mouth, but also he sent
meat. And doubtless this would neither be so costly, nor so hard for the
poor commons to come by, if rentes were not so raised above measure (by under
Tenaunts always most practiced) one man to occupy diverse men's livings, Under
tenants raisers of rents.
trades and mysteries, and that of the richest. And the arrable ground into
sheep pasture so converted (as Moore plainly proves) that although there
may none by the statute keep above two thousand Sheep, Lib. 1. de Vtopia.
there be yet very many that have above ten thousand, Anno Henrici octaui.
13.
and that does transporte grain and other victuals when they see gain will
grow thereof, although the price do exceed the law, and all license
restrained, into foreign realms: neither fearing god that reuengeth the cry
of the needy, nor the Prince that bears the sword of justice, for the
preservation of al her people, according to the commodities of so worthy a
country by her highness extended daily for the maintenance of all her
children, in health, wealth, and tranquillity, as a most virtuous Prince,
which wayeth more the welfare of her good subjects, than the enriching of her
own coffees, counting the least of her liege Babes within the compass of her
own family, a pattern doubtless for all princes to practice cotinuaily every
Christian country.

CHAP. XXI. That the child must only suck until his former teeth appear.
The office of them. And at what time they commonly come, with the number and
form that be required. And how the decrease of the teeth shows, that the
world draws hastily to an end.
THe yongling if it be ordered as you have hard, it shall be time to give it
suck, The office of the teeth.
which shall only be his nourishment until his former teeth be bredde, the
first instruments of digestion, and framers of pronunciation, 8. Phis. 2. de
Vs^ part.
not made by chance, hap, or fortune, but by the providence of the wisest,
even the almighty, as Aristotle and Galen affirms. To whom the said Galen
consecrated those his divine works of the use of the parts, as enemies to his
everlasting praise and glory. Ruf^^*
By that famous clearke Doctor Smith at his Anotomies so excellently and
cunningly described.

And these teeth will be brought forth about the seventh month, as
Herodotus, Aetius, and Montuus do witness. at what age children breed teeth.


Howbeit I have often noted it otherwise, as a year first, sometime three
quarters, sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes before they be born, as
Boswels son had of Lowth, and Richard the third, being undoubted tokens of the
murder and Tyranny that after in him succeeded, as Moore witnesses. But the
fewer they have, and the slenderer they be, the shorter of life, as says
Aristotle. 3.4. Prob. ^
Yet Tranquillus writes that Augustus Caesar had but few, and those slender
and sharp, notwithstanding he lived 76. years, whereby we are taught not
always to conjecture with the Philosopher by the slenderness and fewness of
teeth, short life.

Lib. de ossib.
And they were in all in his time, as writes Galen. 32. sixteen in every
iawe, whereof eight be cutters, four biters, and twenty grinders. Although
sithence experience has proved that some has had but thirty, The number of
the teeth.
other some.28.26. and diverse that have been borne within this fourteen years
only 24. But they are not to be numbered whiles the Infant sucketh, a token
that the world draws nere to an end.
no not until the ^^cond and third age in some, as I have often marked, as I
wish all would consider, how the world draws to an end, and then they
should be never so couetously bente, but rather stand in fear of their evil
deeds, for the which they must yield account at the general judgment, where
neither essoine, protection or wager of law will be admitted.

CHAP. XXII. How often Infantes should suck, what heedefulnesse should be
in the Nurse, aunswerable as the parents mean to have them trained. And how
for lack of clean keeping of the Babe, Galen espied the unquietness thereof.
Lib. de sani. tuen.
AVicen thinks it sufficient for the child to suck twice or thrice a day
at the most, as affirms Montuus, for if it shall be ouerfilled, it will be ye
more sleepye and drousie, the belly will swel, and the urine will be watrie like
to gluttons and drunkards stale. And therefore Ageneta does counsel that we be
spare (...) giving any thing again until it has consumed that that it had
received before. De tu^^. val^^ud. The custom of the Alborages. Lib. de not.
Deor. Lib. de edu. puer. De prin^.
Also Montuus declares how that there be very many deceived in giving the
babe over much milk. And therefore the Alborages had a custom (as testifies
Bochas, Pulio, and Gueuara, that such as should be Priests, might not suck of
the breaste, but of certain reeds that yielded a juice like milk, thinking
thereby as men wholly led by nature, and not by grace. Also that they should
not be so fleshly bent, but rather spirituallye given, as it is very likely,
if ye respect it without grace or discipline. Yet for my part, if any error
shall happen in the quantity of the food and property, as I confess it will
be hard for any to ^^^ne the just quantity and quality, I had rather it
should be in a little to plentiful for yonglings, than any thing to ^cant,
and that it should suck the breast rather than by any means be brought up,
unless ye mean for some singular cause to diminishe the natural growth,
wisdom, and strength. To soldiers especially that be the very rulers and
Triumphers over nations hurtful, as Vigetius affirms, with B. Rich of late
in his second part of the Alarm to England, and as by the dignities given
them by Agamemnon, Alexander, Augustus, Octauian, and Carolus Magnus, Valiant
soldiers are to be honored, and not conte^ned.
is verified to them that list to read Darius Phrigius, Trogus Pompeius,
Salust, Iustine, Quintus Curtius, and the Accidents of armorie. And that to
have a feeble, silly, and sickly body, is taken for an imperfection. Sir John
Prigis Lord Shandoy^.
And so the worthy governor of Bullen in my time there accounted it, not
suffering dwarfes to enter into wages, as I wish that children that have their
natural actions most strong, so to be preserved that to all uses they might be
most meet, for by the actions, is ministered not only desiryng, keeping,
altering and expelling, or being ministered, ingendreth, nourishes and feeds,
as Galen shows with all other learned in Physic: but also the body is
better inhabled, and the mind more perfected.

Howbeit the Nurse (if she do as she ought dutifully (...) to her charge)
shall best appoynte this quantity of milk, as all other things in order, the
times of sleep, of ^^^ging the clothes, laying in the cradle, not to hardly
swad^ed, of taking up, etc.

Observing always a mean in every thing, with a good custom and grace, in
all these and such like, with great regard of the clean keeping of the bed,
Nurcerie, and apparel. For, as Galen declares, he saw a certain child
greatly disquieted, which the Nurse neither by dandling, putting the pappe to
the mouth of the infant, nor holding (...) forth to see if it would unload
the body, was ever the sooner quieted.

At last he beholding his bed, swaddling clothes and apparel, found them
filthye, the child it self vncleanelye and unwashed, badde wash it, as if it
be daily almost, it will be the better, Now the growth is to be augme^ted.
in the water or Baine before prescribed, especially if it be lean (as says
Hippocrates) because that the party that is long kept soft and moist, his
growth will be the more, as Galen affirms, Lib. 2.3. De tuen. valitu.
and experience playnelye proves by the goodlye personages of the people of
Glocestershire, and Somersetshire, Gallant and Iustie people.
and Monmouthshire, and such other moderate moist Countries: and wipe it
clean, and to lay it after in fresh clothes, the which was no sooner done,
the Babe fell on sleep, ^. De sanita. ^uen.
and had not only a most sound sleep, but also a very long.

CHAP. XXIII. At what time the child may be weane^d, and which ought to suck
longest: of the duty of Nobility and Gentilitie: The regard that must be had
as well in the nursing of me^ children as women kind, and what Books do
express the same: A commendation of good women.
^. De sani. tuen^^^.
THese therefore after Galens mind I think good to be observed until the
third year of his age. Lib. 4.
de veta mat. rut.
Howbeit Paulus supposes, that it may be well weaned from the Dug at two
years, and so the inhabiters of the Isles of Baleares used as Sextus Cheronensis
writes. Gordonius, at three years, and Montuus at four years. M^^orica.
M^^orica. Lib. ^e Cons vita hi^. Lib. de Infa. D^tuen. vi. When the child
should be weaned.
But Eucharius and Mokerus says, that custom has brought it but to one year,
and that is most true.

Nevertheless I have known diverse suck less than a year, many a year and a
half, some two years, other two years and a half, and some more than three
years: whose bodies and temperatures, endued with reason, courage and desire,
I could greatly commend, as I do not think my self (to say unto you the
truth) to be any thing the worse, because I sucked so long, but rather the
better, considering how my mother was two and fifty and upward when I was
borne, (as I have heard her say.) And I do remember that I was able to bear a
stool for my good Nurce when I would have suckte. Notwithstanding I do not
appoint every one to suck so long. Yet I think it best that the old woman's
child do suck longer than the young and lusty Nurce, the weak longer than
the strong, Who should suck longest.
the sickly longer than the healthie, the twinne longer than the loneling, the
(...) longer tha^ the female, the noble longer than the unnoble, especially if
any of these causes recited do require.

Whose endeavor in time (God ayding, must be to rule all, if he be a prince, if
of the nobles many under him, if of the commons as he shall be called, and to
obey principallye but one alone, that is, the sovereign Majesty, to preach
the Gospel, The duty of Nobility and Gentility.
to heal the sick, to execute justice, to defend the frontiers, to order
Countries, to lead legions, to chase away enemies, to guide Nauies, and judge
causes marine, to toil in imbases, to conclude leagues, to revenge outward
injuries, to invade foraine foes, to repress home rebels, to defend and assist
the common wealth, to guard and protect princes committed, as the mighty
Earl of Shrewsberrie, The noble Talbot never untrusty.
right loyally and most warely performs. To give judgment on nobles, unnoble
convicted, and in fine, always to deliver faithful counsel, and to mainetaine
and defend our only sovereign and country, increasing the state with people,
dominion, land and customs, from time to time, as Tullie wills, and that
with valiant hearts, provident wits, In off.
and lusty bodies, that can tolerate and bear all extremities expedient, and
abide all services needful, according to the example of our valiant, worthy
and noble Progenitors, whom in time it will be requisite to follow, if we mean
to succeed in their estate of holiness, honor and worship, or to advance
our names from base condition to the title of Arms, Lib 2. de nobilit.
and ensign of Gentilitie, as Osorius politikely writes.

Whereof there will be no doubt, the Lord furthering, if we have from our
birth the supply of al things needful, as it is needful, and when it is
needful, both by day and night to give the Babe the Breast, What works do
show how men and women are to be brought up in civility
regarding the daughters bringing up in Modesty, Honesty and Huswifrie,
after the council of the Iustitution of a Christian woman: no less than the
sons in all Civility, Learning and Chivalry, according to the instruction
of the Image of Governance. But the woman is the good mother of all, and the
only helper and comforter of man by Gods own appointement, Women created for
man's comfort.
as in Genesis we may read: And in Paradise God created her, and called her
Eve, life: and as for man he called him Adam, Earth, because that of the slime
of the earth he was made. Of whose worthiness and dignities, if you be
desirous to understand, read Plutarches particular treatise that he has made
in their commendation. Of the commendation of women.
Bochas, Saint John Chrisostomes Homily upon the beheading of Saint John the
Baptiste, Saint Jerome upon the explication of the seventeenth Psalm,
Christian de Pisa that learned maid, of the commendation of the feminine Sex,
Castilio in his third book of the Courtier, Peter Lawne in his discourse of
the dignity of Marriage, and Hake in his Touchstone for this present time,
besides innumerable others, as well Divines, as Philosophers and Physicians,
that for the avoiding of tediousness I will omit, because I think there is
none so wicked as will dispraise his mother. And I will show how only pappe
shall be given in the day at meet time, after washing and light rubbing,
fricasing the body first emptied of the common excrements about the ^auenth
month, which shall be made after this sort.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the manner how to make the best Pappe, of the use and abuse
thereof: and how the mean diet is best.
TAke of new milk a pint, The making of the best pappe.
put therein of fine wheat flower, so much, as being boiled, will make it
thick. Add to it the biggenesse of a Chestnut of Almond Butter, or of sweet
Butter, one ounce of the best Sugar not faulted in the sunning, and then it
will be the better to digest, and the refuse not turned to the nourishment of
the body, the sooner and easilier emptied. For, that made of the milk and
flower alone, is somewhat slow in distribution, and therewith binding, as you
have heart, being the very cause (as I conjecture, why Galen does discommend
it. Nevertheless, 1. de sanit. tuend.
it is much used over all, and I my self was so fed, my Nurce has said
it, as I have seen diverse others of lively spirit and sound body, as well in
Wales and the Marches, as in sundry other parts of this Realm and foreign
Countries.

Albeit where the Nurce has milk sufficient, Padag. lib. 1. ca. 6
it is not to be used so often, for as Clemens Alexandrinus writes, there is
nothing pleasanter, or that better nourishes, than the mothers milk. Yet this
I would were understood, that children be very ayt to out breathe, and to
dischest the moistures, humors and iuyces of the body, both by reason of
tenderness of habit, 4. detuend vabet.
and abundaunce of heat, as Galen declares.

1. Apo. 3.4.16.
Therefore a plentiful trade of diet is due unto them, which thing old
Hyppocrates plainly proves, saying: that such as have much heat natural,
does need much nourishment, other^ise the body is consumed. Howbeit Gelius
has noted forth of Varro, that the use of too much meat and sleep does make
children dull witted, and slender of stature.

In all things the mean is the best.
The common Proverb therefore did not arise without a good ground, that
says, that Enough is as good as a feast.

And this (as I think) needs not so strictly to be understood, that it should
only be referred to nourishment and rest, but as well to watch and exercise:
and in a word, of all other things needful, fully and briefly in my third
Book of Bathes aid expressed.

CHAP. XXV. Where infants should sleep or rest, and what commodity is in a
Cradle. The discommoditie of vehement rocking immediately after the child has
satisfied himself: Of the benefit of sleep, with the causes thereof: And how
Aristotle was therein deceived.
THe place for children to rest or sleep in best, is a Cradle, because that
thereof may grow a threefold, commodity that is, The benefit of sleeping in a
Cradle.
sleep sooner obtained, the parties through rocking better exercised, and the
infant safer from such hurt preserved, as by having it in bed often
happens. And this is ye fourteenth precept by Gordonius, to a Nurce appointed.

Lib. de Part. Hom.
Howbeit with Eucharius I judge, that immediatelye after sucking, violente
rocking to be hurtful, least that thereby the child should be provoked to
cast up his milk again, or through over sturring the body, it do
corrupt it in the stomach, or make it pass too soon into the joints and
urine ways, causing as says Montanus the stone, grauel and goutes. Of (...)
likewise there is a threefolde necessity: the first, (...) digest
nourishment: the second, that the substance (...) and spirit wasted by waking,
might be restored: (...) it might quiet the instruments of senses weeried, as
^^^roys declares: for if sleep were not, 3. de Colect.
the sense perseuer^^^^ should perish, and so consequently the life, seeing
that the (...) suffers of the sensitive, as Aristotle affirms, that he
(...) of the feeler. Wherefore it is necessary, Moderate rest preserved of
life. 2. de A^.
that sleep should follow watch, because rest follows moving, and it is
rest that preserves the living creature, for as the Poet says, That thing
that wants rest interchangeable,
Can not abide and always be durable.
For rest recouereth the strength enfeebled, it also renueth the members
weakened.

Again: O Sleep thou rest of living things, of Gods accepted eke,
Thou peace of mind, whom care does flee, whom weeried bodies seek,
Thou cherishest their weeryed limbs, and do repair their pain. etc.


Marvelous therefore, In Anasc. mo^^. lib. 1. c. de Vigil. and in some. 4.
Phis. Co^e^^.
and scarce credible is that saying of Montuus, of a noble woman that be says
he knew, that for the space of five and thirty years slepte not, and yet had
her ^^^^the, the reason whereof (as says Velcurie) is either w^nt of natural
heat, moist humor, or thinness of body.

The efficient cause of Sleep, The efficient cause of sleep
is the meeting and drawing ^^ere of the heat natural into the inward parts:
for as Aristotle th^^ Galen teaches, 4. Phis. 2. Aph. co. 2.
Sleep and Watch are made according to the moving of the natural heat,
because in Sleep the natural heat is carried inward, but in watch outward
(as says Hippocrates) to the end that it might help the parts laboring, 6.
Epid.
or else that it might further the action of the Stomache, Liver, and Vessels.
Hence it is that in pestilent evils, and after poison received, A good note
against the pestilence and poison. The material cause. Lib. de somn. and
vigil. 4. Aph. com. 5.1. de cause. Sympt. de Placit. Hyppocrates and Plato in
cau.
before euacuatio^, that we forbid sleep.

The material cause (to be short,) is either vapor ascending into the head, or
of humors contained therein. And being wasted by sickness or old age, the
sleep is the less. Howbeit Aristotle does affirm sleep to be the
disposition of the heart, and not of the brain: wherein truly he was not a
little deceived, seeing it is evident as Hyppocrates, Plato; Galen and Auicen
do prove, that it is the rest of the annual actions, and not of the heart,
for the breathing of it is much more strong in sleep than in watch, whereby
we see, that the heart is not hindered in sleep, neither does his vital action
cease: so that we may well conclude in this point against the Philosopher, and
our abused Proverb, Aristotle confuted.
that; Sleep is the disposition of the first sensitive of the brain, and not
of the heart, as he teaches, and custom uses, howsoever some young students
and old Du^ses in Philosophy have judged.

But this we shall pass over till an other time, and we will proceed to
declare the length of sleep, the ways and means best to obtain it.

CHAP. XXVI. The length of sleep for infants argued, how many ways sleep is
furthered, that the Nurce in her sleep ought not to be disquieted: The form
of laying the child in the Cradle: Of the considerations that must be had
of placing the light in the Chamber with the Babe: Of taking up thereof, and of
the regard of his long standing.
Of the length of sleep.
THe sleep of children ought to be so much more than older persons, as the heat
and moisture is more in them, if so be that Soranus judgment be to be
followed, who appoints the quantity of sleep according to the complexions,
that is, for the melancholy, because we will begin with the (...) the cold and
dry, four hours: for the Cholerike, Conir. crasist.
the (...) hours: the sanguine as he that is hot and moist (...) according to
Galen temperate six hours: and lastly, the ^^^matike, being cold or moiste,
seven hours or eighte.

Howbeit Othonius Brunfelsius wills, Lib. de discip. and inst. puer.
that al children shall (...) seven hours, not so diligently dividing the
complexions, ^^^^dering the diversities of natures: for if the cold and (...)
might to sleep so much, the moist and hot ought to sleep (...) so that ye
see, that the hot and moist temperatures are ^^^itted to sleep longer than
the cold and dry: but children are hotter and moister than any of the other
ages, there^^^ they shall sleep more than any other, as their nature re^^^eth.
To the furthering of sleep there be diverse means, 4. Phis. De sanit^^ (...)
as ^^^^eth Velcurius and Montuus, beds, rocking and lulling of the Nurce before
mentioned, as darkness, silence, softness, warmness, weariness, sweet
cloths and clean by the loving and painful Nurce to be considered. And we will
show in brief how the Infant in Gods name shall be laid down to sleep. Yet
fore^^^^ to them that may, that through the breaking of the Nurces sleep,
milk be not depraved, digestion being hindered, that there be an other had to
rock the infant in the night, and to take it up and lay it down as often as
need shall require.

The form that Hippocrates, De tuenda bona valetud. in com.
Hessus and Placatomus pre^^^^ for laying down of the child is this, first
lay it on the right side a while, then on the left: Aristotle unto Alexander:
But on the back little or none at all, as affirms Montuus, least thereby
the humors might slide (...) they were perfectly altered into the urine,
ways, and (...), causing the Stone, gravel and Gowts.

Here I think good to remember, least it might be neglected to what sort the
light in the Chamber is to be placed, Lib. 1. de conste^ vit. hum. De infant.
of Gord^^^ and Mokerus well noted, because it is a thing that the Ba^e will be
much delighted with, that no discommo^^^^ is the child do arise thereof, as
there will not, if you either set it right before him, or clean forth of
sight. But if fidelings, How the light in the chamber is to be considered
it may cause the Infant to prove squint, or gogle-eyed, although God had in
all things framed him right: for of such a child, according to nature of good
temperature, and shape before described, through good diet, and godly education
in all necessary causes to be brought up and preserved, That the infant be
neither too delicately brought up, nor too rustically.
is this our endeavor, without all pampering or pyning, dandling or dulling,
cockering or clowning, and neither of one depraved sickly, nor deformed:
whereof Pliair more amply than Raynoldes in his book of the infirmities of
children has showed his judgment. But this is no part of my mind, only I
do show, that, for the healthie, the mean is best, as those that be endued
with the best habit of body, De opt. corp. constable. De bo. corp. hab. De sa^^.
iuen^a. 2. Aph. 3.
as Galen expresses. Whereupon to be short, Hippocrates shows as it were in
one word, all the circumstance, that is, that if either sleep or watch
exceed, it is evil. And Martial says: To watch is but light,
But to ouerwatch, decays the might.
Watch truly is most agreeable to the day (as testifyeth Valuardus) but sleep
to the night, De tu. v^. De tu. bo. va. In Coment. Lib. de infant.
as affirms Hessus, the less error shall be committed haerein the better (as
writes Placatomus) and when it waketh of it self in the morning, take it up,
keeping therein a good custom (as wills Mokerus) and wash it clean in
lukewarm water before expressed, De tu. va.
as teaches Montuus, or when it is not soul, with a little of the breast
milk, Wales and the marches has excellent women for nursing and sweet
keeping of the child.
if there be plenty, as the trim and fine nursses of Wales do use, and of
the Marches: by means whereof, their children be not only free from riffe, and
chafing, but also be endued with a fair color, and delicate skin, unless
it be over often, then it causes water wheates. This done, shifte the clothes
warm and clean, and swaddle it up fine and deyntely, not holding it too long
by the feeble arms, upon the weak and tender legs, nor enticing them to go
too soon, least through the wayght of the body (as Galen affirms) it may
catch hurt, De tuenda sani.
of Gordonius likewise granted, making it crook legged, and out shouldred, as
it seems by the British or Welsh Apothegme, the Saxons were that first
inhabited (...) land Britayne.

Ye Sayson dewron diege,
P^luise coyse kessigge.
The Saxons bold and furious,
Like Mares had legs and shoulders.
CHAP. 27. What nourishment is best from time to time for the child. That the
infant upon the suddayne ought not to be weaned. Of the diet that Montuus
appointed the French Kings children.
AL these things recyted observed, give it meat or nourishmente, and that
shall be before it be weaned a good while, with sounder meats, than either
Milk only, or Pappe: yet whiles it breeds teeth, 2. De Elemen.
Pappe is best, seeing that wise nature as Galen teaches, does choose that
that is thick, to constitute the hard parts, and that that is thin for the
softer: as first with fine bread and new Milk, then with bread and sweet
Butter, which I account better than bread and Sugar, appointed by Mokerus,
after which, good broth, lastly, with tender flesh of good temperature and
juice, Lib. 1. de infant. Cap. 15.
even s^c^e as is appointed before for the Nursse, first minsed or bruised,
finely bending rather to moisture than to dries, because their age is moyster
than any other, as Hippocrates, Galen, Lib. de. diet. de Aliment. 1. De sini.
tuenda. 1. Fen. 1.
and Auicen wrighte in all the other ages accordingly to be censidered, for as
their bodies waxes dryer, so must their nourishments: and the change not to be
on the suddayne (...) the breast to other meats, nor to be weaned forthwyth,
Lib. de Port. hom. 1 De infant.
as wisely witieth Eucharius and Mokerus, for by such means of suddayne
change, I have known diverse infants to perish. Provided, that the drink be
clean, fresh, and stale Ale, neither too strong, nor ouerlong drawn, but
presently from the tappe. But all Wynes are unprofitable for children, much
more for infants, whose bodies as you have heard, be naturally most hot and
moist, by reason that through the hot and moist temperature thereof, it
fills their heads with vapoures, and hinders their senses, inducing
innumerable discommodities, of all wise parents to be avoided. And therefore
Plato, and Galen after him, commands all under twelve years of age to
forbear it. De. legib. lib. quod any. mor. and.
The same did Montuus that noble man, to the French Kings children, as he
shows, where also he expresses their diet as follows, Montuus a noble man
borne.
for although he was Baron and Lord of Mirabello, as was his father before him,
and one of the Kings most privy counsel, so was he also of the most honorable
art of Physic Doctor, The diet for the French Kings children.
and his principal Physician. First (says he) I appointed them suppings made
with bread of fine wheat flower, of fine Search, also of Almonds, of Barley, or
Big, of Wheat, which we call Furmentie, of Rye, of Pease, and such like, or
soft bread, steeped in the broth of flesh of Kiddes, Tuppes, Calves, Hens.
etc. And sometime a Capons wing minced in small pieces, or the breast of a
Pheasant roasted, or with the legs of a Partrich roasted, cut in pieces: but
what drink they had, he shows not, seeing utterly he did forbid them all
Wynes.

CHAP. XXVIII. What the word Diet does comprehend. The regard that should be
had to children when they enter into years of perseverance. What very
Nobility is, and how it springs and decays. What Christian children
should consider according to their profession.
THis diet prescribed for the French Kings Children, or rather the kinds of
meats, for the word diet you may know extends so far, that it conteyneth
all the six things not natural, What diet contains.
as air, meat and drink, sleep and watch, labor and rest, emptiness
(...) ^^lling, and the affections of the mind, (in Bathes Aid, and B^^^stones
Bathes benefit sufficiently declared) varieth not (...) all that our
gentilitie do use, saving that ours without (...) is holsomer: neither is
there (as I suppose) any great cause why it should, considering that to the
healthie temperature, an^^^ble to each age and custom of all sorts and states,
ordinary ^^^tes be best: for their bodies differ not in nature (as Solomon
says) from other children, as I wish they were taught, Eccles. 7.
and that always after they would remember, and never at any time ^^^^ne the
deceiptful and damnable doctrine every where too in common, of Machiuels
invention, of flattering superiors, being strange to equals, and stout to
inferiors: De Princ.
but rather the holy Ghost, who wills, that the higher we be advanced, (...)
to humble ourselves, as the Lord Strange whiles he was in Oxford, with the
commendation of every man, and the Earl of Surrey in his fathers time in
Norwich: but especially at the Queens Majesty's progress of late in
Norffolke. And that to all men you bear a good conscience, but chiefly as
says Saint Paul, to them that be of the household of faith, and to them
likewise that be of your kin, alie, friends, famili^ servants, and
neyghbors, and to all other you use good words and countenances, wherein that
honorable Knight, Deuteronomy. 18. Eccles 32. Par. 10. Prou. 20.
p^^^ent counselor, and princely presidente Sir Henry Sidney surpasses,
having doubtless great reason and divine understanding in so doing, seeing we
have all after a sort but one substance by nature of soul and body, and but
one kind of redemption. Neither verily is the blood made purer in the veins,
by reason of pedigree, dignities, reuenews, riches, or fees, nor yet any
difference of beginning or ending, as Tully testifies, Lib. de Senect. ad
Henri^ oct^ de Reg. De prouid. dei,
Sir Thomas Eliot, and Doctor Cradocke, but in respect of our ancestors worthy
calling, bringing up and guiding, except perhaps following the good custom of
our elders, to be of better inclination to honesty, prowes, and piety, and
the longer it shall continue in a name or lignage, the more it is commended,
ho^^^ed, and extolled. For who having any knowledge in divinity, Philosophy,
service, or chivalry, and being void of envy, does not commend and extol
the fidelity of all them that constantly continue in their Catholic unity,
The name of the Talbot terrible to the French, and gracious to his Country In
Chron. In Off. Exodus. 22. Titus. 3. Romans. 5.
perfect loyalty, assisteth the cominaltie, does minister equity, and daunt
the enemy, as the noble and puissant Talbot is of old remembered, and to this
day used, for the victories he achieved, and for the better quieting of their
family in France, as writes Froisard. Contrarily, who of indifferente
judgment does not think them worthy with Tully to be disgraded of all
honor and praise, that forsake the faith, conspire against their Country,
Rebel against the state, sow Schisms, and defame their gouernoures, truly
none that knows reason, experience, or the Scriptures.

An Example.
A like example we have of our Coin, be they as little as Pence, or as great as
Portigues, which as long as they be of right metal, just standerd, and due
stamp, are received for good payment: but if they shall be counterfeited,
clipped, or washed, as they have bin too late, and are over often, who for the
only form trow ye will allow of them? certaynely none of any judgment.

And even so we may say of Gentilitie, wanting either honesty, comendable
quality, or fidelity, declining from their progeny, wasting their patrimony
upon wantonness and bravery, and not upon the service of Prince and
Country: for, even like as these chief virtues, prudence, magnanimity,
justice, godliness, constancy, temperance, loyalty, and liberty, De Pruden.
De Princ.
ever was and is the original cause of all worship, honor, and majesty, as
writes Pontanus, Patritius, Chelidonius Tigurinus, Causes of grace and
disgrace.
and Gueuara: so these head vices, infidelity, obstinacy, rebellion,
ignorance, ingratitude, extortion, injury, rashness, prodigality, and
hautinesse, ever was and is the cause of all infamy, seruilitie, disgrace and
obloquie, with the rest of the sins following, Lib. de nob. De reg.
as Osorius eloquently expresses, and of M. Blandy translated into our tongue
answerably.

Math. 5 1^.
Hence Matthew the Evangelist says, that, when salt has lost his ^^tinesse,
what shall be seasoned therewith? when the just (...) become unjust, what
right shall we look for, when the godly professors and teachers be become
ungodly practisers and doers, what shall be expected? when the tree that brought
forth god fruit, has lost his fruitfulness, what is it good for but to be
casts into the fire? to be short, where Faith is made a fantasy, Wit
wiliness, and Cunning craftiness, what shall (...) think to find but sin
and sickness, punishment and death, damnation and Hell, of al Christian
children to be considered, because it is clean contrary to their professor,
unless they will be but Catholics in name, No Catholics, but ^^sca^^ares,
no Protestants, but Prasters. 3. d^ Off. Etha^ckes honester than most
Christians.
and caste-^waies in deed, seeing that amongst the Infidels, as Tull^e
testifies he was not counted for an honest man, that one might not play
withal blindfold at the game Even and ^dde without deceit, either of Gentilitie
or Yeomanrie, although the Proverb goes Without all barking. Oh what would
the heathen Cicero say now if he lived in these days of ye light of the Gospel,
to them that have put on the armor of light, that show and say in their
doings for a proverb Con^^ience is hanged, that said so then in the time of
Infidelity? And truly it seems too true, the more pity, for diverse and
sundry stick not still to be benefice sellers, as well of the Clergy as of the
Laity, Leasemangers, wood spoilers, and Usurers, not only in the Countries,
but also in towns and Cities, raising of dead treasure and unlawful
advantage, In off.
growing profit and daily revenues, a thing wholly against nature, as Tullie
testifies, because it seuereth the society of mankind, C^n^r. Vsur.
as also that honorable Councellor Master Doctor Wilson in his work right
godly and cunningly has delivered forth of the Scriptures, fathers and
Philosophers. And yet they talk in Pulpits, at Tables, and in their bargains,
as well by way of comparison for their credence, as in their words, although he
were a bond man borne and a traffiquer, boasting himself to be as good as he
that for his virtue is worshipfully called and used protesting earnestly the
heavenly doctrine and outward show of living in all their actions, Dissemblers
in life and doctrine.
and daily therewith at sermons, notwithstanding they be known (after they be
tried) for common Hipocrites, like Aristonicus scholars, as testifies
Laertius: Lib de senect.
and the Athenians, as writes Tullie, who knew what was honest, and taught
the same, but do it they would not. And that made S. John to say in those
days near the destruction of the Jews, that all the world was set upon
wickedness, as too too many be in these days near the end, seeking thorough
fraud one an others spo^^e, and not one another profit, help, and succor,
as Latimer in his Sermons often uttered, The guise of this time.
viz. that many set more by silver than by souls, more by gold than by
godliness, more by a penny than by honesty, more by their lust than by their
laws, more by bravery than the preservation of body and soul, more by private
profit than by common benefit, more by their vain opinions, than the Queens
proceedings: as if the hands had bin ordained to spoil the parts, the feet
to forsake the members, and the head to contemn the body: whereas clean
contrary, in a sound body or state, every one does his duty according to that
that by the law of nature is limited. The hands minister to each member, the
feet serve all the body, and the head governs all the motions in a mean.

Oh prosperous and happy state, oh quiet and loving lims, oh blessed and godly
unity, Equity defined.
that never swarueth from equity. And equity is defined by the Doctor to the
Student of Law, to be a righteousness that considers al particular
circumstances of deeds with the eye of pity and mercy, by too many Lawiers,
as it is bruted, neglected, furthering rather quarrels and envious suits, than
appeasing of brawles, debates, and controversies: A just Judge. a godly and
puissant President. a most worthy Councellor.
Although I have heardful often that honorable and just Judge sir James Dyar
extremely reprove them. And such as delay the poores causes, by the prudent
and puissant President ye Earl of Huntington be utterly rejected, because ye
scripture forbids all christian children to use it. And therefore the Lord
Burleigh high Treasorer of England, does keep with all sorts the days and
times appointed for the hearing and determining of their causes without any
partiality, Sectio. 3.
as does also the Lord Chauncelor prouidently and speedily, A painful and
prudent Potentate.
dire^^^^g all his decrees according to equity.

Sectio tertia.
CHAP. XXIX. At what time the Babe shall begin to be instructed, and after
what manner: How the Theological or Divine graces are before al other to be
first planted.
AS soon as the child therefore can speak, At what time the manners of the
child are to be framed.
and understand what is spoken unto him, let it be forbidden all unlawful and
indecent things, seeing yt by nature (if we may call custom another nature, 7.
Eth. Lib. quod any. mor. and. Padag. 2.
as Hippocrates does) we love those things, as Arist. Galen, and Clemens
Alexa^drinus say, that we are brought up with and accustomed thereunto. And the
custom must be such as will make ye mind godly, De summo doctrine Christ. De
pruden. In Timeo.
manners c^^^^, and ye body te^perate, as teaches Petrus Canisius, Johannes
^onius, and Plato, where he affirms, that ye things which we as love in
youth, in age not to forget. Hence is ye saying of Horace which he avouches,
yt the earthen pot as it was first sea^^^^ed, so it will long remain. Solomon
also says, Pro. 22.
teach a child his way in youth, and in old age he shall not depart from it.
In Catechi.
Master Nowell that worthy Deane declares, that children rather ought to be
brought up first in godly manners and good lessons of Christianity, then in
humane actions and trades worldly, Faith, Hope and Charity
for except the Theological, divine or spiritual graces or powers, taught in
the Catholic Church, be first obtained of al ages as well as infants, A good
similitude and a true.
to the souls health comes as little profit, as to the body grows
benefit, where all disgestion is hindered.

(...) Fides.
And therefore I shall show how to Christians they are delivered, being three
in number, Faith, Hope, and Charity: Faith (says Saint Paul) is a substance
of things looked for no reason appearing. (...) Spes.
(...) Charitas. Ephesians. 2. Heb. In sermon. de Fid. Faith desined. D^ Fid. sermon. 4.
full. 31.
Or Faith (as says Basil) is ye gift of God, and a certain light wherewith
whosoever is lightened, he firmly agrees to all such things as God has
revealed and delivered to his Church to be learned of us.

Faith, (as writes Bullinger) is a gift inspired by God into the mind of man,
whereby without any doubting at all he does believe that to be most true,
whatsoever God has either taught or promised in the books of both the
Testaments, in the Creed made by the Apostles sufficiently declared, and in
the Symbolum said in the Church by Anthanasius, with that of Damasis mentioned
by Saint Hierome, Tom. 2. Hope, what.
as they do the graces or powers of the godhead of the Trinity, the father,
the son, and the holy ghost, whereof there is no doubt, but certainly to be
trusted, Epist. 1.4. Romans 2. Corinthians. 13. Math. 1.
as we hope for the joys everlasting, and so shall we save both body and
soul, and not cast them away, as Ha^mon the Apostata of late did in Norwich.

Charity. how.
Hope, as affirm Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, is given us from God, through
which with an assured trust we look for the joys of our salvation and
everlasting life, and it works in us Charity, for, as Faith ingendereth
Hope, so does Hope Charity.

2 4 1. Cor. 13. De doctri. christ. and de ver. reli.
Charity is a grace, as witnesses Saint John, Saint Paul and Saint Augustine,
given us likewise from God, whereby we love God for his own sake, and our
neighbor for Gods sake, and so undoubtedly to be believed. And not as (...)
proper Pilates interpret it Grammatically, which the ^^^kes call (...), the
Latins Charitas, for every love, (...) or longing, as the Father through kind
to love his child, the Husband for duty, his Wife: the servant, his Master:
the frie^^, his friend: the kinsman, his kinsman: the neighbor, his neighbor:
the amarous lover his love, and such like tra^^^ory affections: neither yet as
the Family of Love faineth. But rather true Charity is taken for the love
that we owe unto God for the innumerable benefits that he has bestowed
undeserved upon us, All our goodness comes of God.
that we not looking for any requital, or balance being empty, may love one
another for his sake, as he has loved us: for Love, says Peter, recouereth
the multitude of sins. And that through this unity we may be incorporate,
and made all the members of one mystical body, being the only badge or sign
whereby we should be disciphered. For, by this, By what Christians are known.
John c. 3. Epist. 1. 1. Cor. 13. John. 13. Decad. 1. Ser. 6. fol. vlt.
says the wisdom of the father, shall ye be known to be my Disciples, if ye
love one another as I have loved you, so that if you be able to remove
m^^ntaines, and have no Charity, this love is but in vain. And therefore
Bullinger says, that Charity is the fulfilling of the Law, which contains
in it the sum of all good works.

CHAP. XXX. What regard must be had to such as keep the company of youth: Of
the abuse of sundry parents: and of laws made as well for them, as for
children.
THus at length we see what sparks of grace are to be kindled in all
Christians, and what they should be that frequent the company of children, and
that use to the Nurcery, Who ought to company babes. Lib. de infant.
and how in words and deeds they ought to give good example, as wills
Fabian, or at the least, none evil.

And such be they as be of good inclination by nature, and that have
themselves bin godly, modestly, and orderly brought up, according to the
Catholic instruction and manners of our land, because there is none other fit
to company noble children, neither them of the gentilitie, nor yet of the
comminaltie to speak plainly, Padag. lib. 1. and. 2.
as Clemens Alexandrinus writes most godly. Of mighty Mamea, mother to the
Emperor Alexander Seuerus watchfully observed, The first Christened Monarke.
as she and her son that was the first of all the Roman Monarchs that was
Christened by Origin, as testifyeth Sir Thomas Elyot, by the authority of
Eucolpius the secretary, although Constantius our Countreyman was the first
that adua^ced the faith, and defended it, as Polidore writes, not a little
auayleable to his and her souls health, Lib. de. 9 in. rer.
and immortal glory, nor smally beneficial to ye Roman Empire, An. mundi.
5423.
if ye consider how it was depraved by the vicious living and beastly example
of Heliogabalus, Anno Christ's. 224.
and his licentious mother Semiramis, as at large ye may read in the Book
entitled The reward of wickedness, and in an ancient Chronicle extant,
imprinted in Germany, but without any Authors name, and infinite others, that
after by their virtuous regiment, and worthy examples, was restored again to
the former Civility, as writes Aurelius Philippus. Howbeit, many Nursses of
our Christian days, as well as they of elder time of Paganism, be so vain,
and diverse parents so fond, neglecting the Apostles counsel to the Ephesians,
Cato to the Romans, and Plato to the Athenians, that they delight rather with
the harlot Semiramis to hear their children wantonly prate like Parets, Fond
parents.
Popiniayes, and Pyes, of blasphemous, trifeling and unseemly speech, than
with godly Mamea, speak and use laudable things, by the faithless as well as
the faithful, that either feared God, followed reason, or fellowship of this
life, Lib 1. de inst. De e^g.
willed, as testifyeth Osorius, forbidding by all laws and means the
contrary, which unreasonable parents are rightely compared of Lawne to Apes,
^^th. mudin.
who with ouer-deere embracing their young ones, do strangle them, unto whom,
I (...) as well that the ancient laws Fatidia were executed (...) the law of
the Leedes to disobedient children extended, (...) Plutarch and Vlpian
mentioned: and then the Gayles no (...) should not be so stored, the Gibbets
so replenished, nor (...) parish with the poor so burdened, Lib. 2. de
offi^^^
nor as Tullie wri^^^^ private men's goods so wasted for common charges, Len.
agrat.
as a Philippus Law the Tribune was devised, although by he ^^ine man shortly
repeated.

CHAP. XXXI. The great cost that the common wealth is at daily in releeuing the
poor. Of the number of them that are yearly executed.
A Greater tax than some subsidies, if the antitient annals be compared with
the present burden of every parish: a larger collection than would mainteyne
yearly a goodly army in a readynesse, always to daunt the enemy, as the
collectors book can testifye, and as (...) wise men thinks, to that use more
necessary, because the goods of all men for need of Prince and Country
should be ^^ered willingly, a mightier company of miserable caytifes, (...)
would defend a large Country, The poor that be unable to labor for their
living, very charity would they should be relieved without co^pulsion.
as in the Records of ^n Clearkes of the Peace, and of the Assise, may easily
be (...). And yet housekeepers be but a little less discharged, if (...) note
the continual resort of the needy, especially in the Country and Towns
that be vncorporate, the poor (as they (...)) not much the more aided, as by
the moan they make to travelers may be easily gathered, nor theft and
wickedness the (...) practiced, as to them that will look thereunto may
easily be perceived.

For what misery is it to see condenmed at one assise in a (...) shire. 39.
notwithstanding the clemency of the Judges, and three hundred and odd in one
Diocese to do penance, or fine for their loose living in a year? But these
be the meanest sort only, for the others escape, as though it were in them no
offense: and in one Goal of prisoners three hundred and upwards at one time,
whereof a great part perhaps may be thoroughe negligence of Justices, or
cruelty, that otherwise might be punished aunswerably to the offenses
lawfullye. And all this I can ascribe to nothing so much doubtless, as to the
manner of bringing up in liberty, void of ye fear of Gods Justice, Whence much
evil grows.
terror of the Princes laws, knowledge of themselves, and exercise in youth,
how to attain lawfully their living and maintenance in age, or an order of
commitment for mean felows and such Roags as the book expresses, Holinshed
describes, and the statute declares, unto Nauies, Mines, or Houses of
exercise, as is Bridewel by the last act of Parliament so charitably and
pollitikely appointed, although not yet in every shire erected, there to eat
the bread of correction, and to drink the water of Repentance, and to travel
for their living that lack mainteynaunce, and not a sure fortress for the
time, to have what they lust for their money, as in the common Goales is used,
according to the nature of the offense and condition of the person, for ever,
or for a season, as the Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and Romans were wont, and
as the Venetians, Spaniardes and Swethians do now, the lesser offenses with
lighter punishment, and the hearty repentante persons, for all sins are not
equal, let some never so much stick to the Stoikes opinion, Parad. 3.
especially, if ye respect the cause, as Tullie himself is driven to confess,
and as the Scripture does manifestlye declare, for some may be forgiven, other
some neither there nor in the world to come: because, as they willingly
offended, so stubbornly they stand to it: but others, as they fell through
weakness of the flesh, so their spirit calls them to repentance, so that
they be remitted of their punishment, being always as nere as might be,
answerable to the offense as may appear as well by the Laws of the Hebrews,
Greeks, and Romans, as by our Own: and hereof be eight kinds, De legib.
lib. Ethi.
as testify Tullie, Isidorus and Dominicus Nauus. Trespass, Good Behauior,
Whipping, Lym for Lymme, Pillery, Banishement, In Polians. Damnum. Vincla.
Verber^. Talionem. Ignominium. Failium. Se^^ltutem. Mortem.
Bondage and Death. But the manner of the Execution ever varied according to
the Crime, for some dyed Inch-mele, some were Famished, some Starued, some
Crucified, some Raw broken, some Hanged, some Quartered, some Headed, some
Drowned, some Broyled, some Burned, some Shot at, some Boared through, some
Buried quick, some Boiled in Lead, some let blood to death, etc. albeit not
for every small Palfree of a crown or two foisted falsely or fetched out of some
Pasture or Grainyarde without the danger of any body, for Poverty to cast a
man away, and to suffer open Pollers, Deceivers, Extortioners, Usurers, and
Bribers, for a light Fine to go scot free. Iwis The Babe cost the Mother more
in Salt Tears at the birth, as it may stand ye Prince and Country in better
stead. Of Moses accordingly considered, as in ye old Testament at large
appears, De lib: edne. Lib. de Infant.
although they were al Bondmen when they were committed to his Conductio^: And
yet I mean not to vary from Plutarch, Boethius and Quintilianus judgments of
trayning up Youth, nor to encourage any that be Old to be evil, who wills,
How infants are to be taught.
that Children shall not be enforced to learn by too much threatening, and
over many strokes, for that may be a Dau^ting to Infants of their feeble
Corages, and a dulling of their weak Wits: Catechizing no less godly than
ancient and needful.
But that they shall rather with good examples, fair allurement, and fine
behest, be entired to cun their Prayers, Cathechisme, and principles of
Christian Religion, before they be confirmed of the Bishop: not because they
can judge what is spoken: Act. 24. Romans 5. Hebr 6. August. 40. 4 De (...) Cor.
In Catach. In confess. Aug. Lib. 3 fr. 195.
but that in time they may remember what they have bin taught, being no new
Custom, as affirm the old Fathers as well as the new Writers Luther, Calum,
Beacon, Nowell, and Hierome the Jesuit, or through hearing of their play
mates, bear away that you would have them learn: and about the age of three
years will they give care to that that they shall hear, and bear away
readily, and that the rather, says Fabian, Lib. 1. ca. 5.
if you have ye Alphabet letters in Iuorie, Bone, Box, or some other devise
convenient for them, daily in their hands to carry about with them, as first
a, then b, after c. etc. then Consonants, after Dissonants, then Words, lastly,
Sentences. Lid. De tuen. sani. ^el^g. (...). 8 P^^^^. Lib. Lib. ^t. Vir^lius
lord.
Albeit they be then wholly given to play like young Lambs, Fawns, and Foales,
as Galen affirms, whom you shall not forbid in time and place convenient, so
much as they will, as wills Osorius, Montuus, and Mokerus: and they will as
much as they can, considering, that of often Joy and Sport ensues the
flourishing of the natural Virtues: for Joy gives power to the Strength, Cap
30.
it stirs up Nature, says Galen, and prolongeth our days, says Syrach,
profiting also all such as be whose, Lib. 7.
except they be oppressed with grosnesse, as Almanzor declares. Foreseeing as
we have said, that in any wise no pastime contrary to the Divine Word,
Unlawful games too common.
be allowed, against the strength of the Body permitted, contrary to the Law
practiced, or excessiuely suffered, least thereby their tender Parts, slender
Wits, and frail Disposition, might be made too soon dull, hard, stubborn and
ungracious, and so hinder their growth, make no account of Virtue, or forsaking
of Vice.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the definition of Sin, with the definition and division of
such as are called Mortal or Deadly Sins.
1. Tim. 3. Aug^st. so. 7. contr. duas epist. Pel^g. lib 1. Sun the cause of
ever lasting death Sap. 1. Romans 6. Cor. 15. Prima pars.
SVch Vices, Sins, Sorows, or griefs as grow unto us by nature or inheritance,
termed Original Sin, I omit in this age, because I will express them in the
other, and I proceed to entreat of the Mortal, so called as I suppose, by
reason the holy Writ says, That every soul that sins, shall dye: what? a
natural Death only think you? nay forsooth, Everlastingly, unless God grant
Repentance and Amendment of Life. By Chawcer in the Parsons tale learnedly and
godly delivered: so that I will not stand there upon: For, we may not think
that God is bound to give us his holy Spirit, or to (...) us our sins, our
selves not being earnest interces^^^ for the same, and daily travelers
therefore: For, A necessary note for the libertines of these days. Parad 3.
Sin defined. lib. 1. rec. cap. 15.22 Contr. faust. Lib. de Parad.
if we (...), what else do we make him, who came to take away the euilles of
the world, but the incourager of all the sins in ye whole world, which god
forbid. Sin, as testifies Tullie, is nothing else but a transgressing and
passing of the limits and bounds of Virtue. Saint Augustine defines Sin to
be whatsoever is desired, spoken, or done, contrary to the will and (...) of
God, or our neighbor, or that which is contrary to his everlasting Law,
whether it be expressly set forth in the holy Scriptures or not. S. Ambrose
is of ye same judgment. In loc. com.


Sin says Musculus, is confessed of all men, as well of ^^^dels as
Christians, to be that that displeases God, Bernard. Scotus. Lumbarde.
pro^^^eth his wrath, and deserves vengeance. Sin, as write the School
Doctors, has three procurators or tempters, Suggestion, Delight, and Consent.

Suggestion, draws us with the vain thoughts and desires of the gain of
this life, and worldly pleasures inward or outward, enticing the frail flesh
to sin.

Delighte, as a certain sauce, provoke us further and further, to proceed
therein.

Consent, How Consent is to be understood.
as a wicked Nurce fostreth and dandleth Vice in her lay. But Consent shall not
be taken for every inclination of the will, whence venial sins grow, say
the School Doctors, but for that only wherein the right mind fully agrees
and freely thereunto yields. And this is that sin which they call mortal,
and not ye other, profitably provided for in our laws, if they be committed by
infa^ts that be under age, idiots, What sins God and man does pardon.
compelled, sick, or unadvised, by God and man pardoned. The sins that the
ancient Divines Gregorius and Cassianus do account for deadely Sin, are
these, Pride, Co^^^^^^nesse, Lechery, Envy, Gluttony, Anger and Sloth: (...)
Covetousness, Deadly sin whence.
Envy and Anger grows from the i^^^^ble or courageous spirit exceeding
reason: Gluttony and Lechery from the natural: but Sloth from both, by reason
ye they want that grace and understanding that is governed by Gods spirit, In
catach. in bom.
or be depraved, as before is showed: Pride, as affyrmeth Petrus Canisius
following Chrysostom, Bernarde, and Prospitius, is an inordinate desire to
pass other men whether the same be in the mind, or show it self by outward
means, measuring no commodity by the own sufficiency, but by the misery and
lack of others, or by the ostentation and show of superfluous abundaunce and
singularity, as Moore describes. Lib. 2. de Vtopia fol. vlt.
This vice is the worste of all other for it specially begets these wicked
daughters, disobedience, bragging, brawling, stubbornness, discord, curiosity
and sects, wandering noweadayes through all nations, as by the disagreement
echewhere, and the disguising of men in women's manners, In orat. De not. De
summo bono.
and women in men's array, with other outrages too common may appear.

Covetousness defined and distinguished
Covetousness, as says Basilius and Isidorus, is an insatiable desire to have
riches and wealth, and you shall not account him, not only a covetous man
that takes an other man's goods, possessions, and liuelyhode, but also he that
desires what is none of his, or he that keeps his own goods, over greedily,
and this in all kind of men either the fear of lack, and distruste of Gods
providence does cause, or else Pride aforesaid lifting their minds with a
desire to pass others with the vain and superfluous brag of things: out of
this stinking lake issues treachery, flattery, deceit, perjury, disquietnes,
violence, theft, murder, bribery, lack of piety, churlishness, Romans 6. Ephesians.
5. De summo Bono vt supr. 4.
hardness of heart, rent raising, usury, and bankerupting in many.

Lechery defined and distinguished.
Lechery, as testifies the Apostle Gregorius and Isidorus is an inordinate
affection to satisfy the naughty and beastly lust of the body which causes
blindness of understanding, rape, incest, with other filthiness, as says
the Apostle, not to be named, roaging, beggary, rashness, inconsta^cie, self
love, hatred of God, too much desire of this life, extreme fear of death, and
Gods judgments, with utter despair of Heavenly ioye^.

Envy is says Saint Ciptian, Basil, and Chrysostom, Sermon. de zel In or 1.
ad pop. Ho^. ^l. 44 Envy defined, and destinguished.
is (...) ^^a^^nesse conceived of an others well doing, and a certain (...),
because he does well, whether it be of his superior, or of his inferioure: the
offspring hereof is muteny, dissension, ^^^^ing, sclandering, libeling,
undermining, kitling, cur^^^, etc. into too many places too too apparante, and
yet they will be counted the children of God, Gospellers, whereas the Gospel
is clean against it.

Gluttony as witnesses Saint Augustine, Chrysostom, Gluttony defined and
distinguished. Sermon de t^m. De b^ly and les. In s^rm. conir. luxu. Vt sup. in
orat. anger defined, and distinguished.
and Ambrose, is an insatiable desire of meat, drink, and delicates. The
litter of this Sow is dullness of sense and understanding, foolish mirth, much
babbling, scoffing, filthiness, and contempt of fasting.

Anger as write Gregory, Basil, and Saint Ambrose, is an inordinate desire
to punish him, whom we suppose has ^^ered us injury, although the
Philosopher terms it a suddayne passion of the mind. The sparks that issue
out of this breast, is outrage, swelling of the heart, reproachful words,
ch^^^ing, blasphemy, breach of charity, bloudshead and murder.

Sloth as may be read in Barnard and Gregory, Sloth defyned, and
distinguished. Sermon. 3 and 6 de assent^. moral 31.
is a sluggish mind that faints to do well, whose enormities are counted to
be malice, contempt of labor, neglecting of prayer, werynesse of Sermons and
service, faintness of courage, despair, and lack of hope. These evils
christian babes, the further they be from us and our children in all places, the
nearer are we like the image of him that made us eachwhere, and the more
certayner we may assure our selves of his favor, but the more they be
frequented, the further from his grace and gifts, and therefore a streighter
discipline by sensures or commisioners of excellent virtue as some judge,
England needs Catoes in these days, as Rome did of old.
would be for (...) elder sort of people used that they might be restreyned
immediately after childhode be expired, whether the evil pro^^^^ of the
corruption of nature, badde custom, lack of correction, and evil pastimes,
or of the instigation of the world, ^^^h, and the devil, ever to be
withstanded in all affairs, travels and pastimes, that so God might be
glorified, the laws observed, and the common wealth preserved, otherwise, the
Lord is rejected, What sin does. Amos. 9.
the holy laws abandoned, and the best flourishing common weal in the world
overwhelmed. Hence Amos prophesies, that the eye of the Lord is upon that
Realm that sins, to root it clean out of the earth, because there is no
place out of his power exempted.

CHAP. XXXIII. In what place babes shall sport them. How provident Bishops
should be in placing and displacing of Schole-maysters. That Tutors ought to
have the knowledge of the Diatetike part of Physic. Of the temperature of the
spring, and how it agrees best with Children.
THe place where Children shall pasture, play, and sport them, What place is
best for children to play in. Lib. 2. de Vtopia.
must be safe from all danger, near neither water nor fire, and yet the
Nurcerie must always have both, as affirms Moore. Upon no high place, for
fear of falling, neither by any edge stool: in the extreme heat, nor in the
vehement cold: in the burning sun, nor in the boisterous wind, but in a
temperate place and season, least it might hinder their health, which thing
Diogenes greatly regarded in the bringing up of Xeniades children, ^^ Apoth.
although he were his bondsman, as says Erasmus. How careful then free
Schole-maysters ought to be without all bribes to discharge their duties that
are worshipfully entreated, Bishops ought no less visit Schools than Churches.
De liber. ^dne. Pri. de sans. tuen. In padag.
you may easily conjecture, and how prouidente Bishops in foreseeing, placing,
and displacing of the^ accordingly, you may easily judge, and how they ought as
Plutarch, Galen, and Cleme^s Alexandrinus says, to be skilful in this art of
preserving health, for of outward causes, as well as of inward, sicknesses are
obtained, as at large in my Dial of Agewes may appear: and especially
children, whose yoares (as those that do out-breath more than any other age)
be very open. And therefore as Hippocrates, ^^^^n, and Auicen, with all other
learned P^isicions, wh^^^^ (...) be Greeks, Arabians, Poenians, or Latins, do
affirm, (...) be sooner afflicted, by reason whereof Galen teaches, that
Children prosper best in the Spring, 3. Aph. coment. 19
and beginning of Summer, because that season is nearest to their Nature. And
yet herein by the way, I would not that any should think me to be of
Athenaeus judgment, confuted at the least of worthy Galen. 1540. years paste,
who did affirm the Spring to be hot and moist: De tempet^m^tis.
but that I with Galen do teach it to be mean, and of moderate temperature,
of Master Buckmaster in his Prognostications wisely noted. Through which
mean temperature no doubt all things flourishe, Lib. de Sig. Coelest. De
Calore. De effici. pri. mot.
as Palingenius, Fallopius, and Paparilla, affirm, for that otherwise it
would not, if it exceeded in any quality, as the other seasons and times do
(as in my Discourse Of the beginning of growing and living things, does
appear) and therefore no marvel if it yield no such universal increase.
The same also we may refer to distempered States, Habites, Z^nes, Regions,
and Ages, as Peter Martyr de Anglera, and Martin Curtis declares in the
Decades and Art of Navigations in our days delivered.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How the best Philosophers define Virtue: Of the agreemente
between Divinity, Philosophy, and Physic: Whence the Moral Virtues
spring, and their need.
Moreover, all Philosophers, especially the Stoykes, Academikes, and
Peripatetikes, that were dilligent in beholding Natures providence, 2 Et^i.
Virtue defyned.
do affirm all Virtues to consist in a mean, as by ye definition of the Prince
of ye Peripatetiks, appears: For, Virtue says he, is a constant affection of
ye mind, obtained by free choice consisting in a certain mean, and directed
by the right rule of Reason, as write Castilio, Hessus, and Placatomus etc.
Lib 2. de Vtop. De Aulic. De tuend bo. vale. In Comnent. In Libi. 3. de off.
and de amitit. De regno.
That is agreeable to Nature, or according to the prescript rule of Nature, as
says Moore soorth of ye Sto^kes. Whosoever observe and obey, as affirm
Aristotle, Cicero, and Osorius, cannot hurt any, nor be hurt of others, seeing
Nature seeks ever as well his own safeguard, as by the same everlasting Law we
are taught to do no otherwise than we would be done unto. But there is none
that would have any evil done unto themselves by any means, therefore they
must as well in Deed as in Thought avoid al acts that may hurt others,
because that The same measure you meat to others says the Scripture, Math. 7.
In Carnud. Ciropedi, de mot. vnimal. De Senect. De amic. Pri. de Not. Quest. de
more. pop. de locis affect. lib 1. ^heo. eccl. 10. super sp 79. lib. de par.
lib. 3 ad Sap. Padag. lib. 1. c 13. What always wise men should w^y. De tuen.
valetu.
Shall be measured to you again. And those actions yt exceed the mean Natures
Lawful Allowance, are counted of Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle, Tullie, and
Alexander, for Perturbations and not Virtues, of Hyppocrates, Archiguites,
Galen, and Auicen Sicknesses, and of Divines, after a sort Sins, Vices: as by
Gregory Nazianzene, Augustine, Ambrosius, and Petrus Lombardus it appears,
but especially by Clemens Alexandrinus: for whatsoever (says he) is besides
the right rule of Reason, is Sin. Which I would the wise capacities did no
less wey, than the unlearned and ignorant sort hitherto has bin unable to
conceive, for otherwise as says Montuus, Theodoretus, could not have
justified, that ye Rational, Appetitiue, and Irascible Spirits or Graces
being coupled (as you have heard in ye Epistle) by interchaungeable let, does
make a good co^mirtion in Virtues. De sani. tuend.
Hence, as says the same Montuus, the Moral Virtues do arise: and by cause
they incline men to be simple, good of disposition after Nature, they are
(says he) to be preferred before those ye arise of Doctrine, by so much I
think with Galen, 1. De us. part. lib. quod any. mot. De sani. tuend. De
Regno. Lib. de Dial. In compent. dial. In epit. dialect.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Osorius, as Nature is before, and better than Art,
for Gods gift is before al Artificial Understanding. And therefore Doctor
Alenaunt of Paris, and Euans our Countreyman, with Ioachim eriom, affirm,
with all other Logitians, that to the (...) out of all knowledge, invention,
and judgment, be th^^ ^^^^rumentes before all instruments: But they can never
(...) obtained, Xenop. lib. 4. de dict. and fact. Tulli^g. Tust. Horac. lib. 4.
Ovid. lib. 4. De potent. eleg. Virgil. Georg. 3.
if Gods gift in the natural action be wanting, as the best divines, and
profane writers do teach.

Hence is it, that some can reason more substantially to the truth, wanting
art through his divine grace, than other some withal their skill and
industry, as daily experience both in Court, Camp, and Country, does declare.

Hence likewise the County Castilio, Lib. 4. de aulit. De Reg.
and Osorius the Bishop testifye, that if nature repugne the Prince, all
diligence and exhortation of the Courtier is but in vain, for what nature has
made crooked (says the Preacher) who can make ^reight: the same also in the
first part, Eccles. 7.
Lib. 1. de infan^
by the example of the Emperoures depraved, I have showed in brief, and
Mokerus at large. Wherefore, when we be distempered, because this natural
means is something wanting, through either the constitution, diet, regiment,
or evil custom, according to the excess, or want thereof, all be depraved
from our parente Adam, more or less, inducing sickness, trouble, and sin.

CHAP. XXXV. At what time Infantes should begin to learn, and what
properties and qualities ought to be in a Tutor, and what Books he should
teach the first age. A brief note of the doctrine that in the other works
and ages shall follow, with diverse other things worth the noting.
NOw that through these, infantes may not be further empayred, Hipp. de natu^.
hom. 1. De off. Lib. de ver. cultu. De sani. tuenda. De cap. libr. 10. The
cause of education. De liber. educan^. padag. Lib. de prudent. 1 de sani. tuend^
as far forth as by diet we may devise, Religion, rule, and art enforce, as
Ambrose, Lactantius, Firmianus, Galen, and Palingenius do show, Children are
to be trained up from the first step of understanding, with loving, learned,
(...) discret persons, of good Religion, expert knowledge, and godly ^se, as
Plutarchus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Iohan^^ Io^^us ^^^^meth Although Galen
and Boethius does not appoint it, until the second seventh year, yet I
think it most reasonable, Lib. 1. de rat. stu. pueror. Lib. de infanti.
with Quintilian, Lodouicus Viues, and Mokerus, especially in this age, soon
ripe soon rotten, whereof in the next volume I shall show the reason, from the
third year the lusty sort, and the other (not so pregnant or ready witted,)
from the fourth year, fifth, and sixth, and that they eschew the sight and
hearing of that that might make them worse, as is said, At the third and fourth
year children are to be taught.
if they learn not that that might make them better: and to appoynte a Tutor,
a Scholemayster of good nature, sufficient knowledge, civil manners, goodly
stature, and seemly gesture, for to be their guide, rather than earnestly to
teach as yet, whose ten properties, with many worthy sayings, touching
nouriture, Lib. 2. de princ.
devised by Don Anthony Gueuara, and translated by Master North, I omit,
because it is extant in English in most places, and do think good to
express these of Gordonius.

The qualities of a good Scholemayster.
First, that he be apt to teach, witty, and ingenious, and that he can
interpret the holy Scriptures, apply them for the amendment of life, and
agree them for the strengthening of our faith.

Secondly, that he be good and honest of conversation: for to speak well, and
work evil, is but to condemn and falsify a man's own words.

Thirdly, that he be humble in teaching, and not lofty and proud hearted, nor
a tormentor with stripes.

Fourthly, that he be eloquent, for science without eloquence is as a Sword in
a lame man's hand.

Lastly, that he be cunning, and have the perfect way of teaching, so
excellentlye well set out by Master Ascham for all sharp wits, (as hitherto
has not bin done) in his book of instruction of youth, dedicated to the noble
and right prudente cou^sellor, the Lord Burleigh, high Treasourer of England.
And as for the other sorts of baser capacities, or pleasanter wits, as their
Tutors shall think best, the Kings Grammar, Foxes long music, wrighting, or
any other, meet for their weak wits, delicate devises, and trades ensuing,
chosen for their (...) and learning, and not for favor or kindred, Wherefore
Scholemaysters are to be admitted.
but at the seventh year, for further in this first work I intend not,
because that the rest of the order of our trayning up in all health, holiness,
and manners of life, with such kind of discipline and trades, meet to garnish a
Christian Diadem, and what complexions are best to learn; and what Authors
meetest to be might, shall be left for diverse volumes, answerable to the
diversity of ages, for others to perform according to this plat^^^e, if I be
hindered or discouraged, aunswerable to each nature, office, time, and place.
etc. seeing those be better prefer^^^, that travel only for private profit,
than he which to his ^^all power with tooth and nail seeks the common
benefit.

CHAP. XXXVI. At what time Galen wills Children to exercise, and what
pastimes be meetest for gentilitie: and what labors and trades be best for the
co^munaltie to avoid, as well ro^gishnesse as idleness: Of the foreshew of
good children, and how soon Strangers make theirs get their living. Of the
speedy regard that would be had to Schools and Scholars of England and
Ireland, as well for the over multitude that is in the one, as the over few
number that is in the other.
IT shall be time, says Galen, for such sons as shall nobly and
worshipfully be descended, and that have such sound parts as we have before
described, meet for the Camp, Court, and common affairs, with the knowledge
before mentioned, to learn to ride, run, ^rastle, toss the light lance, and
throw the small dart, Lib. 7. Asch^m has written a learned and skillful book
of Archerie.
made fit for their feedle strength, using Archerie chiefly, although every
one cannot atteine to Catenes cunning, mentioned by Quintus C^^^ul. The rest of
the co^munaltie, every one to some art or ^^^^rie, answerable to their nature,
invention, and place, unless as in youth you carefully nourishe them, in age
you mean cruelly to cast them away, and therein what else do you says More,
Lib. 2. de Vtopia.
but then make Roges, and then punish Roges. And those persons says Plato,
that pass their lives without profit, In Idea.
ought to have the rest of their days lawfully taken from them. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
Also the Scriptures say, that they that will not labor, ought not to eat.

A just and profitable law. At what age children should be taught to labor. At
what years the children of strangers get their living.
Hence it seems, that our profitable law made against Roges and vagrant
persons, is justly brought. And in childhode labors should begin, because
the twigge, you know the Proverb, will easelyest twine whiles it is green,
he seen pricks that will be a thorn, soon ^roketh the tree that good
camocke will be, and use makes maysterie, as by daily experience, and the
strangers children it appears, for at four and five years many of them get
their living, being therefore no such burden to the common wealth as some
fantastically imagine, but rather greatly beneficial, if you will well wey the
sundry ways and trades that they teach, how our children may get some part
also of their maintenance, with the profit that sundry Towns and Cities has,
by the industry of them learned, Look the Book of the receiving the Queens.
Majesty into Norwiche. A needful thing of Magistrates to be considered, and
speedely to be redressed. Too many Schools, and Scholars in England, In ye
Alarm to England.
as in open show most excellently in the eye of your majesty at Norwich was
handled, wishing, that in sundry corporations of Wales, and the North, some
were planted, that so the idle might be both taught to get their living, and
also, that the void and empty houses might be maynteyned: and that the
greatest part of all youth, having gotten some strength as well of theirs, as
of ours, should be brought up in husbandry, and daily labors, and not in
toyish devises, needelesse for our commons, a lesser part of all kind of
Artificers and Merchants, and the least number of all, for all kind of
Scholars, our state (to them that look into it, as I have done into every
City, Town, Corporation, and Borough, and the manner of the lives of all our
Country people of every degree) does so require, as Ireland does the
contrary, Schools and Universities, as B. Rich rightely proves, our Statute
Laws commands, and for the love I bear to my Country I do (...), because,
that by the mean each state is best maintained, ^f dearth and scarcity may
be eschewed, obedience be embraced, laborious arts and painful travels
practiced, Some needful statutes to be executed.
and also by reason of the great want there is of painful servants and willing
Hindes, notwithstanding, that needeful statutes made for servants, and that
also of taking of Prentises, for doubtless after they have gotten some
Scholerly knowledge, conceit of understanding above their felows, and custom
in idleness the two first ages, they then forthwith condemn for the most in all the ages following, not only honest, homely, and home travels, but also, if
their parents leave them not living aunswerable to their understanding and
liking, nor by any other ways be preferred, to shifts forsooth, sects and
practices, by and by they enter, or into the profession of Divinity, Physic,
Law and Schooling, before they be approved either for capacity, manners, or
experience, turning wit into wiliness, learning to lewdness, truth to
deceitfulness, cunning to craftiness, eloquence to flattery, fidelity to
hypocrisy, labor to idleness, and humility to stoutnesse: to be short, as
Tullie testifies, that as bounty by bounty is diminished, so I affirm, that
by learning, learning is contemned and disabled.

And yet hereby I mean not to seclude the apt mind of any of the Yeomanrie
that shall have continual maintenance from the daily study and practice of any
of the aforenamed, or any other of the liberal sciences, neither Colleges, or
worthy gra^mer schools are to be suppressed, no more tha^ I do affirm, that
the dullarde of high birth is to be preferred, or the pelting schools in
every place to be suffered, as in the next age shall be at large declared, and
the over number in each Diocese idly trained, accounted with the labors,
trades and exercises described.

Which use of laudable labors, and exercises Martial, is so ancient, as
Diogenes scholars practiced it in Greece, in Candy, In Apot^^
as Erasmus declares, In Apoth.
Licurgus appoints it the Lacedaemonians, and Alexander Seuerus furthered it
amongst the Romans, and charged the sensures over youth to be again
careful, In Apoth.
as Valerius Cordus testifies, and Conradus Lycosthenes. Commanding youth
with due reverence to attend often in the presence of their virtuous Parents,
Tutors and Masters, that thereby they might learn Civility, good Manners,
Wisdom, every kind and age by themselves. At the Bathes omitted,
notwithstanding my rules delivered, as of Buckstones chieflye is reported, not
doubting but it will be ordered according to the Register prescribed,
considering the noble Earl would have al men well used, and every one to be
well dealte withal, for to his great charges was the house builded, Look in
the last part of my book of the benefit of ye Bathes of Buckstone
and for the common benefit, and not for private profit, nor vain devises:
and so Plato councelled the Athenians in all their dooyngs, although they were
Infidels, that they should learn all offices of life: of Christians therefore
not to be neglected at all times and in all places.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Tullies division of duties both natural and moral, and
how they ought to be regarded. The antiquity, formalitie and decentnesse of
apparel, in sort handled to the praise and dispraise thereof.
In off. Perfecta. Duty divided according to Tullie
THe Roman Orator deuideth duties two ways, the one perfect following nature
endued with the moral virtues, or Cardinal, as the School Doctors Bernarde
and Lumbarde do term it, with the ancient holy Fathers Anselme and
Augustine, and learned Philosophers, as Aristotle, Macrobius and Scotus, because
they fortify and strengthen all manly motions: as for example: Prudence
righteth understanding, Fortitude Courage, Temperaunce Lust, and Justice all
powers.

The other not so perfect proceeding of instruction by precepts guiding the
trade of life, Media.
according to every condition to the semblaunce of wisdom and natural
goodness, of all wise men (as shows Gueuara) by the authority of Solomon to
be desired, and in their children to be instilled: because they ought more to
rejoice and glory in knowledge their children have, than of the abundaunce of
goods they leave them: Although now adays possessions, annuities, cattelles,
gold and silver be chiefly esteemed: for who, except only the very wise and
perfect noble, hearing one commended for the gifts of the mind and body, that
forthwith demands not for the gifts of fortune also, as of what liuelihode
is he? what is he worth? A foolish demand.
no^ regarding his state, profession, and virtuous calling, or his nobleness
if he be used: preferring the mould of the earth, and dumb beasts, that he
breeds, before man's graces, ruler of all corruptible things and political
causes: Oh horrible abuses, by the very Heathen condemned. For, Wares of
preferment.
as Quintus Curtius writes, the honest, civil and learned sort commonly be
least wealthy, unless it be worthily bestowed upon them, by Princes, Peers,
Potentates, Prolats and parents, gifts, heritage, office, will, or marriage.

And no marvel, for their minds are more inclined to virtue, wisdom,
knowledge and honesty, than to riches, What becomes good men. Supereth.
Arist.
possessions, or annuities, and certainly so it becomes good men, for unless
(babes) you have a delight to seek after wisdom, virtue, knowledge, and good
manners, in vain as says Simplitius is the study natural or divine, In off.
There is nothing comme^dable, where wa^teth good manners and duties.
either the skill and trade of breeding, feeding, husbandry, or clothing, by
Tully so highly waised, or the way of winning of riches by any office, Art,
or mystery: or yet the high gift of preaching, healing, or pleading, not
treading the steps of Christianity, of some Ministers, Physicians and
Lawiers to be better considered in their preaching and practicing, not so much
regarding how eloque^tly, delicately and cunningly it be handled, as how true,
profitably and justly it be performed, mainteining no action or wager of Law
for gain or glory, neither assuring the sick of health when he is paste
remedy, nor alleging the Scriptures for the furtheraunce of liberty, Three
especial points.
but such as accord with the verity, as that famous Clarke and excellent
Preacher Master Doctor Squire of late in his Sermons at Paul's Cross
excellently handled and divinely delivered.

Another part of this duty that may be referred to children consists in the
comely keeping of the body, and seemly form of apparel, of Holinshed not a
little reproved, as it is now used of the elder sort, and by Viues in Prose,
and Lilly in Latin verse, for youths cunningly described, so that it be
regarded: remembering always the due reverence belonging to Parents, Eccl. de
lib. educ. De off. Lib. de infant. Lib. de senect. Number. 8. Exodus 22. Act. 24.
1. Tim. 2. Tit. 3. Romans 5.12 13. 1. Pet. 2. Lib. 2. Stromat. The law a sure
fortress.
Masters, Elders, Nobles and Officers, as Moses, Sirach, Plutarch, Quintilian,
Ambrose, Osorius, and Mokerus wills, which as Tullie shows, was better
observed of the Lacedaemonians, than of the Athenians. But the chiefest regard
of all must be to observe the laws of GOD and the Prince, and them always to
follow and obey, by that reverend Father, and honorable Prelate Master Doctor
Elmer in his Sermons of late before our Sovereign, right godly and
duetifully delivered, even as in the Primative Church it was by the ancient
Fathers and divine Teachers, and as now it becomes al good subjects.
Profitable council.
For as Clemens Alexandrinus affirms, al those that have a desire to follow ye
laws, do build unto themselves strong holds, that keep their minds and bodies
in a lawful mean, Pu^^itia. Adolescentia. Iuuentus. Actas virilis. and Senectus.
obeying their prince without rack in his commandments, and in guiding their
consciences without offense, as in the rest shall not be omitted, according to
the ages of Child, Ladde, Youth, Perfect man, and Old age.

In c^^^ain off. De off. de ^obili.
And those means, demeanors, or behauiors, Aristotle terms Manners, Tullie
Duties Saint Ambrose Christianity, (...), Castilio Couetlinesse, Eliot
Governance, 2 de Regimine. De Aulico. Ad Heuricum. ^.
(...) ciuili^ie, Lawyers in a sort formalitie, Academiks (...), and the holy
Ghost Wisdom, for through Wisdom (...) we reformed, taught and preserved, as
say Solomon and Sy^^ch, it is wisdom that opens the mouth of the dumb, a^^
that causes the tongs of babes to be eloquent, that ma^^^ (...) to endeavor at
al times, in all places, as Plato wills, does by dye^ and discipline to follow
Virtue and flee Vice, (...) abhor evil opinions and sinister, and to keep
the true catholic faith, as says Clemens Alexa^drinus, Athanasius, Padag ^g.
Lib 1.2.3. In simb. In introd. ad sapiens. De rem. Am^. De infant.
and Viues, and that informs children also to avoid idleness, as Ovid
wills, holy Ignatius, sage Cirill, and Mokerus, because that in the judgment
generally of all the wise and learned, it has no small force. These behauiours
in making and ma^ring the manners of the mind as well as the state of the body,
of our late famous Jewel, Lib. de vita and more. Iuell^
as the learned and worthy Doctor Master Humfrie testifies, in his tender
age considered, and during his life accustomed. Also, the Proverb is, that
Meat makes, Cloth shapes, and Manners a man.

The Sacred word likewise says, Eccle. 1^.
that by a man's apparel, laughter, and going, he is known what he is.

And the ancient custom of Princes, Peers, Prelates, A decent form of
apparel laudable.
(...) people do declare it, as by the Parliament Robes of the States, the
Weeds of the Judges and Sergeants, Scarlet Gowns of Aldermen, and the
Liueries of Companies, with the Coats of Arms of the Heralds from time to
time have approved it.

How fantastically, disdainefully and slightly soever (...) condemn comely
ornaments ordered of most ancient ^^^tie for each kind, degree and profession
most decent, as Benedictus Areteus testifies, Prob. 2. De vest.
yet I would not have it so to be thought, that it should be of any
necessity, that the office must be depraved, if the Minister be not in his
habit: as the Proclamation is of no force without there be first before it be
^ead, an Oyre sounded: nor that any superstition therein should be maintained.
Howbeit, to see a Preacher apparelle^^ like a Peddler, a Minister like a
Minstrell, a Doctor like a Dauncer, a Bishop like a Bacheler, a Judge like a
Iester, a Counselor like a Courser, a Souldioure like a Sailer, a Private
person like a Peer, a Commoner like a Courtier, a Woman like a wandering
Masker, a Man like a monstrous Player, a Youth like one of old years, were
very unseemly and vnhealthie in a civil and sound society, where all things
ought to be both comely and profitable, and each one according to their
degree, to be reverenced accordingly, for the Proverb is, that As a man is
met, so is he grette.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A confutation of such as appoint no natural end or godly
election: Of the care that Rulers should have to holy Religion: The folly of
such as have taught persite pleasure to be a let to Virtue: a description
of the best constitution.
But because my meaning is not to standevpon such things thoroughly as serve to
all comeliness of the body and mind, until I come to the other ages, I do
affirm here with Galen, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Saint Augustine, that they
be not a little deceived that suppose all men meet to attain Virtue, as they
be that think there is none that favor honesty, which is to appoint no
natural end, or godly election, What they be that know mankind but by the
half.

A matter worth the maruelling.


because both these know the nature and providence of God in mankind, but by
the half. For, neither are al men borne enemies to goodness, nor all so made
and chosen, that they favor Justice, Virtue, and Godliness. Wherefore I
marvel with them at the Stoikes, that supposed al men meet to get Virtue, as
Paul did at the Galathians, who after they had received the grace of God, cast
it behind them, when as (...) see daily many children borne of the same
parents, brought up of the same Masters, and using the same nourishment,
differ far in nature, as well as in opinion. Who I pray you for Gods sake,
who has taught wickedness, says Galen? and yet few children shall you find
by nature prone to virtue, but by their Parents, Rulers, Preachers, Teachers,
and Masters, Romans ^.
through instruction and correction be brought thereunto: Through the sacred
word, as affirms the Apostle, the people be brought unto the Christian
faith, and by godly regiment kept in holy Religion. A most needful note.
How careful therefore Rulers, Potentates, Prelates and Preachers, ought to
be, to foresee that Unity be observed through all your Majesty's Dominions,
and that no exercise, invention or devise whatsoever be permitted, Prophesying,
Preaching, Reading, Interpretation of Scriptures, or form of ministration
Public, or Private, other than agrees with the holy Catholic Faith, our
present laws confirmed by Gods laws, you may eastlie gather, forasmuch as all
such doings tend to popularitie, mutiny and sedition, as often alteration does
Irreligion: for what a seditious and sclaunderous case is this that still some
put forth, that if it be consonante to the word of God, then we are bound to
obey, use and follow it, otherwise not, Seditious speeches to be avoided.
as though it could not be consonant to the Scriptures, unless such a
singular and precise Sir did approve it. And why? because forsooth their Cape,
as, it, is, excel all men, and that the holy Ghost is rather preast to
instruct Cauillers and Sectaries, than the whole Christian state of his holy
Church, Princes, Peers, and people, not considering, that where Religion is
once firmly grounded, and constantly believed, that then they be there more
obedient unto their divines, Lib. 4. de antiq. De vero cultu. a presumptuous
and seditious objection used still too common.
than to their Captains, as testify Quintus Curtius, Josephus, and
Lactantius, neither that hereby is brought a manifest starting hole to all
contempt and disobedience, if this objection way without distinction of time,
place, and state, be admitted. Again they be holden with extreme folly,
Decad. 2. fol. 238.
as Bullinger learnedly shows, that say we are withdrawn from Virtue through
right pleasure, through lawful pastimes, as in a Pamphlet of late was
delivered, entitled the Destruction of small Vices, No pleasure is to be
forbidden, whereof comes no harm.
accompting recreations, profitable pleasures, reioycings of life, for heinous
Sins, as persons wholly ignorant in Philosophy, Physic, and Divinity: for
the extreme and unlawful lust and pastimes, is not to be termed pleasure,
but rather unreasonable pain, offense and displeasure, whereby by the way it
appears, that Cicero for all his knowledge and eloquence in moral
Philosophy, Lib. 3. de Off. Sect. vltim.
failed for lack of perfect skill in the Natural, and Gods gift in the
Theological, and namely, in that he wrote against Metrodorus, affirming, that a
good complexion, pleasant health, does strive with honesty, Scandalum maius
and minus.
without the latitude whereof, which consists in the most pleasant
agreement of the unity of the parts of the spirits, humors and members,
according to the more and the less, Lib. de Senect.
maintained through moderate exercise of the mind and body in pleasant
recreation, as he says the light in the Lamp is with Oil, very profit,
comely honesty, nor right pleasure can be at all. For first of all that we
may rise out of the mire, and drive him to the wall: what profit or honesty
can be at all where reason is wanting? what manhood where is no courage? The
humane virtues or graces.
what generation or nourishment where lacks desire? what government where
lacks understanding, what Religion, or Doctrine, where sense is wanting* what
world, what joy, what state, where all these things, joyful Health of Body and
Soul, pleasure is vanished, delight destroyed, comely society condemned, the
mean misordered, a good complexion banished or not used? In Eth. Lib. 2. de
V^oy.
and pleasure is defined to be every motion and state of the body, wherein
manne has natural delectation.

Pleasure defined.
There be diverse kinds of pleasures, some are attributed to the soul, and some
to the body.

(...) ^oule intelligence, Nemesius de volupt.
and that delectation that com^^^ (...) contemplation of truth, joining
thereunto the re^^^ (...) of the good life past.

(...) to the body, that delight and pleasure that grows by ^^^^eing of that
which is wanting, and the emptying of that (...) does abound, in ye books
following what is omitted at (...) to be handled, under the things natural
contained, as ^^ my Tables in Bathes aid appears, Wekerus, Lib. 2. par. id
est (...). De loc. medic.
and Va^^^^^: all which felicities and pleasures, the best constitution,
holding the latitude of health, and divine instructions, en^^^eth, brings,
and maynteyneth the graces of the godhead, (...) assisting with the rest
mentioned, in a word for all, everlasting life, as well as continual health:
De sani. tue^^a. De Regim. In Dec.
it causes as Montu^^, Osorius, and Bullinger, following all the best learned,
affirms, with all other virtues of mind and body whatsoever, as in another
place I have more largely discoursed, of ^ullie is confessed, and of the
prudent quickly perceived. For what is he for example, that either has godly
zeal, loyal heart, or loving mind to his Country, that does not think all
this rests with the whole stay of the weal public next under God, in our
Queens majesty's life, Qu. Elizabeth of excellent constitution and knowledge.
who as her highness (be it spoken to the praise of God, profit of the
godly, and without suspicion of all flattery) has a most excellent
complexion of body, agreeable to nature, with all gifts of the mind, and
education answerable, so immediately under God, pleasant and joyful health in
the same constitution practiced, is the long preserver, through whom we have
so much godliness and quietness, which God grant to be perpetual, and her
highness life equal to Polio Romulus, in happiness to Augustus, and in
riches to Croesus, and after this transitory life, to obtain those
unspeakable and everlasting pleasures, joys, and Crown of immortal glory,
prepared for his elect, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Where now was the Prince of Orators the Roman pleaders notable wit,
that in all other things, moral, civil, Tullie reproved.
and politic, was so excellent, that worshily in his Orations as well as in
his Offices and Tuscul questions, Did age, Originals, Augurals, Canon and Civil
Law, vanteth himself so often, when as he brought the best constitution, Gods
deed, sound health, Pleasure, for a Champion to combat with Honesty, and
placed the natural cause of all profit, the mean temperature, health,
pleasure, amidst ye most horrible extremes, devilish deeds, 3. De off. Sect.
vlt. Grimbalde deceived.
vices, displeasures. Here also I can not excuse skillful Grimbald, in
translating Complexion for Constitution, when as Complexion is only taken with
Hippocrates, Galen, and Auicen, and all other learned Physicians, for the
joining together of diverse qualities of the four Elements in one body: but
Constitution conteyneth not only the temperature, that never stays (as Galen
shows) in one degree or sort, De. bo. cor. ha. De temp. De apt. corpor.
constit. 1. De sani. tuenda. De plat. Hipp. and Plat.
but it is a great deal more effectual and more permanent, as the parts
universally well fashioned, apt to al duties, with just members, and decente
greatness, and also the well joining of them sit to all actions.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Stoykes diversely reprehended. Of our deprauing both by
custom, and by nature. What force the temperature is of to alter as well the
body as the mind. Of the condemnation of certain Sects of Philosophers.
Universal destiny condemned. Predestination briefly declared.
THis suffices with that that follows, to show the folly of all them that
say, that we are through moderate pleasure, through healthful state, and
wholesome exercises, withdrawn from virtue, through honest pastimes, and lawful
games, made godless, through a good complexion to strive with honesty, whom
the learned Possidonius, as Galen wrighteth, has notably confuted, affirming
that in us certain inward seeds of vices does lie, as it were certain small
fires, and that it is not so necessary for us to beware of vice, as to
restinguish and keep back the increase of (...) the Stoykes opinion is, a
principle of the Stoykes overthrown.
and others follo^ (...) in used happens to our minds outwardly: (...) sort,
as witnesses Plato, have in themselves, as (...) ashes, causes of evil, That
by custom we be depraved, as well as by nature and will. De Anima fa^ cultate.
Padagog. Will. Understanding. a needful note for all Governors. Lib. 4. Al.
De tuen valc. 19 De repub.
that that happens outwardly (...). Therefore assuredly, evil customs
coming to (...) of the spirit, wanting reason, which (as Bullinger (...) with
Nences. Will, we are made wicked, as affir^^^ ^leme^s Alexandrinus, and
according to the intellectiue (...) understanding, we are stained with false
opinions, as (...) godly, less, and perfect men, we are instructed, the
opini^^ (...) our manners civil, as the Count Castilio, Ia^ ^^^^ncus, and
Hieronimus Montu^s shows. But in the (...) part of the spirit, reason and
foolishness do vary, ac^^^^^ to the more and the less: and do follow (as
teaches (...) temperature of the body, ungoverned by grace and (...) I say,
and the temperature has as a beginning, first (...) in the womb, and after
nourishment and meats gett^^^ (...) more, How the te^perature does alter the
manners.
and these mutually do cherishe and increase one (...) for the hot
temperature, for example sake, man angels. Hence anger kindles the natural
heat, and mali^^ it (...). Contrariwise; they that be of mean temperature,
(...) complexion, be meanly moved in mind, void of all ex^^^^^^ passions and
affections, keeping for the most the pleasant agreement and heavenly harmony
of health, apt to all use, and profits engender good humors, and do yield
themselves also that is unto reasons rule, to Gods laws, to lawdable labors,
and to al good orders and callings whatsoever. Wherefore, let all these be
rejected, and these sects following, What kind of Writers are to be rejected
Aristippus. Epicurus. Hegesias.
especially from the t^^^^ing up and company of al youth, as be of Aristippus,
Epicurus or Hegesias minds, doctrine and manners. The Gyrenaikes and
^^^riserians, who swarued so far from the mean, although then they bare the
name of Philosophers, as well in conversation and doctrine, following and
hunting after vice, delights of ye outward senses, besides ye consent of
inward reason, instead of pleasure, as though there had bin none other
felicity, but to eat, drink, dally, tickle, rub, scratch, and other
unlawful pastimes, contemning the motions and deeds of the spirit, and
cleaving to the appetite and lusts of the flesh, whereas it was and is the
high way, not only to the destruction of body and soul, but also of name and
liuelode, the one sort putting all bliss in wanton chambering, the other in
drunken banqueting, the third in contemning life: so that Hegesias stirred many
to neglect, as well their own preservation, until Ptolomeus the King by
decree put him to silence, as by politic princes ever accustomed, that
against God and the laws has preached, as also induced sundry to despair,
and to cast away themselves through his eloquent orations uttered in the
hearing of ignorant persons, that he made in praise of death, and contempt of
life, as Valerius Maximus, and Erasmus testifies, much like to certain
barbarous Indians, Wisards of India.
mentioned by Quintus Curtius, which amongst them are reckned for their wise
men, who does account it for great shame to be alive, until they be aged,
sick, or grieved, leaving herein no rule to reason, no place to experience,
nor no restraint, amendment, or correction, to the licentious flesh, lust and
ire, will and courage, sinful old Adam, respecting neither the safegarde of
the soul through amendment of life, by the graces of the godhead in the new
Adam, through faith, hope, and charity, with the godly divines, nor the
conservation of the parts in health, the humane graces or virtues, through
Physical council, with the reverend and skillful Physicians, nor the
preservation of power, wisdom, and justice, through blessed and kingly
regiment, with the mighty Magistrates, wise Philosophers, and learned Lawyers,
together with all sort of Scismes, Sects, and Heresies, which are ever said to
tend to sedition, mutenie, and alteration, whereof in all times has bin too
great a trial, needful therefore always speedely to be prevented,
withsta^ded, A wise note, and a pretty taunt.
and abolished, unless we shall as new fangled, as some are in their garments,
and the whole r^^te of them that teach with the desperate and damnable Turks,
or that do believe (...) ^enesaries are instructed al too Heathenly, as did
diverse (...) Philosophers, trusting only in Destiny, who^ the Prophets Jeremy
has utterly confuted, with Saint Gregory, and master Hutcheson, in his work
entitled, The Image of God, or too too generally, as ouermany do feign, that
al things good and evil, do happen of fatal necessity, predestinately, Lib.
1. Stromat. De pradest sancto De verit. fidei. Christ. De pro. Aci. De great. De
pradest. Epist 3. ad Mag. idem. ad Smit. De Prad. De ver fide ch^. Gap. de
Prad. De Pro. De Prad.
seeing that not only all the old holy writers, Clemens Alexandrinus, Ignatius,
Cyrillus, Augustine, and Gregorius, do affirm that Predestination does
appertain but only to the blessed Election of the faithful, godly, and holy
ones alone, but also (...) late foreign and home writers, Erasmus Sarcerius,
Lo^ouicus Viues, Master Hutcheson, Doctor Cradocke, and Antonius Coranus,
very largely and learnedlye delivers: Here only remembered for our outward
instruction, and not to put any Faithful Believer in doubt of our inward
Election and Predestination, through grace in Christ Jesus, and that agreeable
to the whole scope of the Scriptures: for if we shall apply to our vase
capacities, Of our falling, election, predestination, and induration.
The offering of the Lord unto us, is our calling: who so takes hold of him,
is elect: if we continue to the end in the truth, we may boldly say that
we are predestined, the faithful and godly given, and not the Unfaithful,
Sinful and wicked: but if we refuse him, we are Hardened, and so shall we not
lead any into Presumption, De Pradest. Decad. 4. fol. 4. f. 646. Acts. 9.
Cap. 22.
nor life Desperation. And therefore Bullinger right warely and wiselye
teaches, that all men are not drawn unto him by the Hear, nor like Blocks
and Stocks: although Paul was forcibly to preach unto the Gentiles the
verity, Abacucke violently to show Daniel the power and mercy of the Mighty,
Cap. 4.
and Jonas miraculouslye to warn them of Niniuie to repent and cry for
mercy, which they obtained, Because every one of them turned from his evil
way, and from the wickedness he had done, to the great grief of ye Prophet as
ye may read, by reason he saw that his preaching should be falsified, Cap. 3.
More regarding his own credit, than the glory of the mighty, or the saving
of so infinite many, which fault God forbid it should be in any of the
Clergy, seeing that God enforced, none to folly. For the confirmation
whereof, Bullinger cites the saying of our Savior, Ask, and it shall be
given unto you: Math. ^. Luke. 11.
Seek, and ye shall find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for,
whosoever asks receives, and whosoever seeks finds, and to him that
knocks, shall be opened. Whereby we see, that we must always, whiles we
live, ^^aues for the assistance of the graces of the Godhead, to direct ours,
De Praedest. De Lib. arh. Dialog. 1.
according to the divine laws, and then doubtless we are his Saints. Let
any in this point of their precise and unprofitable inventions say what they
list, or can to the contrary, seeing that Cause confesses man to have Reason
and Will, as it is most true, and as by the definition of Man appears:
Essentialis definitio. Homo est Animal. rationale.
for Man is a living creature, endued with reason, or else his state were no
better than a Beast, if there were no difference, which by no means may be
permitted, but always remembered, that the earnest care of children to follow
Virtue may be furthered, Confess. August. Lib. 2.
and not hindered (as forth of Saint Augustine may be gathered) but rather
the more encouraged, and that the evil and disobediente may not have a false
gloss to color their lewdenesse, and that Divine things, Natural and
Political, may not be confounded, nor the weak consciences burdened, De
Praedest.
as in the holy Articles of Religion is forewarned, in the Margent upon Ochines
third Sermon noted, and by Veron likewise willed, and as by this definition set
forth of the sacred Scriptures is verifyed, Romans 8. Ephesians. 1. Di Pred.
for the predestinate are Saints, or holy people, made like to the Image of
God: and are called, justified, and glorified by him.

CHAP. XL. A declaration of certain conceyted fellows void of reason or
art, which judge of the mediate graces not as they ought, nor yet of the
immediate. Of the wickedness of Libertines, and of the speedy redress that
must be had. Machiuels discourses to his Prince to be abandoned. A repetition
of things going before in a Christian society to be remembered.
FVrthermore, who of any right judgment can but mislike the precise and too
too peenish conceit of some that ween themselves odd wightes, which do
judge Gods power and glory to be depraved, if there be granted any grace,
virtue, or power, to proceed from the celestial bodies, theological graces,
man's spirits, or princely regiments, or from the substance and qualities of the
elementall bodies: not knowing the force of moving, light, and influence: the
benefit of faith, hope, and charity: the need of desire, courage, and
reason: the goodness of power, wisdom, and justice: nor the alterations
wrought by heat, cold, moisture, and dries, limited them by their Creator,
to each thing, according to ye law of nature: as persons verily wholly
ignorant in the profound knowledge of God, of nature, of regiment, and
experience of Gods works in his creatures, from time to time approved, and of
late by blasing Stars signified, as well as of old, as berdelike, lau^celike,
swordlike, tunlike, hornelike, torchlike, manlike, besumlike, and such other,
some natural, some supernatural, as Abienus, Damascenus, and Manilius in their
days delivered, and sithence, Picus Mirandula, and Fredericus Nause, but last
of al, Michael Mestlin, Hes. Roslin, and Kindar to write most godly and
learnedly: when as al these his most wonderful works do rather set forth and
declare his most mighty power, inco^prehe^sible wisdom, and exceeding mercy of
us to be considered to his glory and to our profit, tha^ by any means ye
contrary.

For as the Kingly Prophet David says, The Heavens declare the glory of God,
and the Firmament shows forth his handie works. The works of the Lord are
great (says he) and to be sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
Again he says, All his works praise him. And truth it is, whether they be
Mathematically measured, or Metaphisically pondered, ^erm. 7.
let now the Arrian Ochine with his followers never so fondly force to the
contrary.

Moreover, who can but condemn the desperate will, and senseless wit of all
Libertines, that for as much as they follow liberty, and do condemn Gods
precepts, not remembering their newness of birth, the forsaking of sin, they
neither fear God, nor obey man, being the very worst of all others, putting
their blind belief with Diagoras, surnamed Godless, Theodorus, and
Protagoras, in self rule, fickle fortune, De not. deorum.
and blind chance, making no conscience or difference in laws divine or
politic, so they may have their liking, until suddaynely be laid in their
dishe the high Holand herb Chokeweede, No godless creature left unpunished
here, or else in the world to come.
until the just judgment of God fall upon them, like rather brute beasts,
senseless blocks, and blind infidels, than reasonable creatures, godly
children, or dutiful subjects. Equal to these incarnate devils expressed, is
the discourses of the Italian Monster Machiuell to the Prince his master, De
Princip.
who settes aside as well the graces of the godhead Ecclesiastical, humane,
and princely, as Theological, so that he may serve his turn, be it never so
far from the godhead: gifts, celestial influence, humane knowledge, reason,
courage and love, princely virtues, power, wisdom, and justice, or divine
graces, faith, hope, and charity, not regarding by these his faithless and
uncivil doings, how that he divides not only man from man, where his
precepts be embraced, but also leaves no good state peopled for any godly
one Prince to reign upon many virtuous subjects, of late excellently confuted
in a Latin work, Machiuell confuted.
dedicated to the noble and godly Gentleman Master Francis Hastings, and
Master Edward Bacon. No Vice then is there fouler, (that thither my talk may
return from whence it is strayed) than such intemperance of body and mind,
declining from the mean, especially in all such as are appointed in one knot
of Christian society, to love, preserve, and instruct others, as our Savior
did his Disciples, to love, serve and obey one another, regarding so the body,
that we neglecte not the soul. A needful note.
Look so to the Heavenly and divine regiment, that all earthly and princely
state in the Scriptures so highly commended be not overthrown. For if you
suffer our Kingly regiment once to quail, farewell and adue to al Virtues,
Honors and Dignities, De prin. De reg.
as write Patricius, Chelidonius Tigurinus, and Osorius.

CHAP. XLI. The family of Love to be apprehended of the unity that ought to
be in government: Which way Faith is obtained: How means and miracles differ:
Of the confutation of diverse heresies: What hurt does grow of too too
costly apparel: Paul's opinion concerning the unrighteous, and why it is laid
down.
THe vpstarte faithless family of Love therefore are not to be suffered to
wander any longer (laid by Dauy George of Delf, The inuentors of the sect of
the Family of Love.
and hatched by Henry Nicholas of Amsterdam, but made fligge by Christopher
Vittel of Southwarke Ioiner) erroniously, dissemblingly, and damnably teaching,
that they in God are Deified, and God in them Hominified: so that whatsoever
they do, an horrible saying.
be it never so wicked, cannot be evil, as if ye read a work of late set
forth, entitled The Displaying of the family of Love, may at large appear:
seuering themselves from the Christian congregation, and Catholic company of
the Primative Church, visible and militant here upon earth under our Queen,
next and immediately under God, of the Churches of England and Ireland; and
congregating themselves in one house or other of the Family, which if he be a
disciple, they call Rabbi, accompting all things in common, otherwise than the
laws of God and our Prince does warrant, Erroneous and seditious Books.
teaching principles full of sedition, community, and blasphemy, as in the
books of Exhortation, a Dialogue between the father and the son, the
prophecy of the spirit of Love, Euangelium Regni, the glass of
Righteousness, the holy Lamb, etc. does too manifestly appear: exhorting all
my country Babes of every congregation to remain in unity of regiment, A
Catholic exhortation. Math. 12. Dissension cause of all destruction.
as diverse members of one body, seeing that the infallible word of God
affirms, that every kingdom divided in it self can not long stand, as
daily experience, common reason, and infinite histories do declare.

For even as without unity of body and mind, there can be no health or perfect
strength inward, Nothing without means can stand.
as is said, so without outward, in bodies and states politic, of godly
reasons rule in all commonweals, Princes directing, Pastors preaching,
Counselors commanding, Captains leading, Physicians healing, Tutors
teaching, Travelers trading, Artificers working, ploughmen plowing, subjects
obeying, servants serving, etc. with the Lawyers judging to every man
according to the worthiness of his calling, and that by right any way to the^
belongs, divine statute, civil customarie, common, Martial, Marine, and not
every private man's invention measured by the meterod of affection, nothing
holyly, nothing justly, nothing orderly can be ordered in divine rites or
temporal causes, on la^d or on water, in peace or in war, in Court or in
country, in field or in bower, Whence the reason of all laws were had, civil,
common, or private. All the actions proceed from the operation of the parles.
in tent or in town, in Church or in Chapel, in College or in School, etc.
nor any fortress can be fortified, armor ordained, army victualled, house
builded, Sea traded, lame restored, sick mended, infant nourished and
instructed, or naked clothed. Hence if we mark but the use of our own parts,
the pattern of all laws, Regimente and Unity, as M. Rainolds well notes in
his foundation of Rhetorike, and the subject of Physic) we shall find, that
according to instruments and offices from the mediate graces in mankind, it
works deeds: the Arteries con^^yeth the spiritual blood from the hear: the
Veins, the nutritive from the Liver, and sinews, sense from the Brain to al
parts: and they again feeling with the ^^^ctes, fibers, and rest of the
sinew^s, of heat and cold, hard and soft, rough and smooth, etc. So that if
they be let, be it in the wrest, for example, by wou^d, dislocatio^, or
Fracture, until they be united again by Nature, and that noble part of
Phisieke termed Surgery (as at Leith and Barwike I had no small experience
after the assault in the beginning of the second year of the Queens Majesty's
reign) the hand instrument before al instruments shall lose his operation.
Where infirmity happens, help is right needful.
And even so we may say of the eye, the scous^watch of outward actions and
glasses of the inward soul, which if it be affected and enco^bred with ^^th of
Catarike (by Surflot, Lake, Philip Moore, and Gray, Excellent men for the Eyes.
daily handled right artificially) does try no colors, until it be c^ched: so
without Gods gift, Natural reason (the perfect operation of the animal spirit)
being in man as Job affirms, albeit it is the inspiration of the Almighty
that gives Understanding, for as Themistius says, Lib. 3. de Animal
there is nothing more divine. Which understanding in idiots, through defecte,
is wanting, in Infantes and extreme old age, Three sorts of persons depraved
by accidens.
as in the Litargie, Mania, and Melancholy, by reason of Sickness, and as in
the Frensy, Ielosie, and Heresy, through too much Musing, wrong instruction,
affection, extreme love, and trouble of the mind. Without blessed
Gouernemente, holy discipline, and daily instruction, we could not learn so
much as to speak our own language, or any tongue in use, much less know
any Religion. Law, or dutifulness, forasmuch as Paul says, ye Faith being
the substance of things looked for, before defined and divided, comes
generally by the Sense of Hearing, Hebr. 11.
an instrument to ye reasonable office belonging, and hearing by the word of
truth, and therefore Clemens Alex teaches, Lib. 5. Strom. How Faith is
obtained.
that there is no knowledge without faith, nor faith without knowledge. Which
must be understood by the sight and sound of ye Caracters or Letters
forelearned, or by visio^s or inspiratio^s answerable to ye inue^tion and
understanding of each reasonable person in every Nation as of the learned and
godly Nowel in the latter part of his Catechismes, is very well noted out of
the word Loqui to speak, and singularly well approved of Master Ralfe Lever
in his Witcraft, Logike.
and lately found true by experience in the Brute people brought in by Captain
Frobisher, except it be miraculously. But that happens not to all persons,
neither at all times, nor in all places, for if it had or did at any time,
What Gods word does not permit. Certain objections. Math. 7.
or in any age, the Heavenly Writ would not have said against the Godless
Libertines, detestable Southsayers, and dissembling destinators: To them that
knock in Faith, shall be opened, but whether they knock in belief or not,
they shall enter. It would not have said against the old Arians, new
Family of Love, and late Anabaptists (whereof some had grace to recant of late
years at Paul's Cross, Anabaptists recanted.
thorough the godly Doctrine and wise persuasion of a right gracious Pastor in
the Church of God, Doctor Sands Archbishop of York. Mat. 15. Gat. 6. Math. 25.
every where worthilye known) to them that believe, and that be baptized is
salvation belonging. It would not have said against Loyterers, Roags, and all
evil doers, to them that do well of the household of Faith, is the Kingdom
of Heaven, to them that do evil, Hell fire. Hence manifestlye appears the
error of Origin (although some defend him) in that he taught al men should be
saved, (as I have heard some ignorauntlye affirm,) leaving no matter subject
for the triumph of Gods Justice.

Hence likewise the Scripture proves, that Lucifer for pride and ambition with
his adherentes were into perpetual torments condemned: wishing that all
children were hereof instructed, that they might no less regard the mean,
and refrain the extreme, than some of the elder sort wantyng wisdom,
grace, due consideration, do little esteem or avoid. Not knowing belike, or
not regarding Tobias words to his son, how that of Pride began all
destruction, neither yet the confession of thousands at their examinations and
execution: howbeit in the ages following it shall at large be handled, if that
already here said may not suffice, and Opius law delivered, that teaches a
mean to be kept in aparrell, unless such sumptuousness abroad where it
needs not, and attire that ought not, be not forthwith amended. Five great
discommodities through too sumptuous attire.
For hereby doubtless Vice is furthered, Hospitality hindered, Liberality
condemned, Charity neglected, and ability to serve the Prince when need
shall be, diminished: But it would have said, whether they do well or evil,
the everlasting joy is determined. These things the holy Ghost has not
uttered, an answer to the former objections,
because the truth cannot be against it self, and that is the light Lamp
which we are bound to follow, or else the Apostle would not have said, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven. Be not deceived herein,
says he to the Corinthians, Galathians and Ephesians. And this that he spoke,
as he spoke it doubtless by the spirit of God, so the faithful in all their
doings are to consider it, forasmuch as all the workers of iniquity he
wills to depart from him. And truth it is Babes, otherwise, A needful note
for Princes, Prelates, Preachers, and Parents
how should it cause the wicked and disobedient, from evil to refrain, and
to turn unto the Lord: or comfort the faithful, just and honest, to continue
in virtue and earnest zeal of godliness, as the godly have always done, if
virtue has not his reward here and in Heaven, and the vice his punishment both
upon earth and in hell. And this is the Catholic belief, that they that have
done well, shall go into life everlasting, Simb. cath. Quicunque vul^.
they that have done evil into hell fire.

CHAP. XLII. Wherein a good common weal consists: and how the Gentiles as
well as Christians had allurementes and means to draw men thereunto. A
question why Christ suffered. That God is no less just than he is merciful.
How Princes take their regimente from God, in that they punish the evil, and
advance the good. The fruits of the Spirit declared. The works of the flesh
desciphered. Our sauiors sermon upon the mount touched. That the Moral law is
continual, and in some part the Iudicall, but not at all the Ceremonial. How
al men be created to do good works. A brief conclusion upon the drift of this
whole work. That every Country is to live within the limits of their own
laws.
THe Gentiles as well as the Greeks and the Romans, kept this course in all
their governments, What mainteyneth best a commonwealth. De not. Deorum.
as may appear by the laws of Solon, Licurgus, and Pompilius, with infinite
other nations: for Solon affirmed constantly to the Athenians, that a good
common wealth consisted in these two, in preferring the good, and in punishing
evil.

The Romans (says Tullie) founded Temples in memorial hereof, in such sort,
as none could enter into the Temple of Honor before first he passed through the
Temple of Virtue. Lib. 2. de Vtopia.
And the Vtopia^s (says Moore) erected Images for memorial of their virtuous
acts, as we do the Arms, Crests, and Helmets of our worthies of the Garter
at Windsor, which I think he did imitate from the Romans, as we do from
the Greeks. But if any divine honor be given unto them, it is plain
Idolatry, as the commandments do testify. If this be so, and of Infidels
always to be wisely weyed, what shall Christian children of a far better
price, Godlier Regiment, and holier Congregation suppose in the like? shall we
neglecte i^? make no account of these things? be brought up without the
belief and understanding hereof? God forbid, seeing it is more evident than
the Sun Beams, that each Motion (as the Philosophers affirm) is first in
Sense before it be in Deed. Well the^, bind first the inward Man by godly
Religion, (...) done. (...) for (...) Sermon 2. fol. ^^1. Sermon ^ fol. ^^. Romans 13.
holy Education and noble Calling, and the outward will not range: as for
example, ye are taught to fear God, obey your Prince, and love your
Neighbor, and that unfeignedly, wherein doubtless you shall do well. Truly then
if you so do, you will seek to eschew evils, and the^ serve and love, as
affirm Erasmus, Calvin, and Bullinger: and why? because forsooth, that the
inw^rd^n^^^ the affections, be bound with the perfect bond of Christianity, of
Love, the fulfilling of the Law. Bind then the unruly lust of the over lusty
Liver, of the pampered Flesh, and halter the affections of the stubborn and
ungracious Heart in Fetters fetched forth of Gods Law, by all means possible, Good
counsel for Rulers. Psalm 30. Every thing ought to be done according to time,
place, state, and case.
according to the need of the State, Time, and Place (for the Doctrine that is
profitable for the Penitent, is not convenient for the Obstinate: nor
sufficient to the Dullard, that may suffice the Witty: nor available to the
Sick, that may serve the Healthy: nor beneficial to the Stranger, that the
Subject is bound unto:) and set at liberty with great regard and foresight the
sorrowful Sobs of the pitiful Penitent, oppressed through the Remorce of a
wayling and woeful Conscience, Godly fear, Hearty Repentance, with the comfort
and consolation of Gods mercies: then to despair of having forsaken the former
evils, were as great impiety, as is the contemning of his Justice the taking
away of his glory. Hence is the Doctrine of Luther, Super Gal. Luthers meaning.
as I take it, where he says, That a Christian man, if ye rightlye define
him, is free from al Laws, and is not subject to any creature within or
without, meaning (no doubt) where the inward man is regenerate through Grace,
that ye outward will not range, which walks after ye Spirit and not after the
Flesh.

How hard it is to find a right Christian
But because such children as be hard to be found in a common Weal that is
endued with no other, as Platos common Weal, Aristotle's Felicity, Zenos
perfect Man, Galens te^peperate Body. An excellent man in the Mathematical^es.
Dec. 3. Sermon. 8 fol. 405.
Euclides Geometry (only of Master Dee, as some think understood
thoroughly) Tullies Orator, Horace Poet, Moors Vtopia, or Paul's Protestants.
Outward and Politic regiments, are of God ordained (says Bullinger) and all
kind of good Discipline for the Wicked and ungracious sake, as that Honorable
Counselor Master Doctor Wilson well argues in his Art of Logike. and by
reason that the inward man, the affections, cannot of any be judged but by the
outward deeds, No State can stand without Law
the Law is had to rule the unruly and wicked, as the sharp Brake does the
stiff neckte Horse: for they that do well, need not to fear the Law,
considering how that the holy Writ says: That all such it rewards.

A good Objection. Why the Wisdom of the Father was sent to redeem man Lib.
de Stult. Mortalium. Power. Wisdom. Mercy.
And therefore what is he of upright Conscience, Catholic Faith, or reasonable
Judgment, that can think yt our Savior Christ suffered all that he did, not for
the amendment of our Lives rather than for ye impairing of our Manners, than
to continue us in Wickedness, as Riuius wisely writes. For if you will say,
that he will pardon our Vices, how usual soever they be committed, what else
do you teach, but that he does further all the sins of the world. But that will
not agree with the graces yt of Godhead, for Wisdom is against it, and Rule
may not suffer it. Well then, it is evident, that he must no less be a minister
of Justice than of Mercy, unless no Christian State may punish Sin, as some
of the detestable Heretics, Anabaptists, Anabaptists burned in Smithfielde.
Anno. 1575. Epist. 48. ad Vine. Contra Donat. De ve. coercendis hereticis.
Expositio Eccles. in Epist. ad Roma. Cap. 13, 14.
not long agone condemned, banished, burned, and executed, did hold, as well as
the Donatists of old by holy Augustine confuted. Which, if God had not bin
righteous, as belike they most damnably imagined, he had forbidden, so that
they might not indeed. But because he is just, as all the Faithful believe,
Scriptures teach, and Wisdom leads, he commands Vice to be punished,
not for Malice, neither yet for vain Glory, as Veron seems to ground his
dangerous Doctrine, for in him are no Mundane Affections: but by reason he is
just, th^^ should be no hinderance to the quiet living of the good, as
affyrmeth the Count Castilio. Lib. de A^l.


Hence Christian Princes following the will and commandment of God, do justly
execute the hopeless Wicked, Whence Pardons and Punishementes, did grow.
and do pardon the pitiful Penitent: taking al their Authority and Regiment
from his Power and Mercy. For doubtless, even as our Redeemer is merciful (as
says the Verity) to the Faithful and Penitent, that through Frailty do
stray, and that endeavor notwithstanding to follow his will to the vttermoste
of their power: so is he just, and punishes most terribly them that of
malice offend, sin against the holy Ghost, that fall to Apostasy, as Judas,
Simo^ Magus, Philetus, Himeneus, Demas, Julius the Apostata, and Sergius
Mahomets mate did, with too many others, which after they have taken upon the^
the sacred ministry, leave it. With all those also yt of purpose put off the
receiving of the glorious Gospel, with all Holiness, and newness of life,
forsaking to use the deeds of Christianity, The fruits of the Spirit.
which you may call The fruits of the Spirit, for that they be ye very same,
as Faith, Hope, Charity, Baptism, Love, Peace, Piety, Patience, Prayer,
Abstinence, Temperance, Repentance, Mercy, Forgiveness, Innoce^cie, Chastity,
Constancy, Virginity, holy and undefiled Matrimony, Justice, Liberality,
Hospitality, Preaching, interpreting of the sacred Scriptures, suffering
Persecution and Matirdome for the Truth, whereof you may read at large in Fox
his two Tomes of the Acts and Monuments of England, ministering of the holy
Rytes of the Church, blessed Sacraments, and doing good deeds, against yt
which godly Works, no man can proceed justly by law, much less affirm or deny,
that they being done in Faith, do not profit or avail, through Gods Mercy,
and not our Deserving, forasmuch as they be good, and by God and Man
appointed, rewarded, and blessed: for he says, No good deed left of God
unrewarded.
That he that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved: and also, He that
gives to the needy a cup of Water for his names sake, his reward shall be
great in Heaven: that is to say, Praise, Honor, and Immortality to every man
that does good, but upon the soul of every one that does evil, Math. 10. Romans
2.
Indignation, Wrath, and Anguish: So that it appears manifestly hereby, how
their punishment ought to be cruel (not only in Hell, The works of the Flesh.
but also Here,) that impugn your Highness proceedings, or that practice to
perform ye wicked deeds of the Flesh, Apostasy, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Hypocrisy, Sacrilege, Treason, Tyranny, Extortion, Conspiracy, Rebellion,
Rape, Buggerie, Burglarie, Murder, Theft, Perjury, Pride, Hautinesse,
Insolency, Clipping, Washing, Counterfeyting of Coin, Deceit, Cosoning,
Idleness, Roging, Murmuring against Rulers, Backbiting, Filching, Sclandering,
Brauling, Scolding, Libelling, Bribing, Envying, Repining, Taunting, Scoffing,
Fighting, Mutining, Disdain, Disobedience, Unnaturalness, Ingratitude,
Incest, Fornication, Adultery, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Dissembling,
Covetousness, Usury, Sloth, Witchcraft, Bauderie, Ribauldrie, Ba^kerupting,
Vnseruiceablenesse and such like, before mentioned amongst the actual sins,
which are always evil and wicked, and according to the more and the less, be
to be punished. Our Sauioures Sermon made upon the Mount. Math. 7.25. Luke.
6.14.
And therefore our Redeemer testifyeth in that Sermon he made upon the Mount
(which for our Souls health, and Bodily comfort, surpasses al yt Sermons made
upon ye Earth) that Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father, which is in Heaven.
And his will is, that ye believe his word, Obey your Prince and do
thereafter, that is, that we embrace the works of Holiness before recited, and
forsake and renounce the deeds of Wickedness last repeated. The holy Ghost
so instructs, by all Christians to be received. Hence Paul teaches, Romans
25.
That not the Hearers of the Law but the Doers, they are justified, which live
according to the Spirit, Sup. Romans
and not according to the Flesh, By Marlorat excellently opened, affirming,
that our Justification rests upon Faith, without the works of the depraved Law
of Nature, Moses Law, or any other whatsoever, without a constant Faith in
Jesus Christ, but not without the deeds and fruits commanded by the Law of
the Gospel, the Law of the Spirit, and Law of Grace. For as Bullinger
^^uinely delivers, Decad. 3. Ser. 8.
the Moral Law is continual, and in some part the Judicial, but not at all
the Ceremonial of Moses. And certain, so far as the Law is the rule how to
live well and happily, so far as it is the bridle to stay us in Gods fear, so
far as it is a prick to wake the dullness of our flesh, so far as it is
given to instruct, correct, and rebuke us men, so far I say with him, that it
remains still. This Saint James most earnestly affirms, saying, that such
as know how to do well, and do it not, are still bound in their sin, as if he
should say, the Law has rule still over such, for they be not as yet
regenerate, because they walk still according to the flesh, and not according
to the Spirit. The very same Saint Peter makes more plain, for the eyghte
Souls that were saved by water, signifies Baptism that saves us, and not
the cutting away the foreskinne, Circumsition, but the forsaking of evil, a
good conscience co^senting unto Gods will, a lively and undoubted faith,
budding forth all good blossoms, and spiritual fruits: for we acknowledge (as
Bullinger affirms) according to Saint Paul, Decad. 2. Sermon. 6.
that we are created unto good works. But so that hereby we may not swell
with pride in our selves; forgetting the merits of Christ, when we read in
the holy Scriptures that we are justified by ours own works, that our own
works are called righteous, that unto our works is given a reward of
everlasting life, A Catholic exposition upon two special points.
nor yet that we grow to presumptuous, secure, and licentious, when we find
that we are justified only by Faith, that we are freely ransomed by the free
bounty of our redeemer, that he once for all pacified the wrath of his
father, and brought us again to be his dearly beloved Children. But that as
we be freely redeemed through his only goodness, without any merit of ours,
so we without any compulsion, must sanctify our souls and bodies, walking
always in the light of godly conversation, as it is of late very well
expressed by Master Rogers, but most effectually of all, Peter. 2.1.
of old by the holy Apostles themselves. By Peter, who wills that we make
our election and calling this way sure, so that we shall ^^uer fall, if in
Faith we minister virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperance, How
our election is made sure.
in temperance patience, in patience godliness, in godliness brotherly
kindness, in brotherly kindness love. How far now they be deceived, be
they never so excellent orators, or never so cunning Sophisters, and how
unmeet to bring up youth, and to instruct the state of the world, have they
never so many tongs, A conclusion upon the whole drift of this work.
or never so many Schole points, in health, holiness, obedience, unity,
laudable qualities, and profitable arts, what office, place, or dignity soever
they have, or be they never so frantike feruente, as was the murderer that
wounded of late years a valiant Captain, Captain Havvkins.
thinking thereby to have slain a most worthy and noble Gentleman, now of the
Queens Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel: Sir Christopher Hatton.
yea or to live, notwithstanding her highness exceeding mercy and great
piety, that condemn Gods providence, People worthy punishment.
as well ecclesiastical as te^porall government in our most royal Majesty,
primate prerogative, and Palatine power in prelates, by ye Queens highness
given in as large manner as ever they were, or the high dignity of the nobles
and estates, Lordly rule, middle means, appointed doctrine, unity of service,
common prayer, Christian discipline, right reason, ordinary Laws, daily
decrees, holy works, just deeds, healthful medicine, industry and diligence
of virtuous men: cleaving to universal destiny, without regard of ye humane
virtues, particular sensuality, without consideration of the divine graces, or
common liberty, without respect of princely power. You may see herein partly
as in a glass, but in the ages following, all the graces at large mentioned in
the Epistle, as well by the holy writ, use of the parts, natural and moral
Philosophy, as by the experience of all well ordered commonweals, Counsels,
Parliaments, Conuocations, Sinodes, Decrees, and excommunications of the
primitive Church. And how likely it is, that they should be either very godly,
natural wise, or rightly learned, ^ting all certaynetie of divine grace, power
natural, and (...) obedience, the holy word, blessed regimente, godly laws,
^thie creations, high preferments, all aduancementes, me^^^ents, worship,
disgradings, and continual gouernemente (...) the beginning, teaches
approves, and declares, to the^ (...) be not infected with the Heluetian
contagion, or liberty of longing, Persons worthy the reprehension,
to overthrow as well Princes and Nobles of the ^astle, as of the
Spirituality, that there might be no certainetie of superiority, that al might
be at liberty, through election of gouernoures, to come to dignity, not for
desert, but for flattery or fear. Which forasmuch as all men by nature do
conot liberty and superiority, so much the more, Coment. lib. 3.
as affirms Caesar, ought Princes to provide certain and speedy means to
restreyne them. Wherefore I may, (because this Volume shall not ware
unhandsome, nor yet yrkesome,) well conclude against whomesoeuer, with the
Canonized Scriptures, Ephesians. 6. Colloss. 3. 1. Pet. 2.
that the statute, as well of the body, as of the mind of children, yea (...)
sort of subjects in our most puissant state, must be directes, taught; and
assisted by special wisdom, Kingly power, and common right, by dissente of
inheritance, statutes, covenants, deeds, and wills, and not by precise men's
fancies, Every Country requires his own government.
wilful wits, or yet yearly election of craftesmen and commoners, as in
Heluetia, and other places different, seeking the furthest corner of their
youthful wits, to further their foolish wits. Oh barbarous policy, atteyned
two hundred years past and above, by iniquity of us noble Britons, for ever
to be abandoned and condemned, let some mutinous wits turn the cart never so
precisely, seeing that Nature, Scripture, and al kingly rule upon earth is to
the contrary, by that worthy Prelate Doctor Whitegifte Bishop of Worcester,
learnedlye and godly delivered, and of all dutiful persons to be received,
although it can not be, but that the teachers of the truth have enemies, but
Philosophy has foes, but Physic has adversaries, but one industrious has
despisers, but obediente and grave persons have contenmers.

CHAP. XLIII. Who ought to rule Youth, and why. A brief division of the
faculties of the brain. And how that lust and courage is more prone to youth
than to age.
Now such sage persons of perfect years, are meetest to rule, Lib. de Senect.
In Ser^mat. De tuend. valetis. Who ought to rule youth
guide, and instruct youth, (as affirm Tullie, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Montuus) as have ye heavenly gift, understanding the animal faculty and
operation of the brain, with the actions thereof best, as in the two former
ventricles says Siluius, apprehension, fantasy, imagination, opinion, and
common sense: In the middle ventricle, The actions of the reasonable spirit in
mankind.
judgment, estimation, disposition, and cogitation: In the hinder, memory,
science, and calling in memory, prevailing, ruling the deeds of the body
according to grace, and not according to lust and ire. Hence is it that some
can invent Acts and make Ditties better than others. Hence othersome can
dispose their wit and knowledge better than inue^t. Whence that one excels
another, according to the grace given them of God.
Hence likewise some can remember what they have heard, read, or known, very
singular well: but neither devise, do, or judge orderly well. But where all
these excel (as that is very seldom) there is the sharp gracious wise wit,
and neither blind, frantike, nor foolish, as Ochine would have it. And thus
according to the more and the less, Sermon 17.
they are perfect or imperfect answerable to their constitution and heavenly
inspiration, as in youth through slenderness of strength, extreme old age,
and in infirmity: but in ripe years and healthie state best by reason of
their perfection of temperature and godly education: Lib. de Senect.
and therefore it is excellently well said of Tullie, that Prudence and
Wisdom be incident to grave and old years, but Rashness and Folly to
youthful days, as partly by experience I know, The author no Angel.
for the which daily I ask. God mercy. Psalm. 25.
And as the kingly Prophet David does affirm, beseeching the Lord to forgive
the sins of his youth: by the Apostle also confessed, saying: When I was a
child I did like a child, etc. But blessed be the years that bring
amendment, Amen. Hence is the reason why such sage persons do and always
ought to rule and bridle youth, not only in School, but in Church and Pulpit,
as well as in Counsel, Court and Camp, and youth obediently hear, learn, and
follow the^. And therefore Moses well knowing the imperfection of youth,
commands all children to honor and obey their fathers and mothers, Deuteronomy. 20.
that their days may be long in the land which ye Lord gives the^.

Likewise at his departure upon the Mount, calling the whole multitude before
him, he wills the^ to obey their Captain and Elders, as by his oration
extant in Josephus works it appears. Solomon also says, he that spares
correction, Prou. 13.23.
Eccle. 30.
spilleth his child. Syrach in like manner councelleth children to hear their
fathers judgment, and do thereafter, that they may be safe. Now what council
fathers should give their family in these days, Cap. 4.
Tobias words that he taught his only son at that time, is sufficient to teach
all the sons of the whole world in time to come. My so^ (says he) have God
in thy thought all the days of thy life, and beware least at any time thou
consent unto sin: of thee my son Morgan not to be forgotten, My only son.
and the^ thou shall never do amiss. The very same the twelve Patriarchs
taught their children, as by their Testamentes extant it appears. Finally, S.
John the messenger of light, Epist. 1 cap. 1.
and Egle of brightness, as it were in a word includes al: Little children
(says he) let no man deceive you, Ap. 20.
for that he does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous: well,
knowing he that was instructed by the Schoolmaster of al truth, Galen de us
part. De cor. t. m. c. Cap. 4. Lib. de Senect. Lib. 2. de reg.
that Iustie and wilful youths for the most part, have as is aforesaid, and
a^dayly experience proves, the use of ye parts declared: And as the Prophet
Daniel, Tullie, and Osonus do affirm, the natural faculty and operation of
the Liver and the vital of the heart appetite, and last, ire, courage, and
pride, termed of Plato, Seneca, Will.
and Cicero, and of Castilio sensuality, of the Apostle, Padag. lib. 3.
Clemens Alexa^drinus, and al divines, ye world, ye flesh, and ye devil,
Understanding.
surmou^ting an ye reasonable imperfect as yet in ye isntrumental operation.

CHAP. XLIIII. The power of the Soul defyned. Adams fall declared. The Jews
or Israelites loss, notwithstanding the Law of Moses. What marreth many,
albeit they be Christians. Of diverse charitable deeds done of late, as well as
of old. The difference that is between them that favor Virtue, and them that
further vice, although they both profess Christ.
The definition of the reasonable spirit.

In corp. curat. Scient. De Anim. fac. Genes. 1. John 10. S. Hier. ad Panar. S.
August. in epist. ad Hier. Decad. 4. Sermo. 10. Lib. 1. de off. Lib 2 de
regist. inst. Q. diss. 2. De Vtop. Decad. 2. Sermon. 1. Genes. 4. Romans 5.

The law of nature endured. 36 49. years. Decad. 10. All nations wrapped under
sin.

Nature with out grace of none effect. The vain judgment of the Gentiles, and
their erroures.


THis reasonable spirit is poured of God into the brain, as Alsaliar
affirms, Montuus, and Fernelius, and as Bullinger declares forth of ye
Scripture and Doctors, and gives sense with understanding to all the living
parts, and it is defined of the Doctor to the Studente to be a power of the
soul, that descerneth between good and evil, and between good and better,
comparing the other, the which also shows virtues, loves good, and flees
vices: or it is as Tullie, Moore, Osorius and Bullinger write, the law of
nature, rejecting evils, and embracing goodness: or reason is the law of
nature engrafted in the mind, driving away vice and filthiness, prescribing
health and godliness: but alas, this in all the children of Adam is more or
less so depraved from him through original sin, and also actual before
expressed, that the Gentiles, although they had reason not wholly extinct, the
law of nature, Gods law, gods gift, engraffed in their understanding, yet they
neglected it, wandering in all lusts and outrages of the flesh, one trusting to
his wit overcome with wickedness: another in his strength and courage, using
all tyranny, spoil, and murder: another in his delicious delights,
following appetite and lust: another in his parentage; descended of such a
stock, of such a good Prince or ruler: another in his beauty, and comely
corpse: another in his knowledge of tongues: another in Science and eloquence:
another in riches and goods: another in possessions and patrimony: as the
very heirs of lust and pride from our first parent, whereby none does delight
always in well doing, nor in using the reasonable mind given them of God, by
the knowledge of themselves, and beholding his wonderful works, to be
careful how to serve, obey, and love their Creator, Prince and neighbor.

The Jews likewise refused it, The law of Moses continued. 1510. years.
notwithstanding they were heavenly incorporate and rid from the perpetual
bondage of fear under the law of Moses, given unto him by God himself, and
delivered in stony Tables by reason of the hardness of their hearts. But
because they walked after the will of the flesh, and not after the spirit,
the law auailed them not, as Paul testifies to the Romans, for they sought
their righteousness by the ceremonial and outward works of the law, which
were but shadows, and not through inward love and desire thereunto, by faith
in the Messiah the Savior to come, The law of Grace has remained. 1579.
years. All that teach or believe, that the sins of the wicked living or dead
by man may be remitted, or that man through his own power without Christ
may obtanie Heaven, or that Christ vvil pardon vices although he contemn his
law and lean his vvayes, do as much as in them lies, destroy all religion,
princely rule, and natural kindness upon eartk.
unto which all the law tended, as the divine writers at large expound.

Lastly, such Christians as put their Justification in creatures, their own
virtues, or in Christ's only mercy without regard of his power, that does
terrify as well as it did create, and his wisdom that judges as well as it
guides, neglecting the divine graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, subuette the
law of Grace, for the law of Grace if we shall define it, is the league of
Gods favor and beneuolent kindness toward mankind, as in the sacred word,
ancient Doctors, and new writers, is more manifest than the Sun beams, as
to your senses (I doubt not) shall be made evident. For if kind, craft, force,
or abundaunce (that we may fetch this foreland again full wind) if Jewish
ceremonies, circumcision, sin offerings, if the worshipping of creatures as
Idolaters use, if our own natural works without Christ's grace, as ye
Pelagians held, by Saint Augustine confuted: If bare belief in his mercy, the
only acknowledging that Christ died for mankind, without respect of his
justice, In Epist. ad Romans In Euchir. In Instit. In Catech. In Decad. In loc.
com. Super Math. In comment.
as the Originists believed, being no faith indeed but a mere opinion, as say
Erasmus, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Musculus, Marlorat and Gualter, that which
brings forth no fruit, no victory over sin, as over many in these days
fantastically fanste, as diverse of the sensual Jews in Saint James time
affirmed, that counted themselves Christians, boasting of the Gospel, but
neglecting the deeds thereof, by him confuted. And the Anabaptists in Luthers
days in Germany at Mounster by Sleidan mentioned, In comment.
and other into many Christian countries, rebelling, deceiving, and spoiling al
men that they can compass, devise or get, may justify before the upright
Judge, being such deeds before mentioned, as the flesh fulfilleth, and not
such as the spirit works. How shall our depraved nature or corrupt
manners be reformed and made meet before we go hence, for the celestial
Throne in the life to come? sit and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel? yield a
right account for our demeanors at the general judgment in the time to come?
or here live heedefullye, temperately, and honestly, whiles we live according
to holy, Divinity, Kingly policy, and natural society? If once again
Cunning or Learning shall excuse Wickedness: riches, force: flattery and
finenesse purchase pardon: high birth, and noble place, salvation: or naked
faith, without the wedding garment, acceptance: wherefore then has Christ's
suffered his paineful passion, not to save us howsoever we deal, seeing Saint
John says, that Christ came to save sinners. God forbid. Why then forsoothe,
to this end you may be certain that we shall embrace Virtue, and forsake
Vice, that we shall thoroughe faith in his grace strive and fight against
the lusts of the world, flesh, and the Devil, as Paul tells us he did
with the rest of the holy Fathers, and may walk in all holiness and good
behauiours, and not to save sinners, because we sin, for as Saint John says:
Cap. ^. This is meant of the presumtuous and obstinate sinner, and not of the
sorrowful and penitent sinner.
No sinner is heard of God, but that thoroughe faith in him we should
forsake sin, and turn to him through earnest repentance, and then he
saves us which ha^^ sins, for then are we not sinners, although the (...)
and prick thereof do not wholly leave us: These many (...) sons in Scripture
must be distinguished: And so finally not they which go forwards obstinately
still in wickedness, with the aucthor of sin our adversary the Devil, are
saved, but they that do r^pent and amend, as by the whole discourse of
Scriptures is approved. Well then go to Babes, and believe this for ever, In
Catechis. De Fide. Decad. 1. Ser. 6.
that we be redeemed through the free mercy of God by faith only. For
wheresoever faith is, says Calvin, Bullinger, and Beza, there also it shows
it self by good works, because the righteous cannot but work righteousness,
the faithful I say cannot but constantly hope, and unfeignedly and charitably
love his Christian brother. For he disobeyeth not be enuiesh not, he despises
not, he deceives not, or if he has done so, he repents him, intending
never to do so any more, beseeching the Lord to assiste him with his grace.
How it is said that faith only justifies De fide. Ad Petrum. Super Psa. In
sermon. de fide. De summo bono.
And in this sense it is said that Faith only justifies, but in no other, as
Erasmus following the faithful and antie^t fathers, at large declares in his
Prologue to the Paraphrase upon Saint Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and not
through other creatures, our own natures, sinister opinions, loose inventions*
precise practices, without the warrant of the word of God, needelesse
ceremonies, traditions, and oblations, although such rites, Sabaothes,
solemn feasts, and holy days, that serve for the benefit of soul and body
for the contemplation and service of God, and resting of their bodies and
quieting of their mind from worldly affairs, had from the Apostles, Primative
Church, Catholic Councels and holy statutes, be still to be observed and
reverenced according to each state and condition of things indifferent, as by
ye difference there was between the East and the West Church in Anacetus and
Policarpus time may appear, as Socrates, In Eccle. Hist. in Apol. Contra Osor.
Cap. 1. de ciuit. des. 22. Decad. 1. Sermon. 6.
B. Jewel and Fox do witness. And not, in one word for all, through bare
belief, by S. James disproued, of S. Augustine disalowed, and by Bullinger
post a love termed, as some maliciously or ignora^tly do affirm us to hold
without commending of Christian deeds, in the world required, No Realm
commends good works more than England.
of our Sovereign commanded, in the Homelies delivered, and by all our godly
Preachers preferred and straightly charged, as often as they have cause to
entreat thereof, with the which no state of our bigness is able to compare,
not only notably well learned in the Universities, but also through all the
land, God be thanked. And our former liberty is restored, that our first
parent Adam lost through lust and disobedience, pleasant Paradise by the new
Adam is unshut, that was through the old made fast. The way that was barred to
all posterities from the kingdom of heaven, is now by him only made wide open
for all them of the household of faith, Romans 6.
that are buried with him from the vices of this world, and that are risen
again in all godly conversation. Cap. 4.15. Cian. dei. Super Math.
But not they I say once again for a conclusion with Esaias, Saint Augustine,
Golden Chrysostom, and all the godly, that confess Christ and his Gospel
with their lyppes, and deny him with their deeds, (for so do Devils, and all
wicked and presumptuous persons, as Palingenius forth of the Scriptures and
Doctors plainly proves, with Googe in his Epistle to that work by him
translated) or that do neglecte and contemn the blessed laws and means that
he has left with his holy Church, which is the congregation of all such as
profess the faith and doctrine of Christ, being himself the head Cornet
stone, the Rock whereupon the Church is safely builded, but upon no mortal man,
as Saint Augustine writes, whose example and commandments we must follow
in all humbleness and love, as by his holy word does appear, outward
experience, and inward reason, for every like does delight in his like, as well
the Angels as the celestial bodies and earthly creatures, by the which we may
easily gather, that the Creator and ruler of al things, has no delighte in
such as contemn his ways upon earth, and his saving health before all
nations, but in such as covet to be continually holy: for be you holy as I am
holy, says the Lord. And therefore let this be earnestly and straightly
charged, (...) be so bold as to think with the Saduces and fami^^^ of (...),
Two special points of christian doctrine, that whosoever shall deny, does
deserve most horrible torments.
much less to reason against ye excellent dignity of (...) nature, as to
suppose that the soul does dye and perish with the body, in that the world
runs at al adventures, governed (...) providence: but that in this life by
God we be preserved, and after in ye life to come to remain immortal, where
vi^^^ shall be extremely punished and virtues bou^tifully rewarded.

Hence is the straight path (Babes) that leads to the heavenly Jerusalem, and
there is none other, let some lewd lips of Li^^^rti^^s labor never so much
in the broad way to the contrary, affirming sin to serve to salvation in
every e^^te person, as does Bernardine Ochine. Sermon. 3. de elect.
Oh horrible confusion clean contrary to all Catholic Religion, aduising all
ages as well as children earnestly to consider hereof while they (...), and
therewith wisely to weygh the lamentable destruction of the earthly Jerusalem,
The causes of the destruction of Jerusalem. De bell^ iudai^^.
being doubtless the severe s^^^ge of God upon his chosen for sin, refusal
of his word, rebellion, famine, and dissension, as Josephus writes, of all
Christian children not to be forgotten, for none are to be called the children
of Abraham, as says Paul, but they that do the deeds of Abraham, as also
writes Gualter.

By the which at length it appears manifestly, that all men are not to be
counted like vicious, dishonest, or ungracious, notwithstanding our original
fall in Adam, as over many leude and ignorant persons do, when they be reproved
for their evil life, replying without all blushing, I thank you sir for
nothing, you I am sure are good, seeing there is none as the Scripture says,
that does not evil, as though the holy Ghost meante there can be none good
and acceptable before God (...) as it is written for our rebuke and reproach,
that there were so many evil, that there were so few that sought after
Virtue, that forsake not sin before sin forsake them, not calling to
remembrance these textes, how that there be both Dogs and Swine, godly men
in all ages that build upon the s^^^^ rock, and ungodly which build on the
sincking sand, wise Virgins with (...) in these Lamps, abundance of grace:
and the foolish without, does of all goodness, putting no difference between
the best likers and the worst, the good doers and the hand, faithful and
unfaithful, wise and foolish, obedient and disobedient, learned and unlearned,
temperate and intemperate, just and unjust, sick and healthie, long lived and
short.

To this end I do take it that they maintain such folly, such equality, Why the
Author supposes that the evil does maintain this opinion.
that they themselves be they never so devilish, rebellious, traitorous,
blasphemous, fleshly, irreligious, covetous, fornicators, drunkards,
adulterers, extortioners, usurers, murderers, thieves, harlots, bribers,
bankeruptes, pollers, deceivers, etc.) might no more be corrected, penished,
and disgraced, than the most faithful, most honest, most just, most wise,
most learned, most trusty, most valiant, most liberal, most merciful, most
pitiful, most holy, most Catholic, which absurdities no heathnish state can
permit in India, Tar^aria, and Barbaria, What no state can permit that bears
rule.
much less a perdutable common weal of Gods own foundation suffer or allow a
christian regiment of newborn babes: when as we see daily does by testimony
reason and experience, that by virtue and godly means the Church and people of
God flourish and prosper, because Gods grace is amongst them, but by vice and
lack of Charity overwhelmed and brought to haught, by reason the wicked
spirit has rule over them. And therefore what are they of ^ay godly mind,
christian belief, or perfect understanding, A godly disposed Peer. Diverse
charitable deeds done of late in our reformed state as well as of old time. A
charitable Knight. A noble deed of late done by a Doctor of Physic.
that the not highly ^^^^nende, advance, and extol the godly charitable deeds
noble act of late days yet formed in VVarelicke by the mighty Earl of
Leicester, in founding of an Hospital withal other appurtenances, to ye use of
(...) persons (inaimed captains) for ever, land a Preacher, with 300 marks
and above yearly, (...) other provision for their (...) with those buildings at
^ath and ^uckstones. erected by his honor for ye poor. And that likewise upon
Long Melforde Green builded by sir William Cordall with that also besides
Greenewich, and the reedifying of Cunwell and Caius College in Cambridge, with
a worthy (...) of land (...) besides many others in diverse places in our days
as well as of old accomplished, here omitted, because yt the charitable deeds of
the old fathers of this land you shall find notably well no^ in (...) ^ities,
and sundry very well expressed in that book entitled a Defense of the
Ecclesiastical Regiment in England. Now who having any reason, learning, or
experience in Philosophy, Physic, or Divinity, can think, esteem, or
account al Christians to be of one godly disposition, of one natural
inclination, of one temperature of body, of one health in the parts, of one
acceptance before God and men: to be short, of one wit, strength, stature,
favor, length of life, etc. none as I judge. The which life that it may be
lengthned, strengthened, and shortened, as the manners may be mended or depraved
by education, and the calling honored or disgraded by man's aid, wisdom, and
industry, contrary to ye opinion of diverse unskillful, in ye other ages shall be
at large proved, because yt in my discourse of growing and living things I have
made but two or three arguments with other brief examples, affirming that the
life of man may be prolonged, as by the three deeds, natural, accidental, and
divine prescience, is of the learned delivered. These instructions then for
youth, and whatsoever for the elder sort; be they never so simple (that
aduanceth virtue, and suppresseth vice, prefers the fruits of the faithful
spirit, and conde^neth the works of wicked flesh, planteth truth and
supplanteth fals^^de, conde^neth flattery and utters the verity, yields
knowledge and suppresseth ignorance, assisteth the state and procures
quietness, mainteineth health and defends from sickness, banisheth liberty
and teaches the duty for soul and body, according to the Catholic unity)
who so condemns, enuieth, defameth, or misliketh, because it is in our own
tongue, to ye use of ye mean learned, as well as for the best scholars, as some do
our works of the Bathes, None dispraise virtuous diligence but the idle
sluggardes.
that have neither wit nor will to w^y ye weight of our words, written neither
for glory nor gain, but for the common weal, much less to amend the^ or
encourage others, There is no hope of religion, holiness, wisdom, love,
learning, (...) obedience to be found in them.

CHAP. XLV. Why the Author has touched so many matters in brief in this
first book, that at large shall be handled in the other five. Of the
vnknitting of Gordius knot. That no benefit is equal to health, long life,
and a good name. Upon what foundation the Author builds, and of his
plainness and briefnesse. And how only the wise and godly regard Virtue and
Knowledge, but the foolish and wicked, neither.
I Have bin the longer and the more earnester in this last part of this
work, The reason of standing upon this last section.
because I would not only (if I could) grub up al wickedness by the root,
least I might not live to finishe the other, or be discoraged to take pains
with out thanks or benefit, but also to the vttermoste of my small power
presently sow, grass, and strewe the roots, seeds, and plants, of all
virtue, true religion, due obedience, and perfect health, in all children.

What the vnknitting of Gordius knot did signify.
Here loving Babes you have the first wreathe of Gordius knot unknit, which the
most valiant Conqueror with all his puissaunce could not unfold, but was feign
to cut it, to allude ye Oracle, Lib. 3.
as writes Quintus Curtius, because his hautie courage and outrageous lust
would not yield to orderly reason: Will above Reason.
whereby no doubt you may obtain a greater Empire of immortality and
everlasting glory (in subduing your own vain affections, preserving your
perfect parts, and ordering all your trades in Faith, which is the victory
over sin, according to the will of God obedience of your own Prince, and
profit of your native country, as Tullie in the last part of Scipios dream
delivers,) tha^ if ye obtained ten strange tra^sitorie conquests of great
Alexander. (...) Co^^inent.
Howbeit Scanderbergs prowess and victories against the common enemy of al
Christendom who can pass over in silence without commendation. (...) truly
what avails (I pray you) only for lust and ambition, and not for the
proceeding of the glorious gospel and freedom of Christians. A man to win
all the wide world, Luke. 11.
and to lose his own self? as Alexander did in Babylon, before he had reigned
full seven years? or yet his Tomb of gold and too too magnifice^t burial
at Alexandria by Diodorus Siculus so excellently described? Lib. 2.
not regarding the words of Demiphon his Diuiner or Magos, nor the Chaldean
Prophets, or rather Mathematists and Gymnosophistals, as by them is testified
in the places before alleged.

And what benefit is equal to health of body and soul, a god and godly
name, and long life, to sound children well brought up in all godliness and
convenient qualities?

This ye see is the foundation that the wisest have laid, and that I do think
good to follow in this frail age, and to build upon for the preservation of
body and mind in all ages, which if any other had rather to have framed in
any other sort, every man in Gods name has his own gift according to the
measure of graces mentioned given unto them. And they may do as they please,
for my part, I have (as he that lives upon his practice by lawful grace of
the University, and has had no other mainteinance but it for these one and
twenty years) yielded mine endeavor in a form never before so fashioned, as
time and ability would serve me, how the healthy body not only of infantes are
at large to be preserved, and the affections guided, but also of all other in a
brief, if it be effectually considered, in diverse and sundry places of
foreign soil, as well as in our own: for any thing that I can note too too
far amiss, and that has more need of godliness, aid, furtherance, and
increase of honesty, love, service, and due obedience through ^olesome
regiment, severe punishment, and spiritual life, the deprauing, deminishing
and abolishing of Virtue thoroughe had custom, sinister opinions, loose
liberty, slack execution, evil example, or too too precise inventions. For
what avails the confessing of the Scriptures and obedience due to Princes,
the authority of the high Covet of Parliament, the Queens highness to be
supreme governor as well in causes Ecclesiastical as Temporal, the appointing
of high dignities, degrees and offices in both callings, if notwithstanding her
proceedings be contemned or not followed. And therefore for the duty I owe to
God and your Majesty, I do deem it more meet to write according to the Laws
of Christianity, of nature, and of my Country well established (inaugre the
minds, God be thanked, of all the contrary) a plain doctrine, right trade, and
orderlye mean, through wholesome laws, profitable and needful to be kept and
used of al godly subjects, and faithful children, than at wild randon, by
vehement fatal hap, or chaungeable chance, like brainlesse persons,
desperate dolts, and wether blown Cocks, without the scope of gracious reason
certainty of government, and dece^t order, to tread dutifully this our present
pilgrimage, upon whom the ends of the world are come, as Rogers rightly
insinuates in his work of the second coming of Christ: let the Ciceronians
cleave never so much with Tullie to Platos revolution, Anno Plat. (...) s^^^n.
Scipionis.
or lewd Libertines to their licentious liking.

Oh graceless Libertines the decay of nations. Oh wilful Folly and Vice the
ruin of al estates. Oh cursed Hypocrisy, popularitis and flattery, the
welspring of al schisms, heresies, and outrages. Let also the inexpert in
natures lore, the ignorant or careless of Gods commandments blessed regiment,
with the talkers of the Scriptures, and not the followers, of Athanasius, In
Prefat. ad sa. Scrip.
so sharply rebuked, never so colourably, scholerly, do impude^tly utter ye
contrary: howbeit to say the truth of this age, by the judgment of most
travelers as well as by mine own experience in foreign countries as well as
over all our own there is no Realm in all Christendom, where godliness is more
declared, youth better instructed, the people for honest life more co^me^ded,
the inhabiters more welthier maintained, or the common quietness in peace and
unity better preserved than here with us, God be praised, the Queens
highness magnified, and the sacred Counsel honored, and always for his truth
sake conserve it, and the^ to the example of all Nations. For we commit that no
divinity, but rather Diuelishnesse: no reason, but vanities: no policy, but
peevishness: that that abateth the fear of God, that that emboldneth
disobedience, that that maint^ineth the liberty.

Now who so is wise I say with the Prophet Osee shall understand these
things, Cap. 4.
and he that is right instructed will regard them for the ways of the Lord
are righteous, such as be godly will walk in them, as for the wicked they
shall stumble therein.

But Wisdom (says Solomon) shall not enter into a wicked soul, nor dwell in
the body that is subject to sin. Eccle. 1.
And therefore my Babes, if you will attain the favor of God, if you will
attain perpetual pleasure, if you will attain as Solomon did, Wisdom,
fear the Lord, follow Virtue, obey the Prince, honor your parents, serve
your Masters, love your yokefellows, embrace counsel, and cherish your
neighbor, and then all things shall go well with you.

CHAP. XLV. To whom the Author submits all his travels. The duty of Divines:
promise made at their consecration: and of their livings: with the manner of
their lives: and of Symony.
THus to come to an e^d of this first age, and abridgement to the rest, which
is the cause not only of the long sentences, often parenthesis, and strange
manner of writing, but also of the intricate speeches diversity of digressions,
and rude style, most humbly submitting al these simple indeuoures of divine
Physical politic discourses, taken in hand for the universal benefit, The
best, the wisest, and the most confirm al truth
according to my natural duty and allegiaunce, to the appointment of our
only redoubted Majesty, whose authority and direction is the everlasting
word of God (by the high sessions of Parliament) to the consideration of the
most flourishing Counselors and high Commissioners, and to the reverend and
skillful Physicians. But the order, De conf. fidei.
doctrine, ministration and Discipline of the Church to our chief Bishops,
reverend Pastors, and devout Divines, says Calvin, even such as have not
their zealous lips buttered with the greedy desire of too too many benefices,
purchase of Lordships, and to king of Leases, nor in other delights and cares
of the world and the flesh, vain fancies, more affectioned, burdened and
clogged. Because the Scripture says, Math. 19.
that the cares of this world do choke the word, and makes it unfruitful. ^
Ephesians. 2.
And Saint Paul tells Timothy, that warriors and entangle themselves with
no worldly business, by reason that they may be always ready, like valiant
Soldiers to serve their Captains under whom they be appointed: but rather
fully affectioned, What works do declare the duties of Divines. Anno 1.
Elizabeth.
as in the holy Writ is willed, in the statute of unity appointed, in the
articles of Religion published, and in the Injunctions commanded, and in the
Book of Common prayer delivered, of many too new and too too precise, as well as
too old and peevish, neglected and disobeyed, being high time to look
thereunto more severely, and to set forth lively faith, due obedience, godly
fear furnished with Christian deeds, and no dead faith, presumptuous or
vehement opinion, after every sickle and common man's imagination. For what
godly man will account that but a had belief, A tree to be bewen down that
brings forth no good fruit: A subject unworthy of his liberty that
contemns the laws of his sovereign, and that prefers his own fancy for
faith, his liking for laws, and his wilful opinion for religion: not regarding
how Paul, Basil and Bulling^r do define Faith, and how it is to be taken to be
the victory after Satan, Sin, and Hell, over the world, flesh and the Devil,
over presu^ption, disobedience and contention, as is aforesaid. And so of al
Ministers, Masters, and Teachers to be delivered, according to the laws and
decrees put forth by our Majesty, and us in the holy homelies is handled, and
as in ye (...) upon ye Chapters and in ye Church put forth by ye reverend
Father in God Doctor Cowper Bishop of Lincoln is learnedlye and Catholikely
delivered, to the end that the Spirit may rule, and the Flesh be subdued:
that Truth may appear, and Errors be eschued: that Virtue may be embraced,
and Vice expulsed: that Unity may be maintained, and Sedition avoided: that
one Doctrine and Ministration over al be used and al others (besides the
Catholic Law stablished) abolished. Hence arises the sunction of the Clergy,
and not for sovereignty, Monarchy, Temporal dominion, Gregorius Naz: De slat.
Epis.
pomp, glory, honors, riches, pleasures, ease. As I did very well perceive
not long age at the consecration, I saw at Lambeth to be faithfully promised,
Act. 13. Titus. 1. Timoth. 3. 1. Cor. 4. Lampridius in via ta Alexandri Seueri.
Chrysostom super Math. 23. Decret. 4. In confess Cartag. Bulling. lib. de lust
Episcop. Call. in lust. Par. 31. Math. 10. Romans 5. Galath. 6. 1. Tim.
by them that to that high and godly office were elected. And as by the holy
Writ, testimony of the antiente Fathers, and new Writers, and in the
Imposition of hands at the Ordering of Deacons, and Ministers, daily is
approved.

And yet in all this my Discourse I would not that any should think, but that
he that attends on the Altar, ought to live by the Altar: but that he that
delivers Spiritual wisdom ought to have Temporal honor: but that he that
traueleth for the benefit of others ought to have profit himself: and that
every reverend Pastor, learned Preacher, and godly Minister is worthy of that to
his Sea and Benefice apperteineth, be it Tithes or Lordship, with all reverence,
being by law theirs in fee simple as well as any possessions of the Nobility,
Gentilitie, or Commons: and especially those that serve God, Prince, and
Country, Holily, Iustlye, and Dutifully: that distribute the Heavenly food
for Soul and Body, and that keep good hospitality, with a life given wholly
spiritually. Although whiles we live in the flesh, the Motions, Pricks, or
griefs thereof will be more or less daily. Doubtless the contrary dealings
be a great let to the proceeding forwards of the glorious Gospel and heavenly
decrees of your blessed Majesty, as finally in the fear of God, and my
loyal duty, I dare affirm, I hope in this time, as Paul without distruste
did in his days, In Epist.
to Titus and Timothy. By worthy Erasmus excellently opened in his
Paraphrases, which in all churches are meeter in my mind to be red, Math. 13.5.
than every single scholars opinion to be preached, as in the works following
shall be showed, and whereof both the good and the bad grows, to the end
that their light may so shine before men, Mat. 3. Luke. 3.
that other seeing their good works upon earth, they may glorifye God which
is in heaven. And that the chafe may be sifted from the wheat, and that such
as have bin and be spotted with notorious crimes and precise practices, how well
so ever they be learned, spoken or friended, be not permitted either in the
ministry, or ecclesiastical commission, nor to teach any where. Neither
any craftesman, Bankerupte, Learning and authority to lewd men, cause of
lewdness. Romans 8.
makeshifte, ladde, or lewd disposed persons. And that also every age as well
as youth may learn sound doctrine together with the example of virtuous
living, in too many places too too sore decayed. For as the said Saint Paul
says, they be the children of GOD, which be led with the spirit of GOD, and
they which be the children of GOD, doubtless be furnished with godly virtues.

Well then, this is the conclusion, and a sign for ever certain, that where
godly virtues in Christian children be wanting, there is no right faith, no
victory over sin, no following of holy religion, How to know an Hipocrite.
as in the Prologue to the Paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle to the
Romans right godly and cunningly is handeled, prate they never so fast, run
they to Sermons never so often, gadde they never so vsuallye to the Church, have
they the word about their houses never so garnished, or the Bible never so
often in their hands, as the Pharisees had, No doctrine to the ignorant
auaylable without deeds.
and such other Hipocrites, all is but counterfayting, unless they do so,
and therewyth live godly, iustlye, and quietly. For of perfitte faith, of
right religion, of the fear of GOD, of due obedience, all godliness, unity,
love, equity, justice, innocence, seruisablenesse, stayednesse, temperance,
and whatsoever is good grows, and no wickedness, nor such horrible Simony,
as too too many use, nor composition between diuynes themselves upon
resignations, in most countries cried out upon, Simony to common yet with them
yt seem to be earnest professors of the word.
and forbidden by all such godly governors as our majesty is: not only before
Christ's coming amongst the Israelits, as in the old Testament appears, but
also sithence of them of the primative Church, until covetousness bare the
sway, and that sins were promised to be satisfied for silver by every
parasite pardoner, by our sovereign (GOD be thanked) through all her dominions
for ever banished and dissanulled, because divinity, reason and experience
have taught to condemn it. And therefore Pastors, Preachers and ministers of
righteousness, each where may not forget to provide for all such calamities.
The word of God.
Neither al other to remember, that for as much as we have the most certain
and undoubted truth: so in all verity and sincerity of life must we walk, and
the professing, preaching, visiting, and teaching the glorious Gospel to all
Creatures according to the divine laws: for all kinds of estates and
professions are to yield thereunto, as the Prophets, Apostles, Martirs,
confessors, All estates and arts are to yield unto the word of God.
and Catholic Doctors have done in times past, and as they do at this
present, chosing such places of Scripture as make most against such wickedness
as then and there reigns, according to ye Method by Erasmus, Melancton,
Hipperius, and Hemingius delivered, whereat none ought to be offended, although
the letter word for word does not express ye same, De concio. rat.
forseeing that uncharitably they fall not to railing, nor plausibly to lul
any in their lewd living: for that sly and wilye way of wresting the
Scriptures to men's manners like a rule of lead, (because they saw them
unwilling to embrace the truth, that at the least by some means they might
agree together) is hateful now, as it was of old to all the godly.

CHAP. XLVI. What food and doctrine the Apostles delivered: and in what the
sum of the Scripture does consist, and who only, after S Augustine, shall
possess the kingdom of Heaven.
John 21.
IN fine, Love thou me (says our Savior too Peter) then feed my sheep,
see that they be sound and kept from corrupt pastures, feed my lambs, in
brief, feed young and old. Which shows and sets forth his pastoral cure,
and not a Monarchy, Did. 33.8.2 Decad. 5. Sermon. 3. fol. 890. 240. Too many
Patrones make mercha^dise of their Benefices as well as some Divines.
as Nicholas Okam, and Bullinger writes, besides infinite others: for the
Church has not the power of the sword, but spiritually, and therefore Christ
had Peter put it up.

But how shall they feed, when such as be most worthy for life and
doctrine, for silver by Simon sell Benefice be put back: and the unworthy by
Magus the Merchaunt made of?

In fine (Christian babes) this is the blessed food and spiritual milk
wherewith the holy Apostles fed the Christian flock, and whereupon Peter
says all the blessed Gospel depends, the glad tidings consists, namely
that Christ has suffered for us in ye flesh, that we should die with him from
the works and lustres thereof, and should live and walk in the works of the
Spirit, both before mentioned, by Marlorat largely and learnedly expressed.

And therefore Saint Augustine wills all children that be christened, An
undoubted and most Catholic Conclusion.
to hold this for a certainty, and to doubt nothing thereof, that is, that all
those that are baptized in the Catholic or universal Church, shall not come
to everlasting life: but those only who after their Baptism live virtuously,
that is to wit, such as have refrained vice and the concupiscence of the flesh:
for even as neither Infidels, nor Heretics, nor Scismatikes shall attain the
kingdom of heaven, no more can sinful Catholics (disobedient persons) have
any portion therein.

Hitherto (most excellent Sovereign) for the first age at large, and in
brief for the rest, of the maintenance of Body and Mind, until God will
farther, Naturallye, Ciuilly and Religiously, according to the measure of the
gifts of the Godhed, Heavenly, Human, Divine, and Kingly, following and using
Nature, condemning Disobedience, confuting Errors, banishing Libertines, and
directing Christians, in all Health, Wisdom, and Godliness: in the continual
fear, and service of GOD: in Love, Obedience and Duty to their Prince, to
your Highness: and in ordring their Bodies, Minds, and Deeds in a Lawful
mean: because that such Children as be only of the Catholic Faith, that keep
Gods precepts, the living Lord likes, holy Princes advance, and godly
Rulers do chearish. For it is they, and not slanderous Libellors of Christian
Princes, Gods Presidents, that in the new Jerusalem shall be celestial
Citizens, where is such Joy prepared for all the elect, the Faithful,
Obediente, and humble Sprited, as neither Tongue can express, Wit conceive, or
Pen prescribe. Unto the which Earthly happiness and Heavenly blessedness, God
the Father draw us, God the Son guide us, and GOD the holy Ghost bring us. To
the which Almighty, Everlasting, Immensible, and only wise God, before all,
above all, and in all, be all laud, honor, glory, dominion, and Majesty,
for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
A Table containing the Summaries of every Chapter set forth in this Book.
What vvriters ought to consider, and wherefore the Author has made this
work. Chap. 1. How the Nurse must be chosen, and which is best. Chap. 2.
Of the age, favor, and manners of the Nurse. Chap. 3. How to know the
temperature of the Nurse and milk. Chap. 4. Why Nurses are to be changed:
how wise men vvey of vvriters: that Monarkes have bin marred by Nurses: and
Princes by evil parents depraved. Chap. 5. Of the best Milk, and what Teates
be good, and which both grieve and deforme the child, and that do cause it
to be unquiet. Chap. 6. What pleasure children have in Music, and of what
force it is to alter affections: and how the Nurse must rule her passion: and
after what sort lust must be depressed. Cha. 7. The definition and distinction
of Temperance, and of the profit and commendation thereof, with the commodity
that grows of keeping the fasting days, and who has bin alvvayes
tolerated: Of the Theological and humane graces, that of the husband as well
as of the wife are to be vveyghed and considered, with the benefit of
prayer. Chap. 8. In what air exercise should be: of the force thereof: which
is best: and how to know it. Chap. 9. What exercise, trades, labors,
arts, and pastimes be good, meet, and profitable, not only for Nurses, but
also for many others. Chap. 10. A distinction of the four parts of Music,
and what kind of dancing is tolerable. How women ought to be careful in
their behavior: The benefit of exercise, with the best time to use it.
Chap. 11. What meats engender evil juice, with an Argument thereof. Chap.
12. Of the regard that Nurses must have to their feeding. Chap. 13. What
meats are most usually eaten over al England, and which be best not only for
Nurses and children, but also for all others. Chap. 14. How wary Nurses must
be in taking of medicines, that they mar not themselves and the child also
through advise of unlawful practitioners. Chap. 15. What meats and medicines
they be that in her need the Nurse may use safely, to keep her solible, or any
others, and also to bind. Chap. 16. Of the kindness and love that should be in
a Nurse, and of the requiting thereof: A supposition whence often times the
strife between the child and the mother does arise. Chap. 17. Of the B^be
nevve borne, endued with the things natural, and what they be: What kind of
women should be with the sickely wife at her dangerous travel. The
benefit that some fathers get by their children crying at the birth: How the
infant newborn is to be handled of the Midvvife: and what Bath is good for
it. Chap. 18. What devises some dames use for forming of their brood: Of the
abuse that old Priests had in Christning, and vvherin Baptism consists, and
how death comes: Of the worthiness of children, with a brief mention
made how they be provided for: The causes (as some think) why things be so
dear in these days. Chap. 19. That the child must only suck until his former
teeth appear: The office of them: and at what time they commonly come, with
the number and form that be required. And how the decrease of the teeth
shows, that the world draws hastily to an end. Chap. 21. How often
infants should suck, what heedfulnesse should be in the Nurse, answerable as
the parents mean to have them trained. And how for lack of clean keeping
of the Babe Galen espied the unquietness thereof. Chap 22. At what time the
child may be vveaned, and which ought to suck longest: of the duty of the
Nobility and Gentility: The regard that must be had as well in the Nursing of
men children as women kind, and what Books do express the same: A
commendation of good women. Chap. 23. Of the manner how to make the best
pappe, of the use and abuse thereof: and how the mean diet is best. Chap.
24. Where infants should sleep or rest, and what commodity is in a Cradle:
The discommoditie of vehement rocking immediately after the child has
satisfied himself: Of the benefit of sleep, with the cause thereof: And
how Aristotle was therein deceived. Chap. 25. The length of sleep for
infants argued, how many vvayes sleep is furthered, that the Nurse in his
sleep ought not to be disquieted: The form of laying the child in the cradle:
of the considerations that must be had, of placing the light in the chaumber
with the Babe: Of taking up thereof: and of the ragard of his long standing.
Chap. 26. What nourishment is best from time to time for the child: That the
infant upon the sudden ought not to be vveaned: Of the diet that Montuus
appointed the French Kings children. Chap. 27. What the word Diet does
comprehend: The regard that should be had to children when they enter into
years of perseverance: What very Nobility is, and how it springs and
decaieth: What Christian children should consider according to their
profession. Chap. 28. At what time the Babe shall begin to be instructed, and
after what manner: How the Theological or divine graces are before al other to
be first planted. Chap. 29. What regard must be had to such as keep the
company of youth: Of the abuse of suddry parents: and of laws made as well
for them, as for children. Chap. 30. The great cost that the common wealth is
at daily in releeuing the poor: Of the number of them that are yearly
executed. Chap. 31. Of the definition of Sin, with the definition and division
of such as are called mortal or deadly sins. Chap 32. In what place Babes
shall sport them: How provident Bishops should be in placing and displacing of
Scholemaisters: That Tutors ought to have the knowledge of the Diatetike part
of Physic: Of the temperature of the spring, and how it agrees best with
children. Chap. 33. How the best Philosophers define Virtue: Of the
agreemente betvveene Divinity, Philosophy, and Physic: Whence the moral
virtues spring, and their need. Cha. 34 At what time infants should begin to
learn, and what properties and qualities ought to be in a Tutor, and what
Books he should teach the first age: A brief note of the doctrine that in
the other works and ages shall follow, with diverse other things vvorth the
noting. Chap 35. At what time Galen wills children to exercise: and what
pastimes be meetest for Gentilitie: And what labors and trades be best for
the Communaltie, to avoid as well roagishnesse as idleness: of the
foreshevve of good children, and how soon Strangers make theirs get their
living: Of the speedy regard that vvoulde be had to Schools and Scholars of
England and Irelande, as well for the over multitude that is in the one, as
the over fevv number that is in the other. Chap. 36. Of Tullies division of
duties both natural and moral, and how they ought to be regarded: The
antiquity, formalitie and decentnesse of apparel, in sort handled to the
praise and disprayse thereof. Chap. 37. A confutation of such as appoint no
natural end or godly election: Of the care that Rulers should have to holy
Religion: The folly of such as have taught perfect pleasure to be a let to
Virtue: a description of the best constitution. Chap. 38. The Stoykes diversely
reprehended: Of our deprauing both by custom and by nature: What force the
temperature is of to alter as well the body as the mind: Of the condemnation
of certain sects of Philosophers: Universal Destiny condemned: Predestination
briefly declared. Chap. 39. A declaration of certain conceited fellows void
of reason or Art, which judge of the mediate graces, not as they ought, not
yet of the immediate: Of the wickedness of Libertines, and of the speedy
redress that must be had: Machiuels discourses to his prince to be abandoned:
a repetition of things going before in a Christian society to be remembered.
Chap. 40. The family of Love to be apprehended: of the unity that ought to be
in government: Which way Faith is obtained: How means and miracles differ
of the confutatio^ of diverse heresies: What hurt does grow of too too costly
apparel: Paul's opinion concerning the unrighteous, and why it is laid
down. Chap. 41. VVherin a good common weal consists: and how the
Gentiles as well as Christians had allurements and means to dravve men
thereunto: A question way Christ suffered: That God is no less just than he
is merciful How Princes take their regiment from God, in that they punish
the evil, and advance the good: The fruits of the Spirit declared: The
works of the flesh desciphered: Our Saviors Sermon upon the mount
touched: That the Moral law is continual, and in some part the Judicial,
but not at all the Ceremonial: How all men be created to do good works: A
brief conclusion upon the drifte of this whole work: That every Country
is to live within the limits of their own laws. Chap. 42. Who ought to
rule Youth, and why: A brief deuisio^ of the faculties of the brain: And
how that lust and courage is more pron^ (...) Youth than to Age. Chap. 43.
The power of the soul defuted. Adams fall (...): The Jews or Israelites
loss, notvvithsta^ding the law of Moses: What (...) many, albeit they be
Christians: Of diverse charitable deeds done of late, as well as of old, The
difference that is betvveene them that favor Virtue, and the^ that further
vice, although they both profess Christ. Chap. 44. To whom the Author
submits all his trauel^: The duty of Divines: Promise made at their
consecration, and of their livings, with the manner of their lives: And of
Simony. Chap. 45. What foods and doctrine the Apostles delivered: And in what
the Sum of the Scripture does consiste: And who only after Saint Augustine
shall possess the Kingdom of Heaven. Chap. 46.
FINIS.


IMPRINTED AT LONDON, by Henry Bynneman.

Cum Priuilegio.


