A SERMON PREACHED AT HENLY AT THE VISItation on the 27. of April, 1626.

UPON THOSE WORDS OF the 9. Psalm, Verse. 16.

The Lord is known to execute judgment. printer's device(?) of head of woman
wearing headdress

OXFORD, Printed by J. L. and W. T. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND worthily disposed Knight, Sir RICHARD BLVNT, High
Sheriff of Oxfordshire: Grace be multiplied in this world, and blessedness
in the world to come
VVorthie Sir,
WHat has been formerly offered to your religious Ear, is now within a few
days after presented to your judicious Eye; neither doubt I but as then it
found attentive audience with the one, so it will now find kind welcome and
acceptance with the other. Only you will imagine what was then delivered by
voice can never be carried so powerfully in papers as in speech. Solet
acceptior esse sermo vivus quam scriptus, says Bernard, the habit and gesture
of a living man is the very life of Oratory. Yet will I not despair of that
good content a review may bring to a longing spirit. The words contained in the
two Tables which God gave to Moses from the holy mount were first spoken by the
mouth of God ere they were written by the finger of God, and then carried into
the valley to be heard and kept of all the people. So may I likewise say of the
Gospel, voices and prophesies went of the blood of Christ ere ever it dropped out
of his veins. But if gracious words had not fallen from the mouth of Christ,
Christians had never conceived either the power or virtue of his death. For as
there is a blood of redemption, so there is a word of reconciliation, and
surely where the word teaches not, there the blood droppeth not. You are
religiously wise to conceive whereat I aim: to wit, that reading, preaching,
and practicing of piety, may all go together like Saul and Jonathan, of whom
its said, that they were lovely in their lives, and at their deaths were not
divided. I am sure they are the best means to escape those judgments I came
withal in that Visitation discourse. Which, I am made believe by many of my
brethren and those of worth, so well rellished in the first passage, that I
must not deny you a review. I was never ambitious herein, as well understanding
mine own meannesse; nay my privacie has been a second happiness to me. But
yet after the Cleargies dinner (whereof you were pleased to partake, and among
the Lords Prophets, as before you had spent one hour in the Church, so you
ioyed to spend another in the Chamber: a high argument of an entire zeal) so
many importunities grew upon me from some, tendering me their hands for the
transcribing hereof from others, undertaking you should not fail in regard of
that interest they might challenge in me, from all jointly soliciting for a
general favor, that at length I yielded to send it as soon as a marriage
solemnity was past in my parish, for the which I was to be provided against the
Sabbath following. These inducements though powerful, yet I will ingenuously
confess, were not my only motives. I have heard and also observed your
unfeigned affection to the truth, when as for it you have in a manner forsaken
your own, and followed S. Ieroms advise to Furia, Honor thy father if he do
not separate thee froth the true father. Otherwise, licet parvulus: and as he
speaks in another place to Heliodorus: Though thy little Nephewe should hang
upon thy neck, though thy mother with her hair about her ears, and her
garments rent, should show thee the breasts wherewith she nursed thee, though
thy father should lie on the threshold, tread upon thy father to go over,
pass away with dry eyes to the banner of the cross. It is the chief point of
piety to show thy self cruel in such a matter. Since I was taken out of that
famous Nursery, Magdalen College in Oxford by the liberal favor under Gods
providence, of my Right Honorable good Lord and right zealous Patron, Viscount
Wallingford, together with his worthy Spouse, my right noble Lady, for the
which the Lord of heaven multiply his blessings toward them; as also by a
second and entire respect of those blessed servants of God M. Edmund Dunch and
his religious daughter in law, the Lady Mary Dunch, now both with the Lord,
whose memories daily shine in their most hopeful heir, on whom Almighty God
seems, though in a far different degree, to fasten that promise made to
Abraham, Thou shall be a blessing, Genesis 12.2. Since, I say, I was taken from
the University and planted in these parts, I have beheld fair buildings and
sweet seats both on our tops and valleys, but for matter of religion much
averseness, or key-coldnesse. Moreover, the place of authority under his
Majesty you now bear, ouerswaied me not a little for so much pains; which
though, I here came not so welcome to you, yet I thank God from my heart, when
I see men of your quality and condition selected for such places; I am sure
then Religion shall suffer the less.

Sir, I have one boon to crave of you; which I earnestly beg, and am
confident in the obtaining, that since I have been drawn thus far; what you
have in your hands you would by no means let it go farther, nor to any other
view but in your presence. I am not ignorant how full of molestation the times
are, and that questionings through misinterpretation may occasion much
prejudice give these papers leave to ly by you as a pledge of my settled purpose
to deserve your love in my readiness to bestow my pains, if you shall request
them; and to be a continual petitioner to the throne of grace that you may be
kept by the power of God through faith to salvation In him I rest

From my study at Greys this 4th of May, 1626. Your Worships assured ROB:
BARNES.

PSALM: 9. v. 16. The Lord is known to execute judgment* or By his judgment
he executes.


THe Princely Prophet David the sweet singer of Israel in this whole Psalm
celebrates Gods praises in respect of his mercies toward the godly, and
judgments to the wicked, inviting others by his example to do the like; and
finally prays for the prosperity of his servants, and subversion of his
enemies. I intend no large paraphrase on the whole, selecting this bare
proposition for the present occasion, which brancheth it self into these four
particulars. 1. The Person, the Lord. 2. the attribute, Judgment. 3. the
commendation, executes: 4. the end, that we might know, and acknowledge him.
The Lord is known to execute judgment. The Person is of an high elevation,
and in his visitation takes a full survey of whatsoever passes between heaven
and earth. Omnia aperta, all things are open to his view: Hebr. 4. The
judgment fearful, for God is a consuming fire, and its a fearful thing to
fall into his hands. Heb. 10.31. The execution just and free: for as he has a
vis^tation in grace and mercy, visitavit and red^m^t, he has visited and
redeemed his people: Luke. 1.68. and of pity and compassion. Pure religion is
to visit the fatherles and widows: Iam. 1.27. So is there a visitation with
him in correction and sever^ty. I will visit their transgressions with the rod:
Psalm. 89.22. and of wrath and fury, shall not I visit for these things, says
the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged of such a nation? Ier. 5.29. Lastly,
the end is for reformation of all such unregenerate ones, who as yet remain
enemies to the cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things: Phil. 3.18.19. The person, attribute execution,
end, are by the gracious assistance of Gods Spirit, and your (right
worshipful, and the rest dearly beloved) much desired patience, at this time
to become the subject of my ensuing meditations.

And first of the Person, with whom I beginning even make an end, for I will
not go about to describe either That he is, or What he is; the one is
needeles, the other impossible. How shall I describe him that dwells in a light
that none attaines unto? how shall I describe him that has made darkness his
pavilion, measured the waters in his fist, sits on the circle of the earth, in
comparison of whom the inhabitants are but as grasshoppers. Es. 40. How shall I
describe him that cannot be circumscribed, who comprehends all things yet
himself not comprehended; is in all things, himself not included; moves all
things, himself not moved; changes all things, himself unchangeable.
Finally, how shall I describe him who is without quantity great, without
quality good, without measure wise, without time everlasting: in greatness
infinite, in virtue omnipotent, in wisdom profound, in counsel wounderfull,
in judgment terrible, and in all virtues perfect and complete. Search not then
after the majesty, least thou be oppressed with the glory. There is, says a
learned father a holy kind of ignorance not to search after things vnrevealed,
secret things belong to God, but revealed to us: Deuteronomy. 29.29. As he is
therefore in himself I meddle not with him here, but rather as he manifests
himself in his words and works, in his mercy and judgments, in his purity
and power, these being the very hands with which he takes hold of us, and the
arms he embraces us with, or stretches over us. Bernard in his 8: ser. Cant.
ascribes these two hands to God, the one is latitudo qua tribuit affluenter,
this is his bounty bestowing his largess, giving gifts to men; the other is,
fortitudo qua defendit potenter, the hand of his power stretched over all his
creatures, to protect and defend them, and not so only, but to punish them,
when they shall offend him; to which purpose, and Jerome de memb. Dei, says,
manus Dei flagellum, Gods hand is a scourge. With the one he seems as standing
on mount Gerasim: Deuteronomy. 11.29. to deal abroad his blessings, and like Homers
Jupiter, out of one of those tons and great vessels which stands at the
entrance of his palace, sets abroach his favoures to men: with the other as on
mount Eball, he scatters his cursings, and as out of the other tun he
drencheth men with affliction, giving them plenty of tears to drink: Psalm.
80.5.

What I now speak or might more enlarge herein reflects on us (men, fathers,
and brethren,) who represent this great person to our people, and hence are
truly termed Persons, ambassadors for Christ. And secondly on you (dearly
beloved) who are here this day in the fear of God to present misdemeanures.
This supereminent goodness in the person calls to us for imitation, that we
would set copies of goodness and sanctity to our people, that our examples may
prove our best sermons. Vita exemplaris, (says Gregory in his pastoralls)
optima est concio, illudque cum imperio docetur, quod prius agitur quam
docetur. A good life is the best sermon, and he preaches with authority, whose
practice goes before his preaching. For indeed it is a kind of unhappiness as
of princes so of priests, that quicquid faciunt pracicipere videntur. Neither
can we be ignorant that every molehill in our misbehauiours is a mountain,
every moate in our eyes a beam. Chrysologus his tax in one kind, Sermon. 26.
passes popularly current for all sins. Ebrietas in alio crimen, in sacerdote
sacrilegium; alter necat animam suam vino, alter spiritum sanctitatis
extinguit, I spare the english. Hereupon so much clamouring has been about
the cleargies exorbitancy. Our days are far different from Constantines, who
as Theodoret. 1. lib. of his story, cap. 3. reports, when a libell or book was
given up to him concerning some Bishops misdemeanures, first tied a thread about
it then sealed it with his ring, lastly cast it into the fire before all things
were composed, professing himself would not read a word in it, and saying if
what was in it should be divulged, the common people would grow more brazen
faced in sinning, gathering thereby a protection for their sins; nay again
in the same chapter, when even he took a Bishop committing any unclean act,
he would cast his cloak over him, to keep such faults from the common eye. O
the disparity of times! But yet, I praise God, to his honor I may truly and
boldly speak it. If other places be answearable to these parts about us, in
respect of notorious crimes in the clergy, I am assured much time might have
been spared for reformation. In the mean time Antichrist goes up and down
the city, grinnes like a dog, and strives to seduce our professors with that
groundless position or principle. That first we must look to the Person
teaching, before we look to the thing taught; thereby to bring in a seeming
formality to outface true doctrine. A position, I say again without all
ground. For first Christ has taught us what persons soever they are that build
up his kingdom, they must go on. Wherefore John complaining to him: Mark.
9.38 39. Master we saw one casting out devils in thy name, who followed not
us. Jesus faid, forbid him not, for whosoever is not against us is on our part.
Secondly in the new Testament none but enemies of the gospel look to persons
more then doctrine. The priests and elders said to Christ, by what authority
do thou these things: Mat. 21.23. And the Synod at Jerusalem asked Peter: by
what power, and in what name have ye done this: Act. 4.7. But of the true
worshippers of God we hear no such thing. Which I speak not as if ordinarily
we ought not to ask after men's authority, this were the next way to leap from
the shop-board to the pulpit with Brownists, and other sectaries; but to show,
doctrine must be preferred before persons. Thirdly the Eunuch and Lydiae did
not ill in hearing Phillip and Paul without enquiry after their persons, they
knew that Christians should not give an account at the last day of the persons
they heard, but of their obedience or disobedience to their wholesome doctrine.
Lastly most glorious persons may be full of deceit, they that come in sheep
clothing, may be inwardly ravening wolves, yea watchmen may be blind, and
dumb dogs that cannot bark: Es. 56.10. and greedy dogs that can never have
enough: from the prophets to the priests they may all deal falsely: Ier: 6.13.
there may be a conspiracy of them in the medst of the Church: Ezekiel. 22.25. As
in the Trent Council. Yet thus far I will hold with them, that the person
does much commend the work: the Apostle said not in vain. Tim: 2.3.14.
Continue in the things which thou have learned knowing of whom thou have
learned them: that is, God, yea and it may be, Me, Gods minister who have been
in thy soul by the spirit of power effectually concurring with my service.
Again, it puts you in mind, the Churchwardens here assembled who as the horse
of Cloe., 1. Cor. 1.11. this day by solemn oath are to present that sins may
have their just censures. Remember before whom you stand, whose oath you take,
even the oath of the Lord. Ex. 22.11. Non considerandum cui sed per quem iuras,
says Jerome. Take heed then on the one side of spleen that you do nothing
maliciously, so your accusation may be just, your affection unjust, and in
doing that, ye shall sin, which ye had sinned in not doing. Ille dat
poenam, tu amisisti laudem he may be punished, but thou shall not be praised.
On the other side of conniuence and partiality, for there is an Omnia been,
Latin too well known to the vnlearnedst, that swallows up all vanities.
Drunkenesse, uncleanness, swearing, profanation of the sabbath, go abroad
all the year before, and when the visitation comes, either the presentment is
packt up with some recusants names, or otherwise with an omnia been, as if
there were no recusancy in good manners, this is not charity that couers sin,
but a miserable indulgence that cherishes sin. In the Creation there was an
omnia been, God reuiewed his works, and they were exceeding good: Genesis 1. in
our redemption there was an omnia been. He has done all things well, he has
made the blind to sea, the lame to go: here was an omnia been indeed, but
never any since. If any thing may urge you to a sincere discharge hereof, me
thinks it should be the consideration of what follows in the next
circumstance.

Judgment.

The Lord is known to execute judgment. Verbum hoc iudicij, vtinam nemo
transiret sine iudicio: I will says one that no man would slight over this word
Judgment. In the Civil law the title de iudicio is a great title and much
studied, but among Christians it were to be wished it were much more, that it
ever resownded in our ears, arise ye dead and come into judgment. In the
scripture this name is diversely used. sometimes for wisdom to discuss and
discern things doubtful. Give thy judgments to the king. Psalm. 72.1. sometime
for a moderation in punishing, Correct me O God yet in thy judgment. Ier. 10.
sometime it signifies the cause or controversy to be judged, occasioning Esaias to
reprove the Elders of Israel because the widows cause came not before them,
they promoted it not, but put it off from day to day to gratify their
oppressors. Sometime the word of God it self is called Judgment 119 Psalm.
either because God in his word as a judge pronounces what he would have done,
or for that it contains nothing but what is just, or that thereby we shall be
judged, accquitted, condemned. So^time the office of judgment, and public
government. Deu. 1.16, Lastly the punishment itself, So shall thy judgment be.
1. kings. 20.40. the daughters of Sion shall rejoice because of thy judgments.
Psalm: 48.10. take it in what sense you please either for wisdom to discern,
or moderation to punish, or the cause it self, or the square of judgment, or
the offices of judging or punishment, still judgment belongs to God; though I
must confess most properly and peculiarly in this place it implies Punishment
the rather because of the next word, executes, having its due reference to
judgment. Many are the sins of a people, and therefore manifold are Gods
punishments Ezekiel. in his 14. cap. from the 13. v. forward sums up four
judgments. Famine, War, Pestilence, Evil beasts. 1 Famine comes riding on a
pale horse killing with hunger and death, sometimes clad in a roabe of
immoderate rain and showers drowning the worlds plenty and the earths
provision, sometimes bearing on her shoulder heavens of brass, and treading
under her feet the earth of iron. Pale and lean she is more then the picture
of death, mors in illa as well as mors in olla, nay more, genus miserabile
Lethi. When God who gives to man the breath of life shall deny bread to
maintain life, when winter shall be turned to summer, summer to winter, when a
man shall rise early and eat the bread of carefullnesse and at night be to
care for his bread, sow much, bring in little, the harvest little but the
laborers many, when one plants another waters and God denies the increase, is
not this a great judgment? Yea and a threefold sin amongst many hastens it*
first swearing and forswearing, that the very earth mournes because of Oaths.
Ier: 23.10. there was a famine in the days of David, what is the cause? and
they did break their oath. 2 Samuel 21.1. Do not men now slight an oath? is it
not as common as words? yea a common accuser says Austine is a common
forswearer. Secondly the neglect of gods worship whereof the Jews were so
guilty, and punishments brought on them for not repairing the temple. Now if
the material temple and his ceremonial service caused such displeasure to
arise what will the contempt and carelessenesse of his reasonable service
press him to. The tribes went up to the temple, it was Gods express command,
the frequenting of the tabernacle. Exodus: 23.17. So that public meetings for
his worship are not as some would have it a Jewish ceremony or ambulatory, to
cease with the law and that temple, but omnino perpetuum, altogether permanent
in Christ's Church; neither counts he himself as well served by sitting in a
chimney corner, though with devotion, as when we are praying and praising his
holy name in the place allotted for his worship. A third sin is the wasting
of Gods creatures, so that in respect of men's unthankfulness, and some
lauishing of them, God takes them away. In quo quis peccat; He makes the
punishment answerable to the offense. The drunkard shall be clothed with
rags, Prove. 23.21. a lover of pastime shall be poor, 21.17. the whore shall
he bring to a morsel of bread. Secondly, war rusheth forth, riding on a red
horse unbridled, carrying all things by force of arms, not laws. A time
wherein Pirrhus regards not the aged head of Priamus, nor yet the sacred altar
whereto he flies; a time wherein old Jacobs head is sent with sorrow to the
grave, wherein Rabell weeps for her children, and will not be comforted,
because they are not; a time wherein either we must fight, and so run on a
sudden death; or fly, and so lead a tedious life. I have taken away my
peace from the people: Ier. 16.3. This our land has often tasted of this
misery being some times overrun with foreign enemies, beside that great
distraction between the two houses of York and Lancaster. In the compass of
which division, Comines the French historian in that large digression touching
the English wars Lib. 3. Cap. 4. tells us that seven or eight battles were
fought wherein died of the blood royal threescore, or fourscore Princes, and
himself beheld a Duke of Exeter fallen into such misery as that the ran after
the Duke of Burgundies coach barefoote and barelegged begging his bread for
Gods sake. I heard of a kind of a restraint within these few years and yet
scarcely know not the meaning, that preachers should not amaze the people with
fearful presages, of dangerous times to ensue, but O my soul, both secretly,
and openly, pray thou that God in regard of the former sins, may be pleased
to auert this judgment. In the third place the pestilence issues forth on a
black horse, killing with sickness and death, whose terrible blow among other
places, we in this town and the borderers on either hand have the last year
felt, wherein one cries, O my brother come not nigh me, for I am infected,
another barred in by command, shut up by sickness, nay worse pend in by
sorrow, cries out of a window, O my father, O my brother either now breathing
their last or by this time dead. O bellum Dei contra homines. O the arrow of
God that flies silently, swiftly, deadly: pernicissime volat, says Musculus,
exitialiter ferit. It spares none, neither the aged can be privileged, though
Pliny lib. 7. c. 50. avouches, Senes minime sentire pestilentiam, that old men
are never tainted with the plague; neither the coldest regions can stop the
course of it. Possevinus de rebus Muscouit, fol. 11. tells us at what time he
was ambassador for the Pope in Muscovia, the plague which had scarce ever
been heard of before in that country ob intensissima frigora, by reason of the
extreme cold, yet it then killed many thousands; hence is this arrow called
also exterminium, a rooting out: The house may shield men and cattle from the
hail, flight may save from the sword, soiourning in another country preserve
from famine, but in this contagion at home our houses stifle us, abroad the
air infects us. The Prophet in the fourth place comes in with the violence of
evil beasts. Indeed it is Gods goodness that those savage creatures fly into
the wilderness from our company, whereas he could send them into our peopled
towns, and though in themselves they are not so fruitful, he permitting the
mild to increase and multiply, yet can he make them to grow into herds and
flocks. You know how the Lord sent Lions to tear the children of Bethel that
mocked the Prophet. 2. Kings; and what fiery Serpents fell among the murmuring
Israelites; and how grievously in the book of Exodus the Egyptians with
Pharaoh were oppressed with Lice, Frogs, Caterpillars. Plead no immunity from
these two last judgments. If we avoid not and repent of the forenamed sins,
we shall all likewise perish. The Prophet has here ended his number, but I
have not mine. One judgment more is worthy our more serious meditation and
present occasion, which God knows is too much slighted among men as if it
merely came from man. It is an Ecclesiastical judgment, the fearful
sentence of Excommunication. All the rest especially destroy the body, but this
the soul. There are that draw this censure even from Adam whom the Lord cast
out of Eden, and set an Angel at the entry of the garden, who by shaking the
blade of a glistering sword feared him from reentring, not suffering him to
taste of that tree which was a Sacrament of life. The like do the Hebrew
interpreters observe concerning Cain, whom the Lord cast out and banished from
the face of God. For what else is his face but the place appointed for his
worship, where he was wont to appear to the fathers, and where Adam and his
sons met together in sacrifice to him. Come unto the times under the law, how
was this judgment tipified by the uncleanness keeping from the tabernacle, not
entering the temple, not partaking of the sacrifices, nor eating the passover.
Numb. 19.13.20. and 9.13. Look but into the new Testament, what mean the use
of the keys to open and shut, and the words of binding and loosing? Moreover
by example Abraham is commanded to cast out the bond woman, with her son out
of his family which was the Church Genesis 21.10. Himinaeus and Alexander
concerning the faith made shipwreck, and are delivered to Satan that they may
learn not to blaspheme 1. Tim. 1.19.20. the Apostle commands the Corinthians
to purge out the old leaven, that is, as is after expounded in plainer words,
put away from yourseleues that wicked person 1. Cor. 5.7.13. alluding to the
passover which the Israelites were not to kill, till their houses were rid of
leauened bread. Ob. But this punishment and authority seems needless, for the
civil magistrate is charged to punish such as live dissolutely, he bears not
the sword in vain. It belongs to him to take away the life and limme according
to the nature and quality of the offense, what place is there then for
ecclesiastical censures. Sol. I answer, indeed there was a time when the
ecclesiastical authority took up in a manner all, and lay hard not only on
ordinary civil courts, but on David's house, and the throne of kings: But God
ever from the days of Lucifer gave pride a fall, and pride of all sins least
be seems the Church; the time is now come that civil courts are as much too
strong (as in the beginning of this parliament, a reverend Bishop preached) and
if they go a little farther, I see not to what end our visitations should be
kept. But to the purpose, both courts may well stand together, the one hinders
not the other. Christ has settled this as a perpetual order in the church.
Mat. 18.17. If he shall neglect to hear thee, tell it the Church, if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen and a publican.
Where our Savior alluding to the custom of the Jewish church, he shows also
that the Christian church cannot want this spiritual jurisdiction. We are not
to think, as some fondly imagine, that Christ pointed out the civil
magistrate, when he says, tell the Church; nor that those words, (if he hear
not the church, let him be to thee as a heathen or publican) intimate thus
much, except he hear the magistrate of the same faith and religion with thee,
thou may go to law with him, as if he were a heathen or publican, and have
him before a Roman magistrate, that is profane. For Christ speaks not only
to the Jews that then lived, but gives a remedy to be used at all times. The
promise that follows, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, belongs not to one
time, one place, one people, nor to the civil magistrate, nor wrongs civil,
but to the conscience, and had been impertinently added, if Christ had spoken
of seeking civil remedy against civil wrongs, as may appear by these
reasons. First, the words concurring in the text touching binding and loosing,
and elsewhere of opening and shutting, remitting and reteining sins were
never understood but of spiritual power. Secondly, the authority here spoken
of, was such as the disciples present, should sometimes in person exercise, but
these exercised no civil power. Thirdly Christ's words are imperative, Tell it
the Church; not permissiue, you may tell. And Christ commands no man to
persecute his brother civilly, offending him before the civil magistrate; he
commands to forgive him, and to be ready to take another injury, rather then in
law to pursue him: Mat. 4. Fourthly, the ground of this action is not civil,
for then it should more fitly have been named (...), an injury, but here it
has the express name of (...) sin. Likewise he teaches a little before, of
offenses spiritual, and the cure of them; then he shows our duty of seeking,
and recovering every brother going astray, by comparison of seeking and
recovering of a lost sheep. So that we may conclude, that to take the word
Church, for a company of civil magistrates, or a bench of Justices has no
approbation of any author. But why do I dispute so long, I rather com^ ^o
mourn and lament our peoples obstinacy and improvidence, in sleighting this
punishment. Do ye know in what state you are, while ye remain
excommunicated? I will tell you. Excommunication is a sentence of the Church,
whereby a member thereof convicted, or to be convicted of some grievous crime,
as yet continuing unrepentant, is driven out of the church, and out off from
the communion and fellowshippe of the faithful, that thereby he might be
driven to repentance. O what a heap of mischeifes rise here up together. I'ts
bellua multorum capitum. Does this judgment pass on thee? art thou
excommunicated? first thou endeavourest as much as in thee lies to blot thee
out of Gods book, and to deprive thy self of Gods protection. Secondly, know
that the sentence pronounced by Gods faithful minister is ratified in heaven,
Christ is the author of it. The Corinthians being charged to put out from
amongst them him that had offended, they must do it in the name, that is by the
command of Christ. 1. Cor. 5.4. Thirdly thou art barred from the word and
sacraments and prayers of the Church. The word does the noe good, the sacrament
hurts, neither can we bless thee in the name of god. Was not Nebuckudnezars
case most fearful when he was turned to feed on grass like an Ox? but the
excommunicates state is worse, he wants the food of eternal life. Fourthly
thou art to be accounted as an heathen, now between the Jews and heathens
there was no commerce concerning gods worship. Fifthly thou being excommunicated
out of one Church can not be admitted into any other. Churches are sisters
whom one receives all receive, whom one reiects all rerect. Were thou sure
says St. Austine Epist. 74. that thou leaving one service thou should
betake^ into no other, thou would be careful how thou diddst forgo it or
offend. Lastly add hereunto the decrees of princes and and counsels, thou
can have no benefit of the laws, others may sue thee, but thou can not sue
others, others may make their last will and testament, but but thou may not
set thy house thus in order, others may challenge christian burial, but thou
must be buried like an ass; as thou wast out of the church through thy
obstinate life: so shall thou not be brought near it upon thy death. As I
would crave of you (right worshipful) to be sparing in these emissions making
up an extremum fulmen against impenitents: so I cannot but justify your
tenderness herein upon mine own late experience you rather aiming at a
substantial reformation in the delinquents then any exactions. Howsoever the
common conceit runs riot as if all were for pay, I have found the contrary
from your vnderagents. Let that still remain as a tax in the Romish courts,
which are more for payments then repentance, saying to their offenders,
discharge the court and be gone; and not repent, reform and be readmitted into
the Church. I remember i'ts noted of Irenaus, he earnestly reproved Victor
Bishop of Rome for excommunicating many churches in Asia, not for heresy and
apostasy, but for that they would not consent with the Church of Rome in the
celebration of Easter. I beseech you let not your excommunications pass for
small occurrences tending still to reformation, and execution, which is my
third circumstance.

To execute: God is known to execute. A commendation that brings with it Gods
glory, a lands blessing, and each particular peccants welfare. The Lord
ex^cuteth judgment to all th^se that are oppressed with wrong: Psalm. 103.6.
The Lord has executed his judgment upon Angels, cities, the old world; the
great Monarchies, and mighty kingdoms have ^asted of his judgments, who as
they spoiled others, so have they been spoiled themselves: As we may see in
the subversion of the Monarchies, spoken of by Daniell, the Assirians,
Persians, Grecians, and lastly Romans. His executions have lighted on wicked
kings, Pharaoh, Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, Zedechiah, Herod; upon wicked priests, as
those of Baal, and Elyes sons, upon wicked persons, Judas, Achitophel,
Absalon, Corah, Dath^n, and Abiram; in a word on wicked people that put the
Son of God to death: Pilat that corrupt judge, who for f vour of the Jews,
and fear of Caesar, condemned our innocent Savior, was shortly after put out
of his office, and retur^ing to his house in a ma^e content, made away
himself. Caiaphas was dep^sed, and Jonathan took his room. Herod that
despised Christ was condemned by Caligula, to perpetual banishment, where he
died miserably; and the other H^rod, who killed James, and imprisoned Peter,
was eaten up with worms. As for the Jews who cried, his blo^d be upon us and
our children, they had their wish, n^^ any of th^se pl^gues Ezekiel formerly
mentioned, but overtooke them especially want and famine. Through famine, as
you largely heard from this place the last week, they were driven to eat the
leather of their shoes, girdles, bucklers, targets, the dung of their stables,
and in fine their own children. Woeful was this execution, as also that by
war, when the streets of Jerusalem ran with blood, when they were still
taken and crucified on crosses and gibbets set up before the walls, that they
which were within, might see them, and give over, but yet they would not; 500 a
day were thus hanged up, till there were neither trees to be gotten, whereon to
make crosses, nor any more space lest to set them up in. Fearful was the
execution, when certain of them getting meat from the enemies camp for
compassion sake were yet so pursued with Gods anger, that when they hoped their
lives were in safety, suddenly in the night, the bloody soldiers (imagining
they had swallowed down their gold and jewels for their own uses) slew them,
slitting their bowels and raking in for that which was not there, to the number
of 2000 in one night. What should I speak of those cruel persecutors, Nero,
Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian with others? or of our home-papists, who perished
at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth; even so let thine enemies ever
perish, O Lord, who for thy gospel and truths sake, vnrepentantly have evil
will at this our Sion. Thus execution passes for Gods glory, yea and for the
good of a whole kingdom too. Justice exalts a nation, says the wise Solomon:
Pro. ^^.^^. For when sin is some-way punished, God is pacified. Whereupon
Moses slew those idolaters: Ex. 32.29. and Phineas executed judgment, so the
plague ceased; and Achan once stoned, the Israelites prospered, and Jonas but
cast into the sea, the waters calmed. Nay lastly this execution tends to the
benefit of offenders themselves; better be here punished then fall into Gods
hands. It had been good for Elyes children that their father had first
corrected them, not God. And I doubt not but these kind of meetings return
many a prodigal into their fathers home. I speak not this (right worshipful)
as doubting your uprightness, or to teach you that ye know not. For who knows
not that the law is the life of a kingdom, and execution the life of the law;
when the sword of Goliath is not lapt in a cloth behind the Ephod. For it is
one of Machianels rules, how a conqueror might weaken a subdued kingdom, even
to lay the raines on every ones neck; and to allow the people to live every
one as he list in a lawles fashion. Neither speak I this to exasperate your
mind, above that, which nature and the quality of offenders, and offenses does
require. There must be a Moses and Elias. Elias was a fiery spirited prophet
inflamed with zeal, Moses of a meek and mild spirit. Both these tempers are
a happy composition in a Visiter, and make his breast like the sacred Arc,
wherein lay both Aarons rod and the golden pot of Manna, the rod of correction,
and the manna of consolation; the one a Corrasiue, the other a Cordial. This
spiritual Jurisdiction should have both vbera and verbera, or be like the
bees, having much honey, but not without a sting. On^^ (...) the sting be least
in desire and intention, and the last in execution, like God himself, Qui
habet in potestate vindictam, sed mavult in vsu misericordiam. The building of
the church goes slowly forward, though there be many laborers, yet there be
more hinderers. God never had so many friends as enemies. If the overseers
look not well to the business, too many will make church work of it, for
such loytering is fallen into a proverb. Men are fickle, as were the
Galathians, and Churches of Asia, if they be not often visited, they will soon
be corrupted. Luther said in Wittenberg that a few fanaticall spirits had pulled
down more in a short time then all they could build again in 20 years. Let
but Moses turn his back, and ascend the mount to be Isreal's lieger with God,
the people presently speak of making a calfe; he is no sooner vanished of out
their sight, the^ out of mind, and they fall to idolatry. Our churches are not
like Irish timber, if they be not continually swept there will be spiders and
cobwebs. I cannot but name one amongst many; The desolation in our Churches
upon Saints days and holidays, a very plague that infects these chiltren
parts. For you shall have more attending the Cart in the lanes or the plough in
the field, then accompanying the Parson and his Clarke in the Church; we may
justly complain, Religio peperit diuitias, filia devorauit matrem* we are all
for wealth but little for devotion. Our forfathers and fathers in their godly
discretion allotted Eeves as well as Sundays and holy days for surceasing of
work, but now it is well if all the Sabbath may go free for spiritual
employment. Oh the greediness of our times; which formerly was unknown.
Begin with the first time while Moses lived, and you shall find these
festiuities whether maiores or minores, higher or lower yet they were vacativae
ab opere. Buccinate, says the Psalmist, 81, 3. Psalm: blow up the trumpett in
the new moon, even in the time appointed, and upon our solemn feast day. And
it seems these days were thus solemned, used as free from ordinary working in
Elizeus time to whom 2. Kings 4. the Shunamite woman went for her dead son,
thereby occasioning her husband to question her quam ob causam vadis ad eum
hodie, non sunt Calendae, nec Sabbatha, why go thou to him? this day is
neither the Calends nor Sabbath, which argues they were freed from labor,
because her husband insinuated she should go upon a day, when he might be at
leisure from his business, making in that respect a similitude between the
Calends and the Sabbath. Nay it was observed til the time of St. Austin de
december cordis cap: 3. For he by way of reproof of the Jewish women, for another
extreme of their overmuch daliancing on those days, says. Foeminae hebraeorum
melius nerent, vel aliquid operis facerent, quam in Neomenijs suis impudice
saltarent. The Hebrew women were better spinne or do any work, then
immodestly dance in their new moons. O when my eyes behold on an Easter
Tuesday, or the like Festiualls, as they did on the last within half a mile of
this town some plowing. How do I mourn, and wish that our right reverend
Diocoesans worthy sermon preached in Oxford Nouem: 5. 1602. were now again in
these parts preached, who justly gave the reasons why our Churches should be
frequented on such times. One was for that we have exemplum legis M^saicae, the
example of Moses law, which is alleged by them that are learned for one
reason, why our Savior Christ did inst^t^te none though after, the Apostles
themselves in the opinion of Ambrose and Austine, were thought to be the choice
institutors of most of them: then again we have rationem legis M^saicae, the
reason of Mos^s law, to wit, a remembrance of Gods blessings. Thirdly the
practice and authori^y of Christ's Church, since his coming. Fourthly the
promise of Christ, If two or three are gathe ed together in my name, I will be
in the midst of them. Mat. 18.4. how much more if the whole congregation were
assembled, which with an army of prayers should enforce his mercy. I beseech
you again and again take notice of this n^glect, ^ay if it may be with your
own and your officers eyes, no^ referring this reformation to churchwardens,
but that a more immediate execution, both upon our gentry and inferiors, may
bring God to be ^^e^y known, and known in his Saints; and so I come to my
last part, and end of all these executions in judgment, that God may be known
and acknowle^g'd. God is known.) Austin reads the words thus; Notus est
Dominus propter iudicium quod fecit: Jerome thus, Agnitus est Dominus iudicium
faciens: the vulgar thus, Cogn^scitur Dominus ^ud c^af^ciens, and our last
translation thus, N^tu^ se facit Jehovah iudicio quod exercuit; but inten^ing
one and the same thing, that the Lord God has, is, and will be known by
executing judgment. Two words shall dispatch all, first a Quomodo, how; next a
Quando, when. The Quomodo, how God is known, will appear in the practice of a
threefold duty. For as one well says, Iudicia Dei sunt commendanda,
formidanda, meditanda: Gods judgments first are to be praised and admired. The
Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works; they are to be
praised in respect of their greatness, strangenes, goodness. Abyssus abyssum
inuocat. O the deepenesse of his wisdom and knowledge, how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out: Romans 11.33. We see the effect,
not causes, the middle, not the end. David that numbered the people is spared,
and the people numbered are destroyed; the prophet seduced, is slain by a lion,
and the lying prophet that seduced him escaped; a thief is saved at the last
gasp, and Judas an Apostle condemned; Caesar that has the worst cause,
s^cceedes best; Pompey that has the best cause, yet speedes worst; Gods
enemies flourish and are exalted, when his friends mourn and weep. One would
think the word of God prevalent in beating down enorm ties faster then Satan
could raise them, so that where the gospel abounded, sin should not
superabound; and yet this glorious sun has not dispelled all those foggs and
mists, which have surged from hell. But if the sun cause such a stink, i'ts a
sign some dunghill is nigh, let it reflect on a bed of roses, there is all
swee^nes. These presidents occasion some to despair of, others to deny Gods
providence, but let us always say. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are
thy judgments. His judgments are sometimes secret, sometimes manifest,
always just. One while he punishes in this life, and in these like courts,
least there should seem to be no providence; others remain unpunished, least
there should be thought to be no ensuing judgment. Secondly, Gods judgments
are to be feared. If men listen not when he speaks by his word, ministers,
mercies; certainly he will be known by his judgments. Pharaoh first asks in
a kind of scorn, quis est Dominus, but after upon sight of his judgments,
then digitus Dei est hic, this is the very finger of God; and again, The Lord
is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: Ex: 9.27. The most wicked have
trembled at judgments. Baltashars countenance changed at the handwriting in
the wall, and Felix at Paul's preaching of righteousness, temperance, judgment
to come. But if they quake not, imputing all to blind chance and fortune, it
shows they have an atheistical and irreligious heart, even worse then the
devils, who as St. James says, believe and tremble. Whereas the truly
sanctified with David, cry out one while, from my youth up till now thy
terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind; another while as it is toward
the end of the 119 Ps. O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee, and thy
judgments shall teach me. Now last of all, Gods judgments are to be pondered
by frequent meditation, which in midst of tribulation, yet comforts the
dejected, strengthens their faith, increases hope: I considered thine
everlasting judgments, and received comforts, says the Psalmist. But out alas
how far are we from this serious thought, how little use return we to our
souls by these occurrences. We have been smitten indeed, and the hills have
trembled, and our carcases have been torn and thrown to in the streets; for
all this Gods anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still:
Es. 5.25. Surely the reason of all is our slight passing by these judgments,
not so often seasoning our retired'st thoughts, as there is just cause. The
woeful occurrences of times have but the same working in men, which a stone
has when it falls into the waters. Falling in it makes a great noise, and
stirrer the wates very much, one wave begets another for a good pretty space,
at last the motion grows weaker and weaker, and the water returns to his
former smoothnes: so we hear of diverse fearful accidents, at the first
coming we are much moved, it runs from man to man with much swiftnes, but on
a sudden when this first address is past, the matter dies; we are as we
were, and the judgment leaves no impression. God grant the last years plague
for want of serious plunging our thoughts, has not found us this year, as
proane to work wickedness with greedines as before. And thus much of the
Quomodo, how God is usually known. The Quando remains, the time when God thus
manifests himself. Hugo the Cardinal on this Psalm, mentions a threefold
day, Wherein God is known to man, the day of tribulation, of death, and the
last judgment. He is known to some for their salvation, whereupon says the
wise man of the wise man, that he sees the plague and auoides it, facile
laqueos euadit in terris qui habet oculos semper in coelis; says the Gloss.
But to others for their destruction, they fall as a bird in the snare, God then
is known of his servants here more privately, but hereafter to the whole world
more publicly, Luther on this Ps. also writes how the Lord is known two
ways. First outwardly, by punishing the ungodly, and preserving the righteous.
Secondly inwardly through the terrifying of conscience. Shall I abridge all
into one s^mme? Judges ^e e have their courts, and are known in them: so God
has three courts to be known by. 1. of session. 2. of conscience. 3. of the
general assize. This of session is for penalties on our bodies, goods, good
name, either in our selves or others. Though I will confess, the end of his
punishments in this kind is not only for sin, but as in the blindmans case
that the glory of God also might be manifested. Ioh: 9. If herein man chance to
escape, and this court of outward penalties take such little or no hold on him,
yet in the second place there will arise perplexities of conscience. God is the
judge in this court, the conscience the witness, the Devil the accuser, the law
the trial, the deed the evidence, the person the prisoner. Tell me not of
peaceablenes of most men's consciences. They may be quiet, yet not good; as St.
Bernard distinguishes. And in this quietness she may be first caeca blind, the
blind man swallows many a fly, and the ignorant many a sin. Concupiscence
the root of evil, St. Paul thought to be no sin, while the scales of
ignorance were upon his eyes; and I am afraid too many dare not look into the
glass of Gods holy word, least the number of their sins, and foulness of
their souls should affright them. Secondly she may be secure, sleepy, that
can, and will not see, with whom s^n and Satan are in league for a time; sed
ista tranquillitas tempestas erit, this calm will prove a storm, as Jerome
notes. The world, flesh, and devil has so lulled the^ asleep that they never
dream of heaven, nor hell, death, nor judgment, the noise of carnal
pleasures and the voice of worldly profits does drown the voice of conscience
in them as the drums in the sacrifice of Mol^ch did the cry of infants. O ye
Polypragmaticall men that have whole Mines and Mints of business in your
p^tes, that you are not at leisure once in a week, in a month, in a year,
nay scarce in your whole life to parlye with your poor conscience, think on
this and remember that if once she awake, i^gulum petet, like a wild beast
robbed of her whelps, she will fly to the throat of thy roll, she will
affright thee with terrible dreams, such as Polidore Virgill mentions that
Richard the third had the night before Bosworthfield wherein he was slain. He
thought all the devils in hell haled and pulled him in most hideous and ugly
shapes. Id credo non fuit somnium sed conscientia scelerum. that was no fained
dream (says he) but a true torture of his conscience presaging a bloody day
to himself and his followers. Thirdly she may be obdurata cauterized, having
no sense and feeling of sin. Grauissime tunc aegrotat qui se non sentit
aegrotare, that man is desperately sick that feels not his sickness. But what
of all this? what if through habit and custom of sinning, all shame of face
and remorse of conscience be taken away? what if through all this the wicked
has no bands in his death? yet know the general assize must be kept; and the
day of retribution will come after all. For as God was omnipotent in creating
the world, wise in preserving the world, merciful in redeeming the world, so
will he be most just at the latter day in judging the world; to the utter
confusion of all deriders that say most foolishly, where is the promise of his
coming? instead thereof then they shall say, verily there is a God that judges
the earth. He will the^ scan and sift out all that is in man. He will then
discover if our wisdom have not been craft, our severity rigor, our justice
cruelty, our government tyranny: He will make it known whether our authority
have not been oppression; our zeal contention; our humbleness baseness; our
simpleness folly; and our fervor in religion formal hypocrisy. Christ who
was once brought to the bar when Caiphas, Pon. Pilate and Herod sat upon the
bench, shall in that last and great assize sit on the bench and these
miscreants shall be brought to the bar, the godly now are in want and woe
while the wicked in this life take their ease, but then the wicked shall be
tormented, and the godly rest in everlasting joy and honor. Let us pray
therefore that we may all of us know God by his mercies not by his judgments, as
a father not as a judge, by his judgments upon others not upon our selves. And
that at the last day when he shall gather all nations into the valley of
judgment, seperating between the good and the bad, as the good shepherd does
between the sheep and the goats, and saying unto the wicked, go ye cursed
into hell fire etc. we may then be of that blessed number whom he will place at
his right hand, to whom he will say, Come ye blessed: etc. To him be glory,
and praise, and majesty, now and evermore ascribed: Amen.

FINIS.
printer's device(?) of head of woman wearing headdress

