BEN: IONSON, HIS CASE IS ALTERD.

As it has been sundry times Acted by the Children of Blacke-friers.

AT LONDON Printed for Bartholomew Sutton, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard near
the great north door of S. Paul's Church. 1609.

A pleasant Comedy called, the Case is Alterd.
Actus primi,
Scaena prima.
Sound? after a flourish: Juniper a Cobbler is discovered, sitting at work in
his shop and singing. Juniper, Onion, Antony Baladino. YOU woeful wights give
ear a while,
And mark the tenor of my style,
Enter Onion in have. Which shall such trembling hearts unfold
As seldom has to fore been told.
Such chances rare and doleful news
Oni. fellow Juniper Peace a Gods name.
As may attempt your wits to muse.
Oni. Gods so, here man. A pox a God on you.
And cause such trickling tears to pass,
Except your hearts be flint or brass:
Oni. Juniper, Juniper. To hear the news which I shall tell,
That in Castella once befell.
God's Blood, where did thou learn to corrupt a man in the midst of a verse, ha?

Onion. Gods lid man, service is ready to go up man, you must slip on your
coat and come in, we lack waiters pitifully.


Iunip. A pitiful hearing, for now must I of a merry Cobbler become mourning
creature.


Exit Onion. Onion. Well you will come.


Iunip. Presto. Go to, a word to the wise, away, fly? vanish: Lie there the
weeds that I disdain to wear.


Anto. God save you Master Juniper.


Iuni. What Signior Antonio Balladino, welcome sweet Ingle,


Anto. And how do you sir?


Iuni. Faith you see, put to my shifts here as poor retainers be oftentimes,
sirrah Antony there is one of my fellows mightily enamored of thee, and I faith
you slave, now your come I Will bring you together, i'ts Peter Onion, the groom
of the hal, do you know him.


Anto. No not yet, I assure you.


Iuni. O he is one as right of thy humor as may be, a plain simple Rascal, a
true dunce, marry he has been anotable vilaine in his time: he is in love,
sirrah, with awench, and I have preferred thee to him, thou shall make him some
pretty Paradox or some Aligory, how does my coat sit? well.


Anto. I very well.


Enter Onion. Oni. Na Gods so, fellow Juniper, come away.


Iun. Art thou there mad slave, I come with a powder?. Sirrah fellow Onion. I
must have you peruse this Gentleman well, and do him good offices of respect
and kindness, as instance shall be given.


Anto. Nay good master Onion what do you mean, I pray you sir you are to
respectue in good faith.


Onion I would not you should think so sir, for though I have no learning, yet
I honor a scholar in any ground of the earth sir,

Shall I request your name sir?


Anto. My name is Antonio Balladino.


Oni, Balladino? you are not Pageant Poet to the City of Millaine sir* are you.


Anto. I supply the place sir: when aworse cannot be had sir.


Oni. I cry you mercy sir, I love you the better for that sir, by Jesus you
must pardon me, I knew you not, but Il'd pray to be better acquainted with you
sir, I have seen of your works.


Anto. I am at your service good Master Onion, but concerning this maiden that
you love sir? what is she,


Onion. O did my fellow Juniper tell you? marry sir, she is as one may say, but
a poor man's child indeed, and for mine own part I am no Gentleman borne I
must confess, but my mind to me a kingdom is truly.


Anto. Truly a very good saying.


Onion. It Is somewhat stale, but that is no matter.


Anto. O it is the better, such things ever are like bread, which the staler it
is, the more wholesome.


Onion. This is but a hungry comparison in my judgment.


Anto. Why, I Will tell you, M. Onion, I do use as much stale stuff, though I
say it my self, as any man does in that kind I am sure. Did you see the last
Pageant, I set forth?


Onion. No faith sir, but there goes a huge report on it.


Anto. Why, you shall be one of my Maecen-asses, I Will give you one of the
books, O you will like it admirably.


Oni. Nay that is certain, I Will get my fellow Juniper to read it.


Anto. Read it sir, I Will read it to you.


Onion. Tut then I shall not choose but like it.


Anto. Why look you sir, I write so plain, and keep that old Decorum, that
you must of necessity like it; mary you shall have some now (as for example,
in plays) that will have every day new tricks, and write you nothing but
humors: indeed this pleases the Gentlemen: but the common sort they care not
for it, they know not what to make on it, they look for good matter, they, and
are not edified with such toys.


Onion. You are in the right, I Will not give a halfepeny to see a thousand
on'hem. I was at one the last Term, but and ever I see a more roguish thing,
I am a piece of cheese, and no onion, nothing but kings and princes in it, the
fool came not out a lot.


Anto. True sir, they would have me make such plays, but as I tell hem, and
they will give me twenty pound a play, I Will not raise my vain.


Onion. No, it were a vain thing, and you should sir.


Anto. Tut give me the penny, give me the penny, I care not for the Gentlemen I,
let me have a good ground, no matter for the pen the plot shall carry it.


Onion. Indeed that is right, you are in print already for the best plotter.


Anto. I, I might as well ha been put in for a dumb show too.


Ont. I marry sir, I marle you were not, stand aside sir a while:


Enter an armd Sewer: some half dozen in mourning coats following and pass
by with service. Enter Valentine. Onion How now friend, what are you there? be
uncovered, Would you speak with any man here?


Valen, I, or else I must Ira' returned you no answer.


Oni. Friend, you are somewhat to peremptory, let us crave your absence: nay
never scorn it, I am a little your better in this place.


Valen. I do acknowledge it.


Onion. Do you acknowledge it? nay then you shall go forth, I Will teach you how
shall acknowledge it another time; go to, void, I must have the hall purged, no
setting up of a rest here, pack, begone.


Valen. I pray you sir is not your name Onion?


Oni. Your friend as you may use him, and M. Onion, say on.


Valen. M. Onion with a murraine, come come put off this Lions hide, your ears
have discovered you, why Peter! do not I know you Peter?


Onion. Gods so, Valentine!


Valen. O can you take knowledge of me now sir?


Oni. Good Lord, sir, how thou art altered with thy travel?


Valen. Nothing so much as thou art with thine office, but sir, Onion is the
Count Ferneze at home?


Exit Anthony. Oni. I Bully, he is above; and the Lord Paulo Ferneze, his son,
and Maddam Aurelia, and maddam Phaenixella, his daughters, But O Valentine?


Valen. How now man, how do thou?


Oni. Faith sad, heavy, as a man of my coat ought to be.


Valen. Why man, thou were merry enough even now.


Oni. True, but thou know
All creatures here soiorning, upon this wretched earth,
Sometimes have a fit of mourning, as well as a fit of mirth.
O Valentine, mine old Lady is dead, man.

Valen. Dead!


Oni. I faith.


Valen. When dyed she?


Onion. Mary, to morrow shall be three months, she was seen going to heaven
they say, about some five weeks agone! how now? trickling tears, ha?


Valen. Faith thou have made me weep with this news.


Onion. Faith thou have made me weep with this news.


Onion. Why I have done but the part of an Onion, you must pardon me.


Scaene. 2.
Enter the sewer, pass by with service again, the seruing-men take knowledge
of Valentine as they go. Juniper salutes him. Iuni. What Valentiue? fellow
Onion, take my dish I prithee you rogue sirrah, tell me, how thou do, sweet
Ingle.


Valen. Faith, Juniper, the better to see thee thus frolic.


Iuni. Nay, slid I am no changling, I am Juniper still. Exit Oni. I keep the
pristmate ha, you mad Hierogliphick, when shall we swagger.


Valen. Hierogliphick, what meanest thou by that.


Iuni. Mean? Gods so, is it not a good word man? what? stand upon meaning with
your friends. Puh, Absconde.


Valen. Why, but stay, stay, how long has this sprightly humor haunted thee?


Iuni. Foe humor, a foolish natural gift we have in the Aequinoctiall.


Valen. Natural, slid it may be supernatural, this?


Iuni. Valentine, I prithee ruminate thy self welcome. What fortuna de la
Guerra.


Valen. O how pitifully are these words forced.
As though they were pumpt out on's belly.

Iuni. Sirrah Ingle, I think thou have seen all the strange countries in
Christendom since thou wentst?


Valen. I have seen some Juniper.


Iuni. You have seen Constantinople?


Valen. I, that I have.


Iuni. And Jerusalem, and the Indies, and Goodwine sands, and the tower of
Babylon, and Venice and all.


Valen. I all; (...) and he have a nimble tongue, if he practice to vault thus
from one side of the world to another.


Iuni. O it is a most heavenly thing to travel, and see countries, especially at
sea, and a man had a pattent not to be sick.


Valen. O sea sick lest, and full of the scuruie.


Scaene 3.
Enter Juniper, Antonio, Sebastian, Martino, Vincentio, Balthazar and
Christophero. Seba. Valentine? welcome I faith how do sir?


Mart. How do you good Valentine.


Vincen. Troth, Valentine, I am glad to see you.


Balth. Welcome sweet rogue.


Sebast. Before God he never looked better in his life.


Balth. And how is it man? what, Alla Coragio.


Valen. Never better gentlemen I faith.


Iuni. S'will here comes the steward.


Christ. Why how now fellows all here? and nobody to weight above now they are
ready to rise? look up one or two Signior Francesco Colomia's man how doo's
your good master.


Exeunt Juniper, Martino, Vincentio. Valen. In health sir he will be here anon.


Christo. Is he come home, then?


Valen. I sir he is not past six miles hence, he sent me before to learn if
Count Ferneze were here and return him word.


Christo. Yes, my Lord is here; and you may tell your master he shall come very
happily to take his leave of Lord Paulo Ferneze: who is now instantly to depart
with other noble gentlemen, upon special service.


Valen. I will tell him sir.


Christo. I pray you do, fellows make him drink.


Valen. Sirs, what service is it they are employed in?


Sebast. Why against the French they mean to have a fling at Millaine again
they say.


Valen. Who leads our forces, can you tell?


Sebast. Marry that does Signior Maximilian? he is above, now.


Valen. Who, Maximilian of Vicenza?


Balt. I he? do you know him?


Valen. Know him? O yes he is an excellent brave soldier.


Balt. I so they say, but one of the most vain glorious men in Europe.


Valen. He is indeed, marry exceeding valient.


Sebast. And that is rare.


Balt. What.


Sebast. Why to see a vaineglorious man valient.


Valen. Well he is so I assure you.


Enter Juniper. Iuni. What no further yet, come on you precious rascal, sir
Valentine, I Will give you a health I faith, for the heavens you mad Capriceio,
hold hook and line.


Scaene 4.
Enter Lord Paulo Ferneze, his boy following him. Pau. Boy.


Boy. My Lord.


Pau. Sirrah go up to Signior Angelio,
And pray him (if he can) devise some means,
To leave my father, and come speak with me.

Boy I will my Lord.


Pau. Well heaven, be auspicious in the event;
For I do this against my Genius,
And yet my thoughts cannot propose a reason.
Why I should fear, or faint thus in my hopes,
Of one so much endeered to my love.
Some spark it is, kindled within the soul:
Whose light yet breaks not to the outward sense,
That propagates this tymerous suspect;
His actions never carried any face
Of change, or weakness: then I injury him?
In being thus cold conceited of his faith,
O here he comes.
Enter Angels.
Ang. How now sweet Lord, what is the matter?


Pau. Good faith his presence makes me half ashamd.
Of my straid thoughts. Boy. Bestow your self.
Exit Boy. Where is my father, Signior Angelio.

Ang. Marry in the galery, where your Lordship left him.


Pau. That's well. Then Angelio I will be brief.
Since time forbids the use of circumstance,
How well you are received in my affection,
Let it appear by this one instance, only
That now I will deliver to your trust,
The dearest secrets, treasurd in my bosom,
Dear Angelio. You are not every man,
But one, whom my election has designed,
As the true proper object of my soul:
I urge not this t'insinuate my desert,
Or supple your tried temper, with soft phrases;
True friendship lothes such oily complement:
But from th'aboundance of that love, that flows
Through all my spirits, is my speech enforced.

Ang. Before your Lordship do proceed too far,
Let me be bold to intimate thus much;
That what so ere your wisdom has t'expose,
Be it the waightiest and most rich affair,
That ever was included in your breast,
My faith shall poise it, if not --

Pau. O no more,
Those words have rapt me with their sweet effects,
So freely breathed, and so responsible,
To that which I endeavored to extract,
Arguing a happy mixture of our souls.

Ange. Why were there no such sympathy sweet Lord?
Yet the impressure of those ample favors,
I have derived from your unmatched spirit,
Would bind my faith to all obseruances.

Pau. How! favors Angello, o speak not of them,
They are mere paintings, and import no merit,
Looks my love well? thereon my hopes are placed:
Faith, that is bought with favors, cannot last.

Enters Boy. Boy. My Lord.


Pau. How now?


Boy. You are sought for all about the house, within,
The Count your father calls for you.

Pau. God, what cross events do meet my purposes?
Now will he violently fret and grieve
That I am absent. Boy, say I come presently:
Exit Boy. Sweet Angello, I cannot now insist
Upon particulars, I must serve the time
The maine of all this is, I am in love.

Ange. Why starts your Lordship?


Pau. I thought I heard my father coming hither ward, list, ha?


Ange. I hear not any thing, it was but your imagination sure.


Pau. No?


Ange. No, I assure your Lordship.


Pau. I would work safely.


Ange. Why, has he no knowledge of it then?


Pau. O no, no creature yet pertakes it but your self
In a third person, and believe me friend,
The world contains not now another spirit,
To whom I would reueile it. Hark, hark,

Servants. Signior Paulo. Lord Ferneze. within. Ange. A pox upon those brazen
throated slaves,
What are they mad, trow?

Pau. Alas, blame not them,
Their services are (clock-like) to beset,
Backward and forward, at their Lords command,
You know my father's wayward, and his humor
Must not receive a check, for then all objects,
Feed both his grief and his impatience,
And those affections in him, are like powder,
Apt to inflame with every little spark,
And blow up reason, therefore Angelo, peace.

within. Count. Why this is rare, is he not in the garden?


Crist. I know not my Lord.


Count. See, call him?


Pau. He is coming this way, let us withdraw a little.


Exeunt. within. Servants. Signior Paulo, Lord Ferneze, Lord Paulo. Scaene 5.
Enter Count Ferneze, Maximilian, Aurelia, Phoenixella, Sebast. Balthazar.
Count. Where should he be, trow? did you look in the armory?


Sebast. No my Lord.


Count. No, why there? o who would keep such drones? Exeunt Sebast. and
Baltha. How now, ha ye found him?

Enter Martino.
Mart. No my Lord.


Count. No my Lord, I shall have shortly all my family
Speak naught, but no my Lord, where is Christophero,
Enter Chrristophero. Look how he stands, you sleep y knave,
Exit Martino. What is he not in the Garden?

Christo. No my good Lord.


Count. Your good Lord, o how this smells of fennel. Enter Sebast Baltha. You
have been in the garden it appears, well, well.


Balth. We cannot find him my Lord.


Sebast. He is not in the armory.


Count. He is not, he is no where, is he?


Maxi. Count Ferneze.


Count. Signior.


Maxi. Preserve your patience honorable Count.


Count. Patience? a Saint would loose his patience to be crossed,
As I am with a sort of motly brains,
See see, how like a nest of Rookes they stand,
Enter Onion. Gaping on one another! now Diligence, what news bring you?

Oni. Ant please your honor.


Count. Tut, tut, leave pleasing of my honor Diligence, you double with we,
come.


Oni. How: does he find fault with Please his Honor. S'wounds it has begun a
serving man's speech, ever since I belongd to the blew order: I know not how it
may show, now I am in black, but --


Count. What Is that, you mutter sir? will you proceed?


Oni. Ant like your good Lordship.


Count. Yet more; Gods precious.


Oni. What, do not this like him neither?


Count. What say you sir knave?


Oni. Mary I say your Lordship were best to set me to school again, to learn
how to deliver a message.


Count. What do you take exceptions at me then.


Oni. Exception? I take no exceptions, but by Gods so your humors --


Count. Go to you are a Rascal, hold your tongue.


Oni. Your Lordships poor servant, I.


Count. Tempt not my patience.


Oni. Why I hope I am no spirit, am I?


Maxi. My Lord, command your Steward to correct the slave.


Oni. Correct him, S'bloud come you and correct him and you have a mind to it,
correct him, that is a good jest I faith, the Steward and you both, come and
correct him.


Count. Nay see, away with him, pull his cloth over his ears.


Oni. Cloth? tell me of your cloth, here is your cloth, nay and I mourn a
minute longer, I am the rottenest Onion that ever spoke with a tongue.

They thrust him out.
Maxi. What call your hind's count Ferneze?


Count. His name is Onion Signior,


Maxi. I thought him some such saucy companion.


Count. Signior Maximillian.


Maxi. Sweet Lord.


Count. Let me entreat you, you would not regard
Any contempt flowing from such a spirit,
So rude, so barbarous.

Maxi. Most noble Count under your favor --


Coun. Why I Will tell you Signior,
Heel bandy with me word for word, nay more,
Put me to silence, strike me perfect dumb;
And so amaze me, that oftentimes I know not,
Whether to check or cherish his presumption:
Therefore good Signior.

Maxi. Sweet Lord satisfy your self, I am not now to learn how to manage my
affections, I have observed, and know the difference between a base wretch and
a true man, I can distinguish them, the property of the wretch is, he would
hurt and cannot, of the man, he can hurt, and will not.


Coun. Go to, my merry daughter, o these looks,
Agree well with your habit, do they not?
Enter Juniper.
Iunip. Tut, let me alone. By your favor, this is the Gentleman I think, Sir
you appear to be an honorable Gentleman, I understand, and could wish (for
mine own part) that things were conden't otherwise then they are: but (the
world knows) a foolish fellow, somewhat procliue, and hasty, he did it in a
preiudicate humor; mary now upon better computation, he wanes; he melts; his
poor eyes are in a cold sweat. Right noble Signior, you can have but
compunction, I love the man, tender your compassion.


Maxi. Does any man here understand this fellow?


Iunip. O God sir, I may say frustra to the comprehension of your intellection.


Maxi. Before the Lord, he speaks all riddle, I think.
I must have a comment ere I can conceive him.

Count. Why he sues to have his fellow Onion pardoned,
And you must grant it Signior.

Maxi. O with all my soul my Lord, is that his motion?


Iunip. I sir, and we shall retort these kind favors with all allacrity of
spirit, we can sir, as may be most expedient, as well for the quality as the
cause, till when in spite of this complement: I rest a poor Cobbler, servant
to my honorable Lord here, your friend and Juniper.


Exit. Maxi. How Juniper?


Count. I Signior.


Maxi. He is a sweet youth, his tongue has a happy turn when he sleeps.


Enter Paulo Ferneze, Francisco, Colomea, Angelo, Valentine. Count. I for then
it rests, O Sir your welcome,
Why God be thanked you are found at last.
Signior Coloma truly you are welcome,
I am glad to see you sir so well returned.

Fran. I gladly thank your honor, yet indeed
I am sorry for such cause of heaviness,
As has possessed your Lordship in my absence.

Count. O Francisco' you knew her what she was!


Fran. She was a wise and honorable Lady.


Count. I was she not! well weep not she is gone,
Passons duld eye can make two grieves of one,
Whom death mark out, virtue, nor bluod can save,
Princes, as beggars, all must feed the grave.

Max. Are your horse ready Lord Paulo,


Pau. I signior the stay for us at the gate.


Max. Well it is good. Ladies I will take my leave of you,
Be your fortunes as your selves? fair. Come let us to horse,
Count Ferneze I bear a spirit full of thanks for all your honorable
courtesies.

Count. Sir I could wish the number and value of them more in respect of your
deseruings. But Signior Maximillian. I pay you a word in private.


Aur. I Faith brother you are fitted for a general yonder, Beshrow my heart
(If I had Fortunatus hat here) and I would not wish my self a man and go with
you, only t'enioy his presence.


Pau. Why do you love him so well sister.


Aur. No by my troth, but I have such an odd pretty apprehension of his humor
me thinks: that I am eene tickled with the conceit of it.

O he is a fine man.


Ang And me thinks another may be as fine as he.


Aur. O Angelio, do you think I do urge any comparison against you? no, I am
not so ill bred, as to be a deprauer of your worthiness: believe me, if I had
not some hope of your abiding with us, I should never desire to go out of black
whilst I lived: but learn to speak in the nose, and turn puritan presently.


Ang. I thank you Lady: I know you can flout.


Aur. Come do you take it so? I faith you wrong me.


Fran. I, but Maddame,
Thus to disclaim in all the effects of pleasure,
May make your sadness seem to much affected,
And then the proper grace of it is lost.

Phoenix Indeed sir, if I did put on this sadness
Only abroad, and in Society,
And were in private merry; and quick humor'd;
Then might it seem affected and abhord:
But as my looks appear, such is my spirit,
Drowned up with confluence of grief, and melancholy,
That like to rivers run through all my veins,
Quenching the pride and fervor of my blood.

Max. My honorable Lord? no more.
There is the honor of my blood engaged,
For your sons safety.

Count. Signior, blame me not,
For tending his security so much,
He is mine only son, and that word only,
Has with his strong, and reprecussiue sound,
Stroke my heart cold, and given it a deep wound.

Max. Why but stay, I beseech you, had your Lordship ever any more sons then
this.


Count. Why have not you known it Maximilian?


Max. Let my Sword fail me then.


Count. I had one other younger borne then this,
By twice so many how ers as would fill
The circle of a year, his name Camillo,
Whom in that black, and fearful night I lost,
(It Is now a nineteen years agone at least,
And yet the memory of it fits as fresh
Within my brain as twere but yesterday)
It was that night wherein the great Chamont,
The general for France surprised Vicenza,
Me thinks the horror of that clamorous shout
His soldiers gave 'when they attaind the wall,
Yet tingles in mine ear, me thinks I see
With what amazed looks, distracted thoughts,
And minds confused, we, that were citizens,
Confronted one another: every street
Was filled with bitter self tormenting cries,
And happy was that foot, that first could press,
The flowery champaigne, bordering on Verona
Here I (employed about my dear wives safety)
Whose soul is now in peace) lost my Camillo.
Who sure was murdered by the barbarous Soldiers,
Or else I should have heard -- my heart is great.
Sorrow is faint? and passion makes me sweat.

Max Grieve not sweet Count: comfort your spirts, you have a son a noble
gentleman, he stands in the face of honor: For his safety let that be no
question. I am master of my fortune, and he shall share with me. Farewell my
honorable Lord. Ladies once more adieu, for your self maddam you are a most
rare creature, I tell you so, be not proud of it, I love you: come Lord Paulo
to horse.


Pau. Adieu good Signior Francesco: farewell sister.


Sound a tucket, and as they pass every one severally depart, Maximilian,
Paulo Ferneze and Angelo remain Ang. How shall we rid him hence.


Pau. Why well enough? sweet Signior Maximilian.
I have some small occasion to stay:
If it may please you but take horse before
I Will over take you, ere your troops be ranged.

Max. Your motion has taste well: Lord Ferneze I go

Exit Max.
Pau. Now if my love fair Rachel, were so happy,
But to look forth. See fortune does me grace.
Enter Rachel. Before I can demand? how now love.
Where is your father?

Rach. Gone abroad my Lord:


Pau: That's well,


Rach. I but I fear heel presently return,
Are you now going my most honored Lord?

Pau. I my sweet Rachel.


Ang. Before God, she is a sweet wench.


Pau. Rachel I hope I shall not need to urge,
The sacred purity of our effects,
As if it hung in trial or suspense:
Since in our hearts, and by our mutual vows,
It is confirmd and sealed in sight of heaven.
Nay do not weep, why starte you? fear not, Love.
Your father cannot be returned so soon,
I prithee do not look so heavily
Thou shall want nothing

Rach. No is your presence nothing,
I shall want that, and wanting that, want all
For that is all to me.

Pau. Content thee sweet
I have Made choice here of a constant friend
This gentleman? one, whose zealous love
I do repose more, then on all the world,
Thy beauteous self excepted: and to him,
Have I committed my dear care of thee,
As to my genius, or my other soul.
Rsceiue hi gentle love and what deffects,
My absence proves, his presence shall supply.
The time is envious of our longer stay.
Farewell dear Rachel.

Rach: Most dear Lord, adieu,
Heaven and honor crown your deeds, and you,

Exit Rachel. Pau. Faiah tell me Angelio how do thou like her?


Ang. Troth well my Lord, but shall I speak my mind.


Pan. I prithee do.


Ang. She is deriud too meanly to be wife
To such a noble person, in my judgment.

Pau. Nay then thy judgment is to meene, I se^
Did thou near read in difference of good
It Is more to shine in virtue then in blood.
Enter Jacques.
Ang. Come you are so sententious my Lord.


Pau. Here comes her father. How do thou good Jacques?


Ang. God save thee Jacques.


Iaq. What should this mean? Rachel open the door.


Exit Jacques. Ang. God's Blood how the poor slave looks, as though
He had been hauuted by the spirit Lar,
Or seen the ghost of some great Satrapas.
In an unsavory sheet.

Pru. I muse he spoke no, belike he was amazd
Coming so suddenly and vnprepard? Well lets go:

Exeunt. Actus secundi
Scaena prima.
Enter Jacques solus. SO now enough my heart, beat now no more;
At least for this afright, what a could sweat,
Flowed on my brows, and over all my bosom!
Had I not reason? to behold my door
Beset with unthrifts, and my self abroad?
Why Jacques? was their nothing in the house
Worth a continual eye, a vigelent thought,
Whose head should never nod, nor eyes once wincke?
Look on my coat; my thoughts; worn quite thread bare,
That time could never cover with a nappe,
And by it learn, never with nappes of sleep,
To smother your conceits of that you keep.
But yet, I marvel, why these gallant youths
Spokeine so fair, and I esteemd a beggar?
The end of flattery, is gain, or lechery:
If they seek gain of me, they think me rich,
But that they do not: for their other object:
It Is in my handsome daughter, if it be.
And by your leave, her handsomnesse may tell them
My beggary counterfeits, and, that her neatness,
Flows from some store of wealth, that breaks my coffers,
With this same engine, love to mine own breed.
But this is answered: Beggars will keep fine,
Their daughters, being fair, though themselves pine.
Well then, it is for her, I, it is sure for her,
And I make her so brisk for some of them,
That I might live alone once with my gold.
O it is a sweet companion! kind and true,
A man may trust it when his father cheats him;
Brother, or friend, or wife, o wondrous pelf,
" That which makes all men false, is true it self.
But now this maid, is but supposed my daughter:
For I being Steward to a Lord of France,
Of great estate, and wealth, called Lord Chammount,
He gone into the wars, I stole his treasure,
(But hear not, any thing) I stole his treasure,
And this his daughter, being but two years old,
Because it loved me so, that it would leave
The nurse her self, to come into mine arms,
And had I left it, it would sure have dyed.
Now herein I was kind, and had a conscience;
And since her Lady mother that did dye
In childbed of her, loved me passing well,
It may be nature fashiond this affection,
Both in the child and her: but he is ill bred,
That ransackes tombs, and does deface the dead.
I Will therefore say no more: suppose the rest,
Here have I changed my form, my name and hers.
And live obsurely, to enjoy more safe
Enter Rachel. My dearest treasure. But I must abroad, Rachel.
Rach. What is your pleasure sir?


Iaq. Rachel I must abroad.
Lock thy self in, but yet take out the key,
That whosoever peepes in at the keyhole,
May yet imagine there is none at home.

Rach. I will sir.


Iaq. But hark thee Rachel: say a thief should come,
And miss the key, he would resoule indeed
None were at home, and so break in the rather:
Open the door Rachel, set it open daughter;
But sit in it thy self: and talk alowd,
As if there were some more in house with thee:
Put out the fire, kill the chimnies heart,
That it may breath no more then a dead man,
The more we spare my child, the more we gain.

Exeunt. Scaene 2.
Enter Christophero, Juniper and Onion. CHrist. What says my fellow Onion?
come on.


Oni. All of a house sir, but no fellows, you are my Lords Steward, but I pray
you what think you of love, sir?


Christ. Of love Onion? Why it is a very honorable humor.


Oni. Nay if it be but worshipful I care not.


Iunip. Go to, it is honorable, check not at the conceit of the Gentleman.


Oni. But in truth sir, you shall do well to think well of love:
For it thinks well of you, in me, I assure you.

Chris. Gramercy fellow Onion: I do think well, thou art in love, art thou?


Oni. Partly sir, but I am ashamed to say wholly.


Chris. Well, I will further it in thee to any honest woman, or maiden, the
best I can.


Iunip. Why now you come near him sir, he does veil,
He does remunerate, he does chaw the cud in the kindness
Of an honest imperfection to your worship.

Chris But who is it thou love fellow Onion?


Oni. Mary a poor man's daughter, but none of the honestest, I hope.


Chris. Why, would thou not have her honest?


Oni. O no, for then I am sure she would not have me. It Is Rachel de Pry.


Chris. Why, she has the name of a very virtuous maiden.


Iunip. So she is sir, but the fellow talks in quiddits, he.


Chris. What would thou have me do in the matter?


Oni. Do nothing sir, I pray you, but speak for me.


Chris. In what manner?


Oni. My fellow Juniper can tell you sir.


Iunip. Why as thus sir. Your worship may commend him for a fellow fit for
consanguinity, and that he shakes with defire of procreation, or so.


Chris. That were not so good, me thinks.


Iunip. No sir, why so sir? what if you should say to her, correborate thy
self sweet soul, let me distinguish thy pappes with my fingers, divine
Mumps, pretty Pastorella? look thou so sweet and bounteous? comfort my friend
here.


Chris. Well I perceive you wish, I should say something may do him grace, and
further his desires, and that be sure I will.


Oni. I thank you sir, God save your life, I pray God sir.


Iunip. Your worship is too good to live long: you will contaminate me no service.


Chris. Command thou would say, no good Juniper.


Iunip. Health and wealth sir.

Exeunt Onion and Juniper.
Chris. This wench will solicit for my self,
Making my Lord and master privy to it;
And if he second me with his consent,
I will proceed, as having long ere this,
Though her a worthy choice to make my wife.

Exit. Scaene 3.
Enter Aurelia, Phoenixella. AVre. Room for a case of matrons colored black,
How motherly my mothers death has made us?
I would I had some girls now to bring up;
O I could make a wench so virtuous,
She should say grace to every bit of meat,
And gape no wider then a wafers thickness:
And she should make French cursies, so most low,
That every touch should turn her over backward.

Phoeni. Sister, these words become not your atrire,
Nor your estate: our virtuous mothers death
Should print more deep effects of sorrow in us,
Then may be worn out in so little time.

Aure. Sister, faith you take too much Tobacco,
It makes you black within, as you are without.
What true-stich sister? both your sides alike?
Be of a sleighter work: for of my word,
You shall be sold as dear or rather deerer?
Will you be bound to customs and to rites?
Shed profitable tears, weep for advantage;
Or else, do all things, as you are enclynd.
Hate when your stomach serves (says the Physician)
Not at eleven and six. So if your humor
Be now affected with this heaviness.
Give me the reins and spare not, as I do,
In this my pleasurable appetite,
It is Praecisianisme to alter that
With austere judgment, that is given by nature.
I wept you saw too, when my mother dyed:
For then I found it easier to do so,
And fitter with my mood, then not to weep.
But now it is otherwise, another time
Perhaps I shall have such deep thoughts of her,
That I shall weep a fresh, some twelve month hence,
And I will weep, if I be so disposed,
And put on black, as grimly then, as now;
Let the mind go still with the bodies stature,
Judgment is fit for Judges, give me nature.

Scaene. 4.
Enter Aurelia, Phaenixella, Francisco, Augelo. Fran. See Signior Angelo here
are the Ladies,
Go you and comfort one, I Will to the other.

Ange. Therefore I come sir, I Will to the eldest.
God save you Ladies, these sad moodes of yours,
That make you choose these solitary walks,
Are hurtful for your beauties.

Aure. If we had them.


Ange. Come, that condition might be for your hearts,
When you protest faith, since we cannot see them.
But this same heart of beauty, your sweet face
Is in mine eye still.

Aure. O you cut my heart with your sharp eye.


Ange. Nay Lady that's not so, your heart's to hard.


Aure. My beauties heart?


Ange. O no.
I mean that regent of affection, Maddam,
That tramples on al love with such contempt ^n this fair breast.

Aur. No more, your drift is sauour'd,
I had rather seem hard hearted

Ang. Then hard favored,
Is that your meaning, Lady?

Aur. Go too sir.
Your wits are fresh I know, they need no spur,

Ang. And therefore you will ride them.


Aur. Say I do.
They will not tire I hope?

Ang. No not with you, hark you sweet Lady.


Fran. It Is much pity Maddam.
You should have any reason to retain
This sign of grief, much less the thing disignde.

Phoe. Griefs are more fit for Ladies then their pleasures.

Fran. That is for such as follow naught but pleasures.
But you that temper them so well with virtues,
Using your griefs so it would prove them pleasures.
And you would seem in cause of griefs and pleasures equally pleasant.

Phoe Sir so I do now.
It is the excess of either that I strive
So much to shun in all my proou'd endeauours,
Although perhaps unto a general eye,
I may appear most wedded to my griefs,
Yet does my mind forsake no taste of pleasure,
I mean that happy pleasure of the soul,
Divine and sacred contemplation
Of that eternal, and most glorious bliss.
Proposed as the crown unto our souls.

Fran. I will be silent, yet that I may serve
But as a Decade in the art of memory
To put you still in mind of your own virtues
When your too serious thoughts make you too sad)
Accept me for your servant honored Lady.

Phoen. Those ceremonies are too common signior Francis,
For your uncommon gravity, and judgment,
And fits them only, that are naught but cerimony.

Ang. Come, I will not sue, stally to be your servant,
But a new term, will you be my refuge?

Aur. Your refuge, why sir.


Ange. That I might fly to you, when all else fail me.


Aur. And you be good at flying, be my Plouer.


Ang. Nay take away the P.


Aur. Tut, then you cannot fly.


Ang. I Will warrant you. I Will borrow Cupids wings.


Aur. Mass then I fear me you will do strange things:
I pray you blame me not, if I suspect you,
Your own confession simply does detect you,
Nay and you be so great in Cupids books,
It Will make me Jealous. you can with your looks
(I warrant you) inflame a woman's heart,
And at your pleasure take loves golden dart,
And wound the breast of any vertous maid.
Would I were hence: good Faith I am afraid,
You can constrain one ere they be aware,
To run mad for your love?

Ang. O this is rate.


Scaene 6.
Aurelio, Phoenixella, Francisco, Angelo, Count. COunt. Close with my daughters
gentlemen? well done,
It Is like your selves: nay lusty Angelo,
Let not my presence make you bauke your sport,
I will not break a minute of discourse
Twixt you and one of your fair Mistresses.

Ang. One of my mistresses? why thinks your Lordship I have so many


Count. Many? no Angelo.
I do not think thou have many, some fourteen
I here thou have, even of our worthiest dames,
Of any note, in Millaine:

Ang. Nay good my Lord fourteen: it is not so.


Count. By The the Mass that is it, here are their names to show
Fourteen, or fifteen the one. Good Angelo.
You need not be ashamd of any of them,
They are gallants all.

Ang. God's Blood you are such a Lord.


Count. Nay stay sweet Angelo, I am disposed
Exit Ang: A little to be pleasant past my coustome,
He Is gone? he is gone, I have disgrast him shrewdly,
Daughters take heed of him, he is a wild youth,
Look what he says to you believe him not,
He will swear love to every one he sees.
Francisco, give them council, good Francisco,
I dare trust thee with both, but him with neither.

Fran. Your Lordship yet may trust both them with him.


Exunt. Scaene 7.
Count. Christopher, Count. Well go your ways away; how now Christopher,
What news with you?

Christ. I have an humble suit to your good Lordship.


Count. A suit Christopher? what suit I prithee?


Christ. I would crave pardon at your Lordships hands,
If it seem vain or simple in your sight.

Count. I Will pardon all simplicity, Christopher,
What is thy suit?

Christ. Perhaps being now so old a batcheler,
I shall seem half unwise, to bend my self
In strict affection to a poor young maid.

Count. What? is it touching love Christopher?
Art thou dispost to marry, why it is well.

Christo. I, but your Lordship may imagine now
That I being steward of your honors house.
If I be married once, will more regard
The maintenance of my wife and of my charge,
Then the due discharge of my place and office.

Count. No, no, Christopher, I know thee honest.


Christo. Good faith my Lord, your honor may suspect it* but --


Count. Then I should wrong thee, thou have ever been
Honest and true, and will be still I know.

Chris. I but this marriage alters many men:
And you may fear, it will do me my Lord,
But ere it do so? I will undergo
Ten thousand several deaths.

Count. I know it man.
Who would thou have I prithee?

Chris. Rachel de pry,
If your good Lordship, grant me your consent.

Count. Rachel de pry? what the poor beggars daughter?
She Is a right handsome maid, how poor soever,
And thou have my consent, with all my heart.

Chris. I humbly thank your honor. I Will now ask her father.


Exit. Count. Do so Christofero thou shall do well.
It Is strange (she being so poor) he should affect her,
But this is more strange that my self should love her.
I spide her, lately, at her fathers door,
And if I did not see in her sweet face
Gentry and nobleness, nere trust me more:
But this persuasion, fancy wrought in me,
That fancy being created with her looks,
For where love is he think his basest object
Gentle and noble: I am far in love,
And shall be forced to wrong my honest steward,
For I must sue, and seek her for my self;
How much my duty to my late dead wife,
And my own dear renown so ere it swaies,
He to her father straight. Love hates delays.

Exit. Scaene 8.
Enter Onion, Juniper, Valentine, Sebastian, Balthazar, Martino. Onion. Come on
In Faith, lets to some exercise or other my hearts: Fetch the hilts fellow
Juniper, will thou play:


Exit Martino. Iun. I cannot resolve you? it is as I am fitted with the
ingenuity, quantity, or quality of the cudgel.


Valen. How do thou bastinado the poor cudgel with terms?


Iuni. O Ingle, I have the phrases man, and the Anagrams and the Epitaphs,
fitting the mystery of the noble science.


Oni. I Will be hanged and he were not misbegotten of some fencer.


Sebast. Sirrah Valentine, you can resolve me now, have they their masters of
defense in other countries as we have here in Italy?


Valen. O Lord, I, especially they in Vtopia, there they perform their prizes
and chalenges, with as great cerimony as the Italian or any nation else.


Balt Indeed? how is the manner of it (for gods love) good Valeniine?


Iuni. Ingle? I prithee make recourse unto us, we are thy friends and
familiars: sweet Ingle.


Valen. Why thus sir.


Oni. God a mercy good Valentine, nay go on.


Iuni. Silentium bonus socius Onionus, good fellow Onion be not so ingenious,
and turbulent: so fir? and how? how sweet Ingle?


Valen. Marry, first they are brought to the public Theater:


Iuni. What? ha? they Theater there


Valen. Theaters? I and plays to: both tragidy and comedy and set forth with
as much state as can be imagined?


Iuni. By Gods so; a man is nobody, till he has traveled.


Sebast. And how are their plays? as ours are? extemporall?


Valen. O no? all premeditated things, and some of them very good I faith, my
master used to visit them often when he was there.


Balth. Why how are they in a place where any man may see them?


Valen. I, in the common Theaters, I tell you. But the sport is at a new play
to observe the sway and variety of oppinion that passes it. A man shall have
such a confused mixture of judgment, powered out in the throng there, as
ridiculous, as laughter it self: one says he likes not the writing, another
likes not the plot, another not the playing. And sometimes a fellow that comes
not there past once in five year at a Parliament time or so, will be as deep
myr'd in censuring as the best, and swear by Gods foot he would never stir
his foot to see a hundred such as that is.


Oni. I must travel to see these things, I shall nere think well of my self
else.


Iunip. Fellow Onion, I Will bear thy charges and thou will but pilgrimize it
along with me, to the land of Vtopia.


Sebast. Why but me thinks such rookes as these should be ashamed to judge.


Valen. Not a whit? the rankest stinkard of them all, will take upon him as
peremptory, as if he had writ himself in artibus magister.


Sebast. And do they stand to a popular censure for any thing they present.


Valen. I ever, ever, and the people generally are very acceptiue and apt to
applaud any meritable work, but there are two sorts of persons that most
commonly are infectious to a whole auditory.


Balth. What be they?


Iunip. I come lets know them.


Oni. It were good they were noted.


Valen. Marry? one is the rude barbarous crew, a people that have no brains,
and yet grounded judgments, these will hiss any thing that mounts above their
grounded capacities. But the other are worth the observation, I faith.


Omnes. What be they? what be they?


Valen. Faith a few Caprichious gallants.


Iunip. Caprichious? stay, that word's for me.


Valen. And they have taken such a habit of dislike in all things, that they
will approve nothing, be it never so conceited or elaborate, but sit dispersed,
making faces, and spitting, wagging their upright ears and cry filthy, filthy.
Simply uttering their own condition, and using their wryed countenances in
stead of a vice, to turn the good aspects of all that shall sit near them,
from what they behold.


Enter Martino with cudgels. Oni. O that is well said, lay them down, come sirs.
Who plays, fellow Juniper, Sebastian, Balthazar:
Some body take them up, come.

Iunip. Ingle Valentine?


Valen. Not I sir, I profess it not.


Iunip. Sebastian.


Sebast. Balthazar.


Balth. Who? I?


Oni. Come, but one bout, I Will give hem thee, I faith.


Balth. Why, here is Martino.


Oni. Foe he, alas he cannot play a whit, man.


Iunip. That Is all one: no more could you in stata quo prius, Martino, play
with him, every man has his beginning and conduction.


Mart. Will you not hurt me fellow Onion?


Oni. Hurt thee, no? and I do, put me among pot-hearbs, And chop me to pieces,
come on?


Iunip. By your favor sweet bullies give them room, back, so, Martino, do not
look so thin upon the matter.


Oni. Ha, well played, fall over to my leg now? so, to your guard again,
excellent, to my head now, make home your blow: spare not me, make it home,
good, good a gain.


Sebast. Why how now Peter?


Valen. Gods so, Onion has caught a bruise.


Iunip. Couragio? be not caprichious? what?


Oni. Caprichious? not I, I scorn to be caprichious for a scrach, Martino must
have another bout, come.


Val. Seb. Balth. No, no, play no more, play no more.


Oni. Foe, it is nothing a philip, a devise, fellow Juniper prithee get me a
Plantan, I had rather play with one that had skill by half.


Mart. By my troth, fellow Onion, it was against my will.


Oni. Nay that is not so, it was against my head,
But come, we will ha one bout more.

Iunip. Not a bout, not a stroke.


Omnes. No more, no more.


Iunip. Why I Will give you demonstration, how it came, Thou openest the dagger to
falsify over with the back sword frick, and he interrupted, before he could
fall to the close.


Oni. No, no, I know best how it was better the^ any man here, I felt his play
presently: for look you, I gathered upon him thus, thus do you see? for the
double lock, and took it single on the head.


Valen. He says very true, he took it single on the head.


Sebast. Come lets go.

Enter Martino with a cob-web.
Mar. Here fellow Onion, here is a cob-web.


Oni. How? a cob-web Martino, I will have another bout with you? S'wounds do
you first break my head, and then give me a plaster in scorn? come to it, I
will have a bout.


Mart. God's my witness.


Oni. Tut! your witness cannot serve.


Iunip. S'bloud? why what, thou art not lunatike, art thou? and thou be
avoid Mephostophiles. Say the sign shoud be in Aries now: as it may be for
all us, where were your life? Answer me that?


Sebast. He says well, Onion.


Valen. I indeed doo's he.


Iunip. Come, come, you are a foolish Naturalist, go, get a white a of an egg,
and a little flax, and close the breach of the head, it is the most conducible
thing that can be. Martino, do not insinuate upon your good fortune, but play
an honest part and bear away the bucklers.


Exeunt. Act. 3.
Scaene 1.
Enter Angelo solus. ANge. My young and simple friend, Paulo Ferneze,
Bound me with mighty solemn coniurations,
To be true to him, in his love, to Rachel,
And to solicit his remembrance still,
In his enforced absence, much, I faith.
True to my friend in cases of affection?
In women's cases? what a jest it is?
How silly he is, that imagines it!
He is an ass that will keep promise stricktly
In any thing that checkes his private pleasure;
Chiefly in love. S'bloud am not I a man?
Have I not eyes that are as free to look?
And blood to be enflamed as well as his?
And when it is so, shall I not pursue
Mine own loves longings, but prefer my friends?
I it is a good fool, do so, hang me then,
Because I swore, alas, who doo's not know,
That lovers periuries are ridiculous?
Have at thee Rachel: I Will go court her sure:
For now I know her father is abroad.
Enter Jacques. S'bloud see, he is here, o what damned luck is this?
This labor's lost, I must by no means see him.

tau, dery, dery, Exit. Scaene 2.
Jacques, Christophero. IAq. Mischief and hell, what is this man a spirit,
Haunts he my houses ghost? still at my door?
He has been at my door, he has been in,
In my dear door: pray God my gold be safe.
Enter Christophero. Gods pity, here is another. Rachel, ho Rachel.

Chris. God save you honest father.


Iaq. Rachel, Gods light, come to me, Rachel, Rachel!


Exit. Chris. Now in Gods name what ails he? this is strange!
He loves his daughter so, I Will lay my life,
That he is afraid, having been now abroad,
I come to seek her love unlawfully.
Enter Jacques.
Iaq. It Is safe, it is safe, they have notrob'd my treasure.


Chris. Let it not feeme offensive to you sir.


Iaq. Sir, Gods my life, sir, sir, call me sir.


Chris. Good father here me.


Iaq. You are most welcome sir,
I meant almost; and would your worship speak?
Would you abase your self to speak to me?

Chris. It Is no abasing father: my intent
Is to do further honor to you sir
Then only speak: which is to be your son.

Iaq. My gold is in his nostrels, he has smelt it,
Break breast, break heart, fall on the earth my entrails,
With this same bursting admiration!
He knows my gold, he knows of all my treasure,
How do you know sir? whereby do you guess?

Chris. At what sir? what is it you mean?


Iaq. I ask, an't please your Gentle worship, how you know?
I mean, how I should make your worship know
That I have nothing --
To give with my poor daughter? I have nothing:
The very air, bounteous to every man,
Is scant to me, sir.

Chris. I do think good father, you are but poor,


Iaq. He thinks so, hark, but think so:
He thinks not so, he knows of all my treasure.

Exit. Chris. Poor man he is so ouerioyed to hear
His daughter may be past his hopes bestowed,
That betwixt fear and hope (if I mean simply)
He is thus passionate.
Enter Jacques.
Iaq. Yet all is safe within, is none without?
No body break my walls?

Chris. What say you father, shall I have your daughter?


Iaq. I have no dowry to bestow upon her.


Chris. I do expect none, father.


Iaq. That is well,
Then I beseech your worship make no question
Of that you wish, it is too much favor to me.

Chris. I Will leave him now to give his passions breath,
Which being settled, I will fetch his daughter:
I shall but move too much, to speak now to him.

Exit Christophero. Iaq. So, he is gone, would all were dead and gone,
That I might live with my dear gold alone.

Scaene 3. Jacques, Count.
Count. Here is the poor old man.


Iaq. Out of my soul another, comes he hither?


Count. Be not dismayed old man, I come to cheer you.


Iaq. To me by heaven,
Turn ribs to brass, turn voice into a trumpet,
To rattle out the battles of my thoughts,
One comes to hold me talk, while the other robbes me.

Exit. Count. He has forgot me sure: what should this mean?
He fears authority, and my want of wife
Will take his daughter from him to defame her:
He that has naught on earth but one poor daughter,
May take this ecstasy of care to keep her.

Enter Jacques. Iaq. And yet it is safe: they mean not to use force,
But fawning coming. I shall easly know
By his next question, if he think me rich,
Whom see I? my good Lord?

Count. Stand up good father, I call thee not father for thy age,
But that I gladly wish to be thy son,
In honored marriage with thy beauteous daughter.

Iaq. O, so, so, so, so, so, this is for gold,
Now it is sure, this is my daughters neatness,
Makes them believe me rich. No, my good Lord,
I Will tell you all; how my poor hapless daughter
Got that attire she wears from top to toe.

Count. Why father, this is nothing.


Iaq. O yes, good my Lord.


Count. Indeed it is not.


Iaq. Nay sweet Lord pardon me? do not dissemble,
Hear your poor beads-man speak; it is requisite
That I (so huge a beggar) make account
Of things that pass my calling: she was borne
T'enioy nothing underneath the son:
But that, if she had more then other beggars
She should be envied: I will tell you then
How she had all she wears, her warm shoes (God wot)
A kind maid gave her, seeing her go barefoot
In a cold frosty morning; God requite her;
Her homely stockings

Count. Father, I Will hear no more, thou mou'st too much
With thy too curious answer for thy daughter,
That does deserve a thousand times as much,
I Will be thy Son in law, and she shall wear
Th'attire of Countesses.

Iaq. O good my Lord,
Mock not the poor, remembers not your Lordship,
That poverty is the precious gift of God.
As well as riches, tread upon me, rather
Then mock my poorenes.

Count. Rise I say:
When I mock poorenes, then heavens make me poor.
Enter Nuntius.
Scaene 7. Nuncio, Count.
NVn. See here is the Count Ferneze, I will tell him
The hapless accident of his brave son,
That he may seek the sooner to redeem him,
Exit Jacques. God save your Lordship.

Count. You are right welcome sir.


Nun. I would I brought such news as might deserve it.


Count. What, bring you me ill news?


Nun. It Is ill my Lord,
Yet such as usual chance of war affoords,
And for which all men are prepared that use it,
And those that use it not, but in their friends,
Or in their children.

Count. Ill news of my son?
My dear and only son, I Will lay my soul,
Ay me accursed, thought of his death does wound me,
And the report of it will kill me quite.

Nun. It Is not so ill my Lord.


Count. How then?


Nun. He Is taken prisoner, and that is all.

Count. That Is enough, enough,
I set my thoughts on love, on servile love,
Forget my virtuous wife, feel not the dangers,
The bands and wounds of mine own flesh and blood,
And therein am a mad man: therein plagued,
With the most just affliction under heaven.
Is Maximilian taken prisoner to?

Nun. My good my Lord, he is returned with prisoners.


Count. Is It possible, can Maximilian?
Return, and view my face without my son,
For whom he swore such care as for himself?

Nun. My Lord no care can change the events of war.


Count. O! in what tempests do my fortunes sail,
Still wrackt with winds more foul and contrary,
Then any northen guest, or Southern flawe?
That ever yet enforced the sea to gape,
And swallow the poor Merchants traffic up?
First in Vieenza, lost I my first son;
Next here in Millaine my most dear loved Lady:
And now my Paulo, prisoner to the French,
Which last being printed with my other griefs,
Does make so huge a volume, that my breast
Cannot contain them. But this is my love*
I must make love to Rachel, heaven has thrown,
This vengeance on me most deservedly:
Were it for naught but wronging of my steward.

Nun. My Lord since only money may redress
The worst of this misfortune, be not griued,
Prepare his ransom and your noble son
Shall greet your cheered eyes, with the more honor.

Count. I will prepare his ransom: gracious heaven
Grant his imprisonment may be his worst,
Honored and souldier-like imprisonment,
And that he be not manacled and made
A drudge to his proud foe. And here I vow,
Never to dream of seeme-les amorous toys,
Nor aim at other joy on earth,
But the fruition of my only son.

Exunt Scaene 5.
Enter Jacques with his gold and ascuttle full of horse-dung. Iaq, He Is gone: I
knew it; this is our hot lover,
I will believe them! I! they may come in
Like simple woers, and be arrant thieves,
And I not know them! it is not to be told,
What servile villainies, men will do for gold,
O it began to have a huge strong smell,
Which lying so long together in a place;
I Will give it vent, it shall ha shift enough,
And if the devil, that enuies all goodness,
Have told them of my gold, and where I kept it,
I Will set his burning nose once more a work,
To smell where I removed it, here it is:
I Will hide and cover it with this horse-dung:
Who will suppose that such a precious ne^t
Is crowned with such a dunghill excrement?
In my dear life, sleep sweetly my dear child.
"Scarce lawfully begotten, but yet gotten,
"And that's enough. Rot all hands that come near thee
Except mine own. Burn out all eyes that see thee,
Except mine own. All thoughts of thee be poison
To their enamored hearts, except mine own,
I Will take no leave, sweet Prince great Emperor,
But see thee every minute, King of Kings,
I Will not be rude to thee, and turn my back,
In going from thee, but go backward out:
With my face toward thee, with humble courtesies,
None is within. None ouerlookes my wall.
To have gold, and to have it safe, is all.

Exit. Actus 3.
Scaene 1.
Enter Maximilian, with soldiers Chamount, Camilla, Ferneze, Pacue. Max. Lord
Chamount and your valient friend there, I cannot say welcome to Millaine: your
thoughts and that word are not musical, but I can say you are come to Millaine.


Pac. Mort diew.


Cha. Gar soon.


Max. Gentlemen (I would call an Emperor so) you are now my prisoners, I am
sorry, marry this, spit in the face of your fortunes, for your usage shall be
honorable.


Came. We know it signior Maximilian,
The fame of al your actions sounds naught else,
But perfect honor from her swelling cheeks.

Max. It shall do so still I assure you, and I will give you reason, there is
in this last action (you know) a noble gentleman of our party, and a right
valient; semblably prisoner to your general, as your honored selfe's to me, for
whose safety, this tongue has given warrant to his honorable father, the Count
Ferneze. You conceive me.


Came. I signior.


Max. Well? then I must tell you your ransomes be to redeem him, what think
you? your answer.


Came. Marry with my Lords leave here I say signior,
This free and ample offer you have made,
Agrees well with your honor, but not ours:
For I think not but Chamount is as well borne
As is Ferneze, then if I mistake not,
He scorns to have his worth so vnderprised,
That it should need an adiunct, in exchange,
Of any equal fortune, Noble Signior?
I am a soldier, and I love Chamount,
Ere I would bruise his estimation,
With the least ruin of mine own respect,
In this vild kind, these legs should rot with irons,
This body pine in prison, till the flesh
Dropped from my bones in flakes, like withered leaves,
In heart of Autumn, from a stubborn Oak.

Maxi. Mounsieur Gasper (I take it so is your name) misprise me not, I will
trample on the heart, on the soul of him that shall say, I will wrong you: what
I purpose, you cannot now know; but you shall know, and doubt not to your
contentment. Lord Chamount, I will leave you, whilst I go in and present my
self to the honorable Count, till my regression so please you, your noble
feet may measure this private, pleasant and most princely walk, Soldiers
regard them and respect them.


Pac. O Ver bon: excellenta gull, he tak'a my Lord Chamoun^ for Mounsieur
Gaspra, and Mounsieur Gaspra for my Lord Chamont, o dis be brave for make a me
laugh'a, ha, ha, ha, o my heart tickla.


Came. I but your Lordship knows not what hard fate
Might have pursued us, therefore howsoere
The changing of our names was necessary
And we must now be careful to maintain
This error strongly, which our own devise,
Has thrust into their ignorant conceits,
For should we (on the taste of this good fortune)
Appear our selves, it would both create in them
A kind of jealousy, and perchance inuert
Those honorable courses they intend.

Cha. True my dear Gasper: but this hang by here,
Will (at one time or other) on my soul
Discover us: A secret in his mouth
Is like a wild bird put into a cage,
Whose door no sooner opens, but it is out.
But sir, if I may but know
Thou vtterst it

Pac. Vtteria? vat Mounsieur?


Cha. That he is Gasper, and I true Chamont.


Pac. O pardone moy, fore my tongue shall put out de secreta,
Shall breed de cankra in my mouth.

Count. Speak not so loud Pacue.


Pac. Foe, you shall not hear fool, for all your long ear, Reguard
Mounsieur: you be de Chamont, Chamont be Gaspra.


Enter Count Ferueze, Maximilian, Francesco, Aurelia, Phoenixella, Finio. Cha.
Peace, here comes Maximilian.


Came. O belike that is the Count Ferneze, that old man.


Cha. Are those his daughters, trow?


Came. I sure, I think they are.


Cha. Fore God the taller is a gallant Lady.


Came. So are they both believe me.


Max. True my honorable Lord, that Chamont was the father of this man.


Count. O that may be, for when I lost my son,
This was but young it seems.

Fran. Faith had Camillo lived,
He had been much about his years, my Lord.

Count. He had indeed, well, speak no more of him.


Max. Signior perceive you the error? it was no good office in us to stretch the
remembrance of so dear a loss. Count Ferneze, let summer sit in your eye,
look cheerfully sweet Count, will you do me the honor to confine this noble
spirit within the circle of your arms?


Count. Honored Chamont reach me your valiant hand,
I could have wished some happier accident
Had made the way unto this mutual knowledge,
Which either of us now must take of other,
But sure it is the pleasure of our fates,
That we should thus be wrack't on Fortunes wheel,
Let us prepare with steeled patience
To tread on torment, and with minds confirmed
Welcome the worst of envy.

Max. Noble Lord, it is thus. I have here (in mine honor) set this gentleman
free, without ransom, he is now himself, his valor has deserved it, in the
eye of my judgment. Mounsieur Gasper you are dear to me: fortuna non mutuat
genus. But to the maine, if it may square with your Lordships liking, and his
love, I could desire that he were now instantly employed to your noble General
in the exchange of Ferneze for your self, it is the business that requires
the tender hand of a friend.


Count. I, and it would be with more speed effected,
If he would undertake it.

Max. True my Lord. Mounsieur Gasper, how stand you affected to this motion?


Cha. My duty must attend his Lordships will.


Max. What says the Lord Chamont?


Came. My will does then apprroue what these have urged.


Max. Why there is good harmony, good music in thise Mounsieur Gasper, you
shall protract no time, only I will give you a bowl of rich wine to the
health of your General, another to the success of your journey, and a third
to the love of my sword. Pass.


Exeunt all but Aurelia and Phoenixella. Anre. Why how now sister in a motley
muse?
Go to, there is somewhat in the wind, I see.
Faith this brown study suites not with your black,
Your habit and your thoughts are of two colors.

Phoen. Good faith me thinks that this young Lord Chamont favors my mother,
sister, does he not?


Aure. A mothelry conceit, o blind excuse,
Blinder then love himself. Well sister, well.
Cupid has taken his stand in both your eyes, The case is alterd.

Phoen. And what of that?


Aure. Nay nothing but a Saint.
Another Bridget, one that for a face
Would put down Vesta, in whose looks does swim,
The very sweetest cream of modesty.
You to turn tippet? fie, fie, will you give
A packing penny to Virginity.
I thought youl'd dwell so long in Cypres I Will,
You Would worship Maddam Venus at the length;
But come, the strongest fall, and why not you?
Nay, do not frown.

Phoen. Go. go, you soole. Adieu.


Aure. Well I may jest, or so: but Cupid knows
My taking is as bad, or worse then hers.
O Mounsieur Gasper? if thou be a man,
Be not afraid to court me, do but speak,
Challenge thy right and wear it: for I swear
Till thou arriud'st, nere came affection here.

Exit. Enter Pacue, Finio. Fin. Come on my sweet finicall Pacue, the very prime
Of Pages, here is an excellent place for us to practice in,
No body fees us here, come lets to it.
Enter Oniou.
Pac. Contenta: Reguarde, vou le Preimer.


Oni. Sir Finio?


Pac. Mort deiu le pesant.


Oni. Did thou see Valentine?


Finio. Valentine? no.


Oni. No?


Fini. No. Sirrah Onion, whither go?


Oni. O I am vexed, he that would trust any of these lying travelers.


Finio. I prithee stay good Onion.


Pac. Mounsieur Onion, vene ca, come hidera, Ie vou prey. By gar me ha see two,
tree, four hundra towsand of your Cousan hang. Lend me your hand, shall prey
for know you bettra.


Oni. I thank you good signior Parla vou? O that I were in an other world, in
the Ingies, or some where, that I might have room to laugh.


Pac. A we fort boon: stand? you be dear now, me come, Boon iour Mounsieur.

Under the arm.
Fin. God morrow good signior.


Pac By gar, be mush glad for see you.


Fin I return you most kind thanks sir.


Oni. How? how? God's Blood this is rare?


Pac. Nay, shall make you say rare by and by, Reguard Mounsieur Finio,

Theshoulder
Fin. Signior Pache.


Pac. Dieu vou guard Mounsieur.


Fin. God save you sweet signior


Pac. Mounsieur On ion? is not fort boon.


Oni. Bean? quoth he, would I were in debt of a pottle of beans I could do as
much.


Fin. Welcome signior, what is next?


Pac. O here, Void de grand admiration, as should meet perchance Mounsieur
Finio,


Fin. Mounsieur Pacue


Pac. Jesus? by Gar who think we shall meet here?


Fin. By this hand I am not a little proud of it, sir


Oni. This trick is only for the the chamber, it cannot be cleanly done abroad,


Pac. Well what say you for dis den? Mounsieur:


Fin. Nay pray, sir.


Pac. Par ma foy vou bein encounters?


Fin What do you mean sir, let your glove alone.


Pac. Comen, se port la sante.


Fin. Faith exceeding well sir.


Pac, Trot, be mush joy for heir.


Fin. And how is it with you sweet signior Pache.


Pac. Fat comme vou voyer.


Oni. Young gentlemen? spirits of blood, if ever you will taste of a sweet piece of
mutton, do Onion a good turn now.


Pac. Que que, parla Mounseir, what is it.


Oni. Faith teach me one of these tricks.


Pac. O me shall do presently, stand you dear, you signior dear, my self is
here: so fort bein, now I parle to Mounseir Onion, Onion pratla to you, you
speaka to me, so, and as you parle chang the bonet, Mounseir Onion.


Oni. Mounseiur Finio.


Fin. Mounseur Pacue.


Pac. Pray be couera.


Oni. Nay I beseech you sir.


Fin. What do you mean.


Pac. Pardon moy, shall be so,


Oni O God sir.


Fin. Not I in good faith sir.


Pac. By gar you must.


Oni: It shall be yours.


Fin. Nay then you wrong me,


Oni. Well and ever I come to be great.


Pac. You be big enough for de Onion already,


Oni. I mean a great man.


Fin. Then thou would be a monster.


Oni. Well God knows not what fortune may do, command me, use me from the
soul to the crown, and the crown to the soul: meaning not only from the
crown of the head, and the sole of the foot, but also the foot of the mind
and the crowns of the purse, I cannot stay now young gentlemen but -- time was,
time is, and time shall be.


Exeunt. Enter Chamount, Camillo. Cha. Sweet Jasper I am sorry we must part,
But strong necessity enforces it.
Let not the time seem long unto my friend,
Till my return for by our love I swear
(The sacred sphere wherein our souls are knit)
I will endeavor to effect this business
With all industrious care and happy speed.

Came. My Lord these circumstances would come well,
To one less capable of your desert
Then I: in whom your mirrit is confirmed
With such authentical and grounded proves.

Cha. Well I will use no more. Gasper adieu.


Came. Farewell my honored Lord.


Cha. Commend me to the Lady, my good Gasper.


Came. I had remembered that had not you vrgd it.


Cha. Once more adieu sweet Gasper.


Came. My good Lord.


Exit Camillo, Cha. Thy virtues are more precious then thy name,
Kind gentleman I would not sell thy love,
For all the earthly objects that mine eyes,
Have ever tasted, sure thou art nobly borne,
How ever fortune has obscurd thy birth:
For native honor sparkles in thine eyes,
How may I bless the time wherein Chamont
My honored father did surprise vicenza,
Where this my friend (known by no name) was found,
Being then a child and scarce of power to speak,
To whom my father gave this name of Gasper,
And as his own respected him to death,
Since when we two have shard our mutual fortunes,
With equal spirits, and but deaths rude hand,
No violence shall dissolve this sacred band.

Exit. Enter Juniper in his shop singing: to him Onion. Oni. Fellow Juniper, no
more of thy songs and sonets, sweet Juniper, no more of thy hymns and
madrigals, thou sing'st, but I sigh.


Iuni What Is the matter Peter ha? what in an Academy still, still in sable, and
costly black array? ha?


Oni. Prithee rise mount, mount sweet Juniper, for I go down the wind, and
yet I puff: for I am vexed.


Iuni. Ha Bully? vexed? what intoxicate? is thy brain in a quintescence? an
Idea? a metamorphosis? an Apology? ha rogue? come this love feeds upon thee, I
see by thy cheeks, and drinks healthes of vermilion, tears I see by thine
eyes.


Oni. I confess Cupids carouse, he plays super negulum with my liquor of life


Iuni. Tut, thou art a goose to be Cupids gull, go to, no more of this
contemplations, and calculations, mourn not, for Rachels thine own


Oni. For that let the higher powers work: but sweet Juniper, I am not sad for
her, and yet for her in a second person, or ^f not so yet in a third.


Iuni. How second person? away, away, in the crotchets already Longitude and
Latitude? what second? what person? ha?


Oni. Juniper, I Will bewray my self before thee, for thy company is sweet unto
me, but I must entreat thy helping hand in the case.


Iuni. Tut? no more of this surquedry; I am thine own? ad vngem vpsie freeze:
pell mell, come, what case? what case?


Oni. For the case it may be any man's case, as well as mine, Rachel I mean, but
I Will meddle with her anon, in the mean time, ^^lentine is the man has wronged me.


Iuni. How my Ingle wrong thee, is it possible?


Oni. Your Ingle, hang him infidel, well and if I be not reuengd one him let
Peter Onion (by the infernal Gods) be turned to al eeke or a scalion, I spoke
to him for a ditty for this handkerchier.


Iuni. Why, has he not done it?


Oni. Done it, not a verse by this hand.


Iuni. O in dichus illis, O preposterous, well come be blithe, the ^est iud^^ of
the ^l is sometimes dull, fellow Onion pardon mine Iugle: he is a man, has in
pefections and declinations, as other men have, his mass sometimes cannot
carnet nor prognisticat and come of, as it should, no matter, I Will hammer our a
paral^rase for thee my self.


Oni. No sweet Juniper, no danger (...) breed delay, love makes me chollericke
I can bear no longer.


Iuni. Not bear? what my mad Meridian slave? not be are? what?


Oni. Cupids burden: it is to heavy, to tolerable, and as for the handkerchire
and the posie: I will not trouble thee: but if thou will go with me into her
fathers backside, old Jacques backside, and speak for me to Rachel, I will not
being ratitude, the old man is abroad and all.


Iuni. Art thou sure on it.


Oni. As sure as an obligation.


Iuni. Lets away then, come we spend time in a vain circumference, trade
^cashire thee til to morrow, fellow Onion for thy sake I fini^^ this workiday.


Oni. God a mercy, and for thy sake I Will at any time make a holiday.


Exunt. Enter Angelio, Rachel. Ang. Nay I prithee Rachel, I come to comfort
thee, Be not so sad.


Rach. O signior Angelo,
No comfort but his presence can remove,
This sadness from my heart.

Ang. Nay then you are fond,
And want that strength of judgment and election,
That should be attendent on your years and form,
Will you, because your Lord is taken prisoner,
Blubber and weep and keep a peevish stir,
As though you would turn turtle with the news,
Come, come, be wise. Sblood say your Lord should die:
And you go mar your face as you begin,
What would you do trow? who would care for you;
But this it is, when nature will bestow
Her gifts on such as know not how to use them,
You shall have some that had they but one quarter
Of your fair beauty? they would make it show
A little otherwise then you do this,
Or they would see the painter twice an hour,
And I commend them I, that can use art,
With such judicial practice.

Rach. You talk iedly,
If this be your best comfort keep it still,
My senses cannot feed on such sower cates.

Ang. And why sweet heart.


Rach. Nay leave good signior.


Ang. Come I have sweeter vyands yet in store.


Enter Onion and Juniper. Iuni. I in any case mistres Rachel.


Ang. Rachel?


Rach. Gods pity signior Angelo, I here my father, away for Gods sake.


Ang: S'bloud, I am betwixt, I think, this is twice now, I have been served
thus.


Exit Rach. Pray God he meet him not.


Exit Rechel. Oni. O brave? she is yonder, O terrible she is gone.


Iuni. Yea? so nimble in your Dilemma's, and your Hiperbole's Hay my love? O my
love, at the first sight: By the mass.


Oni. O how she skudded, O sweet scud, how she tripped, O delicate trip and go.


Iuni. Come thou art enamored with the influence of her profundity, but sirrah
hark a little.


Oni. O rare, what? what? passing In Faith, what is it? what is it?


Iuni. What will thou say now, if Rachel stand now, and play hity tity through
the key hole, to behold the equipage of thy person:


Oni. O sweet equipage, try good Juniper, tickle her, talk, talk, O? rare


Iuni. Mistress Rachel (watch then if her father come) Rachel? Madona? Rachel?
No.


Oni. Say I am here, Onion or Peter or so.


Iuni. No, I Will knock, we will not stand upon Horizons, and tricks, but fall
roundly to the matter.


Oni. Well said sweet Juniper: Horizons? hang hem? knock, knock.


Rach. Whose there? father.


Iuni. Father no? and yet a father, if you please to be a mother.


Oni. Well said Juniper, to her again, a smack or two more of the mother


Iuni. Do you here? sweet soul, sweet radamant? sweet mathauell one word
Melpomine? are you at leisure.


Rach. At leisure? what to do?


Iuni. To do what, to do nothing, but to be liable to the ecstasy of true
loves exigent, or so, you smell my meaning.


Oni. Smell, filthy, fellow Juniper filthy? smell? O most odious.


Iuni. How filthy.


Oni. Filthy, by this finger? smell? smell a rat, smell a pudding, away these
tricks are for truls, a plain wench loves plain dealing, i will upon my self,
smell to march pain wench.


Iuni. With all my heart, I Will be legitimate and silent as anapple-squire, I Will
see nothing, and say nothing.


Oni. Sweet heart, sweet heart?


Iuni. And bag pudding, ha, ha, ha?


Iaq. What Rachel my girl what Rachel;

Within
Oni. Gods lid*


Iaq. What Rachel,

Within
Rach. Here I am

Within
Oni What rakehell calls Rachel: O treason to my love.


Iuni. Its her father on my life, how shall we entrench and edify our selves
from him?


Oni. O conni-catching* Cupid.

Enter Jacques.
Iaq. How in my back side? where? what come they for?
Onion gets up into a tree. Where are they? Rachel? thieves, thieves?
Stay villain slave: Rachel? untie my dog.
Nay theife thou can not escape.

Iuni. I pray you sir.


Oni. A pitiful Onion, that thou had a rope.


Iaq. Why Rachel: when I say: let loose my dog? garlique my mastiue, let him
loose I say.


Iuni. For Gods sake here me speak, keep up your cur.


Oni. I fear not garlique, heel not bite Onion his kinsman pray God he come
out, and then they will not smell me.


Iaq. well then deliver, come deliver slave?


Iuni. What should I deliver?


Iaq. O thou would have me tell thee? would thou show me thy hands, what
have thou in thy hands?


Iuni. Here be my hands.


Iaq. Stay are not thy fingers ends begrimd with dirt, no thou have wipt them.


Iuni. Wipt them?


Iaq. I thou villain? thou art a subtle knave, put off thy shows, come I
will see them, give me a knife here Rachel, I Will rip the soles.


Oni. No matter he is a cobbler, he can mend them.


Iuni. What are you mad? are you detestable, would you make an Anatomy of me,
think you I am not true Ortographie?


Iaq. Ortographie, Anatomy?


Iuni. For Gods sake be not so inviolable, I am no ambuscado, what predicament
call you this, why do you intimate so much.


Iaq. I can feel nothing.


Oni. Bir Lady but Onion feels something.


Iaq. Soft sir, you are not yet gone, shake your legs, come, and your arms, be
brief, stay let me see these drums, these kilderkins, these bombard slops,
what is it crams hem so.


Iuni. Nothing but hair.


Iaq. That's true, I had almost forgot this rug, this hedghogs nest, this hay
mow, this bears skin, this heath, this firsbush.


Iuni. O let me go, you tear my hair, you reluolue my brains and
understanding.


Iaq. Heart, thou art somewhat eased? half of my fear
Has taken his leave of my, the other half
Still keeps possession in dispight of hope,
Until these amorous eyes, court my fair gold:
Dear I come to thee: friend, why art not gone?
Avoid my souls vexation, Satan hence?
Why do thou stare on me, why do thou stay?
Why por'st thou on the ground with theeuish eyes?
What see thou there, thou curre? what gap'st thou at?
Hence from my house, Rachel, send garlic forth.

Iunip. I am gone sir, I am gone, for Gods sake stay.


Exit Juniper. Iaq. Pack, and thank God thou scap'st so well away.


Oni. If I escape this tree, destinies, I defy you.


Iaq. I cannot see by any Characters
Writ on this earth, that any fellon foot
Has taken acquaintance of this hallowed ground.
None sees me: knees do homage to your Lord.
It Is safe, it is safe, it lies and sleeps so soundly,
Twould do one good to look on it. If this bliss
Be given to any man that has much gold,
Justly to say it is safe, I say it is safe.
O what a heavenly round these two words dance
Within me and without me: First I think hem,
And then I speak hem, then I watch their sound,
And drink it greedily with both mine ears,
Then think, then speak, then drink their sound again,
And racket round about this bodies court.
These two sweet words: it is safe: stay I will feed
My other senses, o how sweet it smells

Oni. I mar'le he smells not Onion, being so near it.


Iaq. Down to thy grave again, thou beauteous Ghost,
Angels men say, are spirits: Spirits be
Invisible, bright angels are you so?
Be you invisible to every eye.
Save only these: Sleep, I Will not break your rest,
Though you break mine: Dear Saints adieu, adieu:
My feet part from you, but my soul dwells with you.

Exit. Oni. Is he gone? o Fortune my friend, and not fortune my foe,
I come down to embrace thee, and kiss thy great toe.
Enter Juniper.
Iunip. Fellow Onion? Peter.


Oni. Fellow Juniper. What Is the old panurgo gone? departed, cosmografied, ha?


Oni. O I, and hark Sirrah. Shall I tell him? no.


Iunip. Nay, be brief and declare, stand not upon conodrums now, thou know
what contagious speeches I have sufferd for thy sake and he should come again
and invent me here.


Oni. He says true, it was for my sake, I will tell him.
Sir Juniper? and yet I will not.

Iunip. What say thou sweet Onion?


Oni. And thou had smelt the sent of me when I was in the tree, thou would
not have said so: but Sir, The case is alterd with me, my heart has given
love a box of the ear, made him kick up the heels I faith.


Iunip. Say thou me so, wad Greek? how haps it? how chances it.


Oni. I cannot hold it, Juniper, have an eye, look, have an eye to the door,
the old prouerb's true, I see: gold is but mucke. Nay Gods so Juniper to the
door, an eye to the maine chance, here you slave, have an eye.


Iunip. O inexorable! o infallible! o infricate divine, and superficial
fortune.


Oni. Nay, it will be sufficient anon, here, look here.


Iunip. O insolent good luck! How did thou produce th'intelligence of the
gold' mynerals.


Oni. I Will tell you that anon, here, make shift, convey, cramme.
I Will teach you how you shall call for garlike again I faith.

Iunip. S'bloud what shall we do with all this? we shall nere bring it to a
consumption.


Oni. Consumption? why we will be most sumptuously attired, man.


Iunip. By this gold, I will have three or four most stigmaticall suites
presently.


Oni. I Will go in my foot-cloth, I Will turn Gentleman.


Iunip. So will I.


Oni. But what badge shall we give, what cullison?


Iunip. As for that lets use the infidelity and commiseration of some harrot of
arms, he shall give us a gudgeon.


Oni. A gudgeon? a scutheon thou would say, man.


Iunip. A scutcheon or a gudgeon, all is one.


Oni. Well, our arms be good enough, lets look to our legs.


Iunip. Content, we will be iogging.


Oni. Rachel? we retire: garlike God boy ye.


Iunip. Farewell sweet Jacques.


Oni. Farewell sweet Rachel, sweet dog adieu.


Exeunt. Fnter Maximilian, Count Ferneze, Aurelia, Phoenixella, Pache. Max. Nay
but sweet Count.


Count. Away, I Will hear no more,
Never was man so palpably abuld,
My son so basely marted; and my self
Am made the subject of your mirth and scorn.

Max. Count Ferneze you tread to hard upon my patience,
Do not persist I advise your Lordship.

Count. I will persist, and unto thee I speak.
Thou. Maximilian thou have injured me.

Max. Before the Lord:


Aur. Sweet signior.


Phoe O my father.


Mvx. Lady let your father thank your beauty.


Pac. By gar me shall be hang for tella dis same,
Metella madamoy selle, she tell her sadera.

Count. The true Chamount set free, and one left here
Of no descent, clad barely in his name.
Sirrah boy come hither, and be sure, you speak the simple truth:

Pac. O pardone moy mounsieur,


Count Come leave your pardons, and directly say.
What villain is the same that has usurped,
The honored name and person of Chamount:

Pac O Mounsieur, no point villain, brave Cheualier, Mounsieur Gasper.


Count. Mounsieur Gasper, on what occasion did they change their names, what
was their policy, or their pretext.


Pac. Me canno tell, par ma foy Mounsieur.


Max. My honorable Lord.


Count. Tut tut, be silent.


Max. Silent? Count Ferneze, I tell thee if Amurath the great
Turk were here I would speak, and he should here me.

Count. So will not I.


Max. By my fathers hand, but thou shall Count, I say till this instant, I was
never touched in my reputation: here me you shall know that you have wronged me,
and I will make you acknowledge it, if I cannot my sword shall.


Count. By heaven I will not, I will stop mine ears,
My senses loath the Savior of thy breath.
It Is poison to me, I say I will not hear.
What shall I know, it is you have iniurd me,
What will you make? make me acknowledge it.
Fetch forth that Gasper, that lewd counterfeit.
Enter serving with Camillo. I Will make him to your face approve your wrongs.
Come on false substance, shadow to Chamont:
Had you none else to work upon but me,
Was I your fittest project? well confess,
What you intended by this secret plot.
And by whose policy it was contrived,
Speak truth, and be entreated courteously,
But double with me, and resolve to prove
The extremest rigor that I can inflict.

Came. My honored Lord, hear me with patience,
Nor hope of favor, not the fear of torment,
Shall sway my tongue, from vttring of a truth.

Count. It Is well, proceed then.


Came. The morn before this battle did begin,
Wherein my Lord Chamount and I were taken,
We vowed one mutual fortune, good or bad,
That day should be embraced of us both,
And urging that might worst succeed our vow,
We there concluded to exchange our names.

Count. Then Maximilian took you for Chamount.


Came. True noble Lord.


Count. It Is false, ignoble wretch,
It Was but a complot to betray my son.

Max. Count, thou lie in thy bosom, Count*

Count. Lie?


Came. Nay I beseech you honored gentlemen,
Let not the untimely ruin of your love,
Follow these slight occurents; be assured
Chamounts return will heal these wounds again,
And break the points of your too piercing thoughts.

Count. Return? I when? when will Chamount return?
Heel come to fetch you, will he? I it is like,
Youl'd have me think so, that is your policy.
No, no, young gallant, your device is stale,
You cannot feed me with so vain a hope.

Came. My Lord, I feed you not with a vain hope,
I know assuredly he will return,
And bring your noble son along with him.

Max. I, I dare pawn my soul he will return.


Count. O impudent dirision? open scorn?
Intolerable wrong? is it not enough?
That you have played upon me all this while;
But still to mock me, still to jest at me?
Fellows, away with him, thou ill-bred slave,
That sets no difference twixt a noble spirit,
And thy own slavish humor, do not think
But i will take worthy vengeance on thee, wretch?

Came. Alas, these threats are idle, like the wind,
And breed no terror in a guiltless mind.

Count. Nay, thou shall want no torture, so resolve, bring him away.


Came. Welcome the worst, I suffer for a friend,
Your tortures will, my love shall never end.

Exeunt. Manent Maximillian, Aurelia, Phoenixella, Pacue. Phoen. Alas poor
gentleman, my fathers rage
Is too extreme, too stern and violent
O that I knew with all my strongest powers,
How to remove it from thy patient breast,
But that I cannot, yet my willing heart,
Shall minister in spite of tyranny
To thy misfortune, something there is in him,
That does enforce this strange affection,
With more then common rapture in my breast:
For being but Gasper, he is still as dear
To me, as when he did Chamount appear.

Exit Phoenixella. Aure. But in good sadness Signior, do you think Chamount
will return?


Max. Do I see your face, Lady?


Aure. I sure, if love have not blinded you.


Max. That is a question, but I will assure you no, I can see, and yet love is
in mine eye: well, the Count your father simply has dishonored me: and this
steel shall engraue it on his burgonet.


Aure. Nay, sweet Signior.


Max. Lady, I do prefer my reputation to my life,
But you shall rule me, come lets march.

Exit Maximillian. Aure. I Will follow Signior, o sweet Queen of love!
Sovereign of all my thoughts, and thou fair fortune,
Who (more to honor my affections)
Have thus translated Gasper to Chamount.
Let both your flames now burn in one bright spear;
And give true light to my a spiring hopes,
Hasten Chamounts return, let him affect me,
Though father, friends, and all the world reject me.

Exit. Enter Angelo, Christopher. Ange. Sigh for a woman, would I fould mine
arms,
Rave in my sleep, talk idly being awake,
Pine and look pale, make loue-walkes in the night,
To steal cold comfort from a day-starres eyes.
Kit, thou art a fool, will thou be wise? then lad
Renounce this boy-gods nice idolatry,
Stand not on complement, and wooing tricks,
Thou love old Jacques daughter, do thou?

Chris. Love her?


Ange. Come, come, I know it, be ruled and she is thine own,
Thou't say her father Jacques, the old beggar,
Has pawnd his word to thee, that none but thou,
Shall be his son in law.

Chris. He has.


Ange. He has? will thou believe him, and be made a kooke,
To wait on such an antique wether cock;
Why he is more inconstant then the sea,
His thoughts, Cameleon-like, change every minute:
No Kit, work soundly, steal the wench away,
Wed her, and bed her, and when that is done,
Then say to Jacques, shall I be your son?
But come to our devise, where is this gold?

Chris. Here Signior Angelo.


Ange. Bestow it, bid thy hands shed golden drops,
Let these bald french crowns be uncovered,
In open sight, to do obeisance
To Jacques staring eyes when he steps forth,
The needy beggar will be glad of gold.
So, now keep thou aloose, and as he treades
This gilded path, stretch out his ambling hopes,
With scattring more and more, and as thou go, cry Jacques, Jacques

Chris. Tust, let me alone.


Ang. First i will play the ghost, I Will call him out, Kit keep aloof.


Chris. But Signior Angelo. Where will your self and Rachel stay for me, after
the jest is ended?


Ange. Mass, that is true, at the old Priory behind S. Foyes.


Chris. Agreed, no better place, i will meet you there.


Ange. Do good fool, do, but i will not meet you there.
Now to this geere, Jacques, Jacques, what Jacques?

within Iaq. Who calls? whose there?


Ange. Jacques.


within Iaq. Who calls?


Ange. Steward, he comes, he comes Jacques.


Enter Jacques. Iaq. What voice is this? no body here, was I not called? I was.
And one cride Jacques with a hollow voice,
I was deceived, no I was not deceived,
See see, it was an Angel called me forth,
Gold, gold, man* making gold, another star,
Drop they from heaven, no, no, my house I hope
Is haunted with a Fairy. My dear Lar,
My household God, My Fairy on my knees.

Christ. Jacques.


Exit Christopher^. Iaq. My Lar does call me, o sweet voice.
Musical as the spheres, see, see, more gold.

within Chris. Jacques.

Enter Rachel.
Iaq. What Rachel, Rachel, lock my door, look to my house.


within Chris. Jacques.


Iaq. Shut fast my door, a golden crown, Jacques shall be a king.


Exit. Ange. To a fools paradise that path will bring
Thee and thy household Lar.

Rach. What means my father, I wonder what strange humor.


Ange. Come sweet soul, leave wondering, start not, it was I laid this plot to
get thy father forth.


Rach. O Angelo.


Ange. O me no oo's, but hear, my Lord your love,
Paulo Ferneze is returned from war,
Lingers at Pont Valeria, and from thence
By post at midnight last, I was coniur'd
To man you thither, stand not on replies,
A horse is sadled for you, will you go,
And I am for you, if you will stay, why so.

Rach. O Angelo, each minute is a day till my Ferneze come, come we will away sir.


Ange. Sweet soul I guess thy meaning by thy looks,
At po^t Valerio thou thy love shall see,
But not Ferneze, Steward fare you well.
You wait for Rachel to, when can you tell?

Exeunt. Enter Iaq. Iaq. O in what golden circle have I dan'st?
Millaine these odorous and enfloured fields
Are none of thine, no here is Elysium,
Here blessed ghosts do walk, this is the Court
And glorious palace where the God of gold
Shines like the son, of sparkling majesty;
O fair fethered, my red-brested birds,
Come fly with me, i will bring you to a quier,
Whose consort being sweetened with your sound:
The music will be fuller, and each hour
These ears shall banquet with your harmony o, o, o,
Enter Christ.
Chris. At the old priorie, behind Saint Foyes,
That was the place of our appointment sure:
I hope he will not make me loose my gold,
And mock me to, perhaps they are within: I Will knock.

Iaq. O God, the case is alterd.


Christ. Rachel?


Angelo? Signior Angelo?


Iaq. Angels? I where? mine Angels? where is my gold?
Why Rachel? O thou theeuish Canibal,
Thou eatest my flesh in stealing of my gold.

Chris. What gold?


Iaq. What gold? Rachel call help, come forth,
I Will rip thine entrails, but i will have my gold:
Rachel why comes thou not? I am undone,
Ay me she speaks not, thou have slain my child.

Exit Chris. What is the man possessed trow? this is strange,
Rachel I see is gone with Angelo:
Well i will once again unto the priory,
And see if I can meet them.

Exit Christopher, Iaq. It Is too true,
Enter Jacques Thou Have made away my child, how have my gold:
O what Hienna called me out of doors,
The theife is gone: my gold's gone, Rachels gone,
All Is gone? save I that spend my cries in vain,
But i will hence too, and die or end this pain.

Exit. Enter Juniper, Onion, Finio, Valentine. Iuni. Swonds, let me go, hay
catso, catch him alive,
I call, I call, boy, I come, I come sweet heart.

Oni. Page hold my rapier, while I hold my friend here.


Valen. O here is a sweet metamorphosis, a cupple of buzzards turned to a pair
of peacocks.


Iuni. Signior Onion, lend me thy boy to vnhang my rapier. On. Signior Juniper
for once or so, but troth is, you must inueigle, as I have done, my Lords page
here a poor follower of mine.


Iuni. Hei ho, your page then shall not be super intendent upon me? he shall not
be addicted? he shall not be incident? he shall not be incident? he shall not
be incident, shall he?


Fin. O sweet signior Juniper.
He foynes Iuni God's Blood stand away princocks? do not aggrauate my joy.

Valen. Nay good Master. Onion.


Oni. Nay and he have the heart to draw my blood, let him come.


Iuni. I Will slice you Onion, I Will slice you?


Oni. I Will cleave you Juniper.


Valen. Why hold, hold, hough? what do you mean?


Iuni. Let him come Ingle, stand by boy, his allebaster blad cannot fear me.


Fin. Why hear you sweet signior, let not there be any conte^tion, between my
Master and you, about me, if you want a page sir, I can help you to a proper
stripling.


Iuni. Can thou? what parentage? what ancestry? what genealogy is he?


Fin. A french boy sir.


Iuni. Has he his French linguist? has he?


Fin. I, sir.


Iuni. Then transport him: here is a crusado for thee.


Oni. You will not, imbecell my servant with your benevolence will you, hold
boy their's a portmantu for thee.


Fin. Lord sir.


On. Do take it boy, its three pounds ten shill. a portmantu.


Fin. I thank your Lordship.


Exit Finio. Iuni. Sirrah Ningle: thou art a traveler, and I honor thee.
I prithee discourse? cherish thy muse? discourse?

Valen. Of what sir?


Iuni. Of what thou will. God's Blood? hang sorrow?


Oni. Prithy Valentine assoile me one thing.


Valen. It Is pity to soil you sir, your new apparel.


On. Mass thou say true, aparel makes a man forget himself.


Iun. Begin, find your tongue Ningle.


Val. Now will gull these ganders rarely:
Gentlemen having in my peregrinatio^ through Mesopotamia.

Iun. Speak legibly, this gam's gone, without the great mercy of God,
Here Is a fine tragedy indeed. There Is a Keisars royal.
By Gods lid, nor King nor Keisar shall?

Enter Finio, Pacue, Balt. Martino. Balt. Where? where? Finio, where be they.


Iun. Go to, i will be with you anon.


Oni. O here is the page signior Juniper:


Iun. What says monsier Onion, boy.


Fin. What say you sir.


Iuni. Tread out boy.


Fin. Take up, you mean sir.


Iun. Tread out I say, so, I thank you, is this the boy.


Pac. Aue mounsieur.


Iuni. Who gave you that name.


Pac. Give me de name, vat name:


Oni. He thought your name had been, we young gentlemen, you must do more then
his legs can do for him, bear with him sir.


Iuni. Sirrah give me instance of your carriage? you will serve my turn, will you?


Pac. What? turn upon the toe.


Fin. O signior no.


Iuni. Page will you follow me, i will give you good exhibition.


Pac. By gar, shall not alone follow you, but shall lead you to.


Oni. Plaguie boy, he sooths his humor? these french villains ha pockie wits.


Iuni. Here? disarme me? take my semitary.


Valen. O rare, this would be a rare man, and he had a little travel,
Balthazar, Martino, put off your shoes, and bid him coble them.


Iuni. Friends, friends, but pardon me for fellows, no more in occupation, no
more in corporation, it is so pardon me, the case is alterd, this is law, but i will
stand to nothing.


Pac. Fat so me tinke.


Iuni. Well then God save the dukes Majesty, is this any harm now? speak, is
this any harm now.


Oni. No nor good neither, God's Blood?


Iuni. Do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me?


Valen. I sir, we do.


Iunip. You do indeed?


Valen. I indeed sir.


Iuni. It Is sufficient, Page carry my purse, dog me?


Exit. Oni. Gentlemen leave him not, you see in what case he is, he is not in
adversity, his purse is full of money, leave him not?


Enter Angelo with Rachel. Exeunt Ang. Nay gentle Rachel?


Rach. Away? forbear? ungentle Angelo,
Touch not my body, with those impious hands,
That like hot Irons sear my trembling heart,
And (...) it hiss, at your disloyalty.
Enter Chamount Paulo Ferneze. Wa^ (...) your drift? to use Fernezes name?
(...) Was he your fittest stale, o wild dishonor!

Pau. Stay noble sir*


Ange. God's Blood how like a puppet do you talk now?
Dishonor? what dishonor? come, come, fool,
Nay then I see you are peevish, S'heart dishonor?
To have you a topriest and marry you,
And put you in an honorable state.

Rach. To marry me? o heaven, can it be?
That men should live with such unfeeling souls,
Without or touch or conscience of religion,
Or that their warping appetites should spoil
Those honored forms, that the true seal of friendship
Had set upon their faces.

Ange. Do you hear? what needs all this? say, will you have me, or no?


Rach. I Will have you gone, and leave me, if you would.


Ange. Leave you? I was accursed to bring you hither,
And make so fair an offer to a fool.
A pox upon you, why should you be coy,
What good thing have you in you to be proud of?
Are y'any other then a beggars daughter?
Because you have beauty. O Gods light a blast.

Pau. I Angelo.


Ange. You scornful baggage, I loved thee not so much, but now I hate thee.


Rach. Upon my knees, you heavenly powers, I thank you,
That thus have tamed his wild affections.

Ange. This will not do, I must to her again,
Rachel, o that thou sawst my heart, or did behold,
The place from whence that scalding figh euented.
Rachel, by Jesus I love thee as my soul, Rachel, sweet Rachel.

Rach. What again returned unto this violent passion.


Ange. Do but hear me, by heaven I love you Rachel.


Rach. Pray forbear, o that my Lord Ferneze were but here.


Ange. God's Blood and he were, what would he do.


Pau. This would he do base villain.


Rach. My dear Lord,


Pau. Thou monster, even the soul of treachery!
O what dishonord title of reproach,
May my tongue spit in thy deserved face?
Me thinks my very presence should inuert,
The steeled organs of those traytrous eyes,
To take into thy heart, and pierce it through:
Turn'st thou them on the ground? wretch, dig a grave,
With their sharp points, to hide th'abhorred head;
Sweet love, thy wrongs have been too violent
Since my departure from thee, I perceive:
But now true comfort shall again appear,
And like an armed angel guard thee safe
From all the assaults of covered villainy.
Come Mounsieur, let us go, and leave this wretch to his despair.

Ange. My noble Ferneze.


Pau. What can thou speak to me, and not thy tongue,
Forced with the torment of thy guilty soul
Break that infected circle of thy mouth,
Like the rude clapper of a crazed bell.
I, that in thy bosom lodged my soul,
With all her train of secrets, thinking them
To be as safe, and richly entertained,
As in a Princes court, or tower of strength,
And thou to prove a traitor to my trust,
And basely to expose it, o this world!

Ange. My honorable Lord.


Pau. The very owl, who^ other birds do stare and wonder at,
Shall hoot at thee, and snakes in every bush
Shall deaf thine ears with their --

Cha. Nay good my Lord, give end unto your passions.


Ange. You shall see, I will redeem your lost opinion.


Rach. My Lord believe him.


Cha. Come, be sarisfied, sweet Lord you know our haste,
Let us to horse, the time for my engaged return is past;
Be friends again, take him along with you.

Pau. Come signior Angelo, hereafter prove more true.


Exeunt. Enter Count Ferneze, Maximillian, Francesco. Count. Tut Maximillian,
for your honored self,
I am persuaded, but no words shall turn
The edge of purposd vengeance on that wretch,
Come, bring him forth to execution.
Enter Camillo bound, withseruants I Will hang him for my son, he shall not
escape,
Had he an hundred lives: Tell me vile slave,
Think thou I love my son? is he my flesh?
Is he my blood, my life? and shall all these be torturd for thy
sake, and not revenged? trusse up the villain.

Max. My Lord, there is no law to confirm this action.
It Is dishonorable.

Count. Dishonorable? Max imillian?
It is dishonorable in Chamount, the day of his prefixed return is past, and he
shall pay fort.

Came. My Lord, my Lord,
Use your extremest vengeance, i will be glad
To suffer ten times more, for such a friend.

Count. O resolute and peremptory wretch!


Fran. My honored Lord, let us entreat a word.


Count. I Will hear no more, I say he shall not live,
My self will do it. Stay, what form is this
Stands betwixt him and me, and holds my hand.
What miracle is this? it is my own fancy,
Carues this impression in me, my soft nature,
That ever has retaind such foolish pity,
Of the most abject creatures misery,
That it abhorres it, what a child am I
To have a child? Ay me, my son, my son.
Enter Christophero.
Chris. O my dear love, what is become of thee?
What unjust absence layest thou on my breast,
Like waights of lead, when swords are at my back,
That run me through with thy unkind flight,
My gentle disposition waxes wild,
I shall run frantike, o my love, my love.
Enter Jacques.
Iaq. My gold, my gold, my life, my soul, my heaven,
What is become of thee? see, i will impart
My miserable loss to my good Lord,
Let me have search my Lord, my gold is gone.

Count. My son, Christophero, think it possible,
I ever shall behold his face again.

Chris. O father where is my love, were you so careless
To let an unthrift steal away your child.

Iaq. I know your Lordship may find out my gold,
For Gods sake pity me, justice, sweet Lord.

Count. Now they have young Chamount? Christophero?
Surely they never will restore my son.

Chris. Who would have thought you could have been so careless to loose your
only daughter.


Iaq. Who would think,
That looking to my gold with such hares eyes,
That ever open, I even when thy sleep,
I thus should loose my gold, my noble Lord, what says your
Lordship?

Count. O my son, my son.


Chris. My dearest Rachel?


Iaq. My most honey gold.


Count. Hear me Christophero.


Chris. Nay hear me Jacques.


Iaq. Hear me most honored Lord.


Max. What rule is here?


Count. O God that we should let Chamount escape.


Enter Aurelia, Phoenixella. Chris. I and that Rachel, such a virtuous maid,
should be thus stolen away.


Iaq. And that my gold, being so hid in earth, should be found out.


Max. O confusion of languages, and yet no tower of Babel!


Fran. Ladies, beshrew me, if you come not fit to make a iangling consort, will
you laugh to see three constant passions.


Max. Stand by, I will urge them, sweet Count, will you be comforted.


Count. It cannot be but he is handled the most cruelly,
That ever any noble prisoner was.

Max. Steward, go cheer my Lord:


Chris. Well, if Rachel took her flight willingly?


Max. Sirrah, speak you touching your daughters flight?


Iaq. O that I could so soon forget to know the thief again, that had my
gold, my gold.


Max. Is not this pure*


Count. O thou base wretch, i will drag thee through the streets.
Enter Balthazar, and whispers with him. And as a monster, make thee wondered
at, how now.

Phoen. Sweet Gentleman? how too unworthily
Art thou thus tortured, brave Maximillian,
Pity the poor youth and appease my father,

Count. How, my son returned? O Maximillian,
Francisco, daughters? bid him enter here.
Enter Chamount, Ferneze, Rachel, Angelo. Do thou not mock me? O my dear
Paulo welcome.

Max. My Lord Chamount?


Cha. My Gasper.


Chris. Rachel.


Iaq. My gold Rachel? my gold?


Count Some body bid the beggar cease his noise.


Chris. O signior Angelo, would you deceive
Your honest friend, that simply trusted you?
Well Rachel: I am glad though art here again.

Ang. I faith she is not for you steward.


Iaq. I beseech you maddam urge your father.


Phoe. I will anon? good Jacques be content.


Aur. Now God a mercy fortune, and sweet Venus,
Let Cupid do his part, and all is well.

Phoe. Me thinks my heart's in heaven with this comfort.


Cha. Is this the true Italian courtesy.
Ferneze were you torturd thus in France? by my souls safety.

Count: My most noble Lord? I do beseech your Lordship.


Cha. Honored Count, wrong not your age with flexure of a knee,
I do impute it to those cares and griefs,
That did torment you in your absent son.

Count. O worthy gentlemen, I am a shamd
That my extreme affection to my son,
Should give my honor so vncur'd a maine,
But my first son, being in Vicenza lost.

Cha. How in Vicenza? lost you a son there?
About what time my Lord?

Count. O the same night, wherein your noble father took the town.


Cha. How long's that since my Lord? can you remember.


Count. It Is now well nie upon the twentieth year.


Cha. And how old was he then?


Count. I cannot tell, between the years of three and sour, I take it.


Cha. Had he no special note in his attire,
Or otherwise, that you can call to mind.

Count I cannot well remember his attire,
But I have often heard his mother say:
He had about his neck a tablet,
Given to him by the Emperor Sigismund.
His Godfather, with this inscription,
Under the figure of a silver Globe: En minimo, mundus.

Cha. How did you call your son my Lord?


Count Camillo Lord Chamount.


Cha. Then no more my Gasper? but Camillo,
Take notice of your father, gentlemen:
Stand not amazd? here is a tablet,
With that inscription? found about his neck
That night, and in Vicenza by my father,
(Who being ignorant, what name he had)
Christened him Gasper, nor did I reveal,
This secret till this hour to any man.

Count. O happy revelation? o blessed hour? o my Camillo.


Phoe. O strange my brother.


Fran. Maximilion? behold how the abundance of his joy Drownds him in tears
of gladness.


Count. O my boy? forgive thy fathers late austerity:


Max. My Lord? I delivered as much before, but your honor would not be
persuaded, I will heareafter give more observance to my visions? I drempt of
this.


Iaq. I can be still no longer, my good Lord,
Do a poor man some grace among all your joys.

Count. Why what is the matter Jacques.


Iaq. I am robbed, I am undone my Lord, robbed and undone:
A heap of thirty thousand golden crowns,
Stolen from me in one minnte, and I fear:
By her confedracy, that calls me father,
But she is none of mine, therefore sweet Lord:
Let her be tortured to confess the truth.

Max. More wonders yet.


Count. How Jacques is not Rachel then thy daughter.


Iaq. No, I disclaim in her, I spit at her,



