THE True and perfect declaration of the mighty army by sea, made and prepared
by the general States of the united Provinces, purposely sent forth to hinder
the proceedings of the King of Spain, under the conduct of Peter Vander Does
General of the said army:

Together with all whatsoever has been done by the said army against the
Islands, Towns, Castles, and Ships, belonging to the said King of Spain.

As also what the said army has gotten and won in the said viage; with the
whole discourse of the adventures of the said army, both in their going forth,
and returning again, from the 28. of May, 1599. until the 6. of March, 1600.

Collected by Ellert de Ionghe, Captain of the Artillery in the said Viage.

Printed at London by John Wolf. 1600.

The true and perfect declaration of the mighty Navy by Sea, prepared and set
forth by the States of the united Provinces (to hinder the proceedings of the
king of Spain) under the leading and conduct of Peter Vander Does, General of
the said Navy, showing what the said army has done against the Isla^ds,
Towns, Castles, and ships of the said king, with the riches and prizes by them
taken and gotten during their whole viage: as also what the said army has
performed by Sea, as well in their viage outward, as homeward. From the 28. of
May 1599. to the 6. of March 1600. gathered and collected by Elbert de Ioughe,
Captain of the Artillery in the said Navy.
Upon the 28. of May 1599. The States army put to sea, out of Zealand, being in
all 73. ships, holding their course between Calis and Dover, the wind being
East Northeast.

The 29. of May, having past Calis, with an East wind, and clear weather, in
the evening they had a calm, then the General cast ancker under Swartnes,
which done, all the navy did the like.

The 30. of May, having hoysed anchor, they set sail with a North Northwest
wind, keeping upon the coast of England, and about twelve of the clock, they
passed Beueside, the wind being East Northeast, they holding their course West
Southwest, being close weather, which caused the General to sail Westward,
the better to have the coast of England in sight, but all the day continued
close weather, yet in the evening they had a sight of Goutstaert, and so
sailing til night, they ankered not far from Plimmouth.

The 1. of June early in the morning, making toward land, about six of the
clock they arrived at Plimmouth, where the General sent a Pinace to land, to
know if any of their ships had arrived there, because certain of them had
sailed out of the Tassel not long before, which they thought to have found at
Plimmouth: but not finding any, about noone they set sail and departed,
holding their course South Southwest: and about evening having a side wind,
they sailed West Southwest, with such dark and close weather, that they could
hardly see ye length of a ship from them, which caused them sometimes to shoot
off muskets, sometimes slings, to let the other ships know that they were not
far from the^, that they should not separate themselves.

The 2. of June, having a calm with close weather, they met al together, and
holding their course South southwest, having the wind East Northeast.

The 3. of June, still having an East Northeast wind, they sailed very slowly
sometimes on the lee, sometimes in the wind, to stay for certain of their
ships that were somewhat behind, and in the end being all together, the
General held his course South southwest, all the Navy following him, in the
night having a Southwest wind.

The 4. of June, the General put forth 2. flags, and shot off two pieces, for a
sign to call all the Captains and Masters, to come aboard of his ship, there
to hold a Marshall assembly, which was presently performed, each of them
putting forth their boats, to board him, having as then past Heyssant about
ten miles, with a Southwest wind, running South southeast: and in the evening
having a Southeast wind, all the Navy held their course South southwest.

The 5. and 6. of June, it was calm with great clappes of thunder, sailing
then under 47. degrees.

The 7. of June, they had a West wind, whereupon the whole Navy set their
course South southwest: after that, the wind coming North, they sailed
Southwest, yet very slowly, by reason yt some of the ships were so far behind,
that they could hardly be discerned, whereupon the rest of the ships stayed for
the^: at the same time the General made an order for the division of their
meat, every 6. men to have among the^ 5. li. of bisquit for a day.

The 8. of June, still having a West wind, they held their course South
southwest: and about evening the wind falling somewhat sharp, the whole Navy
woond about: then the wind coming West again, they were constrained to abate
some of their sails.

The ninth of June, they espied the coast of Galisia, as then having a
North-west wind, holding their course South-west, and about three of the clock
in the after noone, the whole navy having turned about, and made to sea-ward,
not long after they made toward the land again: but being too low from La
Corougie, ye General caused the whole Navy to put to sea again.

The tenth of June, the Navy sailing again toward the land, they had a
South-west wind, and in the evening a Northwest wind, wherewith they sailed
west, being not far from the land.

The eleventh of June, early in the morning, the whole Navy making toward
the shore, and being under the land, perceiving themselves to be as high as the
Corougie, they set their course West South-west, the wind being East
North-east, and about noone came before the Corougie: where being come, and
staying for three of their ships that were behind, which were the ships of
Cornelis Claus. Captain Ians. and a Pinace: In the mean time they made all
the preparation they could, and about one of the clock spreading all their
sails, they put into the heaven, all together casting anchor, very near within
the shot of the town: whereupon those of the Corougie shot diverse great pieces
at the^: which dangerous ankering the navy well perceiving, and finding no
convenient place to land their men, about 5. a clock in the evening they
hoysed anchor: which the town perceiving, began to shoot more fiercely, but did
not any hurt unto the ships. The ankers being up, there fell such a calm, that
the ships were in great danger, for that the town shot upon them so
mightily, although they could not reach them, and the ships by reason of the
calm, not well to be stered, that they had much pain and labor to hold them
from the land, and the town shot so mightily, that in a short space they had
shot at the least above two hundred and thirty shot, and yet could they not
reach the ships, although it seemed impossible, for that the ships, by reason
of the calm, were driven so near under the town, that they might have shot
into them with a musket: and the Generals ship was driven so near to the
town, that Captain Rem Euarts, and brother Ianson, with their Pinnaces were
forced to go and help him: yet in the end with great danger the whole Navy got
to Sea.

The 12. of June, in the morning being somewhat distant from the land, the
ships drove before the calm.

The 13. of June, in the morning about 9. of the clock being at the cape
Finisterre, they had a Northeast wind.

The 14. of June, having a stiff Northwind, they held their course South, and
South and by East, and the wind continuing, in the evening they took in all
their sails, letting the ships drive before the wind without sails.

The 15. of June, the wind lessening, they began to hoyse sails, holding their
course Southeast, and the wind still continuing North, about 9. of the clock
in the morning, they discried cape Roxent, and therewith they made toward the
land, purposing to do some exploit upon Lisbon, but in the evening, the whole
Navy woond about, holding their course South, South-west.

The 16. of June, in the morning the wind being North, they held their course
South Southwest, and about the same time, the Admiral John Garbrants. put
forth a flagge in his stern, desiring to have certain Pinnaces, that were
under his quarter, to come on board of his ship: but none went aboard, but kept
with the whole fleet to Leeward.

The 17. of June, having a West wind, they set their course South Southwest,
and about evening they perceived among their fleet a strange ship, and a bark
with three bases, whereupon presently the General commanded 4. of the best
ships of sail in the whole Navy to make chase after them: which ships having
taken the^, brought them before the General, who having spoken with them, in
the end they departed friendly from each other, for it was an Englishma^. About
that time Captain Caters ship lost the fleet, by reason that the fleet in
the night time changed their course, and woond about.

The 18. of June, the Navy driving before a calm, the General put forth his
accustomed token, to call all the captains and masters aboard his ship, there
to consult with him.

The 19. of June, still having a calm, with a South-winde, order was taken by
the General, for the landing of certain men, whenever they approached any
coast.

The 20. of June they had a calm, and held their course South South-west.

The 21. and 22. of June, having a good swift forewind, they held their course
South South-west, at which time the General caused the whole Navy to be
advertised, that every man should behave and rule himself, according to the
Articles in that case provided, and especially following the 41. and 42.
Articles, the contents whereof do follow.

NOTA.
Whosoever without special cause, and that first made known unto his officers,
shall break out of his array, where he shall be appointed to abide, or that
shall seem to fly out of any battle or enterprise, whether it be before a
town or otherwise, he shall and may presently be slain or stabbed by any man
whatsoever; and being taken and imprisoned, shall be proclaimed traitor, and in
that case punished with death, without any favor.

Any man being placed and set to defend any fort, sconse, or trench, whether
he be captain or soldier, either by water or by land, shall defend and
keep the same, to the last extremity, both with words and works, not doing
any thing to the contrary, whereby the same should be lost without extremity,
upon pain of death, without favor or exception.

No man must give himself to take any spoil, without charge or commission,
upon pain of death.

Hereunto adding, that no man should venture or be so bold to defile or
deflowre any maid or woman whatsoever, upon pain of death.

It was likewise commanded by the General, that no man should kill or murder
any woman or children, (unless they were found in arms to resist) upon pain
of death.

Also it was determined by the General, and the rest of the Captains, the
better to encourage the soldiers, as also for other causes and respects, that
what prisoner soever should be taken, able to pay a good ransom, the tenth
part of the said ransom should be given to the sailors and soldiers, the
rest to him that took him prisoner.

Also that when they determined to assail the first Castle or fort, they
should cause a pike with a fane to be set up upon the land, and as long as the
fane stirred with the wind, they should cease from shooting out of the ships
against the fort or Castle.

The like token should be set up before a town, when they would not shoot any
more against it.



The 23. of June, having a good fore-wind out of the North, they held their
course South South-west, sending out a pinnace to seek for land, for that as
then they were of opinion not to be far from it, which pinnace about evening
returned back again.

The 24. of June, still having a North wind, they held their course South
south-west, and the sun being South-east, they sent out three pinnaces to
discrie la^d, at which time the Vice Admiral of the red flag put forth another
flagge, desiring certain captains to come board his ship, whereof some
boarded him, and about six of the clock in the evening they discried la^d,
whereunto they made, holding their course East southeast.

The 25. of June, in the morning very early, they were under Lanserottes, and
then held their course South South-west and by West, and in the evening
discryed the Island of great Canaria, keeping the whole night under the Island.

The 26. of June, in the morning very early being close under the Island, they
made to the shore, mean time making preparation to land their men in small
boats, approaching near unto the Castle, yet without danger of their shot,
they of the castle began to shoot, but the Hollanders esteemed not thereof, but
to the contrary went so close unto the Castle, that they might reach it with a
musket.

Under the Castle there lay three Spanish ships, whereof the greatest was by
the Hollanders shot under water and sunk.

The Castle shot hard against the Hollanders, and the ships in like sort
against the Castle, especially out of the Generals ship, as also out of many of
the other ships, in such sort, that the Island seemed to be compassed about
with fire: during the which shooting, the soldiers were put into small
boats, and so rowed to land.

The Spaniards upon the downs near the shore, had certain bases, wherewith
they shot hard upon the Hollanders boats, at their entering upon the land, but
the Hollanders stayed with their boats, being ready to land: for it was so
appointed, that not any man should seem to set foot on land, but must stay
hard by the General: also that not any of them should spread any colors,
before he should be landed, and yet they must not do it, before the General
should be on shore, who only had an ensign in his Pinnace. Those of Zealand
and North-Holland were appointed to land toward the Town, and those of
Amsterdam, and of the Maze, toward the Castle, and all at one time. The Castle
perceiving so many boats manned, began to shoot slowly, for that the
Captain of the Castle made his soldiers believe, that they had not above
half a barrel of powder left, whereupon they left off shooting: whereat the
Spaniards that lay in the downs, began to fly, and then all the boats that
lay ready manned, rowed to land.

First the Generalles boat: which being close by the shore, the Spaniards
perceiving, to (let him from landing) skipped into the water up to the chin,
against the Generals boat, and fought so boldly with the Hollanders, that the
General himself standing valiantly in the boat fighting, and ready to leap
on the shore, was in the end forced to return, and the Spaniards made so hot
an assault, that a Captain standing by the General, was thrust into the arm,
but diverse of the Spaniards were shot, so that in the end not many remained to
make resistance.

With that the General valiantly leaped into the water up to the middle: and
after him followed Albert Iansen Cox ensign, who having spread his colors, all
the rest of the boats rowed to land, having given a great vale of shot
against the Castle. The soldiers being landed, and standing in order of
battle, being about four thousand men, the General caused Dammas Verloo,
one that could speak good Spanish, to ask them of the Castle, if they would
yield it up: and having parled for the space of an hour, in the mean time
the General set up a vane upon a pike, to warn the ships not to shoot
against the Castle; which shooting presently ceased: and being in parle, in the
end they of the Castle agreed to deliver it up, upon condition, that the
Spaniards should depart without any arms, which was presently done. In the
which Castle the General placed Captain John Allerts. of Amsterdam, who
entering into it, found therein fifteen great brass pieces, and six Iron
pieces, well provided with powder and munition, being so strong, that in a
manner it was impregnable: the walks being at the least thirty foot thick.

Captain John Allerts. with his company being placed therein, and the
Spaniards to the number of sixty persons gone out, the Hollanders soldiers
being about four thousand strong, marched toward the town: but by the way,
being come to a valley not above a quarter of a mile from the town, they
stayed all night until the morning: in the mean time diverse companies of the
soldiers marched to the town, and went so close under the walls, that they
spent the whole night in skirmishing with the enemy, specially the company of
Dammas Verloo, where he lost many of his men.

The twenty seventh of June, in the morning, their ensigns wauing in the
wind, they marched toward the town: but being within Cannon shot of the
Castle, that stood before the town, the Castle shot mightily upon the
Hollanders, and spoiled many of their men, for they could not fail one shot:
for although they could hardly see the Hollanders, yet they shot at the
ensigns: whereby the Hollanders were constrained to march somewhat aside to
shun their shot: which was easy to be done, being round about compassed with
downs: but the soldiers stayed close under the walls of the town, where
they stood out of danger of the enemies shot, for that the downs were so
great, that they might easily defend themselves from the shot.

The Hollanders in that sort keeping themselves close, the enemy supposed that
they were in mind to retire back again; so that being before fled out of
the Town, they returned into it again, (as it was certified unto the
Hollanders) to resist them, and to that end placed Ordinance upon the hill, that
lay upon the right hand of the way unto the shore, wherewith they did much hurt
unto the Hollanders, for that from the said hill they shot many of their men,
and likewise shot mightily from the Castle with diverse wooden bullets, which
did much mischief.

The General perceiving no means to win the Town, unless some great
shot were planted before it (for they from the hill shot so hard, as also
from the Castle, who for the want of Iron bullets, shot bullets of Tin and
Lead, that no good on his side could be done) used all the speed that might
be, to plant a battery, and to place Ordinance before the Town. Whereupon
sending for the great pieces that lay in the Castle that Captain John Allerts.
kept, placed as many of them as they could before the Town, not without very
great labor and pain: for that many times the pieces being drawn half way
forward, brake their carriages, whereby that day they could bring but three
pieces before the Town, whereof two were appointed to shoot toward the hill,
and therewith, (although very high to shoot up) drove the Spaniards to such a
point, that they left shooting, not daring to stand close together, as they did
before the Hollanders planted their Ordinance: and when the Hollanders were
drawing the pieces toward the town, many times shot some of their men. The
Hollanders, having shot eight times, did likewise cease; mean time preparing
their battery, in the night placing two Demie Cannons among their battery:
but in the mean time the Spaniards conuayed all their goods and treasure out
of the town, not many men remaining within it, perceiving that the Hollanders
minded to win it by force; so that they conveyed all their goods upon the
hills.

The twenty eight of June, early in the morning, the two demi Cannons being
placed in battery against the Castle, Captain Rem Euartson was appointed with
his ship to sail before the Town, and to shoot at it, and they on land
battered the Castle, with two pieces of Artillery.

Mean time there were three demi Cannons more placed in battery, which were
likewise appointed to batter the Castle, so that as then they beat it with five
pieces together.

Then they sent two companies of soldiers upon the hill, who as then had a
right path unto the town, the one being the company of Monsieur Meerkercke,
the other of Coronell Stoem, the company of Damas Verloo compassing beneath
about the foot of the hill.

In this sort the General battered the Castle with five pieces, so that in the
end the Spaniards within the Castle forsook it, and fled, after that the
Hollanders had discharged forty four times upon it: which the General
perceiving, presently sent a company of men into it, and withal set fire
upon the Town gate, thereby to make passage for the Soldiers to enter: but
while the gate burnt, the Saylors could by no means enter into the Town.

But the two companies of Soldiers that went up the hill, had a right path
unto the Town, as also the company of Damas Verloo, that compassed about the
foot of the hill: but the Saylors could not enter before the fire was ceased
and the gate emptied, for that the Spaniards had filled the gate with stones up
to the middle: but the General behaved himself so valiantly, that he caused
certain companies with lathers to scale the walls, he himself in person
entering with them: in the mean time, the three companies from the hill with
their colors displaid, marched toward the town, and entering, went into the
market place, where they stayed to see if any resistance would be made. The
fire at the gate being quenched, and the stones borne away, the troop of
Amsterdam were appointed to bring 4. demi Cannons into the town, which they
must do before that any of them should enter; which was speedily performed,
every man being very diligent to work, that they might enter into the town,
hoping to get great riches, each man thinking to do his best, but all in vain,
for the Spaniards had conuayed all their goods out of the town.

While the Demi cannons were drawing into the town, there came a Saylor being
of Flushing, out of the town, who for the space of five years had been kept
therein the holy house, who perceiving Cornelis Leinsen Admiral of the Zeala^d
ships, and for that he knew him, he fell down at his feet, calling him his
deliverer (next under God) out of prison, wherein he had remained for the space
of 5. years: which done, he was led before the General.

The company of Soldiers being entered into the Castle, they found in it 5.
great pieces of ordinance.

The ordinance being brought into the town, and the troop of Amsterdam, whose
Coronell was Cornelis Remmisen, having under him 3. companies of Saylors, being
entered, after him followed the troop of Zeala^d, with the troop of the Maze
in Holland. Whereof one part being entered, they were commanded to stay in a
plain field, until the General had appointed every man his quarter: whereby
it was very late, before the Captains entered into their quarters, where they
found the houses empty, except it were here and there some women: for the
Spaniards were all fled away with their goods.

The 29. of June, having thoroughly searched throughout the town, and not
finding any man, the General caused certain companies of Soldiers to present
themselves before the castle that stood upon the South side of the town, and
to sommon them to yield: but when they approached it, they found no man within
it. Which done, one company entered, wherein they left 20. soldiers, and in it
they found 3. great pieces of ordinance, but all stopped with nails, stones
and other such like things, to make the^ unserviceable. The rest of the
companies ree^tered the town. This castle stood about the length of a Ca^non
shot southward without the town, being very strong, for that the one side
thereof stood in the water, so that in a manner it was invincible.

But God, in whose power all conquests consist, had stricken the Spaniards
hearts with fear, for it was not won by force: for assure your selves, if
they had holden the first castle, it would have been a very dangerous way to
have passed to the town: and again the castle that stood upon the strand,
where the ships entered, could shoot crossewise one from the other, so that
not any man could have passed without great danger. God be praised for this
victory.

But to return again unto the matter, the company of soldiers being
reentered, in the evening the General sent 10. saylors of Captain Harman
Michtels. company, and 10. of Captain Rem Euarts. company their ensign, being
lieutena^t of the said captain Rem Euarts. and every night they were relieved,
for that they lay therein in great danger, because the Spaniards might easily
have hidden themselves in the vineyards, and seeing convenient time either in
the entry or issuing of the Hollanders, might have cut them off. For that (as
it is said before) the castle stood a Cannon shot from the town.

The 30. of June, there was a parle with the Spaniards touching the ransoming
of the town, or else to suffer it to be burnt: the Spaniard would give no
money, but proffered the General to furnish his whole Navy with sufficient
wine, saying that they had no money, wherewith they departed for that time, not
effecting any thing.

The 1. of July, the word of God was preached within the town of great
Canaria, in S. Annes Church, where there assembled great numbers of saylors and
soldiers, as also the General, with all his Marshal counsel and other
Captains: the preachers text being taken out of the 103. Psalm, the people
singing the 100. Psalm, thanking and praising God for the victory, all with one
consent calling upon the name of the Lord.

The 2. of July, a Marshall court was holden to punish two malefactors, whose
sentence was to be hanged.

The 3. of July, the malefactors were brought forth to execution, and being in
the market place, one of the^ had his pardon, the other was hanged: at the same
time there was a small murmuring among the common soldiers, being desirous to
chase the enemy that had fled up into the hills with their goods, yet no man
made the General acquainted therewith.

This murmuring still continuing, the General was content to permit 6.
companies to go up upon the hills, to chase the enemy, the companies being
Captain John Lambertsen Hoy, Captain Iochem Hendricks. Swarten hondt,
Captain Cornelis Claesen: the Ensign being Claes Cornelisen, the son of
Cornelis Claesen, captain Knooper, captain Quack, and the company of captain
Moye Jacques of Rotterdam, which companies upon the hill lost many of their men,
most dying by reason of the great heat, some of them went aside to win some
pray, but before they could be relieved, many of them were slain by the enemy:
in this fury was slain captain Moye Jacques of Rotterdam.

Coronel Cornelis Remmisen, with the company of Captain Rem Euarts. and
Captain Harman Michelsen, had the reareward, but were constrained to retire
back with loss of many of their men, being sent forth in the hotest time of
the day, and about evening returned back again, without doing any exploite.

The 4. of July, the Holla^ders with their colors displaied issued out of the
town, who by the Generals commandment set it on fire in diverse places, taking
with the^ all the great shot, bells, and whatsoever the Spaniards had left behind
them, but great shot was the best prize that was found within Canaria: for they
found in the Island of Canaria 19. brass, and 6. iron pieces, which were all
lade^ aboard the ships, without any hurt, or misfortune to any man.

The 6. of July, the General put forth two flags, for a sign that all the
Captains, and Masters should go aboard his ship, that he might consult with
them.

Where it was ordained, that each Captain either of Soldiers or Sailers,
should bring forth all the prizes, that they had gotten in the Island of great
Canaria, and that upon their oath.

And that the same goods whether it were victuals, drink, or any other thing,
should by the Pursers of every ship, together with an officer of the Soldiers,
and one of the Sailors, be registered, and by them openly sold, always provided
that no Soldier should bestow more then the value of one months pay, unless
the Captain gave his word, or bought it with ready money.

That the victuals and drink should not be sold, but only registered; and
whosoever should be found, to have concealed any thing, should be punished
according to the contents of the article in that case provided; and further, to
be dismissed of his part of the prizes taken, as also that should be taken
during the whole viage.

Each Provost, or any other person, that should have intelligence of any such
concealed goods, or that could name any man that had concealed any thing, the
said Provost, or other person, should have the one half thereof, the other
half to be kept, for the use and commodity of wounded men in that viage,
whether they be Soldiers or Sailors.

Each Purser should keep a perfect register of all the goods found within
their ships, how much they were sold for, which they should deliver unto the
principal Secretary, to the end that the moneys proceeding thereof, might be
justly and truly employed to the use and benefit of the whole army. It was to
be understood, that all the goods sold at that time, should be brought forth,
and that the buiers thereof should seek their warrants of the sellers.

The great shot found in the first Castle.
li. dz. One brass piece, waighing 6833. 17. one brass piece waighing 4254.
17. one piece 4142. 17. one brass piece w. 6961. 17. one brass piece w. 2162.
6. one brass piece w. 4500. 38. one brass piece w. 2115. 6. one brass piece
w. 4450. 17. one brass piece waighing 4780. 40. More, as they entered, they
found upon the strand one field piece waighing about 2100. pound, with 2.
basses of brass. all 40197. li. Great shot found in the second Castle on the
North side of the Town.
li. One brass piece waighing 6772 one brass piece w. 1800 one brass piece
w. 4254 one brass piece w. 3506 one brass piece w. 1680 Found upon a hill a
field piece and two basses of brass 1400 17412 Great shot found in the castle
on the Southside of the Town.
li. One brass piece waighing 6068 one brass piece w. 4653 one brass piece
w. 1377 and some bullets. 12098

Also all the belles, which they took with them.

They likewise sunk a ship lying before the first castle, that lay to be laden
for the west Indies: there was also an other Spanish bark, which they took
with them, and of all the great shot taken in Canaria, one piece was sunk, and
by captain Banks means, there was an other brass piece left on shore.

There was other goods brought aboard the ship (which by the Generals
commandment) was sold before the mast of every ship. They had in the town
140. pipes of wine, and a great number of pottes of oil. The men they lost in
Canaria were 1440. dead, and 60. wounded.

The 6. of July, the General commanded captain Ruyts ship of Rotterdam to be
vnrigged, because it had a great leake, and was wholly unserviceable, which
being on land was burnt, and in stead thereof rigged a bark by them taken in
Canaria, wherein captain Ruyt put his men, and was one of them that was
appointed for the longer viage.

The 7. of July, lying still before Canaria, the townes-men came forth with a
flagge of peace, desiring to redeem some of the prisoners, for the enemy had
taken 4. of the Hollanders, who upon the 3. of July were left upon the hill,
sick and wholly unable to travel: and it appears that one of those 4.
prisoners came from a Spaniard that had his son prisoner in the ship called
the Orange, wherein the General himself sailed, being one of them that went
out of the castle. But upon deliberation taken, answer was made them, that
they should return again the next day.

The 8. of July, very early they came again unto the General, showing him
that the principal of the town had taken their prisoners from them, as it was
true. For the Spaniards would not agree to any ransom.

Then the Spaniards that were prisoners, being about 60. persons, were divided
into diverse ships: which done, the Navy put to sea, from the North end of the
Island of Canaria, with a Northeast wind, and in the evening cast anchor again
under the South end of the Island.

The 9. of July, being yet under the South end of the Island of Canaria, many
of their me^ bestowed their time in lading of fresh water, and whersoeuer they
went on shore, burnt al before them. The same day the General made a sign,
that all the Pursers should go aboard his ship, there to deliver the Registers
of the goods that were sold, which they delivered unto Wieringhen the Generals
Secretary.

The 10. of July, they set sail from off the South end of great Canaria,
having calm weather, and variable air, but in the evening they had a stiff
wind out of the Northeast, wherewith they held their course West Southwest, and
by night the wind being high, they were constrained to take in their
Marssailes, and to run Northwest, holding their course to Teneriffa, minding
to do some exploite upon Geracico, but not long after, they altered their
minds.

The 11. and 12. of July, having strange and hard weather, they used all the
means they could to get to Gommera, the wind being as then North Northeast,
with foul weather.

The 13. of July, having calm weather, they yet sought to get under Gommera,
which they did, about 12. of the clock at noone: with that the General put
forth his accustomed token, to call all the Captains and Masters aboard his
ship, where it was agreed to send three companies of soldiers into a creek,
there to take land, which was about half a mile from the town, which
companies should march over the hills, and they in the mean time with the
whole Navy would use all the diligence they could to get before the town,
which they did: the companies being gone, the Navy made toward the town,
where being come, they prepared themselves to land the soldiers, which with
great diligence was done.

Now lying at ancker before the town, presently the soldiers and sailors were
put into the small boats, attending a sign from the General.

Then the General putting forth his colors, all together at one instant they
rowed to shore, which was done with great expedition, they of the town not
once making any resista^ce: but as they of Canaria did flee up into ye
mou^tains, not leaving any thing behind them, and whatsoever they could not
carry, they hid it so well that it could hardly be found.

The companies of soldiers and sailors being on land, and Sentinels placed,
the 3. companies that were sent over the hills came unto them, who had sent
20. musketeers out of each company, (to see if the Spaniards would make any
resistance) who descending down the hill, perceived certain Asses laden by
the Spaniards, which they made after, thinking to get a good prize, and to be
the lighter left all their muskets: which the Spaniards that lay hidden in the
vineyards perceiving, left their ambustadoes, and coming forth slew them all:
in this overthrow there were 58. slain, who being dead the Spaniards stripped
off all their clothes, and went away with the pray. In the mean time the three
companies having lost 60. or at the least 58 men, entered into the town.

The 14. of July, by great labor and pains taken in digging, the Hollanders
found 8. pipes of wine within the ground, which were presently laden in the
Captains ships that were appointed for the longer viage, the pipe valued at 7.
pound Flemish: mean time many of the sailors brought fresh water aboard, the
better to be provided in their viage.

The 15. of July, being yet busied to lade water and other balast, they found
two Demi cannons, which the Spaniards had buried in the earth.

The 16. of July, in the morning, the General put forth his accustomed tokens,
to call the Captains and Masters aboard his ship, where it was agreed, that
the ships appointed for the longer viage, should be provided as need required,
and that they should take out of the ships appointed to return again into
Holland, as much victuals as the said ships could well spare: which was done,
and presently thereupon laded all the wheat and rye out of the one ships into
the others, against they should have need to bake it, for the preservation of
their lives, if the viage happened to be long.

It was also concluded, that all the companies of soldiers should march up
the hills, to chase the enemy: mean time the sailors should stay within the
town.

So upon the 17. of July, in the morning about 2. hours before day, with a
still drum they marched up, having very cold and fine weather, but returned
again the same day, not doing any exployt: which done, the sailors were sent
on board the ships.

The 18. of July, using great diligence in digging, they found another demi
cannon and two belles.

The 19. of July, all the soldiers being shipped, the General gave
commandment to set the town on fire: and at that present the soldiers
were divided and placed in the ships that should go the longer viage.

The 20. of July, the General put forth his accustomed signs, to call all
the Captains and masters aboard his ship, where the ships that should go
the longer viage, were appointed, separated, and made ready to set sail.

The 21. of July, all the Navy put to sail from Gommera, having the wind
North-weast, and being somewhat off from the land, departed from each other,
the ships for the long viage being in all 34.

The ships appointed to return to Holland, used all the means they could to
pass between Teneriffa and Gommera, being in number 37. ships great and
small: but perceiving it to be impossible to pass between the Islandes, for
that being there it blue so stiff, that they could hardly bear any sail:
they strove to pass between Palma and Gommera, which they likewise could not
pass, so that the 22.23. and 24. days of July, they kept thereabouts: at that
time the Admiral John Garbrits. the Vice Admiral Logier Petersen, and the
scout Cornelis Clausen, with most of the company, separated themselves from
the rest of the ships.

The 25. of July, holding their course South and by west, they were under 21.
degrees.

The 26. of July, they held their course South and by west, with little wind,
the wind being North-east and by east, with a good pleasing gale.

The 27. of July, the allowance of bread among the soldiers was abated,
because they supposed the viage would be longer then it fell out.

The 28.29. and 30. of July, their course being South-west, and by West, the
wind North-west, the Captains and Masters went all aboard the Generals ship,
which days they mist the ships of Brother Iansen, because it had sailed
forward, and the rest of the ships changed their course: and the same day
likewise, they discryed the Island of Saint Nicholas, being from them
South-west and by west.

The 31. of July in the morning, they were right under the Island, and had
almost sailed round about it, because they could find no anchor ground, so that
they let their boats sail close under the Island to seek a road, where
they found two roades, wherein all the ships might lie, about a Coluerin shot
distant from the land, and twelve fadome water, and there stood three houses.

The first of August, they discryed the Island of Saint Luce, distant from them
West north-west: all that day they stayed by the Island of Saint Nicholas, and
with their Pinnaces went on land, to see if they might find fresh water for
their Navy, but they found not any. There they saw very great Torteauxes,
whereof they took one that weighed almost three hundred pound. The same day
all the Captains and Masters met on board the General, to take counsel
whether they should sail to get fresh water: at last it was concluded to sail
to Isola de Maio, where certain of their shalops went on land for fresh water:
but by reason of the unseasonable heat of the ground, they lost seventeen
men, and certain of their shalops ouerturned.

The second of August, they held their course South-east and by east, with a
calm all the day long.

The third of August in the morning, they discryed the Island of Saint James:
and the same day they took a Torteaux, having at the least five hundred eggs
in her belly, a hundred and fifty of them having shelles, the rest without
shelles, as hens use to have in their bodies, being very great, as big as a
ball of a stiuer; with the which eggs they made tanseyes, which tasted very
well: of the flesh of the Torteaux, they made hodge-podge, and it tasted like
bacon. The eggs that were shelled, had shelles like winde-egges, wherewith
they played at tennis aboard the ships, which rebounded like a tennis ball, and
you must strike very hard with them before they would break.

The fourth of August in the morning they made toward the land, and about
noone ankered under the Island de Maio, where General went on shore, and there
stayed till the next day at noone.

The fifth of August, there came a ship unto them, that had been under five
degrees Northward of the Equinoctial line, to sail to Brasilia, and was
constrained, having a leake, to put to the shore with them, being a Venetian.
The Captains name was Antonie Bolorio; the ship was laden at Calis Malis,
with wine, oil, and other goods: which ship and goods he avouched to be
his, but it was found to be contrary, for that the Merchant being a
Spaniard, was there present, meaning to sell their wares at Brasilia, so that
both the goods and Merchant were found good prize; and the Captain with his
ship and thirty Pipes of wine for his necessary provision, let depart,
because he was a Venetian, balasing his ship with certain pipes of
salt water.

The same day they sent out a Pinnace, with a man of war, being of Zealand,
to chase a ship that they espied: which ship being taken, was found to be
a Portingall, laden in Porta Port, with wine, oil, linnen-cloath, Silks and
Veluets, which amounted unto (as the Captain of the said ship testified
unto them) 20000 ducats.

The tenth of August, they put to sea again, to meet the Portingall with
their two ships that went to chase him, for that the prize was so evil of
sail, that it could not make to them, but by night both she and their two
ships came among the fleet: and at that time also brother Iansens ship,
which had been missing thirteen days, came likewise to the fleet.

The 11. of August, they returned again unto the rode, from whence the day
before they had departed, where they began to unlade their prize, which by
their Marshal court was found lawful; the ship and goods both being forfeit:
the ship had in it eight Iron pieces.

The 12. of August, there boorded the^ four men out of the Island de Maio,
showing them that in the Island there dwelt no more but four Moors, and five
white men: in the Island were very fair horses, that ran about the country,
and great hens, that went as fast as a dog, and being weary with going, flew
away: they are commonly taken by night in the trees, and thousands of goats.

The 15. of August, the black dog, and Albert Ians. returned again unto them
as they lay at anchor, bringing with them two Spanish barks, each having three
bases in them, the one unladen, wherein they put diverse prisoners, and let them
sail to Saint Jacobs: the other was laden with cotton wool, and came from
Civil: they brought likewise a ship of Marsellis, of 100. tons, laden with
wine and oil.

The same day there came unto them two Netherland ships, which set sail out of
the Weelings, having been five weeks and a half upon their viage, they
brought them news that the enemy was gone to lie three miles from Bommel, and
that being under Goutstrat, they spoke with three of the ships that went for
the East Indies, and with them was a pinnace, all being of Amsterdam, very
richly Iaden: the two Netherland ships were sailing to the west Indies for salt.

The same day they put to sail, and departed from the Island de Maio, holding
their course South South-east: the wind Northeast, with a good gale of wind.
The same night the bark taken by the black dog, lost both her maine mast,
and her forke mast.

The 21. of August, holding their course South-east, with a good gale of wind,
in the night time they lost one of their Pursers, he was sick, but no man knew
what was become of him.

The 31. of August, in the morning, they fell close upon the land of Gommera,
by a high piece of ground reaching into the sea, which is called Cape de Monta,
where they ankered, about three small miles from the land, at sixteen fadome
water, where, upon the one side of the ship they found the water to be fresh,
and on the other side salt, and East and by south from them, they saw a great
river, all the coast of the land being full of trees; the river was called Rio
Noua.

The 1. of September, they fetched fresh water out of the river.

The fifth of September, the General entered into a River, called Rio de
Puntes, where they found about thirty wild men, most of them naked, and
amongst them was their kings son, who stayed alone with them in the
Generalles pinnace for the space of an hour: he brought them a tin vessel
full of sodden rice, with two sodden hens, and the General gave him a pot
of twelve gallons of wine, and a box of Marmalade.

The 6. of September, they put to sea, and that day eight Cannoes of wild men
made toward their ships, some with three, and some with four men in a Cannoe,
whereof some boorded their ships: they held their course that day South
south-east.

The tenth of September in the morning, they discryed the Cape de los Palmos.

The 11. of September, to the 19. they drove upon the sea with calm weather:
in the which time all the Captains and masters consulted with the General,
about the landing of the Island of Saint Thomas, with 1400. men.

The 22. of September in the morning, they discried the Island of S. Thomas,
being South and by west from them.

The 23. of September, they held their course Eastward, not to be discovered by
those of the Island, being of opinion, that they could not enter into the
road: so that after noone, they sailed by the shore (determining to la^d) to
the Cape de Loupes Gonsalues, and so to come again on the South side of Saint
Thomas, for that the road was on the South side, but they could hardly sail
from the North side, because of the calmness under the land.

The 24. of September, they discryed the land called Isola de Prince, distant
Northeast.

The 25. of September, the air being very thick and dark, as if some great
tempest would have followed, as the air uses to be so dark about the line,
which never could be found otherwise by any sayler: but where they perceive a
dark cloud in the air, presently they take in all their sails, for that
there comes a sudden and terrible blast of wind, thundering and lightning,
which continues for the space of 2. or 3. hours, and by sailors is called
Trauades: which gone, it is presently fair weather again: but God be thanked,
they had all fair weather, not having any Trauades all the way unto the Cape.

The 27. of September, all the Captains went aboard the Admiral, who gave
the^ their charge to follow him, if the next day they might land in the Island
of Saint Thomas.

The 30. of September, all the Captains were again called aboard the
Admiral, to appoint good order to be holden being on land: half that day they
sailed before the wind, that they might reach the slowest ships, and the same
day there was such a number of fishes about the Admirals ship, that no man
could number them, whereby they took them in with baskets, being as big as
Smelts, and after them followed 2. or 3. hundred great fishes to devour them:
whereby there rose such a noise in the water, as if it had been a tempest: yet
was the weather very fair and calm: but there ordinarily the sea is full of
fish. One of the sailors had hanged a pair of breeches ouer-boord for the
space of an hour, and when he drew them up again, he found in them at the
least 700. fishes. The same day as diverse boats lay on board the Admiral, one
of them had the rother broken off by a fish, and diverse of the fishes leapt
into the boats.

The first of October at noone, they were about a mile from the land, that is,
three miles, sailing from the Cape of Loupes Gonsalues.

The third of October they sailed with a good gale of wind.

The fifth of October in the morning, they set sail, and by night lay under the
land. The same day they let a prize drive upon the sea, having set it on fire,
but first vnlade^ al her goods.

The sixth of October they sailed with a South Wind.

The tenth of October they ankered under the land, hard by the Cape, where they
found a ship of Amsterdam, being the ship which they before had discried.

The same day the Admiral sent his pinnace to a river about four miles from
the Cape de Loupes Gonsalues, for fresh water, where they sailed about four
miles up into the River: whereon there stood a great village, which with their
pinnace they could not approach, by reason that the trees stood so thick upon
the shore: and as the Pinnace sailed forward, great numbers of Monkies leaped
in, and about it; at the last they shot off a musket, whereupon presently
there came diverse wild men in Cannoes of six foot long that brought them
(having a little Iron and linen cloth which they had taken with them, to
provide some fruit, eggs, and flesh for the Admiral) to the village, where
they found a company of wild men standing with their Captain, the Captain
having a rustie sword upon his shoulder, with an old cappe upon his head,
which brought them presently into the village, and to their kings house, whom
they found sitting making money of mother of Pearl: which money (as they said)
he only used when he meant to buy himself a wife of his enemy, and no man
might make such money but he.

The Hollanders being there, the King presently laid down his tools, and
sat still in his seat very stoutly, after their manner, having a long beard
with diverse rings, painted about his arms, and about his eyes of diverse
colors, with a hatte upon his head, being all stuck round about with great
pinnes, in manner of a crown, in such sort, that at the first the Hollanders
were abashed, for that he seemed like a devil: behind him sat two of his
wives, the one all black, the other all red painted, and were naked, only that
they had certain clothes about their priuities.

Now the Hollanders standing before the King, the King spoke five words one
before the other: which words both they, and all the wild men that were
present, must speak after him: but the Hollanders understood not what they
meant: and when the words were ended, they all together clapped their hands;
whereupon the Hollanders had free liberty to go into the village to bartle
and buy what they would.

They brought some of the Hollanders into their Temple, where they perceived a
very old black lean man, with a gray beard, sitting as still as if he had
been dead, at whose feet the wild men fell down, for they held him for a
great Prophet: it is to be supposed that he was a south-sayer, and that he
dealt with the devil, for there they knew not what God is: when it lighteneth
and thu^dereth, as there it does very sore and often, then they pray unto their
Prophet that it may cease: for their opinion is, that as then the devil
tempts them, and that he is supposed to be a South-sayer: the reason was,
for that one of the Hollanders had lost a piece of linen, about ten else
long, which some of the wild men had stolen from him, and there was one of the
wild men that could speak Portingall, that as the Hollanders were going out of
the village, showed them thereof, and went and showed the Captain: whereupon
the Captain went presently back again into the village, and to the temple,
where he understood who had stolen it, so that he brought the piece of linen
to them again.

In the village you shall not find any handi-crafts men, but only two
Smithes, which made nothing else, but heads for pikes and darts, for there the
wild men make great wars against their neighbors: every seven or eight
miles they have a king, by the parting of certain rivers within the land.

The women of this village seem to be very desirous of the company of white
men, as it appeared at the Hollanders departure from them, by a Gentelman,
called Lanscroen, who being compassed about by many of the women, every one
sought to have their will of him: but he not being willing thereunto, got away
from them.

The 17. of October in the morning, they saw the Island of S. Thomas being
Northwest from them, all that day with little sail, holding Northwest, they
compassed about, the better to know the land.

The 19. of October in the morning, being arrived in the road of S. Thomas,
presently the General landed, with all their soldiers, and at their landing
found no resistance: and so marching orderly toward the town, they met a
company of men coming from the town, who for the space of an hour shot at
them, but the Hollanders lost not above 2. or 3. men: which done, they marched
forward, and they of the town fled into the mountains, so that the Hollanders
were presently masters of the town, and at their pleasures laded the goods
which they found there, into their ships.

The same day, Ellert de Ionghe, Captain of the artillery for the viage, in
the name of Grave Maurice, the states of Holland, and the General, summoned the
castle to yield, their lives saved, but they refused the condition: whereupon
the said Ellert was by the said General sent again, to will them to yield up
the castle upon the aforesaid conditions, or if they refused, and would stay
the pla^ting of ordinance (which was ready) before it, that then they should
expect nothing but death. Which they again denied: saying, that they had taken
an oath unto the King, so that they could not so lightly yield up such a castle.

The same night the battery was prepared, and by day two pieces of ordinance
were planted, which they of the castle perceiving, in the morning put forth an
Ensign of peace, desiring that two of their men might speak with the General
to agree with him about the delivery of the castle, which was granted them,
each party meeting: mean time the Hollanders placed seven pieces to batter it.

The 21. of October. in the morning, by agreement made, the castle was yielded
up, the men that were in it being prisoners, upon condition that they should be
ransomed, every man according to his ability.

The 22. of October, 200. men being sent to the second castle about an hours
going from the town, on the North side, they within the castle being afraid,
fled and forsook it, wherein they found three brass pieces, which castle they
presently manned, and at their departure threw it down.

The 23. of October. the captain of the Artillery and captain Lo, were
appointed to march into the Island, who riding upon two horses sent them by the
enemy, presently set forward, for it was the enemies desire, and in their
places two of the enemy remained as pledges: and being in the land they found a
troop of about 600. men all naked, with pieces on their shoulders, except
about 40. Portingales that were among them, who notwithstanding showed to be
very weak of complexion. In this Island are many slaves, some of the
Portingales have 150. and he is but a mean man, that has not at the least 3.
or 400. slaves.

The same day they departed, and it was on both sides agreed, that the next day
they should meet again.

The 24. of October, the said captains went again into the Island, having
advertised the General what they had done, and within 3. hours after
returning again to make report unto the General of their proceedings, they
found him dead: for that when they spoke with him before, his sickness was no
other but a kind of weakness, which had continued two days, yet did he not
leave walking and standing: whereupon he caused himself to be let blood in
the arm, which being done, and feeling himself very weak, said unto those
that were present by him, This sickness takes me very sore: and so laid him
down in his clothes upon his bed, where he had not layne long, but presently
being stricken with death, without uttering any words he died. The same evening,
certain of the Captains put him in a coffin, and gave it out, that the
Generals body should be thrown into the Sea, because it should not be known
by the enemy where they meant to bury him: whereupon he was presently conveyed
into a boat, and so rowed from the land, and about midnight brought again to
land: where being arrived, without any noise they buried him in a house within
the town of S. Thomas, which house after that, with all the houses about it
was burnt to ashes.

Touching the ransoming of the castles, the town and Churches were not
comprehended therein, for that their highest offer was not above 10. thousand
Ducats.

The 25. of October, they made a trench within the town.

The 27. of October. the pieces appointed for battery being brought thither,
presently they lodged their me^ in the trench.

The 28. of October, in the evening the Spaniards set the town on fire in
three places.

The 3. of November, the Hollanders issued out of the town only to set the
country on fire.

The 4. of November, they shipped their men, and set all the town on fire.

The great ordinance that they found in the first castle were 21. brass pieces
great and small.

First, two Double cannons, each waighing 10000. pound, their bullet being 57.
pound.

Ten brass pieces waighing one with the other 3300. li.

Nine basses of brass being most of them red copper.

There was likewise 3. basses of brass, and certain iron pieces found in the
town.

The goods in the town were certain thousand chests of sugar, and a great
number of very great Elephants teeth, very much wool and silks, with other
wares, and many other things, with all the belles.

Also in the road they found 2. ships full laden with sugar, each of them being
of 180. tons: in one of the ships there was a broken piece of ordinance of
10000. li. weight, red copper, which they meant to have molten in Lisbon.

The 5. of October, they set sail, all the prisoners of the castle being
ransomed, only the Governor of the Island, and him they took with the^:
which done, they made toward the cape de Loupes Gonsalues.

The 7. of October. captain Cloyer died, being Vice Admiral.

The description of the Island of S. Thomas.
THe Island of S. Thomas, is an Island lying right under the Equinoctial line,
almost round, and in compass 15. Dutch miles. In the middle of this Island
stands a great hill, compassed about with many trees, above, and between the
which trees there is continually a dropping clowd, which yields so much
water, that it makes all the land about to continue moist, and very apt to
bring forth sugar, by which means the whole Island abou^deth so much in
sugar: the Island is most inhabited by Moors that gather and dress the sugar:
in it there is but one small town called Poroasan. The air is very
unwholesome, whereby such strangers or their issues, as dwell or come thither,
commonly every 8. days are troubled with an ague, and lose many of their men.
In it there grows not any corn, nor wine: the principal meat of the
inhabitants is a root called Ignamo, their drink being water or wine of Palm
trees: in this Island are many trees, but few that bear fruit, they have many
birds of diverse colors, and some strange beasts, as muskcats, and in the sea
an innumerable number of Whales.



The 8. of October, brother Iansen was chosen Vice Admiral.

The 29. of October, in the morning, an assembly was made in the fleet, and it
was determined among them, presently to sail homeward, for that in the space
of two days, that they had sailed from S. Thomas, there died in their ships
about 1032. or 33. men, and had above 1000. more sick, in such manner, that
they could hardly rule their ships, being as then one degree Southward from the
line, and from S. Thomas Westward 180. miles, holding their course Northwest.

The 30. of October, they drove with a calm upon the Sea: then the Captains
of the ships agreed, that 6. of their ships should sail toward Brasilia, to
see if they could fetch any ships from thence: the ships appointed were
captain Broer of Memelike, Admiral, captain Leefhebber of the Maze, captain
Cat of Horn, captain Heart of the Maze, captain Albert John Coxe, captain
Andreas of the Maze, the Pinnace of Peter Verdoes of the Maze, which ships the
same day departed.

The 7. of Noue^ber, the fleet not being able to pass by the salt Islands,
because they lay too far Northward from them, they were constrained to sail
almost to the Flemish Islands, having as then the sun at 13. degrees.

The same evening, as some of them sat eating in their ship, the captain asked
if they should have any fresh fish that night? answer was made, no: but
presently God sent them a flying fish aboard, and fell close by them as they
sat at meat, being as great as a common Haddock: and because God sent them the
fish so miraculously, therefore they commanded the cook presently to broyle
it: and before it was washed and made clean, God sent them an other, which fell
against a stool as they sat at the table.

The 16. of November, the captains assembled, the ships bearing to Leeward.

The 20. of November, in the morning betimes they discovered a strange ship,
but could not overtake it, being the first sail that they had seen in their
return homeward, the weather being still and clear.

The 20. of November, they held to Leeward, to stay for 11. of their ships,
thinking they were behind, but could not hear any news of them.

The 23. of November, in the morning, being 25. ships together, the wind
began to rise high and higher.

The 24. of November in the morning, they were but four ships in company.

The five and twentieth day of November, they sailed before the wind, after
three ships that lay to Leeward from them, being of their own company.

The 31. of December, they were 5. ships in company.

The first of February, the ship wherein captain Ellert de Ionghe was, found
it self alone without company, and so continewed til the 6. of February, when
it found an Englishma^ that had taken a bark, wherein they were, for that
their own ship was suncke, which Englishman for the space of six days
before, had had no drink, so that the Hollander gave them both water and wine.

The tenth day the ship drove in great danger to be lost, if God had not helped
it.

The 14. of February, there came to Plimmouth the ship called the Golden
Lion, wherein died III. men. Eight days after, the Orange tree, being the
Generals ship, arrived there, having cast 120. of 150. men ouerboord that died
in her, and in the ship were but 6. sound men, the rest sick.

Being in England, the Lion and the Orange tree took in fresh men.

The 1. of March, the ship that was left alone, went to sea, and the 9. of the
same month it arrived in the Tassell. And all the ships that came in either
before or after it, had but few men, and were in great danger.

Touching the great death of men that happened among them, was partly that
there is a great heat, and an unwholesome air in the Island of Saint Thomas,
because it lies right under the Equinoctial line, so that many of their men
died of burning feauers, through the heat of the sun, which bred great pain
in their heads, so that in three or four days they were alive and dead, which
is there called la Madorre: for by experience they found in one that died
suddenly, that all the fat in his belly and guts was wholly molten, and lay at
the bottom of his belly like water: this cutting of him up was done, because
diverse of their men complained of a pain in their bellies: some of them going
and standing, without any sickness to be perceived in them, fell out of their
wits, so that four men had sufficient to do to hold them until they died*
this madness proceeded from the heat of the sun, that caused the brains in
their heads to stir or move.

Many died with eating too much of the black sugar, and of the great
Palm Tree nuts, which have much sweet liquor within them, wherewith they
drunk themselves giddie, and thereby got a looseness in their bodies, as also
by the black sugar, whereof presently insued the bloody flix, so that many
died of that disease.

Many also spoiled themselves by lying naked upon the hatches in the night time
when the Moon shined (to cool themselves) which thereabouts yeldeth a
venomous unwholesome air, specially when men sleep.

Some used the company of the black women, and thereby many of them lost
their lives: the women being so hot of nature, that they are wholly contrary
to the nature of white men, and not to be esteemed as natural heat: let an
inhabitant therein dwelling have to do, or accompany with one of their women,
(although she be a white woman) and the next day let himself blood, he dies
without fail, although he were a King.

Many also died of looseness in their bodies, which commonly happens by long
viages, specially, when they were half seas over, under 45. and 46. degrees:
for then it was cold, such as were sick, not being able to endure it: for there
they had a side wind for the space of five weeks, in the which time many of
their men died, so that they think in all, that there died about a thousand
eight hundred men, of looseness in their bodies, when they were in the height
aforesaid, being upon the sixth of January 1600.

It is not to be maruailed at, that they lost many men by the sicknesses
aforesaid (seeing the Portingals themselves do the like, being men of hotter
conplections then we are, and borne under a warmer climate) and by that means
have lost many me^, as Americus Vespucius himself witnesses, who not only
writes of the unwholesome air of this Island, but also says that it is
strange, that a man of Europa should be found in that place with gray hairs,
or being above fifty years of age. The Portingales are of opinion, that this
sickness among men of Europa, comes, because they use to drink often to
cool their bodies, and without eating, and specially because there is little
wind, whereby the air is more infected.

FINIS.

