THE NEW INN OR, The light Heart.

A COMOEDY. As it was never acted, but most negligently played, by some, the
Kings Servants. And more squeamishly beheld, and censured by others, the Kings
Subjects. 1629.

Now, at last, set at liberty to the Readers, his Maties Servants, and
Subjects, to be judged. 1631.

By the Author, B. Ionson. Hor..... me lectori credere mallem:
Quam spectatoris fastidia far superbi.


LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Alchorne, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Church-yeard, at the sign of the green Dragon. MDCXXXI.

THE DEDICATION, TO THE READER.
IF thou be such, I make thee my Patron, and dedicate the Piece to thee: If
not so much, would I had be^e at the charge of thy better litterature.
How-so-euer, if thou can but spell, and join my sense; there is more hope of
thee, then of a hundred fastidious impertinents, who were there present the
first day, yet never made piece of their prospect the right way. What did they
come for, then? thou will it ask me. I will as punctually answer: To see, and to
be seen. To make a general muster of themselves in their clothes of credit:
and possess the Stage, against the Play. To dislike all, but mark nothing.
And by their confidence of rising between the Acts, in oblique lines, make
affidauit to the whole house, of their not understanding one Scene. Armed, with
this praeiudice, as the Stage-furniture, or Arrasclothes, they were there, as
Spectators, away. For the faces in the hangings, and they beheld alike. So I
wish, they may do ever. And do trust my self, and my Book, rather to thy
rusticke candor, than all the pomp of their pride, and solemn ignorance, to
boot. Fare thee well, and fall too. Read

BEN. IONSON.
But, first
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Lord FRAMPVL, a noble Gentleman, well educated, and bred a Scholar, in
Oxford, was married young, to a virtuous Gentlewoman, Sylly's daughter of the
South, whose worth (though he truly enjoyed) he never could rightly value;
but, as many green Husbands (given over to their extrauagant delights, and
some peccant humors of their own) occasioned in his over loving wife, so deep
a melancholy, by his leaving her in the time of her lying in, of her second
daughter, she having brought him only two daughters, Frances, and Laetitia:
and (out of her hurt fancy) interpreting that to be a cause of her husbands
couldnesse in affection, her not being blessed with a son, took a resolution
with her self, after her months time, and thanksgiving ritely in the Church,
to quit her home, with a vow never to return, till by reducing her Lord, she
could bring a wished happiness to the family.

He, in the mean time returning, and hearing of this departure of his Lady,
began, though ouer-late, to resent the injury he had done her: and out of his
cockbraind resolution, entered into as solemn a quest of her. Since when,
neither of them had been heard of. But the eldest daughter Frances, by the
title of Lady Frampul, enjoyed the state, her sister being lost young, and is
the sole relict of the family.

Act 1. Here begins our Comoedy.
This Lady, being a brave, bountiful Lady, and enjoying this free, and
plentiful estate, has an ambitious disposition to be esteemed the Mistress
of many servants, but loves none. And hearing of a famous new-Inne, that is
kept by a merry Host, called Good-stock, in Barnet, inuites some Lords, and
Gentlemen to wait on her thither, as well to see the fashions of the place, as
to make themselves merry, with the accidents on the by. It happens, there is a
melancholique Gentleman, one Master Lovel, has been lodged there some days
before in the Inn, who (unwilling to be seen) is surpised by the Lady, and
invited by Prudence, the Ladies Chambermaid, who is elected Gouernesse of the
Sports, in the Inn, for that day, and instal'd their Sovereign Lovel is
persuaded by the Host, and yields to the Ladies inuitation, which concludes the
first Act. Having revealed his quality before, to the Host.

In the second Act.
Prudence, and her Lady express their anger conceived, at the Tailor, who had
promised to make Prudence a new suite, and bring it home, as on the Eve,
against this day. But, he failing of his word, the Lady had commanded a
standard of her own best apparel to be brought down: and Prudence is so
fitted. The Lady being put in mind, that she is there alone without other
company of women, borrowes (by the advice of Pru) the Hosts son of the house,
whom they dress with the Hosts consent, like a Lady, and send out the
Coachman, with the empty Coach, as for a kinswoman of her Ladyships, Mistress
Laetitia Sylly, to bear her company: Who attended with his Nurse, an old
chare-woman in the Inn, dressed odly by the Hosts council, is believed to be a
Lady of quality, and so received, entertained, and love made to her, by the
young Lord Beaufort, etc: In the mean time, the Fly of the Inn is discovered
to Colonel Glorious, with the Militia of the house, below the stayres, in the
Drawer, Tapster, Chamberlain, and Hostler, inferior officers, with the
Coachman Trundle, Ferret, etc. And, the preparation is made, to the Ladies
design upon Lovel, his upon her, and the Sovereigns upon both.

Here begins, at the third Act, the Epitasis, or business of the Play.
Lovel, by the dexterity, and wit of the Sovereign of the Sports, Prudence;
having two hours assigned him, of free colloquy, and loue-making to his
Misiresse, one, after Dinner, the other after Supper; The Court being set, is
demanded by the Lady Frampul, what Love is? as doubting if there were any such
power, or no. To whom, he first by definition, and after by argument answers,
proving, and describing the effects. of Love, so viuel^, as she, who had
derided the name of Love before, hearing his discourse, is now so taken both
with the Man, and his matter, as she confesses her self enamored of him,
and, but for the ambition she has to enjoy the other hour, had presently
declared her self: which gives both him, and the spectators occasion to think
she yet dissembles, notwithstanding the payment of her kiss, which he
celebrates. And the Court dissolues, upon a news brought, of a new Lady, a
newer Coach, and a new Coachman called Barnaby.

Act 4.
The house being put into a noise, with the rumor of this new Lady, and there
being drinking below in the court, the Colonel, Sir Glorious, with Bat: Burst,
a broken Citizen, and Hodge Huffle his champion; she falls into their hands, and
being attended but with one footman, is uncivilly entreated by them, and a
quarrel commenced, but is rescued by the valor of Lovel; which beheld by the
Lady Frampul, from the window, she is ^nuited up, for safety, where coming,
and conducted by the Host, her gown is first discovered to be the same with
the whole suite, which was bespoken for Pru: and she her self, upon
examination, found to be Pinnacia Stuff, the Tailors wife, who was wont to be
preocupied in all his Customers best clothes, by the footman her husband. They
are both condemned, and censured, she stripped like a Doxey, and sent home a
foot. In the interim, the second hour goes on, and the question, at suit of
the Lady Frampul, is changed from love to valor; which ended, he receives his
second kiss, and by the rigor of the Sovereign, falls into a fit of
melancholy, worse, or more desperate then the first.

The fifth, and last Act is the Catastrophe, or knit^ing up of all, where Fly
brings word to the Host, of the Lord Beauforts being married privately in the
new stable, to the supposed Lady, his son; w^ch the Host receives as an omen
of mirt^. But complains, that Lovel is gone to bed melancholique, when Prudence
appears dressed in the new suit applauded by her Lady, and employed to retriue
Louel. The Host encounters them, with this relation of L. Beauforts marriage,
which is seconded by the L. Latimer, and all the servants of the house. In this
while, L. Beaufort comes in, and profes^es it, calls for his bed, and
bride-bowle, to be made ready, the Host forbids both, shows whom he has
married, and discouers him t^ be his son, a boy. The Lord Bridegroom
confounded, the Nurse enters like a frantic bed lem, cries out on Fly, says
she is undone, in her daughter, who is confessed to be the Lord Frampuls
child, sister to the other Lady, the Host to be their Father. She his wife. He
finding his children, bestows them one on Louel, the other on the Lord
Beaufort, the Inn upon Fly, who had been a Gipsey with him, offers a portion
with Prudence, for her wit, which is refused; and she taken, by the Lord
Latimer, to wife; for the crown of her virtue, and goodness. And all are
contented.

The Scene BARNET. The PERSONS of the PLAY. With some short Characterisme of
the chief Actors.
GOod-stocke, the Host (played well) alia^, the Lord Frampul. He pretends to be
a Gentleman, and a Scholar, neglected by the times, turns Host, and keeps an
Inn, the Sign of the light Heart, in Barnet: is supposed to have one only
S^nne, but is found to have none, but two Daughters, Francis, and Laetitia, who
was lost young. etc.

Louel. A complete Gentleman, a Soldier, and a Scholar, is a melancholy Guest
in the Inn. first quarreld, after, much honored, and beloved by the Host. He
is known to have been Page, to the old Lo. Beaufort, followed him in the
French wars, after a companion of his studies, and left Guardian to his
son. He is assisted in his love to the Lady Frampul, by the Host, and the
Chambermayd, Prudence. He was one, that acted well too.

Ferret. Who is also called Stote, and Vermin, is Lovels servant, a fellow of a
quick, nimble wit, knows the manners and affections of people, and can make
profitable, and timely discoueries of them.

Frank. Supposed a boy, and the Hosts son, borrowed to be dressed for a Lady,
and set up as a stale by Prudence, to catch Beaufort, or Latimer, proves to be
Laetitia, sister to Frances, and Lord Frampu's younger daughter, stolen by a
begger-woman, shorn, put into boys apparel, sold to the Host, and brought
up by him as his son.

Nurse. A poor chare-woman in the Inn, with one eye, that tends the boy, is
thought the Irish beggar that sold him, but is truly the Lady Frampul; who left
her home melancholique, and jealous that her Lord loved her not, because she
brought him none but daughters, and lives, unknown to her husband, as he to
her.

Frances. Supposed the Lady Frampul, being reputed his sole daughter, and
heir, the Barony descending upon her, is a Lady of great fortunes, and beauty,
but fantastical: thinks nothing a felicity, but to have a multitude of
servants, and be called Mistress by them, comes to the Inn to be merry, with
a Chambermaid only, and her Servants her ghests, etc.

Prudence. The Chambermaid, is elected Sou^raigne of the Sports in the Inn,
gouernes all, commands, and so orders, as the Lord Latimer is exceedingly taken
with her, and takes her to his wife, in conclusion.

Lord Latimer and Lord Beaufort, are a pair of young Lords, servants and ghests
to the Lady Frampul, but as Latimer falls enamored of Prudence, so does
Beaufort on the boy, the Hosts son, set up for Laetitia, the younger sister,
which she proves to be indeed.

Sir Glorious Tipto. A Knight, and Colonel, has the luck to think well of
himself, without a ^iuall, talks gloriously of any thing, but very seldom is
in the right. He is the Ladies ghest, and her servant too; but this day utterly
neglects his service, or that him. For he is so enamored on the Fly of the
Inn, and the Militia below stayres, with Hodge Huffle, and Bat: Burst, ghests
that come in, and Trundle, Barnabe, etc. as no other society relisheth with him.

Fly. Is the Parasite of the Inn, visiter general of the house, ^ne that had
been a strolling Gipsee, but now is reclam'd, to be Inflamer of the reckonings.

Pierce. The Drawer, knighted by the Colonel, styled Sir Pierce, and young
Anon, one of the chief of the infantery.

Jordan. The Chamberlain, Another of the Militia, and an officer commands the
Tertia of the Beds.

Iug. The Tapster, a Through-fare of News.

Peck. The Hostler.

Bat: Burst. A broken Citizen, an in and in man.

Hodge Huffle. A cheater, his champion.

Nick Stuff. The Ladies Tailor.

Pinnacia Stuff. His wife.

Trundle. A Coachman.

Barnabe. A hired Coachman.

Staggers. The Smith. Only talked on.

Tree. The Sadler.

The Prologue.
YOu are welcome, welcome all, to the new Inn;
Though the old house, we hope our cheer will win
Your acceptance: we have the same Cook,
Still, and the fat, who says, you sha' not look
Long, for your bill of fare, but every dish
Be served in, in the time, and to your wish:
If any thing be set to a wrong taste,
It Is not the meat, there, but the mouth's displaced,
Remove but that sick palate, all is well.
For this, the secure dresser badd me tell,
Nothing more hurts just meetings, then a crowd;
Or, when the expectation's grown too loud:
That the nice stomach, would have this or that,
And being asked, or urged, it knows not what:
When sharp, or sweet, have been too much a feast,
And both out lived the palate of the ghest.
Beware to bring such appetites to the stage,
They do confess a weak, sick, queasie age,
And a shrewd grudging too of ig norance,
When clothes and faces' boue the men advance:
Hear for your health, then, But at any hand,
Before you judge, vouchsafe to understand,
Concoct, digest: if then, it do not hit,
Some are in a consumption of wit,
Deep, he dares say, he will not think, that all --
For Hecticks are not epidemicall.
THE NEW INN.
Act 1.
Scene 1.
Host. Ferret. I Am not pleased, indeed, you are in the right;
Nor is my house pleased, if my sign could speak,
The sign of the light Heart. There, you may read it;
So may your master too, if he look on it.
A heart weighed with a fether, and out weighed too:
A brayne-child o'mine own! and I am proud on it!
And if his worship think, here, to be melancholy,
In spite of me or my wit, he is deceived;
I will maintain the Rebus' against all humors,
And all complexionsi'the body of Man,
That Is my word, or in the Isle of Britain!
You have reason good mine host.

Hos. Sir I have rhyme too.
Whether it be by chance or art,
A heavy purse makes a light Heart.
There it is expressed! first, by a purse of gold,
A heavy purse, and then two Turtles, makes,
A heart with a light stuck in it, a light heart!
Old Abbot Islip could not invent better,
Or Prior Bolton with his bolt and Ton.
I am an Innekeeper, and know my grounds,
And study 'hem; Brain o'man, I study 'hem:
I must have iouiall guests to drive my ploughs,
And-whistling boys to bring my harvest home,
Or I shall hea^ no Flayles thwack. Here, your master,
And you ha'beene this fornight, drawing fleas
Out of my mattes, and pounding 'hem in cages
Cut out of cards, and those rop'd round with pack-thred,
Drawn through birdlime! a fine subtilty!
Or poring through a multiplying glass,
Upon a captived crab-louse, or a cheese-mite
To be dissected, as the sports of nature,
With a neat Spanish needle! Speculations
That do become the age, I do consesse!
As measuring an Ants eggs, with the Silke-wormes,
By a phantallique instrument of thread,
Shall give you their just difference, to a hair!
Or else recovering o'dead flies, with crumbs!
(Another queint conclusion in the physics)
Which I ha seen you busy at, through the keyhole-
But never had the fate to see a fl^e --
Ent. L^ Alive in your cups, or once heard, drink mine host,
Or such a cheerful chirping charm come from you.

Act 1. Scene 2.
Lovet. Ferret. Host. What Is that? what is that?

Fer. A buzzing of mine
About a fly! a murmr that he has.

Host. Sir I am telling your Stote here, Monsieur Ferret, host
For that I heare's his name) and dare tell you, Sir,
^f you have a mind to be melancholy, and musty,
There Is Footmans Inn, at the towns end, the stocks,
Or Carriers Place, at sign of the broken Waine,
Mansions of State! Take up your harbor there;
There are both flies and fleas, and all variety
Of vermin, for inspection, or dissection.

Lov. We ha set our rest up here, Sir, ^'your Heart.

Host. Sir set your heart at rest, you shall not do it:
^nlesse you can be iouiall. Brain o'man,
^e iouiall first, and drink, and dance, and drink.
Your lodging here, and wi'your daily dumps,
^s a mere libell 'gayn' my house and me;
And, then, your s^andalous commons.

Lov. How mine host?

Host. Sir, they do scandal me, vpo'the road, here
A poor quotidian rack o'mutton, roasted,
^rie, to be grated! and that driven down
With bear, and butter-milke, mingled together,
Or clarified whey, instead of Claret!
It is against my freehold, my inheritance,
My Magna charta, Cor laetificat,
To drink such balder dash, or bonny clabbee!
Gi'me good wine, or catholic, or christian,
Wine is the word, that glads the heart of man:
And mine is the house of wine, Sack, says my bush,
Be merry, and drink Sherry; that is my po^sie!
For I shall never joy i'my light heart,
So long as I conceive a sullen ghest,
Or any thing that is earthy!

Lov. Humerous Host.

Host. I care not if I be.

Lov. But airy also,
Not to defraud you of your rights, or trench
Vpo'your privileges, or great charter,
(For those are every hostlers language now)
Say, you were borne beneath those smiling stars,
Have made you Lord, and owner of the Heart,
Of the Light Heart in Barnet; suffer v^
Who are more Saturnine, t'enioy the shade
Of your round roof yet.

Host. Sir I keep no shades
Nor shelters, I: for either Owls or Rere-mise.

Act 1. Scene 3.
Ferret. Host. Louel. He Will make you a bird of night, Sir.

Host. Bless you child,
You Will make your selves such.

Lov. 'That your son mine host?

En. Fra. to his child of the by the Host speak^ Host. He Is all the sons I
have Sir.

Lov. Pretty boy!
Goes he to school?

Fer. O Lord, Sir, he prates Latin
^d 'twere a parrat, or a play. boy.

Lov. Thou --
^ommend'st him fitly.

Fer. To the pitch, he flies, Sir,
^ee'l tell you what is Latin for a looking-glass,
^beard-brush, rubber, or quick-warming pan.

^v. What Is that?

Fer. a wench, in the Inn-phrase, is al these; A looking-glass in her eye,
A beard-brush with her lips,
A rubber with her hand,
And a warming pan with her hips.


Host. This, in your scurrile dialect. But my Inn
^owes no such language.

F. That Is because, mine host,
^u do profess the teaching him your self.

Host. Sir, I do teach him somewhat. By degrees,
^d with a funnell, I make shift to fill
^e narrow vessel, he is but yet, a bottell.

Lov O let him lose no time, though.

Hos. Sir, he does not.

Lov. And less his manners.

Hos. I provide for those, too.
^me hither Frank, speak to the gentleman
Latin: He is melancholy; say,
^ong to see him merry, and so would treat him.

Fra. Subtristis vis^' es esse aliquantulum patri,
^ite laute excipere, etiam a^ tractare ge^tit.

Lov. Pulchr^.

Host. Tell him, I fear it bodes us some ill luck,
^s too reservedness.

Fra. Veretur pa^er,
(...) quid nobis mali ominis apportet iste
^mis praeclusus vultus.

Lov. Belle. A fine child!
^u wou'not part with him, mine host?

H. Who told you
^ould not?

Lov. I but ask you.

Hos. And I answer.
^o whom? for what?

Lov. To me, to be my Page.

Host. I know no mischiese yet the child has done,
To deserve such a destiny.

Lov. Why?

H^. Go down boy,
And get your breakfast. Trust me, I had rather
Take a fair halter, wash my hands, and hang him
My self, make a clean riddance of him: then.

Lo. What?

Host. Then dam him to that desperate course of life.

Lov. Call you that desperate, which by a line
Of institution, from our Ancestors,
Has been derived down to us, and received
In a succession, for the noblest way
Of breeding up our youth, in letters, arms,
Fair meine, discourses, civil exercise,
And all the blazon of a Gentleman?
Where can he learn to vault, to ride, to fence,
To move his body gracefuller? to speak
His language purer? or to tune his mind,
Or manners, more to the harmony of Nature
Then, in these nourceries of nobility? --

Host. I that was, when the nourceries self, was nobl^
And only virtue made it, not the mercate,
That titles were not vented at the drum,
Or common outcry; goodness gave the greatness,
And greatness worship: Every house became
An Academy of honor, and those parts --
We see departed, in the practice, now,
Quite from the institution.

Lov. Why do you say so?
Or think so enviously? do they not still
Learn there, the Centaures skill, the art of Thrace,
To ride? or Pollux my stery, to fence?
The Pyrrhick gestures, both to dance, and spring
In armor, to be active for the Wars?
To study figures, numbers, and proportions,
May yield 'hem great in counsels, and the arts
Grave Nestor, and the wise Ulysses practiced?
To make their English sweet upon their tongue!
As reu'rend Chaucer says?

Host. Sir you mistake,
To play Sir Pandarus my copy has it,
And carry messages to Madam Cresside.
instead of backing the brave Steed, o'mornings,
To mount the Chambermaid; and for a leap
Of The vaulting horse, to ply the vaulting house:
For exercise of arms, a bale of dice,
Or two or three packs of cards, to show the cheat,
And nimblenesse of hand: mistake a cloak
From my Lords back, and pawn it. Ease his pockets
Of a superfluous Watch, or geld a jewel
Of an odd stone, or so. Twinge three or four buttons
From off my Ladies gown. These are the arts,
Or seven liberal deadly sciences
Of Pagery, or rather Paganism,
As the tides run. To which, if he apply him,
He may, perhaps, take a degree at Tiburne,
A year the earlier: come to read a lecture
Upon Aquinas at S. Thomas a Waterings,
And so go forth a Laureat in hemp circle!

Lov. Yo'are tart, mine host, and talk above your seasoning,
Ore what you seem: it should not come, me thinks,
Under your cap, this vein of salt, and sharpness!
These strikings upon learning, now and then?
How long have you, (if your dull ghest may ask it,)
Drove this quick trade, of keeping the light-heart,
Your Mansion, Palace here, or Hostelry.

Host. Troth, I was borne to somewhat, Sir, above it.

Lov. I easily suspect that: Mine host, your name.

Hos. They call me Good-stock.

Lov. S^r, and you confeffeit,
B^th in your language, treaty, and your bearing.

Hos. Yet all, Sir, are not sons of the white Hen;
Nor can we, as the Songster say^s, come all
To be wrapped soft and warm in fortunes smock:
When she is pleased to trick, or trompe mankind:
Some may be Cotes, as in the cards; but, then
Some must be knaves, some varlets, baudes, and ostlers,
As aces, duizes, cards o'ten, to face it
Out, in the game, which all the world is.

Lov. But,
It being in your free will (as 'twas) to choose
What parts you would sustain, me thinks, a man
Of your sagacity, and clear nostrill, should
Have made, another choice, then of a place
So sordid, as the keeping of an Inn:
Where every Iouial Tinker, for his chinke,
May cry, mine host, to crambe, give us drink;
And do not slinke, but skinke, or else you stink.
Rogu^, Baud, and Cheater, call you by the surnames,
And known Synonyma of your profession.

Hos. But if I be no such; who then is the Rogue,
In understanding, Sir, I mean? who erres?
Who tinkleth then? or personates Thom. Tinker?
Your weazill here may tell you I talk baudy,
And teach my boy it; and you may believe him:
But Sir at your own peril, if I do not:
And at his too, if he do lie, and affirm it.
No slander strikes, less hurts, the innocent:
If I be honest, and that all the cheat
Be, of my self, in keeping this Light Heart,
Where, I imagine all the world's a Play;
The state, and men's affairs, all passages
Of life, to spring new, scenes come in, go out,
And shift, and vanish; and if I have got
A seat, to sit at ease here, i'mine Inn,
To see the Comedy; and laugh, and chuck
At the variety, and throng of humors,
And dispositions, that come iustling in,
And out still, as they one drove hence another:
Why, will you envy me my happiness?
Because you are sad, and lumpish; carry a L^ade stone
In Your pocket, to hang knives on; or let^rings,
T'entice light strawes to leap at 'hem: are not taken
With the alacrities of an host! It Is more,
And iustlier, Sir, my wonder, why you took
My house up, Fiddlers Hall, the Seat of noise,
And mirth, an Inn here, to be drousie in,
And lodge your lethargy in the Light Heart,
As if some cloud from Court had been your Harbinger,
Or Cheape-side debt-Bookes, or some Mistress charge,
Seeing your love grow corpulent, gi' it a diet,
By absence some, such moldy passion!

Lo. It Is guessed unhappily.

Fe. Mine host, yo'are called.

H. I come, boys.

L. Ferret have not you bin ploughing
With this mad Ox, mine host? nor he with you?

Fer. For what Sir?

Lov. Why, to find my riddle out.

Fer. I hope, you do believe, Sir, I can find
Other discourse to be at, then my Master
With Hosts, and Host'lers.

Lou. If you can, it is well.
Go down, and see, who they are come in, what ghests;
And bring me word.

Act. 1. Scene 4.
Lovel. O love, what passion art thou!
So tyrannous! and treacherous! first t'en-slaue,
And then betray, all that in truth do serve thee!
That not the wisest, nor the wariest creature,
Can more dissemble thee, then he can bear
Hot burning coals, in his bare palm, or bosom!
And less, conceal, or hide thee, then a flash
Of enflamed powder, whose whole light does lay it
Open, to all discovery, even of those,
Who have but half an eye, and less of nose!
An Host, to find me! who is, commonly,
The log, a little of this side the signe-post!
Or, at the best, some round grown thing! a Iug,
Faced, with a beard, that fills out to the ghests,
And takes in, fro' the fragments o'their iestes?
But, I may wrong this, out of sullennes,
Or my mis-taking humor? Pray thee, phant'sie,
Be laid, again. And, gentle-Melancholy,
Do not oppress me. I will be as silent,
As the tame lover should be, and as foolish.

Act 1. Scene. 5.
Host. Ferret. Louel. My Ghest, my Ghest, be Iouiall, I beseech thee.
IN have fresh golden ghests, ghests of the game:
Three coach-full! Lords! and Ladies! new come in.
And I will cry them to thee, 'and thee, to them,
So I can spring a smile, but ^his brow,
That like the rugged Roman Alderman, --
Old master Gross, surnamed (...).
Ent. Ferret. Was never seen to laugh, but at an Ass.

Fer. Sir here is the Lady Frampul.

Lou. How!

Fer. And her train.
Lord Beaufort, and Lord Latimer, the Coronel
Tipto', with Mistress Cis, the Chamber-mayd:
Trundle, the Coachman --

Lou. Stop, discharge the house:
And get my horses ready, bid the Groom
Bring 'hem to the back gate.

Hos. What mean you Sir?

Lou. To take fair leave, mine Host.

Hos. I hope, my Ghest,
Though I have talked somewhat above my share,
At large, and been in the altitudes, th'extrau^gants,
Neither my self, nor any of mine have gi'n you
The cause, to quit my house, thus, on the sudden,

Lou. No, I affirm it, on my faith. Excuse me,
From such a rudenes; I was now beginning
To taste, and love you: and am heartily sorry,
Any occasion should be so compelling,
To urge my abrupt departure, thus. But --
Necessity's a Tyran, and commands it.

Hos. She shall command me first to fire my bush;
Then break up house: Or, if that will not serve,
To break with all the world. Turn country bankrupt.
IN mine own town, vpo' the Mercat-day,
And be protested, for my butter, and eggs,
To the last bodge of oats, and bottle of hay;
Ere you shall leave me, I will break my heart:
Coach, and Coach-horses, Lords, and Ladies pack?
All my fresh ghests shall stink! I Will pull my sign, down
Convert mine Inn, to an Almes-house! or a Spittle,
For lazers, or switch-sellers! Turn it, to
An Academy o'rogues! or gi'it away
For a free-schoole, to breed up beggars in,
And send 'hem to the canting Universities
Before you leave me.

Lov. Troth, and I confess,
I am loath, mine host, to leave you: your expressions
Both take, and hold me. But, in case I stay,
I must enjoin you and your whole family
To priuacy, and to conceal me. For,
The secret is, I would not willingly,
See, or be seen, to any of this ging,
Especially, the Lad^.

Hos. Brain o'man,
What monster is she? or Cocatrice in velvet,
That kills thus?

Lov. O good words, mine host. She is
A noble Lady! great in blood! and fortune!
Fair! and a wit! but of so bent a phant'sie,
As she thinks naught a happiness, but to have
A multitude of servants! and, to get them,
(Though she be very honest) yet she venters
Upon these precipices, that would make her
Not seem so, to some prying, narrow natures.
We call her, Sir, the Lady Frances Frampul,
Daughter and heir to the Lord Frampul.

Hos. Who?
He that did love in Oxford, first, a student,
And, after, married with the daughter of --

Lo. Silly.

Hos. Right, of whom the tale went, to turn Puppet-mr.

Lov. And travel with Young Goose, the Motion-man.

Hos. And lie, and live with the Gypsies half a year
Together, from his wife.

Lo. The very same:
The mad Lord Frampul! And this same is his danghter!
But as cock-brain'd as ere the father was!
There were two of 'hem, Frances and Laetitiae;
But Laetice was lost young; and, as the rumor
Flew then, the mother upon it lost her self.
A fond weak woman, went away in a melancholy,
Because she brought him none but girls, she thought
Her husband loved her not. And he, as foolish,
Too late resenting the cause given, went after;
In quest of her, and was not heard of since.

Hos. A strange division of a family!

Lov. And scattered, as in the great confusion!

Hos. But yet the Lady, th'heire, enioyes the land.

Lov. And takes all lordly ways how to confume it
As nobly as she can; if clothes, and feasting,
And the authorized means of riot will do it.

Ent. Fer. Host. She shows her extract, and I honor her for it.

Act. 1. Scene. 6
Ferret. Lovel. Host. Cicelie. Your horses Sir are ready; and the house
Dis-

Lou. Pleased, thou think?

Fer. Icannot tell, dischargd
I Am sure it is.

Lou. Charge it again, good Ferret.
And make unready the horses: Thou know how.
Chalk, and renew the rondels. I am, now
Resolved to stay.

Fer. I easily thought so,
When you should hear what is purposed.

L. What?

Fer. To throw
The house out of the windo?

Host. Brain o'man,
I shall ha'the worst o'that! will they not throw
My household stuff out, first? Cushions, and Carpets,
Chaires, stools, and bedding? is not their sport my ruin?

Lov. Fear not, mine host, I am not of the fellowship.

Fer. I cannot see, Sir, how you will avoid it;
They know already all, you are in the house.

Lov. Who know?

F. The Lords: they have seen me, and inquired it.

Lov. Why were you seene^

Fer Because indeed I had
No medicine, Sir, to go invisible:
No Ferne-seed in my pocket; Nor an Opal
Wrapped in a B^y-leafe, i'my left fist,
To charm their eyes with.

H. He dos give you reasons
As round as Giges ring: which, say the Ancients,
Was a hoop ring; and that is, round as a hoop!

Lov. You will ha'your Rebus still, mine host.

Hos. I must:

Fer. My Lady, too, looked out of the windo, and called me.
And see where Secretary

Pru. comes from her,
Ent. Pru. Emploi'd upon some Ambassy unto you --

Host. I Will meet her, if she come upon emploiment;
Fair Lady, welcome, as your host can make you.

Pru. Forbear, Sir, I am first to have mine audience,
Before the complement. This gentleman
Is my address to.

Host. And it is in state.

Pru. My Lady, Sir, as glad of the encounter
To find a servant, here, and such a servant,
Whom she so values; with her best respects,
Desires to be remembered: and inuites
Your nobleness, to be a part, to day,
Of the society, and mirth intended
By her, and the young Lords, your fellow-seruants.
Who are alike ambitious of enjoying
The fair request; and to that end have sent
Me, their imperfect Orator, to obtain it:
Which if I may, they have elected me,
And crowned me, with the title of a sovereign
Of the days sports devised in the Inn,
So you be pleased to add your suffrage to it.

Lov. So I be pleased, my gentle mistress Prudence?
You cannot think me of that course condition,
T'enuy you any thing.

Host. That Is nobly said!
And like my ghest!

Lov. I gratulate your honor;
And should, with cheer, lay hold on any handle,
That could advance it. But for me to think,
I can be any rag, or particle
O'your Ladies care, more then to fill her list,
She being the Lady, that professes still
To love no soul, or body, but for ends;
Which are her sports: And is not nice to speak this,
But does proclaim it, in all companies:
Her Ladyship must pardon my weak counsels,
And weaker will, if it decline t'obay her.

Pru. O master Louel you must not give credit
To all that Ladies publicly profess,
Or talk, o'th vollee, unto their servants.
Their tongues and thoughts, often times lie far asunder.
Yet, when they please, they have their cabinet-counsels
And reserud thoughts, and can retire themselves
As well as others.

Host. (...), the subtlest of us!
All that is borne within a Ladies lips --

Pru. Is not the issue of their hearts, mine host.

Hos. Or kiss, or drink before me.

Pru. Stay, excuse me;
Mine errand is not done. Yet, if her Ladyships
Slighting, or disesteeme, Sir, of your service,
Has formerly begot any distaste,
Which I not know of: here, I vow unto you,
Upon a Chambermaids simplicity,
Reserving, still, the honor of my Lady,
I will be bold to hold the glass up to her,
To show her Ladyship where she has erred,
And how to tender satisfaction:
So you vouchsafe to prove, but the days venture.

Ho. What say you, Sir? where are you? are you within?

Lov. Yes: I will wait upon her, and the company.

Hos. It is enough, Queen Prudence; I will bring him:
And, of this kiss. I longed to kiss a Queen!

Lov. There is no life on earth, but being in love!
There are no studies, no delights, no business,
No intercourse, or trade of sense, or soul,
But what is love! I was the laziest creature,
The most vnprositable sign of nothing,
The veriest drone, and slept away my life
Beyond the Dormouse, till I was in love!
And, now, I can out-wake the Nightingale,
Out-watch an usurer, and out-walke him too,
Stalk like a ghost, that haunted bout a treasure,
And all that phant'si'd treasure, it is love!

Host. But is your name Loue-ill, Sir, or Loue-well?
I would know that.

Lov. I do not know it my self,
Whether it is. But it is Love has been
The hereditary passion of our house,
My gentle host, and, as I guess, my friend;
The truth is, I have loved this Lady long,
And impotently, with desire enough,
But no success: for I have still forborne
To express it, in my person, to her.

Hos. How then?

Lov. I have sent her toys, verses, and Anagram's,
Trials of wit, mere trifles she has commended,
But knew not whence they came, nor could she guess.

Host. This was a pretty ridling way of wooing!

Lov. I often have been, too, in her company;
And looked upon her, a whole day; admird her;
Loved her, and did not tell her so; loved still,
Looked still, and loved: and loved, and looked, and sighed;
But, as a man neglected, I came of,
And unregarded --

Host. Could you blame her, Sir,
When you were silent, and not said a word?

Lov. O but Ilou'd the more; and she might read it
Best, in my silence, had she bin --

Host. As melancholique
As you are. 'Pray you, why would you stand mute, Sir?

Lov. O thereon hangs a history, mine host.
Did you ever know, or hear, of the Lord Beaufort,
Who served so bravely in France? I was his page,
And, ere he died, his friend! I followed him,
First, in the wars; and in the times of peace,
I waited on his studies: which were right.
He had no Arthurs, nor no Rosicleer's,
No Knights of the Sun, nor Amadis de Gaule's,
Primalions, and Pantagruel's, public Nothings;
Abortiues of the fabulous, dark cloister,
Sent out to poison courts, and infest manners:
But great Achilles, Agamemnons acts,
Sage Nestors counsels, and Ulysses slights,
Tydides fortitude, as Homer wrought them
In his immortal phant'sie, for examples
Of the Heroic virtue. Or, as Virgil,
That master of the Epick poem, limn'd
Pious Aeneas, his religious Prince,
Bearing his aged Parent on his shoulders,
Rapt from the flames of Tr^y, with his young son.
And these he brought to practice, and to use.
He gave me first my breeding, I acknowledge,
Then showered his bounties on me, like the Hours,
That open-handed sit upon the Clouds,
And press the liberality of heaven
Down to the laps of thankful men! But then!
The trust committed to me, at his death,
Was above all! and left so strong a tie
On all my powers! as time shall not dissolve!
Till it dissolve it self, and bury all!
The care of his brave heir, and only son!
Who being a virtuous, sweet, young, hopeful Lord,
Has cast his first affections on this Lady.
And though I know, and may presume her such,
As, out of humor, will return no love;
And therefore might indifferently be made
The courting-stock, for all to practice on.
As she does practice on all us, to scorn:
Yet, out of a religion to my charge,
And debt professed, I ha'made a selfe-decree,
Nere to express my person; though my passion
Burn me to cinders.

Host. Then yo'are not so subtle,
Or half so read in loue-craft, as I took you.
Come, come, you are no Phoenix, an' you were,
I should expect no miracle from your ashes.
Take some advice. Be still that rag of love,
You are. Burn on till you turn tinder.
This Chambermaid may hap to prove the steel,
To strike a sparkle out of the flint, your mistress
May beget bonfires yet, you do not know,
What light may be forced out, and from what darkness.

Lov. Nay, I am so resolved, as still I Will love
Though not confess it.

Host. That Is, Sir, as it chances:
We Will throw the dice for it: Cheer up.

Lov. I do.

Act 2.
Scene 1.
Lady. Prudence. Come wench, this suit will serve: dispatch, make ready.
It was a great deal with the biggest for me;
Which made me leave it off after once wearing.
How does it fit? wilt come together?

Pru. hardly.

Lad. Thou must make shift with it. Pride feels no pain^
Girt thee hard,

Pru. Pox of this errand Taylour,
He angers me beyond all mark of patience.
These base Mechanics never keep their word,
In any thing they promise. Pru. It Is their trade, madam;
To swear and break, they all grow rich by breaking,
More then their words; their honesties, and credits,
Are still the first commodity they put off.

Lad. And worst, it seems, which makes them do it so often.
If he had but broke with me, I had not cared,
But, with the company, the body politic-

Pru. Frustrate our whole design, having that time,
And the materials in so long before?

Lad. And he to fail in all, and disappoint us?
The rogue deserves a torture-

Pru. To be crop'd
With his own Scizzer^.

Lad. Let Us devise him one.

Pru. And have the stumpssear'd up with his own searing candle?

Lad. Close to his head, to trundle on his pillow?
Ple have the Leasse of his house cut out in measures.

Pru. And he be strangled with 'hem?

Lad. No, no life
I would ha'touch't, but stretched on his own yard
He should be alittle, have the strappad^?

Pru. Or an ell of taffata
Drawn through his guts, by way of glister, and fired
With aqua vitae?

Lad. Burning in the hand
With the pressing iron cannot save him.

Pru. Yes,
Now I have got this on: I do forgive him,
What robes he should have brought.

Lad. Thou art not cruel,
Although streight-lac'd, I see, Pru!

Pru. This is well.

Lad. It Is rich enough! But it is not what I meant thee!
I would have had thee brauer then my self,
And brighter far. 'Twill fit the Players yet,
When thou have done with it, and yield thee somewhat.

Pru. That were illiberall, madam, and mere sordid
In me, to let a suit of yours come there.

Lad. Tut, all are Players, and but serve the Scene. Pru,
Dispatch; I fear thou do not like the province,
Thou art so long a fitting thy self for it.
Here is a Scarf, to make thee a knot finer.

Pr. You send me a feasting, madame.

La. Wear it wenc^

Pru. Yes. but, with leave o'your Ladyship, I would tell you
This can but bear the face of an odd journey.

Lad. Why Pru?

Pru. A Lady of your rank and quality,
To come to a public Inn, so many men,
Young Lords, and others, in your company!
And not a woman but my self, a Chambermaid!

Lad. Thou doubt'st to be ouer-layd Pru? Fear it not,
I le bear my part, and share with thee, i'theventer.

Pru. O but the censure, madame, is the maine,
What will they say of you? or judge of me?
To be translated thus, above all the bound
Of fitness, or decorum?

Lad. How, now! Pru!
Turned fool vpo'the sudden, and talk idly
I'thy best clothes! shoot bolts, and sentences
T'affright babies with? as if I lived
To any other scale then what is my own?
Or sought my self, without my self, from home?

Pru. Your Ladyship will pardon me, my fault,
If I have ouer-shot, I Will shoot no more.

Lad. Yes shoot again, good Pru, I Will have thee shoot,
And aim, and hit: I know it is love in thee,
And so I do interpret it.

Pru. Then madame,
Il'd crave a farther leave.

Lad. Be it to license,
It shall not want an ear, Pru, Say, what is it?

Pru. A toy I have, to raise a little mirth,
To the design in hand.

Lad. Out with it Pru.
If it but chime of mirth.

Pru. Mine host has, madame,
A pretty boy in the house, a deinty child,
His son, and is o'your Ladyships name too, Frances,
Whom if your Ladyship would borrow of him,
And give me leave to dress him, as I would,
Should make the finest Lady, and kins-woman,
To keep you company, and deceive my Lords,
Vpo'the matter, with a fountain o'sport.

Lad. I apprehend thee, and the source of mirth
That it may br^ed, but is he bold enough,
The child? and well assured?

Pru. As I am, madame,
Have him in no suspicion, more then me:
Here comes mine host: will you but please to ask him,
Or let me make the motion?

Lad. Which thou will, Pr^

Act 2. Scene 2.
Host. Lady. Prudence. Frank. Your Ladyship, and all your train are welcome.

Lad. I thank my hearty host.

Host. So is your souerainty,
Madame, I wish you joy o'your new gown.

Lad. It should ha'bin, my host, but Stuff, our Tailor
Has broke with us, you shall be of the counsel.

Pru. He will deserve it, madame, my Lady has heard
You have a pretty son, mine host, she'ld see him.

Lad. I very feign, I pr'y thee let me see him, host.

Host. Your Ladyship shall presently,
Bid Frank come hither, anon, unto my Lady,
It is a bashful child, homely brought up,
In a rude hostelry. But the light Heart
Is his fathers, and it may be his.
Here he comes. Frank salute my Lady.

Fra. I do.
What, madame, I am desin'd to do, by my birth right,
As heir of the light Heart, bid you most welcome.

Lad. And I believe your most, my pretty boy,
Being so emphased, by you.

Fra. Your Ladyship,
If you believe it such, are sure to make it.

Lad. Pretily answered! Is your name Francis?

Fra. Yes madame.

Lad. I love mine own the better.

Fra. If I knew yours,
I should make haste to do so too, good madame.

Lad. It is the same with yours.

F. Mine then acknowledges
The luster it receives, by being named, after.

Lad. You will win upon me in complement.

Fra. By silence.

Lad. A modest, and a fair well spoken-child.

Hos. Her Ladyship, shall have him, sovereign Pru,
Or what I have beside: divide my heart,
Between you and your Lady. Make your use of it:
My ^ouse is yours, my son is yours. Behold,
I tender him to your service; Frank, become
What these brave Ladies would have you. Only this,
There is a chare-woman in the house, his nurse,
An Irish woman, I took in, a beggar,
That waits upon him; a poor silly fool,
But an impertinent, and sedulous one,
As ever was: will vex you on all occasions,
Never be off, or from you, but in her sleep;
Or drink which makes it. She does love him so,
Or rather doat on him. Now, for her, a shape,
As we may dress her (and I Will help) to fit her,
With a tuft-taffata cloak, an old French hood,
And other pieces, heterogene enough.

Pru. We ha'brought a standard of apparel, down,
Because this Tailor ^ayld us in the maine.

Hos. She shall advance the game.

Pru. About it then.
And send but Trundle, hither, the coachman, to me.

Hos. I shall: But Pr^, let Louel ha'faire quarter.

Pru. The best.

Lad. Our Host (me thinks) is very game some!

Pru. How like you the boy?

Lad. A miracle!

Pru. Good Madame
But take him in, and sort a suit for him,
^e give our Trundle his instructions;
And wayt upon your Ladyship, in the instant.

Lad. But Pru, what shall we call him, when we ha'drest him?

Pr. My Lady-No-body, Any thing what you will.

Lad. Call him Laetitia, by my sisters name,
And so it will mind our mirth too, we have in hand.

Act 2. Scene. 3.
Prudence. Trundle. Good Trundle, you must straight make ready the Coach,
And lead the horses out but halse a mile,
Into the fields, whether you will, and then
Drive in again, with the Coach-leaues put down,
At the back gate, and so to the back stayres,
As if you brought in some body, to my Lady,
A Kinswoman, that she sent for, Make that answer
If you be askd; and give it out ^'the house, so.

True. What trick is this, good Mistrisse Secretary,
Youl'd put upon us?

Pru. Us? Do you speak pl^rall?

True. Me and my Mares are us.

Pru. If you so join 'hem.
Elegant Trundle, you may use your figures.
I can but urge, it is my Ladies service.

True. Good Mistrisse Prudence, you can urge enough.
I know you 'are Secretary to my Lady,
And Mistress Steward.

Pru. You Will still be trundling,
And have your wages stopped, now at the Audite.

True. It Is true, you 'are Gentlewoman of the horse too.
Or what you will beside, Pru, I do think it:
My best to' obey you.

Pru. And I think so too, Trundl^.

Act. 2. Scene. 4.
Beaufort. Latimer. Host. Why here is return enough of both our venters,
If we do make no more discovery.

Lat. what?
Then of this Parasite?

Bea. O he is a deinty one.
The Parasite of the house.

Lat. here comes mine host.

Hos. My Lords, you both are welcome to the Heart.

Bea. To the light heart we hope.

Lat. And merry I swear.
We never yet felt such a fit of laughter,
As your glad heart has offered us, sin' we entered.

Bea. How came you by this property?

Hos. who! my Fly!

Bea. Your Fly if you call him so.

Hos. nay, he is that.
And will be still.

Beau. In every dish and pot?

Hos. In every Cup, and company, my Lords,
A Creature of all liquors, all complexions,
Be the drink what it will, he will have his sip.

Lat. He'is fitted with a name.

Hos. And he joys in it:
I had him when I came to take the Inn, here,
Assigned me over, in the Inuentory,
As an old implement, a piece of household stuff,
And so he does remain.

Bea. Just such a thing,
We thought him,

Lat. Is he a scholar?

Hos. Nothing less.
But colors for it, as you see: wear's black;
And speaks a little taynted, fly-blowne Latin,
After the School.

Bea. Of Stratford of the Bow.
For Lillies Latin, is to him unknown.

Lat. What calling has' he?

Hos. Only to call in, still.
Inflame the reckoning, bold to charge a bill,
Bring up the shot in the rear, as his own word is,

Bea. And does it in the discipline of the house?
As Corporal of the field, Maestro del Campo,

Hos. And visiter general, of all the room,
He has' formed a fine militia for the Inn too.

Bea. And means to publish it?

Hos. With all his titles.
Some call him Deacon Fly, some Doctor Fly.
Some Captain, some Leiutenant, But my folks
Do call him Quartermaster, Fly, which he is.

Act. 2. Scene. 5.
Tipto. Host. Fly. L. Bea. L. Lati. Come Quartermaster Fly.

Hos. Here Is one, already,
Has got his Titles.

Tip. Doctor!

Fly. Noble Colonel!
No Doctor, yet. A poor professor of ceremony,
Here in the Inn, retainer to the host,
I discipline the house.

Tip. Thou read'st a lecture.
Unto the family here, when is the day?

Fli. This is the day.

Tip. I Will hear thee, and I Will ha'thee a Doctor,
Thou shall be one, thou have a Doctors look!
A ^ace disputatiue, of Salamanca.

Hos. Who Is this?

Lat. The glorious Colonel Tipto, Host,

Bea. One talks upon his tiptocs, if you will hear him.

Tip. Thou have good learning in thee, macte Fly.

Fly. And I say macte, to my Colonel.

Host. Well macted of'hem both.

Bea. They are matched i'saith.

Tip. But Fly, why macte?

Fly. Quasi magis a^cte,
My honorable Colonel.

Tip. What a Critique?

Host. There Is another accession, Critique Fly.

Lat. I fear a taynt here in the Mathematiques.
They say, lines parallel do never meet;
He has met his parallel in wit, and schole-craft.

Bea. They side, not meet man, mend your metaphor,
And save the credit of your Mathematiques.

Tip. But Fly, how came thou to be here, committed
Unto this Inn? Fly, Upon suspicion o'drinke, Sir,
I was taken late one night, here, with the Tapster,
And the under-officers, and so deposited.

Tip. I will redeem thee, Fly, and place thee better,
With a fair Lady.

Fly. A Lady, sweet Sir Glorious!

Tip. A Sovereign Lady. Thou shall be the Bird
To Sovereign Pru, Queen of our sports, her Fly,
The Fly in household, and in ordinary;
Bird of her care, and she shall wear thee there!
A Fly of gold, enameled, and a schoole-Fly.

Host. The school, then are my stables, or the cellar,
Where he does study, deeply, at his hours,
Cases of cups, I do not know how spic'd
With conscience, for the Tapster, and the Hostler: as
Whose horses may be cossen'd? or what Iugs
Filled up with froth? that is his way of learning,

Tip. What antiquated F^ther's that, that talks?

Fly. The worshipful host, my ^atron, Mr. Good-stock:
A merry Greek, and cants in Latin, comely.
Spins like the parish top.

Tip. I Will set him up, then.
Art thou the Dominus?

Host. Fac-totum here, Sir.

Tip. Host real of the house? and Cap of Maintenance?

Host. The Lord of the light Heart, Sir, Cap a pie;
Whereof the Fether is the Emblem, Colonel,
Put up, with the Ace of Hearts!

Tip. But why in Cuerpo?
I hate to see an host, and old, in Cuerpo.

Host. Cuerpo? what is that?

Tip. Light, skipping hose and doublet,
The horse boys garb! poor blank, and half blank Cuerpo,
They relish not the gravity of an host,
Who should be King at Arms, and ceremonies,
In his own house! know all, to the goldweights.

Bea. Why that his Fly does for him here, your Bird.

Tip. But I would do it my self, were I my Host,
I would not speak unto a Cook of quality,
Your Lordships footman, or my Ladies Trundle,
In Cuerpo! If a Dog but stayed below
That were a dog of fashion, and well nosed,
And could present himself; I would put on
The Savoy chain about my neck; the ruff;
And cuffes of Flanders; then the Naples hat;
With the Rome hatband; and the Florentine Agate;
The Millan sword; the cloak of Genoa; set
With Brabant buttons; all my given pieces:
Except my gloves, the natives of Madrid,
To entertain him in! and complement
With a tame cony, as with a Prince that sent it.

Hos. The same deeds, though, become not every man,
That fits a Colonel, will not fit an host,

Tip. Your Spanish host is never seen in Cuerpo,
Without his Paramento's cloak, and sword.

Fli. Sir he has the father
Of swords, within a long sword; Blade cornish styled
Of Sir Rud Hughdibras.

Tip. And with a long sword, bully bird? thy sense?

Fli. To note him a tall-man, and a Master offense:

Tip. But does he teach the Spanish way of Don Lewis?

Fli. No, the Greek Master he.

Tip. what call you him?

Fli. Euclide.

Tip. Fart upon Euclide, he is stale, and antique,
Gi'me the modernes.

Fli. Sir he minds no modernes,
Go by, Hieronymo!

Tip. What was he?

Fli. The Italian,
That played with Abbot Antony, in the Friars,
And Blinkin-sops the bold.

Tip. I mary, those,
Had fencing names, what is become o'them?

Hos. They had their times, and we can say, they were
So had Caranza-his: so had Don Lewis.

Tip. Don Lewis of Madrid, is the sole Master
Now, of the world.

Hos. But this, of the other world
Euclide demonstrates! he! He Is for all!
The only fencer of name, now in Elysium.

Fli. He does it all, by lines, and angles, Colonel.
By parallels, and sections, has his Diagrammes!

Bea. Will thou be flying, Fly?

Lat. At all, why not?
The ayre's as free for a fly, as for an Eagle.

Bea A Buzzard! he is in his contemplation!

Tip. Euclide a fencer, and in the Elysium!

Hos. He played a prize, last week, with Archimedes,
And beat him I assure you.

Tip. Do you assure me?
For what?

Hos. For four in the hundred. Gi'me five,
And I assure you, again.

Tip. Host, Peremptory,
You may be taken, But where? whence ^ad you this?

Hos. Vpo' the road, A post, that came from thence,
Three days ago, here, left it with the Tapster.

Fli. Who is indeed a thorough fare ofnewes,
Jack I^g with the broken belly, a witty fellow!

Hos. Your Bird here heard him.

Tip. Did you hear him Bird?

Hos. Speak in the faith of a fly.

Fli. Yes, and he told us,
Of one that was the Prince of Oranges fencer,

Tip. Steuinus?

Fli. Sir the same, had challenged Euclide
A thirty weapons more then Archimedes
Ere saw; and engines: most of his own Invention:

Tip. This may have credit, and chimes reason, this!
If any man endanger Euclide, Bird,
Observe, that had the honor to quit Europe
This forty year, it is he. He put down Scaliger.

Fli. And he was a great Master.

Bea. Not of fence, Fly.

Tip. Excuse him, Lord, he went of the same grounds.

Bea. On the same earth I think, with other Mortals?

Tip. I mean, sweet Lord, the Mathematiques. Basta!
When thou know more, thou will take less, green honor.
He had his circles, semicircles, quadrants --

Fli. He writ a book of the quadrature of the Circle,

Tip. Cyclometria, I read --

Bea. The title only.

Lat. And Indice.

Bea. If it had one of that quare
What insolent, halfe-witted things, these are?

Lat. So are all smatterers, insolent, and impudent.

Bea. They lightly go together.

Lat. It Is my wonder!
Two animals should hawke at all discourse thus!
Fly every subject to the Mark, or retriue --

Bea. And never have the luck to be in the right!

Lat. It Is foam folks fortune!

Bea. Fortune's a Ba^d
And a blind Beggar: it is their vanity!
And shows most vilely!

Tip. I could take the heart now.
To write unto Don Lewis, into Spain,
To make a progress to the Elysian fields,
Next summer --

Bea. And persuade him die for same,
Of fencing with a shadow! Where Is mine Host?
I would he had heard this buble break, i'fayth.

Act. 2. Scene 6.
Host. Ti^. Prudence. Beaufort. Latimer. Frank. Nurse. Lady. Fly. Lovel. Make
place, stand by, for the Queen Regent, Gentlemen.

Tip. This is thy Queen, that shall be, Bird, our Soueraign.

Bea. Translated Prudence!

Pru. Sweet my Lord, hand off;
It is not now, as when plain Prudence lived,
And reached her Ladyship --

Host. The Chamber Pot.

Pru. The looking-glass, mine Host, loose your house Metaph^
You' have a negligent memory, indeed;
Speak the host's language. Here Is a young Lord,
Will make it a precedent else.

Lat. Well acted Pru.

Host. First minute of her reign! what will she do
Forty year hence? God bless her!

Pru. If you will kiss,
Or complement, my Lord, behold a Lady,
A stranger, and my Ladies kinswoman.

Bea. I do confess my rudeness, that had need
To have mine eye directed to this beauty.

Fra. It was so little, as it asked a perspicill.

Bea. Lady, your name?

Fra. My Lord, it is Laetitia.

Bea. Laetitia! a fair omen! And I take it.
^et me have still such Lettice for my lips:
But that of your family, Lady?

Fra. Silly, Sir.

Bea. My Ladies kinswoman?

Fra. I am so honored.

Host. Already, it takes!

Lad. An excellent fine boy.

Nur. He is descended of a right good stock, Sir.

Bea. What Is this? an Antiquary?

Host. An Antiquity,
By the dress, you would swear! An old Welsh Heralds widow:
She Is a wild-Irish borne! Sir, and a Hybride,
That lives with this young Lady, a mile off here,
And studies Vincent against York.

Bea. She Will conquer,
If she read Vincent. Let me study her.

Host. She Is perfect in most pedigrees, most descents.

Bea. A Baud, I hope, and knows to blaze a coat.

Host. And judges all things with a single eye,
Fly, come you hither; No discovery
Of what you see, to your Colonel Toe, or Tip, here,
But keep all close, tho'you stand in the way o'preferment,
Seek it, off from the road; no flattery for it:
No lick-foote, pain of loosing your proboscis:
My Licorish Fly.

Tip. What says old veluet-head?

Fli. He will present me himself, Sir, if you will not.

Tip. Who? he present? what? whom? An Host? A Groom?
Divide the thanks with me? share in my glories?
Lay up. I say no more.

Hos. Then silence Sir,
And hear the sovereign.

Tip. Hostlers? to usurp
Upon my Sparta' or Province, as they say?
No broom but mine?

Hos. Still Colonel, you mutter?

Tip. I dare speak out, as Cuerpo.

Fli. Noble Colonel.

Tip. And carry what I ask-

Hos. Ask what you can Sr.
So't be in the house.

Tip. I ask my rights and privileges,
And though for form I please to cal't a suit,
I have not been accustomed to repulse.

Pru. No sweet Sir Glorious, you may still command.

Hos. And go without.

Pru. But yet Sir being the first,
And called a suit, you will look it shall be such
As we may grant.

Lad. It else denies it self.

Pru. You hear the opinion of the Court.

Tip. I (...)
No Court opinions.

Pru. It Is my Ladies, though.

Tip. My Lady is a Spinster, at the Law,
And my petition is of right.

Pru. What is it?

Tip. It is for this poor learned bird.

Hos. The Fly?

Tip. Professor in the Inn, here, of small matters:

Lat. How he commends him!

Hos. As, to save himself ^n him.

Lad. So do all Politiques in their commendations.

Hos. This is a State-bird, and the verier fly?

Tip. Hear him problematize.

Pr. Bless us, what is that?

Tip. Or syllogize, elenchize.

Lad. Sure, petard's,
To blow us up.

Lat. Some inginous strong words!

Hos. He means to erect a castle in the air,
And make his fly an Elephant to carry it.

Tip. Bird of the Arts he is, and Fly by name!

Pru. Buz.

Hos. Blow him off good Pru, they will mar all else.

Tip. The Soueraigne's honor is to cherish learning.

Pru. What in a Fly?

Tip. In any thing industrious.

Pr. But Flies are busy!

Lad. Nothing more troublesome,
Or importune!

Tip. There Is nothing more domestic,
Tame, or familiar then your Fly in Cuerpo.

Hos. That is when his wings are cut, he is tame indeed, else
Nothing more impudent, and greedy; licking:

Lad. Or saucy, good Sir Glorious.

Pr. Leave your Aduocate-ship
Except that we shall call you Orator Fly,
And send you down to the dresser, and the dishes.

Hos. A good flap, that!

Pru. Commit you to the steem!

Lad. Or ^s condemn you to the bottles.

Pr. And pots.
There is his quarry.

Hos He will chirp, far better,
Your bird, below.

Lad. And make you finer Music.

Pru. His buz will there become him.

Tip. Come away.
Buz, in their faces: Give 'hem all the Buz,
Dor in their ears, and eyes, Hum, Dor, and Buz!
I will statuminate and under prop thee.
If they scorn us, let us scorn them- We Will find
The thorough-fare below, and Quaere him,
Leave these relicts, Buz; they shall see that I,
Spite of their jeares, dare drink, and with a Fly.

Lat. A fair remove at once, of two impertinents!
Excellent Pru! I love thee for thy wit,
No less then State.

Pru. One must pres^rue the other.

Lad. Who Is here?

Pru. O Lovel, Madam, your sad servant.

Lad. Sad? he is sollen still, and wears a cloud
About his brows; I know not how to approach him.

Pru. I will instruct you, madame, if that be all,
Go to him and kiss him.

Lad. How, Pru?

Pru. Go, and kiss him,
I do command it.

Lad. Thou Art not wild, wench!

Pru. No,
Tame, and exceeding tame, but still your Sovereign.

Lad. Has too much bravery made thee mad?

Pru. Nor proud
Do, what I do enjoin you. No disputing
Of my prerogative, with a front, or frown;
Do not detrect: you know the authority
Is mine, and I will exercise it, swiftly,
If you provoke me.

Lad. I have wouen a net
To snare my self in! Sir I am enioyn'd
To tender you a kiss; but do not know
Why, or wherefore, only the pleasure royal
Will have it so, and vrges -- Do not you
Triumph on my obedience, seeing it forced thus.
There it is.

Lov. And welcome. Was there ever kiss
That relished thus! or had a sting like this,
Of so much Nectar, but, with Aloes mixed.

Pru. No murmuring, nor repining, I am fixed.

Lov. It had, me thinks, a quintessence of either,
But that which was the better, drowned the bitter.
How soon it passed away! how vnrecouered!
The distillation of another soul
Was not so sweet! and till I meet again,
That kiss, those lips, like relish, and this taste,
Let me turn all, consumption, and, here waste.

Pru. The royal assent is past, and cannot alter.

Lad. You Will turn a Tyran.

Pru. Be not you a Rebel,
It is a name is alike odious.

Lad. You Will hear me?

Pru. No, not of this argument.
Would you make laws, and be the first that break'hem?
The example is pernicious in a subject,
And of your quality, most.

Lat. Excellent Princess!

Host. Just Queen!

Lat. Brave Sovereign.

Host A she-Traian! this!

Bea. What is it? Proceed incomparable Pru!
I am glad I am scarce at leisure to applaud thee.

Lat. It^s well for you, you have so happy expressio^s.

Lad. Yes, cry her up, with acclamations, do,
And cry me down, run all with sovereignty.
Prince Power will never want her Parasites.

Pru. Nor Murmr her pretenses: Master Lovel,
For so your libell here, or bill of complaint,
Exhibited, in our high Court of Sou'raignty,
At this first hour of our reign, declares
Against this noble Lady, a dis-respect
You have conceived, if not received, from her.

Host. Received, so the charge lies in our bill.

Pru. We see it, his learned Council, leave your planing,
We that do love our justice, above all
Our other Attributes; and have the nearness,
To know your extraordinary merit;
As also to discern this Ladies goodness;
And find how loath she would be, to lose the honor,
And reputation, she has had, in having
So worthy a servant, though but for few minutes.
Do here enjoin.

Hos. Good!

Pru. Charge, will, and commaud
Her Ladyship, pain of our high displeasure
And the committing an extreme contempt,
Unto the Court, our crown and dignity.

Host. Excellent Sovereign! And egregious Pru^

Pru. To entertain you for a pair of hours,
(Choose, when you please, this day) with all respects,
And valuation of a principal servant,
To give you all the titles, all the privileges,
The freedoms, favors, rights, she can bestow.

Hos. Large, ample words, of a brave latitude!

Pru. Or can be expected, from a Lady of honor,
Or quality, in discourse, access, address.

Hos. Good.

Pru. Not to give ear, or admit conference
With any person but your self. Nor there,
Of any other argument, but love,
And the companion of it, gentile courtship.
For which your two hours service, you shall take
Two kisses.

Hos. Noble!

Pru. For each hour, a kiss,
To be taken freely, fully, and legally;
Before us; in the Court here, and our presence.

Hos. Rare?

Pru. But those hours past, and the two kisses paid,
The binding caution is, never to hope
Renewing of the time, or of the suit,
On any circumstance.

Hos. A hard condition!

Lat. Had it been easier, I should have suspected
The sou'raignes justice.

Hos. O you are servant,
My Lord, unto the Lady, and a Rival:
In point of law, my Lord, you may be challenged.

Lat. I am not jealous!

Host. Of so short a time
Your Lorship needs not, and being done, in foro.

Pru. What is the answer?

Host. He craves respite, madame,
To advise with his learned Council.

Pru. Be you he,
And go together quickly.

Lad. You are, no Tyran?

Pru. If I be madam, you were best appeal me!

Lat. Beaufort --

Bea. I am busy, pr'y thee let me alone:
I have a cause in hearing too.

Lat. At what Bar?

Bea. Lou's Court o'Requests!

Lat. Bring't into the Souerainty:
It is the nobler Court, before Judge Pru,
The only learned mother of the Law!
And Lady of conscience, too!

Bea. It Is well enough
Before this mistress of Requests, where it is.

Host. Let 'hem not scorn you. Bear up master Lovel,
And take your hours, and kisses, They are a fortune.

Lov. Which I cannot appr^ue, and less make use of:

Host. Still i'this cloud! why cannot you make use of?

Lov. Who would be rich to be so soon undone?
The beggars best is wealth, he does not know:
And, but to show it him, in flames his want:

Host. Two hours at height?

Lov. That joy is too too narrow,
Would bound a love, so infinite as mine:
And being past, leaves an eternal loss.
Who so prodigiously affects a feast,
To forfeit health, and appetite, to see it?
Or but to taste a spoone-full, would forgo
All gust of delicacy ever after?

Host. These, yet, are hours of hope.

Lov. But all hours following
Years of despair, ages of misery!
Nor can so short a happiness, but spring
A world of fear, with thought of loosing it;
Better be never happy, then to feel
A lit^e of it, and then loose it ever.

Host. I do confess, it is a strict iniunction;
But, then the hope is, it may not be kept.
A thousand things may interuene, We see
The wind sh^ft often, thrice a day, sometimes;
Decrees may alter upon better motion,
And riper hearing. The best bow may start,
And the hand may vary. Pru may be a sage
In Law, and yet not sour, sweet Pru, smooth Pru,
Soft, debonaire, and amiable Pru,
May do as well as rough, and rigid Pru;
And yet maintain her, venerable Pru,
Maiestique Pru, and Serenissimous Pru.
Try but one hour first, and as you like
The loose o'that, Draw home and prove the other.

Lov. If one hour could, the other happy make,
I should attempt it.

Hos. Put it on: and do.

Lov. Or in the blessed attempt that I might die!

Hos. I mary, there were happiness indeed;
Transcendent to the Melancholy, meant.
It were a fate, above a monument,
And all inscription, to die so. A Death
For Emperors to enjoy! And the Kings
Of the rich East, to pawn their regions for;
To sow their treasure, open all their mines,
Spend all their spices to embalme their corpse,
And wrap the inches up in sheets of gold,
That fell by such a noble destiny!
And for the wrong to your friend, that feare's awa^,
He rather wrongs himself, following fresh light,
New eyes to swear by. If Lord Beaufort change,
It is no crime in you to remain constant.
And upon these conditions, at a game
So urged upon you.

Pru. Sir your resolution --

Hos. How is the Lady affected?

Pru. Sou'^aignes use not
To ask their subjects suffrage where it is due;
But where conditional.

Host. A royal Sovereign!

Lat. And a rare States-woman. I admire her bearing
In her new regiment.

Host. Come choose your h^ures,
Better be happy for a part of time,
Then not the whole: and a short parr, then never.
Shall I appoint 'hem, pronounce for you?

Lov. Your pleasure.

Host. Then he designs his first hour after dinner;
His second after supper. Say ye? Content?

Pru. Content.

Lad. I am content.

Lat. Content.

Fra. Content.

Bea. What Is that? I am content too.

Lat. You have reason,
You had it on the by, and we observed it.

Nur. Trot I am not content: in fait' I am not.

Host. Why art not thou content, Good shelee-nien?

Nur. He tauk so desperate, and so debausht,
So baudy like a Courtier, and a Lord,
God bless him, one that tak'th Tobacco.

Host. Very well mixed.
What did he say?

Nur. Nay, nothing to the purposh,
Or very little, nothing at all to purposh.

Host. Let him alone Nurse.

Nur. I did tell him of Ser^
Was a great family come out of Ireland,
Descended of O Neale, Mac Con, Mac Dermot,
Mac Murrogh, but he marked not.

Host. Nor do I,
Good Queen of Heralds, ply the bottle, and sleep.

Act 3.
Scene 1.
Tipto. Fly. Iug. Pierce. Jordan. Ferret. Trundle. I like the plot of your
Militia, well!
It is a fine Militia, and well ordered!
And the diuision's neat! 'Twill be desired
Only, the'expressions were a little more Spanish:
For there is the best Militia of the world!
To call 'hem Tertias. Tertia of the kitchen,
The Tertia of the cellar, Tertia of the chamber,
And Tertia of the stables.

Fly. That I can, Sir,
And find out very able, fit commanders.
In every Tertia.

Tip. Now you are in the right!
As in the Tertia of the kitchen, your self
Being a person, elegant in sawces,
There to command, as prime Maestro del Campo,
Chief Master of the palate, for that Tertia:
Or the Cook under you, 'cause you are the Marshall;
And the next officer in the field, to the Host.
Then for the cellar, you have young Ano ne,
Is a rare fellow, what is his other name?

Fly. Pierce, Sir.

Tip. Sir Pierce, I Will ha'him a Caualier.
Sir Pierce Anon, will pierce us a new hogs-head!
And then your thorow-fare, l^g here, his Alferez:
An able officer, giu'me thy beard, round Iug,
I take thee by this handle, and do love
One of thy inches! In The chambers, Jordan, here.
He is the Don, del Campo of the beds.
And for the stables, what is his name?

Fly. old Peck.

Tip. Maestro del Campo, Peck! his name is curt,
A monosyllabe, but commands the horse well.

Fly. O, in an Inn, Sir, we have other horse,
Let those troops rest a while. Wine is the horse,
That we must charge with here.

Tip. Bring up the troops,
Or call sweet Fly, it is an exact Militia,
And thou an exact professor, Lipsius Fly,
Thou shall be called, and Iouse: lack Ferret, welcome,
Old Trench-master, and Colonel of the Pyoners,
What can thou bolt us now? a Coney? or two
Out of Thom: Trundles burrow, here, the Coach?
This is the master of the carriages!
How is thy driving Thom: good, as it was?

True. It serves my Lady, and our officer Pru.
Twelve mile an hour! whom has the old trundle still.

Tip. I am taken with the family, here, fine fellows?
Viewing the muster roll.

True. They are brave men!

Fer. And of the Fly, blown discipline all, the Quartermaster!

Tip. The Fly's a rare bird, in his profession!
Let Us sip a private pint with him, I would have him
Quit this light sign of the light heart, my bird:
And lighter house. It is not for his tall
And growing gravity so Cedar-like,
To be the second to an Host in Cuerpo,
That knows no elegancies, use his own
Dictamen, and his Genius, I would have him
Fly high, and strike at all. Here Is young Anon, too.

Pei. What wine is it Gentlemen, white or claret?

Tip. White. My brisk Anon.

Pei. I Will draw you Juno's milk
That died the Lilies, Colonel.

Tip. Do so Pierce.

Pec. A plague of all Iades, what a clap he has gi'n m^

Fli. Why how now Cossen?

Tip. Who Is that?

Fer. The Hostler.

Fli. What ayl'st thou Cossen Peck?

Pec. O me, my hanches!
As sure as you live, Sir, he knew perfectly
I meant to Cossin him. He did leere so on me,
And then he sn^erd. As who would say take heed S'ah,
And when he saw our halfe-pecke, which you know
Was but an old court-dish, Lord how he stamp't?
I thought, 't had been for joy. When suddenly
He cuts me a back caper with his heels,
And takes me just of the crouper. Down come I
And my whole ounce of oats! Then he neighed out,
As if he had a Mare by the tail.

Fli. Troth Cossin,
You are to blame to use the poor dumb Christians,
So cruelly, defraud 'hem o'their dimensum,
Yonder Is the Colonels horse (there I looked in)
Keeping our Ladies Eve! The devil a bit
He has got, sin'e he came in yet! There he stands,
And looks and looks, but it is your pleasure, Cosse,
He should look lean enough.

Pec. He has hay before him.

Fli. Yes, but as gross as hemp, and as soon will choke him,
Unless he eat it buttered. He Had four shoes,
And good ones, when he came in: It is a wonder,
With standing still he should cast three.

Pec. Troth Quartermaster,
This trade is a kind of mystery, that corrupts
Our standing manners quickly: Once a week,
I meet with such a brush to mollify me.
Sometimes a brace, to awake my Conscience,
Yet still, I sleep securely.

Fli. Cossin Peck,
You must use better dealing, faith you must.

Pec. Troth, to give good example, to my successors,
I could be well content to steal but two girths,
And now and then a saddle cloth, change a bridle,
For exercise: and stay there.

Fli. If you could
There were some hope, on you, Cosse. But the fate is
You' are drunk so early, you mistake whole Saddles:
Sometimes a horse.

Pec. I there is --

Fli. The wine, come Cosse, I Will talk with you anon.

Pec. Do, loose no time, good Quartermaster.

Tip There are the horse, come, Fly.

Fli. Charge, in Boys, in; Lieutenant of the ordinance.
Tobacco, and pipes.

Tip. Who Is that? Old Jordan, good!
A comely vessel, and a necessary.
New-scour'd he is: Here Is to thee, Martial Fly.
In milk, my young Anon says.

Pei. Cream of the grape!
That dropped from Juno's breasts, and sprung the Lilly!
I can recite your fables,

Fly. Here is, too,
The blood of Venus, mother of the Rose!

Ior. The dinner is gone up.

Iug. I hear the whistle.

Ior. I, and the fiddlers. We must all go wait.

Pei. Pox of this waiting, Quarter Master, Fly.

Fly. When Chambermaids are sovereigns, wait their Ladi^
Fly scorns to breath.

Pec. or blow upon the^, he.

Pei. Old Parcel Peck! Art thou there? how now? lam^

Pec. Yes faith: it is ill halting before criples,
I have got a dash of a Jade, here, will stick by me.

Pei. O you have had some phant'sie, fellow Peck,
Some revelation --

Pec. What?

Pei. To steal the hay,
Out of the racks again:

Fly. I told him so,
When the ghests backs were turned.

Pei. Or bring (...) pe^
The bottom upwards, heaped with oats; and cry.
Here Is the best measure upon all the road! when
You know the ghest, put in his hand, to feel,
And smell to the oats, that grated all his fingers
Vpo'the wood --

Pec. Mum!

Pei. And found out your (...)

Pec. I ha'bin in the cellar, Pierce.

Pei. You were the there,
Vpo' your knees; I do remember it:
To ha'the fact conceald. I could tell more,
Soping of saddles, cutting of horse tails,
And cropping -- pranks of ale, and hostelry --

Fly. Which he cannot forget, he says, young Knight:
No more then you can other deeds of darkness,
Done in the cellar.

Tip. Well said, bold professor.

Fer. We shall ha'some truth explained.

Pei. We are all mortal,
And have our visions.

Pec. Truly it seems to me
That every horse has his whole peck, and tumbles
^p to the ears in littour,

Fly. When, indeed
There Is no such matter; not a smell of prouander.

Fer. Not so much straw as would tie up a horse-taile!

Fly. Nor any thing in the rack, but two old cob webs!
and so much rotten hay, as had been a hens riest!

True. And yet he is ever apt to sweep the mangers!

^er. But puts in nothing.

Pei. These are fits, and fancies,
Which you must leave, good Peck.

Fly. And you must pray
^t may be revealed to you, at sometimes,
Whose ho^rse you ought to cosen; with what conscience;
The how; and when; a Parsons horse may suffer --

Pei. Who Is master's double beneficed; put in that.

Fly. A little greasing in the teeth; it is wholesome:
And keeps him in a sober shuffle.

Pei. His saddle too
May want a stirrup.

Fly. And, it may be sworn,
His learning lay of one side, and so broke it.

Pec. They have ever oats i'their cloake-bags, to affront us.

Fly. And therefore it is an office meritorious,
To tith such soundly.

Pei. And a graziers may.

Fer. O they are pinching puckfists!

True. And suspicious.

Pei. Suffer before the masters face, sometimes.

Fly. He shall think he sees his horse eat half a bushel,

Pei. When the slight is, rubbing his gummes with salt,
Till all the skin come off, he shall but mumble,
Like an old woman that were chewing brawne,
And drop 'hem out again.

Tip. Well argued Caualier,

Fly. It may do well: and go for an example:
But Cosse, have care of understanding horses,
Horses with angry heels, Nobility horses.
Horses that know the world; let them have meat
Till their teeth ache; and rubbing till their ribs
Shine like a wenches forehead: They are Devils else
Will look into your dealings.

Pec. For mine own part,
The next I cossen of the pampred breed,
I wish he may be found'red.

Fli. Foun-de-red.
Prolate it right.

Pec. And of all four, I wish it,
I love no crouper complements.

Pei. Whose horse w^ it?

Pec. Why, Mr Bursts.

Pei. Is Bat Burst come?

Pec. An hour he has been here.

Tip. What Burst?

Pei. Mas, Bartolmew Burst.
One that has been a Citizen, since a Courtier,
And now a Gamester. Has had all his whirles,
And bouts of fortune, as a man would say,
Once a Bat, and ever a Bat! a Rere-mouse,
And Bird of twilight, he has broken thrice

Tip. Your better man, the Geno'way Proverb say,
Men are not made of steel.

Pei. Nor are they (...)
Always to hold.

Fli. Thrice honorable Colonel!
Hinges will crack-

Tip. Though they be Spanish iro^

Pei. He is a merchant still, Aduenturer,
At in, and in: and is our thorough-fares friend.

Tip. Who? lugs?

Pei. The same: and a fine gentl^
Was with him!

Pec. Mr Huffle.

Pei. Who? Hodge H^

Ti. What Is he?

Pei. A cheater, and another fine gentl^
A friend of the Chamberlaynes! Iordans! Mr Huf^
He is Bursts protection.

Fli. Fights, and vapors for him

Pei. He will be drunk so ciuilly-

Fli. So discreetly-

Pei. And punctually! just at his hour.

Fli. And then
Call for his Jordan, with that hum and state,
As if he pis^'d the Politiques!

Pei. And sup
With his tuft-taffata night-geere, here, so silently!

Fli. Nothing but Music!

Pei. A dozen of bawdy songs.

Tip. And knows the General this?

Fl. O no, Sr. Dormis,
Dormit Patronus, still, the master sleeps.
They Will steal to bed.

Pei. In private Sir, and pay,
The Fiddlers with that modesty, next morning.

Fli. Take a disiune of muscadell, and eggs!

Pei. And pack away in their trundling cheats, like Gipsies^

True. Mysteries, mysteries, Ferret.

Fer. I we see, Trundle,
What the great Officers, in an Inn may do;
I do not say the Officers of the Crown
But the light heart.

Tip. I Will see the Bat, and Huffl^.

Fer. I have some business Sir, I crave your pardon-

Tip. What?

Fer. To be sober.

Tip. Pox, go get you gone then.
Trundle shall stay.

True. No I beseech you Colonel,
Your Lordship has a mind to be drunk private,
With these brave Gallants; I will step ^side
Into the stables, and salute my Mares.

Pei. Yes do: and sleep with 'hem, let him go-base whip-stocke.
Hee'^ as drunk as a fish now, almost as dead.

Tip. Come, I will see the flicker mouse, my Fly.

Act 3. Scene 2.
Prudence vsher'd by the Host, takes her seat of Judicature, Nurse, Frank, the
two Lords Beaufort, and Latimer, assist of the Bench: The Lady and Louel are
brought in, and sit on the two sides of the stage, confronting each the other.
Ferret. Trundle. Pru. Here set the hour; but first produce the parties:
And clear the court. The time is now of price.

Hos. Iug, get you down, and Trundle get you up,
You shall be Crier. Ferret here, the Clearke.
Jordan, smell you without, till the Ladies call you;
Take down the Fiddlers too, silence that noise,
Deep, in the cellar, safe.

Pru. Who keeps the watch?

Hos. Old Sheelinin here, is the Madame Tel-clocke.

Nur. No fait and trot, sweet Master, I shall sleep;
I fait, I shall.

Bea. I p^'y thee, do then, Schrich. O^.
She brings to mind the fable of the Dragon,
That kept the Hesperian fruit. Would I could charm her.

Hos. Trundle will do it with his hum. Come Trundle.
Precede him Ferret, in the form.

Fer. Oyez, oyez, oyez.
Whereas there has been awarded,
By the Queen Regent of Love,
In this high court of soueraig^ty,
Two special hours of address,
To Herebert Lovel, appellant,
Against the Lady Frampul, defendant
Herebert Lovel, Come into the Court.
Make challenge to thy first hour,
And save thee, and thy bail.

True. O yez, etc.
Whereas, etc.
By the Qu. etc.
^n this high, etc.
Two special, etc
To Herebert, etc.
Against the, etc.
Herebert Lov. etc.
Make, etc.
And ^aue, etc.

Hos. Lo, louting where he comes into the Court!
Clearke' of the sou'raignty take his appearance.
And how accoutred, how designed he comes!

Fer. T's done. Now Crier, c^ll the Lady Frampul,
And by the name of,
Francis, Lady Frampul, defendant,
Come into the Court,
Make answer to the award,
And save thee, and thy bail.

True. Francis etc.
Come into the, etc.
Make answer, etc.
And save thee, etc.

Enter Lady Hos. She makes a noble, and a just appearance.
Set it down likewise, and how armd she comes.

Pru. Usher of Loves Court, give 'hem their oath.
According to the f^rme, upon Love's Missal.

Hos. Arise, and ^ay your hands, upon the Book.
Herebert Lovel Appellant, and Lady Frances Frampul, Defendant, you shall
swear upon the Liturgy of Love, Ovid de art a^andi, that you neither have,
ne will have, nor in any w^se bear about you, thing, or things, pointed, or
blunt, within these theselists, other then what are natural, and allowed by
the Court: No enchanted Arms, or weapons, Stones of virtue, Herb of Grace,
Charm, Character, Spel, Philtre, or other power, then Loves only, and the
iustneste of your cause. So help you Love, his Mother, and the contents of
this Book: Kiss it. Return unto yourseats. Crier bid silence.


True. Oyez. Oyez. Oyez.

Fe. In The name of the Sovereign of Love
Notice is given by the Court,
To the Appellant, and Defendant,
That the first hour of address proceeds.
And Love save the Sovereign.

True. In The etc.
Notice is etc.
To the Ap etc.
That the etc.
And love etc.

True. Every man, or woman keep silence pain of imprisonment.

Pru. Do your endeavors, in the name of Love.

Lov. To make my first approaches, then, in love.

Lad. Tell us what Love is, that we may be sure
There Is such a thing, and that it is in nature.

Lov. Excellent Lady, I did not expect
To meet an Infidel! much less an Atheist!
Here in Love's lists! of so much unbelief!
To raise a question of his being --

Host. Well-charg'd!

Lov. I rather thought, and, with religion, think,
Had all the character of love been lost,
His lines, demensions, and whole signature
Razed, and defaced, with dull humanity:
That both his nature, and his essence might
Have found their mighty instauration he^e,
Here where the confluence of fair, and good,
Meets to make up all beauty. For, what else
Is Love, but the most noble, pure affection
Of what is truly beautiful, and fair?
Desire of union with the thing beloved?

(Beau. Have the assistants of the Court their votes,
And writ of privilege, to speak them freely?

Pru. Yes, to assist; but not to interrupt.

Bea. Then I have read somwhere, that man and woman
Were, in the first creation, both one piece,
And being cleft asunder, ever since,
Love was an appetite to be reioyn'd.
As for example --

N^r. Cramo-cree! what meansh' tou?

Bea. Only, to kiss, and part.

Hos. So much is lawful.

Lat. And stands with the prerogative of loves Court!

Lov. It is a fable of Plato's, in his Banquet,
And vtter'd, there, by Aristophanes.

Hos. 'Twas well remembered here, and to good use.)
But on with your description, what Love is.
Desire of union with the thing beloved.

Lov. I meant a definition. For I make
The efficient cause, what is beautiful, and fair.
The formal cause, the appetite of union.
The final cause, the union it self.
But larger, if you will have it, by description,
It is a flame, and ardor of the mind,
Dead, in the proper corpse, quick in another:
Trans-ferres the Lover into the Loved.
The he, or she, that loves, engraues, or stamps
The Idea of what they love, first in themselves:
Or, like to glasses, so their minds take in
The forms of their beloved, and them reflect,
It is the likeness of affections,
Is both the parent, and the nurse of love.
Love is a spiritual coupling of two souls,
So much more excellent, as it least relates
Unto the body; circular, eternal;
N^ feigned, or made, but borne: And then, so precious,
As naught can value it, but it self. So free,
As nothing can command it, but it self.
And in it self, so round, and liberal,
As where it favors, it bestows it self.

(Bea. And, that do I; here my whole self, I tender,
According to the practice of the Court.

Nur I'tish a naughty pract^sh, a lewd practish,
Be quiet man, dou shall not leip her, here.

Bea. Leap her? I lip her, foolish Queen at Arms,
Thy blazon's false: will thou blaspheme thine office?)

Lov. But, we must take, and understand this love
Along still, as a name of dignity;
Not pleasure.

(Hos. Mark you that, my light young Lord?)

Lov. True love has no unworthy thought, no light,
Loose, vn-becoming appetite, or strain,
But fixed, constant, pure, immutable.

(Bea. I relish notthese philosophical feasts:
Give me a banquet o'sense, like that of Ovid:
A form, to take the eye; a voice, mine care;
Pure aromatiques, to my sent; a soft,
Smooth, deinty hand, to touch; and, for my taste,
Ambrosiack kisses, to melt down the palate.)

Lov. They are the earthly, lower form oflouers,
Are only taken with what strikes the senses!
And love by that loose scale. Although I grant,
We like, what is saire and graceful in an object,
And (true) would use it, in the all we tend to,
Both of our civil, and domestic deeds.
In ordering of an army, in our style,
Apparel, gesture, building, or what not?
All arts, and actions do affect their beauty.
But put the case, in travail I may meet
Some gorgeous Structure, a brave Frontispice,
Shall I stay captive ^'the outer court,
Surprised with that, and not advance to know
Who dwells there, and inhabiteth the house?
There is my friendship to be made, within;
With what can love me again: not, with the walls,
Doors, windo'es, architrabes, the frieze, and coronice.
My end is lost in loving of a face,
An eye, lip, nose, hand, foot, or other part,
Whose all is but a statue, if the mind
Move not, which only can make the return.
The end of love is, to have two made one
In will, and in affection, that the minds
Be first inoculated, not the bodies.

Bea. Gi' me the body, if it be a good one.

Fra. Nay, sweet my Lord, I must appeal the Sovereign
For better quarter; If you hold your practice;
True. Silence, pain of imprisonment: Hear the Court.

Lov. The bodies love is frail, subject to change,
And alter still, with it: The minds is firm,
One, and the same, proceeds first, from weighing,
And well examining, what is fair, and good;
Then, what is like in reason, fit in manners;
That breeds good will: good will desire of union.
So knowledge first, begets benevolence,
Benevolence breeds friendship, friendship love.
And where it starts or steps aside from this,
It is a mere degenerous appetite,
A lost, oblique, deprau'd affection,
And bears no mark, or character of Love.

Lad. How am I changed! By what alchimy
Of love, or language, am I thus translated!
His tongue is tip'd with the Philosophers stone,
And that has touched me through every vain!
I feel that transmutation of my blood,
As I were quite become another creature,
And all he speaks, it is proiection!

Pru. Well feigned, my Lady: now her parts begin!

Lat. And she will act 'hem subtly.

Pru. She fails me else.

Lov. Nor do they trespass within bounds of pardon,
That giving way, and license to their love,
Di-uest him of his noblest ornaments,
Which are his modesty, and shamefac'tnesse:
And so they do, that have unfit designs,
Upon the parties, they pretend to love.
For, what is more monstrous, more a prodigy,
Then to hear me protest truth of affection
Unto (...) person that I would dishonor?
And what is a more dishonor, then defacing
Another good, with forfeiting mine own?
And drawing on a fellowship of sin;
From note of which, though (for a while) we may
Be both kept safe, by caution, yet the conscience
Cannot be cleans^d. For what was hitherto
Called by the name of love, becomes destroyed
Then, with the fact: the innocence lost,
The bating of affection soon will follow:
And Love is never true, that is not lasting.
No more then any can be pure, or perfect,
That entertaines more then one object. Dixi.

Lad. O speak, and speak for ever! let min'eare
Be feasted still, and filled with this banquet!
No sense can ever surfeit on such truth!
It is the marrow of all lovers tenants!
Who has read Plato, Heliodore, or Tatius,
Sydney, (...), or all Loves Fathers, like him?
He, is there the Master of the Sentences,
Their School, their Commentary, Text, and Gloss,
And breathes the true divinity of Love!

Pru. Excellent actor! how she hits this passion!

Lad. Where have I lived, in heresy, so long
Out of the Congregation of Love,
And stood irregular, by all his C^nons?

L^. But do you think she plays?

Pru. Vpo'my Sovereignty,
Mark her anon.

Lat. I shake, and am half jealous.

Lad. What penance shall I do, to be received,
And reconciled, to the Church of Love?
Go on procession, barefoot, to his Image,
And say some hundred penitential verses,
There, out of Chaucers Troilus, and Cr^ide?
Or to his mothers shrine, vow a Waxe-candle
As large as the Town May Pole is, and pay it!
Enjoin me any thing this Court thinks fit,
For I have trespassed, and blasphemed Love.
I have, indeed, despised his Deity,
Whom (till this miracle wrought on me) I knew not.
Now I adore Love, and would kiss the rushes
That bear this reverend Gentleman, his Priest,
If that would expiate -- but, I fear it will not.
For, though he be somewhat struck in years, and old
Enough to be my father, he is wise,
And only wise men love, the other covet.
I could begin to be in love with him,
But will not tell him yet, because I hope
T'enioy the other hour, with more delight,
And prove him farther.

Pru. Most S^cratick Lady!
Or, if you will Ironick! gi' you joy
OF you Platonic love here, Mr Lovel.
But pay him his first kiss, yet, in the Court,
Which is a debt, and due: For the houre's run.

Lad. How swift is time, and s^ly steals away
From them would hug it, value it, embrace it?
I should have thought it scarce had run ten minutes,
When the whole hour is fled. Here, take your kiss, Sir,
Which I most willing tender you, in Court.

(Bea. And we do imitate --)

Lad. And I could wish,
It had been twenty -- so the Sovereigns
Poor narrow nature had decreed it so --
But that is past, irreuocable, now:
She did her kind, according to her latitude --

Pru Beware, you do not conjure up a spirit
You cannot lay.

Lad. I dare you, do your worst,
Show me but such an injustice: I would thank you
To alter your award.

Lat. Sure she is serious!
I shall have another fit of jealousy!
I feel a grudging!

Host. Cheer up, noble ghest,
We cannot guess what this may come to, yet;
The brain of man, or woman, is uncertain!

Lov. T^t, she dissembles! All is personated,
And counterfeit comes from her! If it were not,
The Spanish Monarchy, with both the Indies,
Could not buy off the treasure of this kiss,
Or half give balance for my happiness.

Host. Why, as it is yet, it glads my light Heart
To see you roused thus from a sleepy humor,
Of drouzy, accidental melancholy;
And all those brave parts of your soul awake,
That did before seem drowned, and buried in you!
That you express your self, as you had backed
The Muses Horse! or got Bellerophons arms!
What news with Fly?

Fly. News, of a newer Lady,
A finer, freshe^, brauer, bonnier beauty,
A very bona-Roba, and a Bouncer!
In yeallow, glistering, golden Satin.

Lad. Pru,
Adiourne the Court.

Pru. Cry Trundle-

True. Oyez,
Any man, or woman, that has any personal attendance
To give unto the Court; Keep the second hour,
And Love save the Sovereign.

Act 4.
Scene 1.
Iug. Barnabe. Jordan. O Barnabe!

Ior. Welcome Barnabe! Where ha^ thou been?

Bar. In The foul weather.

Iug. Which has wet thee, B^.

Bar. As dri^ as a chip! Good Iug, a cast o'thy name,
As well as thy office; two iugges!

Iug. By, and by.

Ior. What Lady's this thou have brought here?

Bar. A great Lad^
I know no more: one, that will try you, Jordan.
She Will find your gage, your circle, your capacity,
How does old Staggers the Smith? and Tree, the Sadler?
Keep they their peny-club, still?

Ior. And the old catch too,
Of whoop Barnaby-

Bar. Do they sing at me?

Ior. They'are reeling at it, in the parlour, now:

Bar. I Will to 'hem: Gi' me a drink first.

Ior. Where thy (...)

Bar. I lost it by the way-Gi'me another.

Iug. A hat?

Bar. A drink.

Iug. Take heed of taking cold, Ban-

Bar. The wind blew't off at High-gate, and my Lady
Would not endure me, light, to take it up,
But made me drive bare-headed in the rain.

Ior. That she might be mistaken for a Countess?

Bar. Troth, like enough! She might be an o're-grown Duchess,
For ought I know.

Iug. What! with one man!

Bar. At a time,
They carry no more, the best of'hem.

I^. Nor the brauest.

Bar. And she is very brave!

I^r. A stately gown!
And p^ticote, she has on!

Bar. Ha'you spied that, (...)
You'are a notable peerer, an old Rabbi,
At a smocks hem, boy.

Iug. As he is Chamberlane,
He may do that, by his place.

Ior. What Is her Squire?

Bar. A toy, that she allows eight pence a day.
A slight Man-net, to port her, up, and down.
Come show me to my play-fellowes, old Staggert,
And father Tree.

Ior. Here, this way, Bar^abe.

Act 4. Scene 2.
Tipto. Burst. Huffle. Fly. Come, let'vs take in fresco, here, one quart.

Bur. Two quarts, my man of war, let'vs not be stinted.

Huf. Advance three iordans, varlet of the house:

Tip. I do not like your Burst, Bird; He is saucy:
Some Shopkeeper he was?

Fly. Yes, Sir.

Tip. I knew it.
A broke-wing'd Shopkeeper? I nose 'hem, straight.
He had no Father, I warrant him, that durst own him;
Some foundling in a stall, or the Church porch;
Brought up it'he Hospital; and so bound Prentise;
Then Master of a shop; then 'one o'th Inquest;
Then breaks out Bankrupt; or starts Alderman:
The original of both is a Church Porch --

Fli. Of some, my Colonel.

Tip. Good faith, of most!
O'your shop Citizens, they are rud^ Animals!
And let'hem get but ten mile out a town
Th'out swagger all the wapen-take.

Fli. What Is that?

Tip. A Saxon word, to signify the hundred.

Bur. Come let us drink, Sir Glorious, some brave health
Upon our tip-toos.

Tip. To the health of the Bursts.

Bu. Why Bursts?

Ti. Why Tipto's?

Bu. OF I cry you mercy!

Tip. It is sufficient.

Huf. What is so sufficient?

Tip. To drink to you is sufficient.

Huf. On what terms?

Tip. That you shall give security to pledge me.

Huf. So you will name no Spaniard, I will pledge you.

Tip. I rather choose to thirst: and will thirst ever,
Then leave that cream of nations, vn-cry'd up.
Perish all wine, and gust of wine.

Huf. How spill it?
Spill it at me?

Tip. I wrek not, but I spilt it.

Fli. Nay pray you be quiet, noble bloods.

Bur. No Spaniards,
I cry, with my cossen Huffle.

Huf. Spaniards? Pilchers?

Tip. Do not provoke my patient blade. It sleep's,
And would not hear thee: Huffle, thou art rude,
And do not know the Spanish composition.

Bur. What is the Recipe? Name the ingredients.

Tip. Valor.

Bur. Two ounces!

Tip. Prudence.

Bur. Half a dram!

Tip. Justice,

Bur. A penny weight!

Tip. Religion.

Bur. Three scruples!

Tip. And of grauida'd

Bur. A facefull!

Tip. He carries such a dose of it in his looks,
Actions, and gestures, as it breeds respect,
To him, from Savages, and reputation
With all the sons of men.

Bur. Will it give him credit
With Gamesters, Courtiers, Citizens, or Tradesmen?

Tip. He Will borrow money on the stroke of his beard!
Or turn off his Mustaccio! His mere cuello,
Or Ruff about his neck is a Bill of Exchange
In any Bank, in Europe! Not a Merchant
That fees his gate, but straight will furnish him
Upon his pa^e!

Huf. I have heard the Spanish name
Is terrible, to children in some Countries;
And used to make them eat -- their bread and butter:
Or take their worm-seed.

Tip. Huffle, you do shuffle:
-- to them: Stuff, Pinnacia.

Bur. Slid heers a Lady!

Huf. And a Lady gay!

Tip. A well-trimm'd Lady!

Huf. Lett's lay her a board.

Bur. Lett's hail her first.

Tip. By your sweet favor Lady,

Stu. Good Gentlemen be civil, we are strangers.

Bur. And you were Flemings, Sir!

Huf. Or Spaniards!

Tip. The'are here, have been at Seuil i'their days,
And at Madrid too!

Pin. He is a foolish fellow,
I pray you mind him not, He is my Protection.

Tip. In your protection, he is safe, sweet Lady.
So shall you be, in mine.

Huf. A share, good Coronell.

Tip. Of what?

Huf. Of your fine Lady! I am H^dge,
My name is Huffle.

Tip. Huffling Hodge, be quiet.

Bur. And I pray you, be you so, Glorious Coronel,
Hodge Huffle shall be quiet.

Huf. A Lady gay, gay.
For she is a Lady gay, gay, gay. For ^he's a Lady gay.

Tip. Bird of the Vespers, Vespertilio, Burst;
You are a Gentleman, of the first head,
But that head may be broke, as all the Body is --
Burst, if you tie not up your Huffle, quickly.

Huf. Tie dogs, not man.

Hur. Nay pray thee, Hodge, be still.

Tip. This steel here rides not, on this thigh, in vain.

Huf. Show thou thy steel, and thigh, thou glorious Dirt,
Then Hodg^ sings Sampson, and no ties shall hold.
-- Pierce. Iug. Jorden.

To them. Pei. Keep the peace gentlemen: wha^ do you m^

Tip. I will not discompose my self, for Hu^e.

Pin. You ^ee what your entreaty, and pressure still
Of gentlemen, to be civil, does bring on?
A quarrel? and perhaps manslaughter? You
Will carry your goose about you, still? your pla^ing (...)
Your tongue to smooth all is not here fine stuff?

Stu. Why wife?

Pin. Your wife? have not I for^iden you that^
Do you think I Will call you husband ^'this gown,
Or any thing, in that iacket, but Protection?
Here tie my shoe; and show my vellute petticote,
And my silk stocking! why do you make me a Lady,
If I may not do like a Lady, in fine clothes.

Stu. Sweet heart, you may do what you will, with me.

Pin. (...); I knew that at home; what to do with you;
But why was I brought hither? to see fashions?

Stu. And wear them too, sweet heart, but this wild Company

Pin. Why do you bring me in wild Company?
You Would have me tame, and civil, in wild Company?
I hope I know, wild Company are fine Company,
And in fine Company, where I am fine my self,
A Lady may do any thing, deny nothing
To a fine party, I have heard you say it.
-- To them Pierce.

Pei. There are a Company of Ladies above
Desire your Ladyships Company, and to take
The surety of their lodgings, from the affront
Of these halfe-beasts, were here even now, the Centaures,

Pin. Are they fine Ladies?

Pei. Some very fine Ladies.

Pin. As fine as I?

Pei. I dare use no comparisons,
Being a servant, sent --

Pin. Spoke, like a fine fellow!
I would thou were one; I Would not then deny thee:
But, thank thy Lady.
-- To them Host.

Hos. Madam, I must crave you
To afford a Lady a visit, would excuse
Some harshnesse of the house, you have received
From the brute ghests.

Pin. This's a fine old man!
I Would go with him an' he were a little finer!
Stu^ You may sweet heart, it is mine Host.

Pin. mine Host!

Host. Yes madame, I must bid you welcome.

Pin. Do then.

Stu. But do not stay.

Pin. I Will be aduil'd by you, yes!

Act 4. Scene. 3.
-- To them Latimer. Beaufort. Lady. Pru. Frank. Host. Pinnacia. Stuff. What
more then Thracian Barbarism was this!

Bea. The battle of the Centaures, with the Lapithes!

Lad. There is no taming of the Monster drink.

Lat. But what a glorious beast our Tipto showed!
He would not discompose himself, the Don!
Your Spaniard, nere, does discompose himself.

Bea. Yet, how he talked, and ror'd in the beginning!

Pru. And ran as fast, as a knocked Marro'bone.

Bea. So they did all at last, when Lovel went down,
And chased hem bout the Court.

Lat. For all is Don Lewis!
Or fencing after Euclide!

Lad. I nere saw
A lightning shoot so, as my servant did,
His rapier was a Meteor, and he wau'd it
Over 'hem, like a Comet! as they fled him!
I marked his manhood! every stoop he made
Was like an Eagles, at a flight of Cranes!
(As I have read somewhere.)

Bea. Bravely expressed:

Lat. And like a Lover!

Lad. Of his valor, I am!
He seemed a body, rarifi'd, to air!
Or that his sword, and arm were of a piece,
They went together so! Here, comes the Lady.

Bea. A bouncing Bona-roba! as the Fly said.

Fra. She is some Giantesse! I Will stand off,
For fear she swallow me.

La. Is not this our Gown, Pru?
That I bespoke of Stuff?

Pru. It is the fashion!

Lad. I, and the Silk! Feel, sure it is the same!

Pru. And the same Peticote, lace, and all!

Lad. I Will swear it.
How came it hither? make a bill of inquiry.

Pru. Yo'haue a fine suit on, Madam! and a rich one!

Lad. And of a curious making!

Pru. And a new!

Pin. As new, as Day.

Lat. She answers like a fish-wife.

Pin. I put it on, since Noone, I do assure you,

Pru. Who is your Tailor?

Lad. 'Pray you, your Fashioners name.

Pin My Fashioner is a certain man of mine own,
He' is in the house: no matter for his name.

Host. O, but to satisfy this beuy of Ladies:
Of which a brace, here, longed to bid you well-come

Pin. He'^s one, in truth, I title my Protection:
Bid him come up.

Host. Our new Ladies Protection!
What is your Ladyships style?

Pin. Countess Pinnaccia.

Host. Countess Pinnacias man, come to your Lady,

Pru. Your Ladyships Tailor! mas, Stuff!

Lad. How Stuff?
He the Protection!

Hos. Stuff looks like a remnant.

Stu. I am undone, discouerd!

Pru. It Is the suit, Madame,
Now, without scruple! and this, some devise
To bring it home with.

Pin. Why, upon your knees?
Is this your Lady Godmother?

Stu. M^m, Pinnacia.
It is the Lady Frampol: my best customer.

Lad. What show is this, that you present us with?

Stu. I do beseech your Ladyship, forgive me.
She did but say the suit on.

Lad. Who? Which she?

Stu. My wife forsooth.

Lad. How? Mistress Stuff? Your wife!
Is that the riddle?

Pru. We all looked for a Lady,
A Duchess, or a Countess at the least.

Stu. She is my own lawfully begotten wife,
In wedlock. We ha'beene coupled now seven years.

Lad. And why thus mas'qd? You like a footman, ha!
And she your Countess!

Pin. To make a fool of himself
And of me too.

Stu. I pray thee, Pinnace, peace.

Pin. Nay it shall out, since you have called me wife,
And openly dis-Ladied me! though I am dis-Countess'd
I am not yet dis-countenanc'd. These shall see.

Hos silence!

Pi. It is a foolish trick Madame, he has;
For though he be your Taylour, he is my beast.
I may be bold with him, and tell his story.
When he makes any fine garment will fit me,
Or any rich thing that he thinks of price,
Then must I put it on, and be his Countess,
Before he carry it home unto the owners.
A coach is hired, and four horse, he runs
In his velvet I ackat thus, to Rumford, Croyden,
Hounslow, or Barnet, the next bawdy road:
And takes me out, carries me up, and throw's me
Upon a bed.

Lad. Peace thou immodest woman:
She glori^s in the bravery of the vice.

Lat. It Is a queint one!

Bea. A fine species,
Of sornicating with a man's own wife,
Found out by (what is his name?)

Lat. Mr Nic. Stuff!

Host. The very figure of preoccupation
In all his customers best clothes.

Lat. He lies
With his own Succuba, in all your names.

Bea. And all your credits.

Host. I, and at all their costs.

Lat. This gown was then bespoken, for the Souer aig^

Bea. I marry was it.

Lad. And a maine offense,
Committed against the sovereignty: being not brought
Home in the time. Beside, the profanation,
Which may call on the censure of the Court.

Host. Let him be blanketted. Call up the Quartermaster.
Deliver him ore, to Fly.

Stu. O good my Lord.

Host. Pillage the Pinnace.

Lad. Let his wife be stripped.

Bea. Blow off her upper deck.

Lat. Tear all her tackle,

Lad. Pluck the polluted robes over her ears;
Or cut them all to pieces, make a fire o'them:

Pru. To rags, and cinders, burn th'idolatrous vestures.

Hos. Fly, and your fellows, see that the whole censure
Be thoroughly executed.

Fly. Weel toss him, bravely.
Till the stuff stink again.

Host. And send her home,
Diuested to her flanell, in a cart.

Lat. And let her Footman beat the basin before her.

Fli. The Court shall be obei'd.

Hos. Fly, and his office^s
Will do it fiercely.

Stu. Merciful queen Pru.

Pru. I cannot help you.

Bea. Go thy ways Nic. Stuff,
Thou have nickt it for a fashioner of Venery!

Lat. For his own hell! though he run ten mile for it.

Pru. O here comes Lovel, for his second hour.

Bea. And after him, the tipe of Spanish valor.

Act 4. Scene 4.
Lady. Lovel. Tipt^. Latimer. Beaufort. Pru. Frank. Nurse. Host. Servant, what
have you there?

Lou. A meditation,
Or rather a vision, Madam, and of Beauty
Our former subject.

Lad. Pray you let us hear it.

Lov. It was a beauty that I saw
So pure, so perfect, as the frame
Of all the universe was lame,
To that one figure, could I draw,
Or give least line of it a law!
A skeine of silk without a knot!
A fair march made without a halt!
A curious form without a fault!
A printed book without a blot.
All beauty, and without a spot.

Lad. They are gentle words, and would deserve a note,
Set to 'hem, as gentle.

Lov. I have tried my skill.
To close the second hour, if you will hear them,
My boy by that time will have got it perfect.

Lad. Yes, gentle servant. In what calm he speaks,
After this noise, and tumult, so unmoved,
With that serenity of c^untenance,
As i^ his thoughts did acquies^e in that
Which is the object of the second hour,
And nothing else.

Pru. Well then summon the Court.

Lad. I have a suit to the Sovereign of love,
If it may stand with the honor of the Court,
To change the qu^stion but from love, to valor,
To hear, it said, but, what true valor is,
Which often begets true love.

Lat. It is a question
Fit for the Court, to take true knowledge of,
And has my just assent.

Pru. Content.

Bea. Content.

Fra. Content. I am content, give him his oath.

Host. Herebert Lovel, Thou shall swear upon the testament of love, To make
answer to this question propounded to thee by the Court, What true valor is.
And therein to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. So
help thee love, and thy bright sword at need.


Lov. So help me love and my good sword at need.
It is the greatest virtue, and the safety
Of all mankind, the object of it is danger.
A certain mean 'twixt fear, and confidence:
No inconsiderate rashness, or vain appetite
Of false encountering formidable things;
But a true science of distinguishing
What Is good or evil. It springs out of reason,
And tends to perfect honesty, the scope
Is always honor, and the public good:
It is no valor for a private cause.

Bea. No? not sor reputation?

Lov That Is man's Idol,
Set up against God, the maker of all laws,
Who has commanded us we should not kill;
And yet we say, we must for reputation.
What honest man can either fear his own,
Or else will hurt another reputation?
Fear to do base, unworthy things, is valor,
If they be done to us, to suffer them,
Is valor too. The office of a man
That's truly valiant, is considerable
Three ways: The first is in respect of matter,
Which still is danger; in respect of form,
Wherein he must preserve his dignity;
And in the end, which must be ever lawful.

Lat. But men, when they are heated, and in passion,
Cannot consider.

Lov. Then it is not valor.
I never thought an angry person valiant:
Virtue is never aided by a vice.
What need is there of anger, and of tumul^?
When reason can do^ the same things, or more?

Bea. O yes, it is profitable, and of use,
It makes us fierce, and fit to undertake.

Lov. Why so will drink make us both bold, and rash.
Or frenzy if you will, do these make valiant?
They are poor helps, and virtue needs them not.
No man is valianter by being angry,
But he that could not valiant be without:
So, that it comes not in the aid of virtue,
But in the stead of it.

Lat. He holds the right.

Lov. And it is an odious kind of remedy,
To owe our health to a disease.

Tip. If man
Should follow the dictamen of his passion,
He could not escape --

Bea. To discompose himself.

Lat. According to Don Lewis!

Host. Or Caranza!

Lov. Good Colonel Glorious, whilst we treat of valor,
Dismiss your self.

Lat. You are not concerned.

Lov. Go drink,
And congregate the Hostlers, and the Tapsters,
The under-officers of your regiment;
Compose with them, and be not angry valiant!

Tipto goes out. Bea. How does that differ from true valor?

Lov. Thus.
In the efficient, or that which makes it,
For it proceeds from passion, not from judgment:
Then brute beasts have it, wicked persons, there
It differs in the subject: in the form,
It Is carried rashly, and with violence:
Then in the end, where it respects not truth,
Or public honesty; but mere revenge.
Now confident, and undertaking valor,
Swayes from the true, two other ways; as being
A trust in our own faculties, skill, or strength,
And not the right, or conscience o'th^ cause,
That works it: Then in the end, which is the victory,
And not the honor.

Bea. But the ignorant valor
That knows not why it undertakes, but does it
T'escape the infamy merely --

Lov. Is worst of all:
That valor lies, in the eyes of the lookers on;
And is called valor with a witness.

Bea. Right:

Lov. The things true valor is exercised about,
Are poverty, restraint, captivity,
Banishment, loss of children, long disease:
The least is death. Here valor is beheld,
Properly seen; about these it is present:
Not triuiall things, which but require our confidence.
And, yet to those, we must object our selves,
Only for honesty: if any other
Respect be mixed, we quite put out her light.
And as all knowledge, when it is removed
Or separate from justice, is called craft,
Rather then wisdom: so a mind affecting,
Or undertaking dangers, for ambition,
Or any self pretext, not for the public,
Deserves the name of daring, not of valor,
And ouer-daring is as great a vice,
As ouer-fearing.

Lat. Yes, and often greater.

Lov. But as is not the mere punishment,
But cause that, makes a martyr, so it is not
Fighting, or dying; but the manner of it
Renders a man himself. A valiant man
Ought not to undergo, or tempt a danger,
But worthily, and by selected ways:
He undertakes with reason, not by chance.
His valor is the salt to his other virtues,
They are all vnseason'd without it. The waiting maids,
Or the concomitants of it, are his patience,
His magnanimity, his confidence,
His constancy, security, and quiet;
He can assure himself against all rumor!
Despaires of nothing! laughs at contumelies!
As knowing himself, advanced in a height
Where injury cannot reach him, nor aspersion
Touch him with soil!

Lad. Most manly vtterd all!
As if Achilles had the chair in valor,
And Hercules were but a Lecturer!
Who would not hang upon those lips for ever!
That strike such music? I could run on them;
But modesty is such a school mistress,
To keep our sex in awe.

Pru. Or you can feign! my
Subtle and dissembling Lady mistress.

Lat. I fear she means it, Pru, in too good earnest!

Lov. The purpose of an injury it is to vex
And trouble me: now, nothing' can do that,
To him that is valiant. He that is affected
With the least injury, is less then it.
It is but reasonable, to conclude
That should be stronger, still, which hurts, then that
Which is hurt. Now no wickedness is stronger,
Then what opposes it: Not Fortunes self,
When she encounters virtue, but comes off
Both lame, and less! why should a wise man then,
Confess himself the weaker, by the feeling
Of a fools wrong? There may an injury
Be meant me, I may choose, if I will take it.
But we are, now, come to that delicacie,
And tenderness of sense, we think an insolence
Worse then an injury, bear words worse then deeds;
We are not so much troubled with the wrong,
As with the opinion of the wrong! like children,
We are made afraid with visors! Such poor sounds
As is the lie, or common words of spite.
Wise laws thought never worthy a revenge;
And it is the narrowness of humane nature,
Our poverty, and beggary of spirit,
To take exception at these things. He laughed at me!
He broke a jest! a third took place of me!
How most ridiculous quarrels are all these?
Notes of a queasie, and sick stomach, laboring
With want of a true injury! the maine part
Of the wrong, is, our vice of taking it.

Lat. Or our interpreting it to be such.

Lov. You take it rightly. If a woman, or child
Give me the lie, would I be angry? no,
Not if I were i'my wits, sure I should think it
No spice of a disgrace. No more is theirs,
If I will think it, who are to be held
In as contemptible a rank, or worse.
I am kept out a Masque, sometime thrust out,
Made wait a day, two, three, for a great word,
Which (when it comes forth) is all frown, and forehead!
What laughter should this breed, rather then anger!
Out of the tumult, of so many errors,
To feel, with contemplation, mine own quiet?
If a great person do me an affront,
A Giant of the time, sure, I will bear it
Or out of patience, or necessity!
Shall I do more for fear, then for my judgment?
For me now to be angry with Hodge Huffle,
Or Burst (his broken charge) if he be saucy,
Or our own type of Spanish valor, Tipto,
(Who were he now necessited to beg
Would ask an alms, like Conde Oliuares)
Were just to make my self, such a vain Animal
As one of them. If light wrongs touch me not,
No more shall great; if not a few, not many.
There Is naught so sacred with us but may find
A sacrilegious person, yet the thing is
No less divine, cause the profane can reach it.
He is shot free, in battle, is not hurt,
Not he that is not hit. So he is valiant,
That yields not unto wrongs; not he that scapes 'hem
They that do pull down Churches, and deface
The holiest Altars, cannot hurt the Godhead.
A calm wise man may show as much true valor,
Amid'st these popular prouocations,
As can an able Captain show security,
By his brave conduct, through an enemies country.
A wise man never goes the peoples way,
But as the Planets still move contrary
To the worlds motion; so does he, to opinion:
He will examine, if those accidents
(Which common fame calls injuries) happen to him
Deservedly, or no? come they deservedly,
They are no wrongs then, but his punishments:
If undeservedly, and he not guilty,
The doer of them, first, should blush, not he.

Lat. Excellent!

Bea. Truth, and right!

Fra. An Oracle
Could not have spoken more!

Lad. Been more believed!

Pru. The whole Court runs into your sentence, Sir!
And see, your second hour is almost ended.

Lad. It cannot be! O clip the wings of time,
Good Pru, or make him stand still with a charm.
Distill the gout into it, cramps, all diseases
T'arrest him in the foot, and fix him here:
O, for an engine, to k^epe back all clocks!
Or make the Sun forget his motion!
If I but knew what drink the Time now loved,
To set my Trundle at him, mine own Barnabe!

Pru. Why? I Will consult our Shelee ni^n, To-mas.

Nur. Er grae Chreest.

Bea. Wake her not.

Nur. Tower even Cuppan
D'vsque bagh done.

Pru. Vsque bagh's her drink.
But'twi' not make the time drunk.

Host. As't has her,
Away with her, my Lord, but marry her first. Pru,

Pru. I, that 'll be sport anon too, for my Lady.
But she has other game to fly at yet:
The hour is come, your kiss.

Lad. My servants song, first.

Pru. I ^ay the kiss, first; and I so enioyn'd it:
At your own peril, do, make the contempt.

Lad. Well Sir, you must be paid, and legally.

Pru. Nay nothing, Sir, beyond.

Lov. One more-I except.
This was but half a kiss, and I would change it.

Pur. The Court's dissolved, removed, and the play ended.
No sound, or air of Love more, I decree it.

Lov. From what a happiness has that one word
Thrown me, into the gulf of misery?
To what a bottomless despair? how like
A Court remoouing, or an ended Play
Shows, my abrupt precipitate estate,
By how much more my vain hopes were increased
By these false hours of conuersa^ion?
Did not I prophecy this, of my self,
And gave the true prognostics? o my brain!
How art thou turned! and my blood congeald!
My sinews slackned! and my marrow melted!
That I remember not where I have bin,
Or what I am? Only my tongue's on fire;
And burning downward, hurles forth coals, and cinders,
To tell, this temple of love, will soon be ashes!
Come Indignation, now, and be my mistress,
No more of Loves ungrateful tyranny.
His wheel of torture, and his pits of bird-lime,
His nets of nooses, whirle-pooles of vexation,
His mils, to grind his servants into powder --
I will go catch the wind first in a sieue,
Weigh smoke, and measure shadows, plough the wa^,
And sow my hopes there, ere I stay in Love.

La^. My jealousy is off, I am now secure.

Lov. Farewell the craft of crocodiles, women's piety,
And practice of it, in this art of flattering,
And fooling men. I have not lost my reason,
Though I have lent my self out, for two hours,
Thus to be baff^ld by a Chambermaid,
And the good Actor, her Lady, before mine Host,
Of the light Heart, here, that has laughed at all -- (...),

Host. Who I?

Lov. Laugh on, Sir, I Will to bed, and sleep,
And dream away the vapor of Love, if the house
And your leere drunkards let me. Lad. ^ru.

Pru. Sweet Madame.

Lad. Why would you let him go thus?

Pru. In whose power
Was it to stay him, prop'rer then my Ladies!

Lad. Why, in her Ladies? Are not you the Sovereign?

Pru. Would you, in conscience, Madame, ha me vex
His patience more?

Lad. Not but apply the cure,
Now it is vex't.

Pru. That Is but one bodies work.
Two cannot do the same thing handsomely.

Lad. But had not you the authority, absolute?

Pru. And were not you i'rebellion, Lady Frampal,
From the beginning?

Lad. I was somewhat froward,
I must confess, but frowardness sometime
Becomes a beauty, being but a visor
Put on. You Will let a Lady wear her masque, Pru.

Pru. But how do I know, when her Ladyship is pleased
To leave it off, except she tell me so?

Lad. You might have known that by my looks, and language,
Had you been or regardant, or obseruant.
One woman, reads another character,
Without the tedious trouble of deciphering:
If she but give her mind to it, you knew well,
It could not sort with any reputation
Of mine, to come in ^st, having stood out
So long, without conditions, f^r mine honor.

Pru. I thought you did expect none, you so jeered him,
And put him off with scorn-

Lad. Who, I, with scorn?
I did express my love, to idolatry rather,
And so am justly plagued, not understood.

Pru. I swear, I thought you had dissembled, Madam,
And doubt, you do so yet.

Lad. Dull, stupid, wench!
Stay i'thy state of ignorance still, be damned,
An idiot Chambermayd! Has all my care,
My breeding thee in fashion, thy rich clothes,
Honors, and titles wrought no brighter effects
On thy dark soul, then thus? Well! go thy waye^,
Were not the Tailors wife, to be demolished,
Ruined, vncas'd, thou should be she, I vow.

Pru. Why, take your spangled properties, your gown,
And scarfes.

Lad. Pru, Pru, what do thou mean?

Pru. I will not buy this play-boyes bravery,
At such a price, to be vpbraided for it,
Thus, every minute.

Lad. Take it not to heart so.

Pru. The Tailors wife? There was a word of sco^

Lad. It was a word fell from me, Pru, by chance.

Pru. Good Madame, please to vndeceaue your self,
I know when words do slip, and when they are darted
With all their bitterness: vncas'd? demolish't?
An idiot -- Chambermaid, stupid, and dull?
Be damned for ignorance? I will be so.
And think I do deserve it, that, and more,
Much more I do.

Lad. Here comes mine Host! No crying!
Good Pru. Where is my servant Lovel, Host?

Hos. Yo ha sent him up to bed, would, you would follow him!
And make my house amends!

Lad. Would you advise it?

Hos. I would I could command it. My light heart
Should leap till midnight.

Lad. Pray thee be not ^llen,
I yet must have thy counsel. Thou shall wear, Pru,
The new gown, yet.

Pru. After the Taylours wise?

Lad. Come, be not angri^, or grieved: I have a pro^ct.

Hos. Wake Shele^en Thomas! Is this your Heraldri^?
And keeping of records, to loose the maine?
Where is your charge?

N^r. Gra ^hreest!

Hos. Go ask, th'oracl^
Of The bottle, at your girdle, there you lost it:
You are a sober setter of the watch.

Act. 5.
Scene 1.
Host. Fly. Come Fly, and legacy, the Bird of the heart:
Prime insect of the ^nne, Prosessor, Quartermaster,
As ever thou deserued'st thy daily drink,
Padling in sack, and licking in the same,
Now show thy self an implement of price,
And help to raise a nap to us, out of nothing,
Thou saw'st'hem married?

Fly. I do think, I did,
And heard the words, Philip, I take thee, L^tice,
I gave her too, was then the father Fly,
And heard the Priest do his part, far as five nobles
Would lead him in the lines of matrimony.

Host. Where were they married?

Fly. ^'th ne^ stable,

(Hos. Omin^!
I have known many a church been made a stable,
But not a stable made a church till now
I wish 'hem joy. Fly, was he a full priest?

Fly. He bellied for it, had his velvet sleeves,
And his branched cassock, a side sweeping gown,
All his for malities, a good crammed divine!
I went not far to fetch him, the next Inn,
Where he was lodged, for the action.

Hos. Had they a license?

Fly. License of love, I saw no other, and purse,
To pay the duties both of Church, and house,
The angels flew about.

Host. Those birds send luck:
And mirth will follow. I had thought to have sacrificed,
To m^rriment to night, i'my light Heart, Fly,
And like a noble Poet, to have had
My last act best: but all fails in the plot.
Lovel is gone to bed; the Lady Frampull
And Sovereign Pru fallen out: Tipto, and his Regiment
Of mine-men, al drunk dumb, from his whop Barnaby,
To his hoope Trundle: they are his two Tropick^.
No project to rear laughter on, but this,
The marriage of Lord Beaufort, with Laetitia.
Stay! what is here! The satin gown redeemed!
And Pru restored in it, to her Ladies grace!

Fly. She is set forth in it! rig'd for some employment!

Hos. An Embassy at least!

Fly. Some treaty of state!

Host. It Is a fine tack about! and worth the observing.

Act 5. Scene 2.
Lady. Prudence. Host. Fly. Sweet Pru, I, now thou art a Queen indeed!
These robes do royally! and thou becom'st 'hem!
So they do thee! rich garments only fit
The parties they are made for! they shame others.
How did they show on good'y Tailors back!
Like a Caparison for a Sow, God save us!
Thy putting hem on has purged, and hallowed 'hem
From all pollution, meant by the Mechanics.

Pru. Hang him poor snip, a secular shop-wit!
H' has naught but his sheeres to claim by, and his measures,
His prentise may as well put in, for his needle,
And plead a stitch.

Lad. They have no taint in 'hem,
Now of the Tailor.

Pru. Yes, of his wives hanches,
Thus thick of fat; I smell 'hem, of the say.

Lad. It is restoratiue, Pru! with thy but chafing it,
A barren Hindes grease may work miracles.
Find but his chamber door, and he will rise
To thee! or if thou please, feign to be
The wretched party her self, and come unto him
In forma pauperis, to crave the aid
Of his Knight errant valor, to the rescue
Of thy distressed robes! name but thy gown,
And he will rise to that! Pru. I Will fire the charm first,
I had rather dye in a ditch, with Mistress Shore,
Without a smock, as the piti^ull matter has it,
Then owe my wit to cloath^s, or have it beholden.

Host. Still spirit of Pru!

Fly. And smelling of the Sovereign!

Pru. No, I will tell him, as it is, indeed;
I come from the fine, froward, srampull Lady,
One was run mad with pride, wild with self-love,
But late encountering a wise man, who scorned her,
And knew the way to his own bed, without
Borrowing her warming pan, she hathrecouerd
Part of her wits: so much as to consider
How far she has trespast'd, upon whom, and how.
And now sits penitent and solitary,
Like the forsaken Turtle, in the volary
Of the light Heart, the cage, she ha^h abused,
Mourning her folly, weeping at the height
She measures with her eye, from whence she is fallen,
Since she did branch it, on the top of the wood.

Lad. I pr'y thee Pru, abuse me enough, that is use me
As thou think fit, any course way, to humble me,
Or bring me home again, or Lovel on:
Thou do not know my sufferings, what I fe^le,
^y fires, and fears, are met: I burn, and freeze,
My liuer's one great coal, my heart shrunk up
With all the fiuers, and the mass of blood
Within me, is a standing lake of fire,
Curled with the cold wind of my gelid sighs,
That d^ine a drift of sleete through all my body,
And shoo^ a February through my veins.
(...) I see him, I am drunk with thirst,
And surfeted with hunger of his presence.
I know not where I am, or no, or speak,
Or whether thou do hear me.

Pru. Spare expressi^ns.
I Will once more venture for your Ladyship,
So you will use your fortunes reuerendly.

Lad. Religiously, dear Pru, Lou^ and his Mother,
I Will build them several Churches, Shrines, and Alt^rs,
And over head, I Will have, in the glass windows,
The story of this day be painted, round,
For the poor Layety of love to read,
I Will make my self their book, nay their example,
To bid them take occasion by the forelock,
And play no after-games of Love, hereafter.

Host. And here your Host, and's Fly, witness your vows.
And like two lucky birds, bring the presage
Of a loud jest: Lord Beaufort married is.

Lad. H^!

Fli. All to be married.

Pru. To whom, not your sonn^?

Host. The same

Pru. If her Ladyship could take truce
A little with her passion, and give way
To their mirth now running.

Lad. Runn's it mirth, let't come,
It shall be well received, and much made of it.

Pru. We must of this, It was our own conception.

Act 5. Scene 3.
-- Latimer. To them. Room for green rushes, raise the Fiddlers, Chamberlain,
Call up the house in arms.

Hos. This will rouse Lovel.

Fly. And bring him on too.

Lat. Shelee-neen.
Runns like a Heyfar, bitten with the Brieze,
About the court, crying on Fly, and cursing.

Fly. For what, my Lord?

Lat. Yo'were best hear that from her,
It is no office, Fly, fits my relation.
Here come the happy couple! Joy, Lord Beaufort.

Fly. And my young Lady too.

Hos. Much joy, my Lord!

Act 5. Scene 4.
Beaufort. Frank. Sernant. (To them. I thank you all, I thank thee, Father
Fly.
Madam, my Cossen, you look discomposed,
I have been bold with a sallad, after supper,
OF your own lettice, here:

Lad. You have, my Lord.
But laws of hospitality, and fair rites,
Would have made me acquainted.

Bea. IN your own house,
I do acknowledge: Else, I much had trespassed.
But in an Inn, and public, where there is license
Of all community: a pardon of course
May be su'd^ out.

Lat. It will, my Lord, and carry it.
I do not see, how any storm, or tempest
Can help it, now.

Pru. The thing being done, and past,
You bear it wisely, and like a Lady of judgment.

Bea. She is that, secretary Pru.

Pru. Why secretary?
My wise Lord? is your brain lately married?

Bea. Your reign is ended, Pru, no sovereign now:
Your date is out, and dignity expired.

Pru. I am annul'd, how can I treat with Lovel,
Without a new commission?

Lad. Thy gown's commission.

Host. Have patience, Pru, expect, bid the Lord joy.

Pru. And this brave Lady too. I wish them joy.

Pei. Joy. Ior. Joy. Iug. All joy.

Hos. I, the house full of joy.

Fly Play the bells, Fiddlers, crack your strings with joy.

Pru. But Lady Letice, you showed a neglect
Vn-to-be-pardon'd, to'ards my Lady, your kinswoman,
Not to advise with her.

Bea. Good politic Pru,
Urge not your state-aduice, your after-wit;
It Is near vpbraiding. Get our bed ready, Chamberlain,
And Host, a Bride-cup, you have rare conceits,
And good ingredients, ever an old Host
Vpo' the road, has his prouocatiue drinks.

Lat. He is either a good Baud, or a Phyfician.

Bea. 'Twas well he heard you not, his back was turned.
A bed, the Geniall bed, a brace of boys
To night I play for.

Pru. Give us points, my Lord.

Bea. Here take 'hem, Pru, my cod-piece point, and all,
I have claspes, my Letice a^mes here take 'hem boys.
What is the chamber ready? speak, why stare you!
On one another?

Ior. No Sir.

Bea. And why no?

Ior. My master has forbid it. He yet doubts
That you are married.

Bea. Ask his vicar general,
His Fly, here.

Fly. I must make that good, they are married.

Host. But I must make it bad, my hot young Lord.
Gi' him his doublet again, the aier is peircing;
You may take cold, my Lord. See whom you ha'married,
Your hosts son, and aboy.

Fly. You are abused.

Lad. Much joy, my Lord.

Pru. If this be your Latitia,
She Will pr^ue a counterfeit mirth, and a clipped Lady.

Ser. A boy, a boy; my Lord has married a boy.

Lat. Raise all the house in shout, and laughter, a boy!

H^st. Stay, what is here! peace rascals, stop your throats.

Act 5. Scene 5.
-- Nurse. (To them. That magot, worm, that insect! O my child,
My daughter! where is that Fly? I Will fly in his face,
The ^ermin, let me come to him.

Fly. Why Nurse Shele^?

Nur. Hang thee thou Parasite, thou son of crumbs,
And ottes, thou have undone me, and my child,
My daughter, my d^are daughter.

Ho. What means this?

Nur. O Sir, my daughter, my dear child is tuin'd,
By this your Fly, here, married in a stable,
And sold unto a husband.

Host. Stint thy cry,
Harlot, if that be all, did thou not sell him
To me for a boy? and brought him in boys rags,
Here to my door, to beg an alms of me?

Nur. I did good Mr, and I ^raue your pardon.
But it is my daughter, and a g^rle.

Host. Why sayd'st thou
It was a boy, and sold'st him then, to me
With such entreaty, for ten s^illings, Carlin?

Nur. Because you were a charitable man
I ^eard, good Mr, and would br^ed him well,
I would have given him you, for nothing, gladly.
Forgive the lie of my mouth, it was to save
The fruit of my womb. A parents needs are urgent.
And few do know that tyrant over good natures.
But you relieved her, and me too, the Mother,
And took me into your house to be the nurse,
For which heaven heap all blessings on your head,
Whilst there can one be added.

Host. Surethou speakst
Quite like another creature, then thou have lived,
Here, in the house, a Shelee-neen Thomas,
An Irish beggar.

Nur. So I am, God help me.

Host. What art thou? tell, The match is a good match,
For ought I see: ring the bells once a gain.

Bea. Stint, I say, Fiddlers.

Lad. No going off my Lord.

Bea. Nor coming on sweet Lady, things thus standing!

Fly. But what is the haynousnesse of my offense?
Or the degrees of wrong you suffered by it?
In having your daughter matched thus happily,
Into a noble house, a brave young blood,
And a prime peer of the Realm?

Bea. Was that your plot, Fly?
Gi' me a cloak, take her again among you.
I Will none of your light-Heart fosterlings, no Inmates,
Supposititious fruits of an Host's bra^ne,
And his Flys hatching, to be put upon me.
There is a royal Court of the Star Chamber
Will scatter all these mists, disperse these vapors,
And clear the truth. Let beggars match with beggars.
That shall decide it, I will try it there.

Nur. Nay then my Lord, Its not enough, I see
You are licentious, but you will be wicked.
Yo' are not alone content to take my daughter,
Against the law; but having taken her,
You would repudiate, and cast her off,
Now, at your pleasure, like a beast of power,
Without all cause, or color of a cause,
That, or a noble, or an honest man,
Should dare t'except against, her poverty.
Is poverty a vice?

Bea. The Age counts it so.

Nur. God help your Lordship, and your peers that think so,
If any be: if not, God bless them all,
And help the number of the virtuous,
If poverty be a crime. You may object
Our beggary to us, as an accident,
But never deeper, no inherent baseness.
And I must tell you, now, young Lord of dirt,
As an incensed mother, she hat^ more,
And be^ter blood, running i'those small veins,
Then all the race of Beauforts have in mass,
Though they distill their drops from the left rib
Of John OF Gaunt.

Host. Old mother of records,
Thou know her pedigree, then: whose daughter is she?

Nur. The daughter and coheire to the Lord Framp^ll,
This Ladies sister!

Lad. Mine? what is her name?

Nur. Laetitia.

Lad That was lost?

Nur. The true Latitia.

Lad. Sister, O gladness! Then you are our mother?

Nur. I am, dear daughter.

Lad. On my knees, I bless
The light I see you by.

Nur. And to the author
Of that blessed light, I open my other eye,
Which has almost, now, seven year been shut,
Dark, as my vow was, never to see light,
Till such a light restored it, as my children,
Or your dear father, who (I hear) is not.

Bea. Give me my wife, I own her now, and will have her.

Host. But you must ask my leave first, my young Lord,
Leave is but light. Ferret, Go bolt your Master,
Here Is gear will startle him. I cannot keep
The passion in me, I am ^ne turned child,
And I must weep. Fly, take away mine host,
My beard, and cap here, from me, and fetch my Lord.
I am her father, Sir, and you shall now
Ask my consent, before you have her. Wife!
My dear and loving wife! my honored wife!
Who here has gained but I? I am Lord Frampull,
The cause of all this trouble? I am he
Have measured all the Shires of England over:
Wales, and her mountains, seen those wilder nations,
Of people in the Peake, and Lancashire;
Their Pipers, Fiddlers, Rushers, Puppet-masters,
Iuglers, and Gipseys, all the sorts of Canters,
And Colonies of beggars, Tumblers, Ape-carriers,
For to these savages I was addicted,
To search their natures, and make odd discoueries!
And here my wife, like a she Mandeuile,
Ventred in disquisition, after me.

Nur. I may look up, admire, I cannot speak
Yet, to my Lord.

Host. Take heart, and breath, recover,
Thou have recouer'd me, who here had coffined
My self alive, in a poor hostelry,
In pennan^e of my wrongs done unto thee
Whom I long since gave lost.

Nur. So did I you,
Till stealing mine own daughter from her sister,
I lighted on this error has cured all.

Bea. And in that cure, include my trespass, Mother,
And Father, for my wife-

Host. No, the Star Chamber.

Bea. Away with that, you sour the sweetest lettice
Was ever tasted.

Host. Gi'you joy, my Son,
Cast her not off again. O call me Father,
Lovel, and this your Mother, if you like:
But take your Mistress, first, my child; I have power
To give her now, with her consent, her sister
Is given already to your brother Beaufort.

Lov. Is this a dream now, after my first sleep?
Or are these phant'sies made in the light Heart?
And sold in the new Inn?

Host. Best go to bed,
And dream it over all. Let Us all go sleep,
Each with his Turtle. Fly, provide us lodgings,
Get beds prepared: yo' are master now of the Inn,
The Lord of the light Heart, I give it you.
Fly, was my fellow Gipsey. All my family,
Indeed, were Gipseys, Tapsters, Ostlers, Chamberlaines,
Reduced vessels of ciuility.
But here stands Pru, neglected, best deserving
Of all that are in the house, or i'my Heart,
Whom though I cannot help to a fit husband,
I Will help to that will bring one, a just portion:
I have two thousand pound in bank, for Pru,
Call for it when she will

Bea. And I as much.

Host. There Is somewhat yet, four thousand pound! that is better,
Then sounds the proverb, four bare legs in a bed.

Lov. Me, and her mistress, she has power to coy^e
Up, into what she will.

Lad. Indefinite Pru.

Lat. But I must do the crowning act of bounty!

Host. What Is that, my Lord?

Lat. Give her my self,
By all the holy vows of love I do,
Spare all your promised portions, she is a dowry which here
So all sufficient in her virtue and manners,
That fortune cannot add to her.

Pru. My Lord,
Your praises, are instructions to mine ears,
Whence, you have made your wife, to live yo^ servant.

Host. Lights, get us several lights.

Lov. Stay let my Mrs
But hear my vision sung, my dream of beauty,
Which I have brought, prepared, to bid us joy,
And light us all to bed, 'twill be instead
Of ayring of the sheets with a sweet odor.

Host. 'Twill be an incense to our sacrifice
Of love to night, where I will woo afresh,
And like Mecaenas, having but one wife,
I Will marry her, every hour of life, hereafter.

They go out, with a Song. Epilogue.
Plays in themselves have neither hopes, nor fears,
Their fate is only in their hearers ears:
If you expect more then you had to night,
The maker is sick, and sad. But do him right,
He meant to please you: for he sent things fit,
In all the numbers, both of sense, and wit,
If they have not miscarried! if they have,
All that his faint, and faltring tongue does cra^,
Is, that you not impute it to his brai^e.
That Is yet unhurt, although set round with pain,
It cannot long hold out. All strength must yield.
Yet judgment would the last be, i the field,
With a true Poet. He could have haled in
The drunkards, and the noyses of the Inn,
In his last Act; if he had thought it fit
To vent you vapors, in the place of wit:
But better 'twas, that they should sleep, or spew,
Then in the Scene to offend or him, or you.
This he did think; and this do you forgive:
When ere the carcass dies, this Art will live.
And had he lived the care of King, and Queen,
His Art in something more yet had been seen;
But Majors, and Shriffes may yearly fill the stage:
A Kings, or Poets birth do ask^ an age.
Another Epilogue there was, made for the Play in the Poets defense, but the
Play lived not, in opinion, to have it spoken.
A Iouiall Host, and Lord of the new Inn,
Clep't the light Heart, with all that past therein,
Has been the subject of our Play to night,
To give the King, and Queen, and Court delight.
But, then we mean, the Court above the stayres,
And past the guard; men that have more of ears,
Then eyes to judge us: Such as will not hiss
Because the Chambermaid was named Cis.
We think, it would have s^ru'd our Scene as true,
If, as it is, at first we' had called her Pru,
For any mystery we there have found,
Or magic in the lett^s, or the sound.
She only meant was, for a girl of wit,
To whom her Lady did a Province fit:
Which shewould have discharged, and, done as well,
Had she been christened Joyce, Grace, Doll, or Nell.
The just indignation the Author took at the vulgar censure of his Play, by
some malicious spectators, begat this following Ode to himself.
COme leave the lothed stage,
And the more loathsome age:
Where pride, and impudence (in faction knit)
Usurp the chair of wit!
Indicting, and arraigning every day
Something they call a Play.
Let their fastidious, vain
Commission of the brain
Run on, and rage, sweat, censure, and condem'n:
They were not made for thee, less, thou for them.
Say, that thou pour'st them wheat,
And they will acornes eat:
'Twere simple fury, still, thy self to waste
On such as have no taste!
To offer them a surfeit of pure bread,
Whose appetites are dead!
No, give them grains their fill,
Husks, draffe to drink, and swill.
If they love lees, and leave the lusty wine,
Envy them not their palate's, with the swine.
No doubt some moldy tale,
Like Pericles; and stale
As the Shrieues custs, and nasty as his fishscraps, out every dish,
Thrown forth, and rak'tinto the common tub,
May keep up the Play-club:
There, sweepings do as well
As the best ordered meal.
For, who the relish of these ghests will fit,
Needs set them, but, the almes-basket of wit.
And much good do it you then:
Brave plush, and velu^t-men;
Can feed on orts: And safe in your stage-clothes,
Dare quit, upon your oaths,
The stagers, and the stage-wrights too (your peers)
Of larding your large ears
With their foul comic socks;
Wrought upon twenty blocks:
Which, if they are torn, and turned, and patch't enough,
The gamesters share your guilt, and you their stuff.
Leave things so prostitute,
And take the Alcaick Lute;
Or thine own Horace, or Anacr^ns Lyre;
Warm thee, by Findares fire:
And though thy nerves be shrunk, and blood be cold,
Ere years have made thee old;
Strike that disdaine-full heat
Throughout, to their defeat:
As curious fools, and envious of thy strain,
May, blushing, swear no palsey's in thy brain.
But, when they hear thee sing
The glories of thy King,
His zeal to God, and his just awe over men;
They may, blood shaken, then,
Feel such a flesh-quake to possess their powers:
As they shall cry, like ours
In sound of peace, or wars,
No Harp ere hit the stars;
In tuning forth the acts of his sweet reign:
And raising Charles his chariot, above his Waine.
The end.

