THE ALCHEMIST.

Written by BEN. IONSON.

-- Neque, me vt miretur turba, laboro:
Contentus paucis lectoribus.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snodham, for Walter Burre, and are to be sold by
John Stepneth, at the West End of Paul's. 1612.

To the Lady, most aequall with virtue, and her Blood: The Grace, and Glory of
women. MARY LA: WROTH.
Madame,
IN the Age of Sacrifices, the truth of Religion was not in the greatness, and
fat of the Offerings, but in the devotion, and zeal of the Sacrificers: Else,
what could a handful of Gummes have done in the sight of a Hecatombe? Or how,
yet, might a grateful mind be furnished against the iniquity of Fortune;
except, when she failed it, it had power to impart it self? A way found out,
to overcome even those, whom Fortune has enabled to return most, since they,
yet leave themseluesmore. In this assurance am I planted; and stand with those
affections at this Altar, as shall no more avoid the light and witness, then
they do the conscience of your virtue. If what^ offer bear an acceptable
odor, and hold the first strength: It is your value, thatremembers, where,
when, and to whom it was kindled. Otherwise, in these times, there comes rarely
forth that thing, so full of authority, o^ example, but by daylinesse and
custom, grows less, and looses. But this, safe in your judgment (which is a
SIDNEYS) is forbidden to speak more; least it talk, or look like one of the
ambitious Faces of the time: who, the more they paint, are the less themselves.

Your La: true honorer. Ben. Ionson.

TO THE READER.
IF thou be more, thou art an Understander, and then Itrust thee. If thou
art one that take up, and but a Pretender, beware at what hands thou
receiu'st thy commodity; for thou were never more fair in theway to be co^ned
(then in this Age, in Poetry, especially in Plays: wherein, now, the
Concupiscence of ^ges, and Daunces so reigns, as to run away from Nature,
and be afraid of her, is the only point of art that tickles the Spectators.
But how out of purpose, and place, do I name Art? when the Professors are
grown so obstinate contemners of it, and presumers on their own Naturalls, as
they are deriders of all diligence that way, and, by simple mocking at the
terms, when they understand not the things, think to get of wittily with
their Ignorance. Nay, they are esteemed the more learned, and sufficient for
this, by the Multitude, through their excellent vice of judgment. For they
commend Writers, as they do Fencers, or Wrastlers; who if they come in
robustuously, and put for it with a great deal of violence, are received for
the brauer fellows: when many times their own rudeness is the cause of their
disgrace, and a little touch of their Adversary gives all that boisterous force
the foil, I deny not, but that these men, who always seek to do more then
enough, may some time happen on some thing that is good, and great; but very
seldom: And when it comes it does not recompen^ the rest of their ill. It
sticks out perhaps, and is more eminent, because all is sordide, and vile about
it: as lights are more discerned in a thick darkness, then a faint shadow. I
speak not this, out of a hope to do good on any man, against his will; for I
know, if it were put to the question of theirs, and mine, the worse would find
more suffrages: because the most favor common errors. But I give thee this
warning, that there is a great difference between those, that (to gain the
opinion of Copy) utter all they can, how cuer unfitly; and those that use
election, and a mean. For it is only the disease of the unskillful, to think
rude things greater then polished: or scattered more numerous then composed.

To my friend, Mr. Ben: Ionson. upon his Alchemist.
A Master, read in flatteries great skill,
Could not pass truth, though he would force his will,
By praising this too much, to get more praise
In his Art, then you out of yours do raise.
Nor can full truth be uttered of your worth,
Unless you your own praises do set forth:
None else can write so skilfully, to show
Your praise: Ages shall pay, yet still must owe.
All I dare say, is, you have written well,
In what exceeding height, I dare not tell.
George Lucy.

The Persons of the Comoedie.
SVBTLE. The Alchemist. FACE. The Housekeeper. DOL: Common. Their Colleague.
DAPPER. A Clearke. DRVGGER. A Tabacco-man. LOVE-Wit. Master of the House.
EPICVRE MAMMON. A Knight. SVRLY. A Gamster. TRIBVLATION. A Pastorof Amstredam.
ANANIAS. A Deacon there. KASTRIL. The Angry Boy. Da: PLIANT. His sister: A
Widow. Neighbors. Officers. Mutes.
THE ARGUMENT.
T he Sickness hot, A Master quit, for fear,
H is House in Town: and left one Servant there.
E ase him corrupted, and gave means to know
A Cheater, and his Punque; who now brought low,
L eauing their narrow practice, were become
C os'ners at large: and, only wanting some
H ouse to set up, with him they here contract,
E ach for a share, and all begin to act.
M uch company they draw, and much abuse
I n casting Figures, telling Fortunes, News,
S elling of Flies, flat Bawdry, with the Stone:
T ill It, and They, and All in fume are gone.
THE PROLOGVE.
FOrtune, that favors Fools, these two short hours
We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
Judging Spectators: and desire in place,
To the Author justice, to our selves but grase.
Our Scene is LONDON, 'cause we would make known.
No Countries mirth is better then our own.
No Clime breeds better matter, for your Whore,
Baud, Squire, Impostor, many Persons more,
Whose manners, now called Humors, feed the Stage:
And which have still been Subject, to the rage
Or spleen of Comic writers. Though this Pen
Did never aim to grieve, but better Men;
How ever the Age, he lives in, does endure
The vices that she breeds, above their cure.
But, when the wholesome remedies are sweet,
And, in their working, Game, and Profit meet,
He hopes to find no spirit so much diseased,
But will, with such fair Correctiues, be pleased.
For here, he does not fear, who can apply.
If there be any, that will sit so nigh
Unto the stream, to look what it does run,
They shall find things, they'ld think, or wish, were done;
They are so natural follies: But so shown,
As even the Doers may see, and yet not own.
THE ALCHEMIST.
ACT. 1.
SCENE. 1.
FACE. SVBTLE. DOL Common. BEleeu't I will.
SVB. Thy worst. I fart at thee.

DOL. Ha'you your wits? Why Gentlemen! for love --

FAC. Sirah, I Will strip you --

SVB. What to do? lick figs
Out at my --

FAC. Rogue, Rogue, out of all your sleights.

DOL. Nay, look ye! Sovereign, General, are you Madmen?

SVB. O, let the wild sheep loose. I Will gum your silks
With good strong water, an'you come.

DOL. Will you have
The neighbors hear you? Will you betray all?
Hark, I hear some body.

FAC. Srah.

SVB. I shall mar
All that the Tailor has made, if you approach.

FAC. You most notorious whelpe, you insolent slave,
Dare you do this?

SVB. Yes faith, yes faith.

FAC. Why! who
Am I, my Mungrill? Who am I?

SVB. I Will tell you,
Since you know not your self.

FAC. Speak lower, Rogue.

SVB. Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
Honest, plain, liuerie-three-pound-Thrum; that kept
Your Masters worships house, here, in the Friars,
For the vacations.

FAC. Will you be so loud?

SVB. Since, by my means, translated Suburb-Captaine.

FAC. By your means, Doctor Dog?

SVB. Within man's memory,
All this, I speak of.

FAC. Why, I pray you, have I
Been countenanced by you? or you, by me?
Do but collect, Sr. where I met you first.

SVB. I do not hear well.

FAC. Not of this, I think it.
But I shall put you in mind, Sr. at Pie-Corner,
Taking your meal of steeme in, from Cooks stalls
Where, like the Father of Hunger, you did walk
Pi^eously costiue with your pinched horne-nose,
And your complexion, of the Roman^ wash,
Stuck full of black, and melancholique worms,
Like poulder corns, shot, at the Artillery-yard.

SVB. I wish, you could advance your voice, a little.

FAC. When you went pinned up, in the several rags,
Yo'had raked, and picked from dungh^s, before day,
Your feet in moldy s^ppers, for your kibes,
A felt of rugg, and a thin thredden cloak,
That scarce would cover your no-buttockes.

SVB. So Sr.

FAC. When all your Alchemye, and your Algebra,
Your Mineralls, Vegetalls, and Animalls,
Your Coniuring, Cosning, and your dosen of Trades
Could not relieve your corpse, with so much linen
Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
I ga'you countenance, credit for your Coals,
Your Stilles, your Glasses, your Materials,
Built you a Furnace, drew you Customers,
Advanced all your black Arts; lent you, beside.
A house to practice in.

SVB. Your Masters house?

FAC. Where you have studied the more thriuing skill
Of Bawdry, since.

SVB. Yes, in your Masters house.
You, and the Rats, here, kept possession.
Make it not strange. I know, you were one, could keep
The Buttry-hatch still locked, and save the chippings,
Sell the dole-beere to Aqua-v^tae men,
The which, together with your Christmasse vailes,
At Post, and Pair, your letting out of Counters,
Made you a pretty stock some twenty marks,
And gave you credit, to converse with cobwebs,
Here, since your Mistress death has broke up house.

FAC. You might talk softlier, Rascal.

SVB. No, you Scarabe,
I Will thunder you, in pieces. I will teach you
How to beware, to tempt a Fury' again
That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.

FAC. The Place has made you valiant.

SVB. No, your Clothes.
Thou Vermin have I taken thee, out of dung,
So poor, so wretched, when no living thing
Would keep thee company, but a Spider, or worse?
Raysd thee from broomes, and dust, and watring pots?
Sublsm'd thee, and exal^ed thee, and fixed thee
In The third region, the high state of grace?
Wrought thee to spirit, to quintessence, with pains
Would twice have won me the Philosophers work?
Put thee in words, and fashion? made thee fit
For more then ordinary fellowships?
Given thee thy oaths, thy quarrelling dimensions?
Thy rules, to cheat at horse-race, cockpit, cards,
Dice, or what ever gallant tincture, else?
Made thee a Second, in mine own great Art?
And have I this for thank? Doe'you rebel?
Do you fly out, in the proiection?
Would you be gone now?

DOL. Gentlemen, what mean you?
Will you mar all?

SVB. Slave, thou had had no Name,

DOL. Will you undo your selves, with civil war?

SVB. Never been known, past Equi Clibanum,
The heat of horse-dung, under ground, in cellars,
Or an Alehouse, darker then deaf John's: been lost
To all mankind, but Laundresses, and Tapsters,
Had not I been.

DOL. Do'you know who hears you, Sovereign?

FAC. Srah --

DOL. Nay General, I thought you were civil.

FAC. I shall turn desperate, if you grow thus loud.

SVB. And hang thy self, I care not.

FAC. Hang thee, Colliar,
And all thy pots, and pans, in picture I will,
Since thou have moved me.

DOL. o, this'll ore-throw all.

FAC. Write thee up Baud, in Paul's; have all thy tricks
Of cosning with a hollow cole, dust, scrapings,
Searching for things lost, with a sieve, and sheeres,
Erecting figures, in your rows of Houses,
And taking in of shadows, with a glass,
Told in red letters: And a face, cut for thee,
Worse then Gamaliel Ratsey's,

DOL. Are you sound?
Ha'you your senses, Masters?

FAC. I will have
A Book, but barely reckoning thy Impostures,
Shall prou^ a true Phil^phers stone, to Printers.

SVB. Away you Trencher-Raskall.

FAC. Out you Dog-leach,
The vomit of all prisons --

DOL. Will you be
Your own destructions, Gentlemen?

FAC. Still spewed out
For lying too heavy of the basket.

SVB. Cheater.

FAC. Bawd.

SVB. Cowherd.

FAC. Coniurer.

SVB. Cutpurse.

FAC. Witch.

DOL. O me.
We are ruined lost. Ha'you no more regard
To your reputations? Where Is your judgment? Slight,
Have yet, some care of me, o'your Republique.

FAC. Away this Brach. I Will bring thee, Rogue, within
The Statute of Sorcerie, tricesimo tertio
Of Harry the eight: I and (perhaps) thy neck
Within a noose, for laundring gold, and barbing.

DOL. You Will bring your head within a cocks-combe, will you?
And you Sr, with your Menstrue, gather it up.
God's Death you abominable pair of Stinkards
Leave off your barking, and grow one again,
Or, by the light that shines, I Will cut your throats.
I Will not be made a prey unto the Marshall,
For nere a snarling Dog-bolt o'you both.
Ha'you together cossen'd all this while,
And all the world, and shall it now be said
Yo'haue made most courteous shift, to cossen your selves?
You will accuse him? You will bring him in
Within the Statute? Who shall take your word,
A whoresonne, vpstart, Apocryphal Captain,
Whom not a Puritan, in Blackfriars, will trust
So much, as for a fether? And you, too,
Will give the cause, forsooth? You will insult,
And claim a primacie, in the divisions?
You must be chief? as if you, only, had
The poulder to project with? and the work
Were not begun out of aequalitie?
The venture tripartite? All things in common?
Without prioritie? God's Death, you perpetual Curres,
Fall to your couples, again, and cossen kindly,
And heartily, and lovingly, as you should,
And loose not the beginning of a Term,
Or, by this hand, I shall grow factious too
And, take my part, and quit you.

FAC. It Is his fault,
He ever murmures, and objects his pains,
And says, the weight of all lies upon him.

SVB. Why so it does.

DAL. How does it? Do not we
Sustain our parts?

SVB. Yes, but they are not aequall.

DOL. Why, if your part exceed to day, I hope
Ours may, to morrow, match it.

SVB. I, they may.

DOL. May, murmuring Mastiffe, I, and do. Gods will!
Help me to thrattell him.

SVB. Dorothee, Mistress Dorothee,
O'ds precious, I Will do any thing. What do you mean?

DOL. Because o'your Fermentation, and Cibation?

SVB. Not I, by heaven.

DOL. Your Sol and Luna: help me.

SVB. Would I were hanged then. I Will conform my self.

DOL. Will you Sr. do so then, and quickly. Swear.

SVB. What should I swear?

DOL. To leave your faction Sr.
And labor, kindly, in the commune work.

SVB. Let me not breath, if I meant ought, beside.
I only used those speeches, as a spur
To him.

DOL. I hope we need ^o spurs Sr. Doewe?

FAC. Slid, prove to day, who shall sharke best.

SVB. Agreed.

DOL. Yes, and work close, and friendly

SVB. Slight the knot
Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.

DOL. Why so, my good Babounes! Shall we go make
A sort of sober, sc^ruy, praecise Neighbors,
(That scarce have smiled twice, sin'the King came in)
A feast of laughter, at our follies? Raskalls,
Would run themselves from breath, to see me ride,
Or you to have but a Hole, to thrust your heads in,
For which you should pay Eare-rent: No, Agree.
And may Don Provost ride a feasting, long,
In his old velvet ierken, and staynd scarfes,
(My noble Sovereign, and worthy General)
Ere we contribute a new cruel garter
To his most worsted worship.

SVB. Royal Dol!
Spoken like Claridiana, and thy self.

FAC. For which at supper, thou shall sit in triumph,
And not be styled ` Do^ common, but Do^ proper,
Dol singular: the longest cut, at night.
Shall draw thee for his Dol particular.

SVB. Who Is that? one rings. To the windo'

Dol. Pray heaven,
The Master do not troublevs, this quarter.

FAC. O, fear not him. While there dies one, a week,
Of The plague, he is safe, from thinking, toward London.
Beside, he is busy at his hop-yardes, now,
I had a letter from him. If he do,
He Will send such word, for ayring of the house
As you shall have sufficient time, to quit it.
Though we break up a fortnight, it is no matter.

SVB. Who is it, Dol?

DOL. A fine young Quodling.

FAC. O
My Lawyers Clearke, I lighted on, last night,
In Hol'bourne, at the Dagger. He would have
(I told you of him) a Familiar,
To rifle with at horses, and win cups.

DOL. O, let him in.

SVB. Stay. Who shall do it?

FAC. Get you
Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.

DOL. And what shall I do?

FAC. Not be seen, away.
Seem you very reserved.

SVB. Enough.

FAC. God be w'you, Sr.
I pray you, let him know that I was here.
His name is Dapper. I would gladly have stayed, But --

ACT. 1.
SCENE. 2.
DAPPER. FACE. SV^TLE. Captain, I am here
FAC. Who Is that? He Is come, I think, Doctor.
Good faith, Sr, I was going away.

DAP. In truth,
I am very sorry, Captain.

FAC. But I thought
Sure, I should meet you.

DAP. I am very glad.
I'had a sciruy (...), or two, to make,
And I had lent my watch last night, to one
That dines^ to day, at the Shrieffs: and so was robbed
Of my passe-time Is this the Cunning-man?

FAC. This is his worship.

DAP. Is he a Doctor?

FAC. Yes.

DAP. And ha'you broke with him, Captain?

FAC. I.

DAP. And how

FAC. Faith, he does make the matter, Sr. so dainty,
I know not what to say.

DAP. Not so, good Captain.

FAC. Would I were fayrely rid on it, believe me.

DAP. Nay, now you grieve me Sr. Why should you wish so?
I dare assure you, I Will not be ungrateful.

FAC. I cannot think you will, Sr. But the Law
Is such a thing -- And then he says, Reade's matter
Falling so lately.

DAP. Read? He was an Ass^,
And dealt Sr with a Fool.

FAC. It was a Clearke, Sr.

DAP. A Clearke?

FAC. Nay, hear me, Sr. you know the Law
Better, I think

DAP. I should Sr. and the danger.
You know I showed the Statu^e to you?

FAC. You did so.

DAP. And will I tell, then? By this (...) of flesh,
Would it might never wright good (...) hand, more,
If I discover. What do you think of me,
That I am a Chiau^e?

FAC. What Is that?

DAP. The Turk was, here.
As one would say, Do you think I am a Turk?

FAC. I Will tell the Doctor so.

DAP. Do, good sweet Captain.

FAC. Come, noble Doctor,' pray thee, let us prevail,
This is the Gentleman, and he is no Chiause.

SVB. Captain, I have returned you all my answer.
I would do much Sr. for your love -- But this
I neither may, nor can.

FAC. Tut, do not say so.
You deal, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
One that will thank you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
Let that Sr. move you.

SVB. Pray you, forbear.

FAC. He has
Four Angels, here.

SVB. You do me wrong good Sr.

FAC. Doctor, wherein? To tempt you with these spirits?

SVB. To tempt my art, and love, Sir, to my peril.
Fore heaven, I scarce can think you are my friend,
That so would draw me to apparent danger.

FAC. I draw you? A horse draw you, and a halter,
You, and your Flies together.

DAP. Nay, good Captain.

FAC. That know no difference of men.

SVB. Good words Sr.

FAC. Good deeds, Sr. Doctor Dogges-mouth. Slight I bring you
No cheating Clim-o'the-Cloughs, or Claribels.
That look as big as fine, and fifty, and flush,
And spit out secrets, like hot Custard

DAP. Captain.

FAC. Nor any melancholic vnder-Scribe,
Shall tell the Vicar: but, a special Gentle,
That is the Heir to forty marks, a year,
Consorts with the small Poets of the time,
Is the sole hope of his old Grandmother,
That knows the Law, and writes you six fair Hands,
Is a fine Clearke, and has his Ciphring perfect,
Will take his oath, of the Greek Testament,
If need be, in his pocket: and can court
His Mistress, out of Ovid.

DAP. Nay, dear Captain.

FAC. Did you not tell me, so?

DAP. Yes, but I Would ha'you
Use Mr. Doctor, with some more respect.

FAC. Hang him proud Stagg, with his broad velvet head.
But, for your sake, I Would choke ere I would change
An article of breath, with such a Puck-fist.
Come let us be gone.

SVB. Pray you, le'me speak with you.

DAP. His worship calls you, Captain.

FAC. I am sorry,
I e're imbarqu'd my self, in such a business.

DAP. Nay good Sr. He did call you.

FAC. Will he take, then?

SVB. First, hear me --

FAC. Not a syllable, 'lesse you take.

SVB. Pray ye' Sr.

FAC. Upon no terms, but an Assumpsit.

SVB. Your Humor must be law.

FAC. Why now Sr. talk.
Now, I dare hear you with mine honor. Speak.
So may this Gentleman too

SVB. Why Sr.

FAC. No whispring,

SVB. Before Heaven, you do not apprehend the loss
You do your self, in this.

FAC. Wherein? For what?

SVB. Mary, to be so'importunate for one,
That, when he has it, will undo you all:
He Will win up all the money in the Town.

FAC. How!

SVB. Yes. And blow up Gamster, after Gamster,
As they do crackers, in a Puppit-play.
If I do give him a Familiar,
Give you him all you play for; never set him:
For he will have it.

FAC. You Are mistaken, Doctor.
Why, he does ask one but for Cups, and Horses,
A rifling Fly: none o'your great Familiars.

DAP. Yes, Captain, I would have it, for all games.

SVB. I told you so.

FAC. 'Slight, that is a new business!
I understood you, a tame Bird, to fly
Twice in a Term, or so; on Friday nights,
When you had left the Office: for a Nagg,
Of forty, or fifty shillings.

DAP. I it is true, Sir,
But I do think, now, I shall leave the Law,
And therefore.

FAC. Why this changes quite the case!
Do'you think, that I dare move him?

DAP. If you please, Sir,
All Is one to him, I see.

FAC. What? for that money?
I cannot with my Conscience. Nor should you
Make the request, me thinks.

DAP. No, Sir, I mean
To add consideration.

FAC. Why, then, Sir,
I Will try. Say, that it were for all games, Doctor?

SVB. I say, then, not a mouth shall eat for him
At any Ordinary, but of the Score,
That is a gaming mouth, conceive me.

FAC. Indeed!

SVB. He Will draw you all the treasure of the realm,
If it be set him.

FAC. Speak you this from art?

SVB. I, Sir, and reason too; the ground of art.
H'is of the only best complexion
The Queen of Fairie loves.

FAC. What! is he

SVB. Peace.
He Will ouer-heare you. Sir, should she but see him --

FAC. What?

SVB. Do not you tell him.

FAC. Will he win at cards too?

SVB. The Spirits of dead Holland, living Isaac,
You Would swear, were in him: such a vigorous luck
As cannot be resisted. Slight he will put
Six o'your Gallants, to a cloak, indeed.

FAC. A strange success, that some man shall be borne too!

SVB. He hears you, man.

DAP. Sir, I Will not be ungrateful.

FAC. Faith, I have a confidence in his good nature:
You hear, he says, he will not be ungrateful.

SVB. Why, as you please, my venture follows yours.

FAC. Troth, do it Doctor. Think him trusty, and make him.
He may make us both happy in an hour:
Win some five thousand pound, and send us two on it.

DAP. Believe it, and I will, Sir.

FAC. And you shall, Sir.
You have heard all?

DAP. No, what was it? Nothing, I Sir.

FAC. Nothing?

DAP. A little, Sir.

FAC. Well, a rare Star
Reigned, at your birth.

DAP. At mine Sir? No.

FAC. The Doctor
Swears that you are --

SVB. Nay Captayn, Yo'll tell all, now.

FAC. Allied to the Queen of Faerie.

DAP. Who? that I am?
Believe it, no such matter.

FAC. Yes, and that
Yo'were borne with a Caul o'your head.

DAP. Who says so?

FAC. Come.
You know it well enough, though you dissemble it.

DAP. I fac, I do not. You are mistaken.

FAC. How!
Swear by your fac? and in a thing, so known
Unto the Doctor? How shall we, Sir, trust you
In The other matter? Can we ever think,
When you have won five, or six thousand pound,
Yo'll send us shares in it, by this rate?

DAP. By Gad, Sir,
I Will win ten thousand pound, and send you half.
I fac is no oath.

SVB. No, no, he did but jest.

FAC. Go too. Go, thank the Doctor. He is your friend.
To take it so.

DAP. I thank his Worship.

FAC. So?
Another Angel.

DAP. Must I?

FAC. Must you? Slight,
What else is Thanks? Will you be triuiall? Doctor.
When must he come, for his Familiar?

DAP. Shall I not ha'it with me?

SVB. O, good Sir,
There must a world of ceremonies pass,
You must be bathed, and fumigated, first;
Besides, the Queen of Faerie does not rise,
Till it be noone.

FAC. Not, if she daunc'd, to night.

SVB. And she must bless it.

FAC. Did you never see
Her royal Grace, yet?

DAP. Whom?

FAC. Your Aunt of Faerie?

SVB. Not, since she kissed him, in the cradle, Captain,
I can resolve you that.

FAC. Well, see her Grace,
What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know.
It will be somewhat hard to compass: But,
How ever, see her. You are made, believe it,
If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
She will do strange things. See her, at any hand.
'Slid, she may hap to leave you all she has:
It is the Doctors fear.

DAP. How will it be done, then?

FAC. Let me alone take you no thought. Do you
But say to me. Captain, I Will see her Grace.

DAP. Captain, I Will see her Grace.

FAC. Enough.

SVB. Who Is there?
Anon. (Conduct him forth, by the back way)
Sir, against one a Clock, prepare your self.
Till when you must be fasting; only, take
Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
Two at your mouth; and one, at either ear;
Then, bath your fingers ends; and, wash your eyes;
To sharpen your five Senses; and, cry Hum,
Thrice; and then Buz, as often; and then, Come.

FAC. Can you remember this?

DAP. I warrant you.

FAC. Well, then, away. It Is, but your bestowing
Some twenty nobles, among her Graces Servants;
And, put on a clean shirt: You do not know
What grace her Grace may do you in clean linen.

ACT. 1.
SCENE. 3.
SVBTLE. DRVGGER. FACE. COme in. Good wives, I pray you forbear me, now.
Troth I can do you no good, till afternoon.
What is your name, say you, Abel Drugger?
DRV. Yes, Sir.

SVB. A seller of Tobacco?

DRV. Yes, Sir.

SVB. 'Vmh.
Free of the Grocers?

DRV. I, and't please you.

SVB. Well.
Your business, Abel?

DRV. This, and't please your worship,
I Am a young beginner, and am building
Of a new shop, and't like your worship; just,
At corner of a street: (Here Is the plot on it.)
And I would know, by art, Sir, of your Worship,
Which way I should make my door, by Necromantie.
And, where my Shelues. And, which should be for Boxes,
And, which for Potts, I would be glad to thrive, Sir.
And, I was wished to your Worship, by a Gentleman,
One Captain Face, that says you know men's Planets,
And their good Angels, and their bad.

SVB. I do
If I do see'hem.

FAC. What! my honest Abel?
Thou art well met, here.

DRV. Troth, Sir, I was speaking,
Just, as your Worship came here, of your Worship.
I pray you, speak for me to Mr. Doctor.

FAC. He shall do any thing. Doctor, do you hear?
This is my friend, Abel, an honest fellow,
He lets me have good Tobacco, and he does not
Sophisticate it, with Sack-lees, or Oil,
Nor washes it in Muscadell, and Grains,
Nor buries it, in gravel, under ground,
Wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed cloutes:
But keeps it in fine Lilly-pots, that opened,
Smell like conserve of Roses, or French Beans.
He has his Maple block, his silver tongs,
Winchester pipes, and fire of Juniper.
A neat, spruce-honest-fellow, and no Goldmith.

SVB. H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on.

FAC. Already, Sir, ha'you found it? Lo'thee Abel!

SVB. And, in right way to'ward riches.

FAC. Sir.

SVB. This Summer.
He will be of the Clothing of his company.
And, next spring, called to the Scarlet. Spend what he can.

FAC. What, and so little beard?

SVB. Sir, you must think,
He may have a receipt, to make hair come.
But he will be wise, preserve his youth, and fine for it:
His fortune looks for him, another way.

FAC. 'Slid, Doctor, how can thou know this so soon?
I Am amused, at that!

SVB. By a rule, Captain,
In Metaposcopie, which I do work by,
A certain Star in the forehead, which you see not.
Your Chest-nut, or your Oliue-colourd face
Does never fail: and your long Ear does promise.
I knew't, by certain spotts too, in his teeth,
And on the nail of his Mercurial finger.

FAC. Which finger's that?

SVB. His little finger, Look.
Yo'were borne upon a Wensday.

DRV. Yes, indeed, Sir.

SVB. The Thumb, in Chiromantie, we give Venus;
The Forefinger to Jove; the Midst, to Saturn;
The Ring to Sol, the Least, to Mercury:
Who was the Lord, Sir, of his Horoscope,
His House of life being Libra. Which foreshew'd,
He should be a Merchant, and should trade with Balance.

FAC. Why, this is strange! Is It not, honest Nab?

SVB. There is a Ship now, coming from Ormu's,
That shall yield him, such a Commodity
Of Drugs. This is the West, and this the South?

DRV. Yes, Sir.

SVB. And those are your two sides?

DRV. I, Sir.

SVB. Make me your Door, then, South; your broad side, West:
And, on the East Side of your shop, aloft,
Write Mathlaj, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;
Upon the North-part, Rael, Velel, Thiel,
They are the names of those Mercurian spirits,
That do fright flies from boxes.

DRV. Yes, Sir,

SVB. And
Beneath your threshold, bury me a Loade-stone
To draw in Gallants, that wear spurs: The rest,
They Will seem to follow.

FAC. That Is a secret, Nab.

SVB. And, on your stall, a Puppet, with a vice,
And a Court-fucus, to call Citie-Dames.
You shall deal much, with Mineralls.

DRV. Sir, I have,
At home, already --

SVB. I, I know, you'haue Arsnike,
Vitriol, Sal Tartre, Argaile, Alkaly,
Cinoper. I know all. This fellow, Captain,
Will come, in time, to be a great Distiller,
And give a say (I will not say directly,
But very fair) at the Philosophers stone.

FAC. Why, how now Abel! Is this true?

DRV. Good Captain,
What must I give?

FAC. Nay, I Will not counsel thee.
Thou hearst, what wealth, he says, spend what thou can,
Thou Art like to come too.

DRV. I would gi'him a Crown.

FAC. A Crown? And toward such a fortune? Heart,
Thou shall rather gi'him thy shop. No Gold about thee?

DRV. Yes, I have a Portague, I ha'kept this half year.

FAC. Out on thee, Nab, 'Slight, there was such an offer,
'Shalt keepe't no longer, I Will gi'it him for thee?
Doctor, Nab prays your Worship, to drink this, and swears
He will appear more grateful, as your skill
Does raise him in the world.

DRV. I would entreat
Another favor of his Worship.

FAC. What is it, Nab?

DRV. But, to look over, Sir, my Almanac,
And cross out my Ill-dayes, that I may neither
Bargain, nor trust upon them.

FAC. That he shall, Nab.
Leave it, it shall be done, against afternoon.

SVB. And a direction for his shelues.

FAC. Now, Nab?
Art thou well pleased, Nab?

DRV. Thank, Sir, both your Worships.

FAC. Away.
Why, now, you smoaky persecuter of Nature,
Now, do you see, that something's to be done,
Beside your Beech-coale, and your Cor'siue waters,
Your Crosse-lets, Crucibles, and Cucurbites?
You must have stuff, brought home to you, to work on?
And, yet, you think, I am at no expense.
In searching out these veins, then following 'hem,
Then trying'hem out. Before God, my intelligence
Costs me more money, then my share often comes too,
In these rare works.

SVB. You'are pleasant, Sir. How now?

ACT. 1.
SCENE. 4.
FACE. DOL. SVBTLE. What says, my dainty Dolkin?
DOL. Yonder Fish-wife
Will not away. And there is your Giantesse,
The Baud of Lambeth.

SVB. Heart, I cannot speak with'hem.

DOL. Not, before night, I have told'hem, in a voice,
Thorough the Trunk, like one of your Familiars.
But I have spied Sir Epicure Mammon.

SVB. Where?

DOL. Coming along, at far end of the lane,
Slow of his feet, but earnest of his tongue,
To one, that is with him.

SVB. Face, Go you, and shift,
Dol, you must presently make ready, too.

DOL. Why, what is the matter?

SVB. O, I did look for him
With the suns rising. 'Meruaile, he could sleep.
This is the day, I am to perfect for him
The Magisterium, our great work, the Stone;
And yield it, made, into his hands: Of which,
He has, this month, talked, as he were possessed on it,
And, now, he is dealing pieces on it, away.
Me thinks, I see him, entering Ordinaries,
Dispensing for the pox; and Plaguy-houses,
Reaching his dose; Walking More-fields for Lepers;
And offering Citizens Wives Pomander Bracelets,
As his preservative, made of the Elixir;
Searching the Spittle, to make old Baudes young;
And the High ways, for Beggars, to make rich.
I see no end of his labors. He will make
Nature ashamed, of her long sleep, when Art,
Who Is but a Step-dame, shall do more, then she,
In her best love to Mankind, ever could.
If his Dream last, He Will turn the Age, to Gold.

ACT. 2.
SCENE. 1.
MAMON. SVRLY. COme on, Sir. Now, you set your foot, on Shore
In Nouo Orb; Here Is the rich Pern:
And there within, Sir, are the golden Mines
Great Salomon's Op^. He was sailing to it
Three years, but we have reached it in ten Months.
This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
I will pronounce the happy word, Be rich.
This day, you shall be Specta^ssimi.
You shall no more deal with the hollow Die,
Or the frail Card. No more be at charge of keeping
The Liuery-punke, for my young Heir, that must
Seal, at all hours, in his shirt. No more
If he deny, ha'him beaten to it, as he is
That brings him the commodity. No more
Shall thirst of satin, or the covetous hunger
Of velvet entrayles, for a rude spun cloak,
To be displayed at Madam Augusta's, make
The sons of Sword, and Hazard fall before
The golden Calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
Commit I dolatry with Wine, and Trumpets
Or go a feasting, after Drum and Ensign.
No more of this. You shall start up young Vice-roies,
And have your Punques, and Punquettees, my Surly.
And unto thee, I speak it first, Berich.
Where is my Subtle, there? Within Hough? Sir.
WITHIN He Will come to you, by and by.
MAM. That Is his Fire-drake,
His Lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffes his coals,
Till he firke Nature, up, in her own center.
You are not faithful, Sir. This night, I Will change
All, that is metal, in my house, to gold.
And, early in the morning, will I send
To all the Plumbers, and the Peuterers,
And buy their Tin, and Lead up: and to Lothbury.
For all the copper.

SVR. What, and turn that too?

MAM. Yes, and I Will purchase Devonshire, and Cornwaile,
And make them perfect Indies. You admire now?

SVR. No faith.

MAM. But when you see the effects of the great medicine!
Of which one part proiected on a hundred
Of Mercury, or Venus, or the Moon,
Shall turn it, to as many of the Sun;
Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
You will believe me.

SVR. Yes, when I see it, I will.
But, if my eyes do cossen me so (and I
Giuing'hem no occasion) sure, I Will have
A Whore, shall pisse'hem out next day.

MAM. Ha! Why?
Do you think, I fable with you? I assure you,
He that has once the Flower of the Sun,
The perfect Ruby, which we call Elixir,
Not only can do that, but by it is virtue,
Can confer honor, love, respect, long life,
Give safty, valor: yea, and victory,
To whom he will. In eight, and twenty days,
I Will make an Old man, of fourscore, a Child.

SVR. No doubt hee'is that already.

MAM. Nay, I mean,
Restore his years, renew him, like an Eagle,
To the fifth age; make him get Sons, and Daughters,
Young Giants; as our Philosophers have done
(The ancient Patriarchs before the flood)
But taking, once a week, on a knives point,
The quantity of a grain of Mustard, of it:
Become stout Marsses, and beget young Cupids.

SVR. The decayed Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thank you,
That keep the fire a-liue, there.

MAM. It Is the secret
Of Nature, naturiz'd against all infections,
Cures all diseases, coming of all causes,
A month's grief, in a day; a years, in twelve:
And, of what age so ever, in a month.
Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
I Will undertake, withal, to fright the Plague
Out of the kingdom, in three months.

SVR. And I Will
Be bound, the Players shall sing your pra^ses, then,
Without their Poets.

MAM. Sir, I Will do it. Mean time,
I Will give away so much, unto my man,
Shall serve the whole City, with preservative,
Weekly, each house his dose, and at the rate --

SVR. As he that built the Water-worke, dos with water,

MAM. You are incredulous.

SVR. Faith, I have a humor,
I would not willingly be gulled. Your Stone
Cannot transmute me

MAM. Pertinax, Surly,
Will you believe Antiquity? Records?
I Will show you a Book, where Moses, and his Sister,
And Solomon have written, of the Art;
I, and a Treatise penned by Adam.

SVR. How!

MAM. Of The Philosophers stone, and in high Dutch.

SVR. Did Adam write, Sir, in high Dutch?

MAM. He did:
Which proves it was the Primitive tongue.

SVR. What Paper?

MAM. On Cedar board.

SVR. O that, indeed (they say)
Will last against worms.

MAM. It Is like your Irish wood
Against Cobwebs. I have a piece of Iasons fleece, too,
Which was no other, then a Book of Alchemie,
Writ in large sheepe-skin, a good fat Ram-Vellam.
Such was Pythagora's thigh, Pandora's tub;
And, all that fable of Medeas charms,
The manner of our work: The Bulls, our Furnace,
Still breathing fire; our Argent-viue, the Dragon:
The Dragons teeth, Mercury sublimate,
That keeps the whiteness, hardness and the biting;
And they are gathered, into Iason's helm,
(The Alembeke) and then sowed in Mars his field,
And, thence, sublimed so often, till they are fixed.
Both this, the Hesperian Garden, Cadmus story,
Ioue's shower, the boon of Midas, Argus eyes,
Boccace his Demogorgon, thousands more,
All abstract Riddles of our Stone. How now?

ACT. 2.
SCENE. 2.
MAMMON. FACE. SVRLY. Do we succeed? Is our day come? and hold's it?
FAC. The evening will set red upon you, Sir,
You have color for it, crimson, the red Ferment
Has done his office. Three hours hence, prepare you
To see proiection.

MAM. Pertinax, my Surly,
Again, I say to thee, aloud: Be rich.
This day, thou shall have Ingots: and, tomorrow,
Give Lords th'affront. Is it, my Zephyrus, right?
Blushes the Bolts-head?

FAC Like a Wench with Child, Sir,
That were, but now, discovered to her Master.

MAM. Excellent witty Lungs. My only care is,
Where to get stuff, enough now, to project on
This town will not half serve me.

FAC. No Sir? Take
The covering of o'Churches.

MAM. That Is true

FAC. Yes.
Let'hem stand bare, as do their Auditorie,
Or cap 'hem, new, with Shingles.

MAM. No, good Thatch.
Thatch will lie light, vpo'the rafters Lungs.
Lungs, I will manumit thee, from the Furnace;
I will restore thee thy complexion, Puff,
Lost in the embers; and repair this brain,
Hurt with the fume of the Mettalls.

FAC. I have blown, Sir,
Hard for your Worship; thrown by many a Coal,
When it was not Beech; weighed those I put in, just,
To keep your heat, still even; These bleard eyes
Have waked, to read your several colors, Sir,
Of the pale C^ron, the green Lion, the Crow,
The Peacocks tail, the plumed Swan.

MAM. And, lastly,
Thou have descried the Flower, the Sanguis Agni?

FAC. Yes Sir

MAM. Where Is Master?

FAC. At's prayers, Sir, he,
Good man, he is doing his devotions,
For the success.

MAM. Lungs, I will set a period,
To all thy labors: Thou shall be, the Master
Of my Seraglia.

FAC. Good, Sir.

MAM. But do you hear?
I Will geld you' Lungs.

FAC. Yes, Sir.

MAM. For I do mean
To have a list of Wives, and Concubines,
Aequall with Solomon; who had the Stone
Alike, with me: and I will make me, a back
With the Elixir, that shall be as tough
As Hercules, to encounter fifty a night.
Thou Art sure, thou sawst it blood?

FAC. Both blood, and spirit, Sir.

MAM. I will have all my beds, blown up; not stuffed:
Down is too hard. And then, mine Oual Room,
Filled with such pictures, as Tiberius took
From Elephantis: and dull Aretine
But coldly imitated. Then, my Glasses,
Cut in more subtle angles, to disperse,
And multiply the figures, as I walk
Naked between my Succubae. My mistes
I Will have of perfume, vapor'd'bout the room,
To loose our selves in; and my bathes, like pittes
To fall into: from whence, we will come forth,
And roll us dry in Gossamour, and Roses.
Is it ariu'd at Ruby? Where I spy
A wealthy Citizen, or rich Lawyer,
Have a sublimed pure Wife, unto that fellow
I Will send a thousand pound, to be my Cuckold.

FAC. And I shall carry it.

MAM. No, I Will ha'no baudes,
But Fathers, and Mothers. And my flatterers,
Shall be the best, and grauest of Divines,
That I can get for money. My mere fools,
Eloquent Burgesses, and then my Poets
The same that writ so subtly of the Fart,
Whom I will entertain, still, for that Subject.
The few, that would give out themselves, to be
Court, and Towne-Stallions, and, each where, belie
Ladies, who'are known most innocent, for them;
Those will I beg, to ma^e me Eunuchs of^
And they shall fan me, with ten Estrich Tails
A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
We will be brave, Puff, now we ha'the Medicine.
My Meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
Dishes of Agat, set in Gold, and studded
With Emeralds, Saphires, Hjacinths, and Rubies.
The tongues of Carpes, Dormise, and Camels heels,
Boiled in the spirit of Sol, and dissolved Pearl,
( Apicius diet, against the Epilepsie)
And I will eat these broaths, with spoones of Amber,
Headed with Diamant, and Carbuncle.
My foote-Boy shall eat Phesants, caluerd Salmons,
Knots, Godwits, Lamprey's: I my self will have
The beards of Barbels, served, in stead of sallades;
Oyld Mushromes; and the swelling unctuous papps
Of a fat pregnant Sow, newly cut off,
Dressed with an exquisite, and poynant sauce;
For which, I Will say unto my Cook, There Is gold,
Go forth, and be a Knight.

FAC. Sir, I Will go look
A little, how it heightens.

MAM. Do. My Shirts
I Will have of Taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
As Cobwebs; and for all my other raiment
It shall be such, as might provoke the Persian:
Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
My Gloves of Fishes, and Birds-skinnes, perfumed
With Gummes of Paradise, and Eastern air --

SVR. And do'you think to have the Stone, with this?

MAM. No, I do think, to have all this, with the Stone.

SVR. Why, I have heard, he must be Homo frugi,
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortal sin, a very Virgin.

MAM. That makes it, Sir, he is so. But I buy it.
My venture brings it me. He, honest wretch,
A notable, superstitious, good soul,
Has worn his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
With prayer, and fasting for it: And Sir, let him
Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
Not a profane word, before him: It Is poison.

ACT. 2.
SCENE. 3.
MAMMON. SVBTLE. SVRLY. FACE. GGod marrow, Father.
SVB. Gentle Son, good morrow,
And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?

MAM. An Heretic, that I did bring along,
In hope, Sir, to convert him.

SVB. Son, I doubt
Yo'are covetous, that thus you meet your time
In The just point: prevent your day, at morning.
This argues something, worthy of a fear
Of importune, and arnall appetite.
Take heed, you do not cause the blessing leave you,
With your vngouern'd have. I should be sorry,
To see my labors, now, eene ^t perfection,
Got by long watching, and large patience,
Not prosper, where my Love, and Zeal has plac'd'hem.
Which (heaven I call to witness, with your self,
To whom, I have poured my thoughts) in all my ends,
Have looked no way, but unto public good,
To pious uses, and dear Charity
No grown a prodigy with men. Wherein
If you, my Son, should, now, praeuaricate,
And, to your own particular lusts, employ
So great, and catholic a bliss; Be sure,
A curse will follow, yea, and overtake
Your subtle, and most secret ways.

MAM. I know, Sir,
You shall not need to fear me. I but come,
To ha'you confute this Gentleman.

SVB. Who is,
Indeed, Sir, somewhat caustiue of belief
Toward your Stone. Would not be gulled.

SVB. Well, Son,
All that I can convince him in, is this,
The Work is done: Bright Sol is in his robe.
We have a medicine of the triple Soul,
The glorified spirit. Thanks be to heaven,
And make us worthy of it. Vlen spiegle.

FAC. Anon Sir.

SVB. Look well to the Register,
And let your heat, still, lessen by degrees
To the Aludels.

FAC. Yes Sir.

SVB. Did you look
Of The Bolts-head yet?

FAC. Which on D. Sir?

SVB. I.
What Is the complexion?

FAC. Whitish.

SVB. Infuse vinegar,
To draw his vola^le substance, and his tincture:
And let the water in Glass E. be feltred,
And put into the Gripes egg. Lute him, well;
And leave him closed in Balneo.

FAC. I will, Sir.

SVR. What a brave language here is? next to Canting?

SVB. I'haue another work; you never saw, Son,
That, three days since, past the Philoso^hers wheel,
In the lent heat of Athanor; and's become
Sulphur o'nature.

MAM. But it is for me?

SVB. What need you?
You have enough, in that is, perfect.

MAM. O, but --

SVB. Why this is Couetise!

MAM. No, I assure you,
I shall employ it all, in pious uses,
Founding of Colleges, and Grammar Schools,
Marrying young Virgins, building Hospitals,
And now, and then a Church.

SVB. How now.

FAC. Sir please you
Shall I not change the feltre?

SVB. Mary, yes.
And bring me the complexion of Glass B.

MAM. Ha'you another?

SVB. Yes Son, were I assured
Your piety were firm, we would not want
The means to glorify it. But I hope the best:
I mean to tinct C. in sand-heate, tomorrow,
And give him imbibition.

MAM. Of white oil?

SVB. No Sir ofred. F. is come over the helm too,
I thank my Maker, in S. Mary's bath,
And shows Lac Virginis. Blessed be heaven.
I sent you of his faeces there, calc^'d.
Out of that calx, I'ha'wonne the salt of Mercury.

MAM. By pouring on your rectefied water?

SVB. Yes, and reuerberating in Athanor.
How now? What color says it?

FAC. The Ground black, Sir.

MAM. That Is your Crows head.

SVR. Your Cockscomb's, is^t not?

SVB. No, It Is not perfect, would it were the Crow.
That work wants something.

SVR. O, I looked for this.
The hay is a pitching.

SVB. Are you sure, you loos'd'hem
I'their own menstrue?

FAC. Yes, Sir, and then married'hem,
And put'hem in a Bolts-head, nipp'd to digestion,
According as you bad me; when I set
The liquor of Mars to circulation,
In the same heat.

SVB. The process, then, was right.

FAC. Yes, by the token, Sir, the Retort brake,
And what was saved, was put into the Pellicane,
And signed with Hermes seal.

SVB. I thinke'twas so.
We should have a new Amalgama.

SVR. O, this Ferret
Is rank as any Pole-cat.

SVB. But I care not.
Let him e'ene die; we have enough, beside,
In Embrion. H. has his white shirt on?

FAC. Yes, Sir,
He Is ripe for inceration; He stands warm,
In his ash-fire. I would not, you should let
Any dye now, if I might council Sir,
For lucks-sake to the rest. It is not good.

MAM. He says right.

SVR. I, are you bolted?

FAC. Nay, I know it Sir,
I'haue seen the will fortune. What is some three Ounces
Of fresh materials?

MAM. Is It no more?

FAC. No more, Sir,
Of Gold, to amalgame, with some six of Mercuri^

MAM. Away, here is Money. What will serve.

FAC. Ask him, Sir.

MAM. How much?

SVB. Give him nine pound, you may gi'him ten.

SVR. Yes twenty, and be cossend, Do.

MAM. There it is.

SVB. This needs not. But that you will have it, so,
To see conclusions of all. For two
Of our inferior works, are at fixation.
A third is in Ascension. Go your ways,
Ha'you set the Oil of Luna in Kemia?

FAC. Yes, Sir.

SVB. And the Philosophers vinegar?

FAC. I.

SVR. We shall have a sallad.

MAM. When do you make proiection?

SVB. Son, be not hasty, I exalt our Medicine,
By hanging him in Balneo Vaporoso;
And giving him solution; then congeale him,
And then dissolve him; then again congeale him;
For look, how often I iterate the work,
So many times, I add unto his virtue.
As, if at first, one Ounce convert a hundred,
After his second loose, he will turn a thousand;
His third solution, ten: his fourth a hundred.
After his fifth, a thousand thousand Ounces
Of any imperfect metal, into pure
Silver, or Gold, in all examinations,
As good, as any of the natural Mine.
Get you your stuff here, against afternoon,
Your Brass, your Pewter, and your Andirons.

MAM. Not those of iron?

SVB. Yes. You may bring them, too.
We'll change all mettall's.

SVR. I believe you, in that.

MAM. Then I may send my Spitts?

SVB. Yes, and your Racks.

SVR. And Dripping-pannes, and Pot-hangers, and Hooks?
Shall he not?

SVB. If ^e please.

SVR. To be an Ass.

SVB. How Sir!

MAM. This Gent'man, you must bear withal.
I told you, he had no faith.

SVR. And little hope, Sir,
But, much less charity, should I gull my self.

SVB. Why what have you observed, Sir, in our Art,
Seems so impossible?

SVR. But your whole work, no more.
That, you should hatch gold in a Furnace, Sir,
As they do eggs in Egypt.

SVB. Sir, do you
Believe that eggs are hatched so?

SVr. If I should?

SVB. Why, I think that the greater Miracle.
No Egg, but differs from a Chicken, more,
Then Mettalls in themselves.

SVR. That cannot be.
The Egg's ordained by Nature, to that end:
And is a Chicken, in Potentia.

SVB. The same we say of Lead, and other Mettalls,
Which would be Gold, if they had time.

MAM. And that
Our Art does further.

SVB. I, for 'twere absurd
To think that Nature, in the earth, bred Gold
Perfect in the instant. Something went before.
There must be remote Matter.

SVR. I, what is that?

SVB. Mary, we say.

MAM. I, now it heates, stand Father.
Pound him to Dust.

SVB. It is, of the one part,
A humide exhalation, which we call
Materia liquida, or the V^ctuous Water;
On the other part, a certain crasse, and viscous
Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
Do make the elementary matter of Gold:
Which is not, yet, propria materia,
But commune to all Mettalls, and all Stones.
For, where it is forsaken of that moisture,
And has more dryness, it becomes a Stone;
Where it retains more of the humid fatness,
It turns to Sulphur, or to Quicksilver:
Who are the Parents of all other Metals.
Nor can this remote Matter, suddenly,
Progress so from extreme, unto extreme,
As to grow Gold, and leap ore all the means.
Nature does, first, beget th'imperfect; then
Proceeds she to the perfect. Of that ayrye,
And oily water, Mercury is engendered;
Sulphur of the fat, and earthy part; the one
(Which is the last) supplying the place of Male,
The other of the Female, in all Mettalls.
Some do believe Hermaphrodeitie,
That both do act, and suffer. But these two
Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
And, even in Gold, they are; for we do find
Seeds of them, by our fire, and Gold in them:
And can produce the species of each metal
More perfect thence, then Nature does in earth.
Beside, who does not see, in daily practice,
Art can beget Bees, Hornets, Beetles, Waspes,
Out of the Carcasses, and dung of Creatures;
Yea, Scorpions, of an herb, being ritely placed.
And these are living Creatures, far more perfect,
And excellent, then Metal.

MAM. Well said, Father!
Nay, if he take you in hand, Sir, with an argument,
He Will bray you in a Mortar.

SVR. Pray you, Sir, stay.
Rather, then I Will be brayed, Sir, I Will believe,
That Alchemie is a pretty kind of Game,
Somewhat like Tricks of the Cards, to cheat a man,
With charming.

SVB. Sir?

SVR. What else are all your Term^,
Whereon no one o'your Writers grees with other?
Of your Elixir, your Lac virginis,
Your Stone, your Medicine, and your Chrysosperme,
Your Sal, your Sulphur, and your Mercury,
Your Oil of height, your Tree of life, your Blood,
Your Marchesite, your Tutie, your Magnesia,
Your Toade, your Crow, your Dragon, and your Panthar,
Your Sun, your Moon, your Firmament, your Adrop,
Your Lato, Azoch, Zernich, Chibrit, Heautarit,
And then your Red man, and your white (...);
With all your Broathes, your M^nstrues, and Materials,
Of Piss, and Egge-shells, Women's terms, Man's blood,
Hair of the head, burnt Cloutes, Chalk, Merds, and Clay,
Poulder of bones, scalings of Iron, glass.
And worlds of other strange Ingredients,
Would burst a man to name.

SVB. And all these, named,
Intending but one thing: which art our Writers
Used to obscure their Art.

MAM. Sir, so I told him.
Because the simple I diot should not learn it,
And make it vulgar.

SVB. Was not all the knowledge
Of the Egyptians writ in mystic Symboles?
Speak not the Scriptures often in Parables?
Are not the choysest Fables of the Poets,
That were the Fountains, and first Springs of Wisdom,
Wrapped in perplexed Allegories?

MAM. I urged that.
And cleared to him, that Sisiphus was damned
To roll the ceaseless stone, only, because
He would have made ours common. Who is this?

SVB. God's precious -- What do you mean? Go in, good
Lady;
Let me entreat you. Where Is this Varlet?

FAC. Sir?

DOL is seen. SVB. You very knave. Do you use me, thus?

FAC. Wherein Sir?

SVB. Go in, and see, you traitor. Go.

MAM. who is it, Sir?

SVB. Nothing Sir. Nothing.

MAM. What is the matter? Good Sir!
I have not seen you thus distemp'red. Who is it?

SVB. All Arts have still had, Sir, their adversaries,
But ours the most ignorant. What now?

FAC. 'Twas not my fault, Sir, she would speak with you.

SVB. Would she Sir? Follow me.

MAM. stay Lungs.

FAC. I dare not Sir.

FAC. Stay man, what is she?

FAC. A Lords Sister, Sir.

MAM. How! Pray thee stay?

FAC. She Is mad Sir, and sent hither --
(He Will be mad too.

MAM. I warrant thee.) Why sent hither?

FAC. Sir, to be cured.

SVB. Why Rascal!

FAC. Lo you. Here Sir.

MAM. Fore-God, a Bra^^^ante, a brave piece!

SVR. Heart, this is a baudy-House. I Will be burnt else.

MAM. O, by this light, no. Do not wrong him. H'is
Too scrupulous, that way: It is his vice.
No, h'is a rare Physician, do him right.
An excellent Paracelsian! and has done
Strange cures with mineral physic. He deals all
With spirits, he, He will not hear a Word
Of Galen, or his tedious Recipee's.
How now, Lungs!

FAC. Softly, Sir, speak softly. I meant
To have told your Worship all. This must not hear,

MAM. No, he will not be gulled; let him alone.

FAC. You Are very right. Sir, she is a most rare scholar:
And is gone mad, with studying Broughtons works.
If you but name a word, touching the Hebrew,
She falls into her fit, and will discourse
So learnedly of Genealogies,
As you would run mad, too, to hear her, Sir,

MAM. How might one do to have conference with her, Lungs?

FAC. O, diverse have run mad upon the Conference.
I do not know, Sir: I am sent in have,
To fetch a Viale.

SVR. Be not gulled, Sir Mammon.

MAM. Wherein? 'Pray ye, be patient

SVR. Yes, as you are.
And trust confederate Knaves, and Baudes, and Whores.

MAM. You are too foul, believe it. Come here, Zephyrus.
One word.

FAC. I dare not, in good faith.

MAM. Stay, Knave.

FAC. H'is extreme angry, that you saw her, Sir.

MAM. Drink that. What is she, when she is out of her fit?

FAC. O the most affablest Creature, Sir! so merry!
So pleasant! she will mount you up, like quicksilver,
Over the helm; and circulate, like oil;
A very Vegetall: discourse of State,
Of Mathematiques, Ba^dry, any thing --

MAM. Is she no way accessible? no means,
No trick, to give a man a taste of her --
W^t? or so?

FAC. I Will come to you again, Sir.

MAM. S^rly, I did not think, one o'your breeding
Would traduce personages of worth.

SVR. Sir Epic^re,
Your friend to use. Yet, still, loath to be gulled.
I do not like your Phil^sophicall baudes.
Their Stone is lechery enough, to pay for,
Without this bayte

MAM. 'Hart you abuse your self.
I know the Lady, and her friends, and means,
The original of this disaster. Her Brother
H'as told me all.

SVR. And yet, you never saw her
Till now?

MAM. O yes, but I forgot. I have (believe it)
One of the treacherou'st memories, I do think,
Of all mankind.

SVB. What call you her Brother?

MAM. My Lord --
He wi'not have his name known, now I think on it.

SVR. A very treacherous memory.

MAM. Of My faith --

SVR. Tut if you ha'it not about you pass it,
Till we meet next.

MAM. Nay, by this hand, it is true.
He Is one I honor, and my noble friend,
And I respect his House.

SVR. Heart! Can it be,
That a grave Sir, a rich, that has no need,
A wise Sir, too, at other times should thus
With his own oaths, and arguments, make hard means
To gull himself? And, this be your Elixir,
Your Lapis M^neralis, and your Lunarie,
Give me your honest trick, yet, at Primero,
Or Gleeke; and take your Lutum sapientis,
Your Menstruum simplex: I Will have Gold, before you,
And, with less danger of the Quicksilver;
Or the hot Sulphur.

FAC. Here Is one from Captain Face, Sir,
Desires you meet him in the Temple-Church,
Some half hour hence, and upon earnest business.
Sir, if you please to quit us, now; and come,
Again, within two hours: You shall have
My Master busy examining of the works,
And I will steal you in, unto the party, (...)
That you may see her Converse. Sir, Shall I say,
You Will meet the Captains Worship?

SVR. Sir, I will.
But, by Attorney, and to a second purpose.
Now, I am sure, it is a Bawdy House;
I Will swear it, were the Marshall here, to thankeme.
The naming this Commander, does confirm it.
Don Face! Why, h'is the most autentique dealer
I'these Commodities! The Superintendent
To all the queinter Traffiquers, in town.
He is their Visiter, and does appoint
Who lies with whom; and at what hour; what price;
Which gown; and in what smock; what fall; what tire.
Him will I prove, by a third person, to find
The subtilties of this dark Labyrinth:
Which, if I do discover, dear, Sir Mammon,
You Will give your poor Friend leave, though no Philosopher,
To laugh: for you that are, it is thought, shall weep.

FAC. Sir. He does pray, you will not forget.

SVR. I will not, Sir.
Sir Epicure, I shall leave you.

MAM. I follow you, straight.

FAC. But do so, good Sir, to avoid suspicion.
This Gent'man has a par'lous head.

MAM. But will thou
Be constant to thy promise?

FAC. As my life, Sir.
(...) And will thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
And say I am a Noble fellow?

FAC. O what else, Sir?
And, that you will make her royal, with the Stone,
An Empress; and your self King of Bantam.

MAM. Will thou do this?

FAC. Will I Sir?

MAM. Lungs, my Lungs,
I love thee.

FAC. Send your stuff Sir, that my Master
May busy himself, about proiection.

MAM. Thou Have witch'd me, Rogue: Take, Go.

FAC. Your Jack and all Sir.

MAM. Thou art a Villain -- I will send my Jack;
And the weights too. Slave, I could bite thine ^are.
Away, thou do not care for me.

FAC. Not I Sir?

MAM. Come, I was borne to make thee, my good Weasell;
Set thee on a bench: and, ha'thee twirle a Chain
With the best Lords Vermin, of 'hem all.

FAC. Away Sir.

MAM. A Count, nay a Count-Palatine --

FAC. Good Sir, go.

MAM. Shall not advance thee, better; no, nor faster.

ACT. 2.
SCENE. 4.
SVBTLE. FACE. DOL. HAs he bitt? Has he bit?
FAC. And swallowed too, my Subtle.
I have given him line, and now he plays, I faith.

SVB. And shall we twitch him?

FAC. Thorough both the gills.
A Wench is a rare bay^, with which a Man
No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.

SVB. Dol, my Lord Whachums Sister, you must now
Bear your self statelich.

DOL. O, let me alone.
I Will not forget my race, I warrant you.
I Will keep my distance, laugh, and talk aloud;
Have all the tricks of a proud sciruy Lady:
And be as rude 'as her woman.

FAC. Well said, sanguine.

SVB. But will he send his And^rons?

FAC. His Jack too;
And's iron Shooing-horne. I ha'spoke to him. Well,
I must not loose my wary Gamster, yonder.

SVB. O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gulled?

FAC. I, if I can strike a fine hook into him, now,
The Temple-church, there I have cast mine angle.
Well, pray for me. I Will about it.

SVB. What, more G^dgeons!
Dol, scout, scout; stay Face, you must go to the door.
'Pray God, it be my Anabaptist. Who is it Dol?

DOL. I know him not. He looks like a Gold-end man.

SVB. Gods so! it is he, he said he would send. What call you him?
The sanctified Elder, that should deal
For Mammons, Jack, and Andirons! Let him in.
Stay, help me of, first, with my gown. Away
Ma-dame, to your withdrawing Chamber. Now,
In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
Of Amstredam; the exiled Saints: that hope
To raise their discipline, by it. I must use him
In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.

ACT. 2.
SCENE. 5.
SVBTLE. FACE. ANANIAS. Where is my Drudge?
FAC. Sir.

SVB. Take away the Recipient,
And rectify your Menstrue, from the Phlegma.
Then pour it, 'o the Sol, in the Cucurbite,
And let'hem macerate, together.

FAC. Yes, Sir.
And save the ground?

SVB. No. Terra damnata
Must not have entrance, in the work. Who are you?

ANA. A faithful Brother, if it please you.

SVB. What Is that?
A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius artis?
Can you sublime, and dulcefie, calcine?
Know you the sapor pontick? sapor stipstick?
Or, what is Homogene, or Heterogene?

ANA. I understand no Heathen language, truly.

SVB. Heathen, you Knipper-doling? Is Arssacra,
Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
Or the Pamphysick, or Panarchick knowledge,
A Heathen language?

ANA. Heathen Greek, I take it.

SVB. How? Heathen Greek?

ANA. All Is Heathen, but the Hebrew.

SVB. S'rah, my Varlet, stand you forth, and speak to him
Like a Philosopher: Answer, ^'the language.
Name the vexations, and the Martyrizations
Of Mettalls, in the Work.

FAC. Sir, Putrefaction,
Solution, Ablution, Sublimation,
Cohobation, Calcination, Ceration, and
Fixation.

SVB. This is Heathen Greek, to you, now?
And when comes Vivification?

FAC. After Mortification.

SVB. What Is Cohobation?

FAC. It Is the pouring on
Your Aqua R^gis, and then drawing him off,
To the trine circle of the seven spheres.

SVB. What Is the proper passion of Mettalls?

FAC. Malleation.

SVB. What Is your Vltimum supplicium auri?

FAC. Antimonium.

SVB. This's Heathen Greek, to you? And, what is your Mercury?

FAC. A very Fugitive, he will be gone, Sir.

SVB. How know you him?

FAC. By his viscositie,
His oleositie, and his suscitabilitie.

SVB. How do you sublime him?

FAC. With the calce of Egge-shels,
White Marble, Talck.

SVB. Your Magisterium, now?
What Is that?

FAC. Shifting, Sir, your elements,
Dry into cold, cold into moist, moist in-
To hot, hot into dry.

SVB. This's Heathen Greek to you, still?
Your L^pis Philosophicus?

FAC. It Is a Stone, and not
A Stone, a spirit, a soul, and a body;
Which, if you do dissolve, it is dissolved,
If you coagulate, it is coagulated,
If you make it to fly, it flies.

SVB. Enough.
This's Heathen Greek, to you? What are you Sir.

ANA. Please you, a Servant of the exilde Brethren,
That deal with Widows, and with Orphans goods;
And make a just account, unto the Saints:
A Deacon.

SVB. O, you are sent from Mr. Wholesome,
Your Teacher?

ANA. From Tribulation Wholesome,
Our very zealous Pastor.

SVB. Good. I have
Some Orphans goods to come here.

ANA. Of what kind, Sir?

SVR. Peuter, and Brass, Andirons, and Kitchen ware,
Mettalls, that we must use our medicine on:
Wherein the Brethren may have a penn'orth.
For ready money.

ANA. Were the Orphans Parents
Sincere professors?

SVB. Why do you ask?

ANA. Because
We then are to deal justly, and give (in truth)
Their utmost value.

SVB. 'Slid, you would cossen, else,
And, if their Parents were not of the Faithful?
I will not trust you, now I think on it,
Till I have talked with your Pastor. Have you brought money
To buy more Coals?

ANA. No surely.

SVB. No? How so?

ANA. The Brethren bid me ^ay unto you, Sir.
Surely, they will not venture any more,
Till they may see proiection.

SVB. How!

ANA. Yo' have had,
For the Instruments, as bricks, and ^ome, and glasses,
Already thirty pound; and, for Materials,
They say, some ninety more: And, they have heard, since,
That one, at Hiedelberg, made it, of an Egg
And a small paper of Pinne-dust.

SVB. What Is your name?

ANA My name is Ananias.

SVB. Out, the Varlet
That cossend the Apostles! Hence, away,
Flee Mischief; had your holy Consistory
No name to send me, of another sound;
Then wicked Ananias? Send your Elders,
Hither, to make atonement for you, quickly,
And gi' me satisfaction; or out goes
The fire: and down the Alembekes, and the Furnace.
Piger Henricus, or what not. Thou wretch,
Both Sericon, and Bufo, shall belost,
Tell 'hem. All hope of rooting out the Bishops,
Or the Antichristian Hierarchy shall perish,
If they stay threescore minutes. The Aqueitie,
Terreity, and Sulphureitie
Shall run together again, and all be annulled
Thou wicked Ananias. This willfetch 'hem,
And make'hem have toward their gulling more.
A man must deal like a rough Nurse, and fright
Those, that are froward, to an appetite.

ACT. 2.
SCENE. 6.
FACE. SVBTLE. DRVGGER. H'is busy with his spirits, but we'll upon him.
SVB. How now! What Mates? What Baiards have we here?

FAC. I told you he would be furious. Sir, Here Is Nab,
Has brought yo' another piece of Gold, to look on:
(We must appease him. Give it me) and prays you
You would devise (what is it Nab?)

DRV. A sign, Sir.

FAC. I, a good lucky one, a thriuing Sign, Doctor.

SVB. I was devising now.

FAC. 'Slight, do not say so,
He will repent he ga' you any more.
What say you to his Constellation, Doctor?
The Balance?

SVB. No, that way is stale, and Common.
A Towns. Man, borne in Taurus, gives the Bull;
Or the Bulls-head: In Aries, the Ram.
A poor devise. No. I will have his Name
Formed in some mystic character; whose radij,
Striking the senses of the passers by,
Shall, by a virtuall influence, breed affections,
That may result upon the party ownes it:
As thus.

FAC. Nab.

SVB. He first shall have a Bell, That Is Abell;
And, by it, standing one, whose name is Dee,
In a rugg Gown; There Is D. and R^g, that is Drug:
And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
There Is Drugger, Abel Drugger. That Is his sign.
And here is now Mystery, and Hieroglyphick.
Abell, thou art made.

DRV. Sir, I do thank his Worship.

FAC. Six o'thy legs more, will not do it, Nab.
He has brought you a pipe of Tobacco, Doctor.

DRV. Yes, Sir.
I have another thing, I would impart --

FAC. Out with it Nab.

DRV. Sir, there is lodged hard by me
A rich young Widow.

FAC. Good! a Bona roba?

DRV. But nineteen, at the most.

FAC. Very good, Abel.

DRV. Mary sh'is not in fashion, yet; she wears
A hood: but't stands a cop.

FAC. No matter Abel.

DRV. And, I do, now and then give her a fucus,

FAC. What do thou deal, Nab?

SVB. I did tell you, Captain.

DRV. And physic too sometime, Sir, for which she trusts me
With all her mind. She Is come up here, of purpose
To learn the fashion.

FAC. Good, His match too! on Nab.

DRV. And she does strangely long to know her fortune.

FAC. Gods lid, Nab! Send her to the Doctor, hither.

DRV. Yes, I have spoke to her of his Worship, already:
But she is afraid, it will be blown abroad
And hurt her Marriage.

FAC. Hurt it? It Is the way
To heal it, if'twere hurt; to make it more
Followed and sought: Nab, thou shall tell her this.
She Will be more known, more talked of, and your Widows
Are never of any price till they be famous;
Their Honor is their multitude of Suitors.
Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
Thou do not know.

DRV. No, Sir, she will never mary
Under a Knight. Her brother has made a Vow.

FAC. What, and do thou despair, my little Nab,
Knowing, what the Doctor has set down for thee,
And seeing so many, of the City, dubbed?
One Glass o'thy water, with a Madame I know
Will have it done Nab. What Is her brother? a Knight?

DRV. No, Sir, A Gentleman, newly, warm in 'his land, Sir,
Scarce cold in his one and twenty; that does govern
His Sister, here: and is a Man himself
Of some three thousand a year, and is come up
To learn to quarrel, and to live by his wits,
And will go down again, and dye in the Country.

FAC. How! to quarrel?

DRV. Yes, Sir, to carry Quarrels,
As Gallants do, and manage 'hem, by line.

FAC. 'Slid Nab. The Doctor is the only man
In Christendom for him. He has made a Table,
With Mathematical demonstrations,
Touching the Art of Quarrels. He will give him
An Instrument to quarrel by. Go, bring 'hem, both;
Him, and his Sister. And, for thee, with her
The Doctor happ'ly may persuade. Go to.
'Shalt give his Worship, a new Damask suite
Upon the premises.

SVB. O good Captain.

FAC. He shall,
He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Say not,
No offers, bring the Damask, and the Parties.

DRV. I Will try my power, Sir.

FAC. And thy will too, Nab.

SVB. It Is good Tobacco this! What is it an ounce?

FAC. He Will send you a pound, Doctor.

SVB. O, no:

FAC. He will do it.
It is the gooddest soul. Abell about it.
(Thou shall know more anon. Away, be gone.)
A miserable Rogue, and lives with Cheese,
And has the worms. That was the cause indeed
Why he came now. He dealt with me, in private,
To get a medicine for 'hem.

SVB. And shall, Sir. This works.

FAC. A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my dear Subtle:
We Will eene draw lots, and he, that fayles, shall have
The more in goods, the other has in tail.

SVB. Rather the less. For she may be so light
She may want graynes.

FAC. I, or be such a burden,
A man would scarce endure her, for the whole.

SVB. Faith, best let us see her first, and then determine.

FAC. Content. But Doll must have no breath on it.

SVB. Mum.
Away, you to your Surly yonder, Catch him.

FAC. 'Pray God I have not stayed too long.

SVB. I fear it.

ACT. 3.
SCENE. 1.
TRIBVLATION. ANANIAS. THese Chastisements are common to the Saints,
And such rebukes the Elect must bear, with patience;
They are the exercises of the Spirit,
And sent to tempt our fraylties.
ANA. In pure zeal,
I do not like the man: He is a Heathen.
And speaks the language of Canaan, truly.

TRI. I think him a profane person, indeed.

ANA. He bears
The visible mark of the beast, in his forehead.
And for his Stone, it is a work of darkness,
And, with Philosophy, blinds the eyes of man.

TRI. Good Brother, we must bend unto all means,
That may give furtherance, to the holy cause.

ANA. Which his cannot: The sanctified cause
Should have a sanctified course.

TRI. Not always necessary.
The Children of perdition are, often times,
Made instruments even of the greatest works.
Beside, we should give somewhat to man's nature,
The place he lives in, still about the Fire,
And fume of Mettalls, that intoxicate
The brain of Man, and make him prone to passion.
Where have you greater Atheists, then your Cooks?
Or more profane, or choleric then your Glasse-men?
More Antichristian then your Bell-founders?
What makes the Devil so devilish, I would ask you,
Satan, our common enemy, but his being
Perpetually about the fire, and boiling
Br^stone, and Arsnike? We must give, I say,
Unto the motives, and the stirrers up
Of humors in the blood. It may be so.
When as the Work is done, the Stone is made,
This heat of his may turn into a zeal,
And stand up for the beauteous discipline,
Against the menstruous cloth, and ragg of Rome.
We must awayt his calling, and the coming
Of the good Spirit. You did fault, to vpbraid him
With the Brethrens blessing of Heidelberg, waighing
What need we have, to hasten on the Work,
For the restoring of the silenced Saints,
Which never will be, but by the Philosophers Stone.
And, so a learned Elder, one of Scotland,
Assured me; Aurum potabile being
The only medicine, for the civil Magistr^te,
T'incline him to a feeling of the cause:
And must be daily used, in the disease.

ANA. I have not aedified more, truly, by man;
Not, since the beautiful light, first, shone on me:
And I am sad my zeal has so offended.

TRI. Let us call on him, then.

ANA. The motion's good.
And of the Spirit; I will knock first: Peace be within.

ACT. 3.
SCENE. 2.
SVBTLE. TRIBVLATION. ANANIAS. O Are you come? 'Twas time. Your threescore
minutes
Were at the last thread, you see, And, down had gone
Furnus acediae, Turris circulatorius,
Lembeke, Bolts-head, Retort, and Pellicane
Had all been cinders. Wicked Ananias!
Art thou returned? Nay then it goes down, yet.
TRI. Sir, be appeased, He is come to humble
Himself in Spirit, and to ask your patience,
If too much zeal has carried him, aside,
From the due path.

SVB. Why, this does qualefie.

TRI. The Brethren had no purpose, verily,
To give you the least greeuance: but are ready
To lend their willing hands, to any project
The Spirit, and you direct.

SVB. This qualefies more.

TRI. And, for the Orphans goods, let them be valew'd,
Or what is needful, else, to the holy Work,
It shall be numbered: Here, by me, the Saints
Throw down their purse before you.

SVB. This qualifies, most.
Why, thus it should be, now you understand.
Have I discours^d so unto you, of our Stone?
And, of the good that it shall bring your cause?
Showed you (beside the main of hiring forces
Abroad, drawing the Hollanders, your friends,
From the' Indies, to serve you, with all their Fleet)
That even the med'cinall use shall make you a faction,
And party in the Realm. As, put the case,
That some great Man, in stat^, he have the Gout,
Why you but send three drops of your Elixir,
You help him straight: There you have made a Friend.
Another has the Palsy, or the Dropsy,
He takes of your incombustible stuff,
He Is young again: There you have made a Friend.
A Lady, that is past the feate of body,
Though not of mind, and has her face decayed
Beyond all cure of painting; you restore
With the Oil of Tal^k: There you have made a Friend.
And all her friends. A Lord, that is a Leper,
A Knight, that has the bone-ache, or a Squire
That has both these, you make'hem smooth, and sound,
With a bare fricace of your medicine: Still,
You increase your Friends.

TRI. I, it is very praegnant.

SVB. And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
To plate, at Christ-masse.

ANA. Christ-tide, I pray you.

SVB. Yet, Ananias?

ANA. I have done.

SVB. Or changing
His parcel guilt, to massy Gold. You cannot
But raise you Friends. With all, to be of power
To pay an army, in the field; to buy
The King of France, out of his Realms; or Spain,
Out of his Indies: What can you not do,
Against Lords Spiritual, or Temporal,
That shall oppone you?

TRI. Verily, it is true.
We may be temporal Lords, our selves, I take it.

SVB. You may be any thing, and leave of to make
Long-winded exercises: or suck up,
Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not deny,
But such as are not graced, in a State,
May, for their ends, be adverse in Religion,
And get a tune, to call the flock together:
For (to say sooth) a tune does much, with women,
And other phlegmatic people, It is your Bell.

ANA. Bells are profane, a tune may be religious.

SVB. No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
'Slight, it shall down: I will not be thus tortured.

TRI. I pray you, Sir.

SVB. All shall perish. I have spoke it.

TRI. Let me find grace, Sir, in your eyes; The man
He stands corrected: neither did his zeal
(But as your self) allow a tune, some-where.
Which, now, being to'ard the Stone, we shall not need.

SVB. No, nor your holy vizard, to win Widows
To give you Legacies; or make zealous Wives
To rob their Husbands, for the common cause;
Nor take the start of Bands, broke but one day,
And say, they were forfeited, by providence.
Nor shall you need, ore night, to eat huge meals,
To celebrate your next days fast the better:
The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh; Nor cast
Before your hungry hearers, scrupulous bones,
As whether a Christian may hawke, or hunt;
Or whether, Matrons, of the holy Assembly,
May lay their hair out, or wear doublets,
Or have that Idol Starch, about their linen.

ANA. It is indeed an Idol

TRI. Mind him not, Sir.
I do command thee, Spirit (of zeal, but trouble)
To peace within him. Pray you Sir, go on.

SVB. Nor shall you need to libell against the Prelates,
And shorten so your ears, against the hearing
Of the next wire-drawne Grace. Nor, of necessity,
Rail against plays, to please the Alderman,
Whose daily Custard you devour Nor lie
With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selves,
By names of Tribulation, Persecution,
Restraint, Long-Patience, and such like, affected
By the whole Family, or Wood of you,
Only for glory, and to catch the ear
Of the Disciple.

TRI. Truly, Sir, they are
Ways, that the Godly Brethren have invented,
For propagation of the holy cause,
As very notable means; and whereby, also,
Themselves grow soon, and profitably famous.

SVB. O, but the Stone, all is idle to'it! nothing!
The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
The divine secret, that does fly in clouds,
From East to West: and whose Tradition
Is not from men but spirits.

ANA. I hate Traditions.
I do not trust 'hem.

TRI. Peace.

ANA. They are Popish, all.
I will not peace. I will not --

TRI. Ananias.

ANA. Please the profane, to grieve the godly. I may not.

SVB. Well, Ananias, thou shall overcome.

TRI. It is an ignorant zeal, that haunts him, Sir.
But truly, else, a very faithful Brother;
A Botcher: and a man, by revelation,
That has a competent knowledge of the Truth.

SVB. Has he a competent sum, there, in the bagg,
To buy the goods, within? I am made Guardian,
And must, for Charity, and Conscience sake,
Now, see the most be made, for my poor Orphane.
Though I desire the Brethren, too, good Gayners.
There, they are, within. When you have viewed, and bought 'hem,
And taken the Inuentory of what they are,
They'are ready for ^roiection; there is no more
To do; Cast on the medicine: So much Silver
As there is Tin there, so much Gold as Brass,
I Will gi' it you in, by weight.

TRI. But how long time,
Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?

SVB. Let me see,
How Is the Moon, now? Eight, nine, ten days hence
He will be Silver potate; then, three days,
Before he citronise: some fifteen days,
The Magisterium will be perfected.

ANA. About the second day, of the third week,
In the ninth Month?

SVB. Yes my good Ananias.

TRI. What will the Orphans goods arise to, think you?

SVB. Some hundred Marks; as much as filled three Carres,
Vnladed now: you shall make six millions of 'hem.
But I must ha'more coals laid in.

TRI. How!

SVB. Another load,
And then we have finished. We must now increase
Our fire to Ignis ardens, we are past
Fimus equinus, B^lnei, Cineris,
And all those lenter heates. If the holy Purse
Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saint^
Do need a present sum; I have trick
To melt the Pewter, you shall buy now, instantly,
And, with a tincture, make you as good ` Dutch Dollers,
As any are in Holland

TRI. Can you so?

SVB. I, and shall bide the third examination.

ANA. It will be joyful tidings to the Brethren.

SVB. But you must carry it, secret

TRI. I, but stay
This act of coining, is it lawful?

ANA. Lawful?
We know no Magistrate Or, if we did,
This's foreign coin.

SVB. It is no coining, Sir.
It is but casting,

TRI. Ha? you distinguish well.
Casting of money may be lawful.

ANA. It Is, Sir.

TRI. Truly, I take it so.

SVB. There is no scruple
Sir, to be made of it; believe Ananias.
This case of conscience he is studied in.

TRI. I Will make a question of it, to the Brethren.

ANA. The Brethren shall approve it lawful, doubt not.
Where shall't be done?

SVB. For that we will talk, anon.
There Is some to speak with me. Go in, I pray you,
And view the parcels. That Is the Inuentory.
I Will come to you straight. Who is it? Face? Appear.

ACT. 3.
SCENE. 3.
SVBTLE. FACE. DOL. HOw now? Good prise?
FAC. Good pox. Yon'd costiue Cheater
Never came on.

SVB. How then?

FAC. Iha' walkd the round,
Till now, and no such thing.

SVB. And have you quit him?

FAC. Quit him? and Hell would quit him too, he were happy.
'Slight would you have me stalk like a Mill-Iade,
All day, for one, that will not yield us Graynes?
I know him of old.

SVB. O, but to have gulled him,
Had been a maystry.

FAC. Let him go, black Boy,
And turn thee, that some fresh news may possess thee.
A noble Count, a Don of Spain (my dear
Delicious compeere, and my party-baud)
Who is come hither, private, for his Conscience,
And brought munition with him, six great slopps,
Bigger then three Dutch Hoighs, beside round trunkes,
Furnished with Pistolets, and Pieces of eight,
Will straight be here, my Rogue, to have thy Bath
That is the color, and to make his battry
Upon our Dol, our Castle, our Cinque-Port,
Our Dover Pire, our what thou will. Where is she?
She must prepare perfumes, delicate linen,
The bath in chief, a banquet, and her wit,
For she must feel his Epididimis.
Where is the Doxie?

SVB. I Will send her to thee:
And but dispatch my brace of little John Leydens,
And come again my self.

FAC. Are they within then?

SVB. Numbering the sum.

FAC. How much?

SVB. A hundred marks, boy,

FAC. Why this's a lucky day. Ten pounds of Mammon?
Three of my Clearke. A Portague of my Grocer.
This of the Brethren, beside Reuersions,
And States, to come in the Widow, and my Count.
My share, to day, will not be bought for forty --

DOL. What?

FAC. Pounds, dainty Dorothee, art thou so near?

DOL. Yes, say Lo: General, how fares o^ur Camp?

FAC. As, with the few, that had entrenched themselves
Safe, by their discipline, against a world, Dol:
And laughed, within those trenches, and grew fat
With thinking on the booties, Dol, brought in
Daily, by their small parties. This dear hour,
A doughty Don is taken, with my Doll;
And thou may make his ransom, what thou will,
My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fettered
With thy fair looks, before he see's thee, and thrown
In a Downe-bed, as dark as any Dungeon;
Where thou shall keep him waking, with thy Drum;
Thy Drum, my Dol; thy Drum; till he be tame
As the poor Black-birds were in the great frost,
Or Bees are with a basin: and so hiue him
In The Swan-skin Couerlid, and cambrick Sheets,
Till he work Honey, and Wax, my little Gods-guift.

DOL. What is he, General.

FAC. An Adalantado,
A Grande, Girl Was not my Dapper here, yet?

DOL. No.

FAC. Nor my Drugger?

DOL. Neither.

FAC. A pox on 'hem,
They are so long a furnishing. Such Stinkards
Would not be seen, upon these festival days.
How now! ha'you done?

SVB. Done. They are gone. The sum
Is here in Banque, my Face. I would, we knew
Another chapman, now, would buy 'hem outright.

FAC. 'Slid, Nab shall do it, against he have the Widow,
To furnish household.

SVB. Excellent well thought on,
Pray God, he come.

FAC. I pray, he keep away
Till our new business be o're-past.

SVB. But, Face,
How came thou, by this secret Don? A Spirit
Brought me th'intelligence, in a paper, here,
As I was coniuring, yonder, in my Circle
For Surly: I have my Flies abroad. Your Bath
Is famous Subtle, by my means. Sweet Doll,
You must go tune your Virginal, no loosing
Of The least time. And, do you hear? good action.
Firke like a Flounder, kiss like a Scallop, close;
And tickle him with thy Mother Tongue. His great
Verdugo-ship has not a jot of language:
So much the easier to be cossin'd, my Dolly.
He will come here, in a hired Coach, obscure,
And our own Coachman, whom I have sent, as Guide,
No creature else. Who Is that?

SVB. It i'not he?

FAC. O no, not yet this hour.

SVB. Who is it?

DOL. Dapper,
Your Clearke.

FAC. Gods will, then, Queen of Faerie,
On with your tire; and, Doctor, with your robes.
Lett's us dispatch him, for Gods sake.

SVB. 'Twill be long.

FAC. I warrant you, take but the QQs I give you,
It shall be brief enough, 'Slight, here are more.
Abel, and I think, the angry Boy, the Heir,
That fame would quarrel.

SVB. And the Widow?

FAC. No,
Not that I see. Away. O Sir, you are welcome.

ACT. 3.
SCENE. 4.
FACE. DAPPER. DRVGGER. KASTRIL. THe Doctor is within, a moving for you;
I have had the most ado to win him to it;
He swears, you will be the Dearling of the Dice:
He never heard her Highness doat, till now.
Your Aunt has gi^'n you the most gracious words,
That can be thought on.
DAP. Shall I see her Grace?

FAC. See her, and kiss her too. What? honest Nab!
Have brought the Damask? Nab. No Sir, here is Tobacco.

FAC. It Is Well done. Thou Wilt bring the Damasketoo?

DRV. Yes, here is the Gentleman, Captain, Mr. Kastrill,
I have brought to see the Doctor.

FAC. Where Is the Widow?

DRV. Sir, as he likes, his Sister (he says) shall come.

FAC. O, is it so? Good time. Is your name Kastrill, Sir?

KAS. I, and the best of the Kastrills, I'lld be sorry else,
By fifteen hundred, a year Where is this Doctor?
My mad Tobacco-Boy, here, tells me of one,
That can do things. Has he any skill?

FAC. Wherein, Sir?

KAS. To carry a business, manage a Quarrel, fayrely,
Upon fit terms.

FAC. It seems Sir, yo' are but young
About the town, that can make that a question.

KAS. Sir, not so young, but I have heard some speech
Of the angry Boys, and seene'hem take Tobacco;
And in his shop: and I can take it too.
And I would feign be one of'hem, and go down
And practice in the country.

FAC. Sir, for the Duello,
The Doctor, I assure you, shall inform you,
To the least shadow of a hair: and show you,
An Instrument he has, of his own making,
Wherewith, no sooner shall you make report
Of any Quarrel, but he will take the Height on it,
Most instantly; and tell in what Degree,
Of saf'ty it lies in, or mortality.
And, how it may be borne, whether in a right line,
Or a halfe-circle; or may, else, be cast
Into an angle blunt, if not acute:
All this he will demonstrate. And then, Rules,
To give, and take the Lie, by.

KAS. How? to take it?

FAC. Yes, in oblique, he will show you; or in circle:
But never in diameter. The whole Town
Study his Theoremes, and dispute them, ordinarily.
At the eating Academies.

KAS. But, dos he teach
Living, by the Wits, too?

FAC. Any thing, what ever.
You cannot think that subtilty, but he reads it.
He made me a Captain; I was a stark Pimpe,
Iusto'your standing, before I met with him:
It i'not two months since. I Will tell you his method.
First, He will enter you, at some Ordinary.

KAS. No, I Will not come there. You shall pardon me.

FAC. For why, Sir?

KAS. There Is gaming there, and tricks.

FAC. Why, would you be
A Gallant, and not game?

KAS. I, 'twill spend a man.

FAC. Spend you? It will repair you, when you are spent.
How do they live by their wits, there, that have vented
Six times your fortunes?

KAS. What, three thousand a year?

FAC. I, forty thousand.

KAS. Are there such?

FAC. I Sir.
And Gallants, yet. Here Is a young Gentleman,
Is borne to nothing, forty marks a year,
Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
And have a Fly of the Doctor. He will win you
By irresistable luck, within this fortnight,
Enough to buy a Baronry. They will set him
Vpmost, at the Groome-Porters, all the Christmasse.
And, for the whole year through, at every place,
Where there is play, present him with the Chair,
The best attendance, the best drink, sometimes
Two glasses of Canarie, and pay nothing;
The purest linen, and the sharpest knife,
The Partrich next his trencher: and, somewhere,
The dainty bed, in private, with the Dainty.
You shall ha'your Ordinaries bid for him,
As Play Houses for a `Poet^; and the Master
Pray him, aloud, to name what Dish he affects,
Which must be butterd Shrimpes: and those, that drink
To no mouth else, will drink to his, as being
The goodly President-Mouth of all the board.

KAS. Do you not gull one?

FAC. God's my life! Do you think it?
You shall have a cast Commander, can but get
In credit with a Glouer, or a Spurrier,
For some two pair, of eythers ware, aforehand,
Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
Arrive at competent means, to keep himself,
His Punke, and naked Boy, in excellent fashion.
And be admired for it.

KAS. Will the Doctor teach this?

FAC. He will do more, Sir, when your Land is gone,
(As men of Spirit hate to keep earth long)
In a Vacation, when small money is stirring,
And Ordinaries suspended till the Term,
He Will show a Perspectiue, where on one side
You shall behold the faces, and the persons
Of all sufficient young Heirs, in town,
Whose bonds are current for commodity;
On the other side, the Merchants forms, and others,
That, without help of any second Broker,
(Who would expect a share) will trust such parcells:
In the third square, the very street, and sign
Where the Commodity dwells, and does but wait
To be delivered, be it Pepper, Soap,
Hopps, or Tobacco, Ote-meale, Woad, or Cheeses.
All which you may so handle, to enjoy,
To your own use, and never stand obliged.

KAS. I faith! Is he such a fellow?

FAC. Why, Nab here knows him.
And then for making matches, for rich Widows,
Young Gentlewomen, Heirs, the fortunat'st Man!
He Is sent too far, and near, all over England
To have his counsel, and to know their Fortunes.

KAS. Gods will, my Suster shall see him.

FAC. I Will tell you, Sir,
What he did tell me of Nab. It Is a strange thing,
(By the way you must eat no Cheese, Nab, it breeds Melancholy:
And that same Melancholy breeds worms) but pass it,
He told me honest Nab, here, was never at Tavern,
But once in's life.

DRV. Truth, and no more I was not.

FAC. And, then he was so sick --

DRV. Could he tell you that, too?

FAC. How should I know it?

DRV. In troth we had been a shooting,
And had a piece of fat Ram-Mutton, to supper,
That lay so heavy of my stomach --

FAC. And he has no head
To bear any Wine; for, what with the noise of the Fiddlers,
And care of his shop, for he dares keep no Servants --

DRV. My head did so ache --

FAC. As he was feign to be brought home,
The Doctor told me. And then a good Old Woman --

DRV. (Yes faith she dwells in Seacoale-lane) did cure me,
With sodden Ale, and Pellitorie of the Wall;
Cost me but two pence. I had another sickness,
Was worse then that.

FAC. I, that was with the grief
Thou took st for b^ing seast at eighteen pence,
For the water-worke

DRV. In truth, and it was like
To Have cost me almost my life.

FAC Thy hair went off?

DRV. Yes, Sir, it was done for spite

FAC. Nay, so says the Doctor.

KAS. Pray thee Tobacco-Boy, Go fetch my Suster,
I Will see this learned Boy, before I go:
And so shall ^he.

FAC. Sir, he is bu^e now:
But, if you have a Sister to fetch (...),
Perhaps, your own pains may command her sooner;
And he, by that time, will be free.

(...). I go, Sir.

FAC. Drugger, she is thine; the Damas^e. Subtle, and I
Must wrestle for her. Come on, Mr. Dapper.
You see, how I turn Clients, here, away,
To give your cause dispatch. Ha'you performed
The ceremonies were inioyn'd you?

DAP. Yes, of the Vinegar,
And the clean shirt.

FAC. It Is well: that shirt may do you
More Worship then you think. Your Aunt's a fire
But that she will not show it, to have a sight on you.
Have you provided for her Graces Servants?

DAP. Yes here are six-score Edward shillings.

FAC Good.

DAP. And an old Harry's Sovereign.

FAC. Very good.

DAP. And three James shillings, and an Elizabeth groat,
Just twenty nobles.

FAC. O, you are too just.
I would you had had the other Noble in Mari^s.

DAP. I have some Philip and Mary's.

FAC I those same
Are best of all. Where are they? Hark, the Doctor.

ACT. 3.
SCENE. 5.
SVBTLE. FACE. DAPPER. DOL. IS yet her Graces Cossen come?
FAC. He is come.

SVB. And is he fasting?

FAC. Yes.

SVB. And has cried Hum?

FAC. Thrice, you must answer.

DAP. Thrice.

SVB. And as often Buz?

FAC. If you have, say.

DAP. I have.

SVB. Then, to her Cuz,
Hoping, that he has vinegard his senses,
As he was bid, the Faery Queen dispenses,
By me, this Robe, the Peticoate of Fortune;
Which that he straight put on, she does importune.
And though to Fortune near be her Peticoate,
Yet, nearer is her Smock, the Queen does note:
And, therefore, even of that a piece she has sent,
Which, being a Child, to wrap him in, was rent;
And prays him, for a scarf, he now will wear it
(With as much love, as then her Grace did tear it)
About his eyes to show, he is fortunate.
And, trusting unto her to make his State,
He Will throw away all worldly pelf, about him;
Which that he will perform, she does not doubt him.

FAC. She need not doubt him, Sir Alas, he has nothing,
But what he will part withal, as willingly,
Upon her Graces word (Throw away your purse)
As she would ask it, (hand-kerchiefes, and all)
She cannot bid that thing, but he will obey.
If you have a Ring, about you, cast it off,
Or a silver seal, at your wrist, her Grace will send
Her Faeries here to search you, therefore deal
Directly with her Highness. If they find
That you conceal a mite, you are undone.

DAP. Truly there is all

FAC. All what?

DAP. My money, truly.

FAC. Keep nothing, that is transitory, about you,
Bid (...) play music. Look, the (...) are come
To pinch you, if you tell not truth. Advise you.

DAP. O, I have a paper with a Spur-riall in it.

FAC. Ti, ti,
They knew't, they say.

SVB. Ti, ti, ti, ti, he has more yet.

FAC. Ti, ti ti ti. In The the other pocket?

SVB. Titi, titi, titi, titi.
They must pinch him, or he will never confess, they say.

DAP. O, o.

FAC. Nay, pray you hold. He is her Graces Nephew.
Ti ti ti? What care you? Good faith, you shall care.
Deal plainly, Sir, and shame the Faeries. Show
You are an Innocent.

DAP. By this good light, I ha'nothing,

SVB. Ti ti, ti ti to ta. He dos aequiuocate, she says:
Ti, ti do ti, ti ti do, ti da. And swears by the light, when he is blinded.

DAP. By this good dark, I have nothing but a halfe-Crowne
Of Gold, about my wrist, that my Love gave me;
And a leaden Heart I wore, sin' she forsook me.

FAC. I thought, 'twas something. And, would you incur
Your Aunts displeasure for these trifles? Come
I had rather you had thrown away twenty halfe-crownes.
You may wear your leaden Heart still. How now?

SVB. What news, Dol?

DOL. Yonder Is your Knight, Sir Mammon.

FAC. Gods lid, We never thought of him, till now.
Where is he?

DOL. Here, hard by. H'is at the door.

SVB. And, you are not ready, now? Dol, get his suite.
He must not be sent back.

FAC. O by no means.
What shall we do with this same Puffin, here,
Now he is of the Spit?

SVB. Why lay him back a while,
With some devise, Ti, ti ti, ti ti ti. Would her Grace speak with me?
I come. Help Dol.

FAC. Who Is there? Sir Epicure;
My Master's in the way. Please you to walk
Three or four turns, but till his back be turned,
And I am for you. Quickly, Dol.

SVB. Her Grace
Commends her kindly to you, Mr. Dapper.

DAP. I long to see her Grace.

SVB. She, now, is set
At Dinner, in her bed; and she has sent you,
From her own private trencher, a dead Mouse,
And a piece of Ginger-bread, to be merry withal,
And stay your stomach, least you faint with fasting.
Yet, if you could hold out, till she saw you, she says,
It would be better for you.

FAC. Sir, He shall
Hold out, and 'twere this two hours, for her Highness;
I can assure you that. We will not loose
All we have done.

SVB. He must nor see, nor speak
To any body, till then.

FAC. For that, we'll put Sir,
A stay in 'is mouth.

SVB. Of what?

FAC. Of Ginger-bread.
Make you it fit. He that has pleased her Grace,
Thus far, shall not now crinckle, for a little.
Gape Sir, and let him fit you.

SVB. Where shall we now
Bestow him?

DOL. In The Privy.

SVB. Come along, Sir
I now must show you Fortunes privy lodgings.

FAC. Are they perfumed? and his bath ready?

SVB. All.
Only the Fumigation's somewhat strong.

FAC. Sir Epicure,, I am yours, Sir, by and by.

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 1.
FACE. MAMMON. DOL. O Sir, yo'are come in the only, finest time --
MAM. Where Is Master?

FAC. Now preparing for proiection, Sir.
Your stuff will b' all changed shortly.

MAM. Into Gold?

FAC. To Gold, and Silver, Sir.

MAM. Silver I care not for.

FAC. Yes, Sir, a little to give Beggars.

MAM. Where Is the Lady?

FAC. At hand, here. I have told her such brave things, on you,
Touching your bounty and your noble Spirit

MAM. Have thou?

FAC. As she is almost in her fit to see you.
But, good Sir, no Divinity in your conference
For fear of putting her in rage.

MAM. I warrant thee.

FAC. Six men will not hold her down. And, then
If the Old man should hear, or see you.

MAM. Fear not.

FAC. The very House, Sir, would run madd. You know it
How scrupulous he is, and violent,
Against the least act of sin. Physic, or Mathematiques,
Poetry, State, or Baudry (as I told you)
She will endure and never startle; But
No word of Controuer^ie.

MAM. I am schooled, good Lungs.

FAC. And you must praise her House, remember that,
And her Nob^

MAM. Let me, aloue:
No He^ld, no nor A^tiquarie, Lu^gs,
Shall do it better. Go

FAC. Why this is yet
A kind of (...), to have
Dol^ommon for a great Lady.

MAM. Now, Epicure,
Heighten thy self, talk to her, all in Gold;
Rain her as many showers as Jove did dropps
Unto his (...),: Show the God a Mis^r,
Compa'rd with Mammon, What? the Stone will do it.
She shall feel Gold, taste Gold, hear Gold, sleep Gold:
Nay, we will concumbere Gold. I will be puissant,
And mighty in my talk to her. Here she comes.

FAC. To him, Dol, suckle him. This is the noble Knight,
I told your Ladyship.

MAM. Madame, with your pardon,
I kiss your vesture.

DOL Sir, I were uncivil
If I would suffer that, my lip to you Sir.

MAM. I hope, my Lord your Brother be in health, Lady?

DOL. My Lord, my Brother is, though I no Lady, Sir.

FAC. Well said my Guiny-(...)

MAM. Right noble Madam --

FAC. O, we shall have most fierce Idolatry!

MAM. It Is your Pr^rogatiue.

DOL. Rather your Courtesy.

MAM. Were there naught else t'inlarge your virtues, to me,
These answers speak your breeding, and your blood.

DOL. Blood we boast none, Sir, a poor Baron's Daughter.

MAM. Poor, and gat you? Profane not, had your Father
Slept all the happy remnant of his life
After that act, (...) but there still, and panted,
He Had done enough to make himself, his issue,
And his posterity noble

DOL. Sir, although
We may besaid to (...) the guilt, and trappings,
The (...) of (...); yet we stri^e to keep.
The ^eedes, and the (...).

MAM. I do see
The old (...), Virtue, was not lost,
Nor the Drug, Money, used to make your compound.
There is a strange Nobility, in your eye;
This lip, that chinne. Me thinks you do resemble
One of the Austr^ack Princes.

FAC. Very like,
Her Father was an Irish Coster-monger.

MAM. The house of Valois, just, had such a Nose;
And such a Forehead, yet, the Medic^
Of Floren^ boast.

DOL. Troth, and I have been lik'ned
To all these Princ^s.

FAC. I Will be sworn, I heard it.

MAM. I know not, how; It is not any one,
Butee'n the very choice of all their features.

FAC. I Will in, and laugh.

MAM A certain touch, or air,
That (...) a diu^itie, beyond
An earthly beauty.

DOL. O, you play the Courtier.

MAM Good Lady gi'me leave.

DOL. In faith, I may not,
To mock me, Sir.

MAM. To burn i'this sweet flame:
The Phoe^x never knew a nobler death.

DOL. Nay, now you court, the Courtier, and destroy
What you would build. This Art Sir, in your words
Calls your whole faith in question

MAM. By my soul. --

DOL. Na^ Oaths are made of the same air, Sir.

MAM. Nature
Never bestowed upon mortality,
A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
She played the Step-dame in all faces, else.
Sweet Madame, le' me be particular.

DOL. Particular, Sir? I pray you know your distance.

MAM. In no ill sense, sweet Lady, but to ask
How your fair Graces pass the hours? I see
Yo' are lodged, here, in the house of a rare man,
An excellent Artist; But, what is that to you?

DOL. Yes, Sir. I study here the M^thematiques,
And distillation.

MAM. O, I cry your pardon.
H'is a Divine Instructor, can extract
The souls of all things, by his art, call all
The virtues, and the miracles of the Sun,
Into a temperate furnace: teach dull Nature
What her own forces are. A man, the Emperor
Has courted, above Kelley: sent his medalls,
And chains, t'invite him.

DOL. I, and for his Physic, Sir.

MAM. Above the art of Aesculapius,
That drew the envy of the Thunderer.
I know all this, and more.

DOL. Troth, I am taken, Sir,
Whole, with these studies, that contemplate Nature:

MAM. It is a noble Humor. But, this form
Was not intended to so dark a use.
Had you been crooked, foul, of some course mould,
A Cloister, had done well: but, such a feature
That might stand up the Glory of a Kingdom
To live recluse? is a mere solaecisme,
Though in a Nunnery. It must not be.
I muse, my Lord your Brother will permit it:
You should spend half my Land first, were I he.
Dos not this Diamant better, on my finger,
Then in the quarry?

DOL. Yes.

MAM. Why you are like it.
You were created, Lady, for light.
Hear, You shall wear it; take it, the first pledge
Of what I speak: to bind you, to believe me.

DOL. In chains of Adamant?

MAM. Yes, the strongest bands:
And take a secret, too. Here, by your side,
Does stand, this hour, the happiest man, of Europe.

DOL. You are contented, Sir?

MAM. Nay, in true being:
The envy of Princes, and the fear of States.

DOL. Say you so, Sir Epicure?

MAM. Yes, and thou shall prove it,
Daughter of Honor. I have cast mine eye
Upon thy form, and I will rear this beauty.
Above all Styles.

DOL. You mean no treason, Sir?

MAM. No, I will take away that jealousy.
I am the Lord, of the Philosophers Stone,
And thou the Lady.

DOL. How Sir, have you that?

MAM. I am the Master of the Maistry.
This day, the good Old wretch, here, of the house
Has made it for us. Now, he is at proiection.
Think therefore, thy first wish, now; Let me hear it:
And it shall rain into thy lap, no shower,
But floods of Gold, whole cataracts, a deluge,
To get a Nation on thee.

DOL. You are pleased, Sir,
To work on the ambition of our sex.

MAM. I Am pleased, the Glory of her sex should know,
This nooke, here, of the Friars, is no climate
For her, to live obscurely in, to learn
Physic and Surgery, for the Constables wife
Of some odd Hundred in Essex; but come forth,
And taste the air of Palaces, eat, drink
The toils of Empricks, and their boasted practice:
Tincture of Pearl, and Coral, Gold, and Amber;
Be seen at Feasts, and Triumphs; have it asked,
What Miracle she is? set all the Eyes
Of Court a fire, like a burning Glass,
And work 'hem into cinders; when the jewels
Of twenty States adorn thee; and the light
Strikes out the Stars; that, when thy name is mentioned,
Queens may look pale: and, we, but showing our love,
Nero's Poppaea may be lost in story.
Thus will we have it.

DOL. I could well consent, Sir.
But, in a Monarchy, how will this be?
The Prince will soon take notice, and both seize
You, and your Stone, it being a wealth unfit
For any private subject

MAM. If he knew it.

DOL. Your self do boast it, Sir.

MAM. To thee, my Life.

DOL. O, but beware, Sir. You may come to end
The remnant of your days, in a loathed prison,
By speaking of it.

MAM. It Is no idle fear.
We Will therefore go with all, my Girl, and live
In a free State, where we will eat our Mullets,
Sous'd in high-countrey Wines, sup Phesants eggs,
And have our Cockles, boyld in Silver shells,
Our Shrimpes to swim again as when they lived,
In a rare butter, made of Dolphins milk,
Whose cream does look like Opalls: And, with these
Delicate meats, set our selves high for pleasure;
And take us down again; and then renew
Our youth, and strength, with drinking the Elixir:
And so enjoy a perpetuity
Of life, and lust. And thou shall have thy Wardrobe,
Richer then Natures, still, to change thy self,
And vary oftener, for thy pride, then she:
Or Act, her wise, and almost-aequall servant.

FAC. Sir, you are too loud. I hear you, every word,
Into the Laboratory: some fitter place,
The Garden, or great Chamber above. How like you her?

MAM. Excellent, Lungs. There Is for thee.

FAC. But, do you hear?
Good Sir beware, no mention of the Rabbines.

MAM. We think not on 'hem.

FAC. O, it is well, Sir. Subtle --

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 2.
FACE. SVBTLE. KASTRIL. DAME PLIANT. Do thou not laugh?
SVB. Yes. Are they gone?

FAC. All Is clear.

SVB. The Widow is come.

FAC. And your quarrelling Disciple?

SVB. I.

FAC. I must to my Captaine-ship again, then.

SVB. Stay, Bring 'hem in, first.

FAC. So I meant. What is she?
A Bony-Bell??

SVB. I know not.

FAC. We'll draw lotts,
You Will stand to that?

SVB. What else?

FAC. O, for a suite,
To fall now, like a Curtine: Flap.

SVB. To th'dore, man.

FAC. You Will ha'the first kiss, 'cause I am not ready.

SVB. Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrills.

FAC. Who would you speak with?

KAS. Where Is the Captain?

FAC. Gone, Sir,
About some business.

KAS. Gone?

FAC. He Will return straight.
But Mr. Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.

SVB. Come nere, my Worshipful Boy, my Terr^ Fili,
That is, my Boy of Land; Make thy approches:
Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
And I will serve, and satisfy 'hem. Begin.
Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
Here is my Center: Ground thy Quarrel.

KAS. You lie.

SVB. How, Child of wrath, and anger! The loud lie?
For what, my so daine Boy?

KAS. Nay, that look you too;
I am aforehand.

SVB. O, this's no true Grammar,
And as ill Logic. You must render causes, Child,
Your first, and second Intentions, know your Canons,
And your Divisions, Moodes, Degrees, and Differences,
Your Praedicaments, Substance, and Accident,
Series externe, and interne, with their causes
Efficient, (...), formal, final,
And have your el^ments perfect.

KAS. What is this
The angry tongue he talks in?

SVB. That false praecept,
Of being aforehand, has deceived a number;
And made 'hem enter Quarrels, oftentimes,
Before they were aware: and afterward.
Against their w^lls.

KAS. How must I do then, Sir?

SVB. I cry this Lady mercy. She should, first,
Have been saluted. I do call you Lady,
Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
My soft, and buxome Widow.

KAS. Is she, i-faith?

SVB. Yes, or my art is an egregio is liar.

KAS. How know you?

SVB. By inspection, on her forehead;
An^ subtlety of her lip, which must be tasted
Often, to make a judgment 'Slight, she melts
Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
In (...) frontis, tells me, he is no Knight.

PLI. What is he then, Sir?

SVB. Let me see your Hand.
O, your Linea F^rtunae makes it plain;
And (...), here, in Monte veneris:
But, most of all, I^ctura annularis.
He is a Soldier, or a Man of Art, Lady:
But shall have some great honor, shortly.

PLI. Brother,
He Is a rare man, believe me.

KAS. Hold your peace.
Here comes the the other rare man. 'Saue you Captain.

FAC Good Mr. Kastril. Is this your Sister?

KAS. I Sir.
Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?

FAC. I shall be proud to know you, Lady.

PLI. Brother,
He calls me Lady, too.

KAS. I, peace. I, heard it.

FAC The Count is come.

SVB. Where is he?

FAC. At the door.

SVB. Why, you must entertain him.

FAC. What^ll you do
With these the while?

SVB. Why haue'hem up, and shew'hem
Some Fustian Book, or the Dark Glass.

FAC. Before God,
She is a delicate Dab chick! I must have her.

SVB. Must, you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
Come Sir, the Captain will come to us presently.
I Will ha'you to my Chamber of Demonstrations,
Where I Will show you both the Grammar, and Logic,
And (...) of Quarrelling, my whole method,
Drawn out in Tables, and my Instrument,
That has the several Sca^e upon it, shall make you
Able to quarrel, at a strawes breadth, by Moone-light.
And, Lady, I Will have you look in a Glass,
Some half an hour, but to clear your eyesight,
Against you see your Fortune, which is greater,
Then I may judge upon the sudden, trust me.

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 3.
FACE. SVBTLE. SVRLY. Where are you, Doctor?
SVB. I Will come to you presently.

FAC. I will have this same Widow, now I have seen her,
On any composition.

SVB.. What do you say?

FAC. Have you disposed of them?

SVB. I have sent 'hem up.

FAC Subtle, in troth. I needs must have this Widow.

SVB. Is that the matter?

FAC. Nay, but hear me.

SVB. Go to
If you rebel once, Dol shall know it all.
Therefore, be quiet, and obey your chance.

FAC. Nay, thou a^t so violent now. Do but conceive,
Thou art old, and can not serve --

SVB. Who, cannot I?
'Sblood, I will serve her with thee, for a --

FAC. Nay,
But understand: I Will give you composition.

SVB. I will not treat with thee: what, sell my Fortune?
It Is better then my Birthright. Do not murmr.
Win her, and carry her. If you grumble, Dol
Knows it directly.

FAC. Well Sir, I am silent.
Will you go help, to fetch in Don, in state?

SVB. I follow you Sir, we must keep Face in awe,
Or he will ouer-looke us like a Tyranne.
Brain of a Tailor! Who comes here? Don Ion^

SVR. Sennores, beso las manos, a vuestras mercedes.

SVB. Would you had stoup'd a little, and kissed our an^s.

FAC. Peace Subtle.

SVB. Stab me; I shall never hold, man.
He looks in that deep Ruff, like a Head in a platter,
Served in by a short Cloak upon two tressils.

FAC. Or, what do you say to a Collar of Brawne, cut down
Beneath the Souse, and wriggled with a knife?

SVB. 'Slud, he does look too fat to be a Spaniard.

FAC. Perhaps some Fleming, or some Hollander got him
In D'alua's time: Count Egmonts Bastard.

SVB. Don,
Your sciruy, yellow Madril face is welcome.

SVR. Gratia.

SVB. He speaks, out of a Fortification.
'Pray God, He have no squibs in those deep sets.

SVR. Por dios, Sennores, muy linda Casa!

SVB. What says he?

FAC. Praises the house, I think,
I know no more But's action.

SVB. Yes, the Casa,
My precious Diego, will prove fair enough,
To cossen you in. Do you mark? you shall
Be cossened, Diego.

FAC. Cossened, do you see?
My worthy Donzel, Cossened.

SVR. Ent^endo.

SVB. Do you intend it? So do we dear Don.
Have you brought Pistolets? or Portagues?
My solemn D^n? Do thou feel any?

FAC. Full.

SVB. You shall be emptied, Don; pumped, and drawn,
Dry, as they say.

FAC. Milked, in troth, sweet Don.

SVB. See all the Monsters; the great Lion of all, Don.

SVR. Con licencia, se puede ver a esta Sennora?

SVB. What talks he now?

FAC. OF the Sennora.

SVB. O, Don,
That is the Lioness, which you shall see
Also^ my Don.

FAC. 'Slid, Subtle, how shall we do?

SVB. For what?

FAC. Why, Dol's employed, you know.

SVB. That Is true.
Before heaven I know not: He must stay, that is all.

FAC. Stay? That he must not, by no means.

SVB. No, Why?

FAC. Unless you will mar all. 'Slight, Hee'li suspect it.
And then he will not pay, not half so well.
This is a trauell'd Punque-Master, and does know
All the delays: a notable hot Rascal,
And looks, already, Rampant.

SVB. God's Death, and Mammon
Must not be troubled.

FAC. Mamm^n, in no case!

SVB. What shall we do then?

FAC Think: you must be sudden.

SVR. Entiendo, que la Sennora es tan her mosa, q^ (...) tan
a ver la, como la bien (...) de mi vida,

FAC. Mi vida? 'Slid, Sub^le, he puts me in mind of the Widow.
What do thou say to draw her (...) Ha?
And tell her, it is her Fortune. All our venture
Now lies upon it. It is but one man more.
Which on's chance to have her. And beside,
There is no Maiden head, to be feared, or lost.
What do thou think on it, (...)?

SVB. Who I? Why --

FAC. The Credit of our house (...) is engaged.

SVB. You made me an offer for my share e're while.
What will thou g^ (...)?

FAC. O, by that light,
I Will not buy now. You know your doom to me.
Even take your lot, obey your chance, Sir; win her,
And wear her, out for me.

SVB. 'Slight. I Will not work her then.

FAC. It is the common cause, therefore bethink you.
Dol else must know it, as you said.

SVB. I care not.

SVR. (...), p^r que se tardatanta?

SVB. Faith, I am not fit, I am old.

FAC. That Is now no reason, Sir.

SVR. Puede, ser, de haz^r burla de miamor.

FAC. You hear the Don, too? By this air, I call,
And loose the hinges. ^ol.

SVB. A plague of Hell --

FAC. Will you then do?

SVB. Yo' are a terrible Rogue,
I Will think of this: will you, Sir, call the Widow?

FAC. Yes And ^le take her ^oo, with all her faults,
Now, I do think on it better.

SVB. With all my heart, Sir.
Am I discharged of the lot.

FAC. As you please.

SVB. Hands.

FAC. Remember, now, that, upon any change,
You never claim her.

SVB. Much good joy, and health to'you Sir.
Marry a Whore? Fate, let me wed a Witch, first.

SVR. Por estas (...) barbas.

SVB. He swears by his beard.
Dispatch, and call the Brother too.

SVR. Tiengo dud^, Sennores,
Que no me hagan algunatraycion.

SVB. How, Issue on? Yes, praesto Sennor. Please you
Entratha the (...), worthy Don;
Where if it please the F^tes, in your B^thada,
You shall be ^ok'd, and strok'd, and tub'd, and rubbed,
And scrub'd, and fub'd, dear Don, before you go.
You shall in faith, my sciruie Babion Don;
Be curried, clawed, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
I will the heartilier go about it now,
And make the Widow a Punke, so much the sooner,
To be revenged on this impetuous Face:
The quickly doing of it is the grace.

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 4.
FACE. KASTRIL. Da: PLIANT. SVBTLE. SVRLY. COme Lady: I knew, the Doctor would
not leave,
Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.
KAS. To be a Countess say you?

FAC. A Spanish Countess, Sir.

PLI. Why? is that better then an English Countess?

FAC. Better? 'Slight, make you that a question, Lady?

KAS. Nay, she is a fool, Captain, you must pardon her.

FAC. Ask from your Courtier, to your Innes of Court-man,
To your mere Millaner; They will tell you all
Your Spanish Iennet is the best Horse. Your Spanish
Stoop is the best Garb. Your Spanish Beard
Is the best Cut. Your Spanish Ruff^s are the best
Wear. Your Span (...) the best Dance.
Your Spanish (...) in a Glove
The best Perfume. And, for your Spanish Pike,
And Spanish Blade, let your poor Captain speak.
Here comes the Doctor.

SVB. My most honored Lady,
For so I am now to style you, having found
By this my scheme, you are to undergo
An honorable fortune, very shortly.
What will you say now, if some --

FAC. I ha 'told her all, Sir.
And her right worshipful Brother, here, that she shall be
A Countess: do not delay 'hem Sir. A Spanish Countess.

SVB. Still, my scarce Worshipful Captain, you can keep
No secret. Well, since he has told you, Madam,
Do you forgive him, and I do

KAS. She shall do that, Sir.
I Will look to it, it is my charge

SVB. Well then. Naught rests
But that she fit her Love, now, to her fortune.

PLI. Truly, I shall never brook a (...).

SVB. No?

PLI Never, sin eighty e^t could I abide'hem.
And that was some three year before I was borne in truth.

SVB. Come, you must love him, or be miserable:
Choose, which you will.

FAC. By this good rush, persuade her,
She will cry Straw-berrie else, within this twelue-month.

SVB. Nay, Shads, and Mackr^ll, which is worse.

FAC. Indeed, Sir?

KAS. Gods lid. you shall love him, or I Will kick you.

PLI. Why?
I Will do as you will have me, Brother.

KAS. Do,
Or by this hand I Will maull you.

FAC. Nay good Sir.
Be not so fierce.

SVB. No my enraged Child,
She will be ruled. What when she comes to taste
The pleasures of a Countess, to be courted --

FAC. And kissed, and ruffled --

SVB. I, behind the hangings.

FAC. And then come forth in pomp --

SVB. And know her State --

FAC. Of keeping all the Idolaters of the Chamber
Barer to her, then at their prayers --

SVB. Is served
Upon the knee --

FAC. And has her Pages, Huishers.
Footmen, and Coaches --

SVB. Her six Mares --

FAC. Nay eight --

SVB. To hurry her through London, to the Exchange,
Bet'lem, the China-Houses --

FAC. Yes, and have
The Citizens gape at her, and praise her Tires,
And My-Lords Goose turd bands, that rides with her.

KAS. Most brave! By this hand, you are not my Suster,
If you refuse.

PLI. I will not refuse, Brother.

SVR. Que es esto Se^ores, que non seve^ga?
Esta tardanza me mata!

FAC. It is the Count come.
The Doctor knew he would be here, by his Art.

SVB. En Gallanta Madama, Don! Gallantissima!

SVR. Por todos los dioses, la mas acabada
Hermosura, que he visto en mivida!

FAC. Is It not a gallant language that they speak?

KAS. An admirable language! Is It not French?

FAC. No Spanish, Sir.

KAS. It goes like Law-French,
And that, they say, is the Court-liest language.

FAC. List Sir.

SVR. El Solha perdido su lumbre, con el
Resplandor, que trae esta dama. Valga me dio^!

FAC. He' admires your Sister.

KAS. Must not she make curtsy?

SVB. 'Ods will, she must go to him, Man; and kiss him:
It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
To make first court.

FAC. It Is true he tells you, Sir:
His Art knows all.

SVR. Por que no se acude?

KAS. He speaks to her, I think?

FAC. That he does Sir.

SVR. Por el amor de dios, que es esto, que se tarda?

KAS. Nay, see: she will notvnderstand him. Gull.
Noddy.

PLI. What say you Brother?

KAS. Ass, my Suster,
Go kusse him, as the Cunning man would have you.
I Will thrust a pin in your buttocks else.

FAC. O, no Sir.

SVR. Sennora mia, mi persona muy indignaesta
All gar atanta Hermosura.

FAC. Dos he not use her bravely?

KAS. Bravely, i-faith!

FAC. Nay he will use her better.

KAS. Do you think so?

SVR. Sennora, si sera seruida, entremus.

KAS. Where does he carry her?

FAC. Into the Garden, Sir,
Take you no thought, I must interpret for her.

SVB. Give Dol the word. Come my fierce Child. Advance,
We Will to our quarrelling Lesson again.

KAS. Agreed.
I love a Spanish Boy, with all my heart.

SVB. Nay, and by this means, Sir, You shall be Brother
To a great Count.

KAS. I, I knew that, at first.
This match will advance the House of the Kastrils.

SVB. 'Pray God your Sister prove but pliant.

KAS. Why,
Her name is so, by her other Husband.

SVB. How!

KAS. The Widow Pliant. Knew you not that?

SVB. No faith Sir.
Yet by erection of her Figure, I gest it.
Come, let us go practice.

KAS. Yes, but do you think, Doctor.
I ever shall quarrel well?

SVB. I warrant you.

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 5.
DOL. MAMMON. FACE. SVBTLE. FOr after Alexanders death --
MAM. Good Lady --

DOL. That Perdiccas and Antigonus were slain,
The two that stood, Seleuc', and Ptolomee --

MAM. Madame.

DOL. Made up the two legs, and the fourth Beast.
That was Gog-North, and Egypt-South: which after
Was called Gog Iron-leg, and South Iron-leg --

MAM. Lady --

DOL. And then Gog-horned. So was Egypt, too;
Then Egypt Clay-leg, and Gog Clay-leg --

MAM. Sweet Madame.

DOL. And last Gog-Dust, and Aegypt-Dust: which fall
In the last link of the fourth Chain. And these
Be Stars in Story, which none see, or look at --

MAM. What shall I do?

DOL. For, as he says, except
We call the Rabbines, and the Heathen Greeks --

MAM. Dear Lady.

DOL. To come from Salem, and from Athens,
And teach the people of great Britain --

FAC. What Is the matter, Sir?

DOL. To speak the tongue of Eber, and Iauan --

MAM. O,
Sh'is in her fit.

DOL. We shall know nothing --

FAC. Death, Sir,
We are undone.

DOL. Where, then, a learned Linguist
Shall see the ancient used communion
Of Vowels, and Consonants --

FAC. My Master will hear!

DOL. A Wisdom, which Pythagoras held most high --

MAM. Sweet honorable Lady.

DOL. To comprise
All sounds of voices, in few marks of Letters --

FAC. Nay you must never hope to lay her now.

DOL. And so we may arrive by Talmud skill,
And profane Greek, to raise the building up
Of Helens house, against the Ismaelite,
King of Thogarma, and his Habergions
Brimstony, blew, and fiery; and the force
Of King Abaddon, and the Beast of Cittim:
Which Rabbi David Kimchi, Onkelos,
And Aben-Ezra do interpret Rome.

FAC. How did you put her into it?

MAM. Alas
Of a fifth Monarchy I would erect,
Which the Philosophers stone (^y chance) And
Falls on the other four straight.

FAC. Out of (...)
I told you so. 'Slid stop her mouth.

MAM Is It

FAC. She Will never leave else. If the old man hea
We are but foeces, Ashes.

SVB. What Is to do

FAC. O, we are lost. Now she hears him, she (...)

MAM. Where shall I hide me?

SVB. How! What sight is here?
Close deeds of Darkness, and that shun the light!
Bring him again. Who is he? What, my Son?
O, I have lived too long.

MAM. Nay good, dear Father,
There was no'vnchast purpose.

SVB. Not, and flee me,
When I come in?

MAM. That was my Error.

SVB. Error?
Guilt, guilt, my Son. Give it the right Name. No marvel,
If I found check in our great Work within,
When such affairs as these were managing.

MAM. Why, have you so?

SVB. It has gone back this half hour:
And all the rest of our less Works stand still.
Where is the Instrument of wickedness,
My lewd false Drudge?

MAM. Nay good Sir blame not him.
Believe me, 'twas against his Will, or Knowledge.
I saw her by chance.

SVB. Will you commit more sin,
T'excuse a Varlet?

MAM. By my hope, it is true Sir.

SVB Nay, then I wonder less, if you, for whom
The blessing was prepared, would so tempt heaven:
And loose your fortunes.

MAM. Why Sir?

SVB. This will hinder
The Work, a Month at least.

MAM. Why, if it do,
What remedy? but think it not, good Father:
Our purposes were honest.

SVB. As they were,
So the reward will prove. How now! Aye me.
God, and all Saints be good to us. What Is that?

FAC. O Sir, we are defeated: all the Works
Are flowne in fumo. Every Glass is burst.
Furnace, and all rent down: as if a Bolt
Of thunder had been dri^en through the house.
Retorts, Receivers, Pellicanes, Bolt-heads,
All struck in shiuers. Help good Sir. Alas,
Coldness, and Death inuades him. Nay, Sir Mammon,
Do the fair offices of a man. You stand,
As you were readier to depart, then he.
Who Is there? My Lord her Brother is come.

MAM. Ha, Lungs?

FAC. His Coach is at the door. Avoid his sight,
For he is as furious, as his Sister is mad.

MAM. Alas!

FAC. My brain is quite undone with the fume, Sir,
I never must hope to be mine own man again.

MAM. Is all lost, Lungs? Will nothing be preserved,
Of all our cost?

FAC. Faith, very little, Sir.
A peck of coals, or so, which is cold comfort, Sir.

MAM. O my voluptuous mind! I am justly punished.

FAC. And so am I, Sir.

MAM. Cast from all my hopes --

FAC. Nay, certainties Sir.

MAM. By mine own base affections.

SVB. O the cursed fruits of vice, and lust!

MAM. Good Father,
It was my sin. Forgive it.

SVB. Hangs my roof
Over us still, and will not fall, O Justice,
Upon us, for this wicked man!

FAC. Nay, look, Sir,
You grieve him, now, with staying in his sight:
Good Sir, the Noble man will come too, and take you,
And that may breed a Tragedy.

MAM. I Will go.

FAC. I, and repent at home, Sir. It may be,
For some good penance, you may have it, yet
A hundred pound to the Box at Bet'lem.

MAM. Yes.

FAC. For the restoring such as have their wits.

MAM. I Will do it.

FAC. I Will send one to you to receive it.

MAM. Do.
Is no Proiection left?

FAC. All flowne, or stinkes, Sir.

MAM. Will naught be saved, that is good for medicine, think tho^?

FAC. I cannot tell Sir. There will be, perhaps,
Something, about the scraping of the Shardes,
Will cure the Itch, though not your itch of mind, Sir.
It shall be saved for you, and sent home. Good Sir,
This way, for fear the Lord should meet you.

SVB. Face.

FAC. I.

SVB. Is he gone?

FAC. Yes, and as heavily
As all the Gold he hoped for, were in his blood.
Let us be light, though.

SVB. I, as Balls, and bound
And hit our heads against the roof for joy.
There Is so much of our care now cast away.

FAC. Now to our Don.

SVB. Yes, your young Widow, by this time
Is made a Countess, Face: Sh' has been in travail
Of a young Heir for you.

FAC. Good, Sir.

SVB. Off with your case,
And greet her kindly, as a Bridegroom should.
After these common hazards.

FAC. Very well, Sir.
Will you go fetch Don Diego off the while?

SVB. And fetch him over too, if you will be pleased Sir:
Would Dol were, in her place, to pick his pockets now.

FAC. Why you can do it as well, if you would set to it.
I pray you prove your virtue.

SVB. For your sake, Sir.

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 6.
SVRLY. Da: PLIANT. SVBTLE. FACE. LAdy, you see into what hands, you are fallen;
Among what a Nest of villains! and how near
Your honor was to have caught a certain clap
(Through your credulity) had I but been
So punctually forward, as Place. Time,
And other circumstance would have made a man.
For yo' are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
I am a Gentleman, come here disguised,
Only to find the Knaueries of this Citadell,
And where I might have wronged your honor, and have not,
I claim some interest in your love. You are,
They say, a Widow, rich: and I am a Bateheler,
Worth naught. Your fortunes may make me a man,
As mine have preserved you a woman. Think upon it,
And whether, I have deserved you, or no.
PLI. I will, Sir.

SVR. And for these Houshold-Rogues, let me alone.
To treat with them.

SVB. How does my noble Diego?
And my dear Madame, Countess? Has the Count
Been courteous, Lady? liberal? and open?
Donzell, me thinks you look melancholic,
After your Coitum, and scuruy! True-ly,
I do not like the dullness of your eye:
It has a heavy cast, it is vpsee Dutch,
And says you are a lumpish Whore-master.
Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.

SVR. Will you, Don Baud, and Pick-purse? How now? Reele you?
Stand up Sir, you shall find since I am so heavy,
I Will gi' you aequall weight.

SVB. Help, Murder.

SVR. No Sir.
There Is no such thing intended. A good Cart,
And a clean Whip shall ease you of that fear.
I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
Do you see? cossened. Where Is your Captain Face?
That parcell-Broker, and whole-Baud, all Rascal.

FAC. How, Surly!

SVR. O, make your approach, good Captain.
I'haue found, from whence your Copper Rings, and Spoones
Come now, wherewith you cheat abroad in Tauernes.
'Twas here, you learned to anoint your boot with Brimstone,
Then rub men's Gold on it, for a kind of touch,
And say 'twas naught, when you had changed the color,
That you might have it for nothing. And this Doctor,
Your sooty, smoaky-bearded Compeere, He
Will close you so much Gold, in a Bolts-head,
And, on a turn, convey (in the stead) another
With sublimed Mercury, that shall burst i'^he heat,
And fly out all in fumo. Then weeps Mammon.
Then swounes his Worship. Or he is the Faustus,
That casts figures, and can conjure, cures
Plague, Piles, and Pox, by the Ephemerides,
And holds intelligence, with all the Baudes,
And Midwiues of three Shires. While you send in --
Captain, (what is he gone?) Dam'sells with child,
Wives, that are barren, or, the waiting-Maide
With the Greene-sicknesse. Nay Sir, you must tarry
Though he be escaped; and answer, by the ears, Sir.

ACT. 4.
SCENE. 7.
FACE. KASTRIL. SVRLY, SVBTLE. DRVGGER. ANANIAS. Da: PLIANT. DOL. Why, now is
the time, if ever you will quarrel
Well (as they say) and be a true-borne Child.
The Doctor, and your Sister both are abused.
KAS. Where is he? Which is he? He is a Slave
What ere he is, and the Son of a Whore. Are you
The Man, Sir, I would know?

SVR. I should be loath, Sir,
To confess so much.

KAS. Then you lie, in your throat.

SVR. How?

FAC. A very errant Rogue, Sir, and a Cheater,
Employed here, by another Coniurer,
That dos not love the Doctor, and would cross him
If he knew how --

SVR. Sir you are abused.

KAS. You lie,
And it is no matter.

FAC. Well said, Sir. He is
The impudent'st Rascal --

SVR. You are indeed. Will you hear me, Sir?

FAC. By no means. Bid him be gone.

KAS. Be gone Sir, quickly.

SVR. This's strange! Lady, do you inform your Brother.

FAC. There is not such a Foyst, in all the town,
The Doctor had him, presently: And finds, yet,
The Spanish Count will come, here. Bear up, Subtle.

SVB. Yes Sir, he must appear, within this hour.

FAC. And yet this Rogue, would come, in a disguise,
By the temptation of another Spirit,
To trouble our Art, though he could not hurt it.

KAS. I,
I know -- Away, you talk like a foolish Mauther.

SVR. Sir, all is truth, she says.

FAC. Do not believe him, Sir:
He is the lying'st Swabber. Come your ways, Sir.

SVR. You are valiant out of Company.

KAS. Yes, how then Sir?

FAC. Nay, here is an honest fellow too, that knows him,
And all his tricks. Make good what I say, Abel,
This Cheater would have cossen'd thee of the Widow.
He owes this honest Drugger, here, seven pound,
He has had on him, in two-peny'orths of Tobacco.

DRV. Yes Sir. And he has damned himself three terms, to pay me.

FAC. And what does he owe for Lotium?

DRV. Thirty shillings, Sir:
And for six Syringes.

SVR. Hydra of villainy!

FAC. Nay, Sir you must quarrel him out of the house.

KAS. I will.
Sir, if you get not out of doors, you lie,
And you are a Pimpe.

SVR. Why this is madness, Sir,
Not valor in you: I must laugh at this.

KAS. It is my humor: you are a Pimpe, and a Trig,
And an Amadis de Gaul, or a Don Quixote.

DRV. Or a Knight of the curious coxcombe. Do you see?

ANA. Peace to the Household.

KAS. I Will keep peace, for no man.

ANA. Casting of Dollers is concluded lawful.

KAS. Is he the Constable?

SVB. Peace Ananias.

FAC. No, Sir.

KAS. Then you are an Otter, and a Shad, a Whit,
A very Tim.

SVR. You Will hear me Sir?

KAS. I will not.

ANA. What is the Motive.

SVB. Zeal, in the young Gentleman,
Against his Spanish slops.

ANA. They are profane,
Lewd, superstitious, and idolatrous Breeches.

SVR. New Raskals!

KAS. Will you be gone, Sir?

ANA. Avoid Satan,
Thou art not of the light. That Ruff of pride,
About thy neck, betrays thee: 'and is the same
With that, which the unclean Birds, in seuenty-seuen,
Were seen to pranke it with, on diverse coasts.
Thou look like Antichrist, in that lewd hat.

SVR. I must give way.

KAS. Be gone Sir.

SVR. But i will take
A course with you --

ANA. Depart, proud Spanish Fiend.

SVR. Captain, and Doctor.

ANA. Child of perdition.

KAS. Hence Sir.
Did I not quarrel bravely?

FAC. Yes indeed Sir.

KAS. Nay and I give my mind to it, I shall do it,

FAC. O you must follow Sir, and threaten him tame.
He Will turn again else.

KAS. I Will re-turne him, then.

FAC. Drugger, this Rogue prevented us, for thee:
We' had determined, that thou should have come,
In a Spanish suit, and have carried her so; and he
A Brokerly slave, goes, puts it on himself.
Have brought the Damask?

DRV. Yes Sir.

FAC. Thou must borrow,
A Spanish suite. Have thou no credit with the Players?

DRV. Yes Sir, did you never see me play the Poole?

FAC. I know not Nab. Thou shall, if I can help it.
Hieronimo's old Cloak, Ruff, and Hat will serve:
I Will tell thee more, when thou bringst 'hem.

ANA. Sir, I know
The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and has Spies
Upon their Actions: And that this was one
I make no scruple. But the holy Synod
Have been in prayer, and meditation, for it.
And it is reueald no less, to them, then me,
That casting of Money is most lawful.

SVB. True.
But here, I cannot do it; if the House
Should chance to be suspected, all would out.
And we be locked up, in the Tower, for ever,
To make Gold there: (for the state) never come out.
And, then, are you defeated.

ANA. I will tell
This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
That the whole Company of the Separation
May join in humble prayer again,

(SVB. And fasting.)

ANA. Yea, for some fitter place. The Peace of mind
Rest with these walls.

SVB. Thanks, courteous Ananias.

FAC. What did he come for?

SVB. About casting Dollers,
Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
A Spanish Minister came here to spy
Against the Faithful --

FAC. I conceive. Come Subtle,
Thou art so down upon the least disaster!
How would though have done, if I had not helped thee out?

SVB. I thank thee Face, for the Angry Boy, i.faith.

FAC. Who would ha'lookt, it should ha'beene that Rascal?
Surly? He had died his beard, and all. Well, Sir,
Here Is Damask come, to make you a suite.

SVB, Where Is Drugger?

FAC. He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habit,
I Will be the Count, now.

SVB. But where is the Widow?

FAC. Within, with my Lords Sister: Madame Dol
Is entertaining her.

SVB. By your favor, Face,
Now she is honest, I will stand again.

FAC. You will not offer it?

SVB. Why?

FAC. Stand to your word,
Or -- Here comes Dol. She knows --

SVB. Yo' are tyrannous still.

FAC. Strict for my right. How now, Dol? Hast'told her,
The Spanish Count will come?

DOL. Yes, but another is come,
You little looked for.

FAC. Who Is that?

DOL. Your Master:
The Master of the House.

SVB. How Dol?

FAC. She lies.
This is some trick. Come leave your Quiblins, Dorothee.

DOL. Look out, and see.

SVB. Art thou in earnest?

DOL. 'Slight
Forty of the Neighbors are about him, talking.

FAC. It Is he, by this good day.

DOL. 'Twill proueill day,
For some on us.

FAC. We are undone, and taken.

DOL. Lost, I am afraid.

SVB. You said he would not come,
While there dyed one a Week, within the Liberties.

FAC. No: 'twas within the Walls.

SVB. Was It so? Cry' you mercy:
I thought the Liberties. What shall we do now, Face?

FAC. Be silent, not a word, if he call, or knock.
I Will into mine old shape again, and meet him,
Of Jeremy, the Butler. IN the mean time,
Do you two pack up all the goods, and purchase,
That we can carry in the two trunkes. I Will keep him
Off for to day, if I cannot longer: And then
At night, I Will ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
Where we will meet to morrow, and then we will share.
Let Mammon's Brass, and Peuter keep the Cellar:
We Will have another time for that. But, Dol,
'Pray thee go heat a little water, quickly,
Subtle must shave me. All my Captains beard
Must off, to make me appear smooth Jeremy.
You Will do it?

SVB. Yes I Will shave you, as well as I can.

FAC. And not cut my throat, but trim me?

SVB. You shall see, Sir.

ACT. 5.
SCENE. 1.
LOVE-WIT. NEIGHBOVRS. HAs there been such resort, say you?
NEI. 1. Daily, Sir.

NEI. 2. And nightly, too.

NEI. 3. I, some as brave as Lords.

NEI. 4. Ladies, and Gentlewomen.

NEI. 5. Citizens Wives.

NEI. 1. And Knights.

NEI. 6. In Coaches.

NEI. 2. Yes and Oyster-women.

NEI. 1. Beside other Gallants.

NEI. 3. Saylors Wives.

NEI. 4. Tabacco-men.

NEI. 5. Another Pimlico.

LOV. What should my Knave advance,
To draw this company? He hung out no Banners
Of a strang^ Calfe, with five legs, to be seen?
Or a huge Lobstar, with six claws?

NEI. 6. No Sir.

NEI. 3. We had gone in, then, Sir.

LOV. He has no gift
Of Teaching in the nose, that ere I knew of!
You saw no Bills set up, that promised cure
Of Agues, or the Toothache?

NEI. 2. No such thing, Sir.

LOV. Nor heard a Drum struck, for Babouns, or Puppets?

NEI. 5 Neither Sir.

LOV. What devise should he bring forth now?
I love a teeming wit, as I love my nourishment.
'Pray God he have not kept such open house,
That he has sold my hangings, and my bedding:
I left him nothing else. If he have eat 'hem,
A plague of the Moath, say I. Sure he has got
Some baudy Pictures, to call all this Ging;
The Friar, and the Nun; or the new M^tion
Of the Knights Courser, covering the Parsons Mare;
The Boy of six year old, with the great thing:
O^'t may be, he has the fleas that run at ^ilt,
Upon a Table, or some Dog to Dance?
When saw you him?

N^I. 1. Who Sir, Jeremy?

NEI. 2. Jeremy Butler?
We saw him not, this mont'h.

LOV. How!

NEI. 4. Not these five weeks, Sir.

NEI. These six weeks, at the least.

LOV. Yo' amaze me, Neighbors.

NEI. 5. Sure, if your Worship know not where he is,
He Is flipt away.

NEI. 6. Pray God, he be not made away.

LOV. Ha? It Is no time to question, then.

NEI. 6. About
Some three weeks since, I heard a doleful cry,
As I sat up, a mending my wives stockings.

LOV. This's strange! that none will answer! Did thou hear
A cry, say thou?

NEI. 6. Yes Sir, like unto a Man
That had been strangled an hour, and could not speak.

NEI. 2. I heard it too, just this day three weeks, at two a clock
Next morning.

LOV. These be miracles, or you make 'hem so!
A man an hour strangled, and could not speak,
And both you heard him cry?

NEI. 3. Yes, downward, Sir.

LOV. Thou art a wise fellow. Give me thy hand, I pray thee.
What trade art thou, on?

NEI. 3. A Smith, and't please your Worship.

LOV. A Smith? Then, lend me thy help, to get this door open.

NEI. 3. That I will presently, Sir, but fetch my tools --

NEI. 1. Sir. Best to knock again before you break it.

ACT..5
SCENE. 2.
LOVE-Wit. FACE. NEIGHBOVRS. I Will.
FAC. What mean you Sir?

NEI. 1.2.4. O, Here Is (...)

FAC. Good Sir, Come from the door.

Lov. Why? what is the matter?

FAC. Yet farther, you are to near, yet.

LOV. In The name of wonder,
What means the fellow?

FAC. The House, Sir, has been visited.

LOV. What? with the Plague? stand thou the^ farther.

FAC. No, Sir.
I had it not.

LOV. Who had it then? I left
None else, but thee, in the house.

FAC. Yes, Sir. My Fellow,
The Cat, that kept the Buttry, had it on her
A week, before I spied it: But I got her
Conuay'd away, in the night. And so I shut
The house up for a Month-

LOV. How!

FAC. Purposing the^, Sir.
TO have burnt Rose-vinegar, Triackle, and Tar,
And, have made it sweet, that you should never ha'knowne it:
Because I knew the News would but afflict you, Sir.

LOV. Breath less, and farther off. Why this is stranger!
The Neighbors tell me all, here, that the Doors
Have still been open.

FAC. How Sir?

LOV. Gallants, Men, and Women,
And of all sorts, tag-rag, been seen to flock here
In threaues, these ten weeks, as to a second Hogs-den,
In days of Pimlico, and Eyebright.

FAC. Sir.
Their wisdoms will not say so.

LOV. To day, they speak
Of Coaches, and Gallants; one in a French-hood,
Went in, they tell me: and another was seen
In a Velvet Gown, at the windore. Diverse more
Pass in and out.

Fac. They did pass through the doors then,
Or walls, I assure their Eyesights, and their Spectacles;
For here, Sir, are the keys; and here have been,
In this my pocket, now, about twenty days.
And for before, I kept the Fort alone, there.
But that it is yet not deep in the afternoon,
I should believe my Neighbors had seen double
Through the Black-pot, and made these apparitions:
For, on my faith to your Worship, for these three weeks
And upwards, the door has not been opened.

LOV. Strange!

NEI. 1. Good faith, I think I saw a Coach!

NEI. 2. And I too,
I'lld have been sworn!

LOV. Do you but think it now?
And but one Coach?

NEI. 4. We cannot tell, Sir. leremy
Is a very honest fellow.

FAC. Did you see me at all?

NEI. 1. No. That we are sure on.

NEI. 2. I Will be sworn o'that.

LOV. Fine Rogues, to have your testimonies built on!

NEI. 3. Is Jeremy come?

MEI. 1. O yes, you may leave your tools,
We were deceived he says.

NEI. 2. He has had the keys,
And the door has bin shut these three weeks.

NEI. 3. Like enough.

LOV. Peace, and get hence, you Changelings.

FAC. Surly come!
And Mammon made acquainted? They Will tell all.
(How shall I beat them off? What shall I do?)
Nothing's more wretched, then a guilty conscience.

ACT. 5.
SCENE. 3.
SVRLY. MAMMON. LOVE-Wit. FACE. NEIGHBOVRS. KASTRIL. ANA. TRIBVLATION. DAPPER.
SVBTLE. NO Sir, He was a great Physician. This,
It was no Baudy-house: But a mere Chancell.
You knew the Lord, and his Sister.
MAM. Nay good Surly --

SVR. The happy word, Be rich --

MAM. Play not the Tyranne --

SVR. Should be to day pronounced, to all your friends.
And where be your Andirons now? And your Brass Pots?
That should ha'beene Golden Flaggons, and great Wedges?

MAM. Let me but breath. What! They ha'shut their doors,
Me thinks.

SVR. I, now, it is Holyday with them.

MAM. Rogues,
Coseners, Impostors, Baudes.

FAC. What mean you, Sir?

MAM. To enter if we can.

FAC. Another man's house?
Here is the Owner, Sir. Turn you to him,
And speak your business.

MAM. Are you, Sir, the Owner?

LOV. Yes, Sir.

MAM. And are those Knaves, within, your Cheaters?

LOV. What Knaves? What Cheaters?

MAM. Subtle, and his Lungs.

FAC. The Gentleman is distracted, Sir. No Lungs
Nor Lights ha'beene seen here these three weeks, Sir,
Within these doors, upon my word.

SVR. Your word,
Groom arrogant?

FAC. Yes Sir, I am the Housekeeper,
And know the keys have not been out of my hands.

SVR. This's a new Face!

FAC. You do mistake the house, Sir.
What sign was it at?

SVR. You Rascal. This is one
OF the Confederacy. Come let us get Officers!
And force the door.

LOV. 'Pray you stay, Gentlemen.

SVR. No, Sir, we will come with warrant.

MAM I, and then,
We shall ha'your doors open.

LOV. What means this?

FAC. I cannot tell Sir.

NEI. 1. These are two of the Gallants,
That we do think we saw.

FAC. Two of the Fools?
You talk as idly as they. Good faith, Sir,
I think the Moon has cras'd 'hem all. (O me,
The angry Boy come too? He Will make a noise
And nere away till he have betrayed us all.)

KAS. What Rogues, Baudes, Slaves, you'il open the door anon.
Punque, Cocatrice, my Suster. By this light
I Will fetch the Marshall to you. You are a Whore,
To keep your Castle.

FAC. Who would you speak with, Sir?

KAS. The baudy Doctor, and the Cosening Captain,
And Pus my Suster.

LOV. This is something, sure!

FAC. Upon my trust, the doors were never open, Sir.

KAS. I have heard all their tricks, told me twice over,
By the fat Knight, and the lean Gentleman.

LOV. Here comes another.

FAC. Ananias too?
And his Pastor?

TRI. The doors are shut against us.

ANA. Come forth, you Seed of Vipers, Sons of Belial,
Your wickedness is broke forth: Abomination
Is in the House.

KAS. My Suster's there.

ANA. The place,
It is become a Cage of unclean birds.

KAS. I, I will fetch the Scauenger, and the Cunstable.

TRI. You shall do well.

ANA. We Will join, to weed them out.

KAS. You will not come then? Punque, Devise, my Suster?

ANA. Call her not Sister. She is a Harlot, verily.

KAS. I Will raise the street.

LOV. Good Gentlemen, a word.

ANA. Satan, avoid, and hinder not our zeal.

LOV. The world's turned Bet'lem.

FAC. These are all broke loose,
Out of S. Katherines, where they use to keep,
The better sort of Mad-folkes.

NEI. 1. All these Persons
We saw go in, and out here.

NEI. 2. Yes, indeed Sir.

NEI. 3. These were the Parties.

FAC. Peace, you Drunkards. Sir,
I wonder at it! Please you, to give me leave
To touch the door, I Will try and the Lock be changed.

LOV. It mazes me!

FAC. Good faith, Sir, I believe,
There Is no such thing. It Is all Deceptio visus.
Would I could get him away.

DAP. Mr. Captain. Mr. Doctor.

LOV. Who Is that?

FAC. (Our Clearke within, that I forgot) I know not, Sir.

DAP. For Gods sake, when will her Grace be at leisure?

FAC. Ha!
Illusions, some spirit of the air: (His gag is melted,
And now he sets out the throat.)

DAP. I am almost stifled --

(FAC. Would you were altogether.)

LOV. It Is in the house.
Ha! List.

FAC. Believe it Sir, in the air.

LOV. Peace, you --

DAP. Mine Aunts Grace dos not use me well.

SVB. You Fool,
Peace, you will mar all.

FAC. Or you will else, you Rogue.

LOV. O, is it so? Then you converse with spirits.
Come Sir. No more o'your tricks, good leremy,
The truth, the shortest way.

FAC. Dismiss this rabble, Sir.
What shall I do? I am caught.

LOV. Good Neighbors,
I thank you all. You may depart. Come Sir,
You know that I am an indulgent Master:
And therefore conceal nothing. What Is your medicine,
To draw so many several sorts of wild-foule?

FAC. Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit.
But here is no place to talk on it in the street.
Give me but leave, to make the best of my fortune,
And only pardon me the abuse of your House.
It Is all I beg. I Will help you to a Widow,
In recompense, that you shall gi'me thanks for,
Will make you seven years younger, and a rich one.
It Is but your putting on a Spanish Cloak,
I have her within. You need not fear the House,
It was not visited.

LOV. But by me, who came
Sooner then you expected.

FAC. It is true, Sir.
Pray you forgive me.

LOV. Well: Let Us see your Widow.

ACT. 5.
SCENE. 4.
SVBTLE. DAPPER. FACE. DOL. HOw! have you eaten your gag?
DAP. Yes faith, it crumbled
Away in my mouth.

SVB. You have spoiled all then.

DAP. No,
I hope my Aunt of Faery will forgive me.

SVB. Your Aunt's a gracious Lady, but intruth
You were to blame.

DAP. The fume did overcome me,
And I did do it to stay my stomach. 'Pray you
So satisfy her Grace. Here comes the Captain.

FAC. How now! Is his mouth down?

SVB. I, he has spoken!

FAC. (A pox, I heard him, and you too.) He Is undone, then.
I have been feign to say, the House is haunted
With Spirits, to keep Churl back.

SVB. And have thou done it?

FAC. Sure, for this night.

SVB. Why then triumph, and sing
Of Face so famous, the precious King
Of present wits.

FAC. Did you not hear the coil,
About the door?

SVB. Yes, and I dwindled with it.

FAC. Show him his Aunt, and let him be dispatched:
I Will send her to you.

SVB. Well Sir, your Aunt her Grace,
Will give you audience presently, on my suit,
And the Captains word, that you did not eat your gag,
In any contempt of her Highness.

DAP. Not I, in troth, Sir.

SVB. Here she is come. Down of your knees, and wriggle:
She has a stately presence. Good. Yet nearer,
And bid God save her.

DAP. Madame.

SVB. And your Aunt.

DAP. And my most Gracious Aunt, God save your Grace.

DOL. Nephew, we thought to have been angry, with you;
But that sweet face of yours, has turned the tide,
And made it flow with Joy, that eb'd of Love.
Arise, and touch our velvet Gown.

SVB. The Skirts,
And kisse'hem. So.

DOL. Let me now stroke that head.
Much, Nephew, shall thou win; much shall thou spend;
Much shall thou give away, much shall thou Lend.

SVB. I, much indeed. Why do you not thank her Grace?

DAP. I cannot speak, for Joy.

SVB. See, the kind wretch!
Your Graces kins-man right.

DOL. Give me the Bird.
Here is your Fly in a Purse, about your neck, Cosen,
Wear it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
On your right wrist.

SVB. Open a vein, with a Pin,
And let it suck but once a week. Till then,
You must not look on it.

DOL. No. And Kinsman,
Bear your self worthy of the blood you come on.

SVB. Her Grace would have you eat no more Wool-sack pies,
Nor Dagger Frumenty.

DOL. Nor break his fast,
In Heaven, and Hell.

SVB. She Is with you every where.
Nor play with Coster-mongers at Mum-chance, Tray-trip,
God make you rich (when as your Aunt has done it:) but keep
The Gallant'st company, and the best Games.

DAP. Yes, Sir.

SVB. Gleeke and Primero; and what you get be true to us.

DAP. By this hand, I will.

SVB. You may bring's a Thousand pound,
Before to morrow night, (if but three Thousand
Be stirring) if you will.

DAP. I swear, I will then.

SVB. Your Fly will learn you all Games.

FAC. Ha'you done there?

SVB. Your Grace will command him no more duties?

DOL. No:
But come, and see me often. I may chance
To leave him three or four hundred Chests of Treasure,
And some five thousand Acres of Faerie Land:
If he Game well, and comely, with good Gamsters.

SVB. There Is a kind Aunt! Kiss her departing part.
But you must sell your forty mark a year, now.

DAP. I, Sir, I mean.

SVB. Or gi't away. A pox on it.

FAC. I Will gi't mine Aunt. I Will go and fetch the writings.

SVB. It Is well, away.

FAC. Where Is Subtle?

SVB. Here. What news?

FAC. Drugger is at the door, go take his suite,
And bid him fetch a Parson presently.
Say he shall marry the Widow. Thou shall spend
A hundred pound by the service. Now, Queen Dol,
Have you packed up all?

DOL. Yes.

FAC. And how do you like
The Lady Plyant?

DOL. A good dull Innocent.

SVB. Here Is your Hieronimo's cloak, and hat.

FAC. Give me 'hem.

SVB. And the Ruff too?

FAC. Yes, I Will come to you presently.

SVB. Now, he is gone about his project, Dol,
I told you of, for the Widow.

DOL. It Is direct
Against our Articles.

SVB. Well, we will fit him, Wench.
Have thou gulled her of her Jewels, or her Bracelets?

DOL. No, but I will do it.

SVB. Soon at night, my D^lly,
When we are shipped, and all our goods aboard,
Eastward for Ratcliffe, we will turn our course
To Brainford, Westward, if thou say the word,
And take our leaves of this ore-weening Rascal,
This peremptory Face.

DOL. Content. I Am weary of him,

SVB. Thou'hast cause, when the Slave will run a wiuing, Dol,
Against the instrument, that was drawn between us.

DOL. I Will pluck his Bird as bare as I can.

SVB. Yes, tell her,
She must by any means, address some present
To th'Cunning man, make him amends for wronging
His Art with her suspicion, send a Ring,
Or chain of Pearl, she will be tortured else
Extremely in her sleep, say, and have strange things
Come to her, will thou?

DOL. Yes.

SVB. My fine Flitter-mouse,
My Bird of the night; we will tickle it at the Pigeons,
When we have all, and may unlock the Trunks,
And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine --

FAC. What now, a billing?

SVB. Yes, a little exalted
In the good passage of our Stock-affaires.

FAC. Drugger has brought his Parson, take him in, Subtle,
And send him back again, to wash his face.

SVB. I will: and shave himself?

FAC. If you can get him.

DOL. You are hot upon it Face, what ere it is.

FAC. A trick, that Dol shall spend ten pound a month by.
Is he gone?

SVB. The Chaplain waits you in the hall, Sir.

FAC. I Will go bestow him.

DOL. He Will now marry her, instantly.

SVB. He cannot yet, he is not ready. Dear Dol,
Cosen her of all thou can. To deceive him
Is no deceit, but Justice; that would break
Such an inextricable tie as ours was.

DOL. Let me alone to fit him.

FAC. Come my Venturers.
You have packed up all? Where be the Trunkes? Bring forth.

SVB. Here.

FAC. Let Us see 'hem. Where Is the Money?

SVB. Here,
In this.

FAC. Mammons ten pound: Eight score before.
The Brethrens money, this. Druggers and Dappers.
What Paper's that?

DOL. The Jewel of the waiting Maids,
That stole it from her Lady, to know certain --

FAC. If she should have precedence of her Mistress?

DOL. Yes.

FAC. What box is that?

SVB. The Fish-wiues rings, I think.
And th'Alewiues single money. Is It not Dol?

DOL. Yes; and the whistle, that the Saylors wife
Brought you, to know, and her Husband were with Ward.

FAC. We Will wet it to morrow: and our Siluer-beakers,
And Tavern cups. Where be the French Peticoats,
And Girdles, and Hangers?

SVB. Here, in the Trunk,
And the Bolts of Lawne.

FAC. Is Druggers Damask, there?
And the Tobacco?

SVB. Yes.

FAC. Give me the Keys.

DOL. Why you the Keys?

SVB. No matter, Dol, because
We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.

FAC. It Is true, you shall not open them, indeed,
Nor have 'hem forth. Do you see? Not forth, Dol.

DOL. No?

FAC. No my Smock-rampant. The right is, my Master
Knows all, has pardoned me, and he will keep 'hem.
Doctor it is true (you look) for all your Figures.
I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore good Partners,
Both He and She, be satisfied. For here
Determines the Indenture tripartite
Twixt Subtle, Dol, and Face. All I can do
Is to help you over the wall, of the backside;
Or lend you a sheet, to save your Velvet Gown, Doll.
Here will be Officers presently; bethink you,
Of some course suddenly to escape the Dock,
For thither you will come else. Hark you, Thunder.

SVB. You are a precious fiend!

OFF. Open the door.

FAC. Dol, I am sorry for thee i-faith. But hearst thou?
It shall go hard, but I will place thee somewhere:
Thou shall ha'my Letter to Mrs Amo.

DOL. Hang you --

FAC. Or Madame Imperial.

DOL. Pox upon you, Rogue,
Would I had but time to beat thee.

FAC. Subtle,
Let Us know where you set up next; I Will send you
A Customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
What new course have you?

SVB. Rogue, I Will hang my self
That I may walk a greater devil, then thou,
And haunt thee in the Flock-bed, and the Buttery.

ACT. 5.
SCENE. 5.
LOVE-Wit. OFFICERS. MAMMON. SVRLY. FACE. KASTRIL. ANANIAS. T^IBVLATION.
DRVGGER. Da: PLIANT. What do you mean my Masters?
MAM. Open your Door,
Cheaters, Baudes, Coniurers.

OFF. Or we will break it open.

LOV. What warrant have you?

OFF. Warrant enough, Sir, doubt not,
If you will not open it.

LOV. Is there an Officer, there?

OFF. Yes, two, or three for failing.

LOV. Have but patience,
And I will open it straight.

FAC. Sir, Have you done?
Is it a Marriage? perfect?

LOV. Yes, my Brain?

FAC. Off with your Ruff, and Cloak then, be your self, Sir.

SVR. Down with the door.

KAS. 'Slight, ding it open.

LOV. Hold.
Hold Gentlemen, what means this violence?

MAM. Where is this Colliar?

SVR. And my Captain Face?

MAM. These day-Owl^s.

SVR. That are Birding in men's purses.

MAM. Madame Suppository.

KAS. Doxey, my Suster.

ANA. Locusts
Of the foul pit

TRI. Profane as Bell, and the Dragon.

ANA. Worsethen the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.

LOV. Good Gentlemen, hear me. Are you Officers,
And cannot stay this violence?

OFF. Keep the peace.

LOV. Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom do you seek?

MAM. The Chymicall Cousoner.

SVR. And the Captain Pandar.

KAS. The Nun my Suster.

MAM. Madame Rabbi.

ANA. Scorpions,
And Caterpillars.

LOV. Fewer at once, I pray you.

OFF. One after another, Gentlemen, I charge you,
By virtue of my staff --

ANA. They are the vessels
Of shame, and of dishonor.

LOV. Goodzeale, lie still,
A little while.

TRI. Peace, Deacon Ananias.

LOV. The House is mine here, and the doors are open:
If there be any such persons, as you seek for,
Use your authority, search on of Gods name.
I am but newly come to town, and finding
This tumult 'bout my door(to tell you true)
It somewhat mazd me; till my Man, here, (fearing
My more displeasure) told me had done
Somewhat an insolent part, let out my house
(Belike, presuming on my known auersion
From any air of the town, while there was Sickness)
To a Doctor, and a Captain, who, what they are,
Or where they be, he knows not.

MAM. Are they gone?

LOV. You may go in, and search, Sir. Here, I find
The empty Walls, worse then I left'hem, smoked,
A few cracked pots, and Glasses, and a Furnace,
The Seeling filled with To^sies of the Candle:
And Madame, with a Dildo, writ of the walls.
Only one Gentlewoman, I met here,
That is within, that said she was a Widow --

KAS. I that is my Suster. I Will go thumpe her. Where is she?

LOV. And should have married a Spanish Count, buthe,
When he came to it, neglected her so grossly,
That I, a Widdower, am gone through with her.

SVR. How! Have I lost her then?

LOV. Were you the Don, Sir?
Good faith, now, she does blame yo' extremely, and says
You swore, and told her, you had taken the pains,
To dye your beard, and vmbre over your face,
Borrowed a Suit, and Ruff, all for her Love;
And then did nothing What an over sight,
And want of putting forward, Sir, was this!
Well fare an old Hargubuzier, yet,
Could prime his poulder, and give fire, and hit,
All in a twinkling.

MAM. The whole Nest are fled!

LOV. What sort of Birds were they?

MAM. A kind of Choughes,
Or theeuish Dawes, Sir, that have picked my purse
Of Eight-score, and ten Pounds, within these five weeks,
Beside my first Materials; and my Goods,
That lie in the Cellar: which I am glad, they have left,
I may have home yet.

LOV. Think you so Sir?

MAM. I.

LOV. By order of Law, Sir, but not otherwise.

MAM. Not mine own stuff?

LOV. Sir, I can take no knowledge,
That they are yours, but by public means.
If you can bring certificate, that you were gulled of 'hem,
Or any formal Writ, out of a Court,
That you did cosen your self; I will not hold them.

MAM. I Will rather loose'hem.

LOV. That you shall not, Sir,
By me, in troth. Upon these termesthey' are yours.
What should they have been, Sir, turned into Gold all?

MAM. No.
I cannot tell. It may be they should. What then?

LOV. What a great loss in hope have ^ou sustained?

MAM. Not I, the Common wealth has.

FAC. I, he would ha'built
The City new; and made a Ditch about it
Of Silver, should have run with Cream from Hogsden:
That, every Sunday in More-fields, the Younkers,
And Tits, and Tom-boyes should have fed on gratis.

MAM. I will go mount a Turnep-cart, and preach
The end of the world within these two months. Surly,
What! in a Dream?

SVR. Must I needs cheat my self,
With that same foolish vice of Honesty!
Come let us go, and hearken out the Rogues.
That Face I Will mark for mine, if ere I meet him.

FAC. If I can hear of him, Sir, I Will bring you word,
Unto your lodging: for in troth, they were strangers
To me, I thought 'hem honest, as my self, Sir.

TRI. It Is well, the Saints shall not loose all yet. Go,
And get some Carts --

LOV. For what, my zealous Friends?

ANA. To bear away the portion of the Righteous,
Out of this den of Thieves.

LOV. What is that portion?

ANA. The goods, sometimes the Orphans, that the Brethren
Bought with their Silver pence.

LOV. What, those in the Cellar,
The Knight, Sir Mammon claims?

ANA. I do defy
The wicked Mammon, so do all the Brethren,
Thou profane Man. I ask thee, with what conscience
Thou can advance that Nemrod, against us,
That have the seal? Were not the Shillings numbered,
That made the Pounds? were not the Pounds told out,
Upon the second day of the fourth week,
In the eight month, upon the table dormant,
The year, of the last patience of the Saints,
Six hundred and ten.

LOV. Mine earnest vehement Botcher,
And Deacon also, I cannot dispute with you,
But, if you get you not away the sooner,
I shall confute you, with a Cudgel.

ANA. Sir.

TRI. Be patient Ananias.

ANA. I am strong,
And will stand up, well girt, against an Host,
That threaten Gad in exile.

LOV. I shall send you
To Amstredam, to your Cellar.

ANA. I will pray there
Against thy House: May Dogs defile thy walls,
And Waspes and Hornets breed beneath thy roof,
This seat of falsehood, and this cave of cos'nage.

LOV. Another too?

DRV. Not I Sir, I am no Brother.

LOV. Away you Harry Nicholas, do you talk?

FAC. No this was Abel Drugger. Good Sir, go.
And satisfy him; tell him, all is done:
He stayed too long a washing of his face.
The Doctor, he shall hear of him at Westchester:
And of the Captain, tell him at Yarmouth, or
Some good Port-towne else, lying for a wind.
If you can get off the Angry Child now, Sir --

KAS. Come on, you Yew, you have matched most sweetly, have you not?
Did not I say, I would never have you tupt
But by a dubbed Boy, to make you a Lady-Tom?
'Slight, you are a Mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
Death, mun' you marry with a pox?

LOV. You lie, Boy;
As sound as you: and I am afore-handwith you.

KAS. Anon?

LOV. Come, will you quarrel? I will feize you, sirrah.
Why do you not buckle to your tools?

KAS. Gods light!
This is a fine Old Boy, as ere I saw!

LOV. What do you change your copy now? Proceed,
Here stands my Dove: stoop at her, if you dare.

KAS. 'Slight I must love him: I cannot choose i-faith,
And I should be hanged for it. Suster, I protest
I honor thee, for this match.

LOV. O do you so, Sir.

KAS. Yes, and thou can take Tobacco, and drink, Old Boy,
I Will give her five hundred pound more, to her Marriage,
Then her own State.

LOV. Fill a pipe-full, Jeremy.

FAC. Yes, but go in, and take it, Sir.

LOV. We will.
I will be ruled by thee in any thing, Jeremy.

KAS. 'Slight, thou art not Hide-bound, thou art a Iouy Boy!
Come let us in pray thee, and take our W^ffes.

LOV. Whiffe in with your Sister, brother Boy. That Master
That had received such happiness by a Servant,
In such a Widow, and with so much wealth,
Were very ungrateful, if he would not be
A little indulgent to that Servants wit,
And help his fortune, though with some small strain
Of his own candor. Therefore Gentlemen,
And kind Spectators, if I hau out stripped
An old man's gravity, or strict canon, think
What a young Wife, and a good Brain may do:
Stretch Ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
Speak for thy self, Knave.

FAC. So I will Sir. Gentlemen,
My Part a little fell in this last Scene,
Yet 'twas decorum. And though I am clean
Got off, from Subtle, Surly, Mammon, Dol,
Hot Ananias, Dapper, Drugger, all
With whom I traded; yet I put my self
On you, that are my Country: And this Pelf,
Which I have got, if you do quit me, rests
To feast you often, and in^ite new ghests.

The end.

