A COMPENdious and most marvelous History of the latter times of the Jews
commune weal, beginnynge where the Bible or Scriptures leave, and continuing
to the utter subversion and last destruction of that country and people:
Written in Hebrew by Joseph Ben Gorion, a noble man of the same country, who
saw the most things him self, and was auctour and doer of a great part of
the same.

Translated into English by Peter Morvvyng of Magdalen College in Oxford.

LONDINI. Anno Domini. 1558.

The Epistle to the Reader.
BEing moved and requested of a certain honest ma^prynter of London,
studiousse in his vocation of the commodity of this our country, that I would
take in hand to translate this part of the histoty of ye Jews, to the intent
that as there is emongst us already, in our native tongue, the original
beginning of that nation, and the continuance also for a long space in the
Bible, and annexed to the same: so there might be likewise an understanding and
declaration to al men in the English tongue, as well as in other, of the
destruction of so famous a commune weal: I both thought it honest to further so
good an attempt: yea, and almost dishoneste to repulse his request, opportunity
and leisure serving me: considering also how mani prophecies there be in the
scriptures of the destruction not only of the city Jerusalem, but also of the
whole cuntry, and no specialtie nor notification in our tongue of the fulfillinge
of the same. For ye performance whereof, after long weiyng and debating of ye
matter, it was thought most convenient not to burden the desierous hereof
with the providing of so chargeable a volume, as is the great historye of
Flauius Josephus that writ the discourse of the same to the Romans, together
with many other acts of other nations nothing at all perteining to ye history
of ye Jews: but that we should plenteouslye content men's desires and satisfy
our prefixed and aboundauntlye with a far more brief: much less costlye,
and as sufficient a commentarye for our purpose, nothing inferior to the
other in veritye: yea, written by the same Josephus, as the tenure and
contents of both the books do importe, although he name him self in this,
Ben Gorion, that is the son of Gorion, and in the other the Son of
Mattathias: which is a thing so commune in the Jews genealogies, yt men need
not sick far for the like, for one man to diduct his discente from diverse
names of father, graundfather or great graundfather, of the fathers side or of
the mothers side, now taking the name of the next, now of the most notable of
his kindred. But howsoever the names be unlike, thistories do so agrie, that
they may well be thought to be written by one man: this unto his cuntrimen
Jews, or for the^ that desire no more but a just rehearsal of the things
concerning that only country: the other for the Romans, or for the^ that
desire to understand of the feats of the Romans in the time of yt age: which
we thought not to be so necessary for our purpose We determined therefore to
take in hand this Joseph, or rather this his own epitome or bridgment of his
great book, yet the whole history of the Jews notwithstanding.

In the translation whereof what pains is taken, not only in restorynge diverse
words that were depraved and corrupted in the latin text: yea, and some hole
me^bres of sentences left out which were expressly in the Hebrew, but also that
the Hebraicall forms of speech so discrepant from our phrase and accustomed
manner of speaking, might be reduced unto our vulgar and familier
communication, that they might be the better understood: I refer it unto the
judgment of the^ that be expert in the tongs: who if they list to confer both
the textes, they shal-eueriwhere espy a great dissimilitude between the words
of both, and sometime find hole members of sentences transposed: yet I trust
they shall likewise confess both that I have not swarued any thing from the
sense and meaning of the auctour, which I most attentifly did always ponder
and consider, as the thing most profitable for our purpose, and also that it
was necessary so to do, to reduce it unto our manner of speaking. For whereunto
serves it, if it should not be understood? Were it not as good to remain
still not understood in a strange tongue, as not understood in our own? If
such translations, word for word, be to be counted in our tongue, being turned
into our words only. This therefore was chiefly endeavored, that it might be
framed and come most nie unto our vulgar tongue, not to our vulgar words
only, and yet it should not be disframed, nor disgresse from the true
meaning of the Historiographer.

Seeing then that it may now be read in our mother tongue, and understood
also, our hope is that our travail shall not be lost, but that thou likewise
for thy part (gentle Reader) will diligently peruse and read this historye,
worthy of so great pains to be bestowed upon it, both for the pleasantness
of the matter, and also for the inestimable profit that thou may take
thereby. For pleasure: who would not be very much delited and desierous to
understand the end, and what became at length upon such a people, that he
has heard so much of, as every man has read and heard of the Jews in
the Bible and otherwise? besides the delectation, in perceiving things of so
great antiquity. Every man deliteth to behold the pictures of ancient
persons, as of Hercules, Hector, Julius Caesar, Arthur, and reuerenceth them as
though they were half Gods: how much more pleasure should it be to behold the
lively images of their minds which appear in their acts and deeds while they
were here in this life, whereby we should learn to know good from evil, and
by the appliyng of their deeds unto our manners, with considering the event and
success they had of their actions, we may take either an example or some
admonicio^, or occasion to amend our life's, wherein besides pleasure, is also
profit. As when thou see ye Jews here afflicted with diverse kinds of misery,
because they fell from God: then may thou be admonished hereby to see the
better to thine own ways, least the like calamities light upon thee, unless
thou be so fo^d to think God will more spare thee, which art but a wild Olive
and but grafted into ye stock of faith, if thou bring e^ther noughty fruit or
no fruit, then he did the natural branches which sprang naturally of ye rote
it self. Thou shall read here of terrible and horrible euentes of sedicion and
rebellion, yea there was no such cruelti exercised upon them by their external
ennemies, as they used amongst the^ selves one upon an other, subjects against
their princes, and subjects against subjects: in so much yt nothing hastened
their destruction so greatly as their own doggidnesse and intestine hatred* Be
thou warned therefore by their harms, and take heed that thou may avoid ye
like. Consider more over and mark well, the Jews were counted Gods people,
the Romans contrary his ennemies, as without all doubt, having no knowledge
of God, and being Idolaters as they were at that time, they could not be gods
people: yet for all this, God would they should prevail against the Jews, and
subdue them under their yoke. Wherbi we may learn how greatly God is infensed
against iniquity, in so much that he will rather bring in upon his own
children a nation more wicked: then to leave them unpunished, to run forward in
their wicked race. Such proffitable ensamples and lessons are in this history
without number: which if I should recite all, I should bring the whole
book into the preface. We will therefore be content with these few at this
present, neither as all, nor as the chief: desieryng and wisshynge chiefly
(good Reader) that thou may find out not the chief only, but all, and not
only find the^ out, but note them, and imitate them in thy living and orderyng
of thy doings: which if thou do, then have we the expected end of our pains
and trauail, and thou the profit, wherewith all parties may justly, or will
gladly be contented and satisfied.

The siege of Jerusalem.


The state of the common wealth of Jury, from the Machabees, unto the utter
destruction and subversion of the same.
According unto those things that we have found in the Book of Joseph the
priest, the son of Gorion, and in other books written according to the most
certain verity: we will draw forth and rehearse some things for the comfort
that may come thereof, especially seeing all the prophets have bent and directed
their prophecies of things to come, to this, that the kingdom of the house of
David should return and florishe in time to come. Therefore, if there had been
any kings of the house of David, duringe the time of the second house, or
second temple: then should we have been in suspense, yea, even now already our
hope had been dashed. But there was no kingedom of the house of David in that
age, save only a certain dominion that Zerubabel and Nehemia had. Yea rather
the kingdom remained at that time to the house of the Machabees, and them that
were toward them. But now to the purpose. When Alexander the first king of the
Greeks had fortified and established his kingdom, he died, being yet but a
young man, and his kingdom was divided among four of his captains, Daniel.
as it is written. VVhiles he is yet alive, his kingdom shall be broken, and
divided into four coasts of the heavens. He left behind him a son of tender
years called Arkolas, whose tutour or keeper perceiving him to be toward: gave
him impoisoned drink, and made him away. Those captains made war one upon
another: of whom one that was named Ptolomie, procured Moses law to be
translated into Greek, to the intent he might find some occasion to pick a
quarrel against Israel. For by their law he sought means to withdraw them
from their religion, according to the Psalm. Psalm. 129.
Many a time have they fought against me fro my youth up (may Israel now
say.) There were seuentye ancient men that translated the law, whom Ptolomye
the king separated one from an other, putting every man apart in a house by
him self. And they all agreed in sense, albeit they changed thirtene places:
which was not done without miracle, that they all agreed together in the
meaning, as though one alone had writ it. Those xiii. places be these. First,
Gene. 1.
GOD has made in the beginning, whereas no word or thing is put before the
name of God, and also for yt in the Greek tongue, the thing yt does is put
before, and that that is made is placed after: least this word Bereschith
should be taken for a Creator, and Elohim for a creature. The second. Gene.
1. I for we.
I will make man according to the image and likeness, that it should not be
heard as though he were one yt consulted with other. The third. Gene. 2. Sixth
for seventh.
And God finished in the sixth day, and rested on the seventh. Least it should
seem as though he had made any thing in the seventh day, and in it ended his
workynge. Gene. 2. I for we.
The fourth. Go to, I vvil go down, and there will confound their language,
least by speakinge in the plurell number, they should have been thought to be
many. Gene. 18. With the^ that stood by her for, to her self.
The fifth. And Sara laughed, speaking with them that stood by her. Because
Ptolomye the king should not mock them and say, who showed you what she
said to her self? The sixth. Because in their fury they killed an ox, Gene.
49. Crib, for an ox.
and in their will they brake the cribbe, Lest the king should mock and
say, what has a man to do with an ox. Exodus 4. That that could bear a man,
for an Ass.
The seventh. And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon that
that could bear a man. Lest the king should mock our master Moses, because he
rode upon an ass. And that he should not say, how should an ass bear a
woman and two children? He would never have done it if he had not been a
beggar, or base person. The eight. Exodus 12.
And the dwelling of the children of Israel in Egypt and other lands, was
cccxxx. years. Notwithstanding they abid not in Egypt but.ccx. years, and that
is that their father Jacob told them. Descend ye (the letters of the which
word in Hebrew, signify.ccx.) thither. Furthermore, the co^putation of
ccccxxx years, is from the year that Isaac was borne, Exodus 24. little ons for
Princes
which was the holy seed unto Abraham. The ninthe. And unto the little ons of
the children of Israel stretched he not his hand? As who would say: yea,
also unto their little ones he stretched not his hand. Even because he should
not say, the great men escaped, but the children of the sons of Israel
escaped not. The tenthe. Number. 16. Of valor for an ass Deute. 4. That they may
shine is added
I took of them nothing of valor, least he should say, he took not an ass,
but he took one reward. The eleventh. Which things thy Lord God has
divided, that they may shine upon all people. Lest he should take an argument
thereof and say: Lo, the holy and blessed Lord has divided them to all
people, and has given them license to worship them. The twelf. Deu. 17
He went and worshipped strange Gods which I commanded not to vvorshippe.
To worship is added.
Lest he should say: now have thou called them to strange worshippinge of
Gods. The thirtenth. They translated an Hare, little fete, because the kings
wife was called hare: lest she should say, the Jews mock me. When these
seventy elders had translated the law into the greek tongue, Ptolomee
rejoicing much in their wisdom, honored them with princely apparel and great
rewards, brought the^ also home again merry and glad. Moreover, he sends by
them oblations to our God. At that time there were many contented to follow the
laws of the Grecians, but these seuentye refused. Not long after captain
Seleucus, Ptolomies companion in office died, in whose stead Antiochus reigned
in Macedonia. This Antiochus making war upon Ptolomee, bereft him of all his
dominions, and slew him. After that he subdued all the land of Israel then
under the regiment of Ptolomee, and waxed very proud. He hated Israel also
because they loved Ptolomee, and aided him in the wars against him. This is
that Antiochus that builded a great city upon the sea coaste, and called it
Antiochia, wherein he made a golden ydole, commaundyng that the children of
Israel should be brought unto it and worship it. But some of them chose rather
to suffer death for the religion of their god: although some other fell from
the synagoge their mother church. Before this he took away also their Sabbath,
their new moan, and leage of circumcision: forbiddyng that in any wise they
should observe these commandments in any place throughout his whole
dominions. For the which he put many of ye Israelits to death, and oppressed
the^ more then did ever any of their enmies or adversaries. The second man in
honor next him self in Jerusalem was one Polipus, he erected an image in the
temple, co^maundyng the people of Israel to worship it, and who so ever was
disobedient, to be slain. Therefore he put to death Hanna and her seven
children as it is mentioned in other places. When Antiochus perceived this, it
increased his hatred toward Israel, in so much that he did his endeavor yt
none of them should escape or be left alive, except such as would worship the
image. Then fled many of the Israelites to the mount Mediit and to Jericho,
because of the law of Polipus and Antiochus his lord, having to their
governor the hie priest Mattathias son of Johan, Hasmonany.
otherwise called Chasmonany. The priest enjoined them to fast, and punish
the^ selves before the lord with wepinge, sackeclothe, and ashes, and after
this he says unto them. If ye will ieoparde your lives for the holy Lord, why
die we like women: Let us go and fight with Polipus, and if we die, we shall
die with honor: peradventure the holy and blessed God will help us, and will
not root out the remnaunt of Isracll. To this counsel every man assented,
and made a covenant with him upon this thing. Polipus hearing this, gathered
his force together, and made toward them to destroy them, and what Israelite
so ever he found in his way, he slew him. Mattathias the priest and all the
remnant of Israel understanding that Polipus came against them, they went up
upon the mount Mediit with their wives and children. Then he put him self and
his sons in armor. He had five sons. Judas the eldest, the next
Iehonathan, the third Iochanan, the fourth Schimeon, and the fifte Eleasar.
All these were valiant and good men of war. When Polipus came to them he used
craft with Mattathias, saiynge unto him. Thou art one of the chief men in
Israel, and a man of honor and estimation. Come down therefore, and all yt be
with thee, worship the image, and strive not against the king, that ye may
live and not be destroyed. Thou shall be their prince also, if thou will be
conformable. But the priest in no wise would be seduced by him, but rather
cursed and reviled him. Mattathias had an altar at the foot of the hill,
whereupon when he had offered Sacrifice to the most blessed God, there came one
of the wicked Israelites out of Polipus camp, and killed upon it a swine.
This villain was young and lustye, but the prtest was old: yet when he saw
what this lewd fellow had done, criyng unto his god to help him and strenthen
him, he challenged a combat between him self and the fellow. Which thing being
liked both of the fellow, and of Polipus with his whole Army: Mattathias came
down with his drawn sword in his hand, and the fellow stood against him
ready to receive him. But the priest russhed upon him by the assistence of
his god, overcame him, cut of his head, and cast his carcas upon the altar,
whereat Polipus and his whole host were much astonished, beholding one another.
The priest stood still by the altar, criynge: which of you will come to me
man for man? The^ Polipus picked out a strong champion, the best in all his
army, and brought him out of the arayes of his host to teach him his lesson,
how he should behave him self with the priest. The priest therefore drew
toward the Camp with his naked sword in his hand, as though he came to join
with their Champion: but afterward leaving him, he turned his sword upon
Polipus, stroke of his head, and fled to the hill. Then blowing their horns
and making a shoute together, they russhed down upon the Grecians camp. But
when the Grecians saw that their graunde captain was slain, they fled.
Chasmonany and his sons with all Israel followed the chase, ouerthrewe the^,
and made a great slaughter. This done, Mattathias the priest went to Jerusalem,
purified the temple, restored the worshippyng of god: and commanded all that
were born during the time of Polipus to be circumcised, for by the means of his
inhibition, they were uncircumcised. Thus being established, he sat upon the
throne of the kingdom, and drove the Greeks out of the land of Israel. His
kingdom endured one year, which was the.cc. xii. year from the building of
the second house. After this he fell sick, and like to die, charged his
sons to keep the observations of the Lord, and to walk in his ways. Also
to play the men against the Grecians for the religion of the Lord. Then
brought he forth Judas, a tall man and a hardy, and placynge him in the
sanctuary, took a horn of oil, and poured it upon his head, whereat all the
Israelites clapped their hands, and gave a great shoute, saiynge: God save the
king, God save the king. Sone after Judas gathered an army of Israel, and
made an expedicion against the re^nant of the Greeks that were left in the
holds of Israel, and whatsoever he took in hand, God gave it good success.
Notwithstanding Antiochus sent against him a puissant army under the leadyng of
one captain Pelonius, against whom Judas so warred, that the Grecians went to
wrack, for he espied his time when they were destitute of victuals, and spedely
set upon them, beat the^ down handsmoth, and approached to captain Pelonius,
slew the valiauntest about him, yea and him also. When Antiochus heard of this,
he was in a great rage: wherefore he chose out a most valiant captain called
Lisias, and sent him against Jerusalem with a thousand horsemen, and
fotemenne without number. Judas having knowledge thereof, commanded a fast
through out all Israel for three days after, took muster of all his army, and
made over them captains of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tennes. These
said to their soldiers. Who so ever is aferde. etc. Whereupon many of the
people returned home, yet there remained.vii. M. and five hundred of such
courage all, that one would not have run away from an hundredth. Lisias
divided his host into three parts, committing the^ unto three capitaines,
Nicanor, Bagris, and Ptolomee. But after the Israelites had once given a great
shoute: the lord beat down the Greeks, so that the Israelites, destroyed nine
thousand horsemen of them, and spoiled the whole host, and they that remained
alive, took them selves to flight. The next day King Judas kept his Sabbath
together with all Israel in the camp, for the battle was upon the sixte
day. The morrow after the Israelites returned to the spoil of those that were
killed, and after to pursue other that were not able to resist: but they found
none, for they were fled into Astaroth Karnaiim. During the time of this
wars, Antiochus invaded the land of Persia, for they had moved war
against him, and done him iniurye. Wherefore he fought against them: but
having the overthrow at their hands, he returned to Antiochia with great
shame, where also he found his armies with an other dishonor and foil.
Wherewyth he was in such a rage, that he gathered together all the valiauntest
and best Warriors in all Grecia: yea, all that were able to bear weapon,
swearinge he would bring with him such an army, that all the ground about
Jerusalem should not suffice them to stand upon that he would have with
him, even for his sotemen only. And so he set forward his horsemen with
horses and wagons laden with all manner of furnitures for the wars, as Bows,
shieldes, Targets, swords, and spears, brestplates, and mourens, besides a
huge noumber of Elephantes: and such, that a dosen valiant men might fight
upon one Elephant, the Elephants being to them as a Fortress. But king Judas
took heart to him, put his trust in his God, and joined battle with him. At
length when he with the power of Israel approached to the Elephants, they slew
them down right, so that the Elephantes roared, the Horses and all the
beasts that carried the baggage and furnitures were very soore afraid. King
Antiochus also being mounted upon his mare, and not able to sit her in her
flight, was thrown down. His servants therefore findyng him, took him up,
and bare him a while upon their shoulders, and (being a corpulent and a gross
man) they were not able to carye him further, but cast him down in the way.
The Lord had plaged him also and his whole host before with a dry scabbe, or
rotten mattier, and with other most horrible diseases: which as he saw he
confessed it to be the hand of God. Wherefore he made a vow, that if he
escaped, be would circumcise him self with all his soldiers, and would
convert them to the worshippynge of the God of Israel: but God heard him not.
He fled therefore a foot as well as he might, and died by the way through his
grievous and soore diseases, and Opiter his son reigned in his stead. King
Judas with all Israel returned with great joy to the house of the Lord,
offered sacrifices: and as they had laid wodde upon the alter, and the
sacrifice upon that: they called unto the Lord, lovingly to accept their
sacrifice, and in the mean space, fire came forth of the altar by the own
accord, consumed the sacrifice, and the wodde, the like never chanced unto
them to this day. This miracle was wrought the.xxv. day of the month Elul.
August.
The King made an expedicion also into Arabia to war upon the people
thereof, and made of them a great slaughter, brought the^ into subjection, and
made them tributaries. In his return he set upon a great city of the
Greeks, wanne it, and raced it. After that he made a road into Greece, ten
days journey, where as came against him with a huge army, the chief man in
king Opiters realm next his person: but Judas discomfited him and all his
people. From thence he went to the city Sipolis, that was under the Romans,
where as came forth to meet him Godolias with a royal present, informing him
that they had ever borne the Israelits good will, were their neighbors, and
showed them pleasures. The King examined the matter, and found their words
true, so receiuinge their presents, departed thence. After this Gorgorius a
captain of the Romans moved war with Judas, but Judas stroke a battle
with him, and destroyed his whole army, so that none escaped. Opiter son of
Antiochus hearing what Acts Judas did in all countries round about: he
mustred all his people, levied a puissante army, wherewith he came and besieged
Bethar. Then cried Judas and all Israel unto their God with fasting and
sacrifices. The night after Judas divided his men into certain bands,
co^maundynge them to give the Grecians a Camisado, and to enter their Camp
whiles it was dark: which they did, and slew very many of the best of the
Grecians, about a four thousand, preparinge nevertheless for the field
against the morrow: where as also the Israelites did beat down many of the
Greeks. In that battle was slain Eleasar son of Mattathias, the kings
brother. For when he espied one with a golden sword upon an Elephant, he
thought him to be king Opiter, who had.xx. Elephants in his army. Therefore he
took heart to him, and beat down the soldiers of the Greeks on both sides
him, were they never so strong, till he came to that Elephant. And because the
Elephant was so hye that he could not reach them that sat upon him, he
shoued his sword into the bealy of the beast to overthrow the king: whereat
the Elephant shronke together and fell upon Eleasar, that he died there. For
whose sake al Israel mourned and made great lamentation. But Opiter hearing
this, strait way made suite to king Judas for peace, and a league to be made
between them, which after Judas had consented unto: he returned home into
Greece again, and by the way fell into the hands of his enemies that slew him.
After him succeeded Demetrius his enemy, who was the cause of his death. There
were at ye time certain evil disposed persons of the Jews ye served the king
of the Grecians in his wars, namelye one Alkimus: who went to the king of the
Greeks at that time liynge at Antiochia, and stirred him to move war upon
Israel, and king Judas. Whereupon Demetrius sent against him a captain
called Nicanor with a strong army. He now coming to Jerusalem, let Judas
understand that he bare him good will, and was desierous to make peace, and
enter into a league with him. Therefore as Judas came forth accompanied with
his brethren the sons of Chasmonanye: Nicanor met him in the way, imbrased
him, and kissed him: after that led him to his pauilion, and set him upon his
seate^ of honor. King Judas also after he returned from the camp, made unto
Nicanor a great feast, calling him and his noble men with him into
Jerusalem, where they eat and drank at the kings table. King Judas was yet
unmarried, wherefore Nicanor moved him to take a wife that he might have issue,
and not lose his succession, whose counsel Judas allowed. This done, the lewd
pickethanke Alkimus declared to king Demetrius the league that Nicanor had
made with king Judas. Whereat Demetrius being wroth, writ unto Nicanor that he
had intelligence of his traitorous practices. Nicanor was in Jerusalem when
this letter was delivered him. When Judas heard of the contents of the
letter, he fled out of Jerusalem into Samaria, where he sounded a trumpet, and
gathered Israel together. Nicanor upon these letters, entered into the house of
the lord to seek Judas, but he found him not. Then he examined the Priests,
who swear they knew not where he was become. After he had now sought him in
every corner throughout Jerusalem and could not find him: in a fume he swear
he would beat down the temple. And gathering together ai his host, he made
speed against Judas. When he heard of Nicanors coming he issued out of
Samaria to mete him, and after they had stroke the battle, Judas slew of
the Greeks to the number of.xviii. thousand horsemen, took Nicanor alive, and
was minded to kill him. But Nicanor besought him of pardon, alledgynge that the
king knew well enough that he began not this battle with his good will,
but lest he should traunsgresse the commandment of the king his master.
Wherefore (says he) I humblye beseech your majesty not to kill me, and I
swear unto you that I will never bear armor against you, nor anoye you in
any wise. Upon this the king made a league with him, and dimissed him. So he
returned to the king his master with shame enough. After this Demetrius dyed,
and Lisia his son reigned in his stead. Yet the wicked men ceased not, but
moved again King Lisia to make a voyage in his own Person with a puissant
army against Judas: but having the overthrow of king Judas, he fled unto
Asdotum till he had repaired again his army strongelye. Then came he the
second time upon Judas, in which conflicte the Israelites were put to
flight. King Judas notwithstanding fled another one way nor other, but called
to his men, and exhorted them to return and stick by him, yet they would not
obey him. So he abid alone with his drawn sword in his hand, unto whom none
of his enemies durst approach nie, but with charettes and horsemen they
enuironned him, and archers shot at him, wou^ding him sore, till he fell down
dead upon the ground, and they that were about him were taken alive. The time
that he reigned over Israel was.vi. year. Many of the Greeks captains were
slain also in that battle, and the king him self so wounded, that he was
feign to get him into his countreye to be cured of his wounds. After he had
recovered his health, he returned again, came to Jerusalem, and to all the
cities of Israel with the power of the Greeks, wherewith he so afflicted them
at that time for the space of four months after the death of Judas, that the
like tribulation was never seen in Israel. In the mean season the Israelites
resorted to Ionathas the son of Mattathias, and made him king in Judas stead,
and were sworn unto him. This Ionathas fought diverse great battails against
the Greeks, having the aid of one Sauinus of the kindred of king Alexander ye
first, who had made a league with Ionathas, and took his part against Grecia,
wasted and spoiled it sore, till at length the king of the Grecians slew
Ionathas by a train. His reign over Israel dured.vi. year. Then was Schimeon
his brother king in his stead. Against him Antiochus the second king of the
Grecians came to war. But Schimeon met him, and laid first an ambushe to
entrapte the Greeks, then ordered his battayles in array against Antiochus.
After that he with his whole host made a face, fayninge as though they fled,
and retired, till they perceived Antiochus who pursued them, to be within their
danger, then the ambushe brake forth upon the Greeks, and made a very great
slaughter. After this Schimeon returned to Jerusalem with great joy. Then sent
Ptolome king of Egypt an imbassage to Scimeo^ king of Israel, offering him his
daughter in marriage. To his request when king Schimeon had consented: Ptolome
came to Jerusalem, where was made a great feast, and they were alied together.
Whereupon Antiochus king of the Grecia^s writ to Ptolome king of Egypt, privily
to murder Schimeo^ king of Israel. Who^ Ptolomee durst not but obey, for at
that time the king of Egypt was in subjection to the Greeks. Therefore when
Schimeon came into Egypt to se his father in law Ptolomee: he was received
with great feastinge, but in the same he had poison given him, that he died
thereof. Besides this also, his son which came with him, Ptolome cast in
prison. These things justly chanced unto Schimeon, for that he had
traunsgressed the word of the Lord, that forbade all aliance with the
Gentiles. The time that he reigned over Israel was.xviii. years. Then John his
son reigned in his steed, who was called Hircanus in the Greek tongue. The
same Ptolomee king of Egypt invaded Israel with all the power that he could
make. But John the son of Schimeon met him, and the Lord ouerthrewe
Ptolomee with his whole host, that they were slain of the Israelites, and
pursued to the city Dagon, about the which the Israelites made trenches, and
beseged it. Now within the town they had the mother of king Hircanus, whom
Ptolomee caused to be set upon the Walls: and to be scourged with whippes
in the sight of her son. When Hircanus saw the great affliction of his
mother, he would have raised his siege, and departed from Ptolomee. But his
mother called unto him and said: My dear son John, regard not my
tribulation, for all chasteninges come from GOD. Proceed manfully with thy
siege against this city, for it is in great distress, and revenge me, thy
father, and brother murdered by Ptolomee. The king followed her advise, and
manfully raised a mount from the which he battered the walls with engynes of
iron like charrettes till it began to shake. Wherefore many of the soldiers of
the town fled, and their companies began to scatter. Ptolomee saying this,
commanded to afflict his mother yet more, and to increase her scourgynges,
until the entrails of Hircanus was moved, that he could abide no longer to see
his mother so cruelly handled, but left the siege, and let Ptolomee escape: who
nevertheless killed his mother, and fled into Egypt. In the fourth year of
king Hircanus reign, Pius king Greece came and besieged Jerusalem with a great
power and strength, whom Hircanus was not able to mete and encounter within ye
field, suffered him self to be closed up in the City. The King of the
Grecians therefore raised great Towers against the city aparte from the wall,
dug a trench, and cast up a mount. The^ planted their engines named Rams
against the gates, so yt the city was hard besieged: for they beat down^one of
the turrets ye stood upon the wall, whereat all Israel was afraied, and agreed
together to issue out and skirmishe with the^, whatsoever should come thereon,
life or death. Which although Hircanus liked not, yet they so did, and slew
many of their enemies, put them also to flighte, that they were constrained to
encampe them selves further of from Jerusalem. Then the Israelites came to the
towers that the Greeks had builded, and raced the^ to the ground. Thus they
issued out daiely, skirmishynge with Pius, until the feast of the
tabernacles. Then sent king Hircanus to Pius, desierynge him that he would
grant them truice, and let them be in peace while the feast lasted. His
request Pius granted, and sent a fat Ox to be offered to the God of Israel,
coueryng his horns with beaten gold, and dressynge him with fillets of
Cristall, and other precious stones. Clad him also in a garment of purple, and
diverse other precious clothes. He sent moreover plate both of silver and gold
full of diverse kind of spices, all to be offered unto the Lord. When king
Hircanus saw this, he went out unto Pius, and after he had made peace with
him, he made him and his chief men of war a great feast, and offered him a
present of.ccc. pound weight of gold. After that he went to war with Pius in
his army to aid him against the king of Persia that rebelled against him.
But sone after he was come with in the la^d of Persia, yt time of Pentecost was
at hand. Wherefore king Hircanus and the host of Israel returned: but Pius
and his army of the Grecians proceaded. Whom the king of the Persians met in
the field, slew Pius him self, and vainquished the residue that almost none
remained. Whereof when tidings came to Hircanus, he was very glad, and
returned to Jerusalem with peace and joy. After this Hircanus made many
great battails with the nations about him, and had ever the victory. He also
came to the mount of Gorizim, where he wanne a forte of the Sectaries and
Samaritans, and raced down the temple that the Sectaries had there as their
house of Sanctuarye, which they builded by the license of Alexander the first
king of the Greeks. He that builded it was Manasse the priest, brother to
Schimeon the just. But Hircanus the hye priest pulled it down.cc. year after
it was builded. From thence he went to the city of Samaria, and besieged it.
This was the mother city of the Samaritans and Sectaries, which was brought to
such distress by the long siege of Hircanus, that they within were feign to
eat the carcases of dogs. The feast of Propiciation then being at hand,
Hircanus made speed to Jerusalem to execute his office in that feast (for he
was the hye priest) appointing for generalles of his army, Aristobulus his
eldest son, and his second son Antigonus. In the mean season they within the
town writ to the king of Greece to come to succoure the^, which he did with a
great power. But these.ii. young men the kings sons went to meet them with the
strength of the Israelites, and gave them the overthrow, killing them up almost
every one to the number of.xxi. M. fightyng me^, and the rest fled. That done,
the young men returned to the siege of Samaria. King Hircanus their father had
tidings of the coming of the Grecians against his sons, so yt he perceived
they should have the Grecia^s of the one side of them, and the Samaritans and
Sectaries of the other. But he knew nothing what was happened, for that victory
chanced the.ix. day of Tisre. Septembre.
His heart therefore was careful for his sons, and for Israel. Notwithstanding he
proceeded in his office according as ye feast required. So as he entered into the
house of Sanctu^ sactoru^, or ye most holiest to offer ince^ce, and to call for
mercy for his children and for the army: he heard a voice speaking unto him.
Never trouble thy mind with thy children, and with the host of Israel, for
yesterday the lord of his mercy heard the^, and according to ye greatness of his
goodness for thy fathers sakes. Let thy heart therefore be right and thy hand
pure. So ye king going out of ye sa^ctuary, declared if to ye people. Whereupon
the next day they sent post to Samaria, and had word again yt this was true.
Wherefore king Hircanus was manified greatly of all Israel, for they knew yt
the blessed Lord accepted his doings, inspiryng him with the holy ghost, and
increasyng his kingdom and priesthode. After this he took his journey to
Samaria, besieged it a whole year, and at length wan it, slew all also that
bare life within it. He raced the walls, the palaice, and burnt up the city.
He had wars also with the Romans and the Arabians, and God prospered all
that ever he took in hand. So shortly after God gave him rest and quietness
from all that dwelt about him, and from all his enemies, so that Israel rested
boldlye in peace and tranquillity al his time. On a time the king made a
feast to all the sages of Israel, that they might make good cheer with him.
And being merrily disposed, he said: I am your scholar, and what so ever I do,
that do I by your authority. Wherefore I pray you if you see any fault in me,
or if I do not as it becomes me: tell me of it, that I may reform mine evil
way. Then every man greatly extolled and commended him, saiynge: Who is like
unto thee, our Lord king, so worthy of the kingdom and priesthode, so
notable in good works, whose works be done for the God of heaven, which have
also done so much good to Israel? The king was very well pleased with their
answer, and reioysed greatly. Yet was there one amongst them an indiscreet
manne called Eleaser, who spoke unadvisedly to the king. And it please your
majesty, it were sufficient for you to have the crown of the kingdom, ye
might leave of the crown of ^he priesthode to the sede of Aaron, forasmuch as
your mother was captive in the mount Modiit. Incontinente the king was moved
and soore displeased against the Sages, which certain of his servants that
hated the Sages, and smelled somewhat of sects, perceiuyng: one of them
in^ourmed the king that what so ever that indiscreet person had spoken, it was
not without the advice of the Sages. Whereupon the king demanded of the Sages:
What law shall that man have, that in the dispi^e of the king, speaks things
in his reproach? They made answer, he is worthy to be whipped. Then said one of
ye Saduces, the matter is plain, that according to ye minds of the Sages and
at their bidding he vpbrayded thee, and therefore they would not awarde him to
die. Whereat the king held his peace and gave never a word to answer. So all
the joy was dashed and turned into sadness. The next day, at the
commandment of the king, proclamations went out to all the Cities in the
kings dominions, that they should stand to the ordenaunce of Sadoch and
Bithus: and who soever should refence to follow their decrees, or would observe
the tradicions of the Sages and obey their will: should suffer death. This was
Ihon the hie priest, which had the priesthode. xl. years, and in thend became
a Saducie. Notwithstanding the Israelites obeyed not the kings commandment,
but rather priuilye followed the orders of the sages. The king him self and
all his servants, followed the traditions of the Saducies, making inquisition
for them that stake to the constitutions of the Sages: and putting to death,
as many as he could get knowledge of. By this means he drue much people of
Israel into this opinion. The time that Hircanus reigned over Israel was.xxxi.
year, and then he died. After him reigned his son Aristobulus, for he
had.iii. sons, Aristobulus, Antigonus and Alexander. This Alexander was hated
of his father and banished out of his presence. He went therefore and made war
upon Tire and Sidon: subdued them and compelled them to be circumcised.
Aristobulus regarded not the high priesthode, but set light by it, wherefore he
would not execute the office thereof, but took ye kingdom upon him, and set the
crown upon his head: and was called the great king. Besides this he banished
his mother and Alexander her son his younger brother, and would not suffer them
to dwell in Jerusalem. But he loved his brother Antigonus, and made him
lieuetenant general of all his wars, setting him forward into the wars
against his ennemies. Wherein the young man Antigonus had good fortune, and
prospered in all things that he took in hand, and returned safe to Jerusalem.
Whereas he entered into the house of the sanctuary to pray for his brother the
king, which at that time was grievously sick: and also to acknowledge before
the Lord God, his goodness and mercy toward him, in that he aided him
against his enemies. Then came a certain wicked person unto the king, and
informed him with this tale. Thy brother (says he) returning from the wars,
inquyred* of thy health, and when it was told him thou wast sick, he said: I
will go to him to day, and rid him out of the world. When the king heard this,
he was wroth toward the sages: commanded his brother to be apprehended, and
carried to the palaice of Starton, there to be kept in prisonne till he had
made inquisition of his doings.

In the mean space the Queen the kings wife commanded him to be put to death
there without knowledge of the kings mind. But when the King heard that his
brother was killed, he cried mainly out and wept, smiting his breast in such a
sort with his hand, that he sowned, and much blud issued out of his mouth.
He reigned over Israel.ii. year. After him his brother Alexander reigned, who
was also called king Ianai, being brought out of prison where his brother had
put him, and made king of Israel. He was a mighty man, and valeante in all his
wars against his ennemies, prevailing against the^. He had wars with the
Philistines, namelye Azam and Ascalon, whom he put to the worsse, and overcame
them. This man refused not the priesthode, but was his priest. It chanced on a
time, when he stood at thaltare to offer sacrifice: one of the sages cast Ceder
tree upon him, whereat he lift up his righthand upon the altar, crying: give me
my sword. Then the Sages kneled down before him, and swear they did it not of
any contempt, but rather (say they) that we thus sporting before the Lord,
would be merry upon the hie solemn day. But the kings servants answered
roughly again, saiynge: Although ye play and reioyie, yet it is not the manner
of the country to use any such dispitful custom with the king. The co^tencion
waxed hot amongste them, til at the length the Sages spoke evil of the king,
castinge in his tethe that he was an unhallowed and suspended person, and that
his grau^dmother on the fathers side was a captive in the mount Modiit, whereby
her seed was steined. The king was sore moved at that, in so much that he
commanded all the Sages to be slain. Therefore, where so ever they found
them, in the sanctuary or in the streets of Jerusalem: they killed them
forthwith. Then the king commanded that every man should obei the governance
and tradicions of the Saducies. So in those days had the Sages great
tribulation: some fell upon the sword, some fled away, and some tarried at home
with dishonor and shame. After these matters the king made an expedicion into
Arabia, entered the country as far as the rock of the wilderness, against
Hartam king of Arabia, and subdued his land. After that he warred upon
Medaba, and the hole land of Moab, vanquishing them, and bringing them under
tribute: and so returned with honor to Jerusalem. When he had after this well
bethought him of his doings, it repented him of his evil ways: wherefore he
altered his mind and began to make much of the Sages, submitted him to their
ordinance, and esteemed their tradicions. There were also at that time a kind
of sect that were called * These I take to be the same that he calls sages
before.
Phariseis, of whom such as had escaped, the king sent to call them home
again, and when they were come into his presence, he spoke unto them comfortable
words, saying: My brethern, ye shall understand that, that is once done and
past, must needs be termed as it is, and can not be revoked. And truth it is
you can excuse the reproach that ye did me: nor I can not call again the blood
that I have shed. Notwithstanding, I confess my fault unto you, and have
changed my indignation to love: praiynge you to put out of your heart all
rancour and malice, lay away also your mourning and sorowfulnesse of your
minds, reioysyng in your reconciliation and atonement with me, and be of good
cheer. But they made him answer. We will not lay away our hatred and enmity,
for thou speak but disceitfully, and we speak that is truth. Furthermore,
thou have killed our chief men and elders, neither have thou only done us this
injury: but also Hircanus thy father, who began such mischief, and thou have
holden on and continued it. Wherefore this hatred between thee and us has taken
some root: neither can we leave our sorrow and mourninge, till thou dye, and
God take vengeance upon thee for our sakes, then shall we rejoice, when we see
vengeance. So they departed from his presence, neither did the king ever give
them any answer. But when they perceived the king to be incensed against
them, and by that means the matter might redounde to their own harm: after
consultation had, they went to the king of Greece, whose name was Demetrius,
showed him what Hircanus and Alexander his son had done unto the Phariseis
and all the Israelites that bare them good will, and followed their traditions:
and how they also hated Alexander for the mischief that he has wrought
them. So that if any manne would come and reueng the malice of Alexander, they
would be ready to aid him. Demetrius followed their advise, and assembling
together all his people to the number of.xl. thousand horsemen, and fotemen
without number. He took his journey, and encamped against Sichem. Then king
Alexander waged.vi. thousand horsemen to aid him. But the king of the Grecians
writ priuilye to the auncientes of the Sectaries yt they should not aid
Alexander. To the mercinary soldiers also that Alexander had hired, he sent
rewards gold and silver, that they returned home to their country, and aided
not Alexander. Whereupon he was not able to withstand Demetrius. Therefore
hearing yt Demetrius was removed from Sichem toward Jerusalem, entending to
take him in the city: he fled by night with a few of his men to the
mountains, and lurked there. When the men of Israel that were in Judea heard
the king was fled out of Jerusalem, and that the city was in hasarde to come
into the hands of the Grecians: they gathered them selves together, and stood
for their lives as though all had been one man, to the number of.x. thousand,
and set upon Demetrius Camp, killed all his best men of war, and spoiled
his whole host, that he fled from them, and returned home into his country
with shame and dishonor. This done, the king took heart unto him, and returned
to his kingdom, but ye Pharisees fled to Betshemes, stre^gthning the^ selves
against the king. Who having intelligence thereof: gathered an army and went
against the^, wan the city, and took.viii.c. of the chiefest Pharisees, bound
the^ in chains, and brought them to Jerusalem. Then ba^queted he al his
servants upon the roufe of his palaice in a very hie place, where the chief
learned men eat and drank, until he and they were drunk. And in his merye
mode he commanded those.viii.c. Pharisees prisoners to be brought forth and to
be hanged every man of the^ upon gallows before him, at which sight he drunk
and laughed heartily. After this he fell sick ye xxiiii. year of his reign, of a
grievous disease, a quartan ague yt held him three year: yet for all this he
shronke not, nor let to go to the war, to encounter and fight with his
enemies what nation so ever they were of round about him, as though he had been
a hole man. In the xxvii. year of his reign, which was the third of his
sickness, he made an expeditio^ into the land of Moab against a certain city
called Ragaba, to get it by force At which time he was very sick and weak,
wherefore his wife Alexandra the Queen went with him, fearinge least he should
die by the way. And as be encamped him self against the city, and urged it
sore with assaults, his sickness increased upon him more and more. Wherefore
his wife perceiuinge that he was like to die, wept bitterly before him, and
said. To who^ shall I be so bold as to show my face, when thou art once dead,
seeing thou haste wroughte such mischief upon the pharisees, who^ all the land
favors, and follows their traditions, obeiyng their institucions? If they
shall be disposed to wreke them selves upon me and thy young children, they shall
have aid of all that dwell in the la^d. The king answered. Weep not, nor show
any rese^blance of pe^sifnes: I will tell the what you shall do, and if thou will
follow my counsel, thou shall prosper and reign, thou and thy children, as
thou would desire. Be it that I die, there is no man in ye world need know
thereof. Tell thou every man therefore that ask for me: yt I am sick, and will not
that any man shall come at me. In the mean while, anointe and season me with
balmes, fight with a courage against this city til thou win it, and then return
to Jerusalem with joy: and beware thou put on no mourninge apparail, nor weep,
but bring me into Jerusalem and lay me upon a bed like a sick man, and
after call together the chief of the Phariseis, bring them where I am, and
speak unto them gentilly in this sort. Alexander has been ever your enemy. I
know it very well: wherefore take him if ye list and cast him into the fire, or
to the dogs, or bury him, it shall be at your choice. I know well, they are
pitiful men and so full of merci, that they will bury me honorably, and shall
apointe some one of my sons who^ they like best to be king. The Queen did
therefore as she was instructed of the king. When she had won Ragaba, she
joyfully returned to Jerusalem: after that gathered together the elders of the
Pharisees and spoke to them as the king had advised her. The Pharisees hearing
the king was dead, and that his body was in their hands to do withal what
they list, they answered the Queen: God forbid, we should do this unto our
Lord the anointed of God. He was the king and hie priest: what though he
were a sinner, yet his death shall be an expiation for him of al his iniquities.
Therefore we will bewail him and mourn for him: yea, we will carry his coffen our
selves upon our necks and burye him as it becomes a kings magnificence, and
so they did. The time that he reigned was.xxvii. years. After him reigned his
wife Alexandra in his stead, for the Pharisees after they had finished the.vii.
days of ye mourning, they committed the kingdom unto her. She had.ii. sons by
the king: the elder was called Hircanus, the other Aristobulus. Hircanus was a
just man and righteous, but Aristobulus was the warrioure and man of prowes:
besides that, of a familier and loving countenance. He favored also ye learned
men, and followed their instruction. But Hircanus his elder brother, loved the
Pharisees. On a time therefore when the Queen sat in the throne of her kingdom,
she called the ancients of the Pharisees before her, honored them, and
commanded to release and set at liberty al such Pharisees as ye king her
husband and her father in law had cast in prison: and taking the pharisees by
the hands, she commanded all Israel to obey their ordinances. The^ made
Hircanus her son hie priest, and Aristobulus lieueteuaunte of the wars.
She sent also to all the lands that her husband and father in law had
subdued, and demanded the n^ble men's sons for pledges, which she kept in
Jerusalem. So the lord gave unto the Queen quietness from all that were under
her subjection. She gave also the Pharisees authority over the learned sort,
puttinge them into their hands to order at their pleasure. Whereupon straight
way they found one Dogrus a great man amongst the learned sort, whom they
stewe, and much people besides of the ancients of that sect, so that the
Sectaries were in great distress. They gathered them selves together therefore
and came to Aristobulus the lieutenaunt of the wars, and with him they came
to the Queen, saying unto her: Thou know the enmity that is between us and
the Pharisees, which hate thy busband, and father in law, yea, and thy
children also. We were his men of war that went with him in all his affairs,
and aided him now thou have given us into their hands to be murdered and
banished out of the Land. What will Hartam king of Arabia do when he
hears this, that we shall forsake thee? He w^^ come and revenge him of all
the battle that thy husband fought against him. Yea, the Pharisees will take
his part, and deliver thee and thy children into his hands, that there shall
not be left unto Hircanus the king, and his son Alexander thy husband, any
name or remnant at all. The Queen gave them no word to answer: whereat
Aristobulus was angrye, and let not to utter it to his mothers face, but she
would not hear him. Wherefore Aristobulus counseled the Sectaries to go their
ways and depart out of Jerusalem, to choose them cities in the la^d of Judah
where they might dwell with their honor: and not to suffer them selves to be
slain under the Pharisees hands. Wherefore departing from Jerusalem, they dwelte
in the cities of Judah. Not long after this it fortuned the Queen fell sore
sick, that she was like to die. Whereof when Aristobulus heard, he feared least
the Pharisees would make his brother Hircanus king, and at length apprehende
him: wherefore he fled away by night to the cities of the Saducies, to be their
head, and make war upon his brother if he would presume to reign. He came
therefore to the Prince of the Saducies called Galustius, who was a good man of
war. And after he had gathered a strong army of the Saducies, his mother the
Queen sent unto him that he should return unto her, which he would not do:
but rather went to war upon the nations that dwelt about him, where he
wan.xx.cities, and gate him great renown thereby. Now as the Queen his mother
waxed sicker and sicker: the chief Pharisees came unto her, with her son
Hircanus, weping before her, and saying, how they were afraid of her son
Aristobulus, who if he should come into Jerusalem and take it, he would deliver
them up into the hands of the Saducies. Unto whom she answered: I am as you
see, at the point of death, not able to talk much with you: there is here in
my house great treasure that my husband and my fathered gathered, and their
parents kings of the posterity of Chasmonani: take that unto you, and make my
son Hircanus king over you. If Aristobulus will perturbe him and make war
against him: ye may wage men of war therewith and succor him as you think
good. And even with this she fainted and died and was buried amongst her
people, after she had reigned.ix. year over Israel. The Pharisees therefore and
priests with all the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Hircanus her son king in
her stead. Aristobulus hearing tidinges of these things assembled his army
and came toward Jerusalem, to fight against his brother. But Hircanus met him
and encountered with him nigh unto Iordane Jericho. The Saducies of Aristobulus
host were good men of war, and to strong for the Pharisees. Wherefore Hircanus
and the Pharisees had the overthrow at Aristobulus and the Saduces hands, who
with this victory proceeded forth to Jerusalem, besieged it, and brought it to
great distres. Wherefore the priests and the aunciente of the people consulted
together, and came forth to Aristobulus, fell prostrate upon thearth before him,
and besought him yt he would not scatter abroad the inheritance of the Lord.
He condiscended unto their desires upon these conditions, that he should enter
into Jerusalem with them and be king: and his brother Hircanus should be the
hie priest. Whereunto they agreed. Then as Aristobulus entered into Jerusalem,
his brother came out of the sanctuary to mete him: and with embrasings, he
kissed him. So Aristobulus was king, and Hircanus executed the office of the
hie priest. The Lord also gave Israel rest and peace for a while. But
afterward the Lord sent an evil spirit amongst them, which was the cause of
translating the kingdom from the stock of Chasmonani, and of ye destruction of
his posteritye. For the son of Hircanus the great, and the son of Alexander
his son in yt they shed so much innocent blud, and drue Israel from
thobedience of the Prophets, unto the lies and trifles of the Saduces. For thus
it chanced. The Saduces bet into Aristobulus head, yt as long as his brother
Hircanus lived, he, nor his kingdom could never be stablished. Whereupon
Aristobulus devised how to make away Hircanus. Which thing a certain man called
Antipater was aware of, a man of most power in all Israel, and thereto also a
wise, expert, and learned man in all wisdom, both in the laws, and in the
knowledge of the Greek, just of his word, and prudent if any strange or new
matters chanced. His ofspringe was not out of the children of Israel, but of
those Romans which chanced to be vainquished, and became subject under the
dominion of the Israelits, being but strangers, and of no noble house in
Israel. Phaselus
He had. iiii. sons Joseph his eldest, the next Pasilus, the third Herod,
and the.iiii. Pheroras. These had also a sister called Salumith. Antipater
favored Hircanus so entirely for his justice and vprightnes sake, yt he opened
unto him him his brother Aristobulus and the Saducies intent: giving him
counsel to flee to Hartam king of Arabia, but Antipater him self went before to
break the matter to Harta^, of whose coming Hartam was very glad. Then
Antipater declared to him how Hircanus king of Jerusalem was in mind to flee
unto him, because of Aristobulus his brother. If thou will help him (says he)
and let him have speedy aid: thou shalt easilye set Aristobulus besides the
kingdom, for all Israel is inclined to Hircanus, and favor not Aristobulus.
Hartam answered. I am afraied of the Jews and their wilines. Alexander his
father put me thrice to the foil in battle by his subtlety, and took my
dominions from me. The^ Antipater swear unto him. He shall be (says he) thy true
and trustye friend, to do what soever thy heart desiereth. Thus Harta^ was
persuaded, and they made a league together. Then Antipater returnyng to
Jerusalem, caused Hircanus to flee in the night, and they both went together
to the king of Arabia, who much rejoiced at Hircanus coming, and received
him honorably. When they came together to entreat of the league: Hartam
demanded restitution of such cities as Hircanus father had taken from him: to
whom Hircanus consented in all things. Wherefore Hartam raised all the people
of Arabia, and led them to Jerusalem to war upon it. To Hircanus also came
all the men of Judah save only they that dwelt at Jerusalem. So betwixt them
they beset the city round about. It fortuned that in the solemnity of the
Passover, they could not have their service of the solemnity in the holy
place because of the wars. Whereupon a certain just and perfect man of the
town called Honey auriga, Onias.
brake out privily into the camp of Hircanus and Antipater his counseler,
besought the^ with much prayer and tears that they would grant a truce unto
Jerusalem while the feast of sweet bread lasted, that they might execute the
service of Solemnity in the holy place. To whom Hircanus said. Thou art a
just manne, and often when thou have prayed, the Lord has heard thee: pray now
therefore unto thy lord God, to deliver Aristobulus into our hands, and that
Israel may have rest. Honey auriga answered. Am I a God, or able to remove
battles that be stirred up for many men's iniquities? Thus when he seemed to
be unwilling to to pray, Hircanus men compelled him, drawinge their swords,
and saiynge: If thou will not pray, thou shalt dye for it. Therefore as he
saw his life in ieopardye, he cried unto the Lord. O Lord everlasting, which
haste chosen thy people Israel out of all people, and have set thy name in
this house: may it please thy majesty to plant among the children of Israel
frendshippe and brotherhode, take away from among them this hatred which is
risen of nothing, and let not the one of these factions preuail against the other,
seeing they al be thy servants, and children of thy covenant. When the
servants of Hircanus heard him say so: they ran upon him with their swords,
and killed him. But God deferd not his vengeance: for he struck the host as well
of the Arabia^s as of Hircanus with a grievous pestilence. At the same time came
from Rome a famous captain called Pompeius, Po^peius.
to war against the country of Armenia. This Pompeius sent one of his chief
men to Damasco, of whom as Aristobulus (thus besieged had heard) and that an
army of the Romans was come into Damasco: he sent him a present of.iiii. C.
pound weight of gold, desiring him to remove the army of the Arabians from
him, and raise the siege. In those days all the world obeyed the Romans.
That captain therefore writ unto Hartam king of Arabia in this wise: Depart from
Jerusalem: if not, thou shall understand thou haste broken thy league with the
Senate of Rome, and the hole army of the Romans shall shortly invade thy
land. Hartam upon the sight of this letter raised his siege and departed from
Jerusalem. Hircanus also and Antipater departed with shame and reproach.
Aristobulus upon that gathered a power and pursued after them, gave the
Arabians and Israelites that took Hircanus part a great overthrow, and after
returned to Jerusalem with joy. Shortly after Pompeius came to Damasco: him
Aristobulus presented with a vine of gold, merueylous artificially wrought. The
rotes of the vine, leaves clusters, and grapes, yt were upon it were pure gold:
the weight thereof was.v. C pound. Pompeius was very glad thereof, and sent it to
Rome to the Co^sul. And the hole benche of the Senate which was of the number
of.iii. C.xx. senators, wondered at the cunning and wit of him that made it:
and with great joy they bare it into the temple of their gods, placing it in
the presence of ye great Idol Jupiter, so called after ye name of ye planet
Jupiter. Pompeins writ his letters to Aristobulus with great thanks and
co^mendacio^ for ye same: assuring him how both he and the hole Senate favored
him, and that he should have a fre^d of him to speak in his cause as long as he
lived Hircanus hearing of this, was clean dashed and in despair. But Antipater
comforted him saying: let not the friendship yt is betwixt Po^peius and thy
brother dismay thee: I will go to him and make him thy fre^d. Upon yt he went to
Pompeius and persuaded his mind to hate Aristobulus and to favor Hircanus,
informinge him thus. If thou (says he) defend Hircanus, al Israel will be
content to be under thy protection, for they love him every man. But if thou
defend Aristobulus, the people will not obei the, for they hate him. Pompeius
charged him yt no man should be made privy of their communication. For I (says
he) will send for Aristobulus to come unto me to Damasco, and then will I cause
to lay hands of him, and deliver him bound to his brother, restoring the
kingdom to him. Aristobulus upon the sight of Pompeius letters resorted unto
him. Hircanus also came from the rock of the wilderness. And as they appeared
together before Pompeius: Antipater desired him that he would do justice
betwixt Hircanus the king, and Aristobulus his brother, that rebelled against
him, and took his kingedom from him without cause. Whose sayings a thousand of
the elders of Israel stood up and witnessed to be true. Aristobulus made
answer. I never strove with him for the kingdom, until such time as I saw al
these that made Hircanus king, to run in great obloquy, and to sustain much
reproach because he was so feeble a person and of no great wit, nor forced much
of the kingdom: yea, til al nations that were about him whose dominions our
progenitors conquered, began now to despise him, to pass little for offending
him, to deny him tribute, for his simplicitye, and mopishnesse, with lack of
courage. When Aristrobulus had said, there stood up a great multitude of
goodlye and beautiful young men, apparailed in cloth of Hyacinth and purple,
with mighti tergettes upon the same, and other ornaments of gold, crystal
and precious stones: affirming with one accord that Aristrobulus said the
truth, namelye that Hircanus forced not of the kingedome. At whom Pompeius
merueiled saying: Happy is this people having so many hansome men, true in
their words, and wise: Happy also were the Senate of Rome, if they could bring
to pass that this great nation might be under their governance. So he took
his journey to Jerusalem with Hircanus and Aristobulus. But after Aristobulus
perceived ye Pompeius stood not to the promise he made him at the beginning for
the vine: he set light by him, and fled from him to Alexandria in Egypt,
whether Pompeius followed with his host, and beseged Alexandria. From thence
Aristobulus fled again to Jerusalem, and Pompeius pursued him also thither,
writing to Aristobulus a letter of truce and pardon. So Aristobulus came forth
to him, and Po^peius did him at that time no harm, but demanded to be given
unto him all the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Aristobulus refusing
to do: but Po^peius in a rage, caused to lay him fast in heavy iron chains,
and assauted Jerusalem, batteringe the walls very sore, til they of the town
issued out against him and slew of his host.xii. M. me^. After this had the
Israelites civil wars within Jerusalem, because the siege was grievous unto
them, for they were divided into factions, one part said: Let us open the
gates to Pompeius and let him in, that we may submit our selves under his
protection. The other said: Let us fight against him unto the death. But much
people misliked that, so that that side prevailed that would yield. Wherefore
Pompeius entered the town, and the house of the sa^ctuary, killed much people of
the priests and the people of the la^d, made Hircanus king of Israel the.ii.
time, and Antipater his cou^seler. Moreover, he set one Securus a Romain in the
country to receive the tribute and departed, leading Aristobulus with him
bound in irons. And because he took his journey toward Arabia, Hircanus and
Antipater went with him to conduct him. Aristobulus thus being prisoner, and
his.ii. sons with him, it fortuned yt one of the^ called Alexander escaped. And
having intelligence that Hircanus and his counselour were gone out of
Jerusalem: he came thither and rebelled against Hircanus, made up the breaches
of the wall that Pompeius had battered: yea, the Israelites resorted unto him,
and made him King in Hircanus place. Whereupon he gathered an army, and went
forth to meie with Hircanus as he came homewarde from Pompeius, where he gave
Hircanus ye overthrow, and Securus the receiver of the tribute escaped. Then
Alexander returned to Jerusalem, from whence shortly after Gabinius a Romain
with a strong army compelled him to flee to Alexandria. And being in the same
place besieged also of Gabinius: his mother Aristobulus wife went forth to
Gabinius weping, and besought him that he would not destroy her son, for
whose sake he did Alexander no harm.

Gabinius therefore having gotten all the Land of Judea, made Hircanus king
of Jerusalem now the.iii. time: who set Romain captains and rulers in Jericho
and in Zephori, and through all the land of Israel. It fortuned after this
that Aristobulus gat out of prison at Rome, and came into Israel: to whom on
every side resorted men in such fort yt he had a puissa^t host of Israel.
Whereof when he had taken muster, he chose out.viii. thousand of the best, and
with the^ went against Gabinius, where was a sore battle fought between them,
till the best of Aristobulus men were slain, and only one thousand left,
wherewith he fled to the mountains. But the Romans followed the chase, and slew
them every man. Yet Aristobulus would not yield but fought alone, although his
helmet was broken, til he had diverse sore wounds in his head: and then fell he
to the ground, and the Romans took him yet alive, brought him to Gabinius, who
comforted him: commaundinge his surgeons to heal him, and after sent him to
the Consul and Senate of Rome, where he was put in prison yet once again. After
this, the Senate taking pity of Aristobulus wife, which was reported to be
a very wise woman: released her two sons out of prison, and set them at
liberty. Alexander the one of those could not be content, but rebelled once
again against Hircanus and the Roman governors. For he gathered together
much people of Israel, encountered with one of the Romayn governors that
Gabinius had appointed, and gave him the overthrow. But proceadyng further to
fight with Gabinius: had the worsse, and many of the Israelites were slain,
yet he escaped him self and fled. This done, Gabinius came to Jerusalem, and
renewed the kingdom of Israel to Hircanus the.iiii. time. About this time one
of the Senators wives at Rome conceived a child, and dyed in the birth and
travail thereof. They therefore that were about her, strait way ripte her
body, and gate the child out alive, whom they named Julius, and because his
mother was cut, they called him Caesar. This child growing to great
towardnes, and coming to man's estate: the Consul and Senate sent him into
the wars: and what so ever he did he had good fortune and prosperous
success. He deprived the Grecians of the empire and dominion, translating it
to the Romans. Many provinces also besides that did he subdue, and returning
to Rome with a power: attempted to get the dominion and sole regimente over
them. But they had made solemn statutes in the time of their progenitors
never to suffer any king emongst them, or any man to have perpetual rule over
them: wherefore they would not make Julius king. Upon this risse amongst the^
great and mortal wars, so that Julius slew wonderful many of them, and
without number. When Pompeius understood that Caesar reigned at Rome, had killed
the Consul and the Senate, with all the nobilitye of Rome: be gathered together
his hole army out of Arabia, and made toward him. Julius having intelligence
of his coming against him, sent for Aristobulus out of prisone, spoke
frendlye unto him, gave him a power and made him graund captain thereof, bidding
him to go and fight with Pompeius. In deed his army was a strong army: and
he him self was a King of no small prowess and valeantnesse. Pompeius
hearing that Aristobulus came against him, was sore afraid of his
valeantnesse and of his host. Wherefore he sent to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem that were under his obedience, that they should present Aristobulus
with some gift, whereby they might deceive him and poison him. The inhabitants
of Jerusalem at his request, sent unto Aristobulus a present by certain noble
men, whereat Aristobulus was right joyous, and eat and banqueted with them til
he was overcame with drink: then they gave him poison and he died. The time
that he reigned over Israel was four years and six months. He was a good
man of war, hardy in fight, and a man of an amiable countenance. Pompeius
receiuinge tidinges of his death: the more gladder proceeded with his host to
Rome to besiege if. But Julius met him in the way, and destroyed him and his
host: whereby the Empire was established unto Julius. He after this sent
presents to the king of Siria and into Egipte by his captains, to allure
them to his frendshippe. Antipater advised Hircanus to aid Julius if
perchance he might win his favor, which Hircanus did: and Antipater was
captain of the host, who played the man, and found such favor with
Julius, that he made him lieuetenant of his wars. And after he had fought
sundry and great battails, he returned to Jerusalem with great honor, and by
the way prospered much more. Hircanus after this, made Phaselus Antipaters
son governed of Jerusalem: and Herod his third son president of Galily.
There was a certain young man at that time in Jerusalem, called Hizkias, a
valiant man of war: to whom claue al such as were in any distress, and he
became their captain. These went and raunged about into Siria, rouing and
murdering in such sort, that the Sirians were weary of their lives, for fear
of them. Wherefore the king of Siria sent unto Herod, ruler of Galily,
desiring him to kill that Hizkias and his accomplices. Whereupon Herod prepared
him self and went to meet with Hizkias as he returned from the spoil of
Siria: came upon him at unawares and slew him and his men. Whereof when the
king of Siria was certified: he sent a noble reward unto Herod, of silver,
gold, and precious stones: by which, and by like means, he became very
famous. The noble men of Judah made their complainte unto Hircanus upon
Antipater and his sons, for their sore oppressing of the land of Judah:
desiring that Herod might be called from Galily, to appear in judgment and
answer with other, for the killing of Hezkias. The king therefore sent for him,
and he upon that came to Jerusalem, appeared before the judges princely
apparelled with a gilt sword gird about him: whose pride an aunciente man
called Samai blamed and reprehe^ded also his stout heart: but he would not
give ear unto him, nor yet regard the judges. When Hircanus perceived that
the judges had almost determined to give judgment against the young man,
and to make him away: he took pity upon him, and said: We will not give
sentence to day, to morrow is a new day, and by that means delivered him out of
their hands. Herod knew not before that it was a matter of life and death. That
night therefore he fled to ye king of Siria, declaring all what had happened
unto him: The king of Siria let him have a strong army, and came with him him
self, purposing to besiege Jerusalem. But his father Antipater and his elder
brother Phaselus came forth unto him and rebuked him, saying: Is this the
reward that thou rendrest to king Hircanus that took pity upon thee, and
would not have thy blood shed? Therefore they willed him to depart from
Jerusalem, unto whom he condiscended, after he had once let the inhabitauntes
of Jerusalem know what he could do, and had showed the^ his power. Julius
Emperor of Rome about that time, as he was worshippinge in the house of his
GOD, was murdered by the conspyracye of certain of them which had served
Pompeius that was slain, as is before mentioned. The name of one of them that
killed him was Cassius of the country of Macedonia, who fled thither being
afraied to tarry at Rome. This Cassius had great dominions in Macedonia.
Antipater also of whom we spoke, was a great scourge to the noble men of Judah,
and a great deal forer man then was Hircanus him self. Yea, Hircanus could do
nothing in comparison of him, for he had no rule him self: but Antipater and
his sons bare all the swaye throughoute the whole realm. Moreover, Antipater
was in great estimation amongst all the Kings of that time. And for as much as
he so sore oppressed the Jews they therefore hated him, and conspired to kill
him. There was a man in great authority about A^rcanus, by whose means they
wrought this matter. He corrupted the kings Butler with rewards, to put
poison in Antipaters cup, which as he had drunk, he died. These things his
sons Phaselus and Herod dissimuled and winked at, as though they knew
nothing. Notwithstanding they privily writ unto Cassius that reigned in
Macedonia, certifiynge him of this deed. Sone after came Cassius to Tyrus,
from whence he sent messengers to Hircanus to come unto him, who came, and
with him Malchias, Phaseus, and Herod. Cassius entertainynge them all in his
lodging, willed his men that whatsoever Herod had them, they should do it.
Herod willed them to kill Malchias, they slew him therefore sittyng hard by
Hircanus side. Hircanus demanded of the sons of Antipater the cause hereof,
who answered: Is it not manifest that King Cassius servants slew him, and
we know not why? Therefore Hircauus stood in fear of Phaselus and Herod,
being certain that this was their deed. Wherefore he said unto them. This
Malchias was worthy of such a death, for he was a crafty man and an vserer.
These things done, Octauian Augustus, brothers son unto Julius that was
murdered, came unto Rome: and the people of Rome made him their Emperor. He
had a fellow in office named Marcus Antonius his Uncle. Octauianus therefore
saying to the government at Rome, sent Marcus Antonius to war upon Cassius,
and to revenge Julius death. Unto him Hircanus sent a present, a crown of
gold, in which were set sundry precious stones: praiyng him to strengthen
his Kingedome in his hands, and to be a means of a league to be made between
Octauian Augustus king of kings, and him: as there was between him and Julius,
which Antonius granted. Pacorus.
About that time Antigonus fonne of Aristobulus writ to Pagurus king of the
Persians to aid him against Hircanus to remove him, and to restore the
kingdom to him self: and he agreed to give him for his trauail five hundredth
pound weight of gold, and a hundredth Israelitish virgins. So Pagurus gathered
an host against Israel, and Antigonus departed out of Jerusalem with much
people of Israel, that took his part, and foyned them selves to Pagurus. These
came to Jerusalem, besieged it, fought many skirmishes, and gave many great
assaults unto it, til at lenght they undermined the city. Then took they
Hircanus, and slew Phaselus. And to the intent Hircanus should be clean removed
from the priesthod: Antigonus that had deprived him now of his kingdom, cut of
besides yt one of his ears. But Herod escaped and fled to August emperor of
Rome. Pagurus therefore having made Antigonus king of Jerusalem: returned home
into Persia, cariynge Hircanus as prisoner with him. But Augustus appointed
Herod to be king over al Judah, giving to him a very strong army of ye Romans
to obtein it withal. In the way thither, Herod met with Alexandra Hircanus
daughter, and Marimi her daughter, you she had by Alexander son of
Aristobulus, and brought the^ again into the land of Israel, where he took
Marimi to wife, and was married with her in the mount of Galile. For there the
chief of al Israel dwelte: with whom he took peace. Marcus Antonius companion
in office unto Octauian Augustus, about that time made a voyage through all
the East countries, to subdue them unto the Romans, together with Egypt,
Damasco and Siria. Him Herod accompanied to the flud of Euphrates, and helped
him not a little. For the Arabians lay in wait for him in the way, and slew all
that would aid Marcus Antonius. But Herod met with them and slew them.
Wherefore Antonius was very glad of Herodes valiantness: and brought him
again into Israel together with Cassius his captain and lieuetenant of his
wars: having also his letters to all the captains of Siria, after this
tenure. Ye shall understand that our Lord and master Octauian Augustus king
of kings, has appointed Herod the son of Antipater to be king of all the
land of Judah. Therefore as soon as these letters shall come unto you, ye shall
with all speed aid him. No man shall be excused: all that can bear weapon shall
go with him to Jerusalem, to vanquish Antigonus the kings adversary. Who so
refuses to go with him, it shall be leful for the warriors ^o slay him
forthwith. I Marcus Antonius have sworn by my sword, that I will not alter
this that I have said. When the captains of Siria had red this, they resorted
wholly to Herod, so that his host was wonderfully increased. Antigonus hearing
of this, sent one Pompeius lieuetenant of his wars against the^, who fought
a sore battle with them, that much people were slain on both sides, Joseph
king Herodes brother was slain in that battle. Notwithstanding, at length
Antigonus host went to the worsse, and had the overthrow. So Herod and
Ca^^ius proceeded to Jerusalem, and besieged it, the third year after Herod was
made king of Israel. And when they had battred down a piece of the wall:
Cassius with the Romans entered the town and made a great slaughter in
Jerusalem. They entered also into the Sanctuary, and attempted to enter into the
Sanctum sanctorum: but Herod and his men lept between it and the^: and stood
with their drawn swords in the temple door, that they should not. Herod was
also displeased with Casius for his crueltye, and said: If ye will destroy all
the inhabitants of the city, upon whom shall I reign in this kingdom that
Augustus has given me? Wherefore straight way Cassius caused proclamation to
be made through all his host, that no man upon pain of death should kill one
Israelite more. This done, Herod apprehended Antigonus, and delivered him bound
to Cassius. He rewarded also Cassius soldiers both with gold and silver. The^
Cassius offered a present unto the Lord, a crown of Gold, for he was soore
afraid of gods displeasure, because he had fought against the holy city.
That done, he took his journey, and returned into Egypt, and Antigonus as
prisoner with him. Thither sent Herod unto him a royal reward to make away
Antigonus and to murder him, fearinge least he should make claim unto the
Kingedome again. Whereunto Cassius consented, and slew Antigonus. Thus was the
kingdom surely established to Herod. The^ made he wars upon all the nations
that were about him, constrainyng the^ to become tributaries, by which means he
grew to such power: as never any of his predecessors were to be compared unto
him. After all this, Pagurus king of Persia, released out of prison Hircanus son
of Alexander, and promoted him to be head of all the Israelites yt were fled or
flitted into ye land of Sennaar, and into the dominion of the Persians, and he
became their king. This Hircanus had a fervent desire to see the holy city and
the house of the sa^ctuary. Also how Herod who^ he took for his son, and his
kingdom did. Herod hearing ye Hircanus who had been prisoner at Babylon, was
now set at liberty and in great honor: he was afraied of him, mistrusting lest
the Israelits would restore unto the^ selves the kingdom of their fathers.
Wherefore he cast in his mind how to do him mischief. He the^ writes his
letters unto Pagurus: the co^tents whereof were such. Thou shall understand ye
Hircanus is he that brought me up, and used me ever as his son. Now therefore
sense I came to be king of Jerusalem: I have called to my remembrance the
goodness yt he has done to me, wherefore my desire is to reward him according
to his benefits. Therefore I require thee to send him to me: otherwise assure
thy self of wars between thee and the Israelits with their co^federats. Pagurus
having red this letter, sent for Hircanus, and asked him if he would go to
Herod: and notwithstanding Herod's threats, he ceased not to give to Hircanus al
good counsel he could: aduising him to take heed of Herod, because he is
(says he) a blood sheader, a breaker of his league. And he has called thee
for no love he bears thee, but because he fears thee. As long as thou
live, shall he never sleep sound sleep, lest the kingdom should be deuoluted
unto the. It is better therefore for thee to tarry here in some honor, though
it be not of such authority: then to go thither to dye with great dispite,
and end thine old age with a bloody death. Furdermore thou shall know, such
is the disposition of man's heart. If there be two men, the one in honor, the
other in contempt: after time shall come that the despised shall be had in
honor, and the honored to be neglected: never will he that is now honored
and before was in contempt, be content to see him that was before honored, nor
speak frendelye to him. For he will think: Hitherto according his accustomed
manner he has despised me: how much more when his dominion is taken from him,
and his servant reigns in his room? Moreover, Herod knows right well,
that men's hearts are inclined to him that is the true king. And it might so
be, if thou were mete for the priesthode, that he would promote thee unto it,
and be gouernoure of the kingdom him self. But saying thou art dismembered,
have one of thy ears cut of, and thereby art unmeet for the Priesthode^: thou
shall remain in Jerusalem deprived both of kingdom and priesthode, which is
uncomely for thee. Such counsel gave Pagurus king of the Persians unto
Hircanus: yea, and all the Jews that were in Babilo^ besought him that he would
not go unto Herod. Notwithstanding he would not be persuaded, and why? For it
was the Lords will and his deed, that the injury done unto the Sages, whom his
father and graundfather slew, and the injury committed to Honey auriga: might
return upon his head, and be revenged: so that no remnant of the house of
Chasmonany, no name, no residue, no kinsman or posterity should be left
alive. Hircanus therefore took his ^ourney toward Jerusalem, and Herod came
forth to mete him, embrased him, and kissed him: after brought him into his
house, and feasted him daily, called him his father before all men, albeit in
his heart he conspired to murder him. And that knew Alexandra his daughter
and mother in law to Herod: who opened it unto Hircanus, but he would not
credit her at the first, til on a time he perceived the matter clear to be
so, the^ devised he how to flee to Maloc king of Arabia. He sent therefore a
messenger to Maloc, to send him horse and a charet to flee withal: but the
messenger dealt unfaithfully and lewdly with him, for he brought Hircanus
letters privily unto Herod, who rewarded him well for his labor, and bad him
go to Maloc, and to let him know what answer Maloc gave. The messenger upon
this went and delivered the letters to Maloc, who fulfilled Hircanus request,
sent him horses and a charet, writing in this sort. I have sent the horses and
horsemen: come therefore unto me, and whatsoever thy heart desires, I will do it
for thy sake. So the messenger brought the answer secretly unto Herod:
whereupon he sent straight to the place in which he understood Maloces men to
lurk, waiting for Hircanus: and caused to apprehende them alive. Herod
commanded to call together the elders, before whom he willed also Hircanus to
be brought, and of him the king demanded. Tell me if thou writtest any letters
to Maloc king of Arabia? he answered: I wrote none. The^ was Restius the
messenger brought in as his accuser, and the me^ of war also of Arabia yt were
apprehended, which declared the hole matter before the counsel, so that
Hircanus was quite dasshed. Then the king commanded him to be put to death,
and so was the kingdom establisshed unto Herod. The time that Hircanus
reigned, was forty years and six months. After the death of his mother he
reigned three years, and Aristobulus his brother removed him, making him
priest. Again three years after he returned to his kingdom, and reigned
forty years. Then Antigonus son of Aristobulus deposed him, cuttynge of his
ear, and banishing him out of the holy city. So after when Herod his
servant came to the kingedome: Herodes ingratitude.
he returned to Jerusalem, and Herod shed his blood without cause. Yet he
notwithstanding had delivered Herod from the hands of the elders, who would
have put him to death, for the death of Hizkias. From that time Hircanus
wrought none evil in the sight of the Lord, nor offended him in any great
matter: save only in this, that he bare to much with Herod in sheadyng the
innocent blood, wherefore his own life went for the other. Therefore happy is
he that never forget teth any part of his duty. Marimi the daughter of
Alexander the Son of Aristobulus, the wife of Herod, had a brother whose
name was Aristobulus: him Herod would in no wise promote to the hye
priesthode because he feared the children of Chasmonany, although his wife
sued hard, and lay sore upon him for the same matter. But the king made hye
priest one that was nothing of the kindred of Chasmonany, whose name was Haniel
Notwithstanding when he had once made away Hircanus his wives progenitour,
father of Alexandra his mother in law: then he deposed Haniel the hie priest,
and promoted his wives brother Aristobulus to the dignity, although he were
but a child: yet he was wise, and of good understanding, and beautiful
withal, so that in all Israel was not a goodlier nor hansomer young man the^ he
was. And this Haniel was the first that ever was deposed from that office of
the hie priesthode, by any king of Israel before Herod: who did this to quiet
his wife, and to fulfill his mother in laws mind. Notwithstanding this
Alexandra his wyfes mother, was not content nor satisfied, for the death of her
father was such a grief: but always spoke snappishly to the king, that he
sent her to ward. Then she writ to Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, wife unto Marcus
Antonius, a noble manne of Rome, declaryng unto her all the mischief that
Herod had dooen to the posterity of Chalmonani, and desiring her of aid. To
whom Cleopatra made this answer. If thou can find the means to come to me
secretly: you shall perceive what I will do for thee. When Alexandra had red
the letter, she sent to Aristobulus her son the hie priest, showing him that
she would flee to the sea Iapho, and from thence would take shipping into Egypt,
persuading him also to flee with her. We will (says she) make two great
coffers, one for my self and the other for thee: and we will with rewards
procure our servants to carry us out privily, whereby we may flee to save our
lives. This their devise was perceived of one of Herodes servants, who
forthwith made ye king privy unto it. The king commanded his servant that
bewraied them, that when they did co^uey the coffers they should bring them to
him, which the servants did. So when the coffers were brought to the kings
presence, he caused them to be opened, and took out Alexandra and her son
Aristobulus, to whom the king spoke sharply and rebuked them sore. But
Alexandra answered him again as short, in so much yt the king moved with anger,
flang away from her into his chamber, saying: It is better to sit in a corner
of the house, then with a brawling and skolding woman in an open place. The
king dissembled the matter and showed no great displeasure. A year after as
Aristobulus the hie priest apparailed in his ponticall vestures, stood in the
the temple nie unto the alter to offer sacrifices: ye Israelites beheld his
beauty, his wisdom, and behavior in the ministry, whereat every man
reioysed, praising God that had not taken al away, but left one to revenge yt
injuries done to the house of Chasmonani. The king hearing this, was sore
afraid, and not a little displeased: thinking to him self the Israelites
would restore the kingdom of their fathers unto him. He perceived every ma^s
heart to be inclined toward him. Wherefore he deliberated a while, and in the
feast of ye tabernacles, he went to Jericho withal his servants, whereas he
made a great feast to al his nobles and servant, placing them every man after
his degree before him. Aristobulus the hie priest, he set upon his righthand.
And as they eat, drunk, and made merry: the kings servants were disposed to
go and swim in Iordane. To these the king had given secret commandment, that
they should desire Aristobulus to go and bathe with them in Iordane, and then
to drown him. So when they were goinge, they came to Aristobulus and desired
him to go bathe with them, which he would not unless the king gave him leave:
wherefore he asked the king leave, but he denied him at the first, yet at length
the young man entreated him so insta^tly, that the king bad him do what he
would. He went therefore with the other young men to swim. The king took his
horse straitwaye and returned to Jericho withal his train, leauinge the
young men behind, which continued swimming till Sun setting: and as it began
to be dark they drowned the priest Aristobulus emongst them. Whereof when
tidinges came to the king, and it was known that he was dead: the people
wept and made great lame^tacion: considering his virtue, nobility, and beauty,
every man was full of sorrow that he should have so short a life: and they
bewailed so much that it was hard a far of. But Marimi chiefly and Alexandra
the young man's mother could in no wise be comforted. Yea, the king also wept
and made great moan, for it repented him that he had done so wicked an act.
Yet all the people knew well enough, that the thing was procured by the king:
In so much that Alexandra his mother in law let not to tell it him to his
face, that he was ye murderer of her husband, and her father, and now last of
al of her son: to who^ the king answered nether good nor bad. From that day
forwards there was perpetual hatred between Alexandra and Marimi, and Kiparim
the mother of Herod, and Salumith his sister that came of base and servile
blud. For Marimi cast in their teethe to their faces, that they were not of the
sede of Israel: but unholy and of base birth. Notwithstanding Herod loved
Marimi as his life, wherefore he would never displease her as long as she lived,
nor say so much to her as whi say thou so? These things done, Marcus
Antonius a noble man of Rome, next unto Octauian Augustus king of kings,
being sent by Augustus to war upon the kings of the west countries: reigned in
Egypt, and by the provocation of his wife rebelled against Octauian Augustus,
made war with him both by sea and land. And forasmuch as Egypt is nie
adioyninge to the land of Israel, Herod joined with him and helped him. For
Marcus Antonius had aided him before in such sort, that no king durst meddle
with him for fear of Marcus Antonius. Whereupon when Marcus conspired against
his prince and master: Herod aided him with an army, with horsemen, and with
ships also against Octauian. In which wars Octauian gate the victory, slew
Antony and all his people coming by ship to the Isle of Rhodes, and so into
the land of Egypt. Herod hearing that Marcus Antonius was slain, and that
Octauian Augustus was come into Egipte: he fainted for fear of the displeasure
of Octauian. Yet at length he took heart unto him, prepared a royal
present to be carried before him, and followed after him self to Octauian
Augustus. And setting forwards, he called Joseph the husband of Salumnith his
sister, whom he made chief of his household: commaundinge him that if Octauian
Augustus put him to death: he should poison Marimi his wife, saying: it should
not be semely for kings that any mean and base man should mary with a kings
widow, and sleep with her upon a kings bed. So then he took his journey
toward Octauian Augustus, who then was at the Rhodes, where he understood
Octauian to be displeased with him, for that he had aided Marcus Antonius.
Therefore as soon as Herod came to Octauian Augustus presence, having his
croune upon his head: he took it of, and fell down prostrate upon the ground at
Octauians feet, saying: Most noble emperor, I confess my trespass against
your majesty, that I loved M. Antonius my companion in league, who was my
neighbor and aided me. And it is true, yt your majesty se^ce the time you made
me king, have herd of mine affairs yt have happened unto me, but never
succored me. This. M Antonius did not so. I confess therefore yt in his wars
against your majesty, I aided him with an army, with horsemen and ships: Neither
went I out with him for any wars upon mine own borders, but when so ever I
went with him, I holp him to the uttermost of mi power When he was falling, I
bolsterd him up: and wha^ he sto^bled I raised him again. Emongst al these
things I confess also, that I would not be counted of your majesty a breaker
of leage: but now M. Antonius is dead. Wherefore whither yt it shall please
your majesty to restore me to my former estate or no, forasmuch as I have kept
touch with M. Antonius against your majesty amongst other: if you put me to
death, you shall do me no wrong, but justice, because I have deserved death.
When Octauian August herd him speak so, he said unto him: Arise thou king of
Israel in peace, be of good comfort and fear not, for thou art worthy to be
nie, yea, next to my person. I know that Marcus Antonius was set on by his
wife, and would not follow thy counsel, for if he had, I dare say he would
never have conspired against me. So he commanded the croune to be set again
upon Herodes head, and made a leage with him. Then they went both together to
ward Egypt to be revenged upon Cleopatra. But that wicked woman when she saw
her city to be overcome: put on her most precious apparaile, and sitting upon
the throne of her kingdom: commanded a vipor to be brought unto her, which
as soon as she had suffered to sting her breast, she died. As Octauian August came
to her palaire and saw her sit there, he rejoiced that he might be revenged
of her: and commanded to thruste her from her throne, but when they that came
to her found her dead, Octauian was pensife and very sore grieved. In this
while Joseph Salumithes husband disclosed unto Marimi, that the king had
commanded: if it so fortuned him to be put to death by Augustus, that he
should poison her: Whereupon Marimi conceived yet a greater hatred toward the
king, in so much that when the king was returned in safetye, sound, and
with honor also from Octauian, and that all his men and whole houshoulde
reioysed greatelye: Marimi showed no countenance of gladness, no not when the
king him self told her how greatly he was magnified and honored of Octauian:
but always she was sad. Salumith the kings Sister perceiving that Marimi so
vexed the king, she toulde him how Joseph her husband had line with Marimi
whiles he was with Augustus. Herod (say what she could) gave no credit to
her words, knowing that she envied Marimi: until at length he asked the cause
of Marimi why she reioysed not as other did when he returned in safetye from
Augustus: but was ever sad, which showed her to have some rancoure and malice
in her heart to wards him. She answered. Thou haste said heretofore that thou
louedst me above all thine other wives and concubines: yet thou did will
Joseph thy sisters husband to poison me. When Herod heard this, he was
exceadinglye abashed that Joseph had disclosed his secret: and began to
mistrust with him self that which Salumith had told him, yt he had slept with
his wife in deed, and upon that had detected that secret. Therefore he departed
out of his palaice in a great anger and rage, whereby Salumith perceived that
he detested Marimi and therefore she accused her further, hyring false accusars
and forgers of lies, to witness that Marimi would have poisoned the king,
whereof she had diverse arguments also by her countenance. She added moreover,
if thou (says she to the king) let her escape thus she will spedely destroy
thee, and bereue thee of thy kingdom. The law gives a man this counsel. If
any man gooe about to murder thee, prevent him and slay him first. With this
and such like words, she so moved the king, that he commanded to bring
Marimi forth, and to be beheaded in the hie streate of the city. And as she
was brought forth unto the market place of the city, all the women of the
city followed her. Alexandra her mother also cursed and rayled at her, saying:
come out, thou that haste abhorred thy husband, and conspired against thy
lord. Alexandra wept also as though it had been for the wickedness that her
daughter had committed: thinking suerly to please the king by that means, and
to bleare his eyes, if peradventure he might suffer her to live til she might
have opportunity to poison him. Marimi thus going to execution held her peace,
and looked nether to the right hand nor to the left: nor yet feared death any
thing knowing that she was innocent in deed and thought, and therefore God would
render her a good reward in the world to come. Wherefore she bared her neck
without fear, and they cut of her head, sheding the innocent blood. But God
made no delay in punishing the same: for there fell a sore plague and
pestilence in the house of Herod, so that his chief servants, his noble
women and concubines died sore thereof. Yea throughout all Judea reigned the
pestilence vehemently: which affliction all Israel knew well enough chanced
unto the^ for the blood of Marimi. They cried therefore unto the lord,
saying: Will thou forth offense of one man deal so cruelly with the hole
congregation? The lord took pity therefore vp^^ the land, and withore we the
plague from the people. The king repented him also that he had shed blood
without cause: and love so grew in his heart, that he was sick and at deaths
door. Then Alexandra Marimies mother sought means how to poison him. Which
being uttered unto the king: he commanded to apprehende her, and to kill her.
In this manner dealt Herod with all the posterity of the Machabees, leaving
none alive that were called by ye name. He put to death also Joseph the busband
of Salumith. The king had two sons Alexander and Aristobulus, by Marimi his
wife. They were both at Rome when their mother suffered, for their father the
king had sent them thither to learn the Romain tongue. When they heard
tidinges of their mothers death, they wept and mourned for her: hating their
father for his rcueltie. Sone after, ye king their father recovered of his
sickness, was established in his kingdom, builded strong cities, and rose to
great prosperity. In the. ^iii. year of his reign, there fell a great dearth
in the land, wherefore the king took out of his treasure much gold and
silver, and precious stoones, wherewith he sent into Egypt and procured plenty
of corn: and refres^hyng with bread all that lackt and was in distres of
hunger: yea, he spared not his own propre goods. And not only to ye
Israelites showed he this liberality: but also to all that came unto him out of
other strange nations, hearing of his renoume. Moreover in all his wars he
had good fortune. Besides this he thought it good to renew the house of the
sanctuary: whereupon he deliberated with the Israelites, to have their advise
for the building of it after the same quantity and measure that Salolomon king
of Israel builded it. For ye Jews returning from captivity in the time of
Coresch, Cirus.
began to build it after the measure ye Coresch prescribed the^, and not as it
was before. The people of Israel hearing that the king was purposed to pull down
the temple to the ground, and build it a fresh: they made him none answer,
fearing left when he had pulled it down, he would not be so hasty to build
it up again. But the the king perceauing what they feared in their minds,
said: he would not flack the matter, nor rest till he hade brought it to
pass. He said moreover, that he would take out of his treasure plenty of gold
and silver, and give it to grauing: also precious stones, stones of Thasies,
and marble. To the carpenters also and masons, he would deliver timber, and
stones, gold and silver, brass and iron, to make all things necessary to the
work. Wherefore if he pulled down the house, he was able to build it
straight ways again. So he pulled down the house and repaired it again and
finished it, in length a hundred cubits, in breadth likewise a hundredth
cubits, and in height a hundredth cubits, all of white marble: so that the
whole height of the stone work was in all a hundredth and.xx. cubits. For the
foundation was.xx. cubits within the ground, and a hundredth above. The
breadth of every stone was.xii. cubits, and the thicknes thereof.viii.
cubits, every stone was of like bigness. The gates of the house he covered
with fine gold and precious stoones finely set therein: the thresholdes were
of silver and ye tops also. He made also a vine of gold a marvelous cunning
piece of work, the arms thereof or bigger branches were glittering gold, the
lesser branches, slips, or latest shutes of gold, sumwhat red: and al above
was yelow gold, whereupon hong clusters of cristal. The vine was so great yt it
weied a thousand pound weight of pure gold. In all the world was not the like
to be seen. He made also a porche, and before the porche ii, walls of silver
marvelous cu^ningly wrought. Behind ye house toward ye west he made a court
of.c. l. cubits long, and a. C. in breadth: which was paued with pure marble.
Toward the south and north, the length of the court was also Cl. cubits, and
a. C. in breadth. He erected in it also. C. l. pillars of white marble in four
orders. The length of one order was fortye cubits, and every pillar was.xl.
cubits hie, and three cubits thick. The pillars were all of like measure, as
the court of ye north side and of the South was also of like measure, with all
the pilloures thereof. Toward the east the court contained. D. ccxx. cubits,
even to the broke Cedron. No man ever se the like building in all the world. In
the extreme parts of the courts he made also walks and and galeries of such
height: that they ye walked therein might easily se the waters running in the
broke Cedron, by the space of a cubit. Between the porch and the house also (as
though it were a veil or perticion) the king made a wall of silver, of half a
handful thick. In the which was a door of beaten gold, and upon the gate a
sword of gold of xii. pound weight. There were certain poses graven in the
sword, as this. What stranger so ever approaches nie her, let him die for
it. So the things that Herod made in the temple were wonderful: nether was
there ever hard of in all the world any king that was able to make such a
building. When the work was finished, the king sent to Sarons his pastures
for his Cattle: from whence were brought him three hundredth young Bull^ckes,
and very many sheep, according to his Princelye estate. So then they
dedicated and and hallowed the house with great ^oy and gladness. There was one
certain day in the year, when as the king was ever accustomed to make a
great feast to all his court, to al his nobles, and sages in Israel. Against
that self same day the king was mineded to finishe his works, which made
both him more glad and al his people. The same also commanded he to be done
in all the provinces of his kingdom, sending his letters by his poastes to the
noble men, captains, and preside^tes of the provinces, that they should observe
ye dai after the same manner every year. The people also yt were flitted into
their enemies countries: their head rulers and captains came out of eueri
cou^tri far and ners to see the house and the king: for they could never
believe it til they had seen it: and when they had seen it, it exc^aded far
that they had heard of it. These things done, the kings two Sons
Alexander and Aristobulus which he had by Marimi, came home from Rome to
Jerusalem in a great heat and fury, with a strong company, yea their hearts
were very hautye also: for Alexander the elder had married the king of
Capadocies daughter, and Aristobulus the daughter of Salumith the king his
fathers sister. These coming to Jerusalem, went not to the court to do their
duty to the king their father, neither would se him, whereby the king gathered
they went about some mischief against him. Moreover, all his men gave him
warning to take heed of them, and to keep his power or guard about him. He had
had a wife of base stock out of the country, before he came to the kingdom,
by whom he had a son named Antipater. And when he had put Marimi his beloved
wife to death, he called home his wife which he had disdained before, to his
court. Wherefore now saying the two sons of Marimi hated himhe appointed
Antipater his son to be his heir apparent, and to raise his estimacion, gave
him al his treasure, made him Lord and ruler of all that he had, affirminge
that he should reign after him. This Antipater had a subtle wit and a crafty,
for he said dailye to his father. If it like your majesty whereto should you
give me al these things, when as these two lions shall be ever in my top, and
ready to destroy me. By such surmised means he raised discord and hatred
between them and their father. Albeit the king was loathe to hurt his two
sons. Not long after he took his journey to Rome to Octauian and his son
Alexander waited upon him, hoping ye Octauian would be a means for him to turn
his fathers hatred from him, and put al malice out of his mind. When the king
was come thither, Octauian reioysed much of his co^uring, saying: I have
thought long to se thee. To whom have thou left the land of Judah? Herod
answered, for the obedience that I owe unto my Lord the Emperor, I am come to
declare him my chances with this my son his servant. So he told him the
whole matter from the beginning to the end. Then Octauian Augustus blamed the
young manne because he hated his father. The young man answered. How can I
otherwise do? How can I forget the most chaste womb that bare me, which was
of the holy stock? If I forget my mother that was slain giltlesse and
without crime: then let me forget my righthand. These and such like spoke the
young manne not without tears in the presence of Octauian, so that his bowels
was much moved: and the noble men also that were about Octauian could not
abstain from wepinge, but lamented greatly. Octauian first reproved Herod
for his great transgression and cruelty: then labored to pacify the yo^g
manne with comfortable words, and biddinge him honor his father, and submit
him self unto him. When he had done as he was willed (for he would not strive
against the Emperoures commandment). Octauian took the young man by the hand,
and put it into Herodes bosom. Then his father kissed him and embrased him, so
that they wept each of them. After that they took their leave and departed
from Octauian, who comforted them, and gave them a gift, committinge it into
Herodes hands. Herod yet perceived that the hatred of the children of Marimi
would not be apeased. Whereupon when he came home to Jerusalem, he called
together al thelders of Israel and said unto the^: I had determined once to
place one of my sons captain over the people of the Lord, but I might not do
it without the consent of Octauian Augustus. Now therefore I have appointed
my.iii. sons, and have divided my kingdom equally emongst them. Help ye the^
against their enenmies, but in no wise shall ye help one of the^ against
another. And if ye perceive any breach of trendship between them, do that lies
in you to take it away. Whereunto he made them swear presentlye in Jerusalem:
and the bond made, each man departed home to his house. But for all this the
hatred between Antipater and his two brethren was nothing diminished: for he
feared them because they were of the house of Chasmonani, and alied with kings
of great power: he suborned therefore false accusers to say unto the king, that
the young men, sons of Marimi, were determined to destroy him. Likewise he set
variance between Salumith and the^: for she was in greater estimacion then he:
in so much that the king did nothing without her counsel. The same
wroughte he also between Pheroras the kings brother and them. But to Salumith
he said: do thou not consider how the sons of Marimi know yt their
mother was put to death by thy counsel. Therefore if they may bring to pass
to make the king away: they will hew thee to pieces. But when the young men herd
of this: they came before the king, and swear they never intended to hurt their
father, and with weping they persuaded the king that he believed them, and they
got his favor again. Whereat Antipater was not a little displeased: wherefore he
hired falls witnesses to say they saw Alexander the kings son upon a
certain night with his sword drawn before the kings palaice, mindinge to
murder Antipater. He suborned also certain of the kings servants to
witness against Alexander, that he should give them great rewards to allure
them to his pleasure, and to abuse them in filthy buggery, which they refused.
More over, that he desired them to poison the king, which they would not also
agree to do. Whereupon the king was sore displeased toward him, commaundinge
not only him, but all that took his part or defended his integritye: to be
apprehended and put in prison, that execution might be done upon them. Then
Alexander writ unto Archelaus his father in law, desiring him to come to
Jerusalem to his father Herod. This Archelaus was a very wise man and a
notable counseler. When he was come to Jerusalem, Herod was very glad of his
coming: and demanded what matters brought him thither at that present. He
answered: I have heard that Alexander thy son, and my son in law, has
attempted to rebel against thee: it is not possible but my daughter his wife
should be accessarye of this thing, and yet she has not showed it unto the:
wherefore I utterly detest her, as one yt has conspired against thee. Yet
nevertheless I know well that for the love thou bear unto me, thou would
spare her: for this cause am I come unto thee yt when thou have put thy son
to death, I also may slay my daughter. For it is better that we should make
them away, then they us. Herod hearing this was very glad and gave credit to
his friendship. When Archelaus perceived that Herod had a good opinion of him:
he altered his communication, saying to the king: First let us diligently
examine and well try the cause, forasmuch as there are many false witnesses
and lyinge persons in the world: and let us not shed innocent blood upon an
vncertaintye. For Archelaus knew that Herod had given to light credit, and
how he was ready to hear an evil tale, which was the cause of all the
mischief that befell to the people of his house. Well, Herod thought his
counsel good. One of them that accused the kings children was Pheroras the
kings brother: and to say the truth he was the chief of all. Herod loved
Archelaus the king of Cappadocia as him self: whithe Archelaus perceiuinge,
turned his talk to rebuke the king, saying: Thou art now waxen old, and
well stricken in years: thou suffrest these backebiters to rule thee, who stir
thee to work all these mischiefs in thy house. Yea Pheroras thy brother
has falslye provoked thee against thy sons.

When Pheroras heard these words, he was sore afraid: for in deed he had
seduced ye king. Therefore came Pheroras to Archelaus and besought him to save
his life. Archelaus answered him: if thou will obtain pardon for thy
wyckednes, come and fall before his feet and confess that thou have spoken
falsely against his sons: then will I promise thee that he shall be merciful unto
thee, and to his sons. Pheroras did so, confessed yt he had falsely accused
the kings sons. Then Archelaus besought the king for pardon, and he granted
it. After that he entreated him that the young men might be dismissed and
delivered out of prison, which the king commanded to be dooen. The young men
therefore came to the kings presence, and fell down before his feet: and the
king was loving unto them, embrased them, and kissed them. He made great joy also
that Archelaus came in so good an hour unto him: to whom he gave for a
gift.vii. hundredth pounds weight of gold, many precious stones, and
concubines, and dimis^ed him. But Antipater again suborned false accusers, and
write counterfaite letters in the name of the kings sons to one of the
captains, declaringe how they would conspire and kill the king: and by such
means he increased the enemities between them and their father diverse ways,
that the king commanded them to be put in prison, and most strong irons to be
laid upon them. Besides this, Antipater had surprised and won the hearts of the
kings chief rulers and servants, that they suborned his barber to bear false
witness against Alexander, how that he hired him to kill the king at such
time as he should shave his beard. Wha^ the king heard his barbar speak, he
was wonderfullye troubled in his mind, in so much that he said: I am wearye of
my life, to hear these pickthanckes that open mine ears and fill my head with
tales. I can do no way better then to give charge, that who soever bringes me
any such tales hereafter of any bodi, he shall suffer death for it. Wherefore he
commanded the barber to be slain, and his two sons to be brought forth and
hanged upon gallows, sheading their innocent blood. Then reioysed Antipater,
supposing him self to be as sure of the kingdom as though he had it in his
hands. When as he was not aware that although he were never so hie aloft, yet
was there one above higher then he: who considered his doings. Alexander had
two sons, Thigarum and Aristobulus. And Aristobulus had three sons, Tigraues.
Herod Agrippa and Alexander. When the king returned to Jerusalem, (for he
was in Samaria by the lake side, when his sons were put to execution) he
commanded that his nephews should be brought to the court, and taking pity
of them: embrased and kissed them, weping very sore both he and all his
servants. For it greatly repented him of the heinous deeds that he had done.
But wha^ the time of the mourning was past, he caused to call all the chief of
Israel together and said unto them: I am now grown in age and waxen gray
headed, certain how shortly I shall die. I se here before me these little
fatherles children, which I never can behold without great anguishe of my
mind. For when I look upon them, I call to my remembrance what great damage I
have done unto their fathers in my rage and headlong furiousnes. Now therefore
I would commit them to the fuicion and custody of some man that might be a
patron and as father unto the^ to succor them continually to his power. All
the people answered, that he had well spoken. He spoke therefore unto his
brother Pheroras. Thou shall be their patron and defendour, and shall give thy
daughter to Thigarus Alexanders son. He commanded also his son Antipater
to give his daughter to Herod the son of Aristobulus. And the marriages were
made in the kings presence. When Antipater marked the love that the king bare
toward his nephews: he began to be in great care, for Thegarus Alexanders
son had a graundfather by the mother side, a king of great power, namely
Archelaus king of Cappadocia. He falls down therefore at the kings feet to
dissolve and break the friendship yt he bare toward his nephews, and to leave
speaking in their cause as he had done: but he prevailed nothing. Therefore he
left his father and went to Pheroras the kings brother: made a confederacy
with him. Then desired him to frustrate the bond that was between him self and
Herod, and also between him and Thigarus the son of Alexander that was
hanged. So Pheroras came to the king, turned his mind, and dissolved the
marriages. This done, Pheroras and Antipater that sat upon the kings throne,
were become great friends, banketting one the other day and night, and
deuisinge their matters. When this came to the kings ear, he was sore afraid
of their trains, and commanded that his brother Pheroras should never more
come in his sight. Antipater his son was sent to Octauian Augustus to
establishe the kingdom unto him, and to enter in league with him. For Herod
was so old yt he could not go. Antipater iourneying toward Rome, passed
through Egipte, desirous to see it before the death of his uncle Pheroras. And
as he travailed by the hie ways of Egipte, there came a certain marchaunte
having a Vyall in his hand close covered, which cried saying: who will bie a
thing at a great price before he see it, or know what it is? Antipater
meruailed at his words, and asked him what was in his Vyal. But the seller
told him not what it was, before he had bought it and paid dear for it.
Then whispered he in his ear, tellinge him that it was a strong poison, that
would kill one out of hand. This Vyal Antipater sent to Pheroras to be kept
until he returned from Rome. In the mean season Pheroras died, and his wife
hid the Vyall. After when Antipater came home again from Rome: Pheroras wife
and he fell at variance, insomuche that she objected unto him yt he was the
cause that Pheroras was banished the kings presence, the sorrow whereof was his
death. On the other side Antipater went about to accuse her, sowinge discord
between her and the king, to stir him against her. He suborned also a certain
Ennuch or gelded parson to go unto the king and inform him, how that at what
time as he took displeasure with Pheroras his brother and banished him his
presence: Pheroras procured a strong poiso^ and gave it to his wife,
commanding her to destroy the king therewith. The king hearing this was
wroth with the Ennuche, and said: I searched for that venom long a go when
it was noysed that my household servants would give it me to drink: but I
could not find the thing to be true. Yea, I have been to rash in such
matters: for I put my wife Marimi to deaths without a cause, and Alexandra my
mother in law, with my two children. When Antipater heard that the king
credited not the Ennuche, he made suit to the king to send him to Octauian the
second time: for he was a fearde for the Vial that was in Pheroras wifes
house. He had written also with his hand how that he sent it, intending
therewith to poison the kings sons children. But he that prepares a pit for
another, often times falls into it him self. So desiring the king to send
him, he let him go. After this the king commanded to make search if the
Ennuches words were true or no: he sent first for all Pheroras household
servants, examined them whether ever they could perceive that Pheroras was
in mind to hurt him. They all swear no. Then the king commanded to scourge
them very fore, but they confessed nothing: although some dyed under their
hands in the examination. Some he ordered with diverse kind of torments of
some he caused to pluck out all their teethe. And as he hade scourge a
certain woman servant, which had been very trusty to Pheroras, at length
when she could no le^ger stand for strokes, she cried out and said: The holy
and blessed God reue^g us of Rostios the kings wife Antipaters mother, Dosis
Antipaters mother.
which is cause of this. The king hearing these words, bad let her alone, she
will disclose all. Then spoke she. Antipater made feasts every foot for thy
Brother Pheroras and him self: and as they eat and drank, they devised how
to poison thee, specially when as Antipater was going to Octauian. For they
said: Except we destroy him, he will destroy us, as he has done all the children
of his house. Moreover, he loves the children of his sons that were put to
death, which grow apace: and it is possible he may change his mind, and
make one of them king. Antipater also said to thy brother. The king makes as
though he were much my friend, but I trust him not. He gave me (says he) a. C.
pound weight of gold, but all that satifieth not me. When the king heard
this he told how he had given Antipater this gold secretly. The woman said
moreover. There is yet a Vyal of strong poison in Pheroras house, that thy
son sent out of Egipte. Streightwaye the king sent to Pheroras wife, that she
should bring him the Vyall of poison her own self. When she espied ye kings
Ennuches come to fetch her whether she would or no: she gate her up to the
top of the house and cast her self down headlonge to kill her self, because
she would not see the king nor abide his torments. But she died not thereof,
whereupon the kings messengers brought her in a horse litter, and set her
before the king. Then she confessed unto him, how Antipater his son had
co^spired with Pheroras to kill him with a strong poison that he had bought in
Egipte, and sent to Pheroras when he want to Octauian. And how that Pheroras
being at the point of death, repented him thereof, charging that we should never
give that venom to Antipater, but pour it out upon the ground, that the king
might not be poisoned therewith: and I did as he bad me, cast it out al save a
little that I kept in the glase botome, for I ever feared that which is now
come to pass. Then at the kings commandment, the Vyall was brought forth
before him, and there was a little of the venom left, wherefore they gave
better creadite to her words: so that the king was content with her, and bad
his Physicians heal her, and she recovered. This done, the king write to
Antipater to come home with speed, because I am old (says he) and weak,
uncertain how shortly I shall dye. The king had yet also two other sons at
Rome, Archelaus and Polimus. So when Antipater writ to answer his fathers
letters: he signified unto him yt his.ii. sons had diffamed the king and
slaundred him unto Octauian. But the king answered him: come and bring them
with thee, and I will order them as thou think good. Notwithstanding
Antipater dalied and delaied for the space of.vii. months, to se if he might
learn somewhat of his fathers doings, but he could hear nothing. The messengers
that his father had sent, lay upon him every day and drged him to make speed.
Therefore at the.vii. months end he took his journey toward Judea, and came
to Cesarea. There heard he that his father had taken displeasure with his
mother and banished her the court^ but he could not learn what should be the
cause: therefore he was stroke^ in such fear, that he would have gone back
again and left his journey. But they that waited upon him, being desirous to
go home to their houses and family, crafted with him, and persuaded him that if
he should now return back out of his way: he should iustifye his enmies
saiyngs to be true. But if thou come once to thy fathers presence (say they)
who loves the so intirelye: thou shall prevail against thy foes, and get the
upper hand of them that trouble thee. So he followed their counsel, and came
to Jerusalem. When he entered into ye city, no man came forth to meet him, nor
once to bid him welcome home. For all the people hated him for his lies,
slau^ders, peruers and wicked counsel, but chiefly for fear of ye king Yet went
he forward to the court, although with a fearful heart. When he came to the
kings presence, he fell down and did his duty: but the King turned away his
face, and could not abide to look upon him. He went home therefore to his house
with a heavy heart, hanging down his head, and hidynge his face. There his
mother to^de him how their counsel concerning the vial of poison, was
bewraied: and how the king was wonderfully incensed toward him, that
increased yet his fear more and more. The next day by the kings commandment
he was brought^ forth, and before all the chief of Israel assembled together,
the king sat to judge Antipaters cause. There rehearsed the king unto the^ his
sons lewdnes and lies, how he had seduced him and stirred him to kill his
children that were of the king blood, far better and more virtuous then he:
in so much yt with a loud voice the king burst out and bewailed his wife
Marimi, who^ he put to death without a cause, and his two Sons, that they
that were far of might hear him. Then Antipater lift up his head, and began to
speak craftily and subtly. First he forgote not to give gentle words to
pacify his fathers wrath, (but that he could not do.) After he fell to
entreaty in such sort, that all the nobles were moved to pity, and bewailed
his evil Fortune, not without tears: save only Niraleus the kings serretary,
who loved the kings children that were put to death. He rebuked them all that
were sorry for the calamity of Antipater, crying with all his might: where are ye
Alexander and Aristobulus yt were slain giltlesse? Lift up your heads and
behold this bloody and wicked man fall into the pit which he him self made: see
how how his foot is catched in the net that he laid his self for other. Mark
ye not how your maker reuengeth your death and requires yourbloude at his
hand in the time of his destruction? For the wicked man is spared until the
time of his death. So the king him self very much infensed, sent to fetch a
condemned person out of prisone: who being brought before them and tasting a
little of the poison in ye Vial, fell down stark dead forthwith. Then the king
commanded Antipater to be carried to prison, and to be laid in the strongest
irons. The.xl. year of his reign, which was the.lxx. year of his age, king
Herod fell sick, and no remedy, no physic could be found to help him.
Nether his servants nor phisicia^s could procure him any rest, so grievously
came his disease upon him, with lack of breath, and through the anguish of ye
manifold evils yt had happened unto him by his own folk. Whe^upon he cried
out, saying: Woe may he be^, that has none left to succeed him in his
kingdom: nor none to go before his Coffin, and mourn for him at his death.
Then called he to his remembrance, his wife Marimi, and his two sons,
rehearsynge them by name, howlyng and weeping still continually. Upon a certain
day when his sickness came sore upon him: he called to his servants to fetch
him some pleasant apple to see if he might comfort his heart: and when they
had brought it he axed for a knife to cut it, one was brought him. Then he
gathered his strength unto him and rered him self up upon his left arm, and
perceyuyng his life to be full of sorrow and lamentacion: he took the knyfe
with his right hand and fetched his way to thrust it into his belly. But his
servants stepped to him, and caught his arm, holdyng his hands, and would
not suffer him to do it. Then wept he sore and all his servants that the
voice was heard out of the court, and shortly all the city was in a stir,
saying: the king is dead, the king is dead. Antipater being in the prison,
heard the noise, and asked what business is this? they answered him, the king
is dead. Then was he glad, and rejoiced wonderfullye, saying unto the Iaylo^^^^
Strike of mine irons and let me dute that I may go the palaice, and Iwyll
remember thee with a good turn* The keeper answered: I fear least the king be
yet altue. I will go therefore and know the truth, and come again by and by.
Antipater saw he could not get loose, wept for anger at the keeper. So the
keeper came to the court, which as it was told to the king: he commanded him
to be brought to his presence. Then the king asked him. What did Antipater (I
pray thee) when he heard this mourning, and that I was dead? The keeper
answered. He was very glad thereof, and when I would not smite of his irons
and let him out, he wept for anger. The king crted out unto his lords See how
he hates me being yet in prison: if he were here, he would do what he could
to kill me. He would not do as my servants did, make haste to wrest the
knife out of my hand. As true as God lives, he shall never have that he gapeth
for. So the king commanded he should be put to death. And there was never a
man that would intreat^ for him or desire the king to the contrary, but every
man was glad of his destruction. The king commanded the kepar to bring him
forth to the market place: which dooen, his head was smiten of, and so he
lepte, besides his purpose. The king commanded moreover his body to be taken
and carried to the city of Ankalia, there to be buried and not in the city.
That done, Hircaniu^.
and the people returned from the burial: the king sent to call all the nobles
of Israel together, and enforsinge his strength, he sat up in his bed, and
commanded to call his son Archelaus, upon whom he laid his hands and made
him king over Israel. Then showted every man: God save the king, god save ye
king. The king lived.v. dais after the execution of Antipater: then fainted and
died. The time yt he reigned over Israel was forty years. He was a worthy
warrior, a wise and a prudent man, a goodly man of person, having God on his
side. He loved ever the sages Hillell and Samai with their companies. He
enriched the second house more then all other kings, and was more liberal
then all the kings that were before him. His gifts and rewards were rich:
for he counted gold and silver as chafe and stones. He kept Israel in quiet
and peace from al their enemies. He builded also a more royal temple then did
king Salemon. But he made the yoke of tribute and exaction in Israel heuier:
and gave open ear to evil tongues. He was a cruel bloudshedder of poor and
innocente persons. He willed before his death that they should bury him in the
city Erodion, two days journey and a half from Jerusalem. So they put him
in a coffin covered with gold, set here and there with precious stones. The
bed under him was wrought with gold and full of precious stones. Likewise, upon
his head was a cloth of reins powdered with precious stones, and upon yt a
royal crown, made fast to the left side of the coffin: and upon the right
side was the regal scepter. Upon the bear was also a clothe of reins very
thick powdered with precious stones, cristal, amethists, and very many
sapphires. Then all his chief men of war went about him in their coats of
fence, and drawn swords in their hands, with helmes on their heads, as in
time of war. After the^ came Archelaus his son that was made king. Then
followed him all the people. There were fifty of his servants that went
about the bear with every man a chafing dishe of gold in his hand, wherein
they burnt sweet woods and perfumes, every foot casting upon the hearse pure
mi^rhe, as many as went about him. He was borne by certain great lords and
noble me^ of Israel upon their sholders, going leasurably and with a majesty,
til they came to Erodio^, where they buried him with great honor yt like was
never done to any king. These things done, there resorted together such as
hated him, and were weary of their own lives whiles Herod lived, reioysyng
that they had escaped his hands, saying: we have looked till our eyes bleared,
waytinge for the death of Herod that tirant and blood sheder, that oppressed
us with such heavy yokes, and left us nothing to live on, for the great
tributes and taxes yt he laid upon us. Yet now Archelaus his son is worse
then he. Wherefore they co^sulted together, and cast their minds and good
wills toward Antipater the son of Salumith the kings sister, one of the
blood of Chasnonani, and went with him to Oct. Augustus: requesting him to
translate the kingdom from Archelaus to Antipater, but he would not grant
the^ their sewte. Yea, rather he confirmed and assured the kingdom to
Archelaus. Who wrought wickedness in ye sight of the Lord: for he married his
brother Alexanders wife that had children by Alexander: and committed other
many great offenses. The.ix. year of Archelaus reign, it chanced upon a
night, he dreamed a dream. Him thought he saw.ix. eyres of corn very good and
full grow upon one stalk, the^ came a great ox and slopt them up all at once
at one bit: by and by he waked, and perceived it was a dream. Therefore calling
one of the Sages or Pharisees unto him: he showed them his dream. The wise man
said: This is the interpretacio^ of it. The nine eyres fresh and full, be
the.ix. years which hither to thou have reigned. The great Ox is the great
king Octauian Augustus. This year thou shall be removed from thy kingdom
because thou have neglected the word of God, and have married thy brothers
wife. To this Archelaus answered him neither good nor bad. Within five days
after Octauian came toward Jerusalem: and when Archelaus went to mete him: he
put him in prison, deposed him from his kingdom of Israel, and made Antipas his
brother king in his stead. He turned his name also and called him Herod That
done he returned to Rome, whiles Antipas was king, died themperor Octauian
Augustus the.lvi. year of his reign, and Tiberius Caesar succeeded him. This
Antipas also wroughte wickedness and sundry abominations, more then any yt was
before him: for he took his brother Philips wife from him, which had al ready
children by Philip. For this shamful deds, rabbi Ihon ye hie priest rebuked
him, Ihon baptist.
wherefore Antipas put him to death. There was at yt time one Jesus a wise man
(if it be lawful to call him a man: Jesus Christ.
for he was a worker of wonderful and strange works, and a teacher of such
me^ as gladly did hear the truth, and had many disciples both of the Jews,
and also of the ge^tils:) This man was Christ. who^, after he was accused of
the chief rulers of our nation, and condemned by Pilate to be crucified, they
nevertheless ceased not to love which loved him even from ye beginning. To
these he appeared the. 3. day alive, according as the prophets by divine
inspiratio^ had told before, as well of this, as also of many other wonderful
things which should be done by him. And eue^ unto this day the christian sect
which took their name of him does continue. Against this man Antipas of whom we
spoke before, came Tiberius Emperor of Rome, to who^ when Antipas resorted: he
apprehended him, laid him in irons, and sent him into Spain where he died.
Archelaus also yt was deposed before died in the time of this Tiberius reign.
The^ Tiberius made Agrippa (ye son of Aristobulus who^ Herod put to death)
Antipas brother king in his stead The time yt Antipas reigned over Israel
was.xi. years. In Agrippas time died Tiberias Caesar, and Caius succeeded him
This Caius called him self a god: and would suffer no man to worship any
thing in his empire but him self. He continued not long in his digniti, but
decayed and died. After him succeeded Claudius. Claudius being dead, Nero
Caesar was emperor, Agrippa reigned over Israel xxiii. years. In his time Nero
sore oppressed Israel by setting cruel preside^ts over the^, left them nothing
to live upon: besides that punished the^ with diverse torments, until at
length they were constrained to rebel against the Roman Empire, and Nero
Caesar, to rid them selves from under his subjection. And above all other one
Pilus president and captain of the Romain army most greuouslye oppressed
the Jews, and had done many things very wickedlye. For not only had he shed
innocent blood, ravished at his pleasure wifes, and deflored maids in the
cities of Judah: but also robbed with great cruelty every man of his goods. It
chanced that Beronice king Agrippas sister came at that time to Jerusalem of
devotion to visit the holy place. She seeing Pilus violently to oppress the
people, and for payment of exactto^s and tollage, to flea many of them, even at
the entrance of the temple: she came forth wepinge unto Pilus, besechinge him
to be favorable and spare the people for she pitied them very greatli. Yet
Pilus relented nothing, but when she was departed from him, he flouted and
mocked her, although she were the kings sister, and that in the temple of the
Lord. There was present at that time a valiant yo^g man, Eleasar son of
Ananie the hie priest: He, whiles his father was executing his office, could
not abide to se the Israelites so ordered at Pilus hands: but being enkindled
with a fervent zele sou^ded a tro^pet, whereby there assembled about him
forthwith diverse companies and bands of young me^, good warriors, by whose
aid he raised a great co^mocion, and encountered with Pilus and the
Romainsouldiours, of whom he made a great slaughter, prevailing much, and
getting at length thupper hand of Pilus, overthrew al his host, so that Pilus
was constrained to fle alone out of Jerusalem unto Egypt. In the way as he
fled, he chaunsed to mete with king Agrippa coming from Rome from Nero Caesar,
and going home into Judea: to whom Pilus declared what had happened him through
the youth of the Jews at Jerusalem. And as Agrippa had passed Egypt and drue
toward Jerusalem: his sister Beronice directed her letters unto him, moving him
to toyn with ye Jews and to aid them. The people also came wholly the space
of.lx. miles out of the city of Jerusalem to mete him, and fell down flat
before him crying, God save our king Agrippa. But the king studied al he might
to procure quietness and peace to ye city and people. So he entered in to
Jerusalem accompanied with a couple of noble me^ of Rome, worthy captains who^
he brought with him in his train. And when he came into the midst of the city,
the people cried mainlye out upon him, saying: Deliver us o king, and let thy
hand and help be on our side to succoure us, for we will never more be under
the Romans subjection. The king hearing this pitied the people very much:
not withstandinge he was not content that they were mineded to rebel against
the Roman Empire. Wherefore he called together the people at thentrance of the
court of the temple, where were present the elders of Israel and all the
chief men, with the hie priest Anany: declared unto the^ the power of the
Romans, the strength of their kingdom, and what nations round about them
they had subdued, in such sort as no remain of them was left. Wherefore he
besought ^them not to provoke the Romans, nor to destroy the people
remaining of Israel. He added moreover. Harke^ my brethren, says he: I know
well inoughe that there reasteth in your hearts a great grief, and I my
self am full of sorrow and anguishe, that we are not of power able to
withstand the Romans. All be it if ye will be ruled by my counsel, ye shall
find a redress for this matter. For where as counsel is and good
deliberation. there is safetye and things come to prosperous success. Ye shall
sustain for a while the yocke of the Roman captains, til I may certify
Nero of the matter by mi letters and intrete him to rid us of these rulers. I
beseech you be not to hastye of liberty: Many sekinge liberty, have fallen
into further captivity and greater bondage. There be amongste our people
many evil disposed persons, whose delight is in wars, for it is their whole
study: amongst who^ many good me^ do also pearish. Wherefore hear my words, as
for them that be wise may perceive the matter them selves: they that lack
experience, let them learn wisdom at my sayings. Keep therefore silence,
which shall be as well to mine, as to your own commodity, for I shall not need
to streine my self but speak the softlier, with less pain: and ye on the
other side may the better hear and understand what I say. If ye hold not your
peace, ye shall have two discommodities: ye shall interrupte my communication,
and let your selves from hearing. But now to the purpose, ye shall be content
and suffer til I write to Rome of these matters, that Caesar may remove these
evil rulers, and send us the^ that be more humain and gentle. If ye may have
once such, then shall ye not think your selves in bondage, but in liberty, and
worthilye: for then only is servitude grievous, when as the ruler is an unjust
manne and wicked. Now therefore stay your selves: quarrel not with them, for
although they be wicked, yet will they be ashamed to do wrong openly, as that
that they do, they do it secretly. But if ye should accuse the^ to much, they
would rub their foreheads and do it openly without all shame: so should you
make of your judges and rulers, your open enemies. But it were far better to
suffer an unjust governor, then a just enemy. For the one robs men
privily: the other is an open destroier, provoke them not therefore. Consider
the wild beasts that be under man's power, and be kept in cheynes, as Lions,
Bears, and Leopardes: if a man let them alone, they are quiet and harm no
man. But if a man go to their dens and anger the^, then they will flee upon
him and worry him, and other to that be present. The same ye may perceive in a
sever and an agew, which if a man will go about to cure at the beginning, he
shall make it more grievous: but if he will remedy it by leisure, ye seruencie
of it will easly be quenched. Now therefore refrain your selves, take heed ye
set not Caesar in your tops, and the hole Romain empire. Caesar coueteth not
your harm, neither sent he unto you these rulers to hurt you. His eyes can not
see from east to west, nor his hand reatch from Rome hither, for it is flesh
and blood. But if ye will abide til I may send ambassadors to Caesar, I doubt
not but I shall remove these rulers, and rid you of the^ peaceably without any
war or blood shed. If ye be utterly determined to resist the Roman Empire,
you shall understand you be in no wise able to do it: for god is every where
on their side, so that they be Lords throughout all the world, and all people
serve them: and shall, till their end also come. But if ye will not do this
for your own sakes: yet do it for your own countries sake, your children and
wifes, the sanctuary and priests, whom ye are bounden to love and spare,
least ye cast away and undo all them at once. I beseech you take my words
in good part, for I have spoken nothing but that that is for your wealth, and
that may further our peace with the Romans, which I most wish. If you
will be ruled and choose peace, I will take your part and do the best I can
for you: but if ye will needs have wars, ye shall have it alone for me, I
will not meddle with you. With this Agrippas fell on weping, and so did also all
the elders with him, and the men of most wisdom, the chief in all Israel:
yea, Ananie the hie priest also could nor refreine from tears.
Notwithstanding Eleasar his stout son with his routes of warlike young men
about him, they wept not at all, nor would harken or give any ear to holsom
counsel: but all at once with their drawn swoordes, violently rushed upon the
Romayne capitaines that came with Agrippas, slew the^, their men, and all the
multitude yt was with him in Jerusalem and Judea. The elders in Judea with the
wisest and godliest Israelites, seeing what was done, departed from Jerusalem,
fearing Nero and the cruelty of the Romans. Therefore they took the toure of
Sion and remained there. For they would not be taken of the Romans to be of
the same confederacy with the other. The sedicious seeing that, took the
temple of the Lord. So dissension and ciuyll wars fell between the sedicious
and the auncie^tes. For when Eleasar heard the elders and heads of ye people
were fled to the mount Sion: he and his company set upon them, prevailed
against them, and slew a great meany of them. Agrippas perceiving the power of
the sedicious grew apace: he sent out of his camp where he lay without the
town, two valeaunt captains, one named Darius, ye other Philippus with six
thousand men, to succor those elders and sages that were desirous of peace.
These prevailed against Eleasar and the sedicious that took his part: made a
great slaughter of them, skirmishing for the space of seven days together, and
at the length put them to flight and pursewed them to the temple. From that
time forth the wars incresed more and more, between Eleazar and his
accomplices: and Agrippas with his host and the Sages elders and princes that
took their part. Upon a time when the captains of Agrippas entered the
temple: certain cut throat murderers waged by the sedicious, mixte the^
selves amongst the kings bands, and getting behind their backs, wounded
them with short daggers, that they had hid under their iackes, so yt the kings
souldioures having lances and great armed swords in their hands, such as
they use in the wars: could not weld them in the prease, by this means many
of them were slain, and the seditious gate the victory. Thus Darius and
Philippus with the Roman army were put to flight, and the elders with the
Sages yt were desirous of peace, departed out of the town, and fled to king
Agrippas. Then had Eleasar and the seditious the hole rule of the city, and
that to al their great damage. For the fury of the seditious increased to such
outrageousnes that they set a fire king Agrippas house that he had in
Jerusalem, spoiled al his treasure, and al yt was any thing worth, they
divided amongst the^. They burnte his books of accounts and bills of debts
euerychone yt were in his palaice. Beronices house also the kings sister they
set on fice: and they slew all the cunning artificers that were masters of the
kings works. So their rule and power in the city grew every day more and
more grievous then other.

IN those days dwelt the Jews and Aramites together in all the Cities of
Siria, amongst whom also war was moved, for the Cesarians brought the
Romans into the town against the Jews, and slew the^ as mani as they could
find in the town. The Damascians also conspired together to distroy all the
Jews that dwelt amongst the^, which thing they kept secret from their wives,
because for the most part they favored the Jews religion. Therefore the
Aramites upon a certain night armed for the purpose, beset all the ways and
entrances into the town, and the houses also, and slew about.x. M. of the
Jews coming upon them at unawares when they were in their beds, nothing
mistrustynge any such matter. When the Jews of Jerusalem heard how the
Aramites had dealt with the Jews in their country: suddenly they put them
selves in arms, and in a fury and rage like as it had been Lions and bears
that had lost their whelps, they ran to Damasco, burnt their holds, slew the
Damascians with the sword, man, woman, and child, eue^ the very sucking babes:
yea, their oxe^, sheep, camels, and asses, with all other cattle, leauinge
none alive. And thus they dealt with many cities of the Sirians, sleing and
killynge them, not sparyng either old or young: male, or female: but
distreyinge all in most cruel wise, even the the very infantes and sucklyngs
they haled from their mothers breasts and murdered them, in so much that all
the whole Land was full of stenche of the dead bodies that were slain, for
there was no man left to burye the carcases. So the Jews wasted all the la^d
of ye Aramits, and had destroyed it had not Castius a captain of the Romans
delivered Siria and the country of Zofa. The people therefore departed wholly
from Aram to return into Judea, and in the way they came by Scithopolis a
city of Siria, entending to besiege it, for it was yet left untouched, and was
very strong. At that time also Jews and Aramites dwelt together in it. The
Jews therefore that were without, offered peace to the Jews ye dwelt in the
town: but they refused it, and defied them, railinge at them, and for their
friendly offer acquitted them with opprobrious words, and with in^uries also.
For those Jews that dwelt in the foresaid city with the Aramits, loved
together like brethren, and for the more part they were of the Leuitical
tribe, stout men and hardy. The host of the Jews without the city, said
unto them: We come friendly unto you, and would aid you. The other Jews
within annswered: We will neither your friendship nor aid. The army of the
Jews hearing that, consented and agreed to raise their siege, to go to
Jerusalem, and there to remain. For they had a huge booty of goulde and
silver that they had gotten together of the spoils of Siria. After this, the
Sirians that dwelt in Scithopolis said one to another: Putcase the Jews
return again and make war upon us: surely if they should so do, these
Jews that dwell amongst us would join with them, and deliver up the City
into their hands, and then would they be revenged upon us, and distroy us as
they have done the other cities of Siria. Therefore they agreed to say unto the
Jews that inhabited the city with them: We understand your country men will
invade us again, and make war upon us: wherefore depart ye forth of the
city with your wives and children, and lodge in the wood nie unto the city,
till their army be gone again, and then you shall return unto us. The Jews
were content to fulfill their minds, went out of the city, and placed them
selves in the wood. There was amongst them a certain young man named
Schimeon, a good man of watre, fearce, big made, and very strong withal:
he in favor of the gentiles had slain many of the Jews, and sold much of
the people of God. For duringe the time that the Jews besieged Sithopolis: he
issued out continuallye, and skirmished with the host of the Jews, many times
puttinge them to flighte, and never would suffer them to waste the town or to
do any harm to the inhabitauntes thereof. Now as this Schimeon with his
father Saul an honest old man, and the reast of the people of the Jews that
dwelte in Scithopolis, remained all together boldly in the wood, without
mistrustinge any harm: the Romans joined with the Sirians in great number,
entered the wood and slew the Jews all that ever they could find, to the
number of.xiii. thousand. Schimeon him self with his father and their
families had pitched their tents nie unto a fair fountain yt was in the
wood, to whom when their ennemies came to slay them and to destroy their
hole families: Schimeon ran upon them with his drawn sweard, made a great
slaughter of them, and constreyned them to retire. But when as a huge
multitude environed him, and he perceived that all the reaste of the Jews were
slain, and he with his household only remained, nether saw he any way to
escape: he stepte upon a little hill with his naked swearde, saying: Harken
unto me ye Sirians and Romans and ye that dwell in Scithopoles, I will speak
unto you a few words full of lamentacion and sorrow. Now I perceive that
iustli and not without a cause ye make war against me, without any favor or
co^sideracion yt I have delivered you from the hosts of the Jews, and never
suffered the^ to do any displesure to you, your wives and children, nor to your
city as they had done to other cities of Siria. For I am he that for your sakes
have warred against my country men to please you withal: yea, both their
blood and mine own have I pledged unto you: and have kept immolated the love
of strangers, hatinge mine own people, of whom, for your pleasures I have
slain often both the fathers and the children: and now you render evil for the
good that I have done unto you. But in deed God of his just iudgmente has
stirred you up to reward me in this sort, to murder me that have so often
received you. Now therefore ye shall bear me witness that I shall sufficiently
and sharpli enough take vengeance of my self, not without rage and furye most
seuerly, because I have slain my fellows and friends. I will therefore likewise
slay my self to be avenged of my self for my brothers blood that I have shed:
and so shall I be a reue^ger of their blud. And ye shall well perceive me to be of
that hardiness and courage that rather then ye should slay me, and after boast
and brag how ye have killed Schimeon: I will bereue my self of my life and
punish the sheadinge of my brothers blood none otherwise then the law
punishes a murderer and a ma^queller. When he had spoken this, his eyes were
filled with blood and his face with rage, and so inflamed with fury, latynge
aparte all pity: ran and caught hold of his father, haled him out of the
wood and slew him, Then slew he his mother least she should entreat him for
the children, and be sorry for their sakes. That done, his wife came runninge of
her own accord, and held her neck down to the sword: least she should be
constrained to see her children die. Yea, Schimeons children came and offered
them selves to be slain: least they should see the death of their father, or
remain after him to be delivered to the ennemies. After this he slew all his
hole family, that not one of his should come into the hands of their enemies.
Finallye, he gathered their bodies together into one place like a valiaunte
stout warrioure, and then boldlye goarded him self upon his own sword,
least any man else should impare his strength, or boast that he had killed him.
All this Schimeon did with a great courage to take punishment of him self,
because he had bestowed his love rather upon strangers then upon his own
people, and to declare his force and manhood. So he died an abominable and
detestable death, save only it was an argument of his hauty mind and great
courage, as it is said before.

NOw when the Jews had thus rebelled against the Romans and slain their
souldioures and captains: king Agrippas went to Rome, and recounted unto Nero
Caesar the Emperor of Rome all that was happened. Whereupon Nero sent captain
Castius (that was at that time in Siria, and had made war upon the king of
Persia, had vanquished him and al his power, and subdued his dominyons to the
Romans,) and with him a puissante army of Romans, commanding him to go
into Judea to offer peace unto the people, to comfort them, and to bring them
again into league with the Romans if it might be. Castius therefore took his
journey toward Judea, whom Agrippas met in the way, and informed him what had
happened unto him of the Jews: how he had offered them peace and they would
none of it, how also they had burnte his palaice and sacked it. Castius
hearing that, was very glad that he had gotten such an occasion to revenge
the blood of the Romans and Sirians which the Jews had shed. Wherefore he
levied a mighti army and came to Cesarea. And whersoeuer he might espy the
goodliest buil dinges, those caused he to be burnte. From thence went he to
the city Iapho, which he besieged both by land and by water, and at length wan
it: where he slew in the streates eyghte thousand and four hundredth men.
After that he came to Iabes, where he first burnt all the Country about it,
and whom so ever he caught without the town, he slew them. But the citizins of
Zippori went out to mete Castius, and besought him of peace: whom he spared,
came not nie their town, nor slew any that dwelt in their country. The
sedicious Jews that were in the city of Zippori, hearing of Castius coming:
fled unto the mountains. But in the way they lighted upon part of Castius
army, whereof they slew.ii. hundred me^, and wounded their captain Glaphira.
Yet at length the sedicious were put to flight, and many of them, Glaphira
with his horsemen pursued, overthrew, and distroyed: the rest fled to the
mountains. Then Glaphira captain of Castius army went to Cesaria that was
subdued to ye Romans, there to cure his wounds yt the Jews had given him.
From thence went he to Antipire, which as he would have assaulted, perceived
it to be furnished with a great power of the Jews and sedicious. These
hearing that Castius also was coming, they went purposely to fight with him:
but perceiving that Castius power was very great: they determined to encounter
with him in the plain of Gibeon, 50. miles from Jerusalem. Whereupon the Jews
with their companies feigned them selves to flee, to the intent they might stale
the Romans after them. And within.vi. days they came to Gibeon, and there
rested. Castius pursued after with his whole host till he came to Gibeon,
which he besieged and assaulted also. It chanced then upon one of the
Sabbothes in the morning watch, the Jews (armed at al places) issued out of
the town to give their enemies a Camisado. So after they had given a token of
war, they marched toward the host of Castius, whereof they slew. 515.
horsemen, and fotemen 27. thousand, with the loss of only. 22. of their own
company. In that battle did well appear the valiantness of Mugbas a
captain of the Jews army. One Baudius also played the man at the same time:
for at the commandment of Eleasar the priest, chief of the sedicious, he set
the first foot within the Romans ca^pe. Then began the Jewish warriors to be
famous, after they had once so manfully encountered with the Romans. This done,
Castius and Agrippas sent their ambassadors yet once again to Jerusalem to
Eleasar the son of Anany the priest, chief of the rebels that were in Judea
and Jerusalem: requiring peace, and to come in league with Eleasar, least the
people the people of the Jews should be distroied by the Romans incursions
and invasions on every side. But Eleasar refused to hear the legates, and
slew one of them because he made to many words in persuadinge the peace and
league. Upon this, Eleasar assembled the priests and people together to go
out and fight with Castius. Castius perceiuinge how Eleasar and the people
were affected, and what minds they were of, how they had utterly conspired to
distroy the Romans yt were there, and to consume them clean, having a
sufficient trial also of the force and valiantness of the rebels: he
determined fullye to go to Rome, for he perceived he was not able to match
with the sedicious, neither his own power to be compared with theirs.
Wherefore he would go see what end should come of this wars, and what
counsel Caesar's majesty would give. Taking his journey therefore to the city
Iapho, he found there letters of the Romans, for thither was their army
come. From thence went he with them and his own host to Rome, and made
relation unto Caesar of such things as had chanced him: whereat Nero was
wonderfully abashed, and not only he, but all the people of Rome were soore
astonished to hear of the great puissant and valiantnes of the Jews. For the
which cause the wars ceased for that year, so yt the land of Judea was at
great rest and quietness ye year through Eleasars means the head rebel,
specially from ye hands of wicked Castius, yt had sworn to reueng the
Romans, and to quite the Jews: and that he would destroy all the Jews,
that none should be left alive. Therefore these are they that delivered Israel
in the time of the second temple out of the hands of their ennemies, what
time as wars were moved against the Jews and their country: what time also
commotions and tumultes began in Israel. The first business was made by
Antiochus the wicked king of Macedonia: who had determined, not to leave one
man in Israel. His mischeuousnesse proceeded so far, that he slew of the
people of God, the Sages and wise men, princes, elders, and young men, children
great and small, Israelites, Levites also and priests: until all the chief
men of Judah cast their heads together and went to Matthathias son of
Iochanan the hie priest in the mount of Modiith, where he had him self for
the iniquity of Antiochus and his rulers, cryinge upon him, and saying:
Deliver at this season the people of the Lord, and never think to escape thy
self, whiles the most wicked enemy rau^geth thus and runs upon thy people,
and sheadeth thy blood. For the blood of all Israel what is it but thy blood,
and the eyes of every man are fixed upon thee, hopinge that thou should
assist and aid them in this calamity, that they may find deliverance by thy
means. Mattathias hearing this, wept bitterly and said unto them: Fear ye
not, nor let these Macedonians dismay you: the Lord shall fight for you, be ye
only quiet. So the^ was Mattathias stirred, and delivered Israel out of the
hands of Antiochus, and after he had ouercomed him, he was hie priest for one
year, and then died. In whose room succeaded Judas his son, who executed the
office in the temple.vi. years, and was slain in battle. Then his brother
Iochanan was chief in the temple.viii. years, and died likewise in battle.
After him his brother Schimeon was ruler.18. years, who^ Ptolomae his wives
father poisoned at a banquet. Then Iochanan his son succeaded his father in
thoffice, that is he that was named Hircanus, first of that name: so called,
because he vanquished a king of that name called Hircanus, he reigned.21. years
and died. Afterward reigned Aristobulus one year, he was called the great
king, because he first put the royal crown upon his head, and turned the
dignity of the hie priesthode into a kingdom, unhallowing and staining the
holiness thereof. 480. years and.iii. months after the retourninge of Israel
from Babylon. He being dead, his brother Alexander reigned.xxvii. years. After
whose death Alexandra his wife, held the kingdom.ix. years and died. In whose
stead succeeded her son Aristobulus, and reigned three years. In his time
Pompei a Romain captain, came against Jerusalem, wan it and apprehended
Aristobulus, bound him in iro^s and carried him captive to Rome. In whose place
he ordeiued Hircanus his brother to succeed, who reigned forty years. During
his reign, rebelled An tigonus, form of Aristobulus Hircanus brother, and
with the aid of an army of the Persians encountered with Hircanus took him
prisoner and sent him to Babylon, cutting of his ears, yt he should never
after be meet either for the priesthod or for the kingdom. Antigonus
reigned.iii. years. In his days Herod fled, and joined himself with the
Romans, by whose help he slew Antigonus the.iii. year of his reign, and
reigned after him.xxxvii. years, and then died. After Herod succeeded in the
king dome, Archelaus his son: who was taken by the Romans the.ix. year of
his reign, laid in bonds and ended his life at Rome. Next to him reigned
Antipater his brother, who changed his name and called him self Herod, he
reigning fully ten years, overcame and vasted Spain, because the king of
Spain had ravished and taken away his brothers wife, and there died. After him
followed Agrippas son of Aristobulus that was his brothers son, he reigned
three and twenty years. After whose death his son Agrippas reigned twentye
years. This is that Agrippa of whom* we now speak of, and of the calamities
that befell in his time upon Israel. For all the wh^le yt he reigned, the wars
between the Romans and Israel never ceased, until the people of Judea were
led captive into the province of the Romans: what time also the temple was
desolate. I mean the desolation of the second temple, which we saw with our
eyes builded and distroyed.

THe.xx. year of the reign of king Agrippas, the.ix. day of the fifte month
that is called Af, Nero Caesar sent a present for burnt offerings to be offered
in the temple at Jerusalem, ^^ly.
requiring peace of thelders and sages of Judea and Jerusalem, and that they
would receive him into league with them, saying: My request is that you would
offer my present to the Lord your God, for his sernice and religion likes me
very well, so that I desire you to join in league with me according as you
have done with the emperors of Rome my predecessors in time past. I have
heard what Castius the captain of mine armi has done unto you, which
displeases me out of measure. Wherefore I assure unto you a faithful league, by
the consent and counsel of the Senate of Rome, that hereafter there shall never
Roman captain stir hand nor foot against you, but rather your heads,
rulers, and judges, shall be al Jews and of Jerusalem. Yea, Agrippas your king
shall be Lord of all your rulers, and what he commands ye shall do it, the
Romans shall only be called your lords, and have no more to do with you. So
when these legates came to Jerusalem, they went and spoke with Anani the
priest, informed him of Neroes mind, and showed him his present, placing it
before him. The present was this, a bull for a burnt offering with a great crown
of gold upon his head, his horns also were covered with gold, upon him was a
cloth of purple poudred with precious stones: there went certain before him ye
carried.x. talentes of gold: behind followed very many sheep for peace
offringes. When Eleasar Ananies son heard thereof, he came and cast out of he
temple of the Lord Nero Caesar's presents, saying: we will not suspend and
unhallow ye sanctuary of our Lord with the offerings of strangers. For our
Lord God will* accept another their burnt offeringes nor their peace
offerynges. When he had so fayd: he sounded a trompet, set his men in array
against the host of the Romans that kept watch and ward in the city of
Jerusalem, and flewe many of them that day, with one of their capitaines
also, and another they took alive. He being a valiant man, and seeing the
routes of the Jews to urge him grievously, said unto them: save my life and I
will yield me. Unto whom Eleasar the rebel swear that he would not slay him,
but spare him for his manhede, (for he has slain very many of the Jews
before) whereupon he yielded him self. Then Eleasar said unto him: like as thy
sword has made many women childles, so shall thy mother be made childles of
thee above all other, and therewith contrary to his oath he commanded his
servant to kill him and so he died. King Agrippas seeing this, was wonderful
sorye, therefore as he stood in one of the streets, he cried. O thou rebel
Eleasar, I pray God that this mischief, whereof thou art cause, and thy acts
may light ^po^ thee and thy fathers house: which when it comes to pass, we
shall never bewail nor be dismayed at. It appears they shall have sumwhat to
do, that study to make peace and tranquil litie in thy days, for they are
sure to be destroyed with thee. How long will thou continue to bring us into
the breares, thou enemy and hater of the Lord? Why do thou destroy and
waste ye vinyard of the Lord God of hosts? Eleasar answered him: what, take
thou upon thee, the name of a king? for if thou be a king, why co^maundest thou
not us to be punished. Where be thy valea^t soudiours? let see, come thou and
they together and chasten me, that it may be tried whether thou be a king in
deed or no. Thou sta^dest a loofe of, and when thou speak, thy fete are
ready to run away, like as though a dog should set him self against an
armed man and bark at him, bleatinge out his tongue. With this, he wincked
upon the rebels his accomplices, to run upon Agrippas and take him whiles he
held him in talk. But that was perceived of one of Agrippas seruaunies, whom
he had appointed for the same purpose to stand over against him as nie as he
might, to mark and espy if the rebels should make any stour toward him, and
to let him have knowledge. He th^rfore laying his hand upon his head, gave a
sign to the king to ^lie, saying: Away, away, for if thou tarry never so little,
the sedicious will slay the and us together. Which Agrippas perceiving he gate
him thence with all the speed he might, and the rebels pursued him but in
vain, ^^r they could not euertake him. So he gate to Iapho a town under the
Romans where he was in sauegard. From thence he fled to Rome, and declared to
themperoure Nero, the mischief that befell at Jerusalem, and all that seditious
Eleasar had done to his offering: also how his commandment took no place.
Wherefore Nero joined unto him again Castius with a huge army, wherewith they
both entered Judea and wanne many walled towns, amongst which they raced
Iapho. For the Romans perceiuinge the power of the Rebels to increase, were
afraid least they should get it into their hands, whereby it might be anoyaunce
in time to come to the Romans: chiefly saying it was a notable haven for
their ships to arrive at in Judea. After this both Agrippas and Castius led
their army toward Jerusalem to war upon the Rebels, and utterly to destroy
them. Eleasar and other priests with much people hearing this, they issued out
against them, and found them encamped in the way between Jerusalem and Iapho,
but after they had joined their battle, many of the Jews were slain by the
Romans the residue Castius and Agrippas put to flight, and pursued the chase
unto ye gates of Jerusalem, besieged also the city for the space of three days.
The fourth day the priests and the people issued out suddenly, unawares to the
Romans, set upon their camp, and slew.v. thousand footmen, and one thousand
hor^men. Castius saying that nether be nor his could well escape, he chose
out.xl. thousand of his best souldioures and placed them betwixt his camp
and the priests, commanding them to stand all the night soundinge their
trompets and making of fires, that he and Agrippas might escape, and that they
should not remove out of their place till the morrow. The Jews harkeninge to
the sound of the trompets, and musing what it should mean, pursued not the
Romans: but perceiving in the morninge that they were departed toward Cesaria
three days journey of, Eleasar with the people followed: and in the way found
their baggage strawed, that the Romans had cast from them to run the
lightlier and escape the easilier: which they let lie and pursued them to the
gates of Cesaria. But Castius and Agrippas gate safe within the town, and from
thence went both together to Rome, where they declared unto Nero the Emperor,
how they sped at Jerusalem. And as they were making relation of this unto the
Emperor. There came also a post out of Perfia with tidinges that the king
of Persia was reuelted from the Romans Empire, these things troubled the
Emperor sore, to se almost all fall from him, that heretofore had obeyed
the Empire of the Romans.

AT the same time returned Vaspasianus, captain of the host that Nero had
sent into the West parts, as Germauie, Britain and Spain, which lands he
had subdued and brought under the subjection of Nero. To him Nero declared
what mischief the priests had wrought to ye Roman host in Judea, how they
had slain the Romans, and so for the all the tale that Agrippa and Castius
had told him, which displeased Vaspasian very greatly. After this Nero set
Vaspasian captain and his son Titus to reueng the Romans upon the Persians
and Jews, giving in commandment to race their walled towns, to beat down
what so ever they found without sparing any body, either men or women,
children or infants, sucking babes or old folks, but to slay all. So
Vaspasianus and Titus, set forward with a chosen and picked army of the
Romans, passed the seas and came to Antiochia. The Jews having intelligence
of this, chused out of al their captains, three principal most expert
warriors: of whom I Joseph priest that writ this history was one, who by the
divine favor am valiant in battle: and Anani the hie priest, and Eleasar
his son. To these three they committed the hole land of Judea, deuidinge it to
them by lot, and gave them all furniture of war. One third part therefore,
(which was hole Galile from the land af Napththaly and beyond) fell to Joseph
the priest son of Gorion to his honor and glory, whom for his
worthiness they named also Iosiphon, because he was then anointed: appointed,
and consecrated to the wars. The second lot came forth: by the which fell
unto Anani the hie priest, the city of Jerusalem and the country about it,
with a charge to repair the walls of the city, to sustain the brunt of
Vaspasian, if he should come so far The third lot fell to Eleasar the son
of Anani the priest, to whom was joined captain Iehoscua and other Jewish
captains. By the virtue of this lot fell to them the whole land of Edom from
Elath unto the red sea. The rest of the land from Jericho to Euphrates, with
that also that is beyond the river and all the land of Mesopotamia, fell to
captain Menasches lotte. To other Princes also of Judea and to the worthiest
priests, they committed the fensed cities from the frontiers and bounds of
Jerusalem unto Egypt. Vaspasian taking his journey with his host from
Antiochia, came and pitched his te^tes in Aram Zofa. For he had devised and
determined thus with his counsel: first to invade Galile, and after to try what
they could do in Ivdea. Joseph the son of Gorion having intelligence of this:
his purpose, departed from Jerusalem to Galile, built up the towns yt were
destroyed and repaired their walls, gates bars and palaces. Ordained captains
over the people to lead and govern them, some of thousands, some of hundreds,
tribunes and Decurians. He instructed the people also in feats of wars what
the soundes of trompettes signified, what sound served to fall in array, what to
gather the souldioures together, and what to divide them, and after he had
instructed them, the discipl^^ and feats of war, he spoke unto the^ in this
wife. Ye shall understand (dear lites) that ye go to fight at this present,
againstyour enemies. Wherefore let no effeminate fear overcome your hearts, nor
dismaye your selves at the sight of your ennemies, but play the men and take a
good courage unto you to fight for your cities, for your country, and for your
selves. Be not afraid of death but rather be stout in the defense of your
country that ye be not led away from it, and to fight for the sanctuary of
the Lord, that it be not steined and polluted with thunclennesse of ye
gentiles. Consider that it is better to die in battle then to live in
captiuitye and bondage. Therefore when as ye shall come to join with your
ennemies, and shall see any of them beaten down and attempt to rise again,
who soever of you is by and sees him, remember the zeal of your GOD,
wherewith it becomes you to revenge his quarrel, and being moned therewith,
strike him that he never rise agaiene.

But if you shall se any of your selowes down, being enkindled with the zeal
of your God, rescue him from the hands of the enemies: and if he be not yet
slain, cure him. If he be dead: ye shall do what ye can to bury him in the
Israelites burial. And so if we shall choose rather to die then to live, we shall
prospere in our wars, we shall die for the covenant of our God, and deliver
our souls, bringinge them to the light of life in heaven. After he had said
this, he chose out of the Jews.ix. thousand fotemen, and but few horsemen.
And out of these he chose.vi. hundred of the best, such as one of them would
not shrink from ten, ten from an hundred, a hundred from a thousand, a
thousand from ten thousand. With them Joseph went to the cities of Agrippas yt
were in Iehudea to win them. For Agrippas stuck to the Romans were it
right or wrong with all the power he could make. He went first to Tiarua a
great city that belonged to Agrippa, where as both his treasure and municion
of war was. When he came the^ there, he spoke to the people upon the walls
and offered them peace, on condition that they should open the gates and
deliver unto him all the treasure of Agrippas and all his jewels: Thus if they
would do, he then would spare them and flea none of them. Were it not better
for you (says he) to take part with them that defend the sanctuary of God and
his inheritance, then to join your aid with Agrippas, which is co^federate
with our enemies and assayleth us, augmenting the power of the^ that hats us,
so that he refuses not to fight against the sanctuary of the lord, and the
people of his inheritance. The men of the town condescending to Joseph,
opens the gates and he ^niring the town, made peace with them, and they
delivered him all the kings treasures, for they liked Joseph's words and
consented to take such part as he took. At that time came news unto Joseph
that troubled him sore: namely that Tiberias had rebelled and were revolted
from the people that dwelt at Jerusalem and were changed from his lot, to
become Vaspasianus subjects, who had set a Roman captain over the^. For
reformation whereof, he left his army at Tiarua, and took those six hundredth
young men with him to Tiberias, coming upon it sodeinly and at unawares. And as
he stood upon the banks of Genosar, he espied ye navy of the Romans that
lay there at road, to aid Vaspasian, which Joseph commanded to be brooken
in peaces and to be scattered abroad in the sea laake. The me^ of Tiberias
therefore saying the shypbordes dispersed in that fashion, they conieciured it
was done by some of Joseph's host, wherefore the bands of the Romans fled to
the town, gate in and shytte the gates. Joseph notwithstanding came to one
gate of the city and ^^tes that the people might hear, saying: What means
this co^spiracie of yours against me? yea, not against me, but rather against
the Lord God, whose covenant ye have transgressed and brooken the bond that
we made with him: ye have also violated your oath that ye swear by the GOD of
Israel, that we should altogether fight against our enemies, to abate their
pride. The people answered from the walls: we beseech thee our Lord hear
thy servants speak. God forbid we should aid the Romans, and not
rather the people of the Lord God of Israel and his sanctuary, with the
people of his enheritaunce. Howbe it there be amongst us certain proud me^
ungodly perso^es, that have made a league with Vaspasiane, and have brought
into the town one of his chieftaynes. Wherefore and it please thee our Lord
to enter the city with thy soldiers, come unto us that we may live with
thee, rather then to pearishe in the hands of them that hate us. So they
opened the gates that Iosephe went in: and took the town.

Then he caused to apprehende those ungodly persons that were there, about
six hundred men and laid them in irons, sending the^ to Tiarua which* he had
before taken, the other wicked men that had aided Vaspasian, he put to the
sword. But the chief governor of the town he apprehended alive, carried him
out of the city, and commuu^ded one of his souldioures to cut of his hands
forthwith. Then the captain besought Joseph, saying. I beseech the my Lord,
let but one of my hands be cut of, and the other to be left me. This suit Joseph
and his soldiers loughe to scorn, iudgeging him to be no valeaunt man nor of
any hautye courage, Yet Joseph hade his soldier, to g^ue him the sword in his
own hand and let him cut of whither hand he list, and leave him which he
will. So the Roman captain took the sword and cut of his left hand him self,
leauinge him the right, and so was he let go. He came therefore unto Vaspasians
ca^pe to show what shame was done him. After this the citizens of Zippori
rebelled also, making a league with Vaspasian and the Romans host, Joseph
being certified of this, made thither with his hole host to besege it, but the
town abid ye brunt of the assault, that Joseph could prevail nothing against
it. Wherefore he besieged it a long season.

ABout that time it was signified also to the^ of Jerusalem, yt the Askelonites
had entered in friendship with the Romans. They sent therefore Neger the
Edomite and Schiloch the Babilonian, and Iehochanon with a power of the common
people, these came to Askalon and be seged it a great space. Within ye town was
a Romain captain called Antonius, a valiant man and a good warrior, he upon a
certain night in ye morning watch issued out of the town with his company to
give a camisado to the Jews that besieged the town: entered their camp and
made a great slaughter, continuing the same i^l it was day light, so that
about ten thousand of the Jews were slain. The reaste never moved out of
their place, saying, it is better for us to die in this battle, then to fly
from our enemies: therefore they took a good heart unto them, and stood
manfullye in their stations and places, trustinge in the Lord God of Israel.
And when it was day they also set them selves in array against Antony, slew
many of his men, not without loss also of their own part, for Schiloch
the Babilonian and Iehochanan of Jerusalem were both slain by the Romans,
with other also of the Jews, to the noumber of eyghte thousand fightingmen,
that were under Schiloh and Iehochanan. And never a one of the Iewishe
captains escaped that conflicte save only Neger the Edomite, which hid him
self in a certain sepulcher that was there in the plain, whom the Romans
in their pursuts sought, but found him not. Wherefore they set afire the wod
that it burnte round about the sepulcher wherein he lay hid, and consumed
all the trees, shrubs and bushes, but came not nie the sepulcher: for Neger had
called unto ye Lord with his hole heart, to deliver him this once from his
enemies, lest he should be shamfully handled of the^, promising at another time
to be ready to die valeantly in his quarrel. So Neger escaped ye Romans by the
help of the God of Israel, in whom he put his trust. Shortly after sent
the Ierosolimites much people to Askalona, to the n^mber of.xviii thousand
good men of war, to buri the body of the Jews yt were there slain in the
co^flictes by Antoni: they sought also the body of Neger the Edomite, but they
found it not, til at length he cried unto them out of the sepulcher,
saying: I am here: for God has delivered me out of the hands of mine
ennemies, to the intent I may yet be avenged of them in the wars of the
LORD. So Negar declared unto them at large all things how they chanced unto
him. Wherefore the Jews reioysed wonderfu^lye, that that they had found him
alive, that he was saved by such a miracle and that the Lord had delivered him:
Therefore they put their confidence in the Lord, believing that God would be
present with them to aid them, whereof this deliverance of Neger they took for
a sure sign and token. The Romans kept them within the town, for fear of
the multitude of the Jews that were come to bury the bodies. So the Jews
buried all the bodies of their own part that were slain in both battails, for
the Romans were not able to prohibit and let them, but held them in the
town. And when the burial was finished, they took Neger with them to
Jerusalem, to give God thanks there, for his deliverance at that present.
The^ Joseph the priest gathered his strength and came upon Askalon with his
hole army, assaulted them, gate thupper hand and wan the town: after slew
Antony and al his people, with the sword that of all the valeante men of war
that were with him, not one escaped. Besides this, all the villages and hamlets
that were there about without the town, he burnt them every one. And in like
manner served he all the towns and villages there about that had entered in
league with the Romans, fleaing both Jews and Romans that dwelte in them
with the sword, as many as be found: and their houses he burnt. This done,
Joseph returned again to Zippori, sought with them and gate the upper hand:
there shed he much blood of the people that had conspired with the Romans,
utterly destroyed the^, burnt also their cities and villages, led their wives
and children prisoners away to Jerusalem, and what Romans so ever he found
there, he slew them with the sword. When as Vaspasian and Titus his son
heard of all that Iosephe had wroughte against the Romans, both how he
slew their garisones as many as he could find in Galile, and also all the
Jews that had made any league with him and his son, they were wonderful
wroth, and in a great rage. They took therefore their iourny, and came to
Apitelma, otherwise called Acho, where as at that present Agrippas king of
Judea was abidinge and fortye thousand men with him: all good men of war
and archers every one: these joined them selves with Vaspasians army, by
which means the Romans camp became very huge. Moreover, out of other
nations, round about Judea, good men of war without noumber, joined with
Vaspasian. He had aid also of all the best men of war, out of Mesopotamia,
Aram, Zofa, Assure, Sinear, Persia, Chaldea, Macedonia, and out of the
provinces of the people of the East, yea, the people of Mizraim, Lob, Dedam and
Seba with all provinces far and near, that were from under the subjection of
the Jews, cast of the yoke from their necks, and rebelled against the dominion
of Jerusalem, joining their power with the Roman army to aid Vaspasian and
Titus. For these were before subjects unto the Jews, that sore had burdened
the^, wherefore they came to aid the Romans and to invade Jerusalem and the
people of the Jews. But the Edomites had not yet associate them selves with
Vaspasian and Titus, for they were in subjection to the Jews and served them.
So that not one of them aided the Romans. For long before, they had moved
war against Jerusalem, and could not get the victory, but the Jews
prevailed against them and subdued them, Hircanus also the first king of the
Jews circumcised them. They dwelte also in Jerusalem, kept watch and ward
about the house of the Lord, and his couenaunte, without all rebellion
against the Jews and Ierosolimites. And at that present was thirtye thousand
of the best of the Edomites, to keep the walls of Jerusalem, and the house of
the Lord. After this, Vaspasian and Titus with all their host, took their
journey from Acho and came to Galile, and in the mount they pitched their
tents. Whereof when tidinges was brought to Joseph, how the host of the
Romans lay upon the mount of Galile, and how Vaspasian had sent before him a
great power to repair the broaken ways, to fill the hooles and cast down
the hills, to leuel the way that his people might pass the better, for he
was sore moved against ye Jews. Joseph issued out of zipporie with all his
power, set upon them, and flewe them with the sword, taking such
vengeance of them as never was the like before: for his God was with him.
Vaspasian and Titus hearing of this, determined to set upon Joseph at unawares,
and to beset all the ways that he should escape of no side. But Joseph had
intelligence of their coming, wherefore he left zipporie and went to
Tiberia: whether Vaspasian followed with his host. Joseph perceiving them
coming, fled from thence to Iorpata, the biggest city in all Galile, closed up
the gates, and there remained with his army.

THen sent Vaspasian certain noble men in embassage unto Joseph, to debate the
matter with him in this wise. Vaspasian general of the Roman army, desires
to know what it should avail the to be thus pend up within a walled town: he
wills the rather to come forth to entreat of peace with him, and enter in a
league together, for it shall be for thy avail to serve Caesar, emperor of the
Romans ye thou may live and not be destroyed nor yet any of the people
with the. Then Joseph sent ambassadors again to Vaspasian, demanding treuce
for a few days, that he might common of the matter with the people and let
them understand his words: peradventure (says he:) they will be persuaded to
make peace with thee, and then will we enter in league with the Roman empire.
So Vaspasian ceased from fighting against Joseph, permittinge him space to
deliberate of the thing. Upon that Joseph sent Embassadoures to all the
people at Jerusalem, to the priests, chief men, rulers and to the reaste of
the people, lettinge them to wit this. Ye shall understand brethren and
friends, that Vaspasian general of the Romans sent his Embassadoures unto
me, inquiring what it should avail us to be so stiff against them* and not
rather to com forth and to entreat of peace and to join in league together,
that we may serve the Emperor of the Romans, so to save our lives and not
to be destroyed. And I pray you why will ye lose your lives, your wives, your
sons and daughters? why will ye all fall together upon the sword, that both
they, that shall be left alive among you, shall be led captive out of your
country to a people that ye never knew, whose language ye understand not:
and your country to be made desolate, your sanctuarye laid waste, yt there
shall not be so much as one man to enter into it. Never suffer this, you that be
wise men, but rather receive my counsel, and come hither to us, that we may
deliberat together, what conditions of peace we shall make, for the sauegard of
your lives, rather then to be destroyed and that ye may use the commodities of
your country, be at reaste and peace therein. For life and quietness is to be
preferred before death and banishmente. The inhabitants therefore of
Jerusalem, both priests, chief men, rulers, and all the noble me^ of Judea
with the reaste of the people sent unto Joseph, saying. Take heed to thy
self, that thou never consent unto this, to receive conditions of peace with
them: but be strong and bold to fight until such time as thou shall
consume them, or till thou and all the people die in battle, and so shall
thou fight the fightes of the Lord for his people and his sanctuarye, with
the cities of our God: In the mean season, be as be may, so thy power be not
with them. When Joseph heard the determination of the people of Jerusalem,
how all sorts with one consent willed by the ambassadors the continuance of
the wars, he was wonderful wroth, and in a great fury he issued out with all
his people, and set them in array against Vaspasian and the Roman host, in
which conflicte were stayne very many of the Jews. And from ye day forward
Vaspasian began earnestly and fearcely to war upon the Jews. He departed
from thence to the city Gerarta, a great city in the higher Galile: beseged
it and wan it, raced it and flewe all the people, man woman and child: oxen,
sheep, camelles and asses, leaving nothing alive. And then he said: now begin
I to be revenged for the Romans, which ye Jews murdered in the la^d of Judah.
From thence he departed, and brought his army to Iorpata, where Joseph
remained. The first day that he entamped about Iorpata, he gave his soldiers
meat and drink plenty, and made them good chere, the^ furnished every man
with weapons. So on the next morrow early, the Roman army gave a great shoute
and beset the city round about on every side. In this business Joseph stood
upon a certain tower, from whence he beheld the huge camp of the Romans,
wherefore he sounded forth a Trumpet, gave a sign to battle, issued out
with the hole power of the Jews that he had with him, and set upon the
Romans camp at the foot of the hill, continuinge the fight from morning
until night. And when it began to be dark, they ceased fighting and departed
the one sort from the other, the Jews into the town, the Romans to their
tents. In this battle were very many slain on both parties, as well Jews as
Romans. The Romans aduauncinge them selves, proudly and stoutly said, we
will quickly vanqueshe this little nation, as we have subdued all other nations
that we have conquered, that they shall anoy us no more: and afterward we
shall be at reaste. The Jews also on the other side encouraged them selves against
the Romans, saying: At this time we will all die together for the zeal of
the sanctuary of our God, and never suffer these unclean persons to pollute
it: and when we have once destroyed them, we shall be quiet. So what for the
pride of the Romans of the one side and the stubbornnes of the Ie was on
the other, much people was slain in that fight, for it continued til the second
third and fourth day. In this while all the Jews that dwelt about Iorpata,
fled to Vaspasians camp and joined them selves to the Romans to aid them.
And ever as Joseph skirmished with Vaspasian without the city, Vaspasian sent
a power to assault the city. So Joseph and his men fought with Vaspasian
without the town, and the Jews that were within the town defended the walls
against the routes of the Romans, that was a small host made out of the maine
army. But the Jews that weee left within the town, began to deminishe every
day, until very few were left. The hardiest also of Iosephes soldiers and
the worthiest young men that fought with out were all slain, a very few except,
with whom Joseph fled and escaped into the town, shuttinge the gates after
him. But as Vaspasian with all his army besieged Iorpata a long while, he
espied at length a conduite without that ran into the city, whereof the
citezens drunk, because the water thereof was good and sweet, he derived the
waters thereof besides the town, that it could no more come into the city,
whereby the inhabitants of the city were destitute of beuerage, having
nothing left them but well waters. Joseph therefore perceiuinge yt the conduit
water whereof they were always accustomed to drink, was taken away, conceived
with him self. Now will the Romans brag and boast against us, and think to
take us at their pleasure, whiles we have no water but shall be co^streined to
die for thirst.

He took therefore garments, and dipped them in the well waters that were in the
town and hanged them here and there over the walls, to declare unto the
Romans that they had water plenty in the town, least they should conceive
any hope of swift winninge the town, thinking they had no waters. Then
commanded Vaspasian a mount to be raised ^ie to the town side, to plant an
iron Ram upon, to batter the walls with, and beat them down. The manner of
the making of an iron Ram, is thus. First they take a great long thick
beam, upon the fore part whereof they put a great strong head, made like unto
a Rams head, wish horns al of principal streng iron, the weight thereof is as
much as half the beam, and covers the beam also to the mids. Then fasten
they into the ground over against the place that they entend to batter, two
great trees like mastes of ships, between which, they ha^g the beme yt is
called the ram with very strong ropes made of hemp, the best that may be
gotten, and fron wyre twisted together. At the hinder part of this beam from
the wall ward, are ringes of iron surely fastened, with ropes made of hemp
and wire tied to them: that when the assaulters will batter the walls, they
pushe forward the beam as though it were a spear, and fasten his strong
horns amongst the stones. The^ hang they weightes at the ringes in the hinder
part, and much people a far of take hold of the ropes that come through the
ringes behind, and hale that hinder part of the beam upon the ground: and by
such means they shake the wall that they made it to quake again. Thus in many
places they wrest and wrenche out the stones of the building, so that
afterward the wall falls down. There be also other manner of engines, as an
iron ram upon four wheles bound with iron, and fastened with iron nails. To
this they make four feet as has a Ram, or more as the bigness of the
beams requires. The biggeste for the most part is of.xxx. cubits long,
and the least of ten. And look how many ^eete the Ram has, so mani wheles
has it also. For every where has his foot by him, and when they will batter
a wall, certain men appointed thereunto draw it first a good way of, the^ a
great multitude of men take hold of the hinderpart thereof, by four porters or
leauers of wodde that are put therein, and with all their sway shoue forward the
Ram to strike the wall that they will batter. The head of this iron Ram that
goes upon wheles has no horns but is blunt, made of the stro^gest kind of
iron, with a wonderful thick neck. They have also upon hoth sides of the
engyne, a Pentase of wodde for the sauegarde of them that shoue forth the Ram
behind from the arrows or stones of them that are upon the walls.

The Rams that Titus used at Jerusalem, for the most part, ran all upon
wheels. Of the other forte, he had only two, as we shall declare in his place.
The beam of this Ram that we even now described, was as as thick as.x. men
could fado^: ye length thereof, was fifrye cubits. It was also holow within
and filled with Ore hides, folded and sowed together. The wood served for none
other purpose, then that the fashion of the Leithar might be set upon the
ground. The hinder part of the beam was covered over with iron plates. The
leather was put within that the beam should not break with the poise of ye
weights that were hanged by the ringes behind, when as men appointed for the
purpose, haled at the ropes to draw back the beam.

The wood therefore that went about the leather served to keep the leather
in facion. In that they covered it with iron plate, yt they did least they that
kept the walls should set it on fire. The bornes that were upon the head of the
Ram, were as many as they listed, but never fewer then ten, and then the beam
was.xx. cubits long: nor also more then. l. and then the beam was a hundred
cubits in length. Betwixt every horn was the space of a cubite, and every
horn was as thick as a man could fadom, the length was one cubite and a half
at the least. The wodden wall or pentase was as long as the leather that was
put within the beam, and it was set on both the sides toward the hinder
parts of the beam, to defend the men that labored to batter the walls, lest
they should be hurt with arrows or darts. The Ram that Vaspasian used at
Iorpata which he besieged, and me in it, was made in this forte. The length
thereof was.l. cubits, it had.xxv. horns in the head, which was as thick
as ten men: every horn also was as thick as one man, and betwixt every
horn the space of one cubite. The weight that was hanged on the hinder parts
was a thousand and five hundred talents, every talent is about a hundred Troy
weight. The men that labored in the erecting of this engine, were.xv. hundred.
To remo^e it from one place to another, or from one Cit^e to another, were
appointed an hundred and fifty yoke of oxen, or else. 300. couple of borses and
mules. When as they should assault any fortes or cities that stood upon hills,
then must they divide it in parts and bring it up to the siege by piece-meele,
and there set it together again. Now when the Romans had battred the walls
of Iorpata, and Joseph perceived the wall to shake: he took great^ sackes,
filled them full of Chafe, and hanged them down by the Walls, that the
horns of the Ram could not come nie the stones of the wall, but light upon
the sacks, which by the reason of their softnes of the chasse, damned the
stroke yt the wall was less hurt. For such is ye nature of soft things, to geu^
back to ye hard, and to weake^ their force. But Vaspasian saying the subtlety
of Joseph: used also policy for policy, for he sent into the town secretly
Jews spies, which when the batteries should he, might cut asunder the coardes
that the sackes were tied to, and with them slipped down the walls, where the
Romans were ready to receive them that they did not hurt them in the fall, and
immediately they stroke the wall with the ram. There was at that present in
the city a certain valiant man named Eleasar of the house of Anani the hie
priest that then dwelt at Jerusalem. This Eleasar perceiuyng the Romans to
go about to batter down the walls as ^hey did before, plucked out of the wall
a mighty stone, so that he made a great hole or gappe, whereat he ^idde down
the wall, and light stridelinge upon the engine, made fast an fron cheine to
the horns thereof, and gate up again quickelye and nimlye from the beam into
the town with the cheyne in his hand, for the wall was not very hye above
his head as he stood upon the Ram. Then other tall fellows took hold
upon the cheyne, and fastened it to Pillars and Walls in the Town, that the
Romans might rather he constrained to break their Ram then take it away
from thence. The Priest Eleasar yet once again boldlye went down and sat
upon the beam, slew fifty men that labored about the Ram; and the rest
he put to flighte: then returned into the Town, being drawn up again from
the beam by them that were within the Town, greatly reioy^ynge in his
manhood. After that went he up upon a hie tower from whence he tu^bled down
with a mighty force a great stone and a hard upon the head of the Ram,
brake it that both a great part of the head and the bornes fell upon the
ground. For the iron that it was covered with all was old and rustye, so that
it was much wasted and eaten therwyth, the ropes also were old. After that
Eleasar went down again, took part of the bead that was broken, and hurled
it into the town, the Romans that remai^ed, either he flue or put to flight.
The archers shot at him, and wounded him with five arrows, wherefore by the
help of his fellows upon the walls, he climed up, otherwise he had not ben
able for the grief of his wounds. The people then gave a shout for joy of the
dictory of the worthi priest Eleasar that had slain the Romans, and broken
their Ram wherein they put their confidence, and brought part of it into the
town, and fastened it with an iron cheine yt the Romans could not pull it
back again to them, nor have thuse of it after ward. Wherefore diverse of the
valiantest citizens of Iorpata armed them selfs ye day, being stirred with ye
great courage that they had seen in Eleasar, and went down, hewed the beam
into pieces, brought the poyses with the ringes and two mastes with them into
the town: and the same day died Eleasar with great renown, as one yt had
sought for the sanctuary of the lord and for his people and country of Israel,
like a faithful servant and soldier of the Lord: whom all the people mourned
for, buriyng him in ye town, and honoring him for his death, worthiness, and
faithfulness, appointinge him a worthy memory also for that he had waged
battle with the ennemies of the Lord. The young men of the Jews seeing
this, and specially two of them, the one called Nitra, the other Polipus, men of
wisdom and understanding, and therewith expert in the wars being moved with
zeal for the god of Israel: opened the gates and issued out against the
Romans, skirmished with them and slew mani of the^. But at length they were
slain them selves in the skir mishe for the sanctuary of their God, for
Israel, and their country. When Joseph saw the wars to increase more and
more, he issued out, and made a great slaughter in the Romans tents, burnt
the mount and engines of war that the Romans had left, by which means the
wars wared yet hoater and hoater, in so much that Josephus repulsed the
Romans: for when they saw the Jews so desperatelys give their lives for
their God and land, they would not abide their force. When Vaspasian saw his
men shrink he stood up then, and put them in heart, exhorting them with
fair words, and promises, as well gold and silver, as meat and drink,
wherewith the Romans allured, fought with Iosephe that day unto the Sun
setting, and as the battle waxed hot, the Jews wounded Vaspasian with an
arrowe in his right leg, which fore dismaies ye Romans, when they saw the
blood run down his leg: and that day was a fore fight between the Jews and
the Romans. Titus saying his father wounded, fore abashed ran to him to
help him, to whom his father said, how it is my son that thou art thus
astonished, take heart to thee, and with a courage revenge thy father of these
Jews that have now the better hand of us. So they fought both Titus and
Vaspasian withal their hole host ye day a very sore fight, and many were slain
of both parts yea very few were left on Iosephes part, with who^ he returned
into the town, The next day the R^maines raised a new mount instead of
that that Joseph had brent, and planted an other iron Ram thereupon between two
posts accordingly, for Vaspasian had brought.iiii. of this sortwith him from
Rome, but other battering pieces upon wheles had he with him thirti, what more,
what less, ye bigger sort were of.xxx. cubits long, the least ten. He
brought also ten engines to hur^e great and weighty stenes with all, which he
placed ab^ute the walls. The Romans therefore renewed the wars and assaults
against the town as they were wo^t before. But ye town was now desolate and
naked of the stoutest warlike men, for they were al slain in the fightes.
Albeit Joseph remained and a few with him, who went every one and the women
also to defend the walls, for there was almost no men left, fyt for the war.
Then the Romans flonge with thengines stones into the town on every side,
from the mount and munition. It chanced that a great stone hit a woman with
child with such a violence, that it passed through her body, and carried the
child with it for the space of half a mile. They cast up and raised yet other
munites also, from whence they slinged stones, and another like chance
happened. A stone came and hit one of Iosephes men of war, a valiant man, in
such a sort, that it divided his head from his body, and made it fly a large
mile of.

AT the same time one of ye Romain soldiers, divised with him self how to
strike Joseph with a venomed arrow, and gate him under the wall where Joseph
was, to accomplish his purpose. But Joseph espied him and cried unto him: hold
thy hand thou wicked fellow, and do not kill me. With that the fellow start
somewhat aside, being afraid at Joseph's voice: and suddenly the Jews out of the
town poured hot oil upon him from the wall, that his skin was skalded of, and
he ran away naked, howlinge and yellinge to the Romans camp, where he dyed.
Vaspasian and his Son Titus were fullye determined to continue the assault
until the.xlviii. day: notwithstanding the walls were so hie that they
could not win the town. Yet at length the men being so spent within the
town, and they that remained a live so weried with toyling, that they were not
able any longer to furnishe their watch upon the walls: upon a certain
night Vaspasian and Titus skaled the walls at a quarter where watchmen were
lacking, and after the^ many other of the Romain soldiers followed, which went
down on the in side and brake open the great gate of the town, whereat entered
the hole army of the Romans. And being within the town, sounded their
trompets and shouted unto battall. The Jews with the alarm, tumulte, and
hurlye burly of the Romans, awaked out of their sleep and were sore afraied.
Notwithstanding every man took him to his weapon, and into the market place as
fast as they might. They had made the market place of the town so large of
purpose, that if any business should happen, there might come together the hole
city if they would. So lokinge about them they saw the Roman army entering
into the town by the way that came from the great gate. Then fought they with
ye Romans, and died eue^ in the market place where they stood, exhorting one
an other, and saying: let us die here fightinge, and never suffer our^solues to
be taken alive. But Joseph and fortye men with him, worthy men al, fled out
of the town in to a wood where they found a certain cave, and hid them
selves therein. All the rest of the citizens were slain in that conflicte: for
they would not yield nor commit them selves unto the Romans, they trusted
them so little. For on a time a certain Jew besoughte a Roman souldioure to
save his life, and the Roman swear unto him, saying: God deal thus and thus
with me if I sl^a thee, therefore yield and come hither to me. The Jew
required him to give him his righthand that he might trust him: and the Romain
retch him his left hand. The Jew being dismayed in that great fear, markte
not that it was his left hand. But when the Romain had once hold of him, he
kept him fast with that hand, and with his right took his sword and slew the
Jew that then was naked, having cast away his weapon upon trust of the
Roman. When ye Jews saw how the Roman regarded not his oath, but slew
the Jew that upon trust of his promise and the oath had yealded him self
unto him: they determined to dye all together, and never to trust the
Romans. Whereupon they resolved with them selves utterly to die for the
holiness of the Lord God of Israel. But in so doing they fie we much
people of the Romaines^ and far more then they had done in any other
battle. So at the length the City was taken. When Vaspasian had knowledge
where Joseph was become and of his company: he sent Nicanor, Pilerimus, and
Gallicanus with him to Joseph, to will him to come forth, and he should have his
life and not be slain. Then Joseph debated the matter with them yt were with
him in the den, asking them: what say ye to this? For my part, and ye will follow
my counsel, I think best we go out unto them: but upon this condition, that
they will make us a formal assurance effectuallye as we shall require them:
which done, I doubt not but Vaspasian when we come unto him, will be appeased
toward us. When those men perceived Joseph to be inclined to yield unto the
Romans: they said unto him. We marvel at the (Prince Joseph) thou that
waste chosen out of thousands of people, and promoted unto the priesthode and
kingedome, to sanctifye and halow the LORD God of Israel: waste also
appointed graund captain of so huge an host, haste seen with thine eyes the
shameful reproach of thy people, with the displeasures and damages of thy
sheep: that thou have yet any desire to live in this dishonor. What see
thou that thou would desire to live for? should thou not rather desire
death then life? Peradventure thou perswadest thy self, they call thee to save
thy life, or for thy commodity: but without dout this were a vain persuasion.
For they call thee for none other in tent, then to take thee alive, and to
brag how they have ken Joseph, that was consecrated and addict to the wars,
and make that an argument their power prospers, and is exalted. Now therefore
(our dear brother and our prince) consider that this they will do, yea if they
save thy life. But put the case they put thee to death, were it not better for
ye to die of thine sword, then of theirs? Yea, if it were for nothing but for
this, it is better forth to die then to live: least thou should hear
their reproaches, their vpbraidinges, and their quarrellinges. And if they
preserve the alive, never thinck, they do i^ for thy good, but rather for thine
ignominy and shame, which is far greuouser then death it self. Wherefore our
dear brother and our prince, what comes in thy mind, that thou purposest to
live after that thou have lost thy people and thy brethren? and to what
purpose serves thy life after they be gone? Mark and consider diligently
what Moses (of worthy memory) our master did, how he spoke before God,
touching the people of Israel. O pardone their sins (says he) or elsse
blot me quite out of thy book that thou have written: how he would not live
after the destruction of his people, although the almighty said unto him: let
me alone that I may wreake mine anger vnon them and consume them. Where is now
Aaron with thee his brother, that went betwixt life and death, in
withstanding the angel that plaged the people, and offered him self to die for
his people, that ye plage might cease from Israel. Where is king Saul and
his son Iehonathan that fought for the people of God and died in the field?
Coule not Saul have saved his life and his Sons both if he had been so
disposed? But he, when he saw Israel have the overthrow in the battle,
had no desire to live any longer, but chose rather death then life, and
would not be separated from his brethren another in life nor death, as well he,
as Jonathan his Son, those dearlye beloved and most amiable men (as the
scripture terms them.) Why do thou not remember (our dear Prince) the
righteousness of David the anointed of the Lord, who saying a most grievous
pestilence to rage upon the people of Israel, said: Let thy hand (O Lord) I
beseech thee be turned upon me and my fathers house. For I am he that have
sinned, I have transgressed, as for these thy sheep, what have they done? What
have they offended? Where is the holy Law smothered and stifled in thy
heart? Art not thou an anointed Priest that haste declared and taught us
the holy Law, whereby we might learn how to love our Lord God withal our
heart, and with all our soul, and withal our strength? If it be so that the
service of God, consists not in this, that we should love whom he loves,
and die for his cou^uaunt and sa^ctuary, together with his servant that be
slain for the unity of the name of the Lord: Wherein stands it then? Have not
thou often times taught and proved unto us, how that every man that dies in
wars for the lord, his sanctuary, his people, and his law: he is to be
counted in the Lords lot, and made worthy to go unto the great light, and
shall not see everlasting darkness? Art not thou that Joseph the priest, that
have cried so often in battle, I am Joseph the priest, consecrated to
battle, yt have vowed my life, for the people of the Lord his sanctuarye, and
his land? But now when thou baste yealded thy self unto them, and they order
the dispitfullye, what will thou say unto them, or what amends can thou
have at their hands? I put ye case they cast in thy teeth, and say thy words
be but lies. How shall thou avoid that reproach? Art not thou he that said,
men should fight for the people of God, until they die in the conflicte, and
in so doing, their death should be a ransom for their sins, and that
they were sure to go to that great light that is the light of life? Which if it
be true, according as thou have said, why then will thou shun deash, and not
follow thy people that are gone before thee, to that same light? Ever hitherto
thou have had the upper hand, where so ever thou camste, in so much that they
that heard of thee, trembled for fear: and now will thou yield thy life
into captivity to the Romans, as a vile slave? Shall not this thy dishonor
redound also unto the people of God? Thou that art a prince, a king and
priest, will thou be bound in cheines? Every man shall say, this is he that
has given his souldioures and the reaste of his people to die, but has ^^ued
him self, and his own life. So when they had made an end of talk, each
manne drew out his sword and came unto him in the midst of the Cave, sainge:
Hear thou, thou Iosephe our Prince, if thou will be ruled by us, first we
shall slay thee as a Lord and a great Prince: and thou shalt choose what
death thou will die on, that thou may die honorably. But if thou refuse
to dye honestlye: assure thy self of this, that we will every manne set upon
thee and slay thee. Joseph answered. In deed I know my Brethren that your
words are just and true. For who is so mad to desire to live in this
hurlye burlye? and would GOD that he would call my Soul unto him, and
receive it unto him also. For I am not ignorant that it were more expediente
for me to die then to live, for the great troubles that have passed through my
brains. But he knows the secrets of man's heart, and he it is that
gives life unto men.

It is God that closes souls within the bodies, and lets them out
again, because he is the living GOD, in whose hands remain the Souls and
Spirits of all living creatures. He has left with us a Spirit of life, and
closed it up within our bodies. What is he then that will open that that he
has shut? How shall we loose that, that he would have bound and knitte fast
within us? Do ye not al know that the life is a thing that he has left
with us to keep, and that we are his servants? If then we cast away life
before that GOD take it, shall he not worthelye be displeased with us, and
make that we shall not find life in the place of the living with Abraham our
father of famous memory, and with other just and godly men our
forefathers? Do you not know that they went not unto God before they were
called, and when they were called they came, and so dealt GOD with all holy
and Godly men. To Moses our master of worthy memory, the elect of GOD, ye
know that the Lord God of Israel said: get the up upon this mountain
Abarim, and so he did. But he would not have done it of him self, had not God
called him. Whereby ye may see it is not lawful for a man to surrendre his life
unto God, except he require it again. Take example (I pray you) of Job. What
time he cursed the day that he was borne in, might not he either have hanged
him self, or have run upon a knife, or at the least, have followed his wifes
counsel to curse God and die? Not withstanding he abode patiently in most
extreme pain, waitinge til God demanded again his life, and then restored it
unto his Lord god, and would not restore it vndemaunded, but tarried till his
appointed end came. King David also, of famous memory, said. Lead thou my
life out of his pinfolde and prison. For he knew that the life was enclosed in
the body, and that none might let it forth but God. I wot well that death is a
great commodity, so be that the soul may return in his due time unto God,
that gave it us. I know also that he that dies in the wars of the lord, he
shall come to the great light. But I know not what can appease gods wrath
toward the soul of that man yt kills him self, and makes have to restore his
soul before his time, and without the Lords calling. Wherefore my friends and
brethren, I would ye should know it, I am no more cowarde then you: and I do
not disagree with you, because I am of a fainte heart for fear of these
present calamities, but that I know I should commit a heinous offense against
the Lord if I should kill my self. And how say ye (you princes) that stick
vnts your God, to you I speak, tell me who shall make intercession unto God for
us, if we should commit this sin and each kill other? Would not a man judge him
a slave, a fool, a froward person, a rebel, and a stubburne man, yt would be
forced with any misery, to be so man that because all things fall not out, as
he would wish, would therefore hang, or desperately murder him self with
his own hands? Such ye know the law thus punishes, their rightha^d is cut of
wherewith they forced them selves to die, then, they are left unburied, as men
that have destroyed their own souls: by what reason then shall we kill our
selves? I would wish that we might be slain of our ennemies rather then we
should so shamefully murder our selves, whereby ever after we should be taken
for manslears, if any manne flea him self, as did Saul whom ye commended:
without doubt he commits a heinous crime, and such a one, as no
satisfaction can be made for. Besides that, he shall be reckened fainte
hearted, and as one that dispaireth of his recouerye. Wherefore our forefathers
have taught us. A man ought not to despair of his sauegarde and
deliverance: which comes of God, no not when the knife is put to his
throat to cut it. For king Hezekia of famous memory, when he heard these
words of Esaye, that worthy prophet. Make thy vvil and set thy things in a
stay, for thou shall die and not escape. Nevertheless he fainted not nor
ceased to pray unto God for the proio^ging of his life in this world, that he
might amend his life, and send a better soul unto God. Then the Lord God of
Israel, seeing his vnweried and strong hope with his repentance* suffered him to
live.xv. years yet longer. But Saul that saw he was not appointed king over
Israel after the Lords mind, but alonely by the peoples that craved upon
Samuel Give us a King to reign over us: Whereupon afterward God departed
from Saul, for he was not obediente to Gods will, but went about by force
to establishe his kingdom. The Lord then seeing the wickedness of his
heart, gave him over, and chose him an other to be king over his people,
annointinge David his servant, whiles that Saul was yet living. Which
Saul perceiuinge persecutinge David, and labored with all his endeavor to
destrdy him, because he knew God was with him, and prospered all that he did,
whereas contrary al went backward with him. For these causes, I say, he chose
rather to die then live: and would not live after ye people of Israel was
ouerthrown in ye mou^tains of Gilboa. And in mine opinion, he slew him self
for nothing, but for that he was a ^aint hearted coward and vtterli dispaired
of his sauegarde. For although he said. Least these uncircumcised come and
run in through, yet if he had been of a valiant courage, he would have
standed to his defense unto the death: perauenture God would have delivered
him. But he contrary, al in despair procured him self and his son a
shameful death. But ye shall consider this, He was an unmerciful king, and
therefore did G^^^rid him out of the world: for he that will not spare his own
life and his sons: how would he spare other? And where as ye allege Aaron
unto me, I would know of you, why did he put him self between the living and
the dead? was it not because he would turn away the plage from Israel? If he
had known that he him self should have been stricken therewith: doubtless
he would not have striuen against the striker, but trusting in the holiness of
his righteousness, he stood before the Angel to deliver Israel from that
misery. I am not to be compared with Aaron, albeit I am one of his children,
and never yet in all my life did I shrink to venture my life in the wars of
the Lord. And now I am not determined to kill my self, lest I should sin
against God, and spoil my soul of hope of salvation. I know it well, it were
more expedient for me to be slain of mine enemies, then that I should slay my
self. And if ye say the word, let us go forth and suddenly set upon our
enemies to kill and to be killed in the battle of the Lord, and so shall we
do well: peradventure GOD will give them into our hands. For God is able to
save as well by a small army as by a great. Then if you see me to be afraid
of mine enemies sword* ye shall therbi know me to be a dastard, and one that
fawneth upon his enemies, and hu^teth for their favor. But you shall see me go
before you, as a valiant man should, nor once turn my face from death. But what
did ye ever see in me that ye should judge me fearful? Did ye ever know me to
refuse to fight? In the town of Iorpata I have ever kept my quarter and ward,
and every day have I fought with mine enemies, whom I have not spared but
empaired, and that not a little, whiles I defended that little city. 48. days
against them. For I thought with my self, peradventure I may drive away the
enemies of the LORD out of our Land, and put them by Jerusalem that they
go not thither, and so have I foughten with them till all my valeaunt
Souldioures be spente, and none left but you. I could no longer withstand
their force, and I would not yield my self as a Prisoner unto them, therefore I
sledde hither with you into this Cave. Now therefore brethren, ye shall
understand that death is commodious and good in deed which comes in his
time. But it is neither good nor godly for a man to kill him self and his
brother, to go afterward* for that deed into Hell and perdicion. And what
other thing can more clearelye set for the a man's manhood and hautye mind
with his hope in GOD, then Patience, for a man to suffer patiently what so
ever chaunseth unto him, until his end come. Behold the Lions and other
Beasts, how they are wont to wythstande their adversaries that lie in wait
for them, to the intent they may save their lives. Whose armoure is their
Teeth and Claws, wherewyth nevertheless they hurt not them selves, but use
them against other that assail them, til they either ou^rcome, or be
ouercommed.

Therefore if a man will with his own hands let forth his soul out of
his closure before his time, God will not receive it, neither shall it find
any reaste, but be destroyed. And why? Because it is expulsed and thruste out
of his place before his time, and before God do call it: wherefore it shall
wander inconstantlye for ever. Why then, my dear Brethren and friends do
you advise us to kill one another, and to expel and banish our Souls from us,
they not called for? How can we put away this opprobrye? How can we make
amends for this sin? Who shall pray and make intercession for us? And with
this Joseph burste out on weepynge abundauntlye, but they laughed him to scorn.

THen Joseph held up his hands to heaven, saiynge: Thou Lord almightye art
our father, thou have shapened us, and by thy great mercy taken us out of
cley: thou art he that leadest us in thy faieth, and the multitude of thy
mercies and benignity toward us has not ceased. And although our sins
have separated us from thee, yet nevertheless we are thy handy work every one
of us, and of long have been called thy people. Thou art Lord over all
creatures and souls. Thou do what thou will, and no man dare say to thee
why do thou so. Thou art our father, we are cley, thou have given us our
shape and fashion. Therefore if it please thee to take our Souls, take them
by the hands of thine angels, that we commit none evil against them. And
if these my fellows that be present with me will not be partakers of my
Prayer: behold my life alone, for the which I beseech thy benign Clemency,
if it please thee to take it, for thou gave it me, therefore do with it
whatsoever shall seem good unto thee, it is in thy hands, thou lendst it me,
and have preserved it within me. I will not distroye it my self, or let it out
of prison before thou ask for it. For thou know that As man can not live
without judgment: so likewise the same can not die without judgment. Unto
thee therefore do I lift up mine eyes, thou that dwell in Heaven, to deal
mercifullye with thy servants and with me, to turn our hearts that we
consent not unto this, to murder our selves. If thou know any amongst them,
that entende so wicked an Act, I beseech thee, O Lord my GOD, let me find
favor in thine eyes, give them an heart to hear wholesome counsel, that I
may deliver my self and mine own life, which I commend into thy bands, that
thou would receive it unto thee, for in thy hand is the life of every
living creature. Thus when Joseph had finished his prayer, he turned him unto
his fellows and saluted the^. Then said they, can thou therefore incline our
minds, because thou have pra^ed unto God for thy self and for us? did not we
tell ye erewhile, like as we tell the now, ye we are determined to die by one
means or other, where fore say thy mind, and tell us what kind of death thou will end thy life, for we have ever known the a just man and a worthy prince,
therefore art thou worthy to die first. Joseph perceiuinge that his fellows were
utterly determined to die, and would give no ear to his persuasions, for he
could by no reasons draw them to his opinion, he went subtilty to work with
them, saying: Saying it will be none otherwise brethren, I will show you my
de^ise. Ye are determined to die, ye say, and that upon your own swor^es,
therefore there is no better way then to do it by lot, in this wise. Let us
cast lottes amongste our selves, that we may be joined together by couples:
then will we cast lottes, which couple shall die first: after they two shall
cast lottes between the^ which shall kill his fellow: he that remains shall
choose him one of the second couple to kill him. Likewise the second couple
shall cast lottes between them selves, who shall die first, and he that is
left, shall choose him one of the third couple, whom he has a fansy to be
killed of* Then they shall try by lot who shall die first, who being slain,
the other may choose him self one of the four the couple to kill him, and so
on, til al be slain, that we see not the captivity of our people. The last
couple that shall remain, shall do thus, run one upon the others sword, or
elsse set them cast lottes betwixt them selves, and upon whom it falls,
let him die first. But for as much as we are fortye and one, so that we can
not be iustlye joined in couples: let us cast lottes first of all, and see
which of us shall first be slain, and when he is once out of the way, then
let us divide the couples. He that is to be stain first, let him choose
out one of the first couple to be slain of, and when he is dead, the first
couple shall cast lottes, and do as I have devised. Then every man likt his
devise (which was gods doing, who hard Iosephes prayer) and said all with one
mouth, we will do as thou have devised and to the it pertains to divide the
men and to cast the lottes. Joseph answered: but let us swear by the name of
the lord, that this devise shall stand, be ratified and performed. Whereunto
they accorded, and swear all by the name of the Lord, that they would have
that devise to be ratified and kept, which Joseph had invented of casting of
lottes. Then Joseph began to make lottes, who should be thod man: and it light
upon Iehoiada a priest, son of Eliakim a Galilean, which was a valiant man,
and chiefest in every counsel next to Joseph, and the principal perswader of
this wicked fact to kill them selves. After that did he craftily divide them
into couples, so that the lot of his own couple came forth last of al, who
looked to be saved and trusted in God, be^eninge that he would deliver him from
this abominable deed. Then Iehoida chose him one of the first couple, who slew
him. That done, the first couple cast lottes between them, so the one killed his
fellow, and chose him one of the second couple to kill him. The^ they of the
second couple cast lots between them selves in the presence of Joseph, and
the one killed theother, then he that remained, chose him one of the thy: de
couple to flea him. And in this manner did they, til there were al slain and
none left alive, but Joseph and his fellow: who said unto Joseph, go to, let
us cast lottes that we may go to our brethren. Joseph answered him, we will do
so, if thou be so disposed: but first hear me, I pray the, speak a few
things in thine ears, Tell me, have not these sinners rebelled against god, in
thus murdering of them selves so shamefully, nether could I by any means
diswade them, nor have them from this opinion. Wherefore should we two sin
against God so grievously, and against our own souls, if the lot should so fall
yt I shuid kill thee. I should be counted a ma^s^ear and that worthily: and it
may so chance that I shall escape after thee and save my life. But if the lot
should so fall that thou should flea me, thou should be taken also for a
murderer, and perauenture thou should not escape after me, and although
thou think yes. Notwithstanding we lose our hope in god, for that we sin
against our own souls. For all these men that thou see hear dead, lo,
they have sinned against their own souls, dying without discipline and all
good order. If thou will say, how shall we do for our oath that we have sworn.
Doste thou not know, that. He that breaks a wicked oath, do the nothing
wickedly him self. For a man is not constreined to perform an oath unto God,
but to the kepinge of his laws, and bereupon it is that David says. (I have
sworn and vvil perform. For neither vow nor oath, that is made against the
commandments of God, can be ratified before God. And that more is, before ye
we swear, our fathers swear first, a great while ago at the mount of Sinai,
that they and their children would keep the law of the Lord. Moses also
made a couenaunte with them upon the same, and not only with the^ that then
were there, but also with us. How then dare we be so bold to swcare, to
break the law of our God, and become ma^quellers, seeing it is one of the.x.
commandments expressly. Thou shall not kill. Wherefore, my brother, thou shall
understand that we need not be sollititous nor careful for the oath that we
have made, but rather to break it, for God will never be displeased with us for
that, for I being afraid of these wicked persons, that lie now he are
dead, did inuente this subtle means, and way to swear that I might save my
life. Thou therefore, my brother, if thou will be ruled by mine advise, thou
shall save thy life and mine, and I will cast no lottes, nor perform the oath
that we made. Which is not good in the law: if thou will not. I will
withstand thee, and fight with thee, to kill thee and skape my self. And
with this Joseph lepte back and drue out his sword, standinge over against
him, to see what his fellow would answer. His companion hearing this, sturred
neither hand nor foot against him, but said: Lo, I am content, do what
thou thinckest good, because thou art a man of God. And blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, that bathe not withdrawn his mercy from me, but made me to be
in thy lotte, whereby my soul is saved from goinge to helt thy lotte is a
just lotte For the Lord vvil not leave the scourge of sinners, upon the
lotte of the just. Much elsse besides this, spoke Iosephes companion unto
him, for he was sore afraid of him, least he should have killed him if they
had entermedled together, for Joseph was the better man of his hands, and
therefore Joseph chose him into his lot, that he might be able to make his party
good with him. In this point Joseph played the wise man's part, for he
escaped by this means both from the hands of those wicked foles: and also
from his fellow.

Therefore Joseph called out of ye cave to captain Nicanor, and said to him in
this wise: Will thou promise me that neither thou nor any of thy men that be
here with thee, or in the Romans camp shall kill us, before thou have brought
us unto Vaspasian? and let him do with us as he thinks good. Nicanor
answered. So and so deal God with me, if I fulfill not thy request, if so be
it thou will come forth unto me together with the men that thou have with
thee. Joseph answered, I will come forth unto thee, and so many more of us as
be alive: for so is it come to pass, that some of us be dead here in the
cave, wherefore how can they come forth? Then said Nicanor: never think
(friend Joseph) that I am come to deceive thee: come forth and trust in thy
Lord God, for thou neadest not to fear. Joseph said, swear unto me this, by
the god of Israel, although he be unknown unto thee. Nikano^ answered, I
swear unto the by that God that made the world by his wisdom, that thou nedest
not to fear me, but boldly may come forth unto me. So Nikanor made a
couenaunte with Joseph and his fellow, co^firming and ratifying it in writing
after the manner of the Romans: and reatched it into the cave upon a spear,
holding the point of the spear in his own hand. Joseph took the writing,
red it and believed Nicanor: the^ came he forth to Nicanor and his fellow with
him. When Nicanor sitting upon his seat of estate that was made him there in
the woo^e, nie unto the cave, saw Joseph come toward him: he rise up and
embrasing him kissed him: set him on his righthand, and wept with him
aboundauntly, he honored his fellow also, plaringe him between Pohrinus and
Gallicanus, whom he had at that present with him. Then Nicanor asked him for
the rest of the men that were with him, willing that they should come forth,
and he would honor them also, and do them no harm. Joseph declared the
whole matter unto him, what was become of them. Nicanor hearing of the
pertinacious stubburnnesse of the Jews hearts, and their wi^ked intentes, was
wonderfully moved. So then he rose and went from thence with Joseph and his
companion unto Vaspasian. When the Roman army saw Joseph, they were greatly
astonished, and gave a mighty shoute. Some reioysed that Joseph was taken,
saying: This is good luck, that our eyes shall see our long expected desire.
Other lamented and let teeres fall from their eyes with pensive hearts,
saiynge: Is not this that worthy manne, who made all the Romayne host to
quake for fear: and whose Fame and renown was known throughout all lands?
How is it come to pass that so mighty a man is taken in his own country,
and amongst his own people? If this chances unto such a man to be taken
in his own Land in the midst of his family and friends? How shall we escape
in a strange land. Certain evil disposed persons of the Romain soldiers went
to Vaspasian and said. Sir, you shall do well to command this man to be slain
without mercy, that has been the destruction of so many of the people of the
Romans. This is the self same, that shot the arow and stroke you in the leg:
put him to death and then shall you be sure he shall never move war more
against you. If you do not, ye shall see him one day again raise an army
against us, and distroy us. But Iosephe found frendshippe at Titus Vaspasians
sons hands, which came of the LORD. Therefore when he heard those wicked
men's words that desiered Vaspasian to put Joseph to death, he laughed them to
skorne and taunted them, saiynge: Will you tell my father what he has to
do? Will you give him so wicked counsel to flea that man that yeldeth him
self to us upon the trust of our lea^e and band of friendship, which you now go
about to break and frustrate? Did not captain Nicanor in my fathers name and
Caesar's, with all the Romans, make a covenant with him? Take heed what you
say. Is it not treason that you go about to break the Cesarical fidelity?
Moreover, who can tell whether it may so happen that some of us be taken by the
Jews, like as Iosephe is prisoner at this present with us? When Vaspasian
heard his sons words, it pleased him, and he spared Joseph, not sufferyng
him to be slain, but committed him to a certain captain of his, and earied
him about with him through the cities together with king Agrippa. After this
Vaspasian removed his ca^pe to Talmida, which also is called Acho, and from
thence he went to Caesaria a great city. When they of the city saw Joseph,
they cried unto Vaspasian, kill him, kill him, or else he will one day be an
occasion to stir great Wars against thee. But Vaspasian would not hear
them. Tidings came to Vaspasian that they of Iapho invaded the Isles that
were subject under his dominions with a navy, roauynge to spoil them.
Vaspasian therefore commanded to lay in wait for them, that they might be met
withal. So there was an ambushe laid without the town, and it came to
pass, that when the pirates were gone out a roauyng, Vaspasian entered the
town, and took it, because their Soldiers were absente. When the Citizins
returned with their Navy, and saw the Romans in the City, they labored
to arrive and set a land: but by and by a huge tempest and a mighty storm
drove all their Ships against the Rocks that were in the Sea shore, for
there was no Haven for Ships and there they were lost many of of them:
such as swamme to Land, the Romans slew them. They that were drowned in the
sea and slain by the Romans, were in noumber.iiii. thousand good men of
war: besides them were slain in the town.xl. thousand, all Jews.

THis done, Vaspasian set forth Valericus and Taribus two Romain captains with
his son Titus, who went, besieged and wan the towns of defense that were in
Galile. And thus did Titus use them: they that yielded unto him, he saved their
lives: and who soever withstode him, he slew. More over all the cities that
belonged to Agrippas in Galile, he restored them unto him again, only Tiarua
except, which he utterly raced, and slew all the mankind, specially such as
were apt to the wars, sold also their wives and children. And this was the
only city in all Galile, that Titus showed such rigor and extremity unto.
Vaspasian departinge thence took his iorny to Gamala, which is a city upon
the top of a mountain. The name thereof is called Gamala, of an Hebrew word
Gamal, that signifies to quite or to do a good turn because it is the best
city that belonged to Agrippas, and the inhabitants thereof were all very
rich. The city also called Selencia was not far from it situated, a country
replenished with good towns, Gardens, brooks, and all kind of fruitful
trees. Agrippa besoughte Vaspasian, that he would not destroy this city: let
me go first (says he) and offer them peace, peraue^ture they will take it,
that they may save their lives from destruction. Vaspasian was entreated:
saying unto him: go and do as thou will, for to honor thee, I will do^e so
much for thy sake. So Agrippa went to them, and spoke frendlye and peaceablye
unto them, and they received him in like manner, but they mente deceit,
saying. Thou art our LORD and king: to whom therefore does all that is
of any price to be desired in all Israel belong, but unto thee? therefore
come ne^e unto us and debate the matter with thy servant, Agrippas crediting
their words, came hard to the city, and as he listened to them that talked
with him, one cast a great stone from the wall, which light just between his
shoulders, and brake his back with one of his arms also, with such violence
yt it stroke him prostrate to the ground. But his servants stepte to him:
took him up, and carried him to Vaspasian. Who saying him so sore hurt, swear
he would never go from thence til he had taken the city and ordered them in
like manner as he did Tiarua, to leave never a man a live there in. The Roman
Physicians did bestow such diligence about Agrippas that they cured him.
Vaspasian in this rage against the Selucians, because they had wounded the
king, besieged and assaulted them. The Jews within ye town encouraged one an
other, saying, let us stick to it now and play the men, for we have none
other hope to save our lives, saying we have thus ordered the king. Certain
stout men of the^ therefore issued and encountering with the Romans, made a
great slaughter amongst the^. After that the Romans addressed their engines,
planted their iron Rams that they brought with them against the walls, and
by that time night came, battred a great part thereof down to thearth, that
Vaspasian and much people with him might enter at their pleasure. But Vaspasian
gave commandment to his army, that they should not enter that night into
the town, but stand and compass the walls until morrow, yt they might see
how to win it. Notwithstanding they would not be ruled by him, but entered:
then the Jews came upon them, drue the streets with chains, and closed the
ways of the city, entrappinge them in such a sort that they could go another
one way nor other: after set up on them and bette them down even there, so
that they were all slain save a ten men that fled with Vaspasian and a
captain named Butius, one of the best men of war in all the Romans army, him
the Jews pursued and slew But Vaspasian and his fled to the mountains, that
he might be there in sauegarde. And from thence he sent to Titus his son that
was in Siria, for the Roman army, that he had sent with him into Persia,
which Titus led into Iewrye.

Shortly after Vaspasian gathered souldioures and repaired his army, joined
with Agrippas company, and returned to Selencia, wan it and slew them every
manne leaving none alive, and afterward went to other Cities of Galile and
took them, seruinge them in like sort. After that he came to the city called
Nascela, which was a walled town, and of all the towns of defense through
out all Galile, none left but it. Thus he besieged, because thither were
resorted many cutthrotes and wicked persons without all fear of GOD, such
as were Robbers and rouers of the land of Judea. Emongste whom was a certain
manne named Iehochanan, learned, wise and prudente, specially to do mischief,
a wittye counselloure, and of such eloquence that he could persuade
cunninglye, and dissuade men from that they had purposed. Besides this, he
was a murderer, ready to shed blood and to do any mischief: a great
robber, and one that ever gaped after other men's goods. By which means he
was become very rich, wherefore there resorted unto him all vain persons,
mansiears, rebels and ruffains, like him self, geuynge him large rewards, that
they might be of his fraternity, his brethren and adherentes: and he to be
their head. Titus was sent to this city, by his father to offer them
comditions of peace, whether, when he was come, he sent his ambassadors to
the citizens to entreat the peace with the^. Whereunto the Cityzens accorded,
and were ready to enter in league with Titus.

When as this wicked Iehochanan perceived the ancient men of the town and the
heads would receive peace, he commanded his companions to keep the walls, to
let them from speaking with the Romans, and that they would give the
Romans their answer. So therefore, seditious Iehochana^ made answer to the
embassadoure of Titus, saying, to morrow have we a solemn feast to the Lord
God, tell thy master Titus therefore, that he grant us truce for two days,
and the third day we will give him answer. Wherewith Titus was content and
left the assault for two days. These things were done upon Whitson even,
which was called the feast of weakes and harvest. The night before the third
day appointed was come, Iehochanan and his accomplices, gate them out of the
town and fled toward Jerusalem, ere Titus knew thereof: On the morrow he sent
his ambassador to demand their answer, what they would do They answered, we
desire to enter in a league with you, for we are yours to do you what pleasure
your heart desires, upon this condition that none of the Romans hurt either
our bodies or goods, Titus upon this made peace with them, confirminge it by
writing sealed, for the better assurance thereof: So they opened the gates and
Titus came into the town with his hole armi, and the Jews received him with
great joy, honoring him very much. Then Titus inquired for Iehochanan and his
confederates, the citizens declared unto him, how he fled by night withal his,
toward Jerusalem. Titus hearing that, sent after to pursue him: yet they found
him not, he had made such speed: Notwithstanding many of the people, that went
out of the town with him that they might escape the danger, both men women
children, old and impotent persons, they enertoke, slew them every one, and
returned with a great spoil. After this Titus wan all the cities in Galile,
and set rulers in them. Then Vaspasian dislodged from thence and came to the
mount Tabor, which has snow upon it continually: the height thereof is.xxx.
furlonges, and upon the top is a plain of.xxiii. furlong^ broad. Thither sent
Vaspasian one of his Captains called Palgorus, which took the mountain and
the town that stood thereon. But here I will leave of the history of the rest
of the battails that were fought in other places in the land of Israel and
Galile: and speak no more of them in this book, for they be almost
innumerable, and we have made mention of them in the history of the Romans.

The Historye of the siege of Jerusalem.
Now will we discribe the battails of Jerusalem, and how the city was
besieged by ye Romans: wherein we will declare all things truly as our manner
is, and faithfullye, according to the verity of that was done. It came to
pass therefore as Iehochanan the Galilean was fled to Jerusalem, he found
there men mete for his purpose, injurious persons wicked men, murderers,
disceiuers, bloudsheaders an infinite number, for out of all countries within
the land of Judah, there repared thither all men of war, to defend the
sanctuary of our God: and Anani the hie priest received all that came. These
saying Iehochanan and his valeantnesse, fell from Anani the hie priest, and
claue unto him, devising with him of al their affairs, So Iehochanan conspired
with those cutthrotes, to lay hands upon the rich men of the city, and to
spoil them of their goods, and this was their manner, when they espied any
notable rich man of the city, they would after this sort quarrel with him. Art
not thou he that have sent letters to the Romans, and to Vaspasian to betraye
the city unto them: Thus would they examine him before the people: and when he
would answer. God forbid I should so do: then would they bring in lims of
the Devil, of their own company to bear false witness against him, that he
might be condemned to death by the law for a rebel. Thus dealt they with
Antipas and Lohia, both noble men, and of the chief of the city, and their
goods withal their jewels, the seditious ceased for them selves. They quarrels
also to the hie priests, thruste them from their charges that they could not
execute their service. Moreover, they cast lottes who should have the priests
office, and who should be no priest. For they held the priesthode and service
of God, for joys, gaudes, and trifles. So the lotte fell upon one that was
called Pani the son of Peniel, a carterly husbandman, ignorant what belonged
to the priests office, so that he was utter lie unworthy of the priesthode:
yet they made him hye priest for all ye, so light a matter made they of ye
priest hode. The good and Godly men of Jerusalem seeing the power of these
Ruffians and wicked persons bear such swinge: they stack together, and
determined to with stand them by force. The people therefore earnestlye moved
with anger, set upon them, and encountered with them in such sort, that the
fight was great on both sides, in the streates, in the market place, in the
temple, and in the entrance of the Temple, till all the city was filled full
of dead bodies and slain men. For there was not so much as one streate, but
there was some skirmishes in it. The people at length gat the upper hand of the
Ruffia^s, for they were eigerly set and earnestly bent against the^. The
sedicious therefore, seeing the^ selves not able to make their party good with
the people: fled every man into the temple of the Lord, shut it after them,
and there remained. But Anani the hie Priest saying the wicked to be fled to
the temple: willed the people to cease their fighting upon them in the holy
temple of the Lord, least they should pollute it with the blood and dead
carcases of these wicked persons. The people therefore left of the fight. Then
Anani beset the temple round about with a.us. thousand of the best and
pickedst men of the people, well armed all of them with iackes and Sallettes,
and as well weapened, with every manne a sword, a Target, and a Spear or
Pyke, to keep the Temple that they should not come forth. Moreover, Anani
cast in his mind that besides the setting upon them in the Temple, which
were in no wise semelye: it should also be as great a damage if the people
of the Lord, should one riue and stick an other in the very Temple. For
these causes he sent Ambassadors to Iehochanan the Galilean chief Captain
of the the sedicious and thieues, offering him peace: but Iehochanan refused
it. For the Sedicious had sent for the Edomites to come and aid them. These
Edomites had been ever from their first beginnynge very hardye and
Valiaunte men, and warrelyke: yet were they subject to the Jews. For
Hircanus king of Judah had conquered them, and caused them to be circumcised:
bindynge such of them as were the best warriors amongst them, to stand in
arms, and keep watch and ward upon the walls of Jerusalem day and night,
the rest of the^ to pai tribute to ye Jews. Upon a certain night came.xxii.
thousand of these Edomites, all good men of war against Jerusalem. When
Anani the hie Priest and the People that were with him, heard the noise of
the Edumites army: he went upon the wais and demanded of the^ what they were,
from whence they come, and whither they would. They answered. We are
Edomites, and came out of Edomea to visit the Lord God and his temple, and to
see in what case his people stands: for this we come according to our
accustomed manner as ever here tofore. Anani answered. You are disse^blers and
not as your words do show: neither come ye to seek God and his sanctuary, nor
yet to aid his people, but rather to the succors of Iehochanan, graunde
captain of thieues. Were it not better for you to assist the sanctuary of
God, then these sinful sedicious persons, that covet nothing else, then to lay
waste the house of God, and to distroy his people? They in the most holy city
of God, do shede the blood of just, Godly, and innocent men: through whose
wickedness the Romans have the upper hand upon us: because we have Civil
wars at home with the Sedicious, and external with the Romans. Yea, the
wickedness of the sedicious is grown so far, that the most part of us
had rather be slain of the Romans, then of our brethren the Jews. If so
be it, ye be come to aid them, ye shall understand that ye offend our LORD
God greuouslye, to healpe sinners and murderers, that tread the People of GOD
under their fete, like as men tread Grapes in a wine press, and make the
temple of the Lord a dwelling place of ma^quellers and wicked persons. Ye
say ye come to seek the Lord: how is it the^ that ye are thus in arms after
the manner of War? Ye shall understand, we shut not the Gates of the
Town because of you, least you should come in, after your accustomed manner:
but because of your Armoure and Weapons that you have with you, which are
instruments of destruction, a very unmeet fashion to come and visit the
Lord with. Ye should rather have come with offeringes, sacrifices,
confession, and praise. Notwithstanding, if ye will enter into the town for
devotion sake, ye are welcome: but ye must lay away your Weapons, and so
enter in peaceablye. The Edomites answered. We maruayle not a little at thee
which art the hie Priest, our Lord and mediatoure, and at the rest of the
priests of the Lord, with the Elders and Judges of the people that be
present with thee, and your words seem strange in our ears. For we
understand you take us for your ennemies, and thereupon you stop us of our
entrance into the city to visit the Lord God after our accustomed manner.
In that we be armed as ye obiecte unto us: do ye not know that Vaspasian
draws nigh to come to this holy City? This we hearing of, was the cause that
we took our Weapons with us, to come to aid you, and keep the town, as we
have been wont these many years. But how should ye gather this, that we
come to succoure the wicked and sedicious that be with you: when as from the
first day that ever we and our fathers were circumcised, we never swarued
from the Law and commandments of the Lord? Tell us if there be any
commandment in the Law that bids a man to strenthen and maintain the
power of the wicked, to the which we are bound to hearken, and to aid
these? God forbid we should do this: for we all, both that be here, and
the other Edomites also be servants of the Lord and his people, to mayntaine
and defend the law, the people, and the house of the Lord. Whiles they were
thus talkyng together, there rose up a great cloud, and lightenynges were
seen with fire, darckenesse with mighty thunder claps and showers of hail,
that all that saw it were wonderfully afraied. Wherefore the people fled wholly,
left the walls and forts by Anani, of God, al good men of war, besides
innumerable other that they killed of the common people. In the morninge they
laid hands on the rich men, drue them before judges and the.ixx. elders, which
otherwise be called Sanhedrine who^ they called together, and there wicked
Iehochanan ye Galilean, spoke unto the^ in this wise. Whi condemn ye not these
rich cobbes, yt have made a co^spiracy with the Romans, and determine to
betray this holy city into their hands? namely one Sechariahu a just man,
perfect, godly, and virtuous, one that feared the lord, and oued both god and
man: but for his richesse only, which were very great, this Iehochanan
captain of ye sedicious apprehended him, willing thelders to condemn him to
death, for that he had joined with their ennemies (as he said) to betray the
city to the^. The priests, elders, and judges, hearing his words: and
perceiving that both he and ye rest of his bloudi hand desired nothing else then
to make this man away, although they knew him to be most innocent: they wept
and sighed greatly. Iehochanan seeing them weep for Sechariahu, and that they
would not condemn him, respecting his justice and integrity: What, says he:
do ye begin to mourn before there be any corse present? I would I should
never come where God has to do, but if ye order us thus in your judgments,
ye shall be the first that we will lay hold of, and we will sit in judgment our
selves, to discern the matters of the people of god, according as we think
good. Then layinge apart al shame, with an obstinat mind the wicked sort
hoysed up Sechariahu, carried him out of the place of judgment, and brought
him up to the top of a very hie toure, at the East end of the town, from
whence they thruste him down headelonge, and he died there at the walls side
in the vale of Iehoschaphat. The priests therefore were sore afraid of their
own parts, and the judges also with the elders because of wicked Iehochanan
and the reaste of the seditious.

For Iehochanan had given them warning and said, except ye give sentence upon
every man that we shall bring unto you, according to our minds, be ye
assured, ye shall al of you go the same way that Sechariahu is gone before you.
After that they apprehended a just man and a rich, that was beloved of all the
town, whose name was Gorinion, surnamed valeanut: and he was a valiant man in
de^e, most expert in the wars, thereto wise and witty, and a man of a pure
and perfect life. One that was ever the form^st in battle. When so ever they
had any conflict against the gentiles that besieged Jerusalem: and this was his
accustomed manner, that when the ennemies marched to ioyn battle ye Jews, he
would run upon them with such force, and make slaughter of them, that spite of
their hearts, he would drive them to retire, and by that means his body was
full of skarres, of wounds and his face, and his head wonderfullye mangled,
with the wounds that he had re^eiued in battails yt he had been in for the
people of the Lord. Yet now because he would not follow ye most cruel villains
mind Iehochanan, and take his part, Iehochanan commanded him to be
apprehended and brought before him, and when he was come, said thus unto him
Make thy will, set thy house in a stay, and confess thy self unto the Lord, for
there is no way with the but death, and so they led him out of the town to kill
him there, least there should be any business about his death, if they had
put him to death within the town: for all the citizens of Jerusalem loved him,
and he likewise loved them. When they were come to the place of execution,
Gorinion fell down before the^, and besoughte them with tears, in this wise.
Seeing ye have so determined, ye ye will needs slay me, when as notwithstanding
I have committed no crime, nor any thing offended, and that ye will in no
wise spare me, although I be innocent as you know well enough your selves: yet I
beseech you, let me obtain this one thing at your hands, that you would do so
much at ye least wise at mi request as to bury my body: other favor I desire
not. They made him answer: If ye had not spoken unto us thereof, we had
thought to have done it, for so we were determined with our selves. But now
seeing thou art so bold as to demand this of us, we will flea thee, but
burial gettest thou none, thy body shall be cast forth unto the beasts of
thearth and fouls of their. Gorion yet besoughte them to the contrary, until
the most cruel Iehochanan stroke him and sieve him, and after threw out his
body to the beasts of the field: this done they returned into the city.

VAspasian in the mean season drue n^e Jerusalem, for he had pitched his
tents at Cesaria, where he vitailed his army, and paid his souldioures great
wages: wherefore they tarried in that city many days, for when Vaspasian
understood of the civil wars in Jerusalem, he said unto his people, let us
make no haste to besege Jerusalem: til such time as they have slain one an
other amongste them selves: and so at length their pride will be pulled down
when as they see them selves waste away with civil wars, hunger and thurst.
For Vaspasian was a wonderful wise man in all affairs of wars and his
wisdom never turned him to more commoditye then in this denise only. So he
soiourned at Cesaria with his men many days. The people of Jerusalem made
war upon Iehochanan and his accomplices, until innumerable of them were
destroyed, some of them were slain with swords: some the seditious stickte
with short daggers. For certain of the sedicious carried short daggers
secretly under their garments, where with they would come suddenly upon an honest
and just man, and thrust him to the heart, that he should faldown dead in the
place without know ledge who stroke him. So by this means, what with swords
in open fraies, and what with daggers secretlye, very many of the people were
flaine: and far mo that way, then by the Romans: in so much that now very few
citizens were left alive. Thus when Iehochanan had gotten the upper hand of
the city, he made an army out of Jerusalem, to go and take the cities that had
made peace with Vaspasian, which they sacked and raced to the ground, and who
so ever they found in them, Romans or Jews they flue them. Yea Iehochanan
went with them him self, to aid the, spoiling and cariyng away all the richesse
that they found in them. They took also the city Gerara, that stood beyond
Iordane, where as they remained. Then the inhabitants of Jerusalem both
priests, elders and the reast of the people, sent embassaders to Vaspasian to
desire peace with him, and succoures against Iehochanan, and his wicked
rabble, which dailye in the town flue very many of the people of God. The
citizens also of Gerara sent ambassadors unto Vaspasian, saying: If thou will
be Lord over the land of Judea, and the city of Jerusalem, and desierest to
assure the rule thereof, and establishe it unto thee: the^ harken unto our
counsel, and come unto us without delay, to deliver us from the hands of
Iehochanan, and the wicked sedicious persons, that with all their might
endeavor to spoil al our goods, and to get the dominion over us, our wives,
and children, to none other purpose, then by that means to distroy us utterly,
that no remnaunt of us should be left. If so be it thou will come and
valiauntlye withstand them with thy power, we will also fight against them
within the town, till they be all flaine, and then thou shall be our Lord. And
that done, thou may go to Jerusalem without any impediment or hinderaunce
of any man, for they also of that city desire the same, and would gladlye
become Subjects to the Romans. When as therefore Vaspasian heard the
peticions of the Citizins of Gerara, he took his journey thither to succor
them, and deferred to go to Jerusalem. But Iehochanan heard of his That done,
he returned to Cesaria to take muster of his hole army, and prepare to go to
besiege Jerusalem. But in the mean season came purseuants from Rome and
brought him word ye Nero the Emperor was dead, and how that, as he was a
huntinge in the country, the fire of the lord came down from heaven, and fell
upon him that he died of it. After whom reigned Galba not one half year, for
before it was fully ended: he was slain by the noble me^ of Rome, and Vitellius
created in his stead, a fool, yet a sore cruel man, much given to drunkenness,
so that he was in all points unworthy of the Romain empire. The noble men of
Rome that were with Vaspasian, hearing this, greatly disdained at the matter
and said. Was there never a noble man of Rome left, to be placed in the Empire,
but ye must choose a dronken wine souffer? Why did ye not rather elect ye
mighty prince Vaspasian that is here with us, a sage and wise man, thereto also
most valea^t, one that conquered many cities, and vanquished many nations, and
those most fearce? What puissante kings has he subdued under the Roman
empire? how far and wide has he enlarged the dominions of ye Romans? And
now when as the empire ought to have been bestowed upon Vaspasian or some one
like unto him, and none such could be found amongst you; ye bestowed it upon a
fool, and a blowbole dronkard, wherein ye have done very indiscreetly. Well,
thempire of Rome shall have a better emperor one day, and God say Amen.
Wheruppon the princes that were there, cast their heads together, and decreed to
proclaim Vaspasian Emperor. Therefore with one consent, they went unto
Vaspasian and said unto him. Thou shall be our head, for the Empire belongs
unto such a one: and thou shall have the dominion over us. But Vaspasian
refused to take it upon him, and would in no wise consent unto them.
Notwithstanding they compelled him and placed him upon a throne of majesty,
settinge an imperial and far mo that way, then by the Romans: in so much
that now very few citizens were left alive. Thus when Iehochanan had gotten
the upper hand of the city, he made an army out of Jerusalem, to go and take
the cities that had made peace with Vaspasian, which they sacked and raced to
the ground, and who so ever they found in them, Romans or Jews they slew
them. Yea Iehochanan went with them him self, to aid the, spoiling and cariyng
away all the richesse that they found in them. They took also the city Gerara,
that stood beyond Iordane, where as they remained. Then the inhabitants of
Jerusalem both priests, elders and the reast of the people, sent embassaders
to Vaspasian to desire peace with him, and succoures against Iehochanan, and
his wicked rabble, which dailye in the town flue very many of the people of
God. The citizens also of Gerara sent ambassadors unto Vaspasian, saying: If
thou will be Lord over the land of Judea, and the city of Jerusalem, and
desierest to assure the rule thereof, and establishe it unto thee: the^ harken
unto our counsel, and come unto us without delay, to deliver us from the
hands of Iehochanan, and the wicked sedicious persons, that with all their
might endeavor to spoil al our goods, and to get the dominion over us, our
wives, and children, to none other purpose, then by that means to distroy us
utterly, that no remnaunt of us should be left. If so be it thou will come and
daliauntlye withstand them with thy power, we will also fight against them
within the town, till they be all slain, and then thou shall be our Lord. And
that done, thou may go to Jerusalem without any impediment or hinderaunce
of any man, for they also of that city desire the same, and would gladlye
become Subjects to the Romans. When as therefore Vaspasian heard the
peticions of the Citizins of Gerara, he took his journey thither to succor
them, and deferred to go to Jerusalem. But Iehochanan heard of his coming,
wherefore he slew the chief gouernoure of Gerara, and gate him out of the
town with his companions and took them to their fete, determining to fle into a
certain wode. Vaspasian having knowledge thereof, made out after them,
sending one Pologarus, who ouertoke them and made a great slaughter of them.
And in his return toward Gerara, upon Iordane side, he light upon much people
going to Jerusalem, that they might escape together with the Sedicious. Them
Poligorus drove back unto the river, where he slew.xiii. thousand of them,
the reaste leaped into Iordane and were drowned, to the number of.lxxxxii.
thousand men, women and children, with much cattle that were all drowned
together in the river, in so much that the channel of Iordane so stuffed and
stopped with dead bodies, the waters rise and ran over the banckes here and there
into the fields and plains: yet at the length the waters increased and bare
the carcases down the river as far as the sea of Sedom, which is the sea of
pitch, other wise called the salt sea: and all the banks of Iordane lay full of
dead bodies. After this Vaspasian took his journey from thence and went into
the land of Edom, where he wan two strong cities, the one called Lagarith, the
other Cephar, Toch, and slew a ten thousand of the people thereof, leading the
reaste away into bandage. From thence he disloged and came to a town called
Chamath Gedi, which he subdewed: In this city were well springes of heat
waters, from whence the hoate bathes of Tiberiah have their original. The
natural Philosophers and Astronomers of that countri, hold an opinion that
these are the heads of all the hoate well springes in that hole country,
Departinge from thence, he came to Samaria and wanne it. Then repaired he
again all the towns that he had subdued, and made up their walls, placinge
garrisons therein to aid him, what time he should besiege Jerusalem. That done,
he returned to Cesaria to take muster of his hole army, and prepare to go to
besiege Jerusalem. But in the mean season came purseuants from Rome and
brought him word ye Nero the Emperor was dead, and how that, as he was a
huntinge in the country, the fire of the lord came down from heaven, and fell
upon him that he died of it. After whom reigned Galba not one half year, for
before it was fully ended: he was slain by the noble me^ of Rome, and Vitellius
created in his stead, a fool, yet a sore cruel man, much given to drunkenness,
so that he was in all points unworthy of the Romain empire. The noble men of
Rome that were with Vaspasian, hearing this, greatly disdained at the matter
and said. Was there never a noble man of Rome left, to be placed in the Empire,
but ye must choose a dronken wine souffer? Why did ye not rather elect ye
mighty prince Vaspasian that is here with us, a sage and wise man, thereto also
most valea^t, one that conquered many cities, and vanquished many nations, and
those most fearce? What puissante kings has he subdued under the Roman
empire? how far and wide has he enlarged the dominions of ye Romans? And
now when as the empire ought to have been bestowed upon Vaspasian or some one
like unto him, and none such could be found amongst you; ye bestowed it upon a
fool, and a blowbole dronkard, wherein ye have done very indiscreetly. Well,
thempire of Rome shall have a better emperor one day, and God say Amen.
Wheruppon the princes that were there, cast their heads together, and decreed to
proclaim Vaspasian Emperor. Therefore with one consent, they went unto
Vaspasian and said unto him. Thou shall be our head, for the Empire belongs
unto such a one: and thou shall have the dominion over us. But Vaspasian
refused to take it upon him, and would in no wise consent unto them.
Notwithstanding they compelled him and placed him upon a throne of majesty,
settinge an imperial crown upon his head: which he would have put always,
and pulled of with his hand, because he would not be Emperor. Wherefore
the Romayne capitaynes drew out their swords, and said: Thou shalt be
Emperor and reign over us, therefore refuse it not: if thou do, thou shalt
dye upon our swords. Vaspasian therefore saying him self constrained being
afraid of his life: he was content to suffer him self to be proclaimed
Emperor. Then all the Army was sworn unto him, and he sat upon the royal
seat, as emperor, and king of kings.

THE Civil Wars at Jerusalem increased yet still, and much blood was
shed through the wickedness of Iehochanan Captain of Thieues, a lymme of
the Devil, and through the cutthroate murderers that were with him, who had
all even sworn the utter destruction of the city of the Lord and the deaths
of his people. There was also an other cutthroate, a noble manne of Judea at
Jerusalem about the same time called Schimeon, who began also to follow
Iehochanans manners, in sleainge innocents, and robbynge and reauing in
Jerusalem, for as much as Anani the hye Priest had once appointed him
Prince and chief Captain of Jerusalem: and afterward finding him an
enemy, banished him the City.

Wherefore Schimeon went and gate him a route of Unthrifts, murderers, and
thieues, casting in his mind and saiynge: Except I join my self unto such
good fellows, I shall never be able to be revenged of Anani and his
assistauntes that have thus bannished me out of Jerusalem into exyle
wrongfullye, unto my great dishonor. Shall I that have been in such estate,
now be cast out of my dignity, and be constrained to wander here and there as
a banished manne?

He went therefore through all the cities of Judea and Galile, causinge to be
proclaimed in the streets and market places, and sent his letters where he
could not come him self, in this manner and form: Who so ever lists to be
rid from the bondage of his master, or has had any iniurye in his
country, or what servant so ever desires to be set at liberty, or who so
can not abide the rule of his father or his master, all that be in debte and
stand in fear of their creditours, or fear the judges for sheadinge any
innocente blood, and therefore lurketh solitarilye in woods or mountains, if
there be any man that is accused of any notorious crime and in any danger
therefore: to be short, who so ever is disposed to rob and reaue, to do
iniurye and wrong, to haunt hores to steal, to murder, to eat and drink at
other men's cost, without labor of his hands: let him resort to me, and
I will deliver him from the yoke and danger of the laws, I will find him
his fill of booties and spoils. There assembled unto him about twentye
thousand men al murderers, thieves, rebels, lawless persons, wicked and
sedicious men. Then began Schimeon also to vex the Israelites: to turn all
up side down where so ever he came. When the citizens of Jerusalem, the
priests, elders and Anani the hie priest, heard tidinges of Schimeons
dispitefull wickedness, how he held on still oppressinge the people of God,
they were very pensive and said: now will this fellow more trouble us than
Iehochanan, be he never so cruel. They consulted therefore and agreed
secretelye to send a power against him, that might suddenly fall upon him and
ouerrunne him: perauenture (say they) they may flea him or take him alive,
before his wickedness grow to further inconvenience, and join him self with
our foes, then shall they assail us both within the town and without. They
made out therefore against him a great army of Israelites and Jews, with
Charettes, and horsemenne, and footemenne in great number, which came where
his camp lay, and found him in the corn fields distroiynge of the grain,
pullinge down of barnes, and burninge all, both corn and Olive trees. Then
the Ierosolimites divided their army, and set upon Schimeons tents
sodainelye, smote down his tents, and made a great slanghter upon the
sedicious. But shortelye after Schimeon gate the upper hand of the people of
GOD, for he came upon them in the night season, and made a soore slaughter
amongst them. Then they that remained took them selves to flighte toward
Jerusalem, and Schimeon pursued them killinge them unto the hard gates of
Jerusalem, so that mauye of them were slain in the way, and very few
escaped. After this Schimeon went and moved war upon the Edomites, to subdue
them unto him self, which before were under the dominion of the
Hierosolimites. And first the came to the City Asa, otherwise called Gaza, for
it was the first City within the borders of Edome, as men come from
Jerusalem. But the Edomites met him in the field in great noumber, and
joined with him, but nether part had the vyctorye: wherefore at length they
retired both. Then was Schimeon in so great a rage when as he could not
overcome these Edomites, that he wishte him self out of his life. So he
ceased fighting a while, and encamped him self in the borders of the Land
of Edome right against it, and there abode, thinking to set upon them at
an other time.

And as he was deuisynge how to order all things, there came vnth him an
Edomite called Jacob, one of the chiefest men amongste them, and a warrioure:
He hearing of Schimeons proclamation, was moned to come and enter in league
with him and thereupon said unto him. Never let it discomfort thee that thou
could not overcome the Edomites at the first battle. If thou will be
rulled by my counsel thou shall win all the cities in the whole land, and I
will deliver the^ into thy hands. Schimeon desired to know how: therefore
said he, let us here thy counsel, and show us how it may be brought about,
and when it is come to pass, then will we honor thee and reward thee
accordinglye. Jacob said, give me the one half of thine army, which I will
lead with me into an ambushe: then shalt thou in the morning betimes set thy
men in array against the Edomites for a stale, and when thou shalt perceive
them come against thee: then make as though thou fledst, until thou have
staled them out of the town into the feldes to pursue thee. Then will I with
my men come out of our ambushe, and make speed to the gates: where we shall
kill the Warders, and fodainely enter the town, likewise kill all that we
find there, and set up a flagge upon a tower of the town. Then* when the
Edomites shall see that, their hearts will be done and dead for sorrow: then
may thou turn again upon them, and beat them down at thy pleasure. Or if
thou like not this devise: hear yet another way. I have been a captain
amongst them a long while, therefore I will return in the night season into
the town: if the watch examine me from whence I come, I will tell them I
come from Schimeons camp, whither I went as a spy. Then will I go to the
elders of the town, and will the^ to let me have a company of the best
soldiers: and I will bring Schimeon into their hands, if he set upon us
again. For I have vewed his camp, and his power, and understand that he
entendes to morrow to entermeddle with us, which thou shall do in deed. And
when thou see me to issue against thee: thou shall set thy staff in the
rest, and come toward me, then will I take me to flight, and cast a fear
in the Edomites hearts that they shall fly also, which done thou may pursue
to slay them at thy pleasure: overcome them and enter the town. Then that town
great Asa once taken, thou shall quicklye win all the reaste. When Schimeon had
hard this, he went and deliberated with his own counsel: and they likt the
last devise best: wherefore, that they concluded upon. So Jacob the Edomite
returned by night to Asa, and declared to the auncientes of the town, how he
had been in Schimeons camp and had vewed his army, whereby he had conceived good
hope that he should deliver Schimeon into their hands shortly: The elders
therefore made him graund captain and chief of al their men of war, charging
every man in this wise. For so much as none of you are so expert in the
knowledge of warfare, as is Jacob, therefore behooves it you to follow him in all
things: if he set forward, set ye forward: whereas he pitcheth his tent,
pitche ye also: if he stay, stay ye: when as he flies, fly ye: to be short:
when he returns, then return ye, and go not one here breadth from that that
he shall command you, neither one way nor other. Upon the next morrow,
Schimeon issued out of his camp with all his army, and upon that assembled
Jacob his men, and went out to mete him. But when they came at the point ready
to join, and Schimeon with his company had charged their stases against
them, by and by Jacob left the field, turned his back and fled, and the
chief souldioures that were about him fled with him. The reaste of the people
see their captain fly, they ^oke them selves like wise to flighte, every
manne: then Schimeon pursuynge, made a great flaughter of them and wanne the
town, brynginge them under his subjection. And when he had sacked the houses
of them that were slain of the Edomites, and spoiled their goods, which was
very much, the rest that he took prisoners and kept alive: he made peace
withal, and joined the^ unto his own camp. After that he departed from thence,
accompanied with xl. thousand good fighting men, part Edomites, and part
Jews, and came to Chebron, which he wanne and destroted al their grain and
corn feldes. Yet afterward he repaired their walls and such of them as were
left alive, made peace with Schimeon, who received them into league with him,
and they became his men, and followed him in his wars. So he disloged from
thence with his whole army, which by the accession of the Chebronites, was
now wonderfullye increased, and determined to go to Jerusalem. And when he
came nie the city, he raunged here and there upon the fruits that were upon
the ground, and distroyed their corn. Captain Iehochanan having
intelligence of Schimeons coming to besiege the Town, and how he had
distroyed the fields: thought to have gone out of Jerusalem and to fight
with him, but he durst not, for his spies had told him that he should not be
able to overcome him, he had so puissaunt an Army and so well apappointed.
Yet nevertheless he issued out, and lay in an ambushe for Schimeon. In the
mean space by chance Schimeons wise (that was fled out of Jerusalem with
her men and women feruauntes toward her husband, for fear least she should
be slain for her husbands sake, if she should have tarried at Jerusalem:)
passed by where be lay in his ambushe* Her he took and brought again to
Jerusalem, not a little proud of such a pray: thinking, now shall we have
Schimeon at our pleasure, saying we have his wife our prisoner: he lousth her
intirelye, therefore will he do for her sake whatsoever we will have him.
This came to Schimeons ear, who also had taken many of Iehochanans men, and
cut their right hands of, sendyng them so home with shame to Jerusalem to
their master. He sent moreover Embassadoures to Iehochanan, willinge him to
send him his wise in such sort that she might come to him with all that was
hers, or if he refused to do it, he should be the extremelyer handeled: for he
would take the town or it were long: and to Iehochanans shame, cut of the
hands and legs of all them that did inhabit it. Iehochanan hearing this,
was soore afraid and all they that were with him*, and therefore they sent
him his wise. Whereupon Schimeon kept him without the town. And as Schimeon
played the tyrant without, so likewise did Iehochanan within the town. For
Iehochanans soldiers ravished the Israelites wives, and shed innocente
blood. Shortly after Schimeon left the town for a space, and returned into
Edomea: for he had word that the men of most power, and the richest forte
of that country, rebelled. Whereupon he sacked and spoiled all the towns of
Edomea and left them nothing: in so much that he was become very rich, and
then returned to Jerusalem, bringing the Edomites wholly with him, that were
mets for the war^ and many of the Jews resorted unto him also, and with his
power he besieged Jerusalem even at the hard gates. Yet the tirannye of
Iehochanan and his accomplices ceased not, but increased more and more dailye in
Jerusalem, in so much that they taught the citizens of Jerusalem to murder
their neighbors, and to commit adultrye with their wives: by which means
fornication was rife and common in the city. Yea, many of the people and
youth, shaued their beardes, lettinge their here of their heads grow, and
accompaned them selves with women, that thereby they might exercise their
adultery the safer and not be espied. Which sin did wonderfullye defile the
town of Jerusalem: and without doubt furthered the desolation thereof. The
gates also of the town were closed up that no man might go in nor out. Yet,
who so went out, fell into the hands of Schimeon, and was slain, they that
tarried within, were constrained to see before their faces, their shame in every
street and corner. And if any man found any fault, he was slain straight by
Iehochanan the most cruel captain of the seditious rebels. The citizens
therefore saying the tyranny of Iehochanan, to be without measure, they
assembled altogether, and encountered with Iehochanan, and were slain a
wonderful sort of them in that conflict. And except the Edomites that were
fled to Jerusalem for the tyranny of Schimeon had succored the citizens, the
hole people of Jerusalem had bene^ utterly destroyed and slain every mothers
son by Iehochanan, his power was so great. Then Anani the hie priest and the
other priests, with the aunciente, faithful, and sages, and the reaste of the
people of Jerusalem, seeing the wickedness of Iehochanan, and that they could
not suffer it any longer: consulted together to deli^er up the town to
Schimeon, to bring him in, and make him their king, to help them against
Iehochanan, who^ they took to be far more wicked then Schimeon, hoping that
it might come to pass, that Schimeon should flea Iehochanan at length. They
sent therefore Amittai the priest to Schimeon to bring him into the town. But
Schimeon craftily refused it, alledginge what should I come into the town to
you that hate me, and of late banished me your town. Yet they ceased not so,
but sent the same Amittai to him again, to entreat him in the name of all the
people to come, upon a certain night: so he entered into the town with his hole
army. Notwithstanding, he was no sooner within the town, but he brake his
promise and league that he had made with the citizens, and whereas he had
promised to succor them and aid the^: now he was altered and became their
ennemie, joining him self with Iehochanan. And they two rebels reigned in
the city of Jerusalem by course, one one month, and an other another: so where
before Schimeons coming, they thought much to bear ye yoke and oppression of
one sedicious person: now were they constrained to hold down their shoulders and
bear the yoke of two. Yet with in a few days after there fell a variance and
discord between Iehochanan and Schimeon, about Eleasar priest, the son of
Anani the hye Priest. This Eleasar was the beginner and first sower of sedicion
amongst the Israeli^s, whom Schimeon would now have put to death to be wroken of
his father that banished him out of Jerusalem: but Iehochanan took Eleasars
part and defended him. For Eleasar was always Iehochanans friend, and aided
him. His father was hie priest, and bare a great rule in Jerusalem, wherefore
Eleasar was of great estimation and authority with the elders, so that they
durst not reprehend him, and his father also looked negligently unto him, and
let him do what he list, because he had no more sons but him. So he was the
first that assembled naughtye persons together, and held ever on Iehochanans
side from his first coming to Jerusalem. And for his sake fell division and
dissension between Iehochanan and Schimeon, so that they became enemies, and
warred the one upon th^ther ever after, as we shall declare hereafter.

IN this while Vaspasian had sent Antoni and Mankiminus (two noble me^ and of
his counsel,) to Rome against Vitellius, that they might make him out of the
way, and then would be come to Rome to receive the imperial crown there.
Those.ii: captains went therefore and raised an army, by whose aid they set
upon Vitellius and slew him, not without much ado, for there were slain that
day at Rome. 80. M. good me^ of war. When Vasp. had word yt he was dispatched,
he made speed to Rome to his coronatio^, dividing first his army in.ii. parts,
whereof he took the one with him to Rome as a sauegard for him self whatsoever should
happen: and the other he left with Titus his son to besiege Jerusalem withal.
So departing, he left his son Titus at Alex andria, co^mau^ding him to remain
there ill such time as he should signify unto him otherwise by his letters,
and show him what he should do, and that in no wise he should meddle with the
siege of Jerusalem in ye mean space. Titus answered, I shall do dear father
according unto your commandment, for to you it belongs to command, and to
me to obey. Vaspasian took with him king Agrappas, and Munabas his son: for he
feared left they would rebel, and me Joseph priest also as prisoner fast bound
in chains, for so had his counsel moved him, saying: we cannot say the
contrary, but ye we have found no sign of rebellion in Joseph hitherto, nether
think we yt he has gone about any: but who can tell when we are gone hence,
whither he will fly to Jerusalem, and help to set the^ at unity and concord:
the^ they make him their king, and after he be the sorer enemy unto us. Besides
this you shall have need of him in this journey, he being a man of such great
prudence and wisdo, that whosoever follows his counsel, shall bring his matters
to good and fortunate success. Vaspasian thought their counsel good, and took
me prisoner with him, together with king Agrippas and his son, albeit they
had no irons upon the^, nether of hand nor foot, but only had their kepers
appointed them, yt they should not step aside. And as Vaspasian drue nie Rome,
all the citizens came forth to me^e him, and received him with great joy and
mighty shouts. Then commanded he me to be put in prison, but Agrippas and his
son he let go at liberty. The nerte day, assembled all the Senate of Rome to
create Vaspasian emperor, after the manner of the Romans: with who^e was
Agrippas and his son. I also entreated the iaylor to let me have kepers with
me, and so to bring me to the place where he should be crowned and created
Caesar: which the iaylour granted me, and went with me him self to the place,
and brought me where I might see all that was done. Within few days after.
Vaspasian took displeasure with Agrippas upon the information of certain
evil disposed persons that had slaundered him and persuaded Vaspasian that he
went about to rebel, and how he had sent letters to Jerusalem concerning the
same matters. Wherefore Vaspasian put both him and his son Munabas to death.
This befell.iii. years and a half, before the destruction of Jerusalem.
Moreover, before this deed, ye continual sacrifice ceased, for a. M. CC. and
ninety days, as it is written in Daniel. Capitu. 12. And from the time that
the continual sacrifice shall be taken away, and abomination shall be put into
desolation, a thousand. 290. days. The same year and month that Agrippas was
put to death, God moved the mind of Vaspasian to remember me with his mercy,
wherefore he commanded that I should be fetched out of prison and brought to
his presence. And as I stood in irons before him, Caesar had me welcome and spoke
comfortably unto me, saying: Thou know well that I have ever loved thee
from the day I first saw thee, and although I have kept the continually in
duraunce, do not think I did it of any eui^ will or malice toward thee, but
rather maiste thou persuade thy self I did it least the Roman princes
should disdain or envy thee: and say. See here this fellow, that in our wars
has endomaged us so greatly, now goes he checkmate with us, in as great
favor as we. Let us kill him and put him out of the way. But, my friend
Iosephe, be thou of good cheer: I will deliver thee from these iron bonds,
and thou shall be with me in no worsse case then as one of mi chief princes.
And I will send ^hee into Iewrye to my son Titus, to whom thou shall be as
a father and a counselloure. Thou know, Titus was be that took pitye on
thee, and would not suffer thee to be put to death. Yea he has soundrye
times moved me to release thee of thy bo^des and to honor thee, which I have
differred to do, only for this cause that I showed thee. I made him answer.

But how can I be quiet or in suretye of my life, as long as I am in thy
company and thy sons, seeing Agrippas and his son innocently put to death by
you? Gaesar answered. Hold thy peace Joseph, I never looked for any goodness
of Arippas and his son. Thou know not what they had wrought against my
majesty, and how they went about to rebel. Thou have brent their bones with
thy hands. Do thou not know how I honored him and his son in Iewrye, how
I would not suffer mine army to annoy any of his Cities? I answered. Yes, I
know it was so, as your majesty says. Then said he, but for all this has
Agrippas requited me again with evil. For what time as the nobles of Rome in
Iewry went about to make me emperor, thinking me somewhat more mete to rule
thempire then Vitellius: Agrippas persuaded with the^ that they should not make
me Emperor, affirmynge that there was nothing in me worthy, wherefore they
should promote me to that dignity. And after when he came to Rome, he went
from one bishop to an other, and caused them go to the hye bishop to accuse me
of such crimes as in my conscience I knew nothing at all. By this I
perceived that Agrippas heart was full of rancour and rebellion, and therefore I
judged him to death. For where as wickedness is, there it is mete that
condign punishment should not be slackinge. And I put his son to death
likewise. For the son of a traytoure ought not to live upon the earth,
because that in his heart remains the work of his father, being conceived
and borne of a rebellious sede. But I have found thee always faithful and
true, and therefore I commend my son to thy wisdom. With this, he commanded
my yrons to be taken away from me, and being released and at liberty, he set
me honorably amongst the Princes and Senators. Then said I unto him. Is not
this a great dishonor unto me, that I should be delivered from my bonds, and
nevertheless the Israelites that be with me to be kept in prison still? Now
therefore if I have found favor in thy sight, and if thou will do any^
thing at my suit, loose the bonds like wise of all the rest of the Israelits
that be with me: set them at liberty also, and thou shall be assured that I
will be thy faithful counselloure, while my life lasts: and an enemy to thy
foes, to make war upon them that assail thee. Vaspasian granted Iosephe
his request, and willed them to be let at liberty, as many as were prisoners
with Joseph. Shortly after sent he Joseph to his son Titus that abode at
that present at Alexandria in Egypt, to whom he writ concerning Joseph, in
this wise. I send unto thee here (my beloved son) Joseph a prince of the
Jews, a man of experience, trained in war, in whom is great wisdom: he
shall be thy father and faithful counselour, thou shall not do against his
counsel, nether one way nor other, for he is a wise man. Wherefore thou shall
reverence and honor him according as he is worthy, for the Lord his God is
with him, and believe not rashly any man that shall defame Joseph unto thee.
Yea rather put him to death streighte way, that will accuse him: for Joseph
is a faithful man and a good counselloure: and who so is ruled by his
counsel, shall have prosperous success in that he goes about. Therefore
when Joseph shall come unto thee, after he has refreshed him self a few
days of the labors and travails of the sea: then shall thou prepare to take
thy journey against Jerusalem to besiege it. And if the Jews receive the
peaceably, and will submit them selves under the Romain empire: then beware thou
endamage them in nothing, but rather repair their cities, and let them be fre
from altribute for the space of.ii. years: yet of this condition that thrice
every year they set a flagge with the arms of the Romans upon their walls,
that is to say, at their three solemn feasts, when as all the Israelites are
wont to resort to Jerusalem, to appear before the Lord their God. Moreover,
they shall offer for us every feast a sacrifice upon the most holy alter that
is in Jerusalem. And if they refuse to make peace with thee, thou shall
utterly race their towns, and whosoever is left alive, and escape the sword:
those shall thou lead away captive. If so be it they desire to have Joseph to
be their king; we are content therewith. In any wise remember to be ruled by
Joseph's counsel: he shall be thy father, and thou his son. After this
Joseph departed from Rome, and came to Alexandria to Titus, who hearing of
Joseph's arriual, was wondrous glad, and all the ancient and wise men with him.
For Iosephe was full of the spirit of wisdom, understanding, counsel,
valiauntnes, knowledge, and fear of God. Wherefore he went forth to mete him
accompanied with the captains of the Romans army, and received him with
great honor. Then Joseph delivered to Titus his fathers letters: Which Titus
having red, said unto Joseph. What so ever my father has written in these
letters, I would have done the^ by mine own accord: but now that my father
admonishes me of the same I ought to do it the more. Wherefore remain here
with me and I will be thy son, and thou shall be my father to rule and
govern me with thy counsel. So Joseph abode with Titus at Alexandria a hole
month after he came from Rome. Then consulted they together to go to Jerusalem
and besiege it, for Joseph understood well inoughe, that this came of the Lord,
and that his word could not be let nor hindered. Titus therefore and Joseph
with him departed from Alexandria withal their army and pitched their tents at
Nicopolis: from thence they came by water to Thanisa: so forth to Iraclea: and
leauinge that, came to Pelisis. From thence they travailed through the desert
to Baale Iouim: after that to Dicron, so to Gaza, next to Askelon, then to
Inboam: after to Iapho: and so to Cesarea. In these iourneis he wan Asam,
Askalon and Iapho, withal their towns and castles lying about them.

THe first year of the reign of Vaspasian, December
the tenthe month and senenth day of the same came Titus with Joseph and his
army to Cesaria, a famous city, built by king Herod. In this city he
soiourned, until his hole host were come together, as well of Romans as of
other natione, that were under the dominion of the Romans, and came to aid
them in the siege of Jerusalem. Therefore Titus army was wonderful huge and
puissant, wherewith he aboade at Cesarea til the could of winter was paste, and
the month of Af drew nigh. Iulye.
The same year the civil wars grew and increased in Jerusalem, for the
Citizens slew one an other, without any truce, reaste or quietness: no not
in winter, when as wars were wont to cease; but summer and winter both, the
wars never stintted between Schimeon, Iehochanan and Eleasar. For the Lord
the same year had sent amongste them of Jerusalem a turn sick spirit of
giddiness that the people were divided into.iii. parts, whereof the first and
best followed Anani the priest, who at ye time had steined, unhallowed and
suspended his office of priesthode. An other part followed seditious Iehochanan:
ye third, most cruel Schime on. So yt in the midste of Jerusalem was civil
wars, and without, the Romans army made roades from Cesaria even to
Jerusalem, by the means whereof, no man durst go forth for fear least he
should fall into the ennemies hands: nor enter into the town to bring any
necessaries thither. Anani being a perfect godly man and saying the common
weal of Jerusalem, to be governed by the pleasure of ye seditious, gave over
his third part that stake to him to Eleasar his son, which was ye first
author of sedicion, and he ye gave the first occasion, yt was cause also of all the mischief that befell in Jerusalem, and in the hole land of Judea. For he
began a conspiracye against the Roman garrisons, and provoked Israel to
rebel against the Romans and to lay hands upon them. Wherefore there assembled
unto Sedicious Eleasar, Iehudah, Chezron, Schimeon, and Chiskiahu young men of
the nobles of Jerusalem: and Eleasar with his company took the temple, and the
courts about it, appointing of his me^, some to be spies, some to keep watch
and ward about the temple of the lord. But Iehochanan, who because of ye great
resort of people unto him, was stronger then Eleasar: he took the market place
and streates, the lower part of the city. Then Schimeon the Ierosolomite took
the highest part of the town, whereby his men anoyed Iehochanans part fore
with slinges and cross bows. Between these.iii. therefore was most cruel
battle in Jerusalem, for the space of.iiii. days, without ceasing or any
breathing: and every day very many were slain, so that the blud of the Jews yt
were slain, ran every where abou^oauntly through the market place and
streets: yea, even to the temple of the Lord, like unto a floude that had come
of great shoures. And unto the thresholdes of the gates of the temple, the
dead bodies overwhelmed one an other by heaps, for no man buried them.
Iehochanan having the middle part of the town, had Schimeon on the one side
him, and Eleasar on the other. But Schimeon had the best place, from whence he
might anoye both Iehochanan and Eleasar. Eleasar did also what he could to
endomage Schimeon. And Iehochana^ that was in the midst, enco^bred the^ both,
notwithstanding to little purpose. For Schimeons company slang stones, and shot
at them sore: but when as Iehochanans part slange likewise at the^, the stones
redounded again upon them selves. Thus amongst these.iii. the bataile was sore,
and increased eueri day, that all men were in great terroure and fear thereof.
Then assembled to the temple much people of the priests and elders, besechinge
these inward ennemies, not to pollute and defile the temple with their
slaughters, and were almost al slain for their labor. The same day was
slain the priest Agani and Joshua a priest, both of the chiefest Priests,
and Sechariahu the most faithful Prophet of the Lord. Then had the continual
sacrifice ceased, sire and thirtye days: for ever until that time was there
some good men, or other at Jerusalem that offered always sacrifice to the Lord.
But now when they would have continued it, and the priests lay the
sacrifices upon the altar, the sedicious would run upon them and kill them,
that the priests bodies and their cattle, that they would have sacrificed,
should fall all dead to the ground together. They that resorted also out of
the country to Jerusalem for deuocions sake, the seditious slew and utterly
destroyed them that almost no one of them was left alive. Moreover, the dead
bodies of men lay cast in the temple, and that without noumber, tread under
the feet. Yea, the dead body of the priest, that was offeringe sacrifice,
lay upon the earth together with his offering. And when any manne would
offer any sacrifice, strait way one or other of the sedicious would step to
him and and kill him, that the blood of the sacrifice and sacrificer should be
mingled together. In so much that the pauemente of the temple, being al of
marble, was made so slipperye with the blood and fat of them that were slain,
that no man could go upon it without falling. And the priest should not sooner
lay hand up on the sacrifice, but he was slain: and strait an other dead body
should fall upon him: stranger and other: they spared none. So thus the dead
bodies of the good and bad: clean and unclean, wicked and virtuous, thief and
true man, lay one upon an other, and their blood mixed together in the midst of
the temple, with out respect of any man, what degree or condition so ever he
were of. Wherefore the fight and slaughter waxt great both in the town and in
the temple. For whom soever the sedicious overcame: they set fire on their
houses also, where through the fire took into the great men's houses that
were nigh the temple, and into the store houses, whereas against times of
necessity and besiegynges of the town: were laid up in store, corn, wine,
and oil, to the number of a thousand and.iiii. hundred store houses, all filde
full of vit^ailes. For the Elders and other Godly men what time as Vaspasian
was in Galile, they made up the doors of those garner houses, and laid in
victuals into them sufficient for.ii. hundred thousand men for xx. year, and
now in this one battle of the sedicious, they were burnt every one stick
and stone, which was a spedye cause of famine and honger in Jerusalem. At the
same time also the sedicious pulled down and raced all the fair houses and
goodlye buildings, that there should be no monument of any noble house left
to any of the citizins of Jerusalem. So this you see at that time the Lord
visited the citizins of Jerusalem, with four kind of plagues, sword,
pestilence, hunger and fire: besides this, a fifth also was added: the ruin and
decay of all beautiful and gorgeous buildings. And where soever a man turned
him, there was nothing but desolation, pollucion (namely of the temple and all
holy things) vproars, without al reast and refuge, no help, no succor, but
every corner of Jerusalem was full of howling and yellinge: wailinge and
wepinge, sobbinge and sighinge of women and children. Here should ye hear the
roaring and groaning of wounded men, not yet through dead: there the mourninge
and lamentacion for the Elders that then were slain by the sedicious: yonder
children crying out for hunger: to be short, most sorrowful oppression of them
that lived, done by the seditious. Such voices were made every where: that happy
and fortunate was he that before this day died: and unhappy and in a woeful
case were all such as remained alive to see this day. Al these things when I
Joseph heard word of: I tare my bearde with my hands, and cast ashes upon my
head sittynge in great sorrow upon the ground, be wailing the^ misery and
calamity of Jerusalem.

ANd this lamentation made Joseph upon Jerusalem, saying: How is the holy
city laid wast, that was wont to be more happy and more renowned then all the
provinces upon the earth. How is the City that was heretofore in such
highness and dignity, now brought under the foot through the sins of the
citizins thereof: whereas sometime was the dwelling place of the faiethfull,
now bear rule there such men as provoke and stir Gods wrath against it,
and turn it away from their God, wastyng it as thieues. In the which
sometime remained the brightness of the Godheade, it is now become a by word
and a mocking stock to the enemies, replenished with blood of wounded and
slain men. Instead of mirthe, gladness, reioysynge, harpes, and psalteries:
is sorrow, sighhyng, heart breaks, mourning and pensifenes commen in place.
Even as heretofore the priests executed the service of the Lord in offering
sacrifices: so likewise now sedicious persons murder Godly and faithful men.
Where was wont to be the dwelling place of most wise and prudente men:
now is it made a common hostrye of wicked murderers and thieues. O Lord God
of Israel, have not angels in time paste come down from heaven to earth to
fight thy battayles? have not the floudes of the seas persecuted them that
persecuted thee? has not the earth swalowed up them that dispysed thee? and
the wyndes scattred a sunder, that made insurrectyons against thee? and thunder
from heaven destroyed thine enymyes and stars have fought agynste thy fooes?
What means this therefore, and how comes it to pass that thou hyddeste thy
^ace from us? to whom haste thou betaken the sheep of thy pasture? Look upon us
our GOD, and behoulde thy people and enher^taunce, that thou broughtest out
of Egypt, with a mighty power, and a strong hand: with wonders and signs,
leadinge them until this day in thy faith: take pitye upon them in thy
mercy, and extend not thy wrath against thy servants. Where art thou
Moses the son of Amram? stand up and se thy people and flock of sheep,
which thou feddest all thy life with thy wisdom: see how Wolves and Lions
tear them: see how the Israelites are become foes of their own lives and
souls: Yea, wasters and destroiers are sprung up of their own selves. Behold
the people of God, for whose sake thou liftedste up thy staff over the sea,
wherewith thou struckest and deuidedst it, yt it was made dry ground, so that
the Israelites passed through and escaped their enemies. Remember thy prayer,
when as in time of famine and lack of soode, thou obteinedst for them meat
from heaven, and at the same time when they were weary of their lives for
thirst, thou broughte^t water out of the most hard rock. Come forth Aaron,
most holy priest of God, that did put thy self between the living and the
dead, to turn away the plague from Israel, and strokest the destroyer, that
he should not come nie the living. Arise out of thy grave thou Phinees, that
moved with such feruencye: didste revenge the glory and maiesti of the lord
God of Israel. Come and run through these seditious in thy fury, which murder
the people of God and his priests. Awake thou Joshua, that did throw down
the walls of Jericho, with the sound and shout of thy trompets, that the holy
priests held in their hands. Come now and se thy people that thou made to
enherit many nations, and to conquer most puissant kings, how they kill one
an other, how they further and helpforwarde the Idolater to rule and have the
dominion of thy holy la^d that thou gave thy people Israel to enherite. Why
sleapest thou king David, awake and come with the sound of thy Psalterie and
harp, to singe the holy Psalms. Ask account of thy sweet words, yt are
ceased from the mouths of this people, and out of all men's mouths, because
of the maliciousness thereof. See how their princes be trans^o^me^ into
enemies and destroiers: and do not as thou did (good king David) that
did give thine own life for theirs, saiynge. Let thy hand (O Lord) be
turned against me, and against the house of my father: and do not fall upon
thy people to destroy them. Where art thou Eliseus? come and see what thou
canste do, if thou canste reseue the remnaunte of Israel, and find them any
gap to escape at. Did not thou by thy prayer bring the power of the Sirians to
a town of defense, and preuailedste against them without dinte of sword or
battle, and broughtest them down, smitinge them with blindness, that they
turned their enmity toward Israel into love? In deed thou waste he that
vanquishedst the Sirians by thy prayer, that they fled for fear of the same.
Now^ therefore ye herdme^ of Israel, assemble together and listen with your
ears, and hear my words that I will speak in your ears this day. Tell me,
what is become of your prayer ye ye have made for the people of Israel, to
desende and turn away from the^ al wrath, indignation, tribulation, fury, and
immissions of evil spirits? How is it ye now ye see not ye sa^ctuary turned
into a vile sincke of blud? for ye dead bodies of priests lie in the midst of
it. The holy city Jerusalem is become a straung citi, as though the name of
the Lord had never been in it, and the sanctuary of the Lord is in that case
at this present, as thought the divine Godhead had never dwelte therein, for the
temple is turned into a den of thieves: a lodginge of sedicious persons, a
tabernacle of cruel murderers. And who so flies thither for refuge, there
they be slain: as the sedicious have murdered in the midst thereof Anani
the hie priest, and Joshua a priest also, that were Princes and chief
priests, the most reverent amongst the people of God, whom ere this, kings
and nations had besought and desired their favor: but never cast their slain
bodies in the midst of the temple. The nobility also of Jerusalem, the
elders of Judah, and sages of Israel, whose frendshippe kings and nations have
sought, and desiered to make peace with: they iye now slain here and there in
the midst of Jerusalem, are meat unto the fowls of the air, and beasts
of the field, to dogs and Ravens, because there is no man to bury them.
These died not for their offenses, but because they found fault with the
Israelites when they sinned. How are they slain in thee (O Jerusalem thou
holy city, renowned through out the whole earth) all just me^, all holy
men, whom the sedicious have got the upper hand of, those helhou^des and
bloudsuckers that have brought all these mischiefs upon ^hee? How are are
the priests of the Lord, and his Prophets slain amongst those holy men. For
before the holy temple, was the Prophet Sechariahu, that just and holy man
buchered and murdered: yea, without al burial, nether was his blood covered
with earth, but yet still wandreth about and muttereth in the. The blud of
Anani also and Joshua the chief Priests was yet never covered, which were
both slain in thy temple, as men be wont to kill thieves: yea the blood of the
godly young men, and valiant men that would have revenged them, was shed also
by the sedicious like floudes of water. How are the hearts of the people turned
so auckwardly, that they will hear no admonicion of just men? But are like
unto blockishe images, that neither see, nor hear, nor yet understand any
thing. All beas^es be they never so brutish, al plants, and things that
grow upon thearth, withstand them that invade them to do them injury, and
endeavor to avoid the force of their enemy: but thy children ye thou kepest
within thee, are changed into ennemies, and one brother murthereth an other
with the sword. Where is now thy valeauntnes, thou that never would how to
bear the yoke of the gentiles upon thy shoulders: but have cast away the
bondage of the Egiptians, Philistines, Aramites, Assirians, Chaldeis, Persians
and Medes? Where is the strength that God gave to the Chasmonaites, that with
a very small company defended thee, and prevailed against the huge and
puissaunte army of the Greeks: destroyed the stout souldioures of Babylon:
vanquished the mighty army of the Persians, slew Kamitiarus and Antiochus,
and pursued their armies, making great slaughters of them, and filling al
places full of dead carcases of the gentiles. They would not be ruled by sinners,
but ve^tred the^ selves to die, offering their lives, not for their sons and
daughters: but for the sanctuarye of the Lord and his temple, least it should
be polluted with the idols of the gentiles? Where remains now the rod of god,
that, holy rod that budded and blossomed in the days of gladness? Now is both
the sprigs withered and the rod it self also. The rod of faith is withered, the
rod of the kingdom, the rod also of thy people, from whom the holy law is
taken away, nether is there any man ye can tell where to draw any waters of ye
heavenly mercy. Alas the merciful me^ that have been in times paste to their
brethren both alive and dead: how are they now turned into most cruel
tirantes, and have mercy of no man? Where is the multitude of their mercies,
wherewith they were wo^t honorably to bury their dead? Now the corses of their
dead bodies cover the face of the hole earth, and there is no body will
vouchsafe to bury the^: yea, they ye would, ca^ not be suffered, but straitwaies
comes other to the^, and kills the^ before they can do it, so yt they also die
and lie unburied, and are strowed about here and there in the fields? Such is
the guise in the now a days, nether ye father to bury the son, nor the son
the father: the sedicious watch so dilig^tly those that be dead, least any man
should bury them: which if they do, they are also slain by them, and lie
unburied them selves. The temple of the lord that is in thee, and was wont to
smell swetelye of spices, anointmentes, and perfumes: How is it now choked with
carian donge, and most pestilent stenche of dead bodies and blood of the
wounded? Thy streates are strowed full of dead men, some run through with
glaues and iauelines, and other dead for hunger: yea, they that remain yet
alive in the city, are as good as dead also, and may be taken for no less.
For they are weary of their lives, because of the pestilente dampe of the dead
bodies, which also has been the death of many, and has cast many into
most dangerous diseases. This may worthelye seem to be it that David the
anointed of the God of Jacob, the pleasant and sweet musical Poet of
Israel, speaks of: Lord the gentilles are comen into thine inheritance,
they have polluted the temple of thy holiness. And would to God it had been
gentiles tilles that thou had brought up, nourished and exalted to do this
deed, to rebel and sin against thee, and to pollute thus the holy temple
that is in thee. For in the maliciousness of an enemy, a man finedeth the
half of his comfort: but in the malice of a friend, there is no comfort at
all. Yea, the very children that thou have bred, brought up, and promoted:
the self same have stuffed the temple of the Lord that is in thee with
unburied carcases, every manne killinge his neighbor: and the seditious
suffringe no man to burye them, but sleainge all that attempt to bestow any
such benefit upon the dead, in such sort, that they fall dead upon the
corses which they would have buried: and by that means both the corses lie
cast out in the field, no better then the carcases of brute beasts that be
found in deserte places. Yea, the iniquity and cruelty of thy citizens O
Jerusalem is grown so far, that they were not content, only to kill their
neighbors: but they must also hew their bodies in pieces, for else they
thought they were not sufficientlye revenged: although that in so doing, many
times the stenche of the dead took worthy vengeance again of the living,
by castyng him into incurable diseases. All which evils are come upon thy
children because they have forsaken the law of the Lord, and have
traungressed his covenant that he made with their brethren, because also they
have sinned against the Lord GOD of their fathers, in sheadinge the blood of
just men and innocents that were in in thee, even in the temple of the Lord.
And therefore are our sorrowful sighbynges multiplied, and our wepinge daiely
increased, for that we have been the cause of all these evils that are befallen
us, and are not yet ended. O Lord our God, our Sins are gone over our
heads, and the wicked acts that we have committed in thy sight, are
innumerable. The Lord our God is righteous, it is we that have rebelled
against his will, we have profaned and unhallowed his law, we have broken his
covenant. And ever the more that his Wrath enkindleth against us: the more
have we traunsgressed against him. Wherefore to him belongs justice and
judgment, he has worthelye poured the furye of his displeasure upon us: to
us only belongs shame as we have aboundauntly at this day. But he will
once turn again, and have mercy upon us, vainquishe all our sins, and
cast them all into the deep bottomes of the sea. So be it.

AFter these things, the third day of the first month in the first year
of the raygne of Vaspasian, Titus his son took muster of his men in the
plain of Cesaria, to know the certain number of them, which he had not done
before sense his fathers departure: and he found them very many, in so much
that they almost seemed to cover the earth. This done, he took his journey from
Caesaria with his power, and came to Samaria, where the Citizins received him
with great joy, and did him much honor. Wherefore he spared them, and did
them no harm. From thence he came Aielona. xxx. furlonges from Jerusalem:
there he pitched his tents, and leaving them there, took six hundredth
horsemen with him, and came to Jerusalem to view the town, to know what
height the walls were, what strength there was in the town, specially of the
sedicious of whom every where great rumoure was: finallye, to receive
peaceablye all such as were desierous of peace. So as he came to the wall, he
saw no man nether go out nor in: for the gates were shut up, and the sedicious
had laid an am bush without ye town to trappe Titus, who went somewhat before
accompanied with a fews, the rest following a pretye way behind. Whiles
therefore he was in vewing the walls, the sedicious issued out of their ambushe
that they had laid nigh unto Aielonia, and set upon the back of Titus men
behind. Then issued an other forte out of the town, so that they had Titus
between them, and runnynge upon him, separated him from his men, and environed
him on every side, where they slew. lx. of his men, and might have slain him
also, save that they coueted to take him alive. Titus saying him self beset,
and forsaken of his own men that thought it was impossible for him to escape,
perceiuyng also that they went not about to kill him, but to take him alive:
more over, that he could in no wise escape except he would make an irruption
and run through their bands: he took a good heart unto him, and valiauntly
brake through, sleaynge whomsoever came in his way to lay hold of him, and
so escaped. If they had intended to have slain him, they might have done it:
but being desierous to take him alive (as is said) they absteyned from
strikynge him, and so they lost him. And GOD would not deliver him into their
hands, that by him hes might scourge Israel. But the Jews saying him to be
thus escaped, repented fore that they had not killed him, saiynge one to
another: What meant we that we killed him not while we might? it is ill
handeled of us. Therefore they pursued him, hurlinge and shootinge after him
with engines of War, but they could not over take him: for God preserved
him, that he^ might afterward deliver Jerusalem into his hands. So he
returned to Aielona, and perceived the hearts of kings to be in the hands of
GOD. The next morrow brought Titus all his army to Jerusalem, determininge
to encampe him self upon the mount Oliuet: wherefore he first spoke unto his
soldiers in this wise. This day ye go to fight against a most mighty
nation, whose warriers be strong as lions, valiant as liberdes, and nimble as
towns that run in the mountains, to ouerturne chariots and such as sit upon
the^. Now therefore take good hearts unto you, and be courageous: for so it
stands you in hand. Do not think them to be like the nations that
heretofore ye have had to do withal. I my self have experience otherwise of
their dalianntnes and sleightes of war. This said, he marched in array most
strongly, that they should not be scatred asunder, and gave them charge,
specially to the vawarde to take heed of stumbling upon Wells or Cesterns,
whereby they might be hindered, for as yet the day was scarce broken: and
besides that, Titus had knowledge how the Jews fearing of his coming, had
digd secret tre^ches and pitfals. Wherefore to avoid the^, he led his host by
ye mount Oliuet, in which place it never came in their minds to dig.
Therefore when he came to the mount Oliuet, he encamped there against
Jerusalem, right over against the Brook Cedron, that ran between the city
and the hill, and many times ran very shalowe. Titus camp was about six
furlongs from the town. The next morrow they of the town seeing Titus to be
encamped upon the mount Oliuet, the capitaines of the sedicious with their
companies assembled together, and fell at agreement every man with an other,
entendynge to turn their crueltye upon the Romans, confirmyng and ratifiynge
the same atonement and purpose, by swearyng one to an other, and so became
peace amongst them. Wherefore ioynyng together that before were three several
parts, they set open the Gates, and all the best of them issued out with an
horrible noise and shoute, that they made the Romans afraid withal, in such
wise, that they fled before the sedicious, which sodainlye did set upon them at
unawares. But Titus saying his men flee, rebuked them saiinge: Are ye not
ashamed of this timerious cowardnes, when ye are so many and a hundredth for one
of the^? What ignominye is it, so many to be repulsed of so few? Wherwithal
Titus stayed them, and brought them manfullye to withstand the Jews, so that
very many were slain on both sides. But the Romans were not able long to
abide the force of the Jews, albeit that Titus with his elect and most valiant
Soldiers did manfullye keep their ground and never reculed. Titus also
labored to encourage the rest to fight but they were so dismayed that they
wiste not what to do. For to forsake Titus they were ashamed, and to resist the
vyolence of the Jews they were not able. Notwithstanding Titus and his
company made their party good against the Jews, who at length left the
field, and withdrewe them selves toward the town. Then Titus being wroth with
his soldiers that they had fled from the Jews, said unto the^: Shall I not be
avenged of these Jews? shall so few of them put us to flight, not able to
stand in their hands? and will ye flee or recule, saying me abide by it? The
next day Titus took all his at my save a few that he lest in his camp to keep
the baggage, and went downs the Mount Oliuet, settinge his men in battle ray
even against the gates of the city. Then exhorted he the^ to plays the men, and
although they were come down the hill, yet they should not fear the Jews, for
their ca^pe that they had left behind them: for the broke Cedron (says he) is
between our camp and the Israelites, with these words they were encouraged,
and determined to encounter with the Jews under the walls hard at the gates
of the city, trusting to the sauegarde and defense of the brook Cedron. The
captains of the seditious likewise used pollicye: For they deuidinge their
men, sent one company to pass sodenli the broke Cedron, to invade and spoil
the Roman camp that were left in the Mount Oliuet. These therefore went
and fought with the Romans upon the Mount, and drove them out of their
camp. Titus lokinge behind him, and perceiuinge that the Jews had gotten
over the broke and were in hand with his men, he was wonderfullye afraid,
saying him self so enuironned with battles on every side. They within the
town when they saw their fellows once at the mount Oliuet, they opened the
gates, issued withal their power that was left in the town and encountered
with Titus, where he had set his men in arraye over against the gate: where
they made a great slaughter of the Romans, which striving to avenge the
shame gotten the dai before fled not, but stuck to it hard. The Jews also
took heart unto them, and fought manfully, bet down the Romans, that at
length they took the^ to flighte toward ye mount Oliuet, and in their flight
many of the^ were slain of the Jews that pursued the chase. Upon this diverse
of Titus souldioures saying them selves beset both before and behind, cou^seled
Titus to flee with them unto the mountains to save his life, least he should be
slain by the Jews, and they all together with him. For thou (say they) art a
great Lord of many kingdoms, and God shall one day bring thee to the imperial
crown of our Lord thy father. Now therefore if thou should be slain of
the Jews, we are al but dead and what good should thy death do other to thy
self or to other to be slain like one of us? Yet Titus would not be ruled by
them, nor receive their counsel, but kept his ground boldly without once
turninge his face, saying: I will choose rather to die with honor, then to
live with shame And with that he rushed upon the Jews that were nigh him, and
drue them to recule. When the Jews that had enuironned the Roman camp, saw
that: they left the Romans and came flocking about Titus by routes,
assailinge him on every side, endeuouringe also withal their might to
ouercharg him: wherthrough, in that place was a sore and vehement fight, and
much people slain on both parties: yea, Titus escaped narowly from being slain
in that fight and he had dyed in deed, if certain of his valiant soldiers
had not returned unto him, and rescued him ou^e of the Jews hands. That day
were the chief of Titus soldiers slain. Then the Jews retired to their
place at the walls side. They also that went to the mount Oliuet, returned
homeward by the broke Cedron. The Romans saying that, pursued them, whereupon
the Jews turned again upon the Romans, who fled by and by. Thus the Jews
put ye Romans to flight thrice upon one day.

IT came to pass the^, that the external wars paused, and internal civil
wars revived most terribly amongst the sedicious at Jerusalem. For upon the
first day of the hye solemn feast of Passover, captain Iehochanan and his
men came into the temple of the Lord, where he was honorably received of
the priests and Elders, with the rest of the comminaltie. And when they were
within, they cast of their upper garments, under which they were armed with
coats of fence and swords tied to their thighs. After that they beset the doors
and laid hold of the priests: slew the^ and the people also, their hearts was
so cruelly bent against their brethren, nether regarding the reverent
countenaunces of old men, nor enclining to the prayers of them that besought
the^: without sparing either women or children, no not the suckinge babes. This
done Iehochanan stood up and openly protested that nether Schimeon nor Eleasar,
nor any of the reast of the captains of the seditious, nor any manne elsse
should have the soueraintie in that city but he. The other hearing that
Iehochanan had wrought such displeasure to the people of God in the temple,
risse together and slew very many of Iehochanans part, but in the mean season,
what of the one part, and what of the other, the Israelites went to wrack, and
were slain in great number. Tidinges came to Titus how the Jews conspired
against them selves, and slew one an other daily: whereat he reioysed greatly,
and came with his hole host to the town: where he found certain Jews without
that had fled because of the rage of the civil wars. When they saw Titus,
they came and besought him to enter the town and deliver them from the crueltye
of the sedicious, and they would be his servants: for these wars had made
the^ almost wearye of their lives. Yet Titus gave little credit to their tale,
although they made many words to persuade him that it was true. For he
remembered how within three days before, he saw the Jews fight against him
egarlye al with one accord, so earnestlye one rescuing and defending an other,
that no discord appeared to be amongst them. Wherefore he would not believe their
words, in that they required succor and offered to yield. And as they were thus
debatinge the matter, suddenly they heard an uproar in the town, and wonderful
hurliburly, some cryinge. Open the gates, and let Titus come in: other cried
shut the gates, and let not the Romans come in. Then certain upon the walls
called unto the Romans to make speed and come unto the town, they would open
them the gates that they might enter in, and deliver them from the tyranny of
the sedicious, least they should be all slain by the hands of those rauinous
and cruel sedicious persons. The Romans therefore ran to the gates, and when
they approached nigh the Walls, and were come within danger: the Jews hurled
stones from the walls, and shot arrows at them, fleaynge very many of the
Romans. The other Jews also that were without the town, and had besought
Titus to deliver them from the hands of the sedicious: began to assail the
Romans that were gone to the walls with such force, that many of them they
slew, the residue they put to flight, and the Jews followed the chase almost
to Aiclona. Then the Jews mock^ and flouted the Romans calling them fresh
water soldiers, men of no experience, and innocent fools that never saw the
traynes of war before: clappyng also their targetes and shaking their swords
against the Romans in mockage. The Romayne captains seeing these things,
they took great disdain at the matter and in a great ire would have turned
back upon the Jews again had not Titus caused the retreat to be blown. Upon
this Titus assembled al his counsailours, captains, and soldiers together,
and said unto them in this wise. I have a sufficient trial, and understand well
mough your valiantnes and courage (most worthy men and dear soldiers) which
far passes the strength and ma^hode of al other nations: and not only in
this most excellent virtue do ye excel: but also in know ledge and sleightes of
war, in wisdom and forecast ye have been chief of al other. Now therefore
brethren and friends, I marueil not so greatly at the Jews subtlety and craft
in their swearing to you for the persuading of a thing, and after keep not
their oath: but this seems wonderful to me, that ye suffer your selves still to
be disceiued of them, and to be slain by their wiles. For all ye wit ye have,
could not deliver you out of their snares, but now yet again the.iii. time ye
have approached ye walls, and this is the.iii. time ye have been slain for your
labors. And all this comes because ye will not be ruled by me, but transgress
your general and lords co^mau^dme^t. But now mi brethren take heed what ye do
herafter, it becomes you not to rebel against mi words which yet ye have done
oftentimes. Do ye not remember a certain n^ble man of our country in ye wars of
Augustus Caesar against the Persians, how he put his own son to death, because
ye contrary to his fathers commandment (who was grand captain of ye army
under Augustus) he had fough: with his enemies: yea, although he killed iii.
Persia^s. But what speak I of once? ye have oftentimes set life by my
co^maundeme^ts, skirmishing daily with the Jews, and that without al
discretion, rashly, and out of order: wherthrough your co^flicts can have no
good success. If you continue these manners, it shall redownde unto your own
dishonours. Wherefore it were better for you to leave of this, and lay away your
pride, contuma^ye, and stubburunesse: which if ye do, things shall be in
better sauegarde. Much more spoke Titus to his men, rebuking them sharply,
not mentioned here, but declared at large in the volume that we writ unto the
Romans. When he had said, his princes and captains fell every one prostrate to
the earth, and besought him of pardon for their rashness in that they had so
unadvisedly and without order against his mind encofitred with the Jews. Then
Titus taking pity of the^, pardoned them, requesting the^ to be ware herafter
yt they committed nothing against his co^maundme^t another in word nor deed: and
so doing, the^ should have his favor, and avoid his displesure and danger of
death for the contrary. But if they refused to do it, whatsoever he were ye should
tra^sgres his co^maundme^t, he would not spare him, but put him to death, and
give his body to be eaten of ye fouls of thayre. They answered all with one
voice: We are content with these condicio^s, and will do what so ever thou shall
command us. After this Titus considering how earnestly the Ierosolimites
were set one against an other, how they were become such cruel and mor^al
enemies, that each of them conspired others death: he caused the pittes,
cesterns, and trenches that were about Jerusalem to be damde up and stopte with
earth, that the ways might be leuilled for his army. That don he en^a^pt him
self nearer the walls. Against which attempt the Jews issued not out of the
town after their accustomed manner, to put them back from the walls. For
Schimeon was otherwise occupied, he had enterteined ten thousand men of the
best of the seditious Jews, and joined him self to Jacob the Edomite,
captain of.ix. thousand Edomites: with whom he had made a conspiracy utterly
to destroy captain Iehochanan. And settinge upon him, they compelled him to
fly into the court of the temple: where he remained in ye gate of thentrance
of the temple with eight thousand and.iiii. hundredth good men of war, al well
appointed in ^acks. Eleasar also was against him, and joined with Schimeon
becoming an enemy to him that before had saved his life: and so they both
together a^^ailed Iehochanan, neglectinge the defense of the town. By this
means the Romans encamped them selves about the walls at their pleasure,
raisings toures, and castinge trenches to plant their iron Rams upon to
batter the walls. The common people of the Jews, that were under the rule and
government of the three seditious captains, namelye Schimeon, Eleasar, and
Iehochanan (which although they were ill enough al: yet the tyranny of
Iehochanan far passed Schimeon, and Schimeon was far worsse then Eleasar:
though Eleasar was the head author and first beginner of sedicion in all
Israel) were amongst them as she pe ready to be killed. For the forsaid
sedicious captains, slew the people at their pleasures, and divided them into
bands, cas^yng lots upon them who should have which, so that one had another
men, and another man his. And this did they not only with their own men, but
also with all the rest of the people, in such wise, that when the Romans made
any assault, then joined they together as one man to resist the Romans, and
when they had given them a repulse, then wouldthey return to their c^uel
wars, and fall together by the ears among them selfs. Extreme and dreadful
was the ciuyll conflict at that season between the three foresaid captains: and
so sore, that the blood streamed down the chanel out of the gates of
Jerusalem, like as a broke that runs out of a fountain and well spring.
The Romeynes saying it, were moved with much pity, yt they wept bitterly. But
Joseph yt was amongst the^ was stricken with so great heaviness, that he burst
out into a sorrowful lamentation, liftyng up his woeful voice in this wise.

ALas alas Jerusalem, the city of the great king, how shail I now call thee
at this day, or what name shall I give thee? Sometime thou wast called Iebus of
Iebusaeus that builded thee first in all this land. After that thy name was
Zedek, that is justice: whereupon thy king Iehoram was called Malkizedek, for
he was a ryghteous king, and because he raygned in thee with sustice,
therefore was thy name Zedek. Then ryghtuousnesse had his abidyng in thee,
and thy bright star that shined in thee, was Zedek. Moreover, in his time was
thou called Schalem, as the Scripture witnesses, and Malki zedek king of
Schalem, and that because the iniquity of the people that dwelte in thee was
then fulfilled. For at that time chose Abraham our father (of worthy memory)
to worship god in thee, and to take thee to his enheritaunce, to plant in thee
the rote of good works. Whereupon the tabernacle of God remains in thee to
this day: as it was revealed unto the same our father Abraham. In the (say His
the sanctuarye of the Lord. For in that place did Abraham bind his only
Son, upon the top of one of thy hills, that is called mount Moriah, holy
and hallowed: and therefore art thou called Jerusalem, because our father
Abraham (of famous memory) called the place of thy sanctuary Adonai ijreeh, the
Lord shall see. Then thy late name being Schelem, this joined to it, made it
Ijreshalem. For the Lord God shall behold the place of thy sanctuarye, at what
time as it shall be Schalem, that is pure, incorrupt, without lack or spot: but
when so ever it is polluted and defiled as it is at this day, then will he
turn away his face from it. Furthermore thou art also called Ierushalaim
therefore: because that who so understand the dignity and worthiness of the
place wherein thy sanctuary is: shall bid the angels of heaven, to teach in
it the doctrine of the holy ghost, and the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, wherewith little children and the unlearned in thy land may be
made wise. He also that ministered in thy temple, had on a garmente of.iiii.
colors, Skarlet, Violet, Bisse, and Purple. Skarlet in respect of the
heanens that be above the firmamente: Violet and Bisse colors (which be made
of flax) because of the earth of which they come: finally purple in respect
of the sea where purple is gotten. Therefore when as the priest came into the
temple to minister apparailed in these.iiii. colors, he said before the
almighty God: I come to present my self here in thy sight (O Lord of the
world) in.iiii. kinds of colors, that do represent the parts of thy world,
and in such wise do I appear before the^, as though I should bring all the
hole world into thy sight. Moreover, ye foresaid apparail was garnished with
pure gold and precious stones, after ye likeness of the tribes of the sons
of Jacob, who was called Israel: that in that garment he might have the
souerainty before the angels that be above and by them preuail to bring the
virtue of the holy ghost, by the which they should obtain wisdom that dwell
in thee, and prospere in their study and faith, that they might have wisdom
and understanding together. His loins also were girded with linen sloppes,
wherewith he covered his secret parts, for it becomes priests most of al
other persons to be shamfast and bashful, spec^ally when he should minister in
the two sanctuaries. For there are.ii. sanctuaries, the utter and thinnar,
which is the sanctum sactoru^ or the holiest of all. In the utter, the priests
minister as the hie priest commands the^: but into ye inner, yt is the
sanctu^ sanctoru^ enters no man, save ye bie priest only, and that but once a
year. For in it was the arcke of the covenant of the Lord, in the which were
laid up the.ii. tables of thecouenaunt ye God made with the people of Israel
in the mount Sinai. There is also the rod of Aaron that flourished and brought
forth leaves. All these were in the first temple whiles it was yet standing.
Over against that sa^ctuary, were.xiiii. stairs or steps upon the which
apeared the miracle to king Chiskiahu. And thou Jerusalem at that time was
stronger then other cities, Lady of al provinces for great kings and princes
builded thee. King Herod much exalted thee, raising thy walls on height, and
besides that also, defenced thee with an other wall, Antochia
that he named Antochia of Antiochas a Romain, who liberally gave much money
toward the repairinge of the ruins and decaies that were in thee. How comes
it to pass therefore that thou art brought thus low? the gentiles have the
rule over thee now and besiege thee, racing thee, and casting thee down (yea,
they are now in ye midst of thee. Woe be to us for our sins, for ye hautines
of thy strength is dashed, thy sanctuary is trodden under the foot, and made a
sinck of the blood of slain persons. Drink now of thy cup O Jerusalem with thy
daughter Sion, drink I say the cup of veration and grief together with her:
for yet the time shall come, that visions shall be reueiled and redemption also
it self, that thy children shall return to their coasts, with the health of
their redeamer. Then shall be the time of frendshippe, and then shall thou
drink the cup of health and consolation. After this, Titus went to vewe
what way he might best assault the city, and as he devised with him self, he
espied a plain on that side where the sepulcher of Iochanan the hie priest was,
whereas he stayed a while, and sent one of his captains that were there with
him called Nikanor, to common with ye Jews that were upon the walls, to move
them to peace: willing him to say thus unto them: Friends, my Lord Titus is
desirous to spare you and to make a league with you, that ye might be at quiet
and out of this danger of desiruction. And if you be so disposed to consent
thereunto, Titus shall make a league with you yet before night. Nikanor went
and spoke with the people in such wise as Titus had willed him. The Jews
gave him no word to answer, but held their peace: wherefore Nikanor spoke unto
them again, and as he was talking unto them, one from the walls stroke him
with an arrowe and killed him. Whereat Titus was exceadyng wrath that they
should shout at his captain offering them peace, and his death grened him
marueilously. Wherefore he commanded ladders brakes, slings, iron rams, and
other engines of war to be brought to assault the town. So the soldiers
brought an iron Ram to batter the wall, and planted it upon a mount
accordynglye. The Jews saying that were soore afraid, wherefore the three
capitaynes of the sedicious sell at one, and opening the gates, issued out,
and beat the Romans from their pieces, and engyns that were now ready
addressed, setting fire on them and burning them, the ram, slings, and al
the other engines, a few excepted, which Titus and his men saved from the fire.
In this co^flicte the men of Alexandria, that served Titus, behaved them selves
like tall fellows in the rescuinge of the slinges from the Jews: yet the
Jews prevailed: and gate the upper hand of them, till Titus came with a
strong power of picked men, to succoure the Alexandrians, whereas twelve of
the stoutest Jews were slain. In the same skirmishe Iehochanan a captain of
the Edomites, that came to aid the Jews was slain, by an Arabian, that came
behind him, and stroke him with an arrowe, whiles he was talkinge with the
Romans that had entreated him to come unto them. For whom the Edomites
mourned, and lamented sore, for he was a good man of war. The next night
certain of the seditious, chieflye of Iehochanan and Schimeons company,
issued out and came to the three wodden towers that Titus had crected before
the Walls, and set a great Garrison of valiant Soldiers about them to
defend them, and to view also the town out of them to see what the Jews
did. And whosoever were nigh the tou^es, those the Jews slew, the other fled to
Titus camp. But the Romans that were within ye towers wiste nothing of the
matter, trustinge to them that were set about the toures for their sauegarde:
and therefore slept all the night. The Jews after they had slain the Romayne
watch and put them to flight, they came to the toures with sawes, and cut the
feyt a sonder so that they fell suddenly together with them that were within
them, which were very many and slew them every one. Titus hearing the
alarm and the crasshing of the falling of the towers, was sore afraid and
all his hole army: and not knowing what the matter was, they durst not stir
toward it: so the Jews returned clear into the town. On the morrow Titus
brought his hole power to the walls, and whiles the Jews were at their
co^tenciones in the town, he addressed an other Iron Ram wherewith he
suddenly struck the utter wall and battered it through: whervppon, the people
that warded that wall were sain to get them selfs within the sauegarde of the
second wall* Then Titus commanded his soldiers to race to the ground that
wall that he had pearsed, and to carye away the stones thereof, that they
should be no let nor hinderaunce to his men. This was the most substanciall
and strongest wall of al, thicker then both the other, and was builded by Herod.
The Romans laboring earnestly in the defacing of the utter wall, were slain
in great noumber by the Jews from the middle wall, before they could finishe
their purpose. The chief of the Jews perceiving that Titus had not only
taken, but also quite pulled down the utter wall, and how there was now but two
walls left about the town: it went to their hearts and made them look about
them: therefore began the seditious now earnestlye to think of unity and
concord amongst the^ selves: so then they divided the town amongst them into
three wards. Iehochanan was appointed unto that ward that is on the North
part of the temple, beside the Antochia. That part of the town that was
toward the tomb of Iochanan the high priest, was attributed to Schimeon. To
Eleasar was committed the keepinge of the wall. These exhortinge one an other
to play the men, did valeantlye resist the Romans: so that the conflictes
then, began to be sore and hard. The Romans for their renown and fame, laid
on load: and the Jews again stuck stiflye to the defense, saying their end
at hand if they were slack. Titus now and then exhorted his Souldioures to
play the men, promysinge them that would valeauntlye give the onsette upon
the Jews, abundance of gold, silver, and much honor withal. Then stepte
forth one of his soldiers named Longinus, and put him self amongste the
routes of the Jews that were issued out of the town, where he slew a couple
of the chief of them, and straight recovered him self, again within the
array of the Romans. But the Jews shrinkt not from the Romans: for they
were in a fervent rage and a wonderful disdain: and to further their courage,
Schimeon came unto his men and cried upon them with a loud voice saying: For
the reverence of God, friends, fly not this day: who soever does* fly, let
him be sure he shall dye for it, and his house destroyed. Titus also admonyshed
his to keep their array and not to give back to Schimeon. Then went he him
self to that par^e of the town where Iehochanans ward was, there he caused
an Iron Ram to be planted and bente against the wall, (for there was a large
plain). There was at that time in Jerusalem one called Kantor, who gat to him
a company of the sedicious, and shote from the walls into the Romans army,
where he slew very many, compellynge the rest to retire, he with nine other
tale fellows whereof he was the Decurian defended one part of the town. Now
as the Romans bended the Ram to batter the wall, Kantor cried unto Titus. I
beseech thee my Lord Titus, be merciful of this most famous City that is
almost beat down all redye: do not deface it utterly, but take pitye of the
sanctuary that is in it, and destroy not the habitacion of the Lord God.
Titus at his request commanded his men to stay and to leave of batterynge
the wall, then said he to Kantor. Come forth hither to me and thou shalt
save thy life, I will pardon thee, thou shalt not be destroyed. Kantor
answered, I will see if I can persuade these my fellows to come with me. But
he did it upon color, for none other cause then craftily to tryfle out time,
to make Titus to leave of the assault for a while. So he spoke unto his
fellows that knew his mind that the Romans might hear: Let us go down
and fly to the Roman army. Then they drew out their swords and made as
though they would kill him, strikinge upon his harnes, and he fell down to
the ground in the sight of the Romans, which were ignoraun^e of his
disceite. Then one of the Romans let fly an arrow, that wounded Kantor upon
the face, and glauncinge from him, slew an other that stood by him. Then
Kantor cried out. What do ye? will ye shoot at us that desire to be at peace
with you, which ye granted your selves, and now will break your promise
that ye made unto us? Is this the reward my Lord Titus that thou rendrest me
for goinge about to fly unto thee? that thy soldiers shall shoot at me,
hearing me to require conditions of peace? Now therefore my Lord, pleases
it thee to sends hither some man of honor, to whom I may come down and
receive assurance of thy promise, and come to thee afterward to be as one
of thine own men. Titus thinckinge he mente good faith, spoke unto Joseph,
willinge him to go and make peace with the Jew in his name: then to bring
him unto him that he might find sauegarde of his life, from the common
destruction. Iosephe answered. Why will thou send me? what have I offended
thee? have I not ever done the true and faithful service? Therefore if thou
bear me any good will or favor, send me not unto him whom I can not
tru^^e: for Iosephe mystrusted some subteltye knowinge Kantor before. So Titus
sent ^ne captain Iiarus, who said unto Kantor, come down and let us go
together to Cesars son. Kantor desired him to hold abroad his cloak lap,
that he might hurl him down his monye that he had there, (least the Jews
perceiving it would take it from him) and then he would come down. And as
Iiarus held up his lap to receive the money that Kantor spoke of, Kantor
with all his might cast down a great Stone, which Iiarus espiynge, lepte
aside and avoided: but it light upon one of his fellows and slew him. Titus
was wonderful wroth at this, and foorthwyth planted yet an other iron Ram
against the Wall, and at length laid it flat upon the ground. Then
commanded Titus to make fires about the Wall, whereas the Jews should
escape by. Kantor seeing that, would have fled, and as he made haste to escape
the fires, the weight of bys armor bare him down into the fire, and there he
dyed, more desierous of death then life. Then entered the Romans within the
second Wall, against whom the Sedicious issued and fought with such
vehemente force, that they prevailed against their enemies, slew many of
the Romans, and forced the rest to retire unto the first Wall that they
had beaten down before. In this skyrmyshe Titus him self took a bow and
shot at the Jews in such wise, that no one of his arrows were spente in
vain, but that it did some anoyaunce unto the Jews, yet for all that the
Jews gave them the repulse from the Town, and the Romans were not able to
make their party good with them. Within four days after came unto Titus a
new supplye of Soldiers out of all quarters for to ayds the Romans, by
whose healpe they prevailed against the Jews at such times as they issued
out of the Town, and constrained them to wythorawe them selves within the
walls.

Yet Titus pitiynge the miserable state of the City, Temple, and people of the
Lord, at that time commanded his people to wythdrawe them selves from the
walls, and to leave of the assault for a while: that he might offer peace
unto the Jews, to see if they would now be content to submit them selves
unto the Romans, to have quiet and rest without danger of destruction.
Wherefore he gave them truce for five days. And upon the fifth day he came to
the gate of the city, whereas he straightway espied Schimeon and Iehochanan
together preparing fire to distroye the Romans engyns of war, for all the
Jews had agreed together with one accord and one mind still to withstand
the Romans. Wherefore Titus perceiving the Jews to be so desperatlye set,
that they had even vowed their lives to death: he began to offer and propose
unto them co^dicions of peace, and sharply to reprove and blame their obstinate
stubburnnes, saying: I have now won two of your walls, and ye have but one left.
Therefore if you will continue still in this self willed frowardnes: what will ye
do (most miserable creatures) when as I shall atchiue also the third wall,
and quite distroy your city, pulling down your Temple and all? Why do ye
not rather favor and spare your own lives, your wives and children? But the
Jews set upon a solemn obstinacy, would in no wise hear Titus speak.
Therefore Titus sent Iosephe to declare his mind unto them in Hebrew, that
they might safely credit his promises, and the peace that was offered. Iosephe
therefore went and stood over against the gate, keeping him self alofe of, for
he was afraid to come nie the wall, knowing that the people hated him because
he had yielded him self to the Romans. He called therefore unto them aloude:
Hearken all ye Hebrews and Jews, I will declare unto you that, that shall be to
your profit. Then the People gave ear unto Joseph, who spoke unto them in
this wise.

An oration of Josephus to the Citisins of Jerusalem.
YOu should ere this (good people of Jerusalem) have fought so earnestlye
whiles your Cities were yet standing, and your Land repienished with people,
ere ever this mischefe had lighted upon you. Now after that with murders and
slaughters amongst your selves, you have distroyed one another, and poluted the
temple of the sanctuarye with the blood of the murdered, neither have spared
your own lives. You are become few in noumber, a small sort of you is left:
what hope have you then to prevail? Again, you have stirred here and provoked
a valiant Nation, which is ruler over all people, and has subdued all other
lands, which also has those nations in subjection under them, which sometime
reigned over you. Besides this you wage battle with the Romans without all
wit or wisdom, without any remors of this most famous City, without any
reuth of the sanctuary of the Lord, and without any pitye of your own lives.
Nether yet do you sorsake your purpose: for I perceive you to continue in this
same self will to withstand the Romans still, which is nothing else then to
sprede abroad this calamity further, both upon the people of God, and upon his
holy temple. Al bett I am not afraied only for this holy temple, and most
renoumed City leest it should be raced and distroied: but for the sacrifices
and burntoffringes, leest they should cease, as the daily facrifice is ceased.
And why? For we have sinned against our Lord God, wherefore his shadow is
departed from us, because that in this same temple we have kept wars, which
has been an habytacion of wicked, a tabcrnacle of seditious persons: yea, even
the ministers and holy men of God have ye murdered, and within the walls of
the temple have ye shed innocent blood without measure. See now (dear
brethren) mark what ordinance, what engines, what instruments of destruction
are addressed to beat down the Temple, the fire is already kindeled to set a
fire the sanctuarye: And lo, even your very enemies are sorry for your
temple, that they would not have it defaced. But you (dear brethren and
friends,) why are you led with no remorse of your selves that your enemies may
once remove from you these engines of wars. What have you now left to trust
unto, when as two of your walls are already battered down, and one only
remains. You will say peradventure, we put not our trust in our walls, but in
our God. Are ye not aware that your God has long agone given you over, and
has turned him to your enemies, because they have with greater honor and
reverence worshipped his name, then we which rebelliously are fallen away from
him? Wherefore God assisteth not us but our enemies, in so much, that except
it be in such countries, whereas either for extreme cold of the one side, or
exceadyng heat on the other, no man is able to abide: all lands, all nations
are under their dominion. Tell me, I pray you, what expectation have you,
saying GOD has made them a terror unto all nations upon ye earth, who serves
them. Why will not you obey them, that you may live and not perish? Do you
not consider it is come to their turn to rule over all, that God has committed
dominion unto them, and aided them with his assistance? Remember you not how
God in times past aided the Egiptians, in so much that they obtained the
dominion over all the hole world? but afterward departed from them, and
assisted you to get the soueraintye over other nations? After that forsook you
again, and gave the empire unto the Chaldeis, Assirians, and Persians, which
reigned far and wide over many countries? Now also has given them over
and helps the Romans these many years, so that they bear rule over all?
If you will object and say. To what intent should God give the dominion unto
the Romans or other Nations over the world, and over his enheritaunce and
people also, which is an holy temple, a peculier and special Nation of all
the earth? Should you not be ashamed to say this? with what discretion can
you wonder at this, knowing that all mankind one and other, are the handyworke
of God, who exalts whom he list, and whom he list he thrusts down? Ye say
ye be the children of God, and his proper possession, and ye aspire to the
soueraintie, therefore it can not be ye God should determine any thing upon you
by chance, fortune, or sudden anger and displeasure. I grant, but wot ye
what? The shadow or protection of the Lord has forsaken you because of your
sins and transgressions against the temple and his holy ministers. How then
can you stay upon his help, when as he has withdrawn his loving
countenance from you, and your sins have made a deuorce between you and him?
Oh my dear children and brethren, let never this imagination enter into your
hearts, for it shall nothing auail you. Why will you my dear brethren and
friends make war upon the Romans when as they are lords over nations, and have
pierced the straightes of India, and of al Isles of the sea, even to the great
Ocean sea, and from thence to all the parts of the East: whose dominion
extends to the extreme par^es of the earth. Yea, even to Brytayn, and over
al Scotland, which is enupronned on cuerye side with Seas, whose people is
huge like Gyantes, of a big stature, and of a mighty courage, most expert
arche^s, and valiant soldiers in battle. To whom when the Captain of the
Romans came, they gave him the repulse, and would not be subdued: but when the
Princes of the Romans came, they brought them into subjection and servitude
under the Romans. But you say (my brethren and friends) you will rather all
dye then serve the Princes of the Gentyles: and that death is better for you
then life: to be driven to see with your eyes the calamities of the sanctuarye
and people of GOD. Search the histories and chronicles from the time of your
ancestors. When was there ever any time wherein you were free from the yoke
of the Gentiles? Do you not know that Jacob our father of worthy memory, who
was always with GOD, and God with him, took his journey into Egypt, to be a
stranger in a strange land amongst a proud kind of people: least he, his
children, household, and cattle should pearish with honger? There he had
with him his twelve sons which he had begotten, and dwelt there also with his
small family, for fear of the grievous famine that was at that time. Remember
you not when that Judas with his brethren went down into Egypt, how Iosephe
was moved as a stranger to pycke a quarrel against his brethrene to bring
them into bondage, bearing yet in his mind what iuiurye they had done him?
Wherefore some of them he cast in Prisone, and ^handeled them at his
pleasure with crafty accusations, especially Judah who was the chief amongst
them, of whom all the Jews took their name, who if he had been so disposed,
had been able to lay Joseph at his foot a thousand times not knowing him
to be Iosephe.

Wherefore when he was so roughlye and so sharpelye taunted of him, he might
have killed him in his rage. For he was a very bold manne and a hardye, and
of a noble courage, which surely had not forced a rishe to have slain that
Egyptian and more to of his fellows. Notwythstandynge he did not so, vut
contrary, submitted him self under the yoke of Iosephe, called him his Lord
and good master, supposing him to be some Egiptian, humbled him self before him
to obtain his peticion, and to get corn, least his father his brethren, and
other familye should die for honger. What should I say of Joseph, so
beautiful, so wise and wittye a man, was not he feign to serve in Pharoos
house, wherein although his wisdom was well known, insomuch that Pharao set
more by him then by all the noble me^ that were then alive, was also called lord
greatmaster, and Pharaos father: nevertheless he humbly besought Pharao that he
might sustain his father and brethrene with bread, knowing that at ye time the
dominion belonged to Pharao and his people being given them of God. And
although if Iosephe had list to return into the land of Canaan with all his
fathers whole household without Pharaos leave: no man could have let him to
do it, for he bare the greatest rule at that time in Egypt, yet did he not so.
Benjamin also who was likened to a reuenynge woulfe for his fearcenes, when he
was fetched again by force of Iosephes Steward, faynyng a lie upon him, how
chanced he did not kill him? Or else when he alone pursued Benjamin and his
other brethren, could not be if he had list have slain the fellow, and
buried him so that the matter should never have come to light. Notwythstandyng
they did nothing so nor so: but Judas wiselye waiynge the eraltations and
deiections, the promocions and disgracynges, with the common courses of the
world: returned again with his brethren into the City, went to Iosephe and
besought him, until his bowels were moved to pitye, and he was known of his
brethren. All these things does the most holy law of the Lord rehearse unto
us, and puts us in mind of for this intent, that we may learn to bear
for necessities sake the yoke of him yt has the preeminence and rule for his
time. Nether let any judge or think ye Joseph offended god in yt he submitted
him self under the yoke of Pharao, for it is no shame for a wise man to crouch
unto him whose help he stands in need of, whatsoever he be: much more if he
be a king or a Lord. Do ye not know that our fathers were in bondage to king
Pharao in Egypt? But after the lord remembered the covenant that he made with
our fathers, and had determined to lead them out of Aegipt, he sent Moses our
master of famous memory: his Angel his chosen, who knew the lord to be with
him, whereby he was able to destroy who soever did rise against him:
nevertheless when he came to Pharaos presence who then bare rule in Aegipt, he
showed not him felfe in arms, but rather with thunder and hayle, that Pharao
might well perceive and know, God was the Lord. But at what time as Pharao
oppressed the Israelites to sore, our master Moses by gods help brought
them out of Aegipt, with a strong hand and a stretched forth arm, against
the Aegiptianes, whom he punished with continual plages by that means
delivering ye Israelites out of the hands of their Lords and Masters, and
bringing them to the mount of God, made them heirs of all goodness, that is to
say, of the most holy law of God. And after Joshua had subdued the holy
land to the Israelites, and that they inhabited it, there chaunsed unto our
fathers, times of adversity, as it is mentioned in the books of the
Prophets, so that they were constreyned to serve the king of Aschur a long
season, and the kings of Persia, to the Chaldees also were we in bondage,
although not very grievous but tolerable. More over with other kings of the
gentiles we had wars, and sometimes we were put to foyles, sometimes we had
the upper hand. Now therefore my brethern, tell me, what shame were it to you
if you were subject to the Romans? or what are your to be compared to other
nations that be under their dominion? Do you not see that the Romans reign
over your enemies, and bear rule over them that sometimes were your masters
and haters? were it not reason rather that you should love them, which have
brought down your enemies, and revenged you of them? which notwithstanding you
have nothing at all dooen, but rather have ha^^d them, as men void of all
perceiving, without weying and considering, that sense the timeye were under
the^, ye have always lived in most quietness and peace. I my self when I
withstood ye Romans in Gahle, knew very well, that I should be ouercomed at
lenght, but I cold do nothing for the seditious persons that were with me,
which would in no wise follow my counsel: yea it stood me in hand to take heed
of mine own person that I were not killed of them after I had once counseled
and moved them to give up the town. Wherefore seeing the matter stood so, and
God knew my heart: I thought best to fight against the Romans as I might,
and when occasion served to escape to the Romans: to take it. Further when I
was in the cave with my forty co^pamo^s, I had been lost and undone, had not God
given me counsel, making me away to escape and save my ^yfe. For they had
almooste slain me because I gave them council to yield them selves to the
Romans, and to obey them. For I saw this was the time for the Romans to
bear rule, and that God had appointed them to be Lords over all nations. For
this is his manner like as above he has made some to be rulers over other
some: even so benethe also he has set rulers over the kings of the earth.
Who can judge him that is stronger then he. The Romans at this present have
the dominion over all lands and people over the Aegiptians, Assirians,
Persians and Chaldeis, (to every one of these you have been in bondage) and
over other nationes also, which neuerthethelesse till their ground, saw, mawe,
plant and gather in their fruytes: and who has the profit of this goods and
labor but the Romans? who whiles the other toil and travail, live in peace
and rest the^ selves. wherefore mark this also my brethrn: the king of
Macedonia, but at this day their empyry is taken from them, and they are
become subjects to the Romans. They when the Romans first fet upon them,
were very hautye and coye, determined to resist the Romans. Notwithstanding
they were over come of the Romans, and are under there subjection at this
day. What should I speak of ye people of Philistines Which her to for always
have vexed and anoyed you: does not the meanest amongst all the Princes of ye
Romans bear rule over them? what hope then have you to escape, when ye know
the Philistines were ever stronger then you, and you were oftentimes overcome of
them: as for example, Saul your king was slain by them. But you will say
David the anointed of the Lord of Israel, pulled them down and brought them
into subjection. Wot ye what? then God looked upon you with a favorable
contenau^ce, and fought your battayles him self: but at this day he is in no
wise present with you, for he has turned away his countenauce of salvation
from you, because you have sinned against him. And which of you can say, he
has intelligence of the secret of the Lord, or has received any such watch
word, as god gave at that time unto David? 2. Samuel. 5.
When thou shalt hear a sound of moving in the tops of the Mulbery trees,
then shall thou set forwards: for then shall the Lord goo forth before thy
face, to smite the tents and camps of the Philistines. Whosoever (I say) has
knoledge of any such token, let him utter it to his neighbor, and I cold well
consent to follow it. But seeing there is no such thing, harken unto me my
dear brethren, come and serve the Romans in peace and tranquillity. It
shall be no dishonesty for you, with the kings of Persia to be subject to the
Romans: they that sometime were your masters, shall be now your fellows and
companiones. If you will persevere and stand in your opinion still, I will
reason the matter with you thus. Tell me I pray you, when were ever your
auncetors free, and when were they not entangled with the wars of the gentiles
and the dominion of other nations? had you not ever the victory from the time
you came out of Aegipt until the reign of Saul the son of Cis. So long as
the lord was your king, you were in bondage to no man, you served god as your
only king. But after that your evil and corrupt desire stired you to be yrk of
the lord, and lest he should reygn alone to choose a man to have the dominion
over you, according as the custom was in other nationes. I mean, Saul the son
of Cis, and the other kings every one, then served you him, you and your
sons, and ye chefest of you became his ministers, your goodliest daughters
were made his co^fectionaries, his cooks, and his bakers. After Saul, reigned
David, of worthy memory, who ruled over manne nations. But even he also brought
you into bondage, and put diverse of you to death, to satisfy his pleasure
withal. He being dead, you served Solomon his son, who never a whit less
them the other, even as he listed, exercised dominion over you: he also took up
your sons and daughters and made them his slaves. After this came other most
wicked kings: so ye from that time your cuntrye began to go to wrecke, and he
that was the best amongst them was Rehoboam, which said unto you, my father
corrected you with whippes, but I will scourge you with scorpions. And so did
the rest of the kings, which reigned after him: very few of them pleased
God. All the other wrought abomination, not one of them did any good, or reigned
in the fear of the Lord. And in this manner remained the Empire long time
with you, until the kings of Chaldea came and led you captive into Babylon,
where as you were kept until Coresches time king of Persia who sent you again
into your country, with a wonderful deal of gold and silver, with great honor,
which was counted unto him for rightousnes. After Coreschs death, rose against
you the most wicked kings of Greece, who warrynge upon you, gave you great
overthrows, until God stirred up the spirits of certain sage priests of
the stock of Chasmonani, that revenged your injuries. At that time were you
brethren and friends of the Romans, and friendship grew betwixt you many
years. After that you fell from the stock of Chasmonani which had delivered
you: and chose one whose name was Herod, who oppressed you grenouslye. After
him succeaded Archelaus his son, he yet laid a sorer yoke upon you: wherefore
falling from him, ye protested never after to serve the Kings of Judah. So
going to the Romans willinglye you submitted your selves under their
subjection, to serve Augustus the emperor, who ordered you gentilly. Him you
served as other nations did, and it was to your praise, because ye were under a
good gouernoure. Therefore now my brethren and children of my people, what
mean you at this present, that you have determined to dye, and do not rather
spare your selves and your children? Consider I beseech you the things that
grow upon the earth, and al living creatures, beasts, worms, that crepe
upon the ground, fowls of the air, and fisshes of the sea: Do you not see
how ever the stronger has the dominion over the weaker? neither is it any
rebuke or shame for the weaker to give place and obey that which is stronger.
For the Ore and Goat are in awe of the Lion, the Ram and the Ewe of the
Woulfe, the cow and the lamb fear the bear, the goat the libarde, the
hawk is afraied of the egle, the dove of the hawk? Wey the manner of Beasts
and birds amongst their owns kind, you shall see ever the bigger and
stronger to be master over the lesss and weaker. And so in all other things,
the stronger set the^ selves before the weaker always. Wherefore ye mortal men
learn ye hereat, did not one God make al things, and he him self has
dominion over the^ al? notwithstanding all things are so knit together amongst
the^ selves, yt no one thing can stand without another. But he ye holds up al
things is ye blessed god, who if he list ca^ bring the^ al into dust again,
his name be extold for ever. Take example I pray you of ye parts of the hole
world, you shall se one part to be in subjection, an other to bear rule. Be not
the^ so stiff necked to pernert the natural courses of ye world, but rather
let your election follow the causes and events of ye same, which if you do, you
shall be esteemed for wise men. Now then my dear country men, never think it
shame for you to serve the Romans: it is time for you now to return to the
lord with your hole heart, and then eue^ you also shall have the dominion over
other nations according to your desire. This shall then come to pass, when you
follow your lord God with all your strength. Therefore never think that ye
Romans, which have rule over you at this day, are of less power then other
people that heretofore hane had the domiuion over you. For they are a mighty
nation, their Empire and rule over other people they have from above, as I have
proved to you by ye similitudes of brute beasts, which according to nature,
bear rule one over an other. Notwithstanding in mankind it should never
have come to pass, that the bigger should so have the dominion over the
less, unless for their sins, for the which they are so punished, ye one is
compelled to bow his neck under another yoke. Now therefore, my dear people,
take humility and mekenes unto you, never covet to alter ye laws of nature,
but rather receive my words and follow my counsel, obey the Romans, pressed and
ready to make a leage with you according to their bountifulness, that you may
live and do full well. When Joseph the priest had spoken these things in
the hearing of the Citizins of Jerusalem, they burste out and wept, gnasshed
with their teeth, and rayled at Joseph over the walls, hurling stones and
darts at him to have killed him. Therefore when Joseph saw that they would
not follow his counsel, but were so stiff necked, he began to rebuke them
most sharply, criyng unto them in this wise.

Woe to all froward People, and such as rebel against the LORD GOD, what
mean ye you wretches, what have ye to lean unto that ye are so stubburne,
when as nevertheless the Lord is gone from you? For you are wicked people, and
have sinned against him. How can your sins be purged which ye have
committed in the Temple of the Lord by sheadinge of innocente blood without
all mercse? Ye are most giltye, for ye have fought in the temple and
sanctuarye of the Lord, ye have defiled it with the dead bodies of them, whom
ye have slain in the midst thereof. Besides that, ye have suspended and
unhallowed the name of the Lords with your fightinges, making wars upon your
Sabbath day, upon your solemn and festiual days. Tell me now ye froward
rebels: whether did ever your forefathers prevail against their enemies with
spear and shilde, or rather with prayer, penance, and pureness of heart,
wherewith they served GOD, and he again delivered them? But you, what have ye
to trust unto, when as ye are unfaithful? Your shadow and protection is
departed from you, and your Lord God aydeth your enemies, whose power he
mainteyneth to distroye you. If you imagine to be delivered with your swords
and spears, you are foulie disceiued, whereas God would not that you should
escape the hands of your enemies. Open your eyes and se what David the anointed
of the lord said. For the lord will save neither by svvorde nor spear. Call
to your remembrance (ye very foles) Abraham your father which begat you, by
what means he overcame Pharao the king of Egypt, who violently had taken away
Sara his wife from him, surely nonother way did he obtain the victory, then by
prayer unto the lord, who stirred the spirit of Pharao, and put him in mind to
restore him his wife Sara clean and undefiled. Abraham was quiet in his bed,
and at rest from al troubles, but Pharao that great Lord and ruler, he was
punished in the mean season with great plages, because of Sara who^ he had
taken to him by violence to defloure her, which God would not suffer, but rather
uncovered Pharaos flesh, that he was fain to show the secret parts of his
body to physicians to se if they could he ale the^. But who can cure
thinfirmities which god sendes, or who knows his ente^ts? For who knew that
Ieschaciahus biles could be healed with a plaster of figs, or Naman Syrus
lepry, with the wateres of Jordan: or ye bitter wateres with wormwode? Wherefore
when as no man could cure Pharao, he was glad and feign to speak Abraham
fair, and to entreat him to pray unto god to take away from him this plage:
and so by his prayer Pharao recovered. Then Pharao apparaled Sara in precious
garments, gave her gifts both gold and silver and preous stones, and sent
her home honest, pure and holy to Abraham, liyng then in his own house. Isaac
also when he was driven out by Abimilech king of the Philistines, and had
with him ye bond servants of his fathers household, to the number of.8.
hundred and.18. with who^ Abraham had disco^fited five kings, befide many
other mo of his family, so that he had been strong enough to to have invaded
the Philistines: yet he would not do it, but with all mekenes and humility he
used him self toward the king of that country. Notwithstanding after he was
driven out of that land, the Philistines came unto him, and entreated him,
saiynge: we perceive the Lord God is with thee. etc. as it is written in the
Scripture. What shall we say of Jacob when he fled from the presence of his
brother Esau, he carried nothing with him but a bare staff, wherewith he passed
over the river Jordan, as it is written: With my staff passed I this Iordane.
His necessaries took with him for his journey, was prayer, wherewith he made al
his wars. That was it for the which God assisted him when he went away to
Laban, and when he returned from him, when also he was delivered out of the
hands of his brother Esau that sought to kill him. Moreover, by the way as he
returned, when he wrasteled with a certain man, and overcame him. Oh lord,
who is able to number the mercies of the Lord, and the maruails which he
wrought with our fathers of worthy memory, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? What
should I speak of Moses our shepeherd the man of god that feared the cruelty
of Pharao, until he writ in the law, that he had called the name of his son
Eliasar, for he said the god of his father helped him, and delivered him out of
the hands of Pharao. And when he came before Pharao to deliver Israel out of
his hands, and to lead the^ out of Egypt: what thing else overcame he the
tyra^t withal, the^ with prayer? Did he not overthrow ye pride of Pharao and his
charmers only with ye rod of the Lord, which he had with him? Wherewith also he
smote Aegipt with ten plages, and divided the sea into twelve paths? And at
the red sea Moses resisted not Pharao and his hosts with force of arms, but
with prayer: wherefore Pharao and all his ware drouned in ye botom of the sea.
But Moses sang a song of praise unto our God while the soldiers of the
Aegiptians perished that came against Moses and the people of Israel with
weapons, horses, and chariotes: notwithstanding by the means of Moses prayer
they were overwhelmed al in the sea, so that not one of the^ escaped. Who is
ignorant of this, that prayer is of more force then all instruments of war:
that it spedeth and hasteneth the help of the Lord, and his saving health? Do
you not know wha^ Joshua the minister of Moses passed over Jordan, that he was
a warlyke man, and had with him very many most valiant soldiers? Nevertheless
he destroyed not the seven walls of Jericho by force of war, but all only
with prayer, and with the showtes and noise of the priests of the Lord, our
forfathers? Know ye not how that prayer auayled Gedeon, when as he with 300.
men vanquished the hole host of Median. Amalek and the people of ye east, if
prayer had not helped him, I pray you what had 300. men ben able to do against
so great a multitude? Mark (ye fond people) what chau^sed in the arc of the
covenant of the Lord, that the Philistines took away. Our fathers truly were
not able to recover it by their swords and force of arms. But with ye prayer
that the just men of that adge made, the ark was brought again unto his place.
Consider the times of Hezekia king of Judah, when as Sennacherib king of Assure
came up blaspheming, and railing upon the sanctuary of ye Lord God of hosts,
uttering ye pride and malice of his heart: by what means was he ouerthrone? did
our fathers overcome him by force of arms? Nay without doubt: but with prayer
and supplication. For Hezekia ye king, went and put on apparail mete for
prayer: in sted of a shild he took sack cloth, for a helmet, he cast dust upon
his heed, and in steed of arrows and a sword, he set hand upon prayer and
supplieatio^. And the prayer ye Hezekia made, mounted up so far as no arrow had
been ever able to flee: so that his one petition and prayer ouerthrou 185.
thousand most valea^t men of ye host of Sennacherib. Forthermore the king of
Judah and king of Israel and king of Edom joining their powers together,
invaded the Moabites, and in a wilderness, an unoccupied and bare^ dry la^d they
were in great peril for thyrst: what profited the^ their artillery and furniture
of war? Did there not issue out for the^ at the instant prayer of Eliseus a
prophet and man of God plenty of waters in ye desert and a broke in ye
wilderness? Came it not to pass also by ye prayer of ye same Eliseus, yt a
wonderful hurlybucly, a ru^bling, and rattling of chariots of war and of horses
was hard in ye camps of ye Sirianes besedging the city of Samaria: with ye
which noise ye Sirianes being a ferd, fled, noman pursuing nor following the^?
ye know also ye by the prayer of the foresaid prophet, the famine and lack of
victuales that was in the town of Samaria, was turned into great abundau^ce
and plenty, in so much that thirty Ephas or mesures of fine meal were sold for
one piece of silver. Do you not see (most folish men) how our forfathers had
the victory ever by prayer? But let us come to ye beginning again, and speak of
Moses: what time as he held up his hands toward heaven, had not Israel the
upper hand of the Amalekites, by his prayer? Joshua also by his prayer stayed
the sun and moan in the sight of the people of Israel, and the sun stood
still in Gibeon, and the moon in the valey of Ailon, that the evening was
changed into monday, and so Israel vanquished their enemies. Sampson also that
most valiant giant, until such time as he had sinned, did not God evermore
hear his prayer, and ever he gat ye victory thereby? After he had once sinned,
he decayed as any other mean person. Likewise also king Saul, all the while
he walked perfectly and purely, his prayer increased his valeantnes and
strenght: but after he had once sinned, God left him and gave him over. David
also king of Israel, of famous memory, from the time of his youth till his
last end, his valiantnes never failed him, and why? because he always was
helped by his prayer, neither would he ever fight against his country men and
native people when as Saul persecuted him. Wherefore he prevailed against his
enemies, and because he absteyned to lay his hands upon his brethern: therefore
afterward all nations feared him. Did not Assa king of Judah accompanied with a
small number of men, make an expedition against the Aethiopianes, and praing to
the Lord God, said on this wise: We in deed, know not what to do, but our
eyes are bente upon thee, etc. Which prayer the almighty did hear, and the
victory followed, so that Assa slew in the camps of the Aethiopians ten
hundredth thousand men. Deboras a prophetyse by her prayer brought to pas great
health in Israel. What shall I tell of diverse other just and godly women, which
by their prayers obtained many things. Tell me (ye mad me^) know ye not what
Amaziahu king of Judah did? He having wars with the Edomites, vanquished them
and led them prisoners with their wives and children and idols also to
Jerusalem: then fell to worshipping of the same idols that he had taken from
the Edomites, saing unto the^, you ar they which have saved me, and by ye
reason Iworship you: therefore have I ouercomed ye Edomits. To whom when a
prophet of the Lord came and asked him, why sekest thou and seruest the Gods
of, that people that were not able to deliver the^ out of thy hand? By and by
he taunted the prophet again, sainge: who made the of the kings counsel?
wherefore after that he was no moar reprehe^ded of ye prophet, for the lord had
determined to distroy him, as it is written in the books of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah. There fore he was taken prisoner afterward like a fore, when
as he fought against Ioas king of Israel in Bethschemesch, and so was he
compared to a low and vile thorn or shrub: And Ioas unto the noble and hye
ceder tree. Yea all the euilles that ever happened unto us in any age, it came
of our selves: for our lord God is ryghteous in all his works that ever he
wrought upon us. Our enemis did us never so much harm as we did to our selves,
and to our own lives. Ye wot, the gentiles took our precious vessels of our
sa^ctuary away to babel, and brought us the^ again undefiled, but we polluted
and defiled them our selves and the temple also with innocent blud, which we
shed abundantly within it, adding sins to sins ever mo and mo, breking the
law with our evil acts. For who brought ye Romans first against ye city of
Jerusalem, but Hircanus and Aristobulus, for they being at dissentio^ betwixt
the^ selves and one hating ye other, called ye to mains against this city? who
brought Antoni and Sosius princes of ye Romans against Jerusalem, but Herod,
being at variance for the kingdom with the house of Chasmonanites? who also
called Nero Caesar to reygn over us, did you it not your selves? Now therefore
why rebel ye against the empire and dominion of the Romans? If you will say,
because the Romayn president Edomaeus ordered you to bad: had it not ben mete
rather to complain of him to the Emperor, then to rebel against the Romans
and to make war against them? But you will say, we rebelled against Nero
Caesar because he did us to much wrong. Wherefore then rebel ye now against
Vaspasian Caesar, a most merciful man, and one which never hurt you? Or why
make ye not peace with his son, to be under him according as other nationes
be, that ye might live and not peryshe? Have ye not a sufficient proof of his
clemency and mercifulnes, when as he has cause to be cruel upon no man so
much as upon me, which drew out my sword against the Romans, and killed many
of them? notwithstanding neither he nor the rest of ye Romans have done me
any harm. Yea, rather they have bestowed many benefits upon me, and although
I was in their hands, yet they have saved my life. Yea, I confess, that
before they had me prisoner, I would gladly many times have fled to the^, but I
could never do it, for I was ever aferd of my wicked co^paions, least they
should have killed me, and so my death had been to no purpose. But now I praise
the lord God without ceassing, because that for his unmeasurable mercies sake,
he would not suffer me to be enta^gled in ye same mischieues ye you be in.
Nether would I wish to be a companion of such lost unthrifts and castawayes as
you be, which have shed the blood of innoce^tes in the temple of the lord. In
deed if I had been with you, I should have been void of al hope as ye be, saying
ye spare not your own lives, and your own co^tumacie and stubbernes is made a
snare for you. See I pray you, with how great mischiefs you are laden. First
the lord is not emongst you, insomuch ye through the wars which you have
made emo^gst your selves, almost ye waters of Schiloach ar dried up, which her
tofore when ye nations made war against you, flowed in great abundance and ran
over ye banks on both sides. But you are o^erth wart rebels yt have ever
provoked ye lord God unto wrath, you have made slaughteres one upon an other in
the midest of the temple of the lord: how can then the glory of the lord dwell
emongst you? Know ye not because of Korach and his congregation, the lord said
unto Moses and to his people Separate your selves from among this congregation
and I shall consume the^ in a tvvinkling of an eye? But you are far worse then
they, for without all remors or pity, ^e pull down the temple of ye lord with
our own hands, and you your selves set fire on the sanctuary, which most noble
kings and most holy prophets builded, and besyds all this, ye nether spare your
sons nor daughters. And although I be in the Romans ca^p, yet I am not
absent from you, for my most dearly beloved wife is with you, ye wife of my
youth, who^ I can not set lightly by at this present, although I never had
children by her, but rather love her most entierly, because she came of a most
honest and godly house. My dear father and mother ar also with you, very aged
persons, for my father is at this day a hundredth and three years old, and my
mother four score and five, but the years of my life ar very few, evil and full
of tribulacion and sorrow, about threscore and seven, nether have I lived yet
so long, that according to nature I should desire to dye. Now therefore if so be
it you trust not me, but suppose I have proposed these things to you
deceytfully, and that there is no trust of Titus coueuant and bond, or that his
league should be to your hindera^ce and disco^moditie: go to, if it come so to
pas, it shall be leeful for you to kill my father and mother, and my wife: yea I
swear unto you by the lord our God, that I shall deliver my life also into
your hands, that you may do with me what ye list: and by that means shall the
blood of my parents, my wives, and mine be in pledge. Therefore let the
ancient of the city come forth, and I will make a league betwixt them and our
lord Titus. And doubt ye not but as hitherto the lord God would you should be
afflicted and punished by the government of the Romans: so hereafter, he
shall benefyt you thereby and do you good, if so be it you will once acknowledge
and confess, that al dominion is changed and altered at his commandment, and
that God humbles whom he list, and again whom he list he sets aloft. But
persuade your selves of this, that as long as ye refuse to be subject unto the
Romans, so long ye styre against your selves Gods wrath and hye
displeasure: and besides that differ the lengar and prolong your redemption and
deliverance, not only to your selves, but also to your posteritye. Now
therefore my brethern, I thought it my part to declare al these things unto
you, and it is in your power to choose whyther ye list, for who so will, let
him give ear unto me, and who not, let him absteyn from my counsel.

THe people hearing these words and sainges of Joseph the priest, wept
wonderfully, for they could have been content to have followed his counsel. At
that time Titus gave commandment to all the Romans, to send again the Jews
ye were prisoners, and the slaves into the city, and by that means he shifted
from him self the blood of the servants, and laid it upon the necks of their
masters: for Titus took pity of the^ through Joseph's oration, and his good
counsel. The common people of ye Jews desired nothing more then to have comed
forth, and to fall at agreement to make peace with Titus, but Schimeon, Eleasar,
and Iehochanan captains of ye seditious, set strong watch and ward at every
gate, charging the^ to kill all that would go forth, and by that means many
were killed which would have fled forth to Titus: and so the city of Jerusalem
was closed up that no man could get out nor in. In the mean season fell a
great darth and famine in Jerusalem, in so much that the seditio^s serched every
man's house and sellar to find food, which when a certain housekeper would
have withstood, he was killed emongst the^. And thus they dealed with all me^ ye
dwelled at Jerusalem, til all the victuales in the town was spente, that men
began to seek dong and very man's excrements to eat, wherefore much of the people
dyed for hungar. Whosoever at that time could get any herbs, or roots, myse,
serpe^ts or other creping worms what soever they were to eat: he was counted
happy, because he had found meat to susteyn and save his life withal, in ye
hard famine and terrible hu^gar. Moreover who so had any corn in store that no
man knew of, he was afraid to send it to the myll or bake it, because of the
wicked nes of the seditious, lest they should take away from them their
sustenance, wherefore many cat the dry corn vnground in their sellers privily.
At ye time also were exceading rych men in Jerusalem, which stale meat one from
an other, so that the father caught meat from his son, the son from his father,
ye mother snatch from her children, the children likewise from their mother,
and such as fled out at the gates or otherwise let them selves down over the
walls in ye night time unawares to the seditious persons, the romans killed
the^ without. This evil therefore and distres increased so long, till ye people
had devoured al ye ever crept on the earth from ye mouse to the spyder, from
the neuet to the wesel, wherefore a more grievous pestilence followed, whereof died
innumerable among the people of the lord, and there was noman to burye the^.
When they chau^sed to find any dead horse or other beast in the town, a man
should see many Israelites strive and fight for it, so yt in such co^tencions
also very many were slain, in all points like to samisshed ravens lighting upon
a dead carcas. Therefore when diverse men with their wives and children gat out
of the city to gather herbs to eat, and chaunsed among the Romans, the
Romans laid hold of the little children, and killed the^ saying: we will
dispatch these, lest wha^ they grow once to ma^s state, they make war upon us
as their fathers do at this day: so that many which came out of the gates of
the city now and then, the Romans killed them and hanged them upon galowes
over against the gates of Jerusalem to the number of five hundredth. After the
same manner Schimeon, Iehochanan and Eleasar dealt with those Romans whom they
could by any trayn, catch, even hanged them up, upon the walls. Whosoever also
they could perceive would flee unto the Romans, they hanged them likewise
over the walls to the number of five hundredth. But Titus gave co^mau^deme^ts
to al his soldiors, that no man upon pain of death should kill any of them
that fled out of Jerusalem. For he took pitye of the Israelytes, and ceased
not to speak fre^dly and lovingly to the Ierosolimites: so yt he went yet once
again to ye walls, and spoke unto the Jews on this sort. Hear, I beseech
you, ye counsel of Joseph, and come to me, that you may live and not perish
utterly. Spare your people, why will you oppress them vexed with honger,
thirst, pestilence, and besieging? But the sedicious hearing Titus speak, were
wonderfully incensed, and intended to add mischief upon mischief, handelyng
yet more cruelly the people of God. Moreover, they rayled at Titus to provoke
him to anger, that he might leave of speaking to the people, which had now
almost left their obedience and fear of the sedicious: wherefore the
sedicious answered unto the Romans. It is better for us to dys for honger
and to be killed in this affliction, so to come to the bliss and light we
hope for: then to live and see the most holy temple of God defiled and
destroyed. When Titus saw this, he commanded an iron ram to be set to the
wall to batter it, that he might deliver those pore wretches out of Schimeons,
Eleasar, and Iehochanans hands, who held the^ in as captives. At the same time
as they erected that engine to the wall, it from the citizins. 2. Reg. 21.
Likewise of David our king we read, how he entered alone into the camps of
Gyantes, which when Abisai brother of Ioab son of Seruia heard: he went
after him, and received upon his target a stroke that a giant let fly at
David, and killed the Gyaunt. But as concerning Alexander, we know that he
wanne the city by none other means then through the sins of the
inhabitauntes and them that dwelt therein. Likewise also at this present the
sins of the Ierosolimites have delivered and saved thee from death, that thou
might be a snare of destruction to them hereafter. Wherefore thou shall
understand that the Romans have done wisely to abstain from the assault at
this time, because they knew they should have to do with a most valeaunt
nation, which thou having so well tried, may report and testifye when thou
art asked the question.

AFter this, Titus divided his whole army, and laid them priuelye in ambushes
round about the walls. He prepared moreover four Rams of iron to batter the
walls: of these one he planted upon the side of the place called Antochia, the
engyn was thirty cubits long. The same night captain Iehochanan with his
company issued forth, and undermined the ground under the wheles of ye wagons
that bare the Ram, putting pitched bordes oyled, and done over with
brymstone, in the trenches under the wheles, and under the bordes they spread
leather, which likewise was smered and done over with pitche, oil, and
brimstone. Then they set fire upon the bordes which burned till they came to
the fete of the Ram, and they once set afire and burnt, the engine fell upon
the watch that was appointed to keep it being a sleep: and killed them. Whereat
the Romans were much dismayed, and said. It is not possible we should assault
this city hereafter, for they have burnte all our engines of war wherewith we
have subdued al other kingdoms, so that now of fifty iron ra^mes which we
brought with us, we had but five left, and the seditions Jews have burnte three
of the^, what shall we now do? how shall we batter the walls hereafter? The
Jews upon the walls, hearing their words, flouted them and lough them to
scorn. Wherefore Titus ince^sed with anger, commanded the other three Ra^mes to
be addressed in ye place of that which was burnt. In ye mean season whiles
the Romans were at work.iiii. young men moved with a great zeele, whose names
were first Thopatius, Galilaeus, then Megarus Chebronita, the third Iorminus
Schomronita and the fourth Arius Ierosolimita, these all armed, issued out into
the camp of the Romans that then stood about their three engines and yro^
ra^s, diuising how to batter the walls of the city: of whom, some those young
me^ killed, ye other fled. Then.ii. of the^ stod at defense to keep of all the^
ye approached nigh the engine, while the other two, Ierosolimitanus and
Schomronita daubed the timber with a certain matter which they had prepared to
make it take fire, and straight way set fire upon the^, so ye suddenly the rames
were on a light fire. Then they al iiii. joined together withstood ye Romans
that they should not come at the engines to quench the fire. Schortly the rams
fell down and the Romans stood a louf hurling stones and shooting thick at
the^, for they were afraid to come nigh them, because of their great fearcenes,
although they were three thousand me^ ye kept the rams, yet these four set
nothing by the^, nor never went of ye ground, til the rams were clean brent up,
shot the Romans never so thick at them. Titus hearing of ye valea^tnes of
these young men and the harms that they had done unto the Romans: made speed
with his hole host, to save the rams fre^ the fire and to apprehe^d those yo^g
me^. Then fortwith issued out Schimeo^ Iehochana^ and Eleasar captains of ye
seditious with their soldiers, sou^ding their tro^petes, and made ye Romans
retire, yt they could not come nie the fire, and so rescued the four young men
from the Romans that had environed them round about. In that skirmish were
killed ten thousand men and five hundredth. Then gathered together all the whole
army of the Romans to assault the Jews at once approaching hard to the walls
of Jerusalem, there they cried unto the Jews, saying: What? are ye Oren or
goats, that you fight on this fashion upon the walls? Will ye be taken in the
midste of the city like as oxen and goats are taken in their foldes? If ye be
men come forth, and let us try our manhood here in this plain. But you by
stealth and at unawares set upon them that keep our engines, snatching them
up like as it were wolves should snatch sheep, then run away into the town,
as the wolves run to ye wode. If there he any manhod in you, behold we are ready
here, come forth to us, so many for so many, and then we shall see what end
will come thereof. When the captains of the seditious heard that, they spoke
unto the warriors that were in Jerusalem: Which of you will go out with us
to these dogs, to show our force and stomachs for the sanctuary and city
of the Lord? Then five hundredth tal fellows of their own accord issued out
upon the Romans suddenly, slew.viii. M. men, and compelled the rest to
recule from the walls. The Romans then wist what valeantnes the Jews had,
for the Romans were in number forty thousand fighting men, and the Jews were
only five hundred, whereof not one of them was killed in that skirmish. The
Romans a far of shot at the Jews and hurled stoones, to whom the Jews
said: come hither to us, are not you they ye called us forth and provoked us to
come to you? Why come ye not now near? You go about to drive us away with
arowes and stones. What? do ye think us to be dogs, and that we are afraied of
your stones? Are we not men? Yea, we are your masters and betters, for ye
run away from us, as servants flee from their masters, when they follow them,
to beat them.

TItus seeing his army part to be fled, and part to be slain, he cried to his
people saing, is it not a shame for you ye Romans, and a wonderful great
dishonor, to flee from the Jews, so hu^gar beaten, famished, almost dead for
thirst, and beseged? Alas, how shall ye put away this your rebuke and ignominy,
when as al nations, which heretofor, ye have most valea^tly subdued, shall
here ye ye flee from these dead Jews, whose hole land we have in possession,
so that they have nothing left but this only town, which we have also so
batterd, that they have but one only wall to defend them? Besides this, they
are very few, we are innumerable, they have no nation to aid them, we have
help of al lands, why then do ye flee from their sight, like as the small
impotent birds flee from the egle? What though the Jews vow and hassard them
selves desperately for their temple and land, why do not you the same also in
these wars, to get you a renown of valeantnes? Thus the Jews prevailed that
day, and had the upper hand, wherefore they returned into the town with great
glory, having put the Romans to so great a foil. Titus commanded his to
address and prepare the two other rams that were left, to batter the walls
of Jerusalem withal. Wherefore the Roman carpe^ters cast a trenche to prepare
and set up the Rams within it, in such place as Titus had assigned them. The
Jews were ware of it well enough, but winked at the matter as yet until they
had planted the master bemes between the standinge posts. So when the work
was fynished, even to the hangyng up of the engynes betwixt the standing
posts, to shake the wall wythall, the Romans being secure, nothing
mystrustinge that the Jews would stir, because they had been quiet a few
nights and never issued forth of the city. Upon a certain night a pretty while
before day, the three principal capitaines of the sedicious came and cast
their heads together to devise what they should do. Eleasar gave this
counsel, and said: You two the last time issued out, burnte three Rams,
and gate you renoune, and I kept the gates the while: now keep ye the gates,
and I will issue out with my men against the Romans to get me a name also.
The other answered. Go then a Gods name unto them, the Lord God of the
sanctuary whicke is in Jerusalem shall be present with thee, but beware thou
be not slain, and in any wise thou be not taken alive. To whom he answered:
the Lord God shall keep me, for upon the trust of the righteousness of my
father Anani the hie priest, and his sincere service unto god, will I set upon
the^. Eleasar therefore chose an hundred valiant soldiers and with them he
issued out of the town before day. The same night ye Romans had made fires
about their engines where they watched because of the cold. The artificers and
soldiers that kept watch and ward about the Ramms, were in number a hundredth
and fifty. The day was the. 27. of the month of Kislef, Noue^ver.
which was the ninth month that Titus had besieged Jerusalem. Eleasar and his
company thus being issued out, came and found some of ye Romans snorting
about ye fires, other watching in their wards, killed the^ all, that not one
remained. Then some of Eleasars company set fire upon the Rams, burnt the
standinge posts, roapes, cheynes, and other instruments of war. The
artificers that were there they catched alive and burnte them, so that no man
escaped. When it was day, Titus was aware of the Smooke of the fire mountyng
up very foul, and stinking of the wood and men together, he drew toward the
place therefore with his host, to see what the matter was. Eleasar in the mean
season and his company, took as they might get, every man a piece of the
engines out of the fire, or some of their heads that they had killed and
returned with great joy, flouting the Romans and laughing them to skorn, by
the way til they came to the gates of Jerusalem, where they were received of
Schimeon and Iehochanan with great honor.

SOne after this came many soldiors and great bands of me^, out of all nations
yt were subject to the Empire of the Romans, to aid Titus, to whom Titus
declared what had hapened him in ye siedg, the stoutnes of the Jews, and how
they had anoyed many ways the Romain army, adding moar over and asking them,
did ye ever see four men withstand ten thousand and five hunderd, so yt they al
together could nether over throw the^ nor take the^ prisoners? but the four
slew the other, like as it had been tops of cucumers smite^ of with most sharp
swords, when they hard this, they wo^derd all very much. Then Titus spoke unto
his host and to the^ which were newly repaired unto him, to show their advise
and best counsel what was to be don, least we should be shamed (says he)
before al the^ ye shall herafter here of our wars. The grauist and most
ancient of the nations that were newly come to his aid, answered. If it plese
your majesty let ye Romans breath a while and take their rest, which are now
weried with ye sundry batayls of ye Jews, and we who are not so broken with
labor but fresh and lusty shall try what the Jews ca^ do, we ca^ not think yt
they arable to withstand so great a multitude. But ye princes of the Romans
desired Titus yt he would not permit them this, lest he should encrese their oune
sorrows, if peradventure they should be disco^fited (say they) of ye Jews, and
the matter redound unto our shame. For if we which are acquainted with the^ and
know their manner of fight can not sustain their violence, how shall they do it
ye never had proof of the strength and force of ye Jews. They shall be to the^,
like Isop which grows upon ye walls in comparison of ye ceder trees of
Libanus. The Other said, nay, they should do well enough with the^, and they urged
Titus so insta^tly and dishonor returned unto Titus, who reprehended them
because they would not believe the Romans. The nexie day following the Jews
brought forth the three thousand nobles and gentlemen that they had taken
prisoners and plucked out of every one of them an eye, and cut of of every man
the toon hand, after sent them back with shame and reproach to Titus camp. Then
Titus consulted with all his princes, what were best to do with the
Israelites: and when every man had said his mind, he liked never a man's
counsel, but said unto them. Well I have devised this with my self, which I
will follow, and no man shall bring me from my purpose: we will keep the siedge
without any assault or skermishe, for their victuales failed them long agoo,
and so they shall be famished. Besides this, when they shall see us cease to
fight with them, they will fall at variaunce emongst them selves and kill one
an other. This counsel was thought good of all Titus Pryn^es, wherefore they
beseged the town as Titus commanded, and closed up all the ways of the City
round about, least the Jews should as they had done before, come upon them
at unawares. They appointed more over, watch day and night, to take heed that
no man should come out of the town to gather herbs for their sustenance.
Then increased the hungar in Jerusalem, which if it had not been so grievous,
the City had never been won: for the soldiers of the town were lyghter
then Egles and fearcer then Lyones. There dyed therefore of the famine
wonderful many of the Ierosolomites, so that the Jews could not find place
to burye them in, they were so many in every place of the town. Many cast
their dead folks into their wells and tumbled in them selves after and dyed,
many also made them selves graves, and went into them alive, where they tarried
day and night, and dyed vnmourned for. For all mourning and customed
lamentacion for the dead was left of, because of ye unmeasurable famine, which
was so great that it can not be told, and I can not rehearse the thousand part
of the mischief that followed of ye hungar. Titus seeing the innumerable
carcasses of the dead that were cast into the broke Kidron like dong, was
wonderfully amassed with fear, and stretched out his hands toward heaven,
saing: lord God of heaven and earth, whom the Israelites believe in, cleanse me
from this sin, which surely I am not the cause of, for I required peace of
them, but they refused it, and they the^ selves are long of this mischief,
they have sinned against their own souls and lives. I beseech thee reken it
not to me for a sin, that the Jews dye on this fashion.

AT that time certain wicked persons of Jerusalem slaundered Amittai the
priest falsely, saing to captain Schimeon, behold Amittai ye hye priest which
did let thee into the city, goes about to flee to the ten^es of the
Romans. Thou haste experience of his great wit and craft, how he also knows
all the secret ways unto ye town, temple, and sanctuary, and who can tell
whyther he will bring the Romans some night at midnight into the city?
Therefore Schimeon sent certain to fetch Amittai and his four sons unto him.
They you were sent, brought Amittai and but three of his sons, for one was
fled to the Romans and came to Joseph. Amittai with the other, when he came
to Schimeons presence, he besought him not to live, but that he might be put to
death by and by, least he should live to see the death of his children. But
Schimeon was hard hearted and would not be entreated, for it was Gods will that
Amittai should be punished, because he was the bringer of Schimeon into
Jerusalem, and therefore fell he into his hands, which for good, rewarded him
with evil. Schimeon commanded a sort of murderers to place Amittai upon the
walls, in the sight of the Romans, and said unto him: see thou Amittai?
why do not the Romans deliver and rescue the out of my hands, the I say
which would have fled away unto them? Amittai answered nothing to this, but
still besought him that before his death he might kiss his sons and bid them
fare well: but Schimeon utterly denied him. Wherefore Amittai wept a loud, sayng
to his sons, I brought, dear children, I brought this thief into this town,
wherefore I am counted now for a thief my self: all this mischyefe which is
comed upon me and you, it is mine own doing, bycaufe I brought this seditious
villain into this holy City. I thought then, perauenture he will be a help to
the town, but it is now proved contrary, for he has been a most cruel
enemy of the same. It was not enough for us to keep one seditious person,
Iehochanan I mean, which took unto him Eleasar the first begynner of
sedition: but I must bring in also this wicked Schimeon, which is joined to
our fooes to destroy us. In deed I never brought him in for any love yt I
bare unto him, but all the Priests and the hoole multitude of the people sent
me to fetch him, notwithstanding I am worthy of this just judgment of God,
because I took upon me such an ambasage. What should I speak of thee thou
most wicked Schimeon, for whyther so ever thou turnest thee, thou bringst all
things out of frame. In deed thou dealest justly with me, because I have
sinned unto God, to his people and his city, in that I have brought the in, to
be a plage to it. Wherefore I were worthy to be stooned: notwithstanding it had
been thy part, thou wicked murderer to deliver me and my sons from the
hands of the other seditions, for I have wrought them displeasure, but to thee
have I done good. Howbeit our God will not altar nor change his judgments,
which is, that I should fall into the sword of thy hand, for that I made thee
to enter into this city, where in I offended God grievously. If ever I had
purposed to flee unto the Romans, could I not have done it before ever I
brought in thee? for at that time barest thou no rule over us. And before we
called in thee, Iehochanan with his sedition was an offense unto this city,
wherefore we persuaded all the anuncient of the town, that thou should be an
aid unto us, to drive out our foes, but thou in whom we put our trust, art
become our enemy: yea, thou haste been worse then they, for the other put men
to death pryuily, thou do it openly. Who is he that has strengthened the
power of ye Romans? art not thou he? which have killed the soldiers of God in
the midst of this city Jerusalem? for few have been slain without. Titus
would have made peace with us, taking pity upon us, but that same did thou
let and hinder, every day moving new wars and stiring new battles. Titus
gave charge to his souldi^rs to lay no hands upon the temple, but thou have
polluted and defiled the temple of the Lord, sheding blood without measure in
the mids thereof. Titus went back from us upon the holy day of the Lord and
ceased from fighting, saying, go and observe your holy feasts in peace, but
thou vnhalowedst the feast of the Lord and leshedst out the continual fire
with innocent blood. Al these euilles which thou have committed, thou
murderer, at imputed unto me, because I brought the into the town. Now
therefore this bengeaunce is appointed to mine age of the lord God, and by thy
hands shall I goo to my grave with sorrow, because I by my foolishnes, was a
doar in this mischief that is wrought by thee. Albeit now thou wicked Schimeon;
in this that thou killest me, before mine eyes may see the burning of the
temple, it pleases me very well, but whanedeth thee thou murderer to put my
sons to death before my face, why do thou not spare mine age? Would God
that like as I shall not se the burning of the temple, so also I might not see
the blood of my children shed before my face. But what shall I do when God
has delivered me into the hands of a most wicked man? We that were the
ancients of Jerusalem abhorre^ Iehochanan because he murdered old men
without al reverence, but he slew no young men: thou destroyest ^ld and young,
great and small, without any pit or mercy. Iehochanan m^u^ned for the
dead, and buried them also: thou playest upon instruments at their burials,
singest to the Lute, and seundest the trumpet. Then spoke he to Schimeons
servant, who was ready with a sword in his hand, and an are to kill him,
and to cut of his head, saiynge: Go to now, and execute Schimeons thy
masters commandment: be head Sons in sight of their father, and let me
hear the voice of cruelrye in my sons, which notwithstanding I forgive
thee. For as I shall see and hear that against my will: so I dare say thou
killest them not willynglye. Would God that Schimeon would suffer me to
kiss my Sons, and whiles I am alive, to embrace them or they dye. But thou
gentle minister, in one thing show thy pity toward me, that when thou have
put my sons and me to execution, separate not our bodies, nether ley in
sunder their corses from mine: but so, that my body may^ lie uppermost and
cover theirs, to defend them from the fowls of the air, lest they devour my
sons bodies, for it may fortune they may be buried. I beseech thee also
that my mouth and tongue when I am dead may ^ouche my sons faces, that so I
may both embrace and kiss them. But what do I delay or tarry any longer,
seeing the enemy denies me this, to kiss the^ whiles we are yet alive? See
thou therefore that our bodies be not severed, and if Schimeon will not permit
this, that our bodies may be joined in this world, yet can he not let our souls
to be joined, for after I shall be once dead, I doubt not but I shall see the
light of the Lord. His sons hearing their fathers words began to weep very
sore with their father, who said unto them. Alas my sons why weep ye? what
avails tears? why do ye not rather go before me, and I will follow as I may,
for what should I do now, seeing God has given me into the hands of a most
cruel tirant, who spares nether mine age nor your youth? But I trust we
shall live together in the light of the lord, and although I can not be suffered
now to see you enough, yet when we shall come thither we shall be satisfied with
beholding one another. Go ye therefore my dear sons and prepare us a place. O
that I might goo before you, the lord knows, I would do it gladly. But ye
my sons, marvel never at this that is chanced unto us, for it is no new
thing, such like has happened before this in the time of the Chasmonanites,
when as Antiochus by his wickedness put to death the seven brethern young men, in
the sight of their mother which was a righteous and a godly woman, who
chanced to find this mercy at the lords hands, that she might kiss her
sons and embrase them, as they also kissed one an other before they died. Al
they were put to death by the crueltye of the uncircumcised king of the
Macedonians, yet obtained they that which is denied at this day to us ye are
put to death by Schimeon, who has the name of an Israelite, who bears also
the couenaunte of our father Abraham in his flesh. And would God it might
fortune us to live in their inn or place of reast, which al be it it will not
be granted, yet we shall be their neighbors, saying that we also die for the
law of ye lord. Therefore be of good comfort my sons and lament not for my
sake, for I judge this my misery easier, and not so great as the cala^itie of
Zidkiahu, whose sons were first killed, then his eyes put out by the king of
Chal^ea, and he lived man^ years after: we are so much the more happier in my
mind, because we shall dye together. Then said Amittai to Schimeons servant
which should kill him. Make speed I pray thee and kill me first before my
children die, then after kill them also that we may die together, for so it is
more expedient for us then to se the temple of the lord turned into a
butcherye or slaughterhouse to slay men in. After cried he unto God, saying: I
beseech thee, O Lord God most high, which dwell in the highest, judge this
Schimeon according to his works, reward him according to his deseruings. For
thou art the god almighty, and dreadful, let not this thief die therefore
amongst the people of thy pasture, but yt his death may be severed from the
death of other men, let him dye a horrible and a sudden death, that he have no
time to confess his sinne^, and to return him self to thee, that thou may
receive him (for thou art wont^ to receive them which turn to thee by
repentance) for he is not worthy of repentance, which has spoiled and wasted
many goodly things in thy temple, besides that, has murdered most holy men
in the same. To the intent therefore that thy judgments may be declared in him,
I beseech thee make him to be taken of his enmies, together with his wife,
children, and family, and all that ever love him. Nether give unto his soul any
part with the people of god, nor let his portion be with the just men in thy
sanctuary, for he is unworthy of the^, because he has not only sinned him
self, but has caused Israel to sin. Wherefore let his judgment and sentence
go forth from thy sight, yt he may se his wife, children, and his hole house
led into captivity and bondage before his face. Afterward let him die a
strange death, such as never man herd of, let him be killed of must cruel men,
which when they have smite^ him may after quarter him also whiles he is yet
alive, and that he may see his go into bondage. Let him also be a curse before
all that shall see him. More over let him perceive that my words and desteny is
better then his, when as I go unto thee, in that great light, which he shall be
deprived of. After these words Amittai said to the servant, who was appointed
to kill him, I beseech thee, let me find so much favor atthy hands, that
when thou have slain my Sons, thou would kill me with the same sword,
while it is yet wet with the blood of my sons, that our blood may be mingled,
and this may be a recreation to my soul, Kill me also in the sight of the
Romans, that they may avenge me and my sons upon this most cruel
Schimeon, they shall be witnesses against him, that I was not their friend. But
would God my matters were all in that state as they were before, for then
should they perceive me to be an enemy of Schimeons, and a friend of theirs*
Would God I had withstanded Schimeon at the first so earnestly, as I made
war upon the Romans, that I might have avoided his cruelty from the people
of God: when he had said al these things he prayed before god almighty, saying.
O God which dwell in the highest, thou only art most mighty and fearful open
now the eyes of thy judgments, consider and judge betwixt me, and seditious
Schimeon, whose malice is be comen unmeasurable upon the people of God, that he
which sheadeth the blood of them that fear thee in the midst of the temple,
may be rebuked of thee with thy rebukinges according to his works, make spedy
vengaunce, and prolonge not, and that for the deaths sake of thy saints: for
thy judgments are the judgments of truth. Then Schimeon gave
commandment to four cut throtes of his, that three of the^ should kill
Amittais three sons before their fathers face, and the fourth should kill
Amittai him self: and so the blud of the sons was mixte with the blud of
their father. Afterward Schimeons servant took the body of Amittai: and
laid it upon the bodies of his sons, as his desire was, then tumbled them
over the walls. After that commanded Schimeon that Chananehu ye hie priest
should be put to death, whose body was cast unto the bodies of Amittai and his
sons. Aristius also the scribe, one of the noble men of Jerusalem was killed
at the same time: and ten mo just men of his kindred and house because they
murned for the death of Aristius. It fortuned while Schimeon was a killing of
those ten, certain substantial rich men passed by, and were wonderfullye
amassed when they saw the thing, saying one to an other. How long will God
suffer the malice of Schimeon, and will not search out the blood of just
men, nor revenge them? Certain seditious persons hearing this, told it unto
Schimeon, who commanded them to be apprehended and murdered the same day.
After this, there passed by a leven of the noble men of Jerusalem, which
saying two and fortye innocents to be put to death by Schimeon, they lift up
their eyes to the heavens, and said: O Lord god of Israel, how long will thou
hold thy hand, and keep in thine anger against these transgressoures of thy
will? which when Schimeon heard of: he commanded them to be apprehended, and
killed them with his own hands. Eleasar the son of Anani the priest saying
the malice and wickedness of Schimeon to be great, that he made away the just
and godly men of the city, and that there was no hope left: he took ye toure of
Jerusalem, remained in it, and kept it with his. Iehudas also a captain over a
M. men, which kept a turret ye Schimeon had made to put just and godly men
in, gat him up upon the top of the walls, and cried to ye Romans, if
peraue^ture they would deliver him and the rest that were at Jerusalem.
Wherefore he went about to escape with his. M. men that he had could I ever have
looked that I should have over lived my son, and that I should not be suffered
to see him and to burt him? I had trusted he should have buried me, and that he
should have been a help to me in mine age, and when my whole family by the
seditious was almooste made away and extinguished: yet I said, this shall
co^sort me. Now therefore what shall I do, when I have none left to comfort me of
al my children that I bare, for between the seditious and the gentiles our
ennemies, they have slain, xviii. sons that I had, and what shall I do now
from henstorth, but covet death? for I desire not to live now any longer. And
how should. I receive any consolation when I see my son dead, and I ca^ not
bury him? Lord that I might die by and by, for I can not live any longer sense
my son Joseph is dead. She went up yet farther upon the walls, till she came
to the turret where her husband was in prison, and stretch out her hands
toward heaven, criynge with a loud voice: O my son Joseph, my son where art
thou, come and speak unto me and comfort me. The seditious hearing her, laughed
her to scorn: but the Romans when they hard her, and knew of Joseph that it
was his mother, they wept and lamented her case, and many of the Jews also
that were in Jerusalem, but they were feign to refrain it, lest they should be
perceived of Schimeons cruel cutthrotes, Then Iosephes mother said to the
seditious that were by her upon the walls, why do ye not kill me also which
bare Joseph my son, and nursed him with these breasts? ye ennemies of the Lord
have murdered him with other just and righteous men, why kill ye not me also?
God be judge betwixt me and you that hau^ killed my son giltlesse. The
seditious answered her, can thou not if thou list, fall down over the wall
and dye^ we will give thee good leave. When thou haste done so, the Romans
shall take thee up, and burye thee honorably, because that thou art Iosephes
mother, who is their friend. She answered, how should I do this evil unto my
self, to kill my self, and constreine my soul to go forth of my body,
before that God do call it? If I should do so, I should have no hoope left in
the world to come, for no body will burye them, whom they perceive to have
killed them selves. These and such like, while she reasoned wiselye, the
seditious heard and mocked her. Wherefore she wept the more aboundantlye, so
that the Romans and other godly men, hearing her wisdom, could not abstein
from weping. Joseph when he hard his mother speak, he gate on armor, and
approached to the wall, accompanied with most valeaunt Romans, to defend
him from the arrows of the Jews, and spoke to his mother. Fear not my dear
mother, nor take no thought for me, for I have escaped the hands of the
seditious, God has not suffered me to come into their hands. Wherefore I have
hard the words of those wicked counselloures that advised thee to kill thy
self, and thine answer again to them, which before thou gave them I knew
thou would answer. God forbid I say, God forbid that Iosephes mother and
the wise of Gorion should consent to the council of the wicked. Wherefore (my
dear mother) be content and bear the yoke of the sedicious patiently, and
humble thy self before the^. Never strive against the miseries and calamities
of this time, which thou can not alter nor remedy. For they shall perish,
but we shall stand and continue.

THere were certain men of Jerusalem at that time that came to the Gates,
overcame the ward, and gate out with their wives and children, and so escaped
to the Romans, because they could no longer abide the famine and the iniquity
of the sedicious. They were faithful citizins and of great authority, whom
when Joseph heard of, be brought to pass that Titus spared them and received
them to mercy. For Iosephe bare witness and reported for them that they were
noble men of Jerusalem. Wherefore the Romans received them, and gave them fode
and sustenaunce, but certain of them could not brouke nor take it because of
their great honger wherewith they had been long pined, and when the meat went
down into their bealyes, they dyed straight. And their little children when
they saw bread, they fell upon it and took it in deed with their teeth, but
they were not able to chew it, and dyed holding the bread betwixt their teeth.
Titus seeing them dye when they tasted of meat, had ruthe and compassion upon
them, and was very sorye, saying unto Joseph. What shall I do for thy people,
which as soon as they begin to eat, dye straight way? Iosephe answered. My
Lord, I remember I have seen this experience that they which fast long, and
after would take meat, first they drink a little sodden milk, or elsse
eat of a certain Corn called Simill sodden in milk, wherewyth they
strenghthen their bowelles before they took meat: specially such as walked
through wildernesses, whose bowels were long empty when they came to places
inhabited and found meat, they were wont to use this means. Therefore Titus
commanded his men to do as Joseph bad them, whereby many of the Jews
recovered, and many dyed of the flyre. These Jews which were escaped thus out
of Jerusalem to the camps of the Romayne, had swalowed up first their gold
silver, and precious stones to hide the^, least they should be found of the
sedicious. They therefore which recovered and brouked meat, when they would
satisfye nature, they went alone out of the camp, and after sought their gold
and silver, and precious Stones, which were disgested in their excrementes,
and so did they every day. At length certain Aramites and Arabians espiynge
the Jews to use this fashion, told it amongst their fellows one to an other,
and made a conspyracye to lay wait for the Jews, and whom so ever that they
gate, they ripped their bealies to find the Goulde and other jewels which the
Jews had hid there. And by this means the Aramites and Arabians had
murdered two thousand Jews. But when Titus heard of this, he was wonderful
wroth, and commanded them to be apprehended that had done this wicked deed,
and to be put to death, whose goods were given to the Jews that remained
alive. They that were put to death for this fact, were two thousand Aramites
and Arabians together. After this Titus seeing his princes and captayns to have
decked their armoure with gold and silver, some of them also to bear golden
scepters, and some of silver, with other ornaments upon their heads, he
called them together and said unto them. Lay away this gear, these things
are they that provoked the Aramites and Arabians to work this wickedness
against these pore and miserable Jews which fled forth unto us, that they
might live under our pretection. The Capitaynes therefore and princes of the
Romans hearing the commaundemet of Titus, were obedient, and straight laid
away from them those ornaments of gold and silver. Titus also gave
commandment that the rest of the Arabians and the Aramites should be
banished the camp, and that no man hereafter should commit any such heinous
deed against the Jews. Notwithstanding when as any Aramite or Arabian could
get any Jew far out of the camp that no man see it, he killed him. Of the
Romans in the camp, no man either did or said any evil to the Jews, save
certain ungodly Ruffians which had learned at the Aramites and Arabians
those evil and wicked pranckes: for they also when they chanced to mete with
any Jew out of the Camp, if there were no man by, they killed him, and took
away his gold and silver that lay hid in his bowelles. When this came to
Titus ear: he commanded to make Proclamacion in this wise. Whosoever he be yt
has seue, heard, or known any thing of this horrible deed which is committed
of certain Romans upon the Jews, or whosoever has done any such thing him
self: let him come and make relation to Titus, which if he do, the matter shall
be forgeuen him, if not, he shall bear the burden of his own wickedness and
stand at his pearyll, if any thing be proved by him hereafter. Therefore
certain Romans which knew with the^ selves that they had committed the
deed, and being afraid of Titus, reasoned with them selves thus: if we do
not confess unto him the truth, he will by his wisdom search out these
offenders, and punish them by death. Wherefore trusting unto Titus words of
the Proclamation, they came all, who so ever had either done it him self, or
known other to do it, and declared it unto Titus saiynge: This have I done,
this have I known, this was I accessarye unto, and have not hitherto made thee
privy thereunto. There were of the^ in number.ccc. and.xx. men ye made this
confession, al those Titus commanded to be cast into hoate Ouens, and to be
burned. This done, the Jews were more safe ever after in the Romans Camp
without all ieopardye, no man hurtyng the^ either in word or deed. Yea, if
any Romayne found a Jew abroad wanderyng, he conducted him gentilly and
peaceably into the camp. There was a certain scribe of Jerusalem at that
time, a faithful man, whose name was Menachen, son of Seruk the scribe, whose
aunceters had served Esdras the scribe of worthi memory in Babylon, he being a
keeper of the least gate which was in Jerusalem upon ye side toward ye broke
Kidron, noted the number of the dead yt were carried forth to buriyng by that
gate, and found they came to a 115. M. 8. C. and. 8. persons, which were al of
the nobles and ge^tilmen, or at ye least of the substa^ciallest of the Jews.
Titus on a time ( Joseph being present) asked the question of those princes of
the Jews which were fled unto him, saiynge: with their companies against ye
Romans and five very many of them in that skirmishe. Wherefore Titus said, it
is not wisdom to fight with the^ any more, but rather with the Ram to shake and
batter the wall, for they have no mo but this wall left, and so we may bring in
our hole host at once upon them and subdue the seditious. This counsel of Titus
was liked of all the princes and people. The captains of the seditious
mistrusting no less then the Romans intended, that they would be occupied
hereafter in battering their wall, began to build a countermure within over
against the places where the Romans wrought with their Ram, which was in the
plain, by the tomb of Iochanan the hie priest, for there was none other place
besides yt they might come unto with their Ram. And there the Romans had
made.ii. breches in ye two other walls before. The seditious made this
countermure, because they were not able to burn ye iron Ram, as they had done
before, being now almost famished and so pined away yt they could scarf stand
upon their legs, for if they had been so lusty as they were before, and able to
set a fire thengins, ye Romans had never been able to win the town, but should
have been compelled to leave ye assault, as they were co^streined to give over
skirmishing and fighting. On a certain time when the Romans fled, ye seditious
pursuing killed many of them, they said: ye Romans will once be weary, leave of
their sege and go their ways, ye we may dwell at liberti, and turn to ye lord
our god. And when they returned at this time or at any time prosperousli into
ye town, they oppressed ye people ye more: cruelly exacting fode of them, and
saying, gene us meat, if ye will not, we will eat your flesh and your sons. But
the Romans took courage to them selves, determined to fight stoutlye, and
said one to an other, let us stick to it hard and be valiant in our fightes,
it shall be shame for us to fle from these feeble and hunger starued Jews, which
are more like dead persons then living. Therefore they began more earnestlye
to set upon the walls and to make a battery suddenly, they bet down a great
part of that inner wall which the Jews had newly erected, and gave a great
shout, saying: Jerusalem is won, we have gotten the town. But when they looked a
little further, they espied an other countermure raised over against the breche.
Wherefore ye Jews through the town gave also a great shout, and sounded their
tro^pets, rejoicing that they had builded another new cou^termure for that
which was batred down. The same was in captain Iehochana^s ward. The Romans
seeing the cou^termu^e, and bearing the Jews make such triumphs in the town:
were much astonished, al their joy was dashed and turned into dumpes, so that they
could not tell what they should do with that stubburn people of Jerusalem
which had done the^ such damages. The Romans set upon the town again an other
way, whom Titus willed rather to remove thengin, and bend it to the new
wall, whiles it was yet grene and unsettled, saying: let us batter it, and we
shall see it fall by and by, and then shall we enter the town. The Roman
captains followed not Titus counsel, but scaled the walls which they had
battred. The Jews defending their countermure, fought with the Romans within
the breche, repuised them from the wall and the town: and so having abated much
the strength of the Romans, returned to their lodginges. Then said some of
the Romans, we will never besiege this town any longer, for we shall not be
able to get it whiles we live. And there fore let us break up and depart before
we be al destroyed with this siege, for except we do so, we shall al be
confumed therein. Titus seeing his soldiers to make so hard a matter of ye
winning of the town, called them al together and said unto them. Tell me now
ye Roman princes, do ye not know that all vvarres and other businesses
vvhatso ever they be: are more hard, and require greater diligence in the end,
then in the beginning? in which who so trauail, if they faint in thend, do they
not labor in vain? even as your labor shall be in vain, if ye give over the
sege now. Consider a ship, when it has compassed the hole sea, and is now
ready to arrive at the shore, being troubled with a tempest, if the mariners
should then be negligent, the ship may easily be lost, and al they which are in
it perish, the mariners disapointed of their purpose, in that they shall not
atteine unto the place which they coueted to come unto. Like wise builders if
they finishe not their work, but leave of before they make an end: is not al
their labor lost and spent in vain? Husband men also if they til their
ground, and then so we it with seed: shall they not loose their pains,
unless they will also mow it? In like manner, you have foughten very long
against this city, many Princes of you and worthy men have been slain, and
now you may see the strongest walls of the town are broken and made equal
with thearth, the people your adversaries is consumed with hunger, pestilence
and sword. What shall it then avail you all that ever you have done, if you
slake your diligence, and will not finishe the work of the sege? have you not
then employed your labor in vain? And why should this new wall so dismay you? ye
why do ye not prepare your selves to beat down this new wall, which is much
sclenderer then the other three that ye have cast down? If so be it ye should
determine to leave of the sege, had it not ben better for you to have done it
at the beginning, whiles your army was yet whole? Now, when as your are few,
and your most valiaunte soudioures slain: why do you not rather choose to die
the^ to live? Did not you once enter this town, in the time of Nero Caesar, to
defend his name? Now therefore when Vaspasian my father reigns, who is not
only of greater power then Nero, but also more gentle toward you then ever
was Caesar, if you should abate and slake your endeavor and diligence: it
should be to your great shame and reproach. Why take ye not ensample of
these Jews valeantnesse, whom now already, sword, pestilence, and famine
has wasted, so that they have ne hope left: nevertheless they fight still
and never give it over. Do you not se every day, how some of them issue out of
the town, and boldly assail the Romans, not without se^pardy of their
lives, in so much that sometimes they die for it? Which things they do for
none other cause then to get the^ praise and renown for their great prowess.
When as Titus had well debated these things and such like in the ears of his
souldi^ures: a certain valiant man named Sabianus said unto his fellows. Who so
dare go with me to assault these Jews, let him come hither to me, that we
may fulfill the commandment of Cesars son our Lord and master. And
forthwith he took his target and his drawn sword in his hand, made toward the
town with a.xi. tall fellows followynge him, whose valiantness and courage
Titus wo^dered at greatly. The Jews kept their ward upon that part of the
wall, where the Komaines had had a repulse of late: so when they saw Sabianus
and his company draw fast toward them, they began to assail him with
stones and arrows, but Sabianus settinge light at them, urged the Jews.
Shortly one of the Jews met with him, and gave him such a blow that he
felled him to the ground: yet he gate up again and fought for all that wound
mansully, as one that had rather leave his life then the fight, till an other
Israelite came and flue him out right. Three also of his fellows were killed
fighting valeauntly in the place, the other.viii. returned to the ca^pe so sore
wounded, that they died the next day every one. Further, other Romans seeing
Sabianus act, and studiyng to do the like: the next night they took a counsel
upon a tweniye of them, and agreed to assault the town. This their
enterprise when they uttered to the standarde bearer of Titus, he and many
other of the Romans went with them. They al scaling together and clammering up
by the breches, gat up upon the wall, sounded a trompet, and gave a great shout.
The Jews being at their reast as men oppressed with hunger and weariness, and
hearing this larum and shoute of the Romans: were wonderfullye amassed, not
knowinge what the matter mente, or how they should defend them selves. Titus
also heard the shoute, and when he had inquired the matter: he chose out
certain valeaunt men, and drue toward the breches with them. In the mean
season the day was broken, and the Jews rising from their sleep, espied Titus
upon the walls, and marueiled thereat greatelye. The Romans therefore
gatheringe toward Titus, came very thick into the town, some by the breches
of the wall and other some through a vault, by the whithe the Jews were wont
now and the^ to issue out and in. The Jews set the^ selves in array against
the Roma^^es in the very entry of the temple: upon who^ ye Romans ran with
their drawn swords for they had none other armor, nor the Jews nether being
so hastily taken at such a soden. The battle wared very hard and wonderful
dehemente on both barties, the like was never seen in Jerusalem, nor heard of
in an^ ^me, for every man claue hard to his next fe^^ we, and no man could flee
on no side, wherefore ye battails wart strong with lamours and shoutes on both
parties: now the ^oyful shoutes of the vanquishers, now the wailinges on the
other side of the^ that were put to the worsse. The Romans encouraged and
erborted one an other to fight, saying: this is the day which we have long
looked for. The Jews again took heart unto the^, saying: it botes not to f^e
hence, but for the glory of the lord and of his temple let us d^e manfu^lye as
necessiti co^streineth us, and so doing we shall be counted for sarrifices and
offerings: which earnestnes on both sides filled ye entry of ye court of ye lord
with blood, ye it stood like unto a pole or a pond. And that fight continued
from that morninge until that day four days. Then a certains souldioure of
Titus whose name was Golinus, a valeaunt man as was any amongst all the company
of Kuttiim, he seeing the Jews to prevail and to have thupperhande of the
Romans, which now had left of fighting and fled, the Jews pursuing the^: in
a rage he ran against them, and met them at the new wall that Herod builded,
called Antochia, drive them back, and made them take thentri of the temple
again, whereas pressing into the routes of the Jews, he was sore wounded of a
certain Jew. And when he perceived him self wounded, he would have lepte
back, but stombled at a stone in the pauement of the court of the temple and
sell down, where he ^oughte yet still, t^^ a certain Jew killed him outrighte.
He fought in deed very boldly and valeauntlye, but unwarily: for he
considered not his ground wherein he had to do with the Jews. Titus waitinge
for Golinus return, and hearing him to be slain, would have gone him self to
rescue the reaste of his which were with him. But his men would not suffer
him, fearinge leafte he him self should be slain. The Jews therefore gate
the upper hand that day, and slew wonderful many Romans in that bat tail,
spoilinge them also which were killed of their armoure. These were the names
of the Jews ye made that skirmishe. Of the company of captain Iehochanan,
Elasa, and Iphtach: of Schimeons company, Malchiah, and Iaikob a Prince of the
Edomites. And Arsimon, and Iehudah, of the company of Eleasar the son of
Anam. These with their companions made this flaughter of the Romans in the
entran^^ of the temple and drove them back to the Antochia, where they kept
them up that they could not get out. Wherefore when Titus perceived that the
Antochia was in the Romans way, and hindered them: he caused it to be (...)
and pulled down to the ground. These things were done upon the.v. day of
Siuan, May*
the third month, vp^ the even of the solem^ne festival day of weeks, which
otherwise is called Pentecost, and that (...) the.xiiii. month from the
beginning of Titus sieg^ against this city.

SHortly after, upon the third dai of the feast of weeks, the^, Jews as ma^^e
as were at Jerusalem, kept holy (...) and celebrated the waste. Titus taking^
with him Joseph the son of Gorion* went unto the house of ye sa^ctuar^ where
the seditious and soldiers of the Jews were gathered together, and called
unto Iehochanan and the rest of the captains of the seditious, to whom he
(...) the mean^s of Joseph being his interpreter in this wise: What has this
temple offended thee, (you seditious Iehochanan) why have thou brought upon it
thi^ great evil and mischief? If so be it thou trust so much to thy (...)
forth to us with thy men into the fields, and we shall fight with thee thy
fill. Is not this your solemn festival day? Why then will ye fight in
that place where ye should offer your sacrifices? Ye pollute and defile the
sanctuary of your God and his name, and we spare it, knowinge it is the house
of God. And thonlye cause why we make war upon you, is your stubburne
stifneckednesse, that you will not submit your selves to us, whom God has
given the dominion unto, whose will ye lahoure in vain to disappoynt. Either
therefore, if ye will fight no more, humble your selves under our subjection
that ye may save your lives: or else if ye be determined still desperatelye to
fight with us, then get ye forth from hence, and let us go into the fields,
there to set our battles in array, for why, will ye defile your sanctuary and
hinder ye worshipping of your God? Much more besides this spoke Titus, partlye
blaming their stubburnnes in that they had defiled their temple, and yet ceased
not to pollute it more and more: partly with fair words and gentleness
exhorting them to yield, admonishing them not to resist so mighty an army, when
as they could not do it without danger of utter destruction. These and many
other things Joseph expressed in Hebrew to the people as Titus willed him, but
ye Jews answered never a word: for Iehochanan had given a charge yt no man
should speak. Then captain^ Iehochanan answered Titus him self, saying: We
can offer no kind of sacrifices more acceptable to God, then to vow,
ieoparde, and habandon our own bodies and blood for his names sake. Wherefore
we will dye free in this our town, and will never come in bondage to serve you.
Titus made him answer by Joseph, saying: This your city, I grant is a holy
city^, and your temple is mo^^e holy, which no man does deny. But ye have
greuouslye sinned, in that ye have pollu^ed the temple of the Lord your God by
sheadinge in it the innocente blo^ude of sain^es and priests of God, with
other most godly and holy men.

By what reason can ye then say that you shall be accepted for sacrifices and
offerynges before God? Yea, rather God abhors and detesteth you utterly,
when as he requires in his sacrifices that they should have no defaut nor
spot, but ye are all to be spotted, so that no sound place is in you. For tell
me (I pray you) if there be any more abominable spot in man then sin, when
as he traunsgresseth the law of God as ye have done? Neither is there any
wisdom or intelligence in you. For wise men would wisely bear with the
calamities of times, and know the courses of things. How then are ye so
^olishe to say that ye are an acceptable and well pleasynge sacrifice unto
god, when as ye resist the will of GOD so proudelye? But thou Iehochanan and
the rest of the sedicious capitaines that are with thee: tell me, art not thou
a mortal man, subject unto the griefs and vexacions of this life, and worms
meat as we be? Should he not displease thee that should take away a table or
such like thing prepared to the honor of thee, and would thou take it in
good part, and hold him excused that should do so unto thee? Why then haste
thou taken away the sacrifices of thy God out of his Temple, and haste stuffed
it with innumerable dead bodies? Who can see or hear this, and abstain from
wepinge, when he shall know so many Israelites to have suffered death by
thee, and Schimeon, and Eleasar thy fellows? Nether can thou yet apply thy
mind to cease and leave of thy malice, and yet nevertheless perswadest thy self
the while that God is with thee, and that thou with thy fellows art an
acceptable and well pleasynge Sacrifice unto GOD: nothing perceiving that
your sins seperateth you, and keeps you a sunder more strongelye then ante
Brazen wall. It is true, I confess that it becomes every valiant man to
stand stoutelye in the defense of his people, city, and country, For it is
better to dye valiantlye then to com into the subjection of his enmy that goes
about to pluck him from his religion, and drive him out of his country. But I
came not hither for that intent to draw you from your law, or to banish you
out of your land, or else to destroy it and your Cities: but this is the cause
of my coming hither, to effer you peace, and to make a league with you, that
you should take upon you our yoke, and be our subjects as ye were ^^ore.
Where did you ever hear of a people in all the world, that has showed them
selves so merciful and gentle, both toward other, and toward you, as we
have done? Hanniball the captain of the Garthaginian^, after he had wasted our
country, and at lo^gth was taken by us was he not had in great honor and
reputation of us, and with such humanity handled, ye we made him king of his
people? And so dealt we with Antiochus the Macedonia^, and other kings ye we took
prisoners* Ye* brag ye ye keep the watch of ^our god, Why the^ follow ye not the
example of Iechaniah your king, who to save ye temple of your god from
destruction, and left your people also should be led away into bondage, or be
destroyed with the sword: yielded him self and his house into the hands of the
king of the Chaldeis. Why spare you not your own lives, your city, and
sanctuary? Now therefore hearken unto me* and I will make a leage with you
before the God of this house, who shall be a witness betwixt me and you: by whom I
swear that I will never break this league, neither do you any harm, nor
spoil your goods, nor lead you away captive, nor yet set any ruler over you
but a Jew of your own nation, even Joseph the priest which is with me shall
be your prince if you think it good, and all the faithful men also which
are with me shall return to you home again, ye shall inhabit your own land,
ye shall have the use of the fruits thereof with peace and quietness, without
any corruption or alteration of the service of your God. Wherefore credit (...)
^o make a leage with you, and that y^ may trust me the better, ye shall have
pledges, Iosephe a noble man of your country, and other princes and noble men
of the Romans. Come forth therefore and entreat a peace with us, bow your
shoulders and humble your necks to serve us like as all other nations do, and
as you have done your selfs in ye time of Nero Caesar, ye ye may live and not
be distroied, keeping your religion safe and sound. Joseph the priest hearing
the words of Titus and his clemency, in that he was minded to spare ye Jews,
burste out aloude and wept in the presence of the capitaynes of the sedicious
very bitterlye, but they nothing regarded it. Iosephe therefore saying that
Titus could do nothing with the sedicious, said unto their princes. I
marvel nothing though this city tend to desolation and destruction, for I
know the end of it is at hand. But this is it that I marvel most, that ye
have read the book of Daniel and understand it not, which is now fulfilled in all things, and yet never a one of you does mark it. The continual sacrifice
is already ceased a good while ago, the anointed Priest is cut away and put
down. These things although they be most manifest, yet your herts ca^ not be
leave the^. And mani other words spoke Joseph full of admonition and
consolation, but the Jews refused to hear him. When as he had made an end
therefore, and the Sedicious had so hardened their necks, Titus turned him
and departed out of Jerusalem, saiynge: Let us get us hence least their sins
destroy us. Wherefore he pitched his tents without the City, in the same
place where he encamped at the first: For he was afraid both for him self
and his army, lest they should be circu^uented and closed in, and slain
cruellye in so great a City as that was. Certain of the priests at that time
and of the nobles of the town, with other Godly men did wisely se to the^
selves* and came forth to Titus, submittyng the^ selves to his mercy, and were
received of him peceably with great honor. Who^ Titus commanded to be
co^ducted into ye land of Goschen, where in times past the Israelites dwelt in
ye days of Jacob their father, and Joseph Lord of Egypt. Thither sent he
them, and gave it the^ in possession to them and to their heirs for ever,
commaundynge a company of the Chaldeis to safe conducte them til they came to
the land of Goschen. Titus directed his Letters also to the Romayne Presidente
which was set over Egypt, to take pity of the Jews that he had placed in
the Land of Goschen, to sustayn and succor them, and to see that no Roman
or other should do them harm, or anoye them by any means. Many other also
of the Jews coueted to go forth of Hi^rusalem, but they were let of the
Sedicious, that they could not do as they intended. And who can tell whether
they were entangled with their own sins, and destenyed to destruction with
their Sediciousse brethren? when as their hands also were polluted with the
crueltye and iniquitye of the Sedicious? Wherefore the Sedicious closed up all
the ways about the temple, that none of the Jews which were in Jerusalem
might get out to Titus. When Titus knew that many of the Jews were desierous to
flee unto him and could not because of the sedicious: he went again to the
place where he^ was before, and Iosephe with him. Whom when the people saw to
be there with Titus, they fell a weeping, and said unto him. We acknowledge our
sins, and the traunsgression of our fathers, we have all swarued out of the
way against the lord our God, for we know the mercy and gentleness of Titus
the son of Caesar, and that he takes pity upon us: but what can we do, when
it is not in our power to flee unto him, because of ye cruelty of ye sedicious?
The sedicious hearing them talkyng with Joseph in presence of Titus, and that
they spoke reverently of him, and honored his father calling him Lord: they
ran upon them with their drawn swords to kill them. Then cried they unto
Titus, dear Lord and master rescue us. The Romans therefore made speed to
deliver the^ out of the hands of ye sedicious. So risse there a fray in ye
midst of the temple between the Romans and the Jews. The Romans fled into
the place called Sanctum sanctorum, which was the holiest of all, and the Jews
followed after and slew them even there. Titus standinge without, cried unto
Iehochanan, and said unto him. Hear thou, thou Ichochanan, is not thy
wickedness yet great enough? Will thou never make an end of thy mischief?
Where is the honor of thy God? Is it not written in the law of your God of
the Sanctum sanctorum, that no stranger ought to come at it, but only the
hye priest, and that but once a year, because it is the holiest of al? And
now how dare thou be so bold to kill those that are escaped un to it, and how
dare ye shede the blood of the uncircumcised therein whom ye abhor, and yet mixed
their blood with yours. The Lord your God is my witness, that I would not
have this house destroyed, but your own wicked works, and your own hands
pull it down. And would god you would receive our peace, which if it were once
done done, we would honor this house of the sanctuary and temple of the Lord:
yea, we would depart away from you. But your hearts are hardened like iron,
and your necks and foreheds are become obstinate as brass to your own
undoing. For ye shall carry your own sins, and die in the land of the
Romans. I and my fathers house are innocent and gilties of your death, as the
Lord and his temple, in whose presence we stand, shall bear us witness this
day. But when he saw that none of ye sedicious gave any regard to his words, he
chose out of his Romain? xxx. M. valiant fighting men, and gave the^
commandment to take and occupy then try of the temple, which is a holy court,
and determined to go with the^ him self, but his nobles would not suffer him,
but will led him to remain upon a hie place where he might behold his sodiers
fight. And when the^se thee a far of, their h^^ts shal^e comforted, and they
shall fight acc^rding as thou will wish the^, but come no^ at then try of the
temple thy self, lest thou be destroyed amongst other. Titus followed the
counsel of his cap^ains, and went not at ye time with his me^ to the battle. He
made chief captains of that host of.xxx. M. one Karilius and Rostius. i^.
noble men, who^ he commanded to set upon the Jews ye night when they should be
a sleep with wearines. The Romans therefore doing after his commandment set
upon the Jews. But the Jews having intelligence of the matter, kept dilligent
watch, and withstede the Romans val^auntly all that night. But the Romans
were not hastye to fight in the dark, fearinge lest it might turn to their
own harm. As Soon therefore as it was day, the Jews divided them selves, and
bestowed their companies at the Gates of the entrance, and fought like men.
Karilius and Rostius beset the Temple round^ about that not one of the Jews
might escape out, and so the battle increased between them for the space of
v^^. days, sometime the Romans getting the upper hand of the Jews,
driuynge them within the entrance: sometime the Jews encouraging the^ selves,
made the Romans retire, and pursued them to the walls of the Antochia, in
this manner fought they these vii. days. Afterward, the Romans returned
back from the Jews, and would not fight hand to hand with them any more.
Then Titus commanded the Walls of the Antochia to be pulled down further,
that there might be place for his whole hoaste to enter. The famine in the mean
season grew more grievous, so yt no fode was now left. For the Jews began now
to issue out, and steal horses, asses, and other beasts what soever they
could catch, even out of the Romans camp, that they might dress them some
meat and sustain their lives. Which they doing often times, at length the
Romans perceived it, and were wonderfulfye ^^^pleased with the matter.
Wherefore they set watch and ward round about the ca^pe, lest by the disceit of
the Jews they should be spoiled of their cattle, so after yt the Jews could
steal no more from thence. After ward notwithstanding they armed them selves,
and issued out at the East gate, and brake the wall that Titus had raised for
his own safety, lest the Jews should issue out upon a sudden, and come upon
him at unawares.* A sort of tall fellows therefore of the you the of the Jews
issued out by the breaches of the wall, and gate up quickly to the mount
Oliuet, whereas they found horses, mules, asses, and much other cattle, and
fleyng their kepers, they drive them before them with great shoutes into the
town. The Romans perceiving that, pursued them to fight. Wherefore the young
men deui^e^ them selves into two bandes^ the one to drive the bootye, and the
other to resist the Romans. So there was a sore ^yght betwyxt them, but the
Jews gate the upper hand, and went their ways clear with the (...) toward
Jerusalem. For the (...) came for the constrained by the necessity of honger,
and fought for their living: the Romans had no cause to fight, save only
for shame to ^^e their cattle driven away before their eyes, for otherwise
they put not their lives in ieopardye to fight unto drathe as the Jews did,
yet was there many of the Komaynes slain in that ^ighte. The Jews while the
Romans p^^sued them in dayne, they gate into the town with their spoil and
(...), and straight way turned vppon^^^ R^maines and drive the^^n back,
pa^suynge them again till they ^^the a^most to Titus ^ampe, which when the
other Romans saw and the ^^ame to the rescue of their fellows* (...) ed
again those young men to (...) to take the^, albeit the^ escaped (...) without
any ha^the, save that (...) took a boy and brought him unto (...) that took
this lad (...) So the Romans (...) the Jews at that time, and for a certain
token of victory, they had this y^g Jew prisone^. Pornas ye took him was
had in great estimation for that act, of Titus and all the Romay^s. Titus
appareled the boy, and committed him to Josephus to keep. This Boy had a
brother amongst them that escaped into the town, a vile personage evil
favored, and of a low stature, his name was Jonathan. He seeing his brother
taken, comes forth to the to^be of Iochanan the hie priest over against
Romans, and cried unto Titus, and to all the army, saiynge: If there be
ever a man amongst you, let him ^ome forth unto me, here will I aby^^ him,
and fight with him upon thy^ ground: and ye shall know this day whether the
Romans or the Jews be the better men. The Romans despised him, yet
durst they* not meddle with him, but said: if we kill him, we shall never
be counted the better men for such an act, and if he should kill any of
us, it should be a great dishonor to be slain of a wretch. Jonathan said
to to the Romans, how much is the manhood of the Romans to be regarded
in our eyes? Have not you been flayne and put to flight by us? What were you
then if that bands and companies of the Gentiles came not every day to aid
you? If they had not helped you, we had long ago eaten you up. We have
destroyed our selves* one an other with civil wars, so that we are but few
left, but what are you? Who is so hardy of the best of you al^o come and
declare his strength, and to fight with me? I am one of the meanest and
outcastes of the Jews: pick you onte the chiefest and vale antest man
amengest you all, and you shall know by and by whether part is more valiant.
When Jonathan had spaken thus proudelye, there came for the one of the most
valiantst soldiers of ye Ro^ains whose name was Pornas, the same that had
taken the brother of this Jonathan and brought him to Titus, he came no sooner
at Jonathan, but he was killed of him straight way, leaving behind him a
diverse inheritance to Jonathan and the Romans. To Jonathan a fame of
fortitude and valeantnes: to the Romans shame and reproach. When Jonathan had
so slain ye Romain, ye Jews changed his name and called him Iehonathan, by an
honorable name, and gave him a septer of dominion in his hand. But Iehonathan
when he had gotten this victori, gave not ye glory to god, but ascribed it to
his own prowess and became very proud withal, he was not content with one
victory, but would yet provoke the Romans, ^ailing at them, and calling for an
other valeaunte champion to be sent to him, that I might kill him (says he) and
^^lare my force upon him And even as he said so, one of the Romans whose name
was Poriian stroke him through with an arrowe at unawares and killed him. By
whose example we may perceive. It is every man's part chieflye to take heed,
that when they overcome their enemies, they rejoice not over much, nor wax
proud for the matter, for who knovveth what end they shall have the^ selves?
These things done, the Jews seeing the walls of ye temple and the three walls
that compassed the town to be raced and pulled down, knowinge also that they had
no hope left, nor any thing to trust unto: they consulted what were best to be
done. There was a great huge house ioyninge upon the side of the temple that
king Solomon had builded, of a great height, whose walls also the kings of the
second temple had raised on height, and had decked it with timber of fur and
ceder trees. The Jews went and anointed every where the Ceder timber of ye
house with brimstone and pitch abou^dauntly. So when the Romans came again to
the temple to assault ye Jews, and pursued them unto that palaice: they entered
the palaice after ye Jews (who went out again an other way) and some climed
up to the battleme^t^ of ye house, other set up ladders to scale it. Then
reioysed they wonderfully, saying* the palaice is taken: now have the Jews no
place left to flee unto for refuge. Thus when ye Romans had gotten the
palatre and the house was thr^nge full of the^, a certain Jew a yo^g man,
vowing him self desperately to die, went and shut up the palaice, and set fire
of the gates before anointed with brimstone and pitch. And streightway the
side walls of the house, and the whole building began to be on a light fire,
so yt the Romans had no way to escape because the fire compassed the house
on every side. The Jews also stood in harners reu^d about the house least
any of the Romans should escape. Wherefore so many of ye Romans as entered
the house, were destroyed with the fire, which was.xxii. M. men of war. Titus
hearing the cry^ of the Romans that pearished in the fire, made speed with
his men to come and rescue them, but they could not deliver them out of the
fire, it burnt so vehementlye, wherefore Titus and his wept very bitterlye.
The Romans that were above upon the house when they saw their master Titus
weep, and the fire to be between them that nether could come at other: they
cast them selves down headlong from the batlementes of the house which was
very hie, and died, saiynge: we will die in Titus presence, to get us a name
thereby. The Jews kept the gates of the palace, and if they perceived any man
go about to escape out of the fire, or to come down of the batlementes: them
they killed with their swords. In that fire was a certain noble man of the
stock of kings, whose name was Longinus, to whom the Jews cried and flouted
him, saying: come hither to us, ye thou may save thy life and not be
destroyed, but he durst not go out at the gate, fearing least the Jews would
kill him, wherefore he drue out his sword and thrust him self through before
their faces. An other noble man also was in ye fire, whose name was Artorius,
who loking forth from the top of the house, saw one of his dear friends by
Titus which was called Lucius: to whom Artorius called, saying. My dear
friend Lucius get on thine armor and come hither, that I may leap down upon
thee, and thou maiste receive me. If I die, I make thee mine heir, if thou die,
thy children shall inherit my goods. Wherefore Lucius ran and held his lap open
at the house side, and Artorius lept down and light upon him with such weight
that they both died therewith. Titus commanded the covenant that they two made
before their death to be written upon a sword with blood, and their friendship
to be noted in the chronicles of the Romans, that it might be an example to
all men to learn true friendship by. At that time therefore the Jews revenged
them selves meetely well upon the Romans. The fire bre^t till it came to the
house of Chiskiiahu king of Iehudah, and had almooste taken the temple of
the Lord, which the Romans seeing, fled out of the town and gate them to
their tents, a great part of them beings destroyed by the crueltye of the
Jews, so that few of them remained. The rest therefore lay still in their
siege round about the town, saying: we shall not be able to win the town by
the sword, but rather we must be fain to drive the^ to yield by famine, wherefore
they compassed it on every side. In the town now had they no victuals left.

THere was a certain notable rich woman at Jerusalem, of a noble house also,
whose name was Miriam, her dwelling was beyond Jordan, but when she perceived
the wars to grow more and more in the time of Vaspasian, she came up with her
neighbors to Jerusalem, bringing with her not only her men servants and women
servants, and all her whole family: but also her goods and riches which were
very great. When the hunger was grievous at Jerusalem, and the seditious went
from house to house to seek meat, they came also to this woman's house and
took away from her by force all that ever she had, and left her nothing
remaininge. After therefore she her self was oppressed with very great hunger
so that she wishte her out of the world, but her time was not yet come to
die. Wherefore that she might slake her hunger and su^^eine her life, she began
to scrape in the chafe and duste for beasts dong but could find none. She
had one son, and when she saw the famine ware greater and greater upon her,
she laid aside all womanhode and mercy, and took upon her an horrible cruelty:
for when she heard her boy weep and ask for meat which she had not to give
him, she said unto him: What shall I do my son? for the wrath of God has
environed the whole city, in every corner thereof famine reigns, without the
city the sword kills up all, within we stand in fear of the sedicious, our
ennemies preuail without, in the town are fires, burnings, and ruins of
houses, famine, pestilence, spoiling, and destroying, so that I can not feed
thee my son. Now therefore my son, if I should dye for hunger, to who^
should I leave thee, being yet a child? I hoped once that when thou
should come to ma^s state, thou should have sustained mine age with meat,
drink, and cloth, and after when I should dye, to bury me honorablye, like as I
was mineded to bury thee, if thou should have died before me. But now
miso^ne ye art as good as ded al redi, for I have no meat to bring thee up
withal, because of this great famine and crueltye of the enemies both within
and without. If thou should die now amongst other, thou should have no
good nor honorable tomb as I would wish thee. Wherefore I have thought good
to choose yt a sepulcher, eue^ mine own body, least thou should die, and
dogs eat thee in the streets. I will therefore be thy grave, and thou shall
be my fode. And for that, that if thou had lived and grown to ma^s state,
thou ought by right to have nourished me: now feed me with thy flesh, and
with it sustein mine age, before that famine devour thee: and thy body be
consumed. Render therefore unto thy mother ye which she gave unto thee, for
thou c^mmest of her, and thou shalt return into her. For I will bring thee
into the self same shop, in the which the breathe of life was breathed into
thy nosethrilles, forasmuch as thou art my well-beloved son, whom I have loved
always with all my strength, be therefore meat for thy mother, an ignominy and
reproach to the Sedicious that by violence have taken away our fode. Wherefore
my son hear my voice, and sustain my soul and my life, and go to thend
that is determined for thee by my hands, thy lot be in the gardein of Eden and
Paradise, be thou meat for me, and a rebuke and shame to the Sedicious, that
they may be compelled to say: Lo, a woman has killed her son, and has
eaten him. So when she had thus spoken to her son, she took the child, and
turning her face away lest she should see him dye, she killed him with a
sword, and after cut his body into certain pieces, whereof some she roasted,
some she sodde, and when she had eaten of them, she la^ed up the rest to keep.
The sauoure of the flesh roasted when it came out into the streates to the
People: they said one to an other: see, here is a smell of cost meat, which
thing came unto the knowledge of the Sedicious (...) length, who went into
the house of the woman, and spoke roughlye unto her: why should thou have
meat to live with, and we dye for hong^r* The woman made them aunswer^, and
said unto them. Be not dispeased I beseech you with your handemaide for
this, for you shall see I have kept part for you. Sit you down therefore and
I will bring it you that ye may taste thereof, for it is very goodimeate.
And by and by she laid the Table, and set before them part of the childs
flesh, saiy^ge: Cate I pray you, here is a childs hand, se here his foot, and
other parts, and never report that it is any other woman's child, but mine own
only Son that ye knew with me, him I bare, and also have eaten part, and
part I have kept for you. Which when she had spoken, she burst out and
wept, saiynge^ Oh my son, my son, how sweet waste thou to me whiles thou
yet li^edst, and now at thy death also thou art sweter to me then honye: for
thou have not only sed me in this most gr^^ous famine, but thou have defended
me from the wrath of the sedicious, wherewith they were incensed toward me,
when the smell of the meat brought them into my house. Now therefore are
they become my friends, for they sit at my table, and I have made them (...)
feast with thy flesh. After she turned her to the sedicious, and bade them eat
and satis^ie them selves, for why (says she) shoulbe ye abhor my meat which
I have set before you? I have satisfied my self therewith, why therefore do you
not eat of the flesh of mi son? Taste and se how sweet my sons flesh is, I
dare say ye will say it is good meat. What neadeth pity, ought ye to be more
moned therewith then a womanne? If y^ will in no wise eat of the Sacrifice of
my Son, when as I have eaten thereof mi self. Shall not this be a shame for
you, that I should have a better heart and greater courage then you? Behold I
have prepared a fair Table for you most valiant men, why eat ye not? Is it not
a good feast that I have dressed for you? and it was your will that I should make
you this feast It had been my part rather to have been moved with pity of
my son, then yours: and how chances it therefore that ye are more merciful
then I? Are not ye they th^^ spoiled my house, and lest me no kind of sode for
me and my son? Are (...) ye they that constrained me to make you this feast,
notwithstanding the great bonger that I have? Why then ^at y^ not thereof,
when as ye were the auct^ (...) and the causers that I did this ded^? The Jews
hearing this matter, were wonderfullye smitten into ^^dnesse: yea, even the
gouernour^ of the sedicious began to stoop when they heard of this, so that
they all in a manner desiered death, they were so amassed at this horrible
Act. Many therefore of the common people stale out in the nigh^e forth of
Jerusalem with all their substance to the Romans camp, and showed Titus of
this, who wept thereat, and was sorry for the matter exceadinglye, holding up
his bands to heaven, and criynge. Thou Lord God of the world, God of this
house, to whom al secrets are known, which also know my heart, that I
came not against this City as desierous of Wars, but rather of Peace,
which I ever offered them, but yet the citizins thereof evermore refused it,
although I often times entreated them, and when they distroied one another by
their civil dissension, I would have delivered them, but I found them
always like most fierce and cruel beasts, nothing sparinge them selves,
and this mischief is come now so far, that a woman has eaten her own
flesh, being driven thereunto by most extreme necessity. I have heard,
and my forefathers have told me all the power that thou have exercised in
times past toward them and their fathers, how thy name dwelt amongst the^.
For thou broughtest them out of Egypt with a strong hand and a stretched
forth arm out of the house of bondage, ^o whom also thou deuidedst the Sea,
led^est them through it dry, and drownedst their enemies in the water: after
co^d^^tedst thy people through the wil^erhes, and seddest them with brea^^
from heaven, thou causedst quayles to ^^ee unto them, and broughtest out water
out of the rock for them. At ^ength thou broughtest them into this holy
land by great and terrible miracles and wonders. For thou (...) up the waters
of Iordane, and ma^est ^he^ stand as it were on a ^^ape ^yll they were passed
over. Thou cau^edst the sun and the moon also to stay^ the^^ course for thy
peoples sa^e, till they might vanquishe their en^emies, thou would also ye
thy name should (...) amongst them, and thou gave th^^^^ ^his city by
inheritance. Some of (...) thou chosedst for thy self to be Prophets, which
might correct thy people, teach them, and lead them in the right way, to give
them warning of miseries folowinge, that they might take heed of them selves,
and beware of the^* Thou stirredst up wise men amongst them, ^o the intent
Israel might know what were to be done. Moreover, thou did choose of them
prieste^ to serve thee, and to bless thy people Israel. Certain Godly men
of them also thou drewedst unto thee, ^^d in a fierye Chariot thou cariedst
them up into Heaven. Thou smotest the ^en^es of the king of Assure, and kill^^st
in them.clxxxv. thousand men. These and diverse other things have I learned
of my forefathers: yea, and Iosephe the priest, a very wise manne ^^the told
me a great part^ of the (...). And now Lord GOD, this people which I have
stryuen against I would have ^aied they had trusted in th^^, but thou see
they trust not in thy saving health, but in their own sword: thou see also
how proud they be^, notwithstanding thy terrible signs and wonders
wherewyth thou haste ^ought on my side against them, which they will not
acknowledge. They say, there is no man can bring us under, because the
Lord our God will help us, yea, although we be wicked: for as much as for
our sakes he rayned bread down from heaven, divided ye sea, brought out
waters forth of the hard Rock, and stayed the courses of the Sun, and all
for us. But they consider not that thou sh^w^^st those signs to their fathers
for their righteousness sake, and those for their wickedness thou haste
stricken in (...) wars to make their (...), and to lay waste their Cities
because of the multitude of their tra^^^g^^^^i^ns, and how thou haste consu^^^
them with Sword, Pestilence, (...) Famine, that they are feign to (...) the
flesh of their Childrene, and yet for all this, they can not find in (...)
har^es to humble the^ selfs before thee, nor to acknowledge thy hand to have
been upon the^ for their wicked works. I also have not been very earnest upon
them, but have assaulted them ever ge^tlely: If so be it, thou will not
deliver them into my hands: I will get me hence from these most wicked men,
and ^^e away to save my life, least I also perish in their ^innes, when you
shall overthrow the^ as thou did overthrow Sedom and Amora. Wherefore, lo^, I
will get me out of their land with speed least we be destroyed with the^^, for
our eyes do see Sedom that was ouerthrown in their borders. Yea, but this
hardens their hearts also like iron, that they fay: why should we not be
like to our fathers in crueliye, for our forefather. Abraham when as he had
but one only son, he went to ^acri^l^e him to the lord, whom in deed I do
not apprehend for this fact, for whi? I know not the mystery thereof, al be it I
marvel, how he had no pitye on his sonnne. I have heard also of a certain king
of theirs, who the same day he set forwards to the wars, made a v^^^ to God
that he would offer a sacri^^c^, i^ he should have good success in his wars,
and when he returned from the wars, he offered to god his onl^ dough ter, and
so performed his vow that he had vowed unto God. And hereby I know they are
men of a stubburn spirit, for what so ever it gives them in their heads to
do, yt they think must needs be done, and they are a noughty people and most
heinous sinners. Wherefore except thou (...) deliver the^ to ^e: I will gene over
the wa^^es, for I will not be slain with the^ without al judgment. When Titus
had said all these things, he commanded to bring an (...) Ram, and to bend it
against the new (...) which the sedicious had raised, yt they might batter the
wall and cast it down. Then came forth many of ye nobles of the sedicious unto
Titus and made peace with him, whom he placed amougst^ his chief men.
Shortly after ye Romans set a fire a certain gate of the temple, yt was shut,
whose door was covered over with silver, and while the timber of it burnt, the
silver melted and ran upon the ground. So when ye gate was open, there appeared
the way which goes to the Sanctu^ sa^ctorum or holiest of all. As Soon as Titus
saw it, he honored it with great renerence, and forbad his people yt no man
should come ni^ it, saying: take heed ye medie not with this house, til we take
further deliberation what is to be done in the matter. Wherefore he commanded
proclamation to be made throughoute at his camp^ in this wise. Whosoever
co^^eth nie this Sanctuary, shall suffer death for it. He appointed also a
strong kande of men to keep the temple, that it were not suspended and
unhallowed by any of his. But his princes and captain^ answered him, ^aiyng:
unless this house be set a fire, thou shall never subdue this people, so: as much
as to save it they vow them selves to die. Notwithstanding Titus would not
harken to their counsel in this matter, but appointed of his soldiers and such
Jews as had made peace with him to keep ward, geuinge them charge to keep the
temple and Sanctum sanctorum: least it should be polluted, till they had
consulted upon the matter. The sedicious Jews that remained in Jerusalem,
seeing the Romans departed from the temple, and leauinge the kepers there
behind them, they ran upon them with their swords drawn and slew the ward
up, lettinge never a man escape. Which Titus hearing of, be brought his whole
army thither against the sed^^ious and killed many of them, the reast fled to
the mount Sion. The next day the Romans set fire upon the Sanctum fanctorum,
laiyng wood to the doors that were covered over with gold, and then set fire
in them. So after the gold waxte hot and the timber of the gates was once
brent, the house of the Sanctum sanctorum was open (that all men might see it)
the ninth day of fifth Month, July.
which was the very same day that it was opened also in the time of the
Chaldeis. The Romans therefore when they had gotten that door of the Sanctum
sanctorum once open, and had entered into it, they made great joy and gave a
great shoute, whiles the Sanctum sanctorum was a fire: which when Titus saw,
he made great speed to quench the fire and to save the Sanctum sanctorum, but
he could not do it, there did so many set it a fire in so many places. Titus
therefore cried unto them, that they should not do so. But they would not
hear him, for like as a vehement ^^oude of water breaks all things, and
drives them down before it: even so with a furious violence the gentiles
rushed upon the temple of the Lord, the fire flaminge now and then out of
measure. Thus Titus cried upon them in vain: wherefore when Titus saw be
could not refrain the people from the Sanctum sanctorum with words, he drue
out his sword, blaming the captains of his own people, and the other that
were not Romans, he killed them, for they in time paste were more wont to
spoil the temple, nevertheless thelesse he could not stay them nor put them
back. He cried still upon them notwithstanding, til be was so hoorse yt he
could cry no longer. The priests which were in the Sanctum sanctorum
withstode the Romans stoutlye, till they were no more able to lift up their
hands against them. Wherefore when the priests saw there was none other
sauegarde left, they lept into the ^ire, and diverse other Jews with the^,
that had hid them selves in ye Sanctum sanctorum, and so were al brent
together: for they said, what should we live any longer, now that the temple
is burnte? Titus ceased not to strike the people to chase them from the temple,
that they should not sin against the Sanctum sanctorum, but no man would obey
him, for they were mani ye spoiled temple. Titus therefore being so weatye that
al his strength failed him: he fell down upon the ground. So when he saw he
prevailed nothing with his criyng: he left of forbiddinge them. After that the
house of ye Sanctum sanctorum was burnt: Titus rose and entered into it, and saw
the glory and magnifice^ce thereof, and believed that it was the house of the
Lord, for as yet the fire had not utterly consumed al, so that be said: now I
well perceive that this is none other then the house of God and the dwelling of
the God of heavens, nether was it for naught that the Jews stood so earnestly
in the desence thereof, nor the gentiles also did not without a cause send gold
and silver to this temple from the furthest parts of the world. For great is
the glory of this temple, and it far passes the temple of the Romans and all the temples of the gentiles that ever I saw. The GOD of heaven which is the
God of this house, take vengaunce of the Sedicious, whose mischeuous and
heinous deeds have brought this evil upon it. The seditious ye yet remained
at Jerusalem, saying ye Sanctum sanctorum to be burnt: they set the rest of the
temple a fire them selves, and all the houses also that were filled full of
treasure, and all kind of precious jewels: and where they knew there was yet
some victuals left, they set it a fire also, least the Romans should have
any commoditye by it, saying: now that the Sanctum sanctorum is wasted, what
should we live any longer, and then what need have we of any other buildinges
or houses? After this the Romans quenched the fire, and set up their Idols and
images in the temple, and offered burnt offerings unto them, blaspheminge,
railinge, and mocking at the Jews and their laws in the presence of their
idols.

ABout that time was there a certain Jew that prophected a lie unto ye
seditious that remained yet at Jerusalem, bidding them to play the me^ and
resist their enemies: for now (says he) shall the temple be builded by it self
with out man's hand, that God may declare his power unto the Romans, which
now glory in them selves that they have overcome the Jews. Therefore if ye will
fight stoutly against the Romans, this day shall the temple be builded by it
self. Wherefore the sedicious set upon the Romans and ^^ewe many of them. So
the Romans enkindeled with ire, handeled the people cruellye, killinge them
like sheep, where they had favored them hitherto. All these things happened
unto the people because they gave e^edite to the false prophet, and market not
ye signed that appeared at Jerusalem. For the year next before the coming of
Vaspasian, there was seen a star over the Temple so bright, as though a man
had had many draw swords in his hand at once. And at the same time as the
star appeared in the time of the folemne feast talled Passach: Easter.
that whole night the ^emple was as light and as ^^e are as though it had been
middaie, and it con^in^^^ so by the space of.vii. days of the feast. The men
of vnder^^andynge in Israel knew well enough that this was an evil sign, but
the rest of the people interpreted it in good part. The very same time also
they brought a Heffer for a burnte offering, which when she was feld and
stricken down^ that they might dress her, she brought forth a lamb, This
miracle they said likewise made for them, and pretended good. As also this
that f^loweth they interpreted to good. There was a certain Gate that was
called the Cast Gate, a great and wondrous heau^^ gate that was never opened
nor shut, but twentye men had enough to do about it, the crekynge of the
gynnoes and hokes whereof might be heard a far of. This Gate was found
open without any man's help, and they could not shut it, till a gr^ate
noumber assembled and joined their strengthes together. After this* there was
seen over the Temple, and the Sanctum sanctorum by the space of a whole night
a face of a man wonderful terrible. There appeared also at that time ^^ery
chariots and horse me^ and great hoasts in the sky coming nigh to Hiernsalem,
and all the Land of Inda. In the feast also of Week^^ the Prtestes heard a
man walking in the remple, and saiynge with a great and a wonderful terrib^e
^ase voice. Come (...) us go away out of this Temple, and get us hence. But
specially there was one passing all these. A certain manne in the City of a
base and ^^we (...), whose name was Iehoscua the (...) of Chananeiahu, began to
cry upon the feast of the tabernartes with a land voice on this wise. A voice
from the east, a voice from the west, a voice from the four vvindes of the
heavens, a voice against Jerusalem, a voice against the te^ple^ a voice
agaynlle the Bridegroom, a ^oyee against the bryde, and a voice against the
whole people. Which when ^e or ye^ thus very o^^e, the citezins of H^^usalem
hated him, and sai^d to him: What tryest thou always this cry? But the
gouernou^ yt then was in the ^^tie forbade the Citizins to say ^^^^ye thing to
him afterward, supposing h^^ to be besides him self and mad. Therefore he never
left criyng for the space of. iiii ye^^ ^il the wa^rrs began, sa^yng: Woe to
H^erusale^, and to the sanctuary thereof. When the wars were once beg^^e, and
the town besieged, it fortuned as he wandered about upon the walls ^^iyng after
his manner, and at last adding this, Woe unto my felfe: a stone came out of an
engine from the camp, and smitte out his brains. At that time* also there was
a wrttynge found (...) in a stene of old, which the Ie^^^ read, the words
were these. VVh^^ ty^ne the building of the temple shall be brought to sour
square, then it shall be destroyed. Now when the Antoch^^ was taken and raced
by the Romans, and the walls of the temple were also broken: the Jews
making speed to repair the rui^es and (...), without any reme^^raunce of this
scripture, they made ye te^pl^^. (...). squar^. Besides this there was a
scripture fo^^^^e in the wall of the Sanct^m san^^^um on this wise. When the
whole building of the temple shall be four (...): the ^f hall a king rain over
Israel* and that king and ruler shall reign over all the land of Israel. Some
interp^^ted this upon the king of Israel. But the Priests said, it is the
king or ruler of the Romans. The whole army of the Romans being now commed
into the temple, and the Jews also fled to the mount Syon: the Romans set up
their ydols in the temple of the Lord, and offered Sacrifice unto them,
blasp^eminge and raylinge at the Jews, and their god. At that time there came
down to the Romans a little boy of the priests from the mount Syon, which
wont to a ^aptaine of the Romans that was keeper of the temple, and desieted
him to give him some water to drink. He took pitye of the boy, and bade give
him water. The boy taking the vessel that the water was in, first drank him
self, then ran away with the rest. The captain ran after him him self,
but he won^^e not overtake him of a purpose, because he was delited with the
Boys doing, wherefore he let him go for the nonces, so he gate up to the
priostres and gave the^ drink. On a time when the Romans were a^ their
sac^^fyes in the presence of Titus their Lorde^ certay^e of the priests came
and besought. Titus that be waulde not ky^l them: to whom T^tus made aunsw^r,
why do ye wysh to live now, and n^^^ather to dye with your brether^ that have
(...) death for the Gods sake of this house? Then T^tus commanded his men
to (...) them, and so dyed they. After Schimcon and Iehochanan sent
embassado^^^^ Titus to requyer peace, to whom Titus made ^unswer in (...) wise,
Ye (...) this thing to late, and how comes, it to pass that ye now entreat,
for (...) lives, when that of so great a number of people, ye have left none
save a ^^^y sewe. When as also ye have wasted, al things most cruelly and
despe^^^^ yt^ How after all these, your mischi^ons acts ye reguire peace
which ye would never receive of me, although I des^red you never so of^e. For
it ^ityed me to see your people, some to he vered ^yth honger, and some to
be cast ^ute of the City without any burial. But ye hardened your necks
and would never admit any Peace till all the people were destroyed.

Therefore Titus reprehended them with many other words, saying unto them.
Tell me you Sedicious, you wicked and synnefull persons, have not you slain
the people of the Lord? You set his house on fire, you brought upon this City
all this mischief. How can you therefore persuade your selves, or presume to
desire the sauegarde of ^our lives? and why will ye live alone of all the
Sages, righteous, innocente, Godly, and holy men whom ye have slain
without any mercy? How may I commit this, not to be ad^enged of you that
have done me so much mischief? Ye desire life, and yet persevere and continue
in your malice still, holding your swetdes in your hands, and being in Arms,
nevertheless ye entr^^^e ^^es to save your lives. Have we not now taken the
City, and also the temple, and the Sanctum sanctoru^, have we not burnt it
with fire? What is there left for you to put any hope in, and what look ye for
to remain? Wherefore cast away your swords, and lay away your armoure, and
then come unto me and entreat me, and then shall I know what I have to do,
peradventure I shall be gracious unto you, and pardon you your lives. The
captains of the sedicious, Schimeon, and Iehochanan made answer to Titus. We
have sworn by the Lord our God, who is God of heaven and earth ^^at we will
never bear thy yoke, no (...) thee, nor make any peace with th^^ to be subject
unto thee. Now therefore if it be thy pleasure to show us mercy, suffer us to
go out of the City, and we will take our journey into the wilderness: which
if thou will grant us, we will report that we have found favor at thy hand:
if not, we will remain in this place to see what we shall determyne, and
what manner of death we will dye.

When Titus heard this, he was wonderfully wroth and said, remains the pride
of your hearts, and the hardness of your necks yet with you still, although
ye be taken? yet ye dare be so bold to say, we have sworn that we will not
bear thy yoke? Yea, ye have sworn unto death, for ye have despised life, when
as your city is won, the house of the Sanctum sanctorum is burnt, and no
refuge is left you. Where with the^ ca^ ye put away your ignomini and shame, and
what is your hope if a man (...)? Then gave Titus command (...) the Romans,
that they should not omit any opportunity to set upon the sedicious, and by one
means or other to destroys Schimeon and Iehochanan. There was at time a
certain man of the kings blood, whose name was Serach, he accompanied withal
his brethren and sons that were there with him of the kings blood, came
down from the Mount S^on to Titus, who received them honorably and getlely
ordered them. When Iehochanan and Schimeon understood that Serach and the rest
were gone, and had yielded the^ to Titus: they went and set fire upon all that
was in the kings palaice, that the Romans should have no commodity thereby.

FRom thence they went to the temple, where they found certain noble men and
captains, whom Titus had put in authoriti about the temple, of whom three
were chief: one captain of the horsemen, the second of the charrets, and the
third of the foot men, him they killed and took his companion alive. This
besought them that had taken him, yt he might be brought to Schimeon their
captain, let him (says he) do with me as he lift, and in this one thing let
me find favor at your hands. They agreed, and brought him to Schimeon, who
commanded his servants as soon as he was come to flea him. But while he that
was appointed to this business, made delay, and killed him net by and by, he
whipped down of the hill, escaped and came to Titus, who commanded him out of
his sight, being wroth with him that he had not sought unto death, rather
then to be taken quick. But with the Jews was he wonderfullye displeased,
that they had so dispitefullye ordered his men: wherefore he commanded to kill
all the Jews as many as could be found in the streets of the ^^ye, whom he
would have spared before, and caused proclamation to be made throughoute all
his camp for their safetye. Then died many of the Jews, so that every place
was full of dead bodies. The men of war of the Edomites whythe were with
Schimeon perceiuinge how the matter went, they sent Embassadoures to Titus,
to desire peace, and to save their lives: which when it came to Schimeons ear,
he went unto them, and slew the chief of them and their noble men, the rest
of the people of the Edomites fled unto Titus. From that time forth Titus
commanded his men to use no more truelty upon the Jews. Sone after fled
Iehochanan and Schimeon, and hid the^ selves in certain caves. The rest of the
chief me^ of the Jews that were with them seeing them now to be fled: came
nowne from the Mount unto Titus, and set down upon their face before him upon
the ground, whom Titus receiue^ gentlelye: As for the sedicious that were with
Schimeon and Iehochanan, they fought till they al died together. The^ came forth
unto Titus one Joshua a priest son of Schaftai the hie priest, bringing with
him two candelstickes of gold which were in the sanctuary, and the tables of
gold, with other vessels of silver and gold, and also the holy vestures decked
with gold and precious stones, all those he gave unto Titus: who made him
chief priest over them that remained next under Joseph the priest, for Titus
gave Joseph authority as well over the priests and Levites, as over the whole
people of ye Jews. Then was Gorion the father of Joseph that writ this
history, brought out of the prison with his wife and children, among who^ was
one Bonian Joseph's younger brother, he was a very wise and a godly priest, by
whom god bestowed many benefits upon the Israelites. For Titus left him at
Jerusalem, and took him not with him as he did Joseph. Iosephes father lived
after the city was taken twenty months and died. They took then also one
Phmeas a priest who was keeper of the treasure house, he bewraied and uttered
to the Romans all the treasures of ye priests and their vestements: he gave
also unto Titus a moosse precious oil with swear o^ours and perfumes, and
garments also of purple which ye kings of the second temple had given.
Wherefore both this Phineas and Joshua who^ we mentioned before, transgressed the
couenaunte of the Lord, and offended God, in that they delivered his jewels to
the ennemies of his people, which they ought not to have done, but rather to
have died for the glory of the Lord, as the other priests did, which cast
them selves into the fire. Thus was ye city of Jerusalem taken with all the
precious things that were therein: and Titus went up to the mount Sion, ^^ke
it, and raced the walls thereof: Upon a three days after Iehochanan sore vert
with hunger, lest his place where he lucked, and came to Titus, fell down
before him and kissed his feet, saying: save me. O Lord king. Titus commanded
him (...) be fettered with ira^ cheins, and when he had caused him to be carted
about the camp so bound, and to be mocked of al men by the space of.vii. days
he commanded to han^ him, and so gate he a just end and fit reward for his
cruelty. After ware came Schimeon also forth of his den, being driven with
famine, he had out on king ye apparel, and showed him self a far of to ye
Roman host: who seeing him, were afraid to go to him, but he called unto the^
and asked for some captain. Then one came forth and s^id unto Schimeon, tell me
who ye art, and I will not kill thee. Schimeon answered therefore and told him,
I am Schimeon, that sedicious Captain of the Jews which have made you so
much a not now I beseech thee show me so much savor as to bring me to Titus
thy master, which he did. Titus therefore when he saw Schimeon, he commanded
him to be fast bound and to be ^ed about the whole host, that he might be
deluded and m^ckt. Afterward he was put to a fore death: first his head was
stricken of, the^ he was cut in many pieces and cast unto dogs, so he died an
abominable death being punished for his iniquity.

THe number of the Jews as well citizens as other that came unto ye feast to
Jerusalem, which were flaine partly by the Romans, partly by the sedicious,
duringe the whole time of those war^es was known to be thus many, eleventh
hundredth thousand, besides them whose noumber was not known. Only they were
counted which were slain and buried, besides the^ also, that after ye death of
Iehochanan and Schimeon, died with Eleasar the son of Anam the priest, which
were not reckened. They that were led prisoners by Titus to Rome, were.xvi. M.
men. Titus therefore with Joseph went to Rome, leaving Bonian Joseph's brother
at Jerusalem, who was appointed the chief priest of them that abode there, for
that did Joseph request of Titus, which he performed. The sedicious were all
slain in that battle which they took in hand for the peoples sake, and the
temple of the Lord* They also that Titus took prisoners were put to vile
deaths. For he reserved many to be mocking stocks in every (...) wh^re he
passed by in his way is Rome; and in every town he commanded some to be
brought forth and cast unto the Lions, til they were al confumed.

THere was a certain people (...) that time dwelling amongst the moutaines of
Arat, that were called Alamites, whose power Alexander king of Macedonia
fearinge, closed them in on every side. This people although they had no
knowledge of the use of iron, nor armor, yet this was their manner: that one of
the^ with a great poal burnt a little at the end, would put to flight a
hundred good soldiers, were they never so well appointed and armed. Until
this year they were always shut in: but now being oppressed with a great
dearth and famine throughout al their land, they sent Ambassadors to the
People of Hurkan their neighbors, requiring them that they would open the
straightes of the mountayns, that they might come forth with their wives and
children to seek them fode. The Hurkans granted their requests, opened them
the entrances of the mou^tains. So they came forth, wanderyng here and there,
and spoilynge diverse countries, til at length they took their iourneye
toward the Mountains of the land of Madai, where they found horses, namelye
in the desert of Madai, amongste the people of Araf, they gate those horses,
leapt upon them, and entered the land of Madai. The president or ruler of the
country hearing thereof, fled unto the highest hills, leauyng his wife and
children behind him for haste, he was fo afraied of the Alanits knowing their
valiantness. Sraight way he sent to them imbassadours to make peace with
them, and he would let them have vittails, upon this condition that they
should not spoil his country. They made answer, if so be it he would keep
them, and let them have fode for the space of one monthe, syll the corn in
their own country were ripe: they would return home again at the months
end. For we desire not (say they) thy gold or silver, being men separated
from al intercourse and traffic with other people, nor any thing else then
fode we seek not. This the ruler granted them, and let them have a certain
grain called Mill, sodden with one kind of flesh or other. The number of
them was vil, 155140.
thousand a hundredth, fifty, and five thousand, a hundredth and forty persons.
When the month was ended, and the Alanites understood the corn in their own
country was ripe, they departed out of the land of Madai according as they
had sworn, and returned toward their own country. And as they were a geynge
homeward, Mithridates king of Ararat came against them to anoy them, mindyng to
drive them from his coasts, least they should waste his country. Therefore
while they passed through his country going toward their own: Mithridates
made war upon the^, but his men were beaten down by the Alanites, like as
Camelles fall upon the ground when a strong man treades the^ down. Then one
of the young men of the Alanites in dispite put a rope about Mithridates neck,
and drew him after him unto his great shame. Mithridates gate out his sword,
and cut a sunder the rope and fled. To whom the Alanites loking back, said: Go
thy way, get thee home, and move no more war upon us hereafter, for we were
not minded to waiste thy Land, nor to kill thy people. For if we had ever
intended it, could we not have done it long ag^e, when as nothing is betwixt
us and you but the mountains of Ararat? But we were of this mind, that we should
greatly offend to kill me^ of our own shape and likeness. Se now how Alexander
which went about to subdue the hole earth, and to declare his power, closed us
up with in our land, why? because he was afraied we should come out upon him.
But we laughed him to scorn when he did it. If we had listed, we could have
let him from shutting us in, and to make no peace with him, but we forced
not of his doings. For it is our custom to keep us within our country, we
seek none other land, when as our own land is better then any other. It
pleased us well that he enclosed us, that the cruel wild beasts which are in
the mou^tains of Ararat could have no passage to us. The cause whi we came out
now was nothing else, then that we were grieved with a great derth: and we
determined to be no longer from home, then till our own fruits waxte ripe,
and then to return as you se we do. If we had been minded to win your land,
had we not been able utterly to have overcome you, and to have gotten the
dominion over you? But nether ye nor your country did ever delight us greatly,
for our manners differ far from yours. Behold the king of Madai, when he had
kept us for a month, we did him no harm, we are not wont to hurt men as ye
are, that can not be content with your own state, but must encroche upon other
men's inheritance. Now therefore go and return to your own country, and so
will we to ours, without doing you any more harm: wherefore ye need not be
afraid of us. So the Alamites went home to their own countries, having slain
of Mithridates people.ccc. thousand men, and never a one of their own was
killed. Titus hearing of this, was desis^ous to go unto them, to show them
his valeantnesse, but he could not do it, because al his best men were spent
in the wars at Jerusalem. Wherefore he determined to return to Rome after he
had take Jerusalem, where he abode as yet besides the Antochia. There he had
intelligence that diverse of the Jews were gathered together, with who^ was
Eleasar the son of Anani the priest, who during the siege, fled unto a
certain castle called Mezira, whereupon many of the Jews resorted to him.
Titus hearing this, that many had joined them selves to Eleasar, feared least
after his departure, Eleasar would from thence make a rode and take Jerusalem,
so kill up all the Romans, and be an offense to the Roman Empire. Wherefore he
made out against him, and sent thither one Silcham a noble manne of Rome, with
a great host to besiege Mezira, but he could not get it. Wherefore he sent
unto Titus for an iron ram to batter the Walls wythall. Which after he
had received, he beat down the walls of Mezira therwyth. The Jews seeing
that, raised a great coun^ermure within of wodde and ^ymber, which the
Romans set fire in, and bu^nt. After that they assaulted the town from
morning till night, at what time the R^maynes left of, supposing they were
not able to prevail against Eleasars defense in the dark.

ELeasar in the mean season called together all the chief men of the Jews
that were with him, and said unto them in this wise. Come hither ye sede of
Abraham and kingly priesthode which have until this day ever prevailed
against the enemies of God, let us hear your advise what is best to be done
against this multitude that is comed upon us at unawares, ye see that at this
time chieflye it becomes us to follow the courage and valeauntnes of our
forefathers, wherewith they were in time past endued. Consider moreover ye every
thing has his end, and yt there are sometimes in wars when as me^ are wont to
follow the pursuit, sometime to flee from the same who^ they pursued and to
humble them selves before the^. And It is no shame to be humbled and disgraced,
when as all things have their determinate end. Albeit who so is of a haute
courage, he must so establishe his heart, that he quail not with fear, then
shall he be demed a valiant man? If ye therefore be of that courage that ye
fear not death: then will I call you valiant men, and worthily? Consider
the fortitude of Abraham our father, and the fact that he did, for having but
one only son, whom Sara bare unto him in her age, he never staggerd nor
stayed at it to offer him up to ye lord God for a burnte offering. For hes
thought not that he should kill him, but persuaded him self most certainly
that he should promote him to the life and light of the lord, for as much as
for the love of God, and at his commandment he should have killed him. Wey
the thing that Ioschiiahu the just king did, who setting at naught this
wretched life, and aspiring to everlasting felicity, would not avoid the
ieopardye of his life, when as as he might have done it. For although Pharao
Necho said he came not against him, but against the king of the Chaldeis: yet
would not Ioschiiahu hear him, but rather procedinge against Pharao in arms,
was slain in the battle, and went unto that great lights in the garden of
paradise, which is the lot and enheritance of the just. We know that in this
world no man receives the reward of his righteousness, but it is laid up for
him in ye otherworld where he shall reap the fruit of his righteousness, that
he has sown in this world. Nether does long life in this world profit a
man to thobtaining of everlasting bliss, except he work righteousness, and
lead his soul forth of darkness into light: like as contrariwise, shortness
of life hinders no man from everlasting happiness, if so be it his soul
have no defecte in those things that pertein to the world to come. For Abell
which was slain of his brother, lived no long life: yet when he had ended
it, he obtained everlasting rest. But Kain that lived long in this world, was
a wanderer and a runnagate in this earth, and after this life, went to
perpetual miserye. Now therefore, my brethren, if we also shall live any
longer, our life shall be a miserable life, and our days, days of vanitye and
travel: yea, our soul as long as it shall remain in this body, it shall be tossed
with great ^r^bulation: but if it once go forth, then shall it rejoice and
never be afraid. And all the days that it is in the body, it never linneth
weepinge and mourninge, for it is the spirit of life, which is hedged in
within the body, sinnewes, bones, and other members, none otherwise then if it
were bound with chains. The spirit is also that which quickneth the flesh,
that is taken of the duste of the earth, for flesh can not quicken the
spirit. Besides this, the spirit is that which observes and marketh the
flesh, and searches the works thereof, so long as it is in the body. Yea,
the flesh can not se the spirit, but the spirit sees the flesh always,
neither is there any member of the body hid from it. The eyes also of the
bod^e ca^ not perceive what time the spirit resorteth to the flesh and
departs from the same, for the spirit of man, which is his soul, is from
heaven: but the flesh is taken from the earth. Wherefore the soul may
remain without the body, but not likewise the body without the soul, and
when the spirit comes to the flesh, it visits it as a neighbor is wont to
go and see his neighbor, and quickens it: and when again it departs
from it, the flesh dies, and if the soul will follow the desires of the
flesh, then this is the death of the soul: but if it give no ear unto the
flesh, then shall the soul come to the light of life, and the flesh shall
dye. Wherefore the soul is glad when it departs out of ye body, like as one
that has been bound, is well apaid when he is dimissed out of prisone, for all
the while that the soul is kept closed in ye flesh, it is as it were a slave,
in most hard and grievous bondage, under a hard master. Therefore when it
departs from the body, it is glad, because it must go to the garden of
paradise, thus ye see that in this life the soul is compared to a bond
servant and slave. Much more then this did he reason of thimmortality and
blessedness of the soul before them, which we have omitted here: and when he
had done that, he lamented and wept most bitterlye for the case of the city of
Jerusalem, saying.

Where is now the city of Jerusalem, that great and populous city? where is
that most beautiful city of Sio^, that holy city which made merye the whole
earth? Oh thou worship of Israel, the mirthe of our hearts, whither is thy
glory come? where is thy magnificence O Jerusalem, where be the hills of the
daughter of Sion? where be her kings and princes? where be the kings that were
wont to come to inquire of her welfare in her gates? where are her sages and
elders, her young and most vavaleaunt men, which were iocund and merry in her
streets, upon her sabbathes and festiual days? where is her famous sanctuarye,
the dwelling of thalmighty god? where is the house of Sanctum sanctorum, the
habitacion of holiness, wherein no man might set his foot but the hie priest,
which in all ages only once a year entered into it? But now, O Jerusalem,
thou wast once replenished with people, and renowned amo^gste kings, beloved
of God, in thee was established the seat of the kingdom of justice and
judgment, whose streets were paued with most precious marble, whose walls
glisterd and shined with the same stone, whose gates every one were plated
with gold and silver, whose walls were builded with great stones most
honorablye, whose priests in the mids of the sanctuary like to angels of God
and princes of holiness, with sacrifices and burnt offerings made the lord
loving to thee and thy people. How art thou now stuffed full of slain men and
carcases, which have pearished some by the sword, some by famine? and how are
thy sons that dwelt in thee, and the strangers also ye resorted unto thee,
to honor thy feasts, fallen now in thee? How art thou fallen from the hight of
thy pride, and how art thou set a fire and brent even unto thy foundations, and
art left desolate and solitary? What eye is so hard that can behold thee? what
heart so stonye that can abide to see thee? How art thou become a buriyng place
of carkases? and how are thy streets made void and destitute of living
creatures, and they which heretofore were replenished with living, are now
stuffed with dead. How has the ashes of fire covered thee, that the sun can
not come at thee? How do the aunciente men which in times past did sit in the
midst of thee, in ye seat of wisdom, iuogment, and justice: now they sit by the
carcases of their children, to drive away crows and beasts from the^, having
their hoar heads be syrinkled with dust and ashes, in stead of their glory?
And those women thy daughters that are left, they remain in the houses of
the^ that made thee desolate, not that they may live, but to be unhallowed and
polluted? who shall see all these things in thee, and shall desire to live
rather then to die? who knowing thy magnificence that thou had of late, and
now shall see thine ignominye and the dishonor of the same, will not choose to
dye? And would God we had been dead before, ye we might not have seen in thee
thy reproach, or who would bring to pass ye we might lack eyes, that we should
not be compelled to see these mischeues ye are in the mids of thee? And behold
we live a most sorrowful life, for our enemies eue^ now before we be dead, cast
lots upon our sons and daughters to divide the^ amongst the^ to be their
servants and handmaids. When Eleasar had ended this lamentacion, he spoke to
ye people yt was we him, thus.

NOw therefore brethren and friends take pitye of your selves, your wives, and
children, with old men which he with you, let the^ not be led into bondage with
out al merci, ye they be not co^streined to mourn under ye hands of their
enemies: for if ye do this, ye leese without all doubt, all places that are
prepared for you in the world of rightousnesse, neither shall ye have any part
in the light of life. But rather with your own hands kill them, thus if ye will
do, they shall be counted as sacrifices most accdptable unto God, and that done,
we will after issue out upon our enemies, and fight against them till we use
valea^tly for the glory of the lord, for we will nener suffer them to bind us
with bo^des and cheins as bond slaves in ye hands of the uncircumcised. Nether
will we se our aunciente men to be haled by the berdes before our eyes most
miserably, nor yet our maids, wifes, and daughters to be unhallowed and
defloured, nor our sons criynge to us and we can not help them, for what
shall our life avail us, after that our land is desolate, our sanctuary pulled
down, the Romans rauishe our wives and daughters before our eyes, and
oppress our sons with a most grievous and hard yoke? Now therefore it is
better for us to kill al our wives and children, whose blood God shall accept
thankfullye as the blud of burnt offerings, and after* we will issue out upon
the Romans, fight til we be al destroyed, and die for the glory of the Lord
our God. These men therefore went and gathered together their wives and
daughters, embrased (...) and kissed them, saying: is it not better for you to
die in your holy country honorabli then to be led away into houdage with great
ignomini and shame into the lands of your ennemies, and be compelled to die
before the idols of the gentiles? These sayings when the people had beard:
they drove forth that night in great sorrow and pensifenesse, weping and making
great lamen^^cion, but they all confessed with one accord that they had rather
choose to die then live. Therefore as soon as it was day* Eleasars companions
killed their wines and children, cast their bodies into the ^esterns and
wells that were in Mezirah, covering and stepving the^ with earth. Afterward
issued Eleasar ye priest forth of the town withal his me^, and ^orced a battle
upon the Romans, of when the Jews killed a great forte, and fought so long
till they al died ma^fully for the Lord God.

BUt Titus left a remnaunt of Israel in the city Iafnah and the villages
thereabout, and in the estye Bitter, and Aossa and their villages, in which
place Rabban Iochanan son of Sakkai was appointed chief. Bonian the priest
younger brother to Iosephe the Priest, was put in authority by Titus for
Joseph's sake, over all the Jews which were at Jerusalem. At ye same time was
Rasch bag a prince of Israel put to ^^ath* and Ischmael, son of Elischa the
(...) priest. Moreover, Titus was minded to ha^^ put Rabban Gamaliel, father of
Ra^chbag to death, but Rabban Iochanan; son of Sakkai, made suit for him,
and obtained to save his life. This Rabban Iochanan was he that came forth of
Jerusalem in the beginning when Vaspasian father of Titus came first against
Jerusalem, who^ Vaspasian honored greatly, in so much as when he returned to
Rome, he commended this Rabban Iochanan to his son Titus, comaunding him to
honor him, for he perceived he was a very wise man. Titus reigned two years
after he had taken Jerusalem and died. He was a very eloquent man, expert in
the Latin and Greek tongue, and writ diverse works in both the tongues. He loved
most entirely justice and equitye, for he wasted the city of Jerusalem against
his will, and being compelled thereunto. Yea, all the mischief that came upon
it, happened through the malice and noughtinesse of the sedicious, as we have
touched before. And thus far of the wars of the second house.

Thus ends the destruction of Jerusalem. Nn. ii.

The ten Captiuities of the Jews.
i. THE Israelites were ten times led into captivity, four times by the
hands of Sanherib: and four times by Nabuchadnezar, once by Vaspasian, and
once by supersticious Adrian. First invaded them Sanherib, ^^ennache ^^b.
and traunsposed the Rubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasse. He
took away also the golden calfe whi^he Jeroboam the son of Nebat had made.
He led them into Halah, Habur, to the flood of Gozan, and to the cities of
the Medes. This captivity was in the time of Pekah, the son of Remaha.

ii. The second Captivity. Hoscha the son of Ela remained, and slew Pekah
the son of Remalia. Afterward he became the servant and subject of Sanherib
seven years. Then came Sanherib the second time, and carried away the tribes
of A^ar, Isachar, Zebulon, and Naphtali: of whom he let go free only one of
every eight. He t^ke away also an other calf that was in Bethel.

iii. After the death of Ahaz, reigned Hiz kiahu his son in his steed four
years: Hezekia.
the fourth year of whose rain, Sanherib came and entrenched Samaria, beseging
it.iii. years, and at length roke it in the, vi. year of the reign of
Hiskijahu. So led he away the Israelites that were in Samaria, the tribe of
Ephraim, and Manasse. This is the.iii. captivity.

iiii. When Nabuchadnezar had reigned viii. years, Sanheri^ perauenture.
he made wars against Jerusalem, bringynge with him the Chuteans heretics
out of Babylon, E. thiopia, Hemates, Auim, and Sepharuauim, and as he warred
upon Judea, he took in that country a. C and. l. cities, in the which there
were.ii. tribes, Judah and Simeon, whom he took with him, and caused them
forthwith to be led into Halah and Habur, until the king of the Ethiopians
rebelled against him, whose kingdom was on the hinder parts of Egypt. Then
taking Judah and Simeon with him, he made war with the king of Ethiopia. So the
holy and blessed God placed them in dark mountains. He re was four
captiuities, whereby ten tribes went into crile by Sanherib. There remained yet
of Judah. Cx. thousand, and of Benjamin. Cxxx. thousand in Jerusalem, over who^
reigned Hizkiahu. Moreover, Sanherib came out of Ethiopia against Jerusalem
the fifte time, leading with him. Cx. thousand: but the holy Lord ouerthrewe
him there, as it is written: And the angel of the Lord issuinge forth, smote
in the hooste of Assure. Clxxxv. thousand men. His people therefore was slain,
and no man left but Sanherib and his two sons, and Nabuchadnezar, and
Nebusaradan. This slaughter was in the fourtenth year of Hizkiahu from which
overthrow, until the time that Nabuchadnezar invaded the Jews in the reign
of Iehoiakim, were. Cvii. years. v.


The.iiii. year of Iehoiakim came Nabuchadnezar the first time, and carried
away three thousand and.xxiii. of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. and of
other tribes seven thousand, all the able men, and all their power bindinge
them with chains. This is the v. captivity.

Seven years after this captiuitye came Nabuchadnezar an other time, vi.
unto Dophna a City of Antioche, from whence he led four thousand and six
hundredth of the tribe of Judah: and of Benjamin fiftye thousand: of the other
tribes, seven. M. This transmigration made he into Babylon, which is the.vi.
captivity.

Furthermore, vii.
betwixt the sixte bondage and the seventh, were.xi. years of the reign of
Zidkiahu. Zedekia.
When Nabuchadnezar had reigned nintene years he came the third time unto
Jerusalem, and ouercoming Zidkiahu he brent the temple, and took away the
pillars, the brazen sea, and the furnitures that Solomon made, and all the
vessels also of ye house of the Lord, and the treasures of the house of ye king
which was in Jerusalem: all the vessel he sent to Babylon. He slew also of
the Israelites.ix. C. M. and one, besides them that were slain because of the
blood of Zacharias. The Levites stood singinge a song whiles slaughter was
made of them, but they were not able to finishe it before the enemies entered
the temple, and found them standing in their place, with harps in their
hands. Therefore he carried away in this captivity ye Levites which were of the
seed of Moses. vi. C. M. whom when the gentiles had brought unto ye rivers
of Babylon, they demanded of the Jews: Sing us a song of Sion. And by and by
they gnawed of the tops of their fingers with their tethe, saying: How shall
we sing the song of the Lord in a strange land? And the blessed Lord seeing
that they would not sing a song, he losed them and placed them on the further
side of Sambatia. Moreover, he translated and carried away.viii. hundred
and.xxxii. thousand, which were al borne of Judah and Benjamin. Whereof he lest
in Jerusalem vi. M. setting over them for their ruler Gedalia the sone of
Ahikam: who was slain after by Ismael the son of Netania: whereupon the
Israelites being afraid, fled their country into Egipte. This is the
seuenthe transmigration and bondage.

The.xxvii. year of the reign of Nabuchadnezer, he took Egypt and Tire: viii.
drowned the Jews that were therein, which descended of Amon and Moab, and of
the land bordering upon Israel, until they led Jeremy and Baruch with them into
Egipte. This is the eighte captivity. Then the Israelites that remained on live
in Egypt, departed unto Alexandria and remained in it until they grew and
encresed unto many thousands: and who so saw not their glory, saw no glory
in his time. For there was in it the sanctuarye, the altar, the offerings,
incenses, the ordinance of bread, of faces, the houses of studies, and schools
without noumber, men of great substance, riches, and power. But wicked
Trogianus made war upon them and slew very mani of them. After came
Alexander against them, who slew also many of them. These are the eight
captiuities or bondages which befell in the first house, and time of the
first temple.

After the desolation of the first house lxx. years, ix.
Cyrus the soune of Hester sent unto Nehemia, Zerobabel, Baruch, and his whole
society, and they builded the second house. Then after.iiii. years of the
reign of Cyrus, after the house was destroyed, Ezra went from Babylon with
fortye thousand in his company, and the Israelites were afflicted and vexed
under Cyrus, for the space of.xxxiii. years. Then came Alexander the king of
Macedonia and flew Cyrus, and when he had reigned xii. years, he dyed. After
him came four usurpers which afflicted the Israelites.clxviii. years. But
after that the sons of Hasmonai came, they slew those usurpers, and taking
the dominion from them, reigned them selves.ciii. years. Then raygned one
Herod the servant of Hasmonai, who killed his masters, and their whole
familye, save one maid whom he loved. But she clymynge up to the top of an
house, said: There is no body left alive of my fathers house but I alone: so
she cast her self headlonge from the top of the House, and dyed. Herod did
leye her in honye, and preserved her for the space of seven year. There were
that said he had carnal copulation with her after she was dead. Herod,
and Agrippas his son, and Monabaz his Nephewe held the kingdom a hundred
and three years. So have thou four hundredth and three years of the second
house. Then came Vaspasian Caesar and Titus his wives son, and waisted the
second house, cariynge away Israel unto Rome. This is the ninthe
traunsmigration. Moreover, one Bitter remained after the desolation and
wasting of the Temple fiftye and two years.

After that Adrianus who used supersticion with bones made war upon them,
(...)
and traunsposed Israel from their country when he had spoiled it, conueyinge
them into Spain. This is the tenthe Captiuitye. This Adrian vanquished the
Jews (which rebelled the second time against the Romans) with a final and
utter destruction, Haymo.
forbidding and not suffering them in any wise to enter into Jerusalem, which
he had begone to fortifye with very strong walls, and caused it to be called
Helia, Historia vtriusque testame^ti.
after his name. He caused also a Sow to be graven over the chief gate of she
city, and the Jews under her fete carved also in stone, in token of their
subjection.

FINIS.


Imprinted at London by John Day for Richard Judge, dwelling at the North
do^e of Paul's, at the sign of the Bible.

Cum priuile^^^ a^^ imprimendum (...).


