POETICAL VARIETIES: OR, VARIETY OF FANCIES.

By Tho. Jordan Gent.

Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua:

Marti. Epigram. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Humphry Blunden, and are to (...)
his shop, near the Castle Tavern, in Corne-hill. (...)

TO THE MECOENAS OF CANDID INDVSTRY, Mr. JOHN FORD of Grayes Inn, Gent. My
humble Muse directs her weak Endeavors.
Worthy Sir,
I Have had a long propension in my soul to endeavor something worthy your
acceptance, and gain me honor in the oblation, had loved Thalia pleased to
bless my brain with some deserving subject; yet these green fruits (though
gathered in the Springtime of my knowledge) and far unworthy of so choice a
Pallat, may by your kind acceptance be digested, and thought as sweet to all
that taste, as the rich fruit the pregnant Summer yields. Yet, Candid Sir, I
had not robbed the Age of so much Impudence as to communicate the weak effects
my Infant Muse produces to your judgment, but that I knew a sweet
encouragement lives in your gentle censure can give an inspiration to that
brain that is but yet ambitious of desert; which gives me hope I shall (when I
write next) produce things that may merit approbation, and cause you to
confess me,

A Servant studious to deserve your love, THO. JORDAN.

TO THE CRITICAL READER.
Sour Sir, a word with you;
SInce I am fallen into the hazard of your infectious censure, and that I know
you come to kill, not nurse my infant Muse, my language will have license; I
must tell you, you are ungently bold to trespass on a Page of mine, seek some
known Author, whose applauded name selfe-loved opinion taught you to admire;
The title page you censure, not the work, I am condemned already by that rule,
but it is no legal trial; Is your wise knowledge so prophetic grown, that in
an Authors name you read his merit, or think you that the learned Magazin is
quite exhausted from the thrifty schools to make but one man happy Either
resolve to read me honestly with a true purpose to be just in censure,
condemning only theft, or such black guilt, or fairly leave me to my Candid
Reader.

THO. JORDAN.

TO THE CANDID Reader, Health and increase of Knowledge.
THe pregnant Be, filled with the hony'd bounty of the Rose, flies to the
wealthy Hive as does my humble Muse unto your Candor, you are a true Mecoenas
the perfect Storehouse of a royal soul, whose genuine disposition is not
turned with the next breath of frail opinion; but will the meanest merit est
imate with a most gentle censure. You understand what man would do, and think
it more aetheriall to give his Muse a birth then a destroying sentence; I have
composed to feed thy gentle view these various Poems, for which I must
Apologize thus much; I have not robbed the Hive of any man's endeavors, or
exhausted his honey treasury to enrich my barren labors, but from the native
flower sucked I my sweetness, if there be ought that may content thy wealthy
pallat, it is thine own, the Cook prepared it for thee: Farewell.

Thine THO. JORDAN.

Of my friend Mr. Thomas Jordan, Tetraslichon.
Jordan in Harvest swell's, and so thy vain
Runn's like a sudden Torrent after rain.
End as thou have begun, and as that River
That bears thy name; thou may be read forever.
THO. HEYWOOD.

To my Friend Mr. Tho. Jordan on his Poems, which I title, His Underwood.
When ( Jordan) I had read thine Under wood
of growing Poesy, I understood,
(At least imagined) that I saw a Spring
Break through the depth of Winter; and a Ring
Of Sylvans, Satyrs, and light-footed Fawnes,
That haunt the Woods, the Mountains, and the Lawnes,
(Each with his Nymph) unanimously met,
All overjoyed to dance a roundelet.
For that they found in thy delightful Grove,
Something for every one of them to love;
Each in his several kind; and over them sat
The ayrie Choristers, (none without a Mate)
Upon thy branches, who unto their dance,
(With no less joy in Music) did advance
A welcome, and a wished increasefull way,
To every stem, to every sprig, and spray,
Sprung from thy pregnant brain. The Muses throng.
To hear those birds chaunt forth the cheerful Song
They had inspired them with; whilst through his Rays
Phoebus sat smiling down, to see his Bays,
Yet unneglected; and this leaden age
(Whose dullness dampes his Laurel, which the rage
Of Thunder never blasted) to send forth
A Genius that to wear it sings its worth.
And now (most happily) when the Poets old
Are sinking too! That one so young should hold
The club up against the Giant ignorance,
The malice of the times, and blinder chance,
Apollo pleased, thou may expect soon after
(For only thou have moved his this years laughter)
To be in's Darlings list, then will he shine,
Propitiously on every plant of thine;
And make them flourish by his chearing light,
Through the gross darkness of detraction's spite;
And send thee followers, and admirers, who
Shall cry up all thou do or aym'st to do.
Mean time I lend (that dares on envy look)
This Page to bear a Torch before thy book.
RICH. BROM.

To Mr. Thomas Jordan on his Fancies.
I Read thy Fancies; wondered how
Such streams of wit should from thee flow,
Friend Jordan; Inere thought thy head
(Like Nile's scarce yet discovered)
Would so break out; but now I am
Pleased with the knowledge whence they came*
Some Poetasters of the times,
That dabble in the Lake of Rhimes;
Care not, so they be in Print
What sordidtrash or stuff is in it.
There are too many such I fear
That make Books cheap and Paper dear.
But thou art Poesie's true son,
The Issue of thy brain does run
With well digested matter, thine,
Are Moral some, and some Divine,
Some Satyrs some love's Rapsodies,
The dead live by thy Elegies.
We that are old in the art must leake,
And worn with often usage break;
Thy younger pot the Muses will
With their best waters always fill;
When we are gone, the World shall see,
A full-brim'd Helicon in thee.
THO. NABBES.

To his Friend the Author Mr. Thomas Jordan, on his Varieties.
I Must not Jordan pass, though the waves glide
with equal favor of the wind and tide:
Nor for the land will I forsake the streams,
On whose brow danceth flowrie Anadems.
But every limb bathing in fresh delight,
Quicken the bravery of my appetite,
I scud amid st the Curles* and with my palm,
Stroke the delicious waters in a calm,
Whose virtues are more powerful in their birth*
Then all the distillations of the earth;
To sip of this from Cupids hollow hand,
Creates effects more strange then dart, or brand:
Quaffe Candid Reader, but dull clots be gone,
For Iordan's waters, are pure Helicon.
ED. MAY.

On my Friend and adopted son Mr. Thomas Jordan the Infant-Poet of our Age.
FRom smallest Springs, arise the greatest streams,
Thou have begun well; who dares hinder thee
Still to go forward, and dilate thy beams,
T'acquaint the world with thy sweet Poetry.
Speak still in tune, hide not thy worth but show it,
That men may say, thou art borne not made a Poe^.
And he that fayles thy growing Muse to cherish,
May his fixed hopes in expectation perish.
Thine (sance Complement)
I. B.

POETICAL VARIETIES.
A Gentleman in love with twenty Mistresses.
I Prithee leave me love, go place desire
In those cold hearts that never felt Amorous fire,
Or let me be thy Martyr, let me burn
Till I am naught but ashes, and my urne
Translated to some common Spicerie,
May serve thee more then thy Artillery.
Coy Madams tasting me in their hot spice,
Shall feel more flames then all the learned advice
Of Esculapius can alay, though he
Descend from Heaven to teach new Mystery;
If this may not be granted, let me crave
As many hearts as flames, then shall I have
A multitude of fayre-ones; Then I may
Enjoy my Rosa, Rosa.
spend the Amorous day
Within her arms, and at the night retire
To Violetta, Violetta^
quench another fire
In her cold bosom, but ere day does rise
Salute the Morn in my Aurora's Aurora.
eyes:
There like to an Idolater i will gaze
Till my Honoria Honoria.
rids me of the maze
And draws me to her Bower, where having spent
Some heavenly hours, i will find out Millescent Millescent.

(That wonder of perfection) we two,
Can teach the Turtles what they ought to do;
With kisses moist her Ruby lips i will cover.
But then Castara Castara.
says I do not love her;
Who with a witty sweet indulgent smile
Tells me I do forget her all this while.
Then do I kiss and study to excuse,
But yet am strait instructed by my Muse.
B^lla^a Bellara.
wants me, there is a mind as fair
And beautiful as all the other Are:
In their external features, such a one
Might have persuaded desperate Phaeton,
To have forsook his Chariot; her I love
Next to my Beads, till Fancy bids me prove
My chaste Eliza, Eliza.
in her Virg^n breast,
Lies far more worth then Poets have expressed.
In painting ou^ Pandora, I confess
I honor her as I do happiness;
But not like my beloved Beata, Beata.
she
Can give instructions to Martalitie,
How we may escape Hells fatal fire and come,
To (loves blessed Paradise) Elysium;
Except Thalia Thalia.
(one as fair and kind)
Perswad's us to be of another mind;
Makes us believe Elysium is a place
But feigned unless it be in her embrace*
Where I could ever rest, thence never part
Would Eglentina Eglentina.
send me back my heart,
Yet such sweet chains of love she binds it in,
That should I think to loose, twould be a sin
To great for Absolution, I must rest
Until Dulcella Dulcella.
(not more fair then blessed)
Please for to give release, in her it lies
To make me hug my own dear perjuries;
And yet she knows Ambrosia Ambrosia.
being by
I can neglect her and her potencie.
Ambrosia can conduct my happy feet
To Columbina Columbina.
(she that is more sweet
Then natures pe fumed violet) he that knows
Her sweetness, as I do, will say the Rose
Breaths but contagion, yet Candora Candora.
shall
Maintain though she be sweet, she has not all
Kind nature did bestow, for in her breast
Arabiahs, and the chaste Phaenix nest.
Must I though lose Fidelia Fidelia.
and deny
My faith to Anabella, Anabella.
let me dye
When I remember not the sacred love
Twixt me and my Musea; Musea.
The fond Dove
Affects not like Lucella, Lucella.
they are all
So fair, so sweet I know not which to call
My best or happiest, for unhappy I,
Must love but one of all, or by love dye;
I Will leave all therefore, and my self incline
To court Urania, Urania.
she is a love divine.
A Gentleman's deploration for his Mistress, falling from Virtue.
PAtience, inhabit humble souls; extend
Thy passive power to those whose sorrows end;
Mine are eternal, powerful, and immense;
Such as may teach thee wrath fond Patience;
Ixion's wheel is easy, and the stone
Sissiphus rowles he does but sleep upon,
Compared to mine; The greatne^^e of my wrongs
Would want Oration, though an hundred tongues
Guided by fluent Orators, should dare
In thrifty speech but briefly to declare;
They would destroy all Memories, all Sense,
And drive all Language from Intelligence.
Thou that art rich in sorrow* and can swear
Thou have more then Mortality can bear.
Attend, and give me audience, I will show
Thy quaking sense what thou shall fear to know;
Thou will believe (if I at large declare)
Sorrow has taken her dwelling in thy Ear.
And think thou may with lesser patience
Endure thy wrongs, than give mine audience.
Felina's falen from virtue; she is acute
In learned L^vitie, turned Prostitute.
I loved her dearly, while her eyes were pure,
While she blushed innocent, and kissed to cure.
When smiles were modest ensigns, while her breath,
Carried more balm then poison, life then death;
When she weep'd honest grief; and I did see,
Her Salutations were humility;
Then was she perfect Virgin; then did I
Contract my heart to this Idolatry.
Her eyes do now look glorious, but to tell
Unhappy man, the fairest way to Hell.
She blushes now for guilt, smiles to do ill,
Breath's but to poison, kisses but to kill;
Weep's to ^^snare, salut's but to destroy,
Flatters to c^aze, imbraceth to betray;
Betrays to get no profit, or renown,
But falls her self, to pluck another down.
Oh false Felina, must your beauty be
Exposed to Incest, and Adultery.
You are a Whore, and it is the choysest name
That he will render, who first caused your shame;
Sometimes you are his Mistress, when his lust
Has itching Fevers, and must take on trust,
But having done he loathes ye, nay will swear,
It Is you that made him turn Adulterer.
Perhaps you will then repent and think on me,
(That only prized you for your purity)
Resolve to be reserved, and never look
Upon (that dangerous forbidden Book)
Incontinence. Then does another come,
Who gives your penitence a Martyrdo^e,
Whom you embrace with such an appetite,
As if you had been kept from your delight
An age of hours; you deities (that see
Such shipwreck made of divine purity)
Lend me your perfect patience, or I fear
My sorrow will become my murderer,
Release me of the contract that I vowed
Unto Felina; Let her not be proud
Of my undoing too, that I may bear
My sorrows like a man, and let my care
Be to admonish those that mean to wed,
No path so full of danger man can tread,
Let not frail beauty, (that's the rode we pass;
Be much adored; fair my Felina was.
Let not your Mistress wealth or wit surprise,
For fair Felina was both rich and wise.
And let not blushes Ladies virtues tell,
Felina was once Chaste, and yet she fell.
To his Mistrisse Philonella, being at her Looking-glass.
MY sweetest Philonella, turn away
From that Angelick figure, lest you pay
An adoration to your shade; your eye
May win an Hermit to Idolatry.
Admit your soul be better guarded, know
I have still cause for doubt, lest some rash vow
(Made in an ^mrous ecstasy) should tie
Your self to your fair shade eternally,
Which heaven defend, when you bring this to pass.
Be kind you powers, translate me to her glass,
That when the currall creatures come to give
Their daily tribute to me, I may live
The glory of a ^over, and enjoy
More kisses then Adonis (Mirrha^ boy)
Oh but some danger will pursue this bliss
Love is a feeding Fever, and each ^isse
Creats another appetite, Alas
I shall become your beauties burning glass.
Sad lovers will relate, (should you expire)
Narcissus dyed by water, you by fire,
Both for one Amorous folly; yet (as he
Is now a Flower) could you a Phoenix be,
And I the sweet Arabian tree, so blessed
With the rich treasure of your spicie nest;
Most willingly I should desire the bliss,
Of so divine a M^tamorphosis.
Apollo sure would leave his Daphnean tree,
(With Lyrick Airs) to keep us company.
But these are fancies, leave your glass, I vow,
You are to me a better Phoenix now.
To Clora a farewell, once his coy Mistress.
CLora farewell, you may be cruel now
And keep the never-violated vow
You made unto your goddess; I am free
As the great Monarch, whose large Emperie
Contains a thousand Regions, I can sit
Viewing your beauty, yet betray my wit
Unto no greater folly; I can say
Your cheeks are July Roses, and the day
Borrowes its radiant luster from your eyes,
And yet retain my own; I can be wise;
I do disdain the power that made me turn
Apostata to reason; and do burn
With a devoute vexation, I should spend
My precious time to such a thriftlesse end
As to be your Admirer, therefore when
You shall dispute the follies of yongmen,
Let me entreat you, (though it raise your fame
High as Diana's self) you will not name
Me'mongst your captived servants, lest that I
Ruin that fame, and you repenting dye.
To Leda his coy Bride, on the Bridal Night.
Why art thou coy (my Leda) ar't not mine:
Has not the holy Hymeneall twine
Power to contract our Natures? must I be
Still interposed with needelesse Modesty?
What though my former passions made me vow
You were an Angel; be a Mortal now.
The bride-maides all are vanished, and the crew
Of Virgin Ladies that ^id wait on you,
Have left us to our selves; as loath to be
Injurious to our loves wish^d privawe.
Come then undresse; why blush you, prithee smile;
Faith i will disrobe ye, nay I will not spoil
Your Necklace, or your ^orget; Here Is a Pin
Pric^s you (fair Led^) twere a cruel sin
Not to remove it; Oh how many gates
Are to Elysium? (yet the sweetest Straits
That e're made voyage happy) here is a Lace
Me thinks should stifle you; it does embrace
Your body too severely, take a knife,
It Is tedious to undo it; By my life,
It shall be cut. Let your Carnation gown
Be pulled off (too) and next let me pull down
This Rosy Peticote; What is this cloud
That keeps the day light from us, and's allowed
More privilege then I? (Though it be white)
It Is not the white I aim at (by this light)
It shall go off (too) noe? then let't alone,
Come, let us to bed, why look you so? here is none
See's you, but I; be quick or (by this hand)
I Will lay you down my self; you make me stand
Too longi'th cold; Why do you lie so far,
I Will follow you, this distance shall not bar
Your body from me; Oh, it is well, and now
I Will let thy Virgin innocence know how
Kings propagate young Princes, marriage beds
Never destroy, but erect mayden-heads:
Fair Virgins, fairly wedded, but repair
Declining beauty in a prosperous heir.
Come then, lets kiss, let us embrace each other,
Till we have found a babe, fair (like the mother.)
Such face, brest's, waste, soft belly, such a -- why
Do you thrust back my hand so scornefully?
You Will make me strive (I think) Led^, you ^now,
I have a warrant for what ere I do,
And can commit no trespass; therefore come
Make me believe theirs no Elysium
Stweeterthen these embraces -- Now ye'are kind,
(My gentle Leda) since you have resigned,
I Will leave my talking (too) lovers grow mutes
When Amrous Ladies grant such pr^tty suits.
A Paradox on his Mistress, who is cole Black, Blind, Wrinckled, Crooked and
Dumb.
Which of thy virtues shall I first admire,
(Rare piece of natures wonder?) O inspire
My over-Amorous soul, ye Virgins nine
That bless the fount of flowing Hippocrene:
Create a fancy in me, that may fly
Above the towering head of Rapsody.
Negra, thou art not fair; I cannot say
The blushing morn (bright Herald to the day)
Rises in either Cheek; nor yet suppose
The blameless Lilly and chaste bashful Rose
Have a contention there, for these (we know)
Change with their seasons, they but bud, and blow,
And then expire for ever; all their story
Is at an end, when they begin their glory.
But thou art Black, and therein lovely (too)
Constant, as Fate, unto thy changelesse Hue,
(Like to thy inward soul) where we may find
Thy face to be fit Emblem to thy mind,
Constant in all chaste thoughts; and a black night
Sometimes allows more pleasure, then the light
Of a clear Summer morning, when we please
To dedicate our wearied brains to ease
On a soft Pillow; Marriage-beds allow
The night for lovers actions and (we know)
That, ere the seasons of the year decay,
Night claim's as much of rule, as does the Day.
Thy Blackness Black.
is thy happiness; by thee
The paint of white and red Adultery
Can have no entertainemen^; all men's eyes
May trust thy face, for it brooks no disguise;
Thou need'st no Scarfes, no Black-bags here prevail,
Thy face is both thy Beauty and thy Veil.
Were thou not blind Blind.
(some say) thou would despair,
For being so, thou think thy self as fair
As Helen was; but those are fools, and know
No reason to allege, until I show
The perfect truth; thou do reserve thy eyes
But to look inward, where true beauty lies.
Thou lookst not on vain glory, idle toys
That mock the sense, and are not real joys,
But lights that lead to misery; In thee
It is a virtue that thou can not see.
Some call the Wrinckled Wrinckled.
( Negra) and are bold
To tell me that my Mistress is as old
As twice my age, (Thus all seek to beguile
Thy precious worth) each wrinckle is a smile,
(Had they my eyes to see) Then, they would know
(If they be smiles) why they continue so;
I answered that those smiles are always shown,
To tell thou still art friends with every one.
So art thou termed crooked, Crooked.
cause they see
Thee (like the figure of Humility)
Still bending to the earth; but thou art wise
And wilt salute all creatures (since thy eyes
Deny thee to make choice) twere better be
Always so bent, then lose humillity.
Then do they call thee Dumb, (alas) because
Thou art not frequent in the talking laws
Of idle women; must the cruel throng
Of rank backbiters say thou have no tongue?
Admit thou have not, it is not thy intent
That thy chaste silence should give free consent
To every motion; then they wonder what
Thou movest thy head, or point'st thy fingers at,
These were Enigmaes to them, till I told,
The meaning, and the Riddle did unfould,
That none but they, who in thy thoughts abode,
Can understand the virtue of thy nod.
So, art thou none but mine; for only I,
Retain the knowledge of that mystery,
And I am thine, who (spite of envious mocks)
Will marry thee -- by way of Paradox;
No otherwise (believe me Negra;) so
I Will lie with thee, and beget children too.
Thus you that marry ill, and live worse lives,
(Like me) make Para-doxes of your wives.
A Dialogue betwixt Castadorus and Arabellain bed.
Arabella. Dear Castadorus let me rise
Aurora gins to jeere me.
She tells me I do wantonize,

Castadorus. I prithee sweet lie near me.
Let red Aurora smile my dear
And Phoebus laughing follow,
Thou only art Aurora here
Let me be thy Apollo.
It is to envy at our bliss
That they do rise before us,
Is there such hurt in this, or this;

Arabella. Nay fie, why Castadorus.

Castadorus. What, Arabella can one night
Of loving dalliance tire ye?
I could lie ever (if I might)
One hour let me desire ye.

Arabella. Fie, fie, you hurt me, let me go
If you so roughly use me,
What can I say, or think of you;
I prithee ( Love) excuse me.

Castadorus. Thy beauty and my love defend
I should ungently move thee,
It Is kisses ( sweet) that I intend,
Is it not I that l^ve thee?

Arabella. I do confess it is, but then
Since you do so importune,
That I should once lie down again,
Vouchsafe to draw the Curtain
Aurora and Apollo (too)
May visit silent fields,
By my consent they nere shall know
The bliss our pleasure yields.

To his faithless Mistress Vxoria.
WHere was I, when I called my mistress fair
As the bright East (when clouds dispersed are
To the vast North) how did I grossly err,
When (rashly confident) I durst prefer
Her virtue bove Dianas! when we met,
Why did I think the coole-lip't Violet
Kissed not more chastely sweet, or did suppose
Her cheeks begat a color in the rose!
But (worst of all) what madn^sse Seaz'd my sense
When I conceived her craft, pure innocence!
Ye men of happy souls, (I mean) that be
Vnblasted with the breath of perjurie
Proceeding from frail woman; keep ye so,
Or you will find, earth cannot bear a foe
So full of killing mischeife; all that prove
Embrace their ruin, and yet call it love.
Oh in what Chaos did that Caytiffe dwell,
That taught the Age so good a word for Hell!
Because your Mist^esse eyes starrelike appear,
Will you blaspheming cry that Heaven's there?
It Is melancholy madness, and I Will prove
You are seduced by sorcery not love,
Her heart is deep perdition; can her eye
Retain one part of Heaven, Hell so nigh?
I am experienced, read your Fate in me,
Let Adam's tasting the excluded tree
Work fear in you; good Angels tongues forbid
That you should lose your Eden as we did.
Women have subtle slights, they will tell ye then,
What Evah lost, Mary restored again,
Producing all her virgin purity
To be their honor, though impiety
Distracted into Arrogance, and lust
Engrosse their souls and bodies, yet they must
In the black book of their lives fatal story
Write for their own, the Virgin Mary's glory:
Such false Vxoria is, but if there be
A woman Phoenix let her pardon me,
She was excluded, when she knows my wrong,
I know she will be too just to blame my tongue,
And thus conceive, what virtue can he find
In any woman, has his own unkind?
To her perjured Love Maritus, her dishonorer.
OH my undoing faith, now I repent
My hope ere gave my charity consent
To be thy love Maritus, could thou spy
Within the Sphere of my transparant eye
One Cupid loosely revell to invite
Thy soul to so unchaste an appetite
That for its satisfaction I must dye,
Killed in my inocence by perjury?
Oh false Maritus I have heard you tell
That in my eyes two purer Cherub's dwell,
Then those that guard Elysium; and my lip
So chastely cool, that should a Letcher sip,
He might convert to Angel; my hands touch
To a more guilty person do as much.
What wor^er thing are you, these virtues can
Convert them Angels, and not you to man;
Have you a soul? do you believe it must
(When to some urne you have resigned your dust)
Have any residence? do you not feel
In your wide conscience, that Ixions wheel
The Poets paint for Moral, yet agree
To take his torment as one worse then he?
Repent, sigh, weep (Maritus) your wild youth
Has murdered innocence, and wounded truth
Whilst I stand my own statue, and my eyes
Write this in tears --
HERE MY DEAD HONOR LIES.
A vow to his inestimable Mistress.
BY the two Rosy blushes that did move
In your chaste cheeks when I revealed my love,
By those Favonian sighs whose gentle calm
Perfumed the Air sweet, as Iudean balm,
By those two Ruby Portalls, that disclose
Two Hemispheres of Pearl, contrived to pose
The yet amazed beholder, by your eyes,
Brighter to me then Titan when he flies
Over Arabian mountains ere his heat ^
Does cause the toyling rural Negro sweat
Under his spicy burden, by your hair,
Which pardon sweetest if I term a snare
To catch a Cupid in, and falling low
Into your bosom where the banks of Poe
Show nurseryes of Lillies, I protest
With a chaste kiss upon your virgin breast
( Love's sacred register of vows) in thee
My love and life has chose eternity;
Yet take my countervow this zealous kiss
I will be true -- so Angels meet their bliss.
A Dialogue between Icarus and surprised Phillida.
Phil. PRetty sweete-one look on me
Feign I would thy captive be,
Bound by thee is liberty.

Icar. Be not so unkindly wise
For your looks will bribe my eyes
To divulge where my heart lies.

Phil. If they do, thou needst not fear,
By my innocence I swear,
I Will but place another there.

Icar. That's my fear I dare not prove
Nor my resolution move,
Cause I know you are in love.

Phil. Loved Icarus and if I be
I know I cannot injure thee,
Love and beauty will agree.

Ica. Oh you do my hearing wrong,
I have turned my eyes thus long
To be captived by your tongue.

Phil. Then my hours are happy spent,
If my tongue give such content
It shall be thy Instrument.

Ica. But be sure you use it then
Thus unto no other men,
Lest that I grow deaf again.

Loves progress.
Love is my honest character; I am
The child of a fair mother, and I came
From yon' celestial Palace, to surround
This universe, I did so, and have found
My deity adored by all, I was
Their only Genius* brought all acts to pass;
I entered a great City where I spied
A fourscore Bridegroom and a sixteen Bride,
Going to Hymen's Temple, though her eye
Looked but disdainefull of his Gravity
(She was compeld) I pitying the wrong
Shot a sharp shaft, she loved, and he grew young;
This was my first effectual work and then
I met a venerable Citizen,
A Usurer, well troubled with the strife
Of wo^ldly cares, and yet without a wife;
I made him wed his maid, and break his store
For pious uses, to maintain the poor.
I interrupted (next) the serious Muse
Of a sad Student, busy to peruse
The hearts of mineralls, who let gold fly
To purcha^e glass, and practice Alchimy;
I did infuse a Quintessence that made
My wise Philosopher mistake his trade,
Dazeld his fancy so, that he did spy
Faces and lip^ in his Philosophy;
Sweet Roseat blushes, smiles, choice locks of hair,
Soft fingers, and such eyes as women wear*
When all was perfected in every part
A Lady was the Elixir of his Art.
Love is a Courtier (too) I went to Court,
There did I see a general resort
Of royal persons, Dukes, Earls, Lords and Knights;
Each one his Lady, and most choice delights
Vshering their pomp; the Virgin Ladies (too)
Frequent that Senate, who prepare to do
Their amrous rites to love; the youthful squires
Neglect no office that may keep the fyers
Of Cupid ever burning; yet among these
Diana had a vestall did displease
My angry soul; she was a virgin fair
As lovely Psyche; in her trameld hair
Hung precious Diamonds, yet might you spy
No luster in them, cause her eyes were by,
And to reveal her fully, I durst swear
I h^d beheld another Venus there.
This Lady was beloved adored and sought
By a rich heir, (that as much virtue brought
As she had beauty) in whose soul did move
The divine graces, yet he was in love
With this coy piece of Ladyship; but she
Contemned as much, now note the destiny,
I could not brook her humor, but did burn
With hot vexation; which did sudden turn
To royal madness, and in zealous rage
I made him wed a Countess, she a Page.
Thus did I traverse earth, and now am come
To rest my tired limbs in Elysium.
To his most excellent Mistress, Avis Booth.
MElpomene, forget thou art a Muse
Or in thy tragic brain a juice infuse
May keep thee sleeping, let Thalia bring
From green Parnassus, plenty of that spring
Inspires our Laureat Lovers; could I praise
Loved Avis to her worth, I might wear Bays
Thrown from fair Daphne's arms bedewed with tears,
For grief all others are her ravishers.
Who but beholds her cheeks and not supposes
December to be June, there live such Roses;
Here would I rest, should I ascend her eyes,
It Is feared my own would be their sacrifice;
I Will leave particulars lest I should wrong
Those that must nere enjoy her, if my tongue
(Made eloquent by her) could but declare
Each beauty fully, love and sad despair
Would execute all hearers, there would be
A civil war twixt faith and Piety;
Since she will breed ruin if I should discover
I Will draw the Curtains close; but let no lover
Compare his Mistress to her, lest that I
Describe at large, and he by surfeit dye,
Such virtue has her beauty, for she is
A Rara Avis, and my fair Mistrisse.
A^hrostick to his Mistress.
Sweet Soul of goodness, in whose Saintlike breast
Virtue Vowe's dwelling, to make beauty blessed;
Sure Sighing Cytherea sits, your eyes
Are Altars whereon she might sacrifice;
Now None will of the Paphean order be;
Natur's New work transcends a deity;
Arabia's Aromatticks court your scent;
Bright Beauty makes your gazers eloquent,
Let Little Cupid his lost eyes obtain
(Vayl'd) Veiwing you would strike him blind again;
Nay Never think I flatter, If you be
Thus To none else ( by love) you are to me.
A Gentleman desirous to have his Lady's Picture drawn, describes her thus.
INgenious Artist teach thy Pencill how
To paint a goddess, I would let thee know
I have a Mistress thy admired Art
Must limne like my description; do no^ start
If I command a work above thy skill
And send thee once more to Parnassus hill
To hear Thalia's Lectures; have you seen
The lovely feature of the Cypri^^ Queen,
Her cheeks resemble somewhat; though each Rose
In here is seems plucked, and my Aurelia's grows;
Yet they may pass; the Lillyes that do stand
Upon her breasts, tells you my Mistress hand
Is pattern to their whiteness; let her eyes
Not want that heavenly virtue to surprise
Only my heart, let them be loved by none
Whose glories are to captive every one.
It Is only my ambition for to be
Fit for my Mistress, and she fit for me.
But to my first description; for those hairs
Adorn her head, paint them Dia^a wears;
And let her forehead not inferior be
To that which shows great Juno's majesty,
Let those two Rosy portalls, that I call
Her ruby lips, be but so magical
As his her own, so sweet, so balmie made,
Sure I shall leave the substance for the shade.
If you think these Enigma's and that I
Strive but to pose you with my Poetry;
Making an argument you never saw
Such goddesses fayn'd by Poetic law:
I answer such divine powers you shall see
Get but a Mistress, be in love (like me)
Chaste Love sitting under a Grove of ^ong Bay-tre^s, is thus solicited by Lust.
Love. What? sighing Love, for shame arise
Sit not crosse-arm'd, ( by Venus eyes)
Thou doe'st thy passion Idolize.
I Will bring thee to a Mistress, fair
As Lillyes when they first prepare
To kiss the Amorous morni^g air;
She Is as active as desire,
Her voice transcends the Mermaids quire;
In each touch glowe's Cupids fire.
Corinthian wantons whose rare merits
Were in raising leaden spirits,
My choice Mistress breast inherits.
Cold Anchorites, (prepared to mourn
Their past crimes) should they but turn
Their eyes on her; would (gazing) burn;
And in that scorching ecstasy
Not desire to be set free,
But wish to burn eternally.
How can she but so surprise
The chaste hearts of the most wise,
Cupids heaven is her eyes.
Yet if yours whom you do keep
Charie as your thoughts in sleep,
For whom you nightly pray and weep,
Be so fair, so kind, so loving,
So attractive, sweet, and moving,
Let me know her by your proving.

Love.
Love. I have a Mistress chaster far,
Then thine is fair, shall be a star,
When she is in a Sepulcher.
With the harmony divine
Angels limbs with Angels twine,
As does her white soul and mine.
We can kiss without desire,
Enjoy our sweets, and feel no fire
To inflame, or yet expire.
Divinity it self may see,
In her souls fair Symmetry,
What Religion ought to be.
In her eyes an Anchorite may
Make purer his Religious Clay,
And to heaven tread the way.
I am chaste Love, not confined
To your feigned Archer blind,
But adore a virtuous mind;
And whoever will deny
Sensual Lust, and do as I,
Shall ever love, and never dye.

What a Whore is.
NAture's unhappy workmanship; if Fair
So much the worse, all mischiefs doubled are:
If Modest, there is a hell in her intent,
She kills secure, when she seems innocent:
If coy and nice, take heed, it is a slight,
She uses but to strengthen Appetite:
If witty, in her power more dangers lie,
She Will give you Logic for Adultery,
Prove lust legitimate; at last beguile
Your easy sense with a deluding smile,
More subtle then her Logic; in such ways
She spends her precious nere returning days.
(The glory of her youth) And (which is worse)
Had she Helena's beauty, yet the curse,
Of Strumpets will attend her; sickness seases
Her overcharged body, and diseases,
Will understand no Physic, but prepare
Her limbs for earth, ere a repentant Prayer
Can cherish her lost soul; Thus she defloure's
Her living kindred and dead ancestors
Of all their fertile fame, so buried lies,
A pitiful example to the wise;
But those whom she abused in life will laugh
Her final fall, and curse an Epitaph.
An abused Man: Quasi, a Cuccold.
YE Gods that lend me Patience, tell me why
My guiltless fame (pure as your Piety)
Must suffer for its innocence; can fate
For virtuous men such ills predestinate:
Is It not enough you have confined my life
To the loathed prison of an unchaste wife;
Extinguished Hymen's Tapers, and bespread
With ^we and Cypress my poor nuptial bed,
But I must suffer the injurious wrong
And Contumelic of each idiots tongue,
Take the reproach of him (perhaps) that thrives
In his warm Plush by naught else but his wives
(Thrice bought) adultery, yet such as he
Must on my Patience brand his Calumny:
Teach wiser men, and such as know the price
Of a chaste wife, It is a Paradise
All candid souls enjoy not if they do^,
Ye are unjust, my merits claim one (too)
But I repent my rage, conceive again
The reason why you punish virtuous men;
To make it in their suffering appear
They must attend, their heaven is not here;
Yet tell my rude abusers only this,
Not my unkindnesse causes her amiss,
Nor is it poverty my torment brings,
For such as mine may be the fate of Kings.
Lust loses all.
Lust (The hot mother of unchaste desires,
^lacke spotted s^avers and destroying fires)
I must take breath to curse ye, for I see
My ruin will be perfected by thee.
Why do men call thee love, when as no hate
Retaine's a Plague, maks man more desperate:
Thou rob'st him of all honor, make his name
Become the only title of a shame;
Oh may thy fawning falsehood nere have rest
Within the confine's of a noble breast.
All the choice virtues, that I ere could boast
My soul enjoyed, The losses.
insatiate lust has lost:
Religion Religion.
bid me first farewell, for I
Behold no beauty in Divinity;
Then wisdom Wisdom.
left the mansion of my mind
To follie's trust (who never was inclined
Unto chaste laws) I did not wisdom miss,
Wealth can obtain a lustful Mistress:
But soon as wisdom from my soul did slide,
Reason Reason.
removed and bad me seek a guide,
Which thus I did, my present fancy flies
Unto the daylight of my Mistress eyes,
Which being darkened by divine decrce,
I lost my way, and was as blind as she:
But when Religion, Wisdom, Reason went,
Faith Faith.
left me (too) and with a firm consent
Her sister Hope Hope, and Charity.
did follow, both agree
To heaven to transport kind charity;
Love Love.
lost his labor in me, for unjust
I did convert his civil laws to lust.
Honor Honor.
declined, saying it is not right
Man should be servant to his appetite:
Manhood Manhood.
exild himself and would not own
Me nor my acts* I was all Woman grown.
Who thinks I am no loser? who will say
He Is not undone that has no more to p^ay?
Let no man then expose his life and fame
He must needs lose, the devils in the game;
He that buys pleasure at so dear a price
Obtaine's an apple to lose Paradise.
A Dialogue betwixt Adversus and his Mistress the Lady Contra.
Adver. Fair Contra, in the bosom of yon shade
Remaynes a soft repose, by nature made
To give your beauty welcome, it is a Bow^r
Solicited by every fragrant Flower
Nursed in this Rosy Province, shall I crave
I may conduct you to it, (sweet) I have
A gentle story to reveal, so dear
Unto my self, that none but your chaste ear
May hear the petty volume, be but pleased
To sit and hear and my desire is eased.

Contra. You will not kill my patience or betray
My ears to some loose fancy, from what Play
Have you traduced your story? is it new,
Decently delectable, strange and true?
What title has your story? may it be
Heard without tears? comes it off merrily?

Adver. It Is called a Game at Hearts, both strange and new;
The losers win if both the hearts play true.

Con. This is a riddle sure, some fine defeat,
You have composed to give my wit the cheat.

Adver. There is a man -- that's I -- his heart does vow
Unto a virtuous Lady -- that is you.
Be not offended fairest, this is all
The story I can tell or ever shall,
I love you; love you dearly, in your eye
Lives my devotion, there is a deity
So powerful, that is calls my early eyes
From practick Prayer to give it sacrifice.
I love you chastely, my divine desire
Aims but at honored marriage, all the fire
Love ( the great king of passions) did create
Within my breast, is as immac^l^te,
Temprate and pure as the bright flame that flies
In zeal from an accepted sacrifice.

Con. Is this your stories end? is your game don?
Where be your losing winners? who has won?

Adver^ The heart that never played, play then and be
A double winner, i will lose all to thee.

Co^. Indeed I cannot love, or if I do,
Credit me Sir, I cannot fancy you,
You are to full of passion, if you can
Exile it from you and turn merry man,
You may obtain my favor, but if not
Your game is done, your story quite forgot^

Ad^er. Oh the blind cu^se of lovers it does make
Man become Idiot for his mistress sake,
But I disdain the task and let you know
(Your superficial fayre-one) that I bow
Not to the feature of your femall kind,
But to a breast enriched with a fair mind;
If yours be so, I love you, but if not,
My love (like to my story) is forgot:
Must I become a Zane, laugh and toy,
Your ever-losing favor to enjoy;
Does your wise Ladyship conceit it fit,
I should implore the virtue of your wit
With idle mirth, reserved for want on guests,
Or must I plead my marriage love in jests?
It Is a severe conjunction that does tie
Two souls in one unto eternity,
And requires serious wisdom, such as may
Keep the knot tied more then the marriage day;
Perhaps you are engaged, your heart does dwell
Within another, love him then -- farewell.

Contra Sola.
Contra Sola. Thus Virgins sport away their loves, thus I
Have at one blast lost more felicity
Then many Queens can boast, some pitying fate
Contrive a means I may be fortunate
In his loved love again, Oh be so kind
To render me the object of his mind;
If your strickt Canons this request deny,
And that your sentence tells me I must dye
For my transgression, I no mourners crave,
But let some Zane laugh me to my grave;
No Epitaph be writ nor yet a stone
With this Inscription, Here lies buried One,
Lest my lost Love should come, and when he spies
My Sepulcher with pity lose his eyes.

Rara Avis in terris nigroque Similima Cigno.
Fly, fly my nimble Genius round about
The peopled world, find me this Riddle out,
There is much doubt int, to the City fly
Amongst the Femall Beauties, where each eye
Begets a gazing admiration; there
Choose me a young Wench that does know she is fair,
Who in Thought, Word, and Deed is chaste, and yet
Has been thrice tempted by Wealth, Worth and Wit.
In the same City do the best you can
By narrow search, to spy me out a Man
Wedded to Femall follies, yet shall be
The Cities Lord Major for his Gravity.
Repair to Court, you shall a Lady see
Decked like Aurora in choice Bravery,
Win her from those delights, see if you can
Persuade her Ladyship turn Pur^tan.
Perchance she has a husband, one that is
Of youthful metal, can Da^ce, Sing, and Kis^^
Court amorous Ladies, is completely fair,
That owes to Art for a large crispy hair.
Produce him (too) he with the rest may pass
If he did nere behold a Look^ng-Glasse,
Take Cart and to the Country go with speed,
Where C^^wnes, Cow^s, Calfes, Sheep, and fat Oxen feed,
Persuade some great Corne-master, that has bin
A Grand Offender in the thriving Sin
Of Transportation; only to refrain
That thrifty course, and give his Country Grain,
Bid his Old wife for sake her Country tongue,
And trade in Complement, tell her she is young;
If you can make her leave her Coun^ry Iigge,
Shave off her Hair and wear a Periwigge,
Bring her, and all the rest, I dare say than
I have as Rare a Bird, as your black Swan.
To his Mistress Elizabeth Brook.
ELizabeth inspire me, then I shall
Write naught Obscene, but Beauty, Virtue all.
There was a Queen of whom Fames tongue can tell
Called Virtue Servant, she did all Excel,
Durst call themselves Elizabeth; to me,
Me thinks you keep her still in Memory,
Did I not think you chaste, as is the Snow
Girt in Diana's girdle, fair one know
I could not court you, though your beauty might
Play the fair thief, and steal me at first sight,
I should affect no longer then I gazed:
Beauty and Virtue both make Souls amazed
Be you my Brook, my shadow, and I vow
Like fond Narcissus to kiss none but you,
And in that crystal Rivolet, your Eye
Bury my Sight, my Self -- it is life to dye.
A Dialogue betwixt Fidelius and his Silent Mistress Flora.
Fide. MY dearest Flora can you love me.

Flo. Prithee prove me.

Fide. Shall I have your hand to kiss.

Flo. Yes, yes.

Fide. On this whiteness let me swear.

Flo. No pray forbear.

Fide. I love you dearer then my eyes.

Flo. Be wise.

Fide. I prize no happiness like you.

Flo. Will you be True.

Fide. As is the Turtle to her Mate.

Flo. I hate.

Fide. Who my Divinest Flora, me.

Flo. No, flattery.

Fide. He that flatters, may he dye.

Flo. Perpetually.

Fide. And his black Vrne be the cell.

Flo. Where furies dwell.

Fide. May his Name be blasphemous.

Flo. To us.

Fide. His Memory for ever Rot.

Flo. And be forgot.

Fide. Least it keep our age and youth.

Flo. From Love and Truth.

Fide. Thus upon your Virgin hand.

Flo. Your Vows shall stand.

Fide. This kiss confirms my Act and Deed.

Flo. You may exceed.

Fide. Your Hand, your Lip, I Will vow on both

Flo. A dangerous oath.

Fide. My Resolution nere shall start,

Flo. You have my heart.

A Ladies Complaint for the loss of her Love Theodorus.
LEnd me thy Arrows Cupid, teach me how
To wear thy Quiver and to bend thy Bow,
Show me that Shaft in which a Power does lie
To make man chastely Love eternally;
I have my eyes fair Boy with which I Will find
The mark that thou will miss, las, thou art blind,
I See too much, and wish I could not see,
Less I had power my bondage for to free
Or bind another; Theodorus then
Should be my honored Prisoner once again,
Did I appear so worthless, is my face
So poorly barren of the Female Grace
Which Courts our Amorous youth, that I must be
The Subject of a man's Inconstancy,
What though there be no Cupids in my Eyes,
Placed to make Erring Love idolatrize,
What though the Roses in my Cheeks do faint,
And I disdain with an Adulterate paint
To Add a Sinful Beauty, my chaste mind
Shall cast a luster when all eyes are blind,
That might have made my Theodorus Love
With divine Loyalty, and constant prove,
For Love that is only fixed in fair Eyes
And fading Colors, with their downfall dies
Believe me Theodorus, I divine,
(Though thou art gone, and the sad loss is mine)
Thou will not be a winner; Oh take heed
Women are gilded follies, that exceed
A gluttons Riot, Men do often refuse
(For Beauties sake) though they unchastly choose,
If they be beautiously fair, can that
Secure their Minds from Thoughts adulterate,
And should they lose their Honor, can they then
With all their Beauties fetch it back again,
But be your own adviser, let not me
Discourage your opinion, but be free
In your new choice; if my wish take effect,
You never shall repent you did neglect
My courser Fortunes; if your Mistress be
An Angel in your eyes, she is so to me,
Envye is still my Enemy; although
I loved you fondly, I must have you know
'Twas very chastely (too) and (without Wonder)
Hearts may contract when Bodies are asunder.
Yet love your Mistress, and be truly zealous,
I can Affect, yet never make her jealous.
A Moral Eclogue presented by Virtue, Wealth, and Beauty.
Wealth Come hither Beauty, what sad dumpe has got
The upper hand of thy choice thoughts, what blot
Has overcome thy Beauty; thou art sad,
Thoughts discontented and concealed, make mad
The serious Contemplator, then declare,
I Am a Physician, tell me what they are.

Beauty Insatiate Wealth, I will; I come to crave
Along-lost Servant, you unjustly have,
And such a Servant none ere had but ^^hee
Whom Jove embraced) Cadmean Semele,
Though Nature make all men that mortal are
All of one mould, she can but claim a share
In this great Master piece; ere he was fit
Twelve Natures did in consultation sit,
Had he but lived when the Egyptian Queen
(Fair Cleopatra) Reigned, to have been seen,
By her in her high court, sure none but he
Had exchanged places with Mark Anthony;
Or Hellen veiw'd him, ere she went from Greece,
No Wars had been, he could have kept the Peace.

Wealth Is this your cause of Grief, admit I have
This honorable Servant which you crave,
I am the worthier Mistress, what is in you
But a fair face, Riches does me endue,
What will your Beauty, do when (...) shall
Deal cruelly, and let your states both fall,
Beg with your Beauty, can your Beauty then
Contrive a means to raise you up again.
But stay, yonder comes virtue; do but see
How poor she goes, yet she is as nice as thee.

Vertus Health to you Ladies; Beauty, unto you
My message comes; I have a Servant true,
Corrupted by your eyes, till he did see
Your ^aining Smiles he was content with me;
Pray give him back again: my mourning state
Directs the Turtle that has lost her Mate
To beat her feathered bosom, Grief and I
Are in contention for the Majesty
Of perfect sorrow, and we find that none
Have such true grief as those whose Love's are gone;
Such is my state, fair Lady, do not then
Detain my Love, but send him home again.

Bea^. What Love do I detain, what Servant, where
Did I subdue him, what is his Character?

Virtue When first I did behold him, I could spy
The simple Soul of Candid Majesty
Take state in either cheek; for his defense,
He never Blushed, but to show Innocence:
When he did court me, a sweet Passion strove
To tell me, that he lived in perfect love,
I saw he did, and yet am bold to tell,
He might have wrought Faith in an Infid^ll,
He had Exterior Beauty; (too) his eyes
Had luster from his inward Purities.
They were a Fr^ntispiece to all the good
His Soul possessd; greater in Grace then blood;
His name is Bellizarus, let me have
His person (too) it is all the bliss I crave.

Wealth That is my Love coy Virtue.

Beau. Which I claim.

Virtue But is my due.

Wealth Oh ye both lose your Aim,
He has a wealthy Fortune, shall it be
Exposed to the certain jeopardy
Of Beauty or poor Virtue; let him thrive
In my esteems, Wealth keeps the heart alive.
I Will show him Mines of Treasure, which shall buy
Pleasures, that may persuade Mortality
Into a Godhead; I Will a Palace build
Of checkered Marble, whose large roof shall yield
Unparalleled delights; a thousand boys
(Fair as Adonis) with melodious noise
Of new found Timbrils, shall awake his Sense
From sullen sadness (with profuse expense,)
I Will purchase curious diet, whose choice taste
Shall create Odors in his Breath, I Will waste
My (unknown) Treasure to a Myte, that he
May hate you both, and keep his Love with me.

Beauty You argue weakly for him; in my Eye,
A Lover's Amorous Passion can descry
Ten thousand fairer boys, young Cupids all,
And with my voice (at his commanding call)
I Will warble various fancies, that shall make
His heart; cold Melancholy quite forsake
This Ruby Lip being connex'd with his,
Shall be more pleasing then that Nectar is
Jove does revive his Youth with; for his Scent,
My breath is sweeter then that Continent
The Phoenix keeps her nest in when she burns
In Aromats, and a New Phoenix turns.
These but a model of the pleasures be
He shall enjoy, let him return to me.

Virtue. If he be true, no argument should make
His honest soul his first chaste love forsake,
Then (were he yours and I by strife should win)
How could I be a virtue but a sin:
Fond women, know i will teach him how to clime
Beyond your hopes, to treasures more sublime;
I Will show him how to be content with that
Would make you sorrow sick and desperate:
Fortune can wound you wealth, and (beauty) know
The sweetest Roses that do fairest blow,
Will shatter into ruin; you must fear
Beauty will fade, Springs last not all the year:
You talk of Boys and Cupids, I can see
Through the pure cristalls of divinity:
A heaven set with Angels, of whose glory
No mortals pen could ere write perfect story,
And to this joy i will bring him, if he be
So wise to cast you off and live with me.

Wealth. Yet he is mine, and if the God of love
Look pleasing (as he did) I then will move
My next suite unto Hymen, and we will be
Jointly contracted by his Deity:
Do not you rail then, nor you try your heart,
I have possession that's the greater part.

Virtue. I must return to sorrow, weep, and wayle
For his lost soul.

Beauty. I to revenge, and rail.
Use your own counsel, when your rayling's past
Go mourn with virtue and your beauty blast.

The complaint of an old Lady for the loss of her beauty.
A Ge (Beauties tyrant) why do thou,
Furrowe my brow;
With what poison have thou made,
My Lillies fade;
What strange color is this hair
That I wear;
Oh for love's sake take it away,
It Is to gray;
In my cheeks no Roses grow,
Bud or blow;
But are gone, for ever gone,
Every one;
In my eyes no Cupids dance
To advance
The bravery of Appetite
To delight;
I to Venus shrine will go
With my woe,
And declare unto her all
My beauties fall;
There complain that crooked Age
Full of rage,
Has for ever banished
White and red;
So perhaps I may obtain
Allagaine.
And disgraceful Age expel
To her Cell;
But if not, most sure I shall
Ruined fall;
For when beauty is away
All Is but Clay,
Fickle feature grows but brave
For a Grave,
Where the beauty most repleate
Worms will eat.
Go then Beauty be not seen
But in Virgin's at sixteen,
When they are as old as I
Let their Beauty fading dye,
It Is an age for to decline
To our graves, not Venus shrine.
A Gentleman deploring his former follies.
REason I do salute thy brightness, thou
Expellsts the mist of error; from thy brow
A radiant Beam is shot into my s^ule,
By which I have discovered how soul
My former follies made me; it is thee
That makst poor Man become a monarchy:
Had thou been with me when the greedy grape
Ingross^d my senses, and committed Rape
Upon my understanding, I might be
Less in Arrerage for Ebri^ty.
Had I enjoyed thy company when I
(Infla^^'d with feaver-burning luxury)
Ruined a Ladies fame, she had been pure
And kept her may den innocence secure;
I had been happy, for my tainted name
Had been an honest Character, no shame,
Had I employed thy council (when my wrath)
Aided by envy trod a guilty path
Unto my friends confusion, but because
He was not regular in Bacchus laws,
My spleen had beee more temperate, for I
Had conquered rashness by sobriety.
Had thou bin present when my ruder tongue
Calumnious^y did do my Mistress wrong,
Who chastely loved when I did boldly say,
She was my looser creature to alay
Lascivious desires; that she would do
What (heaven) knows) I here saduc'd her to,
Thou had corrected the egregious ill,
And I had lived her honored servant still.
Had thou been pleased ever to lend thy store
Of saving help, such follyes on my score
Had nere been written, it is not yet too late
For devoute penitence to expiate;
Be my Adjutor, Reason it is in thee
That I will seek man's mediocritie.
ELEGIACK POEMS.
An Elegy on his Inestimable friend, Mr. Richard Gunnell, Gent.
Go sell your smiles for weeping, change your mirth
For mourning dirges, lave the precious earth
Of my inestimable friend with tears
(Fertile as them the cheek of April wears,
When Flora propagates her blessing on
The approaching Daffadills) under this stone
Lies his neglected ashes, Oh that they
Who knew his virtues best should let his Clay
Lie unregarded so, and not appear
With a full sorrow, in each eye a tear
Once, daily ore his urne, how can they think
A pleasing thought, sit and securely drink
Insatiate carrowses; these are they
Can lose both friends and sorrows in one day
(Not worth my observation) let me turn
Again to my sad duty, where i will mourn
Till my corporeal essence do become
A glyding rivolet; and pay the sum
To thy dear memory; my stream shall lend
A drop to none les he has lost a friend:
The melancholy madman that will prove
His passion for his Mistress is but love,
Were best be thrifty in his tears, for I
Will not supply him though his mistress; dye;
My ford is thine dear Gunnell and for thee
My Crystal Channel flows so currently,
Tagus and great Pactolus may be proud
Of their red sands, let me my Rivers shroud
In course Meanders, where the waters shall
In a grieved murmr, Gunnell, Gunnell, call,
It is for thee I flow, for thee I glide,
I had retained my floods had thou not dyed.
And little water birds shall chaunt this theme,
Thy Jordan mourner is a Jordan stream.
An Epitaph on his kind friend, Mr. John Honiman, Gent.
THou that could never weep, and know not why
Tears should be spent but in man's infancy,
Come and repent thy error for here lies
A Theme for Angels to write Elegies,
Had they the loss as we have; such a one
As nature killed for his perfection,
And when she sends those virtues back again
His stock shall serve for twenty virtuous men.
In April dyed this April to find May
In Paradise, or celebrate a day
With some celestial creature, had he been
Designed for other then a Cherubin;
Earth would have gave him choice; he was a man
So sweetly good, that he who wisely can
Describe at large, must such another be,
Or court no Muses but Divinity.
Here will I rest, for fear the Readers eyes
Upon his urne become a Sacrifice.
An Elegy on Mr. John Raven, Gent.
NO sooner did sad Rumor wound my ears
With thy decease, but Myriads of tears
Sprung in my fluent eyes, I sighed, Oh me
Is Raven dead, why could the fatal THREE
Not give some dispensation for a man
Deserved the years of Nestor; I began
Much to invoke the destinies, but they
Gave me no answer, sure they do obey
Some greater power, whose immense sovereignty
Admits no Inquisition How or Why;
(The curse of frailty) we but see to choose,
Choose to enjoy, ere we enjoy we lose:
So is thy life to us, what if thou be
Enthroned a Monarch for thy piety,
Our loss is still the same, we lose our prize,
Because we cannot see thee with these eyes,
We do not doubt thy welfare (dearest friend)
But do believe thy meritorious end
Has won eternity, and yet indeed
We cannot choose but grieve, tears will excced
Though they allow no cause, for if thou be
So truly happy as divinity
Declares the blessed transmigration, then
Twere sinful grief to wish thee here again:
Thy death is my instruction, and thy bliss
The subject of my contemplation is.
Heaven inspire thy merit into me,
And I shall dye, to deserve life with thee.
An Elegy on his beloved friend Mr. Charles Rider Student in the Art of
Limning, or Picture-drawing.
IF you can weep, draw near* but if your eyes
Deny to yield a liquid (...)
Laughter perplex ye, may you never be
Worthy to be preserved in memory
But amongst (...) such as know
No season for their ^irth, (...) will allow
Their idle jests, and their more anticke slights
On Funerals as well as Brydall nights.
Here (you that have the magazin of tears)
Exhaust your thrifty fountains, he that wears
Black with an honest sorrow I advise
To aid us in our (too sad) obsequies.
There is an Artist dead, who is it that can
Deny (...) be friend of every man
That maks wi^e use of knowdedg, (...) was rare
In limning (...) his chaste care
Could nere permit his (...) to incline
To the rude (...) of lustful (...)
But h^d his eyes beheld the (...)
P^sture and face, (...)
(Pure as he^ simple Beauty such a one
Was pattern for his Pencill, or else none,
To be particular, I should (...)
Foe to my (...)
But what my (...)
Expect in (...)
His virtues are too many for to be
Composed in a weeping Elegy:
But he is dead, that all-devouring death
That scorns to give religious Monarchs breath
An hour beyond his limits, has thought fit
To use his power on thee; may thy soul sit
In Angels habitations, while we
Deplore thy death, and bless (...) memory.
Since thou were merit (...) I crave
That I may stick this (...) on thy grave,
Where if the (...) heavens please to raise
Showers like my tears, twill grow a (...)
(...)
She did (...)
None but thy (...)
For there (...)
Eclipsed each (...), making midday, night*
Black night, worse waters, may ye ever be
Used to make beauty black, so cursed by me;
May never discontents of (...) life
In greefe-afflicted bosoms, if their eyes
Bannish you thence, for when your f^oods are spent,
There shall not be a cause for discontent:
Rest peaceably (sweet boy) though to us dead,
Jove shall for thee exchange his Ganemed.
An Elegy and Epitaph on his Mistress Fidelia.
PAtience the great Physitio^ of the mind
Has lost his Art, for no balm can he find
To give me cure, there is no Patience left,
It is a virtue which the gfd, bereft.
With my Fidelia, and since she is gone
What good is left me, but distraction;
Yet in her name I do a virtue find.
Charms all my senses, tells my raging mind
She has but left the earth for (...) to try
What throne the Gos prepare for she and I.
Which having done, I then shall hear from her
By that supreme commanding Harbinger,
That summons Princes; Qureenes, religions, Kings
To cast off earth and put on (...) (...)*
My soul thus (...)
I Will wait, and write thus on her mo^^ment.
The Epitaph.
In, this Marble, buried l^es
Beauty, may enrich the skies,
And add light to Phoebus eyes.
Sweeter then Aurora's air
When she paints the Lillyes fair,
And gilds Cowslips with her hair;
Chaster then the virgin Spring,
Ere her blossoms she does bring,
Or cause Philomell to sing.
If such goodness bye among men
Bring me to it, I know then
She is come from (...) again,
But if not, ye st^nde^s by
Cherish me, and say that I
Am the next designed to dye.
An (...) his Mistress Arbella.
Ye are too quick, ye Pioners of death
To execute your charge, I have yet breath
Struggles within my laboring breast, to come
And sigh and hasty Epic^dium
On my Arbella; Oh what stupid sleep
Ceazes your faculties, you do not weep
Your selves to restless rivolers; my eyes
Must act alone Arbella's obsequies;
Do you want common sense, how can you hear
Arbella named (dead named) and shed no tear;
Know you not how to weep, pray look on me,
Methinks each man should be a Niobe,
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
They will pollute her beauty, (...) them have
A wealthy banquet in some (...) grave^
Yet they may stay, for if (...)
Her beauteous cheeks, they (...) by famine dye,
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
FINIS*

