A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF A DISEASE CALLED THE Suffocation of the Mother.

Written upon occasion which has been of late taken thereby, to suspect
possession of an evil spirit, or some such like supernatural power.

Wherein is declared that diverse strange actions and passions of the body of
man, which in the common opinion, are imputed to the Devil, have their true
natural causes, and do accompany this disease.

By EDWARD JORDEN Doctor in Physic.

FOR THOU SHALL LABOR PEACE PLENTY

LONDON.

Printed by John Windet, dwelling at the Sign of the Cross Keys at Powles
Wharfe. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful the President and Fellows of the College of
Physicians in London.
AS I am desirous to satisfy all indifferent men concerning the occasion and
intent of this my discourse: so I thought good to direct the same especially
unto this society, whereof I am a member; to testify both how justly or
rather necessarily I have been drawn to the undertaking and publishing hereof:
as also how willing I am to submit my self to your learned censure; the
argument of my writing being such as none can better judge of then your selves.

And first I protest upon that credit which I desire to have among you, that I
have not undertaken this busines^e of mine own accord, as if I esteemed of
mine own knowledge and observation in this case above other men's. For (if it
had been thought good to have imposed it upon others) I do acknowledge that
there are many among us better able then my self to have written in this kind,
unto whom I would willingly have put over my task. Neither did I ever find my
self provoked hereunto upon any peevish humor to contradict or to disgrace any
who do judge otherwise of some points contained herein, then my self do:
many of them being such as I do love and affect well. Neither upon any fawning
humor to please or flatter any person whatsoever; which I do esteem more base
then begging. But disclayming both honey and gall, I have plainly set down the
true doctrine of Physic concerning that disease which gives so great occasion
of distraction among many good men: especially such as have not le^rning
sufficient to resolve them of this point, or not that moderation and humility
of spirit to acknowledge their insufficiency, and to hearken unto others whom
in all reason they might think able to direct them better in such a case.

For if it be true that one man cannot be perfect in every art and profession,
and therefore in cases out of our own callings, we do depend upon those which
have been trained up in other particular subjects, believing men in their own
professions: Why should we not prefer the judgments of Physicians in a
question concerning the actions and passions of man's body (the proper subject
of that profession) before our own conceits; as we do the opinions of
Divines, Lawyers, Artificers, etc. in their proper Elements. Neither have I
done this as taking upon me to reform the minds of men which are not under my
charge (for I could willingly have permitted every man to enjoy his own
opinion:) But being a Physician, and judging in my conscience that these
matters have been mistaken by the common people; I thought good to make known
the doctrine of this disease, so far forth, as may be in a vulgar tongue
conveniently disclosed, to the end that the unlearned and rash conceits of
diverse, might be thereby brought to better understanding and moderation; who
are apt to make every thing a supernatural work which they do not understand,
proportioning the bounds of nature unto their own capacities: which might prove
an occasion of abusing the name of God, and make us to use holy prayer as
vngroundedly as the Papists do their profane tricks; who are ready to draw
forth their wooden dagger, if they do but see a maid or woman suffering one of
these fits of the Mother, coniuring and exorcising them as if they were
possessed with evil spirits. And for want of work, will oftentimes suborne
others that are in health, to counterfeit strange motions and behauiours: as I
once saw in the Santo in Padua five or six at one sermon interrupting and
reuiling the Preacher, until he had put them to silence by the sign of the
Cross, and certain powerless spelles.

Wherefore it behooves us as to be zealous in the truth, so to be wise in
discerning truth from counterfaiting and natural causes from supernatural
power. I do not deny but that God does in these dayes-worke extraordinarily,
for the deliverance of his children, and for other ends best known unto
himself; and that among other, there may be both possessions by the Devil,
and obsessions and witchcraft, etc. and dispossession also through the Prayers
and supplications of his servants, which is the only means left unto us for
our relief in that case. But such examples being very rare now adays, I
would in the fear of God advise men to be very circumspect in pronouncing of a
possession: both because the impostures be many, and the effects of natural
diseases be strange to such as have not looked thoroughly into them.

But let us consider a little the signs which some do show of a supernatural
power in these examples. For if they say there need no such signs appear,
because the Diuill by witchcraft may inflict a natural disease: then I ask
them what they have to do with the Devil, or with dispossessing of him, when
he is not their present, but has been only an external cause of a disease,
by kindling or corrupting the humors of our bodies; which disease as well as
other will submit it self to physical indications: as is showed, cap. 1.
Wherefore they must needs make him to be an internal cause, and to possess
the members and faculties of the body, and hold them to his use: or else they
understand not what they say, when they do peremptorily disclaim natural
means, and avouch that they speak certain words, and perform certain
voluntary motions upon his incitation, and are hindered by him from speaking
other words which they would feign utter. And therefore to this end diverse
signs and Symptoms are alleged by them, as arguments of a supernatural and
extraordinary power inhaerent in the body.

One of their signs is Insensibilitie, when they do not feel, being pricked
with a pin, or burnt with fire, etc. Is this so strange a spectacle, when in
the Palsy, the falling sickness, Apoplexis, and diverse other diseases, it
is daily observed? And in these fits of the Mother it is so ordinary as I
never read any Author writing of this disease who does not make mention
thereof. This point you shall find proved both by authorities and examples in
the 4. Chapter.

There also you shall find conuulsions, contractions, distortions, and such
like to be ordinary Symptoms in this disease.

Another sign of a supernatural power they make to be the due and orderly
returning of the fits, when they keep their just day and hour, which we call
periods or cicuits. This accident as it is common to diverse other chronicall
diseases, as headaches, gowtes, Epilepsies, Tertians, Quartans, etc. so it is
often observed in this disease of the mother as is sufficiently proved in the
2. Chapter.

Another argumnt of theirs is the offense in eating, or drinking, as if the
Devil meant to choke them therewith. But this Symptom is also ordinary in
vterin affects, as I show in the sixth Chapter: and I have at this time a
patient troubled in like manner.

Another reason of their is, the coming of the fits upon the presence of some
certain person. The like I do show in the same Chapter, and the reasons of
it, from the stirring of the affections of the mind.

Another maine argument of theirs, is the deliverance upon fasting and prayer:
which we will imagine to be so in deed, without any counterfeiting in that
point. You shall see in the 7. Chapter, how this may be a natural remedy two
manner of ways: the one by pulling down the pride of the body, and the height
of the natural humors thereof; a very convenient means, and often prescribed
by our Authors in young and lusty bodies: the other by the confide^t
persuasion of the patient to find release by that means: which I show in that
Chapter by rules and authorities in our profession and also by examples, to be
a very effectual remedy in curing diverse diseases of this nature.

Many other such like instances they may produce, according unto every ones
several conceit: which were in vain for me to repeat perticularly: unless I
knew wherein they would principally insist. But in the discourse following I
have as near as I could described all the Symptoms of this disease; whereby
every man may readily find answers to his several objections.

Now to testify my love and affection to this society of ours, and that I
esteem more of the censure of a few learned and grave men, then of the
opinions of a multitude of other people: I thought good to choose no other
persons to patronize this slender discourse then your selves, who are best able
of any in this land, or any such like society elsewhere (that ever I could
find) to judge whether I write true doctrine or no.

Wherefore desiring you to accept it in good part, and as occasion may serve to
give testimony unto it according as your judgments and consciences shall lead
you, I take my leave this 2. Martii, 1602.

Your loving friend and Colleague. Ed. Jorden.

Of the suffocation of the Mother.
Cap. 1. That this disease does oftentimes give occasion unto simple and
unlearned people, to suspect possession, witchcraft, or some such like
supernatural cause.
THE passive condition of womankind is subject unto more diseases and of other
Hyppocrat. 6 vulgar part. 7.
sorts and natures then men are: and especially in regard of that part Galen
6. locorum affect. cap. 5. radix suffocationum vter us.
from whence this disease which we speak of does arise. For as it has more
variety of Mercatus de muliebr. lib. 2. cap. 1. 1. Ad sui ipsius alimoniam. 2.
Ad speciei propagationem 3. Ad beneficium indiuidui per euacuatione^
superfluitatum.

offices belonging unto it then other parts of the body have, and accordingly
is supplied from other parts with whatsoever it has need of for those uses:
so it must needs thereby be subject unto mo infirmities then other parts are:
both by reason of such as are bred in the part it self, and also by reason of
such as are communicated unto it from other parts, with which it has
correspondence. And as those offices in their proper kinds are more excellent
then other; so the diseases whereby they are hurt or depraved, are more
grievous. But amongst all the diseases whereunto that sex is obnoxious, there
is none comparable unto this which is called The Suffocation of the mother,
either for variety, or for strangeness of accidents. For whatsoever strange
accident may appear in any of the principal functions of man's body, either
animal, vital, or natural, the same is to be seen in this disease, by
reason of the community and consent which this part has with the brain,
Altomarus de medend. hum. corp. malis cap. 110. Barth. Montagnana Consilto. 226.
heart, and liver, the principal seats of these three functions; and the
easy passage which it has unto them by the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves. And
whatsoever humor in other parts may cause extraordinary affects, by reason of
the abundance or corruption of it, this part will afford the like in as
plentiful a manner, and in as high a degree of corruption: and with this
advantage that whereas in the other, some one or two of the, faculties only
one are hurt (as in Apoplexies, Epilepsyes, Syncopyes, subuersions of the
stomach, etc.) and not all (unless as in Syncopyes by consent, where the
vital function ceasing, all the rest must needs suffer; not as one may do
from another, but all directly from this one fountain, in such sort as you
shall often times perceive in one and the same person diverse accidents of
contrary natures to concur at once. Mercatus lib. 2. cap. 2. and 3.


And hereupon the Symptoms of this disease are said to be monstrous and
terrible to behold, and of such a variety as they can hardly be comprehended
within any method or bounds. Insomuch as they which are ignorant of the
strange affects which natural causes may produce, and of the manifold examples
which our profession of Physic does minister in this kind, Valetius scofe
fing at their ignorance calls this disease a kind of devil. in Holler. cap.
59.
have sought above the Moon for supernatural causes: ascribing these
accidents either to diabolical possession, to witchcraft, or to the immediate
finger of the Almighty.

But it is no marvel though the common people and men also in other faculties
very excellent may be deceived by the rareness and strangeness of these
matters, which are hidden out of their Horizon amongst the deepest mysteries
of our profession: when as Physicians themselves, Cosmocrit. li. 1 cap. 7. page
153 Inexperto medico sapesuspitionem numinis prabuerunt
as Cornelius Gemma testifies. If they be not very well exercised in the
practice of their profession, are oftentimes deceived, imagining such manifold
strange accidents as their he mencioneth to accompany this disease, (as
suffocation in the throat, croaking of Frogs, hissing of Snakes, crowing of
Cocks, barking of Dogs, garring of Crows, frenzies, convulsions,
hickcockes, laughing, singing, weeping, crying, etc.) to proceed from some
metaphysicall power, when in deed (as he there says) they are merely
natural.

Fen. 21, 3 cap: 26: tract: 4:
Auicen also in his Chapter of this disease, speaking of the causes of it,
says, that there were some wise Physicians in his time which said, that the
cause of this disease was unknown: Because as Iacobus de Partibus expounds
it, they did think it to be inflicted from above, yet notwithstanding he
sets down natural causes of it, and a natural cure.

Lib. de morbo sacro in principio.
Hippocrates also long before finding this error to be held by some in his
time makes mention of diverse of these Symptoms, and says, that he does not
see any thing in them more supernatural, or more to be admired, then there
is in Tertians, and Quartans, and other kinds of diseases: imputing it either
unto ignorance, and want of experience that Physicians of his time did judge
otherwise; or unto a worser humor, when as being loath to bewray their own
defects through pride and arrogancy: Inscitiae palliu^ maleficium and
incantatio. R. Sc: li. 1. cap. 3.
and not knowing what to prescribe would fly unto divine causes, and
neglecting natural means for their relief, would wholly rely upon
expiations, incantations, sacrifices, etc. cloaking their ignorance under
these shadows, and pretending both more knowledge, and more piety then other
men: by which course they gained this advantage, that if the patient chanced
to recover, they should be highly renowned for their skill; if not, their
excuse was ready that Gods hand was against them.

This he speaks of the Physicians of his time, whom he confuteth
principally by two reasons, which may serve for excellent rules for all men to
discern such cases by. The first is, that there is no supernatural Character
in these Symptoms, as he proves by an induction of diverse of them, which in
the common opinion were thought to be above nature: yet he proves to have
their natural causes in the body of man as well as others have.

The strength of this argument will better appear hereafter in the particular
Symptoms, which we are to entreat of: where it shall be made manifest that the
most of them do both depend upon such natural causes as other diseases have
in our bodies, and also are oftentimes mixed with other diseases which are
accounted natural.

It may likewise appear by this, that whereas all other diseases are known by
their notes and signs which resemble their cause (as Choler, Phlegm,
Melancholy, etc. have their proper marks, corruption and putrefaction, their
proper notes and malignity his Character) so there must be some Character or
note of a supernatural power in these cases (as Luke 8.27.28. etc. Ternel de
abdi it is rerum causis lib. 2 cap 16 Platerus de me^ it is alienat. page 102.
Beniuenius de abditis morborum causis cap. 8. Alsharauius. C. de Epilepsia.
extraordinary strength or knowledge or suffering) or else we have no cause but
to think them natural. If the devil as an external cause, may inflict a
disease by stirring up or kindling the humors of our bodies, and then depart
without supplying continual supernatural power unto it; Auicen. C. de
melancholisi conting at a De monio sufficit nobis quod convert at comptexionem
ad choleram nigram, etc. vide Iacobum de partibus inhunc locum. Valesius meth;
medendi lib. 2. cap. 2.
then the disease is but natural, and will submit it self unto Physical
cure. For external causes when they are already remoted, give no indication of
any remedy.

The second argument of this is, that these Symptoms do yield unto natural
causes, and are both procured and also eased by such ordinary means, as other
diseases are: and Fernel loco ci tato matheus de Grad. ex Azariuio. C. de E
pilepsia.
therefore they must needs be natural.

The strength of this argument is grounded upon the very foundation of our
profession which has been laid by Hippo. de natura humaaa circa medium.
Destatibus pau lo post principix um.
Hyppocrates and Gal. de vena sectione aduersus Erasistr: cap: 8, in art
medicina li cap: 8 9. in constitutione artis cap; 13. methodi med: lib.
9.10.11. etc.
Gallen long ago and ever since confirmed by the practice and observations of
all learned men; that diseases are cured by their contraries. I say contrary
Valesius meth. med: lib: 1. cap: 4:
both unto the disease, unto the cause, and unto the Symptom. And the more
exact the contrariety is; the more proper is the remedy: as when they are
equal in Mercatus meth med: page: 42: 43: Gal. Simplicium lib. 3: cap: 11:
Valesi us controuers: lib. 1. cap. 4 Luk, 11. verse. 21.22.
degree or in power. But what equality of contrariety either in degree or in
power, can there be between a supernatural suffocating power, and the
compression of the belly or throat. They are disperats in Logic, but not
contraries. For contrariety is between such as are comprehended under one
general. And where one is opposed unto one alone, and not indifferently unto
many. Neither do I think, that any man well advised, will say that by
compression of those parts, he is able to suppress the power of the devil.
The like may be said of the application of cupping glasses, of sweet
plasters, of ligatures, etc. beneath, and of evil smelles above; by all which
we do observe those kinds of fits to be mitigated: and yet there can be no
such contrary respect in the^ against a supernatural cause, as is between a
remedy and a disease. They are also procured upon sweet smelles, upon pleasant
meats and drinks, upon fear, anger, jealousy, etc. as in the particular
causes shall be farther declared: and yet no such consent can be showed in
them with any supernatural affect, as that they may any way cause or increase
it. Wherefore the rule of Hyppocrates must needesbe true; that if these
Symptoms do yield unto natural remedies, they must also be natural
themselves. And thus much in explanation of these two arguments of Hyppocrates
against the error of his time: which notwithstanding has been continued in
the minds of men until this day, and no marvel: unless the same corruption
which bred it at the first, had been removed out of the world. And therefore
diverse of our Authors do make especial mention of this case wherein they
report the common people to have been deceived by imagining witchcraft or
possession, Georg. Godelman. de magis etc. lib 1. cap 8.
where indeed there was none.

Amatus Lusitanus reports of one Diua Clara, Bruno Seidelius de morbis
incurab: page: 29 Centuria 5, curat: 78.
a maid of 18. years of age, which had every day two or three such strange
fits, as those that were about her, gave out that that she was haunted with an
evil spirit.

In those fits every part of her body was distorted, she felt nothing, nor
perceived any thing: but had all her senses benumbed, her heart beating, her
teeth close shut together: yet for an hours space or two she would have such
strong motions, that she would weary the strongest men that came at her. When
she had been three weeks in this case, her left arm began to be resolved
with a palsy, etc. He being called unto her prescribed such remedies as are
usual in this case, and within few days recovered her, to the great
admiration of the beholders.

Petrus Forrestus makes mention of another maid of 22. Obseruationu^ medicin:
lib: 10 obseru: 30.
years old, which dwelt with a Burgermaster of Delft in Holland, who falling
in love with a young man, fell also into these fits of the Mother: which held
her many hours together with such violent horrible accidents, as he never
saw the like: her whole body being pulled to and fro with convulsiue motions,
her belly sometimes lifted up, and sometimes depressed, a roaring noise heard
within her, with crying and howling, a distortion of her arms and hands: in
so much as those about her thought her to be possessed with a devil, and out of
all hope of recovery. He being called unto her in January 1565. applied
convenient remedies as there he sets down, and in a short time restored her
to her health again.

Thaddeaus Dunus miscall: cap 9.
Many more such like examples might be produced both out of authentical
writers in our profession and out of our own experiences, which yet do live
(were it not that late examples would be offensive to rehearse:) but these may
suffice to show how easily men unexperienced in those extraordinary kinds of
diseases, may mistake the causes of them: when through admiration of the
unwonted and grievous accidents they behold, they are carried unto Magical and
Metaphysicall speculations. But the learned Physician who has first been
trained up in the study of Philosophy, and afterward confirmed by the practice
and experience of all manner of natural diseases, is best able to discern
what is natural, what not natural, what preternaturall, and what
supernatural, the three first being properly subject to his profession: and
therefore they do wrong unto the faculty of Physic, and unto them selves,
and oftentimes unto others, who neglecting that light which we might yield
them, do run headlong and blind fold into many errors and absurdities. For
prevention whereof I have breefly set down what the doctrine of Physicians is
concerning this disease of the Mother, Lib. 28. obsern. 26.
which of all other is most subject unto misconstruction. For that as Forrestus
says it is a hard matter to discern in what manner the Mother may occasion
such strange and manifold accidents.

Cap. 2. What this disease is, and by what means it causes such variety of
Symptoms.
THis disease is called by diverse names amongst our Authors. Cardanus de
causis sig. et locis morborum cap. 114. Altomarus cap. 110. Guaynerie us cap.
de suffo: matricis.
Passio Hysterica, Suffocatio, Praefocatio, and Strangulatus vteri, Caducus
matricis, etc. In English the Mother, or the Suffocation of the Mother, Aeetius
tetr: 4 Sermon. 4. cap. 68 P. Aegineta lib. 3. cap. 71 Victor Trincavel. lib: 5.
sect. 5 cap. 9.
because most commonly it takes them with choking in the throat: and it is an
affect of the Mother or womb wherein the principal parts of the body by
consent do suffer diversely according to the diversity of the causes and
diseases wherewith the matrix is offended.

I call it an affect in a large signification to comprehend both morbum and
Symptoma. For sometimes it is either of them, and sometimes both. For in regard
the actions of expulsion or retention in the Mother are hurt. It may be called
a Symptoma in action laesa: in regard of the humor to be expelled which
corrupts and putrifieth to a venomous malignitie. It is likewise a Symptom in
excremento vteri mutato. And in regard of the perfrigeration of the Mother, and
so of the whole body. It is also a Symptom Albert. Bottonus cap. 39.
in qualitate tangibili mulata, not morbus ex inte^perie: Gal. locorum
affectorum 3. cap. 7. Petrus Salius page 467. Altomarus cap 110. Horatius
Angenius Epist. 6
because it is suddenly inflicted and suddenly removed. But in regard of the
rising of the Mother whereby it is sometimes drawn upwards or sidewards above his
natural seat, compressing the neighbor parts, and so consequently one
another. It may be said to be morbus in situ, in respect of the compression it
self, causing suffocatio^ and difficulty of breathing. It may be Gal. de
causis morb. cap. 7
causa morbi in forma by causing coarctation of the instruments of breathing.
And sometimes these are complicated and Altom arus ccitate. Rondeletius methodo
curand. morb. cap. 69. matheus de grad. in 9 Rhasis. cap. 28
together with a venomous vapor, arising from this corrupt humor unto diverse
parts of the body, there will be an evil position of the matrix also: either
because the ligaments, veins and arteries being obstructed: Mercatus lib 2.
cap 3.
by those vapors are shortened of their wontedlength, and so draw up the part
higher then it should be; or Matheus de grad. in 9 Rhasis cap. 28. Hor.
Augenius sibi offensum fugiens vt et iucundum insequens.
for that the matrix being grievously anoyed with the malignity of those
vapors does contract it self and rise up by a local motion toward the
midrif.

I say of the Mother or womb because although the womb many times in this
disease do suffer but secondarily, yet the other parts are not affected in
this disease but from the Mother: (Radix suffocationum vterus) which finding it
self anoyed by some unkind humor, either within it self, Galen. 6. loc.
affert. cap. 5. Auicen. Fen. 21 3. cap. 16. tract 4. initium est ex matrice et)
peruenit ad communitate^ fortem cordis et cerebri etc. Horatius Ang^nius
Epistola 6.
or in the vessels adjoining or belonging unto it, does by a natural instinct
which is ingrafted in every part of the body for his own preservation,
endeavor to expel that which is offensive: in which conflict if either the
passage be obstructed, or the humor inobedient or malignant, or the functions
of the womb any way depraved, the offense is communicated from thence unto the
rest of the body. The principal part of the body are the seats of the three
faculties, which do govern the whole body. The brain of the animal, the heart
of the vital, the liver of the natural; although some other parts are
plentifully endewed with some of these faculties, as the stomach, entrails,
veins, spleen, etc. with natural faculties, Gal. de difficultate respira^ di
lib. 1. cap. 7. Trincauel. li. 4 cap. 12. Felix platerus ca. de respira.
defectu Gal. de sympt. differentiis Cap 2.3.
the instruments of respiration with animal and natural. These parts are
affected in this disease, and do suffer in their functions as they are
diminished, depraved, or abolished, Gal. 5. loc. affect. 6 Mercatus page 173.
according to the nature and plenty of the humor, and the temperament and
situation of the Mother: and that diversely: For sometimes the instruments of
respiration alone do suffer, sometimes the heart alone, sometimes two or three
faculties together, sometimes successively one after another, sometimes one
part suffers both a resolution and a conuulsion in the same fit, Petrus
solius diuersus page 400
or when as it suffers in one part and not in another, as we see oftentimes
sense and motion to be taken away and yet hearing and memory to remain,
Market. pa. 170
the speech failing and respiration good. Merca. pa. 174
Sometimes respiration, sense, and motion do altogether fail, and yet the
pulse remain good: So that the variety of those fits is exceeding great,
wherein the principal parts of the body do diversely suffer.

Another diversity there is, in the order of these fits: for sometimes they
keep due g periods or circuits yearly or monthly, Aetius lib. 26. cap. 70 P.
Agineta. lib. 3. cap. 71. Rhasis cont. lib. 22. mesuesum. 4. part. 4. sect. 1
cap. 8. Auicen Fen. 21 3. cap. 16. tract 4. quandoque sunt period. eius tardi,
quandoque accidit omni die.
according to the falling sickness, and sometime every week, sometimes h every
day, etc. I know a gentlewoma^ in this town, who for 2. years together never
missed a fit of the Mother in the afternoon. The like is hereafter mentioned
in the Essex gentlewo. who for 16. years together had every day a fit of the
Mother at a certain hour. D. Argent and I had another patient, in whom for
10. weeks together we observed a fit of the mother every saturday. I add by
consent of the Mother to distinguish those Symptoms or diseases from such as
are caused originally by the part affected. For being procured but by consent,
they endure no longer the^ the fits of the mother do continue. The consent or
community which the matrix has with those principal parts of the body is
easily perceived, if we consider the anatomy of that part, and the diverse
ways whereby it may and does communicate with them. The fu^ctions of this part,
besides that which is common to all other for their nutriment derived from the
natural faculty, are 2. the one respecting the preservation of the whole
body, as it is an Emunctory of diverse superfluities which do abound in that
sex. Gabr. Fallopius de med. purg. Cap. 17. et 23. Via euacuationi^.
The other for the propagation of mankind, where it is to be conceived and
nourished until it be able to appear in the world. In regard of these offices
this part has need of great variety of provision, according as the uses are
manifold. The substance is neruous, for the great necessity it has of sense
and motion.

It is also Porous for the better entertaining of the vital spirits and the
necessity it has of distention and contraction. Constant. Varo lius lib. 4.
cap. 3


It is tied unto diverse parts of the body that it might the better bear the
weight of an infant: backwards by little strings unto the lower gut, Gasparus
Ba^hinus historia anatom. p. 71.
unto the loins and os sacrum: forwards unto the neck of the bladder and os
pubis by certain membranes derived from the peritoneum: on each side it is
tied unto ossa illii by a ligament growing from the muscles of the loins. It
receives also for the former uses, veins from the liver, arteries from the
heart, and nerves from the brain and back, which are all inserted into the
substance of the part, to derive unto it the benefit of those 3. faculties,
both for the proper use of the part, and for the use of propagation and to
discharge the whole body of diverse superfluities, which otherwise would be an
occasion of many infirmities in them.

Now according to this description let us consider how by consent, the
principal parts of the body may be affected from the matrix.

The parts of our body do suffer by consent Trincauel. l. 3 Sect. 2. cap. 2.
two manner of ways. The one is when they do receive some offensive thing
from another part which is Auicen. Fe^. 1.3. tract. 2. ca. 6 Montagnana
consil. 226
called Communitas non absoluta. And this is either a quality as in venomous
and infectious diseases, where the malignitie creeping from one part to another
does alter the quality of the parts as it goes, and at the last is
comminicated to the principal parts, as the head, heart, liver, longs, etc. or
a substance which either by manifest conducts, as veins, nerves, arteries,
etc. or by insensible pores (as Hyppocrates says, Fernel. pathologiae li. 6.
ca. 16
our bodies are transpirable, and transmeable) is conuaied from one part to
another: whether it be a vapor or a humor, as we do commonly observe in the
fits offeuers, where a vapor arising from the part affected, disperseth it
self through the whole body, and affects the sensiue parts with cold or
heat, the motive parts with trembling, the vital parts with fainting,
sounding, inequality of pulse, etc. the natural parts with deiection of
appetite, subversion of the stomach, etc. until nature have overcome and
discussed it. In these Fevers also many times humors are so plentifully sent up
unto the brain, Forestus lib. 10 obseru: 115: in scholiis.
as by custom or long continuance they breed some proper affect there.

The other kind of community is that which they call Communitas absoluta,
wherein the part consenting receives nothing from the other, but yet is
partaker of his grief: either for similitude of substance or function, which
causes mutual compassion: as all neruous parts have with the brain: whereby
if any Nerve or neruous part be hurt or pricked, the brain suffers a
convulsion, or for neighborhood and vicinitie, whereby one part may offend
another, by compression or incumbencie: as in the prolapse of the Mother, the
bladder or fundament is oftentimes offended in their natural excretion. And in
this disease which we have in hand by the local motion of it vpwardes, the
midriffe is straightned of his scope, whereby the lunges do fail in their
duty, or by reason of connection or continuitie which it has with other parts,
by Veins, Nerves, Arteries, Membranes, Ligaments, etc. whereby the offense is
easily imparted unto other parts. Gal: locorum affect: 1: cap. 6
Or lastly by privation of some faculty or matter, whereof the part has
need. As in the obstruction of the Spina Dorsi there follows a resolution or
palsy of the legs or arms, by reason that the animal faculty that should
give sense or motion to the part is intercepted and hindered in his passage.
Likewise in a resolution of the Muscles of the breast, as in a wound of that
part, or in swounding the voice is taken away, Rondeletius cap 69. Trin^ cauell
loco citato:
because the matter of it which is breath, is either not sufficiently made, or
is carried another way, or not competently impelled to the organs of voice.

All these manner of ways has the Matrix by consent to impart her offense
unto other parts. For there wa^teth no corruption of humor, vapor, nor evil
quality, where this part is ill affected, to infect other parts withal,
there wantes no opportunity of conueyance or passage unto any part, by reason
of the large Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, which are derived unto it, with
which it has great affinity and similitude of substance, besides the
connection it has with the heart, liver, brain, and back. It is linked also
in neighborhoode with diverse parts of great use, as the bladder, guts,
midriffe, etc. which are likely to be warmed when this part does burn.
According to the variety of causes and diseases wherewith the womb is
offended, these Symptoms do differ in nature, or in degree. Mercatus page 165.
A plentiful matter produces a vehement Symptom: a corrupt matter according
to the degree of corruption, and the quality of the humor corrupted, causes
like accidents. The diseases also of the Mother being co^plicated with the
former corrupt humors do yield variety of Symptoms: as the rising of the
Mother, which always causes shortness of breath: b Empostumes of the Mother
according to the place where they are bred, Mathaeus de gradi. and Auicenna
locis citatis.
and the quality of them, do also bring a difference in Symptoms. And thus
much for explanation of the definition.

Cap. 3. Of the kinds of this disease, and first of that wherein the vital
faculty is offended.
HOw I come to the kinds and sorts of this disease, which may be reduced unto
three principal heads, according as every part of the body belongs unto
some of the three principal functions which do govern the body of man. Not
that every Symptom in this disease does hurt some of the three functions,
Affectus corporis vel excretionum vitia.
for some are only molestations or deformities, as sudden Collickes, windy
humors, noyses, alteration of color, etc. But because every part may well be
mustred under some of these generals: and we do seldom see any hystericall
affect wherein some one or mo of the functions are not affected. These
functions as they are distinct in office, so they possess in our bodies
several seats and have several instruments belonging unto them.

1 The vital function which by preserving natural heat in a due temperature,
maintains the conjunction of soul and body together, has his principal
mansion in the heart, and from thence by his Arteries conueyeth vital spirits
unto every member. So as without this we could not live: and therefore it is
accounted the principallest function, because the rest receive their being from
this, and this failing they must needs all cease. This function is performed
by the motion of the heart, and Arteries, which in this affect of the Mother is
drawn into consent as it is either diminished, abolished, or depraved. The
deprauation of this motion is either when it is too fast and quick, or when it
beats disorderly. The pulse in this disease is oftentimes too quick, although
it be weak withal: but seeing it brings no great offense with it, the
patient does seldom complain thereof. The greater offense is when it beats
disorderly, and keeps no equal nor orderly stroke, but either trembles and
daunceth in the motion, or else is violently impelled: insomuch as it does not
only remove ones hand being applied to some part where the Arteries are
great, Trincauel. li. 4 cap. 24.
and near to the skin) as lately appeared in a noble Gentleman of this land
now dead) but as Fernelius testifies, has sometimes displaced the ribs, De
partium morbiset symp. lib. 5: cap. 12.
and sometimes broken them through the violent motion of the heart.

This Symptom is called the palpitation or beating of the heart, or Arteries
whereof Maximillian the Emperor died as Crato reports, and wherewith Charles
the fifth was oftentimes molested, as Vesalius writes. It is chiefly to be
perceived where the Arteries are great and near the skin: as under the left
ribs toward the back, and in the neck: as you may obsrue in Maids that
have the green sickness, by the shaking and quiuering of their ruffes, if
they sit close to their necks: where sometimes through the dilatation of the
Artery there arises a Aneurisma. Pernel. loeo citato.
tumor as big as ones fist. This Symp tom is every where mentioned by our
Petrus Salius page 429. Skinckius de cordis palpit. abs. 211. item 218.222.
Forestus lib. 17 obs. 8.
Authors in this disease and our daily experience confirms it.

This motion of the heart and Arteries in this affect of the Mother is
oftentimes diminished either in part or to sense totally. In part, where the
pulse in this disease is weak, slow, obscure, intermittent, etc. and the whole
body accordingly feeble and slow in every action, for want of influence of
vital faculty from the heart. It is totally diminished in that Symptom which
is called Syncope or swounding, the very image of death, where the pulse is
Gal. loc, affect. 6. c 5. pulsum vix perceptibilem habent etc Item de compox
sit. pharmac. s.l. lib. 9 in finit.
scarcely or not at all perceived; the breath or respiration clean gone: by
reason that the heart wanting his motion, has no need of the help of the
lungs to refresh it withal, all the faculties of the body failing, it
selflying like a dead corpse three or four hours together, and Antho.
Guaynerius. cap. de suffoc. matrici^s. Albert, Botionus loco infra citato. Gal.
loco citato. Altomarus loco citato.
sometimes two or three whole days without sense, motion, breath, heat, or
any sign of life at all (like as we see Snakes and other creatures to lie all
the winter, as if they were dead, under the earth) insomuch as diverse Ambros.
paraeus li. 24. c. 10.
errors have been committed in laying forth such for dead, which have
afterward been found to have life in them, and have risen up in their
burials, whereupon there have been laws enacted, as De morbis muliebr: lib.
4. cap. 22. Iacobus Syluius de mensibus mulierum.
Mercurialis reports, that no woman which was subject to this disease should
be buried until she had been three days dead. Or as De morbis medicandis.
lib. 10. cap. 10.
Alexander Benedictus of Bolonia says 72. hours, which comes to the same
reckoning. Practicae lib. 2. cap. 17.
Petrus Bayrus sets down diverse reasons why they should not be buried
before three days be ended, besides the experience of some (as he says)
that have been found alive in their graves after they had been buried. I will
refer the reader for the reasons to the author himself, and to Lib. 10. obser.
79. in scholiis.
Forrestus in his observations. Histor. not. lib. 7. cap. 52.
Pliny makes mention out of Heraclides, of a woman who for seven days
together lay for dead in a fit of the mother, and was restored again to life:
which (says De medica hystoria mirabili. lib. 4. ca. 11
Marcellus Donatus) is not to be thought a fabulous tale, seeing it is not
repugnant to the rules of Philosophy and Physic. And 6. Locorum affect. cap.
5.
Galen making mention of the very same history under the name of Apnaea,
discourses of the reasons of it.

Ioh. Schinckius refert ex pictorio. obseruat. med. lib 4. cap. 288.
Rabbi Moses an ancient Author in Physic, reports also of a woman, that in
the fit of the mother, did lie six days without sense and motion, her
Arteries being waxt hard, and she ready to be buried, and yet recovered.

Demorbis muliebribus cap. 43.
Bottouus a late professor of Physic in Padua, reports of a woman that
being given over for dead in a fit of the Mother, was by such conclusions as
he tried, discovered to be yet alive, and recovered her former health again by
such remedies as he prescribed.

Obseru. li. 10. in scholiis ad obseruat. 79. Iacobus Ruffius testatur se
plures huiusmod. vidiss. mulieb^. l^b. 6, cap. 8.
Forestus of Alkmar in north Holland, but lately dead, sets down the like
example of another, that lay in that manner 24. hours, and was by him restored
to health again.

The like also he cites out of Leouellus, in that place, of one that lay with
her eyes shut, and dumb a whole day, and by convenient remedies was delivered
from her fit, and could rehearse all that was done about her in the time of her
fit. But the most pitiful example of all other in this kind, De hominis
generat. cap. 46.
is that which Ambrose Paraee reports of Vesalius a worthy Physician, and
for anatomicall dissections much renowned, who being called to the opening of a
Gentlewoman in Spain, which was thought to be dead through the violence of one
of these fits, began to open her, and at the second cut of the knife she cried
out, and stirred her limbs, showing manifest signs of life to remain. The
beholders were exceedingly amazed at the sight, and blamed the Physician much
for it: who though he took her for dead, yet took he great apprehension of
sorrow for that accident, that he estranged himself. After through grief and
remorse of conscience for his error, pretended (as others say) a pilgrimage for
the absenting of himself, and therein died. Many more examples to this end
could I produce out of Authentical writers, and late experiences, if it were
free for me to mention them: but these may suffice to show how wonderfully the
vital faculty is overthrown in this disease, and withal respiration, sense,
motion, and all the functions of the body by reason of this.

Cap. 4. Of that kind of this disease wherein the animal faculty is offended.
THe second kind of this disease is, where the animal faculty does
principally suffer; and it is that faculty whereby we do understand, judge, and
remember things that are profitable or hurtful unto us, whereby also we have
sense and do feel the qualities of things, and move to and fro, and perform
diverse other voluntary actions for the commodity of the body. For nature had
made us but base creatures, if she had given us only the vital faculty
barely to live, and the natural to grow, and to supply the expense that is
daily made of natural moisture: If she had not withal given us knowledge and
understanding of such things as we are subject unto, and ability to move our
bodies at our pleasure, to apprehend that which is profitable and to shun that
which is offensive, etc. And therefore as a faculty making most for the
dignity and use of man, it is placed principally in the brain; from whence it
disperseth his beams of influence into every part of the body, according to
the several uses and necessity of each part.

This animal faculty has this peculiar difference from the vital and
natural faculties, that the functions of it are subject unto our will, and may
be intended remitted, or perverted at our pleasure, otherwise the^ in the other
faculties: For no man can make his pulse to beat as he list, or alter the
natural functions at his will and pleasure. But these animal functions may be
abused both by our own will, and by the violence of some disease, and by both,
as Galen testifies, lib. 2. de Symptomatum causis cap. 12. That it may be
abused by our own will, he proves also in another place, De motu musculorum
lib. 2. cap. 7.8.
where he brings an instance of a servant (serui barbari) who killed himself
to anger his master by holding of his breath. S. Augustine says that he knew
a man that could make himself to sweat when he list, by his imagnation only.
De ciuitate Dei lib. 4: Cosmocrit. lib. ^. page 156.
Cornelius Gemma says, that he knew one that could weep when he list: others
that could make their bodies stiff like an image, imitate the voices of all
kind of creatures, raise a hickocke, and break wind as often and in what
manner they would. And S. Augustine tells of one that would make a kind of
music that way. Medici parisien ses in historia Martha. Brossier.
Adrian Turnebus saw a rogue that gained much money by showing this feate, we
do also daily see that some can countersait madness, 1. Sam. 21.13. Gal. lib
quomo do deprehendu^tur qui aegrotare sefingunt. cap. 1.
some drunkenness, some the falling sickness, some palsies and trembling,
some can play the fools and supply the rooms of innocents, some can make
noyses and speak in their bellies or throats, as those which Hyppocrates
calls Eugastrimuthoi ventri loqui, E^idemiorum. 5. R. Scot. lib. 7: cap. 1.
such as was the holy maid of Kent, and Mildred of westwall, etc. And it is
strange to see how young bodies will be bowed and writhed diversely, as we see
in tumblers iuglers, and such like companions. Hereupon diverse have
counterfaited diseases as I once saw a poor fellow being arested for a small
debt cou^terfaited a fit of the falling sickness, with strange and violent
motions: whereby the creditor in compassion was moved to release him. Being
released he was well again, and unto his friends seemed to confess the
cousonage: others have counterfaited possessions, either upon mere deceit or
enticed thereto through the conceit of some disease wherewith they have been
troubled. But for this point I refer you to the histories of Agnes Brigs,
Rachel Pinder, Lib. 16. cap. 4.
Martha Brossier, etc. Ren. Scot tells of one that being blind, deaf, and
dumb, could read any canonical Scripture, but no Apocripha: But was
discovered by inserting a leaf of Apocrapha: among the canonical. Another
faining her self to be possessed with a devil, would answer to any question
made in English, but understood no latin. Diverse such like examples might be
procured to show how the animal functions may be abused by our own will. But
against our wills this faculty does suffer by consent in the suffocation of
the Mother diversely according to the variety of offices or functions which it
performs.

The functions of it are three, the first is called Internal and principal
sense which does govern and direct all the rest by Imagination, Reason and
Memory: which if it be hurt either by imminution or deprauation or total
abolishment, then the inferior functions do necessarily participate with the
offense They are hurt by Imminution when a man does not Conceive, Judge, or
remember so well as he ought to do, as in dullness or blockishnesse, Hebetudo
mentis.
as we call it in vndiscretion, foolishnes or want of judgment, Imprudentia
obliuio.
in oblivion or forgetfulness, etc. They are abolished either in those drowsy
affects which we call Caros, Coma, veternus, Sopor.
Lethargus etc. or in those astonishing Symptoms wherein all the animal
faculties are at once taken away, sometimes with a general resolution or
palsy, as in Apoplexies: Apoplexia. Epilepsia.
sometimes with a general conuulsion, as in the falling sickness: sometimes
with a Stiffness or congelation of the body, Catalepsis.
wherein they lie like an image in the same form they were taken.

These internal senses are overthrown either in part or in whole in this
suffocatio^ of the mother: Hypp. de mor bis muliebr. lib 1 et 2. Torpor occupat
caput men's percellitur et improba fit non facile intel ligit. De virginum
morbis cor fatuum fit, ex fatuitate torpor.
and thereupon it is likened unto these former diseases: and this kind is
accounted by Auicen to be the most grievous of all other, where the imagination
and reason is hurt: and the other which holds them with conuulsions,
contractions, etc. he accounts to be the milder and the more usual. And
therefore he says that commonly they can remember what was done about them in
their fit: Gal. loc. affect. 6.5. De compo sit. pharm. s. L. lib. 9. in fine
Rhasis contine^e 22. Eginet a. li. 3. ca. 71. Aetius tetr. 4 Sermon 4. cap. 68.
paschaliuslib. 1. cap. 58. Valescus de Taran. Iacobus Syluius Altomam. Augeni.
Aui. Fen. 21.3. cap. 16. tract. 4. Idem. Petr. salius de catelepsi. page 384.
unless it be of this most grievous kind.

The Internal sense is depraved when a man does imagine, judge, or remember
things that are not as if they were, or things that are, otherwise then they
are indeed. Whether they do it in cogitation alone, or do express it by word
or deed. As we see in those fools which we call naturals, Insania. Delirium.
Melancholia. Furor.
in mad men, in melancholic men, in those that are furious, in such as do
dote, in such as are distracted through love, fear, grief, joy, anger,
hatred, etc. In some of which they will laugh, cry, prattle, threaten, chide,
or sing, etc. according to the disposition of the party or the cause of the
affect.

These functions are also depraved in too much wakefulnesse through the
commotion of the animal spirits, Vigilia. Insomnium.
also in dreams, where sometimes besides the deprauation of the fantasy they
will walk, talk, laugh, cry, etc. And lastly in that disease whith is called
Saltus viti. F. Platerus de mentis alienatione. page 103
Saltus Sati viti, or Saltuosa dispositio membrorum wherein they will dance,
and leap, and cannot endure to be quiet.

This deprauation of the internal senses, is so ordinary in the fits of the
Mother, as Horatius Augenius Epistola. 6. seems to make it of the essence of
this disease, that the imagination is ever depraved in it. But Hippocrat. de
morbit virg. prae acuta infla matione insanit prae putredi ne clamat, etc De
morbis muliebr. lib. 1. men re alienatur in hoc morbo et de liria fiunt furi
osa dentibus fiendet vigilabit anxia erit etc. Auicen loco citato facit
accidere alienationem per communitatem cerebri, etc. Aetius garrulae inquietae
and iracundae fiunt. lib. 16.7 4. Hier. mercurialis mormorborum muliebr. lib.
4. c. 10. Iacobus Syluius demensibus. Mathaeus de grad. consilio. 80.
histortaem narrat furtosi.
Hyppocrates, Galen, Auicen, and most of the best Authors in our profession, do
affirm that very often there happens an alienation of the mind in this
disease, whereby sometimes they will wax furious and raging deprived of their
right judgment and of rest.

The second function of the animal faculty is the external sensitive
function; which gives to the eye the faculty of seeing, to the ear of
hearing, to the tongue of tasting, Priuatio visus Auditus. Gustus. Olfactus.
Tactus.
to the nose of smelling and to diverse parts of the body the power of feeling.

This function in all these kinds is diminished, depraved, or clean
abolished, but especially in this disease of the mother, we do obscrue the
offense which is done to the feeling faculty, when the parts are benumbed or
do not feel at all, or when they feel Iuxta recep tam a medicis sententiam
dolorem hic insero licetvideatur potius ad simplices corporis affectus
referendus.
pain and offense, or when they feel things falsely and other wisen then they
are.

Concerning hearing, although Hyp:morb muliebr. lib. o. caligo ante oculos
obuersatur et vertigo, oculi non acutevide^t nihil olfaciunt vocata non audit
Rhasis 22. cont. in hac passione non audit quando datur in auribus eius vox
terribilis Aegineta loco citato. Instrumentorum sen sensus apprehensio etc.
Auicen narrat plurimum eius quod fuit in ea nisi sit maxima et immoderata
Aetius sensus et motus intercipiuntur. Gal. immobiles sine sensu race^t
Horatius Angenius Epist. 6, Gal. de motu musc. lib. 2. cap. 6. et 8.
Hyppoc. Rhasis and diverse others do observe that sometimes it is hindered: yet
it seems to be in the former kind where the internal faculty do suffer.
For Mercatus puts it as a difference from the falling sickness, that in this
suffocation of the matrix they do commonly hear. The privation of the other
senses of seeing, tasting, smelling and feeling, are very ordinary in this
disease, as you may observe in the Histories following, and in these quotations.

The third function is that which gives motion to the whole body. This motion
serves either for a voluntary use only, or for a natural use also. The
motions for the voluntary use are the free motions of the external members of
our bodies: as to bow the whole body and the head by means of the back, to
apprehend with the hand, to stand and go with the feet and legs, to chewe
with the jaws, to open and shut the lips and eyelids, to move the eyes, etc.
This function is diminished in that affect which we call lassitudo, werines or
vnweldines, wherein we are not able to move so strongly and nimbly as we should.

It is abolished, Paralysis.
either by a resolution or palsy where the sound part draws the sickly part,
that is the part resolved, and depending draws the muscles and nerves etc. or
by a Spasmus or contractio^ of them Contract io. platerus. Gal. de causis
morboru^ lib. 2. cap. 7. et loc. affect. li. 34.
where the sick part draws the sound part, that is, the muscle which is
affected, draws the member which is well.

A resolution or palsy is either general of both sides of the body Petrus
Salius page 401. tanquam leuis Apoplexia Fern. de part. morbis and sympt. li.
5. cap. 3.
exempting the head, or of one side called Haemiplegia, or yet more particular
of the hand, leg, finger, etc. called Gal. 1. prorhet com. 2.50. et com.
3.26. de victus rat. tom. 4.27. de morb. vulg. com. 2.56 Gybbut. Trismos.
Tortura oris. Strabismus. Spasmus Cynicus.
parapligia.

A Contraction or Spasmus is also of like sorts, sometimes the body is held
upright and cannot be bowed any way in that affect which is called Tetanos,
sometimes it is bowed forwards Emprostotonos sometimes backward Opistotonos,
sometimes the back is crookt in some part of it, as in Gibbo, sometimes the
jaws, lips, face, eyelids, etc. are contracted, whereby they make many strange
faces and mouths sometimes as though they laughed or wept, sometimes holding
their mouths open or awry, their eyes staring, etc. Sometimes the hands,
arms, legs, fingers, toes, etc. are contracted, sometimes particular muscles
in the sides, back, arms, legs, etc. one or more at once, as in crampes.

It is depraved where the motions are immoderate, perverse, inordinate, or
indece^t, as when they are unquiet, and cannot abstain from motions and
gestures, casting their arms and legs to and fro, up and down, dancing,
capring, vawting, fencing, and in diverse manners forming their motions.
Marcellus Doc natus. li. 2. ca. 4
Also in Convulsions of the members, where they are shaken and pulled by
inordinate motions, as we see in the falling sickness. Also in trembling,
palpitation, Felix Platerus de motu deprauato. page 401.
rigor where the teeth do chatter, horror where the hair stands upright,
stretching, yawning, gasping twinkling of the eyes, etc. These impediments and
deprauations of motion are daily observed in vterne affects: as may appear by
these testimonies. Hyppocrat. de morbi muliebr. lib. 1. Albas oculorum parts
subuertit, dentibus frendet, and similis fit his qui herculeo morbo detinentur.
Item fit co^uulsio fortis articulorum corporis, claudam facit aut impotentem
prae rigore, alias atque alias seipsam iactabit. Horror. Erectae ceruicis
spiratio ipsam tenet, and quicquidederit aut biberit ipsam molestat. Torpor
occupat manus and inguina, and crura and poplites. Magnis pedum digitis
conuelluntur gybbosa fit, de not. muliebr. Gal. lib. de semine cap. 3.
Tensiones lumborum and manuum, and pedum viduam apprehendebant loc. affect.
6.5. Aliis crura and bracchia contrahuntur. Auicenna. minor suffocationum est
quae facit accidere spasmum and tetanum, sine nocumento in ratione and sensu.
Quandoque claudit oculos and non aperit eos. Stridor dentium, percussio
oculorum, and motus inuoluntarius lacertorum. Rhasis. Stridor dentium cum
spasmo and torquedine extremitatum, dolores fortes adeo vt mulierem torquere
faciant vndique and caput genibus implicari. etc. Mesue loco superius citato.
Aetius. Oculi post multam grauitatem attolluntur, vterus paulatim laxatur and
intellectum and sensum recipit. etc.

The animal motions which do serve for natural use, have their power from
the animal faculty, but their urging and provoking and cause from the
natural, and are either Respiration, Ingestion, or Excretion. Respiration has
annexed unto it voice, and speech, Suffocatio. Anthon. Guaynerius. cap. de
suffocatione.
this is diminished or abolished in Suffocation or choking, from whence this
disease which we entreat of takes his name, as from the most common Symptom
which appears in it. Priuatio vocis.
In difficulty of breathing. In privation of voice and speech.

It is depraved when it is done immoderately or inordinately, whether it be
voluntary, or inuoluntarie, as in shortness of breath, sighing, yawning, the
hickock, sneesing, Cita respiratio, suspirtum. Oscitatio. Singultus.
Sternuta^io, Ructus, tussis. Deglutitio. Excret^o.
coughing, belching, vomiting, making of noyses, blowing, and reaching, etc.

Ingestion, or swallowing, is also hurt in this affect, when either they cannot
swallow meat, or drink at all, or with great difficulty.

Excretion is also hurt in this case, by vomit, seege or urine, etc. when
either they cannot perform it being provoked, or do it out of season, or more
then is convenient. etc.

These Symptoms also appear in the Suffocation of the Mother. Hyppocrat. de
not. muliebri. Muta derepente fit. de morbis muliebr. linguaipsius refrenatur
and hanc non claram habet. Aliquibus etiam vocis priuatio. Spiritus sublimis
it, et suffocatio et anhelatio densa ipsam corripit. De not. muliebr. Tussis
detinet and contabiscit and videtur peripnumonia esse, etc. Gal. 9. de compis.
Ph. s^l. aliquibus voxintercipitur. loc. affect. 6.5. aliae interceptas habent
spirationes aliae suffocationes, etc. Hyppoc. de not. muliebr. quicquid ederit
autbiberit ipsam molestat. Auicen. Abscinditur loquela etc. Rhasis. Strictura
anhelitus, squinantia, peripneumonia, aposlema in gutture ex co^municatione
Diaphragmatis cummatrice. Gal. Loco citato humiditas quaedam e locis
muliebribus excurrit. etc. Rondalat. cap. 69. Hollerius. cap. 59. Syluius
suspirium. Montagnana consilio. 225.

These motions as they belong to the animal faculty are principally hurt by
Resolution, contraction, or conuulsion, according as the simple motions are,
and therefore we shall not need to stand any longer upon them in this place:
as they belong unto the natural faculty, and do receive offense in that
respect shall be declared hereafter in the third general faculty. In the mean
time let us produce some examples of this 2. kind of Suffocation, where the
animal faculty does principally suffer: for examples many times do persuade
more then doctrine. De morbis internis lib. 1. ca. 59. in scholiis.
Hollerius reports that the governor of Roan in France had two daughters
which were held with these fits, in such sort as they would laugh an hour or
two together, and confessed that they could not refrain from laughing,
although diverse means to that end were used, both by entreaty, and by
threats. He tells also of a gentlewoman de Rochpot, who being in these fits
would rave, laugh, and weep, Lib. 28. obseris 26.
her eyes being shut. Forestus makes mention of one Alcida Theodorici at
Alkmare a young lusty maid who was held 24. hours in a most grievous fit of the
mother, wherein she lay as if she had been half dead, hearing what was said
about her, but could not speak, nor enjoy her other senses. Sometimes she
would be pulled as if she had the falling sickness, sometimes would lie
still as if she were in an Apoplexy, sometimes she would only stir her
legs, Aliam egregia^ motuum co^vulsiuoru^ ab vtero bystor. vide apud eundem.
li. 10. obser. 116 Lib. 26. cap. 16.
the rest of her body being dull: and although she could not speak, yet she
would cry and laugh by turns, and then be sullen and dumpish, as if she were
dead again.

Alexander Benedictus veronensis testifies, that he saw a woman in a fit of
the Mother, that was besides her self, and would sometimes laugh and sometimes
cry. Those that attended her, applied Partrige feathers upon coals unto her
nostrilles, and by chance through want of care there fell a great coal out of
the Chafingdish into her bosom, where it burnt her, and made a great blister,
but she perceived it not until the next day, and then complained of her
breasts. My self had a patient in this City yet living and in good health
(whom I will name unto any whom it may concern) that endured a violent fit
of the Mother a whole day together: wherein she had many strong conuulsions,
and sometimes did lie as if she had been dead. Insomuch as the midwiues would
have given her over, and imputed ignorance unto me that I would attempt any
thing for her recovery. But her husband being persuaded by me to make trial
of some means which I had prescribed for her, she was within three or four
hours delivered of a child; yet knew not of it, until she was thoroughly
recovered of her fit, which was fourteen or fifteen hours after, and then
she asked her husband what was become of her great belly. I could rehearse two
other such like examples within this city, which happened not many months
since.

But we had of late a most rare example of this disease in an Essex Gentlewoman
of good note, who being once frighted by squibs, fell into these fits of the
Mother, which held her every day, and whenever else she did eat any
comfortable meat, for the space of fifteen or sexteene years together, with
such violent conuulsions, as five or six strong men could scarce hold her
down. Sometimes her limbs would be contracted, sometimes particular Muscles,
which would cause swellings in diverse parts of her body, sometimes she would
be without all manner of sense. And being made believe by a stranger Physician
that she was bewitched, her fits increased upon her, and grew to be stronger
then before.

Bartholomeus Montagnana recites up 31. several Symptoms of this disease
which he observed in a Gentlewoman which was his patient. Conuulsions,
swoundings, choking in the throat, sadness and lamentation, coldness over her
whole body, dumbness, and yet could hear, drowsinesse, beating of the heart,
trembling of the hands, contraction of the fingers, etc.

It were in vain to heap up many examples to this purpose, seeing our daily
experience does yield us sufficient store of proof of the variety of these
Symptoms in the animal faculty.

Cap. 5. Of that kind wherein the natural faculty is offended.
THe third kind of this disease is, where the natural faculty does
principally suffer. This faculty is of great necessity for the maintenance
of mankind and according to the diverse uses thereof is distinguished. For
seeing that nature bringes us not forth into the world perfect men, in that
ripeness and integrity, of all human actions which afterward we attain
unto, when we come to full growth, it was meet to be provided of such a
faculty in our bodies as might increase ourstature, and strengthen the
instruments of the whole body, for the better perfection of the actions
thereof. And this is called facultas auctrix. Seeing also that we are made of
a fluxible moulde which wastes and spends it self many ways, whereby it
stands in need of continual refection and reply: Therefore it was meet to
be furnished with such a faculty as might repair the decay and expense of our
substance, by yielding continually apt matter for the nourishment of the body.
And that is called facultas altrix. And thirdly seeing, notwithstanding our
bodies are continually nourished with the best food, yet they must once die as
well as other inferior creatures do: therefore God has endued us as well as
other creatures with the faculty of generation: whereby we may be able to
make our kind to continue as long as the world shall endure.

These three natural faculties have diverse others attending upon them, as the
faculties of Attraction, Retention, Concoction, Expulsion, Alteration,
Formation, etc. Which I will for brevity sake ouerpasse with their bare
mention, because the Symptoms of these faculties are not so evident to the
beholders eye, Gal. de tremor. palp. tit. etc. cap. 2. sensibus non exposita.
nor so strange as those of the vital and animal faculties are, yet that
these are also hurt in the suffocation of the Mother, appears both by daily
observation, and by the authorities of all both ancient and late physicians
who have written of this disease.

Some of these are Symptomata in qualitate mutata, or in excremento vitiato:
but be cause they are in the natural parts, and arising from errors of that
faculty, I have inserted them here.
And to this place may we refer those accidents often mentioned in this
disease. Hypp. de morbis mulieb. lib. 1 Rhasis con. li. 22. Fernel. de partium
morb. lib. 6. cap. 16. Mercatus lib. 2. cap. 2. and 3. Bottonus, and
Mercurialis lociscitatis. Syluius de mensibus.
Gnawing in the stomach, and pains in diverse parts of the body, breaking
of wind, vomiting, purging by siege, vrin, or other excretion, loathing of
meat, thirst, extraordinary hunger, swelling in the throat, swelling in the
body, in the feet, obstructions in the veins, co^sumptions, tumors, fevers,
privation of voice, palenesse of color, rumbling and noise in the belly or
Schenkiusobser. deptisiobser. 137. Cornel. Gema. Cosmocr. Hyppocrat. Epidem. 5.
expectore obstrepebat. etc.
throat, like unto frogs, snakes, or other creatures, or as if they woule
speak as Hyppocrates reports of Polymarchus wife.

And these are three principal kinds of this disease whereunto most of the
Symptoms which ever do appear therein may be referred.

Cap. 6. Of the causes of this disease.
THe causes of this disease and of the Symptoms belonging thereunto, have ever
bin found hard to be described particularly: and especially in a vulgar tongue,
I hold it not meet to discourse to freely of such matters, and therefore I do
crave pardon if I do but slenderly ouerpasse some points which might be
otherwise more largely stood upon

The causes of this disease are either internal, or external. The internal
causes may be any thing contained within the body, as spirit, blood, humors
excrements, etc. whereby this part is apt to be offended, but principally they
are referred unto these two, Gal. loc. affec. 6. cap. 5. Hollerius, demorbis
internis. lib. 1. cap. 59. Paschalius li. 1 cap. 57. Altomarus. ea. 1 10. Item
de vtero gerentibus. cap. 2. Iacobus Sylutus de mensibus. Hor. Augenius epict.
6. Cardanus de causis, etc. morborum. cap. 114.
blood, and nature.

Blood is that humor wherewith we are nourished: without which the infant in the
mothers womb could neither grow and increase in bigness, nor yet live: and
therefore it was necessary that those that were fit for generation, should be
supplied with sufficient store of this humor, for the use of this part wherein
the infa^t is to be nourished, for which cause there are large veins and
arteries derived unto it for the conueyance of blood thereunto, and there is
greater provision thereof made in women's bodies then in men's: least this part
should be forced to withdraw nourishment from other parts of the body, and so
leave them weak and consuming.

But this provision of nature is oftentimes defective: as when it is cut off by
violent causes, Defectus.
and the part left destitute of this familiar humor, which should serve both
for the comfort of the infant, and of the part it self: which finding offense
thereby does communicate it unto the other parts with which it has affinity
according to Hyppocrates doctrine. 1. Morborum muliebrium, and Aristotle, de
generat. animal. Hollerius et Rondelet. loci citatis. Comment. 2. in lib. 1.
Hypp. de morb. muliebr.
cap. 11. vteri cuacuati sursum ascendunt and praefocationes faciunt. Cordaeus
gives us an example of one who by chance cutting a vain in her leg, whereupon
she did bleed plentifully, fell into a fit of the Mother, and by moist and
nourishing diet was recovered. The reason whereof Hyppocrates refers to the
ouerdrying of those parts through large euacuatiou of blood, whereby the matrix
does labor by such motion as it has to supply it self with moisture from
other parts of the body: or as Mercurialis does enterpret it, Lib. 4. cap. 22.
does impart by community (as is aforesaid) the offensive quality unto the
brain, and by that means procures convulsions, etc. Gallen refers it unto
the ouercooling of those parts which necessarily must follow a large euacuation
of blood, 2. loc. affect.
which coldenesse being very offensive unto the nerves and neruous parts by
consent and compassion offends the brain also, and by that means may
procure the former Symptoms.

And as the want and scarsitie of blood may procure this grief, Recessui.
so the abundance and excess thereof does more commonly cause it, where the
patients do want those monthly euacuatio^s which should discharge their bodies
of this superfluity: as we see in strong and lusty maidens, who having ease
and good fare enough, have their veins filled with plenty of blood, Gal. loc.
affect. 6 Pered a in paschalium lib. I. cap. 58. Altomarus. Syluius.
which wanting sufficient vent diste^deth them in bulck and thicknes, and so
contracteth them in their length, whereby the matrix is drawn upwards or
sidewards, according as the repletion is, whereupon follows a compression of
the neighbor parts, as of the midrif which causes shortness of breath, by
straightning the instruments of respiration of their due scope.

But if this blood wanting his proper use do degenerate into the nature of an
excrement, then it offends in quality as well as in excess, and being
detayned in the body, causes diverse kinds of Symptoms, according to the
quality and degree of the distemperature thereof.

This distemperature is either in manifest qualiries, of heat, Alteratio.
cold, moisture, drines, according unto which it is said to be, Hypp. de
morbis vir ginum. Altomarut Corruption.
Melancholicke, Flegmaticke, Choloricke, etc. producing Symptoms of the like
nature, or in corruption and putrefactio^ of this blood which breeds diverse
strange kinds of diste^peratures, Mercatus loco citato.
according to the diversity of the humor putrefied, the degree of putrefaction
or the condition of the cause or author thereof.

The other substance which most commonly is found culpable of this disease, is
nature or sperma: Rondeletius c. 69. Platerus. Pereda in paschalia. Valesius de
Tarrant a. lib 6. Velasiustestatur se deprehen desse circa vteru^ bystericaru^
croceum humorem faetidissimu^ etc. lib. 5.6.15. Mathaus de grad. in. 9. Rha
sis. ca. 28. Item consilio 84. Mercatus. Gal. Auicen. Mercurialis. Bottonus
locis citatis. Hercules Saxo nia de plica. c^ 14. et. 34.
which besides the suspicion of superfluity in some persons, may also receive
diverse sorts of alteration, and likewise of corruption, able to work most
strange and grievous accidents in our bodies. For as it is a substance of
greatest perfection and purity so long as it retayneth his native integrity:
So being depraved or corrupted, it passes all the humors of our body, in
venom and malignitie. For it must needs be a vehement and an impure cause that
shall corrupt so pure a substance, which would easily resist any weak assault:
and a substance so pure and full of spirits as this is, must needs prove most
malicious unto the body when it is corrupted. And therefore it is compared to
the venom of a serpent, a Scorpion, a Torpido, a mad dog, etc. which in a
small quantirie is able to destroy or deprave all the faculties of our bodies
at once.

Galen comparing the corruption of these two together, affirms that although
from the putrefaction of blood, diverse most terrible accidents do arise, yet
they are not so deadly as those which proceed from the corruption of nature;
Syluius, etc.
and proves it by this observation that diverse women enjoying the benefit of
marriage, yet through the suppression of their ordinary euacuation falling into
this disease, had their respiration and vital faculties untouched, although
otherwise they were most grievously affected.(...)

others also having those ordinary matters in good sort, yet being widows
and taken with this grief have felt decay in those faculties as well as in the
rest.

How these two substances by consent may affect the whole body according to
their several natures, has been showed before: But one scruple remains
here to be discussed, namely how this venomous matter may lurk so long in our
bodies in silence not showing it self but at certain times only.

Galen in the former place declares this by the example of a mad dog, Loc.
affect. 6.5. Petrus saliusde affect. particuharibus pa. 326
whose venom being received of us, although but by the foame of his mouth, will
remain sometimes six months within our bodies undiscovered, and then having
gotten more strength and ripenes unto it self, and opportunity of conuaying
his evil quallity unto the parts, Altomarus.
breaks forth to open view by diminishing or perverting the faculties of
those parts. I had once a patient in Kent who feeding upon a mad hog which
he had killed for covetousness sake, found himself distempered therewith at
the first, but within five or six months after grewsuddenly to be stark
mad, and before his death, being by Physic restored to some reasonable
understanding, he confessed the eating of that hog to have been the true
cause of his disease. Diverse reasons may be yielded of this as well as of the
fits of intermittent agues of Epilepsies, of sweating, etc. which oftentimes
have their due recourse by the year, month, week, day or hour, according to
the nature of the humor: which being crude expects his concoction in our
bodies and gives no sign of his presence until such a proportion of it be
digested and resolved into vapors, Ga. loc. affect. 6 Felix Platerus de causis
febrium. page 63. 65 66. etc. Mercatus. Fernel. patholog. li. 6, cap. 16
as for the offense thereof the part affected is not able to brook and for the
weakness of the expulsive faculty not able to avoid out of the body: but
filling the veins, arteries, and the habit of the body, is communicated to the
principal parts; diminishing or deprauing their functions so long, until that
portion of vapors be discussed through natural heat: and ceasing again so
long until by fermentation and concoction, another portion of the corrupt
humor shall be digested.

The uniformity of this humor and of the heat of concoction causes the
uniformity of fits. And this is the cause of the due periods or circuites
which oftentimes are observed in this disease, whereof we have spoken before:
2 according also to the condition of the part affected, which serving as an
euacuatorie to the whole body, is accustomed to such kind of humors and
therefore can endure them better then other parts can. And this is another
cause why this humor gives no sign of his presence until it may communicate
with the principal parts: Quia multum. Quia prauum. Quia insu^tu^.
which are soon offended either with the plenty of those vapors, or with the
malignity, or with the unwonted and unaccustomed approach of them.

The external causes of this disease are either such things as are ordinary
and necessary for our life and which we cannot shun, as our meat and drink,
motion and rest, sleep and watching, euacuation and perturbations of the
mind: or such things as happen unto us accidentally, and may be shunned by
us, as bathes, ointments, plasters, clothes, smelles or vapors, medicines,
venus, noyses, riding, swimming, sailing, wounds, contusions, falls, biting of
venomous beasts, etc. which may be also referred to the former kinds. These
and such like as they are the external causes of all diseases, our bodies
being subject to be hurt and offended by every one of them: so they are
oftentimes accessory to this particular disease.

The air which compasses our bodies and which we breath into our bodies is
the occasion of many infirmities in us, Fernel. li. 1. de morboru^ causis
if either it be distempered in quallitie or corrupted in substance, or
suddenly altered. And this may be the cause why women are more subject unto
this disease at one time of the year then at another, according to the
constitution of the air: as in the winter time, by reason of cold and moist
weather the humors of our bodies are increased and made more crude and gross,
and our pores stopped, whereby expiration is hindered, etc.

But especially we do observe that breathing in of sweet savors does
commonly procure these sittes, Mathaus de grade. Mercas. Rondel. cap. 69.
either for that the matrix by a natural property is delighted with sweet
sauoures, as the liver and spleen with sweet meats, Hier. Mercuria
or because the animal spirits of the brain being thereby stirred up to
motion, do by consent affect the matrix with the like.

And therefore we do especially forbid that they may not smell unto any sweet
thing that are subject unto this grief: Plater. pa. 443 lacobus Ruffius de
muliebribus lib. 6. cap. 8 Syluius Guaynerius.
but rather unto evil favors: which as Platerus thinks by stirring up the
expulsive faculty of the matrix, are a means of the shortening of the fit.

Meat and drink is the Mother of most diseases, whatsoever the Father be,
for the constitution of the humors of our bodies is according to that which
feeds us. And therefore it is reckoned as a principal external cause of
diseases.

And Hyppocrates in this disease forbids sweet and fat meats (a dulcibus et
pinguibus abstineat, De not muliebri. Lib. 2. obseru. 28. Hypp. libro cit a to
quicquidede rit aut liberit ipsam molestat
donec sana sit) Forrestus tells us of a Bruets wife of Delft, who could never
eat or drink any thing that was sweet or pleasant but her fit would take her
a fresh^, and thereuppon was feign to mix wormwood with every thing that she
did eat or drink.

The Essex Gentlewoman of whom I spoke before, Heurnius de morbis capitis page
310.
could never take any comfortable sustenance, but she was sure to have a fit of
the mother. The reason of this may be the same which we have alleged of sweet
vapors.

The errors about euacuation are also an external cause of diseases, and do
breed an internal cause afterward.

As in this disease the want of due and monthly euacuation, or the want of the
benefit of marriage in such as have been accustomed or are apt thereunto,
Altomarus.
breeds a congestio^ of humors about that part, which increasing or corrupting
in the place, causes this disease. Hollerius cap. 59. Rond. c. 69.
And therefore we do observe that maidens and widows are most subject
thereunto. Motion and rest being well ordered do preserve health, but being
disordered do breed diseases, especially to much rest and slothfulness is a
means of this grief, by ingendering crudities and obstructions in women's
bodies, by dulling the spirits and cooling natural heat, etc. So likewise
sleep and watching, the one by benumming, the other by dissipation of the
spirits and natural heat, may occasion this grief.

Hinc Cicero Tusculanarum 3. perturbationes animi, mor bos appellat.
Lastly the perturbations of the mind are oftentimes to blame both for this
and many other diseases. For seeing we are not masters of our own affections,
we are like battered Cities without walls, or ships tossed in the Sea,
exposed to all manner of assults and dangers, even to the overthrow of our own
bodies.

We have infinite examples among our Plinium. Valor. max. Volateranum.
Pontanum. Landum. Gellium, Krantzium.
Historiographers, Cornex lib. 1 consultat. med. cap. 3. Gal. 2. sympt. causis
cap. 5. de praecognit. ca. 6 Beniuenius.
and Physicians of such as have dyed upon joy, grief, love, fear, shame, and
such like perturbations of the mind: and of others that upon the same causes
have fallen into grievous diseases: as Gal. in 5. Aphorism. 45. Amatus lusit.
Cent. 3.
women delivered of their children before their time, upon fear, anger,
grief, etc. others taken with the Gal. loc. affec. 5. de Grammatico Job.
Montanus co^silio. 50 Matheus de grad. de proprio filio. cap. de Epilepsia.
Amatus lusit. cent. 2. cap 90.
Falling sickness, Procopius de bello Gothorum lib. 1. Amatus lusit. cent. 3.
Apoplexies, Christoph. a Vega. li. 4. ca. 14 Corn. Celsus.
Madness, Gal. loco cita.
Swounding, Aretaeus lib. 1 cap. 7.
Palsies, and diverse such like infirmities upon the like causes.

And concerning this disease whereof we do entreat, Consilio 311.
Johannes Montanus tells us of a patient of his, who fell into the fits of the
Mother upon jealousy. Lib. 28. obser. 28. lib. 10. obseru. 30.
Forrestus of another, who had her fits whenever she was angered: and of
another that upon love fell into this disease. My felfe do know a Gentlewoman,
who upon the sight of one particular man would always feel an vterin affect:
and another that upon fear of being chidden, or seeing another in the fit of
the mother, would also fall into it herself.

Cap. 7. Of the cure of this disease, so much as belongs to the friends and
attendants to perform.
THe signs of this disease, seeing they are drawn principally from the causes
and Symptoms before declared shall not need any particular discourse,
especially considering the use of them belongs properly to the Physician, to
direct him in his cure. And therefore I think good to ease my self of this
labor, which would be altogether unprofitable to the reader.

Concerning the cure also I think it not meet to say more then may concern
the friends and assistants unto the patient to look unto: referring Physicians
works unto Physicians. There are some things by the friends to be performed
unto the patient in regard of the Valetius in Hollerium. c. 59 Valescius di
Taranta. lib. 6.
present fit, and some things in regard of the cause. In the fit let the bodies
be kept Paschal. li. 1 ca. 57. Altomar.
upright, straight laced, and the belly and throat held down with ones hand.
Let heed be taken that they hurt not themselves by biting their fingers, B^nd e
^t^^u Hollerius.
striking their arms and legs against hard things, etc. apply evil smells to
their nostrils, and sweet smells beneath Rhasis ad Al^ansor. cap. 28.
tie their legs hard with a garter for reuulsion sake, etc.

Out of the fit, in regard of External causes, remove from them all occasions
of breeding or increasing creasing the disease: as sweet sauors, pleasant meats
and drinks, much rest and slothfulness, etc. Also if Hollerius nullum
remedium melius marito. Valescus de taranta, Syluius. si nubilis est nec
monialis nubat sinon libet aut non licet nubere vtatur frigidis etc. Mat.
Rochius de morb. mal. cap. 5. Guaynerius suppositio in hoc casu principati^
obtinet, etc.
discontinuance of any thing accustomed be the cause of this disease, bring it
into custom again: if want of any thing necessary for their health, let it be
supplied, Valetius in Holl. Cap. 59. istud genus demonii non eiicitur nisi
multo ieiunio. Paschali. Si no^ possit vti viro praecibus and ieiuniocurabitur.
Guaynerius. Curpus macera^tibus vtatur.
let theirdiet be sparing and upon cooling things, let them use much fasting
and prayer, and all other means to pull down their bodies: and contrariwise
abstain from eggs, wine, flesh, etc. If the perturbations of the mind be any
occasion hereof, let them have their proper remedies, as anger and jealousy
are to be appeased by good counsel and persuasions: hatred and malice by
religious instructions, fear by encouragements, love Auicen, Fen. 1 3. c. 14.
tract. 4. de Ylisco.
by inducing hatred, or Aretaeus. lib. 1. cap. 5. De sani. tuenda lib. 1. cap.
11. De subtilit. l. 19 De medica bist oria miraebili. lib. 2. cap. 1.
by permitting them to enjoy their desires, etc. Galen boasts that he did
every year cure many diseases by this stratagem of moderating the
perturbations of the mind by the example of Aesculapius who devised many songs
and ridiculous pastimes for that purpose. To which end also other physicians
have used diverse sorts of fallacies to encounter the melancholic conceits of
their patients. Cardan tells of a Gentlewoman, who finding her self vexed with
many grieous Symptoms, imagined that the Devil was the author thereof, and by
Josephus Niger was cured by procuring her son to make her believe that he saw
three devils in her looking glass, and one great one to drive them out.
Another like policy Marcellus Donatus tells us of, which a Physician used
toward the Countess of Mantua, who being in that disease which we call
melancholia Hyppocrondriaca did verily believe that she was bewitched, and was
cured by conueying of nails, needles, feathers, and such like things into her
close stool when she took physic, making her believe that they came out of
her body. The like there he mentions also out of Trallian, of a woman who
did think that she had a serpent within her, and was cured by the like means.

So that if we cannot moderate these perturbations of the mind, by reason and
persuasions, or by alluring their minds another way, we may politikely
confirm them in their fantasies, that we may the better fasten some cure upon
them: as Constantinus Affricanus (if it be his book which is inserted among
Galens works, Lib de incant. adiuratione, etc.
De incantatione, adiuratione etc.) affirms, and practiced with good
success, upon one who was impotens ad Venerem, and thought himself bewitched
therewith, by reading unto him a foolish medicine out of Cleopatra, made with a
crows gall, and oil: whereof the patient took so great conceit, that upon
the use of it he presently recovered his strength and ability again.

The like opinion is to be held of all those superstitious remedies which
have crept into our profession, Si quis incantationem sibi prodesse confidat,
qualiscu^que sit, cum tamen iuu. it. li. 1. prox i am citato.
of Charms, Exorcismes, Co^stellations, Characters, Periapts, Amulets,
Incense, Holy water, clouts crossed and folded superstitiously, repeating of a
certain number and form of prayers or Aue Mary's, offering to certain
Saints, pissing through the wedding Ring, and a hundred such like toys and
gambols: which when they prevail in the cure of diseases, it is not for any
supernatural virtue in them, either from God or from the devil (although
perhaps the Devil may have a collateral intent or work therein, namely to
draw us unto superstition) but by reason of the confident persuasion which
melancholic and passionate people may have in them: according to the saying of
Auicen, 4. Natural. 6.
that the confidence of the patient in the means used is oftentimes more
auailable to cure diseases then all other remedies whatsoever.

Another course has been taken sometimes in these cases, by removing the
cause of these affections, or by inducing of other perturbations of a diverse
nature. Whereby as (experience teaches us) most grievous diseases have been
oftentimes cured beyond expectation.

A young man falling out of favor with his father, fell thereupon into the fits
of the falling sickness, and continued long and often molested there with;
until a reconciliation was wrought with his father: who sending him a kind
letter to that effect, the young man was presently delivered from that fearful
disease.

A young Maiden also upon some passion of the mind, as it was credibly
reported, fell into these fits of the Mother, and being in one of them, a
Physician then present modestly put his hand under her clothes to feel a
windy tumor which she then had in her back. But a Surgeon there also present
not contented with that manner of examination, offered to take up her clothes,
and to see it bare: whereupon the Maid being greatly offended, took such
indignation at it, as it did put her presently out of her fit.

And it is no marvel that the affections of the mind do bear such rule in
this disease, seeing we do observe that most commonly besides the
indisposition of the body: here is also some Melancholic or capricious
conceit joined withal of love, fear, hatred, jealousy, coffeehouse,
witchcraft, poisoning, etc. which being by policy or good instructions and
persuasions removed, the disease is easily overcome.

Other matters of government of them either in the fit or out of the fit,
together with the cure in regard of the internal causes, because they are
properly belonging to the Physician, I do purposely omit.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Fol. 1th. lin. 22. dele one.

Fol. 3. a. lin. 27. remoted for removed.


