Engraved border THE WORKS OF Benjamin Jonson.

-- neque, me vt miretur turbo, laboro:
Contentus paucis lectoribus.
LONDON printed by W. Stansby, and are to be sold by Rich. $eighen. Ano D.
1616.

(...) fecit


The Catalogue.
Every Man in his Humor, To Mr. CAMBDEN. Every Man out of his Humor, To the
INNES of COURT. Cynthias Reuells, To the COURT. Poe^taster, To Mr. RICH.
MARTIN. Seianus, To ESME Lo. Aubigny. The Fox, To the UNIVERSITIES. The silent
Woman, To Sir FRAN. STVART. The Alchemist, To the Lady WROTH. Catiline, To the
Earl of PEMBROK. Epigrammes, To the same. The Forest, Entertaynments,
Panegyre, Masks, Barriers.
Ad V. CL. BEN. IONSONIVM, Carmen protrepticon.
Raptam Threicij lyram Neanthu^
Pulset; carmina circulis Palaemon
Scribar; qui manibus facit Deabus
Illotis, metuat Probum. Placere
Te doctis innat auribus, placere
Te raris innat auribus. Camaenas
Cum totus legerem tuas (camaenae
Nam totum rogitant tuae, nec vllam
Qui pigre trabat oscitationem,
Lectorem) and Numeros, Acumen, Artem,
Mirum Iudicium, quod ipse censor,
Ionsoni, nimium licet malignus,
Si doctus simul, exigat, viderem,
Sermonem and nitidum, Facetiasque
Dignas Mercurio, nouasque Gnomas
Morum sed veterum, tuique iuris
Quicquid Dramaticum tui legebam,
Tam semper fore, tamque te loquuium,
Vt nec Lemnia notior sigillo
Tellus, nec macula sacrandus Apis,
Non cesto Venus, aut comis Apollo,
Quam Musa fueris sciente notus,
Quam Musa fueris tua notatus,
Illa, quae vnica, sydus vt refulgens,
Stricturas, superat comis, Minorum:
In mentem subijt Stolonis illud,
Lingua Pieridas fuisse Plauti
Vsuras, Ciceronis atque dictum,
Saturno genitum phrasi Platonis,
Musae si Latio, Iouisque Athenis
Dixissent. Fore iam sed hunc and illas
IonsonI numeros puto loquutos,
Anglis si fuerint vtrique fati.
Tam, mi, tu sophiam doces amaene,
Sparsim tamque sophos amaena sternis!
Sed, tot delicias, minus placebat,
Sparsis distraherent tot in libellis
Cerdoi caculae. Volumen vnum,
Quod seri Britonum terant nepotes,
Optabam, and thyasus chorusque amantum
Musas hoc cupiunt, tui laborum
Et quicquid reliquum est, adhuc tuisque
Seruatum pluteis. Tibi at videmur
Non tam quaerere quam parare nobis
Laudem, dum volumus palam merentis
To laurus cupidi reposta scripta;
Dum secernere te tuasque Musas
Audemus numero vngulae liquorem
Gustante, vt veteres nonem sorores
Et sirenibus and solent cicadis;
Dum and secernere posse te videmur,
Efflictim petimus nonumque librum,
Qui nullo sacer haut petatur aeuo,
Qui nullo sacer exolescat aeuo,
Qui curis niteat tuis secundis;
Vt nos scire aliquid simul putetur.
Atqui hoc macte sies, velutque calpar,
Quod dijs inferium, tibi sacremus,
Vt nobis been sit, tuamque frontem
Perfundant ederae recentiores
Et splendour nouus. Inuident coronam
Hanc tantam patriae tibique (quanta
Aeternum a merito tuo superbum
Anglorum genus esse possit olim)
Tantum qui penitus volunt amaenas
Sublatas literas, timentue lucem
Ionson I nimiam tenebriones.
I. Seldom I. C.

TO BEN. IONSON, on his works.
MAy I subscribe a name? dares my bold quill
Write that or good or ill,
Whose frame is of that height, that, to mine eye,
Its head is in the sky?
Yes. Since the most censures, believes, and says
By an implicit faith:
Least their misfortune make them chance amiss,
I Will wast them right by this.
Of all I know thou only art the man
That dares but what he can:
Yet by performance shows he can do more
Then has been done before,
Or will be after. (such assurance gives
Perfection where it lives.)
Words speak thy matter; matter fills thy words;
And choice that grace affords
That both are best: and both most fitly placed,
Are with new VENUS graced
From artfull method all in this point meet,
With good to mingle sweet.
These are thy lower parts. what stands above
Who sees not yet must love,
When on the Base he reads BEN. IONSONS name,
And hears the rest from Fame.
This from my love of truth: which pays this due
To your just worth, not you.
Ed. Heyward.

Upon SEIANVS.
SO brings the wealth-contracting ieweller
Pearls and dear stones, from richest shores and streams,
As thy accomplished travail does confer
From skill-inriched souls, their wealthyer gems;
So does his hand enchase in ammeld gold,
Cut, and adorned beyond their native merits,
His solid flames, as thine has here inrold
In more then golden verse, those bettered spirits;
So he entreasures Princes cabinets,
As thy wealth will their wished libraries;
So, on the throat of the rude sea, he sets
His ventrous foot, for his illustrous prise:
And through wild deserts, armed with wilder beasts,
As thou aduentur'st on the multitude,
Upon the boggie, and engulfed breasts
Of hyrelings, sworn to find most right, most rude:
And he, in storms at sea, does not endure,
Nor in vast deserts, amongst wolves, more danger;
Then we, that would with virtue live secure,
Sustain for her in every vices anger.
Nor is this Allegory unjustly rackt,
To this strange length: Only, that jewels are,
In estimation merely, so exact:
And thy work, in it self, is dear and rare.
Wherein MINERVA had been vanquished,
Had she, by it, her sacred loomes advanced,
And through thy subject wouen her graphicke thread,
Contending therein, to be more entranc't;
For, though thy hand was scarce addressed to draw
The semicircle of SEIANVS life,
The Muse yet makes it the whole sphaere, and law
To all State lives: and bounds ambition's strife.
And as a little brook creepes from his spring,
With shallow tremblings, through the lowest vales,
As if he feared his stream abroad to bring,
Least profane sect should wrong it, and rude gales;
But finding happy channels, and supplies
Of other foords mix with his modest course,
He grows a goodly river, and descryes
The strength, that manned him, since he left his source;
Then takes he in delight some meades, and groves,
And, with his two-edged waters, flourishes
Before great palaces, and all men's loves
Build by his shores, to greet his passages:
So thy chaste Muse, by virtuous selfe-mistrust,
Which is a true mark of the truest merit;
In virgin fear of men's illiterate lust,
Shut her soft wings, and durst not show h^^ spirit;
Till, nobly cherisht, now thou lett'st her fly,
Singing the sable orgies of the Muses,
And in the highest pitch of tragoedie,
Make her command, all things thy ground produces.
Besides, thy Poem has this due respect,
That it lets pass nothing, without observing,
Worthy instruction; or that might correct
Rude manners, and renow me the well deserving:
Performing such a lively evidence
(...) thy narrations, that thy hearers still
Thou turn'st to thy spectators; and the sense
That thy spectators have of good or ill,
Thou iniect'st jointly to thy readers souls.
So dear is held, so decked thy numerous task,
As thou putt'st handles to the Thespian boules,
Or stuck'st rich plumes in the Palladian caske.
All thy worth, yet, thy self must patronise,
By quassing more of the Castalian head;
In expiscation of whose mysteries,
Our nets must still be clogd, with heavy lead,
To make them sink, and catch: For cheerful gold
Was never found in the Pierian streams,
But wants, and scorns, and shames for silver sold.
What? what shall we elect in these extremes?
Now by the shafts of the great CYRRHAN Poet,
That bear all light, that is, about the world;
I would have all dull Poet-haters know it,
They shall be soule-bound, and in darkness hurld,
A thousand years (as Satan was, their fire)
Ere any, worthy the poetique name,
(Might I, that warm but at the Muses fire,
Presume to guard it) should let deathlesse Fame
Light half a beam of all her hundred eyes,
At his dim taper, in their memories.
Fly, fly, you are too near; so, odorous flowers
Being held too near the sensor of our sense,
Render not pure, nor so sincere their powers,
As being held a little distance thence.
O could the world but ^e^^e how sweet a touch
The Knowledge has, which is in love with goodness,
(If Poesy were not ravished so much,
And her compos'de rage, held the simplest woodnesse,
Though of all heats, that temper humane brains,
Her^ ever was most subtle, high, and holy,
First binding savage lives, in civil chains:
Solely religious, and adored solely,
If was felt this) they would not think a love,
That gives it self, in her, did vanities give;
Who is (in earth, though low) in worth above,
Most able t'honour life, though least to live.
And so good Friend, safe passage to thy freight,
To thee a long peace, through a virtuous strife,
In which, lets both contend to virtues height,
Not making fame our object, but good life.
GEOR. CHAPMAN.

To his worthy friend, the Author, H. HOLLAND.
IN that, this book does deigne SEIANVS name,
Him unto more, then CAESAR'S love, it brings:
For, where he could not with ambition's wings,
One quill does heave him to the height of fame.
Ye great-ones though (whose ends may be the same)
Know, that, how ever we do flatter kings,
Their favors (like themselves) are fading things,
With no less envy had, then lost with shame.
Nor make your selves less honest then you are,
To make our author wiser then he is:
Ne of such crimes accuse him, which I dare
By all his Muses swear, be none of his.
The men are not, some faults may be these times:
He acts those men, and they did act these crimes.
Amicissimo, and meritissimo BEN: IONSON.
QVod art ansus et hic tua, Poeta,
Si anderent hominum Deique iuris
Consulti, veteres sequi aemularierque,
O omnes saperemus ad salutem.
His sed sunt veteres araneosi;
Tam nemo veterum est sequutor, vt tu
Illos quod sequeris nou^tor audis.
Factamen quod agis; tuique prima
Libricanitie induantur hora:
Nam chartis pueritiae est neganda,
Nascunturque senes, oportet, illi
Libri, queis dare vis perennitatem.
Priscis, ingenium facit, laberque
Te parem; ho^ superes, vt and futuros,
Ex nostra vitiositate sumas,
Qua priscos superamus, and futuros.
I. D.

AD VTRAMQVE ACADEMIAM, DE BENJAMIN IONSONIO.
HIc ille est primus, qui doctum drama Britannis,
Graiorum antiqua, and Latij monimenta Theatri,
Tanquam explorator versans, foelicibus ausis
Prebebit: Magnis coeptis Gemina astra fauete.
Alterutra veteres contenti laud: Cothurnum hic,
Atque pari soccum tractat Sol scenicus art,
Das VOLPONE iocos, fletus SEIANE dedisti.
At si IONSONIAS mulctatas limite Musas
Angusta plangent quiquam: Vos, dicite, contra,
O nimium miseros quibus ANGLIS ANGLICA lingua
Aut non sat nota est; aut queis (sen trans mare natis)
Hand nota omnino: Vegetet cum tempore Vates,
Mutabit patri^m, fietque ipse ANGLVS APOLLO.
E. BOLTON.

To my dear friend, M. BEN: IONSON. Upon his Fox.
IF it might stand with justice, to allow
The swift conversion of all follies; now,
Such is my mercy, that I could admit
All sorts should equally approve the wit
Of this thy even work: whose growing fame
Shall raise thee high, and thou it, with thy name*
And did not manners, and my love command
Me to forbear to make those understand,
Whom thou, perhaps, have in thy wiser doom
Long since, firmly resolved, shall never come
To know more then they do; I would have shown
To all the world, the art, which thou alone
Have taught our tongue, the rules of time of place,
And other rites, delivered, with the grace
Of comic style, which only, is far more,
Then any English stage has known before.
But, since our subtle gallants think it good
To like of naught, that may be understood,
Lest they should be disprou'd; or have, at best,
Stomachs so raw, that nothing can digest
But what is obscene, or barks: Let us desire
They may continue, simply, to admire
Fine clothes, and strange words; and may live, in age,
To see themselves ill brought upon the stage,
And like it. Whilst thy bold, and knowing Muse
Contenes al praise, but such as thou would choose
FRANC. BEAVMONT.

UPON THE SILENT WOMAN.
Hear you bad writers, and though you not see,
I will inform you where you happy be:
Provide the most malicious thoughts you can,
And bend them all against some private man,
To bring him, not his vices, on the stage,
Your envy shall be clad in so poor rage,
And your expressing of him shall be such,
That he himself shall think he has no touch.
Where he that strongly writes, although he mean
To scourge but vices in a labored scene,
Yet private faults shall be so well expressed
As men do act hem, that each private breast,
That ^^^des these errors in it self, shall say,
He meant me, not my vices, in the play.
FRANC. BEAVMONT.

To my friend M. BEN: IONSON. Upon his Catiline.
IF thou had itch'd after the wild applause
Of common people, and had made thy laws
In writing, such, as caught at present voice,
I should commend the thing, but not thy choice.
But thou have squared thy rules, by what is good;
And art, three ages yet, from understood:
And (I dare say) in it, there lies much wit
Lost, till thy readers can grow up to it.
Which they can never out-grow, to find it ill,
But must fall back again, or like it still.
FRANC. BEAVMONT.

Every MAN IN HIS HVMOVR. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1598. By the then Lord
Chamberlain his Servants.

The Author B. I.

IUVEN. Haud tamen inuideas vati, quem pulpita pascunt.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. DC. XVI.

TO THE MOST LEARNED, AND MY HONORED FRIEND, Mr. Cambden.
SIR,
THere are, no doubt, a supercilious race in the world, who will esteem all
office, done you in this kind, an injury; so solemn a vice it is with them to
use the authority of their ignorance, to the crying down of Poetry, or the
Professors: But, my gratitude must not leave to correct their error; since I am
none of those, that can suffer the benefits conferred upon my youth, to perish
with my age. It is a frail memory, that remembers but present things: And,
had the favor of the times so conspired with my disposition, as it could have
brought forth other, or better, you had had the same proportion, and number of
the fruits, the first. Now, I pray you, to accept this, such, wherein neither
the confession of my manners shall make you blush; nor of my studies, repent
you to have been the instructor: And, for the profession of my
thanke-fulnesse, I am sure, it will, with good men, find either praise, or
excuse.

Your true lover, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
KNO'WELL, An old Gentleman. ED. KNO'WELL, His Son. BRAYNE-WORME, The Fathers
man. Mr. STEPHEN, A country Gull. DOWNRIGHT, A plain Squier. WELL-BRED, His
half Brother. JUST. CLEMENT, An old merry Magistrate. ROGER FORMAL, His
Clarke. KITELY, A Merchant. DAME KITELY, His Wife. Mr. BRIDGET, His Sister. Mr.
MATTHEW, The towne-gull. CASH, KITELIES Man. COB, A Water-bearer. TIB, His
Wife. CAP. BOBADILL, A Paules-man.
THE SCENE LONDON.

EVERY MAN IN HIS HVMOVR. PROLOGVE.
THough need make many Poets, and some such
As art, and nature have not betterd much;
Yet ours, for want, has not so loved the stage
As he dare serve the will customs of the age:
Or purchase your delight at such a rate,
As, for it, he himself must justly hate.
To make a child, now swadled, to proceed
Man, and then shoot up, in one beard, and weed,
Past threescore years: or, with three rustie swords,
And help of some few foot-and-halfe-foote words,
Fight over York, and Lancasters long iarres:
And in the tyring-house bring wounds, to scarres.
He rather prays, you will be pleased to see
One such, to day as other plays should be;
Where neither Chorus wafts you ore the seas;
Nor creaking throne comes down, the boys to please;
Nor nimble squibbe is seen, to make afear'd
The gentlewomen; nor roul'd bullet heard
To say, it thunders; nor tempestuous drum
Rumbles, to tell you when the storm does come;
But deeds, and language, such as men do use:
And persons, such as Comoedie would choose,
When she would show an Image of the times,
And sport with humane follies, not with crimes.
Except, we make 'hem such by loving still
Our popular errors, when we know they are ill.
I mean such errors, as you will all confess
By laughing at them, they deserve no less:
Which when you heartily do, there is hope left, then,
You, that have so graced monsters, may like men.
Act I.
Scene I.
KNOWELL, BRAYNE-WORME, Mr STEPHEN. A Goodly day toward! and a fresh morning!
BRAYNE-WORME,
Call up your young master: bid him rise, sir.
Tell him, I have some business to employ him.

BRA. I will sir, presently.

KNO. But hear you, sirah,
If he be'at his book, disturb him not.

BRA. Well sir.

KNO. How happy, yet, should I esteem my self
Could I (by any practice) weane the boy
From one vain course of study, he affects.
He is a scholar, if a man may trust
The liberal voice of fame, in her report
Of good account, in both our universities,
Either of which has favored him with graces:
But their indulgence, must not spring in me
A fond opinion, that he cannot err.
My self was once a student; and, indeed,
Fed with the selfsame humor, he is now,
Dreaming on naught but idle poetry,
That fruitless, and unprofitable art,
Good unto none, but least to the professors,
Which, then, I thought the mistress of all knowledge:
But since, time, and the truth have waked my judgment,
And reason taught me better to distinguish,
The vain, from th'vsefull learnings. Cossin STEPHEN!
What news with you, that you are here so early?

STE. Nothing, but eene come to see how you do, uncle.

KNO. That Is kindly done, you are wel-come, cousse.

STE. I, I know that sir, I would not ha'come else.
How do my coussin EDWARD, uncle?

KNO. O, well cousse, go in and see: I doubt he be scarce stirring yet.

STE. Uncle, before I go in, can you tell me, an' he have ere a book of the
sciences of hawking, and hunting? I would feign borrow it.


KNO. Why, I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?


STEP. NO wusse; but I Will practice against next year uncle: I have bought me a
hawke, and a hood, and bells, and all; I lack nothing but a book to keep it
by.


KNO. O, most ridiculous.


STEP. Nay, look you now, you are angry, uncle: why you know, an'a man have
not skill in the hawking, and hunting-languages now a days, I Will not give a
rush for him. They are more studied then the Greek, or the Latin. He is for
no gallants company without 'hem. And by gads lid I scorn it, I, so I do, to
be a consort for every hum drum, hang 'hem scroyles, there is nothing in 'hem,
in the world. What do you talk on it? Because I dwell at Hogsden, I shall
keep company with none but the archers of Finsburie? or the citizens, that
come a ducking to Islington ponds? A fine jest in faith! Slid a gentleman mun
show himself like a gentleman. Uncle, I pray you be not angry, I know what I
have to do, I trow, I am no nouice.


KNO. You are a prodigal absurd cocks-combe: Go to.
Nay never look at me, it is I that speak.
Take It as you will sir, I Will not flatter you.
Have you not yet found means enough, to wast
That, which your friends have left you, but you must
Go cast away your money on a kite,
And know not how to keep it, when you ha'done?
O it is comely! this will make you a gentleman!
Well cosen, well! I see you are eene past hope
Of all reclaim. I, so, now you are told on it,
You look another way.

STEP. What would you have me do?

KNO. What would I have you do? I Will tell you kinsman,
Learn to be wise, and practice how to thrive,
That would I have you do: and not to spend
Your coin on every babble, that you fancy,
Or every foolish brain, that humors you.
I would not have you to invade each place,
Nor thrust your self on all societies,
Till men's affections, or your own desert,
Should worthily inuit you to your rank.
He, that is so respectlesse in his courses,
Often sells his reputation, at cheap market.
Nor would I, you should melt away your self
In flashing bravery, least while you affect
To make a blaze of gentry to the world,
A little puff of scorn extinguish it,
And you be left, like an unsavory snuff,
Whose property is only to offend.
I Would ha'you sober, and contain your self;
Not, that your sail be bigger then your boat:
But moderate your expenses now (at first)
As you may keep the same proportion still.
Nor, stand so much on your gentilitie,
Which is an aerie, and mere borrowed thing,
From dead men's dust, and bones: and none of yours
Except you make, or hold it. Who comes here?

Act. I. Scene II.
SERVANT, Mr. STEPHEN, KNOWELL, BRAYNE-WORME. Save you, gentlemen.


STEP. Nay, we do' not stand much on our gentilitie, friend; yet, you are
wel-come, and I assure you mine uncle, here, is a man of a thousand a year,
Middlesex land: he has but one son in all the world, I am his next heir (at
the common law) master STEPHEN, as simple as I stand here, if my cossen die (as
there is hope he will) I have a pretty living of mine own too, beside, hard-by
here.


SERVE. In good time, sir.


STEP. In good time, sir? why! and in a very good time, sir. You do not stout,
friend, do you?


SERVE. Not I, sir.


STEP. Not you sir? you were not best, sir; an' you should, here be them can
perceive it, and that quicky to: go to. And they can give it again soundly
to, and need be.


SERVE. Why, sir, let this satisfy you: good faith, I had no such intent.


STEP. Sir, an' I thought you had, I would talk with you, and that presently.


SERVE. Good master STEPHEN, so you may, sir, at your pleasure.


STEP. And so I would sir, good my fancy companion! an' you were out of mine
uncles ground, I can tell you; though I do not stand upon my gentilitie
neither in it.


KNO. Cossen! cossen! will this nere be left?


STEP. Whoreson base fellow! a mechanical seruing-man! By this cudgel, and 't
were not for shame, I would --


KNO. What would you do, you peremptory gull?
If you cannot be quiet, get you hence.
You see, the honest man demeanes himself
Modestly to'ards you, giving no reply
To your vnseason'd, quarrelling, rude fashion:
And, still you huffe it, with a kind of carriage,
As void of wit, as of humanity.
Go, get you in; fore heaven, I am ashamed
Thou have a kinsmans interest in me.

SERVE. I pray you, sir. Is this master KNO'WELL'S house?

KNO. Yes, marie, is it sir.

SERVE. I should enquire for a gentleman, here, one master EDWARD KNO'WELL: do
you know any such, sir, I pray you?


KNO. I should forget my self else, sir.


SERVE. Are you the gentleman? cry you mercy sir: I was required by a
gentleman in the city, as I rode out at this end of the town, to deliver you
this letter, sir.


KNO. To me, sir! What do you mean? pray you remember your court'sie. ( To
his most selected friend, master EDWARD KNO'WELL.) What might the gentleman's
name be, sir, that sent it? nay, pray you be covered.


SERVE. One master WELL-BRED, sir.


KNO. Master WELL-BRED! A young gentleman? is he not?


SERVE. The same sir, master KITELY married his sister: the rich merchant in the
old Iewrie.


KNO. You say very true. BRAINE-WORME,


BRAY. Sir.


KNO. Make this honest friend drink here: pray you go in.
This letter is directed to my son:
Yet, I am EDWARD KNO'WELL too, and may
With the safe conscience of good manners, use
The fellows error to my satisfaction.
Well, I will break it open (old men are curious)
Be it but for the styles sake, and the phrase,
To see, if both do answer my sons praises,
Who is, almost, grown the idolater
Of this young WELL-BRED: what have we here? what is this?
The letter. Why, NED, I beseech thee; have thou for-sworne all thy friends
in the old Iewrie? or do thou think us all Jews that inhabit there, yet? If
thou do, come over, and but see our frip perie: change an old shirt, for a
whole smock, with us. Do not conceive that antipathy between us, and
Hogs-den; as was between Jews, and hogs-flesh. Leave thy vigilant father,
alone, to number over his green apricots, evening, and morning, of the
north-west wall: An' I had been his son, I had saved him the labor, long
since; if, taking in all the young wenches, that pass by, at the back-dore, and
codd'ling every kernel of the fruit for'hem, would have served. But, pr'y thee,
come over to me, quickly, this morning: I have such a present for thee (our
Turkey company never sent the like to the Grand-SIGNIOR.) One is a Rimer sir,
of your own batch, your own leuin; but does think himself Poet-maior, of the
town: willing to be shown, and worthy to be seen. The other -- I will not
venture his description with you, till you come, because I would have you make
hither with an appetite. If the worst of 'hem be not worth your journey, draw
your bill of charges, as unconscionable, as any Guild Hall verdict will give it
you, and you shall be allowed your viaticum.

From the windmill.

From the Burdello, it might come as well;
The Spittle: or Pict-hatch. Is this the man,
My son has sung so, for the happiest wit,
The choysest brain, the times has sent us forth?
I know not what he may be, in the arts;
Nor what in schools: but surely, for his manners,
I judge him a profane, and dissolute wretch:
Worse, by possession of such great good gifts,
Being the master of so loose a spirit.
Why, what vnhallow'd ruffian would have writ,
In such a scurrilous manner, to a friend!
Why should he think, I tell my Apri-cotes?
Or play the Hesperian Dragon, with my fruit,
To watch it? Well, my son, I'had thought
Y' had had more judgment, to have made election
Of your companions, to have taken on trust,
Such petulant, geering gamsters, that can spare
No argument, or subject from their jest.
But I perceive, affection makes a fool
Of any man, too much the father. BRAYNE-WORME,

BRAY. Sir.

KNO. Is the fellow gone that brought this letter?

BRA. Yes, sir, a pretty while since.

KNO. And, where is your young master?

BRA. In his chamber sir.

KNO. He spoke not with the fellow! did he?

BRA. No sir, he saw him not.

KNO. Take you this letter, and deliver it my son
But with no notice, that I have opened it, on your life.

BRA. O lord, sir, that were a jest, indeed!

KNO. I am resolved, I will not stop his journey;
Nor practice any violent mean, to stay
The unbridled course of youth in him: for that,
Restrained, grows more impatient, and, in-kind,
Like to the eager, but the generous greyhound;
Who never so little from his game withheld,
Turns head, and leapes up at his holders throat.
There is a way of winning, more by love,
And urging of the modesty, then fear:
Force works on servile natures, not the free.
He, that is compelled to goodness, may be good;
But it is but for that fit: where others drawn
By softness, and example, get a habit.
Then, if they stray, but warn 'hem: and, the same
They should for vertu'haue done, they will do for shame.

Act I. Scene II.
EDW. KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME, Mr. STEPHEN. DId he open it, say thou?


BRAY. Yes, of my word sir, and read the contents.


E. KN. That scarce contents me. What countenance (pr'y thee) made he, in the
reading of it? was he angry, or pleased?


BRAY. Nay sir, I saw him not read it, nor open it, I assure your worship.


E. KN. No? how know thou, then, that he did either?


BRAY. Marie sir, because he charged me, on my life, to tell nobodie, that he
opened it: which, unless he had done, he would never fear to have it
revealed.


E. KN. That Is true: well I thank thee, BLAYNE-WORME.


STEP. O, BRAYNE-WORME, did thou not see a fellow here in a
what-sha'-call-him doublet! he brought mine uncle a letter even now.


BRAY. Yes, master STEPHEN, what of him?


STEP. O, I have such a mind to beat him -- Where is he? can thou tell?


BRAY. Faith, he is not of that mind: he is gone, master STEPHEN.


STEP. Gone? which way? when went he! how long since?


BRAY. He is rid hence. He took horse, at the street door.


STEP. And, I staid in the fields! horson scander-bag rogue! O that I had but a
horse to fetch him back again.


BRAY. Why, you may have my mrs. gelding, to save your longing, sir.


STEP. But, I have no boots, that is the spite on it.


BRAY. Why, a fine wispe of hay, rould hard, master STEPHEN.


STEP. No faith, it is no boot to follow him, now: let him eene go, and hang.
'Pray thee, help to trusse me, a little. He dos so vex me --


BRAY. You Will be worse vexed, when you are trussed, master STEPHEN. Best, keep
vn-brac'd; and walk your self, till you be cold: your choler may foundre you
else.


STEP. By my faith, and so I will, now thou tell me on it: How do thou like
my leg, BRAYNE-WORME?


BRAY. A very good leg! master STEPHEN! but the woollen stocking does not
commend it so well.


STEP. Foh, the stockings be good enough, now summer is coming on, for the
dust: I Will have a pair of silk, again'winter, that I go to dwell in the
town. I think my leg would show in a silke-hose.


BRAP. Believe me, master STEPHEN, rarely well,


STEP. In sadness, I think it would: I have a reasonable good leg.


BRAY. You have an excellent good leg, master STEPHEN, but I cannot stay, to
praise it longer now, and I am very sorry for it.


STEP. Another time will serve, BRAYNE-WORME. Gramercie for this.


E. KN. Knowell laughes having read the letter. Ha, ha, ha!


STEP. Slid, I hope, he laughes not at me, and he do --


E. KN. Here was a letter, indeed, to be intercepted by a man's father, and do
him good with him! He cannot but think most virtuously, both of me, and the
sender, sure; that make the careful Costar'-monger of him in our familiar
Epistles. Well, if he read this with patience, I Will be gelt, and troll ballads
for Mr. JOHN TRVNDLE, yonder, the rest of my mortality. It is true, and
likely, my father may have as much patience as another man; for he takes much
physic: and, often taking physic makes a man very patient. But would your
packet, master WEL-BRED, had arrived at him, in such a minute of his patience;
then, we had known the end of it, which now is doubtful, and threatens --
What! my wise cossen! Nay, then, Il efurnish our feast with one gull more
to'ard the mess. He writes to me of a brace, and here is one, that is three: O,
for a fourth; Fortune, if ever thou wilt use thine eyes, I entreat thee --


STEP. O, now I see, who he laughed at. He laughed at somebody in that letter.
By this good light, and he had laughed at me --


E. KN. How now, coussen STEPHEN, melancholy'?


STEP. Yes, a little. I thought, you had laughed at me, cossen.


E. KN. Why, what an' I had cousse, what would you have done?


SERVE. By this light, I would have told mine uncle.


E. KN. Nay, if you would ha'told your uncle, I did laugh at you, cousse.


SERVE. Did you, indeed?


E. KN. Yes, indeed.


STEP. Why, then --


E. KN. What then?


STEP. I am satisfied, it is sufficient.


E. KN. Why, be so gentle cousse. And, I pray you let me entreat a courtesy
of you. I am sent for, this morning, by a friend in the old Iewrie to come to
him; It Is but crossing over the fields to More-gate: Will you bear me
company? I protest, it is not to draw you into bond, or any plot against the
state, cousse.


STEP. Sir, that is all one, and't were; you shall command me, twice so far as
More-gate to do you good, in such a matter. Do you think I would leave you?
I protest --


E. KN. No, no, you shall not protest, cousse.


STEP. By my fackins, but I will, by your leave; I Will protest more to my friend,
then I Will speak off, at this time.


E. KN. You speak very well, cousse.


STEP. Nay, not so neither, you shall pardon me: but I speak, to serve my
turn.


E.KN. Your turn, couss? Do you know, what you say? A gentleman of your sort,
parts, carriage, and estimation, to talk of your turn in this company, and
to me, alone, like a tankard-bearer, at a conduit! Fie. A wight, that
(hitherto) his every step has left the stamp of a great foot behind him, as
every word the favor of a strong spirit! and he! this man! so graced, gilded,
or (to use a more fit metaphore) so tin-foild by nature, as not ten house-wiues
pewter (again' a good time) shows more bright to the world then he! and he (as
I said last, so I say again, and still shall say it) this man! to conceal
such real ornaments as these, and shadow their glory, as a Millaners wife
does her wrought stomacher, with a smokie lawne, or a black cypress? O couss!
It cannot be answered, go not about it. DRAKES old ship, at Detford, may
sooner circle the world again. Come, wrong not the quality of your desert,
with looking downward, couz; but hold up your head, so: and let the Idea of
what you are, be portrayed in your face, that men may read in your physnomie,
( Here, within this place, is to be seen the true, rare, and accomplished
monster, or miracle of nature, which is all one.) What think you of this,
couss?


STEP. Why, I do think of it; and I will be more proud, and melancholy, and
gentleman-like, then I have been: I Will ensure you.


E.KN. Why, that is resolute master STEPHEN! Now, if I can but hold him up to
his height, as it is happily begun, it will do well for a suburbe-humor: we
may hap have a match with the city, and play him for forty pound. Come, couss.


STEP. I Will follow you.


E.KN. Follow me? you must go before.


STEP. Nay, an' I must, I will. Pray you, show me, good cousin.


Act I. Scene IIII.
Mr. MATTHEW, COB. I Think, this be the house: what, hough?


COB. Who Is there? O, master MATTHEW! gi' your worship good morrow.


MAT. What! COB! how do thou, good COB? do thou inhabit here, COB?


COB. I, sir, I and my lineage have kept a poor house, here, in our days.


MAT. Thy lineage, Monsieur COB, what lineage? what lineage?


COB. Why sir, an ancient lineage, and a princely. Mine ance'trie came from a
Kings belly, no worse man: and yet no man neither (by your worships leave, I
did lie in that) but Herring the King of fish (from his belly, I proceed) one
of the Monarchs of the world, I assure you. The first red herring, that was
broiled in ADAM, and EVE'S kitchen, do I fetch my pedigree from, by the
Harrots books. His COB, was my great-great-mighty-great Grand father.


MAT. Why mighty? why mighty? I pray thee.


COB. O, it was a mighty while ago, sir, and a mighty great COB.


MAT. How know thou that?


COB. How know I? why, I smell his ghost, ever and anon.


MAT. Smell a ghost? O unsavory jest! and the ghost of a herring COB!


COB. I sir, with ^auour of your worships nose, Mr. MATTHEW, why not the ghost
of a herring-cob, as well as the ghost of rasher-bacon?


MAT. ROGER BACON, thou would say?


COB. I say rasher-bacon. They were both broyl'd of the col^s? and a man may
smell broyld-meate, I hope? you are a scholar, vpsolue me that, now.


MAT. O raw ignorance! COB, can thou show me of a gentleman, one Captain
BOBADILL, where his lodging is?


COB. O, my guest, sir! you mean.


MAT. Thy guest! Alas! ha, ha.


COB. Why do you laugh, sir? Do you not mean Captain BOBADILL?


MAT. COB, 'pray thee, advise thy self well: do not wrong the gentleman, and
thy self too. I dare be sworn, he scorns thy house: he! He lodge in such
a base, obscure place, as thy house! Tut, I know his disposition so well, he
would not lie in thy bed, if tho'uldst gi'it him.


COB. I will not give it him, though, sir. Mass, I thought somewhat was in it,
we could not get him to bed, all night! Well, sir, though he lie not of my bed,
he lies of my bench: an 't please you to go up, sir, you shall find him with
two cushions under his head, and his cloak wrapped about him, as though he had
neither wun nor lost, and yet (I warrant) he never cast better in his life,
then he has done, to night.


MAT. Why? was he drunk?


COB. Drunk, sir? you hear not me say so. Perhaps, he swallowed a
tauerne-token, or some such device, sir: I have nothing to do withal. I deal
with water, and not with wine. Gi'me my tankard there, hough. God b'w'you, sir.
It Is six a clock: I should have carried two turns, by this. What hough? my
stopple? come.


MAT. Lie in a water-bearers house! A gentleman of his hauings! Well, I Will tell
him my mind.


COB. What TIB, show this gentleman up to the Captain. O, an' my house were
the Brasen-head now! faith, it would eene speak, Mo fools yet. You should have
some now would take this Mr. MATTHEW to be a gentleman, at the least. His
father's an honest man, a worshipful fishmonger, and so forth; and now dos he
creep, and wriggle into acquaintance with all the brave gallants about the
town, such as my guest is: (O, my guest is a fine man) and they flout him
invincibly. He uses every day to a Merchants house (where I serve water) one
master KITELY'S, in the old Iewry; and here is the jest, he is in love with my
masters sister, (mistress BRIDGET) and calls her mistress: and there he will sit
you a whole afternoon sometimes, reading of these same abominable, vile, (a
pox on 'hem, I cannot abide them) rascally verses, poyetrie, poyetrie, and
speaking of enterludes, 'twill make a man burst to hear him. And the wenches,
they do so geere, and ti-he at him -- well, should they do so much to me, Ild
for-sweare them all, by the foot of PHARAOH. There Is an oath! How many
water-bearers shall you hear swear such an oath? O, I have a guest (he
teaches me) he dos swear the legiblest, of any man christened: By St. GEORGE,
the foot of PHARAOH, the body of me, as I am gentleman, and a soldier: such
dainty oaths! and withal, he dos take this same filthy roguish tobacco, the
finest, and cleanliest! it would do a man good to see the fume come forth at
's tonnells! Well, he owes me forty shillings (my wife lent him out of her
purse, by sixe-pence a time) besides his lodging: I would I had it. I shall have
it, he says, the next Action. Helter skelter, hang sorrow, care 'll kill a
cat, vp-tailes all, and a louse for the hangman.


Act I. Scene V.
BOBADILL, TIB, MATTHEW. Bobad. is discovered lying on his bench. Hostess,
hostess.


TIB. What say you, sir?


BOB. A cup of thy small beer, sweet hostess.


TIB. Sir, there is a gentleman, below, would speak with you.


BOB. A gentleman! 'ods so, I am not within.


TIB. My husband told him you were, sir.


BOB. What a plague -- what meant he?


MAT. Captain BOBADILL?


BOB. Who Is there? (take away the basin, good hostess) come up, sir.


TIB. He would desire you to come up, sir. You come into a cleanly house, here.


MAT. 'Saue you, sir. 'Saue you, Captain.


BOB. Gentle master MATTHEW! Is it you, sir? Please you sit down.


MAR. Thank you, good Captain, you may see, I am somewhat audacious.


BOB. Not so, sir. I was requested to supper, last night, by a sort of
gallants, where you were wished for, and drunk to, I assure you.


MAT. Vouchsafe me, by whom, good Captain.


BOB. Mary, by young WELL-BRED, and others: Why, hostess, a stool here, for
this gentleman.


MAT. No haste, sir, it is very well.


BOB. Body of me! It was so late ere we parted last night, I can scarce open my
eyes, yet; I was but new risen, as you came: how passes the day abroad, sir?
you can tell.


MAT. Faith, some half hour to seven: now trust me, you have an exceeding
fine lodging here, very neat, and private!


BOB. I, sir: sit down, I pray you. Master MATTHEW (in any case) possess no
gentlemen of our acquaintance, with notice of my lodging.


MAT. Who? I sir? no.


BOB. Not that I need to care who know it, for the Cabin is convenient, but in
regard I would not be too popular, and generally visited, as some are.


MAT. True, Captain, I conceive you.


BOB. For, do you see, sir, by the heart of valor, in me, (except it be ^o
some peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am extraordinarily engaged, as your
self, or so) I could not extend thus far.


MAT. O Lord, sir, I resolve so.


BOB. I confess, I love a cleanely and quiet priuacy, above all the tumult,
and roar of fortune. What new book have you there? What! Go by, HIERONYMO!


MAT. I, did you ever see it acted? is it not well pend?


BOB. Well pend? I would feign see all the Poets, of these times, pen such
another play as that was! they will prate and swagger, and keep a stir of art
and devices, when (as I am a gentleman) read 'hem, they are the most shallow,
pitiful, barren fellows, that live upon the face of the earth, again!


MAT. Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this book! O eyes, no
eyes, but fountaynes fraught with tears! There Is a conceit! fountains fraught
with tears! O life, no life, but lively form of death! Another! O world, no
world, but mass of public wrongs! A third! Confused and sil'd with murder,
and misdeeds! A fourth! O, the Muses! Is It not excellent? Is It not simply the
best that ever you heard, Captain? Ha? How do you like it?


BOB. It Is good.


MAT. To thee, the purest object to my sense,
The most refined essence heaven couers,
Send I these lines, wherein I do commence
The happy state of turtle-billing lovers.
If they prone rough, vn-polish't, harsh, and rude,
Have made the vast. Thus, mildly, I conclude.

BOB. Bobadill is making him ready all this while. Nay, proceed, proceed.
Where Is this?


MAT. This, sir? a toy of mine own, in my nonage: the infancy of my Muses!
But, when will you come and see my study? good faith, I can show you some very
good things, I have done of late -- That boot becomes your leg, passing well,
Captain, methinkes!


BOB. So, so, It Is the fashion, gentlemen now use.


MAT. Troth, Captain, an' now you speak of the fashion, master WELL-^RED'S
elder brother, and I, are fallen out exceedingly: this other day, I happened to
enter into some discourse of a hanger, which I assure you, both for fashion,
and worke-man-ship, was most peremptory-beautifull, and gentleman-like! Yet, he
condemned, and cried it down, for the most pyed, and ridiculous that ever he
saw.


BOB. Squire DOWNRIGHT? the halfe-brother? was it not?


MAT. I sir, he.


BOB. Hang him, rooke, he! why, he has no more judgment then a malt-horse. By
S. GEORGE, I wonder youl'd loose a thought upon such an animal: the most
peremptory absurd clown of christendom, this day, he is holden. I protest to
you, as I am a gentleman, and a soldier, I never changed words, with his
like. By his discourse, he should eat nothing but hay. He was borne for the
manger, pannier, or pack-saddle! He has not so much as a good phrase in his
belly, but all old iron, and rustie proverbs! a good commodity for some
smith, to make hob-nailes of.


MAT. I, and he thinks to carry it away with his manhood still, where he
comes. He brags he will gi' me the bastinado, as I hear.


BOB. How! He the bastinado! how came he by that word, trow?


MAT. Nay, indeed, he said cudgel me; I termed it so, for my more grace.


BOB. That may be: For I was sure, it was none of his word. But, when? when
said he so?


MAT. Faith, yesterday, they say: a young gallant, a friend of mine told me so.


BOB. By the foot of PHARAOH, and 't were my case now, I should send him a
chartel, presently. The bastinado! A most proper, and sufficient dependence,
warranted by the great CARANZA. Come hither. You shall chartel him. I Will show
you a trick, or two, you shall kill him with, at pleasure: the first stoccata,
if you will, by this air.


MAT. Indeed, you have absolute knowledge in the mystery, I have heard, sir.


BOB. Of whom? Of whom have you heard it. I beseech you?


MAT. Troth, I have heard it spoken of diverse, that you have very rare, and
vn-in-one-breath-vtter-able skill, sir.


BOB. By heaven, no, not I; no skill in the earth: some small rudiments in the
science, as to know my time, distance, or so. I have professed it more for
noblemen, and gentlemen's use, then mine own practice, I assure you. Hostess,
accommodate us with another bed-staffe here, quickly: Lend us another
bed-staffe. The woman does not understand the words of Action. Look you, sir.
Exalt not your point above this state, at any hand, and let your poynard
maintain your defense, thus: (give it the gentleman, and leave us) so, sir.
Come on: O twine your body more about, that you may fall to a more sweet comely
gentleman-like guard. So, indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus. Now,
stand fast of your left leg, note your distance, keep your due proportion of
time -- Oh, you disorder your point, most irregularly!


MAT. How is the bearing of it, now, sir?


BOB. O, out of measure ill! A well-experienc'd hand would pass upon you, at
pleasure.


MAT. How mean you, sir, pass upon me?


BOB. Why, thus sir (make a thrust at me) come in, upon the answer, control
your point, and make a full carreere, at the body. The best-practis'd gallants
of the time, name it the passada: a most desperate thrust, believe it!


MAT. Well, come, sir.


BOB. Why, you do not manage your weapon with any facility, or grace to
inuit me: I have no spirit to play with you. Your dearth of judgment renders
you tedious.


MAT. But one venue, sir.


BOB. Venue! Fie. Most gross denomination, as ever I heard. O, the stoccata,
while you live, sir. Note that. Come, put on your cloak, and we will go to some
private place, where you are acquainted, some tavern, or so -- and have a bit
-- I Will send for one of these Fencers, and he shall breath you, by my
direction; and, then, I will teach you your trick. You shall kill him with it,
at the first, if you please. Why, I will learn you, by the true judgment of
the eye, hand, and foot, to control any enemies point in the world. Should
your adversary confront you with a pistol, 'twere nothing, by this hand, you
should, by the same rule, control his bullet, in a line: except it were
hayle-shot, and spread. What money have you about you, Mr. MATTHEW?


MAT. Faith, I have not past a two shillings, or so.


BOB. It Is some what with the least: but, come. We will have a bunch of redish,
and salt, to taste our wine; and a pipe of t^bacco, to close the orifice of the
stomach: and then, we will call upon young WEL-BRED. Perhaps we shall meet the
CORIDON, his brother, there: and put him to the question.


Act II.
Scene I.
KITELEY, CASH, DOWNRIGHT. THOMAS, Come hither,
There lies a note, within upon my deske,
Here, take my key: It is no matter, neither.
Where is the Boy?

CAS. Within, sir, in the warehouse.

KIT. Let him tell over, straight, that Spanish gold,
And weigh it, with the pieces of eight. Do you
See the delivery of those silver stuffes,
To Mr. LVCAR. Tell him, if he will,
He shall have the grogran's, at the rate I told him,
And I will meet him, on the Exchange, anon.

CAS. Good, sir.

KIT. Do you see that fellow, brother DOWNRIGHT?

DOW. I, what of him?

KIT. He is a jewel, brother.
I took him of a child, up, at my door,
And christened him, gave him mine own name, THOMAS,
Since bred him at the Hospital; where proving
A toward impe, I called him home, and taught him
So much, as I have made him my Cashier,
And given him, who had none, a surname, CASH:
And find him, in his place so full of faith,
That, I durst trust my life into his hands.

DOW. So, would not I in any bastards, brother,
As, it is like, he is: although I knew
My self his father. But you said yo' had somewhat
To tell me, gentle brother, what is it? what is it?

KIT. Faith, I am very loath, to utter it,
As fearing, it may hurt your patience:
But, that I know, your judgment is of strength,
Against the neerenesse of affection --

DOW. What need this circumstance? pray you be direct.

KIT. I will not say, how much I do ascribe
Unto your friendship; nor, in what regard
I hold your love: but, let my past behavior,
And usage of your sister, but confirm
How well I'aue been affected to your --

DOW. You are too tedious, come to the matter, the matter.

KIT. Then (without further ceremony) thus.
My brother WELL-BRED, sir, (I know not how)
Of late, is much declined in what he was,
And greatly altered in his disposition.
When he came first to lodge here in my house,
Never trust me, if I were not proud of him:
Me thought he bare himself in such a fashion,
So full of man, and sweetness in his carriage,
And (what was chief) it showed not borrowed in him,
But all he did, became him as his own,
And seemed as perfect, proper, and possessed
As breath, with life, or color, with the blood.
But, now, his course is so irregular,
So loose, affected, and deprived of grace,
And he himself withal so far fallen off
From that first place, as scarce no note remains,
To tell men's judgments where he lately stood.
He Is grown a stranger to all due respect,
Forgetful of his friends, and not content
To stale himself in all societies,
He makes my house here common, as a Mart,
A Theater, a public receptacle
For giddie humor, and diseased riot;
And here (as in a tavern, or a stews)
He, and his wild associates, spend their hours,
In repetition of lascivious jests,
Swear, leap, drink, dance, and revel night by night,
Control my servants: and indeed what not?

DOW. 'Sdeynes, I know not what I should say to him, in the whole world! He
values me, at a cracked three-farthings, for ought I see: It will never out of
the flesh that is bred in the bone! I have told him enough, one would think, if
that would serve: But, counsel to him, is as good, as a shoulder of mutton to
a sick horse. Well! he knows what to trust to, for GEORGE. Let him spend, and
spend* and domineere, till his heart ache; an' he think to be relieved by me,
when he is got into one o'your city pounds, the Counters, he has the wrong sow
by the ear, in faith: and claps his dish at the wrong man's door. I Will lay my
hand of my halfe-peny, e're I part with 't, to fetch him out, I Will assure him.


KIT. Nay, good brother, let it not trouble you, thus.


DOW. 'S death, he mads me, I could eat my very spur-lethers, for anger! But,
why are you so tame? Why do not you speak to him, and tell him how he
disquiets your house?


KIT. O, there are diverse reasons to dissuade, brother.
But, would your self vouchsafe to travail in it,
(Though but with plain, and easy circumstance)
It would, both come much better to his sense,
And savor less of stomach, or of passion.
You are his elder brother, and that title
Both gives, and warrants you authority;
Which (by your presence seconded) must breed
A kind of duty in him, and regard*
Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
It would but add contempt, to his neglect,
Heap worse on ill, make up a pile of hatred
That, in the rearing, would come tottring down,
And, in the ruin, bury all our love.
Nay, more then this, brother, if I should speak
He would be ready from his heat of humor,
And ouer-flowing of the vapor, in him,
To blow the ears of his familiars,
With the false breath, of telling, what disgraces,
And low disparadgments, I had put upon him.
Whilst they, sir, to relieve him, in the fable,
Make their loose comments, upon every word,
Gesture, or look, I use; mock me all over,
From my flat cap, unto my shining shoes:
And, out of their impetuous rioting phant'sies,
Beget some slander, that shall dwell with me.
And what would that be, think you? mary, this.
They would give out (because my wife is fair,
My self but lately married, and my sister
Here soiourning a virgin in my house)
That I were jealous! nay, as sure as death,
That they would say. And how that I had quarreled
My brother purposely, thereby to find
An apt pretext, to banish them my house.

DOW. Mass perhaps so: They' are like enough to do it.

KIT. Brother, they would, believe it: so should I
(Like one of these penurious quack-saluers)
But set the bills up, to mine own disgrace,
And try experiments upon my self:
Lend scorn and envy, opportunity,
To stab my reputation, and good name --

Act II. Scene II.
MATTHEW, BOBADIL, DOWNRIGHT, KITELY. I Will speak to him --


BOB. Speak to him? away, by the foot of PHARAOH, you shall not, you shall not
do him that grace. The time of day, to you, Gentleman of the house. Is Mr.
WELL-BRED stirring?


DOW. How then? what should he do?


BOB. Gentleman of the house, it is to you: is he within, sir?


KIT. He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.


DOW. Why, do you hear? you.


BOB. The gentleman-citizen has satisfied me, I Will talk to no scauenger.


DOW. How, scauenger? stay sir, stay?


KIT. Nay, brother DOWNRIGHT.


DOW. 'Heart! stand you away, and you love me.


KIT. You shall not follow him now, I pray you, brother,
Good faith you shall not: I will overrule you.

DOW. Ha? scauenger? well, go to, I say little: but, by this good day (god
forgive me I should swear) if I put it up so, say, I am the rankest cow, that
ever pist. 'Sdeynes, and I swallow this, I Will never draw my sword in the sight
of Fleet Street again, while I live; I Will sit in a barn, with Madge-howlet,
and catch mice first. Scauenger? 'Heart, and I Will go near to fill that huge
tumbrell-slop of yours, with somewhat, and I have good luck: your GARAGANTVA
breech cannot carry it away so.


KIT. Oh do not fret your self thus, never think^ on it.


DOW. These are my brothers consorts, these! these are his Cam'rades, his
walking mates! he is a gallant, a Caualiero too, right hangman cut! Let me not
live, and I could not find in my heart to swinge the whole ging of 'hem, one
after another, and begin with him first. I am grieved, it should be said he is
my brother, and take these courses. Well as he brewes, so he shall drink, for
GEORGE, again. Yet, he shall hear on it, and that tightly too, and I live,
In Faith.


KIT. But, brother, let your reprehension (then)
Run in an easy current, not ore-high
Carried with rashness, or devouring choler;
But rather use the soft persuading way,
Whose powers will work more gently, and compose
Th'imperfect thoughts you labor to reclaim:
More winning, then enforcing the consent.

DOW. Bell rings. I, I, let me alone for that, I warrant you.

KIT. How now? oh, the bell rings to breakefast.
Brother, I pray you go in, and bear my wife
Company, till I come; I Will but give order
Forsome dispatch of business, to my servants --

Act II. Scene III.
KITELY, COB, DAME KITELY. To them. WHat, COB? our maids will have you by the
back (In Faith)
For coming so late this morning.

COB. I Will passes by with his tankard. Perhaps so, sir, take heed some body
have not them by the belly, for walking so late in the evening.


KIT. Well, yet my troubled spirit's somewhat eased,
Though not reposed in that security,
As I could wish: But, I must be content.
How e're I set a face on it to the world,
Would I had lost this finger, at a venture,
So WELL-BRED had never lodged within my house.
Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
Of wanton gallants, and young reuellers,
That any woman should be honest long.
Is It like, that factious beauty will preserve
The public weal of chastity, vn-shaken,
When such strong motives muster, and make head
Against her single peace? no, no. Beware,
When mutual appetite does meet to treat,
And spirits of one kind, and quality,
Come once to parlee, in the pride of bluod:
It is no slow conspiracy, that follows.
Well (to be plain) if I but thought, the time
Had answered their affections: all the world
Should not persuade me, but I were a cuckold.
Mary, I hope, they have not got that start:
For opportunity has balkt 'hem yet,
And shall do still, while I have eyes, and ears
To attend the impositions of my heart.
My presence shall be as an iron bar,
'Twixt the conspiring motions of desire:
Yea, every look, or glance, mine eye eiects,
Shall check occasion, as one does his slave,
When he forgets the limits of prescription.

DAME. Sister BRIDGET, pray you fetch down the rose water above in the closet.
Sweet heart, will you come in, to breakefast.


KITE. An' she have ouer-heard me now?

DAME. I pray thee (good MVSSE) we stay for you.

KITE. By heaven I would not for a thousand angels.

DAME. What aile you sweet heart, are you not well, speak good MVSSE.


KITE. Troth my head aches extremely, on a sudden.

DAME. Oh, the lord!

KITE. How now? what?

DAME. Alas, how it burns? MVSSE, keep you warm, good truth it is this new
disease! there is a number are troubled withal! for loves sake, sweet heart,
come in, out of the air.


KITE. How simple, and how subtle are her answers?
A new disease, and many troubled with it!
Why, true: she heard me, all the world to nothing.

DAME. I pray thee, good sweet heart, come in; the air will do you harm in,
troth.


KITE. The air! she has me in the wind! sweet heart!
I Will come to you presently: 't will away, I hope.

DOW. Pray heaven it do.

KITE. A new disease? I know not, new, or old,
But it may well be called poor mortals plague:
For, like a pestilence, it does infect
The houses of the brain. First, it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment; and from thence,
Sends like contagion to the memory:
Still each to other giving the infection.
Which, as a subtle vapor, spreads it self,
Confusedly, through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought, or motion, in the mind,
Be free from the black poison of suspect.
Ah, but what miserie' is it, to know this?
Or, knowing it, to want the minds erection,
In such extremes? Well, I will once more strive,
(In spite of this black cloud) myself to be,
And shake the fever off, that thus shakes me.

Act II. Scene IIII.
BRAYNE-WORME, ED. KNO'WELL, Mr. STEPHEN. S'Lid, I cannot choose but laugh, to
see myself translated thus, from a poor creature to a creator; for now must I
create an intolerable sort of lies, or my present profession looses the grace:
and yet the lie to a man of my coat, is as ominous a fruit, as the Fico. O sir,
it holds for good polity ever, to have that outwardly in vilest estimation,
that inwardly is most dear to us. So much, for my borrowed shape. Well, the
troth is, my old master intends to follow my young, dry foot, over More-fields,
to London, this morning: now I, knowing, of this hunting-match, or rather
conspiracy, and to insinuate with my young master (for so must we that are
blew-waiters, and men of hope and service do, or perhaps we may wear motley
at the years end, and who wears motley, you know) have got me before, in this
disguise, determining here to lie in ambuscado, and intercept him, in the
midway. If I can but get his cloak, his purse, his hat, nay, anything, to cut
him off, that is, to stay his journey, Veni, vidi, vici, I may say with
Captain CAESAR, I am made for ever, in faith. Well, now must I practice to get
the true garb of one of these Lance-knights, my arm here, and my -- young
master! and his cousin, Mr. STEPHEN, as I am true counterfeit man of war, and
no soldier!


E. KN. So sir, and how then, couss?


STEP. 'Sfoot, I have lost my purse, I think.


E. KN. How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?


STEP. I cannot tell, stay.


BRAY. 'Slid, I am afeard, they will know me, would I could get by them.


E. KN. What? have you it?


STEP. No, I think I was bewitched, I --


E. KN. Nay, do not weep the loss, hang it, let it go.


STEP. Oh, it is here: no, and it had been lost, I had not cared, but for a iet
ring mistress MARY sent me.


E. KN. A iet ring? oh, the poesy, the poesy?


STEP. Fine, in faith! Though fancy sleep, my love is deep. Meaning that though
I did not fancy her, yet she loved me dearly.


E. KN. Most excellent!


STEP. And then, I sent her another, and my poesy was: The deeper, the
sweeter, I Will be judged by St. PETER.


E. KN. How, by St. PETER? I do not conceive that!


STEP. Mary, St. PETER, to make up the meeter.


E. KN. He is come back. Well, there the Saint was your good patron, he helped
you at your need: thank him, thank him.


BRAY. I cannot take leave on 'hem, so: I will venture, come what will.
Gentlemen, please you change a few crowns, for a very excellent good blade,
here? I am a poor gentleman, a soldier, one that (in the better state of my
fortunes) scorned so mean a refuge, but now it is the humor of necessity, to
have it so. You seem to be gentlemen, well affected to martial men, else I
should rather die with silence, then line with shame: how ever, vouchsafe to
remember, it is my want speaks, not my self. This condition agrees not with
my spirit --


E. KN. Where have thou served?


BRAY. May it please you, sir, in all the late wars of Bohemia, Hungaria,
Dalmatia, Poland, where not, sir? I have been a poor seruitor, by sea and
land, any time this fourteen years, and followed the fortunes of the best
Commanders in christendom. I was twice shot at the taking of Alepo, once at
the relief of Vienna; I have been at Marseilles, Naples, and the Adriatique
gulf, a gentleman-slaue in the galleys, thrice, where I was most dangerously
shot in the head, through both the thighs, and yet, being thus maym'd, I am
void of maintenance, nothing left me but my scarres, the noted marks of my
resolution.


STEP. How will you sell this rapier, friend?


BRAY. Generous sir, I refer it to your own judgment; you are a gentleman,
give me what you please.


STEP. True, I am a gentleman, I know that friend: but what though? I pray you
say, what would you ask?


BRAY. I assure you, the blade may become the side, or thigh of the best
prince, in Europe.


E. KN. I, with a velvet scabberd, I think.


STEP. Nay, and 't be mine, it shall have a velvet scabberd, Couss, that is
flat: I Would not wear it as it is, and you would give me an angel.


BRAY. At your worships pleasure, sir; nay, it is a most pure Toledo.


STEP. I had rather it were a Spaniard! but tell me, what shall I give you for
it? An' it had a silver hilt --


E. KN. Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold, there is a shilling fellow, take
thy rapier.


STEP. Why, but I will buy it now, because you say so, and there is another
shilling, fellow. I scorn to be out-bidden. What, shall I walk with a
cudgel, like Higgin-Bottom? and may have a rapier, for money?


E. KN. You may buy one in the city.


STEP. Tut, I Will buy this in the field, so I will, I have a mind to it, because
it is a field rapier. Tell me your lowest price.


E. KN. You shall not buy it, I say.


STEP. By this money, but I will, though I give more then it is worth.


E. KN. Come away, you are a fool.


STEP. Friend, I am a fool, that is granted: but I Will have it, for that words
sake. Follow me, for your money.


BRAY. At your service, sir.


Act II. Scene V.
KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME. I Cannot loose the thought, yet, of this letter,
Sent to my son: nor leave t'admire the change
Of manners, and the breeding of our youth,
Within the kingdom, since my self was one.
When I was young, he lived not in the stews,
Durst have conceived a scorn, and vtter'd it,
On a gray head; age was authority
Against a buffon: and a man had, then,
A certain reverence pai'd unto his years,
That had none due unto his life. So much
The sanctity of some prevailed, for others.
But, now, we all are fallen; youth, from their fear:
And age, from that, which bred it, good example.
Nay, would our selves were not the first, even parents,
That did destroy the hopes, in our own children:
Or they not learned our vices, in their cradles,
And sucked in our ill customs, with their milk.
Ere all their teeth be borne, or they can speak,
We make their palats cunning! The first words,
We form their tongues with, are licentious jests!
Can it call, whore? cry, bastard? O, then, kiss it,
A witty child! Cannot swear? The fathers dearling!
Give it two plums. Nay, rather then 't shall learn
No bawdie song, the mother' her self will teach it!
But, this is in the infancy; the days
Of the long coat: when it puts on the breeches,
It will put off all this. I, it is like:
When it is gone into the bone already.
No, no: This die goes deeper then the coat,
Or shirt, or skin. It stains, unto the liver,
And heart, in some. And, rather, then it should not,
Note, what we fathers do! Look, how we live!
What mistresses we keep! at what expense,
In our sons eyes! where they may handle our gifts,
Hear our lascivious courtships, see our dalliance,
Taste of the same provoking meats, with us,
To ruin of our states! Nay, when our own
Portion is fled, to prey on their remainder,
We call them into fellowship of vice!
Bait 'hem with the young chambermaid, to seal!
And teach 'hem all bad ways, to buy affiction!
This is one path! but there are millions more,
In which we spoil our own, with leading them.
Well, I thank heaven, I never yet was he,
That trauail'd with my son, before sixteen,
To show him, the Venetian cortezans.
Nor read the grammar of cheating, I had made
To my sharp boy, at twelve: repeating still
The rule, Get money; still, Get money, Boy;
No matter, by what means; Money will do
More, Boy, then my Lords letter. Neither have I
Dressed snailes, or mushromes curiously before him,
Perfumed my sauces, and taught him to make 'hem;
Preceding still, with my gray gluttony,
At all the ordinaries: and only feared
His palate should degenerate, not his manners.
These are the trade of fathers, now! how ever
My son, I hope, has met within my threshold,
None of these household precedents; which are strong,
And swift, to rape youth, to their precipice.
But, let the house at home be nere so clean
Swept, or kept sweet from filth; nay, dust, and cob-webs:
If he will live, abroad, with his companions,
In dung, and leystalls; it is worth a fear.
Nor is the danger of conuersing less,
Then all that I have mentioned of example.

BRAY. My master? nay, faith have at you: I am flesht now, I have sped so well.
Worshipful sir, I beseech you, respect the estate of a poor soldier; I am
ashamed of this base course of life (god's my comfort) but extremity prouokes
me to it, what remedy?


KNO. I have not for you, now.


BRAY. By the faith I bear unto truth, gentleman, it is no ordinary custom
in me, but only to preserve manhood. I protest to you, a man I have been, a
man I may be, by your sweet bounty.


KNO. 'Pray thee, good friend, be satisfied.


BRAY. Good sir, by that hand, you may do the part of a kind gentleman, in
lending a poor soldier the price of two cannes of beer (a matter of small
value) the king of heaven shall pay you, and I shall rest thankful: sweet
worship --


KNO. Nay, and you be so importunate --


BRAY. He weeps. Oh, tender sir, need will have his course: I was not made to
this vile use! well, the edge of the enemy could not have abated me so much:
It Is hard when a man has served in his Princes cause, and be thus -- Honorable
worship, let me derive a small piece of silver from you, it shall not be given
in the course of time, by this good ground, I was feign to pawn my rapier last
night for a poor supper, I had sucked the hilts long before, I am a pagan
else: sweet honor.


KNO. Believe me, I am taken with some wonder,
To think, a fellow of thy outward presence
Should (in the frame, and fashion of his mind)
Be so degenerate, and sordid-base!
Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practice such a servile kind of life?
Why, were thy education never so mean,
Having thy limbs, a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves, to thy election.
Either the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous gentleman,
Or honest labor: nay, what can I name,
But would become thee better then to beg?
But men of thy condition feed on sloth,
As does the beetle, on the dung she breeds in,
Not caring how the metal of your minds
Is eaten with the rust of idleness*
Now, before me, what e're he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While thou insist's in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin, not thine, but his.

BRAY. Faith sir, I would gladly find some other course, if so --

KNO. I, you would gladly ^inde it, but you will not seek it.

BRAY. Alas sir, where should a man seek? in the wars, there is no ascent by
desert in these days, but -- and for service, would it were as soon purchased,
as wished for (the ayre's my comfort) I know, what I would say --


KNO. What Is thy name?

BRAY. Please you, FITZ-SWORD, sir.

KNO. FITZ-SWORD?
Say, that a man should entertayne thee now,
Would thou be honest, humble, just, and true?

BRAY. Sir, by the place, and honor of a soldier --

KNO. Nay, nay, I like not those affected oaths;
Speak plainly man: what think thou of my words?

BRAY. Nothing, sir, but wish my fortunes were as happy, as my service should
be honest.


KNO. Well, follow me, I Will prove thee, if thy deeds
Will carry a proportion to thy words.

BRAY. Yes sir, straight, I Will but garter my hose. Oh that my belly were hoopt
now, for I am ready to burst with laughing! never was bottle, or bag-pipe
fuller. S'lid, was there ever seen a fox in years to betray himself thus?
now shall I be possessed of all his counsels: and, by that conduit, my young
master. Well, he is resolved to prove my honesty; faith, and I am resolved to
prove his patience: oh I shall abuse him intollerably. This small piece of
service, will bring him clean out of love with the soldier, for ever. He will
never come within the sign of it, the sight of a cassock, or a musket-rest
again. He will hate the musters at Mile-end for it, to his dying day. It Is no
matter, let the world think me a bad counterfeit, If I cannot give him the
slip, at an instant: why, this is better then to have staid his journey! well,
I Will follow him: oh, how I long to be employed.


Act III.
Scene I.
MATTHEW, WELL-BRED, BOBADILL, ED. KNO'WELL, STEPHEN. YEs faith, sir, we were
at your lodging to seek you, too.


WELL. Oh, I came not there to night.


BOB. Your brother delivered us as much.


WELL. Who? my brother DOWNRIGHT?


BOB. He. Mr. WELL-BRED, I know not in what kind you hold me, but let me say to
you this: as sure as honor, I esteem it so much out of the sunshine of
reputation, to through the least beam of reguard, upon such a --


WELL. Sir, I must hear no ill words of my brother.


BOB. I, protest to you, as I have a thing to be saved about me, I never saw
any gentleman-like part --


WELL. Good Captain, faces about, to some other discourse.


BOB. With your leave, sir, and there were no more men living upon the face of
the earth, I should not fancy him, by S. GEORGE.


MAT. Troth, nor I, he is of a rusticall cut, I know not how: he does not carry
himself like a gentleman of fashion --


WELL. Oh, Mr. MATTHEW, that is a grace peculiar but to a few; quos aquus amauit
IVPITER.


MAT. I understand you sir.


WELL. Young Kno'well enters. No question, you do, or you do not, sir. NED
KNO'WELL! by my soul welcome; how do thou sweet spirit, my Genius? S'lid I
shall love APOLLO, and the mad Thespian girls the better, while I live, for
this; my dear fury: now, I see there is some love in thee! Sir, these be
the two I writ to thee of (nay, what a drowsy humor is this now? why do
thou not speak?)


E. KN. Oh, you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter!


WELL. Why, was it not rare?


E. KN. Yes, I Will be sworn, I was never guilty of reading the like; match it
in all PLINY, or SYMMACHVS epistles, and I Will have my judgment burned in the
ear for a rogue: make much of thy vain, for it is inimitable. But I marle
what camel it was, that had the carriage of it? for doubtless, he was no
ordinary beast, that brought it!


WELL. Why?


E. KN. Why, faiest thou? why do thou think that any reasonable creature,
especially in the morning (the sober time of the day too) could have mis-tane
my father for me?


WELL. S'lid, you jest, I hope?


E. KN. Indeed, the best use we can turn it too, is to make a jest on it, now:
but I Will assure you, my father had the full view of your flourishing style, some
hour before I saw it.


WELL. What a dull slave was this? But, sirrah, what said he to it, In Faith?


E. KN. Nay, I know not* what he said: but I have a shrewd guess what he
thought.


WELL. What? what?


E. KN. Mary, that thou art some strange dissolute young fellow, and I a grain
or two better, for keeping thee company.


WELL. Tut, that thought is like the moon in her last quarter, 'twill change
shortly: but, sirrah, I pray thee be acquainted with my two hangby's, here;
thou will take exceeding pleasure in 'hem if thou hear'st 'hem once go: my
wind-instruments. I Will wind 'hem up -- but what strange piece of silence is
this? the sign of the dumb man?


E. KN. Oh, sir, a kinsman of mine, one that may make your music the fuller,
and he please, he has his humor, sir.


WELL. Oh, what is it? what is it?


E. KN. Nay, I Will neither do your judgment, nor his folly that wrong, as to
prepare your apprehension: I Will leave him to the mercy of your search, if you
can take him, so.


WELL. To Master Stephen. Well, Captain BOBADILL, Mr. MATTHEW, pray you know
this gentleman here, he is a friend of mine, and one that will deserve your
affection. I know not your name sir, but I shall be glad of any occasion, to
render me more familiar to you


STEP. My name is Mr. STEPHEN, sir, I am this gentleman's own cousin, sir, his
father is mine uncle, sir, I am somewhat melancholy, but you shall command me,
sir, in what soever is incident to a gentleman.


BOB. To Kno'well. Sir, I must tell you this, I am no general man, but for Mr.
WEL-BRED'S sake (you may embrace it, at what height of favor you please) I do
communicate with you: and conceive you, to be a gentleman of some parts, I
love few words.


E. KN. And I fewer, sir. I have scarce inow, to thank you.


MAT. To Master Stephen. But are you indeed. Sir? so given to it?


STEP. I, truly, sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.


MAT. Oh, it is your only fine humor, sir, your true melancholy, breeds your
perfect sine wit, sir: I am melancholy my self diverse times, sir, and then do
I no more but take pen, and paper presently, and ouerflow you half a score, or
a dozen of sonnets, at a sitting.


(E. KN. Sure, he vtters them then, by the gross.)


STEP. Truly sir, and I love such things, out of measure.


E. KN. I faith, better then in measure, I Will undertake.


MAT. Why, I pray you, sir, make use of my study, it is at your service.


STEP. I thank you sir, I shall be bold, I warrant you; have you a stool
there, to be melancholy' upon?


MAT. That I have, sir, and some papers there of mine own doing, at idle
hours, that you will say there is some sparks of wit in 'hem, when you see them.


WELL. Would the sparks would kindle once, and become a fire a^ongst 'hem, I
might see self-love burned for her heresy.


STEP. Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy enough?


E. KN. Oh I, excellent!


WELL. Captain BOBADILL: why muse you so?


E. KN. He is melancholy, too.


BOB. Faith, sir, I was thinking of a most honorable piece of service, was
performed tomorrow, being St. MARKS day: shall be some ten years, now?


E. KN. In what place, Captain?


BOB. Why, at the beleag'ring of Strigonium, where, in less then two hours,
seven hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in Europe, lost their lives upon
the breach. I Will tell you, gentlemen, it was the first, but the best leagure,
that ever I beheld, with these eyes, except the taking in of -- what do you
call it, last year, by the Genowayes, but that (of all other) was the most
fatal, and dangerous exploit, that ever I was ranged in, since I first bore
arms before the face of the enemy, as I am a gentleman, and soldier.


STEP. 'So, I had as liefe, as an angel, I could swear as well as that
gentleman!


E. KN. Then, you were a seruitor, at both it seems! at Strigonium? and what
do you called?


BOB. Oh lord, sir? by S. GEORGE, I was the first man, that entered the breach:
and, had I not effected it with resolution, I had been slain, if I had had a
million of lives.


E. KN. 'Twas pity, you had not ten; a cats, and your own, in faith. But, was
it possible?


(MAT. 'Pray you, mark this discourse, sir.


STEP. So, I do.)


BOB. I assure you (upon my reputation) it is true, and your self shall
confess.


E. KN. You must bring me to the rack, first.


BOB. Observe me iudicially, sweet sir, they had planted me three
demi-culuerings, just in the mouth of the breach; now, sir (as we were to give
on) their master gunner (a man of no mean skill, and mark, you must think)
confronts me with his linstock, ready to give fire; I spying his intendment,
discharged my petrionel in his bosom, and with these single arms, my poor
rapier, ran violently, upon the Moors, that guarded the ordinance, and
put'hem pell-mell to the sword.


WELL. To the sword? to the rapier, Captain?


E. KN. Oh, it was a good figure observed, sir! but did you all this, Captain,
without hurting your blade.


BOB. Without any impeach, of the earth: you shall perceive sir. It is the most
fortunate weapon, that ever rid on poor gentleman's thigh: shall I tell you,
sir? you talk of Morglay, Excalibur, Durindana, or so? tut, I lend no credit
to that is fabled of 'hem, I know the virtue of mine own, and therefore I
dare, the boldlier, maintain it.


STEP. I mar'le whether it be a Toledo, or no?


BOB. A most perfect Toledo, I assure you, sir.


STEP. I have a countriman of his, here.


MAT. Pray you, let us see, sir: yes faith, it is!


BOB. This a Toledo? pish.


STEP. Why do you pish, Captain?


BOB. A Fleming, by heaven, I Will buy them for a guilder, a piece, an' I would
have a thousand of them.


E. KN. How say you, cousin? I told you thus much?


WELL. Where bought you it, Mr. STEPHEN?


STEP. Of a souruie rogue soldier (a hundred of lice go with him) he swore it
was a Toledo.


BOB. A poor prouant rapier, no better.


MAT. Mass, I think it be, indeed! now I look on it, better.


E. KN. Nay, the longer you look on it, the worse. Put it up, put it up.


STEP. Well, I will put it up, but by -- (I have forgot the Captains oath, I
thought to have sworn by it) an' ere I meet him --


WELL. O, it is past help now, sir, you must have patience.


STEP. Horson connie-catching rascal! I could eat the very hilts for anger!


E. KN. A sign of good digestion! you have an ostrich stomach, cousin.


STEP. A stomach? would I had him here, you should see, an' I had a stomach.


WELL. It Is better as it is: come, gentlemen, shall we go?


Act III. Scene II.
E. KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME, STEPHEN, WELL-BRED, BOBADILL, MATTHEW. A Miracle,
cousin, look here! look here!


STEP. Oh, gods lid, by your leave, do you know me, sir?


BRAY. I sir, I know you, by sight.


STEP. You sold me a rapier, did you not?


BRAY. Yes, marie, did I sir.


STEP. You said, it was a Toledo, ha?


BRAY. True, I did so.


STEP. But, it is none?


BRAY. No sir, I confess it, it is none.


STEP. Do you confess it? gentlemen, bear witness, he has confessed it. By
gods will, and you had not confessed it --


E. KN. Oh cousin, forbear, forbear.


STEP. Nay, I have done, cousin.


WELL. Why you have done like a gentleman, he has confessed it, what would you
more?


STEP. Yet, by his leave, he is a rascal, under his savor, do you see?


E. KN. I, by his leave, he is, and under savor: a pretty piece of civility!
Sir, how do thou like him?


WELL. Oh, it is a most precious fool, make much on him: I can compare him to
nothing more happily, then a drum; for every one may play upon him.


E. KN. No, no, a childs whistle were far the fitter.


BRAY. Sir, shall I entreat a word with you?


E. KN. With me, sir? you have not another Toledo to sell, have you?


BRAY. You are conceipted, sir, your name is Mr. KNO'WELL, as I take it?


E. KN. You are, in the right? you mean not to proceed in the catechism, do
you?


BRAY. No sir, I am none of that coat.


E. KN. Of as bare a coat, though? well, say sir.


BRAY. Faith sir, I am but servant to the drum extraordinary, and indeed (this
smokie varnish being washed off, and three or four patches removed) I appear
your worships in reuersion, after the decease of your good father, BRAYNE-WORME.


E. KN. BRAYNE-WORME! S'light, what breath of a coniurer, has blown thee
hither in this shape.


BRAY. The breath of your letter, sir, this morning: the same that blew you to
the windmill, and your father after you.


E. KN. My father?


BRAY. Nay, never start, it is true, he has followed you over the field's, by
the foot, as you would do a hare in the snow.


E. KN. Sir, WEL-BRED, what shall we do, sir? my father is come over,
after me.


WELL. Thy father? where is he?


BRAY. At Justice CLEMENTS house here, in Colman-street, where he but stays my
return; and then --


WELL. Who Is this? BRAYNE-WORME?


BRAY. The same, sir.


WELL. Why how, in the name of wit, come thou trans-muted, thus?


BRAY. Faith, a devise, a devise: nay, for the love of reason, gentlemen, and
avoiding the danger, stand not here, withdraw, and I Will tell you all.


WELL. But, art thou sure, he will stay thy return?


BRAY. Do I live, sir? what a question is that?


WELL. We Will prorogue his expectation then, a little: BRAYNE-WORME, thou shall
go with us. Come on, gentlemen, nay, I pray thee, sweet NED, droope not:
'heart, and our wits be so wretchedly dull, that one old plodding brain can
outstrip us all, would we were eene pressed, to make porters of; and serve out
the remnant of our days, in Thames Street, or at Custom House key, in a
civil war, against the car-men.


BRAY. AMEN, AMEN, AMEN, say I.


Act III. Scene III.
KITELY, CASH. WHat says he, THOMAS? Did you speak with him?

CAS. He will expect you, sir, within this half hour.

KIT. Has he the money ready, can you tell?

CAS. Yes, sir, the money was brought in, last night.

KIT. O, that is well: fetch me my cloak, my cloak.
Stay, let me see, an hour, to go and come;
I, that will be the least: and then 'twill be
An hour, before I can dispatch with him;
Or very near: well, I will say two hours.
Two hours? ha? things, never dreamt of yet,
May be contrived, I, and effected too,
In two hours absence: well, I will not go.
Two hours; no, fleering opportunity,
I will not give your subtlety that scope.
Who will not judge him worthy to be robbed*
That sets his doors wide open to a thief,
And shows the fellon, where his treasure lies?
Again, what earthie spirit but will attempt
To the taste fruit of beauties golden tree,
When leaden sleep seals up the Dragons eyes?
I will not go. Business, go by, for once.
No beauty, no; you are of too good caract,
To be left so, without a guard, or open!
Your luster too'll inflame, at any distance,
Draw courtship to you, as a iet does strawes,
Put motion in a stone, strike fire from ice,
Nay, make a porter leap you, with his burden!
You must be then kept up, close, and well-watch'd,
For, give you opportunity, no quick-sand
Deuoures, or swallows swifter! He that lends
His wife (if she be fair) or time, or place;
Compells her to be false. I will not go.
The dangers are to many. And, then, the dressing
Is a most main attractiue! Our great heads,
Within the city, never were in safety,
Since our wives wore these little caps: I Will change 'hem,
I Will change 'hem, straight, in mine. Mine shall no more
Wea^e three-pild akornes, to make my horns ache.
Nor, will I go. I am resolved for that.
Carry'in my cloak again. Yet, stay. Yet, do too.
I will defer going, on all occasions.

CASH. Sir. SNARE, your scriuener, will be there with th'bonds.

KITE. That Is true! fool on me! I had clean forgot it,
I must go. What Is a clock?

CASH. Exchange time, sir.

KITE. 'Heart, then will WELL-BRED presently be here, too,
With one, or other of his loose consorts.
I am a knave, if I know what to say,
What course to take, or which way to resolve.
My brain (me thinks) is like an houre-glasse,
Wherein, my imaginations run, like sands,
Filling up time; but then are turned, and turned:
So, that I know not what to stay upon,
And less, to put in act. It shall be so.
Nay, I dare build upon his secrecy,
He knows not to deceive me. THOMAS?

CASH. Sir.

KITE. Yet now, I have bethought me, too, I will not.
THOMAS, is COB within?

CASH. I think he be, sir.

KITE. But he will prate too, there is no speech of him.
No, there were no man of the earth to THOMAS,
If I durst trust him; there is all the doubt.
But, should he have a chinke in him, I were gone,
Lost in my fame for ever: talk for The Exchange.
The manner he has stood with, till this present,
Does promise no such change! what should I fear then?
Well, come what will, I Will tempt my fortune, once.
THOMAS -- you may deceive me, but, I hope --
Your love, to me, is more --

CAS. Sir, if a servants
Duty, with faith, may be called love, you are
More then in hope, you are possessed of it.

KIT. I thank you, heartily, THOMAS; Gi' me your hand:
With all my heart, good THOMAS. I have, THOMAS,
A secret to impart, unto you -- but
When once you have it, I must seal your lips up:
(So far, I tell you, THOMAS.)

CAS. Sir, for that --

KIT. Nay, hear me, out. Think, I esteem you, THOMAS,
When, I will let you in, thus, to my private.
It is a thing fits, nearer, to my crest,
Then thou art ware of, THOMAS. If thou should
Reveal it, but --

CAS. How? I reveal it?

KIT. Nay,
I do not think thou would; but if thou should:
'Twere a great weakness.

CAS. A great treachery.
Give it no other name.

KIT. Thou will not do it, then?

CAS. Sir, if I do, mankind disclaim me, ever.

KIT. He will not swear, he has some reservation,
Some concealed purpose, and close meaning sure:
Else (being urged so much) how should he choose,
But lend an oath to all this protestation?
His no precisian, that I am certain of.
Nor rigid Roman-catholike. He Will play,
At Fayles, and Tick-tack, I have heard him swear.
What should I think of it? urge him again,
And by some other way? I will do so.
Well, THOMAS; thou have sworn not to disclose;
Yes, you did swear?

CAS. Not yet, sir, but I will,
Please you --

KIT. No, THOMAS, I dare take thy word.
But; if thou will swear, do, as thou think good;
I am resolved without it; at thy pleasure.

CAS. By my souls safety then, sir, I protest.
My tongue shall never take knowledge of a word,
Delivered me in nature of your trust.

KIT. It Is too much, these ceremonies need not,
I know thy faith to be as firm as rock.
THOMAS, come hither, near: we cannot be
Too private, in this business. So it is,
(Now, he has sworn, I dare the safelier venture)
I have of late, by diverse observations --
(But, whether his oath can bind him, yea, or no',
Being not taken lawfully? ha? say you?
I will ask counsel, ere I do proceed:)
THOMAS, it will be now too long to stay,
I Will spy some fitter time soon, or to morrow.

CAS. Sir, at your pleasure?

KIT. I will think. And, THOMAS,
I pray you search the books against my return,
For the receipts 'twixt me, and TRAPS.

CAS. I will, sir.

KIT. And, hear you, if your mistress brother, WEL-BRED,
Chance to bring hither any gentlemen,
Ere I come back; let one straight bring me word.

CAS. Very well, sir.

KIT. To the Exchange; do you hear?
Or here in Colman-street, to Justice CLEMENTS.
Forget it not, nor be not out of the way.

CAS. I will not, sir.

KIT. I pray you have a care on it.
Or whether he come, or no, if any other,
Stranger, or else, fail not to send me word.

CAS. I shall not, sir.

KIT. Be It your special business
Now, to remember it.

CAS. Sir. I warrant you.

KIT. But, THOMAS, this is not the secret, THOMAS,
I told you of.

CAS. No, sir. I do suppose it.

KIT. Believe me, it is not.

CAS. Sir. I do believe you.

KIT. By heaven, it is not, that is enough. But, THOMAS,
I would not, you should utter it, do you see?
To any creature living, yet, I care not.
Well, I must hence. THOMAS, conceive thus much.
It was a trial of you, when I meant
So deep a secret to you, I mean not this,
But that I have to tell you, this is nothing, this.
But, THOMAS, keep this from my wife, I charge you,
Locked up in silence, midnight, buried here.
No greater hell, then to be slave to fear.

CAS. Locked up in silence, midnight, buried here.
Whence should this flood of passion (trow) take head? ha?
Best, dream no longer of this running humor,
For fear I sink! the violence of the stream
Already has transported me so far,
That I can feel no ground at all! but soft,
Oh, it is our water-bearer: somewhat has crossed him, now.

Act III Scene IIII.
COB, CASH. FAsting days? what tell you me of fasting days? S'lid, would they
were all on a light fire for me: They say, the whole world shall be consumed
with fire one day, but would I had these ember-weekes, and villainous fridayes
burnt, in the mean time, and then --


CAS. Why, how now COB, what moves thee to this choler? ha?


COB. Collar, master THOMAS? I scorn your collar, I sir, I am none o'your
cart-horse, though I carry, and draw water. An' you offer to ride me, with your
collar, or halter either, I may hap show you a jades trick, sir.


CAS. O, you will slip your head out of the collar? why, goodman COB, you mistake
me.


COB. Nay, I have my rewme, and I can be angry as well as another, sir.


CAS. Thy rewme, COB? thy humor, thy humor? thou mistak'st.


COB. Humor? mack, I think it be so, indeed: what is that humor? some rare
thing, I warrant.


CAS. Mary, I Will tell thee, COB: It is a gentleman-like monster, bred, in the
special gallantrie of our time, by affectation; and fed by folly.


COB. How? must it be fed?


CAS. Oh I, humor is nothing, if it be not fed. Did thou never hear that?
it is a common phrase, Feed my humor.


COB. I Will none on it: Humor, auant, I know you not, be gone. Let who will make
hungry meals for your monster-ship, it shall not be I. Feed you, quoth he?
S'lid, I ha'much ado, to feed my self; especially, on these lean rascally
days, too; and't had been any other day, but a fasting day (a plague on them
all for me) by this light, one might have done the commonwealth good service,
and have drowned them all in the flood, two or three hundred thousand years
ago. O, I do stomach them hugely! I have a maw now, and't were for Sr BEVIS
his horse, against 'hem.


CAS. I pray thee, good COB, what makes thee so out of love with fasting-dayes?


COB. Mary that, which will make any man out of love with 'hem, I think: their
bad conditions, and you will needs know. First, they are of a Flemmish breed, I
am sure on it, for they raven up more butter, then all the days of the week,
beside; next, they stink of fish, and leeke-porridge miserably: thirdly,
they will keep a man devoutly hungry, all day, and at night send him
supperlesse to bed.


CAS. Indeed, these are faults, COB.


COB. He pulls out a red herring. Nay, and this were all, 'twere something, but
they are the only known enemies, to my generation. A fasting-day, no sooner
comes, but my lineage goes to rack, poor cobs they smoke for it, they are
made martyrs of the gridiron, they melt in passion: and your maids too know
this, and yet would have me turn HANNIBAL, and eat my own fish, and blood:
My princely couz, fear nothing; I have not the heart to devour you, and I might
be made as rich as King COPHETVA. O, that I had room for my tears, I could
weep salt water enough, now, to preserve the lives of ten thousand of my kin.
But, I may curse none but these filthy Almanacles, for an't were not for them,
these days of persecution would never be known. I Will be hanged, an'some
Fish-mongers son do not make of hem; and puts in more fasting-dayes then he
should do, because he would utter his fathers dried stock fish, and stinking
conger.


CAS. S'light, peace, thou wilt be beaten like a stock fish, else: here is Mr.
MATTHEW. Now must I look out for a messenger to my master.


Act III. Scene V.
WELL-BRED, ED. KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME, BOBADILL, MATTHEW, STEPHEN, THOMAS,
COB. BEshrew me, but it was an absolute good jest, and exceedingly well carried!


E. KNO. I, and our ignorance maintained it as well, did it not?


WELL. Yes faith, but was it possible thou should not know him? I forgive Mr.
STEPHEN, for he is stupiditie it self!


E. KN. Before god, not I, and I might have been joined patten with one of the
seven wise masters, for knowing him. He had so writhen himself, into the habit
of one of your poor Infanterie, your decayed, ruinous, worme-eaten gentlemen
of the round: such as have vowed to sit on the skirts of the city, let your
Provost, and his halfe-dozen of halberdeirs do what they can; and have
translated begging out of the old hackney pace, to a fine easy amble, and made
it run as smooth, of the tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling. Into the
likeness of one of these Reformado's had he molded himself so perfectly,
observing every trick of their action, as varying the accent, swearing with an
emphasis, indeed all, with so special, and exquisite a grace, that (had thou
seen him) thou would have sworn, he might have been Serieant- Mayor, if
not Lieutenant- Coronell to the regiment.


WELL. Why, BRAYNE-WORME, who would have thought thou had been such an
artificer?


E. KN. An artificer? An architect! except a man had studied begging all his
lifetime, and been a weauer of language, from his infancy, for the clothing
of it! I never saw his rival.


WELL. Where got'st thou this coat, I marl'e?


BRAY. Of a Hounds-ditch man, sir. One of the deuil's near kinsmen, a broker.


WELL. That cannot be, if the proverb hold; for, a crafty knave needs no
broker.


BRAY. True sir, but I did need a broker, Ergo.


WELL. (Well put off) no crafty knave, you will say,


E. KN. Tut, he has more of these shifts.


BRAY. And yet where I have one, the broker has ten, sir,


THO. FRANCIS, MARTIN, never a one to be found, now? what a spite's this?


WELL. How now, THOMAS? is my brother KITELY, within?


THO. No sir, my master went forth eene now: but master DOWNERIGHT is within.
COB, what COB? is he gone too?


WELL. VVhither went your master? THOMAS, can thou tell?


THO. I know not, to Justice CLEMENTS, I think, sir. COB.


E. KN. Justice CLEMENT, what is he?


WELL. Why, do thou not know him? he is a citie-magistrate, a Justice here,
an excellent good Lawyer, and a great scholar: but the only mad, merry, old
fellow in Europe! I showed him you, the other day.


E. KN. Oh, is that he? I remember him now. Good faith, and he has a very
strange presence, me thinks; it shows as if he stood out of the rank, from
other men: I have heard many of his jests in university. They say, he will
commit a man, for taking the wall, of his horse.


WELL. I, or wearing his cloak of one shoulder, or serving of god: any thing
indeed, if it come in the way of his humor.


CAS. Cash goes in and out calling. GASPER, MARTIN, COB: 'heart, where should
they be, trow?


BOB. Master KITELY'S man, 'pray thee vouchsafe us the lighting of this match.


CAS. Fire on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe? FRANCIS. COB.


BOB. Body of me! here is the remainder of seven pound, since yesterday was
seuen-night. It Is your right Trinidado! did you never take any, master STEPHEN?


STEP. No truly, sir? but I Will learn to take it now, since you commend it, so.


BOB. Sir, believe me (upon my relation) for what I tell you, the world shall
not reprove. I have been in the Indies (where this herb grows) where neither
my self, nor a dozen gentlemen more (of my knowledge) have received the taste
of any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and twenty weeks,
but the fume of this simple only. Therefore, it cannot be, but it is most
divine! Further, take it in the nature, in the true kind so, it makes an
antidote, that (had you taken the most deadly poisonous plant in all Italy, it
should expel it, and clarify you, with as much ease, as I speak. And, for
your green wound, your Balsamum, and your St. JOHN'S woort are all mere
gulleries, and trash to it, especially your Trinidado: your Nicotian is good
too. I could say what I know of the virtue of it, for the expulsion of rhewmes,
raw humors, crudities, obstructions, with a thousand of this kind, but I
profess my self no quack-saluer. Only, thus much, by HERCULES, I do hold it,
and will affirm it (before any Prince in Europe) to be the most sovereign,
and precious weed, that ever the earth tendered to the use of man.


E. KN. This speech would have done dece^tly in a tabacco-traders mouth!


CAS. At Justice CLEMENTS, he is: in the middle of Colman-street.


COB. O, oh?


BOB. Where Is the match I gave thee? Master KITELIES man?


CAS. Would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were at SANCTO DOMINGO! I had
forgot it.


COB. By gods me, I marle, what pleasure, or felicity they have in taking
this roguish tobacco! it is good for nothing, but to choke a man, and fill him
full of smoke, and embers: there were four dyed out of one house, last week,
with taking of it, and two more the bell went for, yester-night; one of them
(they say) will never escape it: he voided a bushel of soot yester-day, upward,
and downward. By the stocks, an' there were no wiser men then I, I Would have it
present whipping, man, or woman, that should but deal with a tabacco-pipe;
why, it will stifle them all in the end, as many as use it; it is little better
then rats bane, or rosaker.


ALL. Bobadil beats him with a cudgel. Oh, good Captain, hold, hold.


BOB. You base cullion, you.


CAS. Sir, here is your match: come, thou must needs be talking, too, tho'art
well enough served.


COB. Nay, he will not meddle with his match, I warrant you: well it shall be a
dear beating, and I live.


BOB. Do you prate? Do you murmr?


E. KN. Nay, good Captain, will you regard the humor of a fool? away, knave.


WELL. THOMAS, get him away.


BOB. A horson filthy slave, a dung-worme, an excrement! Body of CAESAR, but
that I scorn to let forth so mean a spirit, I Would have stabbed him, to the earth.


WELL. Mary, the law forbid, sir.


BOB. By PHAROAHS foot, I would have done it.


STEP. Oh, he swears admirably! (by PHAROAHS foot) (body of CAESAR) I shall
never do it, sure (upon mine honor, and by Saint GEORGE) no, I have not the
right grace.


MAY. Master STEPHEN, will you any? By this air, the most divine tobacco, that
ever I drunk!


STEP. None, I thank you, sir. O, this gentleman does it, rarely too! but
nothing like the other. By this air, as I am a gentleman: by --


BRAY. Master Stephen is practicing, to the post. Master, glance, glance!
Master WELL-BRED!


STEP. As I have somewhat to be saved, I protest --


WELL. You are a fool: It needs no affidauit.


E. KN. Cousin, will you any tobacco?


STEP. I sir! upon my reputation --


E. KN. How now, cousin!


STEP. I protest, as I am a gentleman, but no soldier, indeed --


WELL. No, Master STEPHEN? as I remember your name is entered in the artillery
garden?


STEP. I sir, that is true: Cousin, may I swear, as I am a soldier, by that?


E. KN. Oh yes, that you may. It Is all you have for your money.


STEP. Then, as I am a gentleman, and a soldier, it is divine tobacco!


WELL. But soft, where is Mr. MATTHEW? gone?


BRAY. No, sir, they went in here.


WELL. O, let us follow them: master MATTHEW is gone to salute his mistress, in
verse. We shall have the happiness, to hear some of his poetry, now. He
never comes vnfurnish'd. BRAYNE-WORME?


STEP. BRAYNE-WORME? Where? Is this BRAYNE-WORME?


E. KN. I, cousin, no words of it, upon your gentilitie.


STEP. Not I, body of me, by this air, S. GEORGE, and the foot of PHARAOH.


WELL. Rare! your cousins discourse is simply drawn out with oaths.


E. KN. It Is larded with 'hem. A kind of french dressing, if you love it.


Act III. Scene VI.
KITELY, COB. HA? how many are there, say thou?


COB. Mary sir, your brother, master VVELL-BRED --


KIT. Tut, beside him: what strangers are there, man?


COB. Strangers? let me see, one, two; mass I know not well, there are so many.


KIT. How? so many?


COB. I, there is some five, or six of them, at the most.


KIT. A swarm, a swarm,
Spite of the devil, how they sting my head
With forked stings, thus wide, and large! But, COB,
How long have thou been coming hither, COB?

COB. A little while, sir.

KIT. Did thou come running?

COB. No, sir.

KIT. Nay, then I am familiar with thy haste!
Bane to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
I, that before was rankt in such content,
My mind at rest too, in so soft a peace,
Being free master of mine own free thoughts,
And now become a slave? What? never sigh,
Be of good cheer, man: for thou art a cuckold,
It Is done, it is done! nay, when such flowing store,
Plenty it self, falls in my wives lap,
The Cornu-copiae will be mine, I know. But, COB,
What entertaynement had they? I am sure
My sister, and my wife, would bid them welcome! ha?

COB. Like enough, sir, yet, I heard not a word of it.

KIT. No: their lips were sealed with kisses, and the voice
Drowned in a flood of joy, at their arrival,
Had lost her motion, state, and faculty.
COB, which of them was it, that first kissed my wife?
(My sister, I should say) my wife, alas,
I fear not her: ha? who was it, say thou?

COB. By my troth, sir, will you have the truth of it?

KIT. Oh I, good COB: I pray thee, heartily.

COB. Then, I am a vagabond, and fitter for Bride-well, then your worships
company, if I saw any body to be kissed, unless they would have kissed the post,
in the middle of the warehouse; for there I left them all, at their tobacco,
with a pox.


KIT. How? were they not gone in, then, e're thou came?


COB. Oh no sir.


KIT. Spite of the devil* what do I stay here, then? COB, follow me.


COB. Nay, soft and fair, I have eggs on the spit; I cannot go yet, sir. Now
am I for some five and fifty reasons hammering, hammering revenge: oh, for
three or four gallons of vinegar, to sharpen my wits. Revenge, vinegar
revenge: vinegar, and mustard revenge: nay, and he had not lain in my house,
't would never have grieved me, but being my guest, one, that I Will be sworn, my
wife has lent him her smock off her back, while his one shirt has been at
washing; pawned her neckerchers for clean bands for him; sold almost all my
platters, to buy him tobacco; and he to turn monster of ingratitude, and
strike his lawful host! well, I hope to raise up an host of fury for it: here
comes Justice CLEMENT.


Act III. Scene VII.
CLEMENT, KNO'WELL, FORMAL, COB. What Is master KITELY gone? ROGER?


FOR. I, sir.


CLEM. 'Hart of me! what made him leave us so abruptly! How now, sir? what
make you here? what would you have, ha?


COB. And't please your worship, I am a poor neighbor of your worships --


CLEM. A poor neighbor of mine? why, speak poor neighbor.


COB. I dwell, sir, at the sign of the water-tankerd, hard by the green
lattice: I have paid scot, and lot there, any time this eighteen years.


CLEM. To the green lattice?


COB. No, sir, to the parish: mary, I have seldom escaped scot-free, at the
lattice.


CLEM. O, well! what business has my poor neighbor with me?


COB. And't like your worship, I am come, to crave the peace of your worship.


CLEM. Of me knave? peace of me, knave? did I e're hurt thee? or threaten
thee? or wrong thee? ha?


COB. No, sir, but your worships warrant, for one that has wronged me, sir:
his arms are at too much liberty, I would feign have them bound to a treaty
of peace, an' my credit could compass it, with your worship.


CLEM. Thou go far enough about for it, I am sure.


KNO. Why, do thou go in danger of thy life for him? friend?


COB. No sir; but I go in danger of my death, every hour, by his means: an'
I die, within a twelue-moneth and a day, I may swear, by the law of the land,
that he killed me.


CLEM. How? how knave? swear he killed thee? and by the law? what pretense?
what color have thou for that?


COB. Mary, and't please your worship, both black, and blew; color enough, I
warrant you. I have it here, to show your worship.


CLEM. What is he, that gave you this, sir?


COB. A gentleman, and a soldier, he says he is, of the city here.


CLEM. A soldier of the city? What call you him?


COB. Captain BOBADIL.


CLEM. BOBADIL? And why did he bob, and beat you, sirrah? How began the
quarrel betwixt you? ha: speak truly knave, I advise you.


COB. Mary, indeed, and please your worship, only because I spoke against
their vagrant tobacco, as I came by 'hem, when they were taking on it, for
nothing else.


CLEM. Ha? you speak against tobacco? FORMAL, his name.


FORM. What Is your name, sir?


COB. OLIVER, sir, OLIVER COB, sir.


CLEM. Tell OLIVER COB, he shall go to the iayle, FORMAL.


FORM. OLIVER COB, my master, Justice CLEMENT, says, you shall go to the
iayle.


COB. O, I beseech your worship, for gods sake, dear master Justice.


CLEM. Nay, gods precious: and such drunkards, and tankards, as you are, come
to dispute of tobacco once; I have done! away with him.


COB. O, good master Justice, sweet old gentleman.


KNO. Sweet OLIVER, would I could do thee any good: Justice CLEMENT, let me
entreat you, sir.


CLEM. What? a threadbare rascal! a beggar! a slave that never drunk out of
better then pisse-pot mettle in his life! and he to deprave, and abuse the
virtue of an herb, so generally received in the courts of princes, the
chambers of nobles, the bowers of sweet ladies, the cabbins of soldiers!
ROGER, away with him, by gods precious -- I say, go too.


COB. Dear master Justice; Let me be beaten again, I have deserved it: but
not the prison, I beseech you.


KNO. Alas, poor OLIVER!


CLEM. ROGER, make him a warrant (he shall not go) I but fear the knave.


FORM. Do not stink, sweet OLIVER, you shall not go, my master will give you
a warrant.


COB. O, the Lord maintain his worship, his worthy worship.


CLEM. Away, dispatch him. How now, master KNO'WEL! In dumps? In dumps? Come,
this becomes not.


KNO. Sir, would I could not feel my cares --


CLEM. Your cares are nothing! they are like my cap, soon put on, and as soon
put off. What? your son is old enough, to govern himself: let him run his
course, it is the only way to make him a stayed man. If he were an unthrift, a
ruffian, a drunkard, or a licentious liver, then you had reason; you had reason
to take care: but, being none of these, mirth's my witness, an' I had twice so
many cares, as you have, I Would drown them all in a cup of sack. Come, come,
let us try it: I muse, your parcel of a soldier returns not all this while.


Act IIII.
Scene I.
DOWNRIGHT, DAME KITELY. WEll sister, I tell you true: and you will find it
so, in the end.


DAME. Alas brother, what would you have me to do? I cannot help it: you
see, my brother brings 'hem in, here, they are his friends.


DOW. His friends? his fiends. S'lud, they do nothing but hant him, up and
down, like a sort of unlucky sprites, and tempt him to all manner of
villainy, that can be thought of. Well, by this light, a little thing would
make me play the devil with some of 'hem; and 'twere not more for your
husbands sake, then any thing else, I Would make the house too hot for the best on
hem: they should say, and swear, hell were broken loose, e're they went hence.
But, by gods will, it is no bodies fault, but yours: for, an' you had done, as
you might have done, they should have been perboyl'd, and baked too, every
mothers son, e're they should have come in, e're a one of 'hem.


DAME. God's my life! did you ever hear the like? what a strange man is this!
Could I keep out all them, think you? I should put my self, against half a
dozen men? should I? Good faith, you would mad the patient'st body in the world,
to hear you talk so, without any sense, or reason!


Act IIII. Scene II.
Mrs. BRIDGET, Mr. MATTHEW, DAME KITELY, DOWNRIGHT, WEL-BRED, STEPHEN, ED.
KNO'WELL, BOBADIL, BRAYNE-WORME, GASH. Servant (in troth) you are too prodigal
Of your wits treasure, thus to power it forth,
Upon so mean a subject, as my worth?

MAT. You say well, mistress; and I mean, as well.

DOWN. Hoy-day, here is stuff!

WELL. O, now stand close: pray heaven, she can get him to read:
He should do it, of his own natural impudency.

BRID. Servant, what is this same, I pray you?

MATT. Mary, an Elegy, an Elegy, an odd toy --

DOWN. To mock an ape withal. O, I could sow up his mouth, now.

DAME. Sister, I pray you let us hear it.

DOWN. Are you rime-giuen, too?

MATT. Mistress, I Will read it, if you please.

BRID. Pray you do, servant.

DOWN. O, here is no fopperie! Death, I can endure the stocks, better.

E. KN. What ails thy brother? can he not hold his water, at reading of a
ballad?


WELL. O, no: a rhyme to him, is worse then cheese, or a bag-pipe. But, mark,
you loose the protestation.


MATT. Faith, I did it in an humor; I know not how it is: but, please you come
near, sir. This gentleman has judgment, he knows how to censure of a --
pray you sir, you can judge.


STEP. Not I, sir: upon my reputation, and, by the foot of PHARAOH.


WELL. O, chide your cossen, for swearing.


E. KN. Not I, so long as he does not for swear himself.


BOB. Master MATTHEW, you abuse the expectation of your dear mistress, and her
fair sister: Fie, while you live, avoid this prolixitie.


MATT. I shall, sir: well, In^ipere dulce.


E. KN. How! Insipere dulce? a sweet thing to be a fool, indeed.


WELL. What, do you take Insipere, in that sense?


E. KN. You do not? you? This was your villainy, to gull him with a mo^te.


WELL. O, the Benchers phrase: pauca verba, pauca verba.


MATT. Rare creature, let me speak without offense,
Would god my rude words had the influence,
To rule thy thoughts, as thy fair looks do mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner, who is thine.

E. KN. This is in HERO and LEANDER?

WELL. O, I! peace, we shall have more of this.

MATT. Be not unkind, and fair, misshapen stuff
Is of behavior boisterous, and rough:

WELL. Master Stephen answers with shaking his head. How like you that, sir?

E. KN. S'light, he shakes his head like a bottle, to feel and there be any
brain in it!


MATT. But observe the catastrophe, now,
And I in duty will exceed all other,
As you in beauty do excel loves mother.

E. KN. Well, I Will have him free of the wit-brokers, for he vtters nothing, but
stolen remnants.


WELL. O, forgive it him.


E.KN. A filtching rogue? hang him. And, from the dead? it is worse then
sacrilege.


WELL. Sister, what have you here? verses? pray you, lets see. Who made these
verses? they are excellent good!


MAT. O, master WEL-BRED, it is your disposition to say so, sir. They were good
in the morning, I made 'hem, extempore, this morning.


WELL. How? extempore?


MAT. I, would I might be hanged else: ask Captain BOBADILE. He saw me write
them, at the -- (pox on it) the star, yonder.


BRAY. Can he find, in his heart, to curse the stars, so?


E.KN. Faith, his are even with him: they have cursed him enough already.


STEP. Cosen, how do you like this gentleman's verses?


E.KN. O, admirable! the best that ever I heard, cousse!


STEP. Body of CAESAR! they are admirable!
The best, that ever I heard, as I am a soldier.

DOW. I am vexed, I can hold never a bone of me still! Heart, I think, they
mean to build, and breed here!


WELL. Sister, you have a simple servant here, that crowns your beauty, with
such encomions, and devises: you may see, what it is to be the mistress of a
wit! that can make your perfections so transparent, that every bleare eye may
look through them, and see him drowned over head, and ears, in the deep well
of desire. Sister KITELY, I marvel, you get you not a servant, that can rhyme,
and do tricks, too.


DOWN. Oh monster! impudence it self! tricks?


DAME. Tricks, brother? what tricks?


BRID. Nay, speak, I pray you, what tricks?


DAME. I, never spare any body here: but say, what tricks?


BRID. Passion of my heart! do tricks?


WELL. S'light, here is a trick vyed, and reuyed! why, you munkies, you? what a
catter-waling do you keep? has he not given you rimes, and verses, and
tricks?


DOW. O, the fiend!


WELL. Nay, you, lamp of virginity, that take it in snuff so! come, and
cherish this tame poetical fury, in your servant, you will be begged else,
shortly, for a concealment: go to, reward his muse. You cannot give him less
then a shilling, in conscience, for the book, he had it out of, cost him a
teston, at least. How now, gallants? Mr. MATTHEW? Captain? What? all sons of
silence? no spirit?


DOW. Come, you might practice your ruffian-tricks somewhere else, and not
here, I wusse: this is no tavern, nor drinking-schole, to vent your exploits
in.


WELL. How now! whose cow has calu'd?


DOW. Mary, that has mine, sir. Nay, Boy, never look askance at me, for the
matter; I Will tell you of it, I, sir, you, and your companions, mend your selves,
when I have done?


WELL. My companions?


DOW. Yes sir, you companions, so I say, I am not afraid of you, nor them
neither: your hang-byes here. You must have your Poets, and your potlings, your
soldado's, and foolado's, to follow you up and down the city, and here they
must come to domineere, and swagger. Sirrah, you, ballad-singer, and slops,
your fellow there, get you out; get you home: or (by this steel) I Will cut off
your ears, and that, presently.


WELL. S'light, stay, let us see what he dare do: cut off his ears? cut a
whetstone. You are an ass, do you see? touch any man here, and by this hand,
I Will run my rapier to the hilts in you.


DOW. They all draw, and they of the house make out to part them. Yea, that
would I feign see, boy.


DAME. O Jesus! murder. THOMAS, GASPAR!


BRID. Help, help, THOMAS.


E.KN. Gentlemen, forbear, I pray you.


BOB. They offer to fight again, and are parted. Well, sirrah, you,
HOLOFERNES: by my hand, I will pinck your flesh, full of holes, with my rapier
for this; I will, by this good heaven: Nay, let him come, let him come,
gentlemen, by the body of Saint GEORGE, I Will not kill him.


CASH. Hold, hold, good gentlemen.


DOW. You whoreson, bragging coystrill:


Act IIII. Scene III.
KITELY. To them. WHy, how now? what is the matter? what is the stir here?
Whence springs the quarrel? THOMAS! where is he?
Put up your weapons, and put off this rage.
My wife and sister, they are cause of this,
What, THOMAS? where is this knave?

CASH. Here, sir.

WELL. Come, let us go: this is one of my brothers ancient humors, this.


STEP. I am glad, no body was hurt by his ancient humor.


KITE. Why, how now, brother, who en^orst this brawle?


DOW. A sort of lewd rake-hells, that care neither for god, nor the devil!
And, they must come here to read ballads, and rogery, and trash! I Will mar the
knot of 'hem ere I sleep, perhaps: especially BOB, there: he that is all manner
of shapes! and Songs, and sonnets, his fellow.


BRID. Brother, indeed, you are too violent,
To sudden, in your humor: and, you know
My brother WEL-BREDS temper will not bear
Any reproof, chiefly in such a presence,
Where every slight disgrace, he should receive,
Might wound him in opinion, and respect.

DOWN. Respect? what talk you of respect among such,
As have nor spark of manhood, nor good manners?
'Sdeynes I am ashamed, to hear you! respect?

BRID. Yes, there was one a civil gentleman,
And very worthily demeaned himself!

KITE. O, that was some love of yours, sister!

BRID. A love of mine? I would it were no worse, brother!
You'lld pay my portion sooner, then you think for.

DAME. Indeed, he seemed to be a gentleman of an exceeding fair disposition,
and of very excellent good parts!


KITE. Her love, by heaven! my wifes minion!
Fair disposition? excellent good parts?
Death, these phrases are intolerable!
Good parts? how should she know his parts?
His parts? Well, well, well, well, well, well!
It is too plain, too clear: THOMAS, come hither.
What, are they gone?

CASH. I, sir, they went in.
My mistress, and your sister --

KITE. Are any of the gallants within!

CASH. No, sir, they are all gone.

KITE. Art thou sure of it?

CASH. I can assure you, sir.

KITE. What gentleman was that they praised so, THOMAS?

CASH. One, they call him master KNO'WELL, a handsome young gentleman, sir.


KITE. I, I thought so: my mind gave me as much.
I Will die, but they have hid him in the house,
Somewhere; I Will go and search: go with me, THOMAS.
Be true to me, and thou shall find me a master.

Act IIII. Scene IIII.
COB, TIB. WHat TIB, TIB, I say.


TIB. How now, what cuckold is that knocks so hard? O, husband, is it you? what is
the news?


COB. Nay, you have stonn'd me, I faith! you have given me a knock of the
forehead, will stick by me! cuckold? 'Slid, cuckold?


TIB. Away, you fool, did I know it was you, that knocked?
Come, come, you may call me as bad, when you list.

COB. May I? TIB, you are a whore.

TIB. You lie in your throat, husband.

COB. How, the lie? and in my throat too? do you long to be stabbed, ha?


TIB. Why, you are no soldier, I hope?


COB. O, must you be stabbed by a soldier? Mass, that is true! when was
BOBADILL here? your Captain? that rogue, that foist, that fencing Burgullian?
I Will tickle him, in faith.


COB. Why, what is the matter? trow!


COB. O, he has bast^d me, rarely, sumptiously! but I have it herein black and
white; for his black, and blew: shall pay him. O, the Justice! the honestest
old brave Trojan in London! I do honor the very flea of his dog. A plague on
him though, he put me once in a villainous filthy fear; mary, it vanished away,
like the smoke of tobacco: but I was smok't soundly first. I thank the devil,
and his good angel, my guest. Well, wife, or TIB (which you will) get you in,
and lock the door, I charge you, let no body in to you; wife, no body in, to
you: those are my words. Not Captain BOB himself, nor the fiend, in his
likeness; you are a woman; you have flesh and blood enough in you, to be
tempted: therefore, keep the door, shut, upon all comers.


TIB. I warrant you, there shall no body enter here, without my consent.


COB. Nor, with your consent, sweet TIB, and so I leave you.


TIB. It Is more, then you know, whether you leave me so.


COB. How?


TIB. Why, sweet.


COB. Tut, sweet, or sour, thou art a flower,
Keep close thy door, I ask no more.

Act IIII. Scene V.
ED. KNO'WELL, WELL-BRED, STEPHEN, BRAYNE-WORME. WEll BRAYNE-WORME, perform
this business, happily,
And thou make a purchase of my love, for-euer,

WELL. In Faith, now let thy spirits use their best faculties. but, at any hand,
remember the message, to my brother: for, there is no other means, to start him.


BRAY. I warrant you, sir, fear nothing: I have a nimble soul has wakt all
forces of my phant'sie, by this time, and put 'hem in true motion. What you
have possessed me withal, I Will discharge it amply, sir. Make it no question.


WELL. Forth, and prosper, BRAYNE-WORME. Faith, NED, how do thou approve of my
abilities in this devise?


E. KN. Troth, well, howsoever: but, it will come excellent, if it take.


WELL. Take, man? why, it cannot choose but take, if the circumstances miscarrie
not: but, tell me, ingenuously, do thou affect my sister BRIDGET, as thou
pretend'st?


E. KN. Friend, am I worth belief?


WELL. Come, do not protest. In faith, she is a maid of good ornament, and
much modesty: and, except I conceived very worthily of her, thou should not
have her.


E. KN. Nay, that I am afraid will be a question yet, whether I shall have
her, or no?


WELL. Slid, thou shall have her; by this light, thou shall.


E. KN. Nay, do not swear.


WELL. By this hand, thou shall have her: I Will go fetch her, presently. Point,
but where to meet, and as I am an honest man, I Will bring her.


E. KN. Hold, hold, be temperate.


WELL. Why, by -- what shall I swear by? thou shall have her, as I am --


E. KN. 'Pray thee, be at peace, I am satisfied: and do believe, thou will
omit no offered occasion, to make my desires complete.


WELL. Thou shall see, and know, I will not.


Act IIII. Scene VI.
FORMAL, KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME. WAs your man a soldier, sir?

KNO. I, a knave, I took him begging of the way,
This morning, as I came over More-fields!
O, here he is! yo' have made fair speed, believe me:
Where, in the name of sloth, could you be thus --

BRAY. Mary, peace be my comfort, where I thought I should have had little
comfort of your worships service.


KNO. How so?


BRAY. O, sir! your coming to the city, your entertainment of me, and your
sending me to watch -- indeed, all the circumstances either of your charge, or
my employment, are as open to your son, as to your self!


KNO. How should that be! unless that villain, BRAYNE-WORME,
Have told him of the letter, and discovered
All that I strictly charged him to conceal? it is so!

BRAY. I am, partly, of the faith, it is so indeed.

KNO. But, how should he know thee to be my man?

BRAY. Nay, sir, I cannot tell; unless it be by the black art! Is not your
son a scholar, sir?


KNO. Yes, but I hope his soul is not allied
Unto such hellish practice: if it were,
I had just cause to weep my part in him,
And curse the time of his creation.
But, where did thou find them, FITZ-SWORD?

BRAY. You should rather ask, where they found me, sir, for, I Will be sworn I
was going along in the street, thinking nothing, when (of a sudden) a voice
calls, Mr KNO-WEL's man; another cries, soldier: and thus, half a dosen of
'hem, till they had called me within a house where I no sooner came, but thy
seemed men, and out flue al their rapiers at my bosom, with some three or
four score oaths to accompany 'hem, and al to tell me, I was but a dead man,
if I did not confess where you were, and how I was employed, and about what;
which, when they could not get out of me (as I protest, they must have
dissected, and made an Anatomy of me, first, and so I told 'hem) the locked me
up into a room in the top of a high house, whence, by a great miracle (having
a light heart) I slid down, by a bottom of pack-thred, into the street, and so
escaped. But, sir, thus much I can assure you, for I heard it, while I was locked
up, there were a great many rich merchants, and brave citizens wives with 'hem
at a feast, and your son, Mr. EDWARD, withdrew with one of 'hem, and has
pointed to meet her anon, at one COBS house, a water-bearer, that dwells by the
wall. Now, there, your worship shall be sure to take him, for there he preyes,
and fail he will not.


KNO. Nor, will I fail, to break his match, I doubt not.
Go thou, along with Justice CLEMENT'S man,
And stay there for me. At one COBS house, sai'st thou?

BRAY. I sir, there you shall have him. Yes? Invisible? Much wench, or much
son! 'Slight, when he has staid there, three or four hours, traveling
with the expectation of wonders, and at length be delivered of air: o, the
sport, that I should then take, to look on him, if I durst! But, now, I mean
to appear no more before him in this shape. I have another trick, to act, yet.
O, that I were so happy, as to light on a nupson, now, of this Justices nouice.
Sir, I make you stay somewhat long.


FORM. Not a whit, sir. 'Pray you, what do you mean? sir?


BRAY. I was putting up some papers --


FORM. You have been lately in the wars, sir, it seems.


BRAY. Mary have I, sir; to my loss: and expense of all, almosst --


FORM. Troth sir, I would be glad to bestow a pottle of wine o'you, if it
please you to accept it --


BRAY. O, sir --


FORM. But, to hear the manner of your services, and your devices in the
wars, they say they be very strange, and not like those a man reads in the
Roman histories, or sees, at Mile-end.


BRAY. No, I assure you, sir, why, at any time when it please you, I shall be
ready to discourse to you, all I know: and more too, somewhat.


FORM. No better time, then now, sir; we will go to the windmill: there we
shall have a cup of neat grift, we call it. I pray you, sir, let me request
you, to the windmill.


BRAY. I Will follow you, sir, and make grift o'you, if I have good luck.


Act IIII. Scene VII.
MATTHEW, ED. KNO'WELL, BOBADILL, STEPHEN, DOWNRIGHT. To them. SIr, did your
eyes ever taste the like clown of him, where we were to day, Mr. WEL-BRED's
half brother? I think, the whole earth cannot show his parallel, by this
daylight.


E. KN. We were now speaking of him: Captain BOBADIL tells me, he is fallen
foul o'you too.


MAT. O, I, sir, he threatened me, with the bastinado.


BOB. I, but I think, I taught you prevention, this morning, for that -- You
shall kill him, beyond question: if you be so generously minded.


MAT. Indeed, it is a most excellent trick!


He practices at a post. BOB. O, you do not give spirit enough, to our motion,
you are too tardie, too heavy! O, it must be done like lightning, hay?


MAT. Rare Captain!


BOB. Tut, it is nothing, and 't be not done in a -- punto!


E. KN. Captain, did you ever prove your self, upon any of our masters of
defense, here?


MAT. O, good sir! yes, I hope, he has.


BOB. I will tell you, sir. Upon my first coming to the city, after my long
travail, for knowledge (in that mystery only) there came three, of four of
'hem to me, at a gentleman's house, where it was my chance to be resident, at
that time, to entreat my presence at their schools, and withal so much
importuned me, that (I protest to you as I am a gentleman) I was ashamed of
their rude demeanor, out of all measure: well, I told 'hem, that to come to a
public school, they should pardon me, it was opposite (in diameter) to my
humor, but, if so they would give their attendance at my lodging, I protested
to do them what right or favor I could, as I was a gentleman, and so forth.


E. KN. So, sir, then you tried their skill?


BOB. Alas, soon tried! you shall hear sir. Within two or three days after,
they came; and, by honesty; fair sir, believe me, I graced them exceedingly,
showed them some two or three tricks of prevention, have purchased 'hem, since,
a credit, to admiration! they cannot deny this: and yet now, they hate me, and
why? because I am excellent, and for no other vile reason on earth.


E. KN. This is strange, and barbarous! as ever I heard!

BOB. Nay, for a more instance of their preposterous natures, but note, sir.
They have assaulted me some three, four, five, six of them together, as I
have walked alone, in diverse skirts in the town, as Turne-bull, White-chappell,
Shore-ditch, which were then my quarters, and since upon the Exchange, at my
lodging, and at my ordinary: where I have driven them before me, the whole
length of a street, in the open view of all our gallants, pitying to hurt
them, believe me. Yet, all this lenity will not ore-come their spleen: they
will be doing with the pismier, raising a hill, a man may spurn abroad, with
his foot, at pleasure. By my self, I could have slain them all, but I delight
not in murder. I am loath to bear any other then this bastinado for 'hem: yet,
I hold it good polity, not to go disarmed, for though I be skillful, I may
be oppressed with multitudes.


E. KN. I, believe me, may you sir: and (in my conceit) our whole nation should
sustain the loss by it, if it were so.


BOB. Alas, no: what is a peculiar man, to a nation? not seen.


E. KN. O, but your skill, sir!


BOB. Indeed, that might be some loss; but, who respects it? I will tell you,
sir, by the way of private, and under seal; I am a gentleman, and live here
obscure, and to my self: but, were I known to her Majesty, and the Lords
(observe me) I would undertake (upon this poor head, and life) for the
public benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire lines of her
subjects in general, but to save the one half, nay, three parts of her
yearly charge, in holding war, and against what enemy soever. And, how
would I do it, think you?


E. KN. Nay, I know not, nor can I conceive.


BOB. Why thus, sir. I would select nineteen, more, to my self, throughout
the land; gentlemen they should be of good spirit, strong, and able
constitution, i would choose them by an instinct, a character, that I have: and
I would teach these nineteen, the special rules, as your Punto, your Reuerso,
your Stoccata, your Imbroccata, your Passada, your Montanto: till they could
all play very near, or altogether as well as my self. This done, say the
enemy were forty thousand strong, we twenty would come into the field, the
tenth of March, or thereabouts; and we would challenge twenty of the enemy;
they could not, in their honor, refuse us, well, we would kill them:
challenge twenty more, kill them; twenty more, kill them; twenty more, kill
them too; and thus, would we kill, every man, his twenty a day, that is
twenty score; twenty score, that is two hundredth; two hundredth a day, five
days a thousand; forty thousand; forty times five, five times forty, two
hundredth days kills them all up, by computation. And this, will I venture my
poor gentleman-like carcass, to perform (provided, there be no treason
practiced upon us) by fair, and discreet manhood, that is, ciuilly by the
sword.


E. KN. Why, are you so sure of your hand, Captain, at all times?


BOB. Tut, never miss thrust, upon my reputation with you.


E. KN. I would not stand in DOWNE-RIGHTS state, then, an' you meet him, for
the wealth of any one street in London.


BOB. Why, sir, you mistake me! if he were here now, by this welkin, I would
not draw my weapon on him! let this gentleman do his mind: but, I will
bastinado him (by the bright sun) where-euer I meet him.


MAT. Faith, and I Will have a ^ling at him, at my distance.


E. KN. Downright walks over the stage. Gods so', look, where he is: yonder
he goes.


DOW. What peevish luck have I, I cannot meet with these bragging raskalls?


BOB. It Is not he? is it?


E. KN. Yes faith, it is he?


MAT. I Will be hanged, then, if that were he.


E. KN. Sir, keep your hanging good, for some greater matter, for I assure
you, that was he.


STEP. Upon my reputation, it was he.


BOB. Had I thought it had been he, he must not have gone so: but I can hardly
be induced, to believe, it was he, yet.


E. KN. That I think, sir. But see, he is come again!


DOW. O, PHAROAHS foot, have I found you? Come, draw, to your tools: draw,
gypsy, or I Will thresh you.


BOB. Gentleman of valor, I do believe in thee, hear me --


DOW. Draw your weapon, then.


BOB. Tall man, I never thought on it, till now (body of me) I had a warrant of
the peace, served on me, even now, as I came along, by a water-bearer; this
gentleman saw it, Mr. MATTHEW.


DOW. 'Sdeath, you will not draw, then?


BOB. He beats him, and disarmes him: Matthew runs away. Hold, hold, under
thy favor, forbear.


DOW. Prate again, as you like this, you whoreson foist, you. You Will control
the point, you? Your consort is gone? had he staid, he had shared with you, sir.


BOB. Well, gentlemen, bear witness, I was bound to the peace, by this good
day.


E. KN. No faith, it is an ill day, Captain, never reckon it other: but, say
you were bound to the peace, the law allows you, to defend your self: that'll
prove but a poor excuse.


BOB. I cannot tell, sir. I desire good construction, in fair sort. I never
sustained the like disgrace (by heaven) sure I was struck with a plannet
thence, for I had no power to touch my weapon.


E. KN. I, like enough, I have heard of many that have been beaten under a
plannet: go, get you to a surgean. 'Slid, an' these be your tricks, your
passada's, and your mountanto's, I Will none of them. O, manners! that this age
should bring forth such creatures! that Nature should be at leisure to make
hem! Come, cousse.


STEP. Mass, I Will have this cloak.


E. KN. Gods will, it is DOWNE-RIGHT'S.


STEP. Nay, it is mine now, another might have taken up, as well as I: I Will wear
it, so I will.


E. KN. How, an' he see it? he will challenge it, assure your self.


STEP. I, but he shall not have it; I Will say, I bought it.


E. KN. Take heed, you buy it not, too dear, cousse.


Act IIII. Scene VIII.
KITELY, WEL-BRED, DAME KIT. BRIDGET, BRAYNE-WORME, CASH. NOw, trust me
brother, you were much to blame,
T'incense his anger, and disturb the peace,
Of my poor house, where there are sentinells,
That every minute watch, to give alarmes,
Of civil war, without adiection
Of your assistance, or occasion.

WELL. No harm done, brother, I warrant you: since there is no harm done.
Anger costs a man nothing: and a tall man is never his own man, till he be
angry. To keep his valor in obscurity, is to keep himself, as it were, in
a cloke-bag. What Is a musician, unless he play? what is a tall man, unless he
fight? For, indeed, all this, my wise brother stands upon, absolutely: and,
that made me fall in with him, so resolutely.


DAME. I, but what harm might have come of it, brother?


WELL. Might, sister? so, might the good warm clothes, your husband wears, be
poisoned, for any thing he knows: or the wholesome wine he drunk, even now,
at the table --


KITE. Now, god forbid: O me. Now, I remember,
My wife drunk to me, last; and changed the cup:
And bade me wear this cursed suit to day.
See, if heaven suffer murder vndiscour'd!
I feel me ill; give me some mithridate,
Some mithridate and oil, good sister, fetch me;
O, I am sick at heart! I burn, I burn.
If you will save my life, go, fetch it me.

WELL. O, strange humor! my very breath has poisoned him.

BRID. Good brother, be content, what do you mean?
The strength of these extreme conceits, will kill you.

DAME. Beshrew your heart-bloud, brother WELL-BRED, now; for putting such a toy
into his head.


WELL. Is a fit simile, a toy? will he be poisoned with a simile? Brother
KITELY, what a strange, and idle imagination is this? For shame, be wiser. OF
my soul, there is no such matter.


KITE. Am I not sick? how am I, then, not poisoned?
Am I not poisoned? how am I, then, so sick?

DAME. If you be sick, your own thoughts make you sick.

WELL. His jealousy is the poison, he has taken.

BRAY. He comes disguised like Justice Clements man. Mr. KITELY, my master,
Justice CLEMENT, salutes you; and desires to speak with you, with all possible
speed.


KITE. No time, but now? when, I think, I am sick? very sick! well, I will
wait upon his worship. THOMAS, COB, I must seek them out, and set 'hem
sentinells, till I return. THOMAS, COB, THOMAS.


WELL. This is perfectly rare, BRAYNE-WORME! but how got'st thou this apparel
of the Justices man?


BRAY. Mary sir, my proper fine penman, would needs bestow the grist of me, at
the wind-mil, to hear some martial discourse; where so I marshaled him, that I
made him drunk, with admiration! and, because, too much hear was the cause of
his distemper, I stripped him stark naked, as he lay along asleep, and borrowed
his suit, to deliver this counterfeit message in, leaving a rustie armor, and
an old brown bill to watch him, till my return: which shall be, when I have
pawned his apparel, and spent the better part of the money, perhaps.


WELL. Well, thou art a successful merry knave, BRAYNE-WORME, his absence
will be a good subject for more mirth. I pray thee, return to thy young master,
and will him to meet me, and my sister BRIDGET, at the tower instantly: for,
here, tell him, the house is so stored with jealousy, there is no room for
love, to stand upright in. We must get our fortunes committed to some larger
prison, say; and, then the tower, I know no better air: nor where the liberty
of the house may do us more present service. Away.


KITE. Come hither, THOMAS. Now, my secret's ripe,
And thou shall have it; lay to both thine ears.
Hark, what I say to thee. I must go forth, THOMAS.
Be careful of thy promise, keep good watch,
Note every gallant, and observe him well,
That enters in my absence, to thy mistress:
If she would show him rooms, the jest is stale,
Follow 'hem, THOMAS, or else hang on him,
And let him not go after; mark their looks;
Note, if she offer but to see his band,
Or any other amorous toy, about him;
But praise his leg; or foot; or if she say,
The day is hot, and bid him feel her hand,
How hot it is; o, that is a monstrous thing!
Note me all this, good THOMAS, mark their sighs,
And, if they do but whisper, break 'hem off:
I Will bear thee out in it. Will thou do this?
Will thou be true, my THOMAS?

CAS. As truth's self, sir.

KITE. Why, I believe thee: where is COB, now? COB?

DAME. He Is ever calling for COB! I wonder, how he imployes COB, so!


WELL. Indeed, sister, to ask how he imploies COB, is a necessary question
for you, that are his wife, and a thing not very easy for you to be satisfied
in us: but this I Will assure you, COBS wife is an excellent bawd, sister, and,
oftentimes, your husband hants her house, mary, to what end, I cannot
altogether accuse him, imagine you what you think convenient. But, I have
known, fair hides have foul hearts, E're now, sister.


DAME. Never said you truer then that, brother, so much I can tell you for your
learning. THOMAS, fetch your cloak, and go with me, I Will after him presently: I
would to fortune, I could take him there, in faith. Il'd return him his own, I
warrant him.


WELL. So, let hem go: this may make sport anon. Now, my fair sister in-law,
that you knew, but how happy a thing it were to be fair, and beautiful?


BRID. That touches not me, brother.


WELL. That Is true; that is even the fault of it: for indeed, beauty stands a
woman in no stead, unless it procure her touching. But, sister, whether it
touch you, or no, it touches your beauties; and, I am sure, they will abide the
touch; an' they do not, a plague of all ceruse, say I: and, it touches me to
in part, though not in the -- Well, there is a dear and respected friend of
mine, sister, stands very strongly, and worthily affected toward you, and has
vowed to inflame whole bone-fires of zeal, at his heart, in honor of your
perfections. I have already engaged my promise to bring you, where you shall
hear him confirm much more. NED KNO'WELL is the man, sister. There Is no
exception against the party. You are ripe for a husband; and a minutes loss
to such an occasion, is a great trespass in a wise beauty. What say you,
sister? On my soul he loves you. Will you give him the meeting?


BRID. Faith, I had very little confidence in mine own constancy, brother, if
I durst not meet a man: but this motion of yours, savors of an old
knight-aduenturers servant, a little too much, me thinks.


WELL. What Is that, sister?


BRID. Mary, of the squire.


WELL. No matter if it did, I would be such an one for my friend, but see! who
is returned to hinder us?


KITE. What villainy is this? called out on a false message?
This was some plot! I was not sent for. BRIDGET,
Where Is your sister?

BRID. I think she be gone forth, sir.

KITE. How! is my wife gone forth? whether for gods sake?

BRID. She Is gone abroad with THOMAS.

KITE. Abroad with THOMAS? oh, that villain dors me.
He has discovered all unto my wife!
Beast that I was, to trust him: whither, I pray you, went she?

BRID. I know not, sir.

WELL. I Will tell you, brother, whither I suspect she is gone.

KITE. Whither, good brother?

WELL. To COBS house, I believe: but, keep my counsel.

KITE. I will, I will: to COBS house? does she hant COBS?
She Is gone a'purpose, now, to cuckold me,
With that lewd rascal, who, to win her favor,
Has told her all.

WELL. Come, he is once more gone.
Sister, let us loose no time; th'affaire is worth it.

Act III. Scene IX.
MATTHEW, BOBADIL, BRAYNE-WORMe, DOWNRIGHT. To them. I Wonder, Captain, what
they will say of my going away? ha?


BOB. Why, what should they say? but as of a discreet gentleman? quick, wary,
respectfull of natures fair lineaments: and that is all?


MAT. Why, so! but what can they say of your beating?


BOB. A rude part, a touch with soft wood, a kind of gross battery used, laid
on strongly, borne most patiently: and that is all.


MAT. I, but, would any man have offered it in Venice? as you say?


BOB. Tut, I assure you, no: you shall have there your Nobilis, your
Gentelezza, come in bravely upon your reuerse, stand you close, stand you
firm, stand you fair, save your retricato with his left leg, come to the
assalto with the right, thrust with brave steel, defy your base wood! But,
wherefore do I awake this remembrance? I was fascinated, by IVPITER:
fascinated: but I will be vn-witch'd, and revenged, by law.


MAT. Do you hear? is it not best to get a warrant, and have him arrested, and
brought before Justice CLEMENT?


BOB. It were not amiss, would we had it.


MAT. Why, here comes his man, let us speak to him.


BOB. Agreed, do you speak.


MAT. Save you, sir.


BRAY. With all my heart, sir?


MAT. Sir, there is one DOWNRIGHT, has abused this gentleman, and my self,
and we determine to make our amends by law; now, if you would do us the
favor, to procure a warrant, to bring him before your master, you shall be
well considered, I assure you, sir.


BRAY. Sir, you know my service is my living, such favors as these, gotten of
my master, is his only preferment, and therefore, you must consider me, as I
may make benefit of my place.


MAT. How is that? sir.


BRAY. Faith sir, the thing is extraordinary, and the gentleman may be, of
great account: yet, be what he will, if you will lay me down a brace of
angels, in my hand, you shall have it, otherwise not.


MAT. How shall we do, Captain? he asks a brace of angels, you have no
money?


BOB. Not a cross, by fortune.


MAT. Nor I, as I am a gentleman, but two pence, left of my two shillings in
the morning for wine, and redish: let us find him some pawn.


BOB. Pawn? we have none to the value of his demand.


MAT. O, yes. I Will pawn this jewel in my ear, and you may pawn your silk
stockings, and pull up your boots, they will never be mist: It must be done,
now.


BOB. Well, an' there be no remedy: I Will step aside, and pull 'hem off.


MAT. Do you hear, sir? we have no store of money at this time, but you
shall have good pawnes: look you, sir, this jewel, and that gentleman's silk
stockings, because we would have it dispatched, e're we went to our chambers.


BRAY. I am content, sir; I will get you the warrant presently, what is his
name, say you? DOWNRIGHT?


MAT. I, I, GEORGE DOWNRIGHT.


BRAY. What manner of man is he?


MAT. A tall big man, sir; he goes in a cloak, most commonly, of silk
russet, laid about with russet lace.


BRAY. It Is very good, sir.


MAT. Here sir, here is my jewel?


BOB. And, here, are stockings.


BRAY. Well, gentlemen, I Will procure you this warrant presently, but, who will
you have to serve it?


MAT. That Is true, Captain: that must be considered.


BOB. Body of me, I know not! it is service of danger?


BRAY. Why, you were best get one of the varlets of the city, a serieant. I Will
appoint you one, if you please.


MAT. Will you, sir? why, we can wish no better.


BOB. We Will leave it to you, sir.


BRAY. This is rare! now, will I go pawn this cloak of the Iustice's man's, at
the brokers, for a varlets suit, and be the varlet my self; and get either
more pawnes, or more mouie of DOWNRIGHT, for the arrest.


Act IIII. Scene X.
KNO'WEL, TIB, CASH, DAME KITELY, KITELY, COB. OH, here it is, I am glad: I
have found it now.
Ho? who is within, here?

TIB. I am within, sir, what is your pleasure?

KNO. To know, who is within, besides your self.

TIB. Why, sir, you are no constable, I hope?

KNO. O! fear you the constable? then, I doubt not.
You have some guests within, deserve that fear,
I Will fetch him straight.

TIB. OF gods name, sir.

KNO. Go to. Come, tell me, Is not young KNO'WEL, here?

TIB. Young KNO-WELL? I know none such, sir, of mine honesty!

KNO. Your honesty? dame, it flies too lightly from you:
There is no way, but, fetch the constable.

TIB. The constable? the man is mad, I think.

CAS. Ho, who keeps house, here?

KNO. O, this is the female copes-mate of my son?
Now shall I meet him straight.

DAME. Knock, THOMAS, hand.

CAS. Ho, good wife?

TIB. Why, what is the matter with you?

DAME. Why, woman, grieves it you to ope' your door?
Belike, you get something, to keep it shut.

TIB. What mean these questions, 'pray ye?

DAME. So strange you make it? is not my husband, here?

KNO. Her husband!

DAME. My tried husband, master KITELY.

TIB. I hope, he needs not to betryed, here.

DAME. No, dame: he does it not for need, but pleasure.

TIB. Neither for need, nor pleasure, is he here.

KNO. This is but a device, to balke me withal.
Soft, who is this? It Is not my son, disguisd?

DAME. She spies her husband come: and runs to him. O, sir, have I
fore-stald your honest market?
Found your close walks? you stand amazed, now, do you?
I faith (I am glad) I have smokt you yet at last!
What is your jewel trow? In: come, lets see her;
(Fetch forth your huswife, dame) if she be fairer,
In any honest judgment, then my self,
I Will be content with it: but, she is change,
She feeds you fat, she soothes your appetite,
And you are well? your wife, an honest woman,
Is meat twice sod to you, sir? O, you trecher!

KNO. She cannot counterfeit thus palpably.

KITE. Out on thy more then strumpets impudence!
Steal'st thou thus to thy haunts? and, have I taken
Thy bawd, and thee, and thy companion,
Pointing to old Knowell. This horie-beaded letcher, this old goat,
Close at your villainy, and would thou 'scuse it,
With this stale harlots jest, accusing me?
To him. O, old incontinent, do not thou shame,
When all thy powers in chastity is spent,
To have a mind so hot? and to entice,
And feed th'enticements of a lustful woman?

DAME. Out, I defy thee, I, dissembling wretch.

KITE. By Thomas. Defy me, strumpet? ask thy pandar, here,
Can be deny it? or that wicked older?

KNO. Why, hear you, sir.

KITE. Tut, tut, tut: never speak.
Thy guilty conscience will discover thee.

KNO. What lunacie is this, that hants this man?

KITE. Well, good-wife BA'D, COBS wife; and you,
That make your husband such a hoddie-doddie;
And you, young apple-squire; and old ouckold-maker;
He ha'you every one before a Justice:
Nay, you shall answer it, I charge you go.

KNO. Marie, with all my heart, sir: I go willingly.
Though I do taste this as a trick, put on me,
To punish my impertinent search; and justly:
And half forgive my son, for the device.

KITE. Come, will you go?

DAME. Go? to thy shame, believe it.

COB. Why, what is the matter, here? What Is here to do?

KITE. O, COB, art thou come? I have been abused,
And in thy house. Never was man so, wronged!

COB. Slid, in my house? my master KITELY? Who wrongs you in my house?


KITE. Marie, young lust in old; and old in young, here:
Thy wife's their bawd, here have I taken 'hem.

COB. He falls upon his wife and beats her. How? bawd? Is my house come to
that? Am I preferred thither? Did I charge you to keep your doors shut, Is
'BEL? and do you let 'hem lie open for all comers?


KNO. Friend know some cause, before thou beat'st thy wife,
This 's madness, in thee.

COB. Why? is there no cause?

KITE. Yes, I Will show cause before the Justice, COB:
Come, let her go with me.

COB. Nay, she shall go.

TIB. Nay, I will go. I Will see, an' you may be allowed to make a bundle of
hemp, of your right and lawful wife thus, at every cuckoldly knaves pleasure.
Why do you not go?


KITE. A bitter queen. Come, we will have you tamed.


Act IIII. Scene XI.
BRAYNE-WORME, MATTHEW, BOBADIL, STEPHEN, DOWNRIGHT. WEll, of all my
disguises, yet, now am I most like my self: being in this Sergeants gown. A
man of my present profession, never counterfeits, till he lays hold upon a
debtor, and says, he rests him, for then he brings him to all manner of
unrest. A kind of little kings we are, bearing the diminutiue of a mace, made
like a young artichocke, that always carries pepper and salt, in it self.
Well, I know not what danger I undergo, by this exploit, pray heaven, I come
well of.


MAT. See, I think, yonder is the varlet, by his gown.


BOB. Let Us go, in quest of him.


MAT. 'Saue you, friend, are not you here, by appointment of Justice CLEMENTS
man.


BRAY. Yes, an't please you, sir: he told me two gentlemen had willed him to
procure a warrant from his master (which I have about me) to be served on one
DOWNRIGHT.


MAT. It is honestly done of you both; and see, where the party comes, you
must arrest: serve it upon him, quickly, before he be aware --


BOB. Bear back, master MATTHEW.


BRAY. Master DOWNRIGHT, I arrest you, in the queens name, and must carry you
before a Justice, by virtue of this warrant.


STEP. Me, friend? I am no DOWNRIGHT, I. I am master STEPHEN, you do not
well, to arrest me, I tell you, truly: I am in nobodies bonds, nor books, I,
would you should know it. A plague on you heartily, for making me thus afraid
before my time.


BRAY. Why, now are you deceived, gentlemen?


BOB. He wears such a cloak, and that deceived us: But see, here a comes,
indeed! this is he, officer.


DOWN. Why how now, signior gull! are you turned filtcher of late? come,
deliver my cloak.


STEP. Your cloak, sir? I bought it, even now, in open market.


BRAY. Master DOVVNE-RIGHT, I have a warrant I must serve upon you, procured by
these two gentlemen.


DOWN. These gentlemen? these rascals?


BRAY. Keep the peace, I charge you, in her Majesty's name.


DOWN. I obey thee. What must I do, officer?


BRAY. Go before, master Justice CLEMENT, to answer what they can object
against you, sir. I will use you kindly, sir.


MATT. Come, let us before, and make the Justice, Captain --


BOB. The varlet's a tall man! before heaven!


DOWN. Gull, you will gi' me my cloak?


STEP. Sir, I bought it, and I Will keep it.


DOWN. You will.


STEP. I, that I will.


DOWN. Officer, there is thy fee, arrest him.


BRAY. Master STEPHEN, I must arrest you.


STEP. Arrest me, I scorn it. There, take your cloak, I Will none ou't.


DOWN. Nay, that shall not serve your turn, now, sir. Officer, I Will go with
thee, to the Justices: bring him along.


STEP. Why, is not here your cloak? what would you have?


DOWN. I Will ha'you answer it, sir.


BRAY. Sir, I Will take your word; and this gentleman's, too: for his appearance.


DOWN. I Will have no words taken. Bring him along.


BRAY. Sir, I may choose, to do that: I may take bail.


DOWN. It Is true, you may take bail, and choose; at another time: but you
shall not, now, varlet. Bring him along, or I Will swinge you.


BRAY. Sir, I pity the gentleman's case. Here Is your money again.


DOW. 'Sdeynes, tell not me of my money, bring him away, I say.


BRAY. I warrant you he will go with you of himself, sir.


DOW. Yet more ado?


BRAY. I have made a fair mash on it.


STEP. Must I go?


BRAY. I know no remedy, master STEPHEN.


DOWN. Come along, before me, here. I do not love your hanging look behind.


STEP. Why, sir. I hope you cannot hang me for it. Can he, fellow?


BRAY. I think not, sir. It is but a whipping matter, sure!


STEP. Why, then, let him do his worst, I am resolute.


Act V.
Scene I.
CLEMENT, KNO'WEL, KITELY, DAME KITELY, TIB, CASH, COB, SERVANTS. NAy, but
stay, stay, give me leave: my chair, sirrah. You, master KNO'WELL, say you
went thither to meet your son.


KNO. I, sir.


CLEM. But, who directed you, thither?


KNO. That did mine own man, sir.


CLEM. Where is he?


KNO. Nay, I know not, now; I left him with your clarke: And appointed him, to
stay here for me.


CLEM. My dark? about what time, was this?


KNO. Mary, between one and two, as I take it.


CLEM. And, what time came my man with the false message to you, master KITELY?


KITE. After two, sir.


CLEM. Very good: but, mistress KITELY, how that you were at Cons? ha?


DAME. An' please you, s^r, I Will tell you: my brother, WEL-BRED, told me, that
COBS house, was a suspected place --


CLEM. So it appears, me thinks: but, on.


DAME. And that my husband used thither, daily.


CLEM. No matter, so he used himself well, mistress.


DAME. True sir, but you know, what grows, by such hants, oftentimes.


CLEM. I see, rank fruits of a jealous brain, mistress KITELY: but, did you
find your husband there, in that case, as you suspected?


KITE. I found her there, sir.


CLEM. Did you so? that alters the case. Who gave you knowledge, of your wives
being there?


KITE. Marie, that did my brother WEL-BRED.


CLEM. How? WEL-BRED first tell her? then tell you, after? where is WEL-BRED?


KITE. Gone with my sister, sir, I know not whither.


CLEM. Why, this is a mere trick, a device; you are gulled in this most
grossly, all! alas, poor wench, were thou beaten for this?


TIB. Yes, most pitifully, and 't please you.


COB. And worthily, I hope: if it shall prove so.


CLEM. I, that is like, and a piece of a sentence. How now, sir? what is the
matter?


SER. Sir, there is a gentleman, in the court without, desires to speak with
your worship.


CLEM. A gentleman? what is he?


SER. A soldier, sir, he says.


CLEM. He arms himself. A soldier? take down my armor, my sword, quickly: a
soldier speak with me! why, when knaves? come on, come on, hold my cap there,
so; give me my gorget, my sword: stand by, I will end your matters, anou -- Let
the soldier enter, now, sir, what ha'you to say to me?


Act V. Scene II.
BOBADILL, MATTHEW. BY your worships favor --


CLEM. Nay, keep out, sir, I know not your pretense, you send me word, sir,
you are a soldier: why, sir, you shall be answered, here, here be them have
been amongst soldiers. Sir, your pleasure.


BOB. Faith, sir, so it is, this gentleman, and my self, have been most
uncivilly wronged, and beaten, by one DOWNRIGHT, a course fellow, about the
town, here, and for mine own part, I protest, being a man, in no sort, given
to this filthy humor of quarrelling, he has a^^aulted me in the way of my
peace; dispoil'd me of mine honor; dis-arm'd me of my weapons; and rudely,
laid me along, in the open streets: when, I not so much as once offered to
resist him.


CLEM. O, gods precious! is this the soldier? here, take my armor of quickly,
'twill make him swonne, I fear; he is not ^it to look on it, that will put up
a blow.


MATT. An't please your worship, he was bound to the peace.


CLEM. Why, and he were, sir, his hands were not bound, were they?


SER. There Is one of the varlets of the city, sir, has brought two gentlemen,
here, one, upon your worships warrant.


CLEM. My warrant?


SER. Yes, sir. The officer says, procured by these two.


CLEM. Bid him, come in. Set by this picture. What, Mr. DOWNRIGHT! are you
brought at Mr. FRESH-WATERS suite, here!


Act V. Scene III.
DOWNRIGHT, STEPHEN, BRAYNE-WORME. I Faith, sir. And here is another brought
at my suite.


CLEM. What are you, sir?


STEP. A gentleman, sir? O, uncle!


CLEM. Uncle? who? master KNO'W^LL?


KNO. I, sir! this is a wise kinsman of mine.


STEP. God's my witness, uncle, I am wronged here monstrously, he charges me
with stealing of his cloak, and would I might never stir, if I did not find
it in the street, by chance.


DOW. O, did you find it, now? you said, you bought it, ere-while.


STEP. And, you said, I stole it; nay, now my uncle is here, I Will do well
enough, with you.


CLEM. Well, let this breath a while; you, that have cause to complain, there,
stand forth: had you my warrant for this gentleman's apprehension?


BOB. I, an't please your worship.


CLEM. Nay, do not speak in passion so: where had you it?


BOB. Of your clarke, sir?


CLEM. That Is well! an' my clarke can make warrants, and my hand not at 'hem!
Where is the warrant? Officer, have you it?


BRAY. No, sir, your worship's man, master FORMAL, bid me do it, for these
gentlemen, and he would be my discharge.


CLEM. Why, master DOWNRIGHT, are you such a nouice, to be served, and never
see the warrant?


DOW. Sir. He did not serve it on me.


CLEM. No? how then?


DOW. Mary, sir, he came to me, and said, he must serve it, and he would
use me kindly, and so --


CLEM. He flourishes over him with his long-sword. O, gods pity, was it so,
sir? he must serve it? give me my long-sword there, and help me of; so. Come
on, sir varlet, I must ^ut off your legs, sirrah: nay, stand up, I Will use you
kindly; I must ^ut off your legs, I say.


BRAY. O, good sir, I beseech you; nay, good master Justice.


CLEM. I must do it; there is no remedy. I must cut off your legs, sirrah, I
must cut off your ears, you rascal, I must do it; I must cut off your nose,
I must cut off your head.


BRAY. O, good your worship.


CLEM. Well, rise, how do thou do, now? do thou feel thy self well?
have thou no harm?


BRAY. No, I thank your good worship, sir.


CLEM. Why, so! I said, I must cut off thy legs, and I must cut off thy arms,
and I must cut off thy head; but, I did not do it: so, you said, you must
serve this gentleman, with my warrant, but, you did not serve him. You knave,
you slave, you rogue, do you say you must? sirrah, away with him, to the
iayle, I Will teach you a trick, for your must, sir.


BRAY. Good, sir, I beseech you, be good to me.


CLEM. Tell him he shall to the iayle, away with him, I say*


BRAY. Nay, sir, if you will commit me, it shall be for committing more then
this: I will not loose, by my travail, any grain of my fame certain.


CLEM. How is this!


KNO. My man, BRAYNE-WORME!


STEP. O yes, uncle. BRAYNE-WORME has been with my cossen EDWARD, and I, all
this day.


CLEM. I told you all, there was some device!


BRAY. Nay, excellent Justice, since I have laid my self thus open to you;
now, stand strong for me: both with your sword, and your balance.


CLEM. Body of me, a merry knave! Give me a bowl of sack: If he belong to
you, master KNO'WELL, I bespeake your patience.


BRAY. That is it, I have most need of. Sir, if you will pardon me, only; I Will
glory in all the rest, of my exploits.


KNO. Sir, you know, I love not to have my favors come hard, from me. You have
your pardon: though I suspect you shrewdly for being of counsel with my son,
against me.


BRAY. Yes, faith, I have, sir; though you retained me doubly this morning, for
your self: first, as BRAYNE-WORME; after, as FITZ-SWORD. I was your reformed
soldier, sir. 'Twas I sent you to COBS, upon the errand, without end.


KNO. Is it possible! or that thou should disguise thy language so, as I
should not know thee?


BRAY. O, sir, this has been the day of my metamorphosis! It is not that
shape alone that I have run through, to day. I brought this gentleman, master
KITELY, a message too, in the form of master Justices man, here, to draw him
out of the way, as well as your worship: while master WELL-BRED might make a
conueiance of mistress BRIDGET, to my young master.


KITE. How! my sister ^^olne away?


KNO. My son is not married, I hope!


BRAY. Faith, sir, they are both as sure as love, a priest, and three thousand
pound (which is her portion) can make 'hem: and by this time are ready to
bespeake their wedding supper at the windmill, except some friend, here,
prevent 'hem, and inuit 'hem home.


CLEM. Marie, that will I (I thank thee, for putting me in mind o^'t.) Sirrah,
go you, and fetch 'hem hither, upon my warrant. Neithers friends have cause to
be ^orrie, if I know the young couple, aright. Here, I drink to thee, for thy
good news. But, I pray thee, what have thou done with my man FORMAL.


BRAY. Faith, sir, after some ceremony past, as making him drunk, first with
story, and then with wine (but all in kindness) and stripping him to his
shirt: I left him in that cool vain, departed, sold your worships warrant to
these two, pawned his liuerie for that varlets gown, to serve it in; and thus
have brought my self, by my actiuitie, to your worships consideration.


CLEM. And I will consider thee, in another cup of sack. Here Is to thee, which
having drunk of, this is my sentence. Pledge me. Thou have done, or assisted
to nothing, in my judgment, but deserves to be pardoned for the wit of the
offense. If thy master, or any man, here, be angry with thee, I shall suspect
his ingine, while I know him for it. How now? what noise is that!


SER. Sir, it is ROGER is come home.


CLEM. Bring him in, bring him in. What! drunk in arms, against me? Your
reason, your reason for this.


Act V. Scene IIII.
FORMAL. To them. I Beseech your worship to pardon me; I happened into ill
company by chance, that cast me into a sleep, and stripped me of all my clothes
--


CLEM. Well, tell him, I am Justice CLEMENT, and do pardon him: but, what is
this to your armor! what may that signify?


FORM. And 't please you, sir, it hung up 'i the room, where I was stripped; and
I borrowed it of one of the drawers, to come home in, because I was loath, to
do penance through the street, in my shirt.


CLEM. Well, stand by a while. Who be these? O, the young company, welcome,
welcome. Gi' you joy. Nay, mistress BRIDGET, blush not; you are not so fresh a
bride, but the news of it is come hither a^ore you. Master Bridegroom, I have
made your peace, give me your hand: so will I for all the rest, ere you
forsake my roof.


Act V. Scene V.
ED. KNO'WEL, WEL-BRED, BRIDGET. To them. WE are the more bound to your
humanity, sir.


CLEM. Only these two, have so little of man in 'hem, they are no part of my
care.


WELL. Yes, sir, let me pray you for this gentleman, he belongs, to my
sister, the bride.


CLEM. In what place, sir?


WELL. Of her delight, sir, below the stairs, and in public: her poet, sir.


CLEM. A poet? I will challenge him my self, presently, at extempore. Mount up
thy Phlegon muse, and testify,
How SATVRNE, sitting in an ^bo^ cloud,
Disro^'d his podex white as iuorie,
And, through the welkin, thundered all aloud.



WELL. He is not for extempore, sir. He is all for the pocket- muse, please
you command a sight of it.


CLEM. Yes, yes, search him for a taste of his vein.


WELL. You must not deny the Queens Justice, Sir, under a writ of rebellion.


CLEM. What! all this verse? Body of me, he carries a whole realm, a
commonwealth of paper, in's hose! let us see some of his subjects! Unto the
boundless Ocean of thy face,
Runs this poor ri^er changed with streams of eyes.
How? this is stolen!


E. KN. A Parodie! a parodie! with a kind of miraculous gift, to make it
ab^urder then it was.


CLEM. Is all the rest, of this batch? Being me a torch; lay it together, and
give ^^^e. Cleanse the air. He was enough to have infected, the whole city, if
it had not been taken in time! See, see, how our Poets glory shines!
brighter, and brighter! ^ull it increases! O, now, it is at the highest: and,
now, it declines as fast. You may see. Sic transi^ gloria mundi.


KNO. There Is an emblem for you, son, and your studies!


CLEM. Nay, no speech, or act of mine be drawn against such as profess it
worthily. They are not borne eu^rie year, as an Alderman. There goes more to
the making of a good Poet, then a Sheriff, Mr. KITELY. You look upon me!
though, I live in the city here, amongst you, I will do more reverence, to
him, when I meet him, then I will to the Major, out of his year. But, these
paper-pedlers! these inke-dablers! They cannot expect reprehension, or reproach.
They have it with the fact.


E. KN. Sir, you have saved me the labor of a defense.


CLEM. It shall be discourse for supper; between your father and me, if he
dare undertake me. But, to dispatch away these, you sign of the Soldier, and
picture of the Poet (but, both so false, I will not have you hanged out at my
door till midnight) while we are at supper, you two shall penitently fa^^ it out
in my court, without; and, if you will, you may pray there, that we may be so
merry within, as to forgive, or forget you* when we come out. Here Is a third,
because, we tender your safety, shall watch you, he is provided for the
purpose. Look to your change, sir.


S^E^. And what shall I do?


CLEM. O! I had lost a sheep, an he had not bleated! Why, sir, you shall give
Mr. DOWNRIGHT his cloak: and I will entreat him to take it. A trencher, and a
napkin, you shall have, in the buttrie, and keep COB, and his wife company,
here; whom, I will entreat first to be reconciled: and you to endeavor with
your wit, to keep 'hem so.


S^^^. I Will do my best.


COB. Why, now I see thou art honest, TIB, I receive thee as my dea^e, and
mortal wi^e, again.


TI^. And, I you, as my loving, and obedient husband.


CLEM. Good complement! It will be their bridale night too. They are married
anew. Come, I conjure the rest, to put of all discontent. You, Mr. DOWNRIGHT,
your anger; you, master KNO'WELL, your cares; master KITELY, and his wife,
their jealousy.

For, I must tell you both, while that is fed,
Horns in the mind are worse then of the head.

KITE. Sir, thus they go from me, kiss me, sweet heart. See, what a drove of
horns fly, in the air,
Winged with my densed, and my credulous breath!
Watch 'hem, suspicious eyes, watch, where they fall.
See, see! on hends, that think th'haue none at all!
O, what a plenteous world of this, will come!
When air raynes horns, all may be sure of same.
I have learned so much verse out of a jealous man's part, in a play.


CLEM. It Is well, it is well! This night we will dedicate to friendship, love,
and laughter. Master bridegroom, take your bride, and lead: every one, a
fellow. Here is my mistress. BRAYME-WORME! to whom all my addresses of courtship
shall have their reference. Whose adventures, this day, when our grandchildren
shall hear to be made a fable, I doubt not, but it shall find both spectators,
and applause.


THE END.
This Comoedie was first Acted, in the year 1598.

By the then L. CHAMBERLAYNE his Servants.

The principal Comoedians were.
WILL SHAKESPEARE. AVG. PHILIPS. HEN. CONDEL. WILL. SLYE. WILL. KEMPE. RIC.
BVRBADGE. IOH. HEMINGS. THO. POPE. CHR. BEESTON. IOH. DVKE.
With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

Every MAN OVT OF HIS HVMOVR. A Comicall Satyr. Acted in the year 1599. By
the then Lord CHAMBERLAIN his Servants.

The Author B. I.

Non aliena meo pressi pede * si propius sles, Tec apient magis * and deries
repetat^ (...). LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for I. Smithwicke.

1616

TO THE NOBLEST NOVRCERIES OF HVMANITY, AND LIBERTY, IN THE KINGDOM: The Innes
of Court.
I Understand you, Gentlemen, no^ your houses: and a worthy succession of you,
to all time, as being borne the Judges of these studies. When I wrote this
Poem, I had friendship with diverse in your societies; who, as they were great
Names in learning, so they were no less Examples of living. Of them, and then
(that I say no more) it was not despised. Now that the Printer, by a doubled
charge, thinks it worthy a longer life, then commonly the air of such things
does promise; I am careful to put it a servant to their pleasures, who are the
inheriters of the first favor borne it. Yet, I command, it lie not in the way
of your more noble, and useful studies to the public. For so I shall suffer
for it: But, when the gown and cap is off, and the Lord of liberty reigns;
then, to take it in your hands, perhaps may make some Bencher, tincted with
humanity, read: and not repent him.

By your true Honorer, BEN. IONSON.

The Names of the Actors.
ASPER, The Presenter. MACILENTE. PVNTERVOLO. His Lady. Waiting-Gent. Huntsman.
Seruingmen 2. Dog and Cat.
CARLO BVFFONE. FASTID. BRISK. Cinedo his Page.
DELIRO. FALLACE. Fido their Servant. Musicians.
SAVIOLINA. SORDIDO. His Hind.
FVNGOSO. Tailor. Haberdasher. Shomaker.
SOGLIARDO. SHIFT. CLOVE. Rustici. A Groom. Drawers. Constable, and Officers.
ORANGE. GREX. CORDATVS. MITIS.

ASPER his Character. HE is of an ingenious and free spirit, eager and constant
in reproof, without fear controuling the worlds abuses. One, whom no servile
hope of gain, or frosty apprehension of danger, can make to be a Parasite,
either to time, place* or opinion. MACILENTE. A Man well parted, a sufficient
Scholar, and trauail'd; who (wanting that place in the worlds account, which
he thinks his merit capable of) falls into such an envious apoplexy, with
which his judgment is so dazeled, and distasted, that he grows violently
impatient of any opposite happiness in another. PVNTARVOLO. A Vain glorious
Knight, ouer-Englishing his travels, and wholly consecrated to singularity; the
very Jacobs staff of complement: a Sir, that has lived to see the revolution
of time in most of his apparel. Of presence good enough, but so palpably
affected to his own praise, that (for want of flatterers) he commends
himself, to the flo^tage of his own family. He deals upon returns, and
strange performances, resolving (in despite of public derision) to stick to
his own particular fashion, phrase, and gesture. CARLO BVFFONE. A Public,
scurrilous, and profane Iester; that (more swift then Circe) with absurd
simile's will transform any person into deformity. A good Feast-hound, or
Banket-beagell, that will sent you out a supper some three mile off, and swear
to his Patrons (Dam him) he came in Oars, when he was but wafted over in a
Sculler. A slave, that has an extraordinary gift in pleasing his palate, and
will swill up more sack at a sitting, then would make all the Guard a posset.
His religion is railing, and his discourse riba^dry. They stand highest in his
respect, whom he studies most to reproach. FASTIDIVS BRISK. A Neat, spr^ce,
affecting Courtier, one that wears clothes well, and in fashion; practices by
his glass how to salute; speaks good remnants (notwithstanding the Base-violl
and Tobacco:) swears tersely, and with variety; cares not what Ladies favor
he belyes, or great Man's familiarity: a good property to perfume the boot of a
coach. He will borrow another man's borse to praise, and backs him as his own.
Or, for a need, on foot can post himself into credit with his merchant, only
with the gingle of his spur, and the jerke of his wand. DELIRO. A Good doting
Citizen, who (it is thought) might be of the common Council for his wealth: a
fellow sincerely besotted on his own wife, and so rapt with a conceit of her
perfections, that be simply holds himself unworthy of her. And in that
hood-winkt humor, (...) more like a suter then a husband; standing in as true
dread of her displeasure, as when he first made love to her. He does sacrifice
twopence in juniper to her, every morning, before she rises, and wakes her,
with villanous-out-of-tune music, which she out of her contempt (though not
out of her judgment) is sure to dislike. FALLACE. DEliro's wife, and Idol: a
proud mincing Peat, and as perverse as he is officious. She dotes as perfectly
upon the Courtier, as her husband does on her, and only wants the face to be
dishonest. SAVIOLINA. A Court Lady, whose weightiest praise is a light wit,
admired by herself, and one more, her servant Brisk. SORDIDO. A Wretched
hob-nail'd Chuffe, whose recreation, is reading of Almanacks; and felicity,
foul, weather. One that never prayed, but for a lean dearth, and ever wept in
a fat harvest. FVNGOSO. THe son of Sordido, and a student: one that has
reuel'd in his time, and follows the fashion a far off, like a spy. He
makes it the whole bent of his endeavors, to wring sufficient means from his
wretched father, to put him in the Courtiers cut: at which he earnestly aims,
but so unluckily, that he still lights short a suit. SOGLIARDO. AN essential
Clown, brother to Sordido, yet so enamored of the name of a Gentleman, that
he will have it, though he buys it. He comes up every Term to learn to take
Tobacco, and see new Motions. He is in his kingdom when he can get himself
into company, where he may be well laughed at. SHIFT. A Threadbare Sharke. One
that never was Soldier, yet lives upon lendings. His profession is skeldring
and odling, his bank Poules, and his warehouse Pict-hatch. Takes up single
testons upon oaths, till Doomes day. Falls under executions of three shillings,
and enters into fiue-groat bonds. He way-layes the reports of services, and
connes them without book, damming himself he came new from them, when all the
while he was taking the diet in a bawdy house, or lay pawned in his chamber for
rent, and victuals. He is of that admirable and happy memory, that he will
salute one for an old acquaintance, that he never saw in his life before. He
vsurps upon cheats, quarrels, and robberies, which he never did, only to get
him a name. His chief exercises are, taking the Whiffe, squiring a Cockatrice,
and making privy searches for Imparters. CLOVE, and ORANGE. AN inseparable case
of Coxcombs, City-borne; The Gemini or Twins of foppery: that like a pair of
wooden soyles, are fit for nothing, but to be practiced upon. Being well
flattered, they will lend money, and repent when they have done. Their glory is to
inuit Plaiers, and make suppers. And in company of better rank (to avoid the
suspect of insufficiency) will enforce their ignorance, most desperately, to
set upon the understanding of any thing. Orange is the more humorous of the two
(whose small portion of juice being squeezed out) Cloue serves to stick him,
with commendations. CORDATVS. THe Authors friend; A man inly acquainted with
the scope and drift of his Plot: Of a discreet, and understanding judgment;
and has the plase of a Moderator. MITIS. IS a person of no action, and
therefore we have reason to afford him no Character.
EVERY MAN OVT OF HIS HVMOVR.
After the second Sounding. GREX. CORDATVS, ASPER, MITIS. NAy, my dear ASPER,

MIT. Stay your mind:

ASP. Away.
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can check his spirit, or reine his tongue?
Or who has such a dead unfeeling sense,
That heavens horrid thunders cannot wake?
To see the earth, cracked with the weight of sin,
Hell gaping under us, and over our heads
Black rau'nous ruin, with her saile-stretcht wings,
Ready to sink us down, and cover us.
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And have his lips sealed up? not I: my soul
Was never ground into such oily colors,
To flatter vice and daube iniquity:
But (with an armed, and resolved hand)
I Will strip the ragged follies of the time,
Naked, as at their birth:

COR. (Be not too bold.

ASP. You trouble me) and with a whip of steel,
Print wounding lashes in their iron ribs.
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased t'vnmaske a public vice.
I fear no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries;
No brokers, usurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I disposed to say, they are all corrupt.
I fear no courtiers frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hummes.
Tut, these are so innate, and popular,
That drunken custom would not shame to laugh
(In scorn) at him, that should but dare to taxe'hem.
And yet, not one of these but knows his works,
Knows what damnation is, the devil, and hell,
Yet, howerly they persist, grow rank in sin,
Puffing their souls away in perj'rous air,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.

MIT. Forbear, good ASPER, be not like your name.

ASP. O, but to such, whose ^aces are all zeal,
And (with the words of HERCULES) invade
Such crimes as these! that will not smell of sin,
But seem as they were made of Sanctify!
Religion in their garments, and their hair
Cut shorter than their eyebrows! when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and deuoures
More wretches than the Counters.

MIT. Gentle ASPER,
Contain your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.

COR. Unless your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new again,
It is in vain; to spend it in these moods.
Here he makes adresse to the People.
ASP. I not observed this thronged round till now.
Gracious, and kind spectators, you are welcome,
APOLLO, and the MUSES feast your eyes
With graceful objects, and may our MINERVA
Answer your hopes, unto their largest strain.
Yet here, mistake me not, judicious friends.
I do not this, to beg your patience,
Or seruilely to fawn on your applause,
Like some dry brain, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censured, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want art, or judgment, tax me freely:
Let envious Censors with their broadest eyes
Look through and through me; I pursue no favor.
Only vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will give you music worth your ears.
O, how I hate the monstrousness of time,
Where every servile imitating spirit,
(Plagued with an itching leprosy of wit)
In a mere halting fury, strives to fling
His ^lc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And straight leap's forth a Poet! but as lame
As VULCAN, or the founder of Cripple-gate.

MIT. In faith, this Humor will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.

ASP. This Humor? good; and why this Humor, MITIS?
Nay do not turn, but answer.

MIT. Answer? what?

ASP. I will not stir your patience, pardon me,
I urged it for some reasons, and the rather
To give these ignorant well-spoken days,
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humor.

CORD. O do not let your purpose fall, good ASPER,
It cannot but arrive most acceptable,
Chiefly to such, as have the happiness,
Daily to see how the poor innocent word
Is rackt, and tortured.

MIT. I; I pray you proceed.

ASP. Ha? what? what is it?

COR. For the abuse of Humor.

ASP. O, I crave pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humor (as it is ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of air or water,
And in it self holds these two properties,
Moisture and fluxure: As, for demonstration,
Power water on this floor, 'twill wet and run:
Likewise the air (forced through a horn or trumpet)
Flows instantly away, and leaves behind
A kind of dew; and hence we do conclude,
That what soever has fluxure, and humiditie,
As wanting power to contain it self,
Is Humor: so in every humane body
The choler, melancholy, phlegm, and blood,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receive the name of Humors. Now thus far
It may, by Metaphore, apply it self
Unto the general disposition:
As when some one peculiar quality
Does so possess a man, that it does draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
In their confl^ctions, all to run one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humor.
But that a Rooke, in wearing a pyed feather,
The cable hat-band, or the three-pild ruff,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humor!
O, it is more then most ridiculous.

CORD. He speaks pure truth: now if an Idiot
Have but an apish, or phantasticke strain,
It is his Humor.

ASP. Well I will scourge those Apes;
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirror,
As large as is the stage, whereon we act:
Where they shall see the times deformity
Anatomized in every nerve, and sinnew,
With constant courage, and contempt of fear.

MIT. ASPER (I urge it as your friend) take heed,
The days are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are grown impatient of reproof.

ASP. Ha, ha:
You might as well have told me, yond is heaven,
This earth, these men; and all had moved alike.
Do not I know the times condition?
Yes MITIS, and their souls, and who they be
That either will, or can except against me.
None, but a sort of fools, so sick in taste,
That they contemn all physic of the mind,
And like gald camels kick at every touch.
Good men, and virtuous spirits, that loathe their vices,
Will cherish my free labors, love my lives,
And with the fervor of their shining grace,
Make my brain fruitful to bring forth more objects,
Worthy their serious, and intentive eyes.
But why enforce I this? as fainting? no.
If any here chance to behold himself,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For, if he shame to have his follies known,
First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
Was made to ceaze on vice, and with a gripe
Squeeze out the humor of such spongie souls,
As lick up every idle vanity.

CORD. Why this is right Furor Poeticus!
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceive the best, or entertain
This supposition, that a madman speaks.

ASP. What? are you ready there? MITIS sit down:
And my CORDATVS. Sound hough, and begin.
I leave you two, as censors, to sit here:
Observe what I present, and liberally
Speak your opinions, upon every Scene,
As it shall pass the view of these spectators.
Nay, now, you are tedious Sirs, for shame begin.
And MITIS, note me, if in all this front,
You can espy a gallant of this mark,
Who (to be thought one of the judicious)
Sits with his arms thus wreathed, his hat pulled here,
Cries meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will show more several motions in his face,
Then the new London, Rome, or Nineveh,
And (now and then) breaks a dry bisquet jest,
Which that it may more easily be chewed,
He sleeps in his own laughter.

CORD. Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallowed?

ASP. O, assure you.
Or if it did not, yet as HORACE sings,
" Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit,
" Mean cares are welcome still to hungry guests.

CORD. It Is true, but why should we observe 'hem, ASPER?

ASP. O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,
They Are more infectious then the pestilence:
And therefore I would give them pills to purge,
And make 'hem fit for fair societies.
How monstrous, and detested is it, to see
A fellow, that has neither art, nor brain,
Sit like an ARISTARCHVS, or starke-asse,
Taking men's lines, with a tobacco face,
In snuff, still spitting, using his wryed looks
(In nature of a vice) to wrest, and turn
The good aspect of those that shall sit near him,
From what they do behold! O, it is most vile.

MIT. Nay, ASPER.

ASP. Peace, MITIS, I do know your thought.
You Will say, your guests here will except at this:
Pish, you are too timorous, and full of doubt.
Then, he, a patient, shall reject all physic,
'Cause the physicion tells him, you are sick:
Or, if I say, That he is vicious,
You will not hear of virtue. Come, you are fond.
Shall I be so extrauagant to think,
That happy judgments, and composed spirits,
Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
I am ashamed.

CORD. Nay, but good pardon us:
We must not bear this peremptory sail,
But use our best endeavors how to please.

ASP. Why, therein I commend your careful thoughts,
And I will mix with you in industry
To please, but whom? attentive auditors,
Such as will join their profit with their pleasure,
And come to feed their understanding parts:
For these, I Will prodigally spend my self,
And speak away my spirit into air;
For these, I Will melt my brain into invention,
Coin new conceits, and hang my richest words
As polisht jewels in their bounteous ears.
But stay, I loose my self, and wrong their patience;
If I dwell here, they will not begin, I see:
Friends sit you still, and entertain this troop
With some familiar, and by-conference,
I Will haste them sound. Now gentlemen, I go
To turn an actor, and a Humorist,
Where (ere I do resume my present person)
We hope to make the circles of your eyes
Flow with distilled laughter: if we fail,
We must impute it to this only chance,
" Art has an enemy called Ignorance.

CORD. How do you like his spirit, MITIS?

MIT. I should like it much better, if he were less confident.


CORD. Why, do you suspect his merit?


MIT. No, but I fear this will procure him much envy.


CORD. O, that sets the stronger seal on his desert, if he had no enemies, I
should esteem his fortunes most wretched at this instant.


MIT. You have seen his play, CORDATVS? pray you, how is it?


CORD. Faith sir, I must refrain to judge, only this I can say of it, it is
strange, and of a particular kind by it self, somewhat like Vetus Comoedia: a
work that has bounteously pleased me, how it will answer the general
expectation, I know not.


MIT. Does he observe all the laws of Comedy in it?


CORD. What laws mean you?


MIT. Why, the equal division of it into Acts, and Scenes, according to the
Terentian manner, his true number of Actors; the furnishing of the Scene with
GREX, or CHORUS, and that the whole Argument fall within compass of a days
business.


CORD. O no, these are too nice observations.


MIT. They are such as must be received, by your favor, or it cannot be
authentic.


CORD. Troth, I can discern no such necessity.


MIT. No?


CORD. No, I assure you, Signior. If those laws you speak of, had been
delivered us, ab initio, and in their present virtue and perfection, there had
been some reason of obeying their powers: but it is extant, that that which we
call Comoedia, was at first nothing but a simple, and continued Song, sung by
one only person, till SVSARIO invented a second, after him EPICHARMVS a third;
PHORMVS, and CHIONIDES devised to have four Actors, with a Prologue and
Chorus; to which CRATINVS (long after) added a fifth, and sixth; EVPOLIS more;
ARISTOPHANES more then they: every man in the dignity of his spirit and
judgment, supplied something. And (though that in him this kind of Poem
appeared absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it changed
since, in MENANDER, PHILEMON, CECILIVS, PLAVTVS, and the rest; who have utterly
excluded the Chorus, altered the property of the persons, their names, and
natures, and augmented it with all liberty, according to the elegancie and
disposition of those times, wherein they wrote? I see not then, but we should
enjoy the same license, or free power, to illustrate and heighten our invention
as they did; and not be tied to those strict and regular forms, which the
niceness of a few (who are nothing but form) would thrust upon us.


MIT. Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what is his Scene?


COR. Marry, Insula Fortunata, Sir.


MIT. O, the fortunate Island? mass, he has bound himself to a strict law
there.


COR. Why so?


MIT. He cannot lightly alter the Scene, without crossing the seas.


COR. He needs not, having a whole Island to run through, I think.


MIT. No? how comes it then, that in some one Play we see so many seas,
countries, and kingdoms, past over with such admirable dexterity?


COR. O, that but shows how well the Authors can travail in their vocation,
and outrun the apprehension of their auditorie. But leaving this, I would they
would begin once: this protraction is able to sour the best-settled patience
in the Theater.


MIT. They have answered your wish Sir: they sound.


CORD. O, here comes the Prologue: Now sir! if you had staid a little longer, I
meant to have spoke your prologue for you, I faith.


The third sounding. PROLOGVE. PROL. Mary, with all my heart, Sir, you shall
do it yet, and I thank you.


CORD. Nay, nay, stay, stay, hear you?


PROL. You could not have studied to have done me a greater benefit at the
instant, for I protest to you, I am imperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of
necessity have been out.


CORD. Why, but do you speak this seriously?


PROL. Seriously! I (wit's my help do I) and esteem my self in debted to
your kindness for it.


CORD. For what?


PROL. Why, for undertaking the prologue for me.


CORD. How? did I undertake it for you?


PROL. Did you! I appeal to all these gentlemen, whether you did or no? Come,
it pleases you to cast a strange look on it now; but 'twill not serve.


CORD. Before me, but it must serve: and therefore speak your prologue.


PROL. And I do, let me die poisoned with some venomous hiss, and never live
to look as high as the two-penny room again.


MIT. He has put you to it, sir.


COR. Sdeath, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good ^^ith I can
speak no prologue, howsoever his weak wit has had the fortune to make this
strong use of me, here before you: but I protest --


CARLO BVFFONE. CARL. He enters with a boy, and wine. Come, come, leave these
fustian protestations: away, come, I cannot abide these gray headed ceremonies.
Boy, fetch me a glass, quickly, I may bid these gentlemen welcome; give 'hem a
health here: I marl'e whose wit 'twas to put a prologue in you would ^ack-buts
mouth: they might well think he would be out of tune, and yet you would play upon
him too.


CORD. Hang him, dull block.


CARL. O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would have made a
good column, and he had been thought on, when the house was a building. O,
art thou come? well said; give me boy, fill, so. Here Is a cup of wine sparkles
like a diamond. Gentlewomen (I am sworn to put them in first) and Gentlemen, a
round, in place of a bad prologue, I drink this good draught to your health
here, Canarie, the very Elixir and spirit of wine. This is that our Poet calls
Castalian liquor, when he comes abroad (now and then) once in a fortnight, and
makes a good meal among Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary, at home
he keeps a good philosophical diet, beans and butter-milke: an honest pure
Rogue, he will take you off three, four, five of these, one after another,
and look vilanously when he has done, like a one-headed CR^BERVS (he do not
hear me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his brain
rigged a little) he sails away withal, as though he would work wonders when
he comes home. He has made a Play here, and he calls it, Every Man out of his
humor: God's Blood, and he get me out of the humor he has put me in, I Will trust
none of his Tribe again, while I live. Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you
are welcome. I could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there is an old rule,
No pledging your own health. Mary, if any here be thirsty for it, their best
way (that I know) is, sit still, seal up their lips, and drink so much of the
play, in at their ears. Exit.


GREX.
MIT. What may this fellow be, CORDATVS?


COR. Faith, if the time will suffer his description, I Will give it you. He is
one, the Author calls him CARLO BVFFONE, an impudent common iester, a violent
rayler, and an incomprehensible Epicure; one, whose company is desired of all
men, but beloved of none; he will sooner lose his soul then a jest, and
profane even the most holy things, to excite laughter: no honorable or
reverend personage whatsoever, can come within the reach of his eye, but is
turned into all manner of variety, by his adult'rate simile's.


MIT. You paint forth a monster.


COR. He will prefer all Countries before his native, and thinks he can
never sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliver his affectionate conceit
of foreign Atheistical policies: but stay -- Observe these, he will appear
himself anon.


MIT. O, this is your envious man (MACILENTE) I think.


COR. The same, sir.


Act I.
Scene I.
MACILENTE. VIri est, fortunae caecuatem facile far.
It Is true; but, Stoique, where (in the vast world)
Does that man breathe, that can so much command
His blood, and his affection? well: I see,
I strive in vain to cure my wounded soul;
For every cordial that my thoughts apply,
Turns to a cor'siue, and does eat it farther.
There is no taste in this Philosophy,
It Is like a potion that a man should drink,
But turns his stomach with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to believe
That beggary is the only happiness;
Or (with a number of these patient fools)
To sing: My mind to me a kingdom is,
When the lanke hungry belly barks for food.
I look into the world, and there I meet
With objects, that do strike my bloud-shot eyes
Into my brain: where, when I view my self;
Having before observed, this m^n is great,
Mighty, and feared: that, loved and highly favored:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honored: a fifth, rarely featured:
A sixth, admired for his nuptial fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my self,
I wish the organs of my ^ight were cracked;
And that the engine of my grief could cast
Mine eye balls, like two globes of wildfire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that have transfixt my heart,
And often (in the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand upon my face,
Like drops of dew on a stiff cake of ice.

GREX.
COR. This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, ge^^it, in^^titque demes,
S^d^t frigidus, intuem quod odit.

MIT. O peace, you break the Scene.

MACI. Soft, who be these?
I Will lay me down a while till they be past.

GREX.
COR. Signior, note this gallant, I pray you.

MIT. What is he?

COR. A tame Rooke, you will take him presently: List.

Act I. Scene II.
SOGLIARDO, CARLO BVFFONE, MACILENTE. NAy look you CARLO: this is my Humor
now! I have land and money, my friends left me well, and I will be a Gentleman
whatsoever it cost me.


SOG. Tut, and I take an humor of a thing once, I am like your tailors needle,
I go through: but, for my name, Signior, how think you? will it not serve for
a gentleman's name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha?


CAR. Let me hear: how is it?


SOG. Signior In^ulso Sogliardo: me thinks it sounds well.


CAR. O excellent! tut, and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand
for a gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen.


SOG. Why, and for my wealth I might be a Justice of Peace.


CAR. I, and a Constable for your wit.


SOG. All this is my Lordship you see here, and those Farms you came by.


CAR. Good steps to gentility too, mary: but SOGLIARDO, if you affect to be a
gentleman indeed, you must observe all the rare qualities, humors, and
complements of a gentleman.


SOG. I know it, signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to
learn, He assure you.


CAR. Enough sir: I Will make admirable use in the proiection of my medicine upon
this lump of copper here. I Will bethink me, for you sir.


SOG. Signior, I will both pay you, and pray you, and thank you, and think on
you.


GREX.
CORD. Is not this purely good?


MACIL. God's Blood, why should such a prick-card hine as this,
Berich? Ha? a fool? such a transparent gull
That may be scene through? wherefore should he have land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eat my entrails,
And sink my soul into the earth with sorrow.

CAR. First (to be an accomplished gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time)
you must give over housekeeping in the country, and live altogether in the
city amongst gallants; where, at your first appearance, 'twere good you turned
four or five hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunks of
apparel (you may do it without going to a coniurer) and be sure, you mix your
self still, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least
popular; study their carriage, and behavior in all: learn to play at Primero
and Passage, and (ever when you lose) ha'two or three peculiar oaths to swear
by, that no man else swears: but above all, protest in your play, and affirm,
Upon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at every cast) you may do it
with a safe conscience, I warrant you.


SOG. O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that has these
excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you.


CAR. You must endeavor to feed cleanly at your Ordinary, sit melancholy, and
pick your teeth when you cannot speak: and when you come to Plays, be
humorous, look with a good startch't face, and ruffle your brow like a new
boot; laugh at nothing but your own jests, or else as the Noblemen laugh.
That Is a special grace you must observe.


SOG. I warrant you, sir.


CAR. I, and ^it of the stage, and stout: provided, you have a good suit.


SOG. O, I Will have a suit only for that, sir.


CAR. You must talk much of your kindred, and allies.


SOG. Lies! no Signior, I shall not need to do so, I have kindred in the city
to talk of: I have a niece is a merchants wife; and a nephew, my brother
SORDIDOS son, of the Innes of Court.


CAR. O, but you must pretend alliance with Courtiers and great persons: and
ever when you are to dine or suppe in any strange presence, hire a fellow with
a great chain (though it be copper it is no matter) to bring you letters,
feigned from such a Nobleman, or such a Knight, or such a Lady, To their
worshipful, right rare, and noble qualified friend or kinsman, Signior In^ulso
Sogliardo; give your self style enough. And there (while you intend
circumstances of news, or enquiry of their health, or so) one of your
familiars (whom you must carry about you still) breaks it up (as 'twere in a
jest) and reads it publicly at the table: at which, you must seem to take as
unpardonable offense, as if he had torn your Mistress colors, or breathed upon
her picture; and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would advance a
challenge upon it presently.


SOG. Stay, I do not like that humor of challenge, it may be accepted; but
I Will tell you what is my humor now: I will do this. I will take occasion of
sending one of my suites to the Tailors to have the pocke^ repaired, or so; and
there such a letter, as you talk of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the
Tailor will presently give out what I am, upon the reading of it, vvorth
twenty of your Gallants.


CAR. But then you must put on an extreme face of coffeehouse at your man's
negligence.


SOG. O, so I will, and beat him too: I Will have a man for the purpose.


MACIL. You may; you have land and crowns: O partial fate!


CARL. Mass well remembered, you must keep your men gallant, at the first,
fine py^d liueries, laid with good gold lace, there is no loss in it, they may
tip't off and pawn it, when they lack victuals.


SOG. By'r Lady, that is chargeable Signior, 'twill bring a man in debt.


CAR. Debt? why, that is the more for your credit sir: it is an excellent policy
to owe much in these days, if you note it.


SOG. As how good Signior? I would feign be a Politician.


CAR. O! look where you are indebted any great sum, your creditor observes
you with no less regard, then if he were bound to you for some huge benefit,
and will quake to give you the least cause of offense, lest he loose his money.
I assure you (in these times) no man has his servant more obsequious and
pliant, then gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a
moitie, or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, then if you gave them a
new-yeares gift.


SOG. I perceive you, sir: I will take up, and bring my self in credit sure.


CAR. Mary this, always beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poor
needy Ludgathians* they are impudent creatures, turbulent spirits, they care
not what violent tragedies they stir, nor how they play fast and loose with a
poor gentleman's fortunes, to get their own. Mary, these rich fellows (that
have the world, or the better part of it, sleeping in their counting-houses)
they are ten times more placable, they; either fear, hope, or modesty,
restraines them from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your
followers, you shall not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list
your self.


SOG. No? how should I keep 'hem then?


CAR. Keep 'hem? God's Blood let them keep themselves, they are no sheep, are
they? What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparel, jewels, and
diverse other pretty commodities lie negligently scattered, and I would have
those Mercuries follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their fingers
for nothing.


SOG. That Is not so good, me thinks.


CAR. Why, after you have kept 'hem a fortnight, or so, and showed 'hem enough
to the world, you may turn 'hem away, and keep no more but a boy, it is enough.


SOG. Nay, my humor is not for boys, I Will keep men, and I keep any; and I Will
give coats, that is my humor: but I lack a cullisen.


CAR. Why, now you ride to the city, you may buy one, I Will bring you where you
shall have your choice for money.


SOG. Can you, sir?


CAR. O, I: you shall have one take measure of you, and make you a Co^^ of
arms, to fit you of what fashion you will.


SOG. By word of mouth, I thank you, Signior; I Will be once a little prodigal
in a humor, in faith, and have a most prodigious coat.


MACI. Torment and death! break head and brain at once,
To be delivered of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blind Fortune dote thus?
To be enamored on this dustie turfe?
This clod? a whoreson puck-fist? O god, god, god, god, etc.
I could run wild with grief now, to behold
The rankness of her bounties, that does breed
Such bull-rushes; these mushrompe gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place, and worship.

CAR. Let him alone, some stray, some stray.

SOG. Nay, I will examine him before I go, sure.

CAR. The Lord of the soil has al vvests, and straies here? has he not?

SOG. Yes, sir.

CAR. Faith, then I pity the poor fellow, he is fallen into a fools hands.


SOG. Sirrah, who gave you commission to lie in my lordship?


MACI. Your lordship?


SOG. How? my lordship? do you know me, sir?


MACI. I do know you, sir.


CAR. S'heart, he answers him like an echo.


SOG. Why, who am I, Sir?


MACI. One of those that fortune favors.


CAR. The Perphrasis of a fool; I Will observe this better.


SOG. That fortune favors? how mean you that, friend?


MACI. I mean simply. THat you are one that lives not by your wits.


SOG. By my wits? No sir, I scorn to live by my wits, I. I have better means,
I tell thee, then to take such base courses, as to live by my wits. God's Blood,
do thou think I live by my wits?


MACI. Me thinks, Iester, you should not relilsh this well.


CAR. Ha? does he know me?


MACI. Though yours be the worst use a man can put his wit to, of thousands,
to prostitute it at every tavern and ordinary; yet (me thinks) you should
have turned your broad side at this, and have been ready with an Apology,
able to sink this hulke of ignorance into the bottom, and depth of his
contempt.


CAR. God's Blood it is MACILENTE! Signior, you are well encountered, how is it? O, we
must not regard what he says man, a trout, a shallow fool, he has no more
brain then a butter-flie, a mere stuffed suit, he looks like a mustie bottle,
new vvickerd, his head's the cork, light, light. I am glad to see you so well
returned, Signior.


MACI. You are? Gramercie, good IANVS.


SOG. Is he one of your acquaintance? I love him the better for that.


CAR. Gods precious, come away man, what do you mean? and you knew him as I
do, you would shun him, as you would do the plague?


SOG. Why, sir?


CAR. O, he is a black fellow, take heed on him.


SOG. Is he a Scholar, or a Soldier?


CAR. Both, both; a lean mungrell, he looks as if he were chapfalne, with
barking at other men's good fortunes: 'ware how you offend him, he carries oil
and fire in his pen, will scald where it drops: his spirit's like powder,
quick, violent: he will blow a man up with a jest: I fear him worse then a
rotten wall does the cannon, shake an hour after, at the report. Away, come
not near him.


SOG. For Gods sake let us be gone, and he be a Scholar, you know I cannot
abide him, I had as leeue see a Cockatrice, specially as cockatrices go now.


CAR. What, you will stay, signior? this gentleman SOGLIARDO, and I, are to visit
the knight PVNTARVOLO, and from thence to the city, we shall meet there.


MACI. I, when I cannot shun you, we will meet.
It Is strange! of all the creatures I have seen,
I envy not this BVFFON, for indeed
Neither his fortunes, nor his parts deserve it:
But I do hate him, as I hate the devil,
Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarism.
O, it is an open-throated, black-mouthed curre,
That bites at all, but eats on those that feed him.
A slave, that to your face will (serpent-like)
Creep on the ground, as he would eat the dust;
And to your back will turn the tail, and sting
More deadly then a scorpion: Stay, who is this?
Now for my soul, another minion
Of the old lady Chance's: I Will observe him.

Act I. Scene III.
SOLDIDO, MACILENTE, HINE. O Rare! good, good, good, good, good! I thank my
Stars, I thank my Stars for it.


MACI. Said I not true? does not his passion speak
Out of my divination? O my senses,
Why loose you not your powers, and become
Dulled, if not deadded with this spectacle?
I know him, it is SORDIDO, the farmer,
A Boore, and brother to that swine was here.

SORD. Excellent, excellent, excellent! as I would wish, as I would vvish.


MACI. See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
And makes him swoune with laughter, o, o, o.

SORD. Ha, ha, ha, I will not sow my grounds this year. Let me see, what
hauest shall we have? June, July, August?


MACI. What is it, a Prognostication rap's him so?

SORD. The xx, xxi, xxij, days, rain and vvinde, O good, good! the xxiij, and
xxiiij, rain and some wind, good! the xxvi, rain, good still! xxvi, xxvij,
xxviij, wind and some rain; would it had been rain and some vvinde: well
it is good (when it can be no better) xxix, inclining to rain: inclining to
rain? that is not so good now. xxx, and xxxi, vvinde and no rain: no rain?
S'lid stay; this is worse and worse: what says he of S. Swithins? turn
back, look, S. Swithins: no rain?


MACI. O, here is a precious durty damned rogue,
That fats himself with expectation
Of rotten weather, and vnseason'd hours;
And he is rich for it, an elder brother!
His barnes are full! his reekes, and mowes well trod!
His garners crack with store! O, it is well; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee, and thy house.

SORD. O here, S. Swithins, the xv day, variable vveather, for the most part
rain, good; for the most part rain: Why, it should rain forty days after,
now, more or less, it was a rule held, before I was able to hold a plough,
and yet here are two days, no rain; ha? it makes me muse. We Will see how the
next month begins, if that be better. September, first, second, third, and
fourth days, rainy, and blustering; this is well now: fifth, sixth, seventh,
eight, and ninth, rainy, with some thunder; I mary, this is excellent; the
other was false printed sure: the tenth, and eleventh, great store of rain; O
good, good, good, good, good! the twelth, thirteenth, and fourteenth days,
rain; good still: fifteenth, and sixteenth, rain; good still: seventeenth,
and eighteenth, rain, good still; nineteenth, and twentieth, good still, good
still, good still, good still, good still! one and twentieth, some rain; some
rain? well, we must be patient, and attend the heavens pleasure, would it
were more though: the one and twentieth, two and twentieth, three and
twentieth, great tempest of rain, thunder, and lightning. O good again, past
expectation good!
I thank my blessed angel; never, never,
Laid I penny better out, then this,
To purchase this dear book: not dear for price,
And yet of me as dear^ly prized as life,
Since in it, is contained the very life,
Blood, strength, and sinnewes of my happiness.
Blessed be the hour, wherein I bought this book,
His studies happy, that composed the book,
And the man fortunate, that sold the book.
Sleep with this charm, and be as true to me,
As I am joyed, and confident in thee.



MACI. The ^ine e^ters with a pay^^. Ha, ha, ha? IN not this good? Is It not
pleasing this?
Ha, ha, ha! God pardon me! ha, ha!
Is It possible that such a spacious villain
Should live, and not be plagued? or lies he hid
Within the vvrinckled bosom of the world,
Where heaven cannot see him? God's Blood (me thinks)
It Is rare, and strange, that he should breathe, and walk,
Feed with disgestion, sleep, enjoy his health,
And (like a boistrous vvhale, svvallowing the poor)
Still swim in wealth, and pleasure! is 't not strange?
Unless his house, and skin were thunder-proofe,
I vvonder at it! Me thinks, now, the hecticke,
Gout, leprosy, or some such loathed disease
Might light upon him; or that fire (from heaven)
Might fall upon his barnes; or mice, and rats
Eat up his grain; or else that it might rot
Within the hoary reekes, e'ne as it stands:
Me thinks this might be well; and after all
The devil might come and fetch him. I, it is true!
Mean time he sursets in prosperity,
And thou (in envy of him) gnaw'st thy self,
Peace, fool, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely look on merit.

SORD. Who brought this same, sirrah?

HINE. Mary, sir, one of the Justices men, he says it is a precept, and all
their hands be at it:


SORD. I, and the prints of them stick in my flesh,
Deeper then i'their letters: They have sent me
Pills wrapped in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
Would poison all the sweetness of my book,
And turn my honey into homlocke juice.
But I am wiser then to serve their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions. Here Is a device,
To charge me bring my grain unto the markets:
I, much, when I have neither barn nor garner,
Nor earth to hide it in, I Will bring it; till then,
Each corn I send shall be as big as Pa^les.
O, but (say some) the poor are like to starve.
Why let 'hem starve, what is that to me? are bees
Bound to keep life in drones, and idle moths? no:
Why such are these (that term themselves the poor,
Only because they would be pitied,
But are indeed a sort of lazy beggars)
Licencious rogues, and sturdie vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plentious year)
Like snakes, in heat of summer, out of dung,
And this is all that these cheap times are good for:
Whereas a wholesome, and penurious dearth
Purges the soil of such vile excrements,
And kills the vipers up.

HINE. O, but master,
Take heed they hear you not.

SORD. Why so?

HINE. They will exclaim against you.

SORD. I, their exclaimes
Move me as much, as thy breath moves a mountain!
Poor worms, they hiss at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to applaud my self,
To fit and clap my hands, and laugh, and leap,
Knocking my head against my roof, with joy
To see how plumpe my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirrah, go, hie you home, and bid your fellows,
Get all their flailes ready, again' I come.

HINE. I will, Sir.

SORD. I Will instantly set all my hines to thrashing
Of a whole reeke of corn, which I will hide
Under the ground; and with the straw thereof
I Will stuff the outsides of my other mowes:
That done, I Will have 'hem empty all my garners,
And in the friendly earth bury my store,
That, when the searchers come, they may suppose
All Is spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And, to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my door)
Each market day, I will be seen to buy
Part of the purest wheat, as for my household:
Where when it comes, it shall increase my heaps,
Twill yield me treble gain, at this dear time,
Promis^d in this dear book: I have cast all.
Till then I will not sell an ear. I Will hang first.
O, I shall make my prizes as I list,
My house and I can feed on pease, and barley,
What though a world of wretches starve the while?
"He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.

GREX.
COR. Now, Signior, how approve you this? have the Humorists expressed themselves
truly or no?


MIT. Yes (if it be well prosecuted) it is hitherto happy enough: but me thinks,
MACILENTE went hence too soon, he might have been made to stay, and speak
somewhat in reproof of SORDIDO'S wretchedness, now at the last.


COR. O, no, that had been extremely improper, besides, he had continued the
Scene too long with him, as't was, being in no more action.


MIT. You may enforce the length, as a necessary reason; but for propriety, the
Scene would very well have borne it, in my judgment.


COR. O, worst of both: why, you mistake his Humor utterly then.


MIT. How? do I mistake it? is it not envy?


COR. Yes, but you must understand, Signior, he enuies him not as he is a
villain, a wolf in the commonwealth, but as he is rich, and fortunate; for
the true condition of envy, is, Dolor altenae foelicitatis, to have our eyes
continually sixth upon another man's prosperity, that is, his chief happiness,
and to grieve at that. Whereas, if we make his monstrous, and abhord actions
our object, the grief (we take then) comes nearer the nature of hate, then
envy, as being bred out of a kind of contempt and lothing, in our selves.


MIT. So you will infer it had been hate, not envy in him, to reprehend the
humor of SORDIDO?


CORD. Right, for what a man truly enuies in another, he could always love,
and cherish in himself: but no man truly reprehends in another, what he loves
in himself; therefore reprehension is out of his hate. And this distinction
has he himself made in a speech there (if you marked it) where he says, I
envy not this BVFFON, but I hate him.


MIT. Stay, sir: I envy not this BVFFON, but I hate him: why might he not as
well have hated SORDIDO, as him?


COR. No, sir, there was subject for his envy in SORDIDO; his wealth: So was
there not in the other. He stood possessed of no one eminent gift, but
amostodious, and fiend-like disposition, that would turn charity it self
into hate, much more envy, for the present.


MIT. You have satisfied me, sir; O, here comes the Fool and the Iester,
again, me thinks.


COR. 'Twere pity they should be parted, sir.


MIT. What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?


COR. No, sir, this is one Monsieur FASTIDIVS BRISK, otherwise called the fresh
Frenchefied courtier.


MIT. A humorist too?


COR. As humorous as quicksilver, do but observe him, the Scene is the
country still, remember.


Act II.
Scene I.
FAST. BRISK, CINEDO, CARLO BVFFONE, SOGLIARDO. CINEDO, watch when the knight
comes, and give us word.


CINE. I will, sir.


FAST. How like thou my boy, CARLO?


CAR. O, well, well. He looks like a colonel of the Pigmies horse, or one of
these motions, in a great antique clock: he would show well upon a
hab^erdashers stall, at a corner shop, rarely.


FAST. S'heart, what a damned witty rogne's this? how he confounds with his
simile's?


CARL. Better with simile's, then smiles: and whither were you riding now,
Signior?


FAST. Who, I? what a silly iest's that? whither should I ride, but to the
court?


CARL. O, pardon me, sir, twenty places more: your hot-house, or your
whore-house --


FAST. By the virtue of my soul, this knight dwells in Elysium, here.


CARL. He Is gone ^ow, I thought he would fly out presently. These be our
nimble-spirited Ca^so's, that have their euasions at pleasure, will run over a
bog like your wild Irish: no sooner started, but they will leap from one thing
to another, like a squirrell, heigh: dance! and do tricks in their discourse,
from fire to water, from water to air, from air to earth, as if their tongues
did but even lick the four elements over, and away.


FAST. Sirrah, CARLO, thou never ^aw'st my grey-hobbie yet, did thou?


CARL. No: have you such a one?


FAST. The best in Europe (my good villain) thou wilt say, when thou see him.


CARL. But when shall I see him?


FAST. There was a noble man in the court offered me 100. pound for him, by
this light: a fine little fiery slave, he runs like a (oh) excellent,
excellent! with the very sound of the spur.


CARL. How? the sound of the spur?


FAST. O, it is your only humor now extant, sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.


CARL. God's Blood, you shall see him turn morris-dancer, he has got him bells, a
good suit, and a hobbyhorse.


SOGL. Signior, now you talk of a hobbyhorse, I know where one is, will not
be given for a brace of angels.


FAST. How is that, Sir?


SOGL. Mary, sir, I am telling this gentleman of a hobbyhorse, it was my
fathers indeed, and (though I say it --


CARL. That should not say it) on, on.


SOGL. He did dance in it, with as good humor, and as good regard, as any man
of his degree what soever, being no gentleman: I have danced in it my self too.


CARL. Not since the humor of gentilitie was upon you? did you?


SOGL. Yes, once; mary, that was but to show what a gentleman might do, in a
humor.


CARL. O, very good.


GREX.
MIT. Why, this fellows discourse were nothing, but for the word Humor.


COR. O, bear with him, and he should lack matter, and words too, 'twere
pitiful.


SOG. Nay, look you, sir, there is never a gentleman in the country has the
like humors, for the hobbyhorse, as I have; I have the method for the
threeding of the needle and all, the --


CAR. How, the method.


SOG. I, the leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the
nose, and the travels of the egg from singer to singer, all the humors
incident to the quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlor. I Will keep it
for a monument, as long as I live, sure.


CAR. Do so; and when you die, 'twill be an excellent trophee, to hang over
your tomb.


SOG. Mass, and I Will have a tomb (now I think on it) it is but so much charges.


CAR. Best build it in your life time then, your heirs may hap to forget it
else.


SOG. Nay, I mean so, I Will not trust to them.


CAR. No, for heirs, and executors, are grown damnably careless, specially,
since the ghosts of testators left walking: how like you him, Signior?


FAST. Fore heavens, his humor arrides me exceedingly.


CAR. Arrides you?


FAST. I, pleases me (a pox on it) I am so haunted at the count, and at my
lodging, with your refined choice spirits, that it makes me clean of another
garb, another sheafe, I know not how! I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar
phrase, it is against my genius.


SOG. Signior CARLO.


GREX.
COR. This is right to that of HORACE, D^m vitant sl^l^i vitis, in contraria
currunt: so this gallant, laboring to anoid popularitie, falls into a habit of
affection, ten thousand times hatefuller then the former.


CAR. Who, he? a gull, a fool, no salt in him in the earth, man: he looks
like a fresh salmon kept in a tub, he will be spent shortly. His braine's
lighter then his feather already, and his tongue more subject to lie, then
that is to wag: he sleeps with a muske-cat every night, and walks all day
hung'd in pomander chains for penance: he has his skin tan'd in ciuet, to
make his complexion strong, and the sweetness of his youth lasting in the
sense of his sweet lady. A good empty puff, he loves you well, Signior.


SOGL. There shall be no love lost, sir, I Will assure you.


FAST. Nay, CARLO, I am not happy in thy love, I see: pr'y thee suffer me to
enjoy thy company a little (sweet mischief) by this air, I shall envy this
gentleman's place in thy affections, if you be thus private, in faith. How now? is
the knight arrived?


CINEDO. CINE. No, sir, but it is guest he will arrive presently, by his
forerunners.


FAST. His bounds! by MINERVA an excellent figure; a good boy.


CARL. You should give him a french crown for it: the boy would find two
better figures in that, and a good figure of your bounty beside.


FAST. Tut, the boy wants no crowns.


CARL. No crown: speak in the singular number, and we will believe you.


FAST. Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now. Sir (damnation) I have
heard this knight PVNTARVOLO, reported to be a gentleman of exceeding good
humor; thou know him: pr'ythee, how is his disposition? I never was so
favored of my stars, as to see him yet. Boy, do you look to the hobby?


CINE. I, sir, the groom has set him up.


FAST. It Is well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take
knowledge of his -- Nay, good wickedness, his humor, his humor.


CARL. Why, he loves dogs, and hawks, and his wife, well: he has a good riding
face, and he can fit a great horse; he will taint a staff well at tilt: when
he is mounted, he looks like the sign of the George, that is all I know; save,
that in stead of a dragon, he will brandish against a tree, and break his
sword as con^idently upon the knottie bark, as the other did upon the skales
of the beast.


FAST. O, but this is nothing to that is deliuerd of him. They say he has
dialogues, and discourses between his horse, himself, and his dog: and that
he will court his own lady; as she were a stranger never encountered before.


CARL. I, that he will, and make fresh love to her every morning: this
gentleman has been a spectator of it, Signior Insulso.


SOGL. (...) from whispring with the boy. I am resolute to keep a page: say
you sir?


CARL. You have seen Signior Puntaruolo accost his lady?


SOGL. O, I sir.


FAST. And how is the manner of it, pr'ythee, good Signior?


SOGL. Faith sir, in very good sort, he has his humors for it, sir: as first,
(suppose he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet
to sound, and then the waiting gentlewoman, she looks out, and then he
speaks, and then she speaks -- very pretty in faith, gentlemen.


FAST. Why, but do you remember no particulars, Signior?


SOGL. O, yes sir: first, the gentlewoman, she looks out at the window.


CARL. After the trumpet has summoned a parle? not before?


SOGL. No, sir, not before: and then says he -- ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


CARL. What says he? be not rapt so.


SOGL. Says he -- ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


FAST. Nay, speak, speak.


SOGL. Ha, ha, ha, says he: God save you, says he: ha, ha, etc.


CARL. Was this the ridiculous motive to all this passion?


SOGL. Nay, that, that comes after, is -- ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


CARL. Doubtless, he apprehends more then he vtters, this fellow: or else.


SOGL. ^ List, list, they are come from hunting: stand by, close under this
(...), and you shall see it done, better then I can show it.


CARL. So it had need, 'twill scarce poize the observation else.


SOGL. Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.


FAST. O, withdraw, withdraw, it cannot be but a most pleasing object.


Act. II. Scene II.
PVNTARVOLO, HVNTSMAN, GENTLEWOMAN. To the rest. FOrrester, give wind to thy
borne. Enough, by this, the sound has touched the ears of the enclosed:
Depart, leave the dog, and take with thee what thou have deserved, the horn,
and thanks.


CARL. I, mary, there is some taste in this.


FAST. Is It not good?


SOGL. Ah, peace, now above, now above!


PVNT. The gentlewoman appears at the window. Stay: mine eye has (on the
instant) through the bounty of the window, received the form of a Nymph. I
will step forward three pases: of the which, I will barely retire one; and
(after some little flexure of the knee) with an erected grace salute her (one,
two, and three.) Sweet lady, God save you.


GENT. No, forsooth: I am but the waiting gentlewoman.


CARL. He knew that before.


PVNT. Pardon me: Humanum est errare.


CARL. He learned that of his chaplain.


PVNT. To the perfection of complement (which is the Dial of the thought, and
guided by the Sun of your beauties) are required these three specials: the
gnomon, the puntilio's, and the superficies: the superficies, is that we call,
place; the puntilio's, circumstance; and the gnomon, ceremony: in either of
which, for a stranger to err, it is easy and facile, and such am I.


CARL. True, not knowing her horizon, he must needs err: which I fear, he
knows too well.


PVNT. What call you the lord of the castle? sweet face.


GENT. The lord of the castle is a knight, sir; Signior PVNTARVOLO.


PVNT: PVNTARVOLO? O.


CARL. Now must he ruminate.


FAST. Does the wench know him all this while, then?


CARL. O, doc you know me, man? why, therein lies the sirrup of the jest, it is
a project, a designement of his own, a thing studied, and rehearst as
ordinarily at his coming from hawking, or hunting, as a jigge after a play.


SOGL. I, even like your jigge, sir.


PVNT. It Is a most sumptuous and stately edifice! of what years is the knight,
fair damsel?


GENT. Faith, much about your years, sir.


PVNT. What complexion, or what stature bears he?


GENT. Of your stature, and very near upon your complexion.


PVNT. Mine is melancholy:


CARL. So is the dogs, just.


PVNT. And does argue constancy, chie^ly in love. What are his endowments? Is
he courteous?


GENT. O, the most courteous knight in Christian land, sir.


PVNT. Is he magnanimous?


GENT. As the skin between your brows, sir.


PVNT. Is he bountiful?


CARL. 'Slud, he takes an inuentory of his own good parts.


GENT. Bountiful? I, sir, I would you should know it; the poor are seen'd at
his gate, early, and late, sir.


PVNT. Is he learned?


GENT. O, I sir, he can speak the French, and Italian.


PVNT. Then he is trauail'd?


GENT. I, forsooth, he has been beyond sea, once, or twice.


CARL. As far as Paris, to fetch over a fashion, and come back again.


PVNT. Is he religious?


GENT. Religious? I know not what you call religious, but he goes to church, I
am sure.


FAST. S'lid, methinkes, these answers should offend him.


CARL. T'ut, no; he knows they are excellent, and to her capacity, that
speaks 'hem.


PVNT. Would I might see his face.


CARL. She should let down a glass from the window at that word, and request
him to look in it.


PVNT. Doubtless, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qualified? does
the castle contain him?


GENT. No, sir, he is from home, but his lady is within.


PVNT. His lady? what, is she fair? splendidious? and amiable?


GENT. O, Lord, sir!


PVNT. Pr'ythee, dear Nymph, entreat her beauties to shine on this side of the
building.


CARL. Gent. leaves the window. That he may erect a new dyall of complement,
with his gnomons, and his puntilio's.


FAST. Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walk uprightly
before thee.


CARL. Heart, can any man walk more upright then he does? Look, look; as if
he went in a frame, or had a suit of wanescot on: and the dog watching him,
let he should leap out on it.


FAST. O, villain!


CARL. Well, and ever I meet him in the city, I Will ha'him ioynted, I Will pawn
him in east cheap, among the butchers else.


FAST. Peace, who be these, CARLO?


Act II. Scene III.
SORDIDO, FVNGOSO, LADY. To the rest. Yonder Is your godfather; do your duty
to him, son.


SOG. This, sir? a poor elder brother of mine, sir, a y^oman, may dispend some
seven or eight hundred a year: that is his son, my nephew, there.


PVNT. You are not ill-come, neighbor SORDIDO, though I have not yet said,
well-come: what, my god-sonne is grown a great proficient by this?


SORD. I hope he will grow great one day, sir.


FAST. What does he study? the law?


SOGL. I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.


CARL. What call you your nephew, signior?


SOGL. Mary, his name is FVNGOSO.


CARL. FVNGOSO? O, he looked somewhat like a sponge in that pinck^ yellow
doublet, me thought: well, make much of him; I see he was never borne to ride
upon a moile.


GENT. Returned above. My lady will come presently, sir.


SOGL. O, now, now.


PVNT. Sordido and Fungoso withdraw to the other part of the stage, while the
lady is come to the window. Stand by, retire your selves a space: nay, pray
you, forget not the use of your hat; the air is piercing.


FAST. What? will not their presence prevail against the current of his humor?


CARL. O, no: it is a mere flood, a torrent, carries all before it.


PVNT. What more then heavenly pulchritude is this?
What magazine, or treasury of bliss?
Dazzle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O, I am planet-strooke, and in yond sphere,
A brighter sharre then VENUS does appear!

FAST. How? in verse!


CARL. An ecstasy, an ecstasy, man.


LADY. Is your desire to speak with me, sir knight?


CARL. He will tell you that anon; neither his brain, nor his body, are yet
molded for an answer.


PVNT. Most debonaire, and luculent lady, I decline me low, as the basis of
your altitude.


GREX.
CORD. He makes congies to his wife in geometrical proportions.


MIT. Is It possible there should be any such Humorist?


CORD. Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.


PVNT. I have scarce collected my spirits, but lately scattered in the
admiration of your form; to which (if the bounties of your mind be any way
responsible) I doubt not, but my desires shall find a smooth, and secure
passage. I am a poor knight errant (lady) that hunting in the adjacent
forest, was by adventure in the pursuit of a heart, brought to this place;
which heart (dear Madame) escaped by enchantment: the evening approaching (my
self, and servant wearied) my suit is, to enter your fair castle, and refresh
me.


LADY. Sir knight, albeit it be not usual with me (chiefly in the absence of a
husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those
innated virtues, and fair parts, which so strive to express themselves, in
you; I am resolved to entertain you to the best of my unworthy power which I
acknowledge to be nothing, valew'd with what so worthy a person may deserve.
Please you but stay, while I descend.


PVNT. (...) falls in with Sordido, and his son. Most admired lady, you
astonish me!


CARL. What? with speaking a speech of your own penning?


FAST. Nay, look; pry thee peace.


CARL. Pox on it* I am impatient of such fopperie.


FAST. O, let us hear the rest.


CARL. What? a tedious chapter of courtship, after sir LANCELOT, and queen
GVEVENER? away. I mar'le in what dull cold nooke he found this lady out? that
(being a woman) she was blessed with no more copy of wit, but to serve his
humor thus. 'Slud, I think he feeds her with porridge, I: she could never
have such a thick brain else.


SOGL. Why, is porridge so hurtful, signior?


CARL. O, nothing under heaven more prejudicial to those ascending subtle
powers, or does sooner abate that which we call, acumen ingenij, then your
gross fare: why, I Will make you an instance: your city wives, but observe 'hem,
you have not more perfect true fools in the world bred, then they are generally;
and yet you see (by the finenesse and delicacy of their diet, living into the
far capons, drinking your rich wines, feeding on larkes, sparrowes,
potato-pies, and such good unctuous meats) how their wits are refined, and
rarefi'd! and sometimes a very quintessence of conceit flows from 'hem, able
to drown a weak apprehension.


FAST. Peace, here comes the lady.


LADY. Lady with her gent. seeing them, turns in again. Gods me, here is
company: turn in again.


FAST. Slight, our presence has cut off the conuoy of the jest.


CARL. All the better; I am glad on it: for the issue was very perspicuous Come,
let us discover, and salute the knight.


PVNT. Carlo, and the other two, step forth. Stay: who be these that address
themselves toward us? what, CARLO? now, by the sincerity of my soul, welcome;
welcome gentlemen: and how do thou, thou grand scourge; or, second untruss
of the rhyme?


CARL. Faith, spending my metal, in this reeling world (here and there) as
the sway of my affection carries me, and perhaps stumble upon a yeoman
pheuterer, as I do now; or one of Fortunes moiles, laden with treasure, and an
empty cloke-bagge following him, gaping when a bag will untie.


PVNT. Peace, you, ban-dogge, peace: what brisk Nimfadoro is that in the white
virgin boot there?


CARL. Mary, sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowledge
of, and with more then ordinary respect: Monsieur FASTIDIVS.


PVNT. Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsaft abiding here, and
more real entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my
orchards were those of the Hesperide's.


FAST. I possess as much in your wish, sir, as if I were made lord of the
Indies; and I pray you, believe it.


CARL. I have a better opinion of his faith, then to think it will be so
corrupted.


SOGL. Come, brother, I Will bring you acquainted with gentlemen, and good
fellows, such as shall do you more grace, then --


SORD. Carlo is coming toward them. Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance:
Do you take heed, lest --

SOGL. Hushed: my brother, sir, for want of education, sir, somewhat nodding to
the boore, the clown: but I request you in private, sir.


FVNG. By heaven, it is a very fine suit of clothes!


GREX.
COR. Do you observe that, signior? there is another humor has new cracked the
shell.


MIT. What? he is enamored of the fashion, is he?


COR. O, you forestall the jest.


FVN. I mar'le what it might stand him in!


SOG. Nephew?


FVN. Before me, it is an excellent suit, and as neatly becomes him. What said
you, uncle?


SOG. When saw you my niece?


FVN. Mary, yester-night I supt there. That kind of boot does very rare too!


SOG. And what news hear you?


FVN. The guilt spur and all! would I were hanged, but it is exceeding good.
Say you, uncle?


SOG. Your mind is carried away with somewhat else: I ask what news you
hear?


FVN. Troth, we hear none. In good faith, I was never so pleased with a
fashion, days of my life! O (and I might have but my wish) I Would ask no more
of god now, but such a suit, such a hat, such a band, such a doublet, such a
hose, such a boot, and such a --


SOG. They say, there is a new Motion of the city of Nineveh, with JONAS, and
the whale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge? you can tell, cousin?


FVN. Here Is such a world of question with him, now: Yes, I think there be
such a thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfied. Let me see,
the doublet, say fifty shillings the doublet, and between three or four pound
the hose; then boots, hat, and band: some ten or eleven pound would do it
all, and suit me for the heavens.


SOG. I Will see all those devices, and I come to London once.


FVN. Gods s'lid, and I could compass it, 'twere rare: hark you, uncle.


SOG. What says my nephew?


FVN. Faith uncle, I Would have desired you to have made a motion for me to my
father in a thing, that -- walk aside and I Will tell you, sir, no more but
this: there is a parcel of law -- books, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie
in a place for little more then half the money they cost; and I think for
some twelve pound, or twenty mark, I could go near to redeem 'hem; there is
PLOWDEN, DIAR, BROOK, and FITZ-HERBERT, diverse such, as I must have ere long:
and you know, I were as good save five or six pound as not, uncle. I pray you,
move it form.


SOG. That I will: when would you have me do it? presently?


FVN, O, I, I pray you, good uncle: God send me good luck; Lord (and^t be thy
will) prosper it: O, my stars, now, now, if it take now, I am made forever.


FAST. Shall I tell you, sir? by this air, I am the most beholding to that
lord, of any gentleman living; he does use me the most honorably, and with
the greatest respect, more indeed, then can be vtter'd with any opinion of
truth.


PVNT. Then, have you the count GRATIATO?


FAST. As true nobles gentleman too, as any breathes; I am exceedingly endeared
to his love: by this hand (I protest to you, signior, I speak it not
gloriously, nor out of affectation, but) there is he, and the count FRVGALE,
signior ILLVSTRE, signior LVCVLENTO, and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at
court) they do share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enjoy me most private. I
do wish my self sometime an vbiquitarie for their love, in good faith.


CARL. There Is never a one of these, but might lie a week on the rack, ere
they could bring forth his name; and yet he powers them out as familiarly, as
if he had scene 'hem stand by the fire in the presence, or ta^ne tobacco with
them, over the stage, in the lords room.


PVNT. Then you must of necessity know our court-starre there? that planet of
wit, MADDONA SAVIOLINA?


FAST. O, lord sir! my mistress.


PVNT. Is she your mistress?


FAST. Faith, here be some slight favors of hers, sir, that do speak it,
she is: as this scarf, sir, or this ribb and in mine ear, or so; this
feather grew in her sweet sanne sometimes, though now it be my poor fortunes
to wear it, as you see, sir: flight, flight, a foolish toy.


PVNT. Well, she is the lady of a most exalted, and ingenious spirit.


FAST. Did you ever hear any woman speak like her? or enricht with a more
plentiful discourse?


CARL. O, villainous! nothing but sound, sound, a mere echo; she speaks as
she goes tired, in cob-web lawne, light, thin: good enough to catch flies
withal.


PVNT. O, manage your affections.


FAST. Well, if thou be not plagued for this blasphemy, one day --


PVNT. Come, regard not a iester: it is in the power of my purse, to make him
speak well, or ill, of me.


FAST. Sir, I affirm it to you (upon my credit, and judgment) she has the
most harmonious, and musical strain of wit, that ever tempted a true ear;
and yet to see, a rude tongue would profine heaven, if it could.


PVNT. I am not ignorant of it, sir.


FAST. Oh, it flows from her like nectar, and she does give it, that sweet,
quick grace, and exornation in the composure, that (by this good air, as I am
an honest man, would I might never stir, sir, but) she does observe as pure
a phrase, and use as choice figures in her ordinary conferences, as any be in
the Arcadia.


CARL. Or rather in Greenes works, whence she may steal with more security.


SORD. Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall have it, but I Will part
with no more.


FVNG. I Will try what that will do, if you please.


SORD. Do so: and when you have 'hem, study hard.


FVNG. Yes, sir. And I could study to get forty shillings more now! well, I
will put my self into the fashion, as far as this will go presently.


SORD. I wonder it raines not! the Almanac says we should have store of
rain, today.


PVNT. Why, sir, to morrow I will associate you to court my self; and from
thence to the city, about a business, a project I have, I will expose it to
you, sir: CARLO, I am sure, has heard of it.


CARL. What Is that, sir?


PVNT. I do intend, this year of Iubile, coming on, to travail: and
(because I will not altogether go upon expense) I am determined to put forth
some five thousand pound, to be paid me, five for one, upon the return of my
self, my wife, and my dog, from the Turks court in Constantinople. If all, or
either of us miscarry in the journey, it is gone: if we be successful, why,
there will be five and twenty thousand pound, to entertain time withal. Nay,
go not neighbor SORDIDO, stay to night, and help to make our society the
fuller. Gentlemen, frolic: CARLO? what? dull now?


CARL. I was thinking on your project, sir, and you call it so: is this the dog
goes with you?


PVNT. This is the dog, sir.


CARL. He do' not go barefoot, does he?


PVNT. Away, you traitor, away.


CARL. Nay, before god, I speak simply; he may prick his foot with a thorn,
and be as much as the whole venture is worth. Besides, for a dog that never
trauail'd before, it is a large journey to Constantinople: I Will tell you now
(and he were mine) I Would have some present conference with a physicion, what
antidotes were good to give him, preservatives against poison: for (assure you)
if once your money be out, there'll be diverse attempts made against the life of
the poor animal.


PVNT. Thou art still dangerous.


FAST. Is signior DELIROS wife your kinswoman?


SOGL. I, sir, she is my niece, my brothers daughter here, and my nephews
sister.


SORD. Do you know her, sir?


FAST. O, God sir, Signior DELIRO, her husband, is my merchant.


FVNG. I, I have seen this gentleman there, often.


FAST. I cry you mercy, sir: let me crave your name, pray you.


FVNG. FVNGOSO, sir.


FAST. Good signior FVNGOSO, I shall request to know you better, sir.


FVNG. I am her brother, sir.


FAST. In fair time, sir.


PVNT. Come, gentlemen, I will be your conduct.


FAST. Nay, pray you, sir; we shall meet at signior DELIRO'S often.


SOGL. You shall have me at the Heralds office, sir, for some week or so, at my
first coming up. Come, CARLO.


GREX.
MIT. Methinkes, CORDATVS, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung in
the hand.


COR. I see not where he could have insisted less, and to have made the
humors perspicuous enough.


MIT. True, as his subject lies: but he might have altered the shape of his
argument, and explicated 'hem better in single Scenes.


COR. That had been single indeed: why? be they not the same persons in this,
as they would have been in those? and is it not an object of more state, to
behold the Scene full, and relieved with variety of speakers to the end, then
to see a vast empty stage, and the actors come in (one by one) as if they were
dropped down with a feather, into the eye of the spectators?


MIT. Nay, you are better traded with these things then I, and therefore I Will
subscribe to your judgment; mary, you shall give me leave to make objections.


COR. O, what else? it is the special intent of the author, you should do so:
for thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily
would object the same you do.


MIT. So, sir: but when appears MACILENTE again?


COR. Mary, he stays but till our silence give him leave: here he comes, and
with him signior DELIRO, a merchant, at whose house he is come to sojourne:
Make your own observation now, only transfer your thoughts to the city,
with the Scene; where, suppose they speak.


Act II. Scene IIII.
DELIRO, MACILENTE, FIDO, FALLACE. I Will tell you by and by, sir.
Welcome (good MACILENTE) to my house,
To sojourne even for ever: if my best
In cares, and every sort of good entreaty
Deliro comes. His ho^ stre^es flowers. May move you stay with me.

MACI. I thank you, sir:
And yet the muffled fates (had it pleased them)
Might have supplied me, from their own full store,
Without this word (I thank you) to a fool.
I see no reason, why that dog (called Chance)
Should fawn upon this fellow, more then me:
I am a man, and I have limbs, flesh, blood,
Bones, sinews, and a soul, as well as he:
My parts are every way as good as his,
If I said better? why, I did not lie.
Nath'lesse, his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and cry: (I thank you, sir.)

DELI. Dispatch, take heed your mistress see you not.

FIDO. I warrant you, sir. I Will steal by her softly.

DELI. Nay, gentle friend, be merry, raise your looks
Out of your bosom, I protest (by heaven)
You are the man most welcome in the world.

MACI. (I thank you, sir,) I know my cue, I think.

FIDO. With more perfumes and herbs. Where will you have 'hem burn, sir?

DELI. Here, good FIDO*
What? she did not see thee?

FIDO. No, sir.

DELI. That Is well:
Strew, strew, good FIDO, the freshest flowers, so.

MACI. What means this, signior DELIRO? all this censing?

DELI. Cast in more frankincense, yet more, well said.
O, MACILENTE, I have such a wife!
So passing fair, so passing far unkind,
But of such worth, and right to be unkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindness.)

MACI. What can there not?

DELI. No, that is sure as death,
No man alive! I do not say, is not,
But cannot possibly be worth her kindness!
Nay, it is certain, let me do her right.
How, said I? do her right? as though I could,
As though this dull gross tongue of mine could utter
The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite rights,
That sit (as high as I can look) within her!

MACI. This is such dotage, as was never heard.

DELI. Well, this must needs be granted.

MACI. Granted, quoth you?

DELI. Nay, MACILENTE; do not so discredit
The goodness of your judgment to deny it,
For I do speak the very least of her.
And I would crave, and beg no more of heaven,
For all my fortunes here, but to be able
To utter first in fit terms, what she is,
And then the true joys I conceive in her.

MACI. Is It possible, she should deserve so well,
As you pretend?

DELI. I, and she knows so well
Her own deserts, that (when I strive t'enioy them)
She weighs the things I do, with what she merits:
And (seeing my worth out-weigh'd so in her graces)
She is so solemn, so precise, so froward,
That no observance I can do to her,
Can make her kind to me: if she find fault,
I mend that fault; and then she says, I faulted,
That I did mend it. Now, good friend, advise me,
How I may temper this strange spleen in her.

MACI. You are too amorous, too obsequious,
And make her too assured, she may command you.
When women doubt most of their husbands loves,
They are most loving. Husbands must take heed
They give no gluts of kindness to their wives,
But use them like their horses; whom they feed
Not with a manger -- full of meat together,
But half a pecke at once: and keep them so
Still with an appetite to that they give them.
He that desires to have a loving wife,
Must bridle all the show of that desire:
Be kind, not amorous; nor bewraying kindness,
As if love wrought, but considerate duty.
" Offer no loue-rites, but let wives still seek them,
" For when they come unsought, they seldom like them.

DELI. Believe me, MACILENTE, this is gospel.
O, that a man were his own man so much,
To rule himself thus. I will strive in faith,
To be more strange and careless: yet, I hope
I have now taken such a perfect course,
To make her kind to me, and live contented,
That I shall find my kindness well returned,
And have no need to fight with my affections.
She (late) has found much fault with every room
Within my house; one was too big (she said)
Another was not furnished to her mind,
And so through all: all which, now, I have altered.
Then here, she has a place (on my backe-side)
Wherein she loves to walk; and that (she said)
Had some ill smells about it. Now, this walk
Have I (before she knows it) thus perfumed
With herbs, and flowers, and laid in diverse places,
(AS 'twere on altars, consecrate to her)
Perfumed gloves, and delicate chains of amber,
To keep the air in awe of her sweet nostrils:
This have I done, and this I think will please her.
Behold, she comes.

FALL. Here Is a sweet stink indeed:
What, shall I ever be thus crossed, and plagued?
And sick of husband? O, my head does ache,
As it would cleave asunder with these favors,
All my room's altered, and but one poor walk
That I delighted in, and that is made
So fulsome with perfumes, that I am feared
(My brain does sweat so) I have caught the plague.

DELI. Why (gentle wife) is now thy walk too sweet?
Thou said of late, it had sour aires about it,
And found'st much fault, that I did not correct it.

FALL. Why, and I did find fault, sir?

DELI. Nay, dear wife;
I know, thou have staid, thou have loved perfumes,
No woman better.

FALL. I, long since perhaps,
But now that sense is altered: you would have me
(Like to a puddle, or a standing poole)
To have no motion, nor no spirit within me.
No, I am like a pure, and sprightly river,
That moves for ever, and yet still the same;
Or fire, that burns much wood, yet still one flame.

DELI. But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden,
Smelling on roses, and on purple flowers,
And since, I hope, the humor of thy sense
Is nothing changed.

FALL. Why, those were growing flowers,
And these, within my walk, are cut and strewn.

DELI. But yet they have one sent.

FALL. I! have they so?

In your gross judgment. If you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowers, and cut ones,
You have a sense to taste lamp-oile, in faith.
And with such judgment have you changed the chambers,
Leaving no room, that I can joy to be in,
In all your house: and now my walk, and all,
You smoke me from, as if I were a fox,
And long, belike, to drive me quite away.
Well, walk you there, and I Will walk where I list.

DELI. What shall I do? O, I shall never please her,

MACI. Out on thee, dotard! what star ruled his birth?
That brought him such a star? blind Fortune still
Bestows her gifts on such as cannot use them:
How long shall I live, ere I be so happy,
To have a wi^e of this exceeding form?

DELI. Away, with 'hem, would I had broke a joint,
(...) bea^es all away. When I devised this, that should so dislike her.
Away, bear all away.

FALL. I, do: for fear
Ought that is there should like her. O, this man,
How cunningly he can conceal himself!
As though he loved? nay, honored, and adored?

DELI. Why, my sweet heart?

FALL. Sweetheart! O! better still!
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you are simple, you: you cannot change,
Look pale at pleasure, and then red with wonder:
No, no, not you! it is pity o'your naturalls.
I did but cast an amorous eye, even now,
Upon a pair of gloves, that somewhat liked me,
And straight he noted it, and gave command,
All should be taken away.

DELI. Be they nay bane then.
What, sir, FIDO, bring in those gloves again,
You took from hence.

FALL. S'body, sir, but do not,
Bring in no gloves, to spite me: if you do --

DELI. Ay, me, most wretched; how am I misconstru'd?

MACI. O, how she tempts my heart strings, with her eye,
To knit them to her beauties, or to break?
What moved the heavens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man, a beast,
That has no bliss like to others. Would to heaven
(In wreake of my misfortunes) I were turned
To some fair water- Nymph, that (set upon
The deepest whirle-pit of the rau'nous seas,)
My adamantine eyes might headlong hale
This iron world to me, and drown it all.

GREX.
COR. Behold, behold, the translated gallant.

MIT. O, he is welcome.

Act II. Scene V.
FVNGOSO. To the rest. Save you brother, and sister, save you, sir; I have
commendations for you out i^ the country: (I wonder they take no knowledge of
my suit:) mine uncle SOCLIARDO is in town. Sister, me thinks, you are
melancholy: why are you so sad? I think you took me for master FASTIDIVS
BRISLE (sister) did you not.


FALL. Why should I take you for him?


FVNG. Nay, nothing -- I was lately in master FASTIDIVS his company, and, me
thinks, we are very like.


DELI. You have a fair suit, brother, 'giue you joy on it.


FVNG. Faith, good enough to ride in, brother, I made it to ride in.


FALL. O, now I see the cause of his idle demand, was his new suit.


DELI. Pray you good brother, try, if you can change her mood.


FVNG. I warrant you, let me alone. I Will put her out of her dumps. Sister, how
like you my suit?


FALL. O, you are a gallant in print now, brother.


FVNG. Faith, how like you the fashion? it is the last edition, I assure you.


FALL. I cannot but like it, to the desert.


FVNG. Troth, sister, I was feign to borrow these spurs, I have le^t my gown
in gage for'hem, pray you lend me an angel.


FALL. Now, beshrow my heart, then.


FVNG. Good truth, I Will pay you again at my next exhibition: I had but bare
ten pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me wholly into the
fashion.


FALL. I care not.


FVNG. I had spurs of mine own before, but they were not ginglers. Monsieur
FASTIDIVS will be here anon, sister.


FALL. You jest?


FVNG. Never lend me penny more (while you line then) and that I Would be loath to
say, in truth.


FALL. When did you see him?


FVNG. Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at sir PVNTARVOLO'S: nay, sweet
sister.


MACI. I feign would know of heaven now, why yond fool
Should wear a suit of satin? he? that rooke?
That painted jay, with such a deal of outside?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good heaven, give me patience, patience, patience.
A number of these popen jayes there are,
Whom, if a man confer, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, lord, what things they are!

FALL. Come, when will you pay me again, now?

FVNG. O god, sister!

MACI. Here comes another.

Act II. Scene VI.
FASTIDIVS BRISK. To the rest. Save you, signior DELIRO: how do thou, sweet
lady? Let me kiss thee.


FVNG. How? a new suit? Aim.


DELI. And how does master FASTIDIVS BRISK?


FAST. Faith, live in court, signior DELIRO; in grace, I thank god, both of
the noble masculine, and feminine. I must speak with you in private, by and by.


DELI. When you please, sir.


FALL. Why look you so pale, brother?


FVNG. S'lid, all this money is cast away, now.


MACI. I, there is a newer edition come forth.


FVNG. It Is but my hard fortune! well, I Will have my suit changed, I Will go fetch
my tailor presently, but first I Will devise a letter to my father. Have you any
pen, and ink, sister?


FALL. What would you do withal?


FVNG. I would use it. S'light, and it had come but four days sooner, the
fashion.


FAST. There was a countess gave me her hand to kiss to day, in the presence:
did me more good by that light, then -- and yesternight sent her coach twice to
my lodging, to entreat me accompany her, and my sweet mistress, with some two,
or three namelesse ladies more: O, I have been graced by 'hem beyond all aim
of affection: this 's her garter my dagger hangs in: and they do so commend,
and approve my apparel, with my judicious wearing of it, it 's above wonder.


FALL. Indeed sir, it is a most excellent suit, and you do wear it as
extraordinary.


FAST. Why, I Will tell you now (in good faith) and by this chair, which (by the
grace of god) I intend presently to sit in, I had three suits in one year,
made three great ladies in love with me: I had other three, vn-did three
gentlemen in imitation: and other three, gat three other gentlemen widows of
three thousand pound a year.


DELI. Is It possible?


FAST. O, believe it, sir; your good face is the witch, and your apparel the
spells, that bring all the pleasures of the world into their circle.


FALL. Ah, the sweet grace of a courtier!


MACI. Well, would my father had left me but a good face for my portion yet;
though I had shared the unfortunate wit that goes with it, I had not cared: I
might have past for somewhat in the world then.


FAST. Why, assure you, signior, rich apparel has strange virtues: it makes
him that has it without means, esteemed for an excellent wit: he that enioyes
it with means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps the
deformities of nature, and gives luster to her beauties; makes continual
holy day where it shines; sets the wits of ladies at work, that otherwise
would be idle: furnishes your two-shilling ordinary; takes possession of your
stage at your new play; and enricheth your oars, as scorning to go with your
scull.


MACI. Pray you, sir, add this; it gives respect to your fools, makes many
thieves, as many strumpets, and no fewer bankrupts.


FALL. Out, out, unworthy to speak, where he breaths.


FAST. What Is he, signior?


DELI. A friend of mine, sir.


FAST. By heaven, I wonder at you, citizens, what kind of creatures you are!


DELI. Why, sir?


FAST. That you can consort your selves, with such poor seame-rent fellows.


FALL. He says true.


DELI. Sir, I will assure you (how ever you esteem of him) he is a man worthy
of regard.


FAST. Why? what has he in him, of such virtue to be regarded? ha?


DELI. Mary, he is a scholar, sir.


FAST. Nothing else?


DELI. And he is well trauail'd.


FAST. He should get him clothes; I would cherish those good parts of travail
in him, and prefer him to some nobleman of good place.


DELI. Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for ever (in my friends right)
and, I doubt not, but his desert shall more then answer my praise.


FAST. Why, and he had good clothes, I Would carry him to court with me to morrow.


DELI. He shall not want for those, sir, if gold and the whole city will
furnish him.


FAST. You say well, sir: faith, signior DELIRO, I am come to have you play the
Alchymist with me, and change the species of my land, into that metal you
talk of.


DELI. With all my heart, sir, what sum will serve you?


FAST. Faith, some three, or four hundred.


DELI. Troth, sir, I have promised to meet a gentleman this morning, in Par^les,
but upon my return I Will dispatch you.


FAST. I Will accompany you thither.


DELI. As you please, sir; but I go not thither directly.


FAST. It Is no matter, I have no other designement in hand, and therefore as
good go along.


DELI. I were as good have a quartane fever follow me now, for I shall never
be rid of him: (being me a cloak there, one) Still, upon his grace at court,
am I sure to be visited; I was a beast to give him any hope. Well, would I
were in, that I am out with him, once, and -- Come, signior MACILENTE, I must
confer with you, as we go. Nay, dear wife, I beseech thee, forsake these
moods: look not like winter thus. Here, take my keys, open my counting
houses, spread all my wealth before thee, choose any object that delights thee:
If thou will eat the spirit of gold, and drink dissolved pearl in wine, it is
for thee.


FALL. So, sir.


DELI. Nay, my sweet wife.


FALL. Good lord! how you are perfumed! in your terms, and al! pray you leave
us.


DELI. Come, gentlemen.


FAST. Adieu, sweet lady.


FALL. I, I! Let thy words ever sound in mine ears, and thy graces disperse
contentment through all my senses! O, how happy is that lady above other
ladies, that enioyes so absolute a gentleman to her servant! A countess give
him her hand to kiss? ah, foolish countess! he is a man worthy (if a woman
may speak of a man's worth) to kiss the lips of an empress.


FVNG. Ret^^nd with his tailor. What Is master FASTIDIVS gone, sister?


FALL. I, brother (he has a face like a Cherubin!)


FVNG. Gods me, what lucke's this? I have fetched my tailor and all: which way
went he, sister? can you tell?


FALL. Not I, in good faith (and he has a body like an angel!)


FVNG. How long is it since he went?


FALL. Why, but even now: did you not meet him? (and a tongue able to ravish
any woman in the earth!)


FVNG. O, for gods sake (I Will please you for your pains:) but even now, say
you? Come, good, sir: S'lid, I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body ask for
mine uncle SOGLIARDO, they shall have him at the Heralds office, yonder by
Paul's.


FALL. Well, I will not altogether despair: I have heard of a citizens wife,
has been beloved of a courtier; and why not I? heigh, ho: well, I will into my
private chamber, lock the door to me, and think over all his good parts, one
after another.


GREX.
MIT. Well, I doubt, this last Scene will endure some grievous torture.


COR. How? you fear 'twill be rackt, by some hard construction?


MIT. Do not you?


COR. No, in good faith: unless mine eyes could light me beyond sense. I see
no reason, why this should be more liable to the rack, then the rest: you will
say, perhaps, the city will not take it well, that the merchant is made here to
dote so perfectly upon his wife; and she again, to be so Fastidiously
affected, as she is?


MIT. You have vtter'd my thought, sir, indeed.


COR. Why (by that proportion) the court might as well take offense at him we
call the courtier, and with much more pretext, by how much the place
transcends, and goes before in dignity and virtue: but can you imagine that
any noble, or true spirit in court (whose sinowie, and altogether vn-affected
graces, very worthily express him a courtier) will make any exception at the
opening of such an empty trunk, as this BRISK is? or think his own worth
empeacht, by beholding his motley inside?


MIT. No sir, I do not.


COR. No more, assure you, will any grave, wise citizen, or modest matron, take
the object of this folly in DELIRO, and his wife: but rather apply it as the
foil to their own virtues. For that were to affirm, that a man, writing of
NERO, should mean all Emperors: or speaking of MACHIAVEL, comprehend all
Statesmen; or in our SORDIDO, all Farmars; and so of the rest: then which,
nothing can be vtter'd more malicious, or absurd. Indeed, there are a sort of
these narrow-ey'd decypherers, I confess, that will extort strange, and
abstruse meanings out of any subject, be it never so conspicuous and innocently
delivered. But to such (where e're they sit concealed) let them know, the
author defies them, and their writing-tables; and hopes, no sound or safe
judgment will infect it self with their contagious comments, who (indeed)
come here only to pervert, and poison the sense of what they hear, and for
naught else.


MIT. Stay, what new Mute is this, that walks so suspiciously?


COR. O, mary this is one, for whose better illustration; we must desire you to
presuppose the stage, the middle isle in Paul's; and that, the west end of it.


MIT. So, sir: and what follows?


COR. Faith, a whole volume of humor, and worthy the vnclasping.


MIT. As how? what name do you give him first?


COR. He has shift of names, sir: some call him APPLE JOHN, some Signior
WHIFFE, mary, his maine standing name is CAVALIER SHIFT: the rest are but as
clean shirts to his natures.


MIT. And what makes he in Paul's, now?


COR. Troth, as you see, for the advancement of a Siquis, or two; wherein he
has so varied himself, that if any one of 'hem take, he may hull ^p and down
in the humorous world, a little longer.


MIT. It seems then, he bears a very changing sail?


COR. O, as the wind, sir: here comes more.


Act III.
Scene I.
SHIFT, ORANGE, CLOVE. THis is rare, I have set up my bills, without discovery.


ORAN. What? Signior WHI^^E? what fortune has brought you into these west parts?


SHIFT. Troth, signior, nothing but your rheum; I have been taking an ounce
of tobacco hard by here, with a gentleman, and I am come to spit private, in
Pau^es. Save you sir.


ORAN. Adieu, good signior WHI^^E.


CLOVE. Master APPLE JOHN? you are well met: when shall we ^up together; and
laugh, and be fat with those good wenches? ha?


SHIFT. Faith, sir, I must now leave you, upon a few humors, and occasions:
but when you please, sir.


CLOVE. Farewell, sweet APPLE JOHN: I wonder, there are no more store of
gallants here!


GREX.
MIT. What be these two, signior?


COR. Mary, a couple sir, that are mere strangers to the whole scope of our
play; only come to walk a turn or two, i'this Scene of Paul's, by chance.


ORAN. Same you, good master CLOVE.


CLOVE. Sweet master ORANGE.


GREX.
MIT. How? CLOVE, and ORANGE?


COR. I, and they are well met, for it is as dry an ORANGE as ever grew:
nothing, but Salutation; and, O god, sir; and, It pleases you to say so, Sir;
one that can laugh at a jest for company with a most plausible, and extemporall
grace; and some hour after, in private, ask you what it was: the other,
monsieur CLOVE, is a more spic't youth: he will fit you a whole afternoon
sometimes, in a booke-sellers shop, reading the Greek, Italian, and Spanish;
when he understands not a word of either: if he had the tongues, to his suits,
he were an excellent linguist.


CLOVE. Do you hear this reported, for certainty?


ORAN. O god, sir.


Act III. Scene II.
PVNTARVOLO, CARLO. SIrrah, take my cloak: and you sir knave, follow me
closer. If thou losest my dog, thou shall die a dogs death; I will hang thee.


CARL. Tut, fear him not, he is a good lean slave, he loves a dog well, I
warrant him; I see by his looks, I: mass he is somewhat like him. Slud poison
him, make him away with a crooked pin, or somewhat, men; thou may have more
security of thy life: and so sir, what? you have not put out your whole venture
yet? have you?


PVNT. No, I do want yet some fifteen, or sixteen hundred pounds: but my
lady (my wife) is out of her humor; she does not now go.


CARL. No? how then?


PVNT. Mary, I am now enforced to give it out, upon the return of my self, my
dog, and my cat.


CARL. Your cat? where is she?


PVNT. My squire has her there, in the bag: Sirrah, look to her: How like
thou my change, CARLO?


CARL. Oh, for the better, sir; your cat has nine lines, and your wife have but
one.


PVNT. Besides, she will never be sea-sicke, which will save me so much in
conserues: when saw you signior SOGLIARDO?


CARL. I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds office yonder: he
requested me to go before, and take up a man or two for him in Paul's, against
his cognizance was ready.


PVNT. What? has he purchased arms, then?


CARL. I, and rare ones too: of as many colors, as e're you saw any ^ooles
co^^ in your life. I Will go look among youd^ bille, and I can fit him with
legs to his arms --


PVNT. They go to look upon the bills. With legs to his arms! Good: I will
go with you, sir.


Act III. Scene III.
FASTIDIVS, DELIRO, MACILENTE. COme, let us walk in Mediterraneo: I assure you,
sir, I am not the least respected among ladies; but let that pass: do you
know how to go into the presence, sir?


MACI. Why, on my feet, sir.


FAST. No, on your head, sir: for it is that must bear you out, I assure you:
as thus, sir. You must first have an especial care so to wear your hat, that
it oppress not confusedly this your predominant, or fore-top; because (when
you come at the presence door) you may, with once or twice stroking up your
forehead thus, enter, with your predominant perfect: that is, standing up
stiff.


MACI. As if one were frighted?


FAST. I, sir.


MACI. Which indeed, a true fear of your mistress should do, rather than gum
water, or whites of eggs: is it not so, sir?


FAST. An ingenious observation: give me leave to crave your name, Sir.


DELI. His name is, MACILENTE, sir.


FAST. Good signior MACILENTE: if this gentleman, signior DELIRO, furnish you
(as he says he will) with clothes, I will bring you, to morrow by this time,
into the presence of the most divine, and acute lady in court: you shall see
sweet silent rhetorique, and dumb eloquence speaking in her eye; but when she
speaks her self, such an anatomy of wit, so sinewiz'd and arteriz'd, that
it is the goodliest model of pleasure that ever was to behold. Oh! she strikes
the world into admiration of her; (o, o, o) I cannot express 'hem, beleuue me.


MACI. O, your only admiration, is your silence, sir.


PVNT. Before god, CARLO, this is good; let us read 'hem again. If there be any
lady, or gentlewoman of good carriage, that is desirous to entertain (to her
private uses) a young, straight, and upright gentleman, of the age of five, or
six and twenty at the most: who can serve in the nature of a gentleman usher,
and has little legs of purpose, and a black satin fute of his own, to go
before her in: which fute (for the more sweetning) now lies in lauander: and
can hide his face with her fan, if need require: or sit in the cold at the
staire foot for her, as well as another gentleman: Let her subscribe her name
and place, and diligent respect shall be given. This is above measure exellent!
ha?


CARL. No, this, this! here is a fine slave.


PVNT. IF this city, or the suburbs of the same, do afford any young
gentleman, of the first, second, or third head, more or less, whose friends
are but lately deceased, and whose lands are but new come to his hands, that
(to be as exactly qualified as the best of our ordinary gallants are) is
affected to entertain the most gentlemanlike use of tobacco: as first, to give
it the most exquisite perfume; then, to know all the delicate sweet forms for
the assumption of it: as also the rare corollarie, and practice of the Cuban
ebolition, EVRIPVS, and whiffe; which he shall receive, or take in, here at
London, and euaporate at Vxbridge, or farther, if it please him. If there be any
such generous spirit, that is truly enamored of these good faculties: May it
please him, but (by a note of his hand) to specify the place, or ordinary
where he uses to eat, and lie; and most sweet attendance, with tobacco, and
pipes of the best sort, shall be ministered: STET QVAESO CANDIDE LECTOR.


PVNT. Why this is without parallel, this!


CARL. Well, I Will mark this fellow for SOGLIARDO'S use presently.


PVNT. Or rather, SOGLIARDO, for his use,


CARL. Faith, either of 'hem will serve, they are both good properties: I Will
design the other a place too, that we may see him.


PVNT. No better place, then the Mitre, that we may be spectators with you,
CARLO. Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior SOGLIARDO! save you.


Act III. Scene IIII.
SOGLIARDO. To them. Save you, good sir PVNTARVOLO; your dogge's in health,
sir, I see: how now, CARLO?


CARL. We have taken simple pains, to choose you out followers here.


PVNT. Come hither, signior.


CLOVE. They show him the bills. Monsieur ORANGE, yond' gallants observe us;
pr'y thee let us talk fustian a little, and gull 'hem: make 'hem believe we
are great scholars.


ORANG. O lord, sir.


CLOVE. Nay, pr'y thee let us, believe me, you have an excellent habit in
discourse.


ORANG. It pleases you to say so, sir.


CLOVE. By this church, you have la: nay, come, begin: ARISTOTLE in his
Daemonologia, approues SCALIGER for the best Nauigator in his time: and in his
Hypercritiques, he reports him to be Heautontimorumenos: you understand the
Greek, sir?


ORANG. O god, sir.


MACIL. For societies sake he does. O, here be a couple of fine tame parrats.


CLOVE. Now, sir, whereas the Ingenuitie of the time, and the souls
Synderisis are but Embrions in nature, added to the panch of Esquiline, and the
Inter-vallum of the Zodiac, besides the Eclipticke line being opticke, and not
mental, but by the contemplative and theoricke part thereof, does demonstrate
to us the vegetable circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks and
whereas our intellectual, or mincing capreall (according to the Metaphisicks)
as you may read in PLATO's Histriomastix -- You conceive me, sir?


ORANG. O lord, sir.


CLOVE. Then coming to the pretty Animal, as Reason long since is fled to
animalls, you know, or indeed for the more modellizing, or enamelling, or
rather diamondizing of your subject, you shall perceive the Hipothesis, or
Galaxia, (whereof the Meteors long since had their initiall inceptions and
notions) to be merely Pithagoricall, Mathematical, and Aristocraticall -- For
look you, sir, there is ever a kind of concinnitie and species -- Let us
turn to our former discourse, for they mark us not.


FAST. Mass, yonder 's the knight PVNTARVOLO.


DELI. And my cousin SOGLIARDO, me thinks.


MACI. I, and his familiar that baunts him, the devil with a shining face.


DELI. Sogliardo, Puntarvolo, Carlo, (...). Let 'hem alone, observe 'hem not.


SOGL. Nay, I will have him, I am resolute for that. By this parchment,
gentlemen, I have been so toiled among the Harrots yonder, you will not
believe, they do speak in the strangest language, and give a man the hardest
terms for his money, that ever you knew.


CARL. But have you arms? have your arms?


SOGL. Y faith, I thank god, I can write my self gentlemen now, here is my
pattent, it cost me thirty pound, by this breath.


PVNT. A very saire coat, well charged, and full of armorie.


SOGL. Nay, it has as much variety of colors in it, as you have seen a cost
have, how like you the crest, sir?


PVNT. I understand it not well, what is it?


SOGL. Mary, sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.


PVNT. A Bore without a head, that is very rare!


CARL. I, and rampant too: troth, I commend the Heralds wi^, he has decyphered
him well: A Swine without a head, without brain, wit, any thing indeed,
ramping to gentilitie. You can blazon the rest, signior? can you not?


SOGL. O, I, I have it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shillings the
tricking.


CARL. Let Us hear, let us hear.


PVNT. They salute as they meet in the vallie. It is the most vile, foolish,
absurd, palpable, and ridiculous escutcheon, that ever this eye survis'd. Save
you, good monsieur FASTIDIVS.


CARL. Silence, good knight: on, on.


SOGL. GVRONY, of eight pieces; AZVRE and GVLES, between three plates; a
CHEV'RON, ^^grailed checkey, OR, VERT, and ERMINES; on a chief ARGENT between
two ANN'LETS, sables; a Bores head, PROPER.


CARL. How Is that? on a chief ARGENT?


SOGL. Here they (...) with Pontar^olo Carlo, and Sogliardo, (...) and Orange,
(...). On a chief ARGENT, a Bores head, PROPER between two ANN'LETS sables.


CARL. S'lud, it is a Hogs-cheeke, and puddings in a pewter field this.


SOGL. How like you 'hem, signior?


PVNT. Let the word be, Not without mustard; your crest is very rare, sir.


CARL. A frying pan to the crest had had no fellow.


FAST. Entreat your poor friend to walk off a little, signior, I will salute
the knight.


CARL. Come, lap't up, lap't up.


FAST. You are right well encountered, sir, how does your saire dog?


PVNT. In reasonable state, sir: what citizen is that you were consorted with?
a merchant of any worth?


FAST. It Is signior DELIRO, sir.


PVNT. Salute. Is it he? Save you, sir.


DELI. Good sir PVNTARVOLO.


MACI. O, what copy of fool would this place minister, to one endew'd with
patience, to observe it?


CARL. Nay, look you sir, now you are gentleman, you must carry a more exalted
presence, change your mood, and habit, to a more a^stere form, be exceeding
proud, stand upon your gentilitie, and scorn every man. Speak nothing humbly,
never discourse under a nobleman, though you never saw him butriding to the
Star Chamber, it is all one. Love no man. Trust no man. Speak ill of no man
to his face: nor well of any man behind his back. Salute fairly on the front,
and wish 'hem hanged upon the turn. Spread your self upon his bosom
publicly, whose heart you would ca^e in private. These be principles, think
on 'hem, I Will come to you again presently.


PVNT. Sir, keep close; yet not so close: thy breath will thawmy ruff.


SOGI. O, good cousin, I am a little busy, how does my niece? I am to walk
with a knight, here.


Act III. Scene V.
FVNGOSO. TAILOR. To them. O He is here, look you sir, that is the gentleman.


TAIL. What, he in the blush-colour'd satin?


FVNG. I, he sir: though his suit blush, he blushes not, look you, that is the
suit, sir: I would have mine, such a suit without difference, such stuff, such
a wing, such a sleeue, such a skirt, belly, and all; therefore, pray you
observe it. Have you a pair of tables?


FAST. Why, do you see, sir? they say I am fantastical: why, true, I know
it, and I pursue my humor still, in contempt of this censorious age. S'light,
and a man should do nothing, but what a sort of stale judgments about this
town will approve in him, he were a sweet ass: I Would beg him in faith. I never
knew any more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put
themselves in to it. For mine own part, so I please mine own appetite, I am
careless what the fustie world speaks of me. Puh.


FVNG. Do you mark, how it hangs at the knee there?


TAIL. I warrant you, sir.


FVNG. For gods sake, do, note all: do you see the collar, sir?


TAIL. Fear nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch, sir.


FVNG. Pray heaven, it do not, you will make these linings serve? and help me
to a chapman for the outside, will you?


TAIL. I Will do my best, sir: you will put it off presently?


FVNG. I, go with me to my chamber, you shall have it -- but make haste of
it, for the love of a customer, for I Will fit i'my old suit, or else lie a bed,
and read the Arcadia, till you have done.


CARL. O, if ever you were struck with a jest, gallants, now, now. I do usher
the most strange piece of military profession, that ever was discovered in
Insula Paulina.


FAST. Where? where?


PVNT. What is he, for a creature?


CARL. A pimpe, a pimpe, that I have observed yonder, the rarest superficies of
a humor; he comes every morning to empty his hangs in Paul's here: and
offers up some five, or six Hecatomb's of faces, and sighs, and away again.
Here he comes; nay, walk, walk, be not seen to note him, and we shall have
excellent sport.


Act III. Scene VI.
SHIFT. To them. PVN. S'Lid, he vented a sigh^'ne now, I thought he would have
blown up the church.


CAR. O, you shall have him give a number of those false fires ere he depart.


FAST. See, now he is expostulating with his rapier! look, look.


CARL. Did you ever, in your days, observe better passion over a hilt?


PVNT. Except it were in the person of a cutlers boy, or that the fellow were
nothing but vapor, I should think it impossible.


CARL. See, again, he claps his sword of the head, as who should say, well, go
to.


FAST. O violence! I wonder the blade can contain it self, being so prouokt.


CARL. With that, the moody squire thumpt his breast,
Andrear'd his eyes to heaven, ^or revenge.

SOGL. Troth, and you be good gentlemen let us make 'hem friends, and take up
the matter, between his rapier, and him.


CARL. Nay, if you intend that, you must lay down the matter, for this rapier
(it seems) is in the nature a hanger on, and the good gentleman would happily
be rid of him.


FAST. By my faith, and it is to be suspected, I Will ask him.


MACI. O, here is rich stuff, for life's sake, let us go.
A man would wish himself a senseless pillar,
Rather then view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habet inf^elix paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit --

FAST. Signior.


SHIFT. At your service.


FAST. Will you sell your rapier?


CARL. God's Blood, he is turned wild upon the question, he looks as he had seen
a sergeant.


SHIFT. Sell my rapier? now fate bless me.


PVNT. Amen.


SHIFT. You ask't me, if I would sell my rapier, sir?


FAST. I did indeed.


SHIFT. Now, lord have mercy upon me.


PVNT. Amen, I say still.


SHIFT. S'lud sir, what should you behold in my face, sir, that should move you
(as they say, sir) to ask me, sir, if I would sell my rapier?


FAST. Nay (let me pray you, sir) be not moved: I protest, I would rather have
been silent, then any way offensive, had I known your nature.


SHIFT. Sell my rapier? 'ods lid! Nay, sir (for mine own part) as I am a man
that has served in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any gentleman in
the degree of falling foul, but (sell my rapier?) I will tell you sir, I have
served with this foolish rapier, where some of us dare not appear in haste, I
name no man: but let that pass. (Sell my rapier?) death to my lungs. This
rapier, sir, has trauail'd by my side, sir, the best part of France and the low
Country: I have seen V^ishing Brill, and the H^ghe, with this rapier, sir, in
my lord of Leysters time: and (by gods will) he that should offer to disrapier
me now, I would -- Look you sir, you presume to be a gentleman of sort, and so
likewise your friends here, if you have any disposition to travel, for the
sight of service, or so, one, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to
di^ers officers and commanders in the low Countries, that shall for my cause
do you all the good offices, that shall pertain or belong to gentlemen of
your -- Please you to show the bounty of your mind, sir, to impart some ten
groates, or half a crown to our use, till our ability be of grow'th to
return it, and we shall think our self -- God's Blood! sell my rapier?


SOGL. I pray you, what said he, signior, he is a proper man.


FAST. Mary, he tells me, if I please to show the bounty of my mind, to impart
some ten groats to his use, or so.


PVNT. Break his head, and give it him.


CARL. I thought he had been playing of the Jews trump, I.


SHIFT. My rapier? no sir: my rapier is my guard, my defense, my reuenew, my
honor: (if you cannot impart, be secret, I beseech you) and I will maintain
it, where there is a grain of dust, or a drop of water. (Hard is the choice
when the valiant must eat their arms, or clem:) Sell my rapier? no, my dear,
I will not be diuorc't from thee, yet, I have ever found thee true as steel
-- and (you cannot impart sir?) Save you gentlemen: (nevertheless if you have
a fancy to it, sir.)


FAST. Pr'y thee away: is Signior DELIRO departed?


CAR. Ha'you seen a pimpe outface his own wants better?


SOG. I commend him, that can dissemble 'hem so well.


PVNT. True, and having no better a cloak for it, then he has neither.


FAST. Gods precious, what mischievous luck is this! adieu gentlemen.


PVNT. Whither? in such haste, Monsieur FASTIDIVS?


FAST. After my merchant, signior DELIRO, sir.


CARL. O hinder him not, he may hap lose his tide, a good flounder in faith.


ORAN. Hark you, signior WHIFFE, a word with you.


CARL. Orange and Clove call Shif^ aside. How? signior WHIFFE?


ORAN. What was the difference between that gallant that is gone, and you, sir.


SHIFT. No difference: he would ha'giu'n me five pound for my rapier, and I
refused it; that is all.


CLOVE. O, was it no otherwise? we thought you had been upon some terms.


SHIFT. No other then you saw, sir.


CLOVE. Adieu, good Master APPLE-IOHN.


CARL. How? WHIFFE, and APPLE-IOHN too? Heart, what'll you say if this be the
appendix, or labell to both youd' indentures?


PVNT. It may be.


CARL. Resolve us of it, IANVS, thou that look every way: or thou HE^CVLES,
that have trauail'd all countries.


PVNT. Nay, CARLO, spend not time in inuocations now, it is late.


CARL. Signior, here is a gentleman desirous of your name, sir.


SHIFT. Sir, my name is CAVALIER SHIFT: I am known sufficiently in this walk,
sir.


CARL. SHIFT? I heard your name varied even now, as I take it.


SHIFT. True, sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tabbacconist) to
give me the style of signior WHIFFE: as I am a poor esquire about the town
here, they call me Master APPLE-IOHN. Varierie of good names does well, sir.


CARL. I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine
yond' bills to be yours.


SHIFT. Sir, if I should deny the manuscripts, I were worthy to be banished
the middle I Will, for ever.


CARL. I take your word, sir: this gentleman has subscribed to 'hem, and is
most desirous to become your pupil. Mary you must use expedition. Signior
Insulso Sogliardo, this is the professor.


SOGL. In good time, sir, nay, good sir, house your head, do you profess
those sleights in tobacco?


SHIFT. I, do more then profess, sir, and (if you please to be a
practitioner) I will undertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shall take
it plausibly in any ordinary, theater, or the tilt-yard, if need be, in the
most popular assembly that is.


PVNT. But you cannot bring him to the whiffe so soon?


SHIFT. Yes, as soon, sir, he shall receive the first, second, and third
whiffe, if it please him, and (upon the receipt) take his horse, drink his
three cups of Canarie, and expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stanes, and a
third at Bogshot.


CARL. Baw-waw!


SOGL. You will not ser^e me, sir, will you^ I Will give you more then
countenance.


SHIFT. Pardon me, sir, I do scorn to serve any man.


CARL. Who? he serve? God's Blood he keeps high men, and low men, he; he has a
fair living at Fullam.


SHIFT. But in the nature of a fellow, I Will be your follower, if you please.


SOGL. Sir, you shall stay, and dine with me, and if we can agree, we will not
part in haste: I am very bountiful to men of quality. Where shall we go,
signior?


PVNT. Your Miter is your best house.


SHIFT. I can make this dog take as many whiffes as I list, and he shall
retain, or efume them at my pleasure.


PVNT. By your patience, follow me, fellows.


SOGL. Sir, PVNTARVOLO!


PVNT. Pardon me, my dog shall not eat in his company for a million.


CARL. Nay, be not you amazed, signior WHIFFE, what e're that stiffeneckt
gentleman says.


SOGL. No, for you do not know the humor of the Dog, as we do: where
shall we dine, CARLO? I would feign go to one of these ordinaries, now I am a
gentleman.


CARL. So you may, were you never at any yet?


SOGL. No faith, but they say, there resorts your most choice gallants.


CARL. True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in among'st 'hem, they
all stand up and stare at him, as he were some unknown beast, brought out of
Afric, but that'll be helped with a good aduenturous face, you must be
impudent enough, sit down, and use no respect; when any thing's propounded
above your capacity, smile at it, make two or three faces, and it is excellent,
they 'le think you have trauail'd: though you argue a whole day in silence
thus, and discourse in nothing but laughter, 'twill pass. Only (now and then)
give fire, discharge a good full oath, and offer a great wager, 'twill be
admirable.


SOGL. I warrant you, I am resolute: come, good signior, there is a poor french
crown, for your ordinary.


SHIFT. It comes well, for I had not so much as the least portcullice of come
before.


GREX.
MIT. I travel with another objection, signior, which I fear will be
enforced against the author, ere I can be delivered of it.


COR. What Is that, sir?


MIT. That the argument of his Comoedie might have been of some other nature,
as of a duke to be in love with a countess, and that countess to be in love
with the dukes son, and the son to love the ladies waiting maid: some such
cross wooing, with a clown to their seruingman, better then to be thus near,
and familiarly allied to the time.


COR. You say well, but I would feign hear one of these autumne-judgements
define once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himself with
CICEROS definition (till he have strength to propose to himself a better) who
would have a Comoedie to be Imitatio vitae, Speculum consuetudinis, Imago
veritatis; a thing throughout pleasant, and ridiculous, and accommodated to the
correction of manners: if the maker have failed in any particle of this, they
may worthily tax him, but if not, why -- be you (that are for them) silent, as
I will be for him; and give way to the actors.


Act III. Scene VII.
SORDIDO, HINE. ^ NAy, gods precious, if the weather and season be so
respectlesse, that beggars shall live as well as their betters; and that my
hunger, and thirst for riches, shall not make them hunger and thirst with
poverty; that my sleeps shall be brokes, and their hearts not broken; that my
coffers shall be full, and yet care; theirs empty, and yet merry! It Is time,
that a cross should bear flesh and blood, since flesh and blood cannot bear
this cross.


GREX.
MIT. What, will he hang himself?


COR. Faith I, it seems his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and
that makes him despair.


MIT. Beshrow me, he will be out of his humor then, indeed.


SOR. Tut, these star-monger knaves, who would trust 'hem? one says, dark and
rainy, when it is as clear as crystal; another says, tempestuous blasts, and
storms, and 'twas as calm as a milke-bowle; here be sweet rascals for a man
to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring cocks-combs you, you fat
brains, out upon you; you are good for nothing but to sweat night-caps, and
make rug-gownes dear! You learned men, and have not a legion of devils, a
vostre service! a vostre service! by heaven, I think I shall die a better
scholar then they! but soft, how now, sir.


HINE. Here Is a letter come from your son, sir.


SORD. From my son, sir? what would my son, sir? some good news, no doubt.

Sweet and dear father (desiring you first to send me your blessing, which is
more worth to me then gold or silver) I desire you likewise to be advertised,
that this Shrouetide (contrary to custom) we use always to have revels; which
is indeed dancing, and makes an excellent show in truth; especially if we
gentlemen be well attired; which our seniors note, and think the better of
our fathers, the better we are maintained, and that they shall know if they
come up, and have any thing to do in the law: therefore, good father, these
are (for your own sake as well as mine) to re-desire you; that you let me not
want, that which is fit for the setting up of our name, in the honorable volume
of gentilitie, that I may say to our calumniators, with TVLLIE, Ego sum ortus
domus meae, tu occasus tuae. And thus (not doubting of your fatherly
benevolence) I humbly ask you blessing, and pray god to bless you.

Yours, if his own.


How Is this? Yours, if his own? is he not my son, except he be his own
son? Belike this is some new kind of subscription the gallants use. Well,
wherefore do thou stay, knave? Away: go. Here Is a letter indeed; ie^els?
and benevolence? is this a weather to send benevolence? or is this a season to
revel in? Slid the devil and all takes part to vex me, I think! this letter
would never have come now else, now, now, when the sun shines, and the air
thus clear. Soul, if this hold, we shall shortly have an excellent crop of
corn spring out of the high ways: the streets, and houses of the town will
be hid with the rankness of the fruits, that grow therein spite of good
husbandry. Go to, I Will prevent the ^ight of it, come as quickly as it can, I
will prevent the sight of it. I have this remedy, heaven. Stay; I Will try the
pain thus a little, O, nothing, nothing. Well now, shall my son gain a
benevolence by my death? or any body be the better for my gold, or so forth?
No, alive, I kept it from 'hem, and (dead) my ghost shall walk about it, and
preserve it, my son and daughter shall starve ere they touch it, I have bid it
as deep as hell from the sight of heaven, and to it I go now. Falls off.


Act III. Scene VIII.
RVSTICI. RVST. 1. To him. AYe me, what pitiful sight is this! help, help,
help.


RVST. 2. How now? what is the matter?


RVST. 1. O, here is a man has hanged himself, help to get him again.


RVST. 2. Hanged himself? Slid carry him before a justice, it is chance medley,
of my word.


RVST. 3. How now, what is here to do?


RVST. 4. How comes this?


RVST. 2. One has executed himself, contrary to order of law, and by my
consent he shall answer't.


RVST. 5. Would he were in case, to answer it.


RVST. 1. Stand by, he recouers, give him breath.


SORD. Oh.


RVST. 5. Mass, 'twas well you went the foot-way, neighbor.


RVST. 1. I, and I had not cut the halter.


SORD. How! cut the halter? Aye me, I am undone, I am undone.


RVST. 2. Mary, if you had not been undone, you had been hanged, I can tell
you.


SORD. You threadbare horse-bread-eating rascals, if you would needs have
been meddling, could you not have untied it, but you must out it? and in the
midst too! Aye me.


RVST. 1. Out on me, it is the catterpiller SORDIDO! how cursed are the poor,
that the viper was blessed, with this good fortune?


RVST. 2. Nay, how accursed art thou, that art cause to the curse of the poor?


RVST. 3. I, and to save so wretched a caytife?


RVST. 4. Cursed be thy fingers that loosed him.


RVST. 2. Some desperate fury possess thee, that thou may hang thy self
too.


RVST. 5. Never may thou be saved, that saved so damned a monster.


SORDID. What curses breathe these men! how have my deeds
Made my looks differ from another man's,
That they should thus detest, and loathe my life!
Out on my wretched humor, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I Will make fair mends
For my foul errors past, and twenty-fold
Restore to all men, what with vvrong I robbed them:
My barnes, and garners shall stand open still
To all the poor that come, and my best grain
Be made almes-bread, to feed halfe-famisht mouths.
Though hither to amongst you I have lived,
Like an unsauourie muck-hill to my self,
Yet now, my gathered heaps being spread abroad,
Shall turn to better, and more fruitful uses.
Bless then this man, curse him no more for saving
My life, and soul together. O, how deeply
The bitter curses of the poor do pierce!
I am by wonder changed; come in with me
And witness my repentance: now I prove,
"No life is blessed, that is not graced with love.

RVST. 2. O miracle! see when a man has grace!


RVST. 3. Had't not been pity, so good a man should have been cast away?


RVST. 2. Well, I Will get our clarke put his conversion in the Acts, and
Monuments.


RVST. 4. Do, for I warrant him he is a Martyr.


RVST. O god, how he wept, if you marked it! did you see how the tears trill'd?


RVST. 5. Yes, believe me, like master vicars bowls upon the green, for all
the world.


3. or 4. O neighbor, god's blessing of your heart, neighbor, 'twas a good
grateful deed.


GREX.
COR. How now, MITIS? what is that you consider so seriously?


MIT. Troth, that which does essentially please me, the vvarping condition of
this green, and soggy multitude: but in good says, signior, your author has
largely out-stript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberally confess it.
For, when I saw SORDIDO so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of
him, then.


COR. What? you supposed he should have hung himself, indeed?


MIT. I did, and had framed my objection to it ready, which may yet be very
fitly urged, and with some necessity: for though his purposed violence lost the
effect, and extended not to death, yet the intent and horror of the object, was
more then the nature of a Comoedie will in any sort admit.


COR. I? what think you of PLAVTVS, in his Comoedie, called Cistellaria,
there? where he brings in ALCESIMARCHVS with a drawn sword ready to kill
himself, and as he is e'ne fixing his breast upon it, to be restrained from
his resolved outrage, by SILENIVM, and the bawd: is not his authority of power
to give our Scene approbation?


MIT. Sir, I have this only evasion left me, to say, I think it be so indeed,
your memory is happier then mine: but I wonder, what engine he will use to
bring the rest out of their humors!


COR. That will appear anon, never preoccupie your imagination withal. Let
your mind keep company with the Scene still, which now remoues it self from
the country, to the court. Here comes MACILENTE, and signior BRISK, freshly
suited, lose not your self, for now the Epitasis, or busy part of our subject,
is in act.


Act III. Scene IX.
MACILENTE, BRISK, CINEDO, SAVIOLINA. FAST. WEll, now, signior MACILENTE, you
are not only welcome to the court but also to my mistress withdrawing chamber:
Boy, get me some tobacco, I Will but go in, and show I am here, and come to you
presently, sir.


MACI. What Is that he said? by heaven, I marked him not:
My thoughts, and I, were of another world.
I was admiring mine own outside here,
To think what privilege, and palm it bears
Here, in the court! Be a man never so vile
In wit, in judgment, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a silken cover,
He shall not only pass, but pass regarded:
Whereas, let him be poor, and meanly clad,
Though never so richly parted; you shall have
A fellow (that knows nothing but his beef,
Or how to rince his clammy guts in beer)
Will take him by the shoulders, or the throat,
And kick him down the stairs. Such is the state
Of virtue, in bad clothes! ha, ha, ha, ha,
That raiment should be in such high request!
How long should I be, ere I should put off
To the lord Chancelors tomb, or the Shriues posts?
By heaven (I think) a thousand, thousand year.
His gravity, his wisdom, and his faith,
To my dread Sovereign (graces that survive him)
These I could well endure to reverence,
But not his tomb: no more then I Would commend
The chapel organ, for the guilt without,
Or this base violl, for the varnisht face.

FAST. I fear I have made you stay somewhat long, sir, but is my tobacco
ready, boy?


CINE. I, sir.


FAST. Give me, my mistress is upon coming, you shall see her presently, sir,
(Tab.) you will say you never accosted a more piercing wit. This ^abacco is not
dried, boy, or else the pipe's defective. Oh, your wits of Italy are nothing
comparable to her! her braine's a very quiver of jests! and she does dart them
abroad with that sweet loose, and judicial aim, that you would -- here she
comes sir.


MACI. She is seen and goes in again. 'Twas time, his invention had been
bogd else.


SAVI. Give me my fan there.


MACI. How now, Monsieur BRISK?


FAST. A kind of affectionate reverence strikes me with a cold shiuering (me
thinks.)


MACI. I like such tempers well, as stand before their mistresses with fear
and trembling, and before their maker, like impudent mountains.


FAST. By this hand, I Would spend twenty pound my vauting-horse stood here now,
she might see me do but one trick?


MACI. Why, does she love actiuitie?


CINE. Or if you had but your long stockings on, to be dancing a galliard, as
she comes by.


FAST. I either. O, these stirring humors make ladies mad with desire^ she
comes. My good GENIUS embolden me, boy, the pipe quickly.


MACI. What? will he give her music?


FAST. A second good morrow to my fair mistress.


SAVI. Fair servant, I Will thank you a day hence, when the date of your
salutation comes forth.


FAST. How, like you that answer? is it not admirable?


MACI. I were a simple courtier, if I could not admire trifles, sir.


FAST. He talks, and takes tobacco between. Troth, sweet lady, I shall
(Tab.) be prepared to give you thanks for those thanks, and (Tab.) study more
officious, and obsequious regards (Tab.) to your fair beauties. (Tab.) mend
the pipe, boy.


MACI. I never knew tobacco taken as a parenthesis, before.


FAST. Fore god (sweet lady) believe it, I do honor the meanest rush in
this chamber, for your love.


SAVI. I, you need not tell me that, sir, I do think, you do prize a rush,
before my love.


MACI. Is this the wonder of nations?


FAST. O, by this air, pardon me, I said, for your love, by this light: but it
is the accustomed sharpness of your ingenuitie, sweet mistress, to -- Mass
your violl's new strung, methinkes.


MACI. He takes down the violl, and plays between. Ingenuitie. I see his
ignorance will not suffer him to slander her, which he had done most notably,
if he had said wit, for ingenuitie, as he meant it.


FAST. By the soul of music, lady (hum, hum.)


SAVI. Would we might hear it once.


FAST. I do more adore, and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections,
then (hum, hum) ever I shall have power, and faculty to express (hum.)


SAVI. Upon the violl de Gambo, you mean?


FAST. It Is miserably out of tune, by this hand.


SAVI. Nay, rather by the fingers.


MACI. It makes good harmony with her wit.


FAST. Sweet lady, tune it. Boy, some tobacco.


MACI. Tobacco again? he does court his mistress with very exceeding good
changes.


FAST. Signior MACILENTE, you take none, sir? (Tab.)


MACI. No, unless I had a Mistress, signior, it were a great indecorum for me
to take tobacco.


FAST. How like you her wit? (Tab.)


MACI. Her ingenuitie is excellent, sir.


FAST. You see the subject of her sweet fingers, there? (Tab.) Oh, she tickles
it so, that (Tab.) she makes it laugh most divinely; (Tab.) I Will tell you a
good jest now, and yourselfe shall say it is a good one: I have wished my self
to be that instrument (I think) a thousand times, and not so few, by heaven
(Tab.)


MACI. Not unlike, sir: but how? to be cased up, and hung by on the wall?


FAST. O, no, sir, to be in use I assure you; as your judicious eyes may
testify. (Tab.)


SAVI. Here, servant, if you will play, come.


FAST. Instantly, sweet lady. (Tab.) In good faith, here is most divine tobacco!


SAVI. Nay, I cannot stay to dance after your pipe.


FAST. Good! nay, dear lady, stay: by this sweet smoke, I think your wit
be all fire. (Tab.)


MACI. And, he is the Salamander belongs to it.


SAVI. Is your tobacco perfumed, servant? that you swear by the sweet smoke?


FAST. Still more excellent! (before heaven, and these bright lights) I think
(Tab.) you are made of ingenuitie, I. (Tab.)


MACI. True, as your discourse is: O abominable!


FAST. Will your ladyship take any?


SAVI. O, peace I pray you; I love not the breath of a woodcockes head.


FAST. Meaning my head, lady?


SAVI. Not altogether so, sir; but (as it were fatal to their follies that
think to grace themselves with taking tobacco, when they want better
entertainment) you see your pipe bears the true form of a woodcockes head.


FAST. O admirable simile!


SAVI. It Is best leaving of you in admiration, sir.


MACI. Are these the admired lady-wits, that having so good a plaine-song, can
run no better division upon it? S'heart, all her jests are of the stamp, (
March was fifteen years ago.) Is this the Comet, Monsieur FASTADIVS, that your
gallants wonder at so?


FAST. Heart of a gentleman, to neglect me before presence thus! Sweet sir, I
beseech you be silent in my disgrace. By the Muses, I was never in so vile a
humor in my life, and her wit was at the ^loud too. Report it not for a
million, good sir; let me be so far endeared to your love.


GREX.
MIT. What follows next, signior CORDATVS? this gallants humor is almost
spent, me thinks, it ebbes apace, with this contrary breath of his mistress.


COR. O, but it will ^low again for all this, till there come a general
drought of humor among all our actors, and then, I fear not but his will fall
as low as any. See, who presents himself here!


MIT. What, in the old case?


COR. In Faith, which makes it, the more pitiful, you understand where the
Scene is?


Act IIII.
Scene I.
FALLACE. FVNGOSO. WHy, are you so melancholy, brother?


FVNG. I am not melancholy, I thank you, sister.


FALL. Why are you not merry then? there are but two of us in all the world,
and if we should not be comforts one to another, god help us.


FVNG. Faith, I cannot tell, sister, but if a man had any true melancholy in
him, it would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his
neighbors throats, to make his son a gentleman: and yet when he has cut
'hem, he will see his sons throat cut too, ere he make him a true gentleman
indeed, before death cut his own throat. I must be the first head of our
house, and yet he will not give me the head till I be made so. Is any man
termed a gentleman that is not always in the fashion? I would know but that.


FALL. If you be melancholy for that, brother, I think I have as much cause
to be melancholy, as one: for I Will be sworn, I live as little in the fashion,
as any woman in London. By the faith of a Gentlewoman, (beast that I am to say
it) I have not one friend in the world besides my husband. When saw you master
FASTIDIVS BRISK, brother?


FVNG. But a while since, sister, I think: I know not well in truth. By this
hand, I could fight with all my heart, me thinks.


FALL. Nay, good brother, be not resolute.


FVNG. I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answer neither.


FALL. Oh, sweet FASTIDIVS BRISK! O fine courtier! thou art he make me
sigh, and say, how blessed is that woman that has a courtier to her husband!
and how miserable a dame she is, that has neither husband, nor friend in the
court! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! O, fine courtier! How comely he bows him in his
court'sie! how full he hits a woman between the lips when he kisses! how
upright he sits at the table! how daintily he carues! how sweetly he talks,
and tells news of this lord, and of that lady! how cleanely he wipes his
spoone, at every spoonful of any whit-meat he eats, and what a neat case of
pick-tooths he carries about him, still! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! O, fine courtier!


Act IIII. Scene II.
DELIRO, MVSICIANS, MACILENTE, FVNGOSO. SEe, yonder she is, gentlemen. Now (as
ever you will bear the name of musicians) touch your instruments sweetly, she
has a delicate ear, I tell you: play not a false note, I beseech you.


MVSI. Fear not, siguior DELIRO.


DELI. O, begin, begin, some sprightly thing: Lord, how my imagination labors
with the success of it. Well said, good in faith! heaven grant it please her.
I Will not be seen, for then she will be sure to dislike it.


FALL. Hey -- da! this is excellent! I Will lay my life, this is my husbands
dotage. I thought so; nay, never play peeke-boe with me, I know, you do
nothing but study how to anger me, sir.


DELI. Anger thee, sweet wife? why did thou not send for musicians to supper
last night, thy self?


FALL. To supper, sir? now, come up to supper, I beseech you: as though there
were no difference between supper time, when folks should be merry, and this
time when they would be melancholy? I would never take upon me to take a wife,
if I had no more judgment to please her.


DELI. Be pleased, sweet wife, and they shall have done: and would to fate, my
life were done, if I can never please thee.


MACI. Save you, lady, where is master DELIRO?


DELI. Here, master MACILENTE: you are welcome from court, sir; no doubt you
have been graced exceedingly of master BRISKES Mistress, and the rest of the
ladies, for his sake?


MACI. Alas, the poor phantasticke! he is scarce known
To any lady there; and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
De^ide, and play upon his amorous humors,
Though he but apishly does imitate
The gallant'st courtiers, kissing ladies pumps.
Holding the cloth for them, praising their wits,
And seruilely observing every one,
May do them pleasure: fearful to be seen
With any man (though he be never so worthy)
That Is not in grace with some, that are the greatest.
Thus courtiers do, and these he counterfeits.
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Upon their vanities, as they themselves;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
He Is like the Zani, to a tumbler,
That tries tricks after him, to make men laugh.

FALL. Here Is an unthankful spiteful wretch! the good gentleman vouchsaft to
make him his companion (because my husband put him into a few rags) and now
see, how the vnrude rascal back-bites him!


DELI. Is he no more graced amongst 'hem, then? say you?


MACI. Faith, like a pawn, at Chesse: fills up a room, that is all.


FALL. O monster of men! can the earth bear such an e^uious caytiffe?


DELI. Well, I repent me, I e're credited him so much: but (now I see what he
is, and that his masking vizor is off) I Will forbear him no longer. All his
lands are morgag'd to me, and forfeited: besides, I have bonds of his in my
hand, for the receipt of now fifty pound, now a hundred, now two hundred: still,
as he has had a fan but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new suit. Well, I Will
salute him by a Sergeant, the next time I see him, in faith, I Will suit him.


MACI. Why, you may soon see him, sir, for he is to meet signior PVNTARVOLO
at a Notaries, by the Exchange, presently: where he means to take up, upon
return --


FALL. Now, out upon thee, IVDAS; can thou not be content to back-bite thy
friend, but thou must betray him? will thou seek the undoing of any man? and
of such a man too? and will you, sir, get your living by the counsel of
traitors?


DELI. Dear wife, have patience.


FALL. The house will fall, the ground will open, and swallow us: I Will not
bi^de here, for all the gold, and silver in heaven.


DELI. O, good MACILENTE, let us follow and appease her, or the peace of my life
is at an end.


MACI. Now pease, and not peace, feed that life, whose head bangs so heavily
over a woman's manger.


FALL. Deliro fallows his wife. Help me, brother: 'ods body, and you come
here, I Will do my self a mischief.


DELI. Nay, hear me, sweet wife, unless thou will have me go, I will not
go.


FALL. Tut, you shall never have that vantage of me, to say, you are undone by
me: I Will not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here is four angels, I Will
give you toward your suit: for the love of gentry, and as ever you came of
christen creature, make haste to the water fide (you know where Master
FASTIDIVS uses to land) and give him warning of my husbands malicious intent;
and tell him of that lea^e rascals treachery: O heuens! how my flesh rises at
him! nay, sweet brother, make haste: you may say, I would have writ to him,
but that necessity of the time would not permit. He cannot choose but take it
extraordinarily from me: and commend me, to him, good brother, say, I sent you.


FVNG. Let me see, these four angels, and then, forty shillings more I can
borrow on my gown in Fetter-lane. Well, I will go presently, say on my suit,
pay as much money as I have, and swear my self into credit with my tailor,
for the rest.


DELI. Deliro, and Macilente, pass over the stage. O, on my soul you wrong
her, MACILENTE,
Though she be froward, yet I know she is honest.

MACI. Well, then have I no judgment: would any woman (but one that were wild
in her affections) have broke out into that immodest and violent passion
against her husband? or is it possible --


DELI. If you love me, forbear; all the arguments in the world shall never
wrest my heart to believe it.


GREX.
COR. How like you the decyphering of his dotage?


MIT. O, strangely! and of the others envy too, that labors so seriously to
set debate betwixt a man, and his wife. Stay, here comes the knight aduenturer.


COR. I, and his scriuener with him.


Act IIII. Scene III.
PVNTARVOLO, NOTARIE, CARLO, SERVANTS. I Wonder, Monsieur FASTIDIVS comes not!
but, NOTARIE, if thou please to draw the indentures the while, I will give
thee thy instructions.


NOTA. With all my heart, sir; and I Will fall in hand with 'he^ presently.


PVNT. Well then, first, the sum is to be understood.


NOTA. Good, sir.


PVNT. Next, our several appellations, and character of my dog, and cat, must
be known: show him the cat, sirrah.


NOTA. So, sir.


PVNT. Then, that the intended bound, is the Turks court in Constantinople:
the time limited for our return, a year: and that if either of us miscarry,
the whole venture is lost. These are general, conceiu'st thou? or if either of
us turn Turk.


NOTA. I, sir.


PVNT. Now for particulars: That I may make my trauails by sea or land, to my
best liking: and that (hyring a coach for my self) it shall be lawful for my
dog, or cat, or both, to ride with me in the said coach.


NOT. Very good, sir.


PVN. That I may choose to give my dog, or cat fish, for fear of bones: or
any other nutriment, that (by the judgment of the most autenticall physicians,
where I travail) shall be thought dangerous.


NOT. Well, sir.


PVN. That (after the receipt of his money) he shall neither in his own person,
nor any other, either by direct or indirect means, as magic, witchcraft, or
other such exoticke arts, attempt, practice, or complot a^iething, to the
prejudice of me, my dog, or my cat: Neither shall I use the help of any
such forceries, or enchantments, as unctious, to make our skins impenetrable,
or to travail invisible by virtue of a powder, or a ring, or to hang any
three-forked charm about my dogs neck, secretly conuey'd into his collar:
(understand you?) but that all be performed, sincerely, without fraud, or
imposture.


NOT. So, sir.


PVN. That (for testimony of the performance) my self am to bring thence a
T^rkes mustachio, my dog a Gracian hares lip, and my cat the train, or tail
of a Thracian rat.


NOT. It Is done, sir.


PVN. It Is said, sir, not done, sir: but forward. That upon my return, and
landing on the Tower-wharfe, with the aforesaid testimony, I am to receive
five for one, according to the proportion of the sums put forth.


NOT. Well, sir.


PVN. Provided, that if before our departure, or setting forth, either my
self, or these be visited with sickness, or any other casual event, so that
the whole course of the adventure be hindered, thereby; that then, he is to
return, and I am to receive the prenominated proportion, upon fair and equal
terms.


NOT. Very good, sir, is this all?


PVN. It is all, sir: and dispatch them, good NOT ARIE.


NOT. As fast as is possible, sir.


PVN. O, CARLO! welcome: saw you Monsieur BRISK?


CAR. Not I: did he appoint you, to meet here?


PVN. I, and I muse he should be so tardie: he is to take an hundred pounds of
me in venture, if he maintain his promise.


CAR. Is his hour past?


PVN. Not yet, but it comes on apace.


CAR. Tut, be not jealous of him: he will sooner break all the commandments,
then his hour, upon my life, in such a case trust him.


PVN. Me thinks, CARLO, you look very smooth! ha?


CAR. Why, I come but now from a hot-house, I must needs look smooth.


PVN. From a hot-house!


CAR. I, do you make a wonder on it? why it is your only physic. Let a man
sweat once a week in a hothouse, and be well rubbed, froted, with a good
plumpe juicie wench, and sweet linen: he shall never have the pox.


PVNT. What, the French pox?


CARL. The French pox! our pox. S'bloud we have 'hem in as good form as
they, man: what?


PVNT. Let me perish, but thou art a salt one! was your new-created gallant
there with you? SOGLIARDO?


CARL. O, porpuse! hang him, no: he is a lieger at Horns ordinary yonder: his
villainous GANIMEDE, and he have been droning a tobacco pipe there, ever sin'
yesterday no one.


PVNT. Who? signior TRIPARTITE, that would give my dog the Whiffe?


CARL. I, he. They have hired a chamber, and all private to practice in, for
the making of the Pato^^, the Receipt reciprocal, and a number of other
mysteries, not yet extant. I brought some dozen, or twenty gallants this
morning to view 'hem (as you would do a piece of Perspectiue) in at a keyhole:
and there we might see SOGLIARDO sit in a chair, holding his snowt up like a
sow under an apple tree, while the other opened his nostrils with a
poking-sticke, to give the smoke a more free delivery. They had spit some
three, or fourscore ounces between 'hem, before we came away.


PVNT. How! spit three, or fourscore ounces?


CARL. I, and preserved it in porrengers; as a barber does his blood* when he
opens a vein.


PVNT. Out, Pagan: how do thou open the vein of thy friend?


CARL. Friend? Is there any such foolish thing in the world? ha? S'lid I never
rellisht it yet.


PVNT. Thy humor is the more dangerous.


CARL. No, not a whit, Signior: Tut, a man must keep time in all. I can oil
my tongue when I meet him next, and look with a good slicke forehead; 'twill
take away all soil of suspicion, and that is enough: what LYNCEVS can see my
heart? Pish, the title of a friend, it is a vain idle thing, only venerable
among fools: you shall not have one that has any opinion of wit affect it.


Act IIII. Scene IIII.
DELIRO, MACILENTE. To them. Save you, good sir PVNTARVOLO.


PVNT. Signior DELIRO! welcome.


DELI. Pray you, sir, did you see Master FASTIDIVS BRISK? I heard he was to
meet your worship here.


PVNT. Your heard no sigment, sir, I do expect him at every pulse of my watch.


DELI. In good time, sir.


CARL. There Is a fellow now, looks like one of the Patricians of Sparta, mary
his wit's after ten in the hundred. A good bloud-hound, a close-mouth'd dog,
he follows the sent well, mary he is at a fault now, me thinks.


PVNT. I should wonder at that creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.


CARL. O, I cannot abide these limbs of satin, or rather Satan indeed, that
'll walk (like the children of darkness) all day in a melancholy shop, with
their pockets full of blankes, ready to swallow up as many poor unthrifts,
as come within the verge.


PVNT. So! and what have thou for him that is with him, now?


CARL. O, (dam' me) Immortality! I Will not meddle with him, the pure element
of fire, all spirit, extraction.


PVNT. HOW, CARLO? ha, what is he, man?


CARL. A scholar, MACILENTE, do you not know him? a lanke raw-bon'd anatomy,
he walks up and down like a charged musket, no man dares encounter him:
that is his rest there.


PVNT. His rest? why has he a forked head?


CARL. Pardon me, that is to be suspended, you are too quick, too apprehensiue.


DELI. Troth (now I think on it) I Will defer it till some other time.


MACI. Not, by any means, signior, you shall not lose this opportunity, he
will be here presently now.


DELI. Yes says, MACILENTE, it is best. For look you, sir, I shall so
exceedingly offend my wife in it, that --


MACI. Your wife? now for shame lose these thoughts, and become the master of
your own spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my self to be thus
passionately carried (to and fro) with the stream of her humor? and neglect
my deepest affairs, to serve her affections? S'light I would geld my self
first.


DELI. O but, signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would --


MACI. Such a wife? Now hate me, sir, if ever I discerned any wonder in your
wife, yet, with all the speculation I have: I have seen some that have been
thought fairer then she, in my time; and I have seen those, have not been
altogether so tall, esteemed properer women; and I have seen less noses grow
upon sweeter faces, that have done very well too, in my judgment: but in good
faith, signior, for all this, the gentlewoman is a good pretty proud
hard-fauour'd thing, mary not so peerelessely to be doted upon, I must
confess: nay, be not angry.


DELI. Well, sir, (how ever you please to forget your self) I have not
deserved to be thus played upon, but henceforth, pray you forbear my house,
for I can but faintly endure the favor of his breath at my table, that shall
thus jade me for my courtesies.


MACI. Nay, then, signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper woman, and,
by my life, I suspect her honesty, that is more, which you may likewise suspect
(if you please:) do you see? I Will urge you to nothing, against your appetite,
but if you please, you may suspect it.


DELI. Good, sir.


MACI. Good sir? Now horn upon horn pursue thee, thou blind egregious dotard.


CARL. O, you shall hear him speak like ennie. Signior MACILENTE, you saw
monsieur BRISK lately? I heard you were with him at court.


MACI. I, BVFFONE, I was with him.


CARL. And how is he respected there? (I know you will deal ingenuously with us)
is he made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants?


MACI. Faith I, his ciuet and his casting-glasse,
Have helped him to a place amongst the rest:
And there, his Seniors give him good slight looks,
After their garb, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.

CARL. What, is this all?

MACI. Why say, that they should show the frothie fool,
Such grace, as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mighty wind-fall out of doubt.
Why, all their Graces are not to do grace
To virtue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt sputres quite breathless, from themselves.
It Is now esteemed Precisianisme in wit;
And a disease in nature, to be kind
Toward desert, to love, or seek good names:
Who feeds with a good name? who thriues with loving?
Who can provide feast for his own desires,
With serving others? ha, ha, ha:
It Is folly, by our wisest worldlings proved,
(If not to gain by love) to be beloved.

CARL. How like you him? is it not a good spiteful slave? ha?

PVNT. Shrewd, shrewd.

CARL. Dam'me, I could eat his flesh now: divine sweet villain!

MACI. Nay, pr'y thee leave: what is he there?

CARL. Who? this in the starcht beard? it is the dull stiff knight PVNTARVOLO,
man; he is to travail now presently: he has a good knottie wit, marry he
carries little o't out of the land, with him.


MACI. How then?


CARL. He puts it forth in venture, as he does his money; upon the return of a
dog, and cat.


MACI. Is this he?


CARL. I, this is he; a good tough gentleman: he looks like a shield of
brawne, at Shrouetide, out of date, and ready to take his leave: or a dry
poule of ling upon Easter-eue, that has furnished the table all Lent, as he has
done the city this last vacation.


MACI. Come, you will never leave your stabbing smile's: I shall have you aiming
at me with 'hem by and by, but --


CARL. O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good devil, I love thee above the
love of women: I could even melt in admiration of thee, now! gods so, look
here, man; Sir DAGONET, and his squire!


Act IIII. Scene V.
SOGLIARDO, SHIFT. To them. Save you, my dear GALLANTO'S: nay, come approach,
good CAVALIER: pr'y thee (sweet knight) know this gentleman, he is one that it
pleases me to use as my good friend, and companion; and therefore do him good
offices: I beseech you, gentles, know him, know him all over.


PVNT. Sir (for signior SOGLIARDO'S sake) let it suffice, I know you.


SOGL. Why (as I am true gentleman) I thank you, knight, and it shall suffice.
Hark you, sir PVNTARVOLO, you would little think it; he is as resolute a piece of
flesh, as any's in the world.


PVNT. Indeed, sir?


SOGL. Upon my gentilitie, sir: CARLO, a word with you; Do you see that same
fellow, there?


CARL. What? CAVALIER SHIFT?


SOGL. O, you know him; cry you mercy: before me, I think him the tallest
man, living within the walls of Europe.


CARL. The walls of Europe! take heed what you say, signior, Europe's a huge
thing within the walls.


SOGL. Tut, (and 'twere as huge again) I Would justify what I speak. Slid, he
swagger'd even now in a place where we were: I never saw a man do it more
resolute.


CARL. Nay, indeed swaggering is a good argument of resolution. Do you hear
this, signior?


MACI. I, to my grief. O, that such muddy flags,
For every drunken flourish, should atchieue
The name of manhood; whilst true perfect valor
(Hating to show it self) goes by despised!
Heart, I do know now (in a fair just cause)
I dare do more then he, a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And give my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger! Now the pox
Light on your Pickt-hatch prowess.

SOGL. Why, I tell you, sir, he has been the only Bid-stand that ever kept
New Market, Salisbury-plaine, Hockley in the hole, Gads-Hill; all the high
places of any request: he has had his mares and his geldings, he, have been
worth forty, threescore, a hundred pound a horse, would have sprung you over
hedge, and ditch, like your greyhound, he has done five hundred robberies in
his time, more or less, I assure you.


PVNT. What? and escaped?


SOGL. Escaped! in faith I: he has broken the jayle when he has been in yrons, and
yrons; and been out, and in again; and out, and in; forty times, and not so
few, he.


MACI. A fit trumpet, to proclaim such a person.


CARL. But can this be possible?


SHIFT. Why, it is nothing, sir, when a man gives his affections to it.


SOGL. Good PYLADES, discourse a robbery, or two, to satisfy these gentlemen
of thy worth.


SHIFT. Pardon me, my dear ORESTES: Causes have their quiddits, and it is ill
jesting with bell-ropes.


CARL. How? PYLADES, and ORESTES?


SOGL. I, he is my PYLADES, and I am his ORESTES: how like you the conceit?


CARL. O, it is an old stale interlude device: No, I Will give you names my self,
look you, he shall be your IVDAS, and you shall be his Elder tree, to hang on.


MACI. Nay, rather, let him be captain POD, and this his Motion; for he does
nothing but show him.


CARL. Excellent: or thus, you shall be HOLDEN, and he your Camel.


SHIFT. You do not mean to ride, gentlemen?


PVNT. Faith, let me end it for you, gallants: you shall be his Countenance,
and he your Resolution.


SOGL. Troth, that is pretty: how say you, Caualier, shall be so?


CARL. I, I, most voices.


SHIFT. Faith, I am easily yielding to any good impressions.


SOGL. Then give hands, good Resolution.


CARL. Mass, he cannot say, good Countenance, now (properly) to him again.


PVNT. Yes, by an irony.


MACI. O, sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as he is, be altogether
grim, and unpleasant.


Act IIII. Scene VI.
FASTIDIVS BRISK. GOod hours make music with your mirth, gentlemen, and
keep time to your humors: how now, CARLO?


PVNT. Monsieur BRISK! many a long look have I extended for you, sir.


FAST. Good faith, I must crave pardon; I was invited this morning ere I was
out of my bed, by a beuie of ladies, to a banquet: whence it was almost one of
HERCULES labors for me, to come away, but that the respect of my promise did
so prevail with me: I know they will take it very ill, especially one that gave
me this bracelet of her hair but ouer-night, and this pearl another gave me
from her forehead, mary, she -- what? are the writings ready?


PVNT. I will send my man to know. Sirrah, go you to the Notaries, and learn
if he be ready: leave the dog, sir.


FAST. And how does my rare qualified friend, SOGLIARDO? oh, signior MACILENTE!
by these eyes, I saw you not, I had saluted you sooner else, of my troth: I
hope, sir, I may presume upon you, that you will not diuulge my late check, or
disgrace, indeed, sir.


MACI. You may, sir.


CARL. S'heart, he knows some notorious jest by this gull, that he has him
so obsequious.


SOGL. Monsieur FASTIDIVS, do you see this fellow there? does he not look
like a clown? would you think there is any thing in him?


FAST. Anything in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow has a good ingenious face.


SOGL. By this element, he is an ingenious tall man, as ever swagger'd about
London: he, and I, call Countenance, and Resolution, but his name is CAVALIER
SHIFT.


PVNT. CAVALIER, you knew signior CLOG, that was hanged for the robbery at
Harrow of the hill?


SOGL. Knew him, sir! why, 'twas he gave all the directions for the action.


PVNT. How? was it your project, sir?


SHIFT. Pardon me, Countenance, you do me some wrong to make that public,
which I imparted to you in private.


SOGL. Gods will! here are none but friends, Resolution.


SHIFT. That Is all one; things of consequence must have their respects, where,
how, and to whom. Yes, sir, he showed himself a true CLOG in the coherence of
that affair, sir; for if he had managed matters as they were corroborated to
him, it had been better for him by a forty, or fifty score of pounds, sir,
and he himself might have lived (in despite of fates) to have fed on
wood-cocks, with the rest: but it was his heavy fortune to sink, poor CLOG,
and therefore talk no more of him.


PVNT. Why, had he more aiders, then?


SOGL. O god, sir! I, there were some present there, that were the nine
Worthies to him, in faith.


SHIFT. I, sir, I can satisfy you at more convenient conference: but (for mine
own part) I have now reconciled my self to other courses, and profess a
living out of my other qualities.


SOGL. Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to live like a
gentleman, by his quality. By this dog, he has the most rare gift in
tobacco, that ever you knew.


CARL. S'heart, he keeps more ado with this monster, then ever BANKS did
with his horse, or the fellow with the elephant.


MACI. He will hang out his picture shortly, in a cloth, you shall see.


SOGL. O, he does manage a quarrel, the best that ever you saw, for terms,
and circumstances.


FAST. Good faith, signior, (now you speak of a quarrel) I Will acquaint you
with a difference, that happened between a gallant, and my self sir
PVNTARVOLO, you know him if I should name him, signior LVCVLENTO.


PVNT. LVCVLENTO! what in-auspicious chance interposed it self to your two
loves?


FAST. Faith, sir, the same that sundred AGAMEMNON, and great THETIS son; but
let the cause escape, sir: He sent me a challenge (mict with some few braues)
which I restored, and in fine we met. Now indeed, sir, (I must tell you) he did
offer at first very desperately, but without judgment: for look you, sir. I
cast my self into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withal
advancing his rapier to strike, I thought to have took his arm (for he had
left his whole body to my election, and I was sure he could not recover his
guard) Sir, I mist my purpose in his arm, rasht his doublet sleeue, ran him
close by the left cheek, and through his hair. He again, lights me here (I
had on, a gold cable hatband, then new come up, which I wore about a murrey
French hat I had) cuts my hatband (and yet it was massy, gold-smithes work)
cuts my brimmes, which by good fortune (being thick embrodered with
gold-twist, and spangles) disappointed the force of the blow: Nevertheless, it
grazed on my shoulder, takes me away six purles of an Italian cut-worke band I
wore (cost me three pound in the exchange, but three days before.)


PVNT. This was a strange encounter!


FAST. Nay, you shall hear, sir: with this we both fell out, and breathed.
Now (upon the second sign of his assault) I betook me to the former manner of
my defense; he (on the other side) abandoned his body to the same danger, as
before, and follows me still with blows: But I (being loath to take the deadly
advantage that lay before me of his left side) made a kind of stramazoun,
ran him up to the hilts, through the doublet, through the shirt, and yet mist
the skin. He (making a reuerse blow) falls upon my embossed girdle (I had
thrown off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a thick --
lac't satin doublet I had (lined with some four taffataes) cuts off two
panes, embrodered with pearl, rends through the drawings out of tissew, enters
the linings, and skips the flesh.


CARL. I wonder he speaks not of his wrought shirt!


FAST. Here (in the opinion of mutual damage) we paused: but (ere I proceed)
I must tell you, signior, that (in this last encounter) not having leisure to
put off my silver spurs, one of the rowels caught hold of the ru^^le of my
boot, and (being Spanish leather, and subject to tear) overthrows me, rends
me two pair of silk stockings (that I put on, being somewhat a raw morning, a
peach color and another) and strikes me some half inch deep into the side of
the calfe; He (seeing the blood come) presently takes horse, and away. I
(having bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought shirt) --


CARL. O! comes it in there?


FAST. Rid after him, and (lighting at the court-gate, both together) embraced,
and marched hand in hand up into the presence: was not this business well
carried?


MACI. Well? yes, and by this we can guess what apparel the gentleman wore.


PVNT. Fore valor, it was a designement begun with much resolution, maintained
with as much prowess, and ended with more humanity. How now, what says the
Notarie?


SERVE. He says, he is ready, sir, he stays but your worships pleasure.


PVNT. Come, we will go to him, Monsieur. Gentlemen, shall we entreat you to
be witnesses?


SOGL. You shall entreat me, sir: come Resolution.


SHIFT. I follow you, good Countenance.


CARL. Come, signior, come, come.


MACI. O, that there should be fortune
To clothe these men, so naked in desert!
And that the just storm of a wretched life,
Beats 'hem not ragged, for their wretched souls,
And, since as fruitless, even as black as coals!

GREX.
MIT. Why, but signior, how comes it, that FVNGOSO appeared not with his
sisters intelligence, to BRISK?


COR. Mary, long of the evil angels that she gave him, who have indeed tempted
the good simple youth, to follow the tail of the fashion, and neglect the
imposition of his friends. Behold, here he comes, very worshipfully attended
and with good variety.


Act IIII. Scene VII.
FVNGOSO, TAILOR, SHOO-MAKER, HABERDASHER. GRamercie, good shoo-maker, I Will put
to strings my self. Now, sir, let me see, what must you have for this hat?


HABER. Here Is the bill, sir.


FVNG. How does't become me? well?


TAIL. Excellent, sir, as ever you had any hat in your life.


FVNG. Nay, you will say so, all.


HABE. In faith, sir, the hat's as good as any man in this town can serve you;
and will maintain fashion as long: never trust me for a groat else.


FVNG. Does it apply well to my suit?


TAIL. Exceeding well, sir.


FVNG. How like thou my suit, haberdasher?


HABE. By my troth, sir, it is very rarely well made, I never saw a suit sit
better, I can tell, on.


TAIL. Nay, we have no art to please our friends, we.


FVNG. Here, haberdasher, tell this fame.


HABE. Good faith, sir, it makes you have an excellent body.


FVNG. Nay (believe me) I think I have as good a body in clothes, as another.


TAIL. You lack points, to bring your apparel together, sir.


FVNG. I Will have points anon: how now? is it right?


HABE. Faith, sir, it is too little, but upon farther hopes -- Good morrow to
you, sir.


FVNG. Farewell, good haberdasher. Well, now master SNIP, let me see your bill.


GREX.
MIT. Me thinks he discharges his followers too thick.


COR. O, therein he fancily imitates some great man. I warrant you, though he
turns off them, he keeps this tailor, in place of a page, to follow him still.


FVNG. This bill is very reasonable, in faith (hark you, master SNIP) Troth,
sir, I am not altogether so well furnished at this present, as I could wish I
were, but -- If you will do me the favor to take part in hand, you shall have
all I have, by this hand --


TAIL. Sir --


FVNG. And, but give me credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next
term.


TAIL. O lord, sir --


FVNG. Fore god, and by this light, I Will pay you to the utmost, and acknowledge
my self very deeply engaged to you, by the courtesy.


TAIL. Why, how much have you there, sir?


FVNG. Mary I have here four angels, and fifteen shillings of white money:
it is all I have, as I hope to be blessed.


TAIL. You will not fail me, at the next term, with the rest.


FVNG. No, and I do, pray heaven, I be hanged. Let me never breathe again,
upon this mortal stage, as the philosopher calls it. By this air, and (as I am
a gentleman) I Will hold.


GREX.
CORD. He were an yron-hearted fellow, in my judgment, that would not credit
him upon this volley of oaths.


TAIL. Well, sir, I Will not stick with any gentleman for a trifle: you know
what it is, remains?


FVNG. I, sir, and I give you thanks in good faith. O fate! how happy am I
made in this good fortune! Well, now I Will go seek out Monsieur BRISK. 'Ods
so, I have forgot ribband for my shoes, and points. Slid, what luck 's this!
how shall I do? Master SNIPPE, pray let me reduct some two or three shillings
for points, and ribband: as I am an honest man, I have utterly disfurnisht my
self, in the default of memory, pray'le me be beholding to you, it shall come
home in the bill, believe me.


TAIL. Faith, sir, I can hardly depart with ready money, but I Will take up, and
send you some by my boy, presently. What colored ribband would you have?


FVNG. What you shall think meet in your judgment, sir, to my suit.


TAIL. Well, I Will send you some presently.


FVNG. And points too, sir?


TAIL. And points too, sir.


FVNG. Good lord! how shall I study to deserve this kindness of you, sir?
Pray, let your youth make haste, for I should have done a business an hour
since, that I doubt I shall come too late. Now, in good faith, I am exceeding
proud of my suit.


GREX.
COR. Do you observe the plunges, that this poor gallant is put to (signior)
to purchase the fashion?


MIT. I, and to be still a fashion behind with the world, that is the sport.


COR. Stay: O here they come, from sealed, and delivered.


Act IIII. Scene VIII.
PVNTARVOLO, FASTIDIVS BRISK, SERVANTS CARLO, SOGLIARDO, MACILENTE, SHIFT.
FVNGOSO. To them. WEll, now my whole venture is forth, I will resolve to depart
shortly.


FAST. Faith, sir PVNTARVOLO, go to the court, and take leave of the ladies
first.


PVNT. I care not, if it be this afternoones labor. Where is CARLO?


FAST. Here he comes.


CARL. Faith, gallants, I am persuading this gentleman to turn courtier. He is
a man of fair revenue, and his estate will bear the charge well. Besides, for
his other gifts of the mind, or so, why, they are as nature lent him 'hem,
pure, simple, without any artificial drug or mixture of these two threadbare
beggarly qualities, learning, and knowledge, and therefore the more
accommodate, and genuine. Now, for the life it self --


FAST. O, the most celestial, and full of wonder, and delight, that can be
imagined, signior, beyond all thought, and apprehension of pleasure! A man
lives there, in that divine rapture, that he will think himself in the ninth
heaven for the time, and lose all sense of mortality whatsoever; when he shall
behold such glorious (and almost immortal) beauties, hear such angelical and
harmonious voices, discourse with such flowing and ambrosiam spirits, whose
wits are as sudden as lightning, and humorous as nectar, Oh: it makes a man
al quintessence, and flame, and lifts him up (in a moment) to the very
crystal crown of the sky, where (houering in the strength of his
imagination) he shall behold all the delights of the HESPERIDES, the Insulae
Fortunatae, ADONIS gardens, Tempe or what else (condfin'd within the amplest
verge of poesy) to be mere vmbrae, and imperfect figures, conferred with the
most essential felicity of your court.


MACI. Well, this Encomion was not extemporall, it came too perfectly off.


CARL. Besides, sir, you shall never need to go to a hot-house, you shall
sweat there with courting your mistress, or losing your money at primero, as
well as in all the stones in Sweden. Mary this, sir, you must ever be sure to
carry a good strong perfume about you, that your mistress dog may smell you
out amongst the rest; and (in making love to her) never fear to be out: for
you may have a pipe of tobacco, or a base violl shall hang of the wall, of
purpose, will put you in presently. The tricks your Resolution has taught you
in tobacco, (the whisse, and those sleights) will stand you in very good
ornament there?


FAST. I, to some perhaps: but, and he should come to my mistress with
tobacco (this gentleman knows) shee'ld reply upon him, in faith. O, (by this
bright sun) she has the most acute, ready, and facetious wit, that -- tut
there is no spirit able to stand her. You can report it, signior, you have seen
her?


PVNT. Then can he report no less, out of his judgment, I assure him.


MACI. Troth, I like her well enough, but she is too selfe-conceited, me
thinks.


FAST. I indeed, she is a little too self conceited, and 'twere not for that
humor, she were the most-to-be-admir'd lady in the world.


PVNT. Indeed, it is a humor that takes from her other excellencies.


MACI. Why, it may easily be made to forsake her, in my thought.


FAST. Easily, sir? then are all impossibilities easy.


MACI. You conclude too quick upon me, signior, what will you say, if I make
it so perspicuously appear now, that your self shall confess nothing more
possible?


FAST. Mary, I will say, I will both applaud, and admire you for it.


PVNT. And I will second him, in the admiration.


MACI. They whisper. Why, I Will show you, gentlemen. CARLO, come hither.


SOGL. Good faith, I have a great humor to the court: what thinks my
Resolution? shall I adventure?


SHIFT. Troth, Countenance, as you please; the place is a place of good
reputation, and capacity.


SOGL. O, my tricks in tobacco (as CARLO says) will show excellent there.


SHIFT. Why, you may go with these gentlemen now, and see fashions: and after,
as you shall see correspondence.


SOGL. You say true. You will go with me, Resolution?


SHIFT. I will meet you, Countenance, about three or four of clock, but, to
say to go with you I cannot, for (as I am APPLE-IOHN) I am to go before the
Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray', present me excused, good
Countenance.


SOGL. Farewell, good Resolution, but fail not to meet.


SHIFT. As I live.


PVNT. Admirably excellent!


MACI. If you can but persuade SOGLIARDO to court, there is all now.


CARL. O let me alone, that is my task.


FAST. Now, by wit, MACILENTE, it is above measure excellent: 'twill be the
only court-exploit that ever proved courtier ingenious.


PVNT. Upon my soul, it puts the lady quite out of her humor, and we shall
laugh with judgment.


CARL. Come, the gentleman was of himself resolved to go with you, before I
moved it.


MACI. Why then, gallants, you two, and CARLO, go before to prepare the jest:
SOGLIARDO and I will come some while after you.


CARL. Pardon me, I am not for court.


PVNT. That Is true: CARLO comes not at court indeed. Well, you shall leave it
to the faculty of monsieur BRISK, and my self, upon our lives we will
manage it happily. CARLO shall bespeake supper, at the miter, against we come
back: where we will meet, and dimple our cheeks with laughter at the success.


CARL. I, but will you all promise to come?


PVNT. My self shall manfrede it for them: he that fails, let his reputation
lie under the lash of thy tongue.


CARL. Gods so, look who comes here!


SOGL. What, nephew!


FVNG. Uncle, god save you; did you see a gentleman, one monsieur BRISK? a
Courtier, he goes in such a suit as I do.


SOGL. Here is the gentleman, nephew, but not in such a suit.


FVNG. He swounes. Another suit!


SOGL. How now, nephew?


FAST. Would you speak to me, sir?


CARL. I, when he has recovered himself: poor poll.


PVNT. Some Rosa-solis.


MACI. How now, signior?


FVNG. I am not well, sir.


MACI. Why, this it is, to dog the fashion.


CARL. Nay, come gentlemen, remember your affairs; his disease is nothing but
the flux of apparel.


PVNT. Sirs, return to the lodging, keep the cat safe; I Will be the dogs
Guardian my self.


SOGL. Nephew, will you go to court with us? these gentlemen and I are for the
court: nay, be not so melancholy.


FVNG. By gods lid, I think no man in christendom has that rascally fortune
that I have.


MACI. Faith, your suit is well enough, signior.


FVNG. Nay, not for that, I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur FASTIDIVS,
and I have forgot it.


MACI. Why, go along to court with us, and remember it, come. Gentlemen, you
three take one boat, and SOGLIARDO and I will take another: we shall be there
instantly.


FAST. Content: good sir, vouchsafe us your pleasance.


PVNT. Farewell, CARLO; remember.


CARL. I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shoes to throw after you.


PVNT. Good Fortune will close the eyes of our jest, fear not: and we shall
frollicke.


GREX.
MIT. This MACILENTE, signior, begins to be more sociable on a sudden, me
thinks, then he was before: there is some portent in it, I believe.


COR. O, he is a fellow of a strange nature. Now does he (in this calm of his
humor) plot, and store up a world of malicious thoughts in his brain, till
he is so full with 'hem, that you shall see the very torrent of his envy
break forth like a land-floud: and, against the course of all their affections
oppose it self so violently, that you will almost have wonder to think, how
it is possible the current of their dispositions shall receive so quick, and
strong an alteration.


MIT. I mary, sir, this is that, on which my expectation has dwelt all this
while: for I must tell you, signior (though I was loath to interrupt the Scene)
yet I made it a question in mine own private discourse, how he should properly
call it, Every man out of his Humor, when I saw all his actors so strongly
pursue, and continue their humors?


COR. Why, therein his art appears most full of luster, and approaches nearest
the life: especially, when in the flame, and height of their humors, they are
laid flat, it fills the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a
sight were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopt, and cut down by degrees,
when it might be feld in a moment? and to set the axe to it before it came to
that pride, and fullness, were, as not to have it grow.


MIT. Well, I shall long till I see this fall, you talk of.


COR. To help your longing, signior, let your imagination be swifter them a
pair of oars: and by this, suppose PVNTARVOLO, BRISK, FVNGOSO, and the dog
arrived at the court gate, and going up to the great chamber. MACILENTE, and
SOGLIARDO, we will leave them on the water, till possibility and natural
means may land 'hem. Here come the gallants, now prepare your expectation.


Act V.
Scene I.
PVNTARVOLO, FASTIDIVS BRISK, FVNGOSO, GROOM, MACILENTE, SOGLIARDO. COme,
gentles. Signior, you are sufficiently instructed.


FAST. Who, I, sir?


PVNT. No, this gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to bestow my dog, he
is no competent attendant for the presence.


FAST. Mass, that is true indeed, knight, you must not carry him into the
presence.


PVNT. I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my
cormorants to attend me.


FAST. Why, you're best leave him at the porters lodge.


PVNT. Not so: his worth is too well known amongst them, to be forth-comming.


FAST. Slight, how'll you do then?


PVNT. I must leave him with one, that is ignorant of his quality, if I will
have him to be safe. And see! Here comes one that will carry coals, ergo, will
hold my dog. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this dog to thy
prudent care?


GROO. You may, if you please, sir.


PVNT. Pray thee let me find thee here at my return: it shall not be long,
till I will ease thee of thy employment, and please thee. Forth, gentles.


FAST. Why, but will you leave him with so slight command, and infirse no more
charge, upon the fellow?


PVNT. Charge? no; there were no policy in that: that were to let him know the
value of the gemme he holds, and so, to tempt frail nature against her
disposition. No, pray thee let thy honesty be sweet, as it shall be short.


GROO. Yes, sir.


PVNT. But hark you gallants, and chiefly Monsieur BRISK. When we come in
eye-shot, or presence of this lady, let not other matters carry us from our
project: but (if we can) single her forth to some place --


FAST. I warrant you.


PVNT. And be not too sudden, but let the device induce it self with good
circumstance. On.


FVNG. Is this the way? good truth, here be fine hangings.


GROO. Honesty sweet, and short? mary it shall, sir, doubt you not: for even
at this instant if one would give me twenty pounds, I would not deliver him;
there is for the sweet; but now, if any man come offer me but two pence, he
shall have him; there is for the short now. Slid, what a mad humorous gentleman
is this to leave his dog with me? I could run away with him now, and he were
worth any thing.


MACI. Come on, signior, now prepare to court this all-witted lady, most
naturally, and like your self.


SOGL. Faith, and you say the word, I Will begin to her in tobacco.


MACI. O, fie on it: no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet lady? or, Why
are you so melancholy, Madame? though she be very merry, it is all one: be
sure to kiss your hand often enough; pray for her health, and tell her, how,
more then most fair she is. Screw your face at one side thus, and protest; let
her fleere, and look a skaunce, and hide her teeth with her fan, when she
laughs a fit, to bring her into more matter, that is nothing: you must talk
forward (though it be without sense, so it be without blushing) it is most
court-like, and well.


SOGL. But shall I not use tobacco at all?


MACI. O, by no means, 'twill but make your breath suspected, and that you use
it only to confound the rankenesse of that.


SOGL. Nay, I Will be advised, sir, by my friends.


MACI. Gods my life, see, where sir PVNTARS dog is.


GROO. I would the gentleman would return for his follower here, I Will leave
him to his fortunes else.


MACI. S'heart, 'twere the only true jest in the world to poison him now: ha?
by this hand, I Will do it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior
SOGLIARDO, walk aside, and think upon some device, to entertain the lady
with.


SOGL. So I do, sir.


MACI. How now, mine honest friend? whose dog-keeper art thou?


GROO. Dogge-keeper, sir? I hope I scorn that in faith.


MACI. Why? do thou not keep a dog?


GROO. He throws off the dog. Sir, now I do, and now I do not: I think
this be sweet and short. Make me his dogge-keeper?


MACI. This is excellent, above expectation: nay stay, sir, you would be
travailing, but I Will give you a dram shall shorten your voyage: here. So sir,
I Will be bold to take my leave of you. Now to the Turks court in the devils
name, for you shall never go o'gods name. SOGLIARDO, come.


SOGL. I have 't ysaith now, will sting it.


MACI. Take heed you leese it not, signior, ere you come there: preserve it.


GREX.
CORD. How like you this first exploit of his?


MITIS. O, a piece of true envy: but I expect the issue of the other device.


CORD. Here they come, will make it appear.


Act V. Scene II.
SAVIOLINA, PVNTARVOLO, FASTIDIVS BRISK, FVNGOSO, MACILENTE, SOGLIARDO. To
them. WHy, I thought, sir PVNTARVOLO, you had bin gone your voyage?


PVNT. Dear, and most amiable lady, your divine beauties do bind me to those
offices, that I cannot depart when I would.


SAVI. It Is most court-like spoken, sir: but how might we do to have a sight of
your dog, and cat?


FAST. His dog is in the court, lady.


SAVI. And not your cat? how dare you trust her behind you, sir?


PVNT. Troth, madame, she has sore eyes, and she does keep her chamber:
mary I have left under sufficient guard, there are two of my followers to
attend her.


SAVI. I Will give you some water for her eyes: when do you go, sir?


PVNT. Certes, sweet lady, I know not.


FAST. He does stay the rather, madame, to present you acute judgment with so
courtly, and wel-parted a gentleman, as yet your lady-ship has never seen.


SAVI. What Is he, gentle Monsieur BRISK? not that gentleman?


FAST. No lady, this is a kinsman to justice Silence.


PVNT. Pray' sir, give me leave to report him: he is a gentleman (lady) of that
rare and admirable faculty, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe: he
is exceedingly valiant, an excellent scholar, and so exactly trauail'd, that
he is able in discourse, to deliver you a model of any princes court in the
world: speaks the languages with that purity of phrase, and facility of
accent, that it breeds astonishment: his wit, the most exuberant, and (above
wonder) pleasant, of all that ever entered the concaue of this eve.


FAST. It Is most true, lady: mary, he is no such excellent proper man.


PVNT. His travails have changed his complexion, madame.


SAVI. O, sir PVNTARVOLO, you must think, every man was not borne to have my
servant BRISKES feature.


PVNT. But that which transcends all, lady; he does so peerelessely imitate
any manner of person for gesture, action, passion, or whateuer --


FAST. I, especially a rusticke, or a clown, madame, that it is not possible
for the sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discern any sparks of the
gentleman in him, when he does.


SAVI. O, Monsieur BRISK, be not so tyrannous to confine all wits within the
compass of your own: not find the sparks of a gentleman in him, if he be a
gentleman?


FVNG. No in truth (sweet lady) I believe you cannot.


SAVI. Do you believe so? why, I can find sparks of a gentleman in you, sir.


PVNT. I, he is a gentleman, madame, and a reueller.


FVNG. Indeed, I think I have seen your ladyship at our revels.


SAVI. Like enough, sir: but would I might see this wonder you talk of: may
one have a sight of him, for any reasonable sum?


PVNT. Yes, madame, he will arrive presently.


SAVI. What, and shall we see him clown it?


FAST. I faith (sweet lady) that you shall: see, here he comes.


PVNT. This is he! pray observe him, lady.


SAVI. Be shrew me, he clownes it properly indeed.


PVNT. Nay, mark his courtship.


SOGL. How does my sweet lady? hot, and moist? beautiful and lusty? ha?


SAVI. Beautiful, and it please you, sir, but not lusty.


SOGL. O ho, lady; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet
lady? in health? Bonaroba, quaeso, que nouelles? que nouells? sweet creature.


SAVI. O excellent: why gallants, is this he that cannot be deciphered? they
were very bleare-witted, in faith, that could not discern the gentleman in him.


PVNT. But, do you, in earnest, lady?


SAVI. Do I, sir? why, if you had any true court-iudgement in the carriage of
his eye, and that inward power that forms his countenance, you might perceive
his counterfeiting as clear, as the noonday: Alas -- Nay, if you would have
tried my wit, indeed, you should never have told me he was a gentleman, but
presented him for a true clown indeed; and then have seen if I could have
deciphered him.


FAST. Fore god, her ladyship says true (knight:) but does he not affect the
clown most naturally, mistress?


PVNT. O, she cannot but affirm that, out of the bounty of her judgment.


SAVI. Nay, out of doubt he does well, for a gentleman, to imitate; but I
warrant you, he becomes his natural carriage of the gentleman, much better then
his clownerie.


FAST. It Is strange, in truth, her ladyship should see so far into him.


PVNT. I, is it not?


SAVI. Faith, as easily as may be: not decipher him, quoth you?


FVNG. Good sadness, I wonder at it!


MACI. Why, has she deciphered him, gentlemen?


PVNT. O, most miraculously, and beyond admiration!


MACI. Is It possible?


FAST. She has gathered most infallible signs of the gentleman in him,
that is certain.


SAVI. Why, gallants, let me laugh at you, a little: was this your device, to
try my judgment in a gentleman?


MACI. Nay, lady, do not scorn us, though you have this gift of perspicacie
above others: What if he should be no gentleman now, but a clown indeed,
lady?


PVNT. How think you of that? would not your ladyship be out of your humor?


FAST. O, but she knows it is not so.


SAVI. What if he were not a man, ye may as well say? nay, if your worships
could gull me so, indeed, you were wiser then you are taken for.


MACI. In good faith, lady, he is a very perfect clown, both by father, and
mother: that I Will assure you.


SAVI. O, sir, you are very pleasurable.


MACI. Nay, do but look on his hand, and that shall resolve you: look you,
lady, what a palm here is.


SOGL. Tut, that was with holding the plough.


MACI. The plough! did you discern any such thing in him, madame?


FAST. Faith no, she saw the gentleman as bright, as at noonday, she: she
deciphered him at first.


MACI. Troth, I am sorry your ladyships sight should be so suddenly struck.


SAVI. O, you're goodly beagles!


FAST. What, is she gone?


SOGL. Nay, stay, sweet lady, que nouelles? que nouelles?


SAVI. Out, you fool, you.


FVNG. She Is out of her humor in faith.


FAST. Nay, let us follow it while it is hot, gentlemen.


PVNT. Come, on mine honor we shall make her blush in the presence: my spleen
is great with laughter.


MACI. Your laughter will be a child of a feeble life, I believe, sir. Come,
signior, your looks are too dejected, me thinks: why mix you not mirth with
the rest?


FVNG. By gods will, this suit frets me at the soul. I Will have it altered to
morrow, sure.


Act V. scene III.
SHIFT. FASTIDIVS, PVNTARVOLO, SOGLIARDO, FVNGOSO, MACILENTE. To ^im. I Am come
to the court, to meet with my Countenance SOGLIARDO: poor men must be glad of
such countenance, when they can get no better. Well. Need may insult upon a man,
but it shall never make him despair of consequence. The world will say, it is
base: tush, base! it is base to live under the earth, not base to live above it,
by any means.


FAST. The poor lady is most miserably out of her humor, in faith.


PVNT. There was never so witty a jest broken, at the tilt of all the
court-wits christened.


MACI. O, this applause taints it, foully.


SOGL. I think, I did my part in courting. O! Resolution!


PVNT. Aye me, my dog.


MACI. Where is he?


FAST. H^send^aw^y F^ngoso. Gods precious, go seek for the fellow, good
signior.


PVNT. Here, here I left him.


MACI. Why, none was here when we came in now, but CAVALIER SHIFT, enquire of
him.


FAST. Did you see sir PVNTARVOLO'S dog here, Caualier, since you came?


SHIFT. His dog sir? he may look his dog, sir, I saw none of his dog, sir.


MACI. Upon my life, he has stol'ne your dog, sir, and been hired to it by
some that have ventured with you: you may guess by his peremptory answers.


PVNT. Not unlike; for he has been a notorious thief by his own confession.
Sirrah, where is my dog?


SHIFT. Charge me with your dog, sir? I have none of your dog, sir.


PVNT. Villain, thou lie.


SHIFT. Lie, sir? S'bloud, y' are but a man, sir.


PVNT. Rogue, and thief, restore him.


SOGL. Take heed, sir PVNTARVOLO, what you do: heel bear no coals, I can
tell you (of my word.)


MACI. This is rare.


SOGL. It Is mar'le he stabs you not: by this light, he has stabbed forty, for
forty times less matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge.


PVNT. I will make thee stoop, thou abject.


SOGL. Make him stoop, sir! gentlemen, pacifi^ him or he will be killed.


MACI. Is he so tall a man?


SOGL. Tall a man? if you love his life, stand betwixt 'hem: make him stoop!


PVNT. My dog, villain, or I will hang thee: thou have confessed robberies,
and other fellonious acts, to this gentleman thy Countenance --


SOGL. I Will bear no witness.


PVNT. And, without my dog, I will hang thee, for them.


SOGL. Shift kneeles. What? kneel to thine enemies?


SHIFT. Pardon me, good sir; god is my witness, I never did robbery in all my
life.


FVNG. F^ngoso returned. O, sir PVNTARVOLO, your dog lies giving up the ghost
in the wood-yard.


MACI. Heart! is he not dead, yet?


PVNT. O, my dog, born to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me, sir.


SOGL. How? did you never do any robbery, in your life?


MACI. O, this is good: so he swore, sir.


SOGL. I, I heard him. And did you swear true, sir?


SHIFT. I, (as I hope to be forgiven, sir) I never robbed any man, I never stood
by the high-way-side, sir, but only said so, because I would get my self a
name, and be counted a tall man.


SOGL. Now out, base viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Countenance? By this
light, gentlemen, he has confessed to me the most inexorable company of
robberies, and damned himself that he did 'hem; you never heard the like: out
skoundrell, out, follow me no more, I command thee: out of my sight, go,
hence, speak not: I will not hear thee: away camouccio.


MACI. O, how I do feed upon this now, and fat my self! here were a couple
unexpectedly dishumour'd: well, by this time, I hope, sir PVNTARVOLO and his
dog are both out of humor to travail. Nay, gentlemen, why do you not seek
out the knight, and comfort him? our supper at the Mitre must of necessity
hold to night, if you love your reputations.


FAST. Before god, I am so melancholy for his dogs disaster, but I Will go.


SOGL. Faith, and I may go too, but I know, I shall be so melancholy.


MACI. Tush, melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the
mercy of a fury: CARLO will rack your sinews asunder, and rail you to dust,
if you come not.


GREX. MIT. O, then their fear of CARLO, belike, makes them hold their meeting.


COR. I, here he comes: conceive him but to be entered the Mitre, and it is
enough.


Act V. Scene IIII.
CARLO, DRAWER, GEORGE. HOlla: where be these shot-sharkes?


DRAW. By and by: you're welcome, good master BVFFONE.


CARL. Where Is GEORGE? calm GEORGE hither, quickly.


DRAW. What wine please you have, sir? I Will draw you that is neat, master
BVFFONE.


CARL. Away NEOPHITE, do as I bid thee, bring my dear GEORGE to me: Mass,
here he comes.


GEOR. Welcome, master CARLO.


CARL. What! is supper ready, GEORGE?


GEOR. I, sir, almost: will you have the cloth laid, master CARLO?


CARL. O, what else? are none of the gallants come, yet?


GEOR. None yet, sir.


CARL. Stay, take me with you, GEORGE: let me have a good faloyne of porke
laid to the fire, presently.


GEOR. It shall, sir.


CARL. And withal, hear you? draw me the biggest shaft you have, out of the
butt you wo^ of: away, you know my meaning, GEORGE, quick.


GEOR. Done, sir.


CARL. I never hungered so much for thing in my life, as I do to know our
gallants success at court: now is that lean bald-rib MACILENTE, that salt
villain, plotting some mischicuous device, and lies a soking in their frothy
humors like a dry crust, till he has drunk 'hem all up: could the pummise
but hold up his eyes at other men's happiness, in any reasonable proportion:
S'lid, the slave were to be loved next heaven, above honor, wealth, rich fare,
apparel, wenches, all the delights of the belly, and the groine, whateuer.


GEOR. Here, master CARLO.


CARL. Is It right, Boy?


GEOR. I, sir, I assure you it is right.


CARL. He puts forth the drawers, and shuts the door. Well said, my dear
GEORGE, depart: Come, my small gymblet, you in the false scabberd, away, so.
Now to you, sir B^rgomaster, let us taste of your bounty.


GREX.
MIT. What, will he deal upon such quantities of wine, alone?


COR. You will perceive that, sir.


CARL. He sets the two cups asunder, and first drinks with the (...), and
pledges with the other. I mary, sir, here is purity: O, GEORGE, I could bite
off his nose for this, now: Sweet rogue, he has drawn Nectar, the very soul
of the grape! I Will wash my temples with some on it presently, and drink some
half a score draughts; 'twill heat the brain, kindle my imagination, I shall
talk nothing but crackers, and fire-worke, to night. So, sir! please you to be
here, sir, and I here: So.


GREX.
COR. This is worth the observation, signior.


CARL. 1. Cap. Now, sir; here is to you; and I present you with so much of my
love.


2. Cap. I take it kindly from you, sir, and will return you the like
proportion: but withal, sir, remembering the merry night we had at the
countesses, you know where, sir.


1. By heaven, you put me in mind now of a very necessary office, which I
will propose in your pledge, sir: the health of that honorable countess, and
the sweet lady that sat by her, sir.


2. I do veil to it with reverence. And now, signior, with these ladies, I Will
be bold to mix the health of your divine Mistress.


1. Do you know her, sir?


2. O lord, sir, I: and in the respectfull memory and mention of her, I could
wish this wine were the most precious drugge in the world.


1. Good faith, sir, you do honor me in it exceedingly.


GREX.
MIT. Whom should he personate in this, signior?


COR. Faith, I know not, sir, observe, observe him.


2. If it were the basest filth, or mud that runs in the channel, I am bound
to pledge it, respectively, sir. And now, sir, here is a replenisht bowl,
which I will reciprocally turn upon you, to the health of the count FRVGALE.


1. The count FRVGALES health, sir? I Will pledge it on my knees, by this light.


2. Will you, sir? I Will drink it on my knee, then, by the light.


GREX.
MIT. Why, this is strange!


COR. Have you heard a better drunken dialogue?


2. Nay, do me right, sir.


1. So I do, in good faith.


2. Good faith you do not; mine was fuller.


1. Why, believe me, it was not.


2. Believe me, it was: and you do lie.


1. Lie, sir?


2. I, sir.


1. S'wounds!


2. O, come, stab if you have a mind to it.


1. Stab? do thou think I dare not?


CARL. Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, what means this? nay, look, for shame
respect your reputations.


Act V. Scene V.
MACILENTE, CARLO, GEORGE. WHy, how now CARLO! what humour's this?


CARL. O, my good Mischief! art thou come? where are the rest? where are the
rest?


MACI. Faith, three of our ordinance are burst.


CARL. Burst? how comes that?


MACI. Faith, ouer-charg'd, ouer-charg'd.


CARL. But did not the train hold?


MACI. O, yes, and the poor lady is irrecouerably blown up.


CARL. Why, but which of the munition is miscarried? ha?


MACI. Inprimis, sir PVNTARVOLO: next, the COVNTENANCE, and RESOLVTION.


CARL. How? how for the love of wit?


MACI. Troth, the Resolution is proved recreant; the Countenance has changed
his copy: and the passionate knight is shedding funeral tears over his
departed dog.


CARL. What Is his dog dead?


MACI. Poisoned, it is thought: mary, how, or by whom, that is left for some
cunning woman here of the Banke-side to resolve. For my part, I know nothing,
more then that we are like to have an exeeding melancholy supper of it.


CARL. S'life, and I had purposed to be extraordinarily merry, I had drunk off
a good preparatiue of old sack here: but will they come, will they come?


MACI. They will assuredly come: may, CARLO (as thou love me) run over 'hem
all freely to night, and especially the knight; spare no sulphurous jest that
may come out of that sweatie forge of thine: but ply 'hem with all manner of
shot, minion, saker, culvertine, or any thing what thou will.


CARL. I warrant thee, my dear case of petrionels, so I stand not in dread of
thee, but that thou wilt second me.


MACI. Why, my good Germane tapster, I will.


CARL. What, GEORGE. Lomtero, Lomtero, etc. He dances.


GEOR. Did you call, master CARLO?


CARL. More nectar, GEORGE: Lomtero, etc.


GEOR. Your meat's ready, sir, and your company were come.


CARL. Is the loyne of porke enough?


GEOR. I, sir, it is enough.


MACI. Porke? heart, what do thou with such a greasy dish? I think thou
do varnish thy face with the fat on it, it looks so like a glew-pot.


CARL. True, my raw-bon'd-rogue, and if thou would farce thy lean ribs with
it too, they would not (like ragged lathes) rub out so many doublets as they
do: but thou know not a good dish, thou. O, it is the only nourishing meat
in the world. No marvel though that saucie, stubborn generation, the Jews,
were forbidden it: for what would they have done, well pampered with fat porke,
that durst murmr at their maker out of garlic, and onions. S'light, fed
with it, the whoreson strummell, patcht, goggle-ey'd Grumbledories, would have
Gigantomachiz'd. Well said, my sweet GEORGE, fill, fill.


GREX.
MIT. This savors too much of profanation.


COR. O, seruetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, and sibi conflet. The
necessite of his vain compels a toleration: for, bar this, and dash him out
of humor, before his time.


CARL. It Is an Axiom in natural philosophy, What comes nearest the nature of
that it feeds, conuerts quicker to nourisment, and does sooner essentiate. Now
nothing in flesh, and entrails, assimulates or resembles man more, then a hog,
or swine --


MACI. True; and he (to requite their courtesy) oftentimes d'offeth his own
nature, and puts on theirs; as when he becomes as churlish as a hog, or as
drunk as a sow: but to your conclusion.


CARL. Mary, I say, nothing resembling man more then a swine, it follows,
nothing can be more nourishing: for indeed (but that it abhorres from our nice
nature) if we fed one upon another, we should shoot up a great deal faster,
and thrive much better: I refer me to your vsurous Cannibals, or such like:
but since it is so contrary, porke, porke, is your only feed.


MACI. I take it, your devil be of the same diet; he would never have desired
to been incorporated into swine else. O, here comes the melancholy mess: upon
'hem CARLO, charge, charge.


CARL. Before god, sir PVNTARVOLO, I am sorry for your heaviness: body a me, a
shrewd mischance! why, had you no unicorns horn, nor bezoars stone about you?
ha?


Act V. Scene VI.
PVNTARVOLO, CARLO, MACILENTE, FAST. BRISK, SOGLIARDO, FVNGOSO. SIr, I would
request you, be silent.


MACI. Nay, to him again.


CARL. Take comfort, good knight, if your cat have recovered her catarrhe, fear
nothing; your dogs mischance may be helped.


FAST. Say how (sweet CARLO) for so god mend me, the poor knights moves draw
me into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discouraged, good sir
PVNTARVOLO, I am content your adventure shall be performed upon your cat.


MACI. I believe you, musk cod, I believe you, for rather then thou would
make present repayment, thou would take it upon his own bare return from
Calice.


CARL. Nay, 'ds life, hee'ld be content (so he were well rid out of his
company) to pay him five for one, at his next meeting him in Paul's. But for
your dog, sir PVNTAR, if he be not outright dead, there is a friend of
mine, a quack-saluer, shall put life in him again, that is certain.


FVNG. O, no, that comes too late.


MACI. Gods precious, knight, will you suffer this?


PVNT. Drawer, get me a candle, and hard wax, presently.


SOGL. I, and bring up supper; for I am so melancholy.


CARL. O, signior, where is your Resolution?


SOGL. Resolution! hang him rascal: O, CARLO, if you love me, do not mention
him.


CARL. Why, how so? how so?


SOGL. O, the arrant'st crocodile that ever Christian was acquainted with. By
my gentry, I shall think the worse of tobacco while I live, for his sake: I
did think him to be as tall a man --


MACI. Nay, BVFFONE, the knight, the knight.


CARL. S'hid, he looks like an image carved out of box, full of knots: his
face is (for all the world) like a dutch purse, with the mouth downward; his
beard the tassels: and he walks (let me see) as melancholy as one of the
Masters side in the Counter. Do you hear, sir PVNTAR?


PVNT. Sir, I do entreat you no more, but enjoin you to silence, as you
affect your peace.


CARL. Nay, but dear knight, understand (here are none but friends, and such
as wish you well) I would have you do this now; Flea me your dog presently
(but in any case keep the head) and stuff his skin well with straw, as you
see these dead monsters at Bartholmew fair.


PVNT. I shall be sudden, I tell you.


CARL. Or if you like not that, sir, get me somewhat a less dog, and clap into
the skin; here is a slave about the town here, a Jew, one YOHAN; or a fellow
that makes perrukes, will glue it on artificially, it shall never be discerned,
besides, 'twill be so much the warmer for the hound to travail in, you know.


MACI. Sir PVNTARVOLO, 'death, can you be so patient?


CARL. O^ thus, sir: you may have (as you come through Germany) a familiar for
little or nothing, shall turn it self into the shape of your dog, or any
thing (what you will) for certain hours; 'ods my life, knight, what do you
mean? you will offer no violence, will you? hold, hold.


PVNT. 'Sdeath, you slave, you bandog, you.


CARL. As you love wit, stay the enraged knight, gentlemen.


PVNT. By my knighthood, he that stirs in his rescue, dies. Drawer, be gone.


CARL. Murder, murder, murder.


PVNT. I, are you howling, you wolf? Gentlemen, as you tender your lives,
suffer no man to enter, till my revenge be perfect. Sirrah, BVFFONE, lie down;
make no exclamations, but down: down, you curre, or I will make thy blood
flow on my rapier hilts.


CARL. Sweet knight, hold in thy ^urie, and before heaven, I Will honor thee
more, then the Turk does MAHOMET.


PVNT. Down (I say.) Who Is there?


CONS. Within. Here Is the Constable, open the doors.


CARL. Good, MACILENTE.


PVNT. Open no door, if the ADALANTADO of Spain were here, he should not
enter: On, help me with the light, gentlemen: you knock in vain, sir officer.


CARL. Et in Brute!


PVNT. Sirrah, close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heaven.


CARL. He seals up his lips. O, O.


CONS. Open the door, or I will break it open.


MACI. Nay, good Constable, have patience a little, you shall come in
presently, we have almost done.


PVNT. They all draw, and disperse. So; now, are you out of your humor, sir?
Shift, gentlemen.


Act V. Scene VII.
CONSTABLE, OFFICERS, DRAVVERS. To them. LAy hold upon this gallant, and pursue
the rest.


FAST. Lay hold on me, sir! for what?


CONS. Mary, for your not here, sir, with the rest of your companions.


FAST. My riot! master Constable, take heed what you do. CARLO, did I offer
any violence?


CONS. O, sir, you see he is not in case to answer you, and that makes you so
paramptorie.


FAST. Peremptory, s'life I appeal to the drawers, if I did him any hard
measure.


GEOR. They are all gone, there is none of them will be laid any hold on.


CONS. Well, sir, you are like to answer till the rest can be found out.


FAST. Slid, I appear to GEORGE, here.


CONS. Tut, GEORGE was not here: away with him to the Counter, sirs. Come, sir,
you were best get your self dressed somewhere.


GEOR. Good lord, that master CARLO could not take heed, and knowing what a
gentleman the knight is, if he be angry.


DRAW. A pox on 'hem, they have left all the meat on our hands, would they
were choakt with it form.


MACI. ^. What, are they gone, sirs?


GEOR. O, here is master MACILENTE.


MACI. Sirrah, GEORGE, do you see that concealment there? that napkin under
the table?


GEOR. Gods so, signior FVNGOSO!


MACI. Here Is good pawn for the reckoning, be sure you keep him here, and Ice
him not go away till I come again, though he offer to discharge all: I Will
return presently.


GEOR. Sirrah, we have a pawn for the reckoning.


DRAW. What? of MACILENTE?


GEOR. No, look under the table.


FVNG. I hope, all be quiet now: if I can get but forth of this street, I care
not, masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone?


GEOR. ^. What? master FVNGOSO?


FVNG. Was It not a good device this same of me, sirs?


GEOR. Yes says; have you been here all this while?


FVNG. O god, I* good sir, look, and the coast be clear, I Would feign be going.


GEOR. All Is clear, sir, but the reckoning; and that you must clear, and pay
before you go, I assure you.


FVNG. I pay? Slight, I eat not a bit since I came into the house, yet.


DRAW. Why, you may when you please, sir, it is all ready below, that was
bespoken.


FVNG. Bespoken? not by me, I hope?


GEOR. By you, sir? I know not that: but 'twas for you, and your company, I am
sure.


FVNG. My company? S'lid, I was an invited guest, so I was.


DRAW. Faith, we have no thing to do with that, sir, they are all gone but you,
and we must be answered; that is the short and the long on it.


FVNG. Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my masters, then would this pot,
cup, and all were in my belly, if I have a cross about me.


GEOR. What, and have such apparel? do not say so, signior, that mightily
discredits your clothes.


FVNG. As I am an honest man, my tailor had all my money this morning, and yet
I must be feign to alter my suit too: good sirs, let me go, it is friday night,
and in good truth I have no stomach in the world, to eat any thing.


DRAW. That Is no matter, so you pay, sir.


FVNG. Pay? gods light, with what conscience can you ask me to pay that I
never drank for?


GEOR. Yes, sir, I did see you drink once.


FVNG. By this cup, (which is silver) but you did not, you do me infinite
wrong, I looked in the pot once, indeed, but I did not drink.


DRAW. Well sir, if you can satisfy our master, it shall be all one to us.
(by and by.)


GREX.
CORD. Lose not your self now signior.


Act V. Scene VIII.
MACILENTE, DELIRO, FALLACE. TVt, sir, you did bear too hard a conceit of me
in that, but I will now make my love to you most transparent, in spite of any
dust of suspicion, that may be raised to cloud it: and henceforth, since I see
it is so against your humor, I will never labor to persuade you.


DELI. Why, I thank you, signior, but what is that you tell me may concern my
peace so much?


MACI. Faith, sir, it is thus. Your wives brother, signior FVNGOSO, being at
supper to night at a tavern, with a sort of gallants, there happened some
division amongst 'hem, and he is left in pawn for the reckoning: now, if ever
you look that time shall present you with a happy occasion to do your wife
some gracious and acceptable service, take hold of this opportunity, and
presently go, and redeem him; for, being her brother, and his credit so amply
engaged as now it is, when she shall hear (as he cannot himself, but he
must out of extremity report it) that you came, and offered your self so
kindly, and with that respect of his reputation, why, the benefit cannot but
make her dote, and grow mad of your affections.


DELI. Now, by heaven, MACILENTE, I acknowledge my self exceedingly indebted
to you, by this kind tender of your love; and I am sorry to remember that I
was ever so rude, to neglect a friend of your importance: bring me shoes, and
a cloak there, I was going to bed, if you had not come, what tavern is it?


MACI. The Mitre, sir.


DELI. O, why FIDO, my shoes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.


FALL. Come, I marle what piece of nightwork you have in hand now, that you
call for your cloak, and your shoes! what, is this your Pandar?


DELI. O, sweet wife, speak lower, I would not he should hear thee for a
world --


FALL. Hang him rascal, I cannot abide him for his treachery, with his wild
quick-set beard there. Whither go you now with him?


DELI. No whither with him, dear wife, I go alone to a place, from whence I
will return instantly. Good MACILENTE, acquaint not her with it by any means,
it may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answer. I Will come
back immediately.


FALL. Nay, and I be not worthy to know whither you go, stay, till I take
knowledge of your coming back.


MACI. Hear you, mistress DELIRO.


FALL. So sir, and what say you?


MACI. Faith lady, my intents will not deserve this slight respect, when you
shall know 'hem.


FALL. Your intents? why, what may your intents be, for god sake!


MACI. Troth, the time allows no circumstance, lady, therefore know, this was
but a device to remove your husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilst
(with more conueniencie) I might report to you a misfortune that has happened
to Monsieur BRISK -- nay comfort, sweet lady. This night (being at supper a
sort of young gallants committed a riot, for the which he (only) is
apprehended and carried to the Counter, where if your husband, and other
creditours should but have knowledge of him, the poor gentleman were undone
for ever.


FALL. Aye me! that he were.


MACI. Now therefore, if you can think upon any present means for his
delivery, do not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that committed him, will
do it.


FALL. O god, sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me
to him, and say I Will visit him presently?


MACI. No, lady, I shall do you better service, in protracting your husbands
return, that you may go with more safety.


FALL. Good truth, so you may: farewell, good sir. Lord, how a woman may be
mistaken in a man? I would have sworn upon all the testaments in the world, he
had not loved master BRISK. Bring me my keys there, maid. Alas, good
gentleman, if all I have in this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be
at his service.


GREX.
MIT. How MACILENTE sweates i'this business, if you mark him.


COR. I, you shall see the true picture of spite anon: here comes the pawn,
and his redeemer.


Act V. Scene IX.
DELIRO, FVNGOSO, DRAWERS* MACILENTE. COme, brother, be not discouraged for
this, man, what?


FVNG. No truly, I am not discouraged, but I protest to you, brother, I have
done imitating any more gallants either in purse or apparel, but as shall
become a gentleman, for good carriage, or so.


DELI. You say well. This is all, in the bill here? is it not?


GEOR. I, sir.


DELI. There Is your money, tell it: and brother, I am glad I met with so good
occasion to show my love to you.


FVNG. I will study to deserve it in good truth, and I live.


DELI. What, is it right?


GEOR. I, sir, and I thank you.


FVNG. Let me have a capons leg saved, now the reckoning is paid.


GEOR. You shall, sir.


MACI. Where Is signior DELIRO?


DELI. Here, MACILENTE.


MACI. Hark you, sir, have you dispatched this same?


DELI. I marie have I.


MACI. Well then, I can tell you news, BRISK is in the Counter.


DELI. In The Counter?


MACI. It Is true, sir, committed for the stir here to night. Now would I have
you send your brother home before, with the report of this your kindness done
him, to his sister, which will so pleasingly possess her, and out of his mouth
too, that in the mean time you may clap your action on BRISK, and your wife
(being in so happy a mood) cannot entertain it ill, by any means.


DELI. It Is very true, she cannot indeed, I think.


MACI. Think? why it is past thought, you shall never meet the like
opportunity, I assure you.


DELI. I will do it. Brother, pray you go home before, this gentleman, and I
have some private business; and tell my sweet wife, I Will come presently.


FVNG. I will, brother.


MACI. And, signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his
bounty, your brother has used you. (Do you see?) made you a man of good
reckoning; redeemed that you never were possessed of, credit; gave you as
gentleman-like terms as might be; found no fault with your coming behind the
fashion; nor nothing.


FVNG. Nay, I am out of those humors now.


MACI. Well, if you be out, keep your distance, and be not made a shot-clog
any more. Come, signior, let us make haste.


Act V. Scene X.
FALLACE, FAST. BRISK. O Master FASTIDIVS, what pity is it to see so sweet a
man as you are, in so sour a place?


GREX.
COR. As upon her lips, does she mean?


MIT. O, this is to be imagined the Counter, belike?


FAST. Troth, fair lady, it is first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the
Constable, to have it so: but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in
your kind visitation.


FALL. Nay, you shall be comforted in me, more then this, if you please, sir.
I sent you word by my brother, sir, that my husband laid to rest you this
morning, I know not whether you received it, or no.


FAST. No, believe it, sweet creature, your brother gave me no such
intelligence.


FALL. O, the lord!


FAST. But has your husband any such purpose?


FALL. O sweet master BRISK, yes: and therefore be presently discharged, for
if he come with his actions upon you (lord deliver you) you are in for one
half a score year; he kept a poor man in Ludgate once, twelve year, for
sixteen shillings. Where Is your keeper? for loves sake call him, let him take
a bribe, and dispatch you. Lord, how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are
there?


FAST. No, sweet mistress, why are you in this passion?


FALL. O lord, Master FASTIDIVS, if you knew how I took up my husband to day,
when he said he would arrest you; and how I railed at him that persuaded him
to it, the scholar there, (who on my conscience loves you now) and what care I
took to send you intelligence by my brother; and how I gave him four
sovereigns for his pains; and now, how I came running out hither without man
or boy with me, so soon as I heard on it; you would say, I were in a passion
indeed: your keeper, for gods sake. O, Master BRISK (as it is in EVPHVES) Hard
is the choice, when one is compelled either by silence to die with grief, or
by speaking to live with shame.


FAST. Fair lady, I conceive you, and may this kiss assure you, that where
adversity has (as it were) contracted, prosperity shall not -- gods me! your
husband.


FALL. O, me!


Act V. Scene XI.
DELIRO, MACILENTE, FALLACE, FAST. BRISK. I? is it thus!


MACI. Why, how now, signior DELIRO? has the wolf seen you? ha? has GORGONS
head made marble of you?


DELI. Some Planet strike me dead.


MACI. Why, look you; sir, I told you, you might have suspected this long
before, had you pleased; and have saved this labor of admiration now, and
passion, and such extremities as this frail lump of flesh is subject unto.
Nay, why do you not dote now, signior? Me thinks you should say it were some
enchantment, deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could persuade your self it
were a dream now, 'twere excellent: says, try what you can do, signior; it
may be your imagination will be brought to it in time, there is nothing
impossible.


FALL. Sweet husband:


DELI. Out lascivious strumpet.


MACI. What? did you see, how ill that stale vein became him before, of sweet
wife, and dear heart? and are you fallen just into the same now? with sweet
husband. Away, follow him, go, keep state, what? Remember you are a woman,
turn impudent: gi' him not the head, though you gi' him the horns. Away. And
yet me thinks you should take your leave of Enfans-perdus here, your forlorn
hope. How now, Monsieur BRISK? what? friday night? and in affliction too? and
yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate morcels? I perceive, the affection of ladies
and gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoever you go, Monsieur.


FAST. Now, in good faith (and as I am gentle) there could not have come a
thing, in this world, to have distracted me more, then the wrinckled fortunes
of this poor spinster.


MACI. O, yes, sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much better,
believe it. Signior DELIRO has entered three actions against you, three actions,
Monsieur; mary, one of them (I Will put you in comfort) is but three thousand,
and the other two, some five thousand a piece, trifles, trifles.


FAST. O, I am undone.


MACI. Nay, not altogether so, sir, the knight must have his hundred pound
repai'd, that 'll help too, and then sixe-score pound for a diamond, you know
where. These be things will weigh, Monsieur, they will weigh.


FAST. O, heaven!


MACI. What, do you sigh? this it is to kiss the hand of a countess, to have
her coach sent for you, to hang poinards in ladies garters, to wear bracelets
of their hair, and for every one of these great favors to give some slight
jewel of five hundred crowns, or so, why it is nothing. Now, Monsieur, you see
the plague that treads of the heels of your fopperie: well, go your ways in,
remove your self to the two-penny ward quickly, to save charges, and there set
up your rest to spend sir PVNTARS hundred pound for him. Away, good pomander,
go.

Why, here is a change! Now is my soul at peace.
I am as empty of all envy now,
As they of merit to be envied at.
My humor (like a flame) no longer lasts
Then it has stuff to feed it, and their folly,
Being now raked up in their repentant ashes,
Affords no ampler subject to my spleen.
I am so far from malicing their states,
That I begin to pity 'hem. It grieves me
To think they have a being. I could wish
They might turn wise upon it, and be saved now,
So heaven were pleased: but let them vanish, vapors.
Gentlemen, how like you it? has't not been tedious?

GREX.
COR. Nay, we have done censuring, now.


MIT. Yes, faith.


MAC. How so?


COR. Mary, because we will imitate your actors, and be out of our Humors.
Besides, here are those (round about you) of more ability in censure then we,
whose judgments can give it a more satisfying allowance: we will refer you to
them.


MAC. I? is it even so? Well, gentlemen, I should have gone in, and returned to
you, as I was ASPER at the first: but (by reason the shift would have been
somewhat long, and we are loath to draw your patience farther) we will entreat you
to imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of humor for company)
I stand wholly to your kind approbation, and (indeed) am nothing so peremptory
as I was in the beginning: Mary, I will not do as PLAVTVS, in his Amphytrio,
for all this (Summi Ionis causa, Plaudite:) beg a Plaudite, for gods sake;
but if you (out of the bounty of your good liking) will bestow it; why, you
may (in time) make lean MACILENTE as fat, as Sir JOHN FAL-STAFFE.


THE END.
Which, in the presentation before Queen E. was thus varyed, BY MACILENTE.
Never till now did object greet mine eyes
With any light content: but in her graces,
All my malicious powers have lost their stings.
Envy is fled my soul, at sight of her,
And she has chased all black thoughts from my bosom,
Like as the sun does darkness from the world.
My stream of humor is run out of me.
And as our cities torrent (bent t'infect
The hallowed bowels of the silver Thames)
Is checked by strength, and clearness of the river,
Till it has spent it self e'ene at the shore;
So, in the ample, and vnmeasur'd flood
Of her perfections, are my passions drowned:
And I have now a spirit as sweet, and clear,
As the most rarefi'd and subtle air.
With which, and with a heart as pure as fire,
(Yet humble as the earth) do I implore,
O heaven, that she (whose presence has effected
This change in me) may suffer most late change
In her admired and happy government:
May still this Land be called fortunate,
And rugged treason tremble at the sound
When Fame shall speak it with an emphasis.
Let foreign polity be dull as lead,
And pale invasion come with half a heart,
When he but looks upon her blessed soil.
The throat of war be stopped within her land,
And turtle-footed peace dance fayrie rings
About her court: where, never may there come
Suspect, or danger, but all trust, and safety:
Let flattery be dumb, and envy blind
In her dread presence: death himself admire her:
And may her virtues make him to forget
The use of his inevitable hand.
Fly from her age; Sleep time before her throne,
Our strongest wall falls down, when she is gone.
This Comicall Satyr was first acted in the year 1599.

By the then Lord Chamberlain his Servants.

The principal Comoedians were, RIC. BVRBADGE. AVG. PHILIPS. WILL. SLY. IOH.
HEMINGS. HEN. CONDEL. THO. POPE.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.

CYNTHIAS REVELS, OR The Fountain of Self-love. A Comicall Satyr. Acted, in
the year 1600. By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETH'S CHAPEL.

The Author B. I.

MART. Nasutum volo, nolo polyposum.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. DC. XVI.

TO THE SPECIAL FOVNTAINE OF MANNERS: The Court.
THou art a bountiful, and brave spring: and waterest all the noble plants of
this Island. In thee, the whole Kingdom dresseth it self, and is ambitious to
use thee as her glass. Beware, then, thou render men's figures truly, and teach
them no less to bate their deformities, then to love their forms: For, to
grace, there should come reverence; and no man can call that lovely, which is
not also venerable. It is not pould'ring, perfuming, and every day smelling of
the tailor, that conuerteth to a beautiful object: but a mind, shining through
any suit, which needs no false light either of riches, or honors to help it.
Such shall thou find some here, even in the reign of CYNTHIA (a CRITES, and an
ARETE.) Now, under thy PHOEBVS, it will be thy province to make more: Except
thou desire to have thy source mix with the Spring of Self-love, and so
wilt draw upon thee as welcome a discovery of thy days, as was then made of
her nights.

Thy servant, but not slave, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
CYNTHIA. MERCVRY. HESPERVS. CRITES. AMORPHVS. ASOTVS. HEDON. ANAIDES.
MORPHIDES. PROSAITES. MORVS. CUPID. ECHO. ARETE. PHANTASTE. ARGVRION.
PHILAVTIA. MORIA. COS. GELAIA. PHRONESIS. Mutes. THAVMA. Mutes. TIME. Mutes.
THE SCENE. GARGAPHIE.

CYNTHIAS REVELS
After the second sounding.
INDVCTION. BY THREE OF THE CHILDREN. PRay you away; why fellows? Gods so?
what do you mean?


2. Mary that you shall not speak the Prologue, sir.


3. Why? do you hope to speak it?


2. I, and I think I have most right to it: I am sure I studied it first.


3. That Is all one, if the Author think I can speak it better.


1. I plead possession of the cloak: Gentles, your suffrages I pray you.

Within. Why Children are you not ashamed? come in there.


3. Slid, I Will play nothing in the Play: unless I speak it.


1. Why, will you stand to most voices of the gentlemen! let that decide it.


3. O no, sir gallant; you presume to have the start of us there, and that
makes you offer so prodigally.


1. No, would I were whipped, if I had any such thought: try it by lots either.


2. Faith, I dare tempt my fortune in a greater venture then this.


3. Well said, resolute Jack, I am content too: so we draw first. Make the
cuts.


1. But will you not snatch my cloak, while I am stooping?


3. No, we scorn treachery.


2. Which cut shall speak it?


3. The shortest.


1. Agreed.


Draw. The shortest is come to the shortest. Fortune was not altogether blind
in this. Now, sir, I hope I shall go forward without your envy.


2. A spite of all mischievous luck! I was once plucking at the other.


3. Stay, Jack: Slid, I Will do somewhat now before I go in, though it be
nothing but to revenge my self on the Author: since I speak not his
Prologue. I Will go tell all the argument of his play aforehand, and so stale his
invention to the auditorie before it come forth.


1. At the breaches in this speech following, the other two interrupt him,
still. O, do not so.


2. By no means.


3. First, the title of his play is CYNTHIAS Revels, as any man (that has hope
to be saved by his book) can witness; the Scene, GARGAPHIE: which I do
vehemently suspect for some sustian country, but let that vanish. Here, is the
court of CYNTHIA, whither he brings CUPID (travailing on foot) resolved to
turn page. By the way, CUPID meets with MERCVRIE, (as that is a thing to be
noted, take any of our play-bookes without a CUPID, or a MERCVRY in it, and
burn it for an heretic in Poetry) -- Pray thee let me alone. MERCVRY, he
(in the nature of a conjurer) raises up ECHO, who weeps over her love, or
Daffodill, NARCISSUS, a little; sings; curses the spring wherein the pretty
foolish gentleman melted himself away: and there is an end of her. -- Now I am
to inform you, that CUPID, and MERCVRY do both become pages. CUPID attends on
PHILAVTIA, or Self-love, a court-ladie MERCVRY follows HEDON, the voluptuous,
and a courtier; one that ranks himself even with ANAIDES, or the impudent, a
gallant, (and that is my part:) one that keeps laughter, GELAIA the daughter of
folly, (a wench in boys attire) to wait on him -- These, in the court, meet
with AMORPHVS, or the deformed; a trauailer that has drunk of the fountain,
and there tells the wonders of the water. They presently dispatch away their
pages with bottles to fetch of it, and themselves go to visit the ladies. But
I should have told you -- (Look, these emets put me out here) that with this
AMORPHVS, there comes along a citizens heir, ASOTVS, or the prodigal, who (in
imitation of the traveler, who has the whetstone following him) entertaines
the beggar, to be his attendant. -- Now, the Nymphs who are mistresses to these
gallants, are PHILAVTIA, Self-love; PHANTASTE, a light wittiness; ARGVRION
money; and their Guardian, mother MORIA; or mistress folly. --


1. Pray thee no more.


3. There CUPID strikes money in love with the prodigal, makes her dote upon
him, give him jewels, bracelets, carkenets, etc. all which (he most
ingeniously departs withal) to be made known to the other ladies and
gallants; and in the heat of this, increases his train with the fool to
follow him, as well as the beggar. -- By this time, your beggar begins to wait
close, who is returned with the rest of his fellow bottle-men. -- There they
all drink, save ARGVRION, who is fallen into a sudden apoplexy. --


1. Stop his mouth.


3. And then, there is a retired scholar there, you would not wish a thing to
be better contemned of a society of gallants, then it is: and he applies his
service (good gentleman) to the lady ARETE, or virtue, a poor Nymph of
CYNTHIAS train, that is scarce able to buy her self a gown, you shall see her
play in a black robe anon: A creature, that (I assure you) is no less
scorned, then himself. Where am I now? at a stand?


2. Come, leave at last, yet.


3. O, the night is come, (it was somewhat dark, me thought) and CYNTHIA
intends to come forth: (That helps it a little yet.) All the courtiers must
provide for revels; they conclude upon a Masque, the device of which, is --
(what, will you ravish me?) that each of these vices, being to appear before
CYNTHIA, would seem other then indeed they are: and therefore assume the most
neighboring virtues as their masking habites. -- (I'lde cry, a rape, but that
you are children.)


2. Come, we will have no more of this anticipation: to give them the inventory
of their cates aforehand, were the discipline of a tavern, and not fitting
this presence.


1. Tut, this was but to show us the happiness of his memory. I thought at
first, he would have played the ignorant critique with every thing, along as he
had gone, I expected some such device.


3. O, you shall see me do that, rarely, lend me thy cloak.


1. Soft, sir, you will speak my Prologue in it.


3. No, would I might never stir then.


2. Lend it him, lend it him.


1. Well, you have sworn.


3. At the breaches he takes his tobacco. I have. Now, sir, suppose I am one of
your gentile auditors, that an come in (having paid my money at the door, with
much ado) and here I take my place, and sit down: I have my three sorts of
tobacco in my pocket, my sight by me, and thus I begin. By this light, I
wonder that any man is so mad, to come to see these rascally Tits play here --
They do act like so many wrens, or pismires -- not the fifth part of a good
face amongst them all -- And then their music is abominable -- able to
stretch a man's ears worse then ten -- pillories, and their ditties -- most
lamentable things, like the pitiful fellows that make them -- Poets. By this
vapor, and 'twere not for tobacco -- I think -- the very stench of 'hem
would poison me, I should not dare to come in at their gates -- A man were
better visit fifteen jailes, -- or a dozen or two of hospitals -- then once
adventure to come near them. How is it? Well?


1. Excellent: give me my cloak.


3. Stay; you shall see me do another now: but a more sober, or
better-gather'd gallant; that is (as it may be thought) some friend, or
welwisher to the house: And here I enter.


1. What? upon the stage, too?


2. Yes: and I step forth like one of the children, and ask you, Would you
have a stool, sir?


3. A stool, boy?


2. I, sir, if you will give me six pence, I Will fetch you one.


3. For what I pray thee? what shall I do with it?


2. O lord, sir! will you betraie your ignorance so much? why throne your self
in state on the stage, as other gentlemen use, sir.


3. Away, wagge, what, would thou make an implement of me? Slid the boy
takes me for a piece of perspectiue (I hold my life) or some silk cortaine,
come to hang the stage here! sir crack, I am none of your fresh pictures, that
use to beautify the decayed dead arras, in a public theater.


2. It Is a sign, sir, you put not that confidence in your good clothes, and
your better face, that a gentleman should do, sir. But I pray you sir, let me
be a suter to you, that you will quit our stage then, and take a place, the
play is instantly to begin.


3 Most willingly, my good wag: but I would speak with your Author, where is
he?


2. Not this way, I assure you, sir: we are not so officiously befriended by
him, as to have his presence in the tiring^house, to prompt us aloud, stamp at
the booke-holder, swear for our properties, curse the poor tire-man, rail
the music out of tune, and sweat for every venial trespass we commit, as
some Author would, if he had such fine engles as we. Well, it is but our hard
fortune.


3. Nay, crack, be not dis-heartned.


2. Not I, sir, but if you please to confer with our Author, by attorney, you
may, sir: our proper self here, stands for him.


3. Troth, I have no such serious affair to negotiate with him, but what may
very safely be turned upon thy trust. It is in the general behalf of this
fair society here, that I am to speak, at least the more judicious part of
it, which seems much distasted with the immodest and obscene writing of many,
in their plays. Besides, they could wish, your Poets would leave to be
promoters of other men's jests, and to way-lay all the stale apothegmes, or old
books, they can hear of (in print, or otherwise) to farce their Scenes
withal. That they would not so penuriously gleane wit, from every laundresse,
or hackney-man, or derive their best grace (with servile imitation) from common
stages, or observation of the company they converse with; as if their
invention lived wholly upon another man's trencher. Again, that feeding their
friends with nothing of their own, but what they have twice or thrice cooked,
they should not want only give out, how soon they had dressed it; nor how many
coaches came to carry away the broken-meat, besides hobbie-horses, and
footcloth nags.


2. So, sir, this is all the reformation you seek?


3. It is: do not you think it necessary to be practiced, my little wag?


2. Yes, where any such ill-habited custom is received.


3. O (I had almost forgot it too) they say, the vmbrae, or ghosts of some
three or four plays, departed a dozen years since, have bin seen walking on
your stage here: take heed, boy, if your house be haunted with such
hob-goblins, it will fright away all your spectators quickly.


2. Good, sir, but what will you say now, if a Poet (untouched with any breath
of this disease) find the tokens upon you, that are of the auditorie? As some
one ciuet-wit among you, that knows no other learning, then the price of
satin and vellets; nor other perfection, then the wearing of a neat suit; and
yet will censure as desperately as the most professed critique in the house:
presuming, his clothes should bear him out in it. Another (whom it has pleased
nature to furnish with more beard, then brain) prunes his mustaccio, lisps,
and (with some score of affected oaths) swears down all that sit about him;
That the old Hieronimo, (as it was first acted) was the only best, and
iudiciously pend play of Europe. A third greatbellied juggler talks of twenty
years since, and when MONSIEUR was here, and would enforce all wits to be of
that fashion, because his doublet is still so. A fourth miscals all by the name
of fustian, that his grounded capacity cannot aspire to. A fifth, only shakes
his bottle-head, and out of his corkie brain, squeezes out a pittiful-learned
face, and is silent.


3. By my faith, Jack, you have put me down: I would I knew how to get off
with any indifferent grace. Here, take your cloak, and promise some
satisfaction in your Prologue, or (I Will be sworn) we have marred all.


2. Tut, fear not, child, this will never distaste a true sense: Be not out,
and good enough. I would thou had some sugar-candied, to sweeten thy mouth.


The third sounding. PROLOGVE.
IF gracious silence, sweet attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
(The lights of judgments throne) shine any where;
Our doubtful author hopes this is their sphere.
And therefore opens he himself to those;
To other weaker beams, his labors close:
As loath to prostitute their virgin strain,
To every vulgar, and adult'rate brain.
In this alone, his MUSE her sweetness has,
She shunnes the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves, nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or fomie praise, that drops from common jaws:
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What merit is: Then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, in stead of honored bays,
About his poesy; which (he knows) affoords
Words, above action: matter, above words.
Act I.
Scene I.
CUPID, MERCVRIE. WHo goes there?


MER. It Is I, blind archer.


CVP. Who? MERCVRIE?


MER. I.


CVP. Farewell.


MER. Stay, CUPID.


CVP. Not in your company, HELMES, except your hands were ri^etted at your
back.


MER. Why so my little rower?


CVP. Because I know, you have not a finger, but is as long as my quiver (cousin
MERCVRIE) when you please to extend it.


MER. Whence derive you this speech, boy?


CVP. O! it is your best polity to be ignorant. You did never steal MARS his
sword out of the sheath, you? nor NEPTVNES trident? nor APOLLOES how? no, not
you? Alas, your palms (IVPITER knows) they are as tender as the foot of a
foundred nagge, or a ladies face new mercuried, the'ile touch nothing.


MER. Go too (infant) you will be daring still.


CVP. Daring? O IANVS! what a word is there? why, my light fether-heel'd
couss', what are you? any more then my uncle JOVE'S pandar, a lacquey, that
runs on errands for him, and can whisper a light message to a loose wench
with some round volubilitie, wait mannerly at a table with a trencher, and
warble upon a crowde a little, fill out nectar, when Ganimed's away, one that
sweeps the Gods drinking room every morning, and sets the cushions in order
again, which they threw one at another headouer-night, can brush the carpets,
call the stools again to their places, play the crier of the court with an
audible voice, and take state of a President upon you at wrestlings, pleadings,
negotiations, etc. Here Is the catalogue of your imploiments now. O no, I err,
you have the marshalling of all the ghosts too, that pass the stygian ferrie,
and I suspect you for a share with the old sculler there, if the truth were
known; but let that escape. One other peculiar virtue you possess, in lifting,
or lieger-du-maine, (which few of the house of heaven have else besides) I must
confess. But (me thinks) that should not make you put that extreme distance
twixt your self and others, that we should be said to ouerdare in speaking to
your nimble deity? So HERCULES might challenge prioritie of us both, because
he can throw the bar farther, or lift more joined stools at the arms end,
then we. If this might carry it, then we who have made the whole body of
divinity tremble at the twang of our bow, and enforced SATVRNIVS himself to
lay by his curled front, thunder, and three-fork'd fires, and put on a masking
suit, too light for a reueller of eighteen, to be seen in --


MER. How now! my dancing braggart in d^cimo sexto! charm your skipping
tongue, or I Will --


CVP. What? use the virtue of your snakie tip-staffe there upon us?


MER. No, boy, but the smart vigor of my palm about your ears. You have
forgot since I took your heels up into air (on the very hour I was borne)
in sight of all the bench of deities, when the siluerroofe of the Olympi^
palace rung again with applause of the fact.


CVP. O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; for my mother
VENUS (at the same time) but stoopt to embrace you, and (to speak by
metaphore) you borrowed a girdle of hers, as you did JOVE'S scepter (while he
was laughing) and would have done his thunder too, but that 'twas too hot for
your itching fingers.


MER. It Is well, sir.


CVP. I heard, you but looked in at VULCANS forge the other day, and entreated
a pair of his new tongs along with you, for company: It Is joy on you (in faith)
that you will keep your hooked tallons in practice with any thing. Slight, now
you are on earth, we shall have you silch spoones and candle-s^icks, rather
then fail: pray JOVE the perfumed courtiers keep their casting-bottles,
pick-toothes, and shittle-cocks from you; or our more ordinary gallants their
tabacco-boxes, for I am strangely jealous of your nails.


MER. Never trust me, CUPID, but you are turned a most acute gallant of late,
the edge of my wit is clear taken off with the f^^e and subtle stroke of your
thin-ground tongue, you fight with too poinant a phrase, for me to deal with.


CVP. O HERMES, your craft cannot make me confident. I know my own steel to
be almost spent, and therefore entreat my peace with you, in time: you are
too cunning for me to encounter at length* and I think it my safest ward to
close.


MER. Well, for once, I Will suffer you to win upon me, wagge, but use not
these strains too often, they will stretch my patience. Whither might you march,
now?


CVP. Faith (to recover thy good thoughts) I Will discover my whole project. The
Huntresse, and Queen of these groves, DIANA (in regard of some black and
envious slanders hourly breathed against her, for her divine justice on
ACTEON, as she pretends) has here in the vale of Gargaphy, proclaimed a
solemn reuells, which (her godhead put off) she will descend to grace, with
the full and royal expense of one of her cleerest moons: In which time, it
shall be lawful for all sorts of ingenuous persons, to visit her palace, to
court her NYMPHS, to exercise all variety of generous and noble pastimes, as
well to intimate how far she treads such malicious imputations beneath her,
as also to show how clear her beauties are from the least wrinckle of
austerity, they may be charged with.


MER. But, what is all this to CUPID?


CVP. Here do I mean to put off the title of a god, and take the habit of a
page, in which disguise (during the interim of these reuells) I will get to
follow some one of DIANAES maids, where (if my bow hold, and my shafts fly
but with half the willingness, and aim they are directed) I doubt not, but I
shall really redeem the minutes I have lost, by their so long and ouer-nice
proscription of my deity, from their court.


MER. Pursue it (divine CUPID) it will be rare.


CVP. But will HERMES second me?


MER. I am now to put in act, an especial designement from my father JOVE, but
that performed, I am for any fresh action that offers it self.


CVP. Well, then we part.


MER. Farewell, good wag.
Now, to my charge, ECHO, fair ECHO, speak,
It Is MERCVRIE, that calls thee, sorrowful Nymph,
Salute me with thy repercussiue voice,
That I may know what cauerne of the earth
Contains thy ayrie spirit, how, or where
I may direct my speech, that thou may hear.

ACT I. Scene II.
ECHO, MERCVRIE. HEre.


MER. So nigh?

ECC. I.

MER. Know (gentle soul) then, I am sent from JOVE,
Who (pitying the sad burden of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words,
To vent thy passion for NARCISSUS death)
Commands, that now (after three thousand years,
Which have been exercised in IVNOES spite)
Thou take a corporal figure, and ascend,
Enricht with vocal, and articulate power.
Make haste, sad Nymph, thrice shall my winged rod
Strike th'obsequious earth, to give thee way.
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, ECHO, rise,
Here, by this fountain, where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Shrin'd in this yellow flower, that bears his name.

ECC. His name reuiues, and lifts me up from earth.
O, which way shall I first convert my self?
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak,
That (in a moment) I may be delivered
Of the prodigious grief I go withal?
See, see, the mourning fount, whose springs weep yet,
The untimely fate of that too beauteous boy,
That trophaee of self-love, and spoil of nature,
Who (now transformed into this drouping flower)
Hangs the repentant head, back from the stream,
As if it wished, would I had never looked
In such a flattering mirror. O NARCISSUS,
Thou that wast once (and yet art) my NARCISSUS;
Had ECHO but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropped away her self in tears,
Till she had all turned water, that in her,
(As in a (...) glass) thou might have gazed,
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection:
But self-love never yet could look on truth,
But with bleard beams; ^lieke flattery and she
Are twin borne sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you se^er one, the other dies.
Why did the gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthy thoughts, to make thee proud of it?
Why, do I ask? It Is now the known disease
That beauty has, to bear too deep a sense
Of her own selfe-conceiued excellence.
O, had thou known the worth of heavens rich gift,
Thou would have turned it to a truer use,
And not (with starved, and covetous ignorance)
P^^'d in continual eying that bright gem,
The glance whereof to others had been more,
Then to thy famisht mind the wide worlds store:
"So wretched is it to be merely rich.
Witness thy youths dear sweets, here spent untasted,
Like a fair taper, with his own flame wasted.

MER. ECHO, be brief, SATVRNIA is abroad,
And if she hear, she will storm at JOVE'S high will.

ECC. I will (kind MERCVRIE) be brief as time.
Vouchsafe me, I may do him these last rites,
But kiss his flower, and sing some mourning strain
Over his watrie hearse.

MER. Thou do obtain.
I were no son to JOVE, should I deny thee.
Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
The humorous air shall mix her solemn tunes,
With thy sad words: strike musicque from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.

SONG. SLow, slow, fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
Yet slower, yet, ^ faintly gentle springs:
List to the heavy part the music bears,
"Woe weeps out her division, when she sings.
Droupe herbs, and flowers;
Fall grief in showers;
"Our beauties are not ours:
O, I could still
(Like melting snow upon some craggie hill,)
drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since natures pride is, now, a withered daffodill.
MER. Now, have you done?

ECC. Done presently (good HERMES) bide a little,
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while,
But e'ene to taste the place, and I am vanished.

MER. Forgo thy use, and liberty of tongue,
And thou may dwell on earth, and sport thee there.

ECC. Here young ACTEON fell, pursu'de, and torn
By CYNTHIA'S wrath (more eager, then his hounds)
And here, (ay me, the place is fatal) see
The weeping NIOBE, translated hither
From Phrygian mountains: and by PHoeBE reared
As the proud trophaee of her sharp revenge.

MER. Nay, but hear.

ECC. But here, O here, the Fountain of Self-love,
In which LATONA, and her careless Nymphs,
(Regardles of my sorrows) bathe themselves
In hourly pleasures.

MER. Stint thy babbling tongue;
Fond ECHO, thou prophan'st the grace is done thee:
So idle worldlings (merely made of voice)
Censure the powers above them. Come, away,
JOVE calls thee hence, and his will brooks no stay.

ECC. O, stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe
In ayrie garments, and then (faith) I go.
Henceforth, thou treacherous, and murdering spring,
Be ever called the Fountain of Self-love:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
(As an inseparate plague) that who but tastes
A drop thereof, may, with the instant touch,
Grow dotingly enamored on themselves.
Now, HERMES, I have finished.

MER. Then thy speech,
Must here forsake thee, ECHO, and thy voice
(As it was wont) rebound but the last words.
Farewell.

ECC. Well.

MER. Now, CUPID, I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.

Act I. Scene III.
AMORPHVS, ECHO, MERCVRIE. Dear spark of beauty, make not so fast away.


ECC. Away.


MER. Stay, let me observe this portent yet.


AMO. I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaure, nor your Satyr, nor your
Hyaena, nor your Babion, but your mere trauailer, believe me.


ECC. Leave me.


MER. I guessed it should be some travailing motion pursude ECHO so.


AMO. Know you from whom you fly? or whence?


ECC. Hence.


AMO. This is somewhat above strange! a Nymph of her feature, and lineament, to
be so preposterously rude! well, I will but cool my self at you' spring, and
follow her.


MER. Nay, then I am familiar with the issue: I Will leave you too.


AMO. I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her symmetry, could
have dared so improportionable, and abrupt a digression. Liberal, and divine
fount, suffer my profane hand to take of thy bounties. By the purity of my
taste, here is most ambrosiacke water; I will sup of it again. By thy favor,
sweet fount. See, the water (a more running, subtle, and humorous Nymph then
she) permits me to touch, and handle her. What should I infer? If my
behauiours had been of a cheap or customarie garb; my accent, or phrase
vulgar; my garments trite; my countenance illiterate; or vnpractiz'd in the
encounter of a beautiful and braue-attir'd piece; then I might (with some
change of color) have suspected my faculties: but (knowing my self an offense
so sublimated, and refined by travel; of so studied, and well exercised a
gesture; so alone in fashion; able to tender the face of any statesman living;
and to speak the mere extraction of language; one that has now made the sixth
return upon venture; and was your first that ever enricht his country with the
true laws of the duello; whose optiques have drunk the spirit of beauty, in
some eight score and eighteen Princes courts, where I have resided, and been
there fortunate in the amors of three hundred forty and five ladies (all
nobly, if not princely descended) whose names I have in catalogue; to conclude,
in all so happy, as even admiration her self does seem to fasten her kisses
upon me: Certes, I do neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor savor the least
steame, or fume of a reason, that should inuit this foolish fastidious Nymph,
so peeuishly to abandon me. Well, let the memory of her fleet into air; my
thoughts and I am for this other element, water.


Act I. Scene IIII.
CRITES, ASOTVS, AMORPHVS. WHat! the wel-dieted AMORPHVS become a
water-drinker? I see he means not to write verses then.


ASO. No, CRITES? why?


CRI. Because -- Nec placere diu, nec viuere carmina possunt, quae scribuntur
aquae potoribus.


AMO. What say you to your HELICON?


CRI. O, the MUSES well! that is ever excepted.


AMO. Sir, your MUSES have no such water, I assure you; your nectar, or the
juice of your nepenthe is nothing to it; it is above your metheglin, believe it.


ASO. Metheglin! what is that, sir? may I be so audacious to demand?


AMO. A kind of greek wine I have met with, sir, in my travails: it is the
same that DEMOSTHENES usually drunk, in the composure of all his exquisite,
and mellifluous orations.


CRI. That Is to be argued (AMORPHVS) if we may credit LVCIAN, who in his
Eucomio Demosthenis affirms, he never drunk but water in any of his
compositions.


AMO. LVCIAN is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe mine own travails,
before all the LVCIANS of Europe. He does feed you with sittons, figments, and
leasings.


CRI. Indeed (I think) next a trauailer, he does prettily well.


AMO. I assure you it was wine, I have tasted it, and from the hand of an
Italian Antiquarie, who deriues it authentically from the Duke of Ferrara's
bottles. How name you the gentleman you are in rank with there, sir?


CRI. It Is ASOTVS, son to the late deceased PHILARGYRVS the citizen.


AMO. Was his father of any eminent place, or means?


CRI. He was to have been Praetor next year.


AMO. Ha! A pretty formal young gallant, in good sooth: pity, he is not more
gentilely propagated. Hark you, CRITES, you may say to him, what I am, if you
please: though I affect not popularitie, yet I would be loath to stand out to
any, whom you shall vouchsafe to call friend.


CRI. Sir, I fear I may do wrong to your sufficiencies in the reporting them,
by forgetting or misplacing some one; your self can best inform him of your
self, sir: except you had some catalogue, or list of your faculties ready
drawn, which you would request me to show him, for you, and him to take
notice of.


AMO. This CRITES is sour: I will think, sir.


CRI. Do so, sir. O heaven! that any thing (in the likeness of man) should
suffer these rackt extremities, for the uttering of his sophisticate good parts.


ASO. CRITES, I have a suit to you; but you must not deny me: pray you make
this gentleman and I friends.


CRI. Friends! Why? is there any difference between you?


ASO. No, I mean acquaintance, to know one another.


CRI. O, now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me, before*


ASO. In good faith, he is a most excellent rare man, I warrant him!


CRI. Slight, they are mutually inamor'd by this time!


ASO. Will you, sweet CRITES?


CRI. Yes, yes.


ASO. Nay, but when? you will defer it now, and forget it.


CRI. Why, is it a thing of such present necessity, that it requires so violent
a dispatch?


ASO. No, but (would I might never stir) he is a most rauishing man! good
CRITES, you shall endeare me to you, in good faith-law.


CRI. Well, your longing shall be satisfied, sir.


ASO. And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and how well he left
me, and that I am his heir.


CRI. Leave it to me, I Will forget none of your dear graces, I warrant you.


ASO. Nay, I know you can better marshall these affairs then I can -- O gods*
I Would give all the world (if I had it) for abundance of such acquaintance.


CRI. What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to bestow this
reciprocal brace of butter-flies one upon another?


AMO. Since I trod on this side the Alps, I was not so frozen in my
invention. Let me see: to accost him with some choice remnant of spanish, or
italian? that would indifferently express my languages now: marythen, if he
should fall out to be ignorant, it were both hard, and harsh. How else? step
into some ragioni del stato, and so make my induction? that were above him too;
and out of his element, I fear. Feign to have seen him in Venice, or Padua?
or some face near his in similitude? it is too pointed, and open. No, it must
be a more queint, and collateral device. As -- stay: to frame some
encomiastick speech upon this our Metropolis, or the wise magistrates thereof,
in which politic number, it is ods, but his father filled up a room? descend
into a particular admiration of their justice; for the due measuring of coals,
burning of cannes, and such like? As also their religion, in pulling down a
superstitious cross, and advancing a VENUS, or PRIAPVS, in place of it? ha?
'twill do well. Or to talk of some hospital, whose walls record his father a
Benefactor? or of so many buckets bestowed on his parish church, in his life
time, with his name at length (for want of arms) trickt upon them? Any of
these? Or to praise the cleanness of the street, wherein he dwelt? or the
provident painting of his posts against he should have been Praetor? or
(leaving his parent) come to some special ornament about himself, as his
rapier, or some other of his accoutrements? I have it: Thanks, gracious MINERVA.


ASO. Would I had but once spoke to him, and then -- He comes to me.


AMO. It Is a most curious, and neatly-wrought band, this same, as I have scene,
sir.


ASO. O god, sir.


AMO. You forgive the humor of mine eye, in observing it.


CRI. His eye waters after it, it seems.


ASO. O lord, sir, there needs no such apology, I assure you.


CRI. I am anticipated: they will make a solemn deed of gift of themselves, you
shall see.


AMO. Your ribband too does most gracefully, in troth.


ASO. It Is the most gentile, and received wear now, sir.


AMO. Believe me, sir (I speak it not to humor you) I have not seen a young
gentleman (generally) put on his clothes, with more judgment.


ASO. O, it is your pleasure to say so, sir.


AMO. No, as I am virtuous (being altogether vn-trauel'd) it strikes me into
wonder.


ASO. I do purpose to travail, sir, at spring.


AMO. I think I shall affect you, sir. This last speech of yours has begun to
make you dear to me.


ASO. O god, sir. I would there were anything in me, sir, that might appear
worthy the least worthiness of your worth, sir. I protest, sir, I should
endeavor to show it, sir, with more then common regard, sir.


CRI. O, here is rare motley, sir.


AMO. Both your desert, and your endeavors are plentiful, suspect them not:
but your sweet disposition to travail (I assure you) has made you another
my-selfe in mine eye, and struck me inamor'd on your beauties.


ASO. I would I were the fairest lady of France for your sake, sir, and yet I
would travail too.


AMO. O, you should digress from your self else: for (believe it) your
travail is your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Italian says) vi rendi
pronto all' attioni, makes you fit for action.


ASO. I think it be great charge though, sir.


AMOR. Charge? why it is nothing for a gentleman that goes private, as your
self, or so; my intelligence shall quit my charge at all times. Good faith,
this hat has possessed mine eye exceedingly; it is so pretty, and fantastike:
what? is it a beauer?


ASOT. I, sir, I Will assure you it is a beauer, it cost me eight crowns but this
morning.


AMOR. After your French account?


ASOT. Yes, sir.


CRIT. And so near his head? beshrow me, dangerous.


AMOR. A very pretty fashion (believe me) and a most nouel kind of trim:
your band is conceited too!


ASOT. Sir, it is all at your service.


AMOR. O, pardon me.


ASOT. I beseech you, sir, if you please to wear it, you shall do me a most
infinite grace.


CRIT. Slight, will he be praisde out of his clothes?


ASOT. By heaven, sir, I do not offer it you after the Italian manner; I would
you should conceive so of me.


AMOR. Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your courtesies,
especially, being invited by so proper a distinction: may I pray your name, sir?


ASOT. My name is ASOTVS, sir.


AMOR. I take your love (gentle ASOTVS) but let me win you to receive this,
in exchange --


CRIT. 'Hart, they will change doublets anon.


AMOR. And (from this time) esteem your self, in the first rank, of those
few, whom I profess to love. What make you in company of this scholar, here?
I will bring you known to gallants, as ANAIDES of the ordinary, HEDON the
courtier, and others, whose society shall render you graced, and respected:
this is a triuiall fellow, too mean, too cheap, too course for you to
converse with.


ASOT. Slid, this is not worth a crown, and mine cost me eight but this
morning.


CRIT. I looked when he would repent him, he has begun to be sad a good
while.


AMOR. Sir, shall I say to you for that hat? be not so sad, be not so sad: it
is are lique I could not so easily have departed with, but as the
hieroglyphicke of my affection; you shall alter it to what form you please, it
will take any block; I have received it varied (on record) to the three
thousandth time, and not so sew: It has these virtues beside; your head shall
not ache under it; nor your brain leave you, without license; It will preserve
your complexion to eternity; for no beam of the sun (should your wear it
under Zona torrida) has power to approach it by two else. It is proof against
thunder, and enchantment: and was given me by a great man (in Russia) as an
especiall-priz'd present; and constantly affirmed to be the hat, that
accompanied the politic ULYSSES, in his tedious, and ten years travels.


ASOT. By JOVE, I will not depart withal, whosoever would give me a million.


Act I. Scene V.
COS, CRITICVS, AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, PROSAITES. Save you, sweet bloods: does any
of you want a creature, or a dependant?


CRIT. Beshrow me, a fine blunt slave!


AMOR. A page of good timber? it will now be my grace to entertain him first,
though I casheere him again in private: how art thou called?


COS. COS, sir, COS.


CRIT. Cos? How happily has fortune furnished him with a whetstone?


AMOR. I do entertain you, COS, conceal your quality till we be private;
if your parts be worthy of me, I will countenance you; if not, catechize you:
gentles, shall we go?


ASOT. Stay, sir; I Will but entertain this other fellow, and then -- I have a
great humor to taste of this water too, but I Will come again alone for that --
mark the place. What Is your name, youth?


PROS. PROSAITES, sir.


ASOT. PROSAITES? A very fine name, CRITES? is it not?


CRIT. Yes, and a very ancient, sir, the beggar.


ASOT. Follow me, good PROSAITES: Let Us talk.


CRIT. He will rank even with you (er't be long)
If you hold on your course. O vanity,
How are thy painted beauties doted on,
By light, and empty idiots! how pursu'de
With open and extended appetite!
How they do sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raised on their toes, to catch thy ayrie forms,
Still turning giddie, till they reele like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour,
With the long irke somenesse of following time!
O how despisde and base a thing is a man,
If he not strive t'erect his groueling thoughts
Above the strain of flesh! But how more cheap
When, even his best and understanding part,
(The crown, and strength of all his faculties)
Floates like a dead drowned body, on the stream
Of vulgar humor, mixed with commonst dregs?
I suffer for their guilt now, and my soul
(Like one that looks on il-affected eyes)
Is hurt with mere intention on their follies:
Why will I view them then? my sense might ask me:
Or is it a racitie, or some new object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O would it were, therein I could afford
My spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties: so vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul, and were it not
That those (that woo her) greet her with locked eyes,
(In spite of all the impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd custom dawbes her cheeks withal)
She would betray her loathed and leprous face,
And ^right th'enamor'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy leuitie,
(How antike and ridiculous so ere
It suit with us) yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, then avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We act our mimicke tricks with that free license,
That lust, that pleasure, that security,
As if we practiced in a paste-boord case,
And no one saw the motion, but the motion.
Well, check thy passion, lest it grow too loud:
"While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.

Act II.
Scene I.
CUPID, MERCVRY. WHy, this was most unexpectedly followed (by divine delicate
MERCVRY) by the beard of JOVE, thou art a precious deity.


MER. Nay, CUPID, leave to speak improperly, since we are turned cracks,
let us study to be like cracks; practice their language, and behauiours, and
not with a dead imitation: act freely, carelessely, and capriciously, as if our
veins ran with quicksilver, and not utter a phrase, but what shall come
forth steept in the very brine of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.


CVP. That Is not every ones happiness (HERMES) though you can presume upon
the easiness and dexterity of your wit, you shall give me leave to be a
little jealous of mine; and not desperately to hazard it after your capring
humor.


MER. Nay, then, CUPID, I think we must have you hood-winkt again, for you
are grown too provident, since your eyes were at liberty.


CVP. Not so (MERCVRY) I am still blind CUPID to thee.


MER. And what to the lady Nymph you serve?


CVP. Troth, page, boy, and sirrah: these are all my titles.


MER. Then thou have not altered thy name, with thy disguise?


CVP. O, no, that had been supererogation, you shall never hear your courtier
call but by one of these three.


MER. Faith, then both our fortunes are the same.


CVP. Why? what parcel of man have thou lighted on for a master?


MER. Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare not affirm to be
any thing less then a courtier. So much he is, during this open time of
revels, and would be longer, but that his means are to leave him shortly
after. His name is HEDON, a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures. --


CVP. HEDON? he uses much to my ladies chamber, I think.


MER. How is she called, and then I can show thee?


CVP. Madame PHILAVTIA.


MER. O I, he affects her very particularly indeed. These are his graces. He
does (besides me) keep a barber, and a monkie: He has a rich wrought
wast^coat to entertain his visitants in, with a cap almost suitable. His
curtains, and bedding are thought to be his own: his bathing-tub is not
suspected. He loves to have a fencer, a pedant, and a musician seen in his
lodging a mornings.


CVP. And not a poet?


MER. Fie no: himself is a rimer, and that is a thought better then a poet. He
is not lightly within to his mercer, no, though he come when he takes physic,
which is commonly after his play. He beats a tailour very well, but a
stocking-seller admirably: and so consequently any one he owes money too, that
dares not resist him. He never makes general inui^ement, but against the
publishing of a new suit, marie then, you shall have more drawn to his
lodging, then come to the lanching of some three ships; especially if he be
furnished with supplies for the retyring of his old wardrobe from pawn: if
not, he does hire a stock of apparel, and some forty, or fifty pound in
gold, for that fore-noone to show. He Is thought a very necessary perfume for
the presence, and for that only cause welcome thither: six millaners shops
afford you not the like sent. He courts ladies with how many great horse he
has rid that morning, or how often he has done the whole, or the half pommado
in a seuen-night before: and sometime venters so far upon the virtue of his
pomander, that he dares tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at tennis that
week, but wisely conceales so many dozen of bals he is on the score. Here he
comes, that is all this.


Act II. Scene II.
HEDON, MERCVRY, ANAIDES, GELAIA, CUPID. BOy.


MER. Sir.


HEAD. Are any of the ladies in the presence?


MER. None yet, sir.


HEAD. Give me some gold, more.


ANA. Is that thy boy, HEDON?


HEAD. I, what think thou of him?


ANA. S'hart, Il'd geld him; I warrant he has the philosophers stone.


HEAD. Well said, my good melancholy devil: Sirrah, I have deuisde one or two
of the prettiest oaths (this morning in my bed) as ever thou heard'st, to
protest withal in the presence.


ANA. Pray thee, let us hear 'hem.


HEAD. Soft, thou wilt use 'hem before me.


ANA. No (dam' me then) I have more oaths then I know how to utter, by this
air.


HEAD. Faith, one is, by the tip of your ear, sweet lady. Is It not pretty,
and gentile?


ANA. Yes, for the person it is applied to, a lady. It should be light, and --


HEAD. Nay, the other is better, exceeds it much: the invention is farther set
too. By the white valley that lies between the Alpine hills of your bosom, I
protest -- etc.


ANA. Well, you trauel'd for that, HEDON.


MER. I, in a map, where his eyes were but blind guides to his understanding,
it seems.


HEAD. And then I have a salutation will nicke all, by this caper: hay!


ANA. How is that?


HEAD. You know I call madame PHILAVTIA, my Honor; and she calls me her
Ambition. Now, (when I meet her in the presence anon) I will come to her, and
say, sweet Honor, I have hitherto contented my sense with the lillies of your
hand, but now I will taste the roses of your lip; and (withal) kiss her: to
which she cannot but blushingly answer, nay, now you are too ambitious. And
then do I reply; I cannot be too ambitious of honor, sweet lady. Will It not
be good? ha? ha?


ANA. O, assure your soul.


HEAD. By heaven, I think 'twill be excellent, and a very politic
atchiuement of a kiss.


ANA. I have thought upon one for MORIA, of a sudden too, if it take.


HEAD. What is it, my dear invention?


ANA. Mary, I will come to her, (and she always wears a muffe, if you be
remembered) and I will tell her, Madame, your whole self cannot but be
perfectly wise: for your hands have wit enough to keep themselves warm.


HEAD. Now, (before JOVE) admirable! look, thy page takes it too, by Ph^bus, my
sweet facetious rascal, I could eat water-gruell with thee a month, for this
jest, my dear rogue.


ANA. O, (by HERCULES) it is your only dish, above all your potato's, or
oyster-pyes in the world.


HEAD. I have ruminated upon a most rare wish too, and the prophecy to it, but
I Will have some friend to be the prophet; as thus: I do wish my self one of my
mistress Cioppini. Another demands, Why would he be one of his Mistress
Cioppini? A third answers, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall
say, That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then do I
prophecy, pride will have a fall, and he shall give it her.


ANA. I Will be your prophet. By gods so, it will be most exquisite, thou art a
fine inuentious Rogue, sirrah.


HEAD. Nay, and I have poesies for rings too, and riddles that they dream not
of.


ANA. Tut, they will do that, when they come to sleep on them time enough; but
were thy devices never in the presence yet, HEDON?


HEAD. O, no, I disdain that.


ANA. Twere good we went before then, and brought them acquainted with the room
where they shall act, lest the stratagems of it put them out of countenance,
when they should come forth.


CVR. Is that a courtier too?


MER. Troth no; he has two essential parts of the courtier, pride, and
ignorance; mary, the rest come somewhat after the ordinary gallant. It Is
impudence it self, ANAIDES; one, that speaks all that comes in his checkes,
and will blush no more then a sackbut. He lightly occupies the iesters room
at the table, and keeps laughter GELAIA (a wench in pages attire) following
him in place of a squire, whom he now and then tickles with some strange
ridiculous stuff, vtter'd (as his land came to him) by chance. He will censure
or discourse of any thing, but as absurdly as you would wish. His fashion is
not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes. He never drinks
below the salt. He does naturally admire his wit, that wears gold-lace, or
tissue. Stabs any man that speaks more contemptibly of the scholar then he.
He is a great proficient in all the illiberall sciences, as cheating,
drinking, swaggering, whoring, and such like: never kneeles but to pledge
healths; nor prays but for a pipe of pudding tobacco. He will blaspheme in his
shirt. The oaths which he vomits at one supper, would maintain a town of
garrison in good swearing a twelue-moneth. One other genuine quality he has,
which crowns all these, and that is this: to a friend in want, he will not
depart with the weight of a soldred groat, lest the world might censure him
prodigal, or report him a gull: mary, to his cockatrice or punquetto, half a
dozen taffata gowns, or satin kirtles, in a pair or two of months, why they
are nothing.


CVR. I commend him, he is one of my clients.


Act II. Scene III.
AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, COS, PROSAITES, CUPID, MERCVRIE. COme, sir. You are now
within in regard of the presence, and see, the priuacie of this room, how
sweetly it offers it self to our retired intendments. Page, cast a vigilant,
and enquiring eye about, that we be not rudely surpised, by the approach of
some ruder stranger.


COS. I warrant you, sir. I Will tell your when the wolf enters, fear nothing.


MER. O, what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being the invisible
spectators of this strange show, now to be acted?


AMO. Plant your self there, sir: and observe me. You shall now, as well be
the ocular, as the eare-witnesse, how clearly I can refell that paradox, or
rather pseudodox, of those, which hold the face to be the index of the mind,
which (I assure you) is not so, in any politic creature: for instance. I will
now give you the particular, and distinct face of every your most noted species
of persons, as your merchant, your scholar, your soldier, your lawyer,
courtier, etc. and each of these so truly, as you would swear, but that your
eye shall see the variation of the lineament, it were my most proper, and
genuine aspect. First, for your merchant, or citie-face, it is thus, a dull,
plodding face, still looking in a direct line, forward: there is no great
matter in this face. Then have you your students, or academique face, which is
here, an honest, simple, and methodicall face: but somewhat more spread then
the former. The third is your soldiers face, a menacing, and astounding face,
that looks broad, and big: the grace of this face consists much in a
beard. The anti-face to this, is your lawyers face, a contracted, subtle, and
intricate face, full of quirkes, and turnings, a labyrinthaean face, now
angularly, now circularly, every way aspected. Next is your statists face, a
serious, solemn, and supercilious face, full of formal, and square gravity,
the eye (for the most part) deeply and artificially shadowed: there is great
judgment required in the making of this face. But now, to come to your face of
faces, or courtiers face, it is of three sorts, according to our subdiuision of a
courtier, elementarie, practique, and theorique. Your courtier theorique, is
he, that has arrived to his fardest, and does now know the court, rather by
speculation, then practice; and this is his face: a fastidious and oblique
face, that looks, as it went with a vice, and were screwed thus. Your courtier
practike, is he, that is yet in his path, his course, his way, and has not
touched the puntilio, or point of his hopes; his face is here: a most promising,
open, smooth, and ouer-flowing face, that seems as it would run, and power
it self into you. Somewhat a northerly face. Your courtier elementarie, is one
but newly entered, or as it were in the alphabet, or vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la of
courtship. Note well this face, for it is this you must practice.


ASO. I Will practice 'hem all, if you please, sir.


ANO. I, hereafter you may: and it will not be altogether an ungrateful study.
For, let your soul be assured of this (in any rank, or profession what-euer)
the more general, or mayor part of opinion goes with the face, and (simply)
respects nothing else. Therefore, if that can be made exactly, curiously,
exquisitely, thoroughly, it is enough: But (for the present) you shall only apply
your self to this face of the elementarie courtier, a light, reuelling, and
protesting face, now blushing, now smiling, which you may help much with a
wanton wagging of your head, thus, (a feather will teach you) or with kissing
your ^inger that has the ruby, or playing with some string of your band, which
is a most quaint kind of melancholy besides: or (if among ladies) laughing
loud, and crying up your own wit, though perhaps borrowed, it is not amiss.
Where is your page? call for your casting-bottle, and place your mirror in
your hat, as I told you: so. Come, look not pale, observe me, set your face,
and enter.


MER. O, for some excellent painter, to have taken the copy of all these faces!


ASO. PROSAITES.


AMO. Fie, I premonisht you of that: In the court, boy, lacquay, or sirrah.


COS. Master, Lupus in -- O, it is PROSAITES.


ASO. Sirrah prepare my casting-bottle, I think I must be enforced to purchase
me another page, you see how at hand COS waits, here.


MER. So will he too, in time.


CVP. What Is he, MERCVRIE?


MER. A notable smelt. One, that has newly entertained the beggar to follow
him, but cannot get him to wait near enough. It Is ASOTVS, the heir of
PHILARGYRVS; but first I Will give ye the others character, which may make his
the cleerer. He that is with him, is AMORPHVS, a trauailer, one so made out of
the mixture and shreds of forms, that himself is truly deform^d. He walks
most commonly with a cloue, or pick-tooth in his mouth, he is the very mint of
complement, all his behauiours are printed, his face is another volume of
essays; and his beard an Aristarchus. He speaks all cream, skimd, and more
affected then a dozen of waiting women. He is his own promoter in every place.
The wife of the ordinary gives him his diet, to maintain her table in
discourse, which (indeed) is a mere tyranny over her other guests, for he
will usurp all the talk: ten constables are not so tedious. He is no great
shifter, once a year his apparel is ready to revolt. He does use much to
arbitrate quarrels, and fights himself, exceeding well (out at a window.) He
will lie cheaper then any beggar, and louder then most clockes: for which he is
right properly accommodated to the whetstone, his page. The other gallant is
his Zani, and does most of these tricks after him; sweates to imitate him in
every thing (to a hair) except a beard, which is not yet extant. He does
learn to make strange sauces, to eat aenchouies, maccaroni, bouoli, fagioli,
and cauiare, because he loves 'hem; speaks as he speaks, looks, walks,
goes so in clothes, and fashion: is in all, as if he were molded of him. Mary
(before they met) he had other very pretty sufficiencies, which yet he
retains some light impression of: as frequenting a dancing school, and
grievously torturing strangers, with inquisition after his grace in his
galliard. He buys a fresh acquaintance at any rate. His eye and his raiment
confer much together as he goes in the street. He treades nicely, like the
fellow that walks upon ropes; especially the first sunday of his
silke-stockings: and when he is most neat, and new, you shall strip him with
commendations.


CVP. Here comes another.


MER. Cri^es passes by. I, but one of another strain, CUPID: This fellow
weighs somewhat.


CVP. His name, HERMES?


MER. CRITES. A creature of a most perfect and divine temper. One, in whom the
humors and elements are peaceably met, without emulation of precedencie: he is
neither to phantastikely melancholy, too slowly phlegmatic, too lightly
sanguine, or too rashly choleric, but in all, so composde and ordered, as it
is clear, Nature went about some full work, she did more then make a man, when
she made him. His discourse is like his behavior, uncommon, but not
unpleasing; he is prodigal of neither. He strives rather to be that which
men call judicious, then to be thought so: and is so truly learned, that he
affects not to show it. He will think, and speak his thought, both freely:
but as distant from deprauing another man's merit, as proclaiming his own. For
his valor, it is such, that he dares as little to offer an injury, as receive
one. In sum, he has a most ingenuous and sweet spirit, a sharp and seasoned
wit, a straight judgment, and a strong mind. Fortune could never break him,
nor make him less. He counts it his pleasure, to despise pleasures, and is
more delighted with good deeds, then goods. It is a competencie to him that he
can be virtuous. He does neither covet nor fear; he has too much reason to
do either: and that commends all things to him.


CVP. Not better then MERCVRY commends him.


MER. O, CUPID, it is beyond my deity to give him his due praises: I could leave
my place in heaven, to live among mortals, so I were sure to be no other then
he.


CVP. S'light, I believe he is your minion, you seem to be so ravished with him.


MER. He Is one, I would not have a wry thought darted against, willingly.


CVP. No, but a straight shaft in his bosom, I Will promise him, if I am
CITHEREAS son.


MER. Shall we go, CUPID?


CVP. Stay, and see the ladies now: they will come presently. I Will help to paint
them.


MER. What! lay color upon color? that affords but an ill blazon.


CVP. Argurion passes by. Here comes metal to help it, the lady ARGVRION.


MER. Money, money.


CVP. The same. A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy disposition, humorous as
the air, she will run from gallant to gallant (as they sit at primero in the
presence) most strangely, and seldom stays with any. She spreads as she
goes. To day you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning, and
to morrow as melancholic as midnight. She takes special pleasure in a close
obscure lodging, and, for that cause, visites the city so often, where she has
many secret true-concealing favorites. When she comes abroad, she is more
loose and scattering then dust, and will fly from place to place, as she were
rapt with a whirle-winde. Your young student (for the most part) she affects
not, only salutes him, and away: a poet, nor a philosopher, she is hardly
brought to take any notice of; no, though he be some part of an alchemist. She
loves a player well, and a lawyer infinitely: but your fool above all. She
can do much in court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever, no door but
flies open to her, her presence is above a charm. The worst in her is want of
keeping state, and too much descending into inferior and base offices, she is
for any coorse employment you will put upon her, as to be your procurer, or
pandar.


MER. Peace, CUPID, here comes more work for you, another character or two.


Act II. Scene IIII.
PHANTASTE, MORIA, PHILAVTIA, MERCVRIE, CUPID. STay, sweet PHILAVTIA, I Will but
change my fan, and go presently.


MOR. Now (in very good serious) ladies, I will have this order reuerst, the
presence must be better maintayn'd from you: a quarter past eleven, and never a
Nymph in prospectiue? beshrew my hand, there must be a reformed discipline. Is
that your new ruff, sweet lady-bird? By my truth, it is most intricately rare.


MER. Good JOVE, what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be?


CVP. This, Madam MORIA, guardian of the Nymphs. One that is not now to be
persuaded of her wit, she will think her self wise against all the
judgments that come. A lady made all of voice, and air, talks any thing of
any thing. She is like one of your ignorant Poetasters of the time, who when
they have got acquainted with a strange word, never rest till they have wroong
it in, though it loosen the whole fabric of their sense.


MER. That was pretty and sharply noted, CUPID.


CVP. She will tell you, Philosophy was a fine reueller, when she was young,
and a gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was thought to be the
Dame-DIDO, and HELLEN of the court: As also, what a sweet dog she had this
time four years, and how it was called Fortune, and that (if the sates had
not cut his thread) he had been a dog to have given entertainment to any
gallant in this kingdom: and, unless she had whelpt it her self, she could
not have loved a thing better i'this world.


MER. O, I pray thee no more, I am full of her.


CVP. Yes (I must needs tell you) she composes a sack-posset well; and would
court a young page sweetly, but that her breath is against it.


MER. Now, her breath (or something more strong) protect me from her:
the other, the other, CUPID.


CVP. O, that is my lady and mistress, Madam PHILAVTIA. She admires not her
self for any one particularity, but for all: she is fair, and she knows
it: she has a pretty light wit too, and she knows it: she can dance, and
she knows that too: play at shittle-cock, and that too: no quality she has,
but she shall take a very particular knowledge of, and most lady-like commend
it to you. You shall have her at any time read you the history of her self,
and very subtly run over another ladies sufficiencies, to come to her own.
She has a good superficial judgment in painting; and would seem to have so
in poetry. A most complete lady in the opinion of some three, beside her-selfe.


PHI. Faith, how liked you my quippe to HEDON, about the garter? was it not
witty?


MOR. Exceeding witty and integrate: you did so aggrauate the jest withal.


PHI. And did I not dance mouingly the last night?


MOR. Mouingly? out of measure (in troth) sweet charge.


MER. A happy commendation, to dance out of measure.


MOR. Save only you wanted the swim in the turn: O! when I was at fourteen --


PHI. Nay, that is mine own from any Nymph in the court (I am sure on it)
therefore you mistake me in that, Guardian: both the swim and the trip, are
properly mine, every body will affirm it, that has any judgment in dancing: I
assure you.


PHA. Come now, PHILAVTIA, I am for you, shall we go?


PHI. I, good PHANTASTE: What! have you changed your head-tire?


PHA. Yes faith, the other was so near the common: it had no extraordinary
grace; besides, I had worn it almost a day, in good troth.


PHI. I Will be sworn, this is most excellent for the device, and rare. It Is
after the italian print, we looked on the other night.


PHA. It Is so: By this fan, I cannot abide any thing that savors the poor
ouer-worne cut, that has any kindred with it; I must have variety, I: this
mixing in fashion I hate it worse, then to burn juniper in my chamber, I
protest.


PHI. And yet we cannot have a new peculiar court-tire, but these retainers
will have it; these Suburbe-sunday-waiters; these courtiers for high days; I
know not what I should call 'hem --


PHA. O, I, they do most pitifully imitate, but I have a tire a coming
(in faith) shall --


MOR. In good certain, Madam, it makes you look most heavenly; but (lay your
hand on your heart) you never skinned a new beauty more prosperously in your
life, nor more metaphysically: look, good lady, sweet lady, look.


PHI. It Is very clear, and well, believe me. But if you had seen mine
yesterday, when it was young, you would have -- who is your Doctor, PHANTASTE?


PHA. Nay, that is counsel, PHILAVTIA, you shall pardon me: yet (I Will assure
you) he is the most dainty, sweet, absolute rare man of the whole college. O!
his very looks, his discourse, his behavior, all he doo's is physic, I
protest.


PHI. For heavens sake, his name; good, dear PHANTASTE --


PHA. No, no, no, no, no, no, (believe me) not for a million of heavens: I will
not make him cheap. Fie --


CVP. There is a Nymph too, of a most curious and elaborate strain, light, all
motion, an vbiquitarie, she is every where, PHANTASTE --


MER. Her very name speaks her, let her pass. But are these (CUPID) the
stars of CYNTHIAS court? do these Nymphs attend upon DIANA?


CVP. They are in her court (MERCVRIE) but not as stars, these never come in
the presence of CYNTHIA. The Nymphs that make her train, are the divine ARETE,
TIME, PHRONESIS, THAVMA, and others of that high sort. These are privately
brought in by MORIA in this licentious time, against her knowledge: and (like
so many meteors) will van^sh, when she appears.


Act II. Scene V.
PROSAITES, GELAIA, COS, MERCVRIE, CUPID. SONG.
COme follow me, my wagges, and say as I say.
There Is no riches but in rags; hey day, hey day.
You that profess this art, come away, come away,
And help to bear a part. Hey day; hey day, etc.

MER. What! those that were our fellow pages but now, so soon preferred to be
yeomen of the bottles? the mystery, the mystery, good wagges?


CVP. Some dyet-drinke, they have the guard of.


PRO. No, sir, we are going in quest of a strange fountain, lately found out.


CVP. By whom?


COS. My master, or the great discouerer, AMORPHVS.


MER. Thou have well entitled him, COS, for he will discover all he knows.


GEL. I, and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.


PRO. O, the good travailing gentleman yonder has caused such a drought in the
presence, with reporting the wonders of this new water* that all the ladies,
and gallants, lie languishing upon the rushes, like so many pounded cattle in
the midst of harvest, sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them
expected a cock from the fountain, to be brought into his mouth: and
(without we return quickly) they are all (as a youth would say) no better then
a few trowts cast ashore, or a dish of eeles in a sand-bagge.


MER. Well then, you were best dispatch, and have a care of them. Come, CUPID,
thou and I Will go peruse this dry wonder.


Act III.
Scene I.
AMORPHVS, ASOTVS. SIt, let not this dis-countenance, or dis-gallant you a
whit: you must not sink under the first disaster. It is with your young
grammatical courtier, as with your neophyte-player, a thing usual to be
daunted at the first presence, or enter-view: you saw, there was HEDON, and
ANAIDES, (far more practiced gallants then your self) who were both out, to
comfort you. It is no disgrace, no more, then for your aduentrous reueller, to
fall by some in-auspicious chance in his galliard, or for some subtle
politic, to undertake the bastinado, that the state might think worthily of
him, and respect him as a man well beaten to the world. What! has your tailor
provided the property (we spoke of) at your chamber, or no?


ASO. I think he has.


AMO. Nay (I entreat you) be not so flat, and melancholique. Erect your mind:
you shall redeem this with the courtship I will teach you against afternoon.
Where eat you to day?


ASO. Where you please, sir, any where, I.


AMO. Come, let us go and taste some light dinner, a dish of sliced c^uiare,
or so, and after, you shall practice an hour at your lodging, some few forms
that I have recalled. If you had but so far gathered your spirits to you, as
to have taken up a rush (when you were out) and wagg'd it thus, or clensd your
teeth with it: or but turned aside, and feigned some business to whisper with
your page, till you had recouer'd your self, or but found some slight stain
in your stocking, or any other pretty invention (so it had been sudden,) you
might have come off with a most clear, and courtly grace.


ASO. A poison of all, I think I was forespoke, I.


AMO. No, I must tell you, you are not audacious enough, you must frequent
ordinaries, a month more, to initiate your self: In which time, it will not
be amiss, if (in private) you keep good your acquaintance with CRITES, or
some other, of his poor coat; visit his lodging secretly, and often: become
an earnest suter to hear some of his labors.


ASO. O JOVE! sir, I could never get him to read a line to me.


AMO. You must then wisely mix your self in rank, with such, as you know
can; and, as your ears do meet with a new phrase, or an acute jest, take it
in: a quick nimble memory will lift it away, and, at your next public meal,
it is your own.


ASO. But I shall never utter it perfectly, sir.


AMO. No matter, let it come lame. In ordinary talk you shall play it away, as
you do your light crowns at primero: It will pass.


ASO. I shall attempt, sir.


AMO. Do. It is your shifting age for wit, and I assure you, men must be
prudent. After this, you may to court, and there fall in, first with the
wayting-woman, then with the lady. Put case they do retain you there, as a
fit property, to hire coaches some pair of months, or so; or to read them
asleep in afternoones upon some pretty pamphlet, to breathe you; why, it shall
in time imbolden you to some farther archivement: In the interim, you may
fashion your self to be careless, and impudent. --


ASO. How if they would have me to make verses? I heard Hedon spoke to for some.


AMO. Why, you must prove the aptitude of your Genius; if you find none, you
must harken out a vein, and buy: provided you pay for the silence, as for the
work. Then you may securely call it your own.


ASO. Yes, and I Will give out my acquaintance with all the best writers, to
countenance me the more.


AMO. Rather seem not to know 'hem, it is your best. I. Be wise, that you
never so much as mention the name of one, nor remember it mentioned, but if
they be offered to you in discourse, shake your light head, make between a sad
and a smiling face, pity some, rail at all, and commend your self: 't is
your only safe, and unsuspected course. Come, you shall look back upon the
court again to day, and be restored to your colors: I do now partly aim at
the cause of your repulse -- (which was omenous indeed) for as you enter at the
door, there is opposed to you the frame of a woolfe in the hangings, which
(surprising your eye suddenly) gave a false alarm to the heart; and that was
it called your blood out of your face, and so rowted the whole rank of your
spirits: I beseech you labor to forget it. And remember (as I inculcated to
you before, for your comfort) HEDON, and ANAIDES.


Act III. Scene II.
HEDON, ANAIDES. Heart, was there ever so prosperous an invention thus unluckily
perverted, and spoiled by a whore-sonne booke-worme, a candle-waster?


ANA. Nay, be not impatient, HEDON.


HEAD. S'light, I would feign know his name.


ANA. Hang him, poor grogran-rascall, pray thee think not of him: I Will send
for him to my lodging, and have him blanketted when thou will, man.


HEAD. Crites passes by. By gods so; I would thou could. Look, here he
comes. Laugh at him, laugh at him, ha, ha, ha.


ANA. Fough, he smells all lamp-oyle, with studying by candlelight.


HEAD. How confidently he went by us, and carelessly! never moved! nor stirred
at any thing! did you observe him?


ANA. I, a pox on him, let him go, dormouse: he is in a dream now. He has no
other time to sleep, but thus, when he walks abroad, to take the air.


HEAD. Gods precious, this afflicts me more then all the rest, that we should
so particularly direct our hate, and contempt against him, and he to carry it
thus without wound, or passion! it is insufferable.


ANA. S'lid, (my dear envy) if thou but say the word now, I Will undo him
eternally for thee.


HEAD. How, sweet ANAIDES?


ANA. Mary half a score of us get him in (one night) and make him pawn his
wit for a supper.


HEAD. Away, thou have such unseasonable jests. By this heaven, I wonder at
nothing more then our gentlemen-ushers, that will suffer a piece of serge, or
perpetuana, to come into the presence: me thinks they should (out of their
experience) better distinguish the silken disposition of courtiers, then to let
such terrible coorse rags mix with us, able to fret any smooth or gentile
society to the threeds with their rubbing devices.


ANA. Unless 'twere Lent, Ember weeks, or Fasting days, when the place is
most penuriously empty of all other good outsides. Dam' me, if I should
adventure on his company once more, without a suit of buffe, to defend my wit;
he does nothing but stab the slave: how mischieuously he crossed thy device of
the prophecy there? And MORIA, she comes without her muffe too, and there my
invention was lost.


HEAD. Well, I am resolved what I Will do.


ANA. What, my good spirituous spark?


HEAD. Mary, speak all the venom I can of him; and poison his reputation in
every place, where I come.


ANA. Before god, most courtly.


HEAD. And if I chance to be present where any question is made of his
sufficiencies, or of any thing he has done private, or public, I Will censure it
slightly, and ridiculously. --


ANA. At any hand beware of that, so thou may draw thine own judgment in
suspect. No, I Will instruct thee what thou shall do, and by a safer means:
Approve any thing thou hear of his, to the received opinion of it; but if it
be extraordinary, give it from him to some other, whom thou more particularly
affect'st. That Is the way to plague him, and he shall never come to defend
himself. S'lud, I Will give out, all he does is dictated from other men, and
swear it too (if thou wilt ha'mee) and that I know the time, and place where he
stole it, though my soul be guilty of no such thing; and that I think, out
of my heart, he hates such barren shifts: yet to do thee a pleasure, and him
a disgrace, I Will dam'my self, or do any thing.


HEAD. Gramercies, my dear devil: we will put it seriously in practice, ysaith.


Act III. Scene III.
CRITES. Do, good detraction, do, and I the while
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile.
Poor pittious gallants! What lean idle sleights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starved hopes?
As if I knew not how to entertain
These straw-deuices: but, of force, must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
What should I care what every dor does buzze
In credulous cares? it is a crown to me,
That the best judgments can report me wronged;
Them liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps (upon the rumor of their speeches)
Some grieved friend will whisper to me, CRITES,
Men speak ill of thee; so they be ill men,
If they spoke worse, 'twere better: for of such
To be disprais'd, is the most perfect praise.
What can his censure hurt me, whom the world
Has censured vile before me? If good CHRESTVS,
EVTHVS, or PHRONIMVS, had spoke the words,
They would have moved me, and I should have called
My thoughts, and actions, to a strict account
Upon the hearing: But when I remember,
It Is HEDON, and ANAIDES: alas, then,
I think but what they are, and am not stirred.
The one, a light voluptuous reueller,
The other a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk (as they are wont) not as I merit:
Traduce by custom, as most dogs do bark,
Do nothing out of judgment, but disease,
Speak ill, because they never could speak well.
And who'ld be angry with this race of creatures?
What wise physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantike man? the same affects
That he does bear to his sick patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these:
And I do count it a most rare revenge,
That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their malice.
For that is the mark of all their inginous drifts,
To wound my patience, howsoever they seem
To aim at other objects: which if missed,
Their enui's like an arrow, shot upright,
That, in the fall, indangers their own heads.

Act III. Scene IIII.
ARETE, CRITES. WHat, CRITES! where have you drawn forth the day?
You have not visited your jealous friends?

CRI. Where I have seen (most honored ARETE,)
The strangest pageant, fashioned like a court,
(At least I dreamed I saw it) so diffused,
So painted, pyed, and full of rainbow strains,
As never yet (either by time, or place)
Was made the food to my distasted sense:
Nor can my weak imperfect memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were conuolu'd within this thriftie room.
Here, stalks me by a proud, and spangled sir,
That looks three hand-fuls higher then his fore-top;
Savors himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself: one that will speak
More dark, and doubtful then six oracles;
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
Is his own chronicle, and scarce can eat
For registring himself: is waited on
By mimiques, jesters, pandars, parasites,
And other such like prodigies of men.
He past, appears some mincing marmoset
Made all of clothes, and face; his limbs so set
As if they had some voluntary act
Without man's motion, and must move just so
In spite of their creation: one that weighes
His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile
Beyond a point, for fear t'vnstarch his look;
Has trauell'd to make legs, and seen the cringe
Of several courts, and courtiers; knows the time
Of giving titles, and of taking walls;
Has read court-common-places; made them his:
Studied the grammar of state, and all the rules
Each formal usher in that politic school,
Can teach a man. A third comes giving nods
To his repenting creditors, protests
To weeping suitors, takes the coming gold
Of insolent, and base ambition,
That hourly rubs his dry, and itchie palms:
Which grip't, like burning coals, he hurles away
Into the laps of bawdes, and buffons mouths.
With him there meets some subtle PROTEVS, one
Can change, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Houers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which (with cross face) he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: one that dares
Do deeds worthy the hurdle, or the wheel,
To be thought some body; and is (in sooth)
Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
That only to his crimes owes all his worth.

ARE. You tell us wonders, CRITES.

CRI. This is nothing.
There stands a Neophyte glazing of his face,
Pruning his clothes, perfuming of his hair,
Against his idol enters; and repeates
(Like an imperfect prologue, at third music)
His part of speeches, and confederate jests,
In passion to himself. Another swears
His Scene of courtship over; bids, believe him,
Twenty times, ^re they will; anon, does seem
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
Then walks of melancholic, and stands wreathed,
As he were pinned up to the arras, thus.
A third is most in action, swimmes, and friskes,
Plays with his mistress pappes, salutes her pumps,
Adores her hems, her skirts, her knots, her curles,
Will spend his patrimony for a garter,
Or the least feather in her bounteous fan.
A fourth, he only comes in for a mute:
Diuides the act with a dumb show, and exit.
Then must the ladies laugh, straight comes their Scene,
A sixth times worse confusion then the rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this man's eye;
Another, of his lip; a third, his nose;
A fourth commend his leg; a fifth his foot;
A sixth his hand; and every one a limme:
That you would think the poor distorted gallant
Must there expire. Then fall they in discourse
Of tires, and fashions, how they must take place,
Where they may kiss, and whom, when to sit down,
And with what grace to rise; if they salute,
What curt'sie they must use: such cob-web stuff,
As would enforce the common'st sense abhor
The Arachnean workers.

ARE. Patience, gentle CRITES.
This knot of spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webs swept out of CYNTHIAS court,
When once her glorious deity appears,
And but presents it self in her full light:
Till when, go in, and spend your hours with us
Your honored friends, TIME, and PHRONESIS,
In contemplation of our goddess name.
Think on some sweet, and choice invention, now,
Worthy her serious, and illustrous eyes,
That from the merit of it we may take
Desired occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to CYNTHIA.
It is the pride of ARETE to grace
Her studious lovers; and (in scorn of time,
Envy, and ignorance) to lift their state
Above a vulgar height. True happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in the worth, and choice. Nor would I have
Virtue a popular regard pursue:
Let them be good that love me, though but few.

CRI. I kiss thy hands, diuinest ARETE,
And vow my self to thee, and CYNTHIA.

Act III. Scene V.
AMORPHVS, ASOTVS. A Little more forward: So, sir. Now go in, dis-cloke your
self, and come forth. Tailor, bestow thy absence upon us; and be not
prodigal of this secret, but to a dear customer. It Is well entend, sir. Stay,
you come on too fast; your pase is too impetuous. Imagine this to be the palace
of your pleasure, or place, where your lady is pleased to be seen. First, you
present your self, thus: and spying her, you fall off, and walk some two
turns; in which time, it is to be supposed, your passion has sufficiently
whited your face: then (stifling a sigh or two, and closing your lips) with a
trembling boldness, and bold terror, you advance your self forward. Prove
thus much, I pray you.


ASO. Yes, sir, (pray JOVE I can light on it) Here, I come in, you say, and
present my self?


AMO. Good.


ASO. And then I spy her, and walk off?


AMO. Very good.


ASO. Now, sir, I stifle, and advance forward?


AMO. Trembling.


ASO. Yes, sir, trembling: I shall do it better when I come to it. And what
must I speak now?


AMO. Mary, you shall say: Dear beauty, or, sweet honor (or by what other
title you please to remember her) me thinks you are melancholy. This is, if
she be alone now, and discompanied.


ASO. Well, sir, I Will enter again; her title shall be, My dear LINDABRIDES.


AMO. LINDABRIDES?


ASO. I, sir, the Emperor ALICANDROES daughter, and the Prince MERIDIANS
sister (in the Knight of the Sun) she should have been married to him, but
that the Princess CLARIDIANA --


AMO. O, you betray your reading.


ASO. Nay, sir, I have read history, I am a little humanitian. Interrupt me
not, good sir. My dear LINDABRIDES, My dear LINDABRIDES, My dear
LINDABRIDES, me thinks you are melancholy.


AMO. I, and take her by the rosie-finger'd hand.


ASO. Must I so? O, my dear LINDABRIDES, me thinks you are melancholy.


AMO. Or thus, sir. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet
music, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend this
dear beauty.


ASO. Believe me, that is pretty. All variety of divine pleasures, choice
sports, sweet music, rich fare, brave attires, soft beds, and silken
thoughts, attend this dear beauty.


AMO. And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coily recoile, and
signify your repulse; you are to re-enforce your self, with, More then most
fair lady, let not the rigor of your just disdain thus coursly censure of
your servants zeal: and, withal, protest her, to be the only, and absolute
vnparalell'd creature you do adore and admire, and respect, and reverence, in
this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.


ASO. This is hard, by my faith. I Will begin it all, again.


AMO. Do so, and I will act it for your lady.


ASO. Will you vouchsafe, sir? All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports,
sweet music, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend
this dear beauty.


AMO. So, sir, pray you away.


ASO. More then most fair lady, let not the rigor of your just disdain,
thus courtly censure of your servants zeal, I protest, you are the only, and
absolute, vnapparelled --


AMO. Vnparalelld.


ASO. Vnparalelld creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and
reverence, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.


AMO. This is, if she abide you. But now, put case she should be passant
when you enter, as thus: you are to frame your gate thereafter, and call upon
her, Lady, Nymph, Sweet refuge, Star^e of our court. Then if she be guardant,
here: you are to come on, and (laterally disposing your self) swear, by her
blushing and well colored cheek, the bright die of her hair, her morie teeth
(though they be ebonie) or some such white, and innocent oath, to induce you. If
reguardant, then maintain your station, brisk, and irpe, show the supple
motion of your plian^ body, but (in chief) of your knee, and hand, which
cannot but arride her proud humor exceedingly.


ASO. I conceive you, sir, I shall perform all these things in good time, I
doubt not, they do so hit me.


AMO. Well, sir, I am your lady; make use of any of these beginnings, or some
other out of your own invention: and prove, how you can hold up, and follow
it. Say, say.


ASO. Yes, sir, my dear LINDABRIDES. --


AMO. No, you affect that LINDABRIDES too much. And (let me tell you) it is
not so courtly. Your pedant should provide you some parcells of french, or some
pretty commodity of italian to commence with, if you would be exoticke, and
exquisite.


ASO. Yes, sir, he was at my lodging the other morning, I gave him a doublet.


AMO. Double your benevolence, and give him the hose too, clothe you his body,
he will help to apparel your mind. But now, see what your proper GENIUS can
perform alone, without adiection of any other MINERVA.


ASO. I comprehend you, sir.


AMO. I do stand you, sir: fall back to your first place. Good, passing well:
Very properly pursude.


ASO. Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient lady, what! are you all alone?


AMO. We would be, sir, if you would leave us.


ASO. I am at your beauties appointment, bright angel; but --


AMO. What but?


ASO. No harm, more then most fair feature.


AMO. That touch relished well.


ASO. But, I protest --


AMO. And why should you protest?


ASO. For good will (dear esteemed Madam) and I hope, your ladyship will so
conceive of it: And will, in time, return from your disdain,
And rue the suffrance of our friendly pain.



AMO. O, that piece was excellent! if you could pick out more of these
play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you) embroider, or damask your
discourse with them, persuade your soul, it would most iudiciously commend
you. Come, this was a well discharged, and auspicious bout. Prove the second.


ASO. Lady, I cannot ruffle it in red and yellow.


AMO. Why, if you can revel it in white, sir, it is sufficient.


ASO. Say you so, sweet lady? Lan, tede, de, de, de, dant, dant, dant, dante,
etc. No (in good faith) Madame, whosoever told your ladyship so, abusde you;
but I would be glad to meet your ladyship in a measure.


AMO. Me, sir? belike you measure me by your self, then?


ASO. Would I might, fair feature.


AMO. And what were you the better, if you might?


ASO. The better it please you to ask, fair lady.


AMO. Why, this was rauishing, and most acutely continued. Well, spend not your
humor too much, you have now competently exercised your conceit: This (once or
twice a day) will render you an accomplished, elaborate, and well leuelled
gallant. Convey in your courting-stock, we will (in the heat of this) go
visit the Nymphs chamber.


Act IIII.
Scene I.
PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, ARGVRION, MORIA, CUPID. I Would this water would ariue
once, our travailing friend so commended to us.


ARG. So would I, for he has left all us in travail with expectation of it.


PHA. Pray JOVE, I never rise from this couch, if ever I thirsted more for a
thing, in my whole time of being a courtier.


PHI. Nor I, I Will be sworn: The very mention of it sets my lips in a worse
heat, then if he had sprinkled them with MERCVRY. Reach me the glass, sirrah.


CVP. Here, lady.


MOR. They do not peele, sweet Charge, do they?


PHI. Yes, a little, Guardian.


MOR. O, it is an eminent good sign. Ever when my lips do so, I am sure to
have some delicious good drink, or other approaching.


ARG. Mary, and this may be good for us ladies: for (it seems) it is far-fet by
their stay.


MOR. My palate for yours (dear Honor) it shall prove most elegant, I warrant
you: O, I do fancy this gear that is long a coming, with an unmeasurable
strain.


PHA. Pray thee sit down, PHILAVTIA, that rebat^ becomes thee singularly.


PHI. Is It not queint?


PHA. Yes faith. Me thinks, thy servant HEDON is nothing so obsequious to
thee, as he was wont to be; I know not how, he is grown out of his garb a
late, he is warpt.


MOR. In trunesse, and so me thinks too; he is much converted.


PHI. Tut, let him be what he will, it is an animal I dream not of. This
tire (me thinks) makes me look very ingeniously, quick, and spirited, I
should be some LAVRA, or some DELIA, me thinks.


MOR. As I am wise (fair Honors) that title she gave him, to be her
Ambition, spoild him: Before, he was the most propitious and obseruant young
nouice --


PHA. No, no, you are the whole heaven awry, Guardian: it is the swaggering
coach-horse ANAIDES, draws with him there, has been the diuerter of him.


PHI. For CVPIDS sake, speak no more of him; would I might never dare to look
in a mirror again, if I respect ere a marmaset of them al, otherwise, then I
would a feather, or my shittle-cock, to make sport with, now and then.


PHA. Come, sit down; troth (and you be good Beauties) let us run over 'hem
all now: Which is the properst man amongst them? I say, the trauailer, AMORPHVS.


PHI. O, fie on him, he looks like a venetian trumpetter, in the battle of
Lepanto, in the gallerie yonder; and speaks to the tune of a country lady,
that comes ever in the rereward, or train of a fashion.


MOR. I should have judgment in a feature, sweet Beauties.


PHA. A body would think so, at these years.


MOR. And I prefer another now, far before him, a million at least.


PHA. Who might that be, Guardian?


MOR. Mary (fair Charge) ANAIDES.


PHA. ANAIDES! you talked of a tune PHILAVTIA, there is one speaks in a key:
like the opening of some Justices gate, or a poste-boies horn, as if his voice
feared an arrest for some ill words it should give, and were loath to come
forth.


PHI. I, and he has a very imperfect face.


PHA. Like a sea monster, that were to ravish ANDROMEDA from the rock.


PHI. His hand's too great too, by at least a strawes breadth


PHA. Nay, he has a worse fault then that, too.


PHI. A long heel?


PHA. That were a fault in a lady, rather then him: No, they say, he puts off
the calves of his legs, with his stockings, every night.


PHI. Out upon him: turn to another of the pictures, for loves sake. What
says ARGVRION? whom doo's she commend, before the rest?


CVP. I hope, I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer.


MOR. Troth, I made the motion to her ladyship for one to day, in the presence,
but it appeared she was other-waies furnished before: She would none.


PHA. Who was that, ARGVRION?


MOR. Mary, the poor plain gentleman, in the black, there.


PHA. Who, CRITES?


ARG. I, I, he. A fellow, that no body so much as looked upon, or regarded, and
she would have had me done him particular grace.


PHA. That was a true trick of your self, MORIA, to persuade ARGVRION, to
affect the scholar.


ARG. Tut, but she shall be no chuser for me. In good faith, I like the
citizens son there, ASOTVS, me thinks, none of them all come near him.


PHA. Not, HEDON?


ARG. HEDON, in troth no. HEDON'S a pretty slight courtier, and he wears his
clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; Mary, his face is but indifferent, and
he has no such excellent body. No, the other is a most delicate youth, a sweet
face, a straight body, a well proportioned leg and foot, a white hand, a
tender voice.


PHI. How now, ARGVRION?


PHA. O, you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a copy of him upon
us. Such a nose were enough to make me love a man, now.


PHI. And then his several colors he wears; wherein he flourishes
changeably, every day.


PHA. O, but his short hair, and his narrow eyes!


PHI. Why, she dotes more palpably upon him, then ere his father did upon her.


PHA. Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it. If she could dote more,
'twere not amiss. He is an exceeding proper youth, and would have made a most
neat barber-surgeon, if he had been put to it in time.


PHI. Say you so? me thinks, he looks like a taylour already.


PHA. I, that had said on one of his customers suits. His face is like a
squeezed orange, or --


ARG. Well, ladies, jest on: the best of you both would be glad of such a
servant.


MOR. I, I Will be sworn would they, though he be a little shame-fac'd.


PHA. Shame-fac'd, MORIA! out upon him. Your shame-fac'd servant is your only
gull.


MOR. Go to, Beauties, make much of time, and place, and occasion, and
opportunity, and favorites, and things that belong to 'hem, for I Will ensure
you, they will all relinquish; they cannot endure above another year; I know
it out of future experience: and therefore take exhibition, and warning. I was
once a reueller my self, and though I speak it (as mine own trumpet) I was
then esteemed --


PHI. The very march-pane of the court, I warrant you?


PHA. And all the gallants came about you like slyes, did they not?


MOR. Go to, they did somewhat, that is no matter now.


PHA. Nay, good MORIA, be not angry. Put case, that we four now had the
grant from IVNO, to wish our selves into what happy estate we could? what
would you wish to be, MORIA?


MOR. Who I? Let me see now. I would wish to be a wise woman, and know all the
secrets of court, city, and country. I would know what were done behind the
arras, what upon the stairs, what in the garden, what in the Nymphs chamber,
what by barge, and what by coach. I would tell you which courtier were scabbed,
and which not; which lady had her own face to lie with her a-nights, and
which not; who put off their teeth with their clothes in court, who their
hair, who their complexion; and in which box they put it. There should not a
Nymph, or a widow be got with child in the verge, but I would guess (within
one or two,) who was the right father: and in what month it was gotten; with
what words; and which way. I would tell you, which Madame loved a Monsieur,
which a player, which a page; who slept with her husband, who with her friend,
who with her gentleman-usher, who with her horse-keeper, who with her monkie,
and who with all. Yes, and who jigg'd the cock too.


PHA. Fie, you would tell all,


MORIA. If I should wish now, it should be to have your tongue out. But what
says PHILAVTIA? who would she be?


PHI. Troth, the very same I am. Only I would wish my self a little more
command, and soueraignetie; that all the court were subject to my absolute
beck, and all things in it depending on my look; as if there were no other
heaven, but in my smile, nor other hell, but in my frown; that I might send
for any man I list, and have his head cut off, when I have done with him; or
made an eunuch, if he denied me: and if I saw a better face then mine own, I
might have my doctor to poison it. What would you wish, PHANTASTE?


PHA. Faith, I cannot (readily) tell you what* But (me thinks) I should wish
my self all manner of creatures. Now, I would be an empress; and by and by a
duchess; then a great lady of state; then one of your miscelany madams; then
a waiting woman; then your citizens wife; then a course country gentlewoman;
then a deyrie maid; then a shepherds less; then an empress again, or the
queen of fayries: And thus I would prove the vicissitudes, and whirle of
pleasures, about, and again. As I were a shepherdess, I would be pip'd and
sung too; as a deyrie wench, I would dance at may-poles, and make sillabubbes;
As a country gentlewoman, keep a good house, and come up to term, to see
motions; As a citizens wife, be troubled with a jealous husband, and put to
my shifts; (others miseries should be my pleasures) As a waiting woman, I
would taste my ladies delights to her; As a miscellany madame invent new tyres,
and go visit courtiers; As a great lady, lie a bed, and have courtiers
visit me; As a duchess, I would keep my state: and as an empress, I Would
do any thing. And, in all these shapes, I would ever be followed with the
affections of all that see me. Mary, I my self would affect none; or if I
did, it should not be heartily, but so as I might save my self in 'hem still,
and take pride in tormenting the poor wretches. Or, (now I think on it) I
would, for one year, wish my self one woman, but the richest, fairest, and
delicatest in a kingdom, the very center of wealth, and beauty, wherein all
lines of love should meet; and in that person I would prove all manner of
suitors, of all humors, and of all complexions, and never have any two of a
sort: I would see how Love (by the power of his object) could work inwardly
alike, in a choleric man, and a sanguine; in a melancholique, and a
phlegmatique; in a fool, and a wise man; in a clown, and a courtier; in a
valiant man, and a coward: and how he could vary outward, by letting this
gallant express himself in dumb gaze; another with sighing, and rubbing his
fingers; a third, with play-ends, and pitiful verses; a fourth, with stabbing
himself, and drinking healths, or writing languishing letters in his blood; a
fifth, in colored ribbands, and good clothes; with this lord to smile, and
that lord to court, and the the other lord to do^e, and one lord to hang
himself. And then, I to have a book made of all this, which I would call the
book of humors, and every night read a little piece, ere I slept, and laugh
at it. Here comes HEDON.


Act IIII. Scene II.
HEDON, ANAIDES, MERCVRIE, PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, MORIA, ARGVRION, CUPID. Save
you, sweet and clear beauties: By the spirit that moves in me, you are all
most pleasingly bestowed, ladies. Only, I can take it for no good omen, to
find mine Honor so dejected.


PHI. You need not fear, sir, I did of purpose humble my self against your
coming, to decline the pride of my ambition.


HEAD. Fair Honor, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be your sweet pleasure,
I shall lose that title, I will (as I am HEDON) apply my self to your bounties.


PHI. That were the next way to distitle my self of honor. O, no, rather be
still ambitious, I pray you.


HEAD. I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleases you to be your
self, lady. Sweet PHANTASTE, dear MORIA, most beautiful ARGVRION --


ANA. Farewell, HEDON.


HEAD. ANAIDES, stay, whither go you?


ANA. S'light, what should I do here? and you engrosse 'hem all for your own
use, it is time for me to seek out.


HEAD. I, engrosse 'hem? Away, mischief, this is one of your extrauagantiests
now, because I began to ^alute 'hem by their names --


ANA. Faith, you might have sp^rde us Madame Prudence, the Guardian there,
though you had more couetously aimed at the rest.


HEAD. S'heart, take 'hem all, man: what speak you to me of aiming, or covetous?


ANA. I, say you so? nay, then, have at 'hem: ladies, here is one has
distinguished you by your names already. It shall only become me, to ask,
How you do?


HEAD. Gods so, was this the design you trauaill'd with?


PHA. Who answers the brazen head? it spoke to some body.


ANA. Lady Wisdom, do you interpret for these puppets?


MOR. In truth, and sadness (Honors) you are in great offense for this, go
too: the gentleman (I Will undertake with him) is a man of fair living, and
able to maintain a lady in her two carroches a day, besides pages, munkeys,
and parachitos, with such attendants as she shall think meet for her turn,
and therefore there is more respect requirable, howsoere you seem to conniue.
Hark you, sir, let me discourse a syllable with you. I am to say to you,
these ladies are not of that close, and open behavior, as happily you may
suspend; their carriage is well known, to be such as it should be, both gentle
and extraordinary.


MOR. O, here comes the other pair.


Act IIII. Scene III.
AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, HEDON, ANAIDES, MERCVRIE, CUPID, PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA,
ARGVRION, MORIA. THat was your fathers love, the Nymph ARGVRION. I would have
you direct all your courtship thither, if you could but endeare your self to
her affection, you were eternally en-gallanted.


ASO. In truth, sir? pray PHOEBVS I prove fauour-some in her fair eyes.


AMO. All divine mixture, and increase of beauty to this bright beuy of
ladies; and to the male-courtiers, complement, and courtesy.


HEAD. In the behalf of the males, I gratify you, AMORPHVS.


PHA. And I, of the females.


AMO. Succinctly returned. I do vale to both your thanks, and kiss them: but
primarily to yours, most ingenious, acute, and polite lady.


PHI. Gods my life, how he does all to be qualify her! ingenious, acute,
and polite? as if there were not others in place as ingenious, acute, and
polite, as she.


HEAD. Yes, but you must know, lady, he cannot speak out of a dictionarie
method.


PHA. Sit down, sweet AMORPHVS: When will this water come, think you?


AMO. It cannot now belong, fair lady.


CVP. Now observe, MERCVRY.


ASO. How? most ambiguous beauty? love you? that I will by this hand-kercher.


MER. S'lid, he draws his oaths out of his pocket.


ARG. But, will you be constant?


ASO. Constant, Madam? I will not say for constantnesse, but by this purse
(which I would be loath to swear by, unless 'twere embroidered) I protest
(more then most fair lady) you are the only, absolute, and vnparalelld
creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence in this court,
corner of the world, or kingdom: Me thinks you are melancholy.


ARG. Does your heart speak all this?


ASO. Say you? --


MER. O, he is groping for another oath.


ASO. Now, by this watch (I made how forward the day is) I do unfeignedly vow
my self (s'light it is deeper then I took it, past five) yours entirely
addicted, Madame.


ARG. I require no more, dearest ASOTVS, henceforth let me call you mine, and
in remembrance of me, vouchsafe to wear this chain, and this diamond.


ASO. O god, sweet lady!


CVP. There are new oaths for him: what? does HERMES taste no alteration, in
all this?


MER. Yes, thou have struck ARGVRION enamored on ASOTVS, the thinks.


CVP. Alas, no; I am nobody, I: I can do nothing in this disguise.


MER. But thou have not wounded any of the rest, CUPID?


CVP. Not yet: it is enough that I have begun so prosperously.


ARG. Nay, these are nothing to the gems I will hourly bestow upon thee: be
but faithful, and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my richest bounties:
behold, here my bracelets, from mine arms.


ASO. Not so, good lady, By this diamond.


ARG. Take 'hem, wear 'hem: my jewels, chain of pearl, pendants, all I have.


ASO. Nay then, by this pearl, you make me a wanton.


CVP. Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus in swearing?


MER. O, no, there is a way to weane him from this, the gentleman may be
reclaimed.


CVP. I, if you had the ayring of his apparel, couss', I think.


ASO. Loving? 'twere pity I should be living else, believe me. Save you, sir.
Save you, sweet lady. Save you, Monsieur ANAIDES. Save you, dear Madame.


ANA. Do thou know him that saluted thee, HEDON?


HEAD. No, some idle FVNGOSO, that has got above the cup-board, since yesterday.


ANA. S'lud, I never saw him till this morning, and he salutes me as
familiarly, as if we had known together, since the deluge, or the first year
of Troy-action.


AMO. A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter. Confine your self to your
fortunes.


PHI. For sports sake, let us have some riddles, or purposes; hough.


PHA. No faith, your prophecies are best, the the other are stale.


PHI. Prophecies? we cannot all sit in at them; we shall make a confusion. No;
what called you that we had in the fore-noone?


PHA. Substantives, and Adjectives. Is It not HEDON?


PHI. I, that, who begins?


PHA. I have thought; speak your Adjectives, sirs.


PHI. But do not you change, then?


PHA. Not I, who says?


MOR. Odoriferous.


PHI. Popular.


ARG. Humble.


ANA. White-liuer'd.


HEAD. Barbarous.


AMO. Pythagoricall.


HEAD. Yours, Signior.


ASO. What must I do, sir?


AMO. Give forth your Adjective, with the rest; as, prosperous, good, fair,
sweet, well --


HEAD. Any thing, that has not been spoken.


ASO. Yes, sir: well-spoken, shall be mine.


PHA. What? have you all done?


ALL. I..


PHA. Then the Substantive is Breeches. Why odoriferous Breeches, Guardian?


MOR. Odoriferous, because odoriferous; that which contains most variety of
savor, and smell, we say is most odoriferous: now, Breeches I presume are
incident to that variety, and therefore odoriferous Breeches.


PHA. Well, we must take it howsoever, who is next? PHILAVTIA.


PHI. Popular.


PHA. Why popular Breeches?


PHI. Mary, that is, when they are not content to be generally noted in court,
but will press forth on common stages, and brokers stalls, to the public
view of the world.


PHA. Good: why humble Breeches? ARGVRION.


ARG. Humble, because they use to be sat upon; besides, if you tie 'hem not
up, their property is to fall down about your heels.


MER. She has worn the breeches, it seems, which have done so.


PHA. But why white-liuer'd?


ANA. Why? 'shart, are not their linings white? besides, when they come in
swaggering company, and will pocket up any thing, may they not properly be
said to be white-liuer'd?


PHA. O, yes, we must not deny it. And why barbarous, HEDON?


HEAD. Barbarous, because commonly, when you have worn your breeches
sufficiently, you give them to your Barber.


AMO. That Is good: but now Pythagoricall?


PHA. I, AMORPHVS. Why Pythagoricall Breeches?


AMO. O, most kindly of all, it is a conceit of that fortune, I am bold to hug
my brain for.


PHA. How is it, exquisite AMORPHVS?


AMO. O, I am rapt with it, it is so fit, so proper, so happy --


PHI. Nay, do not rack us thus?


AMO. I never truly relisht my self, before. Give me your ears. Breeches
Pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration, into several shapes.


MOR. Most rare, in sweet troth. Mary, this young gentleman, for his
well-spoken --


PHA. I, why well-spoken Breeches?


ASO. Well-spoken? mary well-spoken, because -- whatsoever they speak, is well
taken; and whatsoever is well taken, is well-spoken.


MOR. Excellent! believe me.


ASO. Not so, ladies, neither.


HEAD. But why Breeches, now?


PHA. Breeches, quasi beare-riches; when a gallant bears all his riches in his
breeches:


AMO. Most fortunately etymologiz'd.


PHA. Nay, we have another sport before this, of A thing done, and Who did it,
etc.


PHI. I, good PHANTASTE, let us have that: Distribute the places.


PHA. Why, I imagine, A thing done; HEDON thinks, Who did it; MORIA, With what
it was done; ANAIDES, Where it was done; ARGVRION, When it was done; AMORPHVS,
For what cause it was done; you PHILAVTIA, What followed upon the doing of it;
and this gentleman, Who would have done it better. What? is it conceived about?


ALL. Yes, yes.


PHA. The speak you, sir. Who would have done it better?


ASO. How! does it begin at me?


PHA. Yes, sir: This play is called the Crab, it goes backward.


ASO. May I not name my self?


PHA. If you please, sir, and dare abide the venture of it.


ASO. Then, I would have done it better, what ever it is.


PHA. No doubt on it, sir: a good confidence. What followed upon the act,
PHILAVTIA?


PHI. A few heat drops, and a months mirth.


PHA. For what cause, AMORPHVS?


AMO. For the delight of ladies.


PHA. When, ARGVURION?


ARG. Last progress.


PHA. Where, ANAIDES?


ANA. Why, in a pair of pained slops.


PHA. With what, MORIA?


MOR. With a glyster.


PHA. Who, HEDON?


HEAD. A trauailer.


PHA. Then, The thing done was, An oration was made. Rehearse. An oration was
made.


HEAD. By a trauailer.


MOR. With a glyster.


ANA. In a pair of pained slops,


ARG. Last progress.


AMO. For the delight of ladies.


PHI. A few heat drops, and a months mirth followed.


PHA. And, this silent gentleman would have done it better.


ASO. This was not so good, now.


PHI. In good faith, these unhappy pages would be whipped, for staying thus.


MOR. Beshrew my hand, and my heart, else.


AMO. I do wonder at their protraction!


ANA. Pray VENUS, my whore have not discovered her self to the rascally hoyes,
and that be the cause of their stay.


ASO. I must suit my self with another page: this idle PROSAITES will never be
brought to wait well.


MOR. Sir, I have a kinsman I could willingly wish to your service, if you
would deigne to accept of him.


ASO. And I shall be glad (most sweet lady) to embrace him: where is he?


MOR. I can fetch him, sir, but I would be loath to make you turn away your
other page.


ASO. You shall not, most sufficient lady, I will keep both: pray you lets
go see him.


ARG. Whither goes my love?


ASO. I Will return presently, I go but to see a page, with this lady.


ANA. As sure as fate, 't is so; she has opened all: A pox of all
cockatrices. Dam'me, if she have played loose with me, I Will cut her throat,
within a hairs breadth, so it may be healed again.


MER. What, is he jealous of his Hermaphrodite?


CVP. O, I, this will be excellent sport.


PHI. PHANTASTE! ARGVRION! what? you are suddenly struck, me thinks! for
loves sake let us have some music, till they come. Ambition, reach the lyra, I
pray you.


HEAD. Any thing to which my Honor shall direct me.


PHI. Come, AMORPHVS, cheer up PHANTASTE.


AMO. It shall be my pride, fair lady, to attempt all that is in my power.
But here is an instrument that (alone) is able to infuse soul in the most
melancholique, and dull disposde creature upon earth. O! let me kiss thy
fair knees. Beauteous ears attend it.


HEAD. Will you have the Kiss, Honor?


PHI. I, good Ambition.

SONG. O, That joy so soon should waste!
or so sweet a bliss
as a kiss,
Might not for ever last!
So sugared, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on roses,
When the morn her self descloses,
is not so precious.
O, rather then I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should be my wishing
That I might dye kissing.

HEAD. I made this dittie, and the note to it, upon a kiss that my Honor gave
me; how like you it, sir?


AMO. A pretty air, in general, I like it well: but in particular, your long
die-note did arride me most, but it was somewhat too long. I can show one,
almost of the same nature, but much before it and not so long, in a composition
of mine own. I think I have both the note, and dittie about me.


HEAD. Pray you, sir, see.


AMO. Yes, there is the note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke not. I will
read the dittie to your beauties here, but first I am to make you familiar with
the occasion, which presents it self thus. Upon a time, going to take my leave
of the Emperor, and kiss his great hands; there being then present, the kings
of France, and Arragon, the dukes of Sauoy, Florence* Orbeance, Bourbon,
Brunswicke, the Lantgraue, Count Palatine, all which had severally feasted me;
besides, infinite more of inferior persons, as Counts and others it was my
chance the Emperor detained by some exorbitant affair) to wait him the fifth
part of an hour, or much near it. In which time (retyring my self into a
bay-window) the beauteous lady ANNABELL, niece to the Empress, and sister to
the King of Arragon, who having never before eyde me, (but only heard the
common report of my virtue, learning, and travail) fell into that extremity
of passion, for my love, that she there immediately swouned: physicians were
sent for, she had to her chamber, so to her bed; where (languishing some few
days) after many times calling upon me, with my name in her lips, she expirde.
As that (I must mourningly say) is the only fault of my fortune, that, as it
has ever been my hap to be sewed to, by all ladies, and beauties, where I
have come, so, I never yet sojourned, or rested in that place, or part of the
world, where some high-borne admirable fair feature died not for my love.


MER. O, the sweet power of travail! are you guilty of this, CUPID?


CVP. No, MERCVRIE, and that his page (COS) knows, if he were here present to
be sworn.


PHI. But, how does this draw on the dittie, sir?


MER. O, she is too quick with him; he has not devised that yet.


AMO. Mary, some hour before she departed, she bequeathed to me this glove;
which golden legacy, the Emperor himself took care to send after me, in
six coaches, covered all with black vellet, attended by the state of his
empire; all which he freely presented me with, and I reciprocally (out of the
same bounty) gave to the lords that brought it: only reserving the gift of the
deceased lady, upon which I composde this ode, and set it to my most affected
instrument, the lyra.

SONG. THou more then most sweet glove,
Unto my more sweet love,
Suffer me to store with kisses
This empty lodging, that now misses
The pure rosy hand, that ware thee,
Whiter then the kid, that bare thee.
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
CVPIDS self has kissed it ofter,
Then e're he did his mothers doves,
Supposing her the Queen of loves,
That was thy Mistress,
Best of gloves.

MER. Blasphemy, blasphemy, CUPID.


CVP. I, I Will revenge it time enough; HERMES.


PHI. Good AMORPHVS, let us hear it sing.


AMO. I care not to admit that, since it pleases PHILAVTIA to request it.


HEAD. Here, sir.


AMO. After he has sung. Nay, play it, I pray you, you do well, you do well
-- How like you it, sir?


HEAD. Very well in troth.


AMO. But very well? O, you are a mere mammothrept in judgment then. Why, do
you not observe how excellently the dittie is affected in every place? that I
do not marry a word of short quantity to a long note? nor an ascending
syllable to a descending tone? Besides, upon the word (best) there, you see how
I do enter with an odd minnum, and drive it through the brief, which no
intelligent Musician (I know) but will affirm to be very rare, extraordinary,
and pleasing.


MER. And yet not fit to lament the death of a lady, for all this.


CVP. Tut, here be they will swallow any thing.


PHA. Pray you let me have a coppie of it, AMORPHVS.


PHI. And me too, in troth, I like it exceedingly.


AMO. I have denied it to princes, nevertheless to you (the true female
twins of perfection) I am won, to depart withal.


HEAD. I hope I shall have my Honors coppie.


PHA. Who is returned from seeking his page. You are ambitious in that, HEDON.


AMO. How now, ANAIDES! what is it has conjured up this distemperature in the
circle of your face?


ANA. S'lood, what have you to do? A pox upon your filthy travailing face,
hold your tongue.


HEAD. Nay, doo'st hear, mischief?


ANA. Away, muske-cat.


AMO. I say to thee, thou art rude, debauched, impudent, coorse, impolisht, a
frapler, and base.


HEAD. Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half a years haunting
of ordinaries wrought in this fellow! that came with a tuss-taffa^a ierkin to
town but the other day, and a pair of penilesse hose, and now he is turned
HERCULES, he wants but a club.


ANA. Sir, you with the pencill on your chinne; I will garter my hose with your
guts, and that shall be all.


MER. S'lid, what rare fireworkes be here? flash, flash.


PHA. What Is the matter HEDON? can you tell?


HEAD. Nothing, but that he lackes crowns, and thinks we will lend him some, to
be friends.


ASO. Asotus returns with Moria, and Morus. Come, sweet lady, in good truth
I Will have it, you shall not deny me. MORVS, persuade your aunt I may have her
picture, by any means.


MOR. Yes, sir: good aunt now, let him have it, he will use me the better, if
you love me, do, good aunt.


MOR. Well, tell him, he shall have it.


MOR. Master, you shall have it, she says.


ASO. Shall I? thank her, good page.


CVP. What, has he entertained the fool?


MER. I, heel wait close, you shall see, though the beggar hang off, awhile.


MOR. Aunt, my master thanks you.


MOR. Call him hither.


MOR. Yes, master


MOR. Yes, in verity, and gave me this pursse, and he has promised me a most
fine dog; which he will have drawn, with my picture, he says: and desires
most vehemently to be known to your ladyships.


PHA. Call him hither, it is good groping such a gull.


MOR. Master ASOTVS, master ASOTVS.


ASO. For loves sake, let me go: you see, I am called to the ladies.


ARG. Will thou forsake me then?


ASO. God so, what would you have me do?


MOR. Come hither, master ASOTVS. I do ensure your ladyships, he is a
gentleman of a very worthy desert: and of a most bountiful nature. You must
show and insinuate your self responsible, and equivalent now to my
commendment. Good Honors, grace him.


ASO. I protest (more then most fair ladies) I do wish all variety of divine
pleasures, choice sports, sweet music, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds,
and silken thoughts attend these fair beauties. Will it please your ladyship
to wear this chain of pearl, and this diamond, for my sake?


ARG. O.


ASO. And you, Madame, this jewel, and pendants.


ARG. O.


PHA. We know not how to deserve these bounties, out of so slight merit,
ASOTVS.


PHI. No, in faith, but there is my glove for a favor.


PHA. And soon, after the reuells, I will bestow a garter on you.


ASO. O Lord, ladies! it is more grace then ever I could have hoped, but that
it pleases your ladyships to extend. I protest, it is enough, that you but
take knowledge of my -- if your ladyships want embroidered gowns, tires of any
fashion, rebatu's, jewels, or carkanets, any thing whatsoever, if you
vouchsafe to accept.


CVP. And for it, they will help you to shooe-ties, and devices.


ASO. I cannot utter my self (dear beauties) but, you can conceive --


ARG. O.


PHA. Sir, we will acknowledge your service, doubt not: henceforth, you shall
be no more ASOTVS to us, but our gold-finch, and we your cages.


ASO. O VENUS, Madams! how shall I deserve this? if I were but made acquainted
with HEDON, now, I Will try: pray you away.


MER. How he prays Money to go away from him!


ASO. AMORPHVS, a word with you: here is a watch I would bestow upon you, pray
you make me known to that gallant.


AMO. That I will, sir. Monsieur HEDON, I must entreat you to exchange
knowledge with this gentleman.


HEAD. It Is a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirst after, sir* Good
Monsieur ASOTVS.


ASO. Good Monsieur HEDON, I would be glad to be loved of men of your rank,
and spirit, I protest. Please you to accept this pair of bracelets, sir: they
are not worth the bestowing --


MER. O, HERCULES, how the gentleman purchases! this must needs bring ARGVRION
to a consumption.


HEAD. Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such bounty, I fear.


ASO. O, VENUS, sir; your acquaintance shall be sufficient. And if at any time
you need my bill, or my bond.


ARG. Argurion swoune^. O, O.


AMO. Help the lady there.


MOR. Gods dear, ARGVRION! Madame, how do you?


ARG. Sick.


PHA. Have her forth, and give her air.


ASO. I come again strait, ladies.


MER. Well, I doubt, all the physique he has will scarce recover her: she is
too far spent.


Act IIII. Scene IIII.
PHILAVTIA, GELAIA, ANAIDES, COS, PROSAITES, PHANTASTE, MORIA, AMORPHVS, HEDON.
O Here Is the water come: fetch glasses, page.


GEL. Heart of my body, here is a coile indeed, with your jealous humors.
Nothing but whore, and bitch, and all the villainous swaggering names you can
think on? S'lid, take your bottle, and put it in your guts for me, I Will see
you poxt ere I follow you any longer.


ANA. Nay, good punke, sweet rascal; dam' me, if I am jealous now.


GEL. That Is true indeed: pray let us go.


MOR. What Is the matter, there?


GEL. S'light, he has me upon intergatories, (nay, my mother shall know how
you use me) where I have been? and, why I should stay so long? and, how is it
possible? and withal, calls me at his pleasure, I know not how many
cockatrices, and things.


MOR. In truth and sadness, these are no good epitaphs, ANAIDES, to bestow
upon any gentlewoman; and (I Will ensure you) if I had known you would have dealt
thus with my daughter, she should never have fancied you so deeply, as she has
done. Go too.


ANA. Why, do you hear, mother MORIA. Heart!


MOR. Nay, I pray you, sir, do not swear.


ANA. Swear? why? S'lood, I have sworn before now, I hope. Both you and your
daughter mistake me. I have not honored ARETE, that is held the worthiest lady
in court (next to CYNTHIA) with half that observance, and respect, as I have
done her in private, howsoever outwardly I have carried my self careless, and
negligent. Come, you are a foolish, punke, and know not when you are well
imploi'd. Kiss me, come on. Do it, I say.


MOR. Nay, indeed I must confess, she is apt to misprision. But I must have
you leave it, minion.


AMO. How now, ASOTVS? how does the lady?


ASO. Faith, ill. I have left my page with her, at her lodging.


HEAD. O, here is the rarest water that ever was tasted: fill him some.


PRO. What! has my master a new page?


MER. Yes, a kinsman of the lady MORIAS: you must wait better now, or you are
casheer'd, PROSAITES.


ANA. Come, gallants, you must pardon my foolish humor: when I am angry, that
any thing crosses me, I grow impatient straight. Here, I drink to you.


PHI. O, that we had five, or six bottles more of this liquor.


PHA. Now I commend your judgment, AMORPHVS, who is that knockes? Look, page.


MOR. O, most delicious, a little of this would make ARGVRION well.


PHA. O, no, give her no cold drink, by any means.


ANA. S'lood, this water is the spirit of wine, I Will be hanged else.


CVP. Here Is the lady ARETE, Madame.


Act IIII. Scene V.
ARETE, MORIA, PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, ANAIDES, GELAIA, COS, PROSAITES, AMORPHVS,
ASOTVS, HEDON, MERCVRIE, CUPID. WHat! at your beuer, gallants?


MOR. Wilt please your ladyship drink? it is of the new fountain water.


ARE. Not I, MORIA, I thank you. Gallants, you are for this night free, to
your peculiar delights; CYNTHIA will have no sports: when she is pleased to
come forth, you shall have knowledge. In the mean time, I could wish you did
provide for solemn revels, and some vnlook't-for device of wit, to entertain
her, against she should vouchsafe to grace your pastimes with her presence.


AMO. What say you to a Masque?


HEAD. Nothing better, if the project were new, and rare.


ARE. Why, I Will send for CRITES, and have his advice; be you ready in your
endeavors: He shall discharge you of the inuentiue part.


PHA. But, will not your ladyship stay?


ARE. Not now, PHANTASTE.


PHI. Let her go, I pray you, good lady Sobriety, I am glad we are rid of
her.


PHA. What a set face the gentlewoman has, as she were still going to a
sacrifice?


PHI. O, she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a look.


MOR. Of all Nymphs in the court, I cannot away with her; it is the coursest
thing --


PHI. I wonder, how CYNTHIA can affect her so above the rest! Here be they are
every way as fair as she, and a thought fairer, I trow.


PHA. I, and as ingenious, and conceited as she.


MOR. I, and as politic as she, for all she sets such a forehead on it.


PHI. Would I were dead, if I would change to be CYNTHIA.


PHA. Or I.


MOR. Or I.


AMO. And there is her minion CRITES! why his advice more then AMORPHVS? have
not I invention, before him? Learning, to better that invention, above him? and
infanted, with pleasant travail --


ANA. Death, what talk you of his learning? he understands no more then a
schoole-boy; I have put him down my self a thousand times (by this air) and
yet I never talked with him but twice, in my life: you never saw his like. I
could never get him to argue with me, but once, and then, because I could not
construe an Author I quoted at first sight, he went away, and laughed at me. By
HERCULES, I scorn him, as I do the sodden Nymph, that was here even now, his
mistress ARETE: And I love my self for nothing else.


HEAD. I wonder the fellow does not hang himself, being thus scorned, and
contemned of us that are held the most accomplished society of gallants!


MER. By your selves, none else.


HEAD. I protest, if I had no music in me, no courtship, that I were not a
reueller and could dance, or had not those excellent qualities that give a man
life, and perfection, but a mere poor scholar as he is, I think I should
make some desperate way with my self, whereas now (would I might never breathe
more) if I do know that creature in the kingdom, with whom I would change.


CVP. This is excellent: well, I must alter all this soon.


MER. Look you do, CUPID. The bottles have wrought, it seems.


ASO. O, I am sorry the revels are crossed. I should have tickled it soon. I did
never appear till then. S'lid, I am the neatlyest-made gallant in the
company, and have the best presence; and my dancing -- well, I know what our
usher said to me, lasst time I was at the school: would I might have lead
PHILAVTIA in the measures, and it had been the gods will. I am most worthy, I
am sure.


MORVS. Master, I can tell you news, the lady kissed me yonder, and played with
me, and says she loved you once, as well as she does me, but that you cast
her off.


ASO. Peace, my most esteemed page.


MORVS. Yes.


ASO. What luck is this, that our revels are dashed? Now was I beginning to
glister, in the very high way of preferment. And CYNTHIA had but seen me dance
a strain, or do but one trick, I had been kept in court, I should never have
needed to look toward my friends again.


AMO. Contain your self. You were a fortunate young man, if you knew your own
good: which I have now proiected, and will presently multiply upon you.
Beauties, and Valors, your vouchsafed applause to a motion. the humorous
CYNTHIA has, for this night, with-drawne the light of your de-light --


PHA. It Is true AMORPHVS, what may we do to redeem it?


AMO. Redeem that we cannot, but, to create a new flame, is in our power. Here
is a gentleman my scholar, whom (for some private reasons me specially moving)
I am covetous to gratify with title of Master, in the noble, and subtle
science of Courtship: For which grace, he shall this night in court, and in the
long gallery, hold his public Act, by open challenge, to all Masters of the
mystery whatsoever, to play at the four choice, and principal weapons
thereof, viz. the bare Accost, the better Regard, the solemn Address, and the
perfect Close. What say you?


ALL. Excellent, excellent, AMORPHVS.


AMO. Well, let us then take our time by the forehead: I will instantly have
bills drawn, and advanced in every angle of the court. Sir, betray not your
too much joy. ANAIDES, we must mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance,
Monsieur ASOTVS.


ANA. I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, AMORPHVS.


ASO. Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you, sir. Nay, I begin to know
my self, now.


AMO. O, you must continue your bounties.


ASO. Must I? why, I Will give him this ruby on my finger. Do you hear, sir? I
do heartily with your acquaintance, and I partly know my self worthy of it;
please you, sir, to accept this poor ruby, in a ring, sir. The poesy is of my
own device. Let this blush for me, sir.


ANA. So it must for me, too. For I am not ashamed to take it.


MORVS. Sweet man! by my troth, master, I love you, will you love me, too? for
my aunts sake? I Will wait well, you shall see. I Will still be here. Would I might
never stir, but you are a fine man in these clothes, Master, shall I have
'hem, when you have done with them?


ASO. As for that, MORVS, thou shall see more hereafter: in the mean time, by
this air, or by this feather, I Will do as much for thee, as any gallant shall
do for his page, whatsoever, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.


MER. I wonder, this gentleman should affect to keep a fool! me thinks, he
makes sport enough with himself.


CVP. Well, PROSAITES, 'twere good you did wait closer.


PRO. I, I Will look to it; it is time.


COS. The revels would have been most sumptuous to night, if they had gone
forward.


MER. They must needs, when all the choicest singularities of the court were up
in pantofles; never a one of them, but was able to make a whole show of it
self.


ASO. Within. Sirrah, a torch, a torch.


PRO. O, what a call is there! I will have a canzonet made, with nothing in it,
but sirrah; and the burden shall be, I come.


MER. How now, CUPID, how do you like this change?


CVP. Faith, the thread of my device is cracked, I may go sleep till the
reuelling music awake me.


MER. And there too, CUPID, without you had prevented the Fountain. Alas, poor
god, that remembers not Self-love, to be proof against the violence of his
quiver! Well, I have a plot upon these prizers, for which, I must presently
find out CRITES, and with his assistance, pursue it to a high strain of
laughter, or MERCVRIE has lost of his metal.


Act V.
Scene I.
MERCVRIE, CRITES. IT is resolved on, CRITES, you must do it.

CRI. The grace diuinest MERCVRIE has done me,
In this vouchsafde discovery of himself,
Binds my observance in the utmost term
Of satisfaction, to his godly will:
Though I profess (without the affectation)
Of an enforced, and formed austeritie)
I could be willing to enjoy no place
With so unequal natures.

MER. We believe it.
But for our sake, and to inflict just pains
On their prodigious follies, aid us now:
No man is, presently, made bad, with ill.
And good men, like the sea, should still maintain
Their noble taste, in midst of all fresh humors,
That flow about them, to corrupt their streams,
Bearing no season, much less salt of goodness.
It is our purpose, CRITES, to correct,
And punish, with our laughter, this nights sport
Which our court- Dors so heartily intend:
And by that worthy scorn, to make them know
How far beneath the dignity of man
Their serious, and most practiced actions are.

CRI. I, but though MERCVRIE can warrant out
His vnder-takings, and make all things good,
Out of the powers of his divinity,
The Offense will be returned with weight on me,
That am a creature so despisde, and poor;
When the whole Court shall take it self abusde
By our ironicall confederacy.

MER. You are deceived. The better race in court
That have the true nobility, called virtue,
Will apprehend it, as a grateful right
Done to their separate merit: and approve
The fit rebuke of so ridiculous heads,
Who with their apish customs, and forced garbes,
Would bring the name of courtier in contempt,
Did it not live unblemished in some few,
Whom equal JOVE has loved, and PHOEBVS formed
Of better metal, and in better mould.

CRI. Well, since my leader on is MERCVRIE,
I shall not fear to follow. If I fall,
My proper virtue shall be my relief,
That followed such a cause, and such a chief.

Act V. Scene II.
ASOTVS, AMORPHVS. NO more, if you love me, good master, you are incompatible
to live withal: Send me for the ladies.


AMO. Nay, but intend me.


ASO. Fear me not, I warrant you, sir.


AMO. Render not your self a refractarie, on the sudden. I can allow well,
you should repute highly, heartily (and to the most) of your own endowments; it
gives you forth to the world the more assured: but with reservation of an eye,
to be always turned dutifully back upon your teacher.


ASO. Nay, good, sir, leave it to me. Trust me with trussing all the points
of this action, I pray. S'lid, I hope we shall find wit to perform the
science, as well as another.


AMO. I confess you to be of an aped, and docible humor. Yet, there are
certain puntilioes, or (as I may more nakedly insinuate them) certain
intrinsecate strokes, and wards, to which your actiuitie is not yet amounted.
As your gentile dor, in colors. For supposition, your mistress appears here
in prize, ribbanded with green, and yellow; now it is the part of every
obsequious servant, to be sure to have daily about him copy, and variety of
colors, to be presently answerable to any hourly, or half-hourely change in
his mistress revolution. --


ASO. (I know it, sir.


AMO. Give leave, I pray you) which if your Antagonist, or player-against-you
shall ignorantly be without, and your self can produce; you give him the dor.


ASO. I, I, sir.


AMO. Or, if you can possess your opposite, that the green your mistress
wears, is her rejoicing or exultation in his service; the yellow, suspicion of
his truth, (from her height of affection:) and that he (greenly credulous)
shall withdraw thus, in private, and from the abundance of his pocket (to
displace her jelous conceit) steal into his hat the color, whose bluenesse
does express trueness, (she being nor so, nor so affected) you give him the
dor.


ASO. Do not I know it, sir?


AMO. Nay, good -- swell not above your understanding. There is yet a third
dor, in colors.


ASO. I know it too, I know it.


AMO. Do you know it too? what is it? Make good your knowledge.


ASO. Why it is -- no matter for that.


AMO. Do it, on poene of the dor.


ASO. Why? what is it, say you?


AMO. Lo, you have given your self the dor. But I will remonstrate to you the
third dor; which is not, as the two former dors, indicative, but deliberatiue:
As how? As thus. Your Riualis, with a dutiful, and serious care, lying in his
bed, meditating how to observe his mistress, dispatcheth his lacquay to the
chamber, early, to know what her colors are for the day; with purpose to apply
his wear that day, accordingly: You lay wait before, preoccupie the
chamber-maide, corrupt her, to return false colors; He follows the fallacy;
comes out accoutred to his believed instructions; your mistress smiles; and
you give him the dor.


ASO. Why, so I told you, sir, I knew it.


AMO. Told me? It is a strange outrecuidance! your humor too much redoundeth.


ASO. Why, sir, what, do you think you know more?


AMO. I know that a cook may as soon, and properly be said to smell well, as
you to be wise. I know these are most clear, and clean strokes. But then, you
have your passages, and imbroccata's in courtship; as the bitter Rob in wit;
the Reuerse in face, or wry-mouth; and these more subtle, and secure offenders.
I will example unto you. Your opponent makes entry, as you are engaged with
your mistress. You seeing him, close in her ear, with this whisper (here
comes your Babion, disgrace him) and withal, stepping off, fall on his bosom,
and turning to her, politiquely, aloud say, lady, reguard this noble
gentleman, a man rarely parted, second to none in this court; and then,
stooping over his shoulder, your hand on his breast, your mouth on his
backside, you give him the Reuerse stroke, with this Sanna, or Storkes-bill,
which makes up your wits Bob, most bitter.


ASO. Nay, for heavens sake, teach me no more. I know all as well -- S'lid, if
I did not, why was I nominated? why did you choose me? why did the ladies
prick out me? I am sure there were other gallants. But me of all the rest? By
that light, and as I am a courtier, would I might never stir, but it is
strange. Would to the lord, the ladies would come once.


Act V. Scene III.
MORPHIDES, AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, HEDON, ANAIDES, THE THRONG. LADIES, CITIZEN,
WIFE, PAGES, TAILOR, MERCER, PERFVMER, IEWELLER, etc. SIgnior, the gallants and
ladies are at hand. Are you ready, sir?


AMO. Instantly. Go, accomplish your attire: Cousin MORPHIDES, assist me, to
make good the door with your officious tyranny.


CIT. By your leave my masters there, pray you let us come by.


PAGE You by? why should you come by, more then we?


WIT. Why, sir? Because he is my brother, that plays the prizes.


MOR. Your brother?


CIT. I, her brother, sir, and we must come in.


TAY. Why, what are you?


CIT. I am her husband, sir.


TAY. Then thrust forward your head.


AMO. What tumult is there?


MOR. Who Is there? bear back there. Stand from the door.


AMO. Enter none but the ladies, and their hang-bies; welcome Beauties, and
your kind Shadows.


HEAD. This country lady, my friend, good signior AMORPHVS.


ANA. And my cockatrice, here.


AMO. She is welcome.


MOR. Knock those same pages there; and goodman Cockescombe the citizen, who
would you speak withal?


AMO. With whom? your brother?


MOR. Who is your brother?


AMO. Master ASOTVS? Is he your brother? He is taken up with great persons.
He is not to know you to night.


ASO. O JOVE, master! and there come ere a citizen gentlewoman in my name, let
her have entrance, I pray you. It is my sister.


WIT. Brother.


CIT. Brother, master ASOTVS.


ASO. Who Is there?


WIT. It Is I, brother.


ASO. Gods me! There she is, good master, intrude he.


MOR. Make place. Bear back there.


AMO. Knock that simple fellow, there.


WIT. Nay, good sir; It is my husband.


MOR. The simpler fellow he. Away, back with your head, sir.


ASO. Brother, you must pardon your non-entry: Husbands are not allowed here in
truth. I Will come home soon with my sister; pray you meet us with a lanthorn,
brother. Be merry, sister: I shall make you laugh anon.


PHA. Your prizer is not ready AMORPHVS.


AMO. Apprehend your places, he shall be soon; and at all points.


ANA. Is there any body come to answer him? Shall we have any sport.


AMO. Sport of importance; howsoever, give me the gloves.


HEAD. Gloves! why gloves, Signior?


PHI. He distributes gloves. What Is the ceremony?


AMO. Besides their received fitness, at all prizes, they are here properly
accommodate to the nuptials of my scholars hauiour to the lady courtship.
Please you apparel your hands. Madam PHANTASTE, madam PHILAVTIA, Guardian,
Signior HEDON, Signior ANAIDES, Gentlemen all, Ladies.


ALL. Thanks, good AMORPHVS.


AMO. I will now call forth my provost, and present him.


ANA. Heart! why should not we be masters, as well as he?


HEAD. That Is true, and play our masters prizes, as well as the the other?


MOR. In sadness, for using your court-weapons, me thinks, you may.


PHA. Nay, but why should not we ladies play our prizes, I pray? I see no
reason, but we should take 'hem down, at their own weapons.


PHI. Troth, and so we may, if we handle 'hem well.


WIF. I indeed, forsooth, Madame, if'twere in the city, we would think foul
scorn, but we would, forsooth.


PHA. Pray you, what shoul'd we call your name?


WIF. My name is, Downfall.


HEAD. Good mistress Downfall! I am sorry, your husband could not get in.


WIF. It Is no matter for him, sir.


ANA. No, no, she has the more liberty for her self.


PHA. A flourish. Peace, peace: They come.


AMO. So. Keep up your ruff: the tincture of your neck is not all so pure,
but it will ask it. Maintain your sprig upright; your cloak on your
halfe-shoulder falling; So: I will read your bill, advance it, and present you.

Silence. The challen Be it known to all that profess courtship, by these
presents (from the white satin reueller, to the cloth of tissue, and bodkin)
that we, VLYSSES-POLYTROPVS-AMORPHVS, Master of the noble, and subtle science
of courtship, do give leave and license to our Provost,
ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAGMON-ASOTVS, to play his Masters prize, against all Masters
whatsoever in this subtle mystery, at these four, the choice, and most
cunning weapons of court-complement, viz. the bare Accost; the better Reguard;
the solemn Address; and the perfect Close. These are therefore to give
notice, to all comers, that he, ^he said ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAG^ON-ASOTVS, is
here present (by the help of his Mer^er, Tailor, Milla^er, Sempster, and so
forth) at his designed hour, in this fair gallery, the present day of this
present month, to perform, and do his uttermost for the atchieuement, and
bearing away of the prizes, which are these: viz. for the bare Accost, two
Wall-eyes, in a face forced: For the better R^guard, a Face favorably
simpring, with a Farm wauing: For the solemn Address, two Lips wagging, and
never a wise word: For the perfect Close, a Wring by the hand, with a Banquet
in a corner. And PHOEBVS sa^e CYNTHIA.


Music sounds. Appears no man yet, to answer the prizer? No voice?
Music, give them their summons.


PHA. The solemnity of this is excellent.


AMO. Silence. Well, I perceive your name is their terror; and keeps them
back.


ASO. I faith, Master, Let Us go: no body comes. Victus, victa, victum; Victi,
victae, victi -- Let Us be retrograde.


AMO. Stay. That were dispunct to the ladies. Rather, our self shall be your
Encounter. Take your state, up, to the wall: And, lady, may we implore you to
stand forth, as first term, or bound to our courtship.


H^D. A charge. Before heaven, 'twill show rarely.


AMO. Sound a charge.


ANA. A pox on it. Your vulgar will count this fabulous, and impudent, now: by
that candle, they will never conceit it.


PHA. Excellent well! Admirable!


PHI. Peace.


HEAD. They act their ac^ost severally to the lady (...) ^^a^ds forth. Most
fashionably, believe it.


PHI. O, he is a well-spoken gentleman.


PHA. Now the other.


PHI. Very good.


HEAD. For a Scholar, Honor.


ANA. O, it is too d^tch. He reeles too much.


HEAD. A flourish. This weapon is done.


AMO. No, we have our two bouts, at every weapon, expect.


Act V. Scene IIII.
CRITES, MERCVRIE. To them. WHere be these gallants, and their brave prizer
here?


MORP. Who Is there? bear back: Keep the door.


AMOR. What are you, sir?


C^IT. By your license, grand-master. Come forward, sir.


ANAI. Heart! who let in that rag there, amongst us? put him out, an
impecunious creature.


HEDO. Out with him.


MORE. Come, sir.


AMOR. You must be retrograde.


CRIT. Soft, sir, I am Truchman, and do flourish before this Monsieur, or
french-behau'd gentleman, here; who is drawn hither by report of your
chartells, advanced in court, to prove his fortune with your prizer, so he may
have fair play shown him, and the liberty to choose his stickler.


AMOR. Is he a Master?


CRIT. That, sir, he has to show here; and, confirmed under the hands of the
most skillful, and cunning complementaries alive: please you read, sir.


AMOR. What shall we do?


ANAI. Death, disgrace this fellow in the blacke-stuffe, what ever you do.


AMOR. Why, but he comes with the stranger.


HEDO. That Is no matter. He is our own countryman.


ANA. I, and he is a scholar besides. You may disgrace him here, with
authority.


AMO. Well, see these first.


ASO. Now shall I be observed by yon'd scholar, till I sweat again; I would to
JOVE, it were over.


CRI. Sir, this is the wight of worth, that dares you to the encounter. A
gentleman of so pleasing, and ridiculous a carriage; as, even standing, carries
meat in the mouth, you see; and I assure you, although no bred courtling, yet a
most particular man, of goodly hauings, well fashioned hauiour, and of as
hardened, and excellent a bark, as the most naturally-qualified amongst them,
informed, reformed, and transformed, from his original citticisme, by this
elixi'r, or mere magazine of man. And, for your spectators, you behold them,
what they are: The most choice particulars in court: This tells tales well; This
prouides coaches; This repeates jests; This presents gifts* This holds up the
arras; This takes down from horse; This protests by this light; This swears
by that candle; This delights; This adoreth. Yet, all but three men. Then for
your ladies, the most proud witty creatures, all things apprehending, nothing
understanding, perpetually laughing, curious maintayners of fools, mercers,
and minstrels, costly to be kept, miserably keeping, all disdayning, but their
painter, and pothecary, twixt whom and them there is this reciprock commerce,
their beauties maintain their painters, and their painters their beauties.


MER. Sir, you have played the painter your self, and limbed them to the life.
I desire to deserve before 'hem.


AMO. Having read the certificate. This is anthentique. We must resolve to
entertain the Monsieur, howsoever we neglect him.


HEAD. Come, let us all go together, and salute him.


ANA. Content, and not look of the other.


AMO. Well devised: and a most punishing disgrace.


HEAD. On.


AMO. Monsieur. We must not so much betray our selves to discourtship, as to
suffer you to be longer unsaluted: Please you to use the state, ordained for
the opponent; in which nature, without envy we receive you.


HEAD. And embrace you.


ANA. And commend us to you, sir.


PHI. Believe it, he is a man of excellent silence.


PHA. He keeps all his wit for action.


ANA. This has discountenanced our scholaris, most richly.


HEAD. Out of all emphasis. The Monsieur sees, we regard him not.


AMO. Hold on: make it known how bitter a thing it is, not to be looked on in
court.


HEAD. S'lud, will he call him to him yet? does not Monsieur perceive our
disgrace?


ANA. Heart! he is a fool, I see. We have done our selves wrong to grace him.


HEAD. S'light, what an ass was I, to embrace him?


CRI. Illustrous, and fearful judges --


HEAD. Turn away, turn away.


CRI. It is the suit of the strange opponent (to whom you ought not to turn
your tails, and whose noses I must follow) that he may have the justice,
before he encounter his respected adversary, to see some light stroke of his
play, commenced with some other.


HEAD. Answer not him, but the stranger, we will not believe him.


AMO. I will demand him my self.


CRI. O dreadful disgrace, if a man were so foolish to feel it!


AMO. Is it your suit, Monsieur, to see some praelude of my scholar? Now, sure
the Monsieur wants language.


HEAD. And take upon him to be one of the accomplished? S'light, that is a
goodiest: would we could take him with that nullitie. Non sapette voi parlar'
Itagliano?


ANA. S'foot, the carpe has no tongue.


CRI. Signior, in courtship, you are to bid your abettors forbear, and
satisfy the Monsieurs request.


AMO. A change. Well, I will strike him more silent, with admiration, and
terrify his daring hither. He shall behold my own play, with my scholar.
Lady, with the touch of your white hand, let me re-enstate you. Pro^ost, begin
to me, at the bare Accost. Now, for the honor of my discipline.


HEAD. Signior AMORPHVS, reflect, reflect: what means he by that mouthed wave?


CRI. He is in some distaste of your fellow disciple.


MER. Signior, your scholar might have played well still, if he could have kept
his fear longer: I have enough of him, now. He is a mere piece of glass, I
see through him, by this time.


AMO. You come not to give us the scorn, Monsieur?


MER. Nor to be frighted with a face. Signior! I have seen the lions. You must
pardon me. I shall be loath to hazard a reputation with one, that has not a
reputation to lose.


AMO. How!


CRI. Meaning your pupil, sir.


ANA. This is that black devil there.


AMO. You do offer a strange affront, Monsieur.


CRI. Sir, he shall yield you all the honor of a competent adversary, if you
please to undertake him --


MER. I am pressed for the encounter.


AMO. Me? challenge me?


ASO. What! my Master, sir? S'light, Monsieur, meddle with me, do you hear?
but do not meddle with my Master.


MER. Peace, good squib, go out.


CRI. And stink, he bids you.


ASO. Master?


AMO. Silence, I do accept him. Sit you down, and observe. Me? He never
professed a thing at more charges. Prepare your self, sir. Challenge me? I will
prosecute what disgrace my hatred can dictate to me.


CRI. How tender a trauailers spleen is? comparison, to men, that deserve
least, is ever most offensive.


AMO. You are instructed in our chartell, and know our weapons?


MER. I appear not without their notice, sir.


ASO. But must I lose the prizes, Master?


AMO. I will win them for you, be patient. Lady, vouchsafe the tenure of this
ensign. Who shall be your stickler?


MER. Behold him.


AMO. I would not wish you a weaker. Sound musiques. I provoke you, at the bare
Accost.


PHA. A charge. Excellent comely!


CRI. And worthily studied. This is the exalted Fore-top.


HEAD. O, his leg was too much produced.


ANA. And his hat was carried skiruily.


PHI. Peace; Let Us see the Monsieur's Accost: Rare!


PHA. Sprightly, and short.


ANA. True, it is the french curteau: He lacks but to have his nose slit.


HEAD. A flourish. He does hop. He does bound too much.


AMO. A charge. The second bout, to conclude this weapon.


PHA. Good, believe it!


PHI. An excellent offer!


CRI. This is called the solemn band-string.


HEAD. Foe, that cringe was not put home.


ANA. S'foot, he makes a face like a stabbed LVCRECE.


ASO. Well, he would needs take it upon him, but would I had done it for all
this. He makes me sit still here, like a babioun as I am.


CRI. Making villainous faces.


PHI. See, the French prepares it richly.


CRI. I, this is y'cleped the serious trifle.


ANA. S'lud, it is the horse-start out of the brown study.


CRI. A flourish. Rather the bird-ey'd stroke, sir. Your observance is too
blunt, sir.


AMO. Judges, award the prize. Take breath, sir. This bout has been laborious.


ASO. And yet your Critic, or your Besso'gno, will think these things
sopperie, and easy, now.


CRI. Or rather mere lunacy. For, would any reasonable creature make these his
serious studies, and perfections? Much less, only live to these ends? to be
the false pleasure of a few, the true love of none, and the just laughter of
all?


HEAD. We must prefer the Monsieur, we courtiers must be partial.


ANA. Speak, Guardian. Name the prize, at the bare Accost.


MOR. A pair of wall-eyes, in a face forced.


ANA. Give the Monsieur. AMORPHVS has lost his eyes.


AMO. I! is the palate of your judgment down? Gentles, I do appeal.


ASO. Yes master, to me. The judges be fools.


ANA. How now, sir? Tie up your tongue, Mungrill. He cannot appeal.


ASO. Say you, sir?


ANA. Sir you still, sir.


ASO. Why, so I do. Do not I, I pray you?


MER. Remercie, Madame, and these honorable Censors.


AMO. Well, to the second weapon, The better Reguard: I will encounter you
better. Attempt.


HEAD. Sweet Honor.


PHI. What says my good Ambition?


HEAD. Which take you at this next weapon? I lay a discretion, with you, on
AMORPHVS head.


PHI. Why, I take the french-behau'd gentleman.


HEAD. It Is done, a discretion.


CRI. A discretion? A pretty court-wager! would any discreet person hazard his
wit, so?


PHA. I Will lay a discretion, with you, ANAIDES.


ANA. Hang 'hem. I Will not venture a doibt of discretion, on either of their
heads. --


CRI. No, he should venture all then.


ANA. I like none of their plays.


HEAD. A charge. See, see, this is strange play!


ANA. It Is too full of uncertain motion. He hobbles too much.


CRI. It Is called your court-staggers, sir.


HEAD. That same fellow talks so, now he has a place.


ANA. Hang him, neglect him.


MER. Your good ladyships affectioned.


WI^. Gods so! they speak at this weapon, brother!


ASO. They must do so, sister, how should it be the better Reguard, else?


PHA. Me thinks, he did not this respectively enough.


PHI. Why, the Monsieur but dallies with him.


HEAD. Dallies? Slight see, he will put him to it, in earnest. Well done, AMORPHVS.


ANA. That puff was good indeed.


CRI. Gods me! This is desperate play. He hits himself of the shinnes.


HEAD. And he make this good through, he carries it, I warrant him.


CRI. Indeed he displayes his feet, rarely.


HEAD. See, see; He does the respective Leere damnably well.


AMO. The true idolater of your beauties, shall never pass their de^ties
vnadored: I rest your poor knight.


HEAD. See, now the oblique leere, or the Ianus: He satisfies all, with that
aspect, most nobly.


CRI. A flourish. And most terribly he comes off: like your Rodomantada.


PHA. How like you this play, ANAIDES?


ANA. Good play; but 't is too rough, and boisterous.


AMO. I will second it with a stroke easier, wherein I will prove his language.


ANA. A charge. This is silthie, and grave, now.


HEAD. O, 't is cool, and wary play. We must not disgrace our own camerade,
too much.


AMO. Signora, ho tanto obligo per pefauore rescinto da lei; che veramente
des^^^ero con totto il core, ^ remunerarla in part: and sicurati^e signor a
mea cara, che infera sempre pronto a seruirla, and honorarla. Bascio le mane de
v^ signoria.


CRI. The veneti^^ Dop this.


PHA. Most vnexspectedly excellent! The French goes down certain.


ASO. As buckets are put down into a well;
Or as a schoole-boy. --

CRI. Trusse up your simile, Iacke-daw, and observe.


HEAD. Now the Monsieur is moved.


ANA. Boe-peepe.


HEAD. O, most antique.


CRI. The french Quirke, this sir.


ANA. Heart, he will overrun her!


MER. A flourish. Madamoyselle, Ie voudroy que pou^oy monstrer mon affection,
mais ie suis tant mal he^reuse, ci froid, ci laid, ci -- Ie ne scay qui di dire
-- excuse moy, Ie suis tout vostre.


PHI. O brave, and spirited! He Is a right Iouialist.


PHI. No, no: AMORPHVS gravity outwaies it.


CRI. And yet your lady, or your feather would outweigh both.


ANA. What Is the prize, lady, at this better Reguard?


MOR. A Face favorably simpring, and a fan wauing.


ANA. They have done doubtfully. Divide. Give the favorable Face to the
Signior, and the light wave to the Monsi^ur.


AMO. You become the simper, well, lady.


MER. And the wag, better.


AMO. Now, to our solemn Address. Please the well-grac'd PHILAVTIA to relieve
the lady sentinel; she has stood long.


PHI. With all my heart, come, Guardian* Resign your place.


AMO. Monsieur, furnish your self with what solemnity of ornament you think
fit for this third weapon; at which you are to show all the cunning of stroke,
your devotion can possibly devise.


MER. Let me alone, sir. I Will sufficiently decipher your amorous solemnities.
CRITES, have patience. See, if I hit not all their practicke observance, with
which they lime twigs, to catch their phantasticke ladiebirds.


CRI. I, but you should do more charitably, to do it more openly; that they
might discover themselves mocked in these monstrous affections.


MER. A charge. Lacquay, where is the tailor?


TAY. Here, sir.


HEAD* See, they have their Tailor, Barber, Perfumer, Millaner, Ieweller,
Feather-maker, all in common!


ANA. I, this is pretty.


AMO. They make them selves ready on the stage. Here is a hair too much, take
it off. Where are thy mullets?


MER. Is this pinke of equal proportion to this cut, standing of this distance
from it?


TAY. That it is, sir.


MER. Is it so, sir, you impudent Poultroun? you slave, you list, you shreds,
you. --


HEAD. Excellent. This was the best, yet.


ANA. S'foot, we must use our tailors thus. This is your true magnanimity.


MER. Come, go to: put on. We must bear with you, for the times sake.


AMO. Is the perfume rich, in this jerkin?


PER. Taste, smell; I assure you sir, pure benjamin, the only spirited sent,
that ever awaked a neapolitane nostrill. You would wish your self all nose,
for the love o^t. I frotted a jerkin, for a new-reuenu'd gentleman, yielded me
threescore crowns, but this morning, and the same titillation.


AMO. I savor no sampsuchine, in it.


PER. I am a nulli-fidian, if there be not three thirds of a scruple more of
samp^uchinum, in this confection, then ever I put in any. I Will tell you all the
ingredients, sir.


AMO. You shall be simple, to discover your simples.


PER. Simple? why sir? what recke I to whom I discover? I have in it, musk,
ciuet, amber, pheenicobalanus, the decoction of turmericke, sesama, nard,
spikenard, calamus odoratus, stacte, opobalsamum, amomum, storax, lad^num,
aspalathum, opponax, oenanthe. And what of all these now? what are you the
better? Tut, it is the sorting, and the dividing, and the mixing, and the
tempring, and the ^earcing, and the decocting, that makes the fumigation, and
the ^uffumigation.


AMO. Well, indue me with it.


PER. I will, sir.


HEAD. An excellent confection.


CRI. And most worthy a true voluptarie. JOVE! what a coil these mukse-wormes
take, to purchase another delight? for, themselves, who bear the odours, have
ever the least sense of them. Yet, I do like better the prodigality of
jewels, and clothes, whereof one passes to a man's heirs; the other, at least
wears out time: This presently expires, and without continual riot in
reparation is lost: which who so strives to keep, it is one special argument
to me, that (affecting to smell better then other men) he does indeed smell
far worse.


MER. I know, you will say it sits well, sir.


TAY. Good faith, if it do not, sir, let your Mistress be judge.


MER. By heaven, if my Mistress do not like it, I Will make no more conscience to
undo thee, then to undo an oyster.


TAY. Believe it, sir, there is never a Mistress in the world can mislike it.


MER. No, not goodwife Tailor, your Mistress; that has only the judgment to
heat your pressing tool. But for a court-Mistris, that studies these decorums,
and knows the proportion of every cut, to a hair, knows why such a color,
is cut upon such a color, and, when a satin is cut upon six taffa^aes, will
look that we should diue into the depth of the cut. -- Give me my scarffe.
Show some ribbands, sir. Ha you the feather?


FET. I, sir.


MER. Have you the jewel?


JEW. Yes, sir.


MER. What must I give for the hire on it?


JEW. You Will give me six crowns, sir?


MER. Six crowns? By heaven 'twere a good deed to borrow it of thee, to show:
and never let thee have it again.


JEW. I hope your worship will not do so, sir.


MER. By JOVE, sir, there be such tricks stirring, I can tell you, and
worthily too. Extorting knaves! that live by these Court-decorums, and yet, --
What Is your jewel worth, I pray?


JEW. A hundred crowns, sir.


MER. A hundred crowns? And six for the loan on it an hour? What Is that? the
hundred for the year? These impostors would not be hanged? your thief is not
comparable to 'hem, by HERCULES, well* put it in, and the feather. You will
have it, and you shall; and the pox give you good on it.


AMO. Give me my confects, my moscardini, and place those colors in my hat.


MER. These are ^olognian ribbands, I warrant you?


MIL. In truth, sir: if they be not right granado silk --


MER. A pox on you, you will all say so.


MIL. You give me not a penny, sir.


MER. Come sir, perfume my deuant; May it ascend, like solemn sacrifice, into
the nostrils of the Queen of Love.


HEAD. Your french ceremonies are the best:


ANA. Monsieur, Signior, your solemn Address is too long. The ladies long to
have you come on.


AMO. Soft, sir, our coming on is not so easily prepared. Signior Fig.


PER. I, sir.


AMO. Can you help my complexion, here?


PER. O yes, sir, I have an excellent mineral Fuc^^, for the purpose. The
gloves are right, sir, you shall bury 'hem in a mucke-hill, a draught, seven
years, and take 'hem out, and wash 'hem, they shall still retain their first
sent, true spanish. There Is ambre in the vmbre.


MER. Your price, sweet Fig.


PER. Give me what you will, sir: The Signior pays me two crowns a pair, you
shall give me your love, sir.


MER. My love? with a pox to you, goodman sasafras.


PER. I come, sir. There Is an excellent diapasme in a chain too, if you like
it.


AMO. Stay, what are the ingredients to your fucus?


P^R. Naught, but sublimate, and crude mercury, sir, well prepared, and
dulcified, with the jaw-bones of a sow, burnt, beaten, and searced.


AMO. I approve it. Lay it on.


M^R. I Will have your chain of pomander, sirrah; what is your price?


PER. We Will agree, Monsieur; I Will assure you, it was both decocted, and dried,
where no sun came, and kept in an onyx ever since it was ball'd.


MER. Come, inuert my mustachio, and we have done.


AMO. It Is good.


BAR. Hold still I pray you, sir.


PER. Nay, the ^ucus is exorbitant, sir.


MER. Death! do thou burn me, Harlot?


BAR. I beseech you, sir.


MER. A flourish. Beggar, Varlet, Poultroun?


HEAD. Excellent, excellent!


ANA. Your french Beat is the most natural beat of the world.


ASO. O, that I had played at this weapon!


PHA. A charge. Peace, now they come on; the second part.


AMO. Madame, your beauties, being so attractiue, I muse you are left thus,
alone.


PHI. Better be alone, sir; then ill-accompanied.


AMO. Naught can be ill, lady, that can come near your goodness.


MER. Sweet Madame, on what part of you soever a man casts his eye, he meets
with perfection; you are the lively image of VENUS, throughout; all the GRACES
smile in your cheeks; your beauty nourishes, as well as delights; you have a
tongue steep't in honey; and a breath like a panther: your breasts and forehead
are whiter then gotes milk, or May-blossomes; a cloud is not so soft as your
skin. --


HEAD. Well struck, Monsieur: He charges like a Frenchman indeed, thick, and
hotly.


MER. Your cheeks are CVPIDS baths, wherein he uses to steep himself in
milk, and nectar: He does light all his torches at your eyes, and instructs
you how to shoot, and wound, with their beams. Yet I love nothing, in you,
more then your innocence; you retain so native a simplicity, so vnblam'd a
behavior. Me thinks, with such a love, I should find no head, nor foot of my
pleasure: You are the very spirit of a lady.


ANA. Fair play, Monsieur? you are too hot on the quarrie. Give your
competitor audience.


AMO. Lady, how stirring soever the Monsieurs tongue is, he will lie by your
side, more dull then your eunuch.


ANA. A good stroke; That mouth was excellently put over.


AMO. You are fair, lady --


CRI. You offer foul, Signior, to close. Keep your distance; for all your
Brauo rampant, here.


AMO. I say you are fair, lady, let your choice be fit, as you are fair.


MER. I say, ladies do never believe they are fair, till some fool begins to
dote upon 'hem.


PHI. You play too rough, gentlemen.


AMO. Your frenchified fool is your only fool, lady: I do yield to this
honorable Monsieur, in all civil, and humane courtesy.


MER. A flourish. Buzze.


ANA. Admirable. Give him the prize. Give him the prize; That mouth, again,
was most courtly hit, and rare.


AMO. I knew, I should pass upon him with the bitter Bob.


HEAD. O, but the Reuerse was singular.


PHA. It was most subtle, AMORPHVS.


ASO. If I had don't, it should have been better.


MER. How heartily they applaud this, CRITES!


CRI. You suffer 'hem too long


MER. I Will take off their edge instantly.


ANA. Name the prize, at the solemn Address.


PHI. Two lips wagging.


CRI. And never a wise word; I take it.


ANA. Give to AMORPHVS. And, upon him, again; let him not draw free breath.


AMO. Thanks, fair deliverer, and my honorable judges, Madame PHANTASTE, you
are our worthy object at this next weapon.


PHA. Most couetingly ready, AMORPHVS.


HEAD. Your Monsieur is crest-falne.


ANA. So are most of 'hem once a year.


AMO. A charge. You will see, I shall now give him the gentle dor, presently,
he forgetting to shift the colors, which are now changed, with alteration of
the Mistress. At your last weapon, sir. The perfect Close. Set forward, intend
your approach. Monsieur.


MER. It Is yours, Signior.


AMO. With your example, sir.


MER. Not I, sir.


AMO. It is your right.


MER. By no possible means.


AMO. You have the way.


MER. As I am noble --


AMO. As I am virtuous --


MER. Pardon me, sir.


AMO. I will die first.


MER. You are a tyranne in courtesy.


AMO. He is removed -- Judges bear witness.


MER. Amorphus stays the other, in his moving. What of that, sir?


AMO. You are removed, sir.


MER. Well.


AMO. I challenge you; you have received the dor. Give me the prize.


MER. Soft, sir. How, the dor?


AMO. The common Mistress, you see, is changed.


MER. Right, sir.


AMO. And you have still in your hat the former colors.


MER. You lie, sir, I have none: I have pulled 'hem out. I meant to play
discolored.


CRI. The dor, the dor, the dor, the dor, the dor! the palpable dor.


ANA. A flourish. Heart of my blood. AMORPHVS, what have you done? Stuck a
disgrace upon us all, and at your last weapon?


ASO. I could have done no more.


HEAD. By heaven, it was most unfortunate luck.


ANA. Luck! by that candle, it was mere rashness, and ouer-sight, would any
man have venterd to play so open, and forsake his ward? Dam' me if he have not
eternally undone himself, in court; and discountenanced us, that were his
maine countenance, by it.


AMO. Forgive it, now. It was the soloecisme of my stars.


CRI. The Wring by the hand, and the Banquet is ours.


MER. O, here is a lady, feels like a wench of the first year; you would
think her hand did melt in your touch; and the bones of her fingers ran out at
length, when you pressed 'hem, they are so gently delicate! He that had the
grace to print a kiss on these lips, should taste wine, and rose-leaues. O,
she kisses as close as a cockle. Let Us take 'hem down, as deep as our
hearts, wench, till our very souls mix. Adieu, Signior. Good faith, I shall
drink to you at supper, sir.


ANA. Stay, Monsieur. Who awards you the prize?


CRI. Why, his proper merit, sir: you see he has played down your grand
garbe-Master, here.


ANA. That Is not in your logic to determine, sir: you are no courtier. This
is none of your seven, or nine beggarly sciences, but a certain mystery above
'hem, wherein we that have skill must pronounce, and not such fresh-men as you
are.


CRI. Indeed, I must declare my self to you no professed courtling; nor to have
any excellent stroke, at your subtle weapons: yet if you please, I dare venture
a hit with you, or your fellow, sir DAGONET, here.


ANA. With me?


CRI. Yes, sir.


ANA. Heart, I shall never have such a fortune to save my self in a fellow
again, and your two reputations, gentlemen, as in this. I Will undertake him.


HEAD. Do, and swinge him soundly, good ANAIDES.


ANA. Let me alone, I Will play other manner of play, then has been seen, yet.
I would the prize lay on it.


MER. It shall if you will, I forgive my right.


ANA. Are you so confident? what is your weapon?


CRI. At any, I, sir.


MER. The perfect Close, That Is now the best.


ANA. Content, I Will pay your scholaritie. Who offers?


CRI. Mary, that will I. I dare give you that advantage, too.


ANA. You dare? Well, look to your liberal skonce.


AMO. Make your play still, upon the answer, sir.


ANA. Hold your peace, you are a hobbyhorse.


ASO. Sit by me, Master.


MER. Now CRITES, strike home.


CRI. You shall see me undo the assured swaggerer with a trick, instantly: I
will play all his own play before him; court the wench, in his garb, in his
phrase, with his face; leave him not so much as a look, an eye, a stalk, or
an imperfect oath, to express himself by, after me.


MER. Excellent, CRITES.


ANA. A charge. When begin you, sir? Have you consulted?


CRI. To your cost, sir; which is the Piece, stands forth to be courted? O,
are you she? Well, Madame, or sweet lady, it is so, I do love you in some
sort, do you conceive? and though I am no Monsieur, nor no Signior, and do
want (as they say) logic and sophistry, and good words, to tell you why it
is so; yet by this hand, and by that candle, it is so; And though I be no
booke-worme, nor one that deals by art, to give you rhetorike, and causes,
why it should be so, or make it good it is so, yet dam me, but I know it is so,
and am assured it is so, and I and my sword shall make it appear it is so; and
give you reason sufficient, how it can be no otherwise, but so --


HEAD. S'light, ANAIDES, you are mocked; and so we are all.


MER. How now, Signior! What, suffer your self to be cossen'd of your
courtship, before your face?


HEAD. This is plain confederacy, to disgrace us: Let Us be gone, and plot some
revenge.


AMO. When men disgraces share,
The lesser is the care.

CRI. A flourish. Nay stay, my dear Ambition, I can do you over too. You that
tell your Mistress, Her beauty is all composde of theft; Her hair stole from
APOLLO's goldy-locks; Her white and red, lillies, and roses stolen out of
paradise; Her eyes, two stars, plucked from the sky; Her nose, the gnomon of
Loves dial, that tells you how the clock of your heart goes: And for her
other parts, as you cannot reckon 'hem, they are so many; so you cannot recount
them, they are so manifest. Yours, if his own, unfortunate HOYDEN, in stead of
HEDON.


ASO. Sister, come away, I cannot endure 'hem longer.


MER. Go, Dors, and you, my Madame Courting-stocks,
Follow your scorned, and derided mates;
Tell to your guilty breasts, what mere guilt blocks
You are, and how unworthy humane states.

CRI. Now, sacred god of wit, if you can make
Those, whom our sports tax in these apish graces,
Kiss (like the fighting snakes) your peaceful rod;
These times shall canonize you for a god.

MER. Why, CRITES, think you any noble spirit,
Or any, worth the title of a man,
Will be incenst, to see th'inchaunted vailes
Of self-conceit, and servile flattery
(Wrapped in so many solds, by time, and custom)
Drawn from his wronged, and bewitched eyes?
Who sees not now their shape, and nakedness,
Is blinder then the son of earth, the mole:
Crowned with no more humanity, nor soul.

CRI. Though they may see it, yet the huge estate
Fancy, and form, and sensual pride have gotten,
Will make them blush for anger, not for shame;
And turn shown nakedness, to impudence.
Humor is now the test, we try things in;
All power is just: Naught that delights is sin.
And, yet the zeal of every knowing man,
(Oppressed with hills of tyranny, cast on virtue
By the light phant'sies of fools, thus transported)
Cannot but vent the Aetna of his fires,
T'enflame best bosoms, with much worthier love
Then of these outward, and effeminate shades:
That, these vain joys, in which their wills consume
Such powers of wit, and soul, as are of force
To raise their beings to aeternitie,
May be converted on works, fitting men.
And, for the practice of a forced look,
An antique gesture, or a fustian phrase,
Study the native frame of a true heart,
An inward comeliness of bounty, knowledge,
And spirit, that may conform them, actually,
To Gods high figures, which they have in power:
Which to neglect for a selfe-louing neatness,
Is sacrilege, of an vnpardon'd greatness.

MER. Then let the truth of these things strengthen thee,
In thy exempt, and only man-like course:
Like it the more, the less it is respected;
Though men fail, virtue is by gods protected.
See, here comes ARETE, I Will withdraw my self.

Act V. Scene V.
ARETE, CRITES. CRITES, you must provide strait for a masque,
It Is CYNTHIAS pleasure.

CRI. How, bright ARETE!
Why, 'twere a labor more for HERCULES.
Better, and sooner durst I undertake
To make the different seasons of the year,
The winds, or elements to sympathize,
Then their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure. They agree?
What though all concord's borne of contraries?
So many follies will confusion prove,
And like a sort of jarring instruments,
All out of time: because (indeed) we see
There is not that analogy, twixt discords,
As between things but merely opposite.

ARE. There is your error. For as HERMES wand
Charms the disorders of tumultuous ghosts,
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light then Natures did arrive:
So, what could never in it self agree,
Forgets the eccentrike property,
And at her sight, turns forthwith regular,
Whose scepter guides the flowing Ocean.
And though it did not, yet the most of them
(Being either courtiers, or not wholly rude)
Respect of majesty, the place, and presence,
Will keep them within ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masqu'd like others. For (in troth) not so
T'incorporate them, could be nothing else,
Then like a state vngouern'd without laws;
Or body made of nothing but diseases:
The one, through impotency poor, and wretched,
The other, for the anarchie absurd.

CRI. But, lady, for the reuellers themselves,
It would be better (in my poor conceit)
That others were imploid: for such as are
Unfit to be in CYNTHIAES court, can seem
No less unfit to be in CYNTHIAES sports.

ARE. That, CRITES, is not purposed without
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind,
(Who holding true intelligence, what follies
Had crept into her palace) she resolved,
Of sports, and triumphs, under that pretext,
To have them muster in their pomp, and fullness:
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the reformation she intends.

CRI. I now conceive her heavenly drift in all,
And will apply my spirits, to serve her will.
O thou, the very power, by which I am,
And but for which, it were in vain to be,
Chief next DIANA, virgin, heavenly fair,
Admired ARETE (of them admired,
Whose souls are not enkindled by the sense)
Disdain not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.

ARE. Leave to suspect us: CRITES well shall find,
As we are now most dear, we will prove most kind.
Hark, I am called.

CRI. I follow instantly.
PHOEBVS APOLLO: if with ancient rites,
And due devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate p^ans, on thy golden shrine,
Or sung thy triumphs in a lofty strain,
Fit for a theater of gods to hear;
And thou, the other son of mighty JOVE,
Cyllenian MERCVRY (sweet MAIAS joy)
If in the busy tumults of the mind,
My path thou ever have illumined,
For which, thine altars I have often perfumed,
And decked thy statues with discolored flowers:
Now thrine invention in this glorious court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
CYNTHIA may grace, and give it life by sight.

Act V. Scene VI. The Hymn.
HESPERVS, CYNTHIA, ARETE, TIME, PHRONESIS, THAVMA. QVeene, and Huntresse,
chaste, and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep,
Seated, in thy silver chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
HESPERVS entreats thy light,
Goddess, excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare it self to interpose;
CYNTHIAS shining orb was made
Heaven to clear, when day did close:
Bless us then with wished sight,
Goddess, excellently bright.
Lay thy bow of pearl apart,
And thy cristall-shining quiver;
Give unto the flying heart
Space to breathe, how short soever:
Thou that make a day of night,
Goddess, excellently bright.

CYN. When has DIANA, like an envious wretch,
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world, the precious use
Of hoorded wealth, withheld her friendly aid?
Monthly, we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our virgin-waxen torch
To burn, and blaze, while nutriment does last:
That once consumed, out of JOVE'S treasury
A new we take, and stick it in our sphere,
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men,
Their looked -- for light. Yet, what is their desert?
"Bounty is wronged, interpreted as due;
"Mortals can challenge not a ray, by right,
"Yet do expect the whole of CYNTHIAS light.
But if that Deities withdrew their gifts,
For humane follies, what could men deserve
But death, and darkness? It behooues the high,
For their own sakes, to do things worthily.

ARE. Most true, most sacred Goddess; for the heavens
Receive no good of all the good they do.
Nor JOVE, nor you, nor other heavenly power,
Are fed with fumes, which do from incense rise,
Or sacrifices reeking in their gore,
Yet, for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper good it is, that they be so)
You well are pleased with odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when.

CYN. Else, noble ARETE, they would not blame,
And tax, for or unjust, or for as proud,
Thy CYNTHIA, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starrie crown;
Such is our chastity: which safely scorns
(Not Love; for who more fervently does love
Immortal honor, and divine renown?
But) giddie CUPID, VENUS frantic son.
Yet ARETE, if by this veiled light,
We but discovered (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame,
With note of lightness, from these revels near:
Not, for the empire of the universe,
Should night, or court, this whatsoever shine,
Or grace of ours unhappily enjoy.
"Place, and occasion are two privy thieves;
"And from poor innocent ladies often steal
"(The best of things) an honorable name:
"To stay with follies, or where faults may be,
"Infers a crime, although the party free.

ARE. How Cynthian-ly (that is, how worthily
And like herself) the matchless CYNTHIA speaks!
Infinite iealousies, infinite regards,
Do watch about the true virginity:
But PHoeBE lives from all, not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free.
"Thy presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
"What Is done in CYNTHIAS sight, is done secure.

CYN. That then so answered (dearest ARETE)
What the argument or of what sort our sports
Are like to be this night, I not demand.
Nothing which duty, and desire to please
Bears written in the forehead, comes amiss.
But unto whose invention, must we owe,
The complement of this nights furniture?

ARE. Excellent Goddess, to a man's, whose worth,
(Without hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
One (at least) studious of deserving well,
And (to speak truth) indeed deserving well:
"Potentiall merit stands for actual,
"Where only opportunity does want,
"Not will, nor power: both which in him abound.
One, whom the MUSES, and MINERVA love.
For whom should they, then CRITES, more esteem,
Whom PHOEBVS (though not Fortune) holds dear?
And (which conuinceth excellence in him*)
A principal admirer of your self.
Even, through the ungentle injuries of fate,
And difficulties, which do virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears. What other things
Of farther note, do lie unborn in him,
Them I do leave for cherishment to show,
And for a Goddess graciously to judge.

CYN. We have already judged him, ARETE:
Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities,
Which times, and vicious persons cast on them:
Our self have ever vowed to esteem*
(As virtue, for it self, so) fortune base;
Who Is first in worth, the same be first in place.
Nor farther notice (ARETE) we crave
Then thine approuals sovereign warrantie:
Let 'be thy care, to make us known to him,
" CYNTHIA shall brighten, what the world made dim.

Act V. Scene VII. The first Masque.
CUPID, like ANTEROS. To them. Clear pearl of heaven, and, not to be farther
ambitious in titles, CYNTHIA. The same of this illustrous night, among others,
has also drawn these four fair virgins from the palace of their Queen
Perfection (a word* which makes no sufficient difference, twixt hers, and
thine) to visit thy imperial court: for she, their sovereign, not finding
where to dwell among men, before her return to heaven, advised them wholly to
consecrate themselves to thy celestial service, as in whose clear spirit (the
proper element, and sphere of virtues) they should behold not her alone, (their
ever honored mistress) but themselves (more truly themselves) to live
inthroniz'd. Her self would have commended them unto thy favor more
particularly, but that she knows no commendation is more available with
them, then that of proper virtue. Nevertheless, she willed them to present
this crystal mound, a note of monarchy, and symbol of perfection, to thy
more worthy deity; which, as here by me they most humbly do, so amongst the
rarities thereof, that is the chief, to show whatsoever the world has
excellent, howsoever remote and various. But your irradiate judgment will
soon discover the secrets of this little cristall world. Themselves (to
appear more plainly) because they know nothing more odious, then false
pretexts, have chosen to express their several qualities, thus, in several
colors.

The first, in citron color, is natural Affection, which given us to procure
our good, is sometime called STORGE, and as every one is nearest to himself, so
this handmaid of reason, allowable self-love, as it is without harm, so are
none without it: Her place in the court of Perfection was to quicken minds in
the pursuit of honor. Her device is a perpendicular Level, upon a Cube, or
Square. The word, SE SVO MODVLO. Alluding to that true measure of ones self,
which as every one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous in thy divine
example.

The second, in green, is AGLAIA, delectable and pleasant Conversation, whose
property is to move a kindly delight, and sometime not without laughter: Her
office, to entertain assemblies, and keep societies together with fair
familiarity. Her device within a Ring of clouds, a Heart with shine about it.
The word, CVRARVM NVEILA PELLO. An allegory of CYNTHIAES light, which no less
cleares the sky, then her fair mirth the heart.

The third, in the discolored mantle spangled all over, is EVPHANTASTE, a well
conceited Wittiness, and imployd in honoring the court with the riches of her
pure invention. Her device, upon a Petasus, or Mercuriall hat, a Crescent. The
word, SIC LAVS INGENII. Inferring, that the praise and glory of wit, does ever
increase, as does thy growing moon.

The fourth in white, is APHELEIA, a Nymph as pure and simple as the soul, or
as an abrase table, and is therefore called Simplicity, without folds, without
pleights, without color, without counterfeit: and (to speak plainly)
Plainness it self. Her device is no device. The word under her silver
Shield, OMNIS ABEST FVCVS. Alluding to thy spotless self, who art as far
from impuritie, as from mortality.

My self (celestial Goddess) more fit for the court of CYNTHIA, then the
arbors of CYTHEREE, am called ANTEROS, or Loves enemy; the more welcome
therefore to thy court, and the fitter to conduct this quaternion, who as they
are thy professed votaries, and for that cause adversaries to Love, yet thee
(perpetual Virgin) they both love, and vow to love eternally.


Act V. Scene VIII.
CYNTHIA, ARETE, CRITES. NOt without wonder, nor without delight,
Mine eyes have viewed (in contemplations depth)
This work of wit, divine, and excellent:
What shape? what substance? or what unknown power
In virgins habit, crowned with laurel leaves,
And olive branches wouen in between,
On sea-girt rocks, like to a Goddess shines?
O front! O face! O all caelestiall sure,
And more then mortal! ARETE, behold
Another CYNTHIA, and another Queen,
Whose glory (like a lasting plenilune)
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane!
Not under heaven an object could be found
More sit to please. Let CRITES make approach.
Bounty forbids to paul our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favor, after view:
"The time of grace is, when the cause is new.

ARE. Lo, here the man (celestial DELIA)
Who (like a circle bounded in it self)
Contaynes as much, as man in fullness may.
Lo, here the man, who not of usual earth,
But of that nobler, and more precious mould,
Which PHOEBVS self does temper, is composed;
And, who (though all were wanting to reward)
Yet, to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy favors gain is his ambitions most,
And labors best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.

CYN. With no less pleasure, then we have beheld
This precious crystal, work of rarest wit,
Our eye does read thee (now enstil'd) our CRITES;
Whom learning, virtue, and our favor last,
Exempteth from the gloomy multitude.
"With common eye the supreme should not see.
Henceforth be ours, the more thy self to be.

CRI. Heavens purest light, whose orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy praise (diuinest CYNTHIA)
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thine (save therein) the most unworthy CRITES
Does find himself! for ever shine thy fame;
Thine honors ever, as thy beauties do;
In me they must, my dark worlds chiefest lights,
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed ARETE has pleased to name,
As marks, to which m'indeuours steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.

Act V. Scene IX. The second Masque.
MERCVRIE, as a PAGE. SIster of PHOEBVS, to whose bright orb we owe, that we
not complain of his absence; These four brethren (for they are brethren, and
sons of EVTAXIA, a lady known, and highly beloved of your resplendent
deity) not able to be absent, when CYNTHIA held a solemnity, officiously
insinuate themselves into thy presence: For, as there are four cardinal
virtues, upon which the whole frame of the court does move, so are these the
four cardinal properties, without which, the body of complement moves not.
With these four silver iauelins (which they bear in their hands) they support
in Princes courts the state of the presence, as by office they are obliged;
which, though here they may seem superfluous, yet, for honors sake, they thus
presume to visit thee, having also been emploid in the palace of Queen
Perfection. And though to them, that would make themselves gracious to a
Goddess, sacrifices were fitter then presents, or Impreses, yet they both hope
thy favor; and (in place of either) use several Symboles, containing the
titles of thy imperial dignity.

First, the hethermost, in the changeable blew, and green robe, is the
commendably-fashioned gallant, EVCOSMOS; whose courtly habit is the grace of
the presence, and delight of the surueying eye: whom ladies understand by the
names of neat, and elegant. His symbol is, DIVAE VIRGINI, in which he would
express thy deities principal glory, which has ever been virginity.

The second, in the rich acoutrement, and robe of purple, empaled with gold, is
EVPATHES; who entertaynes his mind with an harmless, but not incurious
variety: All the objects of his senses are sumptuous, himself a gallant,
that, without excess, can make use of superfluity: go richly in
imbroideries, jewels (and what not?) without vanity, and fare delicately
without gluttony: and therefore not (not without cause) is universally thought
to be of five humor. His Symbol is, DIVAE OPTIMAE. An attribute to express
thy goodness, in which thou so resemblest JOVE thy father.

The third, in the blush-colour'd suit, is, EVTOLMOS, as duly respecting
others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by the title of good as
dacitie: to courts, and courtly assemblies, a guest most acceptable. His
Symbol is, DIVAE VIRAGINI. To express thy hardy courage, in chase of savage
beasts, which harbor in woods, and wilderness.

The fourth, in watchet tinsell, is the kind, and truly benefique EVCOLOS. Who
imparteth not without respect, but yet without difficulty; and has the
happiness to make every kindness seem double, by the timely, and freely
bestowing thereof. He is the chief of them, who (by the vulgar) are said to be
of good nature. His Symbol is, DIVAE MAXIMAE. An adiunct to signify thy
greatness, which in heaven, earth, and hell is formidable.


Act V. Scene X.
CUPID, MERCVRIE. The Ma^kes join, and dance. IS not that AMORPHVS, the
trauailer?


MER. As though it were not! do you not see how his legs are in travail with
a measure?


CVP. HEDON, thy master is next.


MER. What, will CUPID turn nomendator, and cry them?


CVP. No faith, but I have a comedy toward, that would not be lost for a
kingdom.


MER. In good time, for CUPID will prove the comedy.


CVP. MERCVRY, I am studying how to match them.


MER. How to mis-match them were harder.


CVP. They are the Nymphs must do it, I shall sport my self with their
passions above measure.


MER. Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I fear thou have not
arrows for the purpose.


CVP. O, yes, here be of all sorts, flights, rouers, and butt-shafts. But I can
wound with a brandish, and never draw bow for the matter.


MER. I cannot but believe it, my invisible archer, and yet me thinks you are
tedious.


CVP. It behoues me to be somewhat circumspect, MERCVRY; for if CYNTHIA hear
the twang of my bow, she will go near to whip me with the string: therefore,
to prevent that, I thus discharge a brandish upon -- it makes no matter which
of the couples. PHANTASTE, and AMORPHVS, at you.


MER. Will the shaking of a shaft strike 'hem into such a fever of affection?


CVP. As well as the wincke of an eye: but I pray thee, hinder me not with thy
prattle.


MER. JOVE forbid I hinder thee. Mary, all that I fear, is CYNTHIAS presence;
which, with the cold of her chastity, casts such an antiperistasis about the
place, that no heat of thine will tarry with the patient.


CVP. It will tarry the rather, for the antiperistasis will keep it in.


MER. I long to see the experiment.


CVP. Why, their marrow boiles already, or they are all turned eunuchs.


MER. They have danced the first strain. Nay, and 't be so, I Will give over
speaking, and be a spectator only.


AMO. CYNTHIA (by my bright soul) is a right exquisite, and splendidious lady;
yet AMORPHVS, I think, has seen more fashions, I am sure more countries: but
whether I have, or not, what need we gaze on CYNTHIA, that have our self to
admire?


PHA. O, excellent CYNTHIA! yet if PHANTASTE sat where she doo's, and had
such a tire on her head (for attire can do much) I say no more -- but
goddesses are goddesses, and PHANTASTE is as she is! I would the reuells were
done once, I might go to my school of glas^e, again, and learn to do my
self right after all this ruffling.


MER. How now, CUPID? here is a wonderful change with your brandish! do you
not hear, how they dote?


CVP. What prodigy is this? no word of love? no mention? no motion?


MER. Not a word, my little Ignis fallen, not a word.


CVP. Are my darts inchaunted? Is their vigor gone? is their virtue --


MER. What? CUPID turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha.


CVP. Laughs MERCVRY?


MER. Is CUPID angry?


CVP. Has he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?


MOR. A rare comoedie, it shall be entitled, CVPIDS.


CVP. Do not scorn us, HERMES.


MER. Choler, and CUPID, are two fiery things; I scorn 'hem not. But I see
that come to pass, which I presaged in the beginning.


CVP. You cannot tell: perhaps the physic will not work so soon upon some,
as upon others. It may be, the rest are not so resty.


MER. Ex vngue, you know the old adage, as these, so are the remainder.


CVP. I Will try: this is the same shaft, with which I wounded ARGVRION.


MER. I, but let me save you a labor, CUPID: there were certain bottles of
water fetched, and drunk off (since that time) by these gallants.


CVP. JOVE, strike me into earth: The Fountain of Self-love!


MER. Nay, faint not, CUPID.


CVP. I remembered it not.


MER. Faith, it was ominous to take the name of ANTEROS upon you, you know not
what charm or enchantment lies in the word: you saw, I durst not venture upon
any device, in our presentment, but was content to be no other then a simple
page. Your arrows properties (to keep decorum) CUPID, are suited (it should
seem) to the nature of him you personate.


CVP. Indignity not to be borne.


MER. Nay rather, an attempt to have been forborne.


CVP. The second strain. How might I revenge my self on this insulting
MERCVRY! there is CRITES, his minion, he has not tasted of this water. It shall
be so. Is CRITES turned dotard on himself too?


MER. That follows not, because the venom of your shafts cannot pierce him,
CUPID.


CVP. As though there were one antidote for these, and another for him?


MER. As though there were not! or as if one effect might not arise of diverse
causes? What say you to CYNTHIA, ARETE, PHRONESIS, TIME, and others there?


CVP. They are divine.


MER. And CRITES aspires to be so.


CVP. But that shall not serve him.


MER. It Is like to do it, at this time. But CUPID is grown too covetous, that
will not spare one of a multitude.


CVP. One is more then a multitude.


MER. The third strain. ARETES favor makes any one shot-proofe against thee,
CUPID. I pray thee, light hony-bee, remember thou art not now in ADORIS garden,
but in CYNTHIAS presence, where thorns lie in garrison about the roses. Soft,
CYNTHIA speaks.


Act V. Scene XI.
CYNTHIA, ARETE, CRITES, MASQVERS. LAdies, and gallants of our court, to end,
And give a timely period to our sports,
Let us conclude them with declining night;
Our empire is but of the darker half.
And if you judge it any recompense
For your fair pains, to have earned DIANAS thanks,
DIANA grants them: and bestows their crown
To gratify your acceptable zeal.
For you are they, that not (as some have done)
Do censure us, as too severe, and sour,
But as (more rightly) gracious to the good;
Although we not deny, unto the proud,
Or the profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so ACTAEON, by presuming far,
Did (to our grief) incur a fatal doom;
And so, swollen NIOBE (comparing more
Then he presumed) was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no crime, to enter sacred bowers,
And hallowed places, with impure aspect,
Most lewdly to pollute? Seems it no crime,
To brave a deity? Let mortals learn
To make religion of offending heaven;
And not at all to censure powers divine.
To men, this argument should stand for firm,
"A Goddess did it, therefore it was good:
"We are not cruel, nor delight in blood.
But what have serious repetitions
To do with revels, and the sports of court
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation. Let 't suffice,
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious, and lewd blasphemies.
For we are no less CYNTHIA, then we were,
Nor is our power (but as our self) the same:
Though we have now put on no tire of shine,
But mortal eyes vndaz'led may endure.
"Years are beneath the spheres: and time makes weak
"Things under heaven, not powers which govern heaven.
And though our self be, in our self, secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunitie from thence. Lo, this is all:
"Honor has store of spleen, but wants gall.
Once more, we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your taken toil, which here let take an end.
And that we not mis-take your several worths,
Nor you our favor, from your selves remove
What makes you not your selves, those clouds of masque:
They vnmasque. "Particular pains, particular thanks do ask.
How! let me view you! ha? Are we contemned?
Is there so little awe of our disdain,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the court?
And (without forehead) boldly press so far,
As farther none? How apt is lenity
To be abusde? severity to be loathed?
And yet, how much more does the seeming face
Of neighbour-vertues, and their borrowed names,
Add of lewd boldness, to loose vanities?
Who would have thought that PHILAVTIA durst
Or have usurped noble STORGES name?
Or with that theft have ventred, on our eyes?
Who would have thought, that all of them should hope
So much of our conniuence, as to come
To grace themselves, with titles not their own?
In stead of medicines, have we maladies?
And such impostumes, as PHANTASTE is,
Grow in our palace? we must lance these sores,
Or all will putrify. Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud then this:
Take off our veil, that shadows may depart,
And shapes appear, beloved ARETE -- So.
Another face of things presents it self,
Then did of late: What! featherd CUPID masked?
And masked like ANTEROS? And, stay! more strange!
Dear MERCVRIE, our brother like a page,
To countenance the ambush of the boy?
Nor ends our discovery as yet:
GELAIA, like a Nymph, that but ere-while
(In male attire) did serve ANAIDES?
CUPID came hither to find sport and game,
Who, heretofore has been too conversant
Among our train; but never felt revenge:
And MERCVRIE bare CUPID company.
CUPID, we must confess this time of mirth
(Proclaimed by us) gave opportunity,
To thy attempts, although no privilege;
Tempt us no farther, we cannot endure
Thy presence longer: vanish hence, away.
You, MERCVRIE, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this plot, we well perceive your hand.
But (for we mean not a censorian task,
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe)
Dear ARETE, and CRITES, to you two
We give the charge; impose what pains you please:
The incurable cut off, the rest reform,
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since reuells were proclaimed let now none bleed.

ARE. How well DIANA can distinguish times?
And forther censures? keeping to her self
The doom of gods, leaving the rest to us?
Come, cite them, CRITES, first, and then proceed.

CRI. First, PHILAVTIA (for she was the first,)
Then light GELAIA, in AGLAIAS name,
Thirdly PHANTASTE, and MORIA next,
Maine follies all, and of the female crew:
AMORPHVS, or EVCOSMOS conterfeit,
Voluptuous HEDON taken for EVPATHES,
Brazen ANAIDES, and ASOTVS last,
With his two pages, MORVS and PROSAITES;
And thou, the travelers evil, COS, approach,
Impostors all, and male deformities --

ARE. Nay, forward, for I delegate my power.
And will that at thy mercy they do stand,
Whom they so often so plainly scorned before.
"'It Is virtue which they want, and wanting it,
"Honor no garment to their backs can fit.
Then, CRITES, practice thy discretion.

CRI. Adored CYNTHIA, and bright ARETE,
Another might seem fitter for this task,
Then CRITES far, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindicatiue,
Or mindful of contempts, which I contemned
As done of impotence) must be remiss,
Who, as I was the author, in some sort,
To work their knowledge into CYNTHIAS sight,
So should be much seuerer to revenge
Th'indignitie, hence issuing to her name.
But there is not one of these, who are vnpain'd,
Or by themselves unpunished: for vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns delight it self to punishment.
But we must forward to design their doom,
You are offenders, that must be confessed,
Do you confess it?

ALL. We do.

CRI. And, that you merit sharp correction?

ALL. Yes.

CRI. Then we (reserving unto DELIAES grace,
Her further pleasure, and to ARETE
What DELIA grants) thus do sentence you.
That from this place (for poenance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of Self-love)
You (two and two) singing a palinode,
March to your several homes by NIOBES stone,
And offer up two tears apiece thereon;
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called weeping Cross:
Because it stands cross of CYNTHIAS way,
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
And, after poenance thus performed, you pass
In like set order, not as MIDAS did,
To wash his gold off into Tagus stream,
But to the well of knowledge, Helicon;
Where purged of your present maladies,
(Which are not few, nor slender) you become
Such as you feign would seem: and then return,
Offering your service to great CYNTHIA.
This is your sentence, if the goddess please.
To ratify it with her high consent:
"The scope of wise mirth unto fruict is bent.

CYN. We do approve thy censure, beloved CRITES.
Which MERCVRY, thy true propitious friend,
(A deity, next JOVE, beloved of us)
Will undertake to see exactly done:
And for this service of discovery
Performed by thee, in honor of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
As shall become our bounty, and thy place.
"Princes, that would their people should do well,
"Must at themselves begin, as at the head;
"For men, by their example, pattern out
"Their imitations, and reguard of laws:
"A virtuous Court a world to virtue draws.

PALINODE. AMO. From spanish shrugs, french faces, smirks, irps, and all
affected humors.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

PHA. From secret friends, sweet servants, loves, doves, and such phantastique
humors.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

AMO. From stabbing of arms, flap-dragons, healths, whiffes, and all such
swaggering humors.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

PHA. From wauing of fannes, coy glaunces, glickes, cringes, and all such
simpring humors.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

AMO. From making love by atturny, courting of puppets, and paying for new
acquaintance.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

PHA. From perfumed dogs, munkeyes, sparrowes, dildo's, and parachito's.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

AMO. From wearing bracelets of hair, shooe-ties, gloves, garters, and rings
with poesies.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

PHA. From pargetting, painting, slicking, glazing, and renewing old riueld
faces.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

AMO. From squiring to tilt-yards, play houses, pageants, and all such public
places.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

PHA. From entertayning one gallant to gull an other, and making fools of
either.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

AMO. From belying ladies favors, noble-mens countenance, coining counterseit
employments, vainglorious taking to them other men's services, and all
selfe-louing humors.

CHORUS. Good MERCVRY defend us.

SONG. NOw each one dry his weeping eyes,
And to the well of knowledge haste;
Where purged of your maladies,
You may of sweeter waters taste:
And, with refined voice, report
The grace of CYNTHIA, and her court.
THE EPILOGVE.
GEntles, be it known to you, since I went in
I am turned rimer; and do thus begin.
The Author (jealous, how your sense does take
His travails) has enjoined me to make
Some short, and ceremonious epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a rogue.
He ties me to such laws, as quite distract
My thoughts; and would a year of time exact.
I neither must be faint, remiss, nor sorry,
Sour, serious, confident, nor peremptory:
But betwixt these. Let Us see; to lay the blame
Upon the Childrens action, that were lame.
To crave your favor, with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the writers faculty.
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The play, might tax the maker of Self-love.
I Will only speak, what I have heard him say;
by ( --) it is good, and if you liked, you may.
THE END.
Ec^e rubet quidam, pallet, slupet, oscitat, odit.
Hoc volo: nunc nobis carmina nostra placent.

This Comicall Satyr was first acted, in the year 1600.

By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETH'S Chapel.

The principal Comoedians were, NOT. FIRED. SAL. PAVY. THO. DAY. IOH.
UNDERWOOD. ROB. BAXTER. IOH. FROST.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

POETASTER, OR His Arraignement. A Comicall Satyr. Acted, in the year 1601.
By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETH'S CHAPEL.

The Author B. I.

MART. Et mihi de nullo fama rubore placet.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY, for Matthew Lownes.

M. DC. XVI.

TO THE VIRTUOUS, AND MY WORTHY FRIEND, Mr. Richard Martin.
SIr, A thankful man owes a courtesy ever: the unthankful, but when he
needs it. To make mine own mark appear, and show by which of these seals I
am known, I send you this piece of what may live of mine; for whose innocence,
as for the Authors, you were once a noble and timely undertaker, to the
greatest Justice of this kingdom. Enjoy now the delight of your goodness;
which is to see that prosper, you preserved: and posterity to owe the reading
of that, without offense, to your name; which so much ignorance, and malice of
the times, then conspired to have suppressed.

Your true lover, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
AUGUSTUS CAESAR. MECOENAS. MARC. OVID. COR. GALLVS. PROPERTIVS. FVS. ARISTVS.
PVB. OVID. VIRGIL. HORACE. TREBATIVS. LVPVS. TVCCA. CRISPINVS. HERMOGENES. DE.
FANNIVS. ALBIVS. MINOS. HISTRIO. PYRGVS. LICTORS. IVLIA. CYTHERIS. PLAVTIA.
CHLOE. MAIDS.
THE SCENE. ROME.

POETASTER.
After the second sounding.
ENVY. Arising in the midst of the stage. LIght, I salute thee, but with
wounded nerves:
Wishing thy golden splendour, pitchy darkness.
What Is here? TH'ARRAIGNMENT? I: This, this is it,
That our sunk eyes have wak't for, all this while:
Here will be subject for my snakes, and me.
Cling to my neck, and wrists, my loving worms,
And cast you round, in soft, and amorous foulds,
Till I do bid, vncurle: Then, break your knots,
Shoot out your selves at length, as your forced stings
Would hide themselves within his malic't sides,
To whom I shall apply you. Stay! the shine
Of this assembly here offends my sight,
I Will darken that first, and outface their grace.
Wonder not, if I stare: these fifteen weeks
(So long as since the plot was but an embrion)
Have I, with burning lights, mixed vigilant thoughts,
In expectation of this hated play:
To which (at last) I am arrived as Prologue.
Nor would I, you should look for other looks,
Gesture, or complement from me, then what
The Infected bulk of ENVY can afford:
For I am risse here with a covetous hope,
To blast your pleasures, and destroy your sports,
With wrestings, comments, applications,
Spie-like suggestions, privy whisperings,
And thousand such promooting sleights as these.
Mark, how I will begin: The Scene is, ha!
ROME? ROME? and ROME? Crack ey-strings, and your balls
Drop into earth; let me be ever blind.
I am prevented; all my hopes are crossed,
Checked, and abated; fie, a freezing sweat
Flows forth at all my pores, my entrails burn:
What should I do? ROME? ROME? O my vexed soul,
How might I force this to the present state?
Are there no players here? no poet-apes,
That come with basiliskes eyes, whose forked tongues
Are steept in venom, as their hearts in gall?
Either of these would help me; they could wrest,
Peruer^, and poison all they hear, or see,
With senseless glosses, and allusions.
Now if you be good devils, fly me not.
You know what dear, and ample faculties
I have endowed you with: I Will lend you more.
Here, take my snakes among you, come, and eat,
And while the squeezed juice flows in your black jaws,
Help me to damn the Author. Spit it forth
Upon his lines, and show your rustie teeth
At every word, or accent: or else choose
Out of my longest vipers, to stick down
In your deep throats; and let the heads come forth
At your rank mouths; that he may see you armed
With triple malice, to hiss, sting, and tear
His work, and him; to forge, and then declame,
Traduce, corrupt, apply, inform, suggest:
O, these are gifts wherein your souls are blessed.
What? do you hide your selves? will none appear?
None answer? what, does this calm troop affright you?
Nay, then I do despair: down, sink again.
This travail is all lost with my dead hopes.
If in such bosoms, spite have left to dwell,
Envy is not on earth, nor scarce in hell.

The third sounding. PROLOGVE.
STay, Monster, ere thou sink, thus on thy head
Set we our bolder foot; with which we tread
Thy malice into earth: So spite should die,
Despised and scorned by noble industry.
If any muse why I salute the stage,
An armed Prologue; know, 't is a dangerous age:
Wherein, who writes, had need present his Scenes
Forty sold proof against the coniuring means
Of base detractors, and illiterate apes,
That fill up rooms in fair and formal shapes.
Against these, have we put on this forced defense:
Whereof the allegory and hid sense
Is, that a well erected confidence
Can fright their pride, and laugh their folly hence.
Here now, put case our Author should, once more,
Swear that his play were good; he does implore,
You would not argue him of arrogance:
How ere that common spawne of ignorance,
Our fry of writers, may beslime his fame,
And give his action that adulterate name.
Such ful-blowne vanity he more does loathe,
Then base deiection: There Is a mean 'twixt both.
Which with a constant firmness he pursues,
As one, that knows the strength of his own muse.
And this he hopes all free souls will allow,
Others, that take it with a rugged brow,
Their moods he rather pitties, then enuies:
His mind it is above their injuries.
Act I.
Scene I.
OVID, LVSCVS. THen, when this body falls in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.
It shall go so.

LVSC. Young master, master OVID, do you hear? gods a me! away with your
songs, and sonnets; and on with your gown and cappe, quickly: here, here, your
father will be a man of this room presently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be
brief. These verses too, a poison on 'hem, I cannot abide 'hem, they make me
ready to cast, by the banks of helicon. Nay look, what a rascally untoward
thing this poetry is; I could tear 'hem now.


OVID. Give me, how neere's my father?


LVSC. Heart a'man: get a law-booke in your hand, I will not answer you else.
Why so: now there is some formalitie in you. By JOVE, and three or four of the
gods more, I am right of mine old masters humor for that; this villainous
poetry will undo you, by the welkin.


OVID. What, have thou buskins on, LVSCVS, that thou swear'st so tragically,
and high?


LVSC. No, but I have boots on, sir, and so has your father too by this time:
for he called for 'hem, ere I came from the lodging.


OVID. Why? was he no readier?


LVSC. O no; and there was the mad skeldring captain, with the velvet arms,
ready to lay hold on him as he comes down: he that presses every man he
meets, with an oath, to lend him money, and cries; (Thou must doo'r, old boy,
as thou art a man, a man of worship.)


OVID. Who? PANTILIVS TVCCA?


LVSC. I, he: and I met little master LVPVS, the Tribune, going thither too.


OVID. Nay, and he be under their arrest, I may (with safety enough) read
over my elegy, before he come.


LVSC. Gods a me! What'll you do? why, young master, you are not castalian
mad, lunatike, frantike, desperate? ha?


OVID. What ailest thou, LVSCVS?


LVSC. God be with you, sir, I Will leave you to your poetical fancies, and
furies. I Will not be guilty, I.


OVID. Be not, good ignorance: I Am glad thou art gone:
For thus alone, our ear shall better judge
The hasty errors of our morning muse.
Ovid L^b. 1. Amo. Ele. 15.
Envy, why twitst thou me, my time's spent ill?
And call'st my verse, fruits of an idle quill?
Or that (unlike the line from whence I sprung)
Wars dustie honors I pursue not young?
Or that I study not the tedious laws;
And prostitute my voice to every cause?
Thy scope is mortal; mine eternal ^ame:
Which through the world shall ever chaunt my name.
HOMER will live, whilst TENEDOS stands, and I WOULD,
Or, to the sea, sleet SIMO^S does slide:
And so shall HESIOD too, while vines do bear,
Or crooked sickles crop the ripened care.
CALLIMACHVS, though in invention low,
Shall still be sung: since he in art does flow.
No loss shall come to SOPHOCLES proud vain.
With sun, and moon, ARATVS shall remain.
Whilst slaves be false, fathers hard, and bawdes be whorish,
Whilst harlots flatter, shall MENANDER flourish.
ENNIVS, though rude, and ACCIVS high-reard strain,
A fresh applause in every age shall gain.
Of VARRO'S name, what ear shall not be told?
Of IASONS ARGO? and the fleece of gold?
Then shall LVCRETIVS lofty numbers die,
When earth, and seas in fire and flames shall fry.
TYTIRVS, Tillage, AENEE shall be read,
Whilst ROME of all the conquered world is head.
Till CVPIDS fires be out, and his bow broken,
Thy verses (neat TIBVLLVS) shall be spoken.
Our GALLVS shall be known from east to west:
So shall LYCORIS, whom he now loves best.
The suffering plough-share, or the flint may wear:
But heavenly poesy no death can fear.
Kings shall give place to it, and kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
Kneel hindes to trash: me let bright PHOEBVS swell,
With cups full flowing from the MUSES well.
Frost-fearing myrtle shall impale my head,
And of sad lovers I Will be often read.
"Envy, the living, not the dead, does bite:
"For after death all men receive their right.
Then, when this body falls in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.

Act I. Scene II.
OVID Senior, OVID Junior, LVSCVS, TVCCA, LVPVS, PYRGVS. YOur name shall live
indeed, sir; you say true: but how infamously, how scorned and contemned in the
eyes and ears of the best and grauest Romans, that you think not on: you
never so much as dream of that. Are these the fruits of all my travail and
expenses? is this the scope and aim of thy studies? are these the hopeful
courses, wherewith I have so long flattered my expectation from thee? verses?
poetry? OVID, whom I thought to see the pleader, become OVID the play-maker?


OVID iu. No, sir.


OVID se. Yes, sir. I hear of a tragoedie of yours coming forth for the
common players there, called MEDEA. By my houshold-gods, if I come to the
acting of it, I Will add one tragic part, more then is yet expected, to it:
believe me when I promise it. What? shall I have my son a stager now? an
enghle for players? a gull? a rooke? a shot-clogge? to make suppers, and be
laughed at? PVBLIVS, I will set thee on the funeral pile, first.


OVID iu. Sir, I beseech you to have patience.


LVSC. Nay, this it is to have your ears damm'd up to good counsel. I did
angure all this to him aforehand, without poring into an oxes panch for the
matter, and yet he would not be scrupulous.


TVCC. How now, good man slave? what, roll powle? all riualls, rascal? why my
Master, of worship, do hear? Are these thy best proiects? is this thy
desseignes and thy discipline, to suffer knaves to be competitors with
commanders and gentlemen? are we paralells, rascal? are we paralells?


OVID. se. Sirrah, go get my horses ready. You Will still be prating.


TVCC. Do, you perpetual stinkard, do, go, talk to tapsters and ostlers,
you slave, they are in your element, go: here be the Emperors captains, you
raggamuffin rascal; and not your cam'rades.


LVPV. Indeed, MARCUS OVID, these players are an idle generation, and do much
harm in a state, corrupt young gentry very much, I know it: I have not been a
Tribune thus long, and observed nothing: besides, they will rob us, us, that
are magistrates, of our respect, bring us upon their stages, and make us
ridiculous to the plebeians; they will play you, or me, the wisest men they can
come by still; me: only to bring us in contempt with the vulgar, and make us
cheap.


TVCC. Thou Art in the right, my venerable cropshin, they will indeed: the
tongue of the oracle never twang'd truer. Your courtier cannot kiss his
mistress slippers, in quiet, for 'hem: nor your white innocent gallant pawn his
reuelling suit, to make his punke a supper. An honest decayed commander, cannot
skelder, cheat, nor be seen in a bawdie house, but he shall be straight in one
of their worm wood comoedies. They are grown licentious, the rogues;
libertines, flat libertines. They forget they are in the statute, the rascals,
they are blazond there, there they are trickt, they and their pedigrees; they
need no other heralds, I wisse.


OVID. se. Me thinks, if nothing else, yet this alone* the very reading of
the public edicts should fright thee from commerce with them; and give thee
distaste enough of their actions. But this betrays what a student you are:
this argues your proficiencie in the law.


OVID. iu. They wrong me, sir, and do abuse you more,
That blow your ears with these untrue reports.
I am not known unto the open stage,
Nor do I traffic in their theaters.
Indeed, I do acknowledge, at request
Of some near friends, and honorable Romans,
I have begun a poem of that nature.

OVID. se. You have, sir, a poem? and where is it? that is tho law you study.


OVID. iu. CORNELIUS GALLVS borrowed it to read.


OVID. se. CORNELIUS GALLVS? There Is another gallant, too, has drunk of the
same poison: and TIBVLLVS, and PROPERTIVS. But these are gentlemen of means,
and reuenew now. Thou art a younger brother, and have nothing, but thy bare
exhibition: which I protest shall be bare indeed, if thou forsake not these
unprofitable by-courses, and that timely too. Name me a professed poet, that his
poetry did ever afford him so much as a competencie. I, your god of poets
there (whom all of you admire and reverence so much) HOMER, he whose
worme-eaten statue must not be spewd against, but with hallowed lips, and
groueling adoration, what was he? what was he?


TVCC. Mary, I Will tell thee, old swagger; He was a poor, blind, riming
rascal, that lived obscurely up and down in boothes, and tap-houses, and
scarce ever made a good meal in his sleep, the whoorson hungry beggar.


OVID. se. He says well: Nay, I know this nettles you now, but answer me;
Is It not true? you will tell me his name shall live; and that (now being dead)
his works have eternis'd him, and made him divine But could this divinity
feed him, while he lived? could his name feast him?


TVCC. Or purchase him a Senators revenue? could it?


OVID. se. I, or give him place in the commonwealth? worship, or attendants?
make him be carried in his litter?


TVCC. Thou speak sentences, old BIAS.


LVPV. All this the law will do, young sir, if you will follow it.


OVID. se. If he be mine, he shall follow and observe, what I will apt him
too, or, I profess here openly, and utterly to disclaim in him.


OVID. iu. Sir, let me crave you will, forgo these moodes;
I will be any thing, or study any thing:
I Will prove the vnfashion'd body of the law
Pure elegance, and make her ruggedst strains
Ruin smoothly, as PROPERTIVS elegies.

OVID. se. PROPERTIVS elegies? good!

LVPV. Nay, you take him too quickly, MARCUS.

OVID. se. Why, he cannot speak, he cannot think out of poetry, he is
bewitched with it.


LVPV. Come, do not mis-prize him.


OVID. se. Mis-prize? I, mary, I would have him use some such words now: They
have some touch, some taste of the law. He should make himself a style out of
these, and let his PROPERTIVS elegies go by.


LVPV. Indeed, young PVBLIVS, he that will now hit the mark, must shoot
thorough the law we have no other planet reigns, and in that sphere, you may
sit, and sing with angels. Why, the law makes a man happy, without respecting
any other merit: a simple scholar, or none at all may be a lawyer.


TVCC. He tells thee true, my noble Neophyte; my little Grammaticaster, he
does: It shall never put thee to thy Mathematiques, Metaphysiques, Philosophy,
and I know not what supposed sufficiencies; If thou can but have the patience
to plod enough, talk, and make noise enough, be impudent enough, and it is
enough.


LVPV. Three books will furnish you.


TVCC. And the less art, the better: Besides, when it shall be in the power
of thy chen rill conscience, to do right, or wrong, at thy pleasure, my pretty
ALCIBIADES.


LVPV. I, and to have better men then himself, by many thousand degrees, to
observe him, and stand bare.


TVCC. True, and he to carry himself proud, and stately, and have the law on
his side for it, old boy.


OVID. se. Well, the day grows old, gentlemen, and I must leave you. PVBLIVS,
if thou will hold my favor, abandon these idle fruitless studies that so
bewitch thee. Send IANVS home his back-face again, and look only forward to
the law: Intend that. I will allow thee, what shall suit thee in the rank of
gentlemen, and maintain thy society with the best: and under these
conditions, I leave thee. My blessings light upon thee, if thou respect them:
if not, mine eyes may drop for thee, but thine own heart will ache for it self;
and so farewell. What, are my horses come?


LVSC. Yes, sir, they are at the gate without.


OVID. se. That Is well. ASINIVS LVPVS, a word. Captain, I shall take my leave
of you?


TVCC. No, my little old boy, dispatch with COTHVRNVS there: I Will attend thee,
I --


LVSC. To borrow some ten drachmes, I know his project.


OVID. se. Sir, you shall make me beholding to you. Now Captain TVCCA, what
say you?


TVCC. Why, what should I say? or what can I say, my flower of the order?
Should I say, thou art rich? or that thou art honorable? or wise? or valiant?
or learned? or liberal? Why, thou art all these, and thou know it (my noble
LVCVLLVS) thou know it: come, be not ashamed of thy virtues, old stumpe.
Honor's a good brooch to wear in a man's hat, at all times. Thou art the man
of wars MECOENAS, old boy. Why should not thou be graced then by them, as
well as he is by his poets? How now, my carrier, what news?


LVSC. The boy has stayed within for his cue, this half hour.


TVCC. Come, do not whisper to me, but speak it out: what? it is no treason
against the state, I hope, is it?


LVSC. Yes, against the state of my masters purse.


PYRG. Sir, AGRIPPA desires you to forbear him till the next week: his moyles
are not yet come up.


TVCC. His moyles? now the bots, the spauin, and the glanders, and some dozen
diseases more, light on him, and his moyles. What have they the yellowes, his
moyles, that they come no faster? or are they foundred? ha? his moyles have the
staggers belike: have they?


PYRG. O no, sir: then your tongue might be suspected for one of his moyles.


TVCC. He owes me almost a talent, and he thinks to bear it away with his
moyles, does he? Sirrah, you, nut-cracker, go your ways to him again, and
tell him I must have money, I: I cannot eat stones and turses, say. What, will
he clem me, and my followers? Ask him, an' he will clem me: do, go. He would
have me fry my ierkin, would he? Away, setter, away. Yet, stay, my little
tumbler: this old boy shall supply now. I will not trouble him, I cannot be
importunate, I: I cannot be impudent.


PYRG. Alas, sir, no: you are the most maidenly blushing creature upon the
earth.


TVCC. Do thou hear, my little six and fifty, or thereabouts? Thou art
not to learn the humors and tricks of that old bald cheater, Time: thou had
not this chain for nothing. Men of worth have their chymaera's, as well as
other creatures: and they do see monsters, sometimes: they do, they do,
brave boy.


PYRG. Better cheap then he shall see you, I warrant him.


TVCC. Thou must let me have six, six, drachmes, I mean, old boy; thou shall
do it: I tell thee, old boy, thou shall, and in private too, do thou see?
Go, walk off: there, there. Six is the sum. Thy sonn's a gallant spark,
and must not be put out of a sudden: come hither, CALLINACHVS, thy father tells
me thou art too poetical, boy, thou must not be so, thou must leave them, young
nouice, thou must, they are a sort of poor starved rascals; that are ever
wrapped up in foul linen; and can boast of nothing but a lean visage, peering
out of a seame-rent suit; the very emblemes of beggerie. No, do hear? turn
lawyer, Thou shall be my solicitor: It Is right, old boy, is it?


OVID. se. You were best tell it, Captain.


TVCC. No: fare thou well mine honest horseman, and thou old beuer. Pray thee
Roman, when thou come to town, see me at my lodging, visit me sometimes:
thou shall be welcome, old boy. Do not balke me, good swaggerer. JOVE keep
thy chain from pawning, go thy ways, if thou lack money, I Will lend thee
some: I Will leave thee to thy horse, now. Adieu.


OVID. se. Farewell, good Captain.


TVCC. Boy, you can have but half a share now, boy.


OVID. se. It Is a strange boldness, that accompanies this fellow: Come.


OVID. iu. I Will give attendance on you, to your horse, sir, please you --


OVID. se. No: keep your chamber, and fall to your studies; do so: the gods
of Rome bless thee.


OVID. iu. And give me stomach to digest this law,
That should have followed sure, had I been he.
O sacred poesy, thou spirit of arts,
The soul of science, and the queen of souls,
What profane violence, almost sacrilege,
Has here been offered thy diuinities!
That thine own guiltless poverty should arm
Prodigious ignorance to wound thee thus!
For thence, is all their force of argument
Drawn forth against thee; or from the abuse
Of thy great powers in a dultrate brains:
When, would men learn but to distinguish spirits,
And set true difference twixt those jaded wits
That run a broken pase for common hire,
And the high raptures of a happy Muse
Borne on the wings of her immortal thought,
That kickes at earth with a disdainefull heel,
And bears at heaven gates with her bright hooues;
They would not then with such distorted faces,
And desperate censures stab at poesy.
They would admire bright knowledge, and their minds
Should never descend on so unworthy objects,
As gold, or titles: they would dread far more,
To be thought ignorant, then be known poor.
"The time was once, when wit drowned wealth: but now,
"Your only barbarism is to have wit, and want.
"No matter now in virtue who excells,
"He, that has coin, has all perfection else.

Act I. Scene III.
TIBVLLVS, OVID. OVID?

OVID. Who Is there? Come in.

TIBV. Good morrow, Lawyer.

OVID. Good morrow (dear TIBVLLVS) welcome: sit down.

TIBV. Not I. What: so hard at it? Let Us see, what is here?
Nay, I will see it --

OVID. Pray thee away --

TIBV. If thrice in field, a man vanquish his foe,
It Is after in his choice to serve, or no.
How now OVID! Law -- cases in verse?

OVID. In troth, I know not: they run from my pen
Unwittingly, if they be verse. What Is the news abroad?

TIBV. Off with this gown, I come to have thee walk.

OVID. No, good TIBVLLVS, I Am not now in case,
Pray' let me alone.

TIBV. How? not in case!
S'light you are in too much case, by all this law.

OVID. Troth, if I live, I will new dress the law,
In sprightly poesies habillaments.

TIBV. The hell thou will. What, turn law into verse?
Thy father has schooled thee, I see. Here, read that same.
There Is subject for you: and if I mistake not,
A Supersedeas to your melancholy.

OVID. How! subscribed IVLIA! O, my life, my heaven!

TIBV. Is the mood changed?

OVID. Music of wit! Note for the harmonious spheres!
Celestial accents, how you ravish me!

TIBV. What is it, OVID?

OVID. That I must meet my IVLIA, the Princess IVLIA.

TIBV. Where?

OVID. Why, at -- heart, I have forgot: my passion so transports me.


TIBV. I Will save your pains: it is at ALBIVS house,
The iewellers, where the fair LYCORIS lies.

OVID. Who? CYTHERIS, CORNELIUS GALLVS love?

TIBV. I, heel be there too, and my PLAVTIA.

OVID. And why not your DELIA?

TIBV. Yes, and your CORINNA.

OVID. True, but my sweet TIBVLLVS, keep that secret:
I would not, for all ROME, it should be thought,
I veil bright IVLIA underneath that name:
IVLIA the gemme, and jewel of my soul,
That takes her honors from the golden sky,
As beauty does all luster, from her eye.
The air respires the pure elyzian sweets,
In which she breathes: and from her looks descend
The glories of the summer. Heaven she is,
Praised in her self above all praise: and he,
Which hears her speak, would swear the tune-full orbs
Turned in his zenith only.

TIBV. PVBLIVS, thou wilt lose thy self.

OVID. O, in no labyrinth, can I safelier err,
Then when I lose my self in praising her.
Hence Law, and welcome, Muses; though not rich,
Yet are you pleasing: let us be reconcilde,
And now made one. Henceforth, I promise faith,
And all my serious hours to spend with you:
With you, whose music strikes on my heart,
And with bewitching tones steals forth my spirit,
In IVLIAS name; fair IVLIA: IVLIAS love
Shall be a law, and that sweet law I Will study,
The law, and art of sacred IVLIAS love:
All other objects will but abiects prove.

TIBV. Come, we shall have thee as passionate, as PROPERTIVS, anon.


OVID. O, how does my SEXTVS?


TIBV. Faith, full of sorrow, for his CYNTHIAS death.


OVID. What, still?


TIBV. Still, and still more, his grieves do grow upon him,
As do his hours. Never did I know
An understanding spirit so take to heart
The common work of fate.

OVID. O my TIBVLLVS,
Let us not blame him: for, against such chances,
The heartiest strife of virtue is not proof.
We may read constancy, and fortitude,
To other souls: but had our selves been struck
With the like planet, had our loves (like his)
Been ravished from us, by injurious death,
And in the height, and heat of our best days,
It would have cracked our sinnewes, shrunk our veins,
And made our very heart strings jar, like his.
Come, let us go take him forth, and prove, if mirth
Or company will but abate his passion.

TIBV. Content, and I implore the gods, it may.

Act II.
Scene I.
ALEIVS, CRISPINVS, CHLOE, MAIDS, CYTHERIS. MAster CRISPINVS, you are welcome:
Pray', use a stool, sir. Your cousin CYTHERIS will come down presently. We
are so busy for the receiving of these courtiers here, that I can scarce be a
minute with my self, for thinking of them: Pray you sit, sir, Pray you sit,
sir.


CRIS. I am very well, sir. Never trust me, but you are most delicately seated
here, full of sweet delight and blandishment! an excellent air, an excellent
air!


ALEI. I, sir, it is pretty air. These courtiers run in my mind still; I
must look out: for IVPITERS sake, sit, sir. Or please you walk into the
garden? There Is a garden on the backside.


CRIS. I am most strenuously well, I thank you, sir.


ALEI. Much good do you, sir.


CHLO. Come, bring those perfumes forward a little, and strew some roses, and
violets here; Fie, here be rooms savor the most pitifully rank that ever I
felt: I cry the gods mercy, my husband's in the wind of us.


ALEI. Why, this is good, excellent, excellent: well said, my sweet CHLOE.
Trim up your house most obsequiously.


CHLO. For VVLCANVS sake, breathe somewhere else: in troth you overcome our
perfumes exceedingly, you are too predominant.


ALEI. Hear but my opinion, sweet wife.


CHLO. A pin for your pinnion. In sincerity, if you be* thus fulsome to me
in every thing, I Will be diuore't; Gods my body? you know what you were,
before I married you; I was a gentlewoman borne, I; I lost all my friends to be
a citizens wife; because I heard indeed, they kept their wives as fine as
ladies; and that we might rule our husbands, like ladies; and do what we
listed: do you think I would have married you, else?


ALBI. I acknowledge, sweet wife, she speaks the best of any woman in Italy,
and mooues as mightily: which makes me, I had rather she should make bumpes on
my head, as big as my two singers, then I would offend her. But sweet wife --


CHLO. Yet again? Is It not grace enough for you, that I call you husband, and
you call me wife: but you must still be poking me, against my will, to things?


ALBI. But you know, wife; here are the greatest ladies, and gallantest
gentlemen of ROME, to be entertained in our house now: and I would feign
advise thee, to entertain them in the best sort, in faith wife.


CHLO. In sincerity, did you ever hear a man talk so idly? You would seem
to be master? You would have your spoke in my cart? you would advise me to
entertain ladies, and gentlemen? because you can marshall your pack-needles,
horse-combes, hobby-horses, and wall-candlestickes in your warehouse better
then I; therefore you can tell how to entertain ladies, and gentle-folkes
better then I?


ALBI. O my sweet wife, vpbraid me not with that: "Gain savors sweetly from
any thing; He that respects to get, must relish all commodities alike; and
admit no difference betwixt oade, and frankincense; or the most precious
balsamum, and a tar-barrell.


CHLO. Mary fough: You sell snuffers too, if you be remembered, but I pray you
let me buy them out of your hand; for I tell you true, I take it highly in
snuff, to learn how to entertain gentlefolkes, of you, at these years, I
faith. Alas man; there was not a gentleman came to your house in your the other
wives time, I hope? nor a lady? nor music? nor masks? Nor you, nor your
house were so much as spoken of, before I disbast my self, from my hood and my
fartingall, to these bumrowles, and your whale-bone-bodies.


ALBI. Look here, my sweet wife; I am mum, my dear mummia, my balsamum, my
spermacete, and my very city of -- she has the most best, true, feminine wit
in ROME!


CRIS. I have heard so, sir; and do most vehemently desire to participate the
knowledge of her fair features.


ALBI. Ah, peace; you shall hear more anon: be not seen yet, I pray you; not
yet: Observe.


CHLO. 'Sbodie, give husbands the head a little more, and they will be nothing
but head shortly; what is he there?


MAID. 1. I know not forsooth.


MAID. 2. Who would you speak with, sir?


CRIS. I would speak with my cousin CYTHERIS.


MAID. He is one forsooth would speak with his cousin CYTHERIS.


CHLO. Is she your cousin, sir?


CRIS. Yes in truth, forsooth, for fault of a better.


CHLO. She is a gentlewoman?


CRIS. Or else she should not be my cousin, I assure you.


CHLO. Are you a gentleman borne?


CRIS. That I am, lady; you shall see mine arms, if 't please you.


CHLO. No, your legs do sufficiently show you are a gentleman borne, sir:
for a man borne upon little legs, is always a gentleman borne.


CRIS. Yet, I pray you, vouchsafe the sight of my arms, Mistress; for I bear
them about me, to have 'hem seen: my name is CRISPINVS, or CRI-SPINAS indeed;
which is well expressed in my arms, (a Face crying in chief; and beneath it a
blouddie Toe, between three Thorns pungent.)


CHLO. Then you are welcome, sir; now you are a gentleman borne, I can find in
my heart to welcome you: for I am a gentlewoman borne too; and will bear my
head high enough, though 'twere my fortune to marry a tradesman.


CRIS. No doubt of that, sweet feature, your carriage shows it in any man's
eye, that is carried upon you with judgment.


ALBI. He is still going in and out. Dear wife, be not angry.


CHLO. God's my passion!


ALBI. Hear me but one thing; let not your maids set cushions in the parlor
windows; nor in the dyning-chamber windows; nor upon stools, in either of
them, in any case; for it is tauerne-like; but lay them one upon another, in
some out-roome, or corner of the dyning-chamber.


CHLO. Go, go, meddle with your bedchamber only, or rather with your bed in
your chamber, only; or rather with your wife in your bed only; or on my
faith, I Will not be pleased with you only.


ALBI. Look here, my dear wife, entertain that gentleman kindly, I pre'
thee, -- mum.


CHLO. Go, I need your instructions indeed; anger me no more, I advise you.
Citi-sin, quoth'a! she is a wise gentlewoman in faith, will marry her self to
the sin of the city.


ALBI. But this time, and no more (by heaven) wife: hang no pictures in the
hall, nor in the dyning-chamber, in any case, but in the gallerie only, for
it is not courtly else, of my word, wife.


CHLO. 'Sprecious, never have done!


ALBI. Wife. --


CHLO. Do I not bear a reasonable corrigible hand over him, CRISPINVS?


CRIS. By this hand, lady, you hold a most sweet hand over him.


ALBI. And then for the great gilt andyrons? --


CHLO. Again! would the andyrons were in your great guts, for me.


ALBI. I do vanish, wife.


CHLO. How shall I do, Master CRISPINVS? here will be all the brauest ladies
in court presently, to see your cousin CYTHERIS: O the gods! how might I behave
my self now, as to entertayne them most courtly?


CRIS. Mary, lady, if you will entertain them most courtly, you must do
thus: as soon as ever your maid, or your man brings you word they are come;
you must say (A pox on 'hem, what do they here.) And yet when they come,
speak them as fair, and give them the kindest welcome in words, that can be.


CHLO. Is that the fashion of courtiers, CRISPINVS?


CRIS. I assure you, it is, lady, I have observed it.


CHLO. For your pox, sir, it is easily hit on; but, it is not so easily to
speak fair after, me thinks?


ALBI. O wife, the coaches are come, on my word, a number of coaches, and
courtiers.


CHLO. A pox on them: what do they here?


ALBI. How now wife! would thou not have 'hem come?


CHLO. Come? come, you are a fool, you: He knows not the trick on it. Call
CYTHERIS, I pray you: and good master CRISPINVS, you can observe, you say; let
me entreat you for all the ladies behauiours, jewels, jests, and attires, that
you marking as well as I, we may put both our marks together, when they are
gone, and confer of them.


CRIS. I warrant you, sweet lady; let me alone to observe, till I turn my
self to nothing but observation. Good morrow cousin CYTHERIS.


CYTH. Welcome kind cousin. What? are they come?


ALBI. I, your friend CORNELIUS GALLVS, OVID, TIBVLLVS, PROPERTIVS, with IVLIA
the Emperors daughter, and the lady PLAVTIA, are lighted at the door; and with
them HERMOGENES TIGELLIVS, the excellent musician.


CYTH. Come, let us go meet them, CHLOE.


CHLO. Observe, CRISPINVS.


CRIS. At a hairs breadth, lady, I warrant you.


Act II. Scene II.
GALLVS, OVID, TIBVLLVS, PROPERTIVS, HERMOGENES, IVLIA, PLAVTIA, CYTHERIS,
CHLOE, ALBIVS, CRISPINVS. HEalth to the lovely CHLOE: you must pardon me,
Mistress, that I prefer this fair gentlewoman.


CYTH. I pardon, and praise you for it, sir; and I beseech your Excellence,
receive her beauties into your knowledge and favor.


IVLI. CYTHERIS, she has favor, and behavior, that commands as much of me:
and sweet CHLOE, know I do exceedingly love you, and that I will approve in
any grace my father the Emperor may show you. Is this your husband?


ALBI. For fault of a better, if it please your highness.


CHLO. Gods my life! how he shames me!


CYTH. Not a whit, CHLOE, they all think you politic, and witty; wise women
choose not husbands for the eye, merit, or birth, but wealth, and sovereignty.


OVID. Sir, we all come to gratulate, for the good report of you.


TIBV. And would be glad to deserve your love, sir.


ALBI. My wife will answer you all, gentlemen; I Will come to you again
presently.


PLAV. You have chosen you a most fair companion here, CYTHERIS, and a very
fair house.


CYTH. To both which, you and all my friends, are very welcome, PLAVTIA.


CHLO. With all my heart, I assure your ladyship.


PLAV. Thanks, sweet Mistress CHLOE.


IVLI. You must needs come to court, lady, in faith, and there be sure your
welcome shall be as great to us.


OVID. She will well deserve it, Madame. I see, even in her looks, gentry,
and general worthiness.


TIBV. I have not seen a more certain character of an excellent disposition.


ALBI. Wife.


CHLO. O, they do so commend me here, the courtiers! what is the matter now?


ALBI. For the banquet, sweet wife.


CHLO. Yes; and I must needs come to court, and be welcome, the Princess
says.


GALL. OVID, and TIBVLLVS, you may be bold to welcome your Mistresses here.


OVID. We find it so, sir.


TIBV. And thank CORNELIUS GALLVS.


OVID. Nay, my sweet SEXTVS, in faith thou art not sociable.


PROP. In faith, I am not, PVBLIVS; nor I cannot.
Sick minds, are like sick men that burn with fevers,
Who when they drink, please but a present taste,
And after bear a more impatient fit.
Pray, let me leave you; I offend you all,
And my self most.

GALL. Stay, sweet PROPERTIVS.

TIBV. You yield too much unto your grieves, and sat,
Which never hurts, but when we say it hurts us.

PROP. O peace, TIBVLLVS; your philosophy
Lends you too rough a hand to search my wounds.
Speak they of griefs, that know to sigh, and grieve;
The free and unconstrained spirit feels
No weight of my oppression.

OVID. Worthy Roman!
Me thinks I taste his misery; and could
Sit down, and chide at his malignant stars.

IVLI. Me thinks I love him, that he loves so truly.

CYTH. This is the perfect'st love, lives after death.

GALL. Such is the constant ground of virtue still.

PLAV. It puts on an inseparable face.

CHLO. Have you marked every thing, CRISPINVS?

CRIS. Every thing, I warrant you.

CHLO. What gentlemen are these? do you know them?

CRIS. I, they are poets, lady.

CHLO. Poets? they did not talk of me since I went, did they?

CRIS. O yes, and extold your perfections to the heavens.

CHLO. Now in sincerity, they be the finest kind of men, that ever I knew:
Poets? Could not one get the Emperor to make my husband a Poet, think you?


CRIS. No, lady, it is love, and beauty make Poets: and since you like Poets
so well, your love, and beauties shall make me a Poet.


CHLO. What shall they? and such a one as these?


CRIS. I, and a better then these: I would be sorry else.


CHLO. And shall your looks change? and your hair change? and all, like these?


CRIS. Why, a man may be a Poet, and yet not change his hair, lady.


CHLO. Well, we shall see your cunning: yet if you can change your hair, I
pray, do.


ALBI. Ladies, and lordings, there is a slight banquet stays within for you,
please you draw near, and accost it.


IVLI. We thank you, good ALBIVS: but when shall we see those excellent
jewels you are commended to have?


ALBI. At your ladyships service. I got that speech by seeing a play last-day,
and it did me some grace now: I see, it is good to collect sometimes; I Will
frequent these plays more then I have done, now I come to be familiar with
courtiers.


GALL. Why, how now, HERMOGENES? what ailest thou trow?


HERM. A little melancholy, let me alone, pray thee.


GALL. Melancholy! how so?


HERM. With riding: a plague on all coaches for me.


CHLO. Is that hard-fauour'd gentleman a poet too; CYTHERIS?


CYTH. No; this is HERMOGENES, as humorous as a poet though: he is at Musician.


CHLO. A Musician? then he can sing.


CYTH. That he can excellently; did you never hear him?


CHLO. O no: will he be entreated, think you?


CYTH. I know not. Friend, Mistress CHLOE would feign hear HERMOGENES sing:
are you interested in him?


GALL. No doubt, his own humanity will command him so far, to the
satisfaction of so fair a beauty; but rather then fail, we will all be
suitors to him.


HERM. 'Cannot sing.


GALL. Pray thee, HERMOGENES.


HERM. 'Cannot sing.


GALL. For honor of this gentlewoman, to whose house, I know thou may be
ever welcome.


CHLO. That he shall in truth, sir, if he can sing.


OVID. What Is that?


GALL. This gentlewoman is wooing HERMOGENES for a song.


OVID. A song* come, he shall not deny her. HERMOGENES?


HERM. 'Cannot sing.


GALL. No, the ladies must do it, he stays but to have their thanks
acknowledged as a debt to his cunning.


IVLI. That shall not want: our self will be the first shall promise to pay
him more then thanks, upon a favor so worthily vouchsaft.


HERM. Thank you, Madame, but 'will not sing.


TIBV. Tut, the only way to win him, is to abstain from entreating him.


CRIS. Do you love singing, lady?


CHLO. O, passingly.


CRIS. Entreat the ladies, to entreat me to sing then, I beseech you.


CHLO. I beseech your grace, entreat this gentleman to sing.


IVLI. That we will CHLOE; can he sing excellently?


CHLO. I think so, Madame: for he entreated me, to entreat you, to entreat him
to sing.


CRIS. Heaven, and earth! would you tell that?


IVLI. Good sir, let us entreat you to use your voice.


CRIS. Alas, Madame, I cannot in truth.


PLAV. The gentleman is modest: I warrant you, he sings excellently.


OVID. HERMOGENES, clear your throat: I see by him, here is a gentleman will
worthily challenge you.


CRIS. Not I, sir, I Will challenge no man.


TIBV. That Is your modesty, sir: but we, out of an assurance of your
excellency, challenge him in your behalf.


CRIS. I thank you, gentlemen, I Will do my best.


HERM. Let that best be good, sir, you were best.


GALL. O, this contention is excellent. What is it you sing, sir?


CRIS. If I freely may discover, etc. Sir, I Will sing that.


OVID. One of your own compositions, HERMOGENES.
He offers you vantage enough.

CRIS. Nay truly, gentlemen, I Will challenge no man --: I can sing but one
staff of the dittie neither.


GALL. The better: HERMOGENES himself will be entreated to sing the other.

SONG. IF I freely may discover,
What would please me in my lover:
I would have her fair, and witty,
Sauouring more of court, then city;
A little proud, but full of pity:
Light, and humorous in her toying.
Often building hopes, and soon destroying,
Long, but sweet in the enjoying,
Neither too easy, nor too hard:
All extremes I would have bard.

GALL. Believe me, sir, you sing most excellently.


OVID. If there were a praise above excellence, the gentleman highly deserves
it.


HERM. Sir, all this does not yet make me envy you: for I know I sing better
then you.


TIBV. Attend HERMOGENES, now.

2. She should be allowed her passions,
So they were but used as fashions;
Sometimes froward, and then frowning,
Sometimes sickish, and then swowning,
Every ^it, with change, still crowning.
Purely jealous, I would have her,
Then only constant when I crave her.
It Is a virtue should not save her.
Thus, nor her delicates would cloy me,
Neither her peenishnesse annoy me.

IVLI. Nay, HERMOGENES, your merit has long since been both known, and
admired of us.


HERM. You shall hear me sing another: now will I begin.


GALL. We shall do this gentleman's banquet too much wrong, that stays for us,
ladies.


IVLI. It Is true: and well thought on, CORNELIUS GALLVS.


HERM. Why it is but a short air, 'twill be done presently, pray' stay; strike
music.


OVID. No, good HERMOGENES: we will end this difference within.


IVLI. It Is the common disease of all your musicians, hat they know no mean,
to be entreated, either to begin, or end.


ALBI. Please you lead the way, gentles?


AL^. Thanks, good ALBIVS.


ALBI. O, what a charm of thanks was here put upon me! O JOVE, what a setting
forth it is to a man, to have many courtiers come to his house! Sweetly was it
said of a good old housekeeper; I had rather want meat, then want ghests:
specially, if they be courtly ghests. For, never trust me, if one of their good
legs made in a house, be not worth all the good cheer, a man can make them.
He that would have fine ghests, let him have a ^^ne wife; he that would have a
fine wife, let him come to me.


CRIS. By your kind leave, Master ALBIVS.


ALBI. What, you are not gone, Master CRISPINVS?


CRIS. Yes faith, I have a desseigne draws me hence: pray' sir, fashion mean
excuse to the ladies.


ALBI. Will you not stay? and see the jewels, sir? I pay you stay.


CRIS. Not for a million, sir, now; Let it suffice, I must relinquish; and so
in a word, please you to expiate this complement.


ALBI. Mum.


CRIS. He presently go and enghle some broker, for a Poets gown, and bespeake
a garland: and then ieweller, look to your best jewel ysaith.


Act III.
Scene I.
HORACE, CRISPINVS. Hor. li. 1. Sat. 9
HMh? yes; I will begin an ode so: and it shall be to MECOENAS.


CRIS. 'Slid, yonder is HORACE! they say he is an excellen^ Poet: MECOENAS loves
him. I Will fall into his acquaintance, if I can; I think he be composing, as he
goes in the street! ha? 't is a good humor, and he be: I Will compose too.


HORA. Swell me a bowl with lusti^ wine,
Till I may see the plump LYaeVS swim
Above the brim:
I drink, as I would wright,
In slowing measure, filled with flame, and spright.

CRIS. Sweet HORACE, MINERVA, and the Muses stand auspicious to thy desseignes.
How far'st thou, sweet man? frolic? rich? gallant? ha?


HORA. Not greatly gallant, sir, like my fortunes; well.
I Am bold to take my leave, sir, you would naught else, sir, would you?

CRIS. Troth, no, but I could wish thou did know us, HORACE, we are a
scholar, I assure thee.


HORA. A scholar, sir? I shall be covetous of your fair knowledge.


CRIS. Gramercie, good HORACE. Nay, we are new turned Poet too, which is more;
and a Satyrist too, which is more then that: I write just in thy vein, I. I am
for your odes or your sermons, or any thing indeed; we are a gentleman
besides: our name is RUFUS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, wear a pretty stoic too.


HORA. To the proportion of your beard, I think it, sir.


CRIS. By PHOEBVS, here is a most neat fine street, is it not? I protest to
thee, I am enamored of this street now, more then of half the streets of
^ome, again; it is so polite, and terse! There Is the front of a building now. I
study architecture too: if ever I should build, I Would have a house just of that
prospectiue.


HORA. Doubtless, this gallants tongue has a good turn, when he sleeps.


CRIS. I do make verses, when I come in such a street as this: O your
city-ladies, you shall ha'hem ^it in every shop like the Muses -- offering you
the c^s^^lian dewes, and the thespian liquors, to as many as have but the sweet
grace and audacitie to -- sip of their lips. Did you never hear any of my
verses?


HORA. No, sir (but I am in some ^^are, I must, now.)


CRIS. I Will tell thee some (if I can but recover 'hem) I composed even now of a
dressing, I saw a iewellers wife wear, who indeed was a jewel herself: I
prefer that kind of tire now, what is thy opinion, HORACE?


HORA. With your silver bodkin, it does well, sir.


CRIS. I cannot tell, but it stirs me more then all your court-curles, or
your spangles, or your tricks: I affect not these high gable-ends, these
tuscane-tops, nor your coronets, nor your arches, nor your pyramids; give me a
fine sweet -- little delicate dressing, with a bodkin, as you say: and a
mushrome, for all your other ornatures.


HORA. Is It not possible to make an escape from him?


CRIS. I have remitted my verses, all this while, I think I have forget 'hem.


HORA. Here Is he, could wish you had else.


CRIS. Pray JOVE, I can entreat 'hem of my memory.


HORA. You put your memory to too much trouble, sir.


CRIS. No, sweet HORACE, we must not have thee think so.


HORA. I cry you mercy; then, they are my ears
That must be tortured: well, you must have patience, ears.

CRIS. Pray thee, HORACE, observe.

HORA. Yes, sir: your satin sleeue begins to fret at the rug that is
underneath it, I do observe: And your ample velvet bases are not without
evident stains of a hot disposition, naturally.


CRIS. O -- I Will die them into another color, at pleasure: how many yards of
velvet do thou think they contain?


HORA. Heart! I have put him now in a fresh way
To vex me more: Faith, sir, your mercers book
Will tell you with more patience, then I can;
(For I am crossed, and so's not that, I think.)

CRIS. S'light, these verses have lost me again: I shall not inuit 'hem to
mind, now.


HORA. Rack not your thoughts, good sir; rather, defer it
To a new time; I Will meet you at your lodging,
Or where you please: Till then, JOVE keep you, sir.

CRIS. Nay, gentle HORACE, stay: I have it, now.

HORA. Yes, sir. APOLLO, HERMES, IVPITER, look down upon me.

CRIS. Rich was thy hap, sweet, deintie cap,
There to be placed:
Where thy smooth black, sleeke white may smacke,
And both be graced.
white, is there usurped for her brow; her forehead: and then sleeke, as the
parallel to smooth, that went before. A kind of Paranomasie, or Agnomination:
do you conceive, sir?


HORA. Excellent. Troth, sir, I must be abrupt, and leave you.


CRIS. Why, what haste have thou? pray thee, stay a little: thou shall not go
yet, by PHOEBVS.


HORA. I shall not? what remedy? Fie, how I sweat with suffering!


CRIS. And then --


HORA. Pray, sir, give me leave to wipe my face a little.


CRIS. Yes, do, good HORACE.


HORA. Thank you, sir.
Death! I must crave his leave to piss anon;
Or that I may go hence with half my teeth:
I am in some such fear. This tyranny
Is strange, to take mine ears up by commission,
(Whether I will or no) and make them stalls
To his lewd soloecismes, and worded trash.
Happy thou, bold BOLANVS, now, I say;
Whose freedom, and impatience of this fellow,
Would, long ere this, have called him fool, and fool,
And rank, and tedious fool, and have flung jests
As hard as stones, till thou had pelted him
Out of the place: whilst my tame modesty
Suffers my wit be made a solemn ass
To bear his fopperies --

CRIS. HORACE, thou art miserably affected to be gone, I see. But -- pray thee,
let us prove, to enjoy thee awhile: Thou have no business, I assure me. Whether
is thy journey directed? ha?


HORA. Sir, I am going to visit a friend, that is sick.


CRIS. A friend? What Is he? do not I know him?


HORA. No, sir, you do not know him; and it is not the worse for him.


CRIS. What Is his name? where is he lodged?


HORA. Where, I shall be fearful to draw you out of your way, sir; a great
way hence: Pray', sir, let us part.


CRIS. Nay, but where is it? I pray thee, say.


HORA. On the far side of all Tyber yonder, by CAESAR'S gardens.


CRIS. O, that is my course directly; I am for you. Come, go: why stand'st thou?


HORA. Yes, sir: marry, the plague is in that part of the city; I had almost
forgot to tell you, sir.


CRIS. Fow: It Is no matter, I fear no pestilence, I have not offended PHOEBVS.


HORA. I have, it seems; or else this heavy scourge
Could never have lighted on me --

CRIS. Come, along.

HORA. I am to go down some half mile, this way, sir, first, to speak with
his physician: And from thence to his apothecary, where I shall stay the mixing
of diverse drugs --


CRIS. Why, it is all one. I have nothing to do, and I love not to be idle,
I Will bear thee company. How call'st thou the pothecary?


HORA. O, that I knew a name would fright him now. Sir RHADAMANTHVS,
RHADAMANTHVS, sir.
There Is one so called, is a just judge, in hell,
And does inflict strange vengeance on all those,
That (here on earth) torment poor patient spirits.

CRIS. He dwells at the three Faries, by IANVS Temple?

HORA. Your pothecary does, sir.

CRIS. Heart, Iowe him money for sweet meats, and he has laid to arrest me, I
hear: but --


HORA. Sir, I have made a most solemn vow: I will never bail any man.


CRIS. Well then, I Will swear, and speak him fair, if the worst come. But his
name is MINOS, not RHADAMANTHVS, HORACE.


HORA. That may be, sir: I but guest at his name by his sign. But your MINOS
is a judge too, sir?


CRIS. I protest to thee, HORACE (do but taste me once) if I do know my
self, and mine own virtues truly, thou will not make that esteem of VARIVS,
or VIRGIL, or TIBVLLVS, or any of 'hem indeed, as now in thy ignorance thou
do; which I am content to forgive: I would feign see, which of these could
pen more verses in a day, or with more facility then I; or that could court
his mistress, kiss her hand, make better sport with her fan, or her dog --


HORA. I cannot bail you yet, sir.


CRIS. Or that could move his body more gracefully, or dance better you shooed
see me, were it not in the street --


HORA. Nor yet.


CRIS. Why, I have been a reueller, and at my cloth of silver suit, and my
long stocking, in my time, and will be again --


HORA. If you may be trusted, sir.


CRIS. And then for my singing, HERMOGENES himself enuies me; that is your
only Master of music you have in Rome.


HORA. Is your mother living, sir?


CRIS. Au: Convert thy thoughts to somewhat else, I pray thee.


HORA. You have much of the mother in you, sir: your father is dead?


CRIS. I, I thank JOVE, and my grandfather too and all my kinsfolks, and
well composed in their vrnes.


HORA. The more their happiness; that rest in peace,
Free from th'abundant torture of thy tongue;
Would I were with them too.

CRIS. What Is that, HORACE?

HORA. I now remember me, sir, of a sad fate
A cunning woman, one SABELLA sung,
When in her ^rne, she cast my destiny,
I being but a child

CRIS. What was it I pray thee?

HORA. She told me, I should surely never perish
By famine, poison, or the enemies sword;
The hecticke fever, cough, or pleurisy,
Should never hurt me; nor the tardie gowt:
But in my time, I should be once surpised,
By a strong tedious talker, that should vex
And almost bring me to consumption.
Therefore (if I were wise) she warned me shun
All such long-winded monsters, as my bane:
For if I could but escape that one discourser,
I might (no doubt) prove an old aged man.
By your leave, sir?

CRIS. Tut, tut: abandon this idle humor, it is nothing but melancholy. Fore
JOVE, now I think o^t, I am to appear in court here, to answer to one that
has me in suit; sweet HORACE, go with me, this is my hour: if I neglect it,
the law proceeds against me. Thou art familiar with these things, pray thee,
if thou love me, go.


HORA. Now, let me dye, sir, if I know your laws;
Or have the power to stand still half so long
In their loud courts, as while a case is Argued.
Besides, you know, sir, where I am to go,
And the necessity --

CRIS. It Is true: --

HORA. I hope the hour of my release be come: He will (upon this
consideration) discharge me, sure.


CRIS. Troth, I am doubtful, what I may best do; whether to leave thee, or my
affairs, HORACE?


HORA. O IVPITER, me, sir; me, by any means: I beseech you, me, sir.


CRIS. No says, I Will venture those now: Thou shall see I love thee, come
HORACE.


HORA. Nay then, I am desperate: I follow you, sir. It Is hard contending with a
man that ouer-comes thus.


CRIS. And how deals MECOENAS with thee? liberally? ha?
Is he open-handed? bountiful?

HORA. He Is still himself, sir.

CRIS. Troth, HORACE, thou art exceeding happy in thy friends and acquaintance;
they are all most choice spirits, and of the first rank of Romans: I do not
know that poet, I protest, has used his fortune more prosperously, then thou
have. If thou would bring me known to MECoeNAS, I should second thy desert
well; thou should find a good sure assistant of me: one, that would speak
all good of thee in thy absence, and be content with the next place, not
envying thy reputation with thy patron. Let me not live, but I think thou and
I (in a small time) should list them all out of favor, both VIRGIL, VARIVS,
and the best of them; and enjoy him wholly to our selves.


HORA. Gods, you do know it, I can hold no longer;
This brize has pricked my patience: Sir, your silkenesse
Clearly mistakes MECOENAS, and his house;
To think, there breathes a spirit beneath his roof,
Subject unto those poor affections
Of vnder-mining envy, and detraction,
Moodes, only proper to base groueling minds:
That place is not in Rome, I dare affirm,
More pure, or free, from such low common evils.
There Is no man grieved, that this is thought more rich,
Or this more learned; each man has his place,
And to his merit, his reward of grace:
Which with a mutual love they all embrace.

CRIS. You report a wonder! it is scarce credible, this.

HORA. I am no torture, to enforce you to believe it, but it is so.

CRIS. Why, this enflames me with a more ardent desire to be his, then
before: but, I doubt I shall find the entrance, to his familiarity, somewhat
more then difficult, HORACE.


HORA. Tut, you will conquer him, as you have done me; There Is no standing out
against you, sir, I see that. Either your importunity, or the intimation of
your good parts; or --


CRIS. Nay, I Will bribe his porter, and the grooms of his chamber; make his
doors open to me that way, first: and then, I Will observe my times. Say, he
should extrude me his house to day; shall I therefore desist, or let fall my
suite, to morrow? No: I Will attend him, follow him, meet him? in the street, the
high ways, run by his coach, never leave him. What? Man has nothing given
him, in this life, without much labor.


HORA. And impudence.
Archer of heaven, PHOEBVS, take thy bow,
And with a full drawn shaft, nail to the earth
This PYTHON; that I may yet run hence, and live:
Or brawnie HERCULES, do thou come down,
And (though thou make it up thy thirteenth labor)
Rescue me from this HYDRA of discourse, here.

Act III. Scene II.
ARISTIVS, HORACE, CRISPINVS. HORACE, well met.

HORA. O welcome, my releeuer,
ARISTIVS, As thou love me, ransom me.

ARIS. What ayl'st thou, man?

HORA. 'Death, I am seaz'd on here
By a Land- R^mora, I cannot stir;
Not move, but as he please.

CRIS. Will thou go, HORACE?

HORA. 'Hart! he cleaues to me like ALCIDES shirt,
Tearing my flesh, and sinnewes; O, I have been vexed
And tortured with him, beyond forty fevers.
For JOVE'S sake, find some means, to take me from him.

ARIS. Yes, I will: but I Will go first, and tell MECOENAS.

CRIS. Come, shall we go?

ARIS. The jest will make his eyes run, in faith.

HORA. Nay, ARISTIVS?

ARIS. Farewell, HORACE.

HORA. 'Death! will a' leave me? FVSCVS ARISTIVS, do you hear? Gods of Rome!
you said, you had somewhat to say to me, in private.


ARIS. I, but I see, you are now imploi'd with that gentleman: 'twere offense
to trouble you. I Will take some fitter opportunity, farewell.


HORA. Mischief, and torment! O, my soul, and heart,
How are you crampt with anguish! Death it self
Brings not the like convulsions. O, this day,
That ever I should view thy tedious face --

CRIS. HORACE, what passion? what humor is this?

HORA. Away, good prodigy, afflict me not.
(A friend, and mock me thus!) never was man
So left under the axe -- how now.

Act III. Scene III.
MINOS, LICTORS, CRISPINVS, HORACE. That Is he, in the imbrodered hat, there,
with the ash-colored feather: his name is LABERIVS CRISPINVS.


LICT. LABERIVS CRISPINVS; I arrest you in the Emperors name.


CRIS. Me, sir? do you arrest me?


LICT. I, sir, at the suit of Master MINOS the pothecarie.


HORA. Thanks, great APOLLO: I will not slip thy favor offered me in my
escape, for my fortunes.


CRIS. Master MINOS? I know no master MINOS. Where Is HORACE? HORACE? HORACE?


MINO. Sir, do not you know me?


CRIS. O yes; I know you, master MINOS: 'crie you mercy. But HORACE? Gods me,
is he gone?


MINO. I, and so would you too, if you knew how. Officer, look to him.


CRIS. Do you hear, master MINOS? pray^ let us be used like a man of our own
fashion. By IANVS, and IVPITER, I meant to have paid you next week, every
drachme. Seek not to eclipse my reputation, thus vulgarly.


MINO. Sir, your oaths cannot serve you, you know I have forborne you long.


CRIS. I am conscious of it, sir. Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, do not exhale
me thus; remember it is but for sweet meats --


LICT. Sweet meat must have sour sauce, sir. Come along.


CRIS. Sweet, master MINOS: I am forfeited to eternal disgrace, if you do not
commiserate. Good officer, be not so officious.


Act III. Scene IIII.
TVCCA, PYRGVS, MINOS, LICTORS, CRISPINVS, HISTRIO, DEMETRIUS. WHy, how now, my
good brace of bloud-hounds? whither do you dragge the gent'man? you mungrels,
you curres, you bandogs, we are Captain TVCCA, that talk to you, you
inhumane pilchers.


MINO. Sir, he is their prisoner.


TVCC. Their pestilence. What are you, sir?


MINO. A citizen of Rome, sir.


TVCC. Then you are not far distant from a fool, sir.


MINO. A pothecarie, sir.


TVCC. I knew thou wast not a physician; fough: out of my nostrils, thou
stink'st of lo^^^m, and the syringe: away, quack-saluer. Follower, my sword.


PYRG. Here, noble leader, you will do no harm with it: I Will trust you.


TVCC. Do you hear, you, good man slave? hook, ram, rogue, catch-pole,
lose the gent'man, or by my velvet arms --


LICT. The Officer strikes up his heels. What will you do, sir?


TVCC. Kiss thy hand, my honorable active varlet: and embrace thee, thus.


PYRG. O patient metamorphosis!


TVCC. My sword, my tall rascal.


LICT. Nay, soft, sir: Some wiser then some.


TVCC. What? and a wit to! By PLVTO, thou must be cherished, slave; here is
three drachmes for thee: hold.


PYRG. There Is half his lendings gone.


TVCC. Give me.


LICT. No, sir, your first word shall stand: I Will hold all.


TVCC. Nay, but, rogue --


LICT. You would make a rescue of our prisoner, sir, you?


TVCC. I, a rescue? away inhumane varlet. Come, come, I never relish above one
jest at most; do not disgust me: Sir, do not. Rogue, I tell thee, rogue,
do not.


LICT. How, sir? rogue?


TVCC. I, why! thou art not angry, rascal? art thou?


LICT. I cannot tell, sir, I am little better, upon these terms.


TVCC. Ha! gods, and fiends! why, do hear? rogue, thou, give me thy hand; I
say unto thee, thy hand: rogue. What? do not thou know me? not me, rogue?
not Captain TVCCA, rogue?


MINO. Come: pra' surrender the gentleman his sword, officer; we'll have no
fighting here.


TVCC. What Is thy name?


MINO. MINOS, an't please you.


TVCC. MINOS? come, hither, MINOS; Thou art a wise fellow, it seems: Let me
talk with thee.


CRIS. Was ever wretch so wretched, as unfortunate I?


TVCC. Thou art one of the centum-viri, old boy, art' not?


MINO. No, indeed, master Captain.


TVCC. Go to, thou shall be, then: I Will have thee one, MINOS. Take my sword
from those rascals, do thou see? go, do it: I cannot attempt with
patience. What does this gentleman owe thee, little MINOS?


MINO. Fourscore sesterties, sir.


TVCC. What? no more? Come, thou shall release him, MINOS: what, I Will be his
bail, thou shall take my word, old boy, and casheere these furies: thou shall
do it, I say, thou shall, little MINOS, thou shall.


CRIS. Yes, and as I am a gentleman, and a reueller, I Will make a piece of
poetry, and absolve all, within these five days.


TVCC. Come, MINOS is not to learn how to use a gent'man of quality, I know;
My sword: If he pay thee not, I will, and I must, old boy. Thou shall be my
pothecary too: have good eringo's, MINOS?


MINO. The best in Rome, sir.


TVCC. Go too then -- Vermin, know the house.


PYRG. I warrant you, Collonell.


TVCC. For this gentleman, MINOS?


MINO. I Will take your word, Captain.


TVCC. Thou have it, my sword --


MINO. Yes, sir: but you must discharge the arrest, Master CRISPINVS.


TVCC. How, MINOS? look in the gentleman's face, and but read his silence.
Pay, pay; it is honor, MINOS.


CRIS. By JOVE, sweet Captain, you do most infinitely endeare, and oblige me
to you.


TVCC. Tut, I cannot complement, by MARS: but IVPITER love me, as I love good
words, and good clothes, and there is an end. Thou shall give my boy that
girdle, and hangers, when thou have worn them a little more --


CRIS. O IVPITER! Captain, he 'shall have them now, presently: please you to
be acceptiue, young gentleman.


PYRG. Yes, sir, fear not; I shall accept: I have a pretty foolish humor of
taking, if you knew all.


TVCC. Not now, you shall not take, boy.


CRIS. By my truth, and earnest, but he shall, Captain, by your leave.


TVCC. Nay, and a 'sweare by his truth, and earnest, take it boy: do not make
a gent'man forsworn.


LICT. Well, sir, there is your sword; but thank master MINOS: you had not
carried it as you do, else.


TVCC. MINOS is just, and you are knaves, and --


LICT. What say you, sir?


TVCC. Pass on, my good scoundrell, pass on, I honor thee: But, that I hate
to have action with such base rogues as these; you should have seen me unrip
their noses now, and have sent 'hem to the next barbers, to stitching: for, do
you see -- I am a man of humor, and I do love the varlets, the honest
varlets; they have wit, and valor: and are indeed good profitable -- errant
rogues, as any live in an empire. Do thou hear, POETASTER? second me. Stand
up (MINOS) close, gather, yet, so. Sir (thou shall have a quarter share, be
resolute) you shall, at my request, take MINOS by the hand, here, little MINOS,
I will have it so; all friends, and a health: Be not inexorable. And thou shall
impart the wine, old boy, thou shall do it, little MINOS, thou shall: make us
pay it in our physic. What? we must live, and honor the gods, sometimes; now
BACCHVS, now COMVS, now PRIAPVS: every god, a little. What Is he, that stalks
by, there? boy, PYRGVS, you were best let him pass, sirrah; do, ferret, let
him pass, do.


PYRG. It Is a player, sir.


TVCC. A player? Call him, call the lousy slave hither: what, will he sail
by, and not once strike, or veil to a Man of war? ha? do you hear? you,
player, rogue, stalker, come back here: no respect to men of worship, you
slave? What, you are proud, you rascal, are you proud? ha? you grow rich, do
you? and purchase, you two-penny teare-mouth? you have fortune, and the good
year on your side, you stinkard? you have? you have?


HIST. Nay, sweet Captain, be confined to some reason; I protest I saw you
not, sir.


TVCC. You did not? where was your sight, OEDIPVS? you walk with hares eyes,
do you? I Will have 'hem glas'd, rogue; and you say the word, they shall be
glazed for you: come, we must have you turn fiddler again, slave, 'get a base
violin at your back, and march in a tawnie coat, with one sleeue, to
Goose-faire, and then you will know us; you will see us then; you will, gulch, you
will? Then, will it please your worship to have any music, Captain?


HIST. Nay, good Captain.


TVCC. What? do you laugh, Owleglas? death, you perstemptuous varlet, I am
none of your fellows: I have commanded a hundred and fifty such rogues, I.


1. PYR. I, and most of that hundred and fifty, have been leaders of a legion.


HIST. If I have exhibited wrong, I Will tender satisfaction, Captain.


TVCC. Sai'st thou so, honest vermin? Give me thy hand, thou shall make us a
supper one of these nights.


HIST. When you please, by JOVE, Captain, most willingly.


TVCC. Do thou 'sweare? to morrow then; say, and hold slave. There are some
of you plaiers honest gent'man-like scoundrels, and suspected to have some wit,
as well as your poets; both at drinking, and breaking of jests: and are
companions for gallants. A man may skelder ye, now and then, of half a dozen
shillings, or so. Do thou not know that PANTALABVS there?


HIST. No, I assure you, Captain.


TVCC. Go, and be acquainted with him, then; he is a gent'man, parcel-
poet, you slave: his father was a man of worship, I tell thee. Go, he pens
high, lofty, in a new stalking strain; bigger then half the rimers in the
town, again: he was borne to fill thy mouth, MINOTAVRVS, he was: he will
teach thee to tear, and rand, Rascal, to him, cherish his muse, go: thou
have forty, forty, shillings, I mean, stinkard, give him in earnest, do, he
shall write for thee, slave. If he pen for thee once, thou shall not need to
travel, with thy pumps full of gravel, any more, after a blind jade and a
hamper: and stalk upon boords, and barrel heads, to an old cracked trumpet --


HIST. Troth, I think I have not so much about me, Captain.


TVCC. It Is no matter: give him what thou have: Stiff ^oe, I Will give my word
for the rest: though it lack a shilling, or two, it skils not: Go, thou art
an honest shifter, I Will have the statute repealed for thee. MINOS, must tell
thee, MINOS, thou have dejected you gent'mans spirit exceedingly: do
observe? do note, little MINOS?


MINO. Yes, sir.


TVCC. Go to then, raise; recover, do. Suffer him not to droop, in prospect
of a player, a rogue, a stager: put twenty into his hand, twenty, ^esterces,
I mean, and let no body see: go, do it, the work shall commend it self,
be MINOS, I Will pay.


MINO. Yes forsooth, Captain.


2. PYR. Do not we serve a notable sharke?


TVCC. And what new matters have you now afoot, sirrah? ha? I would feign come
with my cockatrice one day, and see a play; if I knew when there were a good
bawdie one: but they say, you have nothing but humors, reuells, and satyrs,
that girde, and fart at the time, you slave.


HIST. No, I assure you, Captain, not we. They are on the other side of
Tyber: we have as much ribaldrie in our plays, as can be, as you would wish,
Captain: All the sinners, in the suburbs, come, and applaud our action, daily.


TVCC. I hear, you will bring me of the stage there; you will play me, they say: I
shall be presented by a sort of copper-lac't scoundrels of you: life of PLVTO,
and you stage me, stinkard; your mansions shall sweat for it, your tabernacles,
varlets, your Globes, and your Triumphs.


HIST. Not we, by PHOEBVS, Captain* do not do us imputation without desert.


TVCC. I wu' not, my good two-penny rascal: reach me thy neufe. Do hear?
What will thou give me a week, for my brace of beagles, here, my little
point-trussers? you shall have them act among ye. Sirrah, you, pronounce. Thou
shall hear him speak, in king DARIUS doleful strain.


1. PYR. O doleful days! O direful deadly dump!
O wicked world! and worldly wickedness!
How can I hold my fist from crying, thump,
In rue of this right rascal wretchedness!

TVCC. In an amorous vain now, sirrah, peace.

1. PYR. O, she is wilder, and more hard, withal,
Then beast, or bird, or tree, or stony wall.
Yet might she love me, to vpreare her state:
I, but perhaps, she hopes some nobler mate.
Yet might she love me, to content her sire:
I, but her reason masters her desire.
Yet might she love me as her beauties thrall:
I, but I fear, she cannot love at all.

TVCC. Now, the horrible fierce Soldier, you, sirrah.

1. PYR. What? will I brave thee? I, and beard thee too.
A roman spirit scorns to bear a brain,
So full of base pusillanimitie.

DEMET. HIST. Excellent.

TVCC. Nay, thou shall see that, shall ravish thee anon: prick up thine ears,
stinkard: the Ghost, boys.

1. PYR. Vindicta.

2. PYR. Timoria.

1. PYR. Vindicta.

2. PYR. Timoria.

1. PYR. Veni.

2. PYR. Veni.

TVCC. Now, thunder, sirrah, you, the rumbling plaier.

1. PYR. I, but some body must cry (murder) then, in a small voice.

TVCC. Your fellow-sharer, there, shall do it; Cry, sirrah, cry.

1. PYR. Murder, murder.

2. PYR. Who calls out murder? lady, was it you?

DEMET. HIST. O, admirable good, I protest.

TVCC. Sirrah, boy, brace your drum a little straighter, and do the the other
fellow there, he in the -- what sha' call him -- and yet, stay too.


2. PYR. Nay, and thou dalliest, then I am thy foe,
And fear shall force, what friendship cannot win;
Thy death shall bury what thy life conceales,
Villain! thou die, for more respecting her --

1. PYR. O, stay my Lord.

2. PYR. Then me: yet speak the truth, and I will guerdon thee:
But if thou dally once again, thou die.

TVCC. Enough of this, boy.

2. PYR. Why then lament therefore: damned be thy guts unto king PLVTOES hell,
and princely EREBVS; for sparrowes must have food.

HIST. 'Pray, sweet Captain, let one of them do a little of a lady.

TVCC. O! he will make thee eternally enamored of him, there: do, sirrah,
do: 'twill allay your fellows fury a little.

1. PYR. Master, mock on: the scorn thou give me,
Pray JOVE, some lady may return on thee.

2. PYR. No: you shall see me do the Moore: Master, lend me your scarf a
little.

TVCC. Here, it is at thy service, boy.

2. PYR. They withdraw to make themselves ready. You, master MINOS, hark
hither a little.

TVCC. How do like him? art not rapt? art not tickled now? do not
applaud, rascal? do not applaud?

HIST. Yes: what will you ask for 'hem a week, Captain?

TVCC. No, you mangonizing slave, I will not part from 'hem: you will sell 'hem
for enghles you: let us have good cheer to morrow-night at supper, stalker, and
then we will talk, good capon, and plouer, do you hear, sirrah? and do not
bring your eating plaier with you there; I cannot away with him: He will eat a
leg of mutton, while I am in my porridge, the lean POLVPHAGVS, his belly is
like Barathrum, he looks like a midwife in man's apparel, the slave. Nor the
villanous-out-of-tune fiddler AENO^ARBVS, bring not him. What have thou there?
six and thirty? ha?


HIST. No, here is all I have (Captain) some five and twenty. Pray, sir, will
you present, and accommodate it unto the gentleman: for mine own part, I am a
mere stranger to his humor: besides, I have some business inuites me hence,
with Master ASINIVS LVPVS, the tribune.


TVCC. Well: go thy ways: pursue thy proiects, let me alone with this
desseigne; my POETASTER shall make thee a play, and thou shall be a man of good
parts, in it. But stay, let me see: Do not bring your AESOPE, your
politician; unless you can ram up his mouth with cloves: the slave smells
ranker then some sixteen dung-hills, and is seventeen times more rotten:
Mary, you may bring FRISKER, my zany: He Is a good skipping swaggerer; and your
fat fool there, my MANGO, bring him too: but let him not beg rapiers, nor
scarfes, in his ouer-familiar playing face, nor rore out his barren bold jests,
with a tormenting laughter, between drunk, and dry. Do you hear,
stiffe-toe? Give him warning, admonition, to forsake his saw^y glauering grace,
and his goggle eye: it does not become him, sirrah: tell him so. I have stood
up and defended you I, to gent'men, when you have been said to prey upon
pu'nees, and honest citizens, for socks, or buskins: or when they have called
you usurers, or brokers, or said, you were able to help to a piece of flesh --
I have sworn, I did not think so. Nor that you were the common retreats for
punkes decai'd in their practice. I cannot believe it of you --


HIST. Thank you, Captain: IVPITER, and the rest of the gods confine your
modern delights, without disgust.


TVCC. Stay, thou shall see the Moore, ere thou go: what is he, with the
halfe-armes there, that salutes us out of his cloak, like a motion? ha?


HIST. O, sir, his dubblet's a little decayed; he is otherwise a very simple
honest fellow, sir, one DEMETRIUS, a dresser of plays about the town, here;
we have hired him to abuse HORACE, and bring him in, in a play, with all his
gallants: as, TIBVLLVS, MECOENAS, CORNELIUS GALLVS, and the rest.


TVCC. And: why so, stinkard?


HIST. O, it will get us a huge deal of money (Captain) and we have need
on it; for this winter has made us all poorer, then so many starved snakes: No
body comes at us; not a gentleman, nor a --


TVCC. But, you know nothing by him, do you, to make a play of?


HIST. Faith, not much, Captain: but our Author will devise, that, that shall
serve in some sort.


TVCC. Why, my PARNASSVS, here, shall help him, if thou will: Can thy Author
do it impudently enough?


HIST. O, I warrant you, Captain, and spitefully enough, too; he has one of
the most ouer-flowing rank wits, in Rome. He will slander any man that
breathes, if he disgust him.


TVCC. The boy comes in on Minos (...), who (...), as he alls. I Will know the
poor, egregious, nitty rascal, and he have these commendable qualities, I Will
cherish him (stay, here comes the Tartar) I Will make a gathering for him, I: a
purse, and put the poor slave in fresh rags. Tell him so, to comfort him: well
said, boy.


2. PYR. Where art thou, boy? where is CALIPOLIS?
Fight earthquakes, in the entrails of the earth,
And eastern whirle-windes in the hellish shades:
Some foul contagion of the infected heavens
Blast all the trees; and in their cursed tops
The dismal night-rauen, and tragic owl
Breed, and become forerunners of my fall.

TVCC. Well, now fare thee well, my honest penny-biter: Commend me to
seuen-shares and a half, and remember to morrow -- if you lack a service, you
shall play in my name, rascals, but you shall buy your own cloth, and I Will
have two shares for my countenance. Let thy author stay with me.


DEEM. Yes, sir.


TVCC. 'Twas well done, little MINOS, thou did stalk well; forgive me that I
said thou stunkst, MINOS: 'twas the savor of a poet, I met sweating in the
street, hangs yet in my nostrills.


CRIS. Who? HORACE?


TVCC. I; he, do thou know him?


CRIS. O, he forsook me most barbarously, I protest.


TVCC. Hang him fustie satyr, he smells all goat; he carries a ram, under
his arme-holes, the slave: I am the worse when I see him. Did not MINOS impart?


CRIS. Yes, here are twenty drachmes, he did convey.


TVCC. Well said, keep 'hem, we will share anon; come, little MINOS.


CRIS. Faith, Captain, I Will be bold to show you a mistress of mine, a iewellers
wife, a gallant, as we go along.


TVCC. There spoke my Genius. MINOS, some of thy eringoes, little MINOS; send:
come hither, PARNASSVS, I must have thee familiar with my little locust, here,
it is a good vermin, they say. See, here is HORACE, and old TREBATIVS, the great
lawier, in his company; let us avoid him, now: He is too well seconded.


Act III. Scene V.
HORACE, TREBATIVS. Hor. Sat. 1. li. 2.
THere are, to whom I seem excessive sower;
And past a satyrs law, t'extend my power:
Others, that think what ever I have writ
Wants pith, and matter to eternise it;
And that they could, in one days light, disclose
A thousand verses, such as I compose.
What shall I do, TREBATIVS? say.

TREB. Surcease.

HORA. And shall my Muse admit no more increase?

TREB. So I advise.

HORA. An ill death let me die.
If 'twere not best; but sleep auoids mine eye:
And I use these, lest nights should tedious seem.

TREB. Rather, contend to sleep, and live like them,
That holding golden sleep in special price,
Rubbed with sweet oiles, swim silver Tyber thrice,
And every eu'en, with neat wine steeped be:
Or, if such love of writing ravish thee,
Then dare to sing unconquered CAESAR'S deeds;
Who cheeres such actions, with abundant meeds.

HORA. That, father, I desire; but when I try,
I feel defects in every faculty:
Nor is it a labor fit for every pen,
To paint the horrid troops of armed men;
The lances burst, in GALLIA'S slaughtred forces;
Or wounded Parthians, tumbled from their horses:
Great CAESAR'S wars cannot be fought with words.

TREB. Yet, what his virtue in his peace affords,
His fortitude, and justice thou can show;
As wise LVCILIVS, honored SCIPIO.

HORA. Of that, my powers shall suffer no neglect,
When such slight labors may aspire respect:
But, if watch not a most chosen time,
The humble words of FLACCVS cannot clime
The' attentive ear of CAESAR; nor must I
With less observance shun gross flattery:
For he, reposed safe in his own merit,
Spurns back the gloses of a fawning spirit.

TREB. But, how much better would such accents sound,
Then, with a sad, and serious verse to wound
PANTOLABVS, railing in his saucy jests?
Or NOMENTANVS spent in riotous feasts?
"In satyrs, each man (though untouched) complains
"As he were hurt; and hates such biting strains.

HORA. What shall I do? MILONIVS shakes his heels
In ceaseless dances, when his brain once feels
The stirring fervor of the wine ascend;
And that his eyes false number apprehend.
CASTOR his horse; POLLVX loves handie fights:
Thousand heads, a thousand choice delights.
My pleasure is in feet, my words to close,
As, both our better, old LVCILIVS does:
He, as his trusty friends, his books did trust
With all his secrets; nor, in things unjust,
Or actions lawful, ran to other men:
So, that the old man's life, described was seen
As in a votiue table in his lines;
And to his steps my Genius inclines,
Lucanian, or Apulian, I not whether;
For the Venusian colonie plowes either:
Sent thither, when the Sabines were forced thence
(As old fame sings) to give the place defense
Against such, as seeing it empty, might make rode
Upon the empire; or there six abode:
Whether the Apulian borderer it were,
Or the Lucanian violence they fear.
But this my style no living man shall touch,
If first I be not forced by base reproach;
But, like a sheathed sword, it shall defend
My innocent life; for, why should I contend
To draw it out, when no malicious thief
Robs my good name, the treasure of my life?
O IVPITER, let it with rust be eaten,
Before it touch, or insolently threaten
The life of any with the least disease;
So much I love, and woe a general peace.
But, he that wrongs me (better, I proclaim,
He never had assai'd to touch my fame.)
For he shall weep, and walk with every tongue
Throughout the city, infamously song.
SERVIVS, the Praetor, threats the laws, and vrne,
If any at his deeds repine or spurn;
The witch, CANIDIA, that ALBVCIVS got,
Denounces witchcraft, where she loves not:
THVRIVS, the judge, does thunder worlds of ill,
To such, as strive with his judicial will;
"All men affright their foes in what they may,
"Nature commands it, and men must obey.
Observe with me; "The wolf his tooth does use:
"The bull his horn. And, who does this infuse,
"But nature? There Is luxurious SCAEVA; Trust
His long-liu'd mother with him; His so just
And scrupulous right hand no mischief will;
No more, then with his heel a wolf will kill,
Or Ox with iaw: Mary, let him alone
With tempered poison to remove the croane.
But, briefly, if to age I destined be,
Or that quick deaths black wings inuiron me;
If rich, or poor; at Rome; or fate command
I shall be banished to some other land;
What hiew soever, my whole state shall bear,
I will write satyrs still, in spite of fear.

TREB. HORACE; I fear, thou draw'st no lasting breath:
And that some great man's friend will be thy death.

HORA. What? when the man that first did satyrise,
Durst pull the skin over the ears of vice;
And make, who stood in outward fashion clear,
Give place, as foul within; shall I forbear?
Did LAELIVS, or the man, so great with fame,
That from sacked Carthage fetched his worthy name,
Storm, that LVCILIVS did METELLVS pierce?
Or bury LVPVS quick, in famous verse?
Rulers, and subjects, by whole tribes he checked;
But virtue, and her friends did still protect:
And when from sight, or from the judgment seat,
The virtuous SCIPIO, and wise LAELIVS met,
Vnbrac't, with him in all light sports, they shared;
Till, their most frugall suppers were prepared.
What e're I am, though both for wealth, and wit;
Beneath LVCILIVS, I am pleased to sit,
Yet, envy (spite of her empoisoned breast)
Shall say, I lived in grace here, with the best;
And, seeking in weak trash to make her wound,
Shall find me solid, and her teeth unsound:
'Lesse, learned TREBATIVS censure disagree.

TREB. No, HORACE, I of force must yield to thee,
Only, take heed, as being advised by me,
Lest thou incur some danger: Better pause
Then rue thy ignorance of the sacred laws;
There Is justice, and great action may be su'd
Against such, as wrong men's fames with verses lewd.

HORA. I, with lewd verses; such as libels be,
And aimed at persons of good quality.
I reverence and adore that just decree:
But if they shall be sharp, yet modest rimes
That spare men's persons, and but tax their crimes,
Such, shall in open court, find current pass*
Were CAESAR judge, and with the makers grace.

TREB. Nay, I Will add more; if thou thy self being clear,
Shall tax in person a man, fit to boar
Shame, and reproach; his suit shall quickly be
Dissolved in laughter, and thou thence sit free.

Act IIII.
Scene I.
CHLOE, CYTHERIS. But, sweet lady, say: am I well enough attired for the
court, in sadness?


CYTH. Well enough? excellent well, sweet Mistress CHLOE, this straight-bodied
city attire (I can tell you) will stir a courtiers blood, more, then the finest
loose sacks the ladies use to be put in; and then you are as well iewell'd as
any of them, your ruff, and linen about you, is much more pure then theirs:
And for your beauty, I can tell you, there is many of them would defy the
painter, if they could change with you. Mary, the worst is, you must look to
be envied, and endure a few courtfrumps for it.


CHLO. O JOVE, Madam, I shall buy them too cheap! Give me my muffe, and my
dog there. And will the ladies be any thing familiar with me, think you?


CYTH. O IVNO! why, you shall see 'hem flock about you with their puff wings,
and ask you, where you bought your lawne? and what you paid for it? who
starches you? and entreat you to help 'hem to some pure landresses, out of the
city.


CHLO. O CUPID! give me my fan, and my masque too: And will the lords, and
the poets there, use one well too, lady?


CYTH. Doubt not of that: you shall have kisses from them, go pit-pat,
pit-pat, pit-pat, upon your lips, as thick as stones out of slings, at the
assault of a city. And then your ears will be so furd with the breath of
their complements, that you cannot catch cold of your head (if you would) in
three winters after.


CHLO. Thank you, sweet lady. O heaven! And how must one behave her self
amongst 'hem? you know all.


CYTH. Faith, impudently enough, mistress CHLOE, and well enough. Carry not too
much vnder-thought betwixt your self and them; nor your city mannerly word
(forsooth) use it not too often in any case; but plain, I, Madam; and, No,
Madam: Nor never say, your Lordship, nor your Honor; but, you, and you my Lord,
and my Lady: the other, they count too simple, and minsitiue. And though they
desire to kiss heaven with their titles, yet they will count them fools that
give them too humbly.


CHLO. O intolerable, IVPITER! By my troth, lady, I would not for a world, but
you had lain in my house: and in faith you shall not pay a farthing, for your
board, nor your chambers.


CYTH. O, sweet Mistress CHLOE!


CHLO. I faith, you shall not lady, nay, good lady, do not offer it.


Act IIII. Scene II.
COR. GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, CYTHERIS, CHLOE. COme, where be these ladies? By your
leave, bright stars, this gentleman and I are come to man you to court: where
your late kind entertainment is now to be requited with a heavenly banquet.


CYTH. A heavenly banquet, Gallus?


COR. GALL. No less, my dear, CYTHERIS.


TIBV. That were not strange, lady, if the epithete were only given for the
company invited thither; your self, and this fair gentlewoman.


CHLO. Are we invited to court, sir?


TIBV. You are, lady, by the great Princess, IVLIA: who longs to greet you
with any favors, that may worthily make you an often courtier.


CHLO. In sincerity, I thank her, sir. You have a coach? have you not?


TIBV. The Princess has sent her own, lady.


CHLO. O VENUS! that is well: I do long to ride in a coach most vehemently.


CYTH. But, sweet GALLVS, pray you, resolve me, why you give that heavenly
praise, to this earthly banquet?


COR. GALL. Because (CYTHERIS) it must be celebrated by the heavenly powers:
All the Gods, and Goddesses will be there; to two of which, you two must be
exalted.


CHLO. A pretty fiction in truth.


CYTH. A fiction indeed, CHLOE, and fit, for the fit of a poet.


COR. GALL. Why, CYTHERIS, may not poets (from whose divine spirits, all the
honors of the gods have been deduc't) entreat so much honor of the gods, to
have their divine presence at a poetical banquet?


CYTH. Suppose that no fiction: yet, where are your habilities to make us two
goddesses, at your feast?


COR. GALL. Who knows not (CYTHERIS) that the sacred breath of a true poet,
can blow any virtuous humanity, up to deity?


TIBV. To tell you the femall truth (which is the simple truth) ladies; and to
show that poets (in spite of the world) are able to deifie themselves: At this
banquet, to which you are invited, we intend to assume the figures of the
Gods; and to give our several Loves the forms of Goddesses. OVID will be
IVPITER; the Princess IVLIA, IVNO; GALLVS here APOLLO; you CYTHERIS, PALLAS; I
will be BACCHVS; and my Love PLAVTIA, CERES: And to install you, and your
husband, fair CHLOE, in honors, equal with ours; you shall be a Goddess,
and your husband a God.


CHLO. A God? O my god!


TIBV. A God, but a lame God, lady: for he shall be VULCAN, and you VENUS. And
this will make our banquet no less then heavenly.


CHLO. In sincerity, it will be sugared. Good JOVE, what a pretty foolish
thing it is to be a poet! But hark you, sweet CYTHERIS; could they not
possibly leave out my husband? me thinks, a bodies husband does not so well
at Court: A bodies friend, or so -- but husband, it is like your clog to your
marmaset, for all the world, and the heavens.


CYTH. Tut, never fear, CHLOE: your husband will be left without in the lobby,
or the great chamber, when you shall be put in, in the closet, by this lord, and
by that lady.


CHLO. Nay, then I am certified: he shall go.


Act IIII. Scene III.
GALLVS, HORACE, TIBVLLVS, ALBIVS, CRISPINVS, TVCCA, DEMETRIUS, CYTHERIS,
CHLOE. HORACE! Welcome.

HORA. Gentlemen, hear you the news?


TIBV. What news, my QVINTVS?


HORA. Our melancholic friend, PROPERTIVS,
Has closed himself, up, in his CYNTHIAS tomb;
And will by no entreaties be drawn thence.

ALBI. Nay, good master CRISPINVS, pray you, bring near the gentleman.


HORA. CRISPINVS? Hide me, good GALLVS: TIBVLLVS, shelter me.


CRIS. Make your approach, sweet Captain.


TIBV. What means this, HORACE?


HORA. I am surpised again, farewell.


GALL. Stay, HORACE.


HORA. What, and be tired on, by yond' vulture? No:
PHoe^VS defend me.

TIBV. 'Slight! I hold my life,
This same is he met him in holy street.

GALL. Troth, it is like enough. This act of PROPERTIVS relisheth very strange,
with me.


TVCC. By thy leave, my neat scoundrell: what, is this the mad boy you talked
on?


CRIS. I: this is master ALBIVS, Captain.


TVCC. Give me thy hand, AGAMEMNON; we hear abroad, thou art the HECTOR of
citizens: what say thou? are we welcome to thee, noble NEOPTOLEMVS?


ALBI. Welcome, Captain? by JOVE, and all the Gods in the capitol --


TVCC. No more, we conceive thee. Which of these is thy wedlock, MENELAVS? thy
HELLEN? thy LVCRECE? that we may do her honor; mad boy?


CRIS. She in the little fine dressing, sir, is my Mistress.


ALBI. For fault of a better, sir.


TVCC. A better, profane rascal? I cry thee mercy (my good scroile) was it
thou?


ALBI. No harm, Captain.


TVCC. She is a VENUS, a VESTA, a MELPOMENE: Come hither, PENELOPE; what is thy
name, IRIS?


CHLO. My name is CHLOE, sir; I am a gentlewoman.


TVCC. Thou art in merit to be an empress (CHLOE) for an eye, and a lip; thou
have an emperors nose: kiss me again: it is a virtuous punke, So. Before JOVE,
the gods were a sort of goslings, when they suffered so sweet a breath, to
perfume the bed of a stinkard: thou had ill fortune, THISBE; the fates were
infatuate; they were, punke; they were.


CHLO. That Is sure, sir: let me crave your name, I pray you, sir.


TVCC. I am known by the name of Captain TVCCA, punke; the noble Roman,
punke: a gent'man, and a commander, punke.


CHLO. In good time: a gentleman, and a commander? that is as good as a poet, me
thinks.


CRIS. A pretty instrument! It Is my cousin CYTHERIS violl, this: is it not?


CYTH. Nay, play cousin, it wants but such a voice, and hand, to grace it, as
yours is.


CRIS. Alas, cousin, you are merrily inspired.


CYTH. 'Pray you play, if you love me.


CRIS. Yes, cousin: you know, I do not hate you.


TIBV. A most subtle wench! How she has baited him with a violl yonder, for a
song!


CRIS. Cousin, 'pray you call mistress CHLOE; she shall hear an essay of my
poetry.


TVCC. I Will call her. Come hither, cockatrice: here is one, will set thee up, my
sweet punke; set thee up.


CHLO. Are you a puet, so soon, sir?


ALBI. Wife: mum.

SONG. Love is blind, and a wanton;
In the whole world, there is scant*
one such another:
No, not his Mother.
He has plucked her doves, and sparrowes,
To feather his sharp arrows,
And alone prevails,
Whilst sick VENUS waileth.
But if CYPRIS once recover
The wag; it shall behoue her
To look better to him:
Or she will undo him.

ALBI. O, most odoriferous music!


TVCC. A, ha! stinkard. Another ORPHEUS, you slave, another ORPHEUS! an ARION,
riding on the back of a dolphin, rascal!


GALL. Have you a copy of this dittie, sir?


CRIS. Master ALBIVS has.


ALBI. I, but in truth, they are my wives verses; I must not show 'hem.


TVCC. Show 'hem, bankerupt, show 'hem; they have salt in 'hem, and will brook
the air, stinkard.


GALL. How? to his bright mistress, CANIDIA?


CRIS. I, sir, that is but a borrowed name; as OVIDS CORINNA, or PROPERTIVS his
CYNTHIA, or your NEMESIS, or DELIA, TIBVLLVS.


GALL. It Is the name of HORACE his witch, as I remember.


TIBV. Why? the ditt'is all borrowed; it is HORACES: hang him plagiary.


TVCC. How? he borrow of HORACE? he shall pawn himself to ten brokers,
first. Do you hear, POETASTERS? I know you to be men of worship -- He shall
write with HORACE, for a talent: and let MECoeNAS, and his whole college of
critics take his part: thou shall do it, young PHOEBVS: thou shall, PHAETON;
thou shall.


DEEM. Alas, sir, HORACE! he is a mere sponge; nothing but humors, and
observation, he goes up and down sucking from every society, and when he
comes home, squeazes himself dry again. I know him, I.


TVCC. Thou say true, my poor poetical Fury, he will pen all he knows.
A sharp thornie-tooth'd satyricall rascal, fly him; he carries hey in his
horn: he will sooner lose his best friend, then his least jest. What he once
drops upon paper, against a man, lives eternally to vpbraid him in the mouth of
every slave tankerd-bearer, or water-man; not a bawd, or a boy that comes from
the bake-house, but shall point at him: it is all dog, and scorpion; he
carries poison in his teeth, and a sting in his tail. Fough, body of JOVE!
I Will have the slave whipped one of these days for his satyrs, and his humors,
by one casheer'd clarke, or another.


CRIS. We Will undertake him, Captain.


DEEM. I, and tickle him in faith, for his arrogancy, and his impudence, in
commending his own things; and for his translating: I can trace him in faith.
O, he is the most open fellow, living; I had as lieue as a new suit, I were at
it.


TVCC. Say no more then, but do it; it is the only way to get thee a new suit;
sting him* my little neufts; I Will give you instructions: I Will be your
intelligencer, we'll all join, and hang upon him like so many horse-leaches,
the plaiers and all. We shall sup together, soon; and then we will conspire, in
faith.


GALL. O, that HORACE had stayed still, here.


TIBV. So would not I: for both these would have turned Pythagoreans, then.


GALL. What, mute?


TIBV. I, as fishes in faith: come, ladies, shall we go?


CYTH. We await you, sir. But mistress CHLOE asks, if you have not a god to
spare, for this gentleman.


GALL. Who, Captain TVCCA?


CYTH. I; he.


GALL. Yes, if we can inuit him along, he shall be MARS.


CHLO. Has MARS any thing to do with VENUS?


TIBV. O, most of all, lady.


CHLO. Nay, then, I pray let him be invited: and what shall CRISPINVS be?


TIBV. MERCVRY, mistress CHLOE.


CHLO. MERCVRY? that is a Poet? is it?


GALL. No, lady; but somewhat inclining that way: he is a Herald at arms.


CHLO. A Herald at arms? good: and MERCVRY? pretty: he has to do with
VENUS, too?


TIBV. A little, with her face, lady; or so.


CHLO. It Is very well; pray' let us go, I long to be at it.


CYTH. Gentlemen, shall we'pray your companies along?


CRIS. You shall not only pray, but prevail, lady. Come, sweet Captain.


TVCC. Yes, I follow: but thou must not talk of this now, my little bankerupt.


ALBI. Captain, look here: mum.


DEEM. I Will go write, sir.


TVCC. Do, do, stay: there is a drachme, to purchase ginger-bread, for thy
muse.


Act IIII. Scene IIII.
LVPVS, HISTRIO, LICTOR, MINOS, MECoeNAS, HORACE. COme, let us talk, here;
here we may be private: shut the door,


LICTOR. You are a plaier, you say.


HIST. I, and't please your worship.


LVPV. Good: and how are you able to give this intelligence?


HIST. Mary, sir, they directed a letter to me, and my fellow-sharers.


LVPV. Speak lower, you are not now in your theater, Stager: my sword, knave.
They directed a letter to you, and your fellow-sharers: forward.


HIST. Yes, sir; to hire some of our properties; as a scepter, and a crown,
for JOVE; and a caduceus for MERCVRY: and a petasus --


LVPV. Caduceus? and petasus? Let me see your letter. This is a coniuration; a
conspiracy, this. Quickly, on with my buskins: I Will act a tragoedie, in faith.
Will nothing but our gods serve these poets to profane? dispatch. Plaier, I
thank thee. The Emperor shall take knowledge of thy good service. Who Is there
now? Look, knave. A crown, and a scepter? this is good: rebellion, now?


LICT. It Is your pothecary, sir, master MINOS.


LVPV. What tell thou me of pothecaries, knave? Tell him; I have affairs of
state, in hand; I can talk to no pothecaries, now. Heart of me! Stay the
pothecary there.

You shall see, I have fish't out a cunning piece of plot now: They have had
some intelligence, that their project is discovered, and now have they dealt
with my pothecary, to poison me; it is so; knowing, that I meant to take physic
to day: As sure as death, it is there. IVPITER, I thank thee, that thou have
yet made me so much of a politician. You are welcome, sir; take the potion from
him there; I have an antidote more then you wot off, sir; throw it on the
ground there: So. Now fetch in the dog; And yet we cannot tarry to try
experiments, now: arrest him, you shall go with me, sir; I Will tickle you,
pothecarie; I Will give you a glister, in faith. Have I the letter? I* it is here.
Come, your fasces, LICTORS: The half pikes, and the halberds, take them down
from the lares, there. Plaier, assist me.


MECae. Whither now, ASINIVS LVPVS, with this armorie?


LVPV. I cannot talk now; I charge you, assist me: Treason, treason.


HORA. How? treason?


LVPV. I: if you love the Emperor, and the state, follow me.


Act IIII. Scene V.
OVID, IVLIA, GALLVS, CYTHERIS, TIBVLLVS, PLAVTIA, ALBIVS, CHLOE, TVCCA,
CRISPINVS, HERMOGENES, PYRGVS. GOds, and Goddesses, take your several seats.
Now, M^RCVRY, move your caduceus, and in IVPITERS name command silence.


CRIS. In the name of IVPITER; silence.


HERM. The crier of the court has too clarified a voice.


GALL. Peace, Momus.


OVID. Oh, he is the God of reprehension; let him alone. It Is his office.
MERCVRY, go forward, and proclaim after PHOEBVS, our high pleasure, to all
the Deities that shall partake this high banquet.


CRIS. Yes, sir.


GALL. The great God, IVPITER,
Of his licentious goodness,
Willing to make this feast, no fast
From any manner of pleasure;
Nor to bind any God or Goddess,
To be any thing the more god or goddess, for their names:
He gives them all free license,
To speak no wiser, then persons of baser titles;
And to be nothing better* then common men, or women.
And therefore no God
Shall need to keep himself more strictly to his Goddess,
Then any man does to his wife.
Nor any Goddess
Shall need to keep her self more strictly to her God,
Then any woman does to her husband.
But, since it is no part of wisdom,
In these days, to come into bonds;
It shall be lawful for every lover,
To break loving oaths,
To change their lovers, and make love to others,
As the heat of every ones blood,
And the spirit of our nectar shall inspire.
And IVPITER, save IVPITER.

CRIS. The great, etc.
Of his, etc.
Willing, etc.
From any, etc.
Nor to, etc.
To be, etc.
He gives, etc.
To speak, etc.
And to, etc.
And there, etc.
Shall need, etc.
Then any* etc.
Nor any, etc.
Shall need, etc.
Then any, etc.
But, since, etc.
In these, etc.
It shall, etc.
To break, etc.
To change, etc.
As the, etc.
And the, etc.
And IVPI. etc.

TIBV. So: now we may play the fools, by authority.


HERM. To play the fool by authority, is wisdom.


IVLI. Away with your matterie sentences, Momus; they are too grave, and wise,
for this meeting.


OVID. MERCVRY, give our iester a stool, let him sit by; and reach him of our
cates.


TVCC. Do hear, mad IVPITER? We Will have it enacted; He, that speaks the
first wise word, shall be made cuckold. What sai'st thou? Is It not a good
motion?


OVID. Deities, are you all agreed?


ALL. Agreed, great IVPITER.


ALBI. I have read in a book, that to play the fool wisely, is high wisdom.


GALL. How now, VULCAN! will you be the first wizard?


OVID. Take his wife, MARS, and make him cuckold, quickly.


TVCC. Come, cockatrice.


CHLO. No, let me alone with him, IVPITER: I Will make you take heed, sir, while
you live again; if there be twelve in a company, that you be not the wisest
of 'hem.


ALBI. No more, I will not indeed, wife, hereafter; I Will be here: mum.


OVID. Fill us a bowl of nectar, GANYMEDE: we will drink to our daughter
VENUS.


GALL. Look to your wife, VULCAN: IVPITER begins to court her.


TIBV. Nay, let MARS look to it: VULCAN must do, as VENUS does, bear.


TVCC. Sirrah, boy: catamite. Look, you play GANYMEDE well now, you slave. Do
not spill your nectar; Carry your cup even: so. You should have rubbed your
face, with whites of eggs, you rascal; till your brows had shone like our
sooty brothers here, as sleeke as a horn-booke: or have steept your lips in
wine, till you made 'hem so plump, that IVNO might have been jealous of'hem.
Punke, kiss me, punke.


OVID. Here, daughter VENUS, I drink to thee.


CHLO. 'Thanke you, good father IVPITER.


TVCC. Why, mother IVNO! gods and fiends! what, will thou suffer this ocular
temptation?


TIBV. MARS is enraged, he looks big, and begins to stut, for anger.


HERM. Well played, Captain MARS.


TVCC. Well said, minstrell MOMVS: I must put you in? must I? When will you be
in good fooling of your self, fiddler? never?


HERM. O, it is our fashion, to be silent, when there is a better fool in
place, ever.


TVCC. 'Thanke you, rascal.


OVID. Fill to our daughter VENUS, GANYMEDE, who fills her father with
affection.


IVLI. Will thou be ranging, IVPITER, before my face?


OVID. Why not, IVNO? why should IVPITER stand in awe of thy face, IVNO?


IVLI. Because it is thy wives face, IVPITER.


OVID. What, shall a husband be afraid of his wives face? will she paint it so
horribly? We are a King, cot-queane; and we will reign in our pleasures; and
we will cudgel thee to death, if thou find fault with us.


IVLI. I will find fault with thee, King cuckold-maker: what, shall the King of
gods turn the King of good fellows, and have no fellow in wickedness? This
makes our poets, that know our profaneness, live as profane, as we: By my
godhead, IVPITER; I will join with all the other gods, here; bind thee hand
and foot; throw thee down into earth; and make a poor poet of thee, if thou
abuse me thus.


GALL. A good smart-tongu'd Goddess; a right IVNO.


OVID. IVNO, we will cudgel thee, IVNO: we told thee so yesterday, when thou
were jealous of us, for THETIS.


PYRG. Nay, to day she had me in inquisition too.


TVCC. Well said, my sine Phrygian fry, inform, inform. Give me some wine
(King of Heralds) I may drink to my cockatrice.


OVID. No more, GANYMEDE, we will cudgel thee, IVNO: by S^YX, we will.


IVLI. I, it is well, Gods may grow impudent in iniquity, and they must not be
told of it --


OVID. Yea, we will knock our chinne against our breast; and shake thee out of
Olympus, into an oyster-bote, for thy scolding.


IVLI. Your nose is not long enough to do it, IVPITER, if all thy strumpets,
thou have among the stars, took thy part. And there is never a star in thy
forehead, but shall be a horn, if thou persist to abuse me.


CRIS. A good jest, in faith.


OVID. We tell thee, thou anger'st us, cot-queane; and we will thunder thee in
pieces, for thy cot-queanitie.


CRIS. Another good jest.


ALBI. O, my hammers, and my Cyclops! this boy fills not wine enough, to make
us kind enough, to one another.


TVCC. Nor thou have not collied thy face enough, stinkard.


ALBI. I Will ply the table with nectar, and make them friends.


HERM. Heaven is like to have but a lame skinker, then.


ALBI. "Wine, and good livers, make true lovers: I Will sentence them together.
Here father, here mother, for shame, drink your selves drunk, and forget this
dissension: you two should cling together, before our faces, and give us
example of unity.


GALL. O, excellently spoken, VULCAN, on the sudden!


TIBV. IVPITER, may do well to prefer his tongue to some office, for his
eloquence.


TVCC. His tongue shall be gent'man usher to his wit, and still go before it.


ALBI. An excellent fit office!


CRIS. I, and an excellent good jest, besides.


HERM. What, have you hired MERCVRY, to cry your jests you make?


OVID. MOMVS, you are envious.


TVCC. Why, you whoreson block-head, it is your only block of wit in fashion
(now adays) to applaud other folks jests.


HERM. True: with those that are not artificers themselves. VULCAN, you nod;
and the mirth of the jest droops.


PYRG. He has filled nectar so long, till his brain swims in it.


GALL. What, do we nod, fellow Gods? sound music, and let us startle our
spirits with a song.


TVCC. Do, APOLLO: thou art a good musician.


GALL. What says IVPITER?


OVID. Ha? ha?


GALL. A song.


OVID. Why, do, do, sing.


PLAV. BACCHVS, what say you?


TIBV. CERES?


PLAV. But, to this song?


TIBV. Sing, for my part.


IVLI. Your belly weighes down your head, BACCHVS: here is a song toward.


TIBV. Begin, VULCAN --


ALBI. What else? what else?


TVCC. Say, IVPITER --


OVID. MERCVRY --


CRIS. I, say, say --

SONG. WAke, our mirth begins to die:
Quicken it with tunes, and wine:
Raise your notes, you're out: fie, fie,
This drouzinesse is an ill sign.
We banish him the queere of Gods,
That droops again:
Then all are men,
For here is not one, but nods.

OVID. I like not this sudden and general heaviness, amongst our Godheads:
It Is somewhat ominous. APOLLO, command us louder music, and let MERCVRY, and
MOMVS contend to please, and revive our senses.


SONG. HERM. THen, in a free and lofty strain,
Our broken tunes we thus repair;

CRIS. And we answer them again,
Running division on the panting air:

AMBO. To celebrate this feast of sense,
As free from scandal, as offense.

HERM. Here is beauty, for the eye;

CRIS. For the ear, sweet melody;

HERM. Ambrosiack odours, for the smell;

CRIS. Delicious nectar, for the taste;

AMBO. For the touch, a ladies waste;
Which does all the rest excel!

OVID. I: This has wak't us. MERCVRY, our Herald; Go from our self, the
great God IVPITER, to the great Emperor, AUGUSTUS CAESAR: And command him,
from us (of whose bounty he has received his surname, AUGUSTUS) that for a
thanke-offring to our beneficence, he presently sacrifice as a dish to this
banquet, his beautiful and wanton daughter IVLIA. She Is a cursed queen, tell
him; and plays the scold behind his back: Therefore, let her be sacrificed.
Command him this, MERCVRY, in our high name of IVPITER ALTITONANS.


IVLI. Stay, feather-footed MERCVRY, and tell AUGUSTUS, from us, the great IVNO
SATVRNIA; if he think it hard to do, as IVPITER has commanded him, and
sacrifice his daughter, that he had better to do so ten times, then suffer
her to love the well-nos'd poet, OVID: whom he shall do well to whip, or cause
to be whipped, about the capitol, for soothing her, in her follies.


Act IIII. Scene VI.
CAESAR, MECOENAS, HORACE, LVPVS, HISTRIO, MINOS, LICTORS, OVID, GALLVS,
TIBVLLVS, TVCCA, CRISPINVS, ALBIVS, HERMOGENES, PYRGVS, IVLIA, CYTHERIS,
PLAVTIA, CHLOE. WHat sight is this? MECOENAS! HORACE! say!
Have we our senses? Do we hear? and see?
Or, are these but imaginary objects
Drawn by our fantasy? Why speak you not?
Let us do sacrifice? Are they the Gods?
Reverence, amaze, and fury fight in me.
What? do they kneel? Nay, then I see it is true
I thought impossible: O, impious sight!
Let me divert mine eyes; the very thought
Euerts my soul, with passion: look not, man.
There is a panther, whose unnatural eyes
He offers to kill his daughter. Will strike thee dead: turn then, and die on
her
With her own death.

MECoe. HORACE. What means imperial CAESAR?

CAESA. What, would you have me let the strumpet live,
That, for this pageant, earnes so many deaths?

TVCC. Boy, slinke boy.

PYRG. 'Pray IVPITER, we be not followed by the sent, Master.

CAESA. Say, sir, what are you?

ALBI. I play VULCAN, sir.

CAESA. But, what are you* sir?

ALBI. Your citizen, and ieweller, sir.

CAESA. And what are you, dame?

CHLO. I play VENUS, forsooth.

CAESA. I ask not, what you play? but, what you are?

CHLO. Your citizen, and iewellers wife, sir.

CAESA. And you, good sir?

CRIS. Your gentleman, parcel- poet, sir.

CAESA. O, that profaned name!
And are these seemly company for thee,
Degenerate monster? all the rest I know,
And hate all knowledge, for their hateful sakes.
Are you, that first the deities inspired
With skill of their high natures, and their powers,
The first abusers of their useful light;
Profaning thus their dignities, in their forms:
And making them like you, but counterfeits?
O, who shall follow virtue, and embrace her,
When her false bosom is found naught but air?
And yet, of those embraces, centaures spring,
That war with humane peace, and poison men.
Who shall, with greater comforts, comprehend
Her unseen being, and her excellence;
When you, that teach, and should eternize her,
Live, as she were no law unto your lives:
Nor lived her self, but with your idle breaths?
If you think gods but feigned, and virtue painted,
Know, we sustain an actual residence;
And, with the title of an Emperor,
Retain his spirit, and imperial power:
By which (in imposition too remiss,
Licentious NASO, for thy violent wrong,
In soothing the declined affections
Of our base daughter) we exile thy feet
From all approach, to our imperial court,
On pain of death: and thy mis-gotten love
Commit to patronage of iron doors;
Since her soft-hearted ^ire cannot contain her.

MECoe. O, good my lord; forgive: be like the Gods.

HORA. Let royal bounty (CAESAR) mediate.

CAESA. There is no bounty to be showed to such,
As have no real goodness: Bounty is
A spice of virtue: and what virtuous act
Can take effect on them, that have no power
Of equal habitude to apprehend it,
But live in worship of that idol vice,
As if there were no virtue, but in shade
Of strong imagination, merely enforced?
This shows, their knowledge is mere ignorance;
Their farre-fetcht dignity of soul, a phansy;
And all their square pretext of gravity
A mere vain glory: hence, away with 'hem.
I will prefer for knowledge, none, but such
As rule their lives by it, and can becalme
All sea of humor, with the marble trident
Of their strong spirits: Others fight below
With gnats, and shadows, others nothing know.

Act IIII. Scene VII.
TVCCA, CRISPINVS, PYRGVS, HORACE, MECoeNAS, LVPVS, HISTRIO. What Is become of
my little punke, VENUS! and the poult-foot stinkard, her husband? ha?


CRIS. O, they are rid home in the coach, as fast as the wheels can run.


TVCC. God IVPITER is banished, I hear: and his cockatrice, IVNO, locked up:
'Hart; and and all the poetry in Parnassus get me to be a player again, I Will
sell 'hem my share for a sesterce. But this is humors, HORACE, that
goat-footed envious slave; he is turned fawn now, an informer, the rogue: it is
he has betrayed us all. Did you not see him, with the Emperor, crouching?


CRIS. Yes.


TVCC. Well, follow me. Thou shall libell, and I Will cudgel the rascal. Boy,
provide me a truncheon; Revenge shall gratulate him, tam MARTI, quam MERCVRIO.


PYRG. I, but Master; take heed how you give this out, HORACE is a man of the
sword.


CRIS. It Is true, in troth: they say, he is valiant.


TVCC. Valiant? so is mine arse, gods, and fiends! I Will blow him into air,
when I meet him next: He dares not fight with a puck-fist.


PYRG. Horace passes by. Master, here he comes.


TVCC. Where? IVPITER save thee, my good poet; my noble prophet; my little fat
HORACE. I scorn to beat the rogue in the court; and I saluted him, thus
fair, because he should suspect nothing, the rascal: Come, we will go see
how forward our iourney-man is toward the vntrussing of him.


CRIS. Do you hear, Captain? I Will write nothing in it but innocence: because
I may swear I am innocent.


HORA. Nay, why pursue you not the Emperor for your reward, now, LVPVS?


MECoe. Stay, ASINIVS; you, and your stager, and your band of LICTORS:
I hope your service merits more respect,
Then thus, without a thanks, to be sent hence?

HIST. Well, well, jest on, jest on.

HORA. Thou base unworthy groom.

LVPV. I, I, it is good.

HORA. Was this the treason? this, the dangerous plot,
Thy clamorous tongue so bellowed through the court?
Had thou no other project to increase
Thy grace with CAESAR, but this woluish train;
To prey upon the life of innocent mirth,
And harmless pleasures, bred, of noble wit?
Away, I loathe thy presence: such as thou,
They are the moths, and scarabes of a state;
The bane of empires; and the dregs of courts;
Who (to endeare themselves to any 'employment)
Care not, whose fame they blast; whose life they endanger:
And under a disguised, and cob-web masque
Of love, unto their sovereign, vomit forth
Their own prodigious malice; and pretending
To be the props, and columns of his safety,
The guards unto his person, and his peace,
Disturb it most, with their false lapwing-cries.

LVPV. Good. CAESAR shall know of this; believe it.

MECoe. CAESAR does know it (wolf) and to his knowledge,
He will (I hope) reward your base endeavors.
"Princes that will but hear, or give access
"To such officious spies, can never be safe:
"They take in poison, with an open care,
"And, free from danger, become slaves to fear.

Act IIII. Scene VIII.
OVID. Banished the court? Let me be banished life;
Since the chief end of life is there concluded:
Within the court, is all the kingdom bounded,
And as her sacred sphere does comprehend
Ten thousand times so much, as so much place
In any part of all the empire else;
So every body, moving in her sphere,
Contains ten thousand times as much in him,
As any other, her choice orb excludes.
As in a circle, a magician, then
Is safe, against the spirit, he excites;
But out of it, is subject to his rage,
And loses all the virtue of his art:
So I, exiled the circle of the court,
Lose all the good gifts, that in it I joyed.
"No virtue current is, but with her stamp:
"And no vice vicious, blaunch't with her white hand.
The court's the abstract of all Romes desert;
And my dear IVLIA, th'abstract of the court.
Meethinkes, now I come near her, I respire
Some air of that late comfort, I received:
And while the evening, with her modest veil,
Gives leave to such poor shadows as my self,
To steal abroad, I, like a heart-lesse ghost,
Without the living body of my love,
Will here walk, and attend her. For I know,
Not far from hence, she is imprisoned,
And hopes, of her strict guardian, to bribe
So much admittance, as to speak to me,
And cheer my fainting spirits, with her breath.

Act IIII. Scene IX.
IVLIA, OVID. She appears above, as at her chamber window. OVID? my love?

OVID. Here, heavenly IVLIA.

IVLI. Here? and not here? O, how that word does play
With both our fortunes, differing, like our selves,
Both one; and yet divided, as opposed?
I high, thou low? O, this our plight of place
Doubly presents the two lets of our love,
Local, and ceremonial height, and lowness:
Both ways, I am too high, and thou too low.
Our minds are even, yet: O, why should our bodies,
That are their slaves, be so without their rule?
I Will cast my self down to thee; If I die,
I Will ever live with thee: no height of birth,
Of place, of duty, or of cruel power,
Shall keep me from thee; should my father lock
This body up within a tomb of brass,
Yet I Will be with thee. If the forms, I hold
Now in my soul, be made one substance with it;
That soul immortal; and the same it is now;
Death cannot raze th'affects, she now retayneth:
And then, may she be any where she will.
The souls of parents rule not childrens souls,
When death sets both in their dissolved estates;
Then is no child, nor father: then eternity
Frees all, from any temporal respect.
I come, my OVID, take me in thine arms:
And let me breathe my soul into thy breast.

OVID. O, stay, my love: the hopes thou do conceive
Of thy quick death, and of thy future life,
Are not autenticall. Thou choosest death,
So thou might joy thy love, in the other life.
But know (my princely love) when thou art dead,
Thou only must survive in perfect soul;
And in the soul, are no affections:
We power out our affections with our blood;
And with our bloods affections, fade our loves.
"No life has love in such sweet state, as this;
"No essence is so dear to moodie sense,
"As flesh, and blood; whose quintessence is sense.
"Beauty, composed of blood, and flesh, moves more,
"And is more plausible to blood, and flesh,
"Then spiritual beauty can be to the spirit.
Such apprehension, as we have in dreams
(When sleep, the bond of senses, locks them up)
Such shall we have, when death destroies them quite.
If love be then thy object, change not life;
Live high, and happy still: I still below,
Close with my fortunes, in thy height, shall joy.

IVLI. Ay me, that virtue, whose brave eagles wings
With every stroke, blow stars, in burning heaven;
Should like a swallow (preying toward storms)
Fly close to earth: and with an eager plume,
Pursue those objects, which none else can see,
But seem to all the world, the empty air.
Thus thou (poor OVID) and all virtuous men
Must prey like swallows, on invisible food;
Pursuing flies, or nothing: and thus love,
And every worldly fancy, is transposed,
By worldly tyranny, to what plight it list.
O, father, since thou gave me not my mind,
Strive not to rule it: Take, but what thou gave
To thy disposure. Thy affections
Rule not in me; I must bear all my griefs,
Let me use all my pleasures: virtuous love
Was never scandal to a Goddess state.
But, he is inflexible! and, my dear love,
Thy life may chance be shortened, by the length
Of my unwilling speeches to depart.
Farewell, sweet life: though thou be yet exiled
Th'officious court, enjoy me amply, still:
My soul, in this my breath, enters thine ears,
And on this turrets floor, will I lie dead,
Till we may meet again. In this proud height,
I kneel beneath thee, in my prostrate love,
And kiss the happy sands, that kiss thy feet.
"Great JOVE submits a scepter, to a cell;
"And lovers, ere they part, will meet in hell.

OVID. Farewell, all company; and if I could
All light with thee: hells shade should hide my brows,
Till thy dear beauties beams redeemed my vows.

IVLI. She calls him back. OVID, my love: alas, may we not stay
A little longer (think thou) vndiscern'd?

OVID. For thine own good, fair Goddess, do not stay:
Who would engage a firmament of fires,
Shining in thee, for me, a falling star?
Be gone, sweet life-bloud: if I should discern
Thy self but touched, for my sake, I should die.

IVLI. I will be gone, then; and not heaven it self
He calls her back. Shall draw me back.

OVID. Yet IVLIA, if thou will,
A little longer, stay.

IVLI. I am content.

OVID. O, mighty OVID! what the sway of heaven
Could not retire, my breath has turned back.

IVLI. Who shall go first, my love? my passionate eyes
Will not endure to see thee turn from me.

OVID. If thou go first, my soul will follow thee.

IVLI. Then we must stay.

OVID. Ay me, there is no stay
In amorous pleasures: if both stay, both die.
I hear thy father, hence, my deity.
Fear forgeth sounds in my deluded ears;
I did not hear him: I am mad with love.
There is no spirit, under heaven, that works
With such illusion: yet such witchcraft kill me,
Ere a sound mind, without it, save my life.
Here, on my knees, I worship the blessed place
That held my goddess; and the loving air,
That closed her body in his silken arms:
Vain OVID! kneel not to the place, nor air;
She Is in thy heart: rise then, and worship there*
"The truest wisdom silly men can have,
"Is dotage, on the follies of their flesh.

Act V.
Scene I.
CAESAR, MECOENAS, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, HORACE, EQVITES TO. WE, that have
conquered still, to save the conquered,
And loved to make inflictions feared, not felt;
Grieved to reprove, and joyful to reward,
More proud of reconcilement, then revenge,
Resume into the late state of our love,
Worthy CORNELIUS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS:
You both are gentlemen, you, CORNELIUS,
A soldier of renown; and the first provost,
That ever let our Roman eagles fly
On swarthy Egypt, quarried with her spoils.
Yet (not to bear cold forms, nor men's out-termes,
Without the inward fires, and lives of men)
You both have virtues, shining through your shapes;
To show, your titles are not writ on posts,
Or hollow statues, which the best men are,
Without Promethean stuffings reached from heaven!
Sweet poesies sacred garlands crown your gentry:
Which is, of all the faculties on earth,
The most abstract, and perfect; if she be
True borne, and nursed with all the sciences.
She can so mould Rome, and her monuments,
Within the liquid marble of her lines,
That they shall stand fresh, and miraculous,
Even, when they mix with innouating dust;
In her sweet streams shall our brave Roman spirits
Chase, and swim after death, with their choice deeds
Shining on their white shoulders; and therein
Shall Tyber, and our famous rivers fall
With such attraction, that the ambitious line
Of the round world shall to her center shrink,
To hear their music: And, for these high parts,
CAESAR shall reverence the Pierian arts.

MECoe. Your Majesty's high grace to poesy,
Shall stand against all the dull detractions
Of leaden souls; who (for the vain assumings
Of some, quite worthless of her sovereign wreaths)
Contain her worthiest prophets in contempt.

GALL. Happy is Rome of all earths other states,
To have so true, and great a president,
For her inferior spirits to imitate,
As CAESAR is; who adds to the sun,
Influence, and luster: in increasing thus
His inspirations, kindling fire in us.

HORA. PHOEBVS himself shall kneel at CAESAR'S shrine,
And deck it with bay-garlands dew'd with wine,
To quite the worship CAESAR does to him:
Where other Princes, hoisted to their thrones
By fortunes passionate and disordered power,
Sit in their height, like clouds, before the sun,
Hindering his comforts; and (by their excess
Of cold in virtue, and cross heat in vice)
Thunder, and tempest, on those learned heads,
Whom CAESAR with such honor does advance.

TIBV. All humane business fortune does command
Without all order; and with her blind hand,
She, blind, bestows blind gifts: that still have nursed
They see not who, nor how, but still, the worst.

CAES. CAESAR, for his rule, and for so much stuff
As fortune puts in his hand, shall dispose it
(As if his hand had eyes, and soul, in it)
With worth and judgment. "Hands, that part with gifts,
"Or will restrain their use, without desert;
"Or with a misery, numm'd to virtues right,
"Work, as they had no soul to govern them,
"And quite reject her: seu'ring their estates
"From humane order. Whosoever can,
"And will not cherish virtue, is no man.

EQVES. VIRGIL is now at hand, imperial CAESAR.

CAES. Romes honor is at hand then. Fetch a chair,
And set it on our right hand; where it is fit.
Romes honor, and our own, should ever sit.
Now he is come out of Campania,
I doubt not, he has finished all his Aeneids,
Which, like another soul, I long t'enioy.
What think Viz. Mecoenas, Gallus, Tibullus
you three, of VIRGIL, gentlemen,
(That are of his profession, though rankt higher)
Or HORACE, what say thou, that art the poorest,
And like lie to envy, or to detract?

HORA. CAESAR speaks after common men, in this,
To make a difference of me, for my poorness:
As if the filth of poverty sunk as deep
Into a knowing spirit, as the bane
Of riches does, into an ignorant soul.
No, CAESAR, they be path-lesse, moorish minds,
That being once made rotten with the dung
Of damned riches, ever after sink
Beneath the steps of any villainy.
But knowledge is the nectar, that keeps sweet
A perfect soul, even in this grave of sin;
And for my soul, it is as free, as CAESAR'S:
For, what I know is due, I Will give to all.
"He that detracts, or enuies virtuous merit,
"Is still the covetous, and the ignorant spirit.

CAES. Thanks, HORACE, for thy free, and wholesome sharpness:
Which pleases CAESAR more, then servile fawnes.
"A flatterd prince soon turns the prince of fools.
And for thy sake, we will put no difference more
Between the great, and good, for being poor.
Say then, loved HORACE, thy true thought of VIRGIL.

HORA. I judge him of a rectified spirit,
By many reuolutions of discourse
(In his bright reasons influence) refined
From all the tartarous moodes of common men;
Bearing the nature, and similitude
Of a right heavenly body: most severe
In fashion, and collection of himself,
And then as clear, and confident, as JOVE.

GALL. And yet so chaste, and tender is his ear*
In suffering any syllable to pass,
That, he thinks, may become the honored name
Of issue to his so examined self;
That all the lasting fruits of his full merit
In his own poemes, he does still distaste:
As if his minds piece, which he strove to paint,
Could not with fleshly pencils have her right.

TIBV. But, to approve his works of sovereign worth,
This observation (me thinks) more then serves:
And is not vulgar. That, which he has writ,
Is with such judgment, labored, and distilled
Through all the needful uses of our lives,
That could a man remember but his lines,
He should not touch at any serious point,
But he might breathe his spirit out of him.

CAES. You mean, he might repeat part of his works,
As fit for any conference, he can use?

TIBV. True, royal CAESAR.

CAES. Worthily observed:
And a most worthy virtue in his works.
What thinks material HORACE, of his learning?

HORA. His learning labors not the schoole-like gloss,
That most consists in ecchoing words, and terms,
And soonest wins a man an empty name;
Nor any long, or far-fetcht circumstance,
Wrapped in the curious generalties of arts:
But a direct, and analyticke sum
Of all the worth and first effects of arts.
And for his poesy, it is so ramm'd with life,
That it shall gather strength of life, with being,
And live hereafter, more admired, then now.

CAES. This one consent, in all your doomes of him,
And mutual loves of all your several merits,
Argues a truth of merit in you all.

Act V. Scene II.
CAESAR, VIRGIL, MECOENAS, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, HORACE, EQVITES TO. SEe, here
comes VIRGIL; we will rise and greet him:
Welcome to CAESAR, VIRGIL. CAESAR, and VIRGIL
Shall differ but in sound; to CAESAR, VIRGIL
(Of his expressed greatness) shall be made
A second sur-name, and to VIRGIL, CAESAR.
Where are thy famous Aeneids? do us grace
To let us see, and surfeit on their sight.

VIRG. Worthless they are of CAESAR'S gracious eyes,
If they were perfect; much more with their wants:
Which yet are more, then my time could supply.
And, could great CAESAR'S expectation
Be satisfied with any other service,
I would not show them.

CAES. VIRGIL is too modest;
Or seeks, in vain, to make our longings more.
Show them, sweet VIRGIL.

VIRG. Then, in such due fear,
As fits presenters of great works, to CAESAR,
I humbly show them.

CAES. Let us now behold
A humane soul made visible in life;
And more refulgent in a senseless paper,
Then in the sensual complement of Kings.
Read, read, thy self, dear VIRGIL, let not me
Profane one accent, with an untuned tongue:
"Best matter, badly shown, shows worse, then bad.
See then, this chair, or purpose set for thee
To read thy poem in: refuse it not.
"Virtue, without presumption, place may take
"Above best Kings, whom only she should make.

VIRG. It will be thought a thing ridiculous
To present eyes, and to all future times
A gross untruth; that any poet (void
Of birth, or wealth, or temporal dignity)
Should, with decorum, transcend CAESAR'S chair.
"Poor virtue raised, high birth and wealth set under,
"Crosses heavens courses, and makes worldlings wonder.

CAES. The course of heaven, and fate it self, in this
Will CAESAR cross; much more all worldly custom.

HORA. "Custom, in course of honor, ever erres:
"And they are best, whom fortune least preferres.

CAES. HORACE has (but more strictly) spoke our thoughts.
The vast rude swinge of general confluence
Is, in particular ends, exempt from sense:
And therefore reason (which in right should be
The special rector of all harmony)
Shall show we are a man, distinct by it,
From those, whom custom rapteth in her preasse.
Ascend then, VIRGIL: and where first by chance
We here have turned thy book, do thou first read.

VIRG. Great CAESAR has his will: I will ascend.
'Twere simple injury to his free hand,
That sweepes the cobwebs, from vn-vsed virtue,
And makes her shine proportioned, to her worth.
To be more nice to entertain his grace;
Then he is choice and liberal to afford it.

CAES. Gentlemen of our chamber, guard the doors,
And let none enter, peace. Begin, good VIRGIL.

VIRG. Virg. lib. 4. Aeneid.
Mean while, the skies 'gan thunder; and in tail
Of that, fell pouring storms of sleet, and hail:
The Tyrian lords, and Trojan youth, each where
With VENUS Dardane Iulus.
nephew, now, in fear
Seek out for several shelter through the plain;
Whilst floods come rolling from the hills amain.
DIDO a cave, The Trojan Aeneas.
Prince the same
Lighted upon. There, earth, and heavens great Juno.
dame,
That has the charge of marriage, first gave sign
Unto this contract; fire, and air did shine,
As guilty of the match; and from the hill
The nymphs, with shreekings, do the region fill.
Here first began their bane; This day was ground
Of all their ills: For now, nor rumors sound,
Nor nice respect of state mooues DIDO ought;
Her love, no longer now, by stealth is sought:
She calls this wedlock, and with that fair name
Couers her fault. Forthwith the bruit, and fame,
Through all the greatest Lybian towns, is gone;
Fame, a fleet evil, then which is swifter none:
That moving grows, and flying gathers strength;
Little at first, and fearful; but at length
She dares attempt the skies, and stalking proud
With feet on ground, her head does pierce a cloud!
This child, our parent earth, stird up with spite
Of all the gods, brought forth; and, as some wright,
She was last sister of that Giant Coeus, Enceladus, etc.
race,
That thought to scale JOVE'S court; right swift of pase,
And swifter, far, of wing: a monster vast,
And dreadful. Look, how many plumes are placed
On her huge corpse, so many waking eyes
Stick underneath: and (which may stranger rise
In the report) as many tongues she bears,
As many mouths, as many listening ears.
Nightly, in midst of all the heaven, she flies,
And through the earths dark shadow, shreeking, cries;
Nor do her eyes once bend, to taste sweet sleep:
By day, on tops of houses, she does keep,
Or on high towers; and does thence affright
Cities, and towns of most conspicuous site.
As covetous she is of tales, and lies,
As prodigal of truth: This monster, etc.

Act V. Scene III.
LVPVS, TVCCA, CRISPINVS, DEMETRIUS, HISTRIO, LICTORS, CAESAR, VIRGIL,
MECOENAS, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, HORACE, EQVITES TO. COme, follow me, assist me,
second me: where is the Emperor?

EQVES 1. Sir, you must pardon us.

EQVES 2. CAESAR is private now, you may not enter.

TVCC. Not enter? Charge 'hem, upon their allegiance, crop-shin.

EQVES 1. We have a charge to the contrary, sir.

LVPV. I pronounce you all traitors, horrible traitors:
What? do you know my affairs?
I have matter of danger, and state, to impart to CAESAR.

CAES. What noise is there? who is that names CAESAR?

LVPV. A friend to CAESAR. One that for CAESAR'S good, would speak with CAESAR.


CAES. Who is it? look, CORNELIUS.


EQVES 1. ASINIVS LVPVS.


CAES. O, bid the turbulent informer hence;
We have no vacant ear, now, to receive
The vnseason'd fruits of his officious tongue.

MECoe. You must avoid him there.

LVPV. I conjure thee, as thou art CAESAR, or respect'st thine own safety; or
the safety of the state, CAESAR: Hear me, speak with me, CAESAR; it is no
common business, I come about; but such as, being neglected, may concern the
life of CAESAR.


CAES. The life of CAESAR? Let him enter. VIRGIL, keep thy seat.


EQVITES. Bear back there: whither will you? keep back.


TVCC. By thy leave good man usher: mend thy perruke, so.


LVPV. Lay hold on HORACE there; and on MECOENAS, LICTORS. Romans, offer no
reseue, upon your allegiance: Read, royal CAESAR; I Will tickle you, Satyr.


TVCC. He will, humors, he will: He will squeeze you, Poet puckfist.


LVPV. I Will lop you off, for an unprofitable branch, you satyricall varlet.


TVCC. I, and EPAMINONDAS your patron, here, with his flaggon chain; Come,
resign: Though 'twere your great grandfathers, the law has made it mine now,
sir. Look to him, my party-colored rascals; look to him.


CAES. What is this, ASINIVS LVPVS? I understand it not.


LVPV. Not understand it? A libell, CAESAR. A dangerous, seditious libell. A
libell in picture.


CAES. A libell?


LVPV. I, I found it in this HORACE his study, in MECOENAS his house, here; I
challenge the penalty of the laws against 'hem.


TVCC. I, and remember to beg their land betimes; before some of these
hungry court-hounds sent it out.


CAES. Show it to HORACE: Ask him, if he know it.


LVPV. Know it? His hand is at it, CAESAR.


CAES. Then it is no libell.


HORA. It is the imperfect body of an emblem, CAESAR, I began for MECOENAS.


LVPV. An emblem? right: That Is greek for a libell.
Do but mark, how confident he is.

HORA. A just man cannot fear, thou foolish Tribune;
Not, though the malice of traducing tongues,
The open vastness of a tyrannes ear,
The senseless rigor of the wrested laws,
Or the red eyes of strained authority
Should, in a point, meet all to take his life.
His innocence is armor against all these.

LVPV. Innocence? O, impudence! Let me see, let me see. Is not here an Eagle?
And is not that Eagle meant by CAESAR? ha? Does not CAESAR give the eagle?
Answer me; what say thou?


TVCC. Have thou any evasion, stinkard?


LVPV. Now he is turned dumb. I Will tickle you, Satyr.


HORA. Pish. Ha, ha.


LVPV. Do thou pish me? Give me my long-sword.


HORA. With reverence to great CAESAR, worthy Romans,
Observe but this ridiculous commenter:
The soul to my device, was in this distich.
Thus, often, the base and ravenous multitude
Survive, to share the spoils of fortitude.
Which in this body, I have figured here,
A VULTVRE --

LVPV. A Vulture? I; now, it is a Vulture. O, abominable! monstrous monstrous!
has not your Vulture a beak? has it not legs? and tallons? and wings? and
feathers?


TVCC. Touch him, old Buskins.


HORA. And therefore must it be an Eagle?


MECoe. Respect him not, good HORACE: Say your device.


HORA. A VULTVRE, and a WOLF --


LVPV. A Wolf? good. That Is I; I am the wolf. My name's LVPVS, I am meant by
the wolf. On, on, a Vulture, and a Wolf --


HORA. Preying upon the carcass of an ASS --


LVPV. An Ass? Good still: That Is I, too. I am the ass.
You mean me by the ass --

MECoe. 'Pray thee, leave braying then.

HORA. If you will needs take it, I cannot with modesty give it from you.


MECoe. But, by that beast, the old Egyptians
Were wont to figure in their hieroglyphics,
Patience, frugalitie, and fortitude;
For none of which, we can suspect you, Tribune.

CAES. Who was it, LVPVS, that informed you first,
This should be meant by us? or was it your comment?

LVPV. No, CAESAR: A player gave me the first light of it, indeed.

TVCC. I, an honest sycophant-like slave, and a politician, besides.

CAES. Where is that player?

TVCC. He is without, here.

CAES. Call him in.

TVCC. Call in the player, there: Master AESOPE, call him.

EQVITES. Player? where is the player? Bear back: None, but the player, enter.


TVCC. Yes: this gent'man, and his Achates must.


CRIS. 'Pray you, master usher; we will stand close, here.


TVCC. It Is a gent'man of quality, this; though he be somewhat out of clothes,
I tell ye. Come AESOPE: have a bay-leafe in thy mouth? Well said, be not out,
stinkard. Thou shall have a monopoly of playing, confirmed to thee and thy
couey, under the Emperors broad seal, for this service.


CAES. Is this he?


LVPV. I, CAESAR: this is he.


CAES. Let him be whipped. LICTORS, go take him hence.
And LVPVS, for your fierce credulity,
One fit him with a pair of larger ears:
It Is CAESAR'S doom, and must not be reuok't.
We hate, to have our court, and peace disturbed
With these quotidian clamours. See it done.

LVPV. CAESAR.

CAES. Gag him, we may have his silence.

VIRG. CAESAR has done like CAESAR. Fair, and just
Is his award, against these brainelesse creatures.
It Is not the wholesome sharp morality,
Or modest anger of a satyricke spirit,
That hurts, or wounds the body of a state;
But the sinister application
Of the malicious, ignorant, and base
Interpreter: who will distort, and strain
The general scope and purpose of an author,
To his particular, and private spleen.

CAES. We know it, our dear VIRGIL, and esteem it
A most dishonest practice, in that man,
Will seem too witty in another work.
This while the rest whisper Casar. What would CORNELIUS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS?

TVCC. Nay, but as thou art a man, do hear? a man of worship; and
honorable: Hold, here, take thy chain again. Resume, mad MECoeNAS. What?
do thou think, I meant to have kept it, bold boy? No; I did it but to
fright thee, I, to try how thou would take it. What? will I turn sharke,
upon my friends? or my friends friends? I scorn it with my three souls. Come,
I love bully HORACE, as well as thou do, I: it is an honest hieroglyphick.
Give me thy wrist, Helicon. Do thou think, I Will second e're a rhinoceros
of them all, against thee? ha? or thy noble Hippocrene, here? I Will turn stager
first, and be whipped too: do thou see, bully?


CAES. You have your will of CAESAR: use it Romans.
VIRGIL shall be your Praetor; and our self
Will here sit by, spectator of your sports;
And think it no impeach of royalty.
Our ear is now too much profaned (grave MARO)
With these distastes, to take thy sacred lines:
Put up thy book, till both the time and we
Be sitted with more hallowed circumstance
For the receiving so divine a work.
Proceed with your desseigne.

MECoe. GALL. TIBV. Thanks, to great CAESAR.

GALL. TIBVLLVS, draw you the indictment then, whilst HORACE arrests them, on
the statute of Calumny: MECOENAS, and I, will take our places here. Lictors,
assist him.


HORA. I am the worst accuser, under heaven.


GALL. Tut, you must do it: 'Twill be noble mirth.


HORA. I take no knowledge, that they do malign me.


TIBV. I, but the world takes knowledge.


HORA. 'Would the world knew,
How heartily I wish, a fool should hate me.

TVCC. Body of IVPITER! What? Will they arraigne my brisk POETASTER, and his
poor iourney-man, ha? Would I were abroad skeldring for a drachme, so I were
out of this labyrinth again: I do feel my self turn stinkard, already. But
I must set the best face I have, upon it now: well said, my divine, deft HORACE,
bring the whoreson detracting slaves to the bar, do. Make 'hem hold up their
spread golls: I Will give in evidence for thee, if thou will. Take courage,
CRISPINVS, would thy man had a clean band.


CRIS. What must we do, Captain?


TVCC. Thou shall see anon: Do not make division with thy legs, so.


CAES. What Is he, HORACE?


HORA. I only know him for a motion, CAESAR.


TVCC. I am one of thy Commanders, CAESAR; A man of service, and action; My
name is PANTILIVS TVCCA: I have served in thy wars against MARK ANTONY, I.


CAES. Do you know him, CORNELIUS?


GALL. He Is one, that has had the mustring, or conuoy of a company, now, and
then: I never noted him by any other employment.


CAES. We will observe him better.


TIBV. LICTOR, proclaim silence, in the court.


LICT. In the name of CAESAR, silence.


TIBV. Let the parties, the accuser, and the accused, present themselves.


LICT. The accuser, and the accused; present your selves in court.


CRIS. DEMETRIUS. Here.


VIRG. Read the indictment.


TIBV. RUFUS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIUS FANIVS, hold up your hands. You
are, before this time, jointly and severally indicted, and here presently to be
arraigned, upon the Statute of Calumny, or Lex Remmia ( The one by the name of
RUFUS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, alias CRISPINAS, Poetaster, and plagiary: the other,
by the name of DEMETRIUS FANNIVS, play-dresser, and plagiary) That you (not
having the fear of PHOEBVS, or his shafts, before your eyes) contrary to the
peace of our liege lord, AUGUSTUS CAESAR, his crown and dignity, and against
the form of a Statute, in that case made, and provided; have most ignorantly,
foolishly, and (more like your selves) maliciously, gone about to deprave, and
calumniate the person and writings of QVINTVS HORACIVS FLACCVS, here present,
poet, and priest to the Muses: and to that end have mutually conspired, and
plotted, at sundry times, as by several means, and in sundry places, for the
better accomplishing your base and envious purpose; taxing him, falsely, of
self-love, arrogance, impudence, railing, filching by translation, etc. Of all
which calumnies, and every of them, in manner and form aforesaid, what answer
you? Are you guilty, or not guilty?


TVCC. Not guilty, say.


CRIS. DEMET. Not guilty.


TIBV. How will you be tried?


TVCC. By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romans.


CRIS. DEMET. By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romans.


VIRG. Here sits MECOENAS, and CORNELIUS GALLVS:
Are you contented to be tried by these?

TVCC. I, so the noble Captain may be joined with them in commission, say.


CRIS. DEMET. I, so the noble Captain may be joined with them in commission.


VIRG. What says the plaintiff?


HORA. I am content.


VIRG. Captain, then take your place.


TVCC. Alas, my worshipful Praetor! it is more of thy gent'nesse, then of my
deserving, I wusse. But, since it has pleased the court to make choice of my
wisdom, and gravity, come, my calumnious varlets: Let Us hear you talk for
your selves, now, an hour or two. What can you say? Make a noise. Act, act.


VIRG. Stay, turn, and take an oath first. You shall swear,
By thunder-darting JOVE, the King of gods,
And by the Genius of AUGUSTUS CAESAR;
By your own white, and uncorrupted souls;
And the deep reverence of our Roman justice;
To judge this case, with truth and equity:
As bound by your religion, and your laws.
Now read the evidence: But first demand
Of either prisoner, if that writ be theirs.

TIBV. Show this unto CRISPINVS. Is it yours?

TVCC. Say I: what? do thou stand upon it, pimpe? Do not deny thine own
MINERVA, thy PALLAS, the issue of thy brain.


CRIS. Yes, it is mine.


TIBV. Show that unto DEMETRIUS. Is it yours?


DEEM. It is.


TVCC. There Is a father, will not deny his own bastard, now, I warrant thee.


VIRG. Read them aloud.


TIBV. Rampe up, my genius; be not retrograde:
But boldly nominate a spade, a spade.
What, shall thy lubricall and glibberie Muse
Live, as she were defunct, like punke in stews?
(Tvcc. Excellent!) Alas! That were no modern consequence,
To have cotburnall buskins frighted hence.
No, teach thy incubus to poetize;
And throw abroad thy spurious snotteries,
Upon that puft-vp lump of barmy froth,
(TVCCA. Ah, ha!) Or clumsie chil-blain'd indgement: that, with oath,
Magnificates his merit; and bespawles
The conscious time, with humorous foam, and brawles,
As if his organons of sense would crack
The sinews of my patience. Break his back,
O Poets all, and some: For now we list
Of strenuous venge-ance to clutch the fist.

Subscri. CRIS. TVCC. I mary, this was written like a HERCULES in poetry, now.

CAES. Excellently well threatened!

VIRG. I, and as strangely worded, CAESAR.

CAES. We observe it.


VIRG. The other, now.


TVCC. This's a fellow of a good prodigal tongue too, this'll do well.

TIBV. Our Muse is in mind for th'vntrussing a poet,
I slip by his name; for most men do know it:
A critic, that all the world be scumbers
With satyricall humors, and lyricall numbers.
(TVCC. Art thou there, boy?) And for the most part, himself does advance
With much self-love, and more arrogance.
(TVCC. Good again.) And (but that I would not be thought a prater)
I could tell you, he were a translater.
I know the authors from whence he has stole,
And could trace him too, but that I understand 'hem not full and whole.
(TVCC. That line is broke loose from all his fellows: chain him up shorter,
do.) The best note I can give you to know him by,
Is, that he keeps gallants company;
Whom I would wish, in time should him fear,
Lest after they buy repentance too dear.

Subscri. DEEM. FAN. TVCC. Well said. This carries palm with it.

HORA. And why, thou motly gull? why should they fear?
When have thou known us wrong, or tax a friend?
I dare malice, to betray it. Speak.
Now thou curl'st up, thou poor, and nasty snake,
And shrink'st thy poisonous head into thy bosom:
Out viper, thou that eat'st thy parents, hence.
Rather, such speckled creatures, as thy self,
Should be eschew'd, and shund: such, as will bite
And gnaw their absent friends, not cure their fame,
Catch at the loosest laughters, and affect
To be thought iesters, such, as can devise
Things never seen, or heard, t'impaire men's names,
And gratify their credulous adversaries,
Will carry tales, do basest offices,
Cherish divided fires, and still increase
New flames, out of old embers, will reveal
Each secret that is committed to their trust,
These be black slaves: Romans, take heed of these.

TVCC. Thou twang'st right, little HORACE, they be indeed:
A couple of chap-falne curres. Come, We of the bench,
Let Us rise to the vrne, and condemn 'hem, quickly.

VIRG. Before you go together (worthy Romans)
We are to tender our opinion;
And give you those instructions, that may add
Unto your even judgment in the cause:
Which thus we do commence. First you must know
That where there is a true and perfect merit,
There can be no deiection; and the scorn
Of humble baseness, oftentimes, so works
In a high soul upon the grosser spirit,
That to his bleared, and offended sense,
There seems a hideous fault blazed in the object;
When only the disease in his eyes.
Here-hence it comes, our HORACE now stands taxt
Of impudence, self-love, and arrogance,
By these, who share no merit in themselves;
And therefore, think his portion is as small.
For they, from their own guilt, assure their souls,
If they should confidently praise their works,
In them it would appear inflation:
Which, in a full, and wel-digested man,
Cannot receive that foul abusiue name,
But the fair title of erection.
And, for his true use of translating men,
It still has bin a work of as much palm
In cleerest judgments, as t'inuent, or make.
His sharpness, that is most excusable;
As being forced out of a suffering virtue,
Oppressed with the license of the time:
And howsoever fools, or ierking pedants,
Players, or such like buffon, barking wits,
May with their beggarly, and barren trash,
Tickle base vulgar ears, in their despite;
This (like JOVE'S thunder) shall their pride control,
"The honest Satyr has the happiest soul.
Now, Romans, you have heard our thoughts, Withdraw, when you please.

TIBV. Remove the accused from the bar.

TVCC. Who holds the vrne to us? ha? Fear nothing: I Will quit you, mine honest
pitiful stinkards. I Will do it.


CRIS. Captain, you shall eternally girt me to you, as I am generous.


TVCC. Go to.


CAES. TIBVLLVS, let there be a case of vizards privately provided: we have
found a subject to bestow them on.


TIBV. It shall be done, CAESAR.


CAES. Here be words, HORACE, able to bastinado a man's ears.


HORA. I. Please it great CAESAR, I have pills about me
(Mixed with the whitest kind of ellebore)
Would give him a light vomit; that should purge
His brain, and stomach of those tumorous heates:
Might I have leave to minister unto him.

CAES. O! be his AESCVLAPIVS, gentle HORACE;
You shall have leave, and he shall be your patient.
VIRGIL, use your authority, command him forth.

VIRG. CAESAR is careful of your health, CRISPINVS;
And has himself chose a physician
To minister unto you: take his pills.

HORA. They are somewhat bitter, sir, but very wholesome;
Take yet another, so: Stand by, they will work anon.

TIBV. Romans, return to your several seats: Lictors, bring forward the
vrne; and set the accused at the bar.


TVCC. Quickly, you whoreson egregious varlets; Come forward. What? shall we sit
all day upon you? you make no more haste, now, then a beggar upon pattins: or a
physician to a patient that has no money, you pilchers.


TIBV. RUFUS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIUS FANNIVS, hold up your hands. You
have (according to the Roman custom) put your selves upon trial to the vrne,
for diverse and sundry calumnies, whereof, you have before this time been
indicted, and are now presently arraigned: Prepare your selves to ^arken to the
verdict of your Tryers. CAIUS CILNIVS MECOENAS pronounces you, by this
handwriting, Guilty. CORNELIUS GALLVS, Guilty. PANTILIVS TVCCA --


TVCC. Parcell-guiltie, I.


DEEM. He means himself for it was he indeed,
Suborned us to the calumny.

TVCC. I, you whoreson cantharides? was it I?

DEEM. I appeal to your conscience, Captain.

TIBV. Then, you confess it, now.

DEEM. I do, and crave the mercy of the court.

TIBV. What says CRISPINVS?

CRIS. O, the Captain, the Captain --

HORA. My physic begins to work with my patient, I see.

VIRG. Captain, stand forth and answer.

TVCC. Hold thy peace, Poet Praetor: I appeal from thee, to CAESAR,
I. Do me right, royal CAESAR.

CAES. Mary, and I will, sir. Lictors, gag him: do.
And put a case of vizards over his head,
That he may look bi-fronted, as he speaks.

TVCC. Gods, and fiends! CAESAR! thou will not, CAESAR? will thou? Away, you
whoreson vultures; away. You think I am a dead corpse now, because CAESAR is
disposed to jest with a man of mark, or so. Hold your hook't talons out of my
flesh, you inhumane Harpies. Go to, do it. What? will the royal AUGUSTUS cast
away a gent'man of worship, a Captain, and a Commander, for a couple of
condemned caitiue calumnious Cargo's?


CAES. Dispatch, Lictors.


TVCC. CAESAR.


CAES. Forward, TIBVLLVS.


VIRG. Demand, what cause they had to malign HORACE.


DEEM. In troth, no great cause, not I; I must confess: but that he kept
better company (for the most part) then I: and that better men loved him, then
loved me: and that his writings thriu'd better then mine, and were better
liked, and graced: nothing else.


VIRG. Thus, envious souls repine at others good.


HORA. If this be all; faith, I forgive thee freely.
Envy me still, so long as VIRGIL loves me,
GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, and the best-best CAESAR,
My dear MECOENAS: while these, with many more
(Whose names I wisely slip) shall think me worthy
Their honored, and adored society,
And read, and love, prove, and applaud my poemes;
I would not wish but such as you should spite them.

CRIS. O --

TIBV. How now, CRISPINVS?

CRIS. O, I am sick --

HORA. A basin, a basin, quickly; our physic works. Faint not, man.

CRIS. O -- retrograde -- reciprocal -- Incubus.

CAES. What Is that, HORACE?

HORA. Retrograde, and reciprocal Incubus are come up.

GALL. Thanks be to IVPITER.

CRIS. O -- glibbery -- lubricall -- defunct -- O --

HORA. Well said: here is some store.

VIRG. What are they?

HORA. Glibbery, lubricall, and defunct.

GALL. O, they came up easy.

CRIS. O -- O --

TIBV. What Is that?

HORA. Nothing, yet.

CRIS. Magnificate.

MECoe. Magnificate? that came up somewhat hard.

HORA. I. What cheer, CRISPINVS?

CRIS. O, I shall cast up my -- spurious -- snotteries --

HORA. Good. Again.

CRIS. Chilblaind -- O -- O -- clumsie

HORA. That clumsie stuck terribly.

MECoe. What Is all that, HORACE?

HORA. Spurious snotteries, chilblain'd, clumsie.

TIBV. O IVPITER!

GALL. Who would have thought, there should have been such a deal of filth in
a poet?

CRIS. O -- barmy froth --

CAES. What Is that?

CRIS. -- Puffy -- inflate -- turgidous -- ventositous.

HORA. Barmy froth, puffy, inflate, turgidous, and ventositous are come up.

TIBV. O, terrible, windy words!

GALL. A sign of a windy brain.

CRIS. O -- oblatrant -- furibund -- fatuate -- strenuous --

HORA. Here Is a deal: oblatrant, furibund, fatuate, strenuous.

CAES. Now, all is come up, I trow. What a tumult he had in his belly!

HORA. No: there is the often conscious dampe behind, still.

CRIS. O -- conscious -- dampe.

HORA. It Is come up, thanks to APOLLO, and AESCVLAPIVS:
Yet, there is another; you were best take a pill more?

CRIS. O, no: O -- O -- O -- O.

HORA. Force your self then, a little with your finger.

CRIS. O -- O -- prorumped.

TIBV. Prorumped? What a noise it made! as if his spirit would have prorumpt
with it.

CRIS. O -- O -- O.

VIRG. Help him: it sticks strangely, what ever it is.

CRIS. O -- clutcht.

HORA. Now it is come: clutcht.

CAES. Clutcht? It Is well, that is come up! It had but a narrow passage.

CRIS. O --

VIRG. Again, hold him: hold his head there.

CRIS. Snarling gusts -- quaking custard.

HORA. How now, CRISPINVS?

CRIS. O -- obstupefact.

TIBV. Nay: that are all we, I assure you.

HORA. How do you feel your self?

CRIS. Pretty, and well, I thank you.

VIRG. These pills can but restore him for a time;
Not cure him quite of such a malady,
Caught by so many surfets; which have filled
His blood, and brain, thus full of crudities:
It Is necessary, therefore, he observe
A strict and wholesome diet. Look, you take
Each morning, of old CATOES principles
A good draught, next your heart; that walk upon,
Till it be well digested: Then come home,
And taste a piece of TERENCE, suck his phrase
In stead of lycorice; and, at any hand,
Shun PLAVTVS, and old ENNIVS, they are meats
Too harsh for a weak stomach. Use to read
(But not without a tutor) the best Greeks:
As ORPHEUS, MVSAEVS, PINDARVS,
HESIOD, CALLIMACHVS, and THEOCRITE,
High HOMER, but beware of LYCOPHRON:
He is too dark, and dangerous a dish.
You must not hunt for wild, outlandish terms,
To stuff out a peculiar dialect;
But let your matter run before your words:
And if, at any time, you chance to meet
Some Gallo-belgick phrase, you shall not straight
Rack your poor verse to give it entertainment;
But let it pass: and do not think your self
Much damnified, if you do leave it out;
When, nor your understanding, nor the sense
Could well receive it. This fair abstinence,
In time, will render you more sound, and clear;
And this have I prescribed to you, in place
Of a strict sentence: which till he perform,
Attire him in that robe. And henceforth, learn
To bear your self more humbly; not to swell,
Or breathe your insolent, and idle spite,
On him, whose laughter, can your worst affright.

TIBV. Take him away. CRIS. IVPITER guard CAE

VIRG. And, for a week, or two, see him locked up
In some dark place, remoou'd from company:
He will talk idly else after his physic.
Now, to you, sir. Th'extremitie of law
Awards you to be branded in the front,
For this your calumny; But, since it pleases
HORACE (the party wronged) t'intreat, of CAESAR,
A mitigation of that iuster doom;
With CAESAR'S tongue, thus we pronounce your sentence.
DEMETRIUS FANNIVS, thou shall here put on
That coat, and cap; and henceforth, think thy self
No other, then they make thee: vow to wear them
In every fair, and generous assembly,
Till the best sort of minds shall take to knowledge
As well thy satisfaction, as thy wrongs.

HORA. Only (grave Praetor) here, in open court,
I crave the oath, for good behavior,
May be administered unto them both.

VIRG. HORACE, it shall: TIBVLLVS, give it them.


TIBV. RUFUS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIUS FANNIVS, Lay your hands on your
hearts. You shall here solemnly attest, and swear; That never (after this
instant) either, at Booke-sellers stalls, in tauernes, two-penny rooms,
'tyring-houses, noble-mens buttries, puisne's chambers (the best, and farthest
places, where you are admitted to come) you shall once offer, or dare (thereby
to endeare your self the more to any player, enghle, or guilty gull, in your
company) to malign, traduce, or detract the person, or writings of QVINTVS
HORACIVS FLACCVS; or any other eminent man, transcending you in merit, whom
your envy shall find cause to work upon, either, for that, or for keeping
himself in better acquaintance, or enjoying better friends: Or if (transported
by any sudden and desperate resolution) you do; That then, you shall not
under the bastoun, or in the next presence, being an honorable assembly of his
favorers, be brought as voluntary gent. to undertake the for-swearing of it.
Neither shall you at any time (ambitiously, affecting the title of the
vntrussers, or whippers of the age) suffer the itch of writing to ouer-run your
performance in libell; upon pain of being taken up for lepers in wit, and
(losing both your time, and your papers) be irrecouerably forfeited to the
hospital of Fools. So help you our Roman gods, and the Genius of great
CAESAR.


VIRG. So: now dissolve the court.

HORA. TIBV. GALL. MECOE. VIRG. And thanks to CAESAR,
That thus has exercised his patience.

CAES. We have, indeed, you worthiest friends of CAESAR.
It is the bane, and torment of our ears,
To hear the discords of those iangling rimers,
That, with their bad and scandalous practices,
Bring all true arts, and learning in contempt.
But let not your high thoughts descend so low,
As these despised objects; Let them fall,
With their flat groueling souls: Be you your selves.
And as with our best favors you stand crowned:
So let your mutual loves be still renowned.
Envy will dwell, where there is want of merit,
Though the deserving man should crack his spirit.
SONG. BLush, folly, blush: here is none that fears
The wagging of an asses ears,
Although a wooluish case he wears.
Detraction is but baseness varlet;
And apes are apes, though clothed in scarlet.

THE END.
Rumpatur, quisquis rumpitur inuidia.
TO THE READER.
IF, by looking on what is past, thou have deserved that name, I am willing
thou should yet know more, by that which follows; an apologeticall
Dialogue: which was only once spoken upon the stage, and all the answer I ever
gave, to sundry impotent libells then cast out (and some yet remaining) against
me, and this Play. Wherein I take no pleasure to revive the times, but that
Posterity may make a difference, between their manners that prouok'd me then,
and mine that neglected them ever. For, in these strifes, and on such persons,
were as wretched to affect a victory, as it is unhappy to be committed with
them. Non annorum canicies est laudanda, sed morum.

The Persons.
NASVTVS, POLYPOSVS, AVTHOR. I Pray you let us go see him, how he looks
After these libells.

POLY. O, vexed, vexed, I warrant you.

NASV. Do you think so? I should be sorry for him,
If I found that.

POLY. O, they are such bitter things,
He cannot choose.

NAS. But, is he guilty of 'hem?

POL. Fuh! that is no matter.

NAS. No?

POL. No. Here Is his lodging;
We Will steal upon him: or, let us listen, stay.
He has a humor often to talk to himself.

NAS. They are your manners lead me, not mine own.

AVT. The Fates have not spun him the coursest thread
That (free from knots of perturbation)
Does yet so live, although but to himself,
As he can safely scorn the tongues of slaves;
And neglect Fortune, more then she can him.
It is the happiest thing, this not to be
Within the reach of malice; It prouides
A man so well, to laugh of injuries:
And never sends him farther for his vengeance
Then the vexed bosom of his enemy.
I, now, but think, how poor their spite sets off,
Who, after all their waste of sulphurous terms,
And burst-out thunder of their charged mouths,
Have nothing left, but the vnsau'ry smoke
Of their black vomit, to upbraid themselves:
Whilst I, at whom they shot, sit here shot-free,
And as vn-hurt of envy, as vnhit.

POL. I, but the Multitude, they think not so, sir,
They think you hit, and hurt: and dare give out
Your silence argues it, in not reioyning
To this, or that late libell?

AVT. 'Lasse, good rout!
I can afford them leave, to err so still:
And, like the barking students of Beares-Colledge,
To swallow up the garbadge of the time
With greedy gullets, whilst my self sit by
Pleased, and yet tortured, with their beastly feeding.
It Is a sweet madness runs along with them,
To think, all that are aimed at, still are struck:
Then, where the shaft still lights, make that the mark,
And so, each fear, or feauer-shaken fool
May challenge TEVCERS hand in archery.
Good troth, if I knew any man so vile,
To act the crimes, these whippers reprehend,
Or what their servile apes gesticulate,
I should not then much muse, their shreds were liked;
Since ill men have a lust to hear others sins,
And good men have a zeal to hear sin shamed.
But when it is all excrement, they vent,
Base filth, and offall: or thefts, notable
As Ocean pyracies, or highway stands:
And not a crime there taxed, but is their own,
Or what their own foul thoughts suggested to them,
And, that in all their hea^ of taxing others,
Not one of them, but lives himself (if known)
Improbior satyram scribente cinaedo.
What should I say, more? then turn stone with wonder!

NAS. I never saw this play bred all this tumult.
What was there in it could so deeply offend?
And stir so many hornets?

AVT. Shall I tell you?

NAS. Yes, and ingenuously.

AVT. Then, by the hope,
Which I prefer unto all other objects,
I can profess, I never writ that piece
More innocent, or empty of offense.
Some salt it had, but neither tooth, nor gall,
Nor was there in it any circumstance,
Which, in the setting down, I could suspect
Might be perverted by an enemies tongue.
Only, it had the fault to be called mine.
That was the crime.

POL. No? why they, say you taxed
The Law, and Lawyers; Captains; and the Players
By their particular names.

AVT. It is not so.
I used no name. My Books have still been taught
To spare the persons, and to speak the vices.
These are mere slanders, and enforced by such
As have no safer ways to men's disgraces,
But their own lies, and loss of honesty.
Fellows of practiced, and most laxatiue tongues,
Whose empty and eager bellies, in the year,
Compel their brains to many desperate shifts,
(I spare to name 'hem: for, their wretchedness,
Fury it self would pardon.) These, or such
Whether of malice, or of ignorance,
Or itch, to have me their adversary (I know not)
Or all these mixed; but sure I am, three years,
They did provoke me with their petulant styles
On every stage: And I at last, unwilling,
But weary, I confess, of so much trouble,
Thought, I would try, if shame could win upon 'hem.
And therefore chose AUGUSTUS CAESAR'S times,
When wit, and arts were at their height in Rome,
To show that VIRGIL, HORACE, and the rest
Of those great master-spirits did not want
Detractors, then, or practisers against them:
And by this line (although no parallel)
I hoped at last they would sit down, and blush.
But nothing could I sinde more contrary.
And though the impudence of flies be great,
Yet this has so prouok'd the angry waspes,
Or as you said, of the next nest, the hornets;
That they fly buzzing, mad, about my nostrills:
And like so many screaming grasse-hoppers,
Held by the wings, fill every ear with noise.
And what? those former calumnies you mentioned.
First, of the Law. Indeed, I brought in OVID,
Chid by his angry father, for neglecting
The study of their laws, for poetry:
And I am warranted by his own words.
Sape pater dixit, Trist. lib. 4. Eleg. 10.
studium quid invtile tentas?
Maeonides nullas ipse reliquit opes.
And in far harsher terms elsewhere, as these:
Non me verbosas leges ediscere, Amo. lib. 1. Eleg. 15.
non me
Ingrato voces prostituisse foro.
But how this should relate, unto our laws,
Or their just ministers, with least abuse,
I reverence both too much, to understand!
Then, for the Captain; I will only speak
An Epigramme I here have made: It is
Unto true Soldiers. That Is the lemma. Mark it.
Strength of my Country, whilst I bring to view
Such as are misse-call'd Captains, and wrong you,
And your high names; I do desire, that thence,
Be nor put on you, nor you take offense:
I swear by your true friend, my Muse, I love
Your great profession, which I once did prove;
And did not shame it with my actions, then,
No more then I dare, now, do with my pen.
He that not trusts me, having vowed thus much,
But's angry for the Captain, still* is such.
Now, for the Players, it is true, I taxed 'hem,
And yet, but some; and those so sparingly,
As all the rest might have sat still, vnquestion'd,
Had they but had the wit, or conscience,
To think well of themselves. But, impotent they
Thought each man's vice belonged to their whole tribe:
And much good do it 'hem. What the have done against me,
I am not moved with. If it gave 'hem meat,
Or got 'hem clothes. It Is well. That was their end.
Only amongst them, I am sorry for
Some better natures, by the rest so drawn,
To run in that vile line.

POL. And is this all?
Will you not answer then the libells?

AVT. No.

POL. Nor the vntrussers?

AVT. Neither.

POL. You Are undone then.

AV. With whom?

POL. The world.

AV. The baud^

Po. It will be taken
To be stupidity, or tamenesse in you.

AVT. But, they that have incensed me, can in soul
Acquit me of that guilt. They know, I dare
To spurn, or ba^full 'hem; or squirt their eyes
With ink, or urine: or I could do worse,
Armed with ARCHILOCHVS fury, write Iambicks,
Should make the desperate lashers hang themselves.
Rhyme 'hem to death, as they do Irish rats
In drumming tunes. Or, living, I could stamp
Their foreheads with those deep, and public brands
That the whole company of Barber-Surgeons
Should not take off, with all their art, and playsters.
And these my prints should last, still to be read
In their pale fronts: when, what they write against me,
Shall like a figure, drawn in water, fleet,
And the poor wretched papers be employed
To cloth tobacco, or some cheaper drug.
This I could do, and make them infamous.
But, to what end? when their own deeds have marked 'hem,
And, that I know, within his guilty breast
Each slanderer bears a whip, that shall torment him,
Worse, then a million of these temporal plagues:
Which to pursue, were but a feminine humor,
And, far beneath the dignity of a man.

NAS. It Is true: for to revenge their injuries,
Were to confess you felt 'hem. Let 'hem go,
And use the treasure of the fool, their tongues,
Who makes his gain, by speaking worst, of best.

POL. O, but they lay particular imputations --

AVT. As what?

PO. That all your writing, is mere railing.

AVT. Ha! If all the salt in the old comoedy
Should be so censured, or the sharper wit
Of the bold satyr, termed scolding rage,
What age could then compare with those, for buffo^s?
What should be said of ARISTOPHANES?
PERSIVS? or IUVENAL? whose names we now
So glorify in schools, at least pretend it.
Have they no other?

POL. Yes: they say you are slow,
And scarce bring forth a play a year.

AVT. It Is true.
I would, they could not say that I did that,
There Is all the joy that I take in their trade,
Unless such Scribes as they might be proscribed
The abused theaters. They would think it strange, now,
A man should take but colts-foote, for one day,
And, between whiles, spit out a better poem
Then e're the master of art, or giver of wit,
Their belly made. Yet, this is possible,
If a free mind had but the patience,
To think so much, together, and so vile.
But, that these base, and beggarly conceits
Should carry it, by the multitude of voices,
Against the most abstracted work, opposed
To the stuffed nostrills of the drunken rout!
O, this would make a learned, and liberal soul,
To riue his stained quill, up to the back,
And damn his long-watch'd labors to the fire;
Things, that were borne, when none but the still night,
And his dumb candle saw his pinching throes:
Were not his own free merit a more crown
Unto his travails, then their reeling claps.
This it is, that strikes me silent, seals my lips,
And apts me, rather to sleep out my time,
Then I would waste it in contemned strifes,
With these vile Ibides, these unclean birds,
That make their mouths their clysters, and still purge
From their hot entrails. But, I leave the monsters
To their own fate. And, since the Comic MUSE
Has proved so ominous to me, I will try
If Tragoedie have a more kind aspect.
Her favors in my next I will pursue,
Where, if I prove the pleasure but of one,
So he judicious be; He shall b' alone
A Theater unto me: Once, I Will say,
To strike the ear of time, in those fresh strains,
As shall, beside the cunning of their ground,
Give cause to some of wonder, some despite,
And unto more, despair, to imitate their sound.
I, that spend half my nights, and all my days,
Here in a cell, to get a dark, pale face,
To come forth worth the iuy, or the bays,
And in this age can hope no other grace --
Leave me. There Is something come into my thought,
That must, and shall be sung, high, and aloof,
Safe from the wolves black iaw, and the dull asses hoof.

NASV. I reverence these raptures, and obey 'hem.

This Comicall Satyr was first acted, in the year 1601.

By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETH'S Chapel.

The principal Comoedians were, NOT. FIELD. SAL. PAVY. THO. DAY. IOH.
UNDERWOOD. WILL. OSTLER. THO. MARTON.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

SEIANVS his FALL. A Tragoedie. Acted, in the year 1603. By the K. MAJESTY'S
SERVANTS.

The Author B. I.

MART. Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas, Harpyiasque
Inuenies: Hominem pagmanostra sapit.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY,

M. DC. XVI.

TO THE NO LESS NOBLE, BY VERTVE, THEN BLOOD: Esme L. AVBIGNY.
MY LORD,
IF ever any ruin were so great, as to survive; I think this be one I send
you: the Fall of Seianus. It is a poem, that (if I well remember) in your Lo.
sight, suffered no less violence from our people here, then the subject of it
did from the rage of the people of Rome; but, with a different fate, as (I
hope) merit: For this has out-liu'd their malice, and begot it self a greater
favor then he lost, the love of good men. Amongst whom, if I make your Lo. the
first it thanks, it is not without a just confession of the bond your benefits
have, and ever shall hold upon me.

Your Lo. most faithful honorer, BEN. IONSON.

The Argument.
AELius Seianus, son to Seius Strabo, a gentleman of Rome, and borne at
Vulsinium, after his long service in court: first, under Augustus, afterward,
Tiberius: grew into that favor with the latter, and won him by those arts, as
there wanted nothing, but the name, to make him a copartner of the Empire.
Which greatness of his, Drusus, the Emperors son not brooking, after many
smothered dislikes, it one day breaking out, the Prince struck him publicly
on the face. To revenge which disgrace, Liuia, the wife of Drusus (being before
corrupted by him to her dishonor, and the discovery of her husbands counsels)
Seianus practices with, together with her Physician, called Eudemus, and on^
Lygdus, an Eunuch, to poison Drusus. This their inhumane act having
successful, and unsuspected passage, it emboldeneth Seianus to farther, and
more insolent proiects, even the ambition of the Empire: where finding the
lets, he must encounter, to be many, and hard, in respect of the issue of
Germanicus (who were next in hope for the succession) he deuiseth to make
Tiberius self, his means: and instill's into his ears many doubts, and
suspicions, both against the Princes, and their mother Agrippina: which Caesar
iealously harkening to, as couetously consents to their ruin, and their
friends. In this time, the better to mature and strengthen his design, he
labors to marry Liuia, and works (with all his ingine) to remove Tiberius
from the knowledge of public business, with allurements of a quiet and
retired life: the latter of which, Tiberius (out of a pronenesse to lust, and a
desire to hide those unnatural pleasures, which he could not so publicly
practice) embraces: the former inkindleth his fears, and there gives him
first cause of doubt, or suspect toward Seianus. Against whom, he raises (in
private) a new instrument, one Sertorius Macro, and by him vnder-worketh,
discouers the others counsels, his means, his ends, sounds the affections of
the Senators, diuides, distracts them: at last, when Seianus least looks, and
is most secure (with pretext of doing him an vn-wonted honor in the Senate) he
trains him from his guardes, with one letter, and in one day, has him
suspected, accused, condemned, and torn in pieces, by the rage of the people,

The Persons of the Play.
TIBERIUS.
DRVSVS se. NERO. DRVSVS iu. CALIGVLA. ARRVNTIVS. SILIVS. SABINVS. LEPIDVS.
CORDVS. GALLVS. REGVLVS. TERENTIVS. LACO. EVDEMVS. RUFUS. SEIANVS. LATIARIS.
VARRO. MACRO. COTTA. AFER. HATERIVS. SANQVINIVS. POMPONIVS. POSTHVMVS. TRIO.
MINVTIVS. SATRIVS. NATTA. OPSIVS.
TRIBVNI.
AGRIPPINA. LIVIA. SOSIA.
PRAECONES. FLAMEN. TVBICINES. NVNTIVS. LICTORES. MINISTRI. TIBI^INES. SERVVS.
THE SCENE.

ROME.

SEIANVS. Act. I.
SABINVS, SILIVS, NATTA, LATIARIS, CORDVS, SATRIVS, ARRVNTIVS, EVDEMVS,
HATERIVS, etc.
Hail, CAIUS SILIVS.

SIL. TITIVS SABINVS, Hail.
Yo'are rarely met in court!

SAB. Therefore, well met.

SIL. It Is true: Indeed, this place is not our sphaere.

SAB. No, SILIVS, we are no good inginers;
We want the fine arts, and their thriuing use,
Should make us graced, or favored of the times:
We have no shift of faces, no cleft tongues,
No soft, and glutinous bodies, that can stick,
Like snailes, on painted walls; or, on our breasts,
Creep up, to fall, from that proud height, to which
We did by slavery, not by service, clime.
We are no guilty men, and then no great;
We have nor place in court, office in state,
That we can say, we owe unto our crimes:
We burn with no black secrets, which can make
Us dear to the pale authors; or live feared
Of their still waking iealosies, to raise
Our selves a fortune, by subuerting theirs.
We stand not in the lines, that do advance
To that so courted point.

SIL. But yonder lean
A pair that do. (SAB. Good cousin LATIARIS.)

SIL. SATRIVS SECVNDVS, and PINNARIVS NATTA,
The great SEIANVS clients: There be two,
Know more, then honest counsels: whose close breasts
Were they ripped up to light, it would be found
A poor, and idle sin, to which their trunkes
Had not been made fit organs. These can lie,
Flatter, and swear, forswear, deprave, inform,
Smile, and betray; make guilty men; then beg
The forfeit lives, to get the livings; cut
Men's throats with whisprings; sell to gaping suitors
The empty smoke, that flies about the Palace;
Laugh, when their patron laughes; sweat, when he sweates;
Be hot, and cold with him; change every mood,
Habit, and garb, as often as he varies;
Observe him, as his watch observes his clock;
And true, as turkise in the dear lords ring,
Look well, or ill with him: ready to praise
His lordship, if he spit, or but piss fair,
Have an indifferent stool, or break wind well,
Nothing can escape their catch.

SAB. Alas! these things
Deserve no note, conferred with other vile,
And filthier flatteries, that corrupt the times:
When, not alone our gentries chief are feign
To make their safety from such sordide acts,
But all our Consuls, and no little part
Of such as have been Praetors, yea, the most
Of Senators (that else not use their voices) Fedarij.

Start up in public Senate, and there strive
Who shall propound most abject things, and base,
So much, as often TIBERIUS has been heard,
Leaving the court, to cry O race of men,
Prepared for servitude! which showed, that, he
Who least the public liberty could like,
As loathly brook'd their flat seruilitie.

SIL. Well, all is worthy of us, were it more,
Who with our ryots, pride, and civil hate,
Have so prouok'd the justice of the gods.
We, that (within these fourscore years) were borne
Free, equal lords of the triumphed world,
And knew no masters, but affections,
To which betraying first our liberties,
We since became the slaves to one man's lusts;
And now to many: every ministering spy
That will accuse, and swear, is lord of you,
Of me, of all, our fortunes, and our lives.
Our looks are called to question, and our words,
How innocent soever, are made crimes;
We shall not shortly dare to tell our dreams,
Or think, but 'twill be reason.

SAB. "Tyrannes arts
"Are to give flatterers, grace; accusers, power;
"That those may seem to kill whom they devour.
Now good CREMVTIVS CORDVS.

COR. Hail, to your lordship.

NOT. ^. Who Is that salutes your cousin?

LAT. It Is one CORDVS,
A gentleman of Rome: one, that has writ
Annal's of late, they say, and very well.

NOT. Annal's? of what times?

LAT. I think of POMPEI'S,
And CAIUS CAESAR'S; and so down to these.

NOT. How stands h'affected to the present state?
Is he or Drusian? or Germanican?
Or ours or neutrall?

LAT. I know him not so far.

NOT. Those times are somewhat queasie to be touched.
Have you or seen or heard part of his work?

LAT. Not I, he means they shall be public shortly.

NOT. O. CORDVS do you call him?

LAT. I.

SAB. But these our times
Are not the same, ARRVNTIVS.

ARR. Times? the men,
The men are not the same: it is we are base*
Poor, and degenerate from th'exalted streine
Of our great fathers. Where is now the soul
Of god-like CATO? he, that durst be good,
When CAESAR durst be evil; and had power,
As not to live his slave, to dye his master.
Or where the constant BRUTUS, that (being proof
Against all charm of benefits) did strike
So brave a blow into the monsters heart
That sought unkindly to captive his country?
O, they are fled the light. Those mighty spirits
Lie raked up, with their ashes in their vrnes,
And not a spark of their eternal fire
Glowes in a present bosom. All Is but blaze,
Flashes, and smoke, wherewith we labor so,
There Is nothing Roman in us; nothing good,
Gallant, or great: It Is true, that CORDVS says,
Brave CASSIVS was the last of all that race.

SAB. Drusus passes by. Stand by, lord DRVSVS.

HAT. Th'Emp'rours son, give place.

SIL. I like the prince well.

ARR. A riotous youth,
There Is little hope of him.

SAB. That fault his age
Will, as it grows, correct. Me thinks, he bears
Himself, each day, more nobly then other:
And wins no less on men's affections,
Then does his father lose. Believe me, I love him;
And chiefly for opposing to SEIANVS.

SIL. And I, for gracing his young kinsmen so,
The sons of Prince GERMANICVS: It shows
A gallant cleerenesse in him, a straight mind,
That enuies not, in them, their fathers name.

ARR. His name was, while he lived, above all envy;
And being dead, without it. O, that man!
If there were seeds of the old virtue left,
They lived in him.

SIL. He had the fruits, ARRVNTIVS,
More then the seeds: SABINVS, and my self
Had means to know him, within; and can report him.
We were his followers, (he would call us friends.)
He was a man most like to vertue'; In all,
And every action, nearer to the gods,
Then men, in nature; of a body' as fair
As was his mind; and no less reverend
In face, then fame: He could so use his state,
Temp'ring his greatness, with his gravity,
As it avoided all self-love in him,
And spite in others. What his funerals lacked
In images, and pomp, they had supplied
With honorable sorrow, soldiers sadness,
A kind of silent mourning, such, as men
(Who know no tears, but from their captives) use
To show in so great losses.

COR. I thought once,
Considering their forms, age, manner of deaths,
The neerenesse of the places, where they fell,
To Have paralelled him with great ALEXANDER:
For both were of best feature, of high race,
Yeer'd but to thirty, and, in foreign lands,
By their own people, alike made away.

SAB. I know not, for his death, how you might wrest it:
But, for his life, it did as much disdain
Comparison, with that voluptuous, rash,
Giddy, and drunken Macedon's, as mine
Does with my bond-mans. All the good, in him,
(His valor, and his fortune) he made his;
But he had other touches of late Romans,
That more did speak him: POMPEI'S dignity,
The innocence of CATO, CAESAR'S spirit,
Wise BRUTUS temperance, and every virtue,
Which, parted unto others, gave them name,
Flowed mixed in him. He was the soul of goodness:
And all our praises of him are like streams
Drawn from a spring, that still rise full, and leave
The part remaining greatest.

ARR. I am sure
He was too great for us, and that they knew
Who did remove him hence.

SAB. When men grow fast
Honored, and loved, there is a trick in state
(Which jealous princes never fail to use)
How to decline that growth, with fair pretext,
And honorable colors of employment,
Either by embassy, the war, or such,
To shift them forth into another air,
Where they may purge, and lessen; so was he:
And had his secon'ds there, sent by TIBERIUS,
And his more subtle damme, to discontent him;
To breed, and cherish mutinies; detract
His greatest actions; give audacious check
To his commands; and work to put him out
In open act of treason. All which snares
When his wise cares prevented, a fine poison
Was thought on, to mature their practices.

COR. Here comes SEIANVS.

SIL. Now observe the stoupes,
The bendings, and the falls.

ARR. Most creeping base!
SEIANVS, SATRIVS, TERENTIVS, etc. They pass over the stage. I Note 'hem well:
No more. Say you.

SAT. My lord,
There is a gentleman of Rome would buy --

SEI. How call you him you talked with?

SAT. 'Please your lordship,
It is EVDEMVS, the physician
To LIVIA, DRVSV'S wife.

SEI. On with your suit.
Would buy, you said --

SAT. A Tribune* place, my lord.

SEI. What will he give?

SAT. Fifty sestertia.

SEI. LIVIA'S physician, say you, is that fellow?

SAT. It is, my lord; your lordships answer?

SEI. To what?

SAT. The place, my lord. It Is for a gentleman,
Your lordship will well like off, when you see him;
And one, you may make yours, by the grant.

SEI. Well, let him bring his money, and his name.

SAT. Thank your lordship. He shall, my lord.

SEI. Come hither.
Know you this same EVDEMVS? Is he learned?

SAT. Reputed so, my lord: and of deep practice.

SEI. Bring him in, to me, in the gallerie;
And take you cause, to leave us there, together:
I would confer with him, about a grief. -- On.

ARR. So, yet! another? yet? O desperate state
Of grou'ling honor! See thou this, O sun,
And do we see thee after? Me thinks, day
Should lose his light, when men do lose their shames,
And, for the empty circumstance of life,
Betray their cause of living.

SIL. Nothing so.
SEIANVS can repair, if JOVE should ruin.
He is the now court-god; And well applied
With sacrifice of knees, of crookes, and cringe,
He will do more then all the house of heaven
Can, for a thousand hecatombes. It Is he
Makes us our day, or night; Hell, and Elysium
Are in his look: We talk of RHADAMANTH,
Furies, and firebrarnds; But it is his frown
That is all these, where, on the adverse part,
His smile is more, then ere (yet) Poets feigned
Of bliss, and shades, nectar --

ARR. A serving boy?
I knew him, at CAIUS trencher, when for hyre,
He prostituted his abused body
To that great gourmond, fat APICIVS;
And was the noted pathick of the time.

SAB. And, now, the second face of the whole world.
The partner of the empire, has his image
Reared equal with TIBERIUS, borne in ensigns,
Command's, disposes every dignity,
Centurions, Tribunes, Heads of provinces,
Praetors, and Consuls, all that heretofore
Romes general suffrage gave, is now his sale.
The gain, or rather spoil, of all the earth,
One, and his house, receives.

SIL. He has of late
Made him a strength too, strangely, by reducing
All the Praetorian bands into one camp,
Which he command's: pretending, that the soldier
By living loose, and scattered, fell to riot;
And that if any sudden enterprise
Should be attempted, their united strength
Would be far more, then seuer'd; and their life
More strict, if from the city more removed.

SAB. Where, now, he builds, what kind of fort's he please,
Is hard to court the soldier, by his name,
Wooes, feasts the chiefest men of action,
Whose wants, not loves, compel them to be his.
And, though he never were liberal by kind,
Yet, to his own dark ends, he is most profuse,
Lavish, and letting fly, he cares not what
To his ambition.

ARR. Yet, has he ambition?
Is there that step in state can make him higher?
Or more? or any thing he is, but less?

SIL. Nothing, but Emperor.

ARR. The name TIBERIUS
I hope, will keep; how ere he has fore-gone
The dignity, and power.

SIL. Sure, while he lives.

ARR. And dead, it comes to DRVSVS. Should he fail,
To the brave issue of GERMANICVS;
And they are three: Too many (ha?) for him
To have a plot upon?

SAB. I do not know
The heart of his designs; but, sure, their face
Looks farther then the present.

ARR. By the gods,
If I could guess he had but such a thought,
My sword should cleave him down from head to heart,
But I would find it out: and with my hand
I Would hurl his panting brain about the air,
In mites, as small as atomi, to'vndoe
The knotted bed --

SAB. You are observed, ARRVNTIVS.

ARR. He turns to Seianus clyents. Death! I dare tell him so; and all his
spies:
You, sir, I would, do you look? and you.

SAB. Forbear.

SATRIVS, EVDEMVS, SEIANVS. Here, he will instant be; Let Us walk a turn.
Yo'are in a muse, EVDEMVS?
EVD. Not I, sir.
I wonder he should mark me out so! well,
JOVE, and APOLLO form it for the best.

SAT. Your fortune's made unto you now, EVDEMVS,
If you can but lay hold upon the means;
Do but observe his humor, and -- believe it --
He Is the noblest Roman, where he takes --
Here comes his lordship.

SEI. Now, good SATRIVS.

SAT. This is the gentleman, my lord.

SEI. Is this?
Give me your hand, we must be more acquainted.
Report, sir, has spoke out your art, and learning:
And I am glad I have so needful cause,
(How ever in it self painful, and hard)
To make me known to so great virtue. Look,
Who Is that? SATRIVS -- I have a grief, sir,
That will desire your help. Your name's EVDEMVS?

EVD. Yes.

SEI. Sir?

EVD. It is, my lord.

SEI. I hear, you are Physician to LIVIA, the princess?

EVD. I minister unto her, my good lord.

SEI. You minister to a royal lady, then.

EVD. She is, my lord, and fair.

SEI. That Is understood
Of all their sex, who are, or would be so;
And those, that would be, physic soon can make 'hem*
For those that are, their beauties fear no colors.

EVD. Your lordship is conceited.

SEI. Sir, you know it.
And can (if need be) read a learned lecture,
On this, and other secrets. Pray you tell me,
What more of ladies, besides LIVIA,
Have you your patients?

EVD. Many, my good lord.
The great AUGUSTA, VRGVLANIA.
MVTILIA PRISCA, and PLANCINA, diverse --

SEI. And, all these tell you the particulars
Of every several grief? how first it grew,
And then increased, what action caused that;
What passion that: and answer to each point
That you will put 'hem.

EVD. Else, my lord, we know not
How to prescribe the remedies.

SEI. Go to,
Yo'are a subtle nation, you Physicians!
And grown the only cabinets, in court,
To ladies priuacies. Faith which of these
Is the most pleasant lady, in her physic?
Come, you are modest now.

EVD. It Is fit, my lord.

SEI. Why, sir, I do not ask you of their vrines,
Whose smel's most violet? or whose seige is best?
Or who makes hardest faces on her stool?
Which lady sleeps with her own face, a nights?
Which puts her teeth off, with her clothes, in court?
Or, which her hair? which her complexion?
And, in which box she puts it? These were questions
That might, perhaps, have put your gravity
To some defense of blush. But, I inquired,
Which was the wittiest? meriest? wantonnest?
Harmless intergatories, but conceits.
Me thinks, AUGUSTA should be most perverse,
And froward in her fit?

EVD. She Is so, my lord.

SEI. I knew it. And MVTILIA the most iocund?

EVD. It Is very true, my lord.

SEI. And why would you
Conceal this from me, now? Come, what is LIVIA?
I know, she is quick, and quaintly spirited,
And will have strange thoughts, when she is at leisure;
She tells 'hem all to you?

EVD. My noblest lord,
He breaths not in the empire, or on earth,
Whom I would be ambitious to serve
(In any act, that may preserve mine honor)
Before your lordship.

SEI. Sir, you can loose no honor,
By trusting ought to me. The coursest act
Done to my service, I can so requite,
As all the world shall style it honorable:
"Your idle, virtuous definitions
"Keep honor poor, and are as scorned, as vain:
"Those deeds breathe honor, that do suck in gain.

EVD. But, good my lord, if I should thus betray
The counsels of my patient, and a ladies
Of her high place, and worth; what might your lordship,
(Who presently are to trust me with your own)
Judge of my faith?

SEI. Only the best, I swear.
Say now, that I should utter you my grief;
And with it, the true cause; that it were love;
And love to LIVIA: you should tell her this?
Should she suspect your faith? I would you could
Tell me as much, from her; see, if my brain
Could be turned jealous.

EVD. Happily, my lord,
I could, in time, tell you as much, and more;
So I might safely promise but the first,
To her, from you.

SEI. As safely, my EVDEMVS,
(I now dare call thee so) as I have put
The secret into thee.

EVD. My lord --

SEI. Protest not.
Thy looks are vows to me, use only speed,
And but affect her with SEIANVS love,
Thou art a man, made, to make Consuls. Go.

EVD. My lord, I Will promise you a private meeting
This day, together.

SEI. Can thou?

EVD. Yes.

SEI. The place?

EVD. My gardens, whither I shall fetch your lordship.

SEI. Let me adore my AESCVLAPIVS.
Why, this indeed is physic! and out-speakes
The knowledge of cheap drugs, or any use
Can be made out of it! more comforting
Then all your opiates, iulebes, apozemes,
Magistrall syrrupes, or -- Be gone, my friend,
Not barely styled, but created so;
Expect things, greater then thy largest hopes,
To overtake thee: Fortune, shall be taught
To know how ill she has deserved thus long,
To come behind thy wishes. Go, and speed.
"Ambition makes more trusty slaves, then need,
These fellows, by the favor of their art,
Have, still, the means to tempt, oft-times, the power.
If LIVIA will be now corrupted, then
Thou have the way, SEIANVS, to work out
His secrets, who (thou know) endures thee not,
Her husband DRVSVS: and to work against them.
Prosper it, PALLAS, thou, that betterst wit;
For VENUS has the smallest share in it.

TIBERIUS, SEIANVS, DRVSVS. One kneeles to him. We not endure these
flatteries, let him stand;
Our empire, ensigns, axes, rods, and state
Take not away our humane nature from us:
Look up, on us, and fall before the gods.
SEI. How like a god, speaks CAESAR!

ARR. There, observe!
He can endure that second, that is no flattery.
O, what is it, proud slime will not believe
Of his own worth, to hear it equal praised
Thus with the gods?

COR. He did not hear it, sir.

ARR. He did not? Tut, he must not, we think meanly.
It Is your most courtly, known confederacy,
To have your private parasite redeem
What he, in public subtilty, will lose
To making him a name.

HAT. Right mighty lord --

TIB. We must make up our ears, against these assaults
Of charming tongues; we pray you use, no more
These contumelies to us: style not us
Or lord, or mighty, who profess our self
The servant of the Senate, and are proud
T'enioy them our good, just, and favoring lords.

COR. Rarely dissembled.

ARR. Prince-like, to the life.

SAB. "When power, that may command, so much descends,
"Their bondage, whom it stoupes to, it intends.

TIB. Whence are these letters?

HAT. From the Senate.

TIB. So.
Whence these?

LA. From thence too.

TIB. Are they sitting, now?

LAT. They stay thy answer, CAESAR.

SIL. If this man
Had but a mind allied unto his words,
How blessed a fate were it to us, and Rome?
We could not think that state, for which to change,
Although the aim were our old liberty:
The ghosts of those that fell for that, would grieve
Their bodies lived not, now, again to serve.
"Men are deceived, who think there can be thrall
"Beneath a virtuous prince. Wished liberty
"Never louelier looks, then under such a crown.
But, when his grace is merely but lip-good,
And, that no longer, then he aires himself
Abroad in public, there, to seem to shun
The strokes, and stripes of flatterers, which within
Are lechery unto him, and so feed
His brutish sense with their afflicting sound,
As (dead to virtue) he permits himself
Be carried like a pitcher, by the ears,
To every act of vice: this is a case
Deserves our fear, and does presage the nigh,
And close approach of blood and tyranny.
"Flattery is midwife unto princes rage:
"And nothing sooner, does help forth a tyranne,
"Then that, and whisperers grace, who have the time,
"The place, the power, to make all men offenders.

ARR. He should be told this; and be bid dissemble
With fools, and blind men: We that know the evil,
Should hunt the Palace-rattes, or give them bane;
Fright hence these worse then ravens, that devour
The quick, where they but prey upon the dead:
He shall be told it.

SAB. Stay, ARRVNTIVS,
We must abide our opportunity:
And practice what is fit, as what is needful.
"It is not safe t'enforce a soueraigne's ear:
"Princes hear well, if they at all will hear.

ARR. Ha? Say you so? well. In the mean time, JOVE,
(Say not, but I do call upon thee now.)
Of all wild beasts, preserve me from a tyranne;
And of all tame, a flatterer.

SIL. It Is well prayed.

TIB. Return the lords this voice, we are their creature:
And it is fit, a good, and honest prince,
Whom they, out of their bounty, have instructed
With so dilate, and absolute a power,
Should owe the office of it, to their service;
And good of all, and every citizen.
Nor shall it e're repent us, to have wished
The Senate just, and fau'ring lords unto us,
"Since their free loves do yield no less defense
"TO a princes state, then his own innocence.
Say then, there can be nothing in their thought
Shall want to please us, that has pleased them;
Our suffrage rather shall prevent, then stay
Behind their wills: it is empire, to obey
Where such, so great, so grave, so good determine.
Yet, for the suit of Spain, t'erect a temple
In honor of our mother, and our self,
We must (with pardon of the Senate) not
Assent thereto. Their lordships may object
Our not denying the same late request
Unto the Asian cities: We desire
That our defense, for suffering that, be known
In these brief reasons, with our after purpose.
Since deified AUGUSTUS hindered not
A temple to be built, at Pergamum,
In honor of himself, and sacred Rome,
We, that have all his deeds, and words observed
Ever, in place of laws, the rather followed
That pleasing precedent, because, with ours,
The Senates reverence also, there, was joined.
But, as, to have once received it, may deserve
The gain of pardon, so, to be adored
With the continew'd style, and note of gods,
Through all the provinces, were wild ambition,
And no less pride: Yea, even AUGUSTUS name
Would early vanish, should it be profaned
With such promiscuous flatteries. For our part,
We here protest it, and are covetous
Posterity should know it, we are mortal;
And can but deeds of men: 'twere glory' enough,
Could we be truly a prince. And, they shall add
Abounding grace, unto our memory,
That shall report us worthy our forefathers,
Careful of your affairs, constant in dangers,
And not afraid of any private frown
For public good. These things shall be to us
Temples, and statues, reared in your minds,
The fairest, and most during imag'rie:
For those of stone, or brasle, if they become
Odious in judgment of posterity,
Are more contemned, as dying sepulchers,
Then taken for living monuments. We then
Make here our suite, alike to gods and men,
The one, until the period of our race,
T'inspire us with a free, and quiet mind,
Discerning both divine, and humane laws;
The other, to vouchsafe us after death,
An honorable mention, and fair praise,
T'accompanie our actions, and our name:
The rest of greatness princes may command,
And (therefore) may neglect, only, a long,
A lasting, high, and happy memory
They should, without being satisfied, pursue.
Contempt of fame begets contempt of virtue.

NOT. Rare!

SAT. Most divine!

SEI. The Oracles are ceased,
That only CAESAR, with their tongue, might speak.

ARR. Let me be gone, most felt, and open this!

COR. Stay.

ARR. What? to hear more cunning, and fine words,
With their sound flattered, ere their sense be meant?

TIB. Their choice of Antium, thereto place the gift
Vowed to the goddess, for our mothers health,
Fortuna equestris.
We will the Senate know, we fairly like;
As also, of their grant to LEPIDVS,
For his repayring the Aemilian place,
And restoration of those monuments:
Their grace too in consining of SILANVS,
To the other Is'le Cithera, at the suit
Of his religious sister, much commends
Their policy, so temp'red with their mercy.
But, for the honors, which they have decreed
To our SEIANUS* to advance his statue
In POMPEI'S theater (whose ruining fire
His vigilance, and labor kept restrained
In that one loss) they have, therein, out-gone
Their own great wisdoms, by their skillful choice,
And placing of their bounties, on a man,
Whose merit more adornes the dignity,
Then that can him: and gives a benefit,
In taking, greater, then it can receive.
Blush not, SEIANVS, thou great aid of Rome,
Associate of our labors our chief helper,
Let us not force thy simple modesty
With offering at thy praise, for more we cannot,
Since there is no voice can take it. No man, here,
Receive our speeches, as hyperbole's;
For we are far from flattering our friend,
(Let envy know) as from the need to flatter.
Nor let them ask the causes of our praise;
Princes have still their grounds reared with themselves,
Above the poor low flats of common men,
And, who will search the reasons of their acts,
Must stand on equal bases. Lead, away.
Our loves unto the Senate.

ARR. Caesar.

SAB. Peace.

COR. Great POMPEI'S theater was never ruined
Till now, that proud SEIANVS has a statue
Reared on his ashes.

ARR. Place the shame of soldiers,
Above the best of generals? crack the world!
And bruise the name of Romans into dust,
Ere we behold it!

SIL. Check your passion;
Lord DRVSVS tarries.

DRV. Is my father mad?
Weary of life, and rule, lords? thus to heave
An idol up with praise! make him his mate!
His rival in the empire!

ARR. O, good prince!

DRV. Allow him statues? titles? honors? such,
As he himself refuses?

ARR. Brave, brave DRVSVS!

DRV. The first ascents to sovereignty are hard
But, entered once, there never wants or means,
Or ministers, to help th'aspirer on.

ARR. True, gallant DRVSVS.

DRV. We must shortly pray
To Modesty, that he will rest contented --

ARR. I, where he is, and not write emperor.
SEIANVS, DRVSVS, ARRVNTIVS, etc. He enters, followd with clients. THere is
your bill, and yours; Bring you your man:
I have moved for you, too, LATIARIS.

DRV. What?
Is your vast greatness grown so blindly bold,
That you will over us?

SEI. Why, then give way.

DRV. Give way, Colossus? Do you lift? Advance you?
Drusus strikes him. Take that.

ARR. Good! brave! excellent brave prince!

DRV. Nay, come, approach. What? stand you off? at gaze?
It looks too full of death, for thy cold spirits.
Avoid mine eye, dull camel, or my sword
Shall make thy brau'rie fitter for a grave,
Then for a triumph. I Will advance a statue,
O'your own bulk; but 't shall be on the cross:
Where I will nail your pride, at breadth, and length,
And crack those sinnewes, which are yet but stretched
With your swollen fortunes rage.

ARR. A noble prince!

ALL. A CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR!
SEIANVS. HE that, with such wrong moved, can bear it through
With patience, and an even mind, knows how
To turn it back. Wrath, covered, carries fate:
Revenge is lost, if I profess my hate.
What was my practice late, I Will now pursue
As my fell justice. This has styled it new.

CHORUS -- Of Musicians. Act. II.
SEIANVS, LIVIA, EVDEMVS.
Physician, thou art worthy of a province,
For the great favors done unto our loves;
And, but that greatest LIVIA bears a part
In the requital of thy services,
I should alone, despair of ought, like means,
To give them worthy satisfaction.

LIVE. EVDEMVS, (I will see it) shall receive
A fit, and full reward, for his large merit.
But for this potion, we intend to DRVSVS,
(No more our husband, now) whom shall we choose
As the most apt, and abled instrument,
To minister it to him?

EVD. I say, LYGDVS.

SEI. LYGDVS? what is he?

LIVE. An Eunuch DRVSVS loves.

EVD. I, and his cup bearer.

SEI. Name not a second.
If DRVSVS love him, and he have that place,
We cannot think a sitter.

EVD. True, my lord,
For free access, and trust, are two maine aides.

SEI. Skillful physician!

LIVE. But he must be wrought
To th'vndertaking, with some labored art.

SEI. Is he ambitious?

LIVE. No.

SEI. Or covetous?

LIVE. Neither.

EVD. Yet, gold is a good general charm.

SEI. What is he then?

LIVE. Faith, only wanton, light.

SEI. How! Is he young? and fair?

EVD. A delicate youth.

SEI. Send him to me, I Will work him. Royal lady,
Though I have loved you long, and with that height
Of zeal, and duty, (like the fire, which more
It mounts, it trembles) thinking naught could add
Unto the fervor, which your eye had kindled;
Yet, now I see your wisdom, judgment, strength,
Quickness, and will, to apprehend the means
To your own good, and greatness, I protest
My self through rarefied, and turned all flame
In your affection: Such a spirit as yours,
Was not created for the idle second
To a poor flash, as DRVSVS; but to shine
Bright, as the Moon, among the lesser lights,
And share the sou'raigntie of all the world.
Then LIVIA triumphs in her proper sphere,
When she, and her SEIANVS shall divide
The name of CAESAR; and AVGVSTA'S star
Be dimmed with glory of a brighter beam:
When AGRIPPINA'S fires are quite extinct,
And the scarce-seene TIBERIUS borrowes all
His little light from us, whose folded arms
Shall make one perfect or be. Who Is that? EVDEMVS,
Look, it is not DRVSVS? Lady, do not fear.

LIVE. Not I, my Lord. My fear, and love of him
Left me at once.

SEI. Illustrous lady! stay --

EVD. I Will tell his lordship.

SEI. Who is it, EVDEMVS?

EVD. One of your lordships servants, brings you word
The Emperor has sent for you.

SEI. O! where is he?
He goes out. With your fair leave, dear Princess. I Will but ask
A question, and return.

EVD. Fortunate Princess!
How are you blessed in the fruition
Of this vnequald man, this soul of Rome,
The empires life, and voice of CAESAR'S world!

LIVE. So blessed, my EVDEMVS, as to know
The bliss I have, with what I ought to owe
The means that wrought it. How do'I look to day?

EVD. Excellent clear, believe it. This same fucus
Was well laid on.

LIVE. Me thinks, it is here not white.

EVD. Lend me your scarlet, lady. It Is the sun
Has given some little taint unto the ceruse,
You should have used of the white oil I gave you.
SEIANVS, for your love! his very name
Commands above CUPID, or his shafts --

(LIVE. Nay, now yo'haue made it worse.

EVD. I Will help it straight.)
And, but pronounced, is a sufficient charm
Against all rumor; and of absolute power
To satisfy for any ladies honor.

(LIVE. What do you now, EVDEMVS?

EVD. Make a light fucus,
To touch you ore withal.) Honored SEIANVS!
What act (though never so strange, and insolent)
But that addition will at least bear out,
If 't do not expiate?

LIVE. Here, good physician.

EVD. I like this study to preserve the love
Of such a man, that comes not every hour
To greet the world. ('It Is now well, lady, you should
Use of the dentisrice, I prescribed you, too,
To clear your teeth, and the prepared pomatum,
To smoothe the skin:) A lady cannot be
Too curious of her form, that still would hold
The heart of such a person, made her captive,
As you have his: who, to endeare him more
In your clear eye, has put away his wife,
The trouble of his bed, and your delights,
Fair Apicata, and made spacious room
To your new pleasures.

LIVE. Have not we returned
That, with our hate of DRVSVS, and discovery
Of all his councels?

EVD. Yes, and wisely, lady,
The ages that succeed, and stand far off
To gaze at your high prudence, shall admire
And reckon it an act, without your sex:
It has that rare appearance. Some will think
Your fortune could not yield a deeper sound,
Then mixed with DRVSVS; But, when they shall hear
That, and the thunder of SEIANVS meet,
SEIANVS, whose high name does strike the stars,
And rings about the concaue, great SEIANVS,
Whose glories, style, and titles are himself,
The often iterating of SEIANVS:
They then will lose their thoughts, and be ashamed
To take acquaintance of them.

SEI. I must make
A rude departure, lady. CAESAR sends
With all his haste both of command, and prayer.
Be resolute in our plot; you have my soul,
As certain yours, as it is my bodies.
And, wise physician, so prepare the poison
As you may lay the subtle operation
Upon some natural disease of his.
Your eunuch send to me. I kiss your hands,
Glory of ladies, and commend my love
To your best faith, and memory.

LIVE. My lord,
I shall but change your words. Farewell. Yet, this
Remember for your heed, he loves you not;
You know, what I have told you: His designs
Are full of grudge, and danger: we must use
More then a common speed.

SEI. Excellent lady,
How you do fire my blood!

LIVE. Well, you must go?
The thoughts be best, are least set forth to show.

EVD. When will you take some physic, lady?

LIVE. When
I shall, EVDEMVS: But let DRVSVS drug
Be first prepared.

EVD. Were LYGDVS made, that is done;
I have it ready. And to morrow-morning,
I Will send you a perfume, first to resolve,
And procure sweat, and then prepare a bath
To cleanse, and clear the cutis; against when,
I Will have an excellent new fucus made,
Resistiue against the sun, the rain, or wind,
Which you shall lay on with a breath, or oil,
As you best like, and last some fourteen hours.
This change came timely, lady, for your health;
And the restoring your complexion,
Which DRVSVS choler had almost burnt up:
Wherein your fortune has prescribed you better
Then art could do.

LIVE. Thanks, good physician,
I Will use my fortune (you shall see) with reverence.
Is my coach ready?

EVD. It attends your highness.

SEIANVS. IF this be not revenge, when I have done
And made it perfect, let Egyptian slaves,
Parthians, and barefoot Hebrews brand my face,
And print my body full of injuries.
Thou lost thy self, child DRVSVS, when thou thought
Thou could out-skip my vengeance: or out-stand
The power I had to crush thee into air.
Thy follyes now shall taste what kind of man
They have prouok'd, and this thy fathers house
Crack in the flame of my incensed rage,
Whose fury shall admit no shame, or mean.
Adultery? it is the lightest ill,
I will commit. A race of wicked acts
Shall flow out of my anger, and o're-spread
The worlds wide face, which no posterity
Shall e're approve, nor yet keep silent: Things,
That for their cunning, close, and cruel mark,
Thy father would wish his; and shall (perhaps)
Carry the empty name, but we the prize.
On then, my soul, and start not in thy course;
Though heaven drop sulphur, and hell belch out fire,
Laugh at the idle terrors: Tell proud JOVE,
Between his power, and thine, there is no odds.
'Twas only fear, first, in the world made gods.

TIBERIUS, SEIANVS. IS yet SEIANVS come?
SEI. He Is here, dread CAESAR.

TIB. Let all depart that chamber, and the next:
Sit down, my comfort. When the master-prince
Of all the world, SEIANVS, says, he fears;
Is it not fatal?

SEI. Yes, to those are feared.

TIB. And not to him?

SEI. Not, if he wisely turn
That part of fate he holds, first on them.

TIB. That nature, blood, and laws of kind forbid.

SEI. Do policy, and state forbid it?

TIB. No.

SEI. The rest of poor respects, then, let go by:
State is enough to make the act just, them guilty.

TIB. Long hate pursues such acts.

SEI. Whom hatred frights,
Let him not dream on sou'raignty.

TIB. Are rites
Of faith, love, piety, to be trod down?
Forgotten? and made vain?

SEI. All for a crown.
The prince, who shames a tyrannes name to bear,
Shall never dare do any thing, but fear;
All the command of scepters quite does perish
If it begin religious thoughts to cherish:
Whole Empires fall, swaid by those nice respects.
It is the license of dark deeds protects
Even states most hated: when no laws resist
The sword, but that it acts what it list.

TIB. Yet so, we may do all things cruelly,
Not safely:

SEI. Yes, and do them thoroughly.

TIB. Knows yet, SEIANVS, whom we point at?

SEI. I,
Or else my thought, my sense, or both do err:
It Is AGRIPPINA?

TIB. She; and her proud race.

SEI. Proud? dangerous,

CAESAR. For in them apace
The fathers spirit shoots up. GERMANICVS
Lives in their looks, their gate, their form, t'vpbraide us
With his close death, if not revenge the same.

TIB. The act's not known.

SEI. Not proved. But whispring fame
Knowledge, and proof does to the jealous give,
Who, then to fail, would their own thought believe.
It is not safe, the children draw long breath,
That are provoked by a parents death.

TIB. It is a dangerous, to make them hence,
If nothing but their birth be their offense.

SEI. Stay, till they strike at CAESAR: then their crime
Will be enough, but late, and out of time
For him to punish.

TIB. Do they purpose it?

SEI. You know, sir, thunder speaks not till it hit.
Be not secure: none swiftlier are oppressed,
Then they, whom confidence betrays to rest.
Let not your daring make your danger such:
All power's to be feared, where it is too much.
The youth's are (of themselves) hot, violent,
Full of great thought; and that male-spirited dame,
Their mother, slackes no means to put them on,
By large allowance, popular presentings,
Increase of train, and state, suing for titles,
Has them commended with like prayers, like vows,
To the same Gods, with CAESAR: days and nights
She spends in banquets, and ambitious feasts
For the Nobility; where CAIUS SILIVS,
TITIVS SABINVS, old ARRVNTIVS,
ASINIVS GALLVS, FVRNIVS, REGVLVS,
And others, of that discontented list,
Are the prime guests. There, and to these, she tells
Whose niece she was, whose daughter, and whose wife,
And then must they compare her with AUGUSTA,
I, and prefer her too, commend her form,
Extol her fruitfulness; at which a shower
Falls for the memory of GERMANICVS,
Which they blow over straight, with windy praise,
And puffing hopes of her aspiring sons:
Who, with these hourly ticklings, grow so pleased,
And wantonly conceited of themselves,
As now, they stick not to believe they are such,
As these do give 'hem out: and would be thought
(More then competitors) immediate heirs.
Whilst to their thirst of rule they win the rout
(That Is still the friend of novelty) with hope
Of future freedom, which on every change,
That greedily, though emptily, expects.
CAESAR, it is age in all things breeds neglects,
And princes that will keep old dignity,
Must not admit too youthful heirs stand by;
Not their own issue: but so darkely set
As shadows are in picture, to give height,
And luster to themselves.

TIB. We will command
Their rank thoughts down, and with a stricter hand
Then we have yet put forth, their trains must bate,
Their titles, feasts and factions.

SEI. Or your state.
But how sir, will you work?

TIB. Confine 'hem,

SEI. No.
They are too great, and that too faint a blow,
To give them now: it would have served at first,
When, with the weakest touch, their knot had burst.
But, now, your care must be, not to detect
The smallest cord, or line of your suspect,
For such, who know the weight of princes fear,
Will, when they find themselves discovered, rear
Their forces, like seen snakes, that else would lie
Rould in their circles, close: Naught is more high,
Daring, or desperate, then offenders found;
Where guilt is, rage, and courage does abound.
The course must be, to let 'hem still swell up,
Riot, and surfeit on blind fortunes cup;
Give 'hem more place, more dignities, more style,
Call 'hem to court, to senate: in the while,
Take from their strength some one or twain, or more
Of the maine Fautors; (It will fright the store)
And, by some by-occasion. Thus, with slight
You shall disarme first, and they (in night
Of their ambition) not perceive the train,
Till, in the ingine, they are caught, and slain.

TIB. We would not kill, if we knew how to save;
Yet, then a throne, it is cheaper give a grave.
Is there no way to bind them by deserts?

SEI. Sir, wolves do change their hair, but not their hearts.
While thus your thought unto a mean is tied,
You neither dare enough, nor do provide.
All modesty is fond; and chiefly where
The subject is no less compeld to bear,
Then praise his sou'raignes acts.

TIB. We can no longer
Keep on our masque to thee, our dear SEIANVS;
Thy thoughts are ours, in all, and we but proou'd
Their voice, in our designs, which by assenting
Has more confirmed us, then if heartning JOVE
Had, from his hundred statues, bid us strike,
And at the stroke clickt all his marble thumb's.
But, who shall first be struck?

SEI. First, CAIUS SILIVS;
He is the most of mark, and most of danger:
In power, and reputation equal strong,
Having commanded an imperial army
Seven years together, vanquished SACROVIR
In Germany, and thence obtained to wear
The ornaments triumphall. His steep fall,
By how much it does give the weightier crack,
Will send more wounding terror to the rest,
Command them stand aloof, and give more way
To our surprising of the principal.

TIB. But what, SABINVS?

SEI. Let him grow awhile,
His fate is not yet ripe: we must not pluck
At all together, lest we catch our selves.
And there is ARRVNTIVS too, he only talks.
But SOSIA, SILIVS wife, would be wound in
Now, for she has a fury in her breast
More, then hell ever knew; and would be sent
Thither in time. Then, is there one CREMVTIVS
CORDVS, a writing fellow, they have got
To gather notes of the precedent times,
And make them into Annal's; a most tart
And bitter spirit (I hear) who, under color
Of praising those, does tax the present state,
Censures the men, the actions, leaves no trick,
No practice vn-examin'd, paralels
The times, the governments, a professed champion,
For the old liberty --

TIB. A perishing wretch.
As if there were that chaos bred in things,
The laws, and liberty would not rather choose
To be quite broken, and taken hence by us,
Then have the stain to be preserved by such.
Have we the means, to make these guilty, first?

SEI. Trust that to me: let CAESAR, by his power,
But cause a formal meeting of the Senate,
I will have matter, and accusers ready.

TIB. But how? let us consult.

SEI. We shall mispend
The time of action. Counsels are unfit
In business, where all rest is more pernicious
Then rashness can be. Acts of this close kind
Thrive more by execution, then advice.
There is no lingering in that work begun,
Which cannot praised be, until through done.

TIB. Our edict shall, forthwith, command a court.
While I can live, I will prevent earths fury:
(...).

POSTHVMVS, SEIANVS. MY Lord SEIANVS --
SEI. JULIUS POSTHVMVS,
Come with my wish! what news from AGRIPPINA'S?

POS. Faith none. They all lock up themselves a'late;
Or talk in character: I have not seen
A company changed. Except they had
Intelligence by augurie of our practice.

SEI. When were you there?

POS. Last night.

SEI. And what ghests found you?

POS. SABINVS, SILIVS, (the old list,) ARRVNTIVS,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS.

SEI. Would not these talk?

POS. Little.
And yet we offered choice of argument.
SATRIVS was with me.

SEI. Well: it is guilt enough
Their often meeting. You forgot t'extoll
The hospitable lady?

POS. No, that trick
Was well put home, and had succeeded too,
But that SABINVS cought a caution out;
For she began to swell:

SEI. And may she burst.
JULIUS, Mutilia Prisca.
I would have you go instantly,
Unto the palace of the great AUGUSTA,
And, (by your kindest friend,) get swift access;
Acquaint her, with these meetings: Tell the words
You brought me, (the other day) of SILIVS,
Add somewhat to 'hem. Make her understand
The danger of SABINVS, and the times,
Out of his closeness. Give ARRVNTIVS words
Of malice against CAESAR; so, to GALLVS:
But (above all) to AGRIPPINA. Say,
(As you may truly) that her infinite pride,
Propt with the hopes of her too fruitful womb,
With popular studies gapes for sovereignty;
And threatens CAESAR. Pray AUGUSTA then,
That for her own, great CAESAR'S, and the public
safety, she be pleased to urge these dangers.
CAESAR is too secure (he must be told,
And best he will take it from a mothers tongue.)
Alas! what is 't for us to sound, to explore,
To watch, oppose, plot, practice, or prevent,
If he, for whom it is so strongly labored,
Shall, out of greatness, and free spirit, be
Supinely negligent? Our citi's now
Divided as in time o'th'ciuill war,
And men forbear not to declare themselves
Of AGRIPPINA'S party. Every day,
The faction multiplies; and will do more
If not resisted: you can best enlarge it
As you find audience. Noble POSTHVMVS,
Commend me to your PRISCA: and pray her,
She will solicit this great business
To earnest, and most present execution,
With all her utmost credit with AUGUSTA.

POS. I shall not fail in my instructions.

SEI. This second (from his mother) will well urge
Our late design, and spur on CAESAR'S rage:
Which else might grow remiss. The way, to put
A prince in blood, is to present the shapes
Of dangers, greater then they are (like late,
Or early shadows) and, sometimes, to feign
Where there are none, only, to make him fear;
His fear will make him cruel: And once entered,
He does not easily learn to stop, or spare
Where he may doubt. This have I made my rule,
To thrust TIBERIUS into tyranny,
And make him toil, to turn aside those blocks,
Which I alone, could not remove with safety.
DRVSVS once gone, GERMANICVS three sons
Would clog my way; whose guardes have too much faith
To be corrupted: and their mother known
Of too-too vnreproou'd a chastity,
To be attempted, as light LIVIA was.
Work then, my art, on CAESAR'S fears, as they
On those they fear, till all my betts be cleared:
And he in ruins of his house, and hate
Of all his subjects, bury his own state:
When, with my peace, and safty, I will rise,
By making him the public sacrifice.

SATRIVS, NATTA. THey'are grown exceeding circumspect, and wary.
NOT. They have us in the wind: And yet, ARRVNTIVS
Cannot contain himself.

SAT. Tut, he is not yet
Looked after, there are others more desired,
That are more silent.

NOT. Here he comes. Away.

SABINVS, ARRVNTIVS, CORDVS. HOw is it, that these beagles haunt the house
Of AGRIPPINA?
ARR. O, they hunt, they hunt.
There is some game here lodged, which they must rouse,
To make the great-ones sport.

COR. Did you observe
How they inueigh'd against CAESAR?

ARR. I, baytes, baytes,
For us to bite at: would I have my flesh
Torn by the public hook, these qualified hang-men
Should be my company.

COR. Here comes another.

ARR. I, there is a man, AFER the orator!
One, that has phrases, figures, and fine flowers,
To strew his rethorique with, and does make haste
To get him note, or name, by any offer
Where blood, or gain be objects; steepes his words,
When he would kill, in artificial tears:
The Crocodile of Tyber! him I love,
That man is mine. He has my heart, and voice,
When I would curse, he, he.

SAB. Contemn the slaves,
Their present lives will be their future graves.

SILIVS, AGRIPPINA, NERO, SOSIA. MAy't please your highness not forget your
self,
I dare not, with my manners, to attempt
Your trouble farther.
AGR. Farewell, noble SILIVS.

SIL. Most royal princess.

AGR. SOSIA stays with us?

SIL. She is your servant, and does owe your grace
An honest, but unprofitable love.

AGR. How can that be, when there is no gain, but virtuous?

SIL. You take the moral, not the politic sense.
I meant, as she is bold, and free of speech,
Earnest to utter what her zealous thought
Travails withal, in honor of your house;
Which act, as it is simply borne in her,
Pertakes of love, and honesty, but may,
By th'ouer-often, and vnseason'd use,
Turn to your loss, and danger: For your state
Is waited on by enuies, as by eyes;
And every second ghest your tables take,
Is a fee'd spy, t'obserue who goes, who comes,
What conference you have, with whom, where, when,
What the discourse is, what the looks, the thoughts
Of every person there, they do extract,
And make into a substance.

ARR. Hear me, SILIVS,
Were all TIBERIUS body stuck with eyes,
And every wall, and hanging in my house
Transparent, as this lawne I wear, or air;
Yea, had SEIANVS both his ears as long
As to my in-most closet: I would hate
To whisper any thought, or change an act,
To be made IVNO'S rival. Virtues forces
Show ever noblest in conspicuous courses.

SIL. It Is great, and bravely spoken, like the spirit
Of AGRIPPINA: yet, your highness knows,
There is nor loss, nor shame in providence:
Few can, what all should do, beware enough.
You may perceive with what officious face,
SATRIVS, and NATTA, AFER, and the rest
Visit your house, of late, t'enquire the secrets;
And with what bold, and priuiledg'd art, they rail
Against AUGUSTA: yea, and at TIBERIUS,
Tell tricks of LIVIA, and SEIANVS, all
T'excite, and call your indignation on,
That they might hear it at more liberty.

AGR. Yo'are too suspicious, SILIVS.

SIL. Pray the gods,
I be so AGRIPPINA: But I fear
Some subtle practice. They, that durst to strike
At so examp-lesse, and vn-blam'd a life,
As, that of the renowned GERMANICVS,
Will not sit down, with that exploit alone:
"He threatens many, that has injured one.

NER. 'Twere best rip forth their tongues, sear out their eyes,
When next they come.

SOS. A fit reward for spies.
DRVSVS in: AGRIPPINA, NERO, SILIVS. Hear you the rumor?

AGR. What?

DRV. DRVSVS is dying.

AGR. Dying?

NER. That Is strange!

AGR. Yo'were with him, yesternight.

DRV. One met EVDEMVS, the Physician,
Sent for, but now: who thinks he cannot live.

SIL. Thinks? if it be arrived at that, he knows,
Or none.

AGR. This's quick! what should be his disease?

SIL. Poison. Poison --

AGR. How, SILIVS!

NER. What Is that?

SIL. Nay, nothing. There was (late) a certain blow
Given of the face.

NER. I, to SEIANVS?

SIL. True.

DRV. And, what of that?

SIL. I Am glad I gave it not.

NER. But, there is somewhat else?

SIL. Yes, private meetings,
With a great lady, at a physicians,
And, a wife turned away --

NER. Ha!

SIL. Toys, mere toys:
What wisdom's now in the streets? in the common mouth?

DRV. Fears, whisp'rings, tumults, noise, I know not what:
They say, the Senate sit.

SIL. I Will thither, straight;
And see what is in the forge.

AGR. Good SILIVS do.
SOSIA, and I will in.

SIL. Haste you, my lords,
To visit the sick prince: tender your loves,
And sorrows to the people. This SEIANVS
(Trust my divining soul) has plots on all:
No tree, that stops his prospect, but must fall.

CHORUS -- Of Musicians. Act III. THE SENATE.
SEIANVS, VARRO, LATIARIS. COTTA, AFER. GALLVS, LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS. PRAECONES,
LICTORES.
It Is only you must urge against him, VARRO,
Nor I, nor CAESAR may appear therein,
Except in your defense, who are the Consul:
And, under color of late en'mitie
Between your father, and his, may better do it,
As free from all suspicion of a practice.
Here be your notes, what points to touch at; read:
Be cunning in them. AFER has them too.

VAR. But is he summoned?

SEI. No. It was debated
By CAESAR, and concluded as most fit
To him take vnprepar'd.

AFE. And prosecute
All under name of treason.

VAR. I conceive.

SAB. DRVSVS being dead, CAESAR will not be here.

GAL. What should the business of this Senate be?

ARR. That can my subtle whisperers tell you: We,
That are the good dull-noble lookers on,
Are only called to keep the marble warm.
What should we do with those deep mysteries,
Proper to these fine heads? let them alone.
Our ignorance may, perchance, help us be saved
From whips, and furies.

GAL. See, see, see, their action!

ARR. I, now their heads do travail, now they work;
Their faces run like shittles* they are weauing
Some curious cobweb to catch flies.

SAB. Observe,
They take their places.

ARR. What so low?

GAL. O yes,
They must be seen to flatter CAESAR'S grief
Though but in sitting.

VAR. Bid us silence.

PRAE. Silence.

VAR. Fathers Conscript, may this our present meeting
Turn fair, and fortunate to the Commonwealth.
SILIVS, SENATE. SEe, SILIVS enters.

SIL. Hail grave Fathers.

LIC. Stand.
SILIVS, forbear thy place.

SEN. How!

PRAE. SILIVS stand forth,
The Consul has to charge thee.

LIC. Room for CAESAR.

ARR. Is he come too? nay then expect a trick.

SAB. SILIVS accused? sure he will answer nobly.
TIBERIUS, SENATE. WE stand amazed, Fathers, to behold
This general deiection. Wherefo^e sit
Romes Consuls thus dissolved, as they had lost
All the remembrance both of style, and place?
It not becomes. No woes are of fit weight,
To make the honor of the empire stoop:
Though I, in my peculiar self, may meet
Just reprehension, that so suddenly,
And, in so fresh a grief, would greet the Senate,
When private tongues, of kinsmen, and allies,
(Inspired with comforts) lothly are endured,
The face of men not seen, and scarce the day,
To thousands, that communicate our loss.
Nor can I argue these of weakness; since
They take but natural ways: yet I must seek
For stronger aides, and those fair helps draw out
From warm embraces of the commonwealth.
Our mother, great AUGUSTA, 'is struck with time,
Our self impressed with aged characters,
DRVSVS is gone, his children young, and babes,
Our aims must now reflect on those, that may
Give timely succor to these present ills,
And are our only glad-suruiuing hopes,
The noble issue of GERMANICVS,
NERO, and DRVSVS: might it please the Consul
Honor them in, (they both attend without.)
I would present them to the Senates care,
And raise those suns of joy, that should drink up
These floods of sorrow, in your drowned eyes.

ARR. By JOVE, I am not OEDIPVS enough,
To understand this SPHYNX.

SAB. The princes come.
TIBERIUS, NERO, DRVSVS junior. Approach you noble NERO, noble DRVSVS,
These princes, Fathers, when their parent dyed,
I gave unto their uncle, with this prayer,
That, though h' had proper issue of his own,
He would no less bring up, and foster these,
Then that selfe-bloud; and by that act confirm
Their worths to him, and to posterity.
D^VSVS taken hence, I turn my prayers to you,
And, before our country, and our gods, beseech
You take, and rule AUGUSTUS nephews sons,
Sprung of the noblest ancestors; and so
Accomplish both my duty, and your own.
NERO, and DRVSVS, (these shall be to you
In place of parents, these your fathers, these,
And not unfitly: For you are so borne,
As all your good, or ill's the commonwealths.
Receive them, you strong guardians; and blessed go`ds
Make all their actions answer to their bloods:
Let their great titles find increase by them,
Not they by titles. Set them, as in place,
So in example, above all the Romans:
And may they know no riuals, but themselves.
Let fortune give them nothing; but attend
Upon their virtue: and that still come forth
Greater then hope, and better then their fame.
Relieve me, Fathers, with your general voice.

SEN. May all the gods consent to CAESAR'S wish,
A form of speaking they ^^d.
And add to any honors, that may crown
The hopeful issue of GERMANICVS.

TIB. We thank you, reverend Fathers, in their right.

ARR. If this were true now! but the space, the space
Between the breast, and lips -- TIBERIUS heart
Lies a thought farther, then another man's.

TIB. My comforts are so flowing in my joys,
As, in them, all my streams of grief are lost,
No less then are land-waters in the sea,
Or showers in rivers; though their cause was such,
As might have sprinkled even the gods with tears:
Yet since the greater does embrace the less,
We couetously obey.

(ARR. Well acted, CAESAR.)

TIB. And, now I am the happy witness made
Of your so much desired affections,
To this great issue, I could wish, the fates
Would here set peaceful period to my days;
How ever, to my labors, I entreat
(And beg it of this Senate) some fit ease.

(ARR. Laugh, Fathers, laugh: Have you no spleenes about you?)

TIB. The burden is too heavy, I sustain
On my unwilling shoulders; and I pray
It may be taken off, and re-confer'd
Upon the Consuls, or some other Roman,
More able, and more worthy.

(ARR. Laugh on, still.)

SAB. Why, this does render all the rest suspected!

GAL. It poisons all.

ARR. O, do' you taste it then?

SAB. It takes away my faith to any thing
He shall hereafter speak.

ARR. I, to pray that,
Which would be to his head as hot as thunder,
A wreath of laurel.
(Gain'st which he wears that charm) should but the court
Receive him at his word

GAL. Hear.

TIB. For my self,
I know my weakness, and so little covet
(Like some gone past) the weight that will oppress me,
As my ambition is the counter-point.

(ARR. Finely maintained; good still.)

SEI. But Rome, whose blood,
Whose nerves, whose life, whose very frame relyes
On CAESAR'S strength, no less then heaven on ATLAS,
Cannot admit it but with general ruin.

(ARR. Ah! are you there, to bring him of?)

SEI. Let CAESAR
No more then urge a point so contrary
To CAESAR'S greatness, the grieved Senates vows,
Or Romes necessity.

(GAL. He comes about.

ARR. More nimbly then VERTVMNVS.)

TIB. For the public,
I may be drawn, to show, I can neglect
All private aims; though I affect my rest:
But, if the Senate still command me serve,
I must be glad to practice my obedience.

(ARR. You must, and will, sir. We do know it.)

SEN. CAESAR,
Live long, Another form.
and happy, great, and royal CAESAR,
The gods preserve thee, and thy modesty,
Thy wisdom, and thy innocence.

(ARR. Where is it?
The prayer's made before the subject.)

SEN. Guard
His meekness, JOVE, his piety, his care,
His bounty --

ARR. And his subtlety, I Will put in:
Yet he will keep that himself, without the gods.
All prayer's are vain for him.

TIB. We will not hold
Your patience, Fathers, with long answer; but
Shall still contend to be, what you desire,
And work to satisfy so great a hope:
Proceed to your affairs.

ARR. Now, SILIVS, guard thee;
The curtin's drawing.

AFER aduanceth.

PRAE. Silence.

AFE. Cite CAIUS, SILIVS.

PRAE. CAIUS SILIVS.

SIL. Here.

AFE. The triumph that thou had in Germany
For thy late victory on SACROVIR,
Thou have enjoyed so freely, CAIUS SILIVS,
As no man it enuy'd thee; nor would CAESAR,
Or Rome admit, that thou were then defrauded
Of any honors, thy deserts could claim,
In the fair service of the commonwealth:
But now, if, after all their loves, and graces,
(Thy actions, and their courses being discovered)
It shall appear to CAESAR, and this Senate,
Thou have defiled those glories, with thy crimes --

SIL. Crimes?

AFE. Patience, SILIVS.

SIL. Tell thy moile of patience,
I am a Roman. What are my crimes? Proclaim them.
Am I too rich? too honest for the times?
Have I or treasure, jewels, land, or houses
That some informer gapes for? Is my strength
Too much to be admitted? Or my knowledge?
These now are crimes.

AFE. Nay, SILIVS, if the name
Of crime so touch thee, with what impotence
Will thou endure the matter to be searched?

SIL. I tell thee, AFER, with more scorn, then fear:
Employ your mercenarie tongue, and art.
Where Is my accuser?

VAR. Here.

ARR. VARRO? The Consul?
Is he thrust in?

VAR. It Is I accuse thee, SILIVS.
Against the majesty of Rome, and CAESAR,
I do pronounce thee here a guilty cause,
First, of beginning, and occasioning,
Next, drawing out the war in Gallia,
For which thou late triumph'st; dissembling long
That SACROVIR to be an enemy,
Only to make thy entertainment more,
Whilst thou, and thy wife SOSIA poll'd the province;
Wherein, with sordide-base desire of gain,
Thou have discredited thy actions worth
And been a traitor to the state.

SIL. Thou lie.

ARR. I thank thee, SILIVS, speak so still, and often.

VAR. If I not prove it, CAESAR, but iniustly
Have called him into trial, here I bind
My self to suffer, what I claim against him;
And yield, to have what I have spoke, confirmed
By judgment of the court, and all good men.

SIL. CAESAR, I crave to have my cause deferred,
Till this man's Consulship be out.

TIB. We cannot,
Nor may we grant it.

SIL. Why? shall he design
My day of trial? is he my accuser?
And must he be my judge?

TIB. It has been usual,
And is a right, that custom has allowed
The magistrate, to call forth private men;
And to appoint their day: Which privilege
We may not in the Consul see infringed,
By whose deep watches, and industrious care
It is so labored, as the commonwealth
Receive no loss, by any oblique course.

SIL. CAESAR, thy fraud is worse then violence.

TIB. SILIVS, mistake us not, we dare not use
The credit of the Consul, to thy wrong,
But only do preserve his place, and power,
So far as it concerns the dignity,
And honor of the state.

ARR. Believe him, SILIVS.

COT. Why, so he may, ARRVNTIVS.

ARR. I say so.
And he may choose too.

TIB. By the capitol,
And all our gods, but that the dear republic,
Our sacred laws, and just authority
Are interess'd therein, I should be silent.

AFE. Please' CAESAR to give way unto his trial.
He shall have justice.

SIL. Nay, I shall have law;
Shall I not AFER? speak.

AFE. Would you have (...)

SIL. No, my well-spoken man, I would no more;
Nor less: might I enjoy it natural,
Not taught to speak unto your present ends,
Free from thine, his, and all your unkind handling,
Furious enforcing, most unjust presuming,
Malicious, and manifold applying,
Foul wresting, and impossible construction.

AFE. He raues, he raues.

SIL. Thou durst not tell me so,
Had thou not CAESAR'S warrant. I can see
Whose power condemns me.

VAR. This betrays his spirit.
This does enough declare him what he is.

SIL. What am I? speak.

VAR. An enemy to the state.

SIL. Because I am an enemy to thee,
And such corrupted ministers of the state,
That here art made a present instrument
To gratify it with thine own disgrace.

SEI. This, to the Consul, is most insolent!
And impious!

SIL. I, take part. Reveal your selves.
Alas, I sent not your confed'racies?
Your plots, and combinations? I not know
Minion SEIANVS hates me; and that all
This boast of law, and law, is but a form,
A net of VULCANES filing, a mere ingine,
To take that life by a pretext of justice,
Which you pursue in malice? I want brain,
Or nostrill to persuade me, that your ends,
And purposes are made to what they are,
Before my answer? O, you equal gods,
Whose justice not a world of wolfe-turn'd men
Shall make me to accuse (how ere provoke)
Have I for this so often engaged my self?
Stood in the heat, and feruor of a fight,
When PHOEBVS sooner has forsook the day
Then I the field? Against the blue-ey'd Gauls?
And crisped Germans? when our Roman Eagles
Have fanned the fire, with their laboring wings,
And no blow dealt, that left not death behind it?
When I have charged, alone, into the troops
Of curled Sicambrians, routed them, and came
Not off, with backward ensigns of a slave,
But forward marks, wounds on my breast, and face,
Were meant to thee, O CAESAR, and thy Rome?
And have I this return? did I, for this,
Perform so noble, and so brave defeat,
On SACROVIR? (O JOVE, let it become me
To boast my deeds, when he, whom they concern,
Shall thus forget them.)

AFE. SILIVS, SILIVS,
These are the common customs of thy blood,
When it is high with wine, as now with rage:
This well agrees, with that intemperate vaunt,
Thou lately made at AGRIPPINA'S table,
That when all other of the troops were prone
To fall into rebellion, only yours
Remained in their obedience. You were he,
That saved the empire; which had then been lost,
Had but your legions, there, rebelled, or mutin'd.
Your virtue met, and fronted every peril.
You gave to CAESAR, and to Rome their surety.
Their name, their strength, their spirit, and their state,
Their being was a donatiue from you.

ARR. Well worded, and most like an Orator.

TIB. Is this true, SILIVS?

SIL. Save thy question, CAESAR.
Thy spy, of famous credit, has affirmed it.

ARR. Excellent Roman!

SAB. He does answer stoutly.

SEI. If this be so, there needs no farther cause
Of crime against him.

VAR. What can more impeach
The royal dignity, and state of CAESAR,
Then to be urged with a benefit
He cannot pay?

COT. In this, all CAESAR'S fortune
Is made unequal to the courtesy.

LAT. His means are clean destroyed, that should requite.

GAL. Nothing is great enough for SILIVS merit.

ARR. GALLVS on that side to?

SIL. Come, do not hunt,
And labor so about for circumstance,
To make him guilty, whom you have fore-doom'd:
Take shorter ways, I Will meet your purposes.
The words were mine, and more I now will say:
Since I have done thee that great service, CAESAR,
Thou still have feared me; and, in place of grace,
Returned me hatred: so soon, all best turns,
With doubtful Princes, turn deep injuries
In estimation, when they greater rise,
Then can be answered. Benefits, with you,
Are of no longer pleasure, then you can
With ease restore them; that transcended once,
Your studies are not how to thank, but kill.
It is your nature, to have all men slaves
To you, but you acknowledging to none.
The means that makes your greatness, must not come
In mention of it; if it do, it takes
So much away, you think: and that, which helped,
Shall soonest perish, if it stand in eye,
Where it may front, or but vpbraid the high.

COT. Suffer him speak no more.

VAR. Note but his spirit.

AFE. This shows him in the rest.

LAT. Let him be censured.

SEI. He' has spoke enough to prove him CAESAR'S foe.

COT. His thoughts look through his words.

SEI. A censure.

SIL. Stay,
Stay, most officious Senate, I shall straight
Delude thy fury. SILIVS has not placed
His guards within him, against fortunes spite,
So weakly, but he can escape your gripe
That are but hands of fortune: She her self
When virtue does oppose, must lose her threats.
All that can happen in humanity,
The frown of CAESAR, proud SEIANVS hatred,
Base VARRO'S spleen, and AFERS bloudying tongue,
The Senates servile flattery, and these
Mustred to kill, I Am fortified against;
And can look down upon: they are beneath me.
It is not life whereof I stand enamored:
Nor shall my end make me accuse my fate.
The coward, and the valiant man must fall,
Only the cause, and manner how, discernes them:
Which then are gladdest, when they cost us dearest.
Romans, if any here be in this Senate,
Would know to mock TIBERIUS tyranny,
Look upon SILIVS, and so learn to die.

VAR. O, desperate act!

ARR. An honorable hand!

TIB. Look, is he dead?

SAB. 'Twas nobly struck, and home.

ARR. My thought did prompt him to it. Farewell, SILIVS.
Be famous ever for thy great example.

TIB. We are not pleased, in this sad accident,
That thus has stalled, and abused our mercy,
Intended to preserve thee, noble Roman:
And to prevent thy hopes.

ARR. Excellent wolf!
Now he is full, he howles.

SEI. CAESAR does wrong
His dignity, and safety, thus to mourn
The deserved end of so professed a traitor,
And does, by this his lenity, instruct
Others as factious, to the like offense.

TIB. The confiscation merely of his state
Had been enough.

ARR. O, that was gaped for then?

VAR. Remove the body.

SEI. Let citation
Go out for SOSIA.

GAL. Let her be proscribed.
And for the goods, I think it fit that half
Go to the treasure, half unto the children.

LEP. With leave of CAESAR, I would think, that fourth
Part, which the law does cast on the informers,
Should be enough; the rest go to the children:
Wherein the Prince shall show humanity,
And bounty, not to force them by their want
(Which in their parents trespass they deserved)
To take ill courses.

TIB. It shall please us.

ARR. I,
Out of necessity. This LEPIDVS
Is grave and honest, and I have observed
A moderation still in all his censures.

SAB. And bending to the better -- Stay, who is this?
CREMVTIVS CORDVS? what? is he brought in?

ARR. More blood unto the banquet? Noble CORDVS,
I wish thee good: Be as thy writings, free,
And honest.

TIB. What is he?

SEI. For th'Annal's, CAESAR.

PRAECO, CORDVS, SATRIVS, NATTA. CREMVTIVS CORDus.
COR. Here.

PRAE. SATRIVS SECVNDus,
PINNARIVS NATTA, you are his accusers.

ARR. Two of SEIANVS bloud-hounds, whom he breeds
With humane flesh, to bay at citizens.

AFE. Stand forth before the Senate, and confront him.

SAT. I do accuse thee here, CREMVTIVS CORDVS,
To be a man factious, and dangerous,
A sower of sedition in the state,
A turbulent, and discontented spirit,
Which I will prove from thine own writings, here,
The Annal's thou have published; where thou bit'st
The present age, and with a vipers tooth,
Being a member of it, dare that ill
Which never yet degenerous bastard did
Upon his parent.

NOT. To this, I subscribe;
And, forth a world of more particulars,
Instance in only one: Comparing men,
And times, thou praysest BRUTUS, and affirm'st
That CASSIVS was the last of all the Romans.

COT. How! what are we then?

VAR. What is CAESAR? nothing?

AFE. My lords, this strikes at every Romans private,
In whom reigns gentry, and estate of spirit,
To have a BRUTUS brought in parallel,
A parricide, an enemy of his country,
Ranked, and preferred to any real worth
That Rome now holds. This is most strangely inuectiue.
Most full of spite, and insolent vpbraiding.
Nor is it the time alone is here dispris'd,
But the whole man of time, yea CAESAR'S self
Brought in disualew; and he aimed at most
By oblique glance of his licentious pen.
CAESAR, if CASSIVS were the last of Romans,
Thou have no name.

TIB. Let Us hear him answer. Silence.

COR. So innocent I am of fact, my lords,
As but my words are argued; yet those words
Not reaching either prince, or princes parent:
The which your law of treason comprehends.
BRUTUS, and CASSIVS, I am charged, to have praised:
Whose deeds, when many more, besides my self,
Have writ, not one has mentioned without honor.
Great TITUS LIVIVS, great for eloquence,
And faith, amongst us, in his history,
With so great praises POMPEY did extol,
As often AUGUSTUS called him a POMPEIAN:
Yet this not hurt their friendship. In his book
He often names SCIPIO, AFRANIVS,
Yea, the same CASSIVS, and this BRUTUS too,
As worthi'st men; not thieves, and parricides,
Which notes, upon their fames, are now imposed.
ASINIVS POLLIO'S writings quite throughout
Give them a noble memory; SO MESSALLA
Renowned his general CASSIVS: yet both these
Lived with AUGUSTUS, full of wealth, and honors.
To CICERO'S book, where CATO was heau'd up
Equal with heaven, what else did CAESAR answer,
Being then Dictator, but with a penned oration,
As if before the judges? Do but see
ANTONIUS letters; read but BRUTUS pleadings:
What vile reproach they hold against AUGUSTUS,
False I confess, but with much bitterness.
The Epigram's of BIBACVLVS, and CATVLLVS,
Are read, full stuffed with spite of both the CAESAR'S;
Yet deified JULIUS, and no less AUGUSTUS!
Both bore them, and contemned them: (I not know
Promptly to speak it, whether done with more
Temper, or wisdom) for such obloquies
If they despised be, they dye suppressed,
But, if with rage acknowledged, they are confessed.
The Greeks I slip, whose license not alone,
But also lust did escape unpunished:
Or where some one (by chance) exception took,
He words with words revenged. But, in my work,
What could be aimed more free, or farther of
From the times scandale, then to write of those,
Whom death from grace, or hatred had exempted?
Did I, with BRUTUS, and with CASSIVS,
Armed, and possessed of the PHILIPPI fields,
Incense the people in the civil cause,
With dangerous speeches? or do they, being slain
Seventy years since, as by their images
(Which not the conqueror has defaced) appears,
Retain that guilty memory with writers?
Posterie pays every man his honor.
Nor shall there want, though I condemned am,
That will not only CASSIVS well approve,
And of great BRUTUS honor mindful be,
But that will, also, mention make of me.

ARR. Freely, and nobly spoken.

SAB. With good temper,
I like him, that he is not moved with passion.

ARR. He puts 'hem to their whisper.

TIB. Take him hence,
We shall determine of him at next sitting.

COT. Mean time, give order, that his books be burned,
To the' Aediles.

SEI. You have well advised.

AFE. It fits not such licentious things should live
TO vpbraid the age.

ARR. If the age were good, they might.

LAT. Let'hem be burnt.

GAL. All sought, and burnt, to day.

PRAE. The court is up, Lictors, resume the fasces.

ARRVNTIVS, SABINVS, LEPIDVS. LEt 'hem be burnt! O, how ridiculous
Appears the Senate's brainlesse diligence,
Who think they can, with present power, extinguish
The memory of all succeeding times!
SAB. It Is true when (contrary) the punishment
Of wit, does make the authority increase.
Nor do they ought, that use this cruelty
Of interdiction, and this rage of burning;
But purchase to themselves rebuke, and shame,
And to the writers an eternal name.

LEP. It is an argument the times are sore,
When virtue cannot safely be advanced;
Nor vice reproou'd.

ARR. I, noble LEPIDVS,
AUGUSTUS well foresaw, what we should suffer,
Under TIBERIUS, when he did pronouuce
The Roman race most wretched, that should live
Between so slow jaws, and so long a bruising.
TIBERIUS, SEIANVS. THis business has succeeded well, SEIANVS:
And quite remoou'd all jealousy of practice
Against AGRIPPINA, and our nephews. Now,
We must bethink us how to plant our ingines
For the other pair, SABINVS, and ARRVNTIVS,
And GALLVS too (how ere he flatter us,)
His heart we know.

SEI. Give it some respite, CAESAR.
Time shall mature, and bring to perfect crown,
What we, with so good vultures, have begun:
SABINVS shall be next.

TIB. Rather ARRVNTIVS.

SEI. By any means, preserve him. His frank tongue
Being lent the reins, will take away all thought
Of malice, in your course against the rest.
We must keep him to stalk with.

TIB. Dearest head,
To thy most forunate design I yield it.

SEI. Sir -- IN have been so long trained up in grace,
First, with your father, great AUGUSTUS, since,
With your most happy bounties so familiar,
As I not sooner would commit my hopes
Or wishes to the gods, then to your ears.
Nor have I ever, yet, been covetous
Of ouer-bright, and dazzling honors: rather
To watch, and travail in great CAESAR'S safety,
With the most common soldier.

TIB. It Is confessed.

SEI. The only gain, and which I count most fair
Of all my fortunes, His daughter was betrothed to Claudius, his son.
is that mighty CAESAR
Has thought me worthy his alliance. Hence
Begin my hopes.

TIB. H'mh?

SEI. I have heard, AUGUSTUS
In the bestowing of his daughter, thought
But even of gentlemen of Rome: If so,
(I know not how to hope so great a favor)
But if a husband should be sought for LIVIA,
And I be had in mind, as CAESAR'S friend,
I would but use the glory of the kindred.
It should not make me slothful, or less caring
For CAESAR'S state; it were enough to me
It did confirm, and strengthen my weak house,
Against the-now-vnequall opposition
Of AGRIPPINA; 'and for dear reguard
Unto my children, this I wish: my self
Have no ambition farther, then to end
My days in service of so dear a master.

TIB. We cannot but commend thy piety
Most-lou'd SEIANVS, in acknowledging
Those bounties; which we faintly, such, remember.
But to thy suit. The rest of mortal men,
In all their drifts, and counsels, pursue profit:
Princes, alone, are of a different sort,
Directing their maine actions still to fame.
We therefore will take time to think, and answer.
For LIVIA, she can best, her self, resolve
If she will marry after DRVSVS, or
Continue in the family; besides
She has a mother, and a grandame yet,
Whose nearer counsels she may guide her by:
But I will simply deal. That enmity,
Thou fear in AGRIPPINA, would burn more,
If LIVIAS marriage should (as 'twere in parts)
Divide the imperial house; an emulation
Between the women might break forth; and discord
Ruin the sons, and nephues, on both hands.
What if it cause some present difference?
Thou art not safe, SEIANVS, if thou prove it.
Can thou believe, that LIVIA who was wife
To CAIUS CAESAR, then to DRVSVS, now
Will be contented to grow old with thee,
Borne but a private gentleman of Rome?
And raise thee with her loss, if not her shame?
Or say, that I should wish it, can thou think
The Senate, or the people (who have seen
Her brother, father, and our ancestors,
In highest place of empire) will endure it?
The state thou hold'st already, is in talk;
Men murmr at thy greatness; and the nobles
Stick not, in public, to vpbraid thy climbing
Above our fathers favors, or thy scale:
And dare accuse me, from their hate to thee.
Be wise, dear friend. We would not hide these things
For friendships dear respect. Nor will we stand
Adverse to thine, or LIVIA'S designements.
What we had purposed to thee, in our thought,
And with what near degrees of love to bind thee,
And make thee equal to us, for the present,
We will forbear to speak. Only thus much
Believe our loved SEIANVS, we not know
That height in blood, or honor, which thy virtue,
And mind to us, may not aspire with merit;
And this we will publish, on all watched occasion
The Senate, or the people shall present.

SEI. I am restored, and to my sense again,
Which I had lost in this so blinding suit.
CAESAR has taught me better to refuse,
Then I knew how to ask. How pleases CAESAR
TO embrace my late advice, for leaving Rome?

TIB. We are resolved.

SEI. Here are some motives more
Which I have thought on since, may more confirm.

TIB. Careful SEIANVS! we will straight peruse them:
Go forward in our maine design, and prosper.
SEIANVS. IF those but take, I shall. Dull, heavy CAESAR!
Would thou tell me, thy favors were made crimes?
And that my fortunes were esteemed thy faults?
That thou, for me, were hated? and not think
I would with winged haste prevent that change,
When thou might win all to thy self again,
By forfeiture of me? Did those fond words
Fly swifter from thy lips, then this my brain,
This sparkling forge, created me an armor
TO encounter chance, and thee? Well, read my charms,
And may they lay that hold upon thy senses,
As thou had snuft up hemlocke, or taken down
The juice of poppie, and of mandrakes. Sleep,
Voluptuous CAESAR, and security
Seize on thy stupide powers, and leave them dead
To public cares, awake but to thy lusts.
The strength of which makes thy libidinous soul
Itch to leave Rome; and I have thrust it on:
With blaming of the city business,
The multitude of suites, the confluence
Of suitors, then their importunacies,
The manifold distractions he must suffer,
Besides ill rumors, enuies, and reproaches,
All which, a quiet and retired life,
(Larded with ease, and pleasure) did avoid;
And yet, for any weighty, 'and great affair,
The fittest place to give the soundest counsels.
By this, shall I remove him both from thought,
And knowledge of his own most dear affairs;
Draw all dispatches through my private hands;
Know his designements, and pursue mine own;
Make mine own strengths, by giving suites, and places;
Conferring dignities, and offices:
And these* that hate me now, wanting access
To him, will make their envy none, or less.
For when they see me arbiter of all,
They must observe: or else, with CAESAR fall.

TIBERIUS, SERVUS. TO marry LIVIA? will no less, SEIANVS,
Content thy aims? no lower object? well!
Thou know how thou art wrought into our trust;
Wouen in our design; and think, we must
Now use thee, whatsoere thy proiects are:
It Is true. But yet with caution, and fit care.
And, now we better think -- who is there, within?
SER. CAESAR?

TIB. To leave our journey off, were sin
Against our decreed delights; and would appear
Doubt: or (what less becomes a prince) low fear.
Yet, doubt has law, and fears have their excuse,
Where princes states plead necessary use;
As ours does now: more in SEIANVS pride,
Then all fell AGRIPPINA'S hates beside.
Those are the dreadful enemies, we raise
With favors, and make dangerous, with praise;
The injured by us may have will alike,
But it is the favorite has the power, to strike:
And fury ever boyles more high, and strong,
Heat'with ambition, then revenge of wrong.
It Is then a part of supreme skill, to grace
No man too much; but hold a certain space
Between the ascenders rise, and thine own flat,
Lest, when all rounds be reached, his aim be that.
It Is thought -- IS MACRO in the palace? See:
If not go, seek him, to come to us -- He
Must be the organ, we must work by now;
Though none less apt for trust: Need does allow
What choice would not. IN have heard, that aconite
Being timely taken, has a healing might
Against the scorpions stroke; the proof we will give:
That, while two poisons wrestle, we may live.
He has a spirit too working, to be used
But to the encounter of his like; excused
Are wiser sou'raignes then, that raise one ill
Against another, and both safely kill:
The prince, that ^eeds great natures, they will sway him;
Who nourishes a lion, must obey him.
TIBERIUS, MACRO. MAcro, we sent for you.

MAC. I heard so, CAESAR.

TIB. (Leave us awhile.) When you shall know, good MACRO,
The causes of our sending, and the ends;
You then will harken nearer: and be pleased
You stand so high, both in our choice, and trust.

MAC. The humblest place in CAESAR'S choice, or trust,
May make glad MACRO proud; without ambition:
Save to do CAESAR service.

TIB. Leave our courtings.
We are in purpose, MACRO, to depart
The city for a time, and see Campania;
Not for our pleasures, but to dedicate
A pair of temples, one, to IVPITER
At Capua, the other at Nola, to AUGUSTUS:
In which great work, perhaps, our stay will be
Beyond our will produced. Now, since we are
Not ignorant what danger may be borne
Out of our shortest absence, in a state
So subject unto envy, and embroild
With hate, and faction; we have thought on thee,
(Amongst a field of Romans,) worthiest MACRO,
To be our eye, and ear, to keep strict watch
On AGRIPPINA, NERO, DRVSVS, I,
And on SEIANVS: Not, that we distrust
His loyalty, or do repent one grace,
Of all that heap, we have conferd on him.
(For that were to disparage our election,
And call that judgment now in doubt, which then
Seemed as vnquestion'd as an oracle,)
But, greatness has his cankers. Worms, and moaths
Breed out of too fit matter, in the things
Which after they consume, transferring quite
The substance of their makers, int'themselues.
MACRO is sharp, and apprehends. Besides,
I know him subtle, close, wise, and wel-read
In man, and his large nature. He has studied
Affections, passions, knows their springs, their ends,
Which way, and whether they will work: it is proof
Enough, of his great merit, that we trust him.
Then, to a point; (because our conference
Cannot be long without suspicion)
Here, MACRO, we assign thee, both to spy,
Inform, and chastise; think, and use thy means,
Thy ministers, what, where, on whom thou will;
Explore, plot, practice: All thou do in this,
Shall be, as if the Senate, or the Laws
Had given it privilege, and thou thence styled
The sauier both of CAESAR, and of Rome.
We will not take thy answer, but in act:
Whereto, as thou proceed'st, we hope to hear
By trusted messengers. If It be inquired,
Wherefore we called you, say, you have in charge
To see our chariots ready, and our horse:
Be still our loved, and (shortly) honored MACRO.
MACRO. I Will not ask, why CAESAR bids do this:
But joy, that he bids me. It is the bliss
Of courts, to be employed; no matter, how:
A princes power makes all his actions virtue.
We, whom he works by, are dumb instruments,
To do, but not enquire: His great intents
Are to be served, not searched. Yet, as that bow
Is most in hand, whose owner best does know
T'affect his aims, so let that statesman hope
Most use, most price, can hit his princes scope.
Nor must he look at what, or whom to strike,
But lose at all; each mark must be alike.
Were it to plot against the fame, the life
Of one, with whom I twined; remove a wife
From my warm side, as loved, as is the air;
Practice away each parent; draw mine heir
In compass, though but one; work all my kin
To swift perdition; leave no vntrain'd engine,
For friendship, or for innocence; nay, make
The gods all guilty: I would undertake
This, being imposed me, both with gain, and ease.
The way to rise, is to obey, and please.
He that will thrive in state, he must neglect
The trodden paths, that truth and right respect;
And prove new, wilder ways: for virtue, there,
Is not that narrow thing, she is elsewhere.
Men's fortune there is virtue; reason, their will:
Their license, law; and their observance, skill.
Occasion, is their foil; conscience, their stain;
Profit, their luster: and what else is, vain.
If then it be the lust of CAESAR'S power,
To Have raised SEIANVS up, and in an hour
O're-turne him, tumbling, down, from height of all;
We are his ready engine: and his fall
May be our rise. It is no uncouth thing
To see fresh buildings from old ruins spring.

CHORUS -- Of Musicians. Act IIII.
GALLVS, AGRIPPINA, NERO, DRVSVS, CALIGVLA.
YOu must have patience, royal AGRIPPINA.

AGR. I must have vengeance, first: and that were nectar
Unto my famished spirits. O, my fortune,
Let it be sudden thou prepar'st against me;
Strike all my powers of understanding blind,
And ignorant of destiny to come:
Let me not fear, that cannot hope.

GAL. Dear Princess,
These tyrannies, on your self, are worse then CAESAR'S.

AGR. Is this the happiness of being borne great?
Still to be aimed at? still to be suspected?
To live the subject of all iealousies?
At least the color made, if not the ground
To every painted danger? who would not
Choose once to fall, then thus to hang for ever?

GAL. You might be safe, if you would --

AGR. What, my GALLVS?
Be lewd SEIANVS strumpet? Or the baud
To CAESAR'S lusts, he now is gone to practice?
Not these are safe, where nothing is. Your self,
While thus you stand but by me, are not safe.
Was SILIVS safe? or the good SOSIA safe?
Or was my niece, dear CLAVDIA PVLCHRA safe?
Or innocent FVRNIVS? They, that latest have
(By being made guilty) added reputation
To AFERS eloquence? O, foolish friends,
Could not so fresh example warn your loves,
But you must buy my favors, with that loss
Unto your selves: and, when you might perceive
That CAESAR'S cause of raging must forsake him,
Before his will? Away, good GALLVS, leave me.
Here to be seen, is danger; to speak, treason:
To do me least observance, is called faction.
You are unhappy in me, and I in all.
Where are my sons? NERO? and DRVSVS? We
Are they, be shot at; Let us fall apart:
Not, in our ruins, sepulcher our friends.
Or shall we do some action, like offense,
To mock their studies, that would make us faulty?
And frustrate practice, by preventing it?
The danger's like: for, what they can contriue,
They will make good. No innocence is safe,
When power contests. Nor can they trespass more,
Whose only being was all crime, before.

NER. You hear, SEIANVS is come back from CAESAR?

GAL. No. How? Disgraced?

DRV. More graced now, then ever.

GAL. By what mischance?

CALL. A fortune, like enough
Once to be bad.

DRV. But turned too good, to both.

GAL. What was it?

NER. TIBERIUS sitting at his meat,
In a farm house, they call Spelunca, sited
By the seaside, among the Fundane hills,
Within a natural cave, part of the grot
(About the entry) fell, and ouer-whelm'd
Some of the wayters; others ran away:
Only SEIANVS, with his knees, hands, face,
Ore-hanging CAESAR, did oppose himself
To the remaining ruins, and was found
In that so laboring posture, by the soldiers
That came to succor him. With which adventure,
He has so sixth himself in CAESAR'S trust,
As thunder cannot move him, and is come
With all the height of CAESAR'S praise, to Rome.

AGR. And power, to turn those ruins all on us;
And bury whole posterities beneath them.
NERO, and DRVSVS, and CALIGVLA,
Your places are the next, and therefore most
In their offense. Think on your birth, and blood,
Awake your spirits, meet their violence,
It Is princely, when a tyran does oppose;
And is a fortune sent to exercise
Your virtue, as the wind does try strong trees:
Who by vexation grow more sound, and firm.
After your fathers fall, and uncles fate,
What can you hope, but all the change of stroke
That force, or slight can give? then stand upright;
And though you do not act, yet suffer nobly:
Be worthy of my womb, and take strong cheer;
What we do know will come, we should not fear.
MACRO. Returned so soon? renewed in trust, and grace?
Is CAESAR then so weak? or has the place
But wrought this alteration, with the air;
And he, on next remove, will all repair?
MACRO, thou art engaged: and what before
Was public; now, must be thy private, more.
The weal of CAESAR, fitness did imply;
But thine own fate confers necessity
On thy employment: and the thoughts borne nearest
Unto our selves, move swiftest still, and dearest.
If he recover, thou art lost: yea, all
The weight of preparation to his fall
Will turn on thee, and crush thee. Therefore, strike
Before he settle, to prevent the like
Upon thy self. He does his vantage know,
That makes it home, and gives the foremost blow.

LATIARIS, RUFUS, OPSIVS. IT is a service, great SEIANVS will
See well requited, and accept of nobly.
Here place your selves, between the roof, and seeling,
And when I bring him to his words of danger,
Reveal your selves, and take him.
RVF. Is he come?

LAT. I Will now go fetch him.

OPS. With good speed. I long
To merit from the state, in such an action.

RVF. I hope, it will obtain the Consul-ship
For one of us.

OPS. We cannot think of less,
To bring in one, so dangerous as SABINVS.

RVF. He was a follower of GERMANICVS,
And still is an obseruer of his wife,
And children, though they be declined in grace;
A daily visitant, keeps them company
In private, and in public; and is noted
To be the only client, of the house:
Pray JOVE, he will be free to LATIARIS.

OPS. H'is allied to him, and does trust him well.

RVF. And he will requite his trust?

OPS. To do an office
So grateful to the state, I know no man
But would strain nearer bands, then kindred --

RVF. List,
I hear them come.

OPS. Shift to our holes, with silence.

LATIARIS, SABINVS. IT is a noble constancy you show
To this afflicted house: that not like others,
(The friends of season) you do follow fortune,
And in the winter of their fate, forsake
The place, whose glories warmed you. You are just,
And worthy such a princely patrones love,
As was the worlds-renown'd GERMANICVS:
Whose ample merit when I call to thought,
And see his wife and issue, objects made
To so much envy, jealousy, and hate,
It makes me ready to accuse the gods
Of negligence, as men of tyranny.
SAB. They must be patient, so must we.

LAT. O JOVE.
What will become of us, or of the times,
When, to be high, or noble, are made crimes?
When land, and treasure are most dangerous faults?

SAB. Nay, when our table, yea our bed assaults
Our peace, and safety? when our writings are,
By any envious instruments (that dare
Apply them to the guilty) made to speak
What they will have, to fit their tyrannous wreake?
When ignorance is scarcely innocence:
And knowledge made a capital offense?
When not so much, but the bare empty shade
Of liberty, is reft us? and we made,
The prey to greedy Vultures, and vile spies,
That first transfixe us with their murdering eyes?

LAT. Me thinks, the Genius of the Roman race
Should not be so extinct, but that bright flame
Of liberty might be revived again,
(Which no good man but with his life, should lose)
And we not sit like spent, and patient fools
Still puffing in the dark, at one poor coal,
Held on by hope, till the last spark is out.
The cause is public, and the honor, name,
The immortality of every soul
That is not bastard, or a slave in Rome,
Therein concerned: Whereto, if men would change
The weari'd arm, and for the weighty shield
So long sustained, employ the facile sword,
We might have some assurance of our vows.
This asses fortitude does tire us all.
It must be active valor must redeem
Our loss, or none. The rock, and our hard steel
Should meet, t'enforce those glorious fires again,
Whose splendour cheered the world, and heat gave life
No less then does the sunne's.

SAB. 'Twere better stay,
In lasting darkness, and despair of day.
No ill should force the subject undertake
Against the sovereign; more then hell should make
The gods do wrong. A good man should, and must
Sit rather down with loss, then rise unjust.
Though, when the Romans first did yield themselves
To one man's power, they did not mean their lives,
Their fortunes, and their liberties, should be
His absolute spoil, as purchased by the sword.

LAT. Why we are worse, if to be slaves, and bond
To CAESAR'S slave, be such, the proud SEIANVS?
He that is all, does all, gives CAESAR leave
To hide his vlcerous, and anointed face,
With his bald crown at Rhodes, while he here stalks
Upon the heads of Romans, and their Princes,
Familiarly to Empire.

SAB. Now you touch
A point indeed, wherein he shows his art,
As well as power.

LAT. And villainy in both.
Do you observe where LIVIA lodges? How
DRVSVS came dead? What men have been cut off?

SAB. Yes, those are things removed: I nearer looked,
Into his later practice, where he stands
Declared a master in his mystery.
First, ere TIBERIUS went, he wrought his fear,
To think that AGRIPPINA sought his death.
Then put those doubts in her; sent her often word,
Under the show of friendship, to beware
Of CAESAR, for he laid to poison her:
Drove them to frowns, to mutual iealousies,
Which, now, in visible hatred are burst out.
Since, he has had his hired instruments
To work on NERO, and to heave him up;
To tell him CAESAR'S old; That all the people,
Yea, all the army have their eyes on him;
That both do long to have him undertake
Something of worth, to give the world a hope;
Bids him to court their grace; the easy youth,
Perhaps, gives ear, which straight he writes to CAESAR;
And with this comment: See yon'd dangerous boy,
Note but the practice of the mother, there,
She Is tying him, for purposes at hand,
With men of sword. Here Is CAESAR put in fright
Against son, and mother. Yet, he leaves not thus.
The second brother DRVSVS (a fierce nature,
And fitter for his snares, because ambitious,
And full of envy) him he clasp's, and hugs,
Poisons with praise, tells him what hearts he wears,
How bright he stands in popular expectance;
That Rome does suffer with him, in the wrong
His mother does him, by preferring NERO:
Thus sets he them asunder, each against other,
Proiects the course, that serves him to condemn,
Keeps in opinion of a friend to all,
And all drives on to ruin.

LAT. CAESAR sleeps,
And nods at this?

SAB. Would he might ever sleep,
Bogg'd in his filthy lusts.

OPS. Treason to CAESAR.

RVF. Lay hands upon the traitor, LATIARIS,
Or take the name thy self.

LAT. I am for CAESAR.

SAB. Am I then caught?

RVF. How think you, sir? you are.

SAB. Spies of this head! so white! so full of years!
Well, my most reverend monsters, you may live
To see your selves thus snared.

OPS. Away with him.

LAT. Hale him away.

RVF. To be a spy for traitors,
Is honorable vigilance.

SAB. You do well,
My most officious instruments of state;
Men of all uses: Drag me hence, away.
The year is well begun, and I fall fit,
To be an offering to SEIANVS. Go.

OPS. Cover him with his garments, hide his face.

SAB. It shall not need. Forbear your rude assault,
The fault's not shameful villainy makes a fault.

MACRO, CALIGVLA. SIr, but observe how thick your dangers meet
In his clear drifts! Your mother, and your brothers,
Now cited to the Senate! Their friend, GALLVS,
Feasted to day by CAESAR, since committed!
SABINVS, here we met, hurryed to fetters!
The Senators all struck with fear, and silence,
Save those, whose hopes depend not on good means,
But force their private prey, from public spoil!
And you must know, if here you stay, your state
Is sure to be the subject of his hate,
As now the object.
CALL. What would you advise me?

MAC. To go for Capreae presently: and there
Give up your self, entirely, to your uncle.
Tell CAESAR (since your mother is accused
To fly for succors to AUGUSTUS statue,
And to the army, with your brethren) you
Have rather chose, to place your aides in him,
Then live suspected; or in hourly fear
To be thrust out, by bold SEIANV'S plots:
Which, you shall confidently urge, to be
Most full of peril to the state, and CAESAR,
As being laid to his peculiar ends,
And not to be let run, with common safety.
All which (upon the second) I Will make plain,
So both shall love, and trust with CAESAR gain.

CALL. Away then, let us prepare us for our journey.
ARRVNTIVS. STill, do thou suffer heaven? will no flame,
No heat of sin make thy just wrath to boil
In thy distemp'red bosom, and ore-flow
The pitchy blazes of impiety,
Kindled beneath thy throne? Still can thou sleep,
Patient, while vice does make an antique face
At thy drad power, and blow dust, and smoke
Into thy nostrils? JOVE, will nothing wake thee?
Must vile SEIANVS pull thee by the beard,
Ere thou will open thy black-lidded eye,
And look him dead? Well! Snore on, dreaming gods:
And let this last of that proud Giant-race,
Heave mountain upon mountain, against your state --
Be good unto me, fortune, and you powers,
Whom I, expostulating, have profaned;
I see (what is equal with a prodigy)
A great, a noble Roman, and an honest,
Live an old man! O, MARCUS LEPIDVS,
When is our turn to bleed? Thy self, and I
(Without our boast) are a'most all the few
Left, to be honest, in these impious times.
LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS. WHat we are left to be, we will be, LUCIUS,
Though tyranny did stare, as wide as death,
To fright us from it.

ARR. 'T has so, on SABINVS.

LEP. I saw him now drawn from the Gemonies,
And (what increased the direness of the fact)
His faithful dog (vpbraiding all us Romans)
Never forsook the corp's, but, seeing it thrown
Into the stream, leaped in, and drowned with it.

ARR. O act! to be enui'd him, of us men!
We are the next, the hook lays hold on, MARCUS*
What are thy arts (good patriot, teach them me)
That have preserved thy hairs, to this white die,
And kept so reverend, and so dear a head,
Safe, on his comely shoulders?

LEP. Arts, ARRVNTIVS?
None, but the plain, and passive fortitude,
To suffer, and be silent; never stretch
These arms, against the torrent; live at home,
With my own thoughts, and innocence about me,
Not tempting the wolves jaws: these are my arts.

ARR. I would begin to study 'hem, if I thought
They would secure me. May I pray to JOVE,
In secret, and be safe? I, or aloud?
With open wishes? so I do not mention
TIBERIUS, or SEIANVS? yes, I must,
If I speak out. It Is hard, that. May I think,
And not be rackt? What danger is it to dream?
Talk in ones sleep? or cough? who knows the law?
May I shake my head, without a comment? say
It raines, or it holds up, and not be thrown
Upon the Gemonies? These now are things,
Whereon men's fortune, yea their fate depends.
Nothing has privilege against the violent ear.
No place, no day, no hour (we see) is free.
(Not our religious, and most sacred times)
From some one kind of cruelty: all matter,
Nay all occasion pleases. Mad-mens rage,
The idleness of drunkards, women's nothing,
Iesters simplicity, all, all is good
That can be caught at. Nor is now the event
Of any person, or for any crime,
To be expected; for, it is always one:
Death, with some little difference of place,
Or time -- what is this? Prince NERO? guarded?
LACO, NERO, LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS. ON, Lictors, keep your way: My lords,
forbear.
On pain of CAESAR'S wrath, no man attempt
Speech with the prisoner.

NER. Noble friends, be safe:
To loose your selves for words, were as vain hazard,
As unto me small comfort: Fare you well.
Would all Rome's sufferings in my fate did dwell.

LAC. Lictors, away.

LEP. Where goes he, LACO?

LAC. Sir,
His banished into Pontia, by the Senate.

ARR. Do' I see? and hear? and feel? May I trust sense?
Or does my phant'sie form it?

LEP. Where Is his brother?

LAC. DRVSVS is prisoner in the palace.

ARR. Ha?
I smell it now: it is rank. Where Is AGRIPPINA?

LAC. The princess is confined, to Pandataria.

ARR. Bolts, VULCAN; bolts, for JOVE! PHOEBVS, thy bow;
Stern MARS, thy sword; and blue-ey'd Maid, thy spear;
Thy club, ALCIDES: all the armorie
Of heaven is too little! -- Ha? to guard
The gods, I meant. Fine, rare dispatch! This same
Was swiftly borne! confined? imprisoned? banished?
Most tripartite! The cause, sir?

LAC. Treason.

ARR. O?
The complement of all accusings? that
Will hit, when all else fails.

LEP. This turn is strange!
But yesterday, the people would not hear
Far less objected, but cried, CAESAR'S letters
Were false, and forged; that all these plots were malice:
And that the ruin of the Princes house
Was practiced against his knowledge. Where are now
Their voices? now, that they behold his heirs
Locked up, disgraced, led into exile?

ARR. Hushed.
Drowned in their bellies. Wild SEIANVS breath
Has, like a whirlwind, scattered that poor dust,
He turns to Laco, and the rest. With this rude blast. We Will talk no
treason, sir,
If that be it you stand for? Fare you well.
We have no need of horse-leeches. Good spy,
Now you are spied, be gone.

LEP. I fear, you wrong him.
He has the voice to be an honest Roman.

ARR. And trusted to this office? LEPIDVS,
I Would sooner trust Greeke-SINON, then a man
Our state employes. He Is gone: and being gone,
I dare tell you (whom I dare better trust)
That our night-ey'd TIBERIUS does not see
His minions drifts; or, if he do, h'is not
So errant subtle, as we fools do take him:
To breed a mungrell up, in his own house,
With his own blood, and (if the good gods please)
At his own throat, flesh him, to take a leap.
I do not beg it, heaven: but, if the fates
Grant it these eyes, they must not wink.

LEP. They must
Not see it, LUCIUS.

ARR. Who should let 'hem?

LEP. Zeal,
And duty; with the thought, he is our Prince.

ARR. He is our monster: forfeited to vice
So far, as no racked virtue can redeem him.
His lothed person fouler then all crimes:
An Emperor, only in his lusts. Retired
(From all regard of his own fame, or Rome's)
Into an obscure Island; where he lives
(Acting his tragedies with a comic face)
Amid'st his rout of Chaldee's: spending hours,
Days, weeks, and months, in the unkind abuse
Of grave astrology, to the bane of men,
Casting the scope of men's natiuities,
And having found ought worthy in their fortune,
Kill, or precipitate them in the sea,
And boast, he can mock fate. Nay, muse not: these
Are far from ends of evil, scarce degrees.
He has his slaughterhouse, at Capreae;
Where he does study murder, as an art:
And they are dearest in his grace, that can
Devise the deepest tortures. Thither, too,
He has his boys, and beauteous girls taken up,
Out of our noblest houses, the best formed,
Best nurtured, and most modest: what is their good
Serves to provoke his bad. Some are allured,
Some threatened; others (by their friends detained)
Are ravished hence, like captives, and, in sight
Of their most grieved parents, dealt away
Unto his spintries, sellaries, and slaves,
Masters of strange, and new-commented lusts,
For which wise nature has not left a name.
To this (what most strikes us, and bleeding Rome,)
He is, with all his craft, become the ward
To his own vassal, a stale catamite:
Whom he (upon our low, and suffering necks)
Has raised, from excrement, to side the gods,
And have his proper sacrifice in Rome:
Which JOVE beholds, and yet will sooner riue
A senseless oak with thunder, then his trunck.

LACO, POMPONIVS, MINVTIVS, TERENTIVS. To them. THese letters make men
doubtful what t'expect,
Whether his coming, or his death.

POM. Troth, both:
And which comes soonest, thank the gods for.

(ARR. List,
Their talk is CAESAR, I would hear all voices.)

MIN. One day, he is well; and will return to Rome:
The next day, sick; and knows not when to hope it.

LAC. True, and to day, one of SEIANVS friends
Honored by special writ; and on the morrow
Another punished --

POM. By more special writ.

MIN. This man receives his praises of SEIANVS,
A second, but slight mention; a third, none:
A fourth, rebukes. And thus he leaves the Senate
Divided, and suspended, all uncertain.

LAC. These forked tricks, I understand 'hem not,
Would he would tell us whom he loves, or hates,
That we might follow, without fear, or doubt.

(ARR. Good HELIOTROPE! Is this your honest man?
Let him be yours so still. He is my knave.)

POM. I cannot tell, SEIANVS still goes on,
And mounts, we see: New statues are advanced,
Fresh leaves of titles, large inscriptions read,
His fortune sworn by, himself new gone out
CAESAR'S colleague, in the fifth Consulship,
More altars smoke to him, then all the gods:
What would we more?

(ARR. That the dear smoke would choke him,
That would I more.

LEP. Peace, good ARRVNTIVS.)

LAC. But there are letters come (they say) even now,
Which do forbid that last.

MIN. Do you hear so?

LAC. Yes.

POM. By POLLVX, that is the worst.

(ARR. By HERCULES, best.)

MIN. I did not like the sign, when REGVLVS,
(Whom all we know no friend unto SEIANVS)
Did, by TIBERIUS so precise command,
Succeed a fellow in the Consulship:
It boded somewhat.

POM. Not a mote. His partner,
FVLCINIVS TRIO, is his own, and sure.
They whisper with Terentius. Here comes TERENTIVS. He can give us more.

LEP. I Will never believe, but CAESAR has some sent
Of bold SEIANVS footing. These cross points
Of varying letters, and opposing Consuls,
Mingling his honors, and his punishments,
Fayning now ill, now well, raising SEIANVS,
And then depressing him, (as now of late
In all reports we have it) cannot be
Empty of practice: It Is TIBERIUS art.
For (having found his favorite grown too great,
And, with his greatness, strong; that all the soldiers
Are, with their leaders, made at his devotion;
That almost all the Senate are his creatures,
Or hold on him their maine dependances,
Either for benefit, or hope, or fear;
And that himself has lost much of his own,
By parting unto him; and by the increase
Of his rank lusts, and rages, quite disarmed
Himself of love, or other public means,
To dare an open contestation)
His subtilty has chose this doubling line,
To hold him even in: not so to fear him,
As wholly put him out, and yet give check
Unto his farther boldness. In mean time,
By his employments, makes him odious
Unto the staggering rout, whose aid (in fine)
He hopes to use, as sure, who (when they sway)
Bear down, ore-turne all objects in their way.

ARR. You may be a LINCEVS, LEPIDVS: yet, I
See no such cause, but that a politic tyranne
(who can so well disguise it) should have taken
A nearer way: feigned honest, and come home
To cut his throat, by Law.

LEP. I, but his fear
Would never be masqu'd, all-be his vices were.

POM. His lordship then is still in grace?

TER. Assure you,
Never in more, either of grace, or power.

POM. The gods are wise, and just.

ARR. (The fiends they are.
To suffer thee belie 'hem?)

TER. I have here
His last, and present letters, where he writes him
The Partner of his cares, and his SEIANVS --

LAC. But is that true, it it is prohibited,
To sacrifice unto him?

TER. Some such thing
CAESAR makes scruple of, but forbids it not;
No more then to himself: says, he could wish
It were forborne to all.

LAC. Is it no other?

TER. No other, on my trust. For your more surety,
Here is that letter too.

ARR. (How easily,
Do wretched men believe, what they would have!
Looks this like plot?

LEP. Noble ARRVNTIVS, stay.)

LAC. He names him here without his titles.

LEP. (Note.

ARR. Yes, and come of your notable fool. I will.)

LAC. No other, then SEIANVS.

POM. That Is but haste
In him that writes. Here he gives large amends.

MAR. And with his own hand written?

POM. Yes.

LAC. Indeed?

TER. Believe it, gentlemen, SEIANVS breast
Never received more full contentments in,
Then at this present.

POM. Takes he well th'escape
Of young CALIGVLA, with MACRO?

TER. Faith,
At the first air, it somewhat troubled him.

LEP. (Observe you?

ARR. Nothing. Riddles. TIll I see
SEIANVS struck, no sound thereof strikes me.)

POM. I like it not. I muse h' would not attempt
Somewhat against him in the Consul-ship,
Seeing the people 'ginne to favor him.

TER. He does repent it, now; but h' has employed
PAGONIANVS after him: and he holds
That correspondence, there, with all that are
Near about CAESAR, as no thought can pass
Without his knowledge, thence, in act to front him.

POM. I gratulate the news.

MAC. But, how comes MACRO
So in trust, and favor, with CALIGVLA?

POM. O sir, he has a wife; and the young Prince
An appetite: he can look up, and spy
Flies in the roof, when there are fleas in bed;
And has a learned nose to'assure his sleeps.
Who, to be favored of the rising sun,
Would not lend little of his waning moon?
'T is the saf'st ambition. Noble TERENTIVS.

TER. The night grows fast upon us. At your service.

CHORUS -- Of Musicians. Act V.
SEIANVS. SWell, swell, my joys: and faint not to declare
Your selves, as ample, as your causes are.
I did not live, till now; this my first hour:
Wherein I see my thoughts reached by my power.
But this, and gripe my wishes. Great, and high,
The world knows only two, that is Rome, and I.
My roof receives me not; it is air I tread:
And, at each step, I feel my advanced head
Knock out a star in heaven! Reared to this height,
All my desires seem modest, poor, and slight,
That did before sound impudent: It Is place,
Not blood, discernes the noble, and the base.
Is there not something more, then to be CAESAR?
Must we rest there? It yrkes, to have come so far,
To be so near a stay. CALIGVLA,
Would thou stood'st stiff, and many, in our way.
Winds lose their strength, when they do empty fly,
Vn-met of woods or buildings; great fires die
That want their matter to with-stand them: so,
It is our grief, and will be' our loss, to know
Our power shall want opposites; unless
The gods, by mixing in the cause, would bless
Our fortune, with their conquest. That were worth
SEIANVS strife: durst fates but bring it forth.

TERENTIVS, SEIANVS. SAfety, to great SEIANVS.
SEI. Now, TERENTIVS?

TER. Hears not my lord the wonder?

SEI. Speak it, no.

TER. I meet it violent in the peoples mouths,
Who run, in routs, to POMPEY'S theater,
To view your statue: which, they say, sends forth
A smoke, as from a furnace, black, and dreadful.

SEI. Some traitor has put fire in: (you, go see.)
And let the head be taken off, to look
What it is -- Some slave has practiced an imposture,
To stir the people. How now? why return you?

SATRIVS, NATTA. To them. THe head, my lord, already is taken off,
I saw it: and, at opening, there leap't out
A great, and monstrous serpent!

SEI. Monstrous! why?
Had it a beard? and horns? no heart? a tongue
Forked as flattery? looked it of the hue,
To such as live in great men's bosoms? was
The spirit of it MACRO'S?

NOT. May it please
The most divine SEIANVS, in my days,
(And by his sacred fortune, I affirm it)
I have not seen a more extended, grown,
Foul, spotted, venomous, ugly --

SEI. O, the fates!
What a wild muster's here of attributes,
To Express a worm, a snake?

TER. But how that should
Come there, my lord!

SEI. What! and you too, TERENTIVS?
I think you mean to make 't a prodigy
In your reporting?

TER. Can the wise SEIANVS
Think heaven has meant it less?

SEI. O, superstition!
Why, then the falling of our bed, that brake
This morning, burd'ned with the populous weight
Of our expecting clients, to salute us;
Or running of the cat, betwixt our legs,
As we set forth unto the capitol,
Were prodigies.

TER. I think them ominous!
And, would they had not happened. As, to day,
The fate of some your servants! who, declining
Their way, not able, for the throng, to follow,
Slip't down the Gemonies, and brake their necks!
Besides, in taking your last augurie,
No prosperous bird appeared, but croking ravens
Flag'd up and down: and from the sacrifice
Flew to the prison, where they sat, all night,
Beating the air with their obstreperous beakes!
I dare not counsel, but I could entreat
That great SEIANVS would attempt the gods,
Once more, with sacrifice.

SEI. What excellent fools
Religion makes of men? Believes TERENTIVS,
(If these were dangers, as I shame to think them)
The gods could change the certain course of fate?
Or, if they could, they would (now, in a moment)
For a beeues fat, or less, be bribed t'inuert
Those long decrees? Then think the gods, like flies,
Are to be taken with the steame of flesh,
Or blood, diffused about their altars: think
Their power as cheap, as I esteem it small.
Of all the throng, that fill the Olympian hall,
And (without pity) lade poor ATLAS back,
I know not that one deity, but Fortune;
To whom, I would throw up, in begging smoke,
One grane of incense: or whose ear I Would buy
With thus much oil. Her, I, indeed, adore;
And keep her grateful image in my house,
Sometimes belonging to a Roman king,
But, now called mine, as by the better style:
To her, I care not, if (for satisfying
Your scrupulous phant'sies) I go offer. Bid
Our priest prepare us honny, milk, and poppy,
His masculine odours, and night-vestments: say,
Our rites are instant, which performed, you will see
How vain, and worthy laughter, your fears be.

COTTA, POMPONIVS. POMPONIVS! whither in such speed?
POM. I go
To give my lord SEIANVS notice --

COT. What?

POM. Of MACRO.

COT. Is he come?

POM. Entr'd but now
The house of REGVLVS.

COT. The opposite Consul?

POM. Some half hour since.

COT. And, by night too! stay, sir;
I Will bear you company.

POM. Along, then --

MACRO, REGVLVS, LACO. It Is CAESAR'S will, to have a frequent Senate.
And therefore must your edict lay deep mulct
On such, as shall be absent.
REG. So it does.
Bear it my fellow Consul to adscribe.

MAC. And tell him it must early be proclaimed;
The place, APOLLO 'S temple.

REG. That Is remembered.

MAC. And at what hour?

REG. Yes.

MAC. You do forget
To send one for the Provost of the watch?

REG. I have not: here he comes.

MAC. GRACINVS LACO,
You'are a friend most welcome: by, and by,
I Will speak with you. (You must procure this list
Of the Praetorian cohorts, with the names
Of the Centurions, and their Tribunes.

REG. I.)

MAC. I bring you letters, and a health from CAESAR --

LAC. Sir, both come well.

MAC. (And hear you, with your note,
Which are the eminent men, and most of action.

REG. The Consul goes out. That shall be done you too.)

MAC. Most worthy LACO,
CAESAR salutes you. ( Consul! death, and furies!
Gone now?) the argument will please you, sir.
(Hough! REGVLVS? The anger of the gods
Follow his diligent legs, and ouer'take 'hem,
Returns: In likeness of the gout.) O, good my lord,
We lackt you present; I would pray you send
Another to FVLCINIVS TRIO, straight,
To tell him, you will come, and speak with him:
(The matter we will devise) to stay him, there,
While I, with LACO, do suruay the watch.
Goes out again. What are your strengths, GRACINVS?

LAC. Seven cohorts.

MAC. You see, what CAESAR writes: and ( -- gone again?
H'has sure a vein of mercury in his feet)
Knew you, what store of the praetorian soldiers
SEIANVS holds, about him, for his guard?

LAC. I cannot the just number: but, I think,
Three centuries.

MAC. Three? good.

LAC. At most, not four.

MAC. And who be those Centurions?

LAC. That the Consul
Can best deliver you.

MAC. (When h'is away:
Spite, on his nimble industry.) GRACINVS,
You find what place you hold, there, in the trust
Of royal CAESAR?

LAC. I, and I am --

MAC. Sir,
The honors, there proposed, are but beginnings
Of his great favors.

LAC. They are more --

MAC. I heard him
When he did study, what to add --

LAC. My life,
And all I hold --

MAC. You were his own first choice;
Which does confirm as much, as you can speak:
And will (if we succeed) make more -- Your guardes
Are seven cohorts, you say?

LAC. Yes.

MAC. Those we must
Hold still in readiness, and vndischarg'd.

LAC. I understand so much. But how it can --

MAC. Be done without suspicion, you will object?

REG. What Is that?

LAC. Returns. The keeping of the watch in arms,
When morning comes.

MAC. The Senate shall be met, and set
So early, in the temple, as all mark
Of that will be avoided.

REG. If we need,
We have commission, to possess the palace,
Enlarge prince DRVSVS, and make him our chief.

MAC. (That secret would have burned his reverend mouth,
Had he not spit it out, now:) by the gods,
You carry things too -- let me borrow'a man,
Or two, to bear these -- That of freeing DRVSVS,
CAESAR proiected as the last, and utmost;
Not else to be remembered.

REG. Here are servants.

MAC. These to ARRVNTIVS, these to LEPIDVS,
This bear to COTTA, this to LATIARIS.
If they demand you'of me: say, I have taken
Fresh horse, and am departed. You (my lord)
To your colleague, and be you sure, to hold him
With long narration, of the new fresh favors,
Meant to SEIANVS, his great patron; I,
With trusted LACO, here, are for the guards:
Then, to divide. For, night has many eyes,
Whereof, though most do sleep, yet some are spies.

PRAECONES, FLAMEN, MINISTRI, SEIANVS, TERENTIVS, SATRIVS, etc. BE all profane
far hence; Fly, fly far off:
Be absent far. Far hence be all profane.
FLA. Tub. Tib. Sound, while the Flamen washes. We have been faulty, but
repent us now,
And bring pure hands, pure vestments, and pure minds.

MIN. Pure vessels.

MIN. And pure offerings.

MIN. Garlands pure.

FLA. Bestow your garlands: and (with reverence) place
The veruin on the altar.

PRAE. Favor your tongues.

FLA. Great mother FORTUNE, Queen of humane state,
Rectresse of action, Arbitresse of fate,
To whom all sway, all power, all empire bows,
Be present, and propitious to our vows.

PRAE. Favor it with your tongues.

MIN. Be present, and propitious to our vows.
While they sound again, the Flamen takes of the honey, with his finger, and
tastes, then ministers to all the rest* so of the milk, in an earthen vessel, he
deals about; which done, he sprinkleth, upon the altar, milk; then imposes
the honey, and kindles his gummes, and after censing about the altar places
his censer thereon, into which they put several branches of poppy, and the
music ceasing, proceed. Accept our offering, and be pleased, great goddess.

TER. See, see, the image stirs!

SAT. And turns away!

NOT. Fortune auerts her face!

FLA. Auert, you gods,
The prodigy. Still! still! Some pious rite
We have neglected. Yet! heaven, be appeased.
And be all tokens false, or void, that speak
Thy present wrath.

SEI. Be thou dumb, scrupulous priest:
And gather up thy self, with these thy wares,
Which I, in spite of thy blind mistress, or
Thy iuggling mystery, religion, throw
Thus, scorned on the earth. Nay, hold thy look
Auerted, till I woo thee, turn again;
And thou shall stand, to all posterity,
The Eternal game, and laughter, with thy neck
Writhed to thy tail, like a ridiculous cat.
Avoid these fumes, these superstitious lights,
And all these coos'ning ceremonies: you,
Your pure, and spiced conscience. I, the slave,
And mock of fools, (scorn on my worthy head)
That have been titled, and adored a god,
Yea, sacrificed unto, my self, in Rome,
No less then JOVE: and I be brought, to do
A peevish gigglot rites? Perhaps, the thought,
And shame of that made Fortune turn her face,
Knowing her self the lesser deity,
And but my servant. Bashful queen, if so,
SEIANVS thanks thy modesty. Who Is that?

POMPONIVS, SEIANVS, MINVTIVS, etc. HIs fortune suffers, till he hears my
news:
I have waited here too long. MACRO, my lord --
SEI. Speak lower, and withdraw.

TER. Are these things true?

MIN. Thousands are gazing at it, in the streets.

SEI. What Is that?

TER. MINVTIVS tells us here, my lord,
That, a new head being set upon your statue,
A rope is since found wreathed about it! and,
But now, a fiery meteor, in the form
Of a great ball, was seen to roll along
The troubled air, where yet it hangs, imperfect,
The amazing wonder of the multitude!

SEI. No more. That MACRO'S come, is more then all!

TER. Is MACRO come?

POM. I saw him.

TER. Where? with whom?

POM. With REGVLVS.

SEI. TERENTIVS --

TER. My lord?

SEI. Send for the Tribunes, we will straight have up
More of the soldiers, for our guard. MINVTIVS,
We pray you, go for COTTA, LATIARIS,
TRIO the Consul, or what Senators
You know are sure, and ours. You, my good NATTA,
For LACO, Provost of the watch. Now, SATRIVS,
The time of proof comes on. Arm all our servants,
And without tumult. You, POMPONIVS,
Hold some good correspondence, with the Consul,
Attempt him, noble friend. These things begin
To look like dangers, now, worthy my fates.
Fortune, I see thy worst: Let doubtful states,
And things uncertain hang upon thy will:
Me surest death shall render certain still.
Yet, why is, now, my thought turned toward death,
Whom fates have let go on, so far, in breath,
Vncheck'd, or vnreprou'd? I, that did help
To fell the lofty Cedar of the world,
GERMANICVS; that, at one stroke, cut down
DRVSVS, that upright Elm; withered his vine;
Laid SILIVS, and SABINVS, two strong Oaks,
Flat on the earth; besides, those other shrubs,
CORDVS, and SOSIA, CLAVDIA PVLCHRA,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS, which I have grub'd up;
And since, have set my axe so strong, and deep
Into the root of spreading AGRIPPINE;
Lopt off and scattered her proud branches, NERO,
DRVSVS, and CAIUS too, although re-planted;
If you will, destinies, that, after all,
I faint, now, ere I touch my period;
You are but cruel: and I already have done
Things great enough. All Rome has been my slave;
The Senate sat an idle looker on,
And witness of my power; when I have blushed,
More, to command, then it to suffer; all
The Fathers have sat ready, and prepared,
To give me empire, temples, or their throtes,
When I would ask 'hem; and (what crowns the top)
Rome, Senate, people, all the world have seen
JOVE, but my equal: CAESAR, but my second.
It Is then your malice, fates, who (but your own)
Envy, and fear, to have any power long known.

TERENTIVS, TRIBVNES. STay here: I Will give his lordship, you are come.
MINVTIVS, COTTA, LATIARIS. They confer their letters. MARCUS, TERENTIVS, pray
you tell my lord,
Here Is COTTA, and LATIARIS.
TER. Sir, I shall.

COT. My letter is the very same with yours;
Only requires me to be present there,
And give my voice, to strengthen his design.

LAT. Names he not what it is?

COT. No, nor to you.

LAT. It Is strange, and singular doubtful!

COT. So it is?
It may be all is left to lord SEIANVS.

NATTA, LACO. To them. GEntlemen, where is my lord?

TRI. We wait him here.

COT. The Provost LACO? what is the news?

LAT. My lord --

SEIANVS. To them. NOw, my right dear, noble, and trusted friends;
How much I am a captive to your kindness!
Most worthy COTTA, LATIARIS; LACO,
Your valiant hand; and gentlemen, your loves.
I wish I could divide my self unto you;
Or that it lay, within our narrow powers,
To satisfy for so enlarged bounty.
GRACINVS, we must pray you, hold your guardes
Vnquit, when morning comes. Saw you the Consul?

MIN. TRIO will presently be here, my lord.

COT. They are but giving order for the edict,
To warn the Senate.

SEI. How! the Senate?

LAT. Yes.
This morning, in APOLLO'S temple.

COT. We
Are charged, by letter, to be there, my lord.

SEI. By letter? pray you let us see!

LAT. Knows not his lordship!

COT. It seems so!

SEI. A Senate warned? without my knowledge?
And on this sudden? Senators by letters
Required to be there! who brought these?

COT. MACRO.

SEI. Mine enemy! And when?

COT. This midnight.

SEI. Time,
With every other circumstance, does give
It has some streine of engine in it! How now?

SATRIVS, SEIANVS, etc. MY lord, SERTORIVS MACRO is without,
Alone, and prays to have private conference
In business, of high nature, with your lordship,
(He says to me) and which reguards you much.
SEI. Let him come here.

SAT. Better, my lord, withdraw,
You will betray what store, and strength of friends
Are now about you; which he comes to spy.

SEI. Is he not armed?

SAT. We Will search him.

SEI. No, but take,
And lead him to some room, where you, concealed,
May keep a guard upon us. Noble LACO,
You are our trust: and, till our own cohorts
Can be brought up, your strengths must be our guard.
He salutes them humbly. Now, good MINVTIVS, honored LATIARIS,
Most worthy, and my most unwearied friends:
I return instantly.

LAT. Most worthy lord!

COT. His lordship is turned instant kind, me thinks,
IN have not observed it in him, heretofore.

TRI. 1. It Is true, and it becomes him nobly.

MIN. I
Am raped withal.

TRI. 2. By MARS, he has my lives,
(Were they a million) for this only grace.

LAC. I, and to name a man!

LAT. As he did me!

MIN. And me!

LAT. Who would not spend his life and fortunes,
To purchase but the look of such a lord?

LAC. He, that would nor be lords fool, nor the worlds.

SEIANVS, MACRO. MACRO! most welcome, as most coueted friend!
Let me enjoy my longings. When arrived you?
MAC. About the noone of night.

SEI. SATRIVS, give leave.

MAC. I have been, since I came, with both the Consuls,
On a particular design from CAESAR.

SEI. How fares it with our great, and royal master?

MAC. Right plentifully well; as, with a prince,
That still holds out the great proportion
Of his large favors, where his judgment has
Made once divine election: like the god,
That wants not, nor is wearied to bestow
Where merit meets his bounty, as it does
In you, already the most happy, and ere
The sun shall climb the south, most high SEIANVS.
Let not my lord be' amused. For, to this end
Was I by CAESAR sent for, to the isle,
With special caution to conceal my journey;
And, thence, had my dispatch as privately
Again to Rome; charged to come here by night;
And, only to the Consuls, make narration
Of his great purpose: that the benefit
Might come more full, and striking, by how much
It was less looked for, or aspired by you,
Or least informed to the common thought.

SEI. What may this be? part of my self, dear MACRO!
If good, speak out: and share with your SEIANVS.

MAC. If bad, I should for ever loathe my self,
To be the messenger to so good a lord.
I do exceed m' instructions, to acquaint
Your lordship with thus much; but it is my venture
On your retentiue wisdom: and, because
I would no jealous scruple should molest
Or rack your peace of thought. For, I assure
My noble lord, no Senator yet knows
The business meant: though all, by several letters,
Are warned to be there, and give their voices,
Only to add unto the state, and grace
Of what is purposed.

SEI. You take pleasure, MACRO,
Like a coy wench, in torturing your lover.
What can be worth this suffering?

MAC. That which follows,
The tribuniciall dignity, and power:
Both which SEIANVS is to have this day
Conferred upon him, and by public Senate.

SEI. Fortune, be mine again; thou have satisfied
For thy suspected loyalty.

MAC. My lord,
I have no longer time, the day approaches,
And I must back to CAESAR.

SEI. Where Is CALIGVLA?

MAC. That I forgot to tell your lordship. Why,
He lingers yonder, about Capreae,
Disgraced; TIBERIUS has not seen him yet:
He needs would thrust himself to go with me,
Against my wish, or will, but I have quitted
His forward trouble, with as tardie note
As my neglect, or silence could afford him.
Your lordship cannot now command me ought,
Because, I take no knowledge that I saw you,
But I shall boast to live to serve your lordship:
And so take leave.

SEI. Honest, and worthy MACRO,
Your love, and friendship. Who Is there? SATRIVS,
Attend my honorable friend forth. O!
How vain, and vile a passion is this fear?
What base, uncomely things it makes men do?
Suspect their noblest friends, (as I did this)
Flatter poor enemies, entreat their servants,
Stoop, court, and catch at the benevolence
Of creatures, unto whom (within this hour)
I would not have vouchsafed a quarter-looke,
Or piece of face? By you, that fools call gods,
Hang all the sky with your prodigious signs,
Fill earth with monsters, drop the scorpion down,
Out of the zodiac, or the fiercer lion,
Shake off the loos'ned globe from her long henge,
Roll all the world in darkness, and let loose
The Enraged winds to turn up groves and towns;
When I do fear again, let me be struck
With forked fire, and vnpittyed die:
Who fears, is worthy of calamity.

POMPONIVS, REGVLVS, TRIO. To the rest. IS not my lord here?

TER. Sir, he will be straight.

COT. What news, FVLCINIVS TRIO?

TRI. Good, good tidings.
(But, keep it to your self) My lord SEIANVS
Is to receive this day, in open Senate,
The tribuniciall dignity.

COT. Is It true?

TRI. No words; not to your thought: but, sir, believe it.

LAT. What says the Consul?

COT. (Speak it not again,)
He tells me, that to day my lord SEIANVS --

(TRI. I must entreat you COTTA, on your honor
Not to reveal it.

COT. On my life, sir.)

LAT. Say.

COT. Is to receive the tribuniciall power.
But, as you are an honorable man,
Let me conjure you, not to utter it:
For it is trusted to me, with that bond.

LAT. I am HARPOCRATES.

TER. Can you assure it?

POM. The Consul told it me, but keep it close.

MIN. Lord LATIARIS, what is the news?

LAT. I Will tell you,
But you must swear to keep it secret --

SEIANVS. To them. I Knew the sates had on their distaffe left
More of our thread, then so.

REG. Hail, great SEIANVS.

TRI. Hail, the most honored.

COT. Happy.

LAT. High SEIANus.

SEI. Do you bring prodigies too?

TRI. May all presage
Turn to those fair effects, whereof we bring
Your lordship news.

REG. May 't please my lord withdraw.

SEI. To some that stand by. Yes (I will speak with you, anon.)

TER. My lord,
What is your pleasure for the Tribunes?

SEI. Why,
Let 'hem be thank't, and sent away.

MIN. My lord --

LAC. Wilt please your lordship to command me --

SEI. No.
You are troublesome.

MIN. The mood is changed.

TRI. Not speak?

TRI. Nor look?

LAC. I. He is wise, will make him friends
Of such, who never love, but for their ends.

ARRVNTIVS, LEPIDVS. Diverse other Senators passing by them. I, Go, make haste;
take heed you be not last
To tender your All hail, in the wide hall
Of huge SEIANVS: run, a Lictors pace;
Stay not to put your robes on; but, away,
With the pale troubled ensigns of great friendship
Stamp't in your face! Now, MARCUS LEPIDVS,
You still believe your former augurie?
SEIANVS must go downe-ward? you perceive
His wane approaching fast?

LEP. Believe me, LUCIUS,
I wonder at this rising!

ARR. I, and that we
Must give our suffrage to it? you will say,
It is to make his fall more steep, and grievous?
It may be so. But think it, they that can
With idle wishes 'ssay to bring back time:
In cases desperate, all hope is crime.
See, see! what troops of his officious friends
Flock to salute my lord! and start before
My great, proud lord! to get a lord-like nod!
Attend my lord, unto the Senate House!
Bring back my lord! like servile huishers, make
Way for my lord! proclaim his idol lord-ship,
More then ten cryers, or six noise of trumpets!
Make legs, kiss hands, and take a scattered hair
From my lords eminent shoulder! See, SANQVINIVS!
With his slow belly, and his dropsy! look,
What toyling haste he makes! yet, here is another,
Retarded with the gout, will be before him!
Get thee liburnian porters, thou gross fool,
To bear thy obsequious fatness, like thy peers.
They are met! The gout returns, and his great carriage.

LICTORS, CONSVLS, SEIANVS, etc. Pass over the stage. Give way, make place;
room for the Consul.

SAN. Hail,
Hail, great SEIANVS.

HAT. Hail, my honored lord.

ARR. We shall be marked anon, for our not-haile.

LEP. That is already done.

ARR. It is a note
Of vpstart greatness, to observe, and watch
For these poor trisles, which the noble mind
Neglects, and scorns.

LEP. I, and they think themselves
Deeply dishonored, where they are omitted,
As if they were necessities, that helped
To the perfection of their dignities:
And hate the men, that but refrain 'hem.

ARR. O!
There is a farther cause of hate. Their breasts
Are guilty, that we know their obscure springs,
And base beginnings: thence the anger grows. On. Follow.

MACRO, LACO. WHen all are entered, shut the temple doors;
And bring your guardes up to the gate.
LAC. I will.

MAC. If you shall hear commotion in the Senate,
Present your self: and charge on any man
Shall offer to come forth.

LAC. I am instructed.

THE SENATE. HATERIVS, TRIO, SANQVINIVS, COTTA, REGVLVS, SEIANVS, POMPONIVS,
LATIARIS, LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS, PRAECONES, LICTORES. HOw well his lordship looks
to day!
TRI. As if
He had been borne, or made for this hours state.

COT. Your fellow Consul's come about, me thinks?

TRI. I, he is wise.

SAN. SEIANVS trusts him well.

TRI. SEIANVS is a noble, bounteous lord.

HAT. He is so, and most valiant.

LAT. And most wise.

SEN. He Is every thing.

LAT. Worthy of all, and more
Then bounty can bestow.

TRI. This dignity
Will make him worthy.

POM. Above CAESAR.

SAN. Tut,
CAESAR is but the rector of an I'sle,
He of the empire.

TRI. Now he will have power
More to reward, then ever.

COT. Let us look
We be not slack in giving him our voices.

LAT. Not I.

SAN. Nor I.

COT. The readier we seem
To propagate his honors, will more bind
His thought, to ours.

HAT. I think right, with your lordship.
It is the way to have us hold our places.

SAN. I, and get more.

LAT. More office, and more titles.

POM. I will not lose the part, I hope to share
In these his fortunes, for my patrimony.

LAT. See, how ARRVNTIVS sits, and LEPIDVS.

TRI. Let 'hem alone, they will be marked anon.

SEN. I Will do with others.

SEN. So will I.

SEN. And I.
Men grow not in the state, but as they are planted
Warm in his favors.

COT. Noble SEIANVS!

HAT. Honored SEIANVS!

LAT. Worthy, and great SEIANVS!

ARR. Gods! how the spunges open, and take in!
And shut again! look, look! is not he blessed
That gets a seat in eye-reach of him? more,
That comes in ear, or tongue-reach? O, but most,
Can claw his subtle elbow, or with a buzze
Fly-blow his ears.

PRAET. Proclaim the Senates peace;
And give last summons by the edict.

PRAE. Silence:
In name of CAESAR, and the SENATE. Silence.
MEMMIVS REGVLVS, and FVLCINIVS TRIO, consuls, these present kalends of June,
with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple of APOLLO PALATINE,
all that are Fathers, and are registered Fathers, that have right of entering the
Senate, we warn, or command, you be frequently present, take knowledge the
business is the commonwealths, whosoever is absent, his fine, or mulct, will
be taken, his excuse will not be taken.

TRI. Note, who are absent, and record their names.

REG. Fathers Conscript. May, what I am to utter.
Turn good, and happy, for the commonwealth.
And thou APOLLO, in whose holy house
We here are met, inspire us all, with truth,
And liberty of censure, to our thought.
The majesty of great TIBERIUS CAESAR
Propounds to this grave Senate, the bestowing
Upon the man he loves, honored SEIANVS,
The tribuniciall dignity, and power;
Here are his letters, signed with his signet:
What pleases now the Fathers to be done?

SEN. Read, read 'hem, open, publicly, read 'hem.

COT. CAESAR has honored his own greatness much,
In thinking of this act.

TRI. It was a thought
Happy, and worthy CAESAR.

LAT. And the lord,
As worthy it, on whom it is directed!

HAT. Most worthy!

SAN. Rome did never boast the virtue
That could give envy bounds, but his: SEIANVS --

SEN. Honored, and noble!

SEN. Good, and great SEIANVS!

ARR. O, most tame slavery, and fierce flattery!

PRAE. Silence.

The Epistle is read. TIBERIUS CAESAR TO THE SENATE, GREETING.
IF you, Conscript Fathers, with your children, be in health, it is
abundantly well: we with our friends here, are so. The care of the
commonwealth, howsoever we are remoou'd in person, cannot be absent to our
thought; although, oftentimes, even to princes most present, the truth of their
own affairs is hid: then which, nothing falls out more miserable to a state,
or makes the art of governing more difficult. But since it has been our
ease-full happiness to enjoy both the aides, and industry of so vigilant a
Senate, we profess to have been the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as
being careless of our office, but rather secure of the necessity. Neither do
these common rumors of many, and infamous libels, published against our
retirement, at all afflict us; being born more out of men's ignorance, then
their malice: and will, neglected, find their own grave quickly; whereas too
sensibly acknowledged, it would make their obloquie ours. Nor do we desire
their authors (though found) be censured, since in a free state (as ours) all
men ought to enjoy both their minds, and tongues free.



(ARR. The lapwing, the lapwing.)


Yet, in things, which shall worthily, and more near concern the majesty of
a prince, we shall fear to be so unnaturally cruel to our own fame, as to
neglect them. True it is, Conscript Fathers, that we have raised SEIANVS, from
obscure, and almost unknown gentry,



(SEN. How! how!)


to the highest, and most conspicuous point of greatness, and (we hope)
deseruingly; yet, not without danger: it being a most bold hazard in that
sovereign, who, by his particular love to one, dares adventure the hatred of
all his other subjects.



(ARR. This touches, the blood turns.)


But we affie in your loves, and understandings, and do no way suspect the
merit of our SEIANVS to make our favors offensive to any.



(SEN. O! good, good.)


Though we could have wished his zeal had run a calmer course against
AGRIPPINA, and our Nephews, howsoever the opennesse of their actions, declared
them delinquents; and, that he would have remembered, no innocence is so safe,
but it rejoices to stand in the sight of mercy: The use of which in us, he
has so quite taken away, toward them, by his loyal fury, as now our
clemency would be thought but wearied cruelty, if we should offer to exercise
it.



(ARR. I thank him, there I looked for it. A good fox!)


Some there be, that would interpret this his public severity to be
particular ambition; and that, under a pretext of service to us, he does but
remove his own lets: alleging the strengths he has made to himself, by
the Praetorian soldiers, by his faction in Court, and Senate, by the offices
he holds himself, and conferres on others, his popularitie, and dependents,
his urging (and almost driving) us to this our unwilling retirement, and lastly
his aspiring to be our son in-law.



(SEN. This 's strange!


ARR. I shall anon believe your vultures, MARCUS.)


Your wisdoms, Conscript Fathers, are able to examine, and censure these
suggestions. But, were they left to our absoluing voice, we durst pronounce
them, as we think them, most malicious.



(SEN. O, he has restored all, list.)


Yet, are they offered to be auerr'd, and on the lives of the informers. What
we should say, or rather what we should not say, Lords of the Senate, if this
be true, our gods, and goddesses confound us if we know! Only, we must think,
we have placed our benefits ill: and conclude, that, in our choice, either we
were wanting to the gods, or the gods to us.



(ARR. The Senators shift their places. The place grows hot, they shift.)


We have not been covetous, Honorable Fathers, to change; neither is it now,
any new lust that alters our affection, or old lothing: but those needful
iealousies of state, that warn wiser princes, hourly, to provide their
safety; and do teach them how learned a thing it is to beware of the humblest
enemy; much more of those great ones, whom their own employed favors have
made fit for their fears.



(SEN. Away.


SEN. Sit farther.


COT. Let Us remove --


ARR. Gods! how the leaves drop off, this little wind!)


We therefore desire, that the offices he holds, be first seized by the
Senate; and himself suspended from all exercise of place, or power --



(SEN. How!


SAN. By your leave.


ARR. Come, Porcpisce, (where is HATERIVS?
His gout keeps him most miserably constant.)
Your dancing shows a tempest.

SEI. Read no more.

REG. Lords of the Senate, hold your seats: read on.

SEI. Late enters with the guards. These letters, they are forged.

REG. A guard, sit still.

ARR. There Is change.

REG. Bid silence, and read forward.

PRAE. Silence -- and himself suspended from all exercise of place, or power,
but till due and mature trial be made of his innocence, which yet we can
faintly apprehend the necessity, to doubt. If, Conscript Fathers, to your more
searching wisdoms, there shall appear farther cause (or of farther
proceeding, either to seizure of lands, goods, or more --) it is not our power
that shall limit your authority, or our favor, that must corrupt your
justice: either were dishonorable in you, and both uncharitable to our self.
We would willingly he present with your counsels in this business, but the
danger of so potent a faction (if it should prove so) forbids our attempting
it: except one of the Consuls would be entreated for our safety, to undertake
the guard of us home, then we should most readily adventure. In the mean
time, it shall not be fit for us to importune so judicious a Senate, who know
how much they hurt the innocent, that spare the guilty: and how grateful a
sacrifice, to the gods, is the life of an ungrateful person. We reflect not,
in this, on SEIANVS (notwithstanding, if you keep an eye upon him -- and there
is LATIARIS a Senator, and PINNARIVS NATTA, two of his most trusted ministers,
and so professed, whom we desire not to have apprended) but as the necessity of
the cause exacts it.



REG. A guard on LATIARIS.

ARR. O, the spy!
The reverend spy is caught, who pitties him?
Reward, sir, for your se^uice: now, you have done
Your property, you see what use is made?
Hang up the instrument.

SEI. Give leave.

LAC. Stand, stand,
He comes upon his death, that does advance
An inch toward my point.

SEI. Have we no friends here?

ARR. Hush't. Where now are all the hailes, and acclamations?

MACRO, SENATE. Hail, to the Consuls, and this noble Senate.
SEI. Is MACRO here? O, thou art lost, SEIANVS.

MAC. Sit still, and vn-affrighted, reverend Fathers.
MACRO, by CAESAR'S grace, the new-made Provost,
And now possessed of the praetorian bands,
An honor late belonged to that proud man,
Bids you, be safe: and to your constant doom
Of his deseruings, offers you the surety
Of all the soldiers, tribunes, and centurions,
Received in our command.

REG. SEIANVS, SEIANVS,
Stand forth, SEIANVS.

SEI. Am I called?

MAC. I, thou,
Thou insolent monster, art bid stand.

SEI. Why, MACRO,
It has been otherwise, between you, and I?
This court, that knows us both, has seen a difference,
And can (if it be pleased to speak) confirm,
Whose insolence is most.

MAC. Come down Typhoeus,
If mine be most, lo, thus I make it more;
Kick up thy heels in air, tear off thy robe,
Play with thy beard, and nostrills. Thus it is fit,
(And no man take compassion of thy state)
To use th'ingratefull viper, tread his brains
Into the earth.

REG. Forbear.

MAC. If I could lose
All my humanity now, 'twere well to torture
So meriting a traitor. Wherefore, Fathers,
Sit you amazed, and silent? and not censure
This wretch, who in the hour he first rebelled
Against CAESAR'S bounty, did condemn himself?
P'hlegra, the field, where all the sons of earth
Mustered against the gods, did never acknowledge
So proud, and huge a monster.

REG. Take him hence.
And all the gods guard CAESAR.

TRI. Take him hence.

HAT. Hence.

COT. To the dungeon with him.

SAN. He deserves it.

SEN. Crown all our doors with bays.

SAN. And let an ox
With gilded horns, and garlands, straight be led
Unto the capitol.

HAT. And sacrificed
To JOVE, for CAESAR'S safety.

TRI. All our gods
Be present still to CAESAR.

COT. PHOEBVS.

SAN. MARS.

HAT. DIANA.

SAN. PALLAS.

SEN. IVNO, MERCVRIE,
All guard him.

MAC. Forth, thou prodigy of men.

COT. Let all the traitors titles be defaced.

TRI. His images, and statues be pulled down.

HAT. His chariot-wheeles be broken.

ARR. And the legs
Of the poor horses, that deserved naught,
Let them be broken too.

LEP. O, violent change,
And whirle of men's affections!

ARR. Like, as both
Their bulkes and souls were bound on fortunes wheel,
And must act only with her motion!
LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS. WHo would depend upon the popular air,
Or voice of men, that have to day beheld
(That which if all the gods had fore-declar'd,
Would not have been believed) SEIANVS fall?
He, that this morn rose proudly, as the sun?
And, breaking through a mist of clients breath,
Came on as gazed at, and admired, as he
When superstitious Moors salute his light!
That had our servile nobles waiting him
As common grooms; and hanging on his look,
No less then humane life on destiny!
That had men's knees as frequent, as the gods;
And sacrifices, more, then Rome had altars:
And this man fall! fall? I, without a look,
That durst appear his friend; or lend so much
Of vain relief, to his changed state, as pity!

ARR. They, that before like gnats played in his beams,
And thronged to circumscribe him, now not seen!
Nor deigne to hold a common seat with him!
Others, that waited him unto the Senate,
Now, inhumanely ravish him to prison!
Whom (but this morn) they followed as their lord,
Guard through the streets, bound like a fugitive!
In stead of wreaths, give fetters; strokes, for stoops:
Blind shame, for honors; and black taunts, for titles!
Who would trust slippery chance?

LEP. They, that would make
Themselves her spoil: and foolishly forget,
When she does flatter, that she comes to prey.
Fortune, thou had no deity, if men
Had wisdom: we have placed thee so high,
By fond belief in thy felicity.

SEN. Shout within. The gods guard CAESAR. All the gods guard CAESAR.
MACRO, REGVLVS, SENATORS. NOw great SEIANVS, you that awed the state,
And sought to bring the nobles to your whip,
That would be CAESAR'S tutor, and dispose
Of dignities, and offices! that had
The public head still bare to your designs,
And made the general voice to echo yours!
That looked for salutations, twelve score off,
And would have pyramid's, yea, temples reared
To your huge greatness! now, you lie as flat,
As was your pride advanced.

REG. Thanks, to the gods.

SEN. And praise to MACRO, that has saved Rome.
Liberty, liberty, liberty. Lead on,
And praise to MACRO, that has saved Rome.
ARRVNTIVS, LEPIDVS, TERENTIVS. I Prophecy, out of this Senates flattery,
That this new fellow, MACRO, will become
A greater prodigy in Rome, then he
That now is fallen.

TER. O you, whose minds are good,
And have not forced all mankind, from your breasts;
That yet have so much stock of virtue left,
To pity guilty states, when they are wretched:
Lend your soft ears to hear, and eyes to weep
Deeds done by men, beyond the acts of furies.
The eager multitude, (who never yet
Knew why to love, or hate, but only pleased
To Express their rage of power) no sooner heard
The murmr of SEIANVS in decline,
But with that speed, and heat of appetite,
With which they greedily devour the way
To some great sports, or a new theater;
They filled the capitol, and POMPEI'S circke,
Where, like so many mastiues, biting stones,
As if his statues now were sensitive
Of their wild fury; first, they tear them down:
Then fastening ropes, drag them along the streets,
Crying in scorn, this, this was that rich head
Was crowned with garlands, and with odours, this
That was in Rome so reverenced. Now
The furnace, and the bellows shall too work
The great SEIANVS crack, and piece, by piece,
Drop in the founders pit.

LEP. O, popular rage!

TER. The whilst, the Senate, at the temple of Concord,
Make haste to meet again, and thronging cry,
Let us condemn him, tread him down in water,
While he does lie upon the bank; away:
Where some, more tardie, cry unto their bearers,
He will be censured ere we come, run knaves,
And use that furious diligence, for fear
Their bondmen should inform against their slacknesse,
And bring their quaking flesh unto the hook:
The rout, they follow with confused voice,
Crying, they'are glad, say they could never abide him;
Enquire, what man he was? what kind of face?
What beard he had? what nose? what lips? protest,
They ever did presage h' would come to this:
They never thought him wise, nor valiant: Ask
After his garments, when he dies? what death?
And not a beast of all the herd demands,
What was his crime? or, who were his accusers?
Under what roof, or testimony, he fell?
There came (says one) a huge, long, worded letter
From Capreae against him. Did there so?
O, they are satisfied, no more.

LEP. Alas!
They follow fortune, and hate men condemned,
Guilty, or not.

ARR. But, had SEIANVS thriu'd
In his design, and prosperously oppressed
The old TIBERIUS, then, in that same minute
These very raskals, that now rage like furies,
Would have proclaimed SEIANVS emperor.

LEP. But what has followed?

TER. Sentence, by the Senate;
To lose his head: which was no sooner off,
But that, and th'vnfortunate trunk were seized
By the rude multitude; who not content
With what the forward justice of the state,
Officiously had done, with violent rage
Have rent it limb, from limb. A thousand heads,
A thousand hands, ten thousand tongues, and voices,
Employed at once in several acts of malice!
Old men not staid with age, virgins with shame,
Late wives with loss of husbands, mothers of children,
Losing all grief in joy of his sad fall,
Run quite transported with their cruelty!
These mounting at his head, these at his face,
These digging out his eyes, those with his brain,
Sprinkling themselves, their houses, and their friends;
Others are met, have ravished thence an arm,
And deal small pieces of the flesh for favors;
These with a thigh; this has cut off his hands;
And this his feet; these fingers, and these toes;
That has his liver; he his heart: there wants
Nothing but room for wrath, and place for hatred!
What cannot often be done, is now ore-done.
The whole, and all of what was great SEIANVS,
And next to CAESAR did possess the world,
Now torn, and scattered, as he needs no grave,
Each little dust couers a little part:
So lies he no where, and yet often buried!
ARRVNTIVS, NVNTIVS, LEPIDVS, TERENTIVS. MOre of SEIANVS?

NVN. Yes.

LEP. What can be added?
We know him dead.

NVN. Then, there begin your pity.
There is enough behind, to melt even Rome,
And CAESAR into tears: (since never slave
Could yet so highly offend, but tyranny,
In torturing him, would make him worth lamenting.)
A son, and daughter, to the dead SEIANVS,
(Of whom there is not now so much remaining
As would give fastening to the hang-mans hook)
Have they drawn forth for farther sacrifice;
Whose tenderness of knowledge, unripe years,
And childish silly innocence was such,
As scarce would lend them feeling of their danger:
The girl so simple, as she often asked,
Where they would lead her? for what cause they dragged her?
Cried, she would do no more. That she could take
Warning with beating. And because our laws
Admit no virgin immature to die,
The wittily, and strangely-cruell MACRO,
Delivered her to be deflowered, and spoiled,
By the rude lust of the licentious hangman,
Then, to be strangled with her harmless brother.

LEP. O, act, most worthy hell, and lasting night,
To hide it from the world!

NVN. Their bodies thrown
Into the Gemonies, (I know not how,
Or by what accident returned) the mother,
Th'expulsed APICATA, finds them there;
Whom when she saw lie spread on the degrees,
After a world of fury on her self,
Tearing her hair, defacing of her face,
Beating her breasts, and womb, kneeling amazed,
Crying to heaven, then to them; at last,
Her drowned voice gate up above her woes:
And with such black, and bitter execrations,
(As might affright the gods, and force the sun
Run back-ward to the east, nay, make the old
Deformed CITAOS rise again, to ore-whelme
Them, us, and all the world) she fills the air;
Vpbraids the heavens with their partial doomes,
Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands,
What she, and those poor innocents have transgressed,
That they must suffer such a share in vengeance,
Whilst LIVIA, LYGDVS, and EVDEMVS live,
Who, (as she says, and firmly vows, to prove it
To CAESAR, and the Senate) poisoned DRVSVS?

LEP. Confederates with her husband?

NVN. I.

LEP. Strange act!

ARR. And strangely opened: what says now my monster,
The multitude? they reele now? do they not?

NVN. Their gall is gone, and now they 'gin to weep
The mischief they have done.

ARR. I thank 'hem, rogues!

NVN. Part are so stupide, or so flexible,
As they believe him innocent; all grieve:
And some, whose hands yet reeke with his warm blood,
And gripe the part which they did tear of him,
Wish him collected, and created new.

LEP. How fortune plies her sports, when she begins
To practise'hem! pursues, continues, adds!
Con^ounds, with varying her empassion'd moodes!

ARR. Do thou hope fortune to redeem thy crimes?
To make amends, for thy ill placed favors,
With these strange punishments? Forbear, you things,
That stand upon the pinnacles of state,
To boast your slippery height; when you do fall,
You pash your selves in pieces, nere to rise:
And he that lends you pity, is not wise.

TER. Let this example move th'insolent man,
Not to grow proud, and careless of the gods:
It is an odious wisdom, to blaspheme,
Much more to slighten, or deny their powers.
For, whom the morning saw so great, and high,
Thus low, and little, before the 'euen does lie.

THE END.
This Tragoedie was first acted, in the year 1603.

By the Kings Majesty's SERVANTS.

The principal Tragoedians were, RIC. BVRBADGE. AVG. PHILIPS. WILL. SLY. IOH.
LOWIN. WILL. SHAKE-SPEARE. IOH. HEMINGS. HEN. CONDEL. ALEX. COOK.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

VOLPONE, OR THE FOX. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1605. By the K. MAJESTY'S
SERVANTS.

The Author B. I.

HORAT. Simul and incunda, and idonea dicere vitae.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. D C. XVI.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST EQVALL SISTERS THE TWO FAMOVS UNIVERSITIES FOR
THEIR LOVE AND ACCEPTANCE SHOWN TO HIS POEM IN THE PRESENTATION BEN. IONSON
THE GRATEFVLL ACKNOWLEDGER DEDICATES BOTH IT AND HIMSELF.
Never (most equal SISTERS) had any man a wit so presently excellent, as that
it could raise it self; but there must come both matter, occasion, commenders,
and favorers to it: If this be true, and that the fortune of all writers does
daily prove it, it behoues the careful to provide, well, toward these
accidents; and, having acquired them, to preserve that part of reputation most
tenderly, wherein the benefit of a friend is also defended. Hence is it, that I
now render my self grateful, and am studious to justify the bounty of your
act: to which, though your mere authority were satisfying, yet, it being an
age, wherein Poetry, and the Professors of it hear so ill, on all sides,
there will a reason be looked for in the subject. It is certain, nor can it
with any forehead be opposed, that the too-much license of Poetasters, in this
time, has much deformed their Mistress; that, every day, their manifold, and
manifest ignorance, does stick unnatural reproaches upon her: But for their
petulancy, it were an act of the greatest injustice, either to let the learned
suffer; or so divine a skill (which indeed should not be attempted with
unclean hands) to fall, under the least contempt. For, if men will
impartially, and not a-squint, look toward the offices, and function of a
Poet, they will easily conclude to themselves, the impossibility of any man's
being the good Poet, without first being a good man. He that is said to be able
to inform yong-men to all good disciplines, inflame growne-men to all great
virtues, keep^ old-men in their best and supreme state, or as they decline to
childhood, recover them to their first strength; that comes forth the
interpreter, and arbiter of nature, a teacher of things divine, no less then
humane, a master in manners; and can alone (or with a few) effect the business
of mankind: this, I take him, is no subject for pride, and ignorance to
exercise their railing rhetorique upon. But, it will here be hastily answered,
that the writers of these days are other things; that, not only their manners,
but their natures are inuerted; and nothing remaining with them of the dignity
of Poet, but the abused name, which every Scribe vsurps: that now, especially
in dramatick, or (as they term it) stage- poetry, nothing but ribaldry,
profanation, blasphemy, all license of offense to god, and man, is practiced. I
dare not deny a great part of this (and am sorry, I dare not) because in some
men's abortiue features (and would they had never boasted the light) it is
ouer-true: But, that all are embarked in this bold adventure for hell, is a
most uncharitable thought, and, vtter'd, a more malicious slander. For my
particular, I can (and from a most clear conscience) affirm, that I have ever
trem^led to think toward the least profaneness; have lothed the use of such
foul, and vn-wash'd baud^y, as is now made the food of the scene: And,
howsoever I cannot escape, from some, the imputation of sharpness, but that
they will say, I have taken a pride, or lust, to be bitter, and not my youngest
infant but has come into the world with all his teeth; I would ask of these
supercilious politiques, what nation, society, or general order, or state I
have prouok'd? what public person? whether I have not (in all these)
preserved their dignity, as mine own person, safe? My works are read,
allowed, (I speak of those that are entirely mine) look into them: What broad
reproves have I used? Where have I been particular? Where personal? except
to a mimick, cheater, bawd, or buffon, creatures (for their insolences) worthy
to be taxed? Yet, to which of these so pointingly, as he might not, either
ingenuously have confessed, or wisely dissembled his disease? But it is not
rumor can make men guilty, much less entitle me, to other men's crimes. I
know, that nothing can be so innocently writ, or carried, but may be made
obnoxious to construction; mary, whilst I bear mine innocence about me, I
fear it not. Application, is now, grown a trade with many; and there are,
that profess to have a key for the decyphering of every thing: but let wise
and noble persons take heed how they be too credulous, or give leave to these
inuading interpreters, to be ouer-familiar with their fames, who cunningly,
and often, utter their own virulent malice, under other men's simplest
meanings. As for those, that will (by faults which charity has raked up, or
common honesty concealed) make themselves a name with the multitude, or (to
draw their rude, and beastly claps) care not whose living faces they entrench,
with their petulant styles; may they do it, without a rival, for me: I choose
rather to live grau'd in obscurity, then share with them, in so preposterous a
fame. Nor can I blame the wishes of those severe, and wiser patriots, who
providing the hurts these licentious spirits may do in a state, desire rather
to see fools, and devils, and those antique relics of barbarism retriu'd,
with all other ridiculous, and exploded follies: then behold the wounds of
private men, of princes, and nations. For, as HORACE makes TREBATIVS speak,
among these -- Sibi quisque timet, quanquam est intactus, and odit.
And men may justly impute such rages, if continued, to the writer, as his
sports. The increase of which lust in liberty, together with the present trade
of the stage, in all their misc'line enter-ludes, what learned or liberal
soul does not already abhor? where nothing but the filth of the time is
vtter'd, and that with such impropriety of phrase, such plenty of soloecismes,
such dearth of sense, so bold prolepse's, so rackt metaphor's, with brothelry,
able to violate the ear of a pagan, and blasphemy, to turn the blood of a
christian to water. I cannot but be serious in a cause of this nature, wherein
my fame, and the reputations of diverse honest, and learned are the question;
when a Name, so full of authority, antiquity, and all great mark, is (through
their insolence) become the lowest scorn of the age: and those men subject to
the petulancy of every vernaculous Orator, that were wont to be the care of
Kings, and happiest Monarchs. This it is, that has not only raped me to
present indignation, but made me studious, heretofore; and, by all my actions,
to stand off, from them: which may most appear in this my latest work (which
you, most learned ARBITRESSES, have seen, judged, and to my crown, approved)
wherein I have labored, for their instruction, and amendment, to reduce, not
only the ancient forms, but manners of the scene, the easiness, the
propriety, the innocence, and last the doctrine, which is the principal end of
poesy, to inform men, in the best reason of living. And though my catastrophe
may, in the strict rigor of comic law, meet with censure, as turning back to
my promise; I desire the learned, and charitable critic to have so much faith
in me, to think it was done off industry: For, with what ease I could have
varied it, nearer his scale (but that I fear to boast my own faculty) I could
here insert. But my special aim being to put the s^affle in their mouths,
that cry out, we never punish vice in our enterludes, etc. I took the more
liberty; though not without some lines of example, drawn even in the ancients
themselves, the goings out of whose comoedies are not always joyful, but
oft-times, the bawdes, the servants, the riuals yea, and the masters are
mulcted: and fitly, it being the office of a comick-Poet, to imitate justice,
and instruct to life, as well as purity of language, or stir up gentle
affections. To which, I shall take the occasion elsewhere to speak. For the
present (most reverenced SISTERS) as I have cared to be thankful for your
affections past, and here made the understanding acquainted with some ground of
your favors; let me not despair their continuance, to the maturing of some
worthier fruits: wherein, if my MUSES be true to me, I shall raise the despised
head of poetry again, and stripping her out of those rotten and base rags,
wherewith the Times have adulterated her form, restore her to her primitive
habit, feature, and majesty, and render her worthy to be embraced, and kissed, of
all the great and master- spirits of our world. As for the vile, and slothful,
who never affected an act, worthy of celebration, or are so inward with their
own vicious natures, as they worthily fear her; and think it a high point of
policy, to keep her in contempt with their declamatorie, and windy
inuectiues: she shall out of just rage incite her servants (who are genus
iritabile) to spout ink in their faces, that shall eat, farther then their
marrow, into their fames; and not CINNAMVS the barber, with his art, shall be
able to take out the brands, but they shall live, and be read, till the
wretches dye, as things worst deserving of themselves in chief, and then of
all mankind.

The Persons of the Play.
VOLPONE, a Magnifico. MOSCA, his Parasite. VOLTORE, an Advocate. CORBACCIO, an
old Gentleman. CORVINO, a Merchant. AVOCATORI, four Magistrates NOTARIO, the
Register. NANO, a Dwarf. CASTRONE, an Eunuch. GREGE. POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE, a
Knight. PEREGRINE, a Gent.-trauailer. BONARIO, a young Gentleman. FINE MADAME
WOVLD-BEE, the Knights wife. CELIA, the Merchants wife. COMMANDADORI, Officers.
MERCATORI, three Merchants. ANDROGYNO, a Hermaphrodite. SERVITORE, a Servant.
WOMEN.
THE SCENE VENICE.

VOLPONE, OR THE FOX. THE ARGUMENT.
VOLPONE, childlesse, rich, faines sick, despaires,
Offers his state to hopes of several heirs,
Lies languishing; His Parasite receaues
Presents of all, assures, deludes: Then weaues
Other crosse-plots, which ope' themselves, are told.
New tricks for safety, are sought; they thrive: When, bold,
Each tempts the other again, and all are sold.
PROLOGVE.
NOw, luck yet send us, and a little wit
Will serve, to make our play hit;
(According to the palates of the season)
Here is ri'me, not empty of reason:
This we were bid to credit, from our Poet,
Whose true scope, if you would know it,
In all his poemes, still, has been this measure,
To mix profit, with your pleasure;
And not as some (whose throats their envy failing)
Cry hoarsely, all he writes, is railing:
And, when his plays come forth, think they can flout them,
With saying, he was a year about them.
To these there needs no lie, but this his creature,
Which was, two months since, no feature;
And, though he dares give them five lives to mend it,
It Is known, five weeks fully penned it:
From his own hand, without a co-adiutor,
Nouice, iourney-man, or tutor.
Yet, thus much I can give you, as a token
Of his plays worth, no eggs are broken;
Nor quaking custards with fierce teeth affrighted,
Wherewith your rout are so delighted;
Nor hales he in a gull, old ends reciting,
To stop gaps in his loose writing;
With such a deal of monstrous, and forced action:
As might make Bet'lem a faction:
Nor made he' his play, for jests, stolen from each table,
But makes jests, to fit his fable.
And, so presents quick comoedie, resined,
As best Critics have designed,
The laws of time, place, persons he observes,
From no needful rule he swerueth.
All gall, and coppresse, from his ink, he drayneth,
Only, a little salt remains;
Wherewith, he will rub your cheeks, til (red with laughter)
They shall look fresh, a week after.
Act I.
Scene I.
VOLPONE, MOSCA. GOod morning to the day; and, next, my gold:
Open the shrine, that I may see my saint.
Hail the worlds soul, and mine. More glad then is
The teeming earth, to see the longed-for sun
Peep through the horns of the celestial ram,
Am I, to view thy splendour, darkening his:
That, lying here, amongst my other hoords,
Show like a flame, by night; or like the day
Struck out of chaos, when all darkness fled
Unto the center. O, thou son of SOL,
(But brighter then thy father) let me kiss,
With adoration, thee, and every relic
Of sacred treasure, in this blessed room.
Well did wise Poets, by thy glorious name,
Title that age, which they would have the best;
Thou being the best of things: and far transcending
All style of joy, in children, parents, friends,
Or any other waking dream on earth.
Thy looks, when they to VENUS did ascribe,
They should have given her twenty thousand CVPIDS;
Such are thy beauties, and our loves! Dear saint,
Riches, the dumb god, that give all men tongues:
That can do naught, and yet make men do all things;
The price of souls; even hell, with thee to boot,
Is made worth heaven! Thou art virtue, fame,
Honor, and all things else! Who can get thee,
He shall be noble, valiant, honest, wise --

MOS. And what he will, sir. Riches are in fortune
A greater good, then wisdom is in nature.

VOL. True, my beloved MOSCA. Yet, I glory
More in the cunning purchase of my wealth,
Then in the glad possession; since I gain
No common way: I use no trade, no venture;
I wound no earth with plow-shares; fat no beasts
To feed the shambles; have no mills for iron,
Oil, corn, or men, to grind 'hem into poulder;
I blow no subtle glass; expose no ships
To threatenings of the furrow-faced sea;
I turn no moneys, in the public bank;
Nor usure private --

MOS. No, sir, nor devour
Soft prodigalls. You shall have some will swallow
A melting heir, as glibly, as your Dutch
Will pills of butter, and never purge for it;
Tear forth the fathers of poor families
Out of their beds, and coffin them, alive,
In some kind, clasping prison, where their bones
May be forth-comming, when the flesh is rotten:
But, your sweet nature does abhor these courses;
You loathe, the widows, or the orphans tears
Should wash your pauements; or their pittious cries
Ring in your roofes; and beat the air, for vengeance. --

VOL. Right, MOSCA, I do loathe it.

MOS. And besides, sir,
You are not like the thresher, that does stand
With a huge flaile, watching a heap of corn,
And, hungry, dares not taste the smallest grain,
But feeds on mallows, and such bitter herbs;
Nor like the merchant, who has filled his vaults
With Romagnia, and rich Candian wines,
Yet drinks the lees of Lombards vinegar:
You will not lie in straw, whilst moths, and worms
Feed on your sumptuous hangings, and soft beds.
You know the use of riches, and dare give, now,
From that bright heap, to me, your poor obseru^r,
Or to your dwarf, or your hermaphrodite,
Your eunuch, or what other houshold-trifle
Your pleasure allows maint'nance. --

VOL. Hold thee, MOSCA,
Take, of my hand; thou strik'st on truth, in all:
And they are envious, term thee parasite.
Call forth my dwarf, my eunuch, and my fool,
And let 'hem make me sport. What should I do,
But cocker up my genius, and live free
To all delights, my fortune calls me to?
I have no wife, no parent, child, allie,
To give my substance to; but whom I make,
Must be my heir: and this makes men observe me.
This draws new clients, daily, to my house,
Women, and men, of every sex, and age,
That bring me presents, send me plate, coin, jewels,
With hope, that when I die, (which they expect
Each greedy minute) it shall then return,
Ten-fold, upon them; whilst some, covetous
Above the rest, seek to engrosse me, whole,
And counter work, the one, unto the other,
Contend in gifts, as they would seem, in love:
All which I suffer, playing with their hopes,
And am content to coin 'hem into profit,
And look upon their kindness, and take more,
And look on that; still bearing them in hand,
Letting the cherry knock against their lips,
And, draw it, by their mouths, and back again. How now!

Act I. Scene II.
NANO, ANDROGYNO, CASTRONE, VOLPONE, MOSCA. NOw, room, for fresh gamsters, who
do will you to know,
They do bring you neither play, nor University show;
And therefore do entreat you, that whatsoever they rehearse,
May not fare a whit the worse, for the false pase of the verse.
If you wonder at this, you will wonder more, ere we pass,
For know, here is enclosed the Soul of PYTHAGORAS,
That iuggler divine, as hereafter shall follow;
Which Soul (fast, and loose, sir) came first from APOLLO,
And was breathed into AETHALIDES, MERCVRIVS his son,
Where it had the gift to remember all that ever was done.
From thence it fled forth, and made quick transmigration
To goldy-lockt EVPHORBVS, who was killed, in good fashion,
At the siege of old Troy, by the Cuckold of Sparta.
HERMOTIMVS was next (I find it, in my charta)
To whom it did pass, where no sooner it was missing,
But with one PYRRHVS, of Delos, it learned to go a fishing:
And thence, did it enter the Sophist of Greece.
From PYTHAGORE, she went into a beautiful piece,
Hight ASPASIA, the meretrix; and the next toss of her
Was, again, of a whore, she became a Philosopher,
CRATES the Cynick: (as it self does relate it)
Since, Kings, Knights, and Beggars, Knaves, Lords and Fools gat it,
Besides, ox, and ass, cammell, mule, goat, and brock,
In all which it has spoke, as in the Cobblers cock.
But I come not here, to discourse of that matter,
Or his one, two, or three, or his great oath, by quater,
His musicks, his trigon, his golden thigh,
Or his telling how elements shift: but I
Would ask, how of late, thou have suffered translation,
And shifted thy coat, in these days of reformation?

AND. Like one of the reformed, a Fool, as you see,
Counting all old doctrine heresy.

NAN. But not on thine own forbid meats have thou venter'd?

AND. On fish, when first, a carthusian I entered.

NAN. Why, then thy dogmaticall silence has left thee?

AND. Of that an obstreperous Lawyer bereft me.

NAN. O wonderful change! when Sir Lawyer forsook thee,
For PYTHAGORE'S sake, what body then took thee?

AND. A good dull moyle.

NAN. And how! by that means,
Thou were brought to allow of the eating of beans?

AND. Yes.

NAN. But, from the moyle, into whom did thou pass?

AND. Into a very strange beast, by some writers called an ass,
By others, a precise, pure, illuminate brother,
Of those devour flesh, and sometimes one another:
And will drop you forth a libell, or a sanctified lie,
Betwixt every spoonefull of a natiuitie-pie.

NAN. Now quit thee, for heaven, of that profane nation;
And gently, report thy next transmigration.

AND. To the same that I am.

NAN. A creature of delight?
And (what is more then a Fool) an hermaphrodite?
Now^ pray thee, sweet Soul, in all thy variation,
Which body would thou choose, to take up thy station?

AND. Troth, this I am in, even here would I tarry.

NAN. 'Cause here, the delight of each sex thou can vary?

AND. Alas, those pleasures be stale, and forsaken;
No, it is your Fool, wherewith I am so taken,
The only one creature, that I can call blessed:
For all other forms I have proved most distressed.

NAN. Spoke true, as thou were in PYTHAGORAS still.
This learned opinion we celebrate will,
Fellow eunuch (as behooues us) with all our wit, and art,
To dignifie that, whereof our selves are so great, and special a part.

VOL. Now very, very pretty: MOSCA, this
Was thy invention?

MOS. If it please my patron,
Not else.

VOL. It does, good MOSCA.

MOS. Then it was, sir.
SONG. Fools, they are the only nation
Worth men's envy, or admiration;
Free from care, or sorrow-taking,
Selves, and others merry-making:
All they speak, or do, is sterling.
Your Fool, he is your great man's dearling,
And your ladies sport, and pleasure;
Tongue, and babble are his treasure.
Eene his face begets laughter,
And he speaks truth, free from slaughter;
He Is the grace of every feast,
And, sometimes, the chiefest guest:
Has his trencher, and his stool,
When wit waits upon the fool.
O, who would not be
He, he, he?

VOL. One knocks without. Who Is that? away, look MOSCA.

MOS. Fool, begone,
It Is signior VOLTORE, the Advocate,
I know him, by his knock.

VOL. Fetch me my gown,
My furs and night-caps; say, my couch is changing:
And let him entertayne himself, awhile,
Without in the gallerie. Now, now, my clients
Begin their visitation! vulture, kite,
Raven, and gor-crow, all my birds of prey,
That think me turning carcass, now they come:
I am not for 'hem yet. How now? the news?

MOS. A piece of plate, sir.

VOL. Of what bigness?

MOS. Huge,
Massy, and antique, with your name inscribed,
And arm^s engraven.

VOL. Good! and not a fox
Stretched on the earth, with fine delusiue sleights,
Mocking a gaping crow? ha, MOSCA?

MOS. Sharp, sir.

VOL. Give me my furs. Why do thou laugh so, man?

MOS. I cannot choose, sir, when I apprehend
What thoughts he has (without) now, as he wa^kes:
That this might be the last gift, he should give;
That this would fetch you; if you dyed to day,
And gave him all, what he should be to morrow;
What large return would come of all his venters;
How he should worshipped be, and reuerenc'd;
Ride, with his furs, and foot-clothes; waited on
By herds of fools, and clients; have clear way
Made for his moyle, as lettered as himself;
Be called the great, and learned Advocate:
And then concludes, there is naught impossible.

VOL. Yes, to be learned, MOSCA.

MOS. O, no: rich
Implies it. Hood an ass, with reverend purple,
So you can hide his two ambitious ears,
And, he shall pass for a cathedral Doctor.

VOL. My caps, my caps, good MOSCA, fetch him in.

MOS. Stay, sir, your ointment for your eyes.

VOL. That Is true;
Dispatch, dispatch: I long to have possession
Of my new present.

MOS. That, and thousands more,
I hope, to see you lord of.

VOL. Thanks, kind MOSCA.

MOS. And that, when I am lost in blended dust,
And hundred such, as I am, in succession --

VOL. Nay, that were too much, MOSCA.

MOS. You shall live,
Still, to delude these harpyies.

VOL. Loving MOSCA,
It Is well, my pillow now, and let him enter.
Now, my feigned cough, my phthisick, and my gout,
My apoplexy, palsy, and catarrhes,
Help, with your forced functions, this my posture,
Wherein, this three year, I have milk'd their hopes.
He comes, I hear him (vh, vh, vh, vh) O.

Act I. Scene III.
MOSCA, VOLTORE, VOLPONE. YOu still are, what you were, sir. Only you
(Of all the rest) are he, commands his love:
And you do wisely, to preserve it, thus,
With early visitation, and kind notes
Of your good meaning to him, which, I know,
Cannot but come most grateful. Patron, sir.
Here Is signior VOLTORE is come --

VOLP. What say you?

MOS. Sir, signior VOLTORE is come, this morning,
To visit you.

VOLP. I thank him.

MOS. And has brought
A piece of antique plate, bought of S. MARK,
With which he here presents you.

VOLP. He is welcome.
Pray him, to come more often.

MOS. Yes.

VOLT. What says he?

MOS. He thanks you, and desires you see him often.

VOLP. MOSCA.

MOS. My patron?

VOLP. Bring him near, where is he?
I long to feel his hand.

MOS. The plate is here, sir.

VOLT. How fare you, sir?

VOLP. I thank you, signior VOLTORE.
Where is the plate? mine eyes are bad.

VOLT. I Am sorry,
To see you still thus weak.

MOS. That he is not weaker.

VOLP. You are too munificent.

VOLT. No, sir, would to heaven,
I could as well give health to you, as that plate.

VOLP. You give, sir, what you can. I thank you. Your love
Has taste in this, and shall not be vn-answer'd.
I pray you see me often.

VOLT. Yes, I shall, sir.

VOLP. Be not far from me.

MOS. Do you observe that, sir?

VOLP. Harken unto me, still: It will concern you.

MOS. You are a happy man, sir, know your good.

VOLP. I cannot now last long --

(MOS. You are his heir, sir.

VOLT. Am I?)

VOLP. I feel me going, (vh, vh, vh, vh.)
I am sailing to my port, (vh, vh, vh, vh?)
And I am glad, I am so near my haven.

MOS. Alas, kind gentleman, well, we must all go --

VOLT. But, MOSCA --

MOS. Age will conquer.

VOLT. 'Pray thee hear me.
Am I inscribed his heir, for certain?

MOS. Are you?
I do beseech you, sir, you will vouchsafe
To write me, in your family. All my hopes,
Depend upon your worship. I am lost,
Except the rising sun do shine on me.

VOLT. It shall both shine, and warm thee, MOSCA.

MOS. Sir.
I am a man, that have not done your love
All the worst offices: here I wear your keys,
See all your coffers, and your caskets locked,
Keep the poor inventory of your jewels,
Your plate, and moneys, am your steward, sir,
Husband your goods here.

VOLT. But am I sole heir?

MOS. Without a partner, sir, confirmed this morning;
The wax is warm yet, and the ink scarce dry
Upon the parchment.

VOLT. Happy, happy, me!
By what good chance, sweet MOSCA?

MOS. Your desert, sir;
I know no second cause.

VOLT. Thy modesty
Is loath to know it; well, we shall requite it.

MOS. He ever liked your course, sir, that first took him.
I, often, have heard him say, how he admired
Men of your large profession, that could speak
To every cause, and things mere contraries,
Till they were hoarse again, yet all be law;
That, with most quick agilitie, could turn,
And re-turne; make knots, and undo them;
Give forked counsel; take provoking gold
On either hand, and put it up: these men,
He knew, would thrive, with their humility.
And (for his part) he thought, he should be blessed
To have his heir of such a suffering spirit,
So wise, so grave, of so perplexed a tongue,
And loud withal, that would not wag, nor scarce
Lie still, without a fee; when every word
Your worship but lets fall, is a cecchine!
Another knocks. Who Is that? one knocks, I would not have you seen, sir.
And yet -- pretend you came, and went in haste;
I Will fashion an excuse. And, gentle sir,
When you do come to swim, in golden lard,
Up to the arms, in honny, that your chin
Is borne up stiff, with fatness of the flood,
Think on your vassal; but remember me:
I have not been your worst of clients.

VOLT. MOSCA --

MOS. When will you have your inventory brought, sir?
Or see a copy of the will? (anon)
I Will bring 'hem to you, sir. Away, be gone,
Put business in your face.

VOLP. Excellent, MOSCA!
Come hither, let me kiss thee.

MOS. Keep you still, sir.
Here is CORBACCIO.

VOLP. Set the plate away,
The vulture's gone, and the old rauen's come.

Act I. Scene IIII.
MOSCA, CORBACCIO, VOLPONE. BEtake you, to your silence, and your sleep:
Stand there, and multiply. Now, shall we see
A wretch, who is (indeed) more impotent,
Then this can feign to be; yet hopes to hop
Over his grave. Signior CORBACCIO!
Yo' are very welcome, sir.

CORB. How does your patron?

MOS. Troth, as he did, sir, no amends.

CORB. What? mends he?

MOS. No, sir: he is rather worse.

CORB. That Is well. Where is he?

MOS. Upon his couch, sir, newly fallen asleep.

CORB. Does he sleep well?

MOS. No wink, sir, all this night,
Nor yesterday, but slumbers.

CORB. Good! He should take
Some counsel of physicians: I have brought him
An opiate here, from mine own Doctor --

MOS. He will not hear of drugs.

CORB. Why? I my self
Stood by, while 't was made; saw all th'ingredients:
And know, it cannot but most gently work.
My life for his, it is but to make him sleep.

VOLP. I, his last sleep, if he would take it.

MOS. Sir,
He has no faith in physic.

CORB. 'Say you? 'say you?

MOS. He has no faith in physic: he does think,
Most of your Doctors are the greater danger,
And worse disease, to escape. I often have
Heard him protest, that your physician
Should never be his heir.

CORB. Not I his heir?

MOS. Not your physician, sir.

CORB. O, no, no, no,
I do not mean it.

MOS. No, sir, nor their fees
He cannot brook: he says, they flay a man,
Before they kill him.

CORB. Right, I do conceive you.

MOS. And then, they do it by experiment;
For which the law not only does absolve 'hem,
But gives them great reward: and, he is loath
To hire his death, so.

CORB. It is true, they kill,
With as much license, as a judge.

MOS. Nay, more;
For he but kills, sir, where the law condemns,
And these can kill him, too.

CORB. I, or me:
Or any man. How does his apoplexe?
Is that strong on him, still?

MOS. Most violent.
His speech is broken, and his eyes are set,
His face drawn longer, then 't was wont --

CORB. How? how?
Stronger, then he was wont?

MOS. No, sir: his face
Drawn longer, then 't was wont.

CORB. O, good.

MOS. His mouth
Is ever gaping, and his eyelids hang.

CORB. Good.

MOS. A freezing numnesse stiffens all his joints,
And makes the color of his flesh like lead.

CORB. It Is good.

MOS. His pulse beats slow, and dull.

CORB. Good symptoms, still.

MOS. And, from his brain --

CORB. Ha? how? not from his brain?

MOS. Yes, sir, and from his brain --

(CORB. I conceive you, good.)

MOS. Flows a cold sweat, with a continual rhewme,
Forth the resolved corners of his eyes.

CORB. Is It possible? yet I am better, ha!
How does he, with the swimming of his head?

MOS. O, sir, it is past, the scotomy; he, now,
Has lost his feeling, and has left to snort:
You hardly can perceive him, that he breathes.

CORB. Excellent, excellent, sure I shall out-last him:
This makes me young again, a score of years.

MOS. I was a coming for you, sir.

CORB. Has he made his will?
What has he given me?

MOS. No, sir.

CORB. Nothing? ha?

MOS. He has not made his will, sir.

CORB. Oh, oh, oh.
What then did VOLTORE, the Lawyer, here?

MOS. He smelt a carcass, sir, when he but heard
My master was about his testament;
(As I did urge him to it, for your good --)

CORB. He came unto him, did he? I thought so.

MOS. Yes, and presented him this piece of plate.

CORB. To be his heir?

MOS. I do not know, sir.

CORB. True,
I know it too.

MOS. By your own scale, sir.

CORB. Well,
I shall prevent him, yet. See, MOSCA, look,
Here, I have brought a bag of bright cecchines,
Will quite weigh down his plate.

MOS. Yea, mary, sir!
This is true physic, this your sacred medicine,
No talk of opiates, to this great elixir.

CORB. It Is aurum palpabile, if not potabile.

MOS. It shall be minister'd to him, in his bowl?

CORB. I, do, do, do.

MOS. Most blessed cordial!
This will recover him.

CORB. Yes, do, do, do.

MOS. I think, it were not best, sir.

CORB. What?

MOS. To recover him.

CORB. O, no, no, no; by no means.

MOS. Why, sir, this
Will work some strange effect, if he but feel it.

CORB. It Is true, therefore forbear, I Will take my venture:
Give me't again.

MOS. At no hand, pardon me;
You shall not do your self that wrong, sir. I
Will so advise you, you shall have it all.

CORB. How?

MOS. All, sir, it is your right, your own; no man
Can claim a part: it is yours, without a rival,
Decreed by destiny.

CORB. How? how, good MOSCA?

MOS. I Will tell you, sir. This fit he shall recover --

CORB. I do conceive you.

MOS. And, on first advantage
Of his gayn'd sense, will I re-importune him
Unto the making of his testament:
And show him this.

CORB. Good, good.

MOS. It Is better yet,
If you will hear, sir.

CORB. Yes, with all my heart.

MOS. Now, would I counsel you, make home with speed;
There, frame a will: whereto you shall inscribe
My master your sole heir.

CORB. And disinherit
My son?

MOS. O, sir, the better: for that color
Shall make it much more taking.

CORB. O, but color?

MOS. This will, sir, you shall send it unto me.
Now, when I come to enforce (as I will do)
Your cares, your watchings, and your many prayers,
Your more then many gifts, your this days present,
And, last, produce your will; where (without thought,
Or least regard, unto your proper issue,
A son so brave, and highly meriting)
The stream of your diuerted love has thrown you
Upon my master, and made him your heir:
He cannot be so stupide, or stone dead,
But, out of conscience, and mere gratitude --

CORB. He must pronounce me, his?

MOS. It Is true.

CORB. This plot
Did I think on before.

MOS. I do believe it.

CORB. Do you not believe it?

MOS. Yes, sir.

CORB. Mine own project.

MOS. Which when he has done, sir --

CORB. Published me his heir?

MOS. And you so certain, to survive him --

CORB. I.

MOS. Being so lusty a man --

CORB. It Is true.

MOS. Yes, sir --

CORB. I thought on that too. See, how he should be
The very organ, to express my thoughts!

MOS. You have not only done your self a good --

CORB. But multiplied it on my son?

MOS. It Is right, sir.

CORB. Still, my invention.

MOS. 'Lasse sir, heaven knows,
It has been all my study, all my care,
(I'eene grow gray withal) how to work things --

CORB. I do conceive, sweet MOSCA.

MOS. You are he,
For whom I labor, here.

CORB. I, do, do, do:
I Will straight about it.

MOS. Rooke go with you, raven.

CORB. I know thee honest.

MOS. You do lie, sir --

CORB. And --

MOS. Your knowledge is no better then your ears, sir.

CORB. I do not doubt, to be a father to thee.

MOS. Nor I, to gull my brother of his blessing.

CORB. I may have my youth restored to me, why not?

MOS. Your worship is a precious ass --

CORB. What say thou?

MOS. I do desire your worship, to make haste, sir.

CORB. It Is done, it is done, I go.

VOLP. O, I shall burst;
Let out my sides, let out my sides --

MOS. Contain
Your flux of laughter, sir: you know, this hope
Is such a bait, it couers any hook.

VOLP. O, but thy working, and thy placing it!
I cannot hold; good rascal, let me kiss thee:
I never knew thee, in so rare a humor.

MOS. Alas, sir, I but do, as I am taught;
Follow your grave instructions; give 'hem words;
Power oil into their ears: and send them hence.

VOLP. It Is true, it is true. What a rare punishment
Is avarice, to it self?

MOS. I, with our help, sir.

VOLP. So many cares, so many maladies,
So many fears attending on old age,
Yea, death so often called on, as no wish
Can be more frequent with 'hem, their limbs faint,
Their senses dull, their seeing, hearing, going,
All dead before them; yea, their very teeth,
Their instruments of eating, failing them:
Yet this is reckoned life! Nay, here was one,
Is now gone home, that wishes to live longer!
Feels not his gout, nor palsy, faines himself
Younger, by scores of years, flatters his age,
With confident belying it, hopes he may
With charms, like AESON, have his youth restored:
And with these thoughts so battens, as if fate
Would be as easily cheated on, as he,
Another knocks. And all turns air! Who Is that, there, now? a third?

MOS. Close, to your couch again: I hear his voice.
It is CORVINO, our spruce Merchant.

VOLP. Dead.

MOS. Another bout, sir, with your eyes. Who Is there?

Act I. Scene V.
MOSCA, CORVINO, VOLPONE. SIgnior CORVINO! come most wished for! O,
How happy were you, if you knew it, now!

CORV. Why? what? wherein?

MOS. The tardie hour is come, sir.

CORV. He is not dead?

MOS. Not dead, sir, but as good;
He knows no man.

CORV. How shall I do, then?

MOS. Why, sir?

CORV. I have brought him, here, a pearl.

MOS. Perhaps, he has
So much remembrance left, as to know you, sir;
He still calls on you, nothing but your name
Is in his mouth: Is your pearl orient, sir?

CORV. Venice was never owner of the like.

VOLP. Signior CORVINO.

MOS. Hark.

VOLP. Signior CORVINO.

MOS. 'He calls you, step and give it him. H'is here, sir,
And he has brought you a rich pearl.

CORV. How do you, sir?
Tell him, it doubles the twelfe caract.

MOS. Sir,
He cannot understand, his hearing's gone;
And yet it comforts him, to see you --

CORV. Say,
I have a diamant for him, too.

MOS. Best shew't, sir,
Put it into his hand; it is only there
He apprehends: he has his feeling, yet.
See, how he grasps it!

CORV. 'Lasse, good gentleman!
How pitiful the sight is!

MOS. Tut, forget, sir.
The weeping of an heir should still be laughter,
Under a visor.

CORV. Why? am I his heir?

MOS. Sir, I am sworn, I may not show the will,
Till he be dead: But, here has been CORBACCIO,
Here has been VOLTORE, here were others too,
I cannot number 'hem, they were so many,
All gaping here for legacies; but I,
Taking the vantage of his naming you,
(Signior CORVINO, Signior CORVINO) took
Paper, and pen, and ink, and there I asked him,
Whom he would have his heir? CORVINO. Who
Should be executor? CORVINO. And,
To any question, he was silent too,
I still interpreted the nods, he made
(Through weakness) for consent: and sent home the others,
Nothing bequeathed them, but to cry, and curse.

CORV. They embrace. O, my dear MOSCA. Does he not perceive us?

MOS. No more then a blind harper. He knows no man,
No face of friend, nor name of any servant,
Who't was that fed him last, or gave him drink:
Not those, he has begotten, or brought up
Can he remember.

CORV. Has he children?

MOS. Bastards,
Some dozen, or more, that he begot on beggars,
Gipseys, and Jews, and black- moors, when he was drunk.
Knew you not that, sir? It Is the common fable.
The Dwarf, the Fool, the Eunuch are all his;
H'is the true father of his family,
In all, save me: but he has given 'hem nothing.

CORV. That Is well, that is well. Art sure he does not hear us?

MOS. Sure, sir? why, look you, credit your own sense.
The pox approach, and add to your diseases,
If it would send you hence the sooner, sir.
For, your incontinence, it has deserved it
Thoroughly, and thoroughly, and the plague to boot.
(You may come near, sir) would you would once close
Those filthy eyes of yours, that slow with slime,
Like two frog-pits; and those same hanging cheeks,
Covered with hide, in stead of skin: (nay, help, sir)
That look like frozen dish-clouts, set on end.

CORV. Or, like an old smok'd wall, on which the rain
Ran down in streakes.

MOS. Excellent, sir, speak out;
You may be louder yet: a culuering,
Discharged in his ear, would hardly bore it.

CORV. His nose is like a common sewre, still running.

MOS. It Is good! and, what his mouth?

CORV. A very draught.

MOS. O, stop it up --

CORV. By no means.

MOS. 'Pray you let me.
Faith, I could stifle him, rarely, with a pillow,
As well, as any woman, that should keep him.

CORV. Do as you will, but I Will be gone.

MOS. Be so;
It is your presence makes him last so long.

CORV. I pray you, use no violence.

MOS. No, sir? why?
Why should you be thus scrupulous? pray you, sir.

CORV. Nay, at your discretion.

MOS. Well, good sir, be gone.

CORV. I will not trouble him now, to take my pearl?

MOS. Puh, nor your diamant. What a needless care
Is this afflicts you? Is not all, here, yours?
Am not I here? whom you have made? your creature?
That owe my being to you?

CORV. Grateful MOSCA!
Thou art my friend, my fellow, my companion,
My partner, and shall share in all my fortunes.

MOS. Excepting one.

CORV. What Is that?

MOS. Your gallant wife, sir.
Now, is he gone: we had no other means,
To shoot him hence, but this.

VOLP. My divine MOSCA!
Another knocks. Thou have to day out-gone thy self. Who Is there?
I will be troubled with no more. Prepare
Me music, dances, banquets, all delights;
The Turk is not more sensual, in his pleasures,
Then will VOLPONE. Let me see, a pearl?
A diamant? plate? cecchines? good mornings purchase;
Why, this is better then rob churches, yet:
Or fat, by eating (once a mon'th) a man.
Who is it?

MOS. The beauteous lady WOVLD-BEE, sir.
Wife, to the English Knight, Sir POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE,
(This is the style, sir, is directed me)
Has sent to know, how you have slept to night,
And if you would be visited.

VOLP. Not, now.
Some three hours, hence --

MOS. I told the Squire, so much.

VOLP. When I am high with mirth, and wine: then, then.
Before heaven, I wonder at the desperate valor
Of the bold English, that they dare let loose
Their wives, to all encounters!

MOS. Sir, this knight
Had not his name for nothing, he is politic,
And knows, how ere his wife affect strange aires,
She has not yet the face, to be dishonest.
But, had she signior CORVINO'S wives face --

VOLP. Has she so rare a face?

MOS. O, sir, the wonder,
The blazing star of Italy! a wench
OF the first year! a beauty, ripe, as harvest!
Whose skin is whiter then a swan, all over!
Then silver, snow, or lillies! a soft lip,
Would tempt you to eternity of kissing!
And flesh, that melts, in the touch, to blood!
Bright as your gold! and lovely, as your gold!

VOLP. Why had not I known this, before?

MOS. Alas, sir.
My self, but yesterday, discovered it.

VOLP. How might I see her?

MOS. O, not possible;
She Is kept as warily, as is your gold:
Never does come abroad, never takes air,
But at a windore. All her looks are sweet,
As the first grapes, or cherries: and are watched
As near, as they are.

VOLP. I must see her --

MOS. Sir.
There is a guard, of ten spies thick, upon her;
All his whole household: each of which is set
Upon his fellow, and have all their charge,
When he goes out, when he comes in, examined.

VOLP. I will go see her, though but at her windore.

MOS. In some disguise, then.

VOLP. That is true. I must
Maintain mine own shape, still, the same: we will think.

Act II.
Scene I.
POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE, PEREGRINE. SIr, to a wise man, all the world's his soil.
It is not Italy, nor France, nor Europe,
That must bound me, if my fates call me forth.
Yet, I protest, it is no salt desire
Of seeing countries, shifting a religion,
Nor any dis-affection to the state
Where I was bred (and, unto which I owe
My dearest plots) has brought me out; much less,
That idle, antique, stale, grey-headed project
Of knowing men's minds, and manners, with ULYSSES:
But, a peculiar humor of my wives,
Laid for this height of Venice, to observe,
To quote, to learn the language, and so forth --
I hope you travel, sir, with license?

PER. Yes.

POL. I dare the safelier converse -- How long, sir,
Since you left England?

PER. Seven weeks.

POL. So lately!
You have not been with my lord Ambassador?

PER. Not yet, sir.

POL. Pray you, what news, sir, vents our climate?
I heard, last night, a most strange thing reported
By some of my lords followers, and I long
To hear, how't will be seconded!

PER. What was it, sir?

POL. Mary, sir, of a raven, that should build
In a ship royal of the Kings.

PER. This fellow
Does he gull me, trow? or is gulled? your name, sir?

POL. My name is POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE.

PER. O, that speaks him.
A Knight, sir?

POL. A poor knight, sir.

PER. Your lady
Lies here, in Venice, for intelligence
Of tyres and fashions, and behavior,
Among the curtizans? the fine lady WOVLD-BEE?

POL. Yes, sir, the spider, and the be, oft-times,
Suck from one flower.

PER. Good sir POLITIQVE!
I cry you mercy; I have heard much of you:
It Is true, sir of your raven.

POL. On your knowledge?

PER. Yes, and your lions whelping, in the Tower.

POL. Another whelpe!

PER. Another, sir.

POL. Now, heaven!
What prodigies be these? The fires at Berwike!
And the new star! these things concurring, strange!
And full of omen! Saw you those meteors?

PER. I did, sir.

POL. Fearful! Pray you sir, confirm me,
Were there three porcpisces seen, above the bridge,
As they give out?

PER. Six, and and a sturgeon, sir.

POL. I am astonished!

PER. Nay, sir, be not so;
I Will tell you a greater prodigy, then these --

POL. What should these things portend!

PER. The very day
(Let me be sure) that I put forth from London,
There was a whale discovered, in the river,
As high as Woolwich, that had waited there
(Few know how many mon'ths) for the subversion
Of the Stode-Fleet.

POL. Is It possible? Believe it,
'Twas either sent from Spain, or the Archdukes!
SPINOLA'S whale, upon my life, my credit!
Will they not leave these proiects? Worthy sir,
Some other news.

PER. Faith, STONE, the fool, is dead;
And they do lack a tauerne-foole, extremely.

POL. Is MASS' STONE dead!

PER. H'is dead, sir, why? I hope
You thought him not immortal? O, this Knight
(Where he well known) would be a precious thing
To fit our English stage: He that should write
But such a fellow, should be thought to feign
Extremely, if not maliciously.

POL. STONE dead!

PER. Dead. Lord! how deeply, sir, you apprehend it?
He was no kinsman to you?

POL. That I know of.
Well! that same fellow was an unknown fool.

PER. And yet you knew him, it seems?

POL. I did so. Sir,
I knew him one of the most dangerous heads
Living within the state, and so I held him.

PER. Indeed, sir?

POL. While he lived, in action.
He has received weekly intelligence,
Upon my knowledge, out of the low Countries,
(For all parts of the world) in cabages;
And those dispensed, again, to 'Ambassadors,
In oranges, musk-melons, apricotes,
Limons, pome-citrons, and such like: sometimes,
In Colchester-oysters, and your Selsey-cockles.

PET. You make me wonder!

POL. Sir, upon my knowledge.
Nay, I have observed him, at your public ordinary,
Take his advertisement, from a traveler
(A concealed statesman) in a trencher of meat:
And, instantly, before the meal was done,
Convey an answer in a tooth-pick.

PER. Strange!
How could this be, sir?

POL. Why, the meat was cut
So like his character, and so laid, as he
Must easily read the cipher.

PER. I have heard,
He could not read, sir.

POL. So, 'twas given out,
(In polity) by those, that did employ him:
But he could read, and had your languages,
And to it, as sound a noddle --

PER. I have heard, sir,
That your Bab'ouns were spies; and that they were
A kind of subtle nation, near to China.

POL. I, I, your Mamuluchi. Faith, they had
Their hand in a French plot, or two; but they
Were so extremely given to women, as
They made discovery of all: yet I
Had my aduises here (on wensday last)
From one of their own coat, they were returned,
Made their relations (as the fashion is)
And now stand fair, for fresh employment.

PER. 'Hart!
This, sir POLL. will be ignorant of nothing.
It seems, sir, you know all?

POL. Not all, sir. But,
I have some general notions; I do love
To note, and to observe: though I live out,
Free from the active torrent, yet I Would mark
The currents, and the passages of things,
For mine own private use; and know the ebbes,
And flows of state.

PER. Believe it, sir, I hold
My self, in no small tie, unto my fortunes,
For casting me thus luckily, upon you;
Whose knowledge (if your bounty equal it)
May do me great assistance, in instruction
For my behavior, and my bearing, which
Is yet so rude, and raw --

POL. Why? came you forth
Empty of rules, for travail?

PER. Faith, I had
Some common ones, from out that vulgar grammar,
Which he, that cried Italian to me, taught me.

POL. Why, this it is, that spoils all our brave bloods;
Trusting our hopeful gentry unto pedants:
Fellows of outside, and mere bark. You seem
To be a gentleman, of ingenuous race --
I not profess it, but my fate has been
To be, where I have been consulted with,
In this high kind, touching some great men's sons,
Persons of blood, and honor --

PER. Who be these, sir?

Act II. Scene II.
MOSCA, POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE, VOLPONE, NANO, GREGE. Under that windore, there't
must be. The same.

POL. Fellows, to mount a bank! Did your instructor
In the dear tongues, never discourse to you
Of the Italian mountebankes?

PER. Yes, sir.

POL. Why,
Here shall you see one.

PER. They are quack-saluers,
Fellows, that live by venting oils, and drugs?

POL. Was that the character he gave you of them?

PER. As I remember.

POL. Pity his ignorance.
They are the onely-knowing men of Europe!
Great general scholars, excellent phisicians,
Most admired statesmen, professed favorites,
And cabinet-counsellors, to the greatest princes!
The only languag'd-men, of all the world!

PER. And, I have heard, they are most lewd impostors;
Made all of terms, and shreds; no less belyers
Of great-mens favors, then their own vile medicines;
Which they will utter, upon monstrous oaths:
Selling that drug, for two pence, ere they part,
Which they have valued at twelve crowns, before.

POL. Sir, calumnies are answered best with silence:
Your self shall judge. Who is it mounts, my friends?

MOS. SCOTO of Mantua, sir.

POL. Is It he? nay, then
I Will proudly promise, sir, you shall behold
Another man, then has been phant'sied to you.
I wonder, yet, that he should mount his bank
Here, in this nooke, that has been wont t'appeare
In face of the piazza! Here, he comes.

VOLP. Mount, Zany.

GRE. Follow, follow, follow, follow, follow.

POL. See how the people follow him! h'is a man
May write 10000 crowns, in bank, here. Note,
Mark but his gesture: I do use to observe
The state he keeps, in getting up!

PER. It Is worth it, sir.

VOLP. Most noble gent: and my worthy patrons, it may seem strange, that I,
your SCOTO MANTVANO, who was ever wont to fix my bank in face of the public
piazza, near the shelter of the portico, to the procuratia, should, now (
after eight months absence, from this illustrous city of Venice) humbly retire
my self, into an obscure nooke of the piazza.


POL. Did not I, now, object the same?


PER. Peace, sir.


VOLP. Let me tell you: I am not (as your Lombard proverb says) cold on my
feet; or content to part with my commodities at a cheaper rate, then I
accustomed: look not for it. Nor, that the calumnious reports of that impudent
detractor, and shame to our profession, (ALESSANDRO BVTTONE, I mean) who gave
out, in public, I was condemned a' Sforzato to the galleys, for poisoning the
Cardinal BEMBO'S -- Cook, has at all attached, much less dejected me. No,
no, worthy gent. (to tell you true) I cannot endure, to see the rabble of these
ground Ciarlitani, that spread their clokes on the pauement, as if they meant
to do feats of actiuitie, and then come in, lamely, with their moldy tales
out of BOCCACIO, like stale TABARINE, the Fabulist: some of them discoursing
their trauells, and of their tedious captivity in the Turks galleyes, when
indeed (were the truth known) they were the Christians galleyes, where very
temperately, they eat bread, and drunk water, as a wholesome penance
(enioyn'd them by their Confessors) for base pilferies.


POL. Note but his bearing, and contempt of these.


VOLP. These turdy-facy-nasty-paty-lousy-farticall rogues, with one poor
groats-worth of vn-prepar'd antimony, finely wrapped up in seuerall' scartoccios,
are able, very well, to kill their twenty a week, and play; yet, these meagre
starved spirits, who have half stopped the organs of their minds with earthy
oppilations, want not their favorers among your shriuel'd, sallad-eating
artizans: who are ouer-ioy'd, that they may have their halfe-pe'rth of physic,
though it purge 'hem into another world, 'tmakes no matter.


POL. Excellent! have you heard better language, sir?


VOLP. Well, let'hem go. And gentlemen, honorable gentlemen, know, that for
this time, our bank, being thus removed from the clamours of the canaglia,
shall be the scene of pleasure and delight: For, I have nothing to sell,
little, or nothing to sell.


POL. I told you, sir, his end.


PER. You did so, sir.


VOLP. I protest, I, and my six servants, are not able to make of this
precious liquor, so fast, as it is fetched away from my lodging, by gentlemen
of your city; strangers of the terra-ferma; worshipful merchants; I, and
senators too: who, ever since my arrival, have detayned me to their uses, by
their splendidous liberalities. And worthily. For, what auailes your rich man
to have his magazines stuffed with moscadelli, or of the purest grape, when his
physicians prescribe him (on pain of death) to drink nothing but water,
cocted with anise-seeds? O, health! health! the blessing of the rich! the
riches of the poor! who can buy thee at too dear a rate, since there is no
enjoying this world, without thee? Be not then so sparing of your purses,
honorable gentlemen, as to abridge the natural course of life --


PER. You see his end?


POL. I, is it not good?


VOLP. For, when a humide flux, or catarrhe, by the mutability of air, falls
from your head, into an arm, or shoulder, or any other part; take you a
duckat, or your cecchine of gold, and apply to the place affected: see, what
good effect it can work. No, no, it is this blessed vnguento, this rare
extraction, that has only power to disperse all malignant humors, that
proceed, either of hot, cold, moist, or windy causes --


PER. I would he had put in dry to.


POL. 'Pray you, observe.


VOLP. Pointing to his bill and his glass. To fortify the most indigest, and
crude stomach, I, were it of one, that (through extreme weakness) vomited
blood, applying only a warm napkin to the place, after the unction, and
fricace; for the vertigine, in the head, putting but a drop into your
nostrills, likewise, behind the ears; a most sovereign, and approved remedy:
the mal-caduco, crampes, conuulsions, paralysies, epilepsies, tremor-cordia,
retyred-nerues, ill vapors of the spleen, stoppings of the liver, the stone,
the strangury, hernia ventosa, iliaca passio; stops a disenteria, immediately;
eases the torsion of the small guts; and cures melancolia hypocondriaca, being
taken and applied, according to my printed receipt. For, this is the physician,
this the medicine; this counsels, this cures; this gives the direction, this
works the effect: and (in sum) both together may be termed an abstract of
the theorick, and practick in the Aesculapian art. 'Twill cost you eight
crowns. And, ZAN FRITADA, 'pray thee sing a verse, extempore, in honor of it.


POL. How do you like him, sir?


PER. Most strangely, I!


POL. Is not his language rare?


PER. But Alchimy
I never heard the like: or BROVGHTONS books.
SONG. HAd old HIPPOCRATES, or GALEN,
(That to their books put medicines all in)
But known this secret, they had never
(Of which they will be guilty ever)
Been murderers of so much paper,
Or wasted many a hurtlesse taper:
No Indian drug had ere been famed,
Tobacco, sassafras not named;
Ne yet, of guacum one small stick, sir,
Nor RAYMVND LVLLIES great elixir.
Ne, had been known the Danish GONSWART.
Or PARACELSVS, with his long-sword.

PER. All this, yet, will not do, eight crowns is high.

VOLP. No more. Gentlemen, if I had but time to discourse to you the miraculous
effects of this my oil, surnamed oglio del SCOTO; with the count-lesse
catalogue of those I have cured of th'aforesaid, and many more diseases; the
pattents and privileges of all the Princes, and commonwealths of
Christendom; or but the depositions of those that appeared on my part, before
the signiory of the Sanita, and most learned college of physicians; where I
was authorized, upon notice taken of the admirable virtues of my medicaments,
and mine own excellency, in matter of rare, and unknown secrets, not only to
disperse them publicly in this famous city, but in all the territories, that
happily joy under the government of the most pious and magnificent states of
Italy. But may some other gallant fellow say, O, there be diverse, that make
profession to have as good, and as experimented receipts, as yours: Indeed,
very many have assayed, like apes in imitation of that, which is really and
essentially in me, to make of this oil; bestowed great cost in furnaces,
stilles, alembeks, continual fires, and preparation of the ingredients, (as
indeed there goes to it six hundred several simples, besides, some quantity
of humane fat, for the conglutination, which we buy of the anatomistes) but,
when these practitioners come to the last decoction, blow, blow, puff, puff,
and all flies in fumo: ha, ha, ha. Poor wretches! I rather pity their folly,
and indiscretion, then their loss of time, and money; for those may be
recovered by industry: but to be a fool borne, is a disease incurable. For
my self, I always from my youth have indeuour'd to get the rarest secrets,
and book them; either in exchange, or for money: I spared nor cost, nor
labor, where any thing was worthy to be learned. And gentlemen, honorable
gentlemen, I will undertake (by virtue of chymicall art) out of the honorable
hat, that couers your head, to extract the four elements; that is to say, the
fire, air, water, and earth, and return you your felt without burn, or
stain. For, whilst others have been at the balloo, I have been at my book:
and am now past the craggie paths of study, and come to the flowrie plains
of honor, and reputation.


POL. I do assure you, sir, that is his aim.


VOLP. But, to our price.


PER. And that withal, sir POL.


VOLP. You all know (honorable gentlemen) I never valued this ampulla, or
vial, at less then eight crowns, but for this time, I am content, to be
deprived of it for six; six crowns is the price; and less in courtesy, I
know you cannot offer me: take it, or leave it, howsoever, both it, and I, am
at your service. I ask you not, as the value of the thing, for then I should
demand of you a thousand crowns, so the Cardinals MONTALTO, FERNESE, the great
duke of Tuscany, my gossip, with diverse other princes have given me, but I
despise money: only to show my affection to you, honorable gentlemen, and
your illustrous state here, I have neglected the messages of these princes,
mine own offices, framed my journey hither, only to present you with the
fruits of my travels. Tune your voices once more to the touch of your
instruments, and give the honorable assembly some delightful recreation.


PER. What monstrous, and most painful circumstance
Is here, to get some three, or four gazets!
Some threepence, in the whole, for that 'twill come to.

SONG. YOu that would last long, list to my song,
Make no more coil, but buy of this oil.
Would you be ever fair? and young?
Stout of teeth? and strong of tongue?
Tart of palate? quick of ear?
Sharp of sight? of nostrill clear?
Moist of hand? and light of foot?
(Or I will come nearer to it)
Would you live free from all diseases?
Do the act, your mistress pleases;
Yet fright all aches from your bones?
Here Is a medicine, for the nones.
VOLP. Well, I am in a humor (at this time) to make a present of the small
quantity my coffer contains: to the rich, in courtesy, and to the poor, for
Gods sake. Wherefore, now mark; I asked you six crowns; and six crowns, at
other times, you have paid me; you shall not give me six crowns, nor five,
nor four, nor three, nor two, nor one; nor half a duckat; no, nor a
muccinigo: six -- pence it will cost you, or six hundred pound -- expect no
lower price, for by the banner of my front, I will not bate a bagatine, that I
will have, only, a pledge of your loves, to carry something from amongst you,
to show, I am not contemned by you. Therefore, now, toss your handkerchiefes,
chearefully, chearefully; and be advertised, that the first heroique spirit,
that deignes to grace me, with a handkerchiefe, I will give it a little
remembrance of something, beside, shall please it better, then if I had
presented it with a double pistolet.


PER. CELIA at the windo' throws down her handkerchiefe. Will you be that
heroique spark, sir POL?
O, see! the windore has prevented you.

VOLP. Lady, I kiss your bounty: and, for this timely grace, you have done
your poor SCOTO of Mantua, I will return you, over and above my oil, a
secret, of that high, and inestimable nature, shall make you for ever enamored
on that minute, wherein your eye first descended on so mean, (yet not
altogether to be despised) an object. Here is a poulder, concealed in this
paper, of which, if I should speak to the worth, nine thousand volumes were
but as one page, that page as a line, that line as a word: so short is this
pilgrimage of man (which some call life) to the expressing of it. Would I
reflect on the price? why, the whole world were but as an empire, that empire
as a province, that province as a bank, that bank as a private purse, to the
purchase of it. I will, only, tell you; It is the poulder, that made VENUS a
goddess ( given her by APOLLO) that kept her perpetually young, cleared her
wrincles, firm'd her gummes, filled her skin, colored her hair; from her,
derived to HELEN, and at the sack of Troy (unfortunately) lost: till now, in
this our age, it was as happily recouer'd, by a studious Antiquarie, out of
some ruins of Asia, who sent a moyetie of it, to the court of France (but much
sophisticated) wherewith the ladies there, now, color their hair. The rest
(at this present) remains with me; extracted, to a quintessence: so that,
where ever it but touches, in youth it perpetually preserues, in age restores
the complexion; seat's your teeth, did they dance like virginal iacks, firm
as a wall; makes them white, as iuory, that were black, as --


Act II. Scene III.
CORVINO, POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE. He beats away the mont^banke etc. Spite of
the devil, and my shame! come down, here;
Come down: no house but mine to make your scene?
Signior FLAMINIO, will you down, sir? down?
What is my wife your FRANCISCINA? sir?
No windores on the whole piazza, here,
To make your properties, but mine? but mine?
Heart! ere to morrow, I shall be new christened,
And called the PANTALONE di besogniosi,
About the town.

PER. What should this mean, sir POL?

POL. Some trick of state, believe it. I will home.

PER. It may be some design, on you.

POL. I know not.
I Will stand upon my guard.

PER. It is your best, sir.

POL. This three weeks, all my aduises, all my letters,
They have been intercepted.

PER. Indeed, sir?
Best have a care.

POL. Nay, so I will.

PER. This knight,
I may not lose him, for my mirth, till night.

Act II. Scene IIII.
VOLPONE, MOSCA. O, I am wounded.

MOS. Where, sir?

VOLP. Not without;
Those blows were nothing: I could bear them ever.
But angry CUPID, bolting from her eyes,
Has shot himself into me, like a flame;
Where, now, he flings about his burning heat,
As in a furnace, an ambitious fire,
Whose vent is stopped. The fight is all within me.
I cannot live, except thou help me, MOSCA;
My liver melts, and I, without the hope
Of some soft air, from her refreshing breath,
Am but a heap of cinders.

MOS. 'Lasse, good sir!
Would you had never seen her.

VOLP. Nay, would thou
Had never told me of her.

MOS. Sir, it is true;
I do confess, I was unfortunate,
And you unhappy: but I Am bound in conscience,
No less then duty, to effect my best
To your release of torment, and I will, sir.

VOLP. Dear MOSCA, shall I hope?

MOS. Sir, more then dear,
I will not bid you to despair of ought,
Within a humane compass.

VOLP. O, there spoke
My better Angel. MOSCA, take my keys,
Gold, plate, and jewels, all is at thy devotion;
Employ them, how thou will; nay, coin me, too:
So thou, in this, but crown my longings. MOSCA?

MOS. Use but your patience.

VOLP. So I have.

MOS. I doubt not
To bring success to your desires.

VOLP. Nay, then,
I not repent me of my late disguise.

MOS. If you can horn him, sir, you need not.

VOLP. True:
Besides, I never meant him for my heir.
Is not the color of my beard, and eyebrows,
To make me known?

MOS. No jot.

VOLP. I did it well.

MOS. So well, would I could follow you in mine,
With half the happiness; and, yet, I would
Escape your epilogue.

VOLP. But, were they gulled
With a belief, that I was SCOTO?

MOS. Sir,
SCOTO himself could hardly have distinguished!
I have not time to flatter you, now, we will part:
And, as I prosper, so applaud my art.

Act II. Scene V.
CORVINO, CELIA, SERVITORE. DEath of mine honor, with the cities fool?
A iuggling, tooth-drawing, prating mountebanke?
And, at a public windore? where whilst he,
With his strained action, and his dole of faces,
To his drug-lecture draws your itching ears,
A crew of old, vn-marri'd, noted lechers,
Stood leering up, like Satyrs: and you smile,
Most graciously! and fan your favors forth,
To give your hot spectators satisfaction!
What, was your mountebanke their call? their whistle?
Or were you' enamored on his copper rings?
His saffron jewel, with the toade-stone in it?
Or his imbroidred suit, with the cope-stitch,
Made of a herse-cloth? or his old tilt-feather?
Or his starched beard? well! you shall have him, yes.
He shall come home, and minister unto you
The fricace, for the moother. Or, let me see,
I think, you' had rather mount? would you not mount?
Why, if you will mount, you may; yes truly, you may:
And so, you may be seen, down to' th'foot.
Get you a citterne, lady vanity,
And be a dealer, with the virtuous man;
Make one: I Will but protest my self a cuckold,
And save your dowry. I am a Dutchman, I!
For, if you thought me an Italian,
You would be damned, ere you did this, you whore:
Thou'ldst tremble, to imagine, that the murder
Of father, mother, brother, all thy race,
Should follow, as the subject of my justice!

CEL. Good sir, have patience!

CORV. What coul'dst thou propose
Less to thy self, then, in this heat of wrath,
And stung with my dishonor, I should strike
This steel unto thee, with as many stabs,
As thou were gazed upon with goatish eyes?

CEL. Alas sir, be appeased! I could not think
My being at the windore should more, now,
Move your impatience, then at other times.

CORV. No? not to seek, and entertain a parlee,
With a known knave? before a multitude?
You were an actor, with your handkerchiefe!
Which he, most sweetly, kissed in the receipt,
And might (no doubt) return it, with a letter,
And point the place, where you might meet: your sisters,
Your mothers, or your aunts might serve the turn.

CEL. Why, dear sir, when do I make these excuses?
Or ever stir, abroad, but to the church?
And that, so seldom --

CORV. Well, it shall be less;
And thy restraint, before, was liberty,
To what I now decree: and therefore, mark me.
First, I will have this bawdy light damned up;
And, til 't be done, some two, or three yards off,
I Will chalk a line: over which, if thou but chance
To set thy desperate foot; more hell, more horror,
More wild, remorcelesse rage shall seize on thee,
Then on a coniurer, that, had heedlesse left
His circles safety, ere his devil was laid.
Then, here is a lock, which I will hang upon thee;
And, now I think on it, I will keep thee backe-wards;
Thy lodging shall be backe-wards; thy walks back-wards;
Thy prospect-all be backe-wards; and no pleasure,
That thou shall know but backe-wards: Nay, since you force
My honest nature, know, it is your own
Being too open, makes me use you thus.
Since you will not contain your subtle nostrils
In a sweet room, but they must snuff the air
Knock within. Of rank, and sweatie passengers -- One knockes.
Away, and be not seen, pain of thy life;
Not look toward the windore: if thou do --
(Nay stay, hear this) let me not prosper, whore,
But I will make thee an anatomy,
Dissect thee mine own self, and read a lecture
Upon thee, to the city, and in public.
Away. Who Is there?

SER. It Is signior MOSCA, sir.

Act. II. Scene. VI.
CORVINO, MOSCA. LEt him come in, his master's dead: There Is yet
Some good, to help the bad. My MOSCA, welcome,
I guess your news.

MOS. I fear you cannot, sir.

CORV. Is It not his death?

MOS. Rather the contrary.

CORV. Not his recovery?

MOS. Yes, sir,

CORV. I am cursed,
I am bewitched, my crosses meet to vex me.
How? how? how? how?

MOS. Why, sir, with SCOTO'S oil!
CORBACCIO, and VOLTORE brought of it,
Whilst I was busy in an inner room --

CORV. Death! that damned mountebanke! but, for the law,
Now, I could kill the rascal: 't cannot be,
His oil should have that virtue. Have not I
Known him a common rogue, come fidling in
To the osteria, with a tumbling whore,
And, when he has done all his forced tricks, been glad
Of a poor spoonefull of dead wine, with flies in it?
It cannot be. All his ingredients
Area sheep gall, a roasted bitches marrow,
Some few sod earewigs, pounded caterpillars,
A little capons grease, and fasting spittle:
I know 'hem, to a dram.

MOS. I know not, sir,
But some on it, there they powered into his ears,
Some in his nostrils, and recouer'd him;
Applying but the fricace.

CORV. POX of that fricace.

MOS. And since, to seem the more officious,
And flattering of his health, there, they have had
(At extreme fees) the college of physicians
Consulting on him, how they might restore him;
Where, one would have a cataplasme of spices,
Another, a flayd ape clapped to his breast,
A third would ha'it a dog, a fourth an oil
With wild cats skins: at last, they all resolved
That, to preserve him, was no other means,
But some young woman must be straight sought out,
Lusty, and full of juice, to sleep by him;
And, to this service (most unhappily,
And most unwillingly) am I now employed,
Which, here, I thought to pre-acquaint you with,
For your advice, since it concerns you most,
Because, I would not do that thing might cross
Your ends, on whom I have my whole dependence, sir:
Yet, if I do it not, they may delate
My slacknesse to my patron, work me out
Of his opinion; and there, all your hopes,
Venters, or whatsoever, are all frustrate.
I do but tell you, sir. Besides, they are all
Now striving, who shall first present him. Therefore --
I could entreat you, briefly, conclude somewhat:
Prevent 'hem if you can.

CORV. Death to my hopes!
This is my villainous fortune! Best to hire
Some common curtezan?

MOS. I, I thought on that, sir.
But they are all so subtle, full of art,
And age again doting, and flexible,
So as -- I cannot tell -- we may perchance
Light on a queen, may cheat us all.

CORV. It Is true.

MOS. No, no: it must be one, that has no tricks, sir,
Some simple thing, a creature, made unto it;
Some wench you may command. Have you no kinswoman?
Gods so -- Think, think, think, think, think, think, think, sir.
One of the Doctors offered, there, his daughter.

CORV. How!

MOS. Yes, signior LVPO, the physician,

CORV. His daughter?

MOS. And a virgin, sir. Why? Alas
He knows the state of's body, what it is;
That naught can warm his blood, sir, but a fever;
Nor any incantation raise his spirit:
A long forgetfulness has seized that part.
Besides, sir, who shall know it? some one, or two --

CORV. I pray thee give me leave. If any man
But I had had this luck -- The thing in it self,
I know, is nothing -- Wherefore should not I
As well command my blood, and my affections,
As this dull Doctor? In the point of honor,
The cases are all one, of wife, and daughter.

MOS. I hear him coming.

CORV. She shall do it: It Is done.
Slight, if this Doctor, who is not engaged,
Unless 't be for his counsel (which is nothing)
Offer his daughter, what should I, that am
So deeply in? I will prevent him: wretch!
Covetous wretch! MOSCA, I have determined.

MOS. How, sir?

CORV. We'll make all sure. The party, you wot of,
Shall be mine own wife, MOSCA.

MOS. Sir. The thing,
(But that I would not seem to counsel you)
I should have motion'd to you, at the first:
And, make your count, you have cut all their throtes.
Why! it is directly taking a possession!
And, in his next fit, we may let him go.
It Is but to pull the pillow, from his head,
And he is thratled: 't had been done, before,
But for your scrupulous doubts.

CORV. I, a plague on it,
My conscience fools my wit. Well, I Will be brief,
And so be thou, lest they should be before us;
Go home, prepare him, tell him, with what zeal,
And willingness, I do it: swear it was,
On the first hearing (as thou may do, truly)
Mine own free motion.

MOS. Sir, I warrant you,
I Will so possess him with it, that the rest
Of his starved clients shall be banished, all;
And only you received. But come not, sir,
Until I send, for I have something else
To ripen, for your good (you must not know it)

CORV. But do not you forget to send, now.

MOS. Fear not.

Act II. Scene VII.
CORVINO, CELIA. WHere are you, wife? my CELIA? wife? what, blubbering?
Come, dry those tears. I think, thou thought me in earnest?
Ha? by this light, I talked so but to try thee.
Me thinks, the lightness of the occasion
Should have confirmed thee. Come, I am not jealous.

CEL. No?

CORV. Faith, I am not, I, nor never was:
It is a poor, unprofitable humor.
Do not I know, if women have a will,
They Will do against all the watches, of the world?
And that the fiercest spies, are tamed with gold?
Tut, I am confident in thee, thou shall see it:
And see, I Will give thee cause too, to believe it.
Come, kiss me. Go, and make thee ready straight,
In all thy best attire, thy choicest jewels,
Put 'hem all on, and, with 'hem, thy best looks:
We are invited to a solemn feast,
At old VOLPONE'S, where it shall appear
How far I am free, from jealousy, or fear.

Act III.
Scene I.
MOSCA. I Fear, I shall begin to grow in love
With my dear self, and my most prosperous parts,
They do so spring, and burgeon; I can feel
A whimsey in my blood: (I know not how)
Success has made me wanton. I could skip
Out of my skin, now, like a subtle snake,
I am so limber. O! Your Parasite
Is a most precious thing, dropped from above,
Not bred amongst clods, and clot-poules, here on earth.
I muse, the mystery was not made a science,
It is so liberally professed! almost
All the wise world is little else, in nature,
But Parasites, or Sub-parasites. And, yet,
I mean not those, that have your bare towne-arte,
To know, who is fit to feed 'hem; have no house,
No family, no care, and therefore mould
Tales for men's ears, to bait that sense; or get
Kitchin-inuention, and some stale receipts
To please the belly, and the groine; nor those,
With their court-dog-tricks, that can fawn, and fleere,
Make their reuennue out of legs, and faces,
Echo my-Lord, and lick away a moath:
But your fine, elegant rascal, that can rise,
And stoop (almost together) like an arrow;
Shoot through the air, as nimbly as a star;
Turn short, as does a swallow; and be here,
And there, and here, and yonder, all at once;
Present to any humor, all occasion;
And change a visor, swifter, then a thought!
This is the creature, had the art borne with him;
Toiles not to learn it, but does practice it
Out of most excellent nature: and such sparks,
Are the true Parasites, others but their Zant's.

Act III. Scene II.
MOSCA, BONARIO. Who Is this? BONARIO? old CORBACCIO's son?
The person I was bound to seek. Fair sir,
You are happ'ly met.

BON. That cannot be, by thee.

MOS. Why, sir?

BON. Nay 'pray thee know thy way, and leave me:
I would be loath to inter-change discourse,
With such a mate, as thou art.

MOS. Courteous sir,
Scorn not my poverty.

BON. Not I, by heaven:
But thou shall give me leave to hate thy baseness.

MOS. Baseness?

BON. I, answer me, is not thy sloth
Sufficient argument? thy flattery?
Thy means of feeding?

MOS. Heaven, be good to me.
These imputations are too common, sir,
And easily stuck on virtue, when she is poor;
You are unequal to me, and how ere
Your sentence may be righteous, yet you are not,
That ere you know me, thus, proceed in censure:
St. MARK bear witness against you, it is inhumane.

BON. What? does he weep? the sign is soft, and good!
I do repent me, that I was so harsh.

MOS. It Is true, that, swayed by strong necessity,
I am enforced to eat my careful bread
With too much obsequie; it is true, beside,
That I am feign to spin mine own poor raiment,
Out of my mere observance, being not borne
To a free fortune: but that I have done
Base offices, in rending friends asunder,
Dividing families, betraying counsels,
Whispering false lies, or mining men with praises,
Trained their credulity with periuries,
Corrupted chastity, or am in love
With mine own tender ease, but would not rather
Prove the most rugged, and laborious course,
That might redeem my present estimation;
Let me here perish, in all hope of goodness.

BON. This cannot be a personated passion!
I was to blame, so to mistake thy nature;
'Pray thee forgive me: and speak out thy business.

MOS. Sir, it concerns you; and though I may seem,
At first, to make a maine offense, in manners,
And in my gratitude, unto my master,
Yet, for the pure love, which I bear all right,
And hatred of the wrong, I must reveal it.
This very hour, your father is in purpose
To disinherit you --

BON. How!

MOS. And thrust you forth,
As a mere stranger to his blood; it is true, sir:
The work no way ingageth me, but, as
I claim an interest in the general state
Of goodness, and true virtue, which I hear
T'abound in you: and, for which mere respect,
Without a second aim, sir, I have done it.

BON. This tale has lost thee much of the late trust,
Thou had with me; it is impossible:
I know not how to lend it any thought,
My father should be so unnatural.

MOS. It is a confidence, that well becomes
Your piety; and formed (no doubt) it is,
From your own simple innocence: which makes
Your wrong more monstrous, and abhorred. But, sir,
I now, will tell you more. This very minute,
It is, or will be doing: And, if you
Shall be but pleased to go with me, I Will bring you,
(I dare not say where you shall see, but) where
Your ear shall be a witness of the deed;
Hear your self written bastard: and professed
The common issue of the earth.

BON. I Am mazed!

MOS. Sir, if I do it not, draw your just sword,
And score your vengeance, on my front, and face;
Mark me your villain: You have too much wrong,
And I do suffer for you, sir. My heart
Weeps blood, in anguish --

BON. Lead. I follow thee.

Act III. Scene III.
VOLPONE, NANO, ANDROGYNO, CASTRONE. MOSCA stays long, me thinks. Bring forth
your sports
And help, to make the wretched time more sweet.

NAN. Dwarf, Fool, and Eunuch, well met here we be.
A question it were now, whether of us three,
Being all the known delicates of a rich man,
In pleasing him, claim the precedencie can?

CAS. I claim for my self.

AND. And, so does the fool.

NAN. It Is foolish indeed: let me set you both to school.
First, for your dwarf, he is little, and witty,
And every thing, as it is little, is prittie;
Else why do men say to a creature of my shape,
So soon as they see him, it is a pretty little ape?
And, why a pretty ape? but for pleasing imitation
Of greater men's action, in a ridiculous fashion.
Beside, this feat body of mine does not crave
Half the meat, drink, and cloth, one of your bulkes will have.
Admit, your fools face be the mother of laughter,
Yet, for his brain, it must always come after:
And, though that do feed him, it is a pitiful case,
His body is beholding to such a bad face.

VOLP. One knocks. Who Is there? my couch, away, look, NANO, see:
Give me my cappes, first -- go, enquire. Now, CUPID
Send it be MOSCA, and with fair return.

NAN. It is the beauteous madam --

VOLP. WOVLD-BE -- is it?

NAN. The same.

VOLP. Now, torment on me; squire her in:
For she will enter, or dwell here for ever.
Nay, quickly, that my fit were past. I fear
A second hell too, that my loathing this
Will quite expel my appetite to the other:
Would she were taking, now, her tedious leave.
Lord, how it threats me, what I am to suffer!

Act III. Scene IIII.
LADY, VOLPONE, NANO, WOMEN. 2. I Thank you, good sir. 'Pray you signify
Unto your patron, I am here. This band
Shows not my neck enough (I trouble you, sir,
Let me request you, bid one of my women
Come hither to me) in good faith, I, am dressed
Most favorably, to day, it is no matter,
It Is well enough. Look, see, these petulant things!
How they have done this!

VOLP. I do feel the fever
Entering, in at mine ears; O, for a charm,
To fright it hence.

LAD. Come nearer: is this curle
In his right place? or this? why is this higher
Then all the rest? you have not washed your eyes, yet?
Or do they not stand even in your head?
Where Is your fellow? call her.

NAN. NOW, St. MARK
Deliver us: anon, she will beat her women,
Because her nose is red.

LAD. I pray you, view
This tire, forsooth: are all things apt, or no?

WOM. One hair a little, here, stick out, forsooth.

LAD. Does 't so forsooth? and where was your dear sight
When it did so, forsooth? what now? bird-ey'd?
And you, too? 'pray you both approach, and mend it.
Now (by that light) I muse, yo'are not ashamed!
I, that have preached these things, so often, unto you,
Read you the principles, argued all the grounds,
Disputed every fitness, every grace,
Called you to counsel of so frequent dressings --

(NAN. More carefully, then of your fame, or honor)

LAD. Made you acquainted, what an ample dowry
The knowledge of these things would be unto you,
Able, alone, to get you noble husbands
At your return: and you, thus, to neglect it?
Besides, you seeing what a curious nation
The Italians are, what will they say of me?
The English lady cannot dress her self;
Here Is a fine imputation, to our country!
Well, go your ways, and stay, in the next room.
This fucus was too course too, it is no matter.
Good-sir, you will giue'hem entertaynement?

VOLP. The storm comes toward me.

LAD. How does my VOLP?

VOLP. Troubled with noise, I cannot sleep; I dreamt
That a strange fury entered, now, my house,
And, with the dreadful tempest of her breath,
Did cleave my roof asunder.

LAD. Believe me, and I
Had the most fearful dream, could I remember't --

VOLP. Out on my fate; I have given her the occasion
How to torment me: she will tell me hers.

LAD. Me thought, the golden mediocritie
Polite, and delicate --

VOLP. O, if you do love me,
No more; I sweat, and suffer, at the mention
Of any dream: feel, how I tremble yet.

LAD. Alas, good soul! the passion of the heart.
Seed-pearle were good now, boild with syrrope of apples,
Tincture of gold, and corrall, citron-pills,
Your elicampane root, mirobalanes --

VOLP. Ay me, I have taken a grasse-hopper by the wing.

LAD. Burnt silk, and amber, you have muscadell
Good in the house --

VOLP. You will not drink, and part?

LAD. No, fear not that. I doubt, we shall not get
Some english saffron (half a dram would serve)
Your sixteen cloves, a little musk, dried mints.
Buglosse, and barley-meale --

VOLP. She Is in again,
Before I fayn'd diseases, now I have one.

LAD. And these applied, with a right scarlet-cloth --

VOLP. Another flood of words! a very torrent!

LAD. Shall I, sir, make you a poultise?

VOLP. No, no, no;
I Am very well: you need prescribe no more.

LAD. I have, a little, studied physic; but, now,
I Am all for music: save, in the fore-noones,
An hour, or two, for painting. I would have
A lady, indeed, to have all, letters, and arts,
Be able to discourse, to write, to paint,
But principal (as PLATO holds) your music
(And, so does wise PYTHAGORAS, I take it)
Is your true rapture; when there is concent
In face, in voice, and clothes: and is, indeed,
Our sexes chiefest ornament.

VOLP. The Poet,
As old in time, as PLATO, and as knowing,
Says that your highest female grace is silence.

LAD. Which o'your Poets? PETRARCH? or TASSO? or DANTE?
GVERRINI? ARIOSTO? ARETINE?
CIECO di Hadria? I have read them all.

VOLP. Is every thing a cause, to my destruction?

LAD. I think, I ha'two or three of'hem, about me.

VOLP. The sun, the sea will sooner, both, stand still,
Then her eternal tongue! nothing can escape it.

LAD. Here Is PASTOR FIDO --

VOLP. Profess obstinate silence,
That Is, now, my safest.

LAD. All our English writers,
I mean such, as are happy in the Italian,
Will deigne to steal out of this author, mainely;
Almost as much, as from MONTAGNIE:
He has so modern, and facile a vein,
Fitting the time, and catching the court-eare.
Your PETRARCH is more passionate, yet he,
In days of sonetting, trusted 'hem, with much:
DANTE is hard, and few can understand him.
But, for a desperate wit, there is ARETINE!
Only, his pictures are a little obscene --
You mark me not?

VOLP. Alas, my mind's perturb'd.

LAD. Why, in such cases, we must cure our selves,
Make use of our philosophy --

VOLP. O'y me.

LAD. And, as we find our passions do rebel,
Encounter 'hem with reason; or divert 'hem,
By giving scope unto some other humor
Of lesser danger: as, in politic bodies,
There Is nothing, more, does ouer-whelme the judgment,
And clouds the understanding, then too much
Settling, and fixing, and (as't were) subsiding
Upon one object. For the incorporating
Of these same outward things, into that part,
Which we call mental, leaves some certain faeces,
That stop the organs, and, as PLATO says,
Assassinates our knowledge.

VOLP. Now, the spirit
Of patience help me.

LAD. Come, in faith, I must
Visit you more, a days; and make you well:
Laugh, and be lusty.

VOLP. My good angel save me.

LAD. There was but one sole man, in all the world,
With whom I ere could sympathize; and he
Would lie you often, three, four hours together,
To hear me speak: and be (sometime) so raped,
As he would answer me, quite from the purpose,
Like you, and you are like him, just. I Will discourse
(And 't be but only, sir, to bring you a-sleepe
How we did spend our time, and loves, together,
For some six years.

VOLP. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.

LAD. For we were coaetanci, and brought up --

VOLP. Some power, some fate, some fortune rescue me.

Act III. Scene V.
MOSCA, LADY, VOLPONE. GOd save you, Madam.

LAD. Good sir.

VOLP. MOSCA? welcome,
Welcome to my redemption.

MOS. Why, sir?

VOLP. Oh,
Rid me of this my torture, quickly, there;
My Madam, with the everlasting voice:
The bells, in time of pestilence, never made
Like noise, or were in that perpetual motion;
The cockpit comes not near it. All my house,
But now, steam'd like a bath, with her thick breath.
A lawyer could not have been heard; nor scarce
Another woman, such a hayle of words
She has let fall. For hells sake, rid her hence.

MOS. Has she presented?

VOLP. O, I do not care,
I Will take her absence, upon any price,
With any loss.

MOS. Madam --

LAD. I have brought your patron
A toy, a cap here, of mine own work --

MOS. It Is well,
I had forgot to tell you, I saw your Knight,
Where you would little think it --

LAD. Where?

MOS. Mary,
Where yet, if you make haste, you may apprehend him,
Rowing upon the water in a gondole,
With the most cunning curtizan, of Venice.

LAD. Is It true?

MOS. Pursue 'hem, and believe your eyes:
Leave me, to make your gift. I knew, 't would take.
For lightly, they that use themselves most license,
Are still most jealous.

VOLP. MOSCA, hearty thanks,
For thy quick fiction, and delivery of me.
Now, to my hopes, what say thou?

LAD. But do you hear, sir? --

VOLP. Again; I fear a paroxisme.

LAD. Which way
Rowed they together?

MOS. Toward the rialto.

LAD. I pray you lend me your dwarf.

MOS. I pray you, take him.
Your hopes, sir, are like happy blossoms, fair,
And promise timely fruit, if you will stay
But the maturing; keep you, at your couch,
CORBACCIO will arrive straight, with the will:
When he is gone, i will tell you more.

VOLP. My blood,
My spirits are returned; I am alive:
And like your wanton gam'ster, at primero,
Whose thought had whispered to him, not go less,
Methinkes I lie, and draw -- for an encounter.

Act III. Scene VI.
MOSCA, BONARIO. SIr, here conceald, you may hear all. But 'pray you
One knockes. Have patience, sir; the same's your father, knocks:
I am compeld, to leave you.

BON. Do so. Yet,
Cannot my thought imagine this a truth.

Act. III. Scene. VII.
MOSCA, CORVINO, CELIA, BONARIO, VOLPONE. DEath on me! you are come too soon,
what meant you?
Did not I say, I would send?

CORV. Yes, but I feared
You might forget it, and then they prevent us.

MOS. Prevent? did ere man haste so, sor his horns?
A courtier would not ply it so, for a place.
Well, now there is no helping it, stay here;
I Will presently return.

CORV. Where are you, CELIA?
You know not wherefore I have brought you hither?

CEL. Not well, except you told me.

CORV. Now, I will:
Hark hither.

MOS. To Bonario. Sir, your father has sent word,
It will be half an hour, ere he come;
And therefore, if you please to walk, the while,
Into that gallery -- at the upper end,
There are some books, to entertain the time:
And i will take care, no man shall come unto you, sir.

BON. Yes, I will stay there, I do doubt this fellow.

MOS. There, he is far enough; he can hear nothing:
And, for his father, I can keep him off.

CORV. Nay, now, there is no starting back; and therefore,
Resolve upon it: I have so decreed.
It must be done. Nor, would I moue't before,
Because I would avoid all shifts and tricks,
That might deny me.

CEL. Sir, let me beseech you,
Affect not these strange trials; if you doubt
My chastity, why lock me up, for ever:
Make me the heir of darkness. Let me live,
Where I may please your fears, if not your trust.

CORV. Believe it, I have no such humor, I.
All that I speak, I mean; yet I am not mad:
Not horne-mad, see you? Go too, show your self
Obedient, and a wife.

CEL. O heaven!

CORV. I say it,
Do so.

CEL. Was this the train?

CORV. I'haue told you reasons;
What the physicians have set down; how much,
It may concern me; what my engagements are;
My means; and the necessity of those means,
For my recovery: wherefore, it you be
Loyal, and mine, be won, respect my venture.

CEL. Before your honor?

CORV. Honor? tut, a breath;
There Is no such thing, in nature: a mere term
Invented to awe fools. What is my gold
The worse, for touching? clothes, for being looked on?
Why, this 's no more. An old, decrepit wretch,
That has no sense, no sinew; takes his meat
With others fingers; only knows to gape,
When you do scald his gummes; a voice; a shadow;
And, what can this man hurt you?

CEL. Lord! what spirit
Is this has entered him?

CORV. And for your fame,
That Is such a Iigge; as if I would go tell it,
Cry it, on the piazza! who shall know it?
But he, that cannot speak it; and this fellow,
Whose lips are in my pocket: save your self,
If you will proclaime't, you may. I know no other,
Should come to know it.

CEL. Are heaven, and saints then nothing?
Will they be blind, or stupide?

CORV. How?

CEL. Good Sir,
Be jealous still, aemulate them; and think
What hate they burn with, toward every sin.

CORV. I grant you: if I thought it were a sin,
I would not urge you. Should I offer this
To some young Frenchman, or hot Tuscane blood,
That had read ARETINE, conn'd all his printes,
Knew every quirke within lusts laborinth,
And were professed critique, in lechery;
And I would look upon him, and applaud him,
This were a sin: but here, it is contrary,
A pious work, mere charity, for physic,
And honest polity, to assure mine own.

CEL. O heaven! can thou suffer such a change?

VOLP. Thou art mine honor, MOSCA, and my pride;
My joy, my tickling, my delight! go, bring 'hem.

MOS. Please you draw near, sir.

CORV. Come on, what --
You will not be rebellious? by that light --

MOS. Sir, signior CORVINO, here, is come to see you.

VOLP. Oh.

MOS. And hearing of the consultation had,
So lately, for your health, is come to offer,
Or rather, sir, to prostitute --

CORV. Thanks, sweet MOSCA.

MOS. Freely, vn-ask'd, or vn-intreated --

CORV. Well.

MOS. (As the true, fervent instance of his love)
His own most fair and proper wife; the beauty,
Only of price, in Venice --

CORV. It Is well urged.

MOS. To be your comfortresse, and to preserve you.

VOLP. Alas, I am past already! 'pray you, thank 'him,
For his good care, and promptness, but for that,
It Is a vain labor, eene to fight, against heaven;
Applying fire to a stone: (vh, vh, vh, vh.)
Making a dead leaf grow again. I take
His wishes gently, though; and, you may tell him,
What IN have done for him: mary; my state is hopeless!
Will him, to pray for me; and t'vse his fortune,
With reverence, when he comes to it.

MOS. Do you hear, sir?
Go to him, with your wife.

CORV. Heart of my father!
Will thou persist thus? come, I pray thee, come.
Thou see it is nothing. CELIA. By this hand,
I shall grow violent. Come, do it, I say.

CEL Sir, kill me, rather: I will take down poison,
Eat burning coals, do any thing --

CORV. Be damned.
(Heart) I will drag thee hence, home, by the hair;
Cry thee a strumpet, through the streets; rip up
Thy mouth, unto thine ears; and slit thy nose,
Like a raw rotchet -- Do not tempt me, come.
Yield, I am loath -- (Death) I will buy some slave,
Whom I will kill, and bind thee to him, alive;
And at my windore, hang you forth: devising
Some monstrous crime, which I, in capital letters,
Will eat into thy flesh, with aquafortis,
And burning cor'siues, on this stubborn breast.
Now, by the blood, thou have incensed, i will do it.

CEL. Sir, what you please, you may, I am your martyr.

CORV. Be not thus obstinate. I have not deserved it:
Think, who it is, entreats you. 'Pray thee, sweet;
(Good faith) thou shall have jewels, gowns, attires,
What thou will think, and ask. Do, but, go kiss him.
Or touch him, but. For my sake. At my suit.
This once. No? not? I shall remember this.
Will you disgrace me, thus? do' you thirst my'vndoing?

MOS. Nay, gentle lady, be advised.

CORV. No, no.
She has watched her time. God's precious, this is skiruy;
It Is very skiruie: and you are --

MOS. Nay, good, sir.

CORV. An errant locust, by heaven, a locust. Whore,
Crocodile, that have thy thy tears prepared,
Expecting, how thou wilt bid 'hem flow.

MOS. Nay, 'Pray you, sir,
She will consider.

CEL. Would my life would serve
To satisfy.

CORV. (God's Death) if she would but speak to him,
And save my reputation, 'twere somewhat;
But, spightfully to affect my utter ruin.

MOS. I, now you' have put your fortune, in her hands.
Why in faith, it is her modesty, I must quit her;
If you were absent, she would be more coming;
I know it: and dare undertake for her.
What woman can, before her husband? 'pray you,
Let us depart, and leave her, here.

CORV. Sweet CELIA,
Thou may redeem all, yet; I Will say no more:
If not, esteem your self as lost. Nay, stay there.

CEL. O god, and his good angels! whether, whether.
Is shame fled humane breasts? that with such ease,
Men dare put off your honors, and their own?
Is that, which ever was a cause of life,
Now placed beneath the basest circumstance?
And modesty an exile made, for money?

VOLP. He leapes off from his couch. I, in CORVINO, and such earth-fed minds,
That never tasted the true heaven of love.
Assure thee, CELIA, he that would sell thee,
Only for hope of gain, and that uncertain,
He would have sold his part of paradise
For ready money, had he met a cope-man.
Why art thou mazed, to see me thus revived?
Rather applaud thy beauties miracle;
It Is thy great work: that has, not now alone,
But sundry times, 'rays'd me, in several shapes,
And, but this morning, like a mountebanke,
To see thee at thy windore. I, before
I would have left my practice, for thy love,
In varying figures, I would have contended
With the blue PROTEVS, or the horned Flood.
Now, art thou welcome.

CEL. Sir!

VOLP. Nay, fly me not.
Nor, let thy false imagination
That I was bedrid, make thee think, I am so:
Thou shall not find it. I am, now, as fresh,
As hot, as high, and in as iouiall plight,
As when (in that so celebrated scene,
At recitation of our comoedie,
For entertainment of the great VALOYS)
I acted young ANTINOVS; and attracted
The eyes, and ears of all the ladies, present,
TO admire each graceful gesture, note, and footing.

SONG. COme, my CELIA, let us prove,
While we can, the sports of love;
Time will not be ours, for ever,
He, at length, our good will sever;
Spend not then his gifts, in vain.
Suns, that set, may rise again:
But if, once, we lose this light,
It Is with us perpetual night.
Why should we defer our joys?
Fame, and rumor are but toies.
Cannot we delude the eyes
Of a few poor houshold-spies?
Or his easier ears beguile,
Thus removed, by our wile?
It Is no sin, loves fruits to steal;
But the sweet thefts to reveal:
To be taken, to be seen,
These have crimes accounted been.
CEL. Some serene blast me, or dire lightning strike
This my offending face.

VOLP. Why droopes my CELIA?
Thou have in place of a base husband, found
A worthy lover: use thy fortune well,
With secrecy, and pleasure. See, behold,
What thou art queen of; not in expectation,
As I feed others: but possessed, and crowned.
See, here, a rope of pearl; and each, more orient
Then that the brave Egyptian queen carrous'd:
Dissolve, and drink 'hem. See, a carbuncle,
May put out both the eyes of our St. MARK;
A diamant, would have bought LOLLIA PAVLINA,
When she came in, like starlight hid with jewels,
That were the spoils of provinces; take these,
And wear, and loose 'hem: yet remains an eare-ring
To purchase them again, and this whole state.
A gem, but worth a private patrimony,
Is nothing: we will eat such at a meal.
The heads of parrats, tongues of nightingales,
The brains of peacoks, and of estriches
Shall be our food: and, could we get the phoenix,
(Though nature lost her kind) she were our dish.

CEL. Good sir, these things might move a mind affected
With such delights; but I, whose innocence
Is all I can think wealthy, or worth th'enioying,
And which once lost, I have naught to loose beyond it,
Cannot be taken with these sensual baits:
If you have conscience --

VOLP. It Is the beggars virtue,
If thou have wisdom, hear me, CELIA.
Thy bathes shall be the juice of iuly-flowres,
Spirit of roses, and of violets,
The milk of unicorns, and panthers breath
Gathered in bags, and mixed with cretan wines.
Our drink shall be prepared gold, and amber;
Which we will take, until my roof whirle round
With the vertigo: and my dwarf shall dance,
My eunuch sing, my fool make up the antique.
Whilst, we, in changed shapes, act OVIDS tales,
Thou, like EVROPA now, and I like JOVE,
Then I like MARS, and thou like ERYCINE,
So, of the rest, till we have quite run through
And wearied all the fables of the gods.
Then will I have thee in more modern forms,
Attired like some sprightly dame of France,
Brave Tuscan lady, or proud Spanish beauty;
Sometimes, unto the Persian Sophies wife;
Or the grand- Signiors mistress; and, for change,
To one of our most art-full courtizans,
Or some quick Negro, or cold Russian;
And I will meet thee, in as many shapes:
Where we may, so, trans-fuse our wandering souls,
Out at our lips, and score up sums of pleasures,
That the curious shall not know,
How to tell them, as they slow;
And the envious, when they find
What their number is, be pind.

CEL. If you have ears that will be pierced; or eyes,
That can be opened; a heart, may be touched;
Or any part, that yet sounds man, about you:
If you have touch of holy saints, or heaven,
Do me the grace, to let me escape. If not,
Be bountiful, and kill me. You do know,
I am a creature, hither ill betrayed,
By one, whose shame I would forget it were,
If you will daigne me neither of these graces,
Yet feed your wrath, sir, rather then your lust;
(It is a vice, comes nearer manliness)
And punish that unhappy crime of nature,
Which you miscal my beauty: flay my face,
Or poison it, with ointments, for seducing
Your blood to this rebellion. Rub these hands,
With what may cause an eating leprosy,
E'ene to my bones, and marrow: any thing,
That may disfavor me, save in my honor.
And I will kneel to you, pray for you, pay down
A thousand hourly vows, sir, for your health,
Report, and think you virtuous --

VOLP. Think me cold,
Frosen, and impotent, and so report me?
That I had NESTOR'S hernia, thou would think.
I do degenerate, and abuse my nation,
To play with opportunity, thus long:
I should have done the act, and then have parlee'd.
Yield, or I Will force thee.

CEL. O! just God.

VOLP. In vain --

BON. He (...) from (...) Mo^^a (...) placed (...) Forbear, foul rauisher,
libidinous swine,
Free the forced lady, or thou dy'st, impostor.
But that I am loath to snatch thy punishment
Out of the hand of justice, thou should, yet,
Be made the timely sacrifice of vengeance,
Before this altar, and this dross, thy idol.
Lady, let us quit the place, it is the den
Of villainy; fear naught, you have a guard:
And he, ere long, shall meet his just reward.

VOLP. Fall on me, roof, and bury me in ruin,
Become my grave, that were my shelter. O!
I am vn-masqu'd, vn-spirited, vn-done,
Betrayed to beggary, to infamy --

Act III. Scene VIII.
MOSCA, VOLPONE. WHere shall I run, most wretched shame of men,
To beat out my vn-luckie brains?

VOLP. Here, here.
What! do thou bleed?

MOS. O, that his wel-driu'n sword
Had been so courteous to have cleft me down,
Unto the nauill; ere I lived to see
My life, my hopes, my spirits, my patron, all
Thus desperately engaged, by my error.

VOLP. Woe, on thy fortune.

MOS. And my follies, sir.

VOLP. The have made me miserable.

MOS. And my self, sir.
Who would have thought, he would have harken'd, so?

VOLP. What shall we do?

MOS. I know not, if my heart
Could expiate the mischance, Il'd pluck it out.
Will you be pleased to hang me? or cut my throat?
And i will requite you, sir. Let Us die like Romans,
They knock without. Since we have lived, like Grecians.

VOLP. Hark, who is there?
I hear some footing, officers, the Saffi,
Come to apprehend us! I do feel the brand
Hissing already, at my forehead: now,
Mine ears are boring.

MOS. To your couch, sir, you
Make that place good, how ever. Guilty men
Suspect, what they deserve still. Signior CORBACCIO!

Act III. Scene IX.
CORBACCIO, MOSCA, VOLTORE, VOLPONE. WHy! how now? MOSCA!

MOS. O, undone, amazed, sir.
Your son (I know not, by what accident)
Acquainted with your purpose to my patron,
Touching your will, and making him your heir;
Entered our house with violence, his sword drawn,
Sought for you, called you wretch, unnatural,
Vowed he would kill you.

CORB. Me?

MOS. Yes, and my patron.

CORB. ^This act, shall disinherit him indeed:
Here is the will.

MOS. It Is well, sir.

CORB. Right and well.
Be you as careful now, for me.

MOS. My life, sir,
Is not more tendered, I am only yours.

CORB. How does he? will he die shortly, think thou?

MOS. I fear.
He Will out-last May.

CORB. To day?

MOS. No, last-out May, sir.

CORB. Could thou not gi' him a dram?

MOS. O, by no means, sir.

CORB. Nay, I Will not bid you.

VOLT. This is a knave, I see.

MOS. How, signior VOLTORE! did he hear me?

VOLT. Parasite.

MOS. Who Is that? O, sir, most timely welcome --

VOLT. Scarce,
To the discovery of your tricks, I fear.
You are his, only? and mine, also? are you not?

MOS. Who? I, sir!

VOLT. You, sir. What device is this
About a will?

MOS. A plot for you, sir.

VOLT. Come,
Put not your foist's upon me, I shall sent 'hem.

MOS. Did you not hear it?

VOLT. Yes, I hear, CORBACCIO
Has made your patron, there, his heir.

MOS. It Is true,
By my device, drawn to it by my plot,
With hope --

VOLT. Your patron should reciprocate?
And, you have promised?

MOS. For your good, I did, sir.
Nay more, I told his son, brought, hid him here,
Where he might hear his father pass the deed;
Being persuaded to it, by this thought, sir,
That the unnaturalness, first, of the act,
And then, his fathers often disclaiming in him,
(Which I did mean t'helpe on) would sure enrage him
To do some violence upon his parent.
On which the law should take sufficient hold,
And you be stated in a double hope:
Truth be my comfort, and my conscience,
My only aim was, to dig you a fortune
Out of these two, old rotten sepulchers --

(VOLT. I cry thee mercy, MOSCA.)

MOS. Worth your patience,
And your great merit, sir. And, see the change!

VOLT. Why? what success?

MOS. Most hapless! you must help, sir.
Whilst we expected the old raven, in comes
CORVINO'S wife, sent hither, by her husband --

VOLT. What, with a present?

MOS. No, sir, on visitation:
(I Will tell you how, anon) and, staying long,
The youth, he grows impatient, rushes forth,
Seizes the lady, wound's me, makes her swear
(Or he would murder her, that was his vow)
T'affirme my patron to have done her rape:
Which how unlike it is, you see! and, hence,
With that pretext, he is gone, t'accuse his father;
Defame my patron; defeat you --

VOLT. Where Is her husband?
Let him be sent for, straight.

MOS. Sir, I Will go fetch him.

VOLT. Bring him, to the Scrutineo.

MOS. Sir, I will.

VOLT. This must be stopped.

MOS. O, you do nobly, sir.
Alas, 'twas labored all, sir, for your good;
Nor, was there want of counsel, in the plot:
But fortune can, at any time, orethrow
The proiects of a hundred learned clearkes, sir.

CORB. What Is that?

VOLT. Wilt please you sir, to go along?

MOS. Patron, go in, and pray for our success.

VOLP. Need makes devotion: heaven your labor bless.

Act IIII.
Scene I.
POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE. I Told you, sir, it was a plot: you see
What observation is. You mentioned me,
For some instructions: I will tell you, sir,
(Since we are met, here in this height of Venice)
Some few particulars, I have set down,
Only for this meridian; fit to be known
Of your crude traveler, and they are these.
I will not touch, sir, at your phrase, or clothes,
For they are old.

PER. Sir, I have better.

POL. Pardon
I meant, as they are theames.

PER. O, sir, proceed:
I Will slander you no more of wit, good sir.

POL. First, for your garb, it must be grave, and serious;
Very reserved, and locked; not tell a secret,
On any terms, not to your father; scarce
A fable, but with caution; make sure choice
Both of your company, and discourse; beware,
You never spoke a truth --

PER. How!

POL. Not to strangers,
For those be they you must converse with, most;
Others I would not know, sir, but, at distance,
So as I still might be a fauer, in 'hem:
You shall have tricks, else, past upon you, hourly.
And then, for your religion, profess none;
But wonder, at the diversity of all;
And, for your part, protest, were there no other
But simply the laws of the land, you could content you:
NIC: MACHIAVEL, and monsieur BODINE, both,
Were of this mind. Then, must you learn the use,
And handling of your silver forke, at meals;
The metal of your glass: (these are maine matters,
With your Italian) and to know the hour,
When you must eat your melons, and your figs.

PER. Is that a point of state, too?

POL. Here it is.
For your Venetian, if he see a man
Preposterous, in the least, he has him straight;
He has: he strippes him. I Will acquaint you, sir,
I now have lived here ('it is some fourteen months)
Within the first week, of my landing here,
All took me for a citizen of Venice:
I knew the forms, so well --

PER. And nothing else.

POL. I had read CONTARENE, took me a house,
Dealt with my Jews, to furnish it with moueables --
Well, if I could but find one man, one man,
To mine own heart, whom I durst trust, I would --

PER. What? what, sir?

POL. Make him rich; make him a fortune:
He should not think, again. I would command it.

PER. As how?

POL. With certain proiects, that I have:
Which, I may not discover.

PER. If I had
But one to wager with, I would lay odds, now,
He tells me, instantly.

POL. One is, (and that
I care not greatly, who knows) to serve the state
Of Venice, with red herrings, for three years,
And at a certain rate, from Roterdam,
Where I have correspondence. There Is a letter,
Sent me from one of the States, and to that purpose;
He cannot write his name, but that is his mark.

PER. He is a chaundler?

POL. No, a cheesemonger.
There are some other too, with whom I treat,
About the same negotiation;
And, I will undertake it: For it is thus,
I Will do it with ease, IN have cast it all. Your hoigh
Carries but three men in her, and a boy;
And she shall make me three returns, a year:
So, if there come but one of three, I save,
If two, I can defalke. But, this is now,
If my main project fail.

PER. Then, you have others?

POL. I should be loath to draw the subtle air
Of such a place, without my thousand aims.
I Will not dissemble, sir, where ere I come,
I love to be consideratiue; and, it is true,
I have, at my free hours, thought upon
Some certain goods, unto the state of Venice,
Which I do call my cautions: and, sir, which
I mean (in hope of pension) to propound
To the great council, then unto the forty,
So to the ten. My means are made already --

PER. By whom?

POL. Sir, one, that though his place b'obscure,
Yet, he can sway, and they will hear him. H'is
A commandadore.

PER. What, a common sergeant?

POL. Sir, such, as they are, put it in their mouths,
What they should say, sometimes: as well as greater.
I think I have my notes, to show you --

PER. Good, sir,

POL. But, you shall swear unto me, on your gentry,
Not to anticipate --

PER. I, sir?

POL. Nor reveal
A circumstance -- My paper is not with me.

PER. O, but, you can remember, sir.

POL. My first is,
Concerning tinder-boxes. You must know,
No family is, here, without it is box.
Now sir, it being so portable a thing,
Put case, that you, or I were ill affected
Unto the state; sir, with it in our pockets,
Might not I go into the arsenale?
Or you? come out again? and none the wiser?

PER. Except your self, sir.

POL. Go too, then. I, therefore,
Advertise to the state, how fit it were,
That none, but such as were known patriots,
Sound lovers of their country, should be sufferd
T'enioy them in their houses: and, even those,
Sealed, at some office, and, at such a bigness,
As might not lurk in pockets.

PER. Admirable!

POL. My next is, how t'enquire, and be resolved,
By present demonstration, whether a ship,
Newly arrived from Soria, or from
Any suspected part of all the leuant,
Be guilty of the plague: And, where they use,
To lie out forty, fifty days, sometimes,
About the Lazaretto, for their trial;
I Will save that charge, and loss unto the merchant,
And, in an hour, clear the doubt.

PER. Indeed, sir?

POL. Or -- I will loose my labor.

PER. 'My faith, that is much.

POL. Nay, sir, conceive me. 'Twill cost me, in onions,
Some thirty liu'res --

PER. Which is one pound sterling.

POL. Beside my water-workes: for this I do, sir.
First, I bring in your ship, 'twixt two brickwalles;
(But those the state shall venture) on the one
I strain me a fair tarre-paulin; and, in that,
I stick my onions, cut in halfes: the other
Is full of loope-holes, out at which, I thrust
The noses of my bellows; and, those bellows
I keep, with water-workes, in perpetual motion,
(Which is the easi'st matter of a hundred)
Now, sir, your onion, which does naturally
Attract the infection, and your bellows, blowing
The air upon him, will show (instantly)
By his changed color, if there be contagion,
Or else, remain as fair, as at the first.
Now it is known, it is nothing.

PER. You are right, sir.

POL. I would, I had my note.

PER. 'Faith, so would I:
But, you have done well, for once, sir.

POL. Were I false,
Or would be made so, I could show you reasons,
How I could sell this state, now, to the Turk;
Spite of their galleis, or their --

PER. Pray you, sir POLL.

POL. I have 'hem not, about me.

PER. That I feared.
They' are there, sir?

POL. No, this is my diary,
Wherein I note my actions of the day.

PER. 'Pray you, let us see, sir. What is here? notandum,
A rat had gnawne my spurre-lethers; notwithstanding,
I put on new, and did go forth: but, first,
I threw three beans over the threshold. Item,
I went, and bought two tooth-pickes, whereof one
I burst, immediately, in a discourse
With a dutch merchant, 'bout ragion del stato.
From him I went, and paid a moccinigo,
For peecing my silk stockings; by the way,
I cheapen'd sprats: and at St. MARKS, I vrin'd.
'Faith these are politic notes!

POL. Sir, I do slip
No action of my life, thus, but I quote it.

PER. Believe me it is wise!

POL. Nay, sir, read forth.

Act IIII. Scene II.
LADY, NANO, WOMEN, POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE. WHere should this loose knight be,
trow? sure, h'is housed.

NAN. Why, then he is fast.

LAD. I, he plays both, with me:
I pray you, stay. This heat will do more harm
To my complexion, then his heart is worth.
(I do not care to hinder, but to take him)
How it comes of!

WOM. My master's yonder.

LAD. Where?

WOM. With a young gentleman.

LAD. That same's the party!
In man's apparel. 'Pray you, sir, iog my knight:
I will be tender to his reputation,
How ever he demerit.

POL. My lady!

PER. Where?

POL. It Is she indeed, sir, you shall know her. She is,
Were she not mine, a lady of that merit,
For fashion, and behavior; and, for beauty
I durst compare --

PER. It seems, you are not jealous,
That dare commend her.

POL. Nay, and for discourse --

PER. Being your wife, she cannot miss that.

POL. Madame,
Here is a gentleman, 'pray you, use him, fairly,
He seems a youth, but he is --

LAD. None?

POL. Yes, one
Has put his face, as soon, into the world --

LAD. You mean, as early? but to day?

POL. How Is this!

LAD. Why in this habit, sir, you apprehend me.
Well, master WOVLD-BEE, this does not become you;
I had thought, the odor, sir, of your good name,
Had been more precious to you; that you would not
Have done this dire massacre, on your honor;
One of your gravity, and rank, besides!
But, knights, I see, care little for the oath
They make to ladies: chiefly, their own ladies.

POL. Now, by my spurs (the symbol of my knighthood)

(PER. Lord! how his brain is humbled, for an oath)

POL. I reach you not.

LAD. Right, sir, your polity
May bear it through, thus. Sir, a word with you.
I would be loath, to contest publicly,
With any gentlewoman; or to seem
Froward, or violent (as the courtier says)
It comes too near rusticity, in a lady,
Which I would shun, by all means: and, how-euer
I may deserve from master WOVLD-BEE, yet,
To Have one fair gentlewoman, thus, be made
Th'vnkind instrument, to wrong another,
And one she knows not, I, and to persevere;
In my poor judgment, is not warranted
From being a soloecisme in our sex,
If not in manners.

PER. How is this!

POL. Sweet madame,
Come nearer to your aim.

LAD. Mary, and will, sir.
Since you provoke me, with your impudence,
And laughter of your light land- siren, here,
Your SPORVS, your hermaphrodite --

PER. What Is here?
Poetique fury, and historique storms!

POL. The gentleman, believe it, is of worth,
And of our nation.

LAD. I, your white-Friers nation?
Come, I blush for you, master WOVLD-BEE, I;
And am ashamed, you should have no more forehead,
Then, thus, to be the patron, or St. GEORGE
To a lewd harlot, a base fricatrice,
A female devil, in a male outside.

POL. Nay,
And you be such a one! I must bid adieu
To your delights. The case appears too liquide.

LAD. I, you may carry't clear, with your state-face!
But, for your carniuale concupiscence,
Who here is fled for liberty of conscience,
From furious persecution of the Marshall,
Her will I disc'ple.

PER. This is fine, in faith!
And do you use this, often? is this part
Of your wits exercise, against you have occasion?
Madam --

LAD. Go to, sir.

PER. Do you hear me, lady?
Why, if your knight have set you to beg shirts,
Or to inuit me home, you might have done it
A nearer way, by far.

LAD. This cannot work you,
Out of my snare.

PER. Why? am I in it, then?
Indeed, your husband told me, you were fair,
And so you are; only your nose enclines
(That side, that is next the sun) to the queene-apple.

LAD. This cannot be endured, by any patience.

Act IIII. Scene III.
MOSCA, LADY, PEREGRINE. What Is the matter, madame?

LAD. If the Senate
Right not my quest, in this; I will protest 'hem,
To all the world, no aristocracie.

MOS. What is the injury, lady?

LAD. Why, the callet,
You told me of, here I have taken disguised.

MOS. Who? this? what means your ladyship? the creature
I mentioned to you, is apprehended, now,
Before the Senate, you shall see her --

LAD. Where?

MOS. I Will bring you to her. This young gentleman
I saw him land, this morning, at the port.

LAD. Is It possible! how has my judgment wandered!
Sir, I must, blushing, say to you, I have erred:
And plead your pardon.

PER. What! more changes, yet?

LAD. I hope, yo' have not the malice to remember
A gentlewomans passion. If you stay,
In Venice, here, please you to use me, sir --

MOS. Will you go, madame?

LAD. 'Pray you, sir, use me. In faith,
The more you see me, the more I shall conceive,
You have forgot our quarrel.

PER. This is rare!
Sir POLITIQV^ WOVLD-BEE? no, sir POLITIQVE bawd!
To bring me, th^^^ acquainted with his wife!
Well, wise sir POL: since you have practiced, thus,
Upon my freshman-ship, I Will try your salt-head,
What proof it is against a counter-plot.

Act IIII. Scene IIII.
VOLTORE, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, MOSCA. WEll, now you know the carriage of the
business,
Your constancy is all, that is required
Unto the safety of it.

MOS. Is the lie
Safely conuai'd amongst us? is that sure?
Knows every man his burden?

CORV. Yes.

MOS. Then, shrink not.

CORV. But, knows the Advocate the truth?

MOS. O, sir,
By no means. I devised a formal tale,
That salu'd your reputation. But, be valiant, sir.

CORV. I fear no one, but him; that, this his pleading
Should make him stand for a co-heire --

MOS. Co-halter.
Hang him: we will but use his tongue, his noise,
As we do croakers, here.

CORV. I, what shall he do?

MOS. When we have done, you mean?

CORV. Yes.

MOS. Why, we'll think,
Sell him for mummia. he is half dust already.
To Voltore. Do not you smile, to see this buffalo,
How he does sport it with his head? -- IN should
To Corbac^io. If all were well, and past. Sir, only you
Are he, that shall enjoy the crop of all,
And these not know for whom they toil.

CORB. I, peace.

MOS. To Coruino, then to Voltore again. But you shall eat it. Much!
Worshipful sir,
MERCVRY sit upon your thundering tongue,
Or the French HERCULES, and make your language
As conquering as his club, to beat along,
(As with a tempest) flat, our adversaries:
But, much more, yours, sir.

VOLT. Here they come, have done.

MOS. I have another witness, if you need, sir,
I can produce.

VOLT. Who is it?

MOS. Sir, I have her.

Act IIII. Scene V.
AVOCATORI, 4. BONARIO, CELIA, VOLTORE, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, MOSCA, NOTARIO,
COMMANDADORI. THe like of this the Senate never heard of.

AVOC. 2. 'Twil come most strange to them, when we report it.

AVOC. 4. The gentlewoman has been ever held
Of vn-reproued name.

AVOC. 3. So, the young man.

AVOC. 4. The more unnatural part that of his father.

AVOC. 2. More of the husband.

AVOC. 1. I not know to give
His act a name, it is so monstrous!

AVOC. 4. But the impostor, he is a thing created
T'exceed example!

AVOC. And all after times!

AVOC. 2. I never heard a true voluptuary
Described, but him.

AVOC. 3. Appear yet those were cited?

NOTA. All, but the old magnifico, VOLPONE.

AVOC. 1. Why is not he here?

MOS. Please your father-hoods,
Here is his Advocate. Himselfe's, so weak,
So feeble --

AVOC. 4. What are you?

BON. His parasite,
His knave, his pandar: I beseech the court,
He may be forced to come, that your grave eyes
May bear strong witness of his strange impostures.

VOLT. Upon my faith, and credit, with your virtues,
He is not able to endure the air.

AVO. 2. Bring him, how ever.

AVO. 3. We will see him.

AVO. 4. Fetch him.

VOLT. Your father-hoods fit pleasures be obeyed,
But sure, the sight will rather move your pitties,
Then indignation; may it please the court,
In the mean time, he may be heard in me:
I know this place most void of prejudice,
And therefore crave it, since we have no reason
To fear our truth should hurt our cause.

AVOC. 3. Speak free.

VOLT. Then know, most honored fathers, I must now
Discover, to your strangely' abused ears,
The most prodigious, and most frontlesse piece
Of solid impudence, and treachery,
That ever vicious nature yet brought forth
To shame the state of Venice. This lewd woman
(That wants no artificial looks, or tears,
To help the visor, she has now put on)
Has long been known a close adulteress,
To that lascivious youth there; not suspected,
I say, but known; and taken, in the act;
With him; and by this man, the easy husband,
Pardoned: whose timelesse bounty makes him, now,
Stand here, the most unhappy, innocent person,
That ever man's own goodness made accused.
For these, not knowing how to owe a gift
Of that dear grace, but with their shame; being placed
So' above all powers of their gratitude,
Began to hate the benefit: and, in place
Of thanks, devise t'extirpe the memory
Of such an act. Wherein, I pray your father-hoods,
To observe the malice, yea, the rage of creatures
Discovered in their evils; and what heart
Such take, even, from their crimes. But that, anon,
Will more appear. This gentleman, the father,
Hearing of this foul fact, with many others,
Which daily struck at his too-tender ears,
And, grieved in nothing more, then that he could not
Preserve him self a parent (his sons ills
Growing to that strange flood) at last decreed
To dis-inherit him.

AVOC. 1. These be strange turns!

AVOC. 2. The young man's fame was ever fair, and honest.

VOLT. So much more full of danger is his vice,
That can beguile so, under shade of virtue.
But as I said (my honored sires) his father
Having this settled purpose, (by what means
To him betrayed, we know not) and this day
Appointed for the deed; that parricide,
(I cannot style him better) by confederacy
Preparing this his paramour to be there,
Entered VOLPONE'S house (who was the man
Your father-hoods must understand, designed
For the inheritance) there, sought his father:
But, with what purpose sought he him, my lords?
(I tremble to pronounce it, that a son
Unto a father, and to such a father
Should have so foul, felonious intent)
It was, to murder him. When, being prevented
By his more happy absence, what then did he?
Not check his wicked thoughts; no, now new deeds:
(Mischief does ever end, where it begins)
An act of horror, fathers! he dragged forth
The aged gentleman, that had there lien, bed-red,
Three years, and more, out off his innocent couch,
Naked, upon the floor, there left him; wounded
His servant in the face; and, with this strumpet
The stale to his forged practice, who was glad
To be so active, (I shall here desire
Your father-hoods to note but my collections,
As most remarkable) thought, at once, to stop
His fathers ends; discredit his free choice,
In the old gentleman; redeem themselves,
By laying infamy upon this man,
To whom, with blushing, they should owe their lives.

AVOC. 1. What proofs have you of this?

BON. Most honored fathers,
I humbly crave, there be no credit given
To this man's mercenary tongue.

AVOC. 2. Forbear.

BON. His soul moves in his fee.

AVOC. 3. O, sir.

BON. This fellow,
For six sols more, would plead against his maker.

AVOC. 1. You do forget your self.

VOLT. Nay, nay, grave fathers,
Let him have scope: can any man imagine
That he will spare' his accuser, that would not
Have spared his parent?

AVO. 1. Well, produce your proofs.

CEL. I would I could forget, I were a creature.

VOLT. Signior CORBACCIO.

AVO. 4. What is he?

VOLT. The father.

AVO. 2. Has he had an oath?

NOT. Yes.

CORB. What must I do now?

NOT. Your testimony's craved.

CORB. Speak to the knave?
I Will have my mouth, first, stopped with earth; my heart
Abhors his knowledge: I disclaim in him.

AVO. 1. But, for what cause?

CORB. The mere portent of nature.
He is an utter stranger, to my loins.

BON. Have they made you to this!

CORB. I will not hear thee,
Monster of men, swine, goat, wolf, parricide,
Speak not, thou viper.

BON. Sir, I will sit down,
And rather wish my innocence should suffer,
Then I resist the authority of a father.

VOLT. Signior CORVINO.

AVO. 2. This is strange!

AVO. 1. Who Is this?

NOT. The husband.

AVO. 4. Is he sworn?

NOT. He is.

AVO. 3. Speak then.

CORV. This woman (please your father-hoods) is a whore,
Of most hot exercise, more then a partrich,
Upon record --

AVO. 1. No more.

CORV. Neighes, like a iennet.

NOT. Preserve the honor of the court.

CORV. I shall,
And modesty of your most reverend ears.
And, yet, I hope that I may say, these eyes
Have seen her glew'd unto that piece of cedar;
That fine well-timber'd gallant: and that, here,
The letters may be read, thorough the horn,
That make the story perfect.

MOS. Excellent! sir.

CORV. There is no shame in this, now, is there?

MOS. None.

CORV. Or if I said, I hoped that she were onward
To her damnation, if there be a hell
Greater then whore, and woman; a good catholic
May make the doubt.

AVO. 3. His grief has made him frantique.

AVO. 1. She swownes. Remove him, hence.

AVO. 2. Look to the woman.

CORV. Prettily feigned! again!

AVO. 4. Stand from about her.

AVO. 1. Give her the air.

AVO. 3. What can you say?

MOS. My wound Rare!
(May't please your wisdoms) speaks for me, received
In aid of my good patron, when he mist
His sought-for father, when that well-taught dame
Had her eve given her, to cry out a rape.

BON. O, most laid impudence! Fathers --

AVO. 3. Sir, be silent,
You had your hearing free, so must they theirs.

AVO. 2. I do begin to doubt the imposture here.

AVO. 4. This woman, has too many moodes.

VOLT. Grave fathers,
She is a creature, of a most professed,
And prostituted lewdness.

CORV. Most impetuous!
Unsatisfied, grave fathers!

VOLT. May her fainings
Not take your wisdoms: but, this day, she baited
A stranger, a grave knight, with her loose eyes,
And more lascivious kisses. This man saw 'hem
Together, on the water, in a gondola.

MOS. Here is the lady her self, that saw 'hem too,
Without; who, then, had in the open streets
Pursued them, but for saving her knights honor.

AVO. 1. Produce that lady.

AVO. 2. Let her come.

AVO. 4. These things,
They strike, with wonder!

AVO. 3. I am turned a stone!

Act IIII. Scene VI.
MOSCA, LADY, AVOCATORI, etc. Be resolute, madame.

LAD. I, this same is she.
Out, thou chameleon harlot; now, thine eyes
Vie tears with the hyaena: dare thou look
Upon my wronged face? I cry your pardons.
I fear, I have (forgettingly) transgrest
Against the dignity of the court --

AVO. 2. No, madame.

LAD. And been exorbitant --

AVO. 4. You have not, lady.

AVO. 4. These proofs are strong.

LAD. Surely, I had no purpose:
To scandalize your honors, or my sexes.

AVO. 3. We do believe it.

LAD. Surely, you may believe it.

AVO. 2. Madame, we do.

LAD. Indeed, you may; my breeding
Is not so course --

AVO. 4. We know it.

LAD. To offend
With pertinacy --

AVO. 3. Lady.

LAD. Such a presence:
No, surely.

AVO. 1. We well think it.

LAD. You may think it.

AVO. 1. Let her overcome. What witnesses have you,
To make good your report?

BON. Our consciences.

CEL. And heaven, that never fails the innocent.

AVO. 4. These are no testimonies.

BON. Not in your courts,
Where multitude, and clamor ouercomes.

AVO. 1. Nay, then you do wax insolent.

VOLT. Here, here,
Volpone is brought in, as impotent. The testimony comes, that will convince,
And put to utter dumbness their bold tongues.
See here, grave fathers, here is the rauisher,
The rider on men's wives, the great impostor,
The grand voluptuary! do you not think,
These limbs should affect venery? or these eyes
Covet a concubine? 'pray you, mark these hands.
Are they not fit to stroke a ladies breasts?
Perhaps, he does dissemble?

BON. So he does.

VOLT. Would you have him tortured?

BON. I would have him proved.

VOLT. Best try him, then, with goades, or burning Irons;
Put him to the strappado: I have heard,
The rack has cured the gout, faith, give it him,
And help him of a malady, be courteous.
I Will undertake, before these honored fathers,
He shall have, yet, as many left diseases,
As she has known adulterers, or thou strumpets.
O, my most equal hearers, if these deeds,
Acts, of this bold, and most exorbitant strain,
May pass with sufferance, what one citizen,
But owes the forfeit of his life, yea fame,
To him that dares traduce him? which of you
Are safe, my honored fathers? I would ask
(With leave of your grave father-hoods) if their plot
Have any face, or color like to truth?
Or if, unto the dullest nostrill, here,
It smell not rank, and most abhorred slander?
I crave your care of this good gentleman,
Whose life is much endangered, by their fable;
And, as for them, I will conclude with this,
That vicious persons when they are hot, and fleshed
In impious acts, their constancy abounds:
Damned deeds are done with greatest confidence.

AVOC. 1. Take 'hem to custody, and sever them.

AVOC. 2. It Is pity, two such prodigies should live.

AVOC. 1. Let the old gentleman be returned, with care:
I Am sorry, our credulity wronged him.

AVO. 4. These are two creatures!

AVO. 3. I have an earthquake in me!

AVO. 2. Their shame (even in their cradles) fled their faces.

AVO. 4. You' have done a worthy service to the state, sir,
In their discovery.

AVO. 1. You shall hear, ere night,
What punishment the court decrees upon 'hem.

VOLT. We thank your fatherhoods. How like you it?

MOS. Rare.
I Would have your tongue, sir, tipped with gold, for this;
I Would have you be the heir to the whole city;
The earth I Would have want men, ere you want living:
They'are bound to erect your statue, in St. MARKS.
Signior CORVINO, I would have you go,
And show your self, that you have conquered.

CORV. Yes.

MOS. It was much better, that you should profess
Your self a cuckold, thus, then that the other
Should have been proved.

CORV. Nay, I considered that:
Now, it is her fault.

MOS. Then, it had been yours.

CORV. True, I do doubt this Advocate, still.

MOS. In Faith,
You need not, I dare ease you of that care.

CORV. I trust thee, MOSCA.

MOS. As your own soul, sir.

CORB. MOSCA.

MOS. Now for your business, sir.

CORB. How? have you business?

MOS. Yes, yours, sir.

CORB. O, none else?

MOS. None else, not I.

CORB. Be careful then.

MOS. Rest you, with both your eyes, sir.

CORB. Dispatch it.

MOS. Instantly.

CORB. And look, that all,
What-euer, be put in, jewels, plate, moneys,
Household-stuffe, bedding, cortines.

MOS. Cortine-rings, sir,
Only, the Advocates see must be deducted.

CORB. I Will pay him, now: you will be too prodigal.

MOS. Sir, I must tender it.

CORB. Two cecchines is well?

MOS. No, six, sir.

CORB. It Is too much.

MOS. He talked a great while,
You must consider that, sir.

CORB. Well, there is three --

MOS. I Will give it him.

CORB. Do so, and there is for thee.

MOS. Bountiful bones! What horride strange offense
Did he commit against nature, in his youth,
Worthy this age? you see, sir, how I work
Unto your ends; take you no notice.

VOLT. No,
I Will leave you.

MOS. All, is yours; the devil, and all:
Good Advocate. Madame, I Will bring you home.

LAD. No, I Will go see your patron.

MOS. That you shall not:
I Will tell you, why. My purpose is, to urge
My patron to reform his will; and, for
The zeal you' have shown to day, whereas before
You were but third, or, fourth, you shall be now
Put in the first: which would appear as begged,
If you were present. Therefore --

LAD. You shall sway me.

Act V.
Scene I.
VOLPONE. WEll, I am here; and all this brunt is past:
I never was in dislike with my disguise,
Till this fled moment; here, 'twas good, in private,
But, in your public, Cave, whilst I breathe.
Before god, my left leg 'gan to have the crampe;
And I apprehended, straight, some power had struck me
With a dead palsy: well, I must be merry,
And shake it off. A many of these fears
Would put me into some villainous disease,
Should they come thick upon me: I Will prevent 'hem.
Give me a boule of lusty wine, to fright
He drinks. This humor from my heart; (hum, hum, hum)
It Is almost gone, already: I shall conquer.
Any device, now, of rare, ingenious knavery,
That would possess me with a violent laughter,
Drinks again. Would make me up, again! So, so, so, so.
This heat is life; it is blood, by this time: MOSCA!

Act V. Scene II.
MOSCA, VOLPONE, NANO, CASTRONE. HOw now, sir? does the day look clear again?
Are we recouer'd? and wrought out of error,
Into our way? to see our path, before us?
Is our trade free, once more?

VOLP. Exquisite MOSCA!

MOS. Was it not carried learnedly?

VOLP. And stoutly.
Good wits are greatest in extremities.

MOS. It were a folly, beyond thought, to trust
Any grand act unto a cowardly spirit:
You are not taken with it, enough, me thinks?

VOLP. O, more, then if I had enjoyed the wench:
The pleasure of all woman-kind's not like it.

MOS. Why, now you speak, sir. We must, here be ^ixt;
Here, we must rest; this is our masterpiece:
We cannot think, to go beyond this.

VOLP. True,
Thou 'hast played thy prise, my precious MOSCA.

MOS. Nay, sir,
To gull the court --

VOLP. And, quite divert the torrent,
Upon the innocent.

MOS. Yes, and to make
So rare a music out of discordes --

VOLP. Right.
That, yet, to me's the strangest! how the have borne it!
That these (being so divided amongst themselves)
Should not sent somewhat, or in me, or thee,
Or doubt their own side.

MOS. True, they will not see it.
Too much light blinds 'hem, I think. Each of'hem
Is so possessed, and stuffed with his own hopes,
That any thing, unto the contrary,
Never so true, or never so apparent,
Never so palpable, they will resist it --

VOLP. Like a temptation of the devil.

MOS. Right, sir.
Merchants may talk of trade, and your great signiors
Of land, that yields well; but if Italy
Have any glebe, more fruitful, then these fellows,
I am deceived. Did not your Advocate rare?

VOLP. O (my most honored fathers, my grave fathers,
Under correction of your father-hoods,
What face of truth is, here? If these strange deeds
May pass, most honored fathers --) I had much a do
To forbear laughing.

MOS. 'T seemed to me, you sweat, sir.

VOLP. In troth, I did a little.

MOS. But confess, sir,
Were you not daunted?

VOLP. In good faith, I was
A little in a mist; but not dejected:
Never, but still my self.

MOS. I think it, sir
Now (so truth help me) I must needs say this, sir.
And, out of conscience, for your advocate:
He' has taken pains, in faith, sir, and deserved,
(In my poor judgment, I speak it, under favor,
Not to contrary you, sir) very richly --
Well -- to be cosen'd.

VOLP. 'Troth, and I think so too,
By that I heard him, in the latter end.

MOS. O, but before, sir; had you heard him, first,
Draw it to certain heads, then aggrauate,
Then use his vehement figures -- I looked still,
When he would shift a shirt; and, doing this
Out of pure love, no hope of gain --

VOLP. It Is right.
I cannot answer him, MOSCA, as I would,
Not yet; but for thy sake, at thy entreaty,
I will begin, even now, to vex 'hem all:
This very instant.

MOS. Good, sir.

VOLP. Call the dwarf,
And eunuch, forth.

MOS. CASTRONE, NANO.

NAN. Here.

VOLP. Shall we have a jig, now?

MOS. What you please, sir.

VOLP. Go,
Straight give out, about the streets, you two,
That I am dead; do it with constancy,
Sadly, do you hear? impute it to the grief
Of this late slander.

MOS. What do you mean, sir?

VOLP. O,
I shall have, instantly, my vulture, crow,
Raven, come flying hither (on the news)
To peck for carrion, my shee-wolfe, and all,
Greedy, and full of expectation --

MOS. And then to have it ravished from their mouths?

VOLP. It Is true, I will have thee put on a gown,
And take upon thee, as thou were mine heir;
Show 'hem a will: open that chest, and reach
Forth one of those, that has the blankes. I Will straight
Put in thy name.

MOS. It will be rare, sir.

VOLP. I,
When they e'enegape, and find themselves deluded --

MOS. Yes.

VOLP. And thou use them skiruily. Dispatch,
Get on thy gown.

MOS. But, what, sir, if they ask
After the body?

VOLP. Say, it was corrupted.

MOS I Will say, it stunke, sir; and was feign to have it
Coffined up instantly, and sent away.

VOLP. Any thing, what thou will. Hold, here is my will.
Get thee a cap, a count-booke, pen and ink,
Papers before thee; sit, as thou were taking
An inuentory of parcels: I Will get up,
Behind the cortine, on a stool, and harken;
Sometime, peep over; see, how they do look;
With what degrees, their blood does leave their faces!
O, 'twill afford me a rare meal of laughter.

MOS. Your Advocate will turn stark dull, upon it.

VOLP. It will take off his oratories edge.

MOS. But your Clarissimo, old round-backe, he
Will crumpe you, like a hog-louse, with the touch.

VOLP. And what CORVINO?

MOS. O, sir, look for him,
To morrow morning, with a rope, and a dagger,
To visit all the streets; he must run mad.
My Lady too, that came into the court,
To bear false witness, for your worship --

VOLP. Yes,
And kissed me before the fathers; when my face
Flowed all with oils.

MOS. And sweat, sir. Why, your gold
Is such another medicine, it dries up
All those offensive sauors! It transformes
The most deformed, and restores 'hem lovely,
As 'twere the strange poetical girdle. Cesti^.
JOVE
Could not invent, to himself, a shroud more subtle,
To pass ACRISIVS guardes. It is the thing
Makes all the world her grace, her youth, her beauty.

VOLP. I think, she loves me.

MOS. Who? the lady, sir?
She Is jealous of you.

VOLP. Do thou say so?

MOS. Hark,
There Is some already.

VOLP. Look.

MOS. It is the vulture:
He has the quickest sent.

VOLP. I Will to my place,
Thou, to thy posture.

MOS. I am set.

VOLP. But, MOSCA,
Play the artificer now, torture 'hem, rarely.

Act. V. Scene. III.
VOLTORE, MOSCA, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, LADY, VOLPONE. HOw now, my MOSCA?

MOS. Turkey carpets, nine --

VOLT. Taking an inuentory? that is well.

MOS. Two suits of bedding, tissew --

VOLT. Where Is the will?
Let me read that, the while.

CORB. So, set me down:
And get you home.

VOLT. Is he come, now, to trouble us?

MOS. Of cloth of gold, two more --

CORB. Is it done, MOSCA?

MOS. Of several vellets, eight --

VOLT. I like his care.

CORB. Do thou not hear?

CORV. Ha? is the hour come, MOSCA?

VOLP. Volpone peepes from behind a trauerse. I, now, they muster.

CORV. What does the advocate here?
Or this CORBACCIO?

CORB. What do these here?

LAD. MOSCA?
Is his thread spunne?

MOS. Eight chests of linen --

VOLP. O,
My sine dame WOVLD-BEE, too!

CORV. MOSCA, the will,
That I may show it these, and rid 'hem hence.

MOS. Six chests of diaper, four of damask -- There.

CORB. Is that the will?

MOS. Down-beds, and boulsters --

VOLP. Rare!
Be busy still. Now, they begin to flutter:
They never think of me. Look, see, see, see!
How their swift eyes run over the long deed,
Unto the name, and to the legacies,
What is bequeathed them, there --

MOS. Ten suits of hangings --

VOLP. I, i'their garters, MOSCA. Now, their hopes
Are at the gasp.

VOLT. MOSCA the heir!

CORB. What Is that?

VOLP. My advocate is dumb, look to my merchant,
He has heard of some strange storm, a ship is lost,
He faints: my lady will swoune. Old glazen-eyes,
He has not reached his despair, yet.

CORB. All these
Are out of hope, IN am sure the man.

CORV. But, MOSCA --

MOS. Two cabenets --

CORV. Is this in earnest?

MOS. One
Of ebony. --

CORV. Or, do you but delude me?

MOS. The other, mother of pearl -- I am very busy.
Good faith, it is a fortune thrown upon me --
Item, one salt of agat -- not my seeking.

LAD. Do you hear, sir?

MOS. A perfumed box -- 'pray you forbear,
You see I am troubled -- made of an onyx --

LAD. How!

MOS. Tomorrow, or next day, I shall be at leisure,
To talk with you all.

CORV. Is this my large hopes issue?

LAD. Sir, I must have a fayrer answer.

MOS. Madame!
Mary, and shall: 'pray you, fairly quit my house.
Nay, raise no tempest with your looks; but, hark you:
Remember, what your ladyship offered me,
To put you in, an heir; go to, think on it.
And what you said, eene your best madames did
For maintenance, and, why not you? enough.
Go home, and use the poor sir POL, your knight, well;
For fear I tell some riddles: go, be melancholique.

VOLP. O, my fine devil!

CORV. MOSCA, 'pray you a word.

MOS. Lord! will not you take your dispatch hence, yet?
Me thinks (of all) you should have been the example.
Why should you stay, here? with what thought? what promise?
Hear you, do not you know, I know you an ass?
And, that you would, most feign, have been a wittoll,
If fortune would have let you? that you are
A declared cuckold, on good terms? this pearl,
You Will say, was yours? right: this diamant?
I Will not deny't, but thank you. Much here, else?
It may be so. Why, think that these good works
May help to hide you bad: I Will not betray you,
Although you be but extraordinary,
And have it only in title, it suffices.
Go home, be melancholique too, or mad.

VOLP. Rare, MOSCA! how his villainy becomes him!

VOLT. Certain, he does delude all these, for me.

CORB. MOSCA, the heir?

VOLP. O, his four eyes have found it!

CORB. IN am cosen'd, cheated, by a parasite-slaue;
Harlot, t'hast gul'd me.

MOS. Yes, sir. Stop your mouth,
Or I shall draw the only tooth, is left.
Are not you he, that filthy covetous wretch,
Wi^h the three legs, that here, in hope of prey,
Have, any time this three year, snuft about,
With your most grou'ling nose; and would have hired
Me to the pois'ning of my patron? sir?
Are not you he, that have, to day, in court,
Professed the dis-inheriting of your son?
Perjured your self? Go home, and die, and stink;
If you but croake a syllable, all comes out:
Away and call your porters, go, go, stink.

VOLP. Excellent varlet!

VOLT. Now, my faithful MOSCA,
I find thy constancy.

MOS. Sir?

VOLT. Sincere.

MOS. A table
Of porphiry -- I mar'le, you will be thus troublesome.

VOLT. Nay, leave off now, they are gone.

MOS. Why? who are you?
What? who did send for you? O'cry you mercy,
Reverend sir! good faith, I am grieved for you,
That any chance of mine should thus defeat
Your (I must needs say) most deserving travels:
But, I protest, sir it was cast upon me,
And I could, almost, wish to be without it,
But, that the will of the dead, must be observed.
Mary, my joy is, that you need it not,
You have a gift, sir, (thank your education)
Will never let you want, while there are men,
And malice, to breed causes. Would I had
But half the like, for all my fortune, sir.
If I have any suites (as I do hope,
Things being so easy, and direct, I shall not)
I will make bold with your obstreperous aid,
(Conceive me) for your fee, sir. In mean time,
You, that have so much law, I know have the conscience,
Not to be covetous of what is mine.
Good sir, I thank you for my plate: 'twill help
To set up a young man. Good faith, you look
As you were cos^iue; best go home, and purge, sir.

VOLP. Bid him, eat lettuce well: my witty mischief,
Let me embrace thee. O, that I could now
Transform thee to a VENUS -- MOSCA, go,
Straight, take my habit of Clarissimo;
And walk the streets; be seen, torment 'hem more:
We must pursew, as well as plot. Who would
Have lost this feast?

MOS. I doubt it will loose them.

VOLP. O, my recovery shall recover all.
That I could now but think on some disguise,
To meet 'hem in: and ask 'hem questions.
How I would vex 'hem still, at every turn?

MOS. Sir, I can fit you.

VOLP. Can thou?

MOS. Yes, I know
One of the Commandatori, sir, so like you,
Him will I straight make drunk, and bring you his habit.

VOLP. A rare disguise, and answering thy brain!
O, I will be a sharp disease unto 'hem.

MOS. Sir, you must look for curses --

VOLP. Till they burst;
The Fox fares ever best, when he is cursed.

Act V. Scene IIII.
PEREGRINE, MERCATORI. 3. WOMAN, POLITIQVE. AM I enough disguised?

MER. 1. I warrant you.

PER. All my ambition is to fright him, only.

MER. 2. If you could ship him away, 'twere excellent.

MER. 3. To Zant, or to Alepo?

PER. Yes, and have his
Adventures put in the book of voyages,
And his guld story registered, for truth?
Well, gentlemen, when I am in, a while,
And that you think us warm in our discourse,
Know your approaches.

MER. 1. Trust it to our care.

PER. Save you, fair lady. Is sir POLL. within?

WOM. I do not know, sir.

PER. 'Pray you, say unto him,
Here is a merchant, upon earnest business,
Desires to speak with him.

WOM. I will see, sir.

PER. 'Pray you.
I see, the family is all female, here.

WOM. He sai's, sir, he has weighty affairs of state,
That now require him whole, some other time
You may possess him.

PER. 'Pray you say again,
If those require him whole, these will exact him*
Whereof I bring him tidings. What might be
His grave affair of state, now? how, to make
Bolognian sauseges, here, in Venice, sparing
One o'th'ingredients.

VVOM. Sir, he sai's, he knows
By your word, tidings, that you are no statesman,
And therefore, wills you stay.

PER. Sweet, 'pray you return him,
I have not read so many proclamations,
And studied them, for words, as he has done,
But -- Here he deignes to come.

POL. Sir, I must crave
Your courteous pardon. There has chanced (to day)
Unkind disaster, 'twixt my lady, and me:
And I was penning my apology
To give her satifaction, as you came, now.

PER. Sir, I am grieved, I bring you worse disaster;
The gentleman, you met at the port, to day,
That told you, he was newly arrived --

POL. I, was
A fugitive punke?

PER. No, sir, a spy, set on you:
And, he has made relation to the Senate,
That you professed to him, to have a plot,
To sell the state of Venice, to the Turk.

POL. O me!

PER. For which, warrants are signed by this time*
To apprehend you, and to search your study,
For papers --

POL. Alas, sir. I have none, but notes,
Drawn out of play-bookes --

PER. All the better, sir.

POL. And some essays. What shall I do?

PER. Sir, best
Convey your self into a sugar-chest,
Or, if you could lie round, a frail were rare:
And I could send you, aboard.

POL. Sir, I but talked so,
They knock without. For discourse sake, merely.

PER. Hark, they are there.

POL. I am a wretch, a wretch.

PER. What, will you do, sir?
Ha you never a curren-but to leap into?
They Will put you to the rack, you must be sudden.

POL. Sir, I have an ingine --

(MER. 3. Sir POLITIQVE WOVLD-BE?

MER. 2. Where is he?)

POL. That I have thought upon, before time.

PER. What is it?

POL. (I shall never endure the torture.)
Mary, it is, sir, of a tortoyse-shell,
Fitted, for these extremities: 'pray you sir, help me.
Here, IN have a place, sir, to put back my legs,
(Please you to lay it on, sir) with this cap,
And my black gloves, I Will lie, sir, like a tortoyse,
Till they are gone.

PER. And, call you this an ingine?

POL. Mine own device -- good sir, bid my wives women
They rush in. To burn my papers.

MER. 1. Where Is he hid?

MER. 3. We must,
And will, sure, find him.

MER. 2. Which is his study?

MER. 1. What
Are you, sir?

PER. I Am a merchant, that came here
To look upon this tortoyse.

MER. 3. How?

MER. 1. St. MARK!
What beast is this?

PER. It is a fish.

MER. 2. Come out, here.

PER. Nay, you may strike him, sir, and tread upon him:
He Will bear a cart.

MER. 1. What, to run over him?

PER. Yes.

MER. 3. Let Us iump, upon him.

MER. 2. Can he not go?

PER. He creeps, sir.

MER. 1. Let Us see him creep.

PER. No, good sir, you will hurt him.

MER. 2. (Heart) I Will see him creep; or prick his guts.

MER. 3. Come out, here.

PER. 'Pray you sir, (creep a little)

MER. 1. Forth.

MER. 2. Yet further.

PER. Good sir, (creep)

MER. 2. We'll see his legs.

MER. 3. They pu^ of the shel and discover him. Gods so, he has garters!

MER. 1. I, and gloves!

MER. 2. Is this
Your fearful tortoyse?

PER. Now, sir POLL. we are even;
For your next project, I shall be prepared:
I am sorry, for the funeral of your notes, sir.

MER. 1. 'Twere a rare motion, to be seen in Fleet Street!

MER. 2. I, in the term.

MER. 1. Or Smithfield, in the fair.

MER. 3. Me thinks, it is but a melancholique sight!

PER. Farewell, most politic tortoyse.

POL. Where Is my lady?
Knows she of this?

WOM. I know not, sir.

POL. Enquire.
O, I shall be the fable of all feasts;
The freight of the gazetti; ship-boyes tale;
And, which is worst, even talk for ordinaries.

WOM. My lady's come most melancholique, home,
And says, sir, she will straight to sea, for physic.

POL. And I, to shun, this place, and clime for ever;
Creeping, with house, on back: and think it well,
To shrink my poor head, in my politic shell.

Act IIII. Scene V.
VOLPONE, MOSCA. The first, in the habit of a Commandadora: the other, of a
Clarissimo. AM I then like him?

MOS. O, sir, you are he:
No man can sever you.

VOLP. Good.

MOS. But, what am I?

VOLP. Before heaven, a brave Clarissimo, thou becom'st it!
Pity, thou were not borne one.

MOS. If I hold
My made one, 'twill be well.

VOLP. I Will go, and see
What news, first, at the court.

MOS. Do so. My FOX
Is out on his hole, and, ere he shall re-enter,
I Will make him languish, in his borrowed case,
Except he come to composition, with me:
ANDROGINO, CASTRONE, NANO.

ALL. Here.

MOS. Go, recreate your selves, abroad; go, sport:
So, now I have the keys, and am possessed.
Since he will, needs, be dead, before his time,
I Will bury him, or gain by him. I Am his heir:
And so will keep me, till he share at least.
To cosen him of all, were but a cheat
Well placed; no man would construe it a sin:
Let his sport pay for it, this is called the FOXE-trap.

Act V. Scene VI.
CORBACCIO, CORVINO, VOLPONE. THey say, the court is set.

CORV. We must maintain
Our first tale good, for both our reputations.

CORB. Why? mine is no tale: my son would, there, have killed me.

CORV. That Is true, I had forgot: mine is, I am sure.
But, for your will, sir.

CORB. I, I Will come upon him,
For that, hereafter, now his Patron's dead.

VOLP. Signior CORVINO! and CORBACCIO! sir,
Much joy unto you.

CORV. Of what?

VOLP. The sudden good,
Dropped down upon you --

CORB. Where?

VOLP. (And, none knows (how)
From old VOLPONE, sir.

CORB. Out, errant knave.

VOLP. Let not your too much wealth, sir, make your furious.

CORB. Away, thou varlet.

VOLP. Why sir?

CORB. Do thou mock me?

VOLP. You mock the world, sir, did you not change wills?

CORB. Out, harlot.

VOLP. O! belike you are the man,
Signior CORVINO? 'faith, you carry it well;
You grow not mad withal: I love your spirit.
You are not ouer-leauen'd, with your fortune.
You should have some would swell, now like a wine-fat,
With such an Autumn -- Did he gi'you all, sir?

CORV. Avoid, you rascal.

VOLP. Troth, your wife has shew'ne
Her self a very woman: but, you are well,
You need not care, you have a good estate,
To bear it out, sir, better by this chance.
Except CORBACCIO have a share?

CORB. Hence, varlet.

VOLP. You will not be a' known, sir: why it is wise.
Thus do all gam'sters, at all games, dissemble.
No man will seem to win. Here, comes my vulture,
Heauing his beak up in the air, and snuffing.

Act V. Scene VII.
VOLTORE, VOLPONE. OVt-stript thus, by a parasite? a slave?
Would run on errands? and make legs, for crummes?
Well, what I Will do --

VOLP. The court stays for you worship.
I eene rejoice, sir, at your worships happiness,
And that it fell into so learned hands,
That understand the fingering. --

VOLT. What do you mean?

VOLP. I mean to be a suitor to your worship,
For the small tenement, out of reparations;
That, at the end of your long row of houses,
By the piscaria: it was, in VOLPONE'S time,
Your predecessor, ere he grew diseased,
A handsome, pretty, custom'd, bawdy house,
As any was in Venice (none disprais'd)
But fell with him; his body, and that house
Decayed, together.

VOLT. Come, sir, leave your prating.

VOLP. Why, if your worship give me but your hand,
That I may have the refusal; I have done.
It Is a mere toy, to you, sir; candle rents:
As your learned worship knows --

VOLT. What do I know?

VOLP. Mary no end of your wealth, sir, god decrease it.

VOLT. Mistaking knave! what, mock'st thou my misfortune?

VOLP. His blessing on your heart, sir, would 'twere more.
(Now, to my first, again; at the next corner.)

Act V. Scene VIII.
CORBACCIO, CORVINO, (MOSCA, passant) VOLPONE. SEe, in our habit! see the
impudent varlet!

CORV. That I could shoot mine eyes at him, like gun-stones.

VOLP. But, is this true, sir, of the parasite?

CORB. Again, t'afflict us? monster?

VOLP. In good faith, sir,
I Am heartily grieved, a beard of your grave length
Should be so ouer-reach'd. I never brook'd
That parasites hair, me thought his nose should cosen:
There still was somewhat, in his look, did promise
The bane of a Clarissimo.

CORB. Knave --

VOLP. Me thinks,
Yet you, that are so traded in the world,
A witty merchant, the fine bird, CORVINO,
That have such moral emblemes on your name,
Should not have sung you shame; and dropped your cheese:
To let the FOX laugh at your emptiness.

CORV. Sirrah, you think, the privilege of the place,
And your red saucy cap, that seems (to me)
Nayl'd to your iolt-head, with those two cecchines,
Can warrant your abuses; come you, hither:
You shall perceive, sir, I dare beat you. Approach.

VOLP. No haste, sir, I do know your valor, well:
Since you durst publish what you are, sir.

CORV. Tarry,
I Would speak, with you.

VOLP. Sir, sir, another time --

CORV. Nay, now.

VOLP. O god, sir! I were a wise man,
Would stand the fury of a distracted cuckold.

CORB. Mosca walks by 'hem. What! come again?

VOLP. Upon 'hem, MOSCA; save me,

CORB. The ayre's infected, where he breathes.

CORV. Lets fly him.

VOLP. Excellent Basiliske! turn upon the vulture.

Act V. Scene IX.
VOLTORE, MOSCA, VOLPONE. Well, flesh-flie, it is summer with you, now;
Your winter will come on.

MOS. Good Advocate,
'Pray thee, not rail, nor threaten out of place, thus;
Thou Wilt make a soloecisme (as madame says.)
Get you a biggen, more: your brain breaks loose.

VOLT. Well, sir.

VOLP. Would you have me beat the insolent slave?
Throw dirt, upon his first good clothes?

VOLT, This same
Is, doubtless, some familiar!

VOLP. Sir, the court
In troth, stays for you. I am mad, a mule,
That never read JUSTINIAN, should get up,
And ride an Advocate. Had you no quirke,
To avoid gullage, sir, by such a creature?
I hope you do but jest; he has not done't:
This's but confederacy, to blind the rest.
You are the heir?

VOLT. A strange, officious,
Trouble-some knave! thou do torment me.

VOLP. I know --
It cannot be, sir, that you should be cosen'd;
It Is not within the wit of man, to do it:
You are so wise, so prudent, and, it is fit,
That wealth, and wisdom still, should go together.

Act V. Scene 10.
AVOCATORIA, 4. NOTARIO, COMMANDADORE, BONARIO, CELIA, CORBACCIO, CORVINO,
VOLTORE, VOLPONE. ARe all the parties, here?

NOT. All, but the Advocate.

AVO. 2. And, here he comes.

AVO. Then bring 'hem forth to sentence.

VOLT. O, my most honored fathers, let your mercy
Once win upon your justice, to forgive --
I am distracted --

(VOLP. What will he do, now?)

VOLP. O,
I know not which t'addresse my self to, first,
Whether your father-hoods, or these innocents --

(CORV. Will he betray himself?)

VOLT. Whom, equally,
I have abused, out of most covetous ends --

(CORV. The man is mad?

CORB. What Is that!

CORV. He is possessed.)

VOLT. For which; now struck in conscience, here I prostrate
My self, at your offended feet, for pardon.

AVO. 1.2. Arise.

CEL. O heaven, how just thou art!

VOLP. I Am caught
I'mine own noose --

CORV. Be constant, sir, naught now
Can help, but impudence.

AVO. 1. Speak forward.

COM. Silence.

VOLT. It is not passion in me, reverend fathers,
But only conscience, conscience my good sires,
That makes me, now, tell truth. That parasite,
That knave has been the instrument of all.

AVO. Where is that knave? fetch him.

VOLP. I go.

CORV. Grave fathers,
This man's distracted; he confessed it, now:
For, hoping to be old VOLPONE'S heir,
Who now is dead --

AVOC. 3. How?

AVO. 2. Is VOLPONE dead?

CORV. Dead since, grave fathers --

BON. O, sure vengeance!

AVO. 1. Stay,
Then, he was no deceiuer?

VOLT. O, no, none:
The parasite, grave fathers.

CORV. He does speak,
Out of mere envy, 'cause the seruant's made
The thing, he gap't for; please your father-hoods,
This is the truth: though, I Will not justify
The other, but he may be some-deale faulty.

VOLT. I, to your hopes, as well as mine, CORVINO:
But I Will use modesty. Pleases your wisdoms
To view these certain notes, and but confer them;
As I hope favor, they shall speak clear truth.

CORV. The devil has entered him!

BON. Or bides in you.

AVO. 4. We have done ill, by a public officer,
To send for him, if he be heir.

AVO. 2. For whom?

AVO. 4. Him, that they call the parasite.

AVO. 3. It Is true;
He is a man, of great estate, now left.

AVO. 4. Go you, and learn his name; and say, the court
Intreates his presence, here; but, to the clearing
Of some few doubts.

AVO. 2. This same's a labyrinth!

AVO. 1. Stand you unto your first report?

CORV. My state,
My life, my fame --

BON. (Where is it?)

CORV. Are at the stake.

AVO. 1. Is yours so too?

CORB. The Aduocate's a knave:
And has a forked tongue --

AVO. 2. (Speak to the point.)

CORB. So is the parasite, too.

AVO. 1. This is confusion.

VOLT. I do beseech your father-hoods, read but those;

CORV. And credit nothing, the false spirit has writ:
It cannot be, but he is possessed, grave fathers.

Act V. Scene XI.
VOLPONE, NANO, ANDROGINO, CASTRONE. TO make a snare, for mine own neck! and
run
My head into it, wilfully! with laughter!
When I had newly escaped, was free, and clear!
Out of mere wantonness! O, the dull devil
Was in this brain of mine, when I devised it;
And MOSCA gave it second: he must now
Help to ^eare up this vein, or we bleed dead.
How now! who let you loose? whither go you, now?
What? to buy ginger-bread? or to drown kitlings?

NAN. Sir, master MOSCA called us out of doors,
And bid us all go play, and took the keys.

AND. Yes.

VOLP. Did master MOSCA take the keys? why, so!
I am farther, in. These are my fine conceits!
I must be merry, with a mischief to me!
What a vile wretch was I, that could not bear
My fortune soberly? I must have my crotchets?
And my conundrums! well, go you, and seek him:
His meaning may be truer, then my fear.
Bid him, he straight come to me, to the court;
Thither will I, and, if 't be possible,
Vn-screw my advocate, upon new hopes:
When I prouok'd him, then I lost my self.

Act V. Scene XII.
AVOCATORI, etc. THese things can nere be reconciled. He, here,
Professes, that the gentleman was wronged;
And that the gentlewoman was brought thither,
Forced by her husband: and there left.

VOLT. Most true.

CEL. How ready is heaven to those, that pray!

AVO. 1. But, that
VOLPONE would have ravished her, he holds
Utterly false; knowing his impotence.

CORV. Grave fathers, he is possessed; again, I say,
Possessed: nay, if there be possession,
And obsession, he has both.

AVO. 3. Here comes our officer.

VOLP. The parasite will straight be, here, grave fathers.

AVO. 4. You might invent some other name, sir varlet.

AVO. 3. Did not the notarie meet him?

VOLP. Not that I know.

AVO. 4. His coming will clear all.

AVO. 2. Yet it is mistie.

VOLT. Volpone whispers the Advocate. May't please your father hoods --

VOLP. Sir, the parasite
Willed me to tell you, that his master lives;
That you are still the man; your hopes the same;
And this was, only a jest --

VOLT. How?

VOLP. Sir, to try
If you were, firm, and how you stood affected.

VOLT. Art' sure he lives?

VOLP. Do I live, sir?

VOLT. O me!
I was to violent.

VOLP. Sir, you may redeem it,
They said, you were possessed; fall down, and seem so:
Voltore falls. I Will help to make it good. God bless the man!
(Stop your wind hard, and swell) see, see, see, see!
He vomits crooked pinnes! his eyes are set,
Like a dead hares, hung in a poulters shop!
His mouth's running away! do you see, signior?
Now, it is in his belly.

(CORV. I, the devil!)

VOLP. Now, in his throat.

(CORV. I, I perceive it plain.)

VOLP. 'Twill out, it will out; stand clear. See, where it flies!
In shape of a blew toad, with a battes wings!
Do not you see it, sir?

CORB. What? I think I do.

CORV. It Is too manifest.

VOLP. Look! he comes t'himselfe!

VOLT. Where am I?

VOLP. Take good heart, the worst is past, sir.
You are dis-possest.

ATO. 1 What accident is this?

AVO. Sudden, and full of wonder!

ATO. 3. If he were.
Possessed, as it appears, all this is nothing.

CORV. He has been, often, subbiect to these fits,

AVO. 1. Show him that writing, do you know it, sir?

VOLP. Deny it, sir, forswear it, know it not.

VOLT. Yes, I do know it well, it is my hand:
But all, that it contains, is false.

BON. 3. O practice!

AVO. 2. What maze is this!

AVO. 1. Is he not guilty, then,
Whom you, there, name the parasite?

VOLT. Grave fathers,
No more then, his good patron, old VOLPONE.

AVO. 4. Why, he is dead?

VOLT. O no, my honored fathers.
He lives --

AVO. 1. How! lives?

VOLT. Lives.

AVO. 2. This is subtler, yet!

AVO. 3. You said, he was dead?

VOLT. Never.

AVO. 3. You said so?

CORV. I heard so.

AVO. 4. Here comes the gentleman make him way.

AVO. 3. A stool.

AVOC. 4. A proper man! and were VOLPONE dead,
A fit match for my daughter.

AVOC. 3. Give him way.

VOLP. MOSCA, I was a'most lost, the Advocate
Had betrayed all; but, now, it is recouer'd:
All Is of the hinge again -- say, I am living.

MOS. What busy knave is this! most reverend fathers,
I sooner, had attended your grave pleasures,
But that my order, for the funeral
Of my dear patron did require me --

VOLP. (MOSCA!)

MOS. Whom I intend to bury, like a gentleman.

VOLP. I, quick, and cosen me of all.

AVO. 2. Still stranger!
More intricate!

AVO. 1. And come about again!

AVO. 4. It is a match, my daughter is bestowed.

MOS. (Will you gi'me half?

VOLP. First, I Will be hanged.

MOS. I know,
Your voice is good, cry not so lowd')

AVO. 1. Demand
The Advocate. Sir, did not you affirm,
VOLPONE was alive?

VOLP. Yes, and he is;
This gent'man told me so, (thou shall have half.)

MOS. Whose drunkard is this same? speak some, that know him:
I never saw his face. (I cannot now
Afford it you so cheap.

VOLP. No?)

AVO 1. What say you?

VOLT. The officer told me.

VOLP. I did, grave fathers,
And will maintain, he lives, with mine own life.
And, that this creature told me. (I was borne,
With all good stars my enemies.)

MOS. Most grave fathers,
If such an insolence, as this, must pass
Upon me, I am silent: 'twas not this,
For which you sent, I hope.

AVO. 2. Take him away.

(VOLP. MOSCA.)

AVO. 3. Let him be whipped.

(VOLP. Will thou betray me?
Cosen me?)

AOC. 3. And taught to bear himself
Toward a person of his rank.

AVO. 4. Away.

MOS. I humbly thank your father-hoods.

VOLP. Soft, soft: whipped?
And loose all that I have? if I confess,
It cannot be much more.

AVO. 4. Sir, are you married?

VOLP. He puts off his disguise. They Will be allied, anon; I must be resolute:
The FOX shall, here, uncase.

(MOS. Patron.)

VOLP. Nay, now,
My ruins shall not come alone; your match
I Will hinder sure: my substance shall not glue you,
Nor screw you, into a family.

(MOS. Why, patron!)

VOLP. I am VOLPONE, and this is my knave;
This, his own knave; this, auarices fool;
This, a Chimaera of wittall, fool, and knave;
And, reverend fathers, since we all can hope
Naught, but a sentence, let us not now despair it.
You hear me brief.

CORV. May it please your father-hoods --

COM. silence.

AVOC. 1. The knot is now undone, by miracle!

AVOC. 2. Nothing can be more clear.

AVO. 3. Or can more prove
These innocent.

AVOC. 1. Give 'hem their liberty.

BON. Heaven could not, long, let such gross crimes be hid.

AVOC. 2. If this be held the high way to get riches,
May I be poor.

AVOC. 3. This 's not the gain, but torment.

AVOC. 1. These possess wealth, as sick men possess fevers,
Which, trulyer may be said to possess them.

AVOC. 2. Disroabe that parasite.

CORV. MOS. Most honored fathers.

AVOC. 1. Can you plead ought to stay the course of justice?
If you can, speak.

CORV. VOLT. We beg favor,

CEL. And mercy.

AVOC. 1. You hurt your innocence, suing for the guilty.
Stand forth; and, first, the parasite. You appear
TO have been the chiefest minister, if not plotter,
In all these lewd impostures; and now, lastly,
Have, with your impudence, abused the court,
And habit of a gentleman of Venice,
Being a fellow of no birth, or blood:
For which, our sentence is, first thou be whipped;
Then live perpetual prisoner in our galleys.

VOLT. I thank you, for him.

MOS. Ban^ to thy wooluish nature.

AVOC. 1. Deliver him to the Saffi. Thou, VOLPONE,
By blood, and rank a gentleman, can not fall
Under like censure; but our judgment on thee
Is, that thy substance all be straight confiscate
To the hospital, of the Incurabili:
And, since the most was gotten by imposture,
By faining lame, gout, palsy, and such diseases,
Thou art to lie in prison, crampt with irons,
Till thou be sick, and lame indeed. Remove him.

VOLP. This is called mortifying of a FOX.

AVOC. 1. Thou VOLTORE, to take away the scandale
Thou have given all worthy men, of thy profession,
Art banished from their fellowship, and our state.
CORBACCIO, bring him near. We here possess
Thy son, of all thy state; and confine thee
To the monastery of San' Spirito:
Where, since thou knew'st not how to live well here,
Thou shall be learned to die well.

CORB. Ha! what said he?

COM. You shall know anon, sir.

AVOC. Thou CORVINO, shall
Be straight imbarqu'd from thine own house, and rowed
Round about Venice, through the grand canale,
Wearing a cap, with fair, long asses ears,
In stead of horns: and, so to mount (a paper
Pined on thy breast) to the berlino --

CORV. Yes,
And, have mine eyes beat out with stinking fish,
Bruised fruit, and rotten eggs -- It Is well. I Am glad,
I shall not see my shame, yet.

AVOC. 1. And to expiate
Thy wrongs done to thy wife, thou art to send her
Home, to her father, with her dowry trebled:
And these are all your judgments.

(ALL. Honored fathers.)

AVOC. 1. Which may not be reuok'd. Now, you begin,
When crimes are done, and past, and to be punished,
To think what your crimes are: away with them.
Let all, that see these vices thus rewarded,
Take heart, and love to study'hem. Mischiefs feed
Like beasts, till they be fat, and then they bleed.
VOLPONE. THe seasoning of a play is the applause.
Now, though the FOX be punished by the laws,
He, yet, does hope there is no suffering due,
For any fact, which he has done against you;
If there be, sensure him: here he, doubtful, stands.
If not, fare iouially, and clap your hands.

THE END.
This Comoedie was first acted, in the year 1605.

By the Kings Majesty's SERVANTS.

The principal Comoedians were, RIC. BVRBADGE. HEN. CONDEL. WILL. SLY. IOH.
HEMINGS. IOH. LOWIN. ALEX. COOK.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

EPICOENE, OR The silent Woman. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1609. By the
Children of her Majesty's REVELLS.

The Author B. I.

HORAT. Vt sis tu similis Caeli, Byrrhique latronum,
Non ego sim Capri, neque Sulci. Cur metuas me?
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. D C. XVI.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, BY ALL TITLES. Sir Francis Stuart:
SIR,
MY hope is not so nourished by example, as it will conclude, this dumb piece
should please you, by cause it has pleased others before: but by trust, that
when you have read it, you will find it worthy to have dis-pleas'd none. This
makes, that I now number you, not only in the Names of favor, but the Names
of justice, to what I write; and do, presently, call you to the exercise of
that noblest, and manlyest virtue: as coveting rather to be freed in my fame,
by the authority of a Judge, then the credit of an Undertaker. Read therefore,
I pray you, and censure. There is not a line, or syllable in it changed from
the simplicity of the first Copy. And, when you shall consider, through the
certain hatred of some, how much a man's innocence may be endangered by an
vn-certaine accusation; you will, I doubt not, so begin to hate the iniquity
of such natures, as I shall love the contumely done me, whose end was so
honorable, as to be wiped off by your sentence.

Your unprofitable, but true lover, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
MOROSE. A Gent. that loves no noise* DAVP. EVGENIE. A Knight his nephew.
CLERIMONT. A Gent. his friend. TRVE-WIT. Another friend. EPICOENE. A young Gent.
supposed the silent Woman. IOH. DAW. A Knight, her servant. AMOROVS LA FOOL. A
Knight also. TITOM: OTTER. A land, and sea-Captaine. CVTBERD. A Barber. MVTE.
One of MOROSE his servants. MAD. HAVGHTY. Ladies Collegiates. MAD. CENTAVRE.
Ladies Collegiates. Mrs. MAVIS. Ladies Collegiates. Mrs. TRVSTY. The La.
HAVGHTIES woman. Mrs. OTTER. The Captains wife. Pretenders. PARSON. PAGES.
SERVANTS.
THE SCENE LONDON.

EPISCOENE, OR The silent Woman. PROLOGVE.
TRuth says, of old, the art of making plays
Was to content the people; and their praise
Was to the Poet money, wine, and bays.
But in this age, a sect of writers are,
That, only, for particular likings care,
And will taste nothing that is populare.
With such we mingle neither brains, nor breasts;
Our wishes, like to those (make public feasts)
Are not to please the cooks tastes, but the guests.
Yet, if those cunning palates hither come,
They shall find guests entreaty, and good room;
And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
That, when they leave their seats, shall make 'hem say,
Who wrote that piece, could so have wroten a play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to present all custard, or all tart,
And have no other meats, to bear a part,
Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
The Poet prays you then, with better thought
To sit; and, when his cares are all in brought,
Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
Be sit for ladies: some for lords, knights, squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Friars.
Nor is it, only, while you keep your seat
Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eat
A week at ord'naries, on his broken meat:
If his Muse be true,
Who commends her to you.
Another. Occasioned by some persons impertinent exception.
THe ends of all, who for the Scene do write,
Are, or should be, to profit, and delight.
And still't has been the praise of all best times,
So persons were not touched, to tax the crimes.
Then, in this play, which we present to night,
And make the object of your ear, and sight,
On forfeit of your selves, think nothing true:
Lest so you make the maker to judge you.
For he knows, Poet never credit gained
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well feigned.
If any, yet, will (with particular slight
Of application) wrest what he does write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
They make a libell, which he made a play.
Act I.
Scene I.
CLERIMONT, BOY, TRVE-WIT. He comes out making himself ready. HAVE you got the
song yet perfect I ga'you, boy?


BOY. Yes, sir.


CLE. Let me hear it.


BOY. You shall, sir, but in faith let no body else.


CLE. Why, I pray?


BOY. It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in town, sir, besides me a
perfect deal of ill will at the mansion you wot of, whose lady is the
argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing under a man that comes there.


CLE. I think, and above a man too, if the truth were racked out of you.


BOY. No faith, I Will confess before, sir. The gentlewomen play with me, and
throw me of the bed; and carry me in to my lady; and she kisses me with her
oil'd face; and puts a perruke of my head; and asks mean' I will wear her
gown; and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow of the ear, and calls me
innocent, and lets me go.


CLE. No marvel, if the door be kept shut against your master, when the
entrance is so easy to you -- well sir, you shall go there no more, lest I
be feign to seek your voice in my ladies rushes, a fortnight hence. Sing, Boy
sings. sir.


TRV. Why, here is the man that can melt away his time, and never feels it!
what, between his mistress abroad, and his engle at home, high fare, soft
lodging, fine clothes, and his fiddle; he thinks the hours have no wings, or
the day no post-horse. Well, sir gallant, were you struck with the plague this
minute, or condemned to any capital punishment to morrow, you would begin
then to think, and value every article of your time, esteem it at the true
rate, and give all for it.


CLE. Why, what should a man do?


TRV. Why, nothing: or that, which when it is done, is as idle. Harken after the
next horse-race, Horses o^ the time.
or hunting-match; lay wagers, praise Puppy, or Pepper-corne, White-foote,
Franklin; swear upon White-maynes party; spend aloud, that my lords may hear
you; visit my ladies at night, and be able to give 'hem the character of
every bowler, or better of the green. These be the things, wherein your
fashionable men exercise themselves, and I for company.


CLE. Nay, if I have thy authority, I Will not leave yet. Come, the other are
considerations, when we come to have gray heads, and weak hammes, moist eyes,
and shrunk members. We Will think on 'hem then; then we will pray, and fast.


TRV. I, and destine only that time of age to goodness, which our want of
ability will not let us employ in evil?


CLE. Why, then it is time enough.


TRV. Yes: as if a man should sleep all the term, and think to effect his
business the last day. O, CLERIMONT, this time, because it is an incorporeall
thing, and not subject to sense, we mock our selves the fineliest out of it,
with vanity, and misery indeed: not seeking an end of wretchedness, but
only changing the matter still.


CLE. Nay, thou wilt not leave now --


TRV. See but our common disease! with what justice can we complain, that
great men will not look upon us, nor be at leisure to give our affairs such
dispatch, as we expect, when we will never do it to our selves: nor hear,
nor regard our selves.


CLE. Foh, thou have read PLVTARCHS moralls, now, or some such tedious fellow;
and it shows so vilely with thee: Before god, 'twill spoil thy wit utterly.
Talk me of pinnes, and feathers, and ladies, and rushes, and such things: and
leave this Stoicitie alone, till thou make sermons.


TRV. Well, sir. If it will not take, I have learned to loose as little of my
kindness, as I can. I Will do good to no man against his will, certainly. When
were you at the college?


CLE. What college?


TRV. As if you knew not!


CLE. No faith, I came but from court, yesterday.


TRV. Why, is it not arrived there yet, the news? A new foundation, sir, here
in the town, of ladies, that call themselves the Collegiates, an order
between courtiers, and country-madames, that live from their husbands; and
give entertainment to all the Wits, and Braueries of the time, as they call
'hem: cry down, or up, what they like, or dislike in a brain, or a fashion,
with most masculine, or rather hermaphroditicall authority: and, every day,
gain to their college some new probationer.


CLE. Who is the President?


TRV. The grave, and youthful matron, the lady HAVGHTY.


CLE. A pox of her autumnall face, her peec'd beauty: there is no man can be
admitted till she be ready, now adays, till she has painted, and perfumed,
and washed, and scoured, but the boy here; and him she wipes her oil'd lips
upon, like a sponge. I have made a song, I pray thee hear it, of the subject.

SONG. STill to be neat, still to be dressed,
As, you were going to a feast;
Still to be pou'dred, still perfumed:
Lady, it is to be presumed,
Though arts hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.
Give me a look, give me a face,
That makes simplicity a grace;
Robes loosely flowing, hair as free:
Such sweet neglect more takes me,
Then all th'adulteries of art.
Thy strike mine eyes, but not my heart.

TRV. And I am, clearly, of the other side: I love a good dressing, before any
beauty of the world. O, a woman is, then, like a delicate garden; nor, is
there one kind of it: she may vary, every hour; take often counsel of her
glass, and choose the best. If she have good ears, show 'hem; good hair,
lay it out; good legs, wear short clothes; a good hand, discover it often;
practice any art, to mend breath, cleanse teeth, repair eyebrows, paint, and
profess it.


CLE. How? publicly?


TRV. The doing of it, not the manner: that must be private. Many things, that
seem foul, in the doing, do please, done. A lady should, indeed, study her
face, when we think she sleeps: nor, when the doors are shut, should men
be inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for us to see their perrukes
put on, their false teeth, their complexion, their eyebrows, their nails?
you see guilders will not work, but enclosed. They must not discover, how
little serves, with the help of art, to adorn a great deal. How long did the
canuas hang before Ald-gate? were the people suffered to see the cities Love,
and Charity, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and
burnished? No. No more should servants approach their mistresses, but when they
are complete, and finished.


CLE. Well said, my TRVE-WIT.


TRV. And a wise lady will keep a guard always upon the place, that she may
do things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a chamber, where the
poor madame, for haste, and troubled, snatched at her perruke, to cover her
baldness: and put it on, the wrong way.


CLE. O prodigy!


TRV. And the vn-conscionable knave held her in complement an hour, with that
reuerst face, when I still looked when she should talk from the the other side.


CLE. Why, thou should have releeu'd her.


TRV. No faith, I let her alone, as we will let this argument, if you please, and
pass to another. When saw you DAVPHINE EVGENIE?


CLE. Not these ^^ee days. Shall we go to him this morning? he is very
melancholique, I hear.


TRV. Sick of the uncle? is he? I met that stiff piece of formalitie, his
uncle, yesterday, with a huge turbant of night-caps on his head, buckled over
his cares.


CLE. O, that is his custom when he walks abroad. He can endure no noise, man.


TRV. So I have heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made?
they say, he has been upon diverse treaties with the Fish-wiues, and
Orenge-women; and articles propounded between them: mary, the Chimney-sweepers
will not be drawn in.


CLE. No, nor the Broome-men: they stand out stiffely. He cannot endure a
Costard-monger, he swounes if he hear one.


TRV. Me thinks, a Smith should be ominous.


CLE. Or any Ha^mer-man. A Brasier is not suffered to dwell in the parish, nor
an Armorer. He would have hanged a Pewterers 'prentice once upon a
shroue-tuesdaies riot, for being of that trade, when the rest were quit.


TRV. A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau'-boyes?


CLE. Out of his senses. The Waights of the city have a pension of him, not to
come near that ward. This youth practiced on him, one night, like the
Bell-man; and never left till he had brought him down to the door, with a
long-sword: and there left him flourishing with the air.


BOY. Why, sir! he has chosen a street to lie in, so narrow at both ends,
that it will receive no coaches, nor carts, nor any of these common noises: and
therefore, we that love him, devise to bring him in such as we may, now and
then, for his exercise, to breath him. He would grow resty else in his ease.
His virtue would rust without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to
come down with the dogs of some four parishes that way, and I thank him, he
did; and cried his games under master MOROSE'S windore: till he was sent crying
away, with his head made a most bleeding spectacle to the multitude. And,
another time, a Fencer, marching to his prize, had his drum most tragically run
through, for taking that street in his way, at my request.


TRV. A good wag. How does he for the bells?


CLE. O, in the Queens time, he was wont to go out of town every satterday
at ten a clock, or on holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sickness, the
perpetuity of ringing has made him devise a room, with double walls, and
treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calk'd: and there he lives by
candlelight. He turned away a man, last week, for having a pair of new
shoes that creak'd. And this fellow waits on him, now, in tennis-court socks,
or slippers sol'd with wool: and they talk each to other, in a trunk. See,
who comes here.


Act I. Scene II.
DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT. HOw now! what aile you sirs? dumb?


TRV. Struck into stone, almost, I am here, with tales of thine uncle! There
was never such a prodigy heard of.


DAVP. I would you would once loose this subject, my masters, for my sake. They
are such as you are, that have brought me into that predicament, I am, with
him.


TRV. How is that?


DAVP. Mary, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. He thinks, I, and my
company are authors of all the ridiculous acts, and moniments are told of him.


TRV. S'lid, I would be the author of more, to vex him, that purpose, deserves
it: it gives thee law of plaguing him. I Will tell thee what I would do. I would
make a false almanac; get it printed: and then have him drawn out on a
coronation day to the tower-wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the
ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! he cannot, man. Art not thou next of blood, and
his sisters son?


DAVP. I, but he will thrust me out of it, he vows, and marry.


TRV. How! that is a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venture on a
wife?


CLE. Yes* why, thou art a stranger, it seems, to his best trick, yet. He has
imploid a fellow this half year, all over England, to harken him out a dumb
woman; be she of any form, or any quality, so she be able to bear
children: her silence is dowry enough, he says.


TRV. But, I trust to god, he has found none.


CLE. No, but he has heard of one that is lodged in the next street to him, who
is exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but six words a
day. And her he is about now, and shall have her.


TRV. Is It possible! who is his agent in the business?


CLE. Mary, a Barber, one CVT-BERD: an honest fellow, one that tells DAVPHINE
all here.


TRV. Why, you oppress me with wonder! A woman, and a barber, and love no
noise!


CLE. Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knacke with his
sheeres, or his fingers: and that continence in a barber he thinks so eminent
a virtue, as it has made him chief of his counsel.


TRV. Is the barber to be seen? or the wench?


CLE. Yes, that they are.


TRV. I pray thee, DAVPHINE, let us go thither.


DAVP. I have some business now: I cannot in faith.


TRV. You shall have no business shall make you neglect this, sir, we will make
her talk, believe it; or if she will not, we can give out, at least so much
as shall interrupt the treaty: we will break it. Thou art bound in
conscience, when he suspects thee without cause, to torment him.


DAVP. Not I, by any means. I Will give no suffrage to it. He shall never have
that plea against me, that I opposed the least phant'sie of his. Let it lie
upon my stars to be guilty, I Will be innocent.


TRV. Yes, and be poor, and beg; do, innocent: when some groom of his has
got him an heir, or this barber, if he himself cannot. Innocent! I pray
thee, NED, where lies she? let him be innocent, still.


CLE. Why, right over against the barbers; in the house, where sir JOHN DAW
lies.


TRV. You do not mean to confound me!


CLE. Why?


TRV. Does he, that would marry her, know so much?


CLE. I cannot tell.


TRV. 'Twere enough of imputation to her, with him.


CLE. Why?


TRV. The only talking sir in the town! JACK DAW! And he teach her not to
speak -- God b'w'you. I have some business too.


CLE. Will you not go thither then?


TRV. Not with the danger to meet DAW, for mine ears.


CLE. Why? I thought you two had been upon very good terms.


TRV. Yes, of keeping distance.


CLE. They say he is a very good scholar.


TRV. I, and he says it first. A pox on him, a fellow that pretends only to
learning, buys titles, and nothing else of books in him.


CLE. The world reports him to be very learned.


TRV. I am sorry, the world should so conspire to belie him.


CLE. Good faith, I have heard very good things come from him.


TRV. You may. There Is none so desperately ignorant to deny that: would they
were his own. God b'w' you, gentlemen.


CLE. This is very abrupt!


Act I. Scene III.
DAVPHINE, CLERIMONT, BOY. COme, you are a strange open man, to tell every
thing, thus.


CLE. Why, believe it DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT'S a very honest fellow.


DAVP. I think no other: but this frank nature of his is not for secrets.


CLE. Nay, then, you are mistaken DAVPHINE: I know where he has been well
trusted, and discharged the trust very truly, and heartily.


DAVP. I contend not, NED, but, with the fewer a business is carried, it is
ever the safer. Now we are alone, if you will go thither, I am for you.


CLE. When were you there?


DAVP. Last night: and such a decameron of sport fallen out! BOCCACE never
thought of the like. DAW does nothing but court her; and the wrong way. He
would lie with her, and praises her modesty; desires that she would talk,
and be free, and commends her silence in verses: which he reads, and
swears, are the best that ever man made. Then railes at his fortunes, stamps,
and mutines, why he is not made a counselor, and called to affairs of state.


CLE. I pray thee let us go. I would feign partake this. Some water, Boy.


DAVP. We are invited to dinner together, he and I, by one that came thither
to him, sir LA-FOOLE.


CLE. O, that is a precious mannikin!


DAVP. Do you know him?


CLE. I, and he will know you too, if ere he saw you but once, though you
should meet him at church in the midst of prayers. He is one of the Braueries,
though he be none of the Wits. He will salute a Judge upon the bench, and a
Bishop in the pulpit, a Lawyer when he is pleading at the bar, and a Lady
when she is dancing in a masque, and put her out. He does give plays, and
suppers, and inuites his guests to 'hem, aloud, out of his windore, as they
ride by in coaches. He has a lodging in the Strand for the purpose. Or to watch
when ladies are gone to the China houses, or the Exchange, that he may meet
'hem by chance, and give 'hem presents, some two or three hundred pounds-worth
of toys, to be laughed at. He is never without a spare banquet, or sweetmeats
in his chamber, for their women to alight at, and come up to, for a bait.


DAVP. Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much siner!
what is his christen-name? I have forgot.


CLE. Sir AMOROVS LA-FOOLE.


BOY. The gentleman is here below, that ownes that name.


CLE. Heart, he is come, to inuit me to dinner, I hold my life.


DAVP. Like enough: pray thee, let us have him up.


CLE. Boy, marshall him.


BOY. With a truncheon, sir?


CLE. Away, I beseech you. I Will make him tell us his pedigree, now; and what
meat he has to dinner; and, who are his guests; and, the whole course of his
fortunes: with a breath.


Act I. Scene IIII.
LA-FOOLE, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE. S'Aue, dear sir DAVPHINE, honored master
CLERIMONT.


CLE. Sir AMOROVS! you have very much honested my lodging, with your presence.


LA-F. Good faith, it is a fine lodging! almost, as delicate a lodging, as mine.


CLE. Not so, sir.


LA-F. Excuse me, sir, if it were in the Strand, I assure you. I am come,
master CLERIMONT, to entreat you wait upon two or three ladies, to dinner, to
day.


CLE. How, sir! wait upon 'hem? did you ever see me carry dishes?


LA-F. No, sir, dispense with me; I meant, to bear 'hem company.


CLE. O, that I will, sir. The doubtfulnesse of your phrase, believe it, sir,
would breed you a quarrel, once an hour, with the terrible boys, if you
should but keep 'hem fellowship a day.


LA-F. It should be extremely against my will, sir, if I contested with any man.


CLE. I believe it, sir; where hold you your feast?


LA-F. At TOM OTTERS, sir.


DAVP. TOM OTTER? what is he?


LA-F. Captain OTTER, sir; he is a kind of gamster: but he has had command,
both by sea, and by land.


DAVP. O, then he is animal amphibium?


LA-F. I, sir: his wife was the rich China-woman, that the courtiers visited so
often, that gave the rare entertainment. She commands all at home.


CLE. Then, she is Captain OTTER?


LA-F. You say very well, sir: she is my kins-woman, a LA-FOOLE by the mother
side, and will inuit, any great ladies, for my sake.


DAVP. Not of the LA-FOOLES of Essex?


LA-F. No, sir, the LA-FOOLES of London.


CLE. Now, h'is in.


LA-F. They all come out of our house, the LA-FOOLES of the north, the
LA-FOOLES of the west, the LA-FOOLES of the east, and south -- we are as
ancient a family, as any is in Europe -- but I my self am descended lineally
of the french LA-FOOLES -- and, we do bear for our coat Yellow, or Or,
checkered Azure, and Gules, and some three or four colors more, which is a
very noted coat, and has, sometimes, been solemnly worn by diverse
nobility of our house -- but let that go, antiquity is not respected now --
I had a brace of fat Does sent me, gentlemen, and half a dosen of phesants, a
dosen or two of godwits, and some other foul, which I would have eaten, while
they are good, and in good company -- there will be a great lady, or two, my
lady HAVGHTY, my lady CENTAVRE, mistress DOL MAVIS -- and they come a'purpose,
to see the silent gentlewoman, mistress EPICOENE, that honest sir JOHN DAW has
promised to bring thither -- and then, mistress TRVSTY, my ladies woman, will be
there too, and this honorable Knight, sir DAVPHINE, with your self, master
CLERIMONT -- and we will be very merry, and have fiddlers, and dance -- I have
been a mad wag, in my time, and have spent some crowns since I was a page in
court, to my lord LOFTY, and after, my ladies gentleman-usher, who got me
knighted in Ireland, since it pleased my elder brother to die -- I had as fair
a gold ierkin on that day, as any was worn in the Iland-voyage, or at Caliz,
none disprais'd, and I came over in it hither, showed my self to my friends,
in court, and after went down to my tenants, in the country, and suruai'd my
lands, let new leases, took their money, spent it in the eye of the land here,
upon ladies -- and now I can take up at my pleasure.


DAVP. Can you take up ladies, sir?


CLE. O, let him breath, he has not recouer'd.


DAVP. Would I were your half, in that commodity --


LA-F. No, sir, excuse me: I meant money, which can take up any thing. I have
another guest, or two, to inuit, and say as much to, gentlemen. I Will take my
leave abruptly, in hope you will not fail -- Your servant.


DAVP. We will not fail you, sir precious LA-FOOLE; but she shall, that your
ladies come to see: if I have credit, before sir DAW.


CLE. Did you ever hear such a wind-fucker, as this?


DAVP. Or, such a rooke, as the other! that will betray his mistress, to be
seen. Come, it is time, we prevented it.


CLE. Go.


Act II.
Scene I.
MOROSE, MVTE. CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this
trunk, to save my servants the labor of speech, and mine ears, the discord
of sounds? Let me see: all discourses, but mine own, afflict me, they seem
harsh, impertinent, and irksome. Is it not possible, that thou should
answer me, by signs, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? speak not, though I
question you. You have taken the ring, off from the street door, At the
breaches, still the fellow makes legs: or signs. as I bad you? answer me not,
by speech, but by silence; unless, it be otherwise ( --) very good. And, you
have fastened on a thick quilt, or flock-bed, on the outside of the door;
that if they knock with their daggers, or with bricke-bats, they can make no
noise? but with your leg, your answer, unless it be otherwise ( --) very
good. This is not, only, fit modesty in a servant, but good state, and
discretion in a master. And you have been with CVTBERD, the barber, to have
him come to me? ( --) good. And, he will come presently? answer me not but
with your leg, unless it be otherwise: if it be otherwise, shake your head, or
shrug ( --) so. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wise in these! and it is a
frugall, and comely gravity. How long will it be, ere CVTBERD come? stay, if
an hour, hold up your whole hand; if half an hour, two singers; if a
quarter, one; ( --) good: half a quarter? it is well. And have you given him a
key, to come in without knocking? ( --) good. And, is the lock oild, and the
hinges, to day? ( --) good. And the quilting of the stairs no where worn out,
and bare? ( --) very good. I see, by much doctrine, and impulsion, it may be
effected: stand by. The Turk, in this divine discipline, is admirable,
exceeding all the potentates of the earth; still waited on by mutes; and all
his commands so executed; yea, even in the war (as I have heard) and in his
marches, most of his charges, and directions, given by signs, and with
silence: an exquisite art! and I am heartily ashamed, and angry oftentimes,
that the Princes of Christendom, should suffer a Barbarian, to transcend 'hem
in so high a point of felicity. I will practice it, One winds a horn
without. Again. hereafter. How now? oh! oh! what villain? what prodigy of
mankind is that? look. Oh! cut his throat, cut his throat: what murderer,
hell-hound, devil can this be?


MVT. It is a post from the court --


MOR. Out rogue, and must thou blow thy horn, too?


MVT. Alas, it is a post from the court, sir, that says, he must speak with
you, pain of death --


MOR. Pain of thy life, be silent.


Act II. Scene II.
TRVE-WIT, MOROSE, CVTBERD. BY your leave, sir (I am a stranger here) is your
name, master MOROSE? is your name, master MOROSE? fishes! Pythagoreans all!
this is strange! What say you, sir, nothing? Has HARPOCRATES been here, with
his club, among you? well sir, I will believe you to be the man, at this time:
I will venture upon you, sir. Your friends at court commend 'hem to you, sir --


(MOR. O men! O manners! was there ever such an impudence?)


TRV. And are extremely sollicitous for you, sir.


MOR. Whose knave are you!


TRV. Mine own knave, and your compere, sir.


MOR. Fetch me my sword --


TRV. You shall taste the one half of my dagger, if you do (groom) and you,
the other, if you stir, sir: be patient, I charge you, in the kings name, and
hear me without insurrection. They say, you are to marry? to marry! do you
mark, sir?


MOR. How then, rude companion!


TRV. He shows him a halter. Mary, your friends do wonder, sir, the Thames
being so near, wherein you may drown so handsomely; or London Bridge, at a
low fall, with a fine leap, to hurry you down the stream; or, such a
delicate steeple, in the town, as Bow, to vault from; or, a brauer height, as
Paul's, or, if you affected to do it nearer home, and a shorter way, an
excellent garret windore, into the street; or, a beam, in the said garret,
with this halter; which they have sent, and desire, that you would sooner
commit your grave head to this knot, then to the wed-lock nooze; or, take a
little sublimate, and go out of the world, like a rat; or a fly (as one said)
with a straw in your arse: any way, rather, then to follow this goblin
matrimony. Alas, sir, do you ever think to find a chaste wife, in these
times? now? when there are so many masks, plays, puritan preachings,
mad-folkes, and other strange sights to be seen daily, private and public?
if you had lived in king ETHELDRED'S time, sir, or EDWARD the Confessors, you
might, perhaps, have found in some cold countrey-hamlet, then, a dull frostie
wench, would have been contented with one man: now, they will as soon be
pleased with one leg, or one eye. I Will tell you, sir, the monstrous hazards you
shall run with a wife.


MOR. Good sir! have I ever cosen'd any friends of yours of their land? bought
their possessions? taken forfeit of their morgage? begged a reuersion from
'hem? bastarded their issue? what have I done, that may deserve this?


TRV. Nothing, sir, that I know, but your itch of marriage.


MOR. Why? if I had made an assassinate upon your father; vitiated your mother;
ravished your sisters --


TRV. I would kill you, sir, I would kill you, if you had.


MOR. Why? you do more in this, sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all
facinorous acts, that could be named, to do that you do --


TRV. Alas, sir, I am but a messenger: I but tell you, what you must hear. It
seems, your friends are careful after your souls health, sir, and would have
you know the danger (but you may do your pleasure, for all them, I persuade
not, sir) If, after you are married, your wife do run away with a vaulter, or
the Frenchman that walks upon ropes, or him that daunces the iig, or a sencer
for his skill at his weapon, why it is not their fault; they have discharged
their consciences: when you know what may happen. Nay, suffer valiantly, sir,
for I must tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If she be
fair, young, and vegetous, no sweet meats ever drew more flies; all the yellow
doublets, and great roses in the town will be there. If foul, and crooked,
she will be with them, and buy those doublets and roses, sir. If rich, and that
you marry her dowry, not her; she will reign in your house, as imperious as a
widow. If noble, all her kindred will be your tyrannes. If fruitful, as proud
as May, and humorous as April; she must have her doctors, her midwiues, her
nurses, her longings every hour: though it be for the dearest morsel of man.
If learned, there was never such a parrat; all your patrimony will be too
little for the guests, that must be invited, to hear her speak Latin and
Greek: and you must lie with her in those languages too, if you will please
her. If precise, you must feast all the silenced brethren, once in three days;
salute the sisters; entertain the whole family, or wood of 'hem; and hear
long-winded exercises, singings, and catechisings, which you are not given to,
and yet must give for: to please the zealous matron your wife, who, for the
holy cause, will cosen you, over and above. You begin to sweat, sir? but this
is not half, in faith: you may do your pleasure notwithstanding, as I said
before, I come not to persuade you. Upon my faith, The Mute is stealing away.
master serving man, if you do stir, I will beat you.


MOR. O, what is my sin! what is my sin?


TRV. Then, if you love your wife, or rather, dote on her, sir: O, how she will
torture you! and take pleasure in your torments! you shall lie with her but when
she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion; or it must be for that
jewel, or that pearl, when she does; every half hours pleasure must be
bought anew: and with the same pain, and charge, you wooed her at first. Then,
you must keep what servants she please; what company she will; that friend
must not visit you without her license; and him she loves most she will seem
to hate eagerliest, to decline your jealousy; or, faigne to be ielous of you
first; and for that cause go live with her she-friend, or cosen at the
college, that can instruct her in all the mysteries, of writing letters,
corrupting servants, taming spies; where she must have that rich goune for
such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; be served in
silver; have the chamber sill'd with a succession of grooms, footmen, vshers,
and other messengers; besides embroyderers, iewellers, tyre-women, sempsters,
fether-men, perfumers; while she feels not how the land drops away; nor the
acres melt; nor forsees the change, when the mercer has your woods for her
veluets; never weighes what her pride costs, sir: so she may kiss a page, or
a smoth chinne, that has the despair of a beard; be a states-woman, know all
the news, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath, what at court, what in
progress; or, so she may censure poets, and authors, and styles, and compare
'hem, DANIEL with SPENSER, IONSON with the the other youth, and so forth; or, be
thought cunning in controversies, or the very knots of divinity; and have,
often in her mouth, the state of the question: and then skip to the
Mathematiques, and demonstration and answer, in religion to one; in state, to
another, in baud'ry to a third.


MOR. O, O!


TRV. All this is very true, sir. And then her going in disguise to that
coniurer, and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soon you
shall die? next, if her present servant love her? next that, if she shall have
a new servant? and how many? which of her family would make the best baud,
male, or female? what precedence she shall have by her next match? and sets
down the answers, and believes 'hem above the scriptures. Nay, perhaps she will
study the art.


MOR. Gentle sir, have you done? have you had your pleasure of me? I Will think of
these things.


TRV. Yes sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going
afoot, and lies in, a month, of a new face, all oil, and birdlime; and rises
in asses milk, and is clens'd with a new fucus: god b'w' you, sir. One thing
more (which I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may
have made a conuayance of her virginity before hand, as your wise widows do
of their states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, sir: who can tell?
or if she have not done it yet, she may do, upon the wedding day, or the night
before, and antidate you cuckold. The like has been heard of, in nature. It Is
no devised impossible thing, sir. God b'w' you: I Will be bold to leave this rope
with you, sir, for a remembrance. Farewell MVTE.


MOR. The horn again. Come, have me to my chamber: but first shut the door. O,
shut the door, shut the door: Is he come again?


CVT. It Is I, sir, your barber.


MOR. O CVTBERD, CVTBERD, CVTBERD! here has bin a cut-throate with me: help me
in to my bed, and give me physic with thy counsel.


Act II. Scene III.
DAW, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE, EPICOENE. NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her
own charges: it is nothing to me, gentlemen. But she will not be invited to
the like feasts, or guests, every day.


CLE. They dissuade her, privately. O, by no means, she may not refuse -- to
stay at home, if you love your reputation: 'Slight, you are invited thither of
purpose to be seen, and laughed at by the lady of the college, and her
shadows. This trumpeter has proclaimed you.


DAVP. You shall not go; let him be laughed at in your stead, for not bringing
you: and put him to his extemporall faculty of fooling, and talking loud to
satisfy the company.


CLE. He will suspect us, talk aloud. 'Pray' mistress EPICOENE, let us see your
verses; we have sir JOHN DAW'S leave: do not conceal your servants merit, and
your own glories.


EPI. They Will prove my servants glories, if you have his leave so soon.


DAVP. His vain glories, lady!


DAW. Show 'hem, show 'hem, mistress, I dare own 'hem.


EPI. Judge you, what glories?


DAW. Nay, I Will read 'hem my self, too: an author must recite his own works.
It is a madrigall of modesty. Modest, and fair, for fair and good are near
Neighbors, how ere. --



DAVP. Very good.


CLE. I, Is It not?


DAW. No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.

DAVP. Excellent!

CLE. That again, I pray'sir JOHN.

DAVP. It has some thing in it like rare wit, and sense.

CLE. Peace.

DAW. No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I praise sweet modesty, I praise
Bright beauties rays:
And having praised both beauty' and modestee,
I have praised thee.

DAVP. Admirable!

CLE. How it chimes, and cries tinke in the close, divinely!

DAVP. I, it is SENECA.

CLE. No, I think it is PLVTARCH.

DAW. The dor on PLVTARCH, and SENECA, I hate it: they are mine own
imaginations, by that light. I wonder those fellows have such credit with
gentlemen.


CLE. They are very grave authors.


DAW. Grave asses! mere Essaists! a few loose sentences, and that is all. A man
would talk so, his whole age, I do utter as good things every hour, if they
were collected, and observed, as either of'hem.


DAVP. Indeed! sir JOHN?


CLE. He must needs, living among the Wits, and Braueries too.


DAVP. I, and being president of'hem, as he is.


DAW. There is ARISTOTLE, a mere common place-fellow; PLATO, a discourser;
THVCIDIDES, and LIVIE, tedious and dry; TACITUS, an entire knot: sometimes
worth the untying, very seldom.


CLE. What do you think of the Poets, sir JOHN?


DAW. Not worthy to be named for authors. HOMER, an old tedious prolixe ass,
talks of curriers, and chines of beef. VIRGIL, of dunging of land, and bees.
HORACE, of I know not what.


CLE. I think so.


DAW. And so PINDARVS, LYCOPHRON, ANACREON, CATVLLVS, SENECA the tragoedian,
LVCAN, PROPERTIVS, TIBVLLVS, MARTIAL, IVVENAL, AVSONIVS, STATIVS, POLITIAN,
VALERIVS FLACCVS, and the rest --


CLE. What a sack full of their names he has got!


DAVP. And how he poures 'hem out! POLITIAN, with VALERIVS FLACCVS!


CLE. Was not the character right, of him?


DAVP. As could be made, in faith.


DAW. And PERSIVS, a crabbed cockescombe, not to be endured.


DAVP. Why? whom do you account for authors, sir JOHN DAW?


DAW. Syntagma Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris canonice, the
King of Spaines bible.


DAVP. Is the King of Spaines bible an author?


CLE. Yes, and Syntagma.


DAVP. What was that Syntagma, sir?


DAW. A civil lawer, a Spaniard.


DAVP. Sure, Corpus was a Dutchman.


CLE. I, both the Corpusses, I knew 'hem: they were very corpulent authors.


DAW. And, then there is VATABLVS, POMPONATIVS, SYMANCHA, the other are not to
be received, within the thought of a scholar.


DAVP. Fore god, you have a simple learned servant, lady, in titles.


CLE. I wonder that he is not called to the helm, and made a councellor!


DAVP. He is one extraordinary.


CLE. Nay, but in ordinary! to say truth, the state wants such.


DAVP. Why, that will follow.


CLE. I muse, a mistress can be so silent to the dotes of such a servant.


DAW. It Is her virtue, sir. I have written somewhat of her silence too.


DAVP. In verse, sir JOHN?


CLE. What else?


DAVP. Why? how can you justify your own being of a Poet, that so slight all
the old Poets?


DAW. Why? every man, that writes in verse, is not a Poet; you have of the
Wits, that write verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that live by it,
the poor fellows that live by it.


DAVP. Why? would not you live by your verses, sir JOHN.


CLE. No, 'twere pity he should. A knight live by his verses? he did not make
'hem to that end, I hope.


DAVP. And yet the noble SIDNEY lives by his, and the noble family not ashamed.


CLE. I, he professed himself; but sir JOHN DAW has more caution: he will not
hinder his own rising in the state so much! do you think he will? Your
verses, good sir JOHN, and no poems.


DAW. Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
Deny't who can.

DAV. Not I, believe it: your reason, sir.

DAV. Nor, is it a tale,
That female vice should be a virtue male,
Or masculine vice, a female virtue be:
You shall it see
Proved with increase,
I know to speak, and she to hold her peace.
Do you conceive me, gentlemen?


DAV. No faith, how mean you with increase, sir JOHN?

DAW. Why, with increase is, when I court her for the common cause of mankind;
and she says nothiug, but consentire videtur: and in time is grauida.


DAVP. Then, this is a ballad of procreation?


CLE. A madrigall of proceation, you mistake.


EPI. 'Pray give me my verses again, servant.


DAW. If you you will ask 'hem aloud, you shall.


CLE. See, here is TRVE-WIT again!


Act II. Scene IIII.
CLERIMONT, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, CVTBERD, DAW, EPICOENE. WHere have thou been,
in the name of madness! thus accoutred with thy horn?


TRV. Where the sound of it might have pierced your senses, with gladness, had
you been in eare-reach of it. DAVPHINE, fall down and worship me: I have
forbid the banes, lad. I have been with thy virtuous uncle, and have broke the
match.


DAVP. You have not, I hope.


TRV. Yes faith; and thou should hope otherwise, I should repent me: this
horn got me entrance, kiss it. I had no other way to get in, but by faining
to be a post; but when I got in once, I proved none, but rather the contrary,
turned him into a post, or a stone, or what is stiffer, with thundering into him
the incommodities of a wife, and the miseries of marriage. If ever GORGON were
seen in the shape of a woman, he has seen her in my description. I hane put
him off o'that sent, for ever. Wby do you not applaud, and adore me, sirs? why
stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy of the benefit.


DAVP. Did not I tell you? mischief! --


CLE. I would you had placed this benefit somewhere else.


TRV. Why so?


CLE. Slight, you have done the most inconsiderate, rash, weak thing, that
ever man did to his friend.


DAVP. Friend! if the most malicious enemy I have, had studied to inflict an
injury upon me, it could not be a greater.


TRV. Wherein? for gods-sake! Gent: come to your selves again.


DAVP. But I presaged thus much before, to you.


CLE. Would my lips had been soldred, when I spak on it. Slight, what moved you
to be thus impertinent?


TRV. My masters, do not put on this strange face to pay my courtesy: off
with this visor. Have good turns done you, and thank 'hem this way?


DAVP. Fore heaven, you have undone me. That, which I have plotted for, and
been maturing now these four months, you have blasted in a minute: now I am
lost, I may speak. This gentlewoman was lodged here by me o'purpose, and, to
be put upon my uncle, has professed this obstinate silence for my sake, being my
entire friend; and one, that for the requital of such a fortune, as to marry
him, would have made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are
utterly miscarried by this unlucky accident.


CLE. Thus it is, when a man will be ignorantly officious; do services, and not
know his why: I wonder what courteous itch possessed you! you never did absurder
part in your life, nor a greater trespass to friendship, to humanity.


DAVP. Faith, you may forgive it, best: 'twas your cause principally.


DLE. I know it, would it had not.


CAVP. How now CVTBERD? what news?


CVT. The best, the happiest that ever was, sir. There has been a mad
gentleman with your uncle, this morning (I think this be the gentleman) that
has almost talked him out of his wits, with threatening him from marriage --


DAVP. On, I pray thee.


CVT. And your uncle, sir, he thinks 'twas done by your procurement;
therefore he will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if he like her, he
says, and that she be so inclining to dombe, as I have told him, he swears
he will marry her, to day, instantly, and not defer it a minute longer.


DAVP. Excellent! beyond our expectation!


TRV. Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew it would be thus.


DAVP. Nay, sweet TRVE-WIT, forgive me.


TRV. No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weak
part.


CLE. Will thou ascribe that to merit, now, was mere fortune?


TRV. Fortune? mere providence. Fortune had not a finger in it. I saw it must
necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is never false to me in these
things. Show me, how it could be otherwise.


DAVP. Nay, gentlemen, contend not, it is well now.


TRV. Alas, I let him go on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he
pleased.


CLE. Away thou strange iustifier of thy self, to be wiser then thou were, by
the event.


TRV. Event! By this light, thou shall never persuade me, but I foresaw it,
as well as the stars themselves.


DAVP. Nay, gentlemen, it is well now: do you two entertain sir JOHN DAW, with
discourse, while I send her away with instructions.


TRV. I Will be acquainted with her, first, by your favor.


CLE. Master TRVE-WIT, lady, a friend of ours.


TRV. I am sorry, I have not known you sooner, lady, to celebrate this rare
virtue of your silence.


CLE. Faith, an' you had come sooner, you should ha'seene, and heard her well
celebrated in sir JOHN DAW'S madrigalls.


TRV. JACK DAW, god save you, when saw you LA-FOOLE?


DAW. Not since last night, master TRVE-WIT.


TRV. That Is miracle! I thought you two had been inseparable.


DAW. He Is gone to inuit his guests.


TRV. Gods so! it is true! what a false memory have I toward that man! I am one:
I met him e'ne now, upon that he calls his delicate fine black horse, rid into
a foame, with poasting from place to place, and person to person, to give 'hem
the cue --


CLE. Lest they should forget?


TRV. Yes: there was never poor captain took more pains at a muster to show
men, then he, at this meal, to show friends.


DAW. It is his quarter-feast, sir.


CLE. What! do you say so, sir JOHN?


TRV. Nay, JACK DAW will not be out, at the best friends he has, to the talent
of his wit: where is his mistress, to hear and applaud him? is she gone!


DAW Is mistress EPICOENE gone?


CLE. Gone before, with sir DAVPHINE, I warrant, to the place.


TRV. Gone before! that were a manifest injury; a disgrace and a half: to
refuse him at such a festival time, as this, being a Bravery, and a Wit too.


CLE. Tut, he will swallow it like cream: he is better read in iure civilly,
then to esteem any thing a disgrace is offered him from a mistress.


DAW. Nay, let her eene go; she shall sit alone, and be dumb in her chamber,
a week together, for JOHN DAW, I warrant her: does she refuse me?


CLE. No, sir, do not take it so to heart: she does not refuse you, but a
little neglect you. Good faith, TRVE-WIT, you were too blame to put it into his
head, that she does refuse him.


TRV. She does refuse him, sir, palpably: how ever you mince it. An' I were as
he, I would swear to speak never a word to her, to day, for it.


DAW. By this light, no more I will not.


TRV. Nor to any body else, sir.


DAW. Nay, I will not say so, gentlemen.


CLE. It had been an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could
have drawn him to it.


DAW. I Will be very melancholique, in faith.


CLE. As a dog, if I were as you, sir JOHN.


TRV. Or a snaile, or a hog-louse: I would roll my self up for this day,
in troth, they should not unwind me.


DAW. By this pick-tooth, so I will.


CLE. It Is well done: he begins already to be angry with his teeth.


DAW. Will you go, gentlemen?


CLE. Nay, you must walk alone, if you be right melancholique, sir JOHN.


TRV. Yes sir, we will dog you, we will follow you a far off.


CLE. Was there ever such a two yards of knighthood, measured out by Time, to
be sold to laughter?


TRV. A mere talking mole! hang him: no mushrome was ever so fresh. A fellow
so utterly nothing, as he knows not what he would be.


CLE. Let Us follow him: but first, let us go to DAVPHINE, he is houering about
the house, to hear what news.


TRV. Content.


Act II. Scene V.
MOROSE, EPICOENE, CVTBERD, MVTE. He goes about her, and viewes her. WElcome
CVTBERD; draw near with you fair chardge: and, in her ear, softly entreat
her to vnmasque ( --) So. Is the door shut? ( --) enough. Now, CVTBERD, with
the same discipline I use to my family, I will question you. As I conceive,
CVTBERD, this gentlewoman is she, you have provided, and brought, in hope she
will sit me in the place and person of a wife? Answer me not, but with your
leg, unless it be otherwise: ( --) very well done CVTBERD. I conceive,
besides, CVTBERD, you have been pre-acquainted with her birth, education, and
quallities, or else you would not prefer her to my acceptance, in the weighty
consequence of marriage. ( --) this I conceive, CVTBERD. Answer me not but with
your leg, unless it be otherwise. ( --) Very well done CVTBERD. Give aside
now a little, and leave me to examine her condition, and aptitude to my
affection. She is exceeding fair, and of a special good favor; a sweet
composition, or harmony of limbs: her temper of beauty has the true height of
my blood. The knave has exceedingly well fitted me without: I will now try her
within. Come near, fair gentlewoman: let not my behavior seem rude, though
unto you, She curtsies. being rare, it may happily appear strange. ( -- (Nay,
lady, you may speak, though CVTBERD, and my man, might not: for, of all
sounds, only, the sweet voice of a fair lady has the just length of mine
ears. I beseech you, say lady, out of the first fire of meeting eyes, (they
say) love is stricken: do you feel any such motion, suddenly shot into you,
Curt'sie. from any part you see in me? ha, lady? ( --) Alas, lady, these
answers by silent curt'sies, from you, are too courtlesse, and simple. I have
ever had my breeding in court: and she that shall be my wife, must be
accomplished with courtly, and audacious ornaments. Can you speak lady?


EPI. She speaks softly. Judge you, forsooth.


MOR. What say you, lady? speak out, I beseech you.


EPI. Judge you, forsooth.


MOR. Curt'sie. Of My judgment, a divine softnes! but can you naturally, lady,
as I enjoin these by doctrine and industry, refer your self to the search of
my judgment, and (not taking pleasure in your tougue, which is a woman's
chiefest pleasure) think it plausible, to answer me by silent gestures, so
long as my speeches iumpe right, with what you conceive? ( --) Excellent!
divine! if it were possible she should hold out thus! Peace CVTBRD, thou art
made for ever, as thou have made me, if this felicity have lasting: but I
will try her further. Dear lady, I am courtly, I tell you, and I must have
mine ears banqueted with pleasant, and witty conferences, pretty girds,
scoffs, and daliance in her, that I mean to choose for my bedpheere. The
ladies in court, think it a most desperate impair to their quickenesse of
wit, and good carriage, if they cannot give occasion for a man to court 'hem;
and, when an amorous discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to
continue it, as himself: and do you alone so much differ from all them, that,
what they (with so much circumstance) affect, and toil for, to seem learned,
to seem judicious, to seem sharp, and conceited, you can bury in your self,
with silence? and rather trust your graces to the fair conscience of virtue,
then to the worlds, or your own proclamation?


EPI. I should be sorry else.


MOR. What say you, lady? good lady, speak out.


EPI. I should be sorry, else


MOR. That sorrow does fill me with gladness! O MOROSE! thou art happy above
mankind! pray that thou may contain thy self. I will only put her to it
once more, and it shall be with the utmost touch, and test of their sex. But
hear me, fair lady, I do also love to see her, whom I shall choose for my
heicfar, to be the first and principal in all fashions; praecede all the dames
at court, by a fortnight; have her counsel of tailors, linneners, lace-women,
embroyderers, and sit with 'hem sometimes twice a day, upon French
intelligences; and then come forth, varied like Nature, or oftener then she,
and better, by the help of Art, her aemulous servant. This do I affect. And
how will you be able, lady, with this frugalitie of speech, to give the
manifold (but necessary) instructions, for that bodies, these sleeves, those
skirts, this cut, that stitch, this embroyderie, that lace, this wire, those
knots, that ruff, those roses, this girdle, that fan, the the other skarfe,
these gloves? ha! what say you, lady.


EPI. I Will leave it to you, sir.


MOR. How lady? pray you, rise a note.


EPI. I leave it to wisdom, and you sir.


MOR. Admirable creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sin against
so sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print on those divine lips, the
seal of being mine. CVTBERD, I give thee the lease of thy house free: thank
me not, but with thy leg ( --) I know what thou woulst say, she is poor, and
her friends deceased; she has brought a wealthy dowr^e in her silence,
CVTBERD: and in respect of her poverty, CVTBERD, I shall have her more loving,
and obedient, CVTBERD. Go thy ways, and get me a minister presently, with a
soft-low voice to marry us, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but brief
as he can; away: softly, CVTBERD. Sirrah, conduct your mistress into the dining
room, your now -- mistress. O my felicity! how I shall be revenged on mine
insolent kinsman, and his plots, to fright me from marrying! This night I will
get an heir, and thrust him out of my blood like a stranger; he would be
knighted, forsooth, and thought by that means to reign over me, his title
must do it: no kinsman, I will now make you bring me the tenth lords, and the
sixteenth ladies letter, kinsman; and it shall do you no good kinsman. Your
knighthood it self shall come on it is knees, and it shall be rejected; it
shall be sued for it is fees to execution, and not be redeemed; it shall cheat
at the tweluepeny ordinary, it knighthood, for it is diet all the term time,
and tell tales for it in the vacation, to the hostess: or it knighthood shall
do worse; take sanctuary in Coleharbor, and fast. It shall fright all it
friends, with borrowing letters; and when one of the foure-score has brought
it knighthood ten shillings, it knighthood shall go to the Cranes, or the Bear
at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in fear: it shall not have money to discharge
one tavern reckoning, to inuit the old creditors, to forbear it knighthood;
or the new, that should be, to trust it knighthood. It shall be the tenth name
in the bond, to take up the commodity of pipkins, and stone jugs; and the part
thereof shall not furnish it knighthood forth, for the attempting of a bakers
widow, a brown bakers widow. It shall give it knighthoods name, for a
stallion, to all gamesome citizens wives, and be refused; when the master of a
dancing school, or ( How do you call him) the worst reueller in the town is
taken: it shall want clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to fool to lawyers.
It shall not have hope to repair it self by Constantinople, Ireland, or
Virginia; but the best, and last fortune to it knighthood shall be, to make DOL
TEARE-SHEET, or KATE COMMON, a lady: and so, it knighthood may eat.


Act II. Scene VI.
TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, CLERIMONT, CVTBERD. ARe you sure he is not gone by?


DAVP. No, I staid in the shop ever since.


CLE. But, he may take the other end of the lane.


DAVP. No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hither.


TRV. What a barbarian it is to stay then!


DAVP. Yonder he comes.


CLE. And his charge left behind him, which is a very good sign, DAVPHINE.


DAVP. How now CVTBERD, succeedes it, or no?


CVT. Past imagination, sir, omnia secunda; you could not have prayed, to have
had it so well: Saltat senex, as it is in the proverb, he does triumph in his
felicity; admires the party! he has given me the lease of my house too! and, I
am now going for a silent minister to marry 'hem, and away.


TRV. Slight, get one of the silenced ministers, a zealous brother would torment
him purely.


CVT. Cum priuilegio, sir.


DAVP. O, by no means, let us do nothing to hinder it now when it is done and
finished, I am for you: for any devise of vexation.


CVT. And that shall be, within this half hour, upon my dexterity, gentlemen.
Contriue what you can, in the mean time, bonis auibus.


CLE. How the slave does latin it!


TRV. It would be made a jest to posterity, sirs, this days mirth, if ye will.


CLE. Beshrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.


DAVP. And, for my part. What is it?


TRV. To translate all LA-FOOLES company, and his feast hither, to day, to
celebrate this bride-ale.


DAVP. I mary, but how will it be done?


TRV. I Will undertake the directing of all the ladie-guests thither, and then
the meat must follow.


CLE. For gods sake, let us effect it: it will be an excellent comoedy of
affliction, so many several noyses.


DAVP. But are they not at the other place already, think you?


TRV. I Will warrant you for the colledge-honors: one of their faces has not the
priming color laid on yet, nor the other her smock sleek'd.


CLE. O, but they will rise earlier then ordinary, to a feast.


TRV. Best go see, and assure our selves.


CLE. Who knows the house?


TRV. I Will lead you, were you never there yet?


DAVP. Not I.


CLE. Nor I.


TRV. Where ha'you lived then? not know TOM OTTER!


CLE. No: for gods sake, what is he?


TRV. An excellent animal, equal with your DAW, or LA-FOOLE, if not
transcendent; and does latin it as much as your barber: he is his wifes
Subject, he calls her Princess, and at such times as these, follows her up
and down the house like a page, with his hat off, partly for heat, partly for
reverence. At this instant, he is marshalling of his bull, bear, and horse.


DAVP. What be those, in the name of Sphinx?


TRV. Why sir? he has been a great man at the beare-garden in his time: and
from that subtle sport, has taken the witty denomination of his chief carousing
cups. One he calls his bull, another his bear, another his horse. And then he
has his lesser glasses, that he calls his dear, and his ape; and several
degrees of'hem too: and never is well, nor thinks any intertainement perfect,
till these be brought out, and set of the cupbord.


CLE. For gods love! we should miss this, if we should not go.


TRV. Nay, he has a thousand things as good, that will speak him all day. He
will rail on his wife, with certain common places, behind her back; and to
her face --


DAVP. No more of him. Let Us go see him, I petition you.


Act III.
Scene I.
OTTER, Mrs. OTTER, TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE. NAy, good Princess, hear
me pauca verba.


Mrs. OT. By that light, I Will ha'you chained up, with your bul-dogs, and
beare-dogges, if you be not civil the sooner. I Will send you to kennell,
in faith. You were best bait me with your bull, bear, and horse? Never a time,
that the courtiers, or collegiates come to the house, but you make it a
shrouetuesday! I would have you get your whitsontide-veluet-cap, and your
staff in your hand, to intertaine 'hem: yes in troth, do.


OTT. Not so, Princess, neither, but under correction, sweet Princess, gi'me
leave -- these things I am known to the courtiers by. It is reported to them
for my humor, and they receive it so, and do expect it. TOM OTTERS bull,
bear, and horse is known all over England, in rerum natura.


Mrs. OT. Fore me, I will na-ture 'hem over to Paris-garden, and na-ture you
thither too, if you pronounce 'hem again. Is a bear a fit beast, or a bull,
to mix in society with great ladies? think in your discretion, in any good
polity.


OTT. The horse then, good Princess.


Mrs OT. Well, I am contented for the horse: they love to be well horsed, I
know. I love it my self.


OTT. And it is a delicate fine horse this. Poetarum Pegasus. Under correction,
Princess, IVPITER did turn himself into a -- Taurus, or Bull, under
correction, good Princess.


Mrs. OT. By my integrity, I Will send you over to the banke-side, I Will commit
you to the Master of the garden, if I hear but a syllable more. Must my house,
or my roof, be polluted with the sent of bears, and bulls, when it is perfumed
for great ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married you? That
I would be Princess, and reign in mine own house: and you would be my
subject, and obey me? What did you bring me, should make you thus peremptory?
Do I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will, among your
gamsters, to vex and torment me, at such times as these? Who gives you your
maintenance, I pray you? who allows you your horse-meat, and mans-meat? your
three suits of apparel a year? your four pair of stockings, one silk,
three worsted? your clean linen, your bands, and cuffes when I can get you to
wear 'hem? It Is mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with courtiers, or
great personages, to speak to you out of their coaches, and come home to your
house? Were you ever so much as looked upon by a lord, or a lady, before I
married you: but on the Easter or Whitson-holy-daies? and then out at the
banqueting house windore, when NED WHITING, or GEORGE STONE, were at the stake?


(TRV. For gods sake, let us go staue her off him.)


Mrs. OT. Answer me to that. And did not I take you up from thence, in an old
greasy buffe-doublet, with points; and green vellet sleeves, out at the
elbowes? you forget this.


(TRV. She Will worry him, if we help not in time.)


Mrs. OT. O, here are some of the gallants! Go to, behave your self
distinctly, and with good morality; Or, I protest, I Will take away your
exhibition.


Act. III. Scene II.
TRVE-WIT, Mrs. OTTER, CAP. OTTER, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE, CVTBERD. BY your leave,
fair mistress OTTER, I Will be bold to enter these gentlemen in your acquaintance.


Mrs. OT. It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, sir.


TRV. How does my noble Captain? Is the bull, bear, and horse, in rerum
natura still?


OTT. Sir, Sic visum superis.


Mrs. OT. I would you would but intimate 'hem, do. Go your ways in, and get
tosts, and butter, made for the wood-cocks. That Is a sit province for you.


CLE. Alas, what a tyranny, is this poor fellow married too.


TRV. O, but the sport will be anon, when we get him loose.


DAV. Dares he ever speak?


TRV. No Anabaptist ever railed with the like license: but mark her language
in the mean time, I beseech you.


Mrs. OT. Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My cousin, sir AMOROVS, will be
here briefly.


TRV. In good time lady. Was not sir JOHN DAW here, to ask for him, and the
company?


Mrs. OT. I cannot assure you, Mr. TRVE-WIT. Here was a very melancholy knight
in a ruff, that demanded my subject for some body, a gentleman, I think.


CLE. I, that was he, lady.


Mrs. OT. But he departed straight, I can resolve you.


DAV. What an excellent choice phrase, this lady expresses in!


TRV. O, sir! she is the only authentical courtier, that is not naturally
bred one, in the city.


Mrs. OT. You have taken that report upon trust, gentlemen.


TRV. No, I assure you, the court gouernes it so, lady, in your behalf.


Mrs. OT. I am the servant of the court, and courtiers, sir.


TRV. They are rather your idolaters.


Mrs. OT. Not so, sir.


DAV. How now, CVTBERD? Any cross?


CVT. O, no sir: Omnia been. 'Twas never better of the hinges, all is sure. I
have so pleased him with a curate, that he is gone to it almost with the
delight he hopes for soon.


DAV. What is he, for a vicar?


CVT. One that has caught a cold, sir, and can scarce be heard six inches
off; as if he spoke out of a bull-rush, that were not picked, or his throat were
full of pith: a fine quick fellow, and an excellent barber of prayers. I came
to tell you, sir, that you might omnem mouere lapidem (as they say) be ready
with your vexation.


DAV. Gramercy, honest CVTBERD, be there abouts with thy key to let us in.


CVT. I will not fail you, sir: Ad manum.


TRV. Well, I Will go watch my coaches.


CLE. Do; and we will send DAW to you, if you meet him not.


Mrs. OT. Is master TRVE-WIT gone?


DAV. Yes, lady, there is some vnfortnnate business fallen out.


Mrs. OT. So I judged by the phisiognomy of the fellow, that came in; and I had
a dream last night too of the new pageant, and my lady Maioresse, which is
always very ominous to me. I told it my lady HAVGHTY the other day; when her
honor came hither to see some China stuffes: and she expounded it, out of
ARTEMIDORVS, and I have found it since very true. It has done me many affronts.


CLE. Your dream, lady?


Mrs. OT. Yes, sir, anything I do but dream of the city. It staynd me a
damasque table-cloth, cost me eighteen pound at one time; and burnt me a black
satin gown, as I stood by the fire, at my lady CENTAVRES chamber in the
college, another time. A third time, at the Lords masque, it dropped all my
wire, and my ruff with waxe-candle, that I could not go up to the banquet. A
fourth time, as I was taking coach to go to Ware, to meet a friend, it dashed
me a new suit all over (a crimson satin doublet, and black velvet skirts)
with a brewers horse, that I was feign to go in and shift me, and kept my
chamber a leash of days for the anguish of it.


DAVP. These were dire mischances, lady.


CLE. I would not dwell in the city, and 'twere so fatal to me.


Mrs. OT. Yes sir, but I do take advise of my doctor, to dream of it as
little, as I can.


DAVP. You do well, mistress OTTER.


Mrs. OT. Will it please you to enter the house farther, gentlemen?


DAVP. And your favor, lady: but we stay to speak with a knight, sir JOHN
DAW, who is here come. We shall follow you, lady.


Mrs. OT. At your own time, sir. It is my cosen sir AMOROVS his feast. --


DAVP. I know it lady.


Mrs. OT. And mine together. But it is for his honor; and therefore I take no
name of it, more then of the place.


DAVP. You are a bounteous kinswoman.


Mrs. OT. Your servant, sir.


Act III. Scene III.
CLERIMONT, DAW, LA-FOOLE, DAVPHINE, OTTER. WHy do not you know it, sir JOHN
DAW?


DAW. No, I am a rooke if I do.


CLE. I Will tell you then, she is married by this time! And whereas you were put
in the head, that she was gone with sir DAVPHINE, I assure you, sir DAVPHINE
has been the noblest, honestest friend to you, that ever gentleman of your
quality could boast off. He has discovered the whole plot, and made your
mistress so acknowledging, and indeed, so ashamed of her injury to you, that
she desires you to forgive her, and but grace her wedding with your presence to
day -- She is to be married to a very good fortune, she says, his uncle, old
MOROSE: and she willed me in private to tell you, that she shall be able to do
you more favors, and with more security now, then before.


DAW. Did she say so, in faith?


CLE. Why, what do you think of me, sir JOHN! ask sir DAVPHINE.


DAVP. Nay, I believe you. Good sir DAVPHINE, did she desire me to forgive
her?


CLE. I assure you, sir JOHN, she did.


DAW. Nay then, I do with all my heart, and I Will be iouiall.


CLE. Yes, for look you sir, this was the injury to you. LA-FOOLE intended
this feast to honor her bridale day, and made you the property to inuit the
college ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, she should
have appeared (as his friend) to have given you the dor. Whereas now, sir
DAVPHINE has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of satisfaction,
that you shall bring all the ladies to the place where she is, and be very
iouiall; and there, she will have a dinner, which shall be in your name: and
so dis-appoint LA-FOOLE, to make you good again, and (as it were) a sauer in
the man.


DAW. As I am a knight, I honor her, and forgive her heartily.


CLE. About it then presently, TRVE-WIT is gone before to confront the coaches,
and to acquaint you with so much, if he meet you. Join with him, and it is
well. See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be very
iouiall.


LA-F. Are the ladies come, sir JOHN DAW, and your mistress? sir DAVPHINE! you
are exceeding welcome, and honest master CLERIMONT. Where Is my cossen? did you
see no collegiats, gentlemen?


DAVP. Collegiats! Do you not hear, sir AMOROVS, how you are abused?


LA-F. How sir!


CLE. Will you speak so kindly to sir JOHN DAW, that has done you such an
affront?


LA-F. Wherein, gentlemen? let me be a suitor to you to know, I beseech you!


CLE. Why sir, his mistress is married to day, to sir DAVPHINES uncle, your
cosens neighbor, and he has diuerted all the ladies, and all your company
thither, to frustrate your provision, and stick a digrace upon you. He was
here, now, to have enticed us away from you too: but we told him his own, I
think.


LA-F. Has sir JOHN DAW wronged me so in-humanely?


DAV. He has done it, sir AMOROVS, most maliciously, and trecherously: but if
you will be ruled by us, you shall quit him in faith.


LA-F. Good gentlemen! I Will make one, believe it. How I pray?


DAV. Mary sir, get me your phesants, and your godwits, and your best meat, and
dish it in silver dishes of your cosens presently, and say nothing, but clap
me a clean towell about you, like a sewer; and bare-headed, march before it
with a good confidence ('it is but over the way, hard by) and we'll second you,
where you shall set it of the board, and bid 'hem welcome to it, which shall show
it is yours, and disgrace his preparation utterly: and, for your cosen, whereas
she should be troubled here at home with care of making and giving welcome,
she shall transfer all that labor thither, and be a principal guest her
self, sit ranked with the colledge-Honors, and be honored, and have her
health drunk as often, as bare, and as loud as the best of 'hem.


LA-F. I Will go tell her presently. It shall be done, that is resolved.


CLE. I thought he would not hear it out, but 'twould take him.


DAVP. Well, there be guests, and meat now; how shall we do for music?


CLE. The smell of the venison, going through the street, will inuit one noise
of fiddlers, or other.


DAVP: I would it would call the trumpeters thither.


CLE. Faith, there is hope, they have intelligence of all feasts. There Is good
correspondence betwixt them, and the London-cookes. It Is twenty to one but we
have 'hem.


DAVP. 'Twill be a most solemn day for my uncle, and an excellent fit of mirth
for us.


CLE. I, if we can hold up the aemulation betwixt FOOL, and DAW, and never
bring them to expostulate.


DAVP. Tut, flatter 'hem both (as TRVE-WIT says) and you may take their
understandings in a purse-net. They Will believe themselves to be just such men
as we make 'hem, neither more nor less. They have nothing, not the use of
their senses, but by tradition.


CLE. He enters like a sewer. See! Sir AMOROVS has his towell on already. Have
you persuaded your cossen?


LA-F. Yes, it is very faesible: she will do any thing she says, rather then
the LA-FOOLES shall be disgraced.


DAVP. She is a noble kinswoman. It will be such a pest'ling device, sir
AMOROVS! It will pound all your enemies practices to poulder, and blow him up
with his own mine, his own train.


LA-F. Nay, we will give fire, I warrant you.


CLE. But you must carry it privately, without any noise, and take no notice by
any means --


OTT. Gentlemen, my Princess says, you shall have all her silver dishes,
festinate: and she is gone to alter her tire a little, and go with you --


CLE. And yourselfe too, captain OTTER.


DAVP. By any means, sir.


OTT. Yes sir, I do mean it: but I would entreat my cosen sir AMOROVS, and
you gentlemen, to be suitors to my Princess, that I may carry my bull, and my
bear, as well as my horse.


CLE. That you shall do, captain OTTER.


LA-F. My cosen will never consent, gentlemen.


DAVP. She must consent, sir AMOROVS, to reason.


LA-F. Why, she says they are no decorum among ladies.


OTT. But they are decora, and that is better, sir.


CLE. I, she must hear argument. Did not PASIPHAE, who was a queen, love a
bull? and was not CALISTO, the mother of ARCAS, turned into a bear, and made a
star, mistress VRSVLA, in the heavens?


OTT. O God! that I could have said as much! I will have these stories painted
in the beare-garden, ex Ouidij metamorphosi.


DAVP. Where is your Princess, Captain? pray' be our leader.


OTT. That I shall, sir.


CLE. Make haste, good sir AMOROVS.


Act III. Scene IIII.
MOROSE, EPICOENE, PARSON, CVTBERD. SIr, there is an angel for your self, and a
brace of angels for your cold. Muse not at this manage of my bounty. It is fit
we should thank fortune, double to nature, for any benefit she conferres upon
us; besides, it is your imperfection, but my solace.


PAR. The parson speaks, as having a cold. I thank your worship, so is it
mine, now.


MOR. What says he, CVTBERD?


CVT. He says, Praesto, sir, whenever your worship needs him, he can be
ready with the like. He got this cold with sitting up late, and singing catches
with cloth-workers.


MOR. No more. I thank him.


PAR. He coughes. God keep your worship, and give you much joy with your fair
spouse. (Vmh, vmh.)


MOR. O, O, stay CVTBERD! let him give me five shillings of my money back. As
it is bounty to reward benefits, so is it equity to mulct injuries. I will have
it. What says he?


CVT. He cannot change it, sir.


MOR. It must be changed.


CVT. Cough again.


MOR. What says he?


CVT. He will cough out the rest, sir.


PAR. Again. (Vmh, vmh, vmh.)


MOR. Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I forgive it. --


EPI. Fie, master MOROSE, that you will use this violence to a man of the
church.


MOR. How!


EPI. It does not become your gravity, or breeding, (as you pretend in court)
to have offered this outrage on a water-man, or any more boystrous creature,
much less on a man of his civil coat.


MOR. You can speak then!


EPI. Yes, sir.


MOR. Speak out I mean.


EPI. I sir. Why, did you think you had married a statue? or a motion, only?
one of the French puppets, with the eyes turned with a wire? or some innocent
out of the hospital, that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth,
and look upon you.


MOR. O immodestie! a manifest woman! what CVTBERD?


EPI. Nay, never quarrel with CVTBERD, sir, it is too late now. I confess, it
does bate somewhat of the modesty I had, when I writ simply maid: but I hope,
I shall make it a stock still competent, to the estate, and dignity of your
wife.


MOR. She can talk!


EPI. Yes indeed, sir.


MOR. What, sirrah. None of my knaves, there? where is this impostor, CVTBERD?


EPI. Speak to him, fellow, speak to him. I Will have none of this coacted,
unnatural dumbness in my house, in a family where I govern.


MOR. She is my Regent already! I have married a PENTHESILEA, a SEMIRAMIS, sold
my liberty to a distaffe!


Act III. Scene V.
TRVE-WIT, MOROSE, EPICOENE Where Is master MOROSE?


MOR. Is he come again! lord have mercy upon me.


TRV. I wish you all joy, mistress EPICOENE, with your grave and honorable
match.


EPI. I return you the thanks, master TRVE-WIT, so friendly a wish deserves.


MOR. She has acquaintance, too!


TRV God save you, sir, and give you all contentment in your fair choice,
here. Before I was the bird of night to you, the owl but now I am the
messenger of peace, a dove, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to
the celebration of this good hour.


MOR. What hour, sir?


TRV. Your marriage hour sir. I commend your resolution, that (notwithstanding
all the dangers I laid before you, in the voice of a night-crow) would yet go
on, and be your self. It shows you are a man constant to your own ends, and
upright to your purposes, that would not be put off with left handed cries.


MOR. How should you arrive at the knowledge of so much!


TRV. Why, did you ever hope, sir, committing the secrecy of it to a barber,
that less then the whole town should know it? you might as well have told it
the conduit, or the bake-house, or the infant'ry that follow the court, and
with more security. Could your gravity forget so old and noted a remnant, as
lippis and tonsoribus notum. Well sir, forgive it your self now, the fault,
and be communicable with your friends. Here will be three or four fashionable
ladies, from the college to visit you presently, and their train of minions,
and followers.


MOR. Bar my doors! bar my doors! where are all my eaters? my mouths now?
bar up my doors, you varlets.


EPI. He is a varlet, that stirs to such an office. Let 'hem stand open. I
would see him that dares move his eyes toward it. Shall I have a barricado made
against my friends, to be barred of any pleasure they can bring in to me with
honorable visitation.


MOR. O Amazonian impudence!


TRV. Nay faith, in this, sir, she speaks but reason: and me thinks is more
continent then you. Would you go to bed so presently, sir, before noone? a man
of your head, and hair, should owe more to that reueuerend ceremony, and not
mount the marriage bed, like a towne-bul, or a mountaine-goate; but stay the
due season; and ascend it then with religion, and fear. Those delights are to
be steeped in the humor, and silence of the night; and give the day to other
open pleasures, and jollities of feast, or music, of reuells, of discourse:
we will have all, sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.


MOR. O, my torment, my torment!


TRV. Nay, if you endure the first half hour, sir, so tediously, and with
this irksomeness; what comfort, or hope, can this fair gentlewoman make to her
self hereafter, in the consideration of so many years as are to come --


MOR. Of my affliction. Good sir, depart, and let her do it alone.


TRV. I have done, sir.


MOR. That cursed barber!


TRV. (Yes faith, a cursed wretch indeed, sir.)


MOR. I have married his citterne, that is common to all men. Some plague, above
the plague --


TRV. (All Egypts ten plagues)


MOR. Revenge me on him.


TRV. It Is very well, sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I Will assure you
he will bear 'hem. As, that he may get the pox with seeking to cure it, sir?
Or, that while he is curling another man's hair, his own may drop off? Or, for
burning some male-baudes lock, he may have his brain beat out with the
curling-iron?


MOR. No, let the wretch live wretched. May he get the itch, and his shop so
lousie, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.


TRV. (I, and if he would swallow all his balls for pills, let not them purge
him)


MOR. Let his warning pan be ever cold.


TRV. (A perpertuall frost underneath it, sir)


MOR. Let him never hope to see fire again.


TRV. (But in hell, sir)


MOR. His chaires be always empty, his scissors rust, and his combs mould in
their cases.


TRV. Very dreadful that! (And may he loose the invention, sir, of caruing
lanternes in paper)


MOR. Let there be no baud carted that year, to employ a basin of his: but let
him be glad to eat his sponge, for bread.


TRV. And drink lotium to it, and much good do him.


MOR. Or, for want of bread --


TRV. Eat eare-waxe, sir. I Will help you. Or, draw his own teeth, and add
them to the lute-string.


MOR. No, beat the old ones to poulder, and make bread of them.


TRV. (Yes, make meal of the millstones.)


MOR. May all the botches, and burns, that he has cured on others, break out
upon him.


TRV. And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himself, sir: or, if he do
remember it, let him have scraped all his linen into lint for it, and have not a
rag left him, to set up with.


MOR. Let him never set up again, but have the gout in his hands for ever.
Now, no more, sir.


TRV. O that last was too high set! you might go less with him in faith, and
be revenged enough: as, that he be never able to new-paint his pole --


MOR. Good sir, no more. I forgot my self.


TRV. Or, want credit to take up with a combe-maker --


MOR. No more, sir.


TRV. Or, having broken his glass in a former despair, fall now into a much
greater, of ever getting another --


MOR. I beseech you, no more.


TRV. Or, that he never be trusted with trimming of any but chimney-sweepers --


MOR. Sir --


TRV. Or, may he cut a colliers throat with his rasor, by chance-medlee, and
yet hang for it.


MOR. I will forgive him, rather then hear any more. I beseech you, sir.


Act III. Scene VI.
DAW, MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, HAVGHTY, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, TRVSTY. THis way, madame.


MOR. O, the sea breaks in upon me! another flood! an inundation! I shall be
orewhelm'd with noise. It beats already at my shores. I feel an earthquake in
my self, for it.


DAW. 'Giue you joy, mistress.


MOR. Has she servants too!


DAW. She kisses them severally as he presents them. I have brought some ladies
here to see, and know you. My lady HAVGHTY, this my lady CENTAVRE, mistress
DOL MAVIS, mistress TRVSTIE my lady HAVGHTIES woman. Where Is your husband?
let us see him: can he endure no noise? let me come to him.


MOR. What nomenclator is this!


TRV. Sir JOHN DAW, sir, your wifes servant, this.


MOR. A DAW, and her servant! O, it is decreed, it is decreed of me, and she
have such servants.


TRV. Nay sir, you must kiss the ladies, you must not go away, now; they come
toward you, to seek you out.


HAVE. In Faith, master MOROSE, would you steal a marriage thus, in the midst of
so many friends, and not acquaint us? Well, I Will kiss you, notwithstanding the
justice of my quarrel: you shall give me leave, mistress, to use a becoming
familiarity with your husband.


EPI. Your ladyship does me an honor in it, to let me know he is so worthy
your favor: as, you have done both him and me grace, to visit so vnprepar'd a
pair to entertain you.


MOR. Complement! complement!


EPI. But I must lay the burden of that, upon my servant, here.


HAVE. It shall not need, mistress MOROSE, we will all bear, rather then one
shall be oppressed.


MOR. I know it: and you will teach her the faculty, if she be to learn it.


HAVE. Is this the silent woman?


CEN. Nay, she has found her tongue since she was married, master TRVE-WIT
says.


HAVE. O, master TRVE-WIT! 'saue you. What kind of creature is your bride here?
she speaks, me thinks!


TRV. Yes madame, believe it, she is a gentlewoman of very absolute behavior,
and of a good race.


HAVE. And JACK DAW told us, she could not speak.


TRV. So it was carried in plot, madam, to put her upon this old fellow, by sir
DAVPHINE, his nephew, and one or two more of us: but she is a woman of an
excellent assurance, and an extraordinary happy wit, and tongue. You shall
see her make rare sport with DAW, ere night.


HAVE. And he brought us to laugh at her!


TRV. That falls out often, madame, that he that thinks himself the
master-wit, is the master-foole. I assure your lady-ship, ye cannot laugh at
her.


HAVE. No, well have her to the college: and she have wit, she shall be one
of us! shall she not CENTAVRE? we will make her a collegiate.


CEN. Yes faith, madame, and MAVIS, and she will set up a side.


TRV. Believe it madame, and mistress MAVIS, she will sustain her part.


MAV. I Will tell you that, when I have talked with her, and tried her.


HAVE. Use her very ciuilly, MAVIS.


MAV. So I will, madame.


MOR. Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus ever.


TRV. In the mean time, madame, would but your lady-ship help to vex him a
little: you know his disease, talk to him about the wedding ceremonies, or
call for your gloves, or --


HAVE. Let me alone. CENTAVRE, help me. Mr. bridegroom, where are you?


MOR. O, it was too miraculously good to last!


HAVE. We see no ensigns of a wedding, here; no character of a brideale: where
be our skarfes, and our gloves? I pray you, give 'hem us. Let Us know your
brides colors, and yours, at least.


CEN. Alas, madame, he has provided none.


MOR. Had I known your ladyships painter, I would.


HAVE. He has given it you, CENTAVRE, in faith. But, do you hear, M. MOROSE, a
jest will not absolve you in this manner. You that have sucked the milk of the
court, and from thence have been brought up to the very strong meats, and
wine, of it; been a courtier from the biggen, to the nightcap: (as we may
say) and you, to offend in such a high point of ceremony, as this! and let
your nuptials want all marks of solemnity! How much plate have you lost to
day (if you had but regarded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through
your mere rusticitie?


MOR. Madame --


HAVE. Pardon me, sir, I must insinuate your errors to you. No gloves? no
garters? no skarfes? no epithalamium? no masque?


DAW. Yes, madame, I Will make an epithalamium, I promised my mistress, I have
begun it already: will your ladyship hear it?


HAVE. I, good JACK DAW.


MOR. Will it please your ladyship command a chamber, and be private with your
friend? you shall have your choice of rooms, to retire to after: my whole
house is yours. I know, it has been your ladyships errand, into the city, at
other times, how ever now you have been unhappily diuerted upon me: but I
shall be loath to break any honorable custom of your ladyships. And therefore,
good madame --


EPI. Come, you are a rude bridegroom, to entertayne ladies of honor in this
fashion.


CEN. He is a rude groom, indeed.


TRV. By that light, you deserve to be grafted, and have your horns reach from
one side of the Island, to the other. Do not mistake me, sir, I but speak
this, to give the ladies some heart again, not for any malice to you.


MOR. Is this your Brauo, ladies?


TRV. As god help me, if you utter such another word, I Will take mistress bride
in, and begin to you, in a very sad cup, do you see? Go too, know your
friends, and such, as love you.


Act III. Scene VII.
CLERIMONT, MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, LA-FOOLE, OTTER, Mrs. OTTER, etc.
Music of all sorts. BY your leave, ladies. Do you want any music? I have
brought you variety of noyses. Play, sirs, all of you.


MOR. O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot upon me! This day, I shall be their
anvile to work on, they will grate me asunder. It Is worse then the noise of a
saw.


CLE. No, they are hair, rosin, and guts. I can give you the receipt.


TRV. Peace, boys.


CLE. Play, I^say.


TRV. La-Foole passes oue^ sewing the meat. Peace, rascals. You see who is
your friend now, sir? Take courage, put on a martyrs resolution. Mock down
all their attemptings, with patience. It Is but a day, and I would suffer
heroically. Should an ass exceed me in fortitude? No. You betray your
infirmity with your hanging dull ears, and make them insult: bear up
bravely, and constantly. Look you here, sir, what honor is done you
unexpected, by your nephew; a wedding dinner come, and a Knight sewer before
it, for the more reputation: and fine Mrs. OTTER, your neighbor, in the rump,
or tail of it.


MOR. Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.


TRV. I warrant you, sir, she will not transform you. Look upon her with a
good courage. Pray you entertayne her, and conduct your guests in. No? Mistress
bride, will you entreat in the ladies? your bridegroom is so shame-fac'd, here
--


EPI. Will it please your ladyship, madame?


HAVE. With the benefit of your company, mistress.


EPI. Servant, pray you perform your duties.


DAW. And glad to be commanded, mistress.


CEN. How like you her wit, MAVIS.


MAV. Very prettily, absolutely well.


Mrs. OT. It Is my place.


MAV. You shall pardon me, mistress OTTER.


Mrs. OT. Why I am a collegiate.


MAV. But not in ordinary.


Mrs OT. But I am.


MAV. We Will dispute that within.


CLE. Would this had lasted a little longer.


TRV. And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captain OTTER, what news?


OTT. I have brought my bull, bear, and horse, in private, and yonder are the
trumpetters without, and the drum, gentlemen.


MOR. The Drum, and Trumpets sound. O, O, O.


OTT. And we will have a rouse in each of'hem, anon, for bold Britons, in faith.


MOR. O, O, O.


ALL. Follow, follow, follow.


Act IIII.
Scene I.
TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE. WAs there ever poor bridegroom so tormented?
or man indeed?


CLE. I have not read of the like, in the chronicles of the land.


TRV. Sure, he cannot but go to a place of rest, after all this purgatory.


CLE. He may presume it, I think.


TRV. The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neesing, the farting,
dancing, noise of the music, and her masculine, and loud commanding, and
urging the whole family, makes him think he has married a fury.


CLE. And she carries it up bravely.


TRV. I, she takes any occasion to speak: that is the height on it.


CLE. And how soberly DAVPHINE labors to satisfy him, that it was none of his
plot!


TRV. And has almost brought him to the faith, in the article. Here he comes.
Where is he now? what is become of him, DAVPHINE?


DAV. O, hold me up a little, I shall go away in the jest else. He has got on
his whole nest of night-caps, and locked himself up, in the top of the house,
as high, as ever he can climb from the noise. I peeped in at a crany, and saw
him fitting over a crosse-beame of the roof, like him of the sadlers horse in
Fleetstreet, vp-right: and he will sleep there.


CLE. But where are your collegiates?


DAV. With-drawne with the bride in private.


TRV. O, they are instructing her in the colledge-Grammar. If she have grace
with them, she knows all their secrets instantly.


CLE. Methinks, the lady HAVGHTY looks well to day, for all my dispraise of
her in the morning. I think, I shall come about to thee again, TRVE-WIT.


TRV. Believe it, I told you right. Women ought to repair the losses, time and
years have made in their features, with dressings. And an intelligent woman,
if she know by her self the least defect, will be most curious, to hide it:
and it becomes her. If she be short, let her sit much, lest when she stands,
she be thought to sit. If she have an ill foot, let her wear her gown the
longer, and her shoo the thinner. If a fat hand, and scald nails, let her
carue the less, and act in gloves. If a sour breath, let her never discourse
fasting: and always talk at her distance. If she have black and rugged
teeth, let her offer the less at laughter, especially if she laugh wide, and
open.


CLE. O, you shall have some women, when they laugh, you would think they
brayed, it is so rude, and --


TRV. I, and others, that will stalk in their gait like an Estrich, and take
huge strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I love measure in the feet, and
number in the voice: they are gentlenesses, that oft-times draw no less then
the face.


DAV. How came thou to study these creatures so exactly? I would thou
would make me a proficient.


TRV. Yes, but you must leave to live in your chamber then a month together upon
AMADIS de Gaul, or Don QVIXOTE, as you are wont; and come abroad where the
matter is frequent, to court, to tiltings, public shows, and feasts, to
plays, and church sometimes: thither they come to show their new tyres too, to
see, and to be seen. In these places a man shall find whom to love, whom to
play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold ever. The variety arrests his
judgment. A wench to please a man comes not down dropping from the seeling,
as he lies on his back droning a tobacco pipe. He must go where she is.


DAV. Yes, and be never the near.


TRV. Out heretic. That diffidence makes thee worthy it should be so.


CLE. He says true to you, DAVPHINE.


DAV. Why?


TRV. A man should not doubt to overcome any woman. Think he can vanquish
'hem, and he shall: for though they deny, their desire is to be tempted.
PENELOPE her self cannot hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last.
You must persevere, and hold to your purpose. They would solicit us, but that
they are afraid. Howsoever, they wish in their hearts we should solicit them.
Praise 'hem, flatter 'hem, you shall never want eloquence, or trust: even the
chastest delight to feel themselves that way rubbed. With praises you must mix
kisses too. If they take them, they will take more. Though they strive, they
would be overcome.


CLE. O, but a man must beware of force.


TRV. It is to them an acceptable violence, and has oft-times the place of the
greatest courtesy. She that might have been forced, and you let her go free
without touching, though she then seem to thank you, will ever hate you
after: and glad in the face, is assuredly sad at the heart.


CLE. But all women are not to be taken always.


TRV. It Is true. No more then all birds, or all fishes. If you appear learned
to an ignorant wench, or iocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why she
presently begins to mistrust her self. You must approach them in their own
height, their own line: for the contrary makes many that fear to commit
themselves to noble and worthy fellows, run into the embraces of a rascal. If
she love wit, give verses, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem, to
have good. If valor, talk of your sword, and be frequent in the mention of
quarrels, though you be staunch in fighting. If actiuitie, be seen of your
barbary often, or leaping over stools, for the credit of your back. If she
love good clothes or dressing, have your learned counsel about you every
morning, your french tailor, barber, linnener, etc. Let your poulder, your
glass, and your comb, be your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the
ornament of your head, then the safety: and wish the commonwealth rather
troubled, then a hair about you. That will take her. Then if she be covetous
and craving, do you promise any thing, and perform sparingly: so shall you
keep her in appetite still. Seem as you would give, but be like a barren
field that yields little, or unlucky dice, to foolish, and hoping gamesters.
Let your gifts be slight, and dainty, rather then precious. Let cunning be
above cost. Give cherries at time of year, or apricots; and say they were sent
you out of the country, though you bought 'hem in Cheap Side. Admire her
tyres; like her in all fashions; compare her in every habit to some deity;
invent excellent dreams to slatter her, and riddles; or, if she be a great
one, perform always the second parts to her: like what she likes, praise
whom she praises, and fail not to make the household and servants yours, yea
the whole family, and salute 'hem by their names: ('it is but light cost if you
can purchase 'hem so) and make her physician your pensioner, and her chief
woman. Nor will it be out of your gain to make love to her too, so she
follow, no usher, her ladies pleasure. All blabbing is taken away, when she
comes to be a part of the crime.


DAV. On what courtly lap have thou late slept, to come forth so sudden and
absolute a courtling?


TRV. Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkning after
these mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence. DAVPHINE. Speak, art thou
in love in earnest?


DAV. Yes by my troth am I: 'twere ill dissembling before thee.


TRV. With which of 'hem, I pray thee?


DAV. With all the collegiates.


CLE. Out on thee. We Will keep you at home, believe it, in the stable, and you
be such a stallion.


TRV. No. I like him well. Men should love wisely, and all women: some one for
the face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please
the touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the ear; and where the
objects mix, let the senses so too. Thou would think it strange, if I
should make 'hem all in love with thee before night!


DAV. I would say thou had the best philtre in the world, and could do
more then madame MEDEA, or Doctor FOREMAN.


TRV. If I do not, let me play the mounte-banke for my meat while I live, and
the bawd for my drink.


DAV. So be it, I say.


Act IIII. Scene II.
OTTER, CLERIMONT, DAW, DAVPHINE, MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, LA-FOOLE, Mrs. OTTER. O
Lord, gentlemen, how my knights and I have mist you here!


CLE. Why, Captain, what service? what service?


OTT. To see me bring up my bull, bear, and horse to fight.


DAW. Yes faith, the Captain says we shall be his dogs to bait 'hem.


DAV. A good employment.


TRV. Come on, let us see a course then.


LA-F. I am afraid my cousin will be offended if she come.


OTT. Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I have placed the drum and the trumpets,
and one to give 'hem the sign when you are ready. Here Is my bull for my self,
and my bear for sir JOHN DAW, and my horse for sir AMOROVS. Now set your foot
to mine, and yours to his, and --


LA-F. Pray god my cousin come not.


OTT. Saint GEORGE, and saint ANDREW, fear no cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et
rauco strepuerunt cornua cantu.


TRV. Well said, Captain, in faith: well fought at the bull.


CLE. Well held at the bear.


TRV. Low, low, Captain.


DAV. O, the horse has kicked off his dog already.


LA-F. I cannot drink it, as I am a Knight.


TRV. Gods so, off with his spurs, somebody.


LA-F. It goes again my conscience. My cousin will be angry with it.


DAW. I have done mine.


TRV. You fought high and fair, sir JOHN.


CLE. At the head.


DAV. Like an excellent beare-dog.


CLE. You take no notice of the business, I hope.


DAW. Not a word, sir, you see we are iouiall.


OTT. Sir AMOROVS, you must not aequiuocate. It must be pulled down, for all
my cousin.


CLE. Sfoot, if you take not your drink, they will think you are discontented
wit some thing: you will betray all, if you take the least notice.


LA-F. Not I, I Will both drink, and talk then.


OTT. You must pull the horse on his knees, sir AMOROVS: fear no cousins.
Iacta est alea.


TRV. O, now he is in his vain, and bold. The least hint given him of his wife
now, will make him rail desperately.


CLE. Speak to him of her.


TRV. Do you, and I Will fetch her to the hearing of it.


DAV. Captain hee-OTTER, your shee-OTTER is coming, your wife.


OTT. Wife! Buz. Titiuilitium. There Is no such thing in nature. I confess,
gentlemen, I have a cook, a laundresse, a house-drudge, that serves my
necessary turns, and goes under that title: But he is an ass that will be so
vxorious, to tie his affections to one circle. Come, the name dulls appetite.
Here, replenish again: another bout. Wives are nasty sluttish animalls.


DAV. O, Captain.


OTT. As ever the earth bare, tribus verbis. Where Is master TRVE-WIT?


DAW. He Is slipped aside, sir.


CLE. But you must drink, and be iouiall.


DAW. Yes, give it me.


LA-F. And me, too.


DAW. Let Us be iouiall.


LA-F. As iouiall as you will.


OTT. Agreed. Now you shall have the bear, cousin, and sir JOHN DAW the horse,
and I Will have the bull still. Sound Tritons of the Thames. Nunc est bibendum,
nunc pede libero --


MOR. Morose speaks from above: the trumpets sounding. Villains, murderers,
sons of the earth, and traitors, what do you there?


CLE. O, now the trumpets have waked him, we shall have his company.


OTT. A wife is a sciruy clogdogdo; an unlucky thing, a very foresaid
beare-whelpe, without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia.


DAV. His wife is brought out to bear him. Why did you marry one then,
Captain?


OTT. A pox -- I married with six thousand pound, I* I was in love with that.
I have not kissed my fury, these forty weeks.


CLE. The more to blame you, Captain.


TRV. Nay, mistress OTTER, hear him a little first.


OTT. She has a breath worse then my grand-mothers, profecto.


Mrs. OT. O treacherous liar. Kiss me, sweet master TRVE-WIT, and prove him a
slaundering knave.


TRV. I Will rather believe you, lady.


OTT. And she has a perruke, that is like a pound of hemp, made up in
shoo-thrids.


Mrs. OT. O viper, mandrake!


OTT. A most vile face! and yet she spends me forty pound a year in mercury,
and hogs-bones. All her teeth were made in the Black- Friars: both her
eyebrows in the Strand, and her hair in Siluer-street. Every part of the
town ownes a piece of her.


Mrs. OT. I cannot hold.


OTT. She takes her self asunder still when she goes to bed, into some twenty
boxes; and about next day noone is put together again, like a great Germane
clock: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole house, and
then is quiet again for an hour, but for her quarters. Have you done me right,
gentlemen?


Mrs. OT. She falls upon him and beats him. No, sir, I Will do you right with
my quarters, with my quarters.


OTT. O, hold, good Princess.


TRV. Sound, sound.


CLE. A battle, a battle.


Mrs. OT. You notorious stinkardly beareward, does my breath smell?


OTT. Under correction, dear Princess: look to my bear, and my horse,
gentlemen.


Mrs. OT. Do I want teeth, and eyebrows, thou bull-dog?


TRV. Sound, sound still.


OTT. No, I protest, under correction --


Mrs. OT. I, now you are under correction, you protest: but you did not protest
before correction, sir. Thou IVDAS, to offer to betray thy Princess! I Will make
thee an example --


MOR. Morose descends with a long sword. I will have no such examples in my
house, lady OTTER.


Mrs. OT. Ah --


MOR. Mrs. MARY AMBREE, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell Hounds,
Stentors, out of my doors, you sons of noise and tumult, begot on an ill
May Day, or when the Gally-foist is a-floate to Westminster! A trumpetter could
not be conceived, but then!


DAV. What ailes you, sir?


MOR. They have rent my roof, walls, and all my windores asunder, with their
brazen throats.


TRV. Best follow him, DAVPHINE.


DAV. So I will.


CLE. Where Is DAW, and LA-FOOLE?


OTT. They are both run away, sir. Good gentlemen, help to pacify my
Princess, and speak to the great ladies for me. Now must I go lie with the
bears this fortnight, and keep out of the way, till my peace be made, for
this scandale she has taken. Did you not see my bull-head, gentlemen?


CLE. Is It not on, Captain?


TRV. No: but he may make a new one, by that, is on.


OTT. O, here it is. And you come over, gentlemen, and ask for TOM OTTER,
we will go down to Rat^liffe, and have a course ysaith: for all these
disasters. There Is bona spes left.


TRV. Away, Captain, get off while you are well.


CLE. I am glad we are rid of him.


TRV. You had never been, unless we had put his wife upon him. His humor is
as tedious at last, as it was ridiculous at first.


Act IIII. Scene III.
HAVGHTY, Mrs. OTTER, MAVIS, DAW, LA-FOOLE, CENTAVRE, EPICOENE, TRVEWIT,
CLERIMONT. WE wondered why you shreek'd so, Mrs. OTTER.


Mrs. OT. O god, madame, he came down with a huge long naked weapon in both
his hands, and looked so dreadfully! Sure, he is beside himself.


MAV. Why what made you there, mistress OTTER?


Mrs. OT. Alas, mistress MAVIS, I was chastising my subject, and thought nothing
of him.


DAW. Faith, mistress, you must do so too. Learn to chastise. Mistress OTTER
corrects her husband so, he dares not speak, but under correction.


LA-F. And with his hat off to her: 'twould do you good to see.


HAVE. In sadness it is good, and mature counsel: practice it, MOROSE. I Will
call you MOROSE still now, as I call CENTAVRE, and MAVIS: we four will be all
one.


CEN. And you will come to the college, and live with us?


HAVE. Make him give milk, and honey.


MAV. Look how you manage him at first, you shall have him ever after.


CEN. Let him allow you your coach, and four horses, your woman, your
chambermaid, your page, your gentleman-usher, your french cook, and four
grooms.


HAVE. And go with us, to Bed'lem, to the China houses, and to the Exchange.


CEN. It will open the gate to your fame.


HAVE. Here Is CENTAVRE has immortalized her self, with taming of her wild male.


MAV. I, she has done the miracle of the kingdom.


EPI. But ladies, do you count it lawful to have such plurality of servants,
and do 'hem all graces?


HAVE. Why not? why should women deny their favors to men? Are they the
poorer, or the worse?


DAW. Is the Thames the less for the dyers water, mistress?


LA-F. Or a torch, for lighting many torches?


TRV. Well said, LA-FOOLE; what a new one he has got?


CEN. They are empty losses, women fear, in this kind.


HAVE. Besides, ladies should be mindful of the approach of age, and let no
time want his due use. The best of our days pass first.


MAV. We are rivers, that cannot be called back, madame: she that now
excludes her lovers, may live to lie a forsaken beldame, in a frozen bed.


CEN. It Is true, MAVIS: and who will wait on us to coach then? or write, or
tell us the news then? Make anagrammes of our names, and inuit us to the
cockpit, and kiss our hands all the play-time, and draw their weapons for our
honors?


HAVE. Not one.


DAW. Nay, my mistress is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here be
in presence have tasted of her favors.


CLE. What a neighing hobbyhorse is this!


EPI. But not with intent to boast 'hem again, servant. And have you those
excellent receipts, madame, to keep your selves from bearing of children?


HAVE. O yes, MOROSE. How should we maintain our youth and beauty, else? Many
births of a woman make her old, as many crops make the earth barren.


Act IIII. Scene IIII.
MOROSE, DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT, EPICOENE, CLERIMONT, DAW, HAVGHTY, LA-FOOLE,
CENTAVRE, MAVIS, Mrs. OTTER, TRVSTY. O My cursed angel, that instructed me to
this fate!


DAV. Why, sir?


MOR. That I should be seduced by so foolish a devil, as a barber will make!


DAV. I would I had been worthy, sir, to have partaken your counsel, you
should never have trusted it to such a minister.


MOR. Would I could redeem it with the loss of an eye (nephew) a hand, or any
other member.


DAV. Mary, god forbid, sir, that you should geld your self, to anger your
wife.


MOR. So it would rid me of her! and, that I did supererogatorie penance, in a
bellfry, at Westminster Hall, in the cockpit, at the fall of a stagge; the
tower-whar^e (what place is there else?) London Bridge, Paris-garden,
Belins-gate, when the noises are at their height and lowdest. Nay, I would sit
out a play, that were nothing but fights at sea, drum, trumpet, and target!


DAV. I hope there shall be no such need, sir. Take patience, good uncle. This
is but a day, and it is well worn too now.


MOR. O, 'twill be so for ever, nephew, I foresee it, for ever. Strife and
tumult are the dowry that comes with a wife.


TRV. I told you so, sir, and you would not believe me.


MOR. Alas, do not rub those wounds, master TRVE-WI^, to blood again: 'twas
my negligence. Add not affliction to affliction. I have perceived the effect
of it, too late, in madamme OTTER.


EPI. How do you, sir?


MOR. Did you ever hear a more unnecessary question? as if she did not see!
Why, I do as you see, Empress, Empress.


EPI. You are not well, sir! you look very ill! something has distempered you.


MOR. O horrible, monstrous impertinencies! would not one of these have served?
do you think, sir? would not one of these have served?


TRV. Yes, sir, but these are but notes of female kindness, sir: certain
tokens that she has a voice, sir.


MOR. O, is it so? come, and 't be no otherwise -- what say you?


EPI. How do you feel your self, sir?


MOR. Again, that!


TRV. Nay, look you, sir: you would be friends with your wife upon
vn-conscionable terms, her silence --


EPI. They say you are run mad, sir.


MOR. Not for love, I assure you, of you; do you see?


EPI. O lord, gentlemen! Lay hold on him for gods sake: what shall I do? who is
his physician (can you tell) that knows the state of his body best, that I
might send for him? Good sir, speak. I Will send for one of my doctors else.


MOR. What, to poison me, that I might die intestate, and leave you possessed of
all?


EPI. Lord, how idly he talks, and how his eyes sparkle! He looks green
about the temples! Do you see what blue spots he has?


CLE. I, it is melancholy.


EPI. Gentlemen, for heavens sake counsel me. Ladies! Servant, you have read
PLINY, and PARACELSVS: Never a word now to comfort a poor gentlewoman? Ay me!
what fortune had I to marry a distracted man?


DAW. I Will tell you, mistress --


TRV. How rarely she holds it up!


MOR. What mean you, gentlemen?


EPI. What will you tell me, servant?


DAW. The disease in Greek is called (...), in Latin, Insania, Furor, vel
Ecstasis melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit
fanaticus.


MOR. Shall I have a lecture read upon me alive?


DAW. But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, mistress? and Phrenetis is only
delirium, or so --


EPI. I, that is for the disease, servant: but what is this to the cure? we are
sure enough of the disease.


MOR. Let me go.


TRV. Why, we will entreat her to hold her peace, sir.


MOR. O, no. Labor not to stop her. She is like a conduit-pipe, that will
gush out with more force, when she opens again.


HAVE. I Will tell you, MOROSE, you must talk divinity to him altogether, or
moral philosophy.


LA-F. I, and there is an excellent book of moral philosophy, madame, of
RAYNARD the fox, and all the beasts, called, DONES philosophy.


CEN. There is, indeed, sir AMOROVS LA-FOOLE.


MOR. O misery!


LA-F. I have read it, my lady CENTAVRE, all over to my cousin, here.


Mrs OT. I, and it is a very good book as any is, of the Modernes.


DAW. Tut, he must have SENECA read to him, and PLVTARCH, and the Ancients;
the Modernes are not for this disease.


CLE. Why, you discommended them too, to day, sir JOHN.


DAW. I, in some cases: but in these they are best, and ARISTOTLE'S Ethics.


MAV. Say you so, sir JOHN? I think you are deceived: you took it upon trust.


HAVE. Where Is TRVSTY, my woman? I Will end this difference. I pr'ythee, OTTER,
call her. Her father and mother were both mad, when they put her to me.


MOR. I think so. Nay, gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exercise, I know,
a marriage ceremony, which I must endure.


HAVE. And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cured with the Sickmans salve; and
the other with GREENES groates-worth of wit.


TRV. A very cheap cure, madame.


HAVE. I, it very faesible.


Mrs. OT. My lady called for you, mistress TRVSTY: you must decide a
controversy.


HAVE. O TRVSTY, which was it you said, your father, or your mother, that was
cured with the Sicke-mans salve?


TRVS. My mother, madame, with the salve.


TRV. Then it was the Sicke-womans salve.


TRVS. And my father with the Groates-worth of wit. But there was other means
used: we had a Preacher that would preach folk asleep still; and so they were
prescribed to go to church, by an old woman that was their physician, thrice a
week --


EPI. To sleep?


TRVS. Yes forsooth: and every night they read themselves asleep on those
books.


EPI. Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure
those books.


MOR. Oh.


LA-F. I can help you with one of 'hem, mistress MOROSE, the groatsworth of wit.


EPI. But I shall disfurnish you, sir AMOROVS: can you spare it?


LA-F. O, yes, for a week, or so; I Will read it my self to him.


EPI. No, I must do that, sir: that must be my office.


MOR. Oh, oh!


EPI. Sure, he would do well enough, if he could sleep.


MOR. No, I should do well enough, if you could sleep. Have I no friend that
will make her drunk? or give her a little ladanum? or opium?


TRV. Why, sir, she talks ten times worse in her sleep.


MOR. How!


CLE. Do you not know that, sir? never ceases all night.


TRV. And snores like a por^pisce.


MOR. O, redeem me, fate, redeem me, fate. For how many causes may a man be
diuorc'd, nephew?


DAV. I know not truly, sir.


TRV. Some Divine must resolve you in that, sir, or canon-Lawyer.


MOR. I will not rest, I will not think of any other hope or comfort, till I
know.


CLE. Alas, poor man.


TRV. You Will make him mad indeed, ladies, if you pursue this.


HAVE. No, we will let him breathe, now, a quarter of an hour, or so.


CLE. By my faith, a large truce.


HAVE. Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?


DAW. It is his nephew, madame.


LA-F. Sir DAVPHINE EVGENIE.


CEN. He looks like a very pitiful knight --


DAW. As can be. This marriage, has put him out of all.


LA-F. He has not a penny in his purse, madame --


DAW. He is ready to cry all this day.


LA-F. A very sharke, he set me in the nicke the other night at primero.


TRV. How these swabbers talk!


CLE. I, OTTERS wine has swelled their humors above a springtide.


HAVE. Good MOROSE, let us go in again. I like your couches exceeding well:
we will go lie, and talk there.


EPI. I wait on you, madame.


TRV. 'Slight, I will have 'hem as silent as Signs, and their posts too, e're I
have done. Do you hear, lady-bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble
wench, continue this discourse of DAVPHINE within: but praise him exceedingly.
Magni^ie him with all the height of affection thou can. (I have some purpose
in it) and but beat off these two rookes, JACK DAW, and his fellow, with any
coffeehouse hither, and I Will honor thee for ever.


EPI. I was about it, here. It angered me to the soul, to hear 'hem begin
to talk so malepert.


TRV. Pray thee perform it, and thou win'st me an idolater to thee,
everlasting.


EPI. Will you go in, and hear me do it?


TRV. No, I Will stay here. Drive 'hem out of your company, it is all I ask:
which cannot be any way better done, then by extolling DAVPHINE, whom they
have so slighted.


EPI. I warrant you: you shall expect one of 'hem presently.


CLE. What a cast of kastrils are these, to hawke after ladies, thus?


TRV. I, and strike at such an eagle as DAVPHINE.


CLE. He will be mad, when we tell him. Here he comes.


Act IIII. Scene V.
CLERIMONT, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, DAW, LA-FOOLE. O Sir, you are welcome.


TRV. Where Is thine uncle?


DAV. Run out of doors in's night-caps, to talk with a Casuist about his
divorce. It works admirably.


TRV. Thou would have said so, and thou had been here! The ladies have
laughed at thee, most comically, since thou wentst, DAVPHINE.


CLE. And asked, if thou were thine uncles keeper?


TRV. And the brace of Babouns answered, yes; and said, thou were a pitiful
poor fellow, and did live upon posts: and had nothing but three suits of
apparel, and some few beneuolences that lords ga' thee to fool to 'hem, and
swagger.


DAV. Let me not live, I Will beat 'hem. I Will bind 'hem both to grand Madames
bed-postes, and have 'hem bayted with monkeyes.


TRV. Thou shall not need, they shall be beaten to thy hand, DAVPHINE. I have
an execution to serve upon 'hem, I warrant thee shall serve: trust my plot.


DAV. I, you have many plots! So you had one, to make all the wenches in love
with me.


TRV. Why, if I do not yet before night, as near as it is; and that they do
not every one inuit thee, and be ready to scratch for thee: take the morgage
of my wit.


CLE. Before god, I Will be his witness; thou shall have it, DAVPHINE: thou shall
be his fool for ever, if thou do not.


TRV. Agreed. Perhaps 'twill be the better estate. Do you observe this
gallerie? or rather lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of studies, at each end
one: here will I act such a tragi-comoedy between the Guelphes, and the
Ghibellines, DAW and LA-FOOLE -- which of 'hem comes out first, will I seize
on: (you two shall be the chorus behind the arras, and whip out between the
acts, and speak.) If I do not make 'hem keep the peace, for this remnant of
the day, if not of the year, I have faild once -- I hear DAW coming: Hide,
and do not laugh, for gods sake.


DAW. Which is the way into the garden, trow*


TRV. O, JACK DAW! I am glad I have met with you. In good faith, I must have
this matter go no further between you. I must have it taken up.


DAW. What matter, sir? Between whom?


TRV. Come, you disguise it -- Sir AMOROVS and you. If you love me JACK, you
shall make use of your philosophy now, for this once, and deliver me your
sword. This is not the wedding the CENTAVRES were at, though there be a
shee-one here. The bride has entreated me I will see no blood shed at her
bridal, you saw her whisper me ere-while.


DAW. As I hope to finish TACITUS, I intend no murder.


TRV. Do you not wait for sir AMOROVS?


DAW. Not I, by my knighthood.


TRV. And your schollership too?


DAW. And my schollership too.


TRV. Go to, then I return you your sword, and ask you mercy; but put it not
up, for you will be assaulted. I understood that you had apprehended it, and
walked here to brave him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in
regard of your honor.


DAW. No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good friends
as could be.


TRV. Trust not you to that visor. I saw him since dinner with another face: I
have known many men in my time vexed with losses, with deaths, and with
abuses, but so offended a wight as sir AMOROVS, did I never see, or read of.
For taking away his guests, sir, to day, that is the cause: and he declares it
behind your back, with such threatenings and contempts -- He said to DAVPHINE,
you were the errandst ass --


DAW. I, he may say his pleasure.


TRV. And swears, you are so protested a coward, that he knows you will
never do him any manly or single right, and therefore he will take his course.


DAW. I Will give him any satisfaction, sir -- but fighting.


TRV. I, sir, but who knows what satisfaction he will take? blood he thirsts
for, and blood he will have: and where-abouts on you he will have it, who
knows, but himself?


DAW. I pray you, master TRVE-WIT, be you a mediator.


TRV. He puts him up. Well, sir, conceal your self then in this study, till
I return. Nay, you must be content to be locked in: for, for mine own
reputation I would not have you seen to receive a public disgrace, while I
have the matter in managing. Gods so, here he comes: keep your breath close,
that he do not hear you sigh. In good faith, sir AMOROVS, he is not this
way, I pray you be merciful, do not murder him; he is a christian as good
as you: you are armed as if you sought a revenge on all his race. Good
DAVPHINE, get him away from this place. I never knew a man's choler so high,
but he would speak to his friends, he would hear reason. JACK DAW, JACK
DAW! a-sleepe?


DAW. Is he gone, master TRVE-WIT?


TRV. I, did you hear him?


DAW. O god, yes.


TRV. What a quick ear fear has?


DAW. But is he so armed, as you say?


TRV. Armed? did you ever see a fellow, set out to take possession?


DAW. I, sir.


TRV. That may give you some light, to conceive of him: but it is nothing to the
principal. Some false brother in the house has furnished him strangely* Or, if
it were out of the house, it was TOM OTTER.


DAW. Indeed, he is a Captain, and his wife is his kinswoman.


TRV. He has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword, to mow you off at the knees.
And that sword has spawned such a dagger! -- but then he is so hung with
pikes, halberds, peitronells, calliuers, and muskets, that he looks like a
Justice of peace's hall: a man of two thousand a year, is not sess'd at so
many weapons, as he has on. There was never fencer challenged at so many
several foiles. You would think he meant to murder all Saint PVLCHRES
parish. If he could but victual himself for half a year, in his breeches,
he is sufficiently armed to overrun a country.


DAW. Good lord, what means he, sir! I pray you, master TRVEWIT, be you a
mediator.


TRV. Well, I Will try if he will be appeased with a leg or an arm, if not, you
must die once.


DAW. I would be loath to loose my right arm, for writing madrigalls.


TRV. Why, if he will be satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, all is one
to me. You must think, I Will do my best.


DAW. Good sir, do.


CLE. He puts him up again, and then came forth. What have thou done?


TRV. He will let me do nothing, man, he does all before me, he offers his left
arm.


CLE. His left wing, for a JACK DAW.


DAV. Take it, by all means.


TRV. How! Maime a man for ever, for a jest? what a conscience have thou?


DAV. It Is no loss to him: he has no employment for his arms, but to eat
spoone-meate. Beside, as good maime his body as his reputation.


TRV. He is a scholar, and a Wit, and yet he does not think so. But he looses
no reputation with us, for we all resolved him an ass before. To your places
again.


CLE. I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.


TRV. Look, you will spoil all: these be ever your tricks.


CLE. No, but I could hit of some things that thou will miss, and thou will
say are good ones.


TRV. I warrant you. I pray forbear, I Will leave it off, else.


DAV. Come away, CLERIMONT.


TRV. Sir AMOROVS!


LA-F. Master TRVE-WIT.


TRV. Whether were you going?


LA-F. Down into the court, to make water.


TRV. By no means, sir, you shall rather tempt your breeches.


LA-F. Why, sir?


TRV. Enter here, if you love your life.


LA-F. Why! why!


TRV. Question till your throat be cut, do: dally till the enraged soul find
you.


LA-F. Who Is that?


TRV. DAW it is: will you in?


LA-F. I, I, I Will in: what is the matter?


TRV. Nay, if he had been cool enough to tell us that, there had been some
hope to atone you, but he seems so implacably enraged.


LA-F. 'Slight, let him rage. I Will hide my self.


TRV. Do, good sir. But what have you done to him within, that should provoke
him thus? you have broke some jest upon him, before the ladies --


LA-F. Not I, never in my life, broke jest upon any man. The bride was praising
sir DAVPHINE, and he went away in snuff, and I followed him, unless he took
offense at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge all the horse
full.


TRV. By my faith, and that may be, you remember well: but he walks the
round up and down, through every room of the house, with a towell in his
hand, crying, where is LA-FOOLE? who saw LA-FOOLE? and when DAVPHINE, and I,
demanded the cause, we can force no answer from him, but (O revenge, how
sweet art thou! I will strangle him in this towell) which leads us to
conjecture, that the maine cause of his fury is for bringing your meat to
day, with a towell about you, to his discredit.


LA-F. Like enough. Why, and he be angry for that, I Will stay here, till his
anger be blown over.


TRV. A good becoming resolution, sir. If you can put it on of the sudden.


LA-F. Yes, I can put it on. Or, I Will away into the country presently.


TRV. How will you get out of the house, sir? He knows you are in the house,
and he will watch you this se'n-night but he will have you. He Will out-wait a
sargeant for you.


LA-F. Why, then I Will stay here.


TRV. You must think, how to victual your self in time, then.


LA-F. Why, sweet master TRVE-WIT, will you entreat my cousin OTTER, to send me
a cold venison pasty, a bottle or two of wine, and a chamber pot.


TRV. A stool were better, sir, of sir A-IAX his invention.


LA-F. I, that will be better indeed: and a pallat to lie on.


TRV. O, I would not advise you to sleep by any means.


LA-F. Would you not, sir? why, then I will not.


TRV. Yet, there is another fear --


LA-F. Is there, sir? What is it?


TRV. No, he cannot break open this door with his foot, sure.


LA-F. I Will set my back against it, sir. I have a good back.


TRV. But, then if he should batter.


LA-F. Batter! if he dare, I Will have an action of batt'ry, against him.


TRV. He faines, as if one were present, ^o fright the other, who is run in to
hide himself. Cast you the worst. He has sent for poulder already, and what
he will do with it, no man knows: perhaps blow up the corner of the house,
where he suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, sir JOHN DAW,
he is not this way: what will you do? before god, you shall hang no petarde
here. I Will die rather. Will you not take my word? I never knew one but would be
satisfied. Sir AMOROVS, there is no standing out. He has made a petarde of an
old brass pot, to force your door. Think upon some satisfaction, or terms,
to offer him.


LA-F. Sir, I Will give him any satisfaction. I dare give any terms.


TRV. You Will leave it to me, then?


LA-F. I, sir. I Will stand to any conditions.


TRV. He calls forth Clerimont, and Dauphine. How now, what think you, sirs?
were not a difficult thing to determine, which of these two feared most.


CLE. Yes, but this fears the brauest: the other a whiniling dastard, JACK
DAW! but LA-FOOLE, a brave heroique coward! and is afraid in a great look, and
a stout accent. I like him rarely.


TRV. Had it not been pity, these two should have been concealed?


CLE. Shall I make a motion?


TRV. Briefly. For I must strike while it is hot.


CLE. Shall I go fetch the ladies to the catastrophe?


TRV. Vmh? I, by my troth.


DAV. By no mortal means. Let them continue in the state of ignorance, and
err still: think 'hem wits, and fine fellows, as they have done. 'Twere
sin to reform them.


TRV. Well, I will have 'hem fetched, now I think on it, for a private purpose
of mine: do, CLERIMONT, fetch 'hem, and discourse to hem all that is past, and
bring 'hem into the gallery here.


DAV. This is thy extreme vanity, now: thou think thou were undone, if
every jest thou make were not published.


TRV. Thou shall see, how unjust thou art, presently. CLERIMONT, say it was
DAVPHINE'S plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift be not for thy good. There Is
a carpet in the next room, put it on, with this scarf over thy face, and a
cushion of thy head, and be ready when I call AMOROVS. Away -- JOHN DAW.


DAW. What good news, sir.


TRV. Faith, I have followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you
were a knight, and a scholar; and that you knew fortitude did consist magis
patiendo quam faciendo, magis ferendo quam feriendo.


DAW. It does so indeed, sir.


TRV. And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my
troth, in my conceit, too much.


DAW. What was it, sir.


TRV. Your upper lip, and six o'your fore-teeth.


DAW. 'Twas unreasonable.


TRV. Nay, I told him plainly, you could not spare 'hem all. So after long
argument ( pro and con, as you know) I brought him down to your two
butter-teeth, and them he would have.


DAW. O, did you so? why, he shall have 'hem.


TRV. But he shall not, sir, by your leave. The conclusion is this, sir,
because you shall be very good friends hereafter, and this never to be
remembered, or vp-braided; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such
thing to you in his own person: he is to come here in disguise, give you five
kicks in private, sir, take your sword from you, and lock you up in that
study, during pleasure. Which will be but a little while, we will get it
released presently.


DAW. Five kicks? he shall have six, sir, to be friends.


TRV. Believe me, you shall not ouer-shoot your self, to send him that word
by me.


DAW. Deliver it, sir. He shall have it with all my heart, to be friends.


TRV. Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and heartily too, upon these
terms, he shall have me to enemy while I live. Come, sir, bear it bravely.


DAW. O god, sir, it is nothing.


TRV. True. What Is six kicks to a man, that reads SENECA?


DAW. I have had a hundred, sir.


TRV. Dauphine comes forth, and kick him. Sir AMOROVS. No speaking one to
another, or rehearsing old matters.


DAW. One, two, three, four, five. I protest, sir AMOROVS, you shall have six.


TRV. Nay, I told you should not talk. Come, give him six, and he will needs.
Your sword. Now return to your safe custody: you shall presently meet before
the ladies, and be the dearest friends one to another -- Give me the scarf,
now, thou shall beat the other barefaced. Stand by, sir AMOROVS.


LA-F. What Is here? A sword.


TRV. I cannot help it, without I should take the quarrel upon my self: here
he has sent you his sword --


LA-F. I Will receive none on it.


TRV. And he wills you to fasten it against a wall, and break your head in
some few several places against the hilts.


LA-F. I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my own blood.


TRV. Will you not?


LA-F. No. I Will beat it against a fair flat wall, if that will satisfy him:
If not, he shall beat it himself, for AMOROVS.


TRV. Why, this is strange starting off, when a man vnder-takes for you! I
offered him another condition: Will you stand to that?


LA-F. I, what is it.


TRV. That you will be beaten, in private.


LA-F. Yes. I am content, at the blunt.


TRV. Then you must submit your self to be hood-winked in this skarfe, and
be led to him, where he will take your sword from you, and make you bear a
blow, over the mouth, gules, and tweakes by the nose, sans number.


LA-F. I am content. But why must I be blinded?


TRV. That Is for your good, sir: because, if he should grow insolent upon
this, and publish it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope he will not do)
you might swear safely and protest, he never beat you, to your knowledge.


LA-F. O, I conceive.


TRV. I do not doubt, but you will be perfect good friends upon it, and not dare
to utter an ill thought one of another, in future.


LA-F. Not I, as god help me, of him.


TRV. Nor he of you, sir. If he should -- Come, sir. All hid, sir JOHN.


LA-F. Dauphine enters to tweake him. Oh, sir JOHN, sir JOHN. Oh, O-O-O-O-O-Oh
--


TRV. Good, sir JOHN, leave tweaking, you will blow his nose off. It Is sir JOHN'S
pleasure, you should retire into the study. Why, now you are friends. All
bitterness between you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by,
DAMON and PYTHIAS upon it: and embrace with all the rankness of friendship that
can be. I trust, we shall have 'hem tamer in their language hereafter.
DAVPHINE, I worship thee. Gods will, the ladies have surprised us!


Act IIII. Scene VI.
HAVGHTY, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, Mrs. OTTER, EPICOENE, TRVSTY, DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT,
etc. Having discouerd part of the past scene, above. CENTAVRE, how our
judgments were imposed on by these adulterate knights!


CEN. Nay, madame, MAVIS was more deceived then we, 'twas her commendation
vtter'd 'hem in the college.


MAV. I commended but their wits, madame, and their braueries. I never looked
toward their valors.


HAVE. Sir DAVPHINE is valiant, and a wit too, it seems?


MAV. And a bravery too.


HAVE. Was this his project?


Mrs. OT. So master CLERIMONT intimates, madame.


HAVE. Good MOROSE, when you come to the college, will you bring him with you?
He seems a very perfect gentleman.


EPI. He is so, madame, believe it.


CEN. But when will you come, MOROSE?


EPI. Three or four days hence, madame, when I have got me a coach, and
horses.


HAVE. No, to morrow, good MOROSE, CENTAVRE shall send you her coach.


MAV. Yes faith, do, and bring sir DAVPHINE with you.


HAVE. She has promised that, MAVIS.


MAV. He is a very worthy gentleman, in his exteriors, madame.


HAVE. I, he shows he is judicial in his clothes.


CEN. And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, madame, that have their faces
set in a brake!


HAVE. I, and have every hair in form!


MAV. That wear purer linen then our selves, and profess more neatness,
then the french hermaphrodite!


EPI. I ladies, they, what they tell one of us, have told a thousand, and are
the only thieves of our fame: that think to take us with that perfume, or with
that lace, and laugh at us vn-conscionably when they have done.


HAVE. But, sir DAVPHINES carelessness becomes him.


CEN. I could love a man, for such a nose!


MAV. Or such a leg!


CEN. He has an exceeding good eye, madame!


MAV. And a very good lock!


CEN. Good MOROSE, bring him to my chamber first.


Mrs. OT. Please your honors, to meet at my house, madame?


TRV. See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken, I warrant thee.


HAVE. You have vnbrac'd our brace of knights, here, master TRVE-WIT.


TRV. Not I, madame, it was sir DAVPHINES ingine: who, if he have disfurnish'd
your ladyship of any guard, or service by it, is able to make the place good
again, in himself.


HAVE. There Is no suspicion of that, sir.


CEN. God so, MAVIS, HAVGHTY is kissing.


MAV. Let us go too, and take part.


HAVE. But I am glad of the fortune (beside the discovery of two such empty
caskets) to gain the knowledge of so rich a mine of virtue, as sir DAVPHINE.


CEN. We would be al glad to style him of our friendship, and see him at the
college.


MAV. He cannot mix with a sweeter society, I Will prophecy, and I hope he
himself will think so.


DAV. I should be rude to imagine otherwise, lady.


TRV. Did not I tell thee, DAVPHINE? Why, all their actions are governed by
crude opinion, without reason or cause; they know not why they do any thing,
without reason or cause; they know not why they do any thing: but as they are
informed, believe, judge, praise, condemn, love, hate, and in aemulation one
of another, do all these things alike. Only, they have a natural inclination
swayes 'hem generally to the worst, when they are left to themselves. But,
pursue it, now thou have 'hem.


HAVE. Shall we go in again, MOROSE?


EPI. Yes, madame.


CEN. We Will entreat sir DAVPHINES company.


TRV. Stay, good madame, the inter-view of the two friends, PYLADES and
ORESTES: I Will fetch 'hem out to you straight.


HAVE. Will you, master TRVE-WIT?


DAV. I, but noble ladies, do not confess in your countenance, or outward
bearing to 'hem any discovery of their follies, that we may see, how they
will bear up again, with what assurance, and erection.


HAVE. We will not, sir DAVPHINE.


CEN. MAV. Upon our honors, sir DAVPHINE.


TRV. Sir AMOROVS, sir AMOROVS. The ladies are here.


LA-F. Are they?


TRV. Yes, but slip out by and by, as their backs are turned, and meet sir JOHN
here, as by chance, when I call you. JACK DAW.


DAW. What say you, sir?


TRV. Whip out behind me suddenly: and no anger in your looks to your
adversary. Now, now.


LA-F. Noble sir JOHN DAW! where have you been?


DAW. To seek you, sir AMOROVS.


LA-F. Me! I honor you.


DAW. I prevent you, sir.


CLE. They have forgot their rapiers!


TRV. O, they meet in peace, man.


DAV. Where Is your sword, sir JOHN?


CLE. And yours, sir AMOROVS?


DAW. Mine! my boy had it forth, to mend the handle, eene now.


LA-F. And my gold handle was broke too, and my boy had it forth.


DAV. Indeed, sir? How their excuses meet!


CLE. What a consent there is, in the handles?


TRV. Nay, there is so in the points too, I warrant you.


Mrs. OT. O me! madame, he comes again, the man man, away.


Act IIII. Scene VII.
MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE.
He had found the two swords drawn within. What make these naked weapons
here, gentlemen?


TRV. O, sir! here has like to been murder since you went! A couple of knights
fallen out about the brides favors: we were feign to take away their weapons,
your house had been begged by this time else --


MOR. For what?


CLE. For manslaughter, sir, as being accessory.


MOR. And, for her favors?


TRV. I, sir, heretofore, not present. CLERIMONT, carry 'hem their swords, now.
They have done all the hurt they will do.


DAV. Have you spke with a lawyer, sir?


MOR. O, no! there is such a noise in the court, that they have frighted me
home, with more violence then I went! such speaking, and counter-speaking, with
their several voices of citations, appellations, allegations, certificates,
attachments, intergatories, references, conuictions, and afflictions indeed,
among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noise here is silence too 't! a kind
of calm midnight!


TRV. Why, sir, if you would be resolved indeed, I can bring you hither a very
sufficient Lawyer, and a learned Divine, that shall inquire into every least
scruple for you.


MOR. Can you, master TRVE-WIT?


TRV. Yes, and are very sober grave persons, that will dispatch it in a
chamber, with a whisper, or two.


MOR. Good sir, shall I hope this benefit from you, and trust my self into
your hands?


TRV. Alas, sir! your nephew, and I, have been ashamed, and oft-times mad
since you went, to think how you are abused. Go in, good sir, and lock your
self up til! we call you, we will tell you more anon, sir.


MOR. Do your pleasure with me, gentlemen; I believe in you: and that deserves
no delusion --


TRV. You shall find none, sir: but heapt, heapt plenty of vexation.


DAV. What will thou do now, WIT?


TRV. Recover me hither OTTER, and the Barber, if you can, by any means,
presently.


DAV. Why? to what purpose?


TRV. O, I Will make the deepest Divine, and grauest Lawyer, out of them two, for
him --


DAV. Thou can not man, these are waking dreams.


TRV. Do not fear me. Clap but a civil gown with a welt, of the one; and a
canonical cloak with sleeves, of the other: and give 'hem a few terms in
their mouths, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and complete a Parson,
for this turn, as may be wished, trust not my election. And, I hope, without
wronging the dignity of either profession, since they are but persons put on,
and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters latin, I remember.


DAV. Yes, and OTTER too.


TRV. Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this case, to his no comfort,
let me be thought a JACK DAW, or LA-FOOLE, or any thing worse. Go you to your
ladies, but first send for them.


DAV. I will.


Act V.
Scene I.
LA-FOOLE, CLERIMONT, DAW, MAVIS. WHere had you our swords, master CLERIMONT?


CLE. Why, DAVPHINE took 'hem from the madman.


LA-F. And he took 'hem from our boys, I warrant you?


CLE. Very like, sir.


LA-F. Thank you, good master CLERIMONT. Sir JOHN DAW, and I are both beholden
to you.


CLE. Would I knew how to make you so, gentlemen.


DAW. Sir AMOROVS, and I are your servants, sir.


MAV. Gentlemen, have any of you a pen-and-inke. I would feign write out a
riddle in Italian, for sir DAVPHINE, to translate.


CLE. Not I, in troth lady, I am no scriuener.


DAW. I can furnish you, I think, lady.


CLE. He has it in the haft of a knife, I believe!


LA-F. No, he has his box of instruments.


CLE. Like a surgean!


LA-F. For the mathematiques: his squire, his compasses, his brass pens, and
black-lead, to draw maps of every place, and person, where he comes.


CLE. How, maps of persons!


LA-F. Yes, sir, of NOMENTACK, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia,
and of his mistress, mistress EPICoeNE.


CLE. Away! he has not found out her latitude, I hope.


LA-F. You are a pleasant gentleman, sir.


CLE. Faith, now we are in private, let us wanton it a little, and talk
waggishly. Sir JOHN, I am telling sir AMOROVS here, that you two govern the
ladies, where e're you come, you carry the feminine gender before you.


DAW. They shall rather carry us before them, if they will, sir.


CLE. Nay, I believe that they do, withal -- But, that you are the prime-men
in their affections, and direct all their actions --


DAW. Not I: sir AMOROVS is.


LA-F. I protest, sir JOHN is.


DAW. As I hope to rise in the state, sir AMOROVS, you have the person.


LA-F. Sir JOHN, you have the person, and the discourse too.


DAW. Not I, sir. I have no discourse -- and then you have actiuitie beside.


LA-F. I protest, sir JOHN, you come as high from Tripoly, as I do every whit:
and lift as many joined stools, and leap over 'hem, if you would use it --


CLE. Well, agree on it together knights; for between you, you divide the
kingdom, or commonwealth of ladies affections: I see it, and can perceive a
little how they observe you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell strange
stories, my masters, if you would, I know.


DAW. Faith, we have seen somewhat, sir.


LA-F. That we have -- vellet petti-coates, and wrought smocks, or so.


DAW. I, and --


CLE. Nay, out with it, sir JOHN: do not envy your friend the pleasure of
hearing, when you have had the delight of tasting.


DAW. Why -- a -- do you speak, sir AMOROVS.


LA-F. No, do you, sir JOHN DAW.


DAW. In Faith, you shall.


LA-F. In Faith, you shall.


DAW. Why, we have been --


LA-F. In the great bed at Ware together in our time. On, sir JOHN.


DAW. Nay, do you, sir AMOROVS.


CRE. And these ladies with you, Knights?


LA-F. No, excuse us, sir.


DAW. We must not wound reputation.


LA-F. No matter -- they were these, or others. Our bath cost us fifteen
pound, when we came home.


CLE. Do you hear, sir JOHN, you shall tell me but one thing truly, as you
love me.


DAW. If I can, I will, sir.


CLE. You lay in the same house with the bride, here?


DAW. Yes, and conuerst with her hourly, sir.


CLE. And what humor is she of? is she coming, and open, free?


DAW. O, exceeding open, sir. I was her servant, and sir AMOROUS was to be.


CLE. Come, you have both had favors from her? I know, and have heard so much.


DAW. O, no, sir.


LA-F. You shall excuse us, sir: we must not wound reputation.


CLE. Tut, she is married, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and
therefore speak plainly: how many times, in faith? which of you lead first? Ha?


LA-F. Sir JOHN had her mayden-head, indeed.


DAW. O, it pleases him to say so, sir, but sir AMOROVS knows what is what, as
well.


CLE. Do thou in faith, AMOROVS?


LA-F. In a manner, sir.


CLE. Why, I commend you lads. Little knows Don Bridegroom of this. Nor
shall he, for me.


DAW. Hang him, mad ox.


CLE. Speak softly: here comes his nephew, with the lady HAVGHTY. He Will get
the ladies from you, sirs, if you look not to him in time.


LA-F. Why, if he do, we will fetch 'hem home again, I warrant you.


Act V. Scene II.
HAVGHTY, DAVPHINE, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, CLERIMONT. I Assure you, sir DAVPHINE, it
is the price and estimation of your virtue only, that has embarked me to
this adventure, and I could not but make out to tell you so; nor can I repent
me of the act, since it is always an argument of some virtue in our selves,
that we love and affect it so in others.


DAV. Your ladyship sets too high a price, on my weakness.


HAVE. Sir, I can distinguish gemmes from peebles --


DAV. (Are you so skillful in stones?)


HAVE. And, howsoever I may suffer in such a judgment as yours, by admitting
equality of rank, or society, with CENTAVRE, or MAVIS --


DAV. You do not, madame, I perceive they are your mere foiles.


HAVE. Then are you a friend to truth, sir. It makes me love you the more. It
is not the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are not apprehensiue
of an eminent perfection, but love flat, and dully.


CEN. Where are you, my lady HAVGHTY?


HAVE. I come presently, CENTAVRE. My chamber, sir, my Page shall show you; and
TRVSTY, my woman, shall be ever awake for you: you need not fear to
communicate anything with her, for she is a FIDELIA. I pray you wear this
jewel for my sake, sir DAVPHINE. Where Is MAVIS, CENTAVRE?


CEN. Within, madame, a writing. I Will follow you presently. I Will but speak a
word with sir DAVPHINE.


DAVP. With me, madame?


CEN. Good sir DAVPHINE, do not trust HAVGHTY, nor make any credit to her,
what ever you do besides. Sir DAVPHINE, I give you this caution, she is a
perfect courtier, and loves no body, but for her uses: and for her uses, she
loves all. Besides, her physicians give her out to be none of the clearest,
whether she pay 'hem or no, heaven knows: and she is above fifty too, and
pargets! See her in a fore-noone. Here comes MAVIS, a worse face then she! you
would not like this, by candlelight. If you will come to my chamber one of these
mornings early, or late in an evening, I Will tell you more. Where Is HAVGHTY,
MAVIS?


MAV. Within, CENTAVRE.


CEN. What have you, there?


MAV. An Italian riddle for sir DAVPHINE, (you shall not see it in faith,
CENTAVRE.) Good sir DAVPHINE, solue it for me. I Will call for it anon.


CLE. How now, DAVPHINE? how do thou quit thy self of these females?


DAVP. 'S light, they haunt me like fayries, and give me jewels here, I cannot
be rid of 'hem.


CLE. O, you must not tell, though.


DAVP. Mass, I forgot that: I was never so assaulted. One loves for virtue,
and bribes me with this. Another loves me with caution, and so would possess
me. A third brings me a riddle here, and all are jealous: and rail each at
other.


CLE. A riddle? pray' le' me see 't? Sir DAVPHINE, I chose this way of
intimation for priuacie. The ladies here, I know, have both hope, and purpose,
to make a collegiate and servant of you. If I might be so honored, as to
appear at any end of so noble a work, I would enter into a fame of taking
physique tomorrow, and continue it four or five days, or longer, for your
visitation. MAVIS. By my faith, a subtle one! Call you this a reiddle? What Is
their plain dealing, trow?


DAVP. We lack TRVE-WIT, to tell us that.


CLE. We lack him for somewhat else too: his Knights reformados are wound up as
high, and insolent, as ever they were.


DAVP. You jest.


CLE. No drunkards, either with wine or vanity, ever confessed such stories of
themselves. I would not give a flies leg, in balance against all the women's
reputations here, if they could be but thought to speak truth: and, for the
bride, they have made their affidauit against her directly --


DAVP. What, that they have lain with her?


CLE. Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place
where. I had almost brought 'hem to affirm that they had done it, to day.


DAVP. Not both of 'hem.


CLE. Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would have set
it down under their hands.


DAVP. Why, they will be our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.


Act V. Scene III.
TRVE-WIT, MOROSE, OTTER, CVTBERD, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE. O, Are you here? Come
DAVPHINE. Go, call your uncle presently. I have fitted my Divine, and my
Canonist, died their beards and all: the knaves do not know themselves they
are so exalted, and altered. Preferment changes any man. Thou shall keep one
door, and I another, and then CLERIMONT in the midst, that he may have no
means of escape from their cauilling, when they grow hot once. And then the
women (as I have given the bride her instructions) to break in upon him, in
the l'enuoy. O, 'twill be full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come, master
Doctor, and master Parson, look to your parts now, and discharge 'hem bravely:
you are well set forth, perform it as well. If you chance to be out, do not
confess it with standing still, or humming, or gaping one at another: but go
on, and talk alowd, and eagerly, use vehement action, and only remember your
terms, and you are safe. Let the matter go where it will: you have many will
do so. But at first, be very solemn, and grave like your garments, though
you loose your selves after, and skip out like a brace of iugglers on a table.
Here he comes! set your faces, and look superciliously, while I present you.


MOR. Are these the two learned men?


TRV. Yes, sir, please you salute 'hem?


MOR. Salute 'hem? I had rather do any thing, then wear out time so
unfruitfully, sir. I wonder, how these common forms, as god save you, and you
are well-come, are come to be a habit in our lives! or, I am glad to see you!
when I cannot see, what the profit can be of these words, so long as it is no
whit better with him, whose affairs are sad, and grievous, that he hears this
salutation.


TRV. It Is true, sir, we will go to the matter then. Gentlemen, master Doctor,
and master Pastor, I have acquainted you sufficiently with the business, for
which you are come hither. And you are not now to inform your selves in the
state of the question, I know. This is the gentleman, who expects your
resolution, and therefore, when you please, begin.


OTT. Please you, master Doctor.


CVT. Please you, good master Parson.


OTT. I would hear the Canon Law speak first.


CVT. It must give place to positive Divinity, sir.


MOR. Nay, good gentlemen, do not throw me into circumstances. Let your
comforts arrive quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoording me my
peace, if so I shall hope any. I love not your disputations, or your
court-tumults. And that it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My father,
in my education, was wont to advise me, that I should always collect, and
contain my mind, not suffering it to ^low loosely; that I should look to what
things were necessary to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the
one and eschewing the other. In short, that I should endeare my self to rest,
and avoid turmoile: which now is grown to be another nature to me. So that I
come not to your public pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect
those things, that make for the dignity of the commonwealth: but for the
mere avoiding of clamors, and impertinencies of Orators, that know not how to
be silent. And for the cause of noise, am I now a suitor to you. You do not
know in what a misery I have been exercised this day, what a torrent of
evil! My very house turns round with the tumult! I dwell in a windmill! The
perpetual motion is here, and not at Eltham.


TRV. Well, good master Doctor, will you break the ice? master Parson will
wade after.


CVT. Sir, though unworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.


OTT. It Is no presumption, domine Doctor.


MOR. Yet again!


CVT. Your question is, for how many causes a man may have diuortium legitimum,
a lawful divorce. First, you must understand the nature of the word divorce, a
diuertendo --


MOR. No excursions upon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.


CVT. I answer then, the Canon Law affords divorce but in few cases, and the
principal is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim
impedimenta, twelve impediments (as we call 'hem) all which do not dirimere
contractum, but irritum reddere matrimonium, as we say in the Canon Law, not
take away the bond, but cause a nullitie therein.


MOR. I understood you, before: good sir, avoid your impertinencie of
translation.


OTT. He cannot open this too much, sir, by your favor.


MOR. Yet more!


TRV. O, you must give the learned men leave, sir. To your impediments, master
Doctor.


CVT. The first is impedimentum erroris.


OTT. Of which there are several species.


CVT. I, as error personae.


OTT. If you contract your self to one person, thinking her another.


CVT. The, error fortunae.


OTT. If she be a beggar, and you thought her rich.


CVT. Then, error qualitatis.


OTT. If she prove stubborn, or headstrong, that you thought obedient.


MOR. How? is that, sir a lawful impediment? One at once, I pray you gentlemen.


OTT. I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, sir.


CVT. Mr. Parson says right. Nec post nuptiarum benedictionem. It does indeed
but irrita reddere sponsalia, annull the contract: after marriage it is of no
onstancy.


TRV. Alas, sir, what a hope are we fallen from, by this time!


CVT. The next is conditio: if you thought her free borne, and she prove a
bondwoman, there is impediment of estate and condition.


OTT. I, but Mr. Doctor, those seruitudes are sublatae, now, among us
christians.


CVT. By your favor, master Parson --


OTT. You shall give me leave, master Doctor.


MOR. Nay, gentlemen, quarrel not in that question; it concerns not my case:
pass to the third.


CVT. Well then, the third is votum. If either party have made a vow of
chastity. But that practice, as master Parson said of the other, is taken away
among us, thanks be to discipline. The fourth is cognatio: if the persons be of
kin, within the degrees.


OTT. I: do you know, what the degrees are, sir?


MOR. No, nor I care not, sir: they offer me no comfort in the question, I am
sure.


CVT. But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognitio
spiritualis. If you were her godfather, sir, then the marriage is incestuous.


OTT. That comment is absurd, and superstitious, master Doctor. I cannot endure
it. Are we not all brothers and sisters, and as much a kin in that, as
godfathers, and god-daughters?


MOR. O me! to end the controversy, I never was a godfather, I never was a
godfather in my life, sir. Pass to the next.


CVT. The fifth is crimen adulterij: the known case. The sixth, cultus
disparitas, difference of religion: have you ever examined her, what religion
she is of?


MOR. No, I would rather she were of none, then be put to the trouble of it!


OTT. You may have it done for you, sir.


MOR. By no means, good sir, on, to the rest: shall you ever come to an end,
think you?


TRV. Yes, he has done half, sir. (On, to the rest) be patient, and expect,
sir.


CVT. The seventh is, vis: if it were upon compulsion, or force.


MOR. O no, it was too voluntary, mine: too voluntary.


CVT. The eight is, or do: if ever she have taken holy orders.


OTT. That Is superstitious, too.


MOR. No matter, master Parson: would she would go into a nunnerie yet.


CVT. The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, sir, to any other before.


MOR. I thrust my self too soon into these fetters.


CVT. The tenth is, publica honestas: which is inchoata quaedam affinitas.


OTT. I, or affinitas orta ex sponsalibus: and is but leave impedimentum.


MOR. I feel no air of comfort blowing to me, in all this.


CVT. The eleventh is, affitas ex fornicatione.


OTT. Which is no less vera affinitas, then the other, master Doctor.


CVT. True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.


OTT. You say right, venerable Doctor. And, nascitur ex eo, quod per coniugium
duae personae efficiuntur vna caro --


MOR. Hey-day, now they begin.


CVT. I conceive you, master Parson. Ita per fornicationem aeque est verus
pater, qui sic generat --


OTT. Et vere filius qui sic generatur --


MOR. What Is all this to me?


CLE. Now it grows warm.


CVT. The twelfth, and last is, si forte coire nequibis.


OTT. I, that is impedimentum grauissimum. It does utterly annull, and
annihilate, that. If you have manifestam frigiditatem, you are well, sir.


TRV. Why, there is comfort come at length, sir. Confess your self but a man
unable, and she will sue to be diuorc'd first.


OTT. I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, and insanabilis, as Paralisis,
Elephantiasis, or so --


DAV. O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, gentlemen.


OTT. You say troth, sir, and as it is in the canon, master Doctor.


CVT. I conceive you, sir.


CLE. Before he speaks.


OTT. That a boy, or child under years, is not fit for marriage, because he
cannot reddere debitum. So your omnipotentes --


TRV. Your impotentes, you whoreson Lobster.


OTT. Your impotentes, I should sa,y, are minime apti ad contrahenda
matrimonium.


TRV. Matrimonium? We shall have most vn-matrimoniall latin, with you:
matrimonia, and be hanged.


DAV. You put 'hem out, man.


CVT. But then there will arise a doubt, master Parson, in our case, post
matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (do you conceive me, sir?)


OTT. Very well, sir.


CVT. Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere eam pro sorore.


OTT. Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely apostaticall.


CVT. You shall pardon me, master Parson, I can prove it.


OTT. You can prove a Will, master Doctor, you can prove nothing else. Does not
the verse of your own canon say. Haec socianda vetant conubia, facta
retractant --


CVT. I grant you, but how do they retractare, master Parson?


MOR. (O, this was it, I feared.)


OTT. In aeternum, sir.


CVT. That Is false in divinity, by your favor.


OTT. It Is false in humanity, to say so. Is he not prorsus invtilis ad
thorum? Can he praestare fidem datam? I would feign know.


CVT. Yes: how if he do conualere?


OTT. He can not conualere, it is impossible.


TRV. Nay, good sir, attend the learned men, they will think you neglect 'hem
else.


CVT. Or, if he do simulare himself frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?


OTT. I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.


DAVP. (They dispute it very learnedly, in faith.)


OTT. And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positive.


MOR. Good sir, let me escape.


TRV. You will not do me that wrong, sir?


OTT. And therefore, if he be manifest frigidus, sir --


CVT. I, if he be manifest frigidus, I grant you --


OTT. Why, that was my conclusion.


CVT. And mine too.


TRV. Nay, hear the conclusion, sir.


OTT. Then, frigiditatis causa --


CVT. Yes, causa frigiditatis --


MOR. O, mine ears!


OTT. She may have libellum diuortij, against you.


CVT. I, diuortij libellum she will sure have.


MOR. Good eccho's, forbear.


OTT. If you confess it.


CVT. Which I would do, sir --


MOR. I will do any thing --


OTT. And clear my self in foro conscientiae --


CVT. Because you want indeed --


MOR. Yet more?


OTT. Exercendi potestate.


Act V. Scene IIII.
EPICOENE, MOROSE, HAVGHTY, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, Mrs. OTTER, DAW, TRVE-WIT,
DAVPHINE, CLERIMONT, LA-FOOLE, OTTER, CVTBERD. I Will not endure it any longer.
Ladies, I beseech you help me. This is such a wrong, as never was offered to
poor bride before. Upon her marriage day, to have her husband conspire against
her, and a couple of mercinarie companions, to be brought in for forms sake,
to persuade a separation! If you had blood, or virtue in you, gentlemen, you
would not suffer such eare-wigs about a husband, or scorpions, to creep between
man and wife --


MOR. O, the variety and changes of my torment!


HAVE. Let 'hem be cudgelled out of doors, by our grooms.


CEN. I Will lend you my footman.


MAV. We Will have our men blanket 'hem in the hall.


Mrs. OT. As there was one, at our house, madame, for peeping in at the door.


DAW. Content, in faith.


TRV. Stay, ladies, and gentlemen, you will hear, before you proceed?


MAV. I'lld have the bridegroom blanketted, too.


CEN. Begin with him first.


HAVE. Yes, by my troth.


MOR. O, mankind generation!


DAVP. Ladies, for my sake forbear.


HAVE. Yes, for sir DAVPHINES sake.


CEN. He shall command us.


LA-F. He is as fine a gentleman of his inches, madame, as any is about the
town, and wears as good colors when he list.


TRV. Be brief, sir, and confess your infirmity, she will be a-fire to be
quit of you, if she but hear that named once, you shall not entreat her to
stay. She Will fly you, like one that had the marks upon him.


MOR. Ladies, I must crave all your pardons --


TRV. Silence, ladies.


MOR. For a wrong I have done to your whole sex, in marrying this fair, and
virtuous gentlewoman --


CLE. Hear him, good ladies.


MOR. Being guilty of an infirmity, which before I conferred with these
learned men, I thought I might have concealed --


TRV. But now being better informed in his conscience by them, he is to
declare it, and give satisfaction, by asking your public forgiveness.


MOR. I am no man, ladies.


ALL. How!


MOR. Utterly vn-abled in nature, by reason of frigidity, to perform the
duties, or any the least office of a husband.


MAV. Now, out upon him, prodigious creature!


CEN. Bridegroom vncarnate.


HAVE. And would you offer it, to a young gentlewoman?


Mrs. OT. A lady of her longings?


EPI. Tut, a device, a device, this, it smells rankly, ladies. A mere comment
of his own.


TRV. Why, if you suspect that, ladies, you may have him searched.


DAW. As the custom is, by a jury of physicians.


LA-F. Yes faith, 'twill be brave.


MOR. O me, must I undergo that!


Mrs. OT. No, let women search him, madame: we can do it our selves.


MOR. Out on me, worse!


EPI. No, ladies, you shall not need, I Will take him with all his faults.


MOR. Worst of all!


CLE. Why, then it is no divorce, Doctor, if she consent not?


CVT. No, if the man be frigidus, it is de part vxoris, that we grant
libellum diuortij, in the law.


OTT. I, it is the same in theology.


MOR. Worse, worse then worst!


TRV. Nay, sir, be not utterly dis-heartned, we have yet a small relic of
hope left, as near as our comfort is blown out. CLERIMONT, produce your brace
of Knights. What was that, master Parson, you told me in errore qualitatis,
e'ne now? DAVPHINE, whisper the bride, that she carry it as if she were
guilty, and ashamed.


OTT. Mary sir, in errore qualitatis (which master Doctor did forbear to urge)
if she be found corrupta, that is, vitiated or broken up, that was pro
virgin desponsa, espoused for a maid --


MOR. What then, sir?


OTT. It does dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere too.


TRV. If this be true, we are happy again, sir, once more. Here are an
honorable brace of Knights, that shall affirm so much.


DAW. Pardon us, good master CLERIMONT.


LA-F. You shall excuse us, master CLERIMONT.


CLE. Nay, you must make it good now, Knights, there is no remedy, I Will eat
no words for you, nor no men: you know you spoke it to me?


DAW. Is this gentleman-like, sir?


TRV. JACK DAW, he is worse then sir AMOROVS: fiercer a great deal. Sir
AMOROVS, beware, there be ten DAWES in this CLERIMONT.


LA-F. I Will confess it, sir.


DAW. Will you, sir AMOROVS? will you wound reputation?


LA-F. I am resolved.


TRV. So should you be too, JACK DAW: what should keep you off?


DAW. Will he? I thought he would have been angry.


CLE. You will dispatch, Knights, it must be done, in faith.


TRV. Why, an' it must it shall, sir, they say. They Will never go back. Do
not tempt his patience.


DAW. It is true indeed, sir.


LA-F. Yes, I assure you, sir.


MOR. What is true gentlemen? what do you assure me?


DAW. That we have known your bride, sir --


LA-F. In good fashion. She was our mistress, or so --


CLE. Nay, you must be plain, Knights, as you were to me.


OTT. I, the question is, if you have carnaliter, or no.


LA-F. Carnaliter? what else, sir?


OTT. It is enough: a plain nullitie.


EPI. I am vn-done, I am vn-done!


MOR. O, let me worship and adore you, gentlemen!


EPI. I am vn-done!


MOR. Yes, to my hand, I thank these Knights: master Parson, let me thank you
otherwise.


CEN. And, have they confessed?


MAV. Now out upon 'hem, informers!


TRV. You see, what creatures you may bestow your favors on, madames.


HAVE. I would except against 'hem as beaten Knights, wench, and not good
witnesses in law.


Mrs. OT. Poor gentlewoman, how she takes it!


HAVE. Be comforted, MOROSE, I love the better for it.


CEN. So do I, I protest.


CVT. But gentlemen, you have not known her, since matrimonium?


DAW. Not to day, master Doctor.


LA-F. No, sir, not to day.


CVT. Why, then I say, for any act before, the matrimonium is good and perfect:
unless, the worshipful Bridegroom did precise, before witness demand, if
she were virgo ante nuptias.


EPI. No, that he did not, I assure you, master Doctor.


CVT. If he cannot prove that, it is ratum coniugium, notwithstanding the
premises. And they do no way impedire. And this is my sentence, this I
pronounce.


OTT. I am of master Doctors resolution too, sir: if you made not that demand,
ante nuptias.


MOR. O my heart! will thou break? will thou break? this is worst of all
worst worsts! that hell could have devised! Marry a whore! and so much noise!


DAVP. Come, I see now plain confederacy in this Doctor, and this Parson, to
abuse a gentleman. You study his affliction. I pray' be gone companions. And
gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for having parts with 'hem. Sir, will it
please you hear me?


MOR. O, do not talk to me, take not from me the pleasure of dying in
silence, nephew.


DAVP. Sir, I must speak to you. I have been long your poor despised
kins-man, and many a hard thought has strengthened you against me: but now it
shall appear if either I love you or your peace, and prefer them to all the
world beside. I will not be long or grievous to you, sir. If I free you of
this unhappy match absolutely, and instantly after all this trouble, and almost
in your despair, now --


MOR. (It cannot be.)


DAVP. Sir, that you be never troubled with a murmr of it more, what shall I
hope for, or deserve of you?


MOR. O, what thou will, nephew! thou shall deserve me, and have me.


DAVP. Shall I have your favor perfect to me, and love hereafter?


MOR. That, and any thing beside. Make thine own conditions. My whole estate
is thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.


DAVP. Nay, sir, I will not be so vn-reasonable.


EPI. Will sir DAVPHINE be mine enemy too?


DAVP. You know, I have been long a suter to you, uncle, that out of your
estate, which is fifteen hundred a year, you would allow me but five hundred
during life, and assure the rest upon me after: to which I have often, by my
self and friends tendered you a writing to sign, which you would never
consent, or incline too. If you please but to effect it now --


MOR. Thou shall have it, nephew. I will do it, and more.


DAVP. If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall have
power instantly, before all these, to revoke your act, and I will become, whose
slave you will give me to, for-euer.


MOR. Where is the writing? I will seal to it, that, or to a blanke, and write
thine own conditions.


EPI. O me, most unfortunate wretched gentlewoman!


HAVE. Will sir DAVPHINE do this?


EPI. Good sir, have some compassion on me.


MOR. O, my nephew knows you belike: away crocodile.


CEN. He does it not sure, without good ground.


DAVP. Here, sir.


MOR. Come, nephew: give me the pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seal
to what thou will, for my deliverance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliver it
thee as my deed. If there be a word in it lacking, or writ with false
orthographie, I protest before -- I will not take the advantage.


DAVP. He takes of Epi^o^nes perruke. Then here is your release, sir; you have
married a boy: a gentleman's son, that I have brought up this half year, at my
great charges, and for this composition, which I have now made with you. What
say you, master Doctor? this is iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?


OTT. Yes sir, in primo gradu.


CVT. In primo gradu.


DAVP. He pulls of their beardes, and disguise. I thank you, good Doctor
CVTBERD, and Parson OTTER. You are beholden to 'hem, sir, that have taken this
pains for you: and my friend, master TRVE-WIT, who enabled 'hem for the
business. Now you may go in and rest, be as private as you will, sir. I Will
not trouble you, till you trouble me with your funeral, which I care not how
soon it come. CVTBERD, I Will make your lease good. Thank me not, but with
your leg, CVTBERD. And TOM OTTER, your Princess shall be reconciled to you.
How now, gentlemen! do you look at me?


CLE. A boy.


DAVP. Yes, mistress EPICOENE.


TRV. Well, DAVPHINE, you have lurch'd your friends of the better half of the
garland, by concealing this part of the plot! but much good do it thee, thou
deseru'st it, lad. And CLERIMONT, for thy unexpected bringing in these two to
confession, wear my part of it freely. Nay, sir DAW, and sir LA-FOOLE, you see
the gentlewoman that has done you the favors! we are all thankful to you,
and so should the womankind here, specially for lying on her, though not with
her! You meant so, I am sure? But, that we have stuck it upon you to day, in
your own imagined persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the champion of the
sex, should beat you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which ladies
receive from such cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or
fortune can make you hope to enjoy their bodies, will yet lie with their
reputations, and make their fame suffer. Away you common moths of these, and
all ladies honors. Go, travail to make legs and faces, and come home with
some new matter to be laughed at: you deserve to live in an air as corrupted,
as that wherewith you feed rumor. Madames, you are mute, upon this new
metamorphosis! but here stands she, that has vindicated your fames. Take heed
of such insectae hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you have discovered
any mysteries to this young gentleman. He is (a'most) of years, and will make a
good visitant within this twelue-month. In the mean time, we will all undertake
for his secrecy, that can speak so well of his silence. Spectators, if you
like this comoedie, rise cheerfully, and now MOROSE is gone in, clap your
hands. It may be, that noise will cure him, at least please him.


THE END.
This Comoedie was first acted, in the year 1609.

By the Children of her Majesty's REVELLS.

The principal Comoedians were, NOT. FIELD. GIL. CARRY. HVG. ATTAWEL. IOH.
SMITH. WILL. BARKSTED. WILL. PEN. RIC. ALLIN. IOH. BLANET.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

THE ALCHEMIST. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1610. By the Kings MAJESTY'S
Servants.

The Author B. I.

LVCRET. -- petere inde coronam,
Vnde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY

M. D C. XVI.

TO THE LADY, MOST DESERVING HER NAME, AND BLOOD: Mary, LA. WROTH.
MADAME,
IN the age of sacrifices, the truth of religion was not in the greatness, and
fat of the offerings, but in the devotion, and zeal of the sacrificers: Else,
what could a handful of gummes have done in the sight of a hecatombe? or, how
might I appear at this altar, except with those affections, that no less love
the light and witness, then they have the conscience of your virtue? If what I
offer bear an acceptable odor, and hold the first strength, it is your value
of it, which remembers, where, when, and to whom it was kindled. Otherwise, as
the times are, there comes rarely forth that thing, so full of authority, or
example, but by assiduitie and custom, grows less, and looses. This, yet,
safe in your judgment (which is a SIDNEYS) is forbidden to speak more; lest
it talk, or look like one of the ambitious Faces of the time: who, the more
they paint, are the less themselves.

Your La: true honorer, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
SVBTLE, The Alchemist. FACE, The housekeeper. DOL. COMMON, Their Colleague.
DAPPER, A Clarke. DRVGGER, A Tabacco-man. LOVE-WIT, Master of the house.
EPICVRE MAMMON, A Knight. SVRLEY, A Gamster. TRIBVLATION, A Pastor of
Amsterdi^. ANANIAS, A Deacon there. KASTRILL, The angry Boy. DA. PLIANT, His
sister: A widow. NEIGHBOVRS. OFFICERS. MVTES.
THE SCENE LONDON.

The Alchemist. THE ARGUMENT.
The sickness hot, a master quit, for fear,
His house in town: and left one servant there.
Ease him corrupted, and gave means to know
A cheater, and his punque; who, now brought low,
Leaving their narrow practice, were become
Cos'ners at large: and, only wanting some
House to set up, with him they here contract,
Each for a share, and all begin to act.
Much company they draw, and much abuse,
In casting figures, telling fortunes, news,
Selling of flies, flat bawdry, with the stone:
Till it, and they, and all in fume are gone.
PROLOGVE.
FORTUNE, that favors fools, these two short hours
We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
Judging Spectators: and desire in place,
To The Author justice, to our selves but grace.
Our Scene is London, 'cause we would make known,
No countries mirth is better then our own.
No clime breeds better matter, for your whore,
Bawd, squire, impostor, many persons more,
Whose manners, now called humors, feed the stage:
And which have still been subject, for the rage
Or spleen of comick-writers. Though this pen
Did never aim to grieve, but better men;
How ever the age, he lives in, does endure
The vices that she breeds, above their cure.
But, when the wholesome remedies are sweet,
And, in their working, gain, and profit meet,
He hopes to find no spirit so much diseased,
But will, with such fair correctiues be pleased.
For here, he does not fear, who can apply.
If there be any, that will sit so nigh
Unto the stream, to look what it does run,
They shall find things, they'ld think, or wish, were done;
They are so natural follies, but so shown,
As even the doers may see, and yet not own.
Act I.
Scene I.
FACE, SVBTLE, DOL Common. BEleeu't, I will.

SVB. Thy worst. I fart at thee.

DOL. Have you your wits? Why gentlemen! for love --

FAC. Sirrah, I Will strip you --

SVB. What to do? lick sigs
Out at my --

FAC. Rogue, rogue, out of all your sleights.

DOL. Nay, look ye! Sovereign, General, are you madmen?

SVB. O, let the wild sheep loose. I Will gum your silks
With good strong water, an'you come.

DOL. Will you have
The neighbors hear you? Will you betray all?
Hark, I hear some body.

FAC. Sirrah --

SVB. I shall mar
All that the tailor has made, if you approach.

FAC. You most notorious whelpe, you insolent slave.
Dare you do this?

SVB. Yes faith, yes faith.

FAC. Why! who
Am I, my mungrill? Who am I?

SVB. I Will tell you,
Since you know not your self --

FAC. Speak lower, rogue.

SVB. Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
Honest, plain, liuery-three-pound-thrum; that kept
Your masters worships house, here, in the friars,
For the vacations --

FAC. Will you be so loud?

SVB. Since, by my means, translated suburb-Captayne.

FAC. By your means, Doctor dog?

SVB. Within man's memory,
All this, I speak of.

FAC. Why, I pray you, have I
Been countenanced by you? or you, by me?
Do but collect, sir, where I met you first.

SVB. I do not hear well.

FAC. Not of this, I think it.
But I shall put you in mind, sir, at pie-corner.
Taking your meal of steeme in, from cooks stalls,
Where, like the father of hunger, you did walk
Piteously costiue, with your pinch'd-horne-nose,
And your complexion, of the roman wash,
Stuck full of black, and melancholique worms,
Like poulder-cornes, shot, at the artillerie-yard.

SVB. I wish, you could advance your voice, a little.

FAC. When you went pinned up, in the several rags,
Yo'had raked, and picked from dung-hills, before day,
Your feet in mouldie slippers, for your kibes,
A felt of rugg, and a thin thredden cloak,
That scarce would cover your no-buttocks --

SVB. So, sir!

FAC. When all your alchemy, and your algebra,
Your mineralls, vegetalls, and animalls,
Your coniuring, cosning, and your dosen of trades,
Could not relieve your corpse, with so much linen
Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
I ga'you countenance, credit for your coals,
Your stills, your glasses, your materials,
Built you a furnace, drew you customers,
Advanced all your black arts; lent you, beside,
A house to practice in --

SVB. Your masters house?

FAC. Where you have studied the more thriuing skill
Of bawdrie, since.

SVB. Yes, in your masters house.
You, and the rats, here, kept possession.
Make it not strange. I know, yo' were one, could keep
The buttry-hatch still locked, and save the chippings,
Sell the dole-beere to aqua-vitae-men,
The which, together with your christ-masse vailes,
At post and pair, your letting out of counters,
Made you a pretty stock, some twenty marks,
And gave you credit, to converse with cob-webs,
Here, since your mistress death has broke up house.

FAC. You might talk softlier, rascal.

SVB. No, you scarabe,
I Will thunder you, in pieces. I will teach you
How to beware, to tempt a fury again
That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.

FAC. The place has made you valiant.

SVB. No, your clothes.
Thou vermin, have I taken thee, out of dung,
So poor, so wretched, when no living thing
Would keep thee company, but a spider, or worse?
Raised thee from broomes, and dust, and watring pots?
Sublimed thee, and exalted thee, and fixed thee
IN the third region, called our state of grace?
Wrought thee to spirit, to quintessence, with pains
Would twice have won me the philosophers work?
Put thee in words, and fashion? made thee fit
For more then ordinary fellowships?
Given thee thy oaths, thy quarrelling dimensions?
Thy rules, to cheat at horse-race, cockpit, cards,
Dice, or what ever gallant tincture, else?
Made thee a second, in mine own great art?
And have I this for thank? Do you rebel?
Do you fly out, in the proiection?
Would you be gone, now?

DOL. Gentlemen, what mean you?
Will you mar all?

SVB. Slave, thou had had no name --

DOL. Will you vn-doe your selves, with civil war?

SVB. Never been known, past equi clibanum,
The heat of horse-dung, under ground, in cellars,
Or an alehouse, darker then deaf John's: been lost
To all mankind, but laundresses, and tapsters,
Had not I been.

DOL. Do'you know who hears you, Sovereign?

FAC. Sirrah --

DOL. Nay, General, I thought you were civil --

FAC. I shall turn desperate, if you grow thus loud.

SVB. And hang thy self, I care not.

FAC. Hang thee, colliar,
And all thy pots, and pans, in picture I will,
Since thou have moved me. --

DOL. (O, this'll ore-throw all.)

FAC. Write thee up bawd, in Paul's; have all thy tricks
Of cosning with a hollow cole, dust, scrapings,
Searching for things lost, with a sieve, and sheeres,
Erecting figures, in your rows of houses,
And taking in of shadows, with a glass,
Told in red letters: And a face, cut for thee,
Worse then GAMALIEL RATSEY'S.

DOL. Are you sound?
Have you your senses, masters?

FAC. I will have
A book, but barely reckoning thy impostures,
Shall prove a true philosophers stone, to printers.

SVB. Away, you trencher-raskall.

FAC. Out you dog-leach,
The vomit of all prisons --

DOL. Will you be
Your own destructions, gentlemen?

FAC. Still spewed out
For lying too heavy of the basket.

SVB. Cheater.

FAC. Bawd.

SVB. Cow-herd.

FAC. Coniurer.

SVB. Cutpurse.

FAC. Witch.

DOL. O me!
We are ruined! lost! Ha'you no more regard
To your reputations? Where Is your judgment? S'light,
Have yet, some care of me, o'your republique --

FAC. Away this brach. I Will bring thee, rogue, within
The statute of sorcerie, tricesimo tertio.
Or HARRY the eight: I, and (perhaps) thy neck
Within a nooze, for laundring gold, and barbing it.

DOL. You Will bring your head within a cocks-combe, will you?
And you, sir, with your menstrue, gather it up.
God's Death, you abominable pair of stinkards,
Leave off your barking, and grow one again,
Or, by the light that shines, I Will cut your throats.
She catches out Face his sword: and breaks Subtles glass. I Will not be made
a prey unto the marshall,
For never a snarling dog-bolt o'you both.
Have you together cossen'd all this while,
And all the world, and shall it now be said
Yo' have made most courteous shift, to cosen your selves?
You will accuse him? You will bring him in
Within the statute? Who shall take your word?
A whore-sonne, vpstart, apocryphal captain,
Whom not a puritan, in black- friars, will trust
So much, as for a feather! And you too,
Will give the cause, forsooth? You will insult,
And claim a primacie, in the divisions?
You must be chief? as if you, only, had
The poulder to project with? and the work
Were not begun out of equality?
The venture tripartite? All things in common?
Without prioritie? God's Death, you perpetual curres,
Fall to your couples again, and cossen kindly,
And heartily, and lovingly, as you should,
And loose not the beginning of a term,
Or, by this hand, I shall grow factious too,
And, take my part, and quit you.

FAC. 'T is his fault,
He ever murmures, and objects his pains,
And says, the weight of all lies upon him.

SVB. Yes, but they are not equal.

DOL. Why, if your part exceed to day, I hope
Ours may, to morrow, match it.

SVB. I, they may.

DOL. May, murmuring mastiffe? I, and do. Death on me!
Help me to thrattell him.

SVB. DOROTHEE, mistress DOROTHEE,
O'ds preciuos, I Will do anything. What do you mean?

DOL. Because o'your fermentation, and cibation?

SVB. Not I, by heaven --

DOL. Your Sol, and Luna -- help me.

SVB. Would I were hanged then. I Will conform my self.

DOL. Will you, sir, do so then, and quickly: swear.

SVB. What should I swear?

DOL. To leave your faction, sir.
And labor, kindly, in the commune work.

SVB. Let me not breath, if I meant ought, beside.
I only used those speeches, as a spur
To him.

DOL. I hope we need no spurs, sir. Do we?

FAC. 'Slid, prove to day, who shall sharke best.

SVB. Agreed.

DOL. Yes, and work close, and friendly.

SVB. 'Slight, the knot
Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.

DOL. Why so, my good babounes! Shall we go make
A sort of sober, sciruy, precise neighbors,
(That scarce have smiled twice, sin' the king came in)
A feast of laughter, at our follies? raskalls,
Would run themselves from breath, to see me ride,
Or you to have but a hole, to thrust your heads in,
For which you should pay eare-rent? No, agree.
And may Don Provost ride a feasting, long,
In his old velvet ierken, and stayn'd scarfes,
(My noble Sovereign, and worthy General)
Ere we contribute a new crewell garter
To his most worsted worship.

SVB. Royal DOL!
Spoken like CLARIDIANA, and thy self!

FAC. For which, at supper, thou shall sit in triumph,
And not be styled DOL Common, but DOL Proper,
DOL Singular: the longest cut, at night,
Shall draw thee for his DOL Particular.

SVB. Who Is that? one rings. To the windo',

DOL. Pray heaven,
The master do not trouble us, this quarter.

FAC. O, fear not him. While there dies one, a week,
Of The plague, he is safe, from thinking toward London.
Beside, he is busy at his hop-yards, now:
I had a letter from him. If he do,
He Will send such word, for ayring of the house
As you shall have sufficient time, to quit it:
Though we break up a fortnight, it is no matter.

SVB. Who is it, DOL?

DOL. A fine young quodling.

FAC. O,
My Lawyers clarke, I lighted on, last night,
In Hol'bourne, at the dagger. He would have
(I told you of him) a familiar,
To rifle with, at horses, and win cups.

DOL. O, let him in.

SVB. Stay. Who shall do it?

FAC. Get you
Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.

DOL. And what shall I do?

FAC. Not be seen, away.
Seem you very reserved.

SVB. Enough.

FAC. God b'w'you, sir.
I pray you, let him know that I was here.
His name is DAPPER. I would gladly have staid, but --

Act I. Scene II.
DAPPER, FACE, SVBTLE. Captain, I am here.

FAC. Who Is that? He Is come, I think, Doctor.
Good faith, sir, I was going away.

DAP. In truth,
I Am very sorry, Captain.

FAC. But I thought
Sure, I should meet you.

DAP. I, I Am very glad.
I'had a sciruy writ, or two, to make,
And I had lent my watch last night, to one
That dines, to day, at the shrieffs: and so was robbed
Of my passe-time. Is this the cunning-man?

FAC. This is his worship.

DAP. Is he a Doctor?

FAC. Yes.

DAP. And ha'you broke with him, Captain?

FAC. I.

DAP. And how?

FAC. Faith, he does make the matter, sir, so dainty,
I know not what to say --

DAP. Not so, good Captain.

FAC. Would I were fairly rid on it, believe me.

DAP. Nay, now you grieve me, sir. Why should you wish so?
I dare assure you. I Will not be ungrateful.

FAC. I cannot think you will, sir. But the law
Is such a thing -- And then, he says, Reade's matter
Falling so lately --

DAP. Read? He was an ass,
And dealt, sir, with a fool.

FAC. It was a clarke, sir.

DAP. A clarke?

FAC. Nay, hear me, sir, you know the law
Better, I think --

DAP. I should, sir, and the danger.
You know I showed the statute to you?

FAC. You did so.

DAP. And will I tell, then? By this hand, of flesh,
Would it might never wright good court-hand, more,
If I discover. What do you think of me,
That I am a Chiause?

FAC. What Is that?

DAP. The Turk was, here --
As one would say, do you think I am a Turk?

FAC. I Will tell the Doctor so.

DAP. Do, good sweet Captain.

FAC. Come, noble Doctor, 'pray thee, let us prevail,
This is the gentleman, and he is no Chiause.

SVB. Captain, I have returned you all my answer.
I would do much, sir, for your love -- But this
I neither may, nor can.

FAC. Tut, do not say so.
You deal, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
One that will thank you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
Let that, sir, move you.

SVB. Pray you, forbear --

FAC. He has
Four angels, here --

SVB. You do me wrong, good sir.

FAC. Doctor, wherein? To tempt you, with these spirits?

SVB. To tempt my art, and love, sir, to my peril.
Before heaven, I scarce can think you are my friend,
That so would draw me to apparent danger.

FAC. I draw you? A horse draw you, and a halter,
You, and your flies together --

DAP. Nay, good Captain.

FAC. That know no difference of men.

SVB. Good words, sir.

FAC. Good deeds, sir, Doctor dogs-meate. 'Slight I bring you
No cheating CLIM- of the-CLOVGHS, or CLARIBELS,
That look as big as fiue-and- fifty, and flush,
And spit out secrets, like hot custard --

DAP. Captain.

FAC. Nor any melancholic vnder-scribe,
Shall tell the Vicar: but, a special gentle,
That is the heir to forty marks, a year,
Consorts with the small poets of the time,
Is the sole hope of his old grandmother,
That knows the law, and writes you six fair hands,
Is a fine clarke, and has his cyphring perfect,
Will take his oath, of the greek XENOPHON,
If need be, in his pocket: and can court
His mistress, out of OVID.

DAP. Nay, dear Captain.

FAC. Did you not tell me, so?

DAP. Yes, but I Would have you
Use master Doctor, with some more respect.

FAC. Hang him proud stagge, with his broad velvet head.
But, for your sake, I Would choke, ere I would change
An article of breath, with such a puck-fist --
Come let us begone.

SVB. Pray you, le'me speak with you.

DAP. His worship calls you, Captain.

FAC. I am sorry,
I e're imbarqu'd my self, in such a business.

DAP. Nay, good sir. He did call you.

FAC. Will he take, then?

SVB. First, hear me --

FAC. Not a syllable, 'lesse you take.

SVB. Pray ye', sir --

FAC. Upon no terms, but an assumpsit.

SVB. Your humor must be law.

FAC. Why now, sir, talk.
Now, I dare hear you with mine honor. Speak.
So may this gentleman too.

SVB. Why, sir --

FAC. No whispring.

SVB. Before heaven, you do not apprehend the loss
You do you self, in this.

FAC. Wherein? For what?

SVB. Mary, to be so'importunate for one,
That, when he has it, will vn-doe you all:
He Will win up all the money in the town.

FAC. How!

SVB. Yes. And blow up gamster, after gamster,
As they do crackers, in a puppit-play.
If I do give him a familiar,
Give you him all you play for; never set him:
For he will have it.

FAC. You Are mistaken, Doctor.
Why, he does ask one but for cups, and horses,
A rifling fly: none o'your great familiars.

DAP. Yes, Captain, I would have it, for all games.

SVB. I told you so.

FAC. 'Slight, that is a new business!
I understood you, a tame bird, to fly
Twice in a term, or so; on friday-nights,
When you had left the office: for a nagge,
Of forty, or fifty shillings.

DAP. I, it is true, sir,
But I do think, now, I shall leave the law,
And therefore --

FAC. Why, this changes quite the case!
Do'you think, that I dare move him?

DAP. If you please, sir,
All Is one to him, I see.

FAC. What! for that money?
I cannot with my conscience. Nor should you
Make the request, me thinks.

DAP. No, sir, I mean
To add consideration.

FAC. Why, then, sir,
I Will try. Say, that it were for all games, Doctor?

SVB. I say, then, not a mouth shall eat for him
At any ordinary, but of the score,
That is a gaming mouth, conceive me.

FAC. Indeed!

SVB. He Will draw you all the treasure of the realm,
If it be set him.

FAC. Speak you this from art?

SVB. I, sir, and reason too: the ground of art.
H'is of the only best complexion,
The queen of Fairy loves.

FAC. What! is he!

SVB. Peace.
He Will ouer-heare you. Sir, should she but see him --

FAC. What?

SVB. Do not you tell him.

FAC. Will he win at cards too?

SVB. The spirits of dead HOLLAND, living ISAAC,
You Would swear, were in him: such a vigorous luck
As cannot be resisted. 'Slight he will put
Six o'your gallants, to a cloak, indeed.

FAC. A strange success, that some man shall be borne too!

SVB. He hears you, man --

DAP. Sir, I Will not be ungrateful.

FAC. Faith, I have a confidence in his good nature:
You hear, he says, he will not be ungrateful.

SVB. Why, as you please, my venture follows yours.

FAC. Troth, do it, Doctor. Think him trusty, and make him.
He may make us both happy in an hour:
Win some five thousand pound, and send us two on it.

DAP. Believe it, and I will, sir.

FAC. And you shall, sir.
You have heard all?

DAP. No, what was it? nothing, I sir.

FAC. Nothing?

DAP. A little, sir.

FAC. Well, a rare star
Reigned, at your birth.

DAP. At mine, sir? no.

FAC. The Doctor
Swears that you are --

SVB. Nay, Captain, yo'll tell all, now.

FAC. Allied to the queen of Faerie.

DAP. Who? that I am?
Believe it, no such matter --

FAC. Yes, and that
Yo'were borne with a caul o'your head.

DAP. Who says so?

FAC. Come.
You know it well enough, though you dissemble it.

DAP. I-fac, I do not. You are mistaken.

FAC. How!
Swear by your fac? and in a thing so known
Unto the Doctor? How shall we, sir, trust you
In The other matter? Can we ever think,
When you have won five, or six thousand pound,
You Will send us shares in it, by this rate?

DAP. By JOVE, sir,
I Will win ten thousand pound, and send you half.
I-fac's no oath.

SVB. No, no, he did but jest.

FAC. Go too. Go, thank the Doctor. He Is your friend
To take it so.

DAP. I thank his worship.

FAC. So?
Another angel.

DAP. Must I?

FAC. Must you? Slight,
What else is thanks? will you be triuiall? Doctor,
When must he come, for his familiar?

DAP. Shall I not ha'it with me?

SVB. O, good sir!
There must a world of ceremonies pass,
You must be bathed, and fumigated, first;
Besides, the Queen of Faerie does not rise,
Till it be noone.

FAC. Not, if she daunc'd, to night.

SVB. And she must bless it.

FAC. Did you never see
Her royal Grace, yet?

DAP. Whom?

FAC. Your aunt of Faerie?

SVB. Not, since she kissed him, in the cradle, Captain,
I can resolve you that.

FAC. Well, see her Grace,
What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know!
It will be somewhat hard to compass: but,
How ever, see her. You are made, believe it,
If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
She will do strange things. See her, at any hand.
'Slid, she may hap to leave you all she has!
It is the Doctors fear.

DAP. How will it be done, then?

FAC. Let me alone, take you no thought. Do you
But say to me, Captain, I Will see her Grace.

DAP. One knocks without. Captain, I Will see her Grace.

FAC. Enough.

SVB. Who Is there?
Anon. (Conduct him forth, by the back way)
Sir, against one a clock, prepare your self.
Till when you must be fasting; only, take
Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
Two at your mouth; and one, at either ear;
Then, bath your fingers ends; and wash your eyes;
To sharpen your five senses; and, cry hum,
Thrice; and then buz, as often; and then, come.

FAC. Can you remember this?

DAP. I warrant you.

FAC. Well, then, away. It Is, but your bestowing
Some twenty nobles, among her Graces servants;
And, put on a clean shirt* You do not know
What grace her Grace may do you in clean linen.

Act I. Scene III.
SVBTLE, DRVGGER, FACE. COme in (Good wives, I pray you forbear me, now.
Troth I can do you no good, till afternoon)
What is your name, say you, ABEL DRVGGER?

DRV. Yes, sir.

SVB. A seller of tobacco?

DRV. Yes, sir.

SVB. 'Vmh.
Free of the Grocers?

DRV. I, and't please you.

SVB. Well --
Your business, ABEL?

DRV. This, and't please your worship,
I Am a young beginner, and am building
Of a new shop, and't like your worship; just,
At corner of a street: (Here Is the plot on it.)
And I would know, by art, sir, of your worship,
Which way I should make my door, by necromancie.
And, where my shelues. And, which should be for boxes.
And, which for pots. I would be glad to thrive, sir.
And, I was wished to your worship, by a gentleman,
One Captain FACE, that says you know men's planets,
And their good angels, and their bad.

SVB. I do,
If I do see 'hem --

FAC. What! my honest ABEL?
Thou art well met, here!

DRV. Troth, sir, I was speaking,
Just, as your worship came here, of your worship.
I pray you, speak for me to master Doctor.

FAC. He shall do any thing. Doctor, do you hear?
This is my friend, ABEL, an honest fellow,
He lets me have good tobacco, and he does not
Sophisticate it, with sack-lees, or oil,
Nor washes it in muscadell, and grains,
Nor buries it, in gravel, under ground,
Wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed clouts:
But keeps it in fine lilly-pots, that opened,
Smell like conserve of roses, or french beans.
He has his maple block, his silver tongs,
Winchester pipes, and fire of juniper.
A neat, spruce-honest-fellow, and no goldsmiths.

SVB. H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on --

FAC. Already, sir, have you found it? Lo'thee ABEL!

SVB. And, in right way to'ward riches --

FAC. Sir.

SVB. This summer,
He will be of the clothing of his company:
And, next spring, called to the scarlet. Spend what he can.

FAC. What, and so little beard?

SVB. Sir, you must think,
He may have a receipt, to make hair come.
But he will be wise, preserve his youth, and fine for it:
His fortune looks for him, another way.

FAC. 'Slid, Doctor, how can thou know this so soon?
I Am amused, at that!

SVB. By a rule, Captain,
In metaposcopie, which I do work by,
A certain star in the forehead, which you see not.
Your chest-nut, or your oliue-colour'd face
Does never fail: and your long ear does promise.
I knew't, by certain spots too, in his teeth,
And on the nail of his mercurial finger.

FAC. Which finger's that?

SVB. His little finger. Look.
Yo'were borne upon a wensday?

DRV. Yes, indeed, sir.

SVB. The thumb, in chiromantie, we give VENUS;
The forefinger to JOVE; the midst, to SATVRNE;
The ring to SOL; the least, to MERCVRIE:
Who was the lord, sir, of his horoscope,
His house of life being Libra, which fore-shew'd,
He should be a merchant, and should trade with balance.

FAC. Why, this is strange! Is It not, honest NAB?

SVB. There is a ship now, coming from Ormus,
That shall yield him, such a commodity
Of drugs -- This is the west, and this the south?

DRV. Yes, sir;

SVB. And those are your two sides?

DRV. I, sir.

SVB. Make me your door, then south; your broad side, west:
And, on the east side of your shop, aloft,
Write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;
Upon the north-part, Rael, Velel, Thiel.
They are the names of those Mercurial spirits,
That do fright flies from boxes.

DRV. Yes, sir.

SVB. And
Beneath your threshold, bury me a lodestone
To draw in gallants, that wear spurs: The rest,
They Will seem to follow.

FAC. That Is a secret NAB!

SVB. And, on your stall, a puppet, with a vice,
And a court- fucus, to call city-dames.
You shall deal much, with mineralls.

DRV. Sir, I have,
At home, already --

SVB. I, I know, you'haue arsnike,
Vitriol, sal-tartre, argaile, alkaly,
Cinoper: I know all. This fellow, Captain,
Will come, in time, to be a great distiller,
And give a say (I will not say directly,
But very fair) at the phiosophers stone.

FAC. Why, how now, ABEL! Is this true?

DRV. Good Captain,
What must I give?

FAC. Nay, I Will not counsel thee.
Thou hearst, what wealth (he says, spend what thou can)
Thou Art like to come too.

DRV. I would gi'him a crown.

FAC. A crown! 'nd toward such a fortune? Heart,
Thou shall rather gi'him thy shop. No gold about thee?

DRV. Yes, I have a portague, I have kept this half year.

FAC. Out on thee, NAB, S'light, there was such an offer --
'Shalt keepe't no longer, I Will gi'it him for thee?
Doctor, NAB prays your worship, to drink this: and swears
He will appear more grateful, as your skill
Does raise him in the world.

DRV. I would entreat
Another favor of his worship.

FAC. What is it, NAB?

DRV. But, to look over, sir, my almanac,
And cross out my ill-dayes, that I may neither
Bargain, nor trust upon them.

FAC. That he shall, NAB.
Leave it, it shall be done, against afternoon.

SVB. And a direction for his shelues.

FAC. Now, NAB?
Art thou well pleased, NAB?

DRV. Thank, sir, both your worships.

FAC. Away.
Why, now, you smoky persecuter of nature!
Now, do you see, that some-thing's to be done,
Beside your beech-coale, and your cor'siue waters,
Your crosse-lets, crucibles, and cucurbites?
You must have stuff, brought home to you, to work on?
And, yet, you think, I am at no expense,
In searching out these veins, then following 'hem,
Then trying 'hem out. Before god, my intelligence
Costs me more money, then my share often comes too,
In these rare works.

SVB. You're pleasant, sir. How now?

Act I. Scene IIII. FACE, DOL, SVBTLE.
WHat says, my dainty DOLKIN?

DOL. Yonder fish-wife
Will not away. And there is your giantesse,
The bawd of Lambeth.

SVB. Heart, I cannot speak with 'hem.

DOL. Not, before night, I have told 'hem, in a voice,
Thorough the trunk, like one of your familiars.
But I have spied sir EPICVRE MAMMON-

SVB. Where?

DOL. Coming along, at far end of the lane,
Slow of his feet, but earnest of his tongue,
To one, that is with him.

SVB. FACE, go you, and shift,
DOL, you must presently make ready, too --

DOL. Why, what is the matter?

SVB. O, I did look for him
With the suns rising: 'Maruaile, he could sleep!
This is the day, I am to perfect for him
The magisterium, our great work, the stone;
And yield it, made, into his hands: of which,
He has, this month, talked, as he were possess;d.
And, now, he is dealing pieces on it, away.
Me thinks, I see him, entering ordinaries,
Dispensing for the pox; and plaguy-houses,
Reaching his dose; walking more-fields for lepers;
And offering citizens-wiues pomander-bracelets,
As his preservative, made of the elixir;
Searching the spittle, to make old bawdes young;
And the highways, for beggars, to make rich:
I see no end of his labors. He will make
Nature ashamed, of her long sleep: when art,
Who Is but a step-dame, shall do more, then she,
In her best love to mankind, ever could.
If his dream last, he will turn the age, to gold.

Act II.
Scene I.
MAMMON, SVRLY. COme on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore
In nouo orb; Here Is the rich Peru:
And there within, sir, are the golden mines,
Great SALOMON'S Ophir! He was sailing to it,
Three years, but we have reached it in ten months.
This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
I will pronounce the happy word, be rich.
This day, you shall be spectatissimi.
You shall no more deal with the hollow die,
Or the frail card. No more be at charge of keeping
The liuery-punke, for the young heir, that must
Seal, at all hours, in his shirt. No more
If he deny, have him beaten to it, as he is
That brings him the commodity. No more
Shall thirst of satin, or the covetous hunger
Of velvet entrails, for a rude-spun cloak,
To be displaid at Madame AVGVSTA'S, make
The sons of sword, and hazard fall before
The golden calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
Commit idolatry with wine, and trumpets:
Or go a feasting, after drum and ensign.
No more of this. You shall start up young Vice-royes,
And have your punques, and punquettees, my SVRLY.
And unto thee, I speak it first, be rich. Within Sir.
Where is my SVBTLE, there? Within hough?
He Will come to you, by and by.

MAM. That Is his fire-drake,
His lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffes his coals,
Till he firke nature up, in her own center.
You are not faithful, sir. This night, I Will change
All, that is metal, in thy house, to gold.
And, early in the morning, will I send
To all the plumbers, and the pewterers,
And buy their tin, and lead up: and to Lothbury,
For all the copper.

SVR. What, and turn that too?

MAM. Yes, and I Will purchase Devonshire, and Cornwaile,
And make them perfect Indies! You admire now?

SVR. No faith.

MAM. But when you see the effects of the great medicine!
Of which one part proiected on a hundred
Of Mercury, or Venus, or the Moon,
Shall turn it, to as many of the Sun;
Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
You will believe me.

SVR. Yes, when I see it, I will.
But, if my eyes do cossen me so (and I
Giving 'hem no occasion) sure, I Will have
A whore, shall piss 'hem out, next day.

MAM. Ha! Why?
Do you think, I fable with you? I assure you,
He that has once the flower of the sun,
The perfect ruby, which we call elixir,
Not only can do that; but by it is virtue,
Can confer honor, love, respect, long life,
Give safety, valor: yea, and victory,
To whom he will. In eight, and twenty days,
I Will make an old man, of fourscore, a child.

SVR. No doubt, he is that already.

MAM. Nay, I mean,
Restore his years, renew him, like an eagle,
To the fifth age; make him get sons, and daughters,
Young giants; as our Philosophers have done
(The ancient Patriarchs before the flood)
But taking, once a week, on a knives point,
The quantity of a grain of mustard, of it:
Become stout MARSES, and beget young CVPIDS.

SVR. The decayed Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thank you,
That keep the fire a-liue, there.

MAM. It Is the secret
Of nature, naturiz'd against all infections,
Cures all diseases, coming of all causes,
A month's grief, in a day; a years, in twelve:
And, of what age soever, in a month.
Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
I Will undertake, withal, to fright the plague
Out of the kingdom, in three months.

SVR. And I Will
Be bound, the players shall sing your praises, then,
Without their poets.

MAM. Sir, I Will do it. Mean time,
I Will give away so much, unto my man,
Shall serve the whole city, with preservative,
Weekly, each house his dose, and at the rate --

SVR. As he that built the water-worke, does with water?

MAM. You are incredulous.

SVR. Faith, I have a humor,
I would not willingly be gulled. Your stone
Cannot transmute me.

MAM. PERTINAX, SVRLY,
Will you believe antiquity? records?
I Will show you a book, where MOSES, and his sister,
And SALAMON have written, of the art;
I, and a treatise penned by ADAM.

SVR. How!

MAM. Of The Philosophers stone, and in high- Dutch.

SVR. Did ADAM write, sir, in high- Dutch?

MAM. He did:
Which proves it was the primitive tongue.

SVR. What paper?

MAM. On cedar board.

SVR. O that, indeed (they say)
Will last against worms.

MAM. It Is like your Irishwood,
Against cob-webs. I have a piece of IASONS fleece, too,
Which was no other, then a book of alchemie,
Writ in large sheepe-skin, a good fat ram-vellam.
Such was PYTHAGORA'S thigh, PANDORA's tub;
And, all that fable of MEDEAS charms,
The manner of our work: The Bulls, our furnace,
Still breathing fire; our argent-viue, the Dragon:
The Dragons teeth, mercury sublimate,
That keeps the whiteness, hardness, and the biting;
And they are gathered, into IASON's helm,
(The alembeke) and then sowed in MARS his field,
And, thence, sublimed so often, till they are fixed.
Both this, the Hesperian garden, CADMVS story,
Jove's shower, the boon of MIDAS, ARGVS eyes,
BOCCACE his Demogorgon, thousands more,
All abstract riddles of our stone. How now?

Act II. Scene II.
MAMMON, FACE, SVRLY. Do we succeed? Is our day come? and hold's it?

FAC. The evening will set red, upon you, sir;
You have color for it, crimson: the red ferment
Has done his office. Three hours hence, prepare you
To see proiection.

MAM. PERTINAX, my SVRLY,
Again, I say to thee, aloud, be rich.
This day, thou shall have ingots: and to morrow,
Give lords th'affront. Is it, my ZEPHYRVS, right?
Blushes the bolts-head?

FAC. Like a wench with child, sir,
That were, but now, discovered to her master.

MAM. Excellent witty Lungs! My only care is,
Where to get stuff, enough now, to project on,
This town will not half serve me.

FAC. No, sir? Buy
The covering of of churches.

MAM. That Is true.

FAC. Yes.
Let 'hem stand bare, as do their auditorie.
Or cap 'hem, new, with shingles.

MAM. No, good thatch:
Thatch will lie light vpo' the rafters, Lungs.
Lungs, I will manumit thee, from the furnace;
I will restore thee thy complexion, Puff,
Lost in the embers; and repair this brain,
Hurt wi' the fume of the mettalls.

FAC. I have blown, sir,
Hard, for your woship; thrown by many a coal,
When 'twas not beech; weighed those I put in, just,
To keep your heat, still even; These bleard-eyes
Have waked, to read y our several colors, sir,
Of the pale citron, the green lion, the crow,
The peacocks tail, the plumed swan.

MAM. And, lastly,
Thou have descryed the flower, the sanguis agni?

FAC. Yes, sir.

MAM. Where Is master?

FAC. At's prayers, sir, he,
Good man, he is doing his devotions,
For the success.

MAM. Lungs, I will set a period,
To all thy labors: Thou shall be the master
Of my seraglia.

FAC. Good, sir.

MAM. But do you hear?
I Will geld you, Lungs.

FAC. Yes, sir.

MAM. For I do mean
To have a list of wives, and concubines,
Equal with SOLOMON; who had the stone
Alike, with me: and I will make me, a back
With the elixir, that shall be as tough
As HERCULES, to encounter fifty a night.
Thou Art sure, thou saw it blood?

FAC. Both blood, and spirit, sir.

MAM. I will have all my beds, blown up; not stuffed:
Down is too hard. And then, mine oual room,
Filled with such pictures, as TIBERIUS took
From ELEPHANTIS: and dull ARETINE
But coldly imitated. Then, my glasses,
Cut in more subtle angles, to disperse,
And multiply the figures, as I walk
Naked between my succubae. My mists
I Will have of perfume, vapor'd 'bout the room,
To loose our selves in; and my baths, like pits
To fall into: from whence, we will come forth,
And roll us dry in gossamour, and roses.
(Is it arrived at ruby?) -- Where I spy
A wealthy citizen, or rich lawyer,
Have a sublimed pure wife, unto that fellow
I Will send a thousand pound, to be my cuckold.

FAC. And I shall carry it?

MAM. No. I Will have no bawds,
But fathers, and mothers. They will do it best.
Best of all others. And, my flatterers
Shall be the pure, and grauest of Divines,
That I can get for money. My mere fools,
Eloquent burgesses, and then my poets
The same that writ so subtly of the fart,
Whom I will entertain, still, for that subject.
The few, that would give out themselves, to be
Court, and towne-stallions, and, each where, belie
Ladies, who are known most innocent, for them;
Those will I beg, to make me eunuchs of:
And they shall fan me with ten estrich tails
A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
We will be brave, Puff, now we have the medicine.
My meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
Dishes of agate, set in gold, and studded,
With emeralds, sapphires, hiacynths, and rubies.
The tongues of carpes, dormise, and camels heels,
Boiled in the spirit of SOL, and dissolved pearl,
(APICIVS diet, against the epilepsie)
And I will eat these broaths, with spoones of amber,
Headed with diamant, and carbuncle.
My footboy shall eat phesants, caluerd salmons,
Knots, godwits, lamprey's: I my self will have
The beards of barbels, served, in stead of sallades;
Oild mushromes; and the swelling unctuous paps
Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,
Dressed with an exquisite, and poynant sauce;
For which, I Will say unto my cook, there is gold,
Go forth, and be a knight.

FAC. Sir, I Will go look
A little, how it heightens.

MAM. Do. My shirts
I Will have of taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
As cob-webs; and for all my other raiment
It shall be such, as might provoke the Persian;
Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
My gloves of fishes, and birds-skins, perfumed
With gummes of paradise, and eastern air --

SVR. And do'you think to have the stone, with this?

MAM. No, I do think, to have all this, with the stone.

SVR. Why, I have heard, he must be homo frugi,
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortal sin, a very virgin.

MAM. That makes it, sir, he is so. But I buy it.
My venture brings it me. He, honest wretch,
A notable, superstitious, good soul,
Has worn his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
With prayer, and fasting for it: and, sir, let him
Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
Not a profane word, before him: It Is poison.

Act II. Scene III.
MAMMON, SVBTLE, SVRLY, FACE. GOod morrow, father.

SVB. Gentle son, good morrow,
And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?

MAM. An heretic, that I did bring along,
In hope, sir, to convert him.

SVB. Son, I doubt
Yo'are covetous, that thus you meet your time
In The just point: prevent your day, at morning.
This argues something, worthy of a fear
Of importune, and carnal appetite.
Take heed, you do not cause the blessing leave you,
With your vngouern'd have. I should be sorry,
To see my labors, now, e'ene at perfection,
Got by long watching, and large patience,
Not prosper, where my love, and zeal has placed 'hem.
Which (heaven I call to witness, with your self,
To whom, I have poured my thoughts) in all my ends,
Have looked no way, but unto public good,
To pious uses, and dear charity,
No grown a prodigy with men. Wherein
If you, my son, should now preuaricate,
And, to your own particular lusts, employ
So great, and catholic a bliss: be sure,
A curse will follow, yea, and overtake
Your subtle, and most secret ways.

MAM. I know, sir,
You shall not need to fear me. I but come,
To ha'you confute this gentleman.

SVR. Who is,
Indeed, sir, somewhat caustiue of belief
Toward your stone: would not be gulled.

SVB. Well, son,
All that I can convince him in, is this,
The work is done: Bright SOL is in his robe.
We have a medicine of the triple Soul,
The glorified spirit. Thanks be to heaven,
And make us worthy of it. Ulen spiegel.

FAC. Anon, sir.

SVB. Look well to the register,
And let your heat, still, lessen by degrees,
To the Aludels.

FAC. Yes, sir.

SVB. Did you look
Of The Bolts-head yet?

FAC. Which on D. sir?

SVB. I,
What Is the complexion?

FAC. Whitish.

SVB. Infuse vinegar,
To draw his volatile substance, and his tincture:
And let the water in Glass E. be feltred,
And put into the Gripes egg. Lute him well;
And leave him closed in balneo.

FAC. I will, sir.

SVR. What a brave language here is? next to canting?

SVB. I'haue another work; you never saw, son,
That, three days since, past the Philosophers wheel,
In the lent heat of Athanor; and's become
Sulphur o'nature.

MAM. But it is for me?

SVB. What need you?
You have enough, in that is, perfect.

MAM. O, but --

SVB. Why, this is couetise!

MAM. No, I assure you,
I shall employ it all, in pious uses,
Founding of colleges, and grammar schools,
Marrying young virgins, building hospitalls,
And now, and then, a church.

SVB. How now?

FAC. Sir, please you,
Shall I not change the feltre?

SVB. Mary, yes.
And bring me the complexion of Glass B.

MAM. Have you another?

SVB. Yes, son, were I assured
Your piety were firm, we would not want
The means to glorify it. But I hope the best:
I mean to tinct C. in sand-heat, to morrow,
And give him imhibition.

MAM. Of white oil?

SVB. No, sir, of red. F. is come over the helm too,
I thank my Maker, in S. MARY'S bath,
And shows lac Virginis. Blessed be heaven.
I sent you of his faeces there, calcined.
Out of that calx, IN have won the salt of MERCVRY.

MAM. By pouring on your rectified water?

SVB. Yes, and reuerberating in Athanor.
How now? What color says it?

FAC. The ground black, sir.

MAM. That Is you crowes-head?

SVR. Your cocks-comb's, is it not?

SVB. No, it is not perfect, would it were the crow.
That work wants something.

SVR. (O, I looked for this.
The hay is a pitching.)

SVB. Are you sure, you loosed 'hem
IN their own menstrue?

FAC. Yes, sir, and then married 'hem,
And put 'hem in a Bolts-head, nipp'd to digestion,
According as you bad me; when I set
The liquor of MARS to circulation,
In the same heat.

SVB. The process, then, was right.

FAC. Yes, by the token, sir, the Retort brake,
And what was saved, was put into the Pellicane,
And signed with HERMES seal.

SVB. I think 'twas so.
We should have a new amalgama.

SVR. (O, this ferret
Is rank as any pole-cat.)

SVB. But I care not.
Let him e'ene die; we have enough beside,
In embrion. H has his white shirt on?

FAC. Yes, sir,
He Is ripe for inceration: He stands warm,
In his ash-fire. I would not, you should let
Any die now, if I might counsel, sir,
For lucks sake to the rest. It is not good.

MAM. He says right.

SVR. I, are you bolted?

FAC. Nay, I know it, sir,
I'haue seen the will fortune. What is some three ounces
Of fresh materials?

MAM. Is It no more?

FAC. No more, sir,
Of gold, to amalgame, with some six of Mercury.

MAM. Away, here is money. What will serve?

FAC. Ask him, sir.

MAM. How much?

SVB. Give him nine pound: you may gi'him ten.

SVR. Yes, twenty, and be cossend, do.

MAM. There it is.

SVB. This needs not. But that you will have it, so,
To see conclusions of all. For two
Of our inferior works, are at fixation.
A third is in ascension. Go your ways.
Have you set the oil of Luna in kemia?

FAC. Yes, sir.

SVB. And the philosopers vinegar?

FAC. I.

SVR. We shall have a sallad.

MAM. When do you make proiection?

SVB. Son, be no hasty, I exalt our medicine,
By hanging him in balneo vaporoso;
And giving him solution; then congeale him;
And then dissolve him; then again congeale him;
For look, how often I iterate the work,
So many times, I add unto his virtue.
As, if at first, one ounce convert a hundred,
After his second loose, he will turn a thousand;
His third solution, ten; his fourth, a hundred.
After his fifth, a thousand thousand ounces
Of any imperfect metal, into pure
Silver, or gold, in all examinations,
As good, as any of the natural mine.
Get you your stuff here, against afternoon,
Your brass, your pewter, and your andirons.

MAM. Not those of iron:

SVB. Yes. You may bring them, too.
We Will change all mettall's.

SVR. I believe you, in that.

MAM. Then I may send my spits?

SVB. Yes, and your racks.

SVR. And dripping-pans, and pot-hangers, and hooks?
Shall he not?

SVB. If he please.

SVR. To be an ass.

SVB. How, sir!

MAM. This gent'man, you must bear withal.
I told you, he had no faith.

SVR. And little hope, sir,
But, much less charity, should I gull my self.

SVB. Why, what have you observed, sir, in our art,
Seems so impossible?

SVR. But your whole work, no more.
That you should hatch gold in a furnace, sir,
As they do eggs, in Egypt!

SVB. Sir, do you
Believe that eggs are hatched so?

SVR. If I should?

SVB. Why, I think that the greater miracle.
No egg, but differs from a chicken, more,
Then mettalls in themselves.

SVR. That cannot be.
The egg's ordained by nature, to that end:
And is a chicken in potentia.

SVB. The same we say of lead, and other mettalls,
Which would be gold, if they had time.

MAM. And that
Our art does further.

SVB. I, for 'twere absurd
To think that nature, in the earth, bred gold
Perfect, in the instant. Something went before.
There must be remote matter.

SVR. I, what is that?

SVB. Mary, we say --

MAM. I, now it heats: stand Father.
Pound him to dust --

SVB. It is, of the one part,
A humide exhalation, which we call
Materia liquida, or the unctuous water;
On the other part, a certain crasse, and viscous
Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
Do make the elementarie matter of gold:
Which is not, yet, propria materia,
But commune to all mettalls, and all stones.
For, where it is forsaken of that moisture,
And has more dryness, it becomes a stone;
Where it retains more of the humid fatness,
It turns to sulphur, or to quicksilver:
Who are the parents of all other mettalls.
Nor can this remote matter, suddenly,
Progress so from extreme, unto extreme,
As to grow gold, and leap ore all the means.
Nature does, first, beget th'imperfect; then
Proceeds she to the perfect. Of that ayrie,
And oily water, mercury is engendered;
Sulphur of the fat, and earthy part: the one
(Which is the last) supplying the place of male,
The other of the female, in all mettalls.
Some do believe hermaphrodeitie,
That both do act, and suffer. But, these two
Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
And, even in gold, they are; for we do find
Seeds of them, by our fire, and gold in them:
And can produce the species of each metal
More perfect thence, then nature does in earth.
Beside, who does not see, in daily practice,
Art can beget bees, hornets, beetles, waspes,
Out of the carcasses, and dung of creatures;
Yea, scorpions, of an herb, being ritely placed:
And these are living creatures, far more perfect,
And excellent, then mettalls.

MAM. Well said, father!
Nay, if he take you in hand, sir, with an argument,
He Will bray you in a mortar.

SVR. 'Pray you, sir, stay.
Rather, then I Will be brai'd, sir, I Will believe,
That Alchemie is a pretty kind of game,
Somewhat like tricks of the cards, to cheat a man,
With charming.

SVB. Sir?

SVR. What else are all your terms,
Whereon no one o'your writers grees with other?
Of your elixir, your lac virginis,
Your stone, your medicine, and your chrysosperme,
Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercury,
Your oil of height, your tree of life, your blood,
Your marchesite, your tutie, your magnesia,
Your toade, your crow, your dragon, and your panthar,
Your sun, your moon, your firmament, your adrop,
Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heautarit,
And then, your red man, and your white woman,
With all your broths, your menstrues, and materials,
Of piss, and egge-shells, women's terms, man's blood,
Hair of the head, burnt clouts, chalk, merds, and clay,
Poulder of bones, scalings of iron, glass,
And worlds of other strange ingredients,
Would burst a man to name?

SVB. And all these, named,
Intending but one thing: which art our writers
Used to obscure their art.

MAM. Sir, so I told him,
Because the simple idiot should not learn it,
And make it vulgar.

SVB. Was not all the knowledge
Of the Egyptians writ in mystic symboles?
Speak not the Scriptures, often, in parables?
Are not the choicest fables of the Poets,
That were the fountains, and first springs of wisdom,
Wrapped in perplexed allegories?

MAM. I urged that,
And cleared to him, that SISIPHVS was damned
To roll the ceaseless stone, only, because
Dol is seen. He would have made ours common. Who is this?

SVB. God's precious -- What do you mean? Go in, good lady,
Let me entreat you. Where Is this varlet?

FAC. Sir?

SVB. You very knave! do you use me, thus?

FAC. Wherein, sir?

SVB. Go in, and see, you traitor. Go.

MAM. Who is it, sir?

SVB. Nothing, sir. Nothing.

MAM. What Is the matter? good, sir!
I have not seen you thus distemp'red. Who is it?

SVB. All arts have still had, sir, their adversaries,
But ours the most ignorant. What now?

FAC. 'Twas not m;y fault, sir, she would speak with you.

SVB. Would she, sir? Follow me.

MAM. Stay, Lungs.

FAC. I dare not, sir.

MAM. How! 'Pray thee stay?

FAC. She Is mad, sir, and sent hither --

MAM. Stay man, what is she?

FAC. A lords sister, sir.
(He Will be mad too.

MAM. I warrant thee.) Why sent hither?

FAC. Sir, to be cured.

SVB. Why, rascal!

FAC. Lo you. Here, sir.

MAM. 'Fore-god, a BRADAMANTE, a brave piece.

SVR. Heart, this is a bawdy house! I Will be burnt else.

MAM. O, by this light, no. Do not wrong him. H'is
Too scrulous, that way. It is his vice.
No, h'is a rare physician, do him right.
An excellent Paracelsian! and has done
Strange cures with mineral physic. He deals all
With spirits, he. He will not hear a word
Of GALEN, or his tedious recipe's.
How now, Lungs!

FAC. Softly, sir, speak softly. I meant
To have told your worship all. This must not hear.

MAM. No, he will not be gulled; let him alone.

FAC. You Are very right, sir, she is a most rare scholar;
And is gone mad, with studying BRAVGHTONS works.
If you but name a word, touching the Hebrew,
She falls into her fit, and will discourse
So learnedly of genealogies,
As you would run mad, too, to hear her, sir.

MAM. How might one do to have conference with her, Lungs?

FAC. O, diverse have run mad upon the conference.
I do not know, sir: I am sent in have,
To fetch a violl.

SVR. Be not gulled, sir MAMMON.

MAM. Wherein? 'Pray ye, be patient.

SVR. Yes, as you are.
And trust confederate knaves, and bawdes, and whores.

MAM. You are too foul, believe it. Come, here, Ulen.
One word.

FAC. I dare not, in good faith.

MAM. Stay, knave.

FAC. H'is extreme angry, that you saw her, sir.

MAM. Drink that. What is she, when she is out of her fit?

FAC. O, the most affablest creature, sir! so merry!
So pleasant! she will mount you up, like quicksilver,
Over the helm; and circulate, like oil,
A very vegetall: discourse of state,
Of mathematiques, bawdry, any thing --

MAM. Is she no way accessible? no means,
No trick, to give a man a taste of her -- wit --
Or so? -- Ulen.

FAC. I Will come to you again, sir.

MAM. SVRLY, I did not think, one of your breeding
Would traduce personages of worth.

SVR. Sir EPICVRE,
Your friend to use: yet still, loath to be gulled.
I do not like your philosophical bawdes.
Their stone is lechery enough, to pay for,
Without this bait.

MAM. 'Hart, you abuse your self.
I know the lady, and her friends, and means,
The original of this disaster. Her brother
H'as told me all.

SVR. And yet, you n'ere saw her
Till now?

MAM. O, yes, but I forgot. I have (believe it)
One of the trecherou'st memories, I do think,
Of all mankind.

SVB. What call you her, brother?

MAM. My lord --
He wi' not have his name known, now I think on 't.

SVR. A very treacherous memory!

MAM. OF my faith --

SVR. Tut, if you have it not about you, pass it,
Till we meet next.

MAM. Nay, by this hand, 't is true.
He Is one I honor, and my noble friend,
And I respect his house.

SVR. Heart! can it be,
That a grave sir, a rich, that has no need,
A wife sir, too, at other times, should thus
With his own oaths, and arguments, make hard means
To gull himself? And, this be your elixir,
Your lapis mineralis, and your lunarie,
Give me your honest trick, yet, at primero,
Or gleeke; and take your lutum sapientis,
Your menstruum simplex: I Will have gold, before you,
And, with less danger of the quicksilver;
Or the hot sulphur.

FAC. Here Is one from Captain FACE, sir,
Desires you meet him in the Temple-church,
Some half hour hence, and upon earnest business.
SIr, if you please to quit us, now; and come,
Again, within two hours: you shall have
My master busy examining of the works;
and I will steal you in, unto the party,
That you may see her converse. Sir, shall I say,
You Will meet the Captains worship?

SVR. Sir, I will.
But, by attorney, and to a second purpose.
Now, I am sure, it is a bawdy house;
I Will swear it, were the Marshall here, to thank me:
The naming this Commander, does confirm it.
Don FACE! Why, h' is the most autentique dealer
IN these commodities! The Superintendent
To all, the queinter traffiquers, in town.
He is their Visiter, and does appoint
Who lies with whom; and at what hour; what price;
Which gown; and in what smock; what fall; what tire.
Him, will I prove, by a third person, to find
The subtilties of this dark labyrinth:
Which, if I do discover, dear sir MAMMON,
You Will give your poor friend leave, though no Philosopher,
To laugh: for you that are, it is thought, shall weep.

FAC. Sir. He does pray, you will not forget.

SVR. I will not, sir.
Sir EPICVRE, I shall leave you?

MAM. I follow you, straight.

FAC. But do so, good sir, to avoid suspicion.
This gent'man has a par'lous head.

MAM. But will thou, Ulen,
Be constant to thy promise?

FAC. As my life, sir.

MAM. And will thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
And say I am a noble fellow?

FAC. O, what else, sir?
And, that you will make her royal; with the stone,
An Empress; and your self king of Bantam.

MAM. Will thou do this?

FAC. Will I, sir?

MAM. Lungs, my Lungs!
I love thee.

FAC. Send your stuff, sir, that my master
May busy himself, about proiection.

MAM. Thou Have witch'd me, rogue: Take, go.

FAC. Your jack, and all, sir.

MAM. Thou art a villain -- I will send my jack;
And the weights too. Slave, I could bite thine ear.
Away, thou do not care for me.

FAC. Not I, sir?

MAM. Come, I was borne to make thee, my good weasell;
Set thee on a bench: and, have thee twirle a chain
With the best lords vermin, of'hem all.

FAC. Away, sir.

MAM. A Count, nay, a Count-palatine --

FAC. Good sir, go.

MAM. Shall not advance thee, better: no, nor faster.

Act II. Scene IIII.
SVBTLE, FACE, DOL. HAs he bit? Has he bit?

FAC. And swallowed too, my SVBTLE.
I have given him line, and now he plays, I faith.

SVB. And shall we twitch him?

FAC. Thorough both the gills.
A wench is a rare bait, with which a man
No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.

SVB. DOL, my lord WHA'TS'HVMS sister, you must now
Bear your self statelich.

DOL. O, let me alone.
I Will not forget my race, I warrant you.
I Will keep my distance, laugh, and talk aloud;
Have all the tricks of a proud sciruy lady,
And be as rude'as her woman.

FAC. Well said, Sanguine.

SVB. But will he send his andirons?

FAC. His jack too;
And's iron shooing-horne: I have spoke to him. Well,
I must not loose my wary gamster, yonder.

SVB. O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gulled?

FAC. I, if I can strike a fine hook into him, now,
The Temple-church, there I have cast mine angle.
Well, pray for me. I Will about it.

SVB. One knock. What, more gudgeons!
DOL, scout, scout; stay FACE, you must go to the door:
'Pray god, it be my Anabaptist. Who is it, DOL?

DOL. I know him not. He looks like a gold-end-man.

SVB. Gods so! it is he, he said he would send. What call you him?
The sanctified Elder, that should deal
For MAMMONS jack, and andirons! Let him in.
Stay, help me of, first, with my gown. Away
Ma-dame, to your withdrawing chamber. Now,
In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
Of Amsterdam, the exiled Saints: that hope
To raise their discipline, by it. I must use him
In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.

Act II. Scene V.
SVBTLE, FACE, ANANIAS. WHere is my drudge?

FAC. Sir.

SVB. Take away the recipient,
And rectify your menstrue, from the phlegma.
Then power it, of the Sol, in the cucurbite,
And let'hem macerate, together.

FAC. Yes, sir.
And save the ground?

SVB. No. Terra damnata
Must not have entrance, in the work. Who are you?

ANA. A faithful Brother, if it please you.

SVB. What Is that?
A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius artis?
Can you sublime, and dulcefie? calcine?
Know you the sapor pontick? sapor slipstick?
Or, what is homogene, or heterogene?

ANA. I understand no heathen language, truly.

SVB. Heathen, you KNIPPER-DOLING? Is Ars sacra,
Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
Or the pamphysick, or panarchick knowledge,
A heathen language?

ANA. Heathen Greek, I take it.

SVB. How? heathen Greek?

ANA. All Is heathen, but the Hebrew.

SVB. Sirah, my varlet, stand you forth, and speak to him
Like a Philosopher: Answer, in the language.
Name the vexations, and the martyrizations
Of mettalls, in the work.

FAC. Sir, Putrefaction,
Solution, Ablution, Sublimation,
Cohobations, Calcination, Ceration, and
Fixation.

SVB. This is heathen Greek, to you, now?
And when comes Vivification?

FAC. After Mortification.

SVB. What Is Cohobation?

FAC. 'T is the pouring on
Your Aqua Regis, and then drawing him off,
To the trine circle of the seven spheres.

SVB. What Is the proper passion of mettalls?

FAC. Malleation.

SVB. What Is your vltimum supplicium auri?

FAC. Antimonium.

SVB. This's heathen Greek, to you? And, what is your Mercury?

FAC. A very fugitive, he will be gone, sir.

SVB. How know you him?

FAC. By his viscositie,
His oleositie, and his suscitabilitie.

SVB. How do you sublime him?

FAC. With the calce of egge-shels,
White marble, talck.

SVB. Your magisterium, now?
What Is that?

FAC. Shifting, sir, your elements,
Dry into cold, cold into moist, moist into hot, hot into dry.


SVB. This's heathen Greek to you, still?
Your lapis philosophicus?

FAC. It Is a stone, and not
A stone; a spirit, a soul, and a body:
Which, if you do dissolve, it is dissolved,
If you coagulate, it is coagulated,
If you make it to fly, it flies.

SVB. Enough.
This's heathen Greek, to you? What are you, sir?

ANA. Please you, a servant of the exiled Brethren,
That deal with widows, and with orphans goods;
And make it a just account, unto the Saints:
A Deacon.

SVB. O, you are sent from master WHOLESOME,
Your teacher?

ANA. From TRIBVLATION WHOLESOME,
Our very zealous Pastor.

SVB. Good. I have
Some orphans goods to come here.

ANA. Of what kind, sir?

SVB. Pewter, and brass, andirons, and kitchen ware,
Mettalls, that we must use our medicine on:
Wherein the Brethren may have a penn'orth.
For ready money.

ANA. Were the orphans parents
Sincere professors?

SVB. Why do you ask?

ANA. Because
We then are to deal justly, and give (in truth)
Their vtomost value.

SVB. "Slid, you would cossen, else,
And, if their parents were not of the faithful?
I will not trust you, now I think on it,
Till I have talked with your Pastor. Have you brought money
To buy more coals?

ANA. No, surely.

SVB. No? How so?

ANA. The Brethren bid me say unto you, sir.
Surely, they will not venture any more,
Till they may see >proiection.

SVB. How!

ANA. Yo'haue had,
For the instruments, as bricks, and lome, and glasses,
Already thirty pound; and, for materials,
They say, some ninety more: And, they have heard, since,
That oe, at Heidelberg, made it, of an egg,
And a small paper of pin-dust.

SVB. What Is your name?

ANA. My name is ANANIAS.

SVB. Out, the varlet
That cossend the Apostles! Hence, away,
Flee Mischief; had your holy Consistory
No name to send me, of another sound;
Then wicked ANANIAS? Send your Elders,
Hither, to make atonement for you, quickly.
And gi'me satisfaction; or out-goes
The fire: and down the alembekes, and the furnace.
Piger Henricus, or what not. Thou wretch,
Both Sericon, and Bufo, shall be lost,
Tell 'hem. All hope of rooting out the Bishops,
Or the Antichristian Hierarchy shall perish,
If they stay threescore minutes. The Aqueitie,
Terrestie, and Sulphureitie
Shall run together again, an all be annulled
Thou wicked ANANIAS. This will fetch 'hem,
And make 'hem have toward their gulling more.
A man must deal like a rough nurse, and fright
Those, that are froward, to an appetite.

Act II. Scene VI.
FACE, SVBTLE, DRVGGER.
H'Is busy with his spirits, but we will upon him.

SVB. How now! What mates? What Bairards have we here?

FAC. I told you, he would be furious. Sir, here is NAB,
Has brought yo' another old piece of gold, to look on:
(We must appease him. Give it me) and prays you,
You would devise (what is it NAB?)

DRV. A sign, sir.

FAC. I, a good lucky one, a thriuing sign, Doctor.

SVB. I was devising now.

FAC. ('Slight, do not say so,
He will repent he ga' you any more.)
What say you to his constellation, Doctor?
The Balance?

SVB. Not, that way is stale, and common.
A townes-man, borne in Taurus, gives the bull
Or the bulls-head: in Aries, the ram.
A poor device. No, I will have nis name
Formed in some mystic character; whose radij,
Striking the senses of the passers by,
Shall, by a vertuall influence, breed affections,
That may result upon the party ownes it:
As thus --

FAC. NAB!

SVB. He first shall have a bell, that is ABEL;
And, by it, standing one, whose name is DEE,
In a rugg gown; there is D. and Rug, that is DRVG:
And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
There Is DRVGGER, ABEL DRVGGER. That Is his sign.
And here is now mystery, and hieroglyphick!

FAC. ABEL, thou art made.

DRV. Sir, I do thank his worship.

FAC. Six o'thy legs more, will not do it, NAB.
He has brought you a pipe of tobacco, Doctor.

DRV. Yes, sir:
I have another thing, I would impart --

FAC. Out with it, NAB.

DRV. Sir, there is lodged, hard by me,
A rich young widow --

FAC. Good! a bona roba?

DRV. But nineteen, at the most.

FAC. Very good, ABEL.

DRV. Mary, sh'is not in fashion, yet; she wears
A hood: but 't stands a cop.

FAC. No matter, ABEL.

DRV. And, I do, now and then give her a fucus --

FAC. What! do thou deal, NAB?

SVB. I did tell you, Captain.

DRV. And physic too sometime, sir: for which she trusts me
With all her mind. She Is come up here, of purpose
To learn the fashion.

FAC. Good (his match too!) on, NAB.

DRV. And she does strangely long to know her fortune.

FAC. Gods lid, NAB, Send her to the Doctor, hither.

DRV. Yes, I have spoke to her of his worship, already:
But she is afraid, it will be blown abroad
And hurt her marriage.

FAC. Hurt it? It Is the way
To heal it, if 'twere hurt; to make it more
Followed, and sought: NAB, thou shall tell her this.
She Will be more known, more talked of, and your widows
Are never of any price till they be famous;
Their honor is their multitude of suitors:
Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
Thou do not know.

DRV. No, sir, she will never marry
Under a knight. Her brother has made a vow.

FAC. What, and do thou despair, my little NAB,
Knowing, what the Doctor has set down for thee,
And, seeing so many, of the city, dubbed?
One glass o'thy water, with a Madame, I know,
Will have it done,

NAB. What Is her brother? a knight?

DRV. No, sir, a gentleman, newly warm in 'his land, sir,
Scarce cold in his one and twenty; that does govern
His sister, here: and is a man himself
Of some three thousand a year, and is come up
To learn to quarrel, and to live by his wits,
And will go down again, and dye in the country.

FAC. How! to quarrel?

DRV. Yes, sir, to carry quarrels,
As gallants do, and manage 'hem, by line.

FAC. 'Slid, NAB! The Doctor is the only man
In Christendom for him. He has made a table,
With Mathematical demonstrations,
Touching the Art of quarrels. He will give him
An instrument to quarrel by. Go, bring 'hem, both:
Him, and his sister. And, for thee, with her
The Doctor happ'ly may persuade. Go to.
'Shalt give his worship, a new damask suite
Upon the premises.

SVB. O, good Captain.

FAC. He shall,
He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Stay not,
No offers, bring the damask, and the parties.

DRV. I Will try my power, sir.

FAC. And thy will too, NAB.

SVB. It Is good tobacco this! What is it an ounce?

FAC. He Will send you a pound, Doctor.

SVB. O, no.

FAC. He will do it.
It is the gooddest soul. ABEL, about it.
(Thou shall know more anon. Away, be gone.)
A miserable rogue, and lives with cheese,
And has the worms. That was the cause indeed
Why he came now. He dealt with me, in private,
To get a medicine for'hem.

SVB. And shall, sir. This works.

FAC. A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my dear SVBTLE:
We Will eene draw lots, and he, that fails, shall have
The more in goods, the other has in tail.

SVB. Rather the less. For she may be so light
She may want grains.

FAC. I, or be such a burden,
A man would scarce endure her, for the whole.

SVB. Faith, best let us see her first, and then determine.

FAC. Content. But DOL must have no breath on it.

SVB. Mum.
Away, you to your SVRLY yonder, catch him.

FAC. 'Pray god, I have not stayed too long.

SVB. I fear it.

Act III.
Scene I.
TRIBVLATION, ANANIAS. THese chastisements are common to the Saints,
And such rebukes we of the Separation
Must bear, with willing shoulders, as the trialls
Sent forth, to tempt our frailties.

ANA. In pure zeal,
I do not like the man: He is a heathen.
And speaks the language of Canaan, truly.

TRI. I think him a profane person, indeed.

ANA. He bears
The visible mark of the Beast, in his forehead.
And for his Stone, it is a work of darkness,
And, with Philisophie, blinds the eyes of man.

TRI. Good Brother, we must bend unto all means,
That may give furtherance, to the holy cause.

ANA. Which his cannot: The sanctified cause
Should have a sanctified course.

TRI. Not always necessary.
The children of perdition are oft-times,
Made instruments even of the greatest works.
Beside, we should give somewhat to man's nature,
The place he lives in, still about the fire,
And fume of mettalls, that intoxicate
The brain of man, and make him prone to passion.
Where have you greater Atheists, then your Cooks?
Or more profane, or choleric then your Glasse-men?
More Antichristian, then your Bell-founders?
What makes the Devil so deuillish, I would ask you,
Satan, our common enemy, but his being
Perpetually about the fire, and boiling
Brimstone, and arsnike? We must give, I say,
Unto the motives, and the stirrers up
Of humors in the blood. It may be so.
When as the work is done, the stone is made,
This heat of his may turn into a zeal,
And stand up for the beauteous discipline,
Against the menstruous cloth, and ragg of Rome.
We must await his calling, and the coming
Of the good spirit. You did fault, t'vpbraid him
With the Brethrens blessing of Heidelberg, waighing
What need we have, to hasten on the work,
For the restoring of the silenced Saints,
Which never will be, but by the Philosophers stone.
And, so a learned Elder, one of Scotland,
Assured me; Aurum potabile being
The only medicine, for the civil Magistrate,
T'incline him to a feeling of the cause:
And must be daily used, in the disease.

ANA. I have not edified more, truly, by man;
Not, since the beautiful light, first, shone on me:
And I am sad, my zeal has so offended.

TRI. Let us call on him, then.

ANA. The motion's good,
And of the spirit; I will knock first: Peace be within.

Act III. Scene II.
SVBTLE, TRIBVLATION, ANANIAS. O, Are you come? 'Twas time. Your threescore
minutes
Were at the last thread, you see; and down had gone
Furnus acediae, Turris circulatorius:
Lembeke, Bolts-head, Retort, and Pellicane
Had all been cinders. Wicked ANANIAS!

TRI. Sir, be appeased, he is come to humble
Himself in spirit, and to ask your patience,
(...) (...)
SVB. And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
To plate, at Christ-masse --

ANA. Christ-tide, I pray you.

SVB. Yet, ANANIAS?

ANA. I have done.

SVB. Or changing
His parcel guilt, to massy gold. You cannot
But raise you friends. With all, to be of power
To pay an army, in the field, to buy
The king of France, out of his realms; or Spain;
Out of his Indies: What can you not do,
Against lords spiritual, or temporal,
That shall oppone you?

TRI. Verily, it is true.
We may be temporal lords, our selves, I take it.

SVB. You may be any thing, and leave off to make
Long-winded exercises: or suck up,
Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not deny,
But such as are not graced, in a state,
May, for their ends, be adverse in religion,
And get a tune, to call the flock together:
For (to say sooth) a tune does much, with women,
And other phlegmatic people, it is your bell.

ANA. Bells are profane: a tune may be religious.

SVB. No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
'Slight, it shall down: I will not be thus tortured.

TRI. I pray you, sir.

SVB. All shall perish. I have spoke it.

TRI. Let me find grace, sir, in your eyes; the man
He stands corrected: neither did his zeal
(But as your self) allow a tune, some-where.
Which, now, being to'ard the stone, we shall not need.

SVB. No, nor your holy vizard, to win widows
To give you legacies; or make zealous wives
To rob their husbands, for the common cause:
Nor take the start of bonds, broke but one day,
And say, they were forfeited, by providence.
Nor shall you need, ore-night to eat huge meals,
To celebrate your next days fast the better:
The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh. Nor cast
Before your hungry hearers, scrupulous bones,
As whether a Christian may hawke, or hunt;
Or whether, Matrons, of the holy assembly,
May lay their hair out, or wear doublets:
Or have that idol Starch, about their linen.

ANA. It is, indeed, an idol.

TRI. Mind him not, sir.
I do command thee, spirit (of zeal, but trouble)
To peace within him. Pray you, sir, go on.

SVB. Nor shall you need to libell against the Prelates,
And shorten so your ears, against the hearing
Of the next wire-drawne grace. Nor, of necessity,
Rail against plays, to please the Alderman,
Whose daily custard you devour. Nor lie
With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selves,
By names of TRIBVLATION, PERSECVTION,
RESTRAINT, LONG-PATIENCE, and such like, affected
By the whole family, or wood of you,
Only for glory, and to catch the ear
Of the Disciple.

TRI. Truly, sir, they are
Ways, that the godly Brethren have inuente^
For propagation of the glorious cause,
As very notable means, and whereby, also,
Themselves grow soon, and profitably famous.

SVB. O, but the stone, all is idle to'it! nothing!
The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
The divine secret, that does fly in clouds,
From east to west: and whose tradition
Is not from men, but spirits.

ANA. I hate Traditions:
I do not trust them --

TRI. Peace.

ANA. They are Popish, all.
I will not peace. I will not --

TRI. ANANIAS.

ANA. Please the profane, to grieve the godly: I may not.

SVB. Well, ANANIAS, thou shall overcome.

TRI. It is an ignorant zeal, that haunts him, sir.
But truly, else, a very faithful Brother,
A botcher: and a man, by revelation,
That has a competent knowledge of the truth.

SVB. Has he a competent sum, there, in the bagg,
To buy the goods, within? I am made guardian,
And must, for charity, and conscience sake,
Now, see the most be made, for my poor orphane:
Though I desire the Brethren, too, good gayners.
There, they are, within. When you have viewed, and bought'hem,
And taken the inventory of what they are,
They are ready for proiection; there is no more
To do: cast on the medicine, so much silver
As there is tin there, so much gold as brass,
I Will gi'it you in, by weight.

TRI. But how long time,
Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?

SVB. Let me see,
How Is the moon, now? Eight, nine, ten days hence
He will be silver potate; then, three days,
Before he citronise: some fifteen days,
The Magisterium will be perfected.

ANA. About the second day, of the third week,
In the ninth month?

SVB. Yes, my good ANANIAS.

TRI. What will the orphans goods arise to, think you?

SVB. Some hundred marks; as much as filled three carres,
Vnladed now: you will make six millions of 'hem.
But I must have more coals laid in.

TRI. How!

SVB. Another load,
And then we have finished. We must now increase
Our fire to ignis ardens, we are past
Fimus equinus, Balnei, Cineris,
And all those lenter heats. If the holy purse
Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saints
Do need a present sum, I have trick
To melt the pewter, you ^^all buy now, instantly,
And, with a tincture, (...) you as good Dutch dollers,
As any are in Holland.

TRI. Can you so?

SVB. I, and shall bide the third examination.

ANA. It will be joyful tidings to the Brethren.

SVB. But you must carry it, secret.

TRI. I, but stay,
This act of coining, is it lawful?

ANA. Lawful?
We know no Magistrate. Or, if we did,
This's foreign coin.

SVB. It is no coining, sir.
It is but casting.

TRI. Ha? you distinguish well.
Casting of money may be lawful.

ANA. It Is, sir.

TRI. Truly, I take it so.

SVB. There is no scruple,
Sir, to be made of it; believe ANANIAS:
This case of conscience he is studied in.

TRI. I Will make a question of it, to the Brethren.

ANA. The Brethren shall approve it lawful, doubt not.
Where shall't be done?

SVB. For that we will talk, anon.
Knock without. There Is some to speak with me. Go in, I pray you,
And view the parcells. That Is the inventory.
I Will come to you straight. Who is it? FACE! Appear.

Act III. Scene III.
SVBTLE, FACE, DOL. HOw now? Good prise?

FAC. Good pox! Yond' caustiue cheater
Never came on.

SVB. How then?

FAC. I have walked the round,
Till now, and no such thing.

SVB. And have you quit him?

FAC. Quit him? and hell would quit him too, he were happy.
'Slight would you have me stalk like a mill-iade.
All day, for one, that will not yield us grains?
I know him of old.

SVB. O, but to have gulled him,
Had been a maistry.

FAC. Let him go, black Boy,
And turn thee, that some fresh news may possess thee.
A noble Count, a Don of Spain (my dear
Delicious compeere, and my partie-bawd)
Who is come hither, private, for his conscience,
And brought munition with him, six great slopps,
Bigger then three Dutch hoighs, beside round trunkes,
Furnished with pistolets, and pieces of eight,
Will straight be here, my rogue, to have thy bath
(That is the color,) and to make his battry
Upon our DOL, our Castle, our cinque-Port,
Our Dover pire, our what thou will. Where is she?
She must prepare perfumes, delicate linen,
The bath in chief, a banquet, and her wit,
For she must milk his Epididimis.
Where is the Doxie?

SVB. I Will send her to thee:
And but dispatch my brace of little JOHN LEYDENS,
And come again my self.

FAC. Are they within then?

SVB. Numbering the sum.

FAC. How much?

SVB. A hundred marks, Boy.

FAC. Why, this's a lucky day! Ten pounds of MAMMON!
Three of my clarke! A portague of my grocer!
This of the Brethren! beside reuersions,
And states, to come in the widow, and my Count!
My share, to day, will not be bought for forty --

DOL. What?

FAC. Pounds, dainty DOROTHEE, art thou so near?

DOL. Yes, say lord General, how fares our camp?

FAC. As, with the few, that had entrenched themselves
Safe, by their discipline, against a world, DOL:
And laughed, within those trenches, and grew fat
With thinking on the booties, DOL, brought in
Daily, by their small parties. This dear hour,
A doughtie Don is taken, with my DOL;
And thou may make his ransom, what thou will,
My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fettered
With thy fair looks, before he see's thee; and thrown
In a downe-bed, as dark as any dungeon;
Where thou shall keep him waking, with thy drum;
Thy drum, my DOL; thy drum; till he be tame
As the poor black-birds were in the great frost,
Or bees are with a basin: and so hiue him
IN the swan-skin couerlid, and cambrick sheets,
Till he work honey, and wax, my little Gods-guift.

DOL. What is he, General?

FAC. An Adalantado,
A Grande, girl. Was not my DAPPER here, yet?

DOL. No.

FAC. Nor my DRVGGER?

DOL. Neither.

FAC. A pox on 'hem.
They are so long a furnishing! Such stinkards
Would not be seen, upon these festival days.

And gallants, yet. Here Is a young gentleman,
Is borne to nothing, forty marks a year,
Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
And have a fly of the Doctor. He will win you
By irresistable luck, within this fortnight,
Enough to buy a baronie. They will set him
Vpmost, at the Groome-porters, all the Christmasse!
And, for the whole year through, at every place,
Where there is play, present him with the chair;
The best attendance, the best drink, sometimes
Two glasses of canarie, and pay nothing;
The purest linen, and the sharpest knife,
The partrich next his trencher: and, somewhere,
The dainty bed, in private, with the dainty.
You shall have your ordinaries bid for him,
As play houses for a poet; and the master
Pray him, aloud, to name what dish he affects,
Which must be butterd shrimps: and those that drink
To no mouth else, will drink to his, as being
The goodly, president mouth of all the board.

KAS. Do you not gull one?

FAC. 'Od's my life! Do you think it?
You shall have a cast commander, (can but get
In credit with a glouer, or a spurrier,
For some two pair, of eithers ware, aforehand)
Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
Arrive at competent means, to keep himself,
His punke, and naked boy, in excellent fashion.
And be admired for it.

KAS. Will the Doctor teach this?

FAC. He will do more, sir, when your land is gone,
(As men of spirit hate to keep earth long(
In a vacation, when small money is stirring,
And ordinaries suspended till the term,
He Will show a perspectiue, where on one side
You shall behold the faces, and the persons
Of all sufficient young heirs, in town,
Whose bonds are current for commodity;
On the other side, the merchants forms, and others,
(That, without help of any second broker,
(Who would expect a share) will trust such parcels:
In the third square, the very street, and sign
Where the commodity dwells, and does but wait
To be delivered, be it pepper, soap,
Hops, or tobacco, oat-meale, woad, or cheeses.
All which you may so handle, to enjoy,
To your own use, and never stand obliged.

KAS. In Faith! Is he such a fellow?

FAC. Why, NAB here knows him.
And then for making matches, for rich widows,
Young gentlewomen, heirs, the fortunat'st man!
He Is sent too, far, and near, all over England,
To have his counsel, and to know their fortunes.

KAS. Gods will, my suster shall see him.

FAC. I Will tell you, sir,
What he did tell me of NAB. It Is a strange thing!
(By the way you must eat no cheese, NAB, it breeds melancholy:
And that same melancholy breeds worms) but pass it,
He told me, honest NAB, here, was never at tavern,
But once in's life!

DRV. Truth, and no more I was not.

FAC. And, then he was so sick --

DRV. Could he tell you that, too?

FAC. How should I know it?

DRV. In troth we had been a shooting,
And had a piece of fat ram-mutton, to supper,
That lay so heavy of my stomach --

FAC. And he has no head
To bear any wine; for, what with the noise of the fiddlers,
And care of his shop, for he dares keep no servants --

DRV. My head did so ache --

FAC. As he was feign to be brought home,
The Doctor told me. And then, a good old woman --

DRV. (Yes faith, she dwells in Sea-coale-lane) did cure me,
With sodden ale, and pellitorie of the wall:
Cost me but two pence. I had another sickness,
Was worse then that.

FAC. I, that was with the grief
Thou took'st for being sess'd at eighteen pence,
For the water-worke.

DRV. In truth, and it was like
To Have cost me almost my life.

FAC. Thy hair went off?

DRV. Yes, sir, 'twas done for spite.

FAC. Nay, so says the Doctor.

KAS. Pray thee, tabacco-Boy, go fetch my suster,
I Will see this learned Boy, before I go:
And so shall she.

FAC. Sir, he is busy now:
But, if you have a sister to fetch hither,
Perhaps, your own pains may command her sooner;
And he, by that time, will be free.

KAS. I go.

FAC. DRVGGER, she is thine: the damask. (SVBTLE, and I
Must wrestle for her.) Come on, master DAPPER.
You see, how I turn clients, here, away,
To give your cause dispatch. Ha'you performed
The ceremonies were inioyn'd you?

DAP. Yes, of the vinegar,
And the clean shirt.

FAC. It Is well: that shirt may do you
More worship then you think. Your aunt's a fire
But that she will not show it, to have a sight on you.
Ha'you provided for her Graces servants?

DAP. Yes, here are sixe-score EDWARD shillings.

FAC. Good.

DAP. And an old HARRY'S sovereign.

FAC. Very good.

DAP. And three JAMES shillings, and an ELIZABETH groat,

(...)

Act IIII.
Scene I.
FACE, MAMMON, DOL. O, Sir, yo'are come in the only, finest time --

MAM. Where Is master?

FAC. Now preparing for proiection, sir.
Your stuff will b' all changed shortly.

MAM. Into gold?

FAC. To gold, and silver, sir.

MAM. Silver, I care not for.

FAC. Yes, sir, a little to give beggars.

MAM. Where Is the lady?

FAC. At hand, here. I have told her such brave things, of you,
Touching your bounty and your noble spirit --

MAM. Have thou?

FAC. As she is almost in her fit to see you.
But, good sir, no divinity in your conference,
For fear of putting her in rage --

MAM. I warrant thee.

FAC. Six men will not hold her down. And, then
If the old man should hear, or see you --

MAM. Fear not.

FAC. The very house, sir, would run mad. You know it
How scrupulous he is, and violent,
Against the least act of sin. Physic, or Mathematiques,
Poetry, State, or Bawdry (as I told you)
She will endure, and never startle: But
No word of controversy.

MAM. I am schooled, good Ule^.

FAC. And you must praise her house, remember that,
And her nobility.

MAM. Let me, alone:
No Herald, no nor Antiquarie, Lungs,
Shall do it better. Go.

FAC. Why, this is yet
A kind of modern happiness, to have
DOL Common for a great lady.

MAM. Now, EPICVRE,
Heighten thy self, talk to her, all in gold;
Rain her as many showers, as JOVE did drops
Unto his DANAE: Show the God a miser,
Compared with MAMMON. What? the stone will do it.
She shall feel gold, taste gold, hear gold, sleep gold:
Nay, we will concumbere gold. I will be puissant,
And mighty in my talk to her! Here she comes.

FAC. To him, DOL, suckle him. This is the noble knight,
I told your ladyship --

MAM. Madame, with your pardon,
I kiss your vesture.

DOL. Sir, I were vn-ciuill
If I would suffer that, my lip to you, sir.

MAM. I hope, my lord your brother be in health, lady?

DOL. My lord, my brother is, though I no lady, sir.

FAC. (Well said my Guiny-bird.)

MAM. Right noble madame --

FAC. (O, we shall have most fierce idolatry!)

MAM. It Is your prerogative.

DOL. Rather your courtesy.

MAM. Were there naught else t'inlarge your virtues, to me,
These answers speak your breeding, and your blood*

DOL. Blood we boast none, sir, a poor Baron's daughter.

MAM. Poor! and gat you? Profane not. Had your father
Slept all the happy remnant of his life
After that act, lain but there still, and panted,
H' had done enough, to make himself, his issue,
And his posterity noble.

DOL. Sir, although
We may be said to want the guilt, and trappings,
The dress of honor; yet we strive to keep
The seeds, and the materials.

MAM. I do see
The old ingredient, virtue, was not lost,
Nor the drug money, used to make your compound.
There is a strange nobility, in your eye,
This lip, that chin! Me thinks you do resemble
One of the Austriack princes.

FAC. Very like,
Her father was an Irish costar-monger.

MAM. The house of Valois, just, had such a nose.
And such a forehead, yet, the Medici
Of Florence boast.

DOL. Troth, and I have been lik'ned
To all these Princes.

FAC. I Will be sworn, I heard it.

MAM. I know not how! it is not any one,
But even the very choice of all their features.

FAC. I Will in, and laugh.

MAM. A certain touch, or air,
That sparkles a divinity, beyond
An earthly beauty!

DOL. O, you play the courtier.

MAM. Good lady, gi' me leave --

DOL. In faith, I may not,
To mock me, sir.

MAM. To burn in this sweet flame:
The Phoenix never knew a nobler death.

DOL. Nay, now you court the courtier: and destroy
What you would build. This art, sir, in your words,
Calls your whole faith in question.

MAM. By my soul --

DOL. Nay, oaths are made of the same air, sir.

MAM. Nature
Never bestowed upon mortality,
A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
She played the step-dame in all faces, else.
Sweet madame, le' me be particular --

DOL. Particular, sir? I pray you, know your distance.

MAM. In no ill sense, sweet lady, but to ask
How your fair graces pass the hours? I see
Yo'are lodged, here, in the house of a rare man,
An excellent Artist: but, what is that to you?

DOL. Yes, sir. I study here the mathematiques,
And distillation.

MAM. O, I cry your pardon.
H' is a divine instructor! can extract

Act IIII. Scene II.
FACE, SVBTLE, KASTRIL, DAME PLIANT. Do thou not laugh?

SVB. Yes. Are they gone?

FAC. All Is clear.

SVB. The widow is come.

FAC. And your quarrelling disciple?

SVB. I.

FAC. I must to my Captaine-ship again, then.

SVB. Stay, bring 'hem in, first.

FAC. So I meant. What is she?
A Bony-bell?

SVB. I know not.

FAC. We Will draw lots,
You Will stand to that?

SVB. What else?

FAC. O, for a suite,
To fall now, like a cortine: flap.

SVB. To th'dore, man.

FAC. You Will have the first kiss, 'cause I am not ready.

SVB. Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.

FAC. Who would you speak with?

KAS. Where Is the Captain?

FAC. Gone, sir,
About some business.

KAS. Gone?

FAC. He Will return straight.
But master Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.

SVB. Come near, my worshipful Boy, my terrae Fili,
That is, my Boy of land; make thy approches:
Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
And I will serve, and satisfy 'hem. Begin,
Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
Here is my center: Ground thy quarrel.

KAS. You lie.

SVB. How, child of wrath, and anger! the loud lie?
For what, my sudden Boy?

KAS. Nay, that look you too,
I am aforehand.

SVB. O, this's no true Grammar,
And as ill Logic! You must render causes, child,
Your first, and second Intentions, know your canons,
And your divisions, moodes, degrees, and differences,
Your praedicaments, substance, and accident,
Series externe, and interne, with their causes
Efficient, material, formal, final,
And have your elements perfect --

KAS. What is this!
The angry tongue he talks in?

SVB. That false precept,
Of being aforehand, has deceived a number;
And made 'hem enter quarrels, oftentimes,
Before they were aware: and, afterward,
Against their wills.

KAS. How must I do then, sir?

SVB. I cry this lady mercy. She should, first,
Have been saluted. I do call you lady,
Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
He kisses her. My soft, and buxome widow.

KAS. Is she, i-faith?

SVB. Yes, or my art is an egregious liar.

KAS. How know you?

SVB. By inspection, on her forehead,
He kisses her again. And subtlety of her lip, which must be tasted
Often, to make a judgment. 'Slight, she melts
Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
In riuo frontis, tells me, he is no knight.

PLI. What is he then, sir?

SVB. Let me see your hand.
O, your linea Fortunae makes it plain;
And stella, here, in monte Veneris:
But, most of all, iunctura annularis.
He is a soldier, or a man of art, lady:
But shall have some great honor, shortly.

PLI. Brother,
He Is a rare man, believe me!

KAS. Hold your peace.
Here comes the the other rare man. 'Saue you Captain.

FAC. Good master KASTRIL. Is this your sister?

KAS. I, sir.
Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?

FAC. I shall be proud to know you, lady.

PLI. Brother,
He calls me lady, too.

KAS. I, peace. I heard it.

FAC. The Count is come.

SVB. Where is he?

FAC. At the door.

SVB. Why, you must entertain him.

FAC. What'll you do
With these the while?

SVB. Why, have 'hem up, and show 'hem
Some fustian book, or the dark glass.

FAC. Before god,
She is a delicate dab-chick! I must have her.

SVB. Must you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
Come sir, the Captain will come to us presently.
I Will have you to my chamber of demonstrations,
Where I Will show you both the Grammar, and Logic,
And Rhetoric of quarrelling; my whole method,
Drawn out in tables: and my instrument,
That ha^h the several scale upon it, shall make you
Able to quarrel, at a strawes breadth, by Moone-light.
And, lady, I Will have you look in a glass,
Some half an hour, but to clear your eyesight,
Against you see your fortune: which is greater,
Then I may judge upon the sudden, trust me.

Act IIII. Scene III.
FACE, SVBTLE, SVRLY. WHere are you, Doctor?

SVB. I Will come to you presently*

FAC. I will have this same widow, now I have seen her,
On any composition.

SVB. What do you say?

FAC. Have you disposed of them?

SVB. I have sent 'hem up.

FAC. SVBTLE, in troth, I needs must have this widow.

SVB. Is that the matter?

FAC. Nay, but hear me.

SVB. Go to,
If you rebel once, DOL shall know it all.

And scrub'd, and fub'd, dear Don, before you go.
You shall, in faith, my sciruie babioun Don:
Be curried, clawed, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
I will the heartilier go about it now,
And make the widow a punke, so much the sooner,
To be revenged on this impetuous FACE:
The quickly doing of it is the grace.

Act IIII. Scene IIII.
FACE, KASTRIL, DA. PLIANT, SVBTLE, SVRLY. COme lady: I knew, the Doctor would
not leave,
Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.

KAS. To be a Countess, say you? A Spanish Countess, sir.

PLI. Why? is that better then an English Countess?

FAC. Better? 'Slight, make you that a question, lady?

KAS. Nay, she is a fool, Captain, you must pardon her.

FAC. Ask from your courtier, to your innes of court-man,
To your mere millaner: they will tell you all,
Your Spanish iennet is the best horse. Your Spanish
Stoop is the best garb. Your Spanish beard
Is the best cut. Your Spanish ruffes are the best
Wear. Your Spanish Pauin the best dance.
Your Spanish titillation in a glove
The best perfume. And, for your Spanish pike,
And Spanish blade, let your poor Captain speak.
Here comes the Doctor.

SVB. My most honored lady,
(For so I am now to style you, having found
By this my scheme, you are to undergo
An honorable fortune, very shortly.)
What will you say now, if some --

FAC. I have told her all, sir.
And her right worshipful brother, here, that she shall be
A Countess: do not delay 'hem, sir. A Spanish Countess.

SVB. Still, my scarce worshipful Captain, you can keep
No secret. Well, since he has told you, madame,
Do you forgive him, and I do.

KAS. She shall do that, sir.
I Will look to it, it is my charge.

SVB. Well then. Naught rests
But that she fit her love, now, to her fortune.

PLI. Truly, I shall never brook a Spaniard.

SVB. No?

PLI. Never, sin' eighty-eight could I abide 'hem,
And that was some three year before I was borne, in truth.

SVB. Come, you must love him, or be miserable:
Choose, which you will.

FAC. By this good rush, persuade her,
She will cry straw-berries else, within this twelue-month.

SVB. Nay, shads, and mackrell, which is worse.

FAC. Indeed, sir?

KAS. Gods lid, you shall love him, or I Will kick you.

PLI. Why?
I Will do as you will have me, brother.

KAS. Do,
Or by this hand, I Will maull you.

FAC. Nay, good sir,
Be not so fierce.

SVB. No, my enraged child,
She will be ruled. What, when she comes to taste
The pleasures of a Countess! to be courted --

FAC. And kissed, and ruffled!

SVB. I, behind the hangings.

FAC. And then come ^orth in pomp!

SVB. And know her state!

FAC. Of keeping all th'idolaters of the chamber
Barer to her, then at their prayers!

SVB. Is served
Upon the knee!

FAC. And has her pages, huishers,
Footmen, and coaches --

SVB. Her six mares --

FAC. Nay, eight!

SVB. To hurry her through London, to the Exchange,
Bet'lem, the China-houses --

FAC. Yes, and have
The citizens gape at her, and praise her tyres!
And my-lords goose-turd bands, that rides with her!

KAS. Most brave! By this hand, you are not my suster,
If you refuse.

PLI. I will not refuse, brother.

SVR. Que es esto, Sennores, que non se venga?
Esta tardanza me mata!

FAC. It is the Count come!
The Doctor knew he would be here, by his art.

SVB. En gallanta Madama, Don! gallantissima!

SVR. Por todos los dioses, la mas acabada
Hermosura, que he visto en mi vida!

FAC. Is It not a gallant language, that they speak?

KAS. An admirable language! Is It not French?

FAC. No, Spanish, sir.

KAS. It goes like law- French,
And that, they say, is the court-liest language.

FAC. List, sir.

SVR. El Sol ha perdido su lumbre, con el
Resplandor, que trae esta dama. Valga me dios!

FAC. He' admires your sister.

KAS. Must not she make curtsie?

SVB. 'Ods will, she must go to him, man; and kiss him!
It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
To make first court.

FAC. It Is true he tells you, sir:
His art knows all.

SVR. Por que no se acude?

KAS. He speaks to her, I think?

FAC. That he does sir.

SVR. Por el amor de dios, que es esto, que se tarda?

KAS. Nay, see: she will not understand him! Gull.
Noddy.

PLI. What say you brother?

KAS. Ass, my suster,
Go kusse him, as the cunning man would have you,
I Will thrust a pin in your buttocks else.

FAC. O, no sir.

SVR. Sennora mia, mi persona muy indigna esta
All gar a tanta Hermosura.

A peck of coals, or so, which is cold comfort, sir.

MAM. O my voluptuous mind! I am justly punished.

FAC. And so am I, sir.

MAM. Cast from all my hopes --

FAC. Nay, certainties, sir.

MAM. By mine own base affections.

SVB. Subtle seems come to himself. O, the cursed fruits of vice, and lust!

MAM. Good father,
It was my sin. Forgive it.

SVB. Hangs my roof
Over us still, and will not fall, O justice,
Upon us, for this wicked man!

FAC. Nay, look, sir,
You grieve him, now, with staying in his sight:
Good sir, the noble man will come too, and take you,
And that may breed a tragoedie.

MAM. I Will go.

FAC. I, and repent at home, sir. It may be,
For some good penance, you may ha'it, yet,
A hundred pound to the box at Bet'lem --

MAM. Yes.

FAC. For the restoring such as have their wits.

MAM. I Will do it.

FAC. I Will send one to you to receive it.

MAM. Do.
Is no proiection left?

FAC. All flowne, or stinks, sir.

MAM. Will naught be saved, that is good for medicine, think thou?

FAC. I cannot tell, sir. There will be, perhaps,
Something, about the scraping of the shardes,
Will cure the itch: though not your itch of mind, sir.
It shall be saved for you, and sent home. Good sir,
This way: for fear the lord should meet you.

SVB. FACE.

FAC. I.

SVB. Is he gone?

FAC. Yes, and as heavily
As all the gold he hoped for, were in his blood.
Let us be light, though.

SVB. I, as balls, and bound
And hit our heads against the roof for joy:
There Is so much of our care now cast away.

FAC. Now to our Don.

SVB. Yes, your young widow, by this time
Is made a Countess, FACE: Sh' has been in travail
Of a young heir for you.

FAC. Good, sir.

SVB. Off with your case,
And greet her kindly, as a bridegroom should,
After these common hazards.

FAC. Very well, sir.
Will you go fetch Don DIEGO off, the while?

SVB. And fetch him over too, if you will be pleased, sir:
Would DOL were in her place, to pick his pockets now.

FAC. Why, you can do it as well, if you would set to it.
I pray you prove your virtue.

SVB. For your sake, sir.

Act IIII. Scene VI.
SVRLY, DA. PLIANT, SVBTLE, FACE. LAdy, you see into what hands, you are fallen;
Among what a nest of villains! and how near
Your honor was to have caught a certain clap
(Through your credulity) had I but been
So punctually forward, as place, time,
And other circumstance would have made a man:
For yo'are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
I am a gentleman, come here disguised,
Only to find the knaueries of this Citadell,
And where I might have wronged your honor, and have not,
I claim some interest in your love. You are,
They say, a widow, rich: and I am a batcheler,
Worth naught: Your fortunes may make me a man,
As mine have preserved you a woman. Think upon it,
And whether, I have deserved you, or no.

PLI. I will, sir.

SVB. And for these houshold-rogues, let me alone,
To treat with them.

SVB. How does my noble DIEGO?
And my dear madame, Countess? Has the Count
Been courteous, lady? liberal? and open?
Donzell, me thinks you look melancholic,
After your coitum, and scuruy! True-ly,
I do not like the dullness of your eye:
It has a heavy cast, it is vpsee Dutch,
And says you are a lumpish whore-master.
He falls to picking of them. Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.

SVR. Will you, Don bawd, and pick-purse? How now? Reele you?
Stand up sir, you shall find since I am so heavy,
I Will gi' you equal weight.

SVB. Help, murder!

SVR. No, sir.
There Is no such thing intended. A good cart,
And a clean whip shall ease you of that fear.
I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
Do you see? cossened? Where Is your Captain FACE?
That parcell-broker, and whole-bawd, all rascal.

FAC. How, SVRLY!

SVR. O, make your approach, good Captain.
I'haue found, from whence your copper rings, and spoones
Come, now, wherewith you cheat abroad in tauernes.
'Twas here, you learned t'anoint your boot with brimstone,
Then rub men's gold on it, for a kind of touch,
And say 'twas naught, when you had changed the color,
That you might have it for nothing? And this Doctor,

FAC. I know not, NAB: thou shall, if I can help it.
HIERONYMO'S old cloak, ruff, and hat will serve,
Subtle has whisperd with him this while. I Will tell thee more, when thou
bringst 'hem.

ANA. Sir, I know
The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and has spies
Upon their actions: and that this was one
I make no scruple. But the holy Synod
Have been in prayer, and meditation, for it.
And it is revealed no less, to them, then me,
That casting of money is most lawful.

SVB. True.
But here, I cannot do it; if the house
Should chance to be suspected, all would out,
And we be locked up, in the tower, for ever,
To make gold there (for th'state) never come out:
And, then, are you defeated.

ANA. I will tell
This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
That the whole company of the Separation
May join in humble prayer again.

(SVB. And fasting.)

ANA. Yea, for some fitter place. The peace of mind
Rest with these walls.

SVB. Thanks, courteous ANANIAS.

FAC. What did he come for?

SVB. About casting dollers,
Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
A Spanish minister came here to spy,
Against the faithful --

FAC. I conceive. Come SVBTLE,
Thou art so down upon the least disaster!
How would though have done, if I had not helped thee out?

SVB. I thank thee FACE, for the angry Boy, i-faith.

FAC. Who would have looked, it should have been that rascal?
SVRLY? He had died his beard, and all. Well, sir,
Here Is damask come, to make you a suit.

SVB. Where Is DRVGGER?

FAC. He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habit,
I Will be the Count, now.

SVB. But where is the widow?

FAC. Within, with my lords sister: Madame DOL
Is entertayning her.

SVB. By your favor, FACE,
Now she is honest, I will stand again.

FAC. You will not offer it?

SVR. Why?

FAC. Stand to your word,
Or -- here comes

DOL. She knows --

SVB. Yo'are tyrannous still.

FAC. Strict for my right. How now, DOL? Hast'told her,
The Spanish Count will come?

DOL. Yes, but another is come,
You little looked for!

FAC. Who Is that?

DOL. Your master:
The master of the house.

SVB. How, DOL!

FAC. She lies.
This is some trick. Come, leave your quiblins, DOROTHEE.

DOL. Look out, and see.

SVB. Art thou in earnest?

DOL. 'Slight,
Forty of the neighbors are about him, talking.

FAC. It Is he, by this good day.

DOL. 'Twill prove ill day,
For some on us.

FAC. We are undone, and taken.

DOL. Lost, I Am afraid.

SVB. You said he would not come,
While there dyed one a week, within the liberties.

FAC. No: 'twas within the walls.

SVB. Was It so? Cry' you mercy:
I thought the liberties. What shall we do now, FACE?

FAC. Be silent: not a word, if he call, or knock.
I Will into mine old shape again, and meet him,
Of JEREMY, the butler. IN the mean time,
Do you two pack up all the goods, and purchase,
That we can carry in the two trunkes. I Will keep him
Off for to day, if I cannot longer: and then
At night, I Will ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
Where we will meet to morrow, and there we will share.
Let MAMMON'S brass, and pewter keep the cellar:
We Will have another time for that. But, DOL,
'Pray thee, go heat a little water, quickly,
SVBTLE must shave me. All my Captains beard
Must off, to make me appear smooth JEREMY.
You Will do it?

SVB. Yes, I Will shave you, as well as I can.

FAC. And not cut my throat, but trim me?

SVB. You shall see, sir.

Act V.
Scene I.
LOVE-WIT, NEIGHBOVRS. HAs there been such resort, say you?

NEI. 1. Daily, sir.

NEI. 2. And nightly, too.

NEI. 3. I, some as brave as lords.

NEI. 4. Ladies, and gentlewomen.

NEI. 5. Citizens wives.

NEI. 1. And knights.

NEI. 6. In coches.

NEI. 2. Yes, and oyster-women.

NEI. 1. Beside other galla^ts.

NEI. 3. Sailors wives.

NEI. 4. Tabacco-men.

NEI. 5. Another Pimlico!

LOV. What should my knave advance,
To draw this company? He hung out no banners
Of a strange Calfe, with five legs, to be seen?
Or a huge Lobster, with six claws?

NEI. 6. No, sir.

NEI. 3. We had gone in then, sir.

LOV. He has no gift
Of teaching in the nose, that ere I knew of!
You saw no Bills set up, that promised cure
Of agues, or the toothache?

NEI. 2. No such thing, sir.

LOV. Nor heard a drum struck, for Babiouns, or Puppets?

NEI. 5. Neither, sir.

LOV. What device should he bring forth now!
I love a teeming wit, as I love my nourishment.
'Pray god he have not kept such open house,
That he has sold my hangings, and my bedding:
I left him nothing else. If he have eat 'hem,
A plague of the moath, say I. Sure he has got
Some bawdy pictures, to call all this ging;

SVR. Should be to day pronounced, to all your friends.
And where be your andirons now? and your brass pots?
That should have been golden flaggons, and great wedges?

MAM. Let me but breath. What! They have shut their doors,
Mammon and Surly knock. Methinks!

SVR. I, now, it is holy day with them.

MAM. Rogues,
Coseners, impostors, bawds.

FAC. What mean you, sir?

MAM. To enter if we can.

FAC. Another man's house?
Here is the owner, sir. Turn you to him,
And speak your business.

MAM. Are you, sir, the owner?

LOV. Yes, sir.

MAM. And are those knaves, within, your cheaters?

LOV. What knaves? what cheaters?

MAM. SVBTLE, and his Lungs.

FAC. The gentleman is distracted, sir! No lungs,
Nor lights have been seen here these three weeks, sir,
Within these doors, upon my word!

SVR. Your word,
Groom arrogant?

FAC. Yes, sir, I am the housekeeper,
And know the keys have not been out of my hands.

SVR. This's a new FACE?

FAC. You do mistake the house, sir!
What sign was it at?

SVR. You rascal! This is one
OF the confederacy. Come, let us get officers,
And force the door.

LOV. 'Pray you stay, gentlemen.

SVR. No, sir, we will come with warrant.

MAM. I, and then,
We shall have your doors open.

LOV. What means this?

FAC. I cannot tell, sir!

NEI. 1. These are two of the gallants,
That we do think we saw.

FAC. Two of the fools?
You talk as idly as they. Good faith, sir,
I think the Moon has cras'd 'hem all! (O me,
The angry Boy come too? He Will make a noise,
And nere away till he have betrayed us all.)

KAS. Kastrill knocks. What rogues, bawds, slaves, you will open the door anon,
Punque, cocatrice, my suster. By this light
I Will fetch the marshall to you. You are a whore,
To keep your castle --

FAC. Who would you speak with, sir?

KAS. The bawdy Doctor, and the cosening Captain,
And PVS my suster.

LOV. This is something, sure!

FAC. Upon my trust, the doors were never open, sir.

KAS. I have heard all their tricks, told me twice over,
By the fat knight, and the lean gentleman.

LOV. Here comes another.

FAC. ANANIAS too?
And his Pastor?

TRI. The doors are shut against us.

ANA. They beat too, at the door. Come forth, you seed of sulphur, sons of
fire,
Your stench, it is broke forth: abomination
Is in the house.

KAS. I, my suster's there.

ANA. The place,
It is become a cage of unclean birds.

KAS. Yes, I will fetch the scauenger, and the constable.

TRI. You shall do well.

ANA. We Will join, to weed them out.

KAS. You will not come then? punque, device, my suster!

ANA. Call her not sister. She is a harlot, verily.

KAS. I Will raise the street.

LOV. Good gentlemen, a word.

ANA. Satan, avoid, and hinder not our zeal.

LOV. The world's turned Bet'lem.

FAC. These are all broke loose,
Out of S. KATHER'NES, where they use to keep,
The better sort of mad-folkes.

NEI. 1. All these persons
We saw go in, and out, here.

NEI. 2. Yes, indeed, sir.

NEI. 3. These were the parties.

FAC. Peace, you drunkards. Sir,
I wonder at it! Please you, to give me leave
To touch the door, I Will try, an'the lock be changed.

LOV. It mazes me!

FAC. Good faith, sir, I believe,
There Is no such thing. It Is all deceptio visus.
Would I could get him away.

DAP. Dapper cries out within. Master Captain, master Doctor.

LOV. Who Is that?

FAC. (Our clark within, that I forgot!) I know not, sir.

DAP. For gods sake, when will her Grace be at leisure?

FAC. Ha!
Illusions, some spirit of the air: (his gag is melted,
And now he sets out the throat.)

DAP. I am almost stiffled --

(FAC. Would you were altogether.)

LOV. It Is in the house.
Ha! List.

FAC. Believe it, sir, in the air!

LOV. Peace, you --

DAP. Mine aunts Grace does not use me well.

SVB. You fool,
Peace, you will mar all.

FAC. Or you will else, you rogue.

LOV. O, is it so? Then you converse with spirits!
Come sir. No more o'your tricks, good JEREMY,
The truth, the shortest way.

FAC. Dismiss this rabble, sir.
What shall I do? I am caught.

LOV. Good neighbors,
I thank you all. You may depart. Come sir,
You know that I am an indulgent master:
And therefore, conceal nothing. What Is your medicine,
To draw so many several sorts of wild-fowle?

FAC. Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit:
(But here is no place to talk on it in the street.)
Give me but leave, to make the best of my fortune,
And only pardon me the abuse of your house:
It Is all I beg. I Will help you to a widow,
In recompense, that you shall gi' me thanks for,
Will make you seven years younger, and a rich one.
It Is but your putting on a Spanish cloak,
I have her within. You need not fear the house,
It was not visited.

LOV. But by me, who came
Sooner then you expected.

FAC. It is true, sir.
'Pray you forgive me.

LOV. Well: let us see your widow.

Act V. Scene IIII.
SVBTLE, DAPPER, FACE, DOL. HOw! have you eaten your gag?

DAP. Yes faith, it crumbled
Away in my mouth.

SVB. You have spoiled all then.

DAP. No,
I hope my aunt of Faery will forgive me.

SVB. Your aunt's a gracious lady: but in troth
You were to blame.

DAP. The fume did overcome me,
And I did do it to stay my stomach. 'Pray you
So satisfy her Grace. Here comes the Captain.

FAC. How now! Is his mouth down?

SVB. I! he has spoken!

FAC. (A pox, I heard him, and you too.) He Is vn-done, then.
(I have been feign to say, the house is haunted
With spirits, to keep churl back.

SVB. And have thou done it?

FAC. Sure, for this night.

SVB. Why, then triumph, and sing
Of FACE so famous, the precious king
Of present wits.

FAC. Did you not hear the coil,
About the door?

SVB. Yes, and I dwindled with it.)

FAC. Show him his aunt, and let him be dispatched:
I Will send her to you.

SVB. Well sir, your aunt her Grace,
Will give you audience presently, on my suit,
And the Captains word, that you did not eat your gag,
In any contempt of her Highness.

DAP. Not I, in troth, sir.

SVB. Dol like the Queen of Faery. Here she is come. Down o'your knees, and
wriggle:
She has a stately presence. Good. Yet nearer,
And bid, God save you.

DAP. Madame.

SVB. And your aunt.

DAP. And my most gracious aunt, god save your Grace.

DOL. Nephew, we thought to have been angry with you:
But that sweet face of yours, has turned the tide,
And made it flow with joy, that eb'd of love.
Arise, and touch our velvet gown.

SVB. The skirts,
And kiss 'hem. So.

DOL. Let me now stroke that head,
Much, nephew, shall thou win; much shall thou spend;
Much shall thou give away: much shall thou lend.

SVB. (I, much, indeed.) Why do you not thank her Grace?

DAP. I cannot speak, for joy.

SVB. See, the kind wretch!
Your Graces kins-man right.

DOL. Give me the Bird.
Here is your Fly in a purse, about your neck, cosen,
Wear it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
On your right wrist --

SVB. Open a vein, with a pin,
And let it suck but once a week: till then,
You must not look on it.

DOL. No. And, kins-man,
Bear your self worthy of the blood you come on.

SVB. Her grace would ha'you eat no more Wool-sack pies,
Nor Dagger frume'ty.

DOL. Nor break his fast,
In heaven, and hell.

SVB. She Is with you every where!
Nor play with Costar-mongers, at mum-chance, tray-trip.
God make you rich, (when as your aunt has done it:) but keep
The gallant'st company, and the best games --

DAP. Yes, sir.

SVB. Gleeke and primero: and what you get, be true to us.

DAP. By this hand, I will.

SVB. You may bring's a thousand pound,
Before to morrow night, (if but three thousand,
Be stirring) an' you will.

DAP. I swear, I will then.

SVB. Your Ply will learn you all games.

FAC. Have you done there?

SVB. Your grace will command him no more duties?

DOL. No:
But come, and see me often. I may chance
To leave him three or four hundred chests of treasure,
And some twelve thousand acres of Faerie land:
If he game well, and comely, with good gamesters.

SVB. There Is a kind aunt! kiss her departing part.
But you must sell you forty mark a year, now:

DAP. I, sir, I mean.

SVB. Or, gi't away: pox on it.

FAC. I Will gi't mine aunt. I Will go and fetch the writings.

SVB. It Is well, away.

FAC. Where Is SVBTLE?

SVB. Here. What news?

FAC. DRVGGER is at the door, go take his suite,
And bid him fetch a Parson, presently:
Say, he shall marry the widow. Thou shall spend
A hundred pound by the service! Now, queen DOL,
Have you packed up all?

DOL. Yes.

FAC. And how do you like
The lady PLYANT?

DOL. A good dull innocent.

SVB. Here Is your HIERONIMO'S cloak, and hat.

FAC. Give me 'hem.

SVB. And the ruff too?

FAC. Yes, I Will come to you presently.

SVB. Now, he is gone about his project, DOL,
I told you of, for the widow.

DOL. It Is direct
Against our articles.

SVB. Well, we will fit him, wench.
Have thou gulled her of her jewels, or her bracelets?

DOL. No, but I will do it.

SVB. Soon at night, my DOLLY,
When we are shipped, and all our goods aboard,
Eastward for Ratcliffe; we will turn our course
To Brainford, westward, if thou'saist the word:
And take our leaves of this ore-weaning rascal,
This peremtorie FACE.

DOL. Content, I Am weary of him.

SVB. Tho 'hast cause, when the slave will run a wiuing, DOL,
Against the instrument, that was drawn between us.

DOL. I Will pluck his bird as bare as I can.

SVB. Yes, tell her,
She must by any means, address some present
To the cunning man; make him amends, for wronging
His art with her suspicion; send a ring;

Or chain of pearl; she will be tortured else
Extremely in her sleep, say: and have strange things
Come to her. Will thou?

DOL. Yes.

SVB. My fine flitter-mouse,
My bird of the night; we will tickle it at the pigeons,
When we have all, and may vn-lock the trunkes,
They kiss. And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine --

FAC. What now, a billing?

SVB. Yes, a little exalted
In the good passage of our stock-affaires.

FAC. DRVGGER has brought his Parson, take him in, SVBTLE,
And send NAB back again, to wash his face.

SVB. I will: and shave himself?

FAC. If you can get him.

DOL. You are hot upon it, FACE, what ere it is!

FAC. A trick, that DOL shall spend ten pound a month by.
Is he gone?

SVB. The Chaplain waits you in the hall, sir.

FAC. I Will go bestow him.

DOL. He Will now marry her, instantly.

SVB. He cannot, yet, he is not ready. Dear DOL,
Cosen her of all thou can. To deceive him
Is no deceit, but justice, that would break
Such an inextricable tie as ours was.

DOL. Let me alone to fit him.

FAC. Come, my venturers,
You have packed up all? Where be the trunkes? Bring forth.

SVB. Here.

FAC. Let Us see 'hem. Where Is the money?

SVB. Here,
In this.

FAC. MAMMONS ten pound: eight score before.
The Brethrens money, this. DRVGGERS, and DAPPERS.
What paper's that?

DOL. The jewel of the waiting maids,
That stole it from her lady, to know certain --

FAC. If she should have precedence of her mistress?

DOL. Yes.

FAC. What box is that?

SVB. The fish-wiues rings, I think:
And th'ale-wiues single money. Is It not DOL?

DOL. Yes: and the whistle, that the saylors wife
Brought you, to know, and her husband were with WARD.

FAC. We Will wet it to morrow: and our siluer-beakers,
And tavern cups. Where be the French petti-coats,
And girdles, and hangers?

SVB. Here, in the trunk,
And the bolts of lawne.

FAC. Is DRVGGERS damask, there?
And the tobacco?

SVB. Yes.

FAC. Give me the keys.

DOL. Why you the keys!

SVB. No matter, DOL: because
We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.

FAC. It Is true, you shall not open them, indeed:
Nor have 'hem forth. Do you see? Not forth, DOL.

DOL. No!

FAC. No, my smock-rampant. The right is, my master
Knows all, has pardoned me, and he will keep 'hem,
Doctor, it is true (you look) for all your figures:
I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore, good partners,
Both he, and she, be satisfied: for, here
Determines the indenture tripartite,
Twixt SVBTLE, DOL, and FACE. All I can do
Is to help you over the wall, of the backside;
Or lend you a sheet, to save your velvet gown, DOL.
Here will be officers, presently; bethink you,
Of some course suddenly to escape the dock:
Some knock. For thither you will come else. Hark you, thunder.

SYB. You are a precious fiend!

OFF. Open the door.

FAC. DOL, I am sorry for thee i-faith. But hearst thou?
It shall go hard, but I will place thee some-where:
Thou shall have my letter to mistress AMO.

DOL. Hang you --

FAC. Or madame Caesarean.

DOL. Pox upon you, rogue,
Would I had but time to beat thee.

FAC. SVBTLE,
Let Us know where you set up next; I Will send you
A customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
What new course ha'you?

SVB. Rogue, I Will hang my self:
That I may walk a greater devil, then thou,
And haunt thee in the flock-bed, and the buttery.

Act V. Scene V.
LOVE-WIT, OFFICERS, MAMMON, SVRLY, FACE, KASTRIL, ANANIAS, TRIBVLATION,
DRVGGER, DA. PLIANT. WHat do you mean, my masters?

MAM. Open your door,
Cheaters, bawds, coniurers.

OFF. Or we will break it open.

LOV. What warrant have you?

OFF. Warrant enough, sir, doubt not:
If you will not open it.

LOV. Is there an officer, there?

OFF. Yes, two, or three for failing.

LOV. Have but patience,
And I will open it straight.

FAC. Sir, have you done?
Is it a marriage? perfect?

LOV. Yes, my brain.

FAC. Off with your ruff, and cloak then, be your self, sir.

SVR. Down with the door.

KAS. 'Slight, ding it open.

LOV. Hold.
Hold gentlemen, what means this violence?

MAM. Where is this Colliar?

SVR. And my Captain FACE?

MAM. These day-Owles.

SVR. That are birding in men's purses.

MAM. Madame Suppository.

KAS. Doxey, my sister.

ANA. Locusts
Of the foul pit.

TRI. Profane as BELL, and the Dragon.

ANA. Worse then the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.

LOV. Good gentlemen, hear me. Are you officers,
And cannot stay this violence?

OFF. Keep the peace.

LOV. Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom do you seek?

TRI. Be patient ANANIAS.

ANA. I am strong,
And will stand up, well girt, against an host,
That threaten GAD in exile.

LOV. I shall send you
To Amsterdam, to your cellar.

ANA. I will pray there,
Against thy house: may dogs defile thy walls,
And waspes, and hornets breed beneath thy roof,
This seat of false-hood, and this cave of cos'nage.

LOV. Another too?

DRV. Not I sir, I am no Brother.

LOV. Drueger enters, and he beats him away. Away you HARRY NICHOLAS, do you
talk?

To the Parson.
FAC. No, this was ABEL DRVGGER. Good sir, go,
And satisfy him; tell him, all is done:
He stayed too long a washing of his face.
The Doctor, he shall hear of him at Westchester;
And of the Captain, tell him at Yarmouth: or
Some good port-towne else, lying for a wind.
If you get off the angry Child, now, sir --

KAS. To his sister. Come on, you yew, you have matched most sweetly, have you
not?
Did not I say, I would never have you tupt
But by a dubbed Boy, to make you a lady- Tom?
'Slight, you are a mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
Death, mun' you marry with a pox?

LOV. You lie, Boy;
As sound as you: and I am aforehand with you.

KAS. Anon?

LOV. Come, will you quarrel? I will feize you, sirrah.
Why do you not buckle to your tools?

KAS. Gods light!
This is a fine old Boy, as ere I saw!

LOV. What, do you change your copy, now? Proceed,
Here stands my dove: stoop at her, if you dare.

KAS. 'Slight I must love him! I cannot choose, i-faith!
And I should be hanged for it. Suster, I protest,
I honor thee, for this match.

LOV. O, do you so, sir?

KAS. Yes, and thou can take tobacco, and drink, old Boy,
I Will give her five hundred pound more, to her marriage,
Then her own state.

LOV. Fill a pipe-full, JEREMY.

FAC. Yes, but go in, and take it, sir.

LOV. We will.
I will be ruled by thee in any thing, JEREMY.

KAS. 'Slight, thou art not hide-bound! thou art a Iouy' Boy!
Come let us in, I pray thee, and take our whiffes.

LOV. Whiffe in with your sister, brother Boy. That master
That had received such happiness by a servant,
In such a widow, and with so much wealth,
Were very ungrateful, if he would not be
A little indulgent to that servants wit,
And help his fortune, though with some small strain
Of his own candor. Therefore, gentlemen,
And kind Spectators, if I have out-stript
An old man's gravity, or strict canon, think
What a young wife, and a good brain may do:
Stretch ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
Speak for thy self, knave.

FAC. So I will, sir. Gentlemen,
My part a little fell in this last Scene,
Yet 'twas decorum. And though I am clean
Got off, from SVBTLE, SVRLY, MAMMON, DOL,
Hot ANANIAS, DAPPER, DRVGGER, all
With whom I traded; yet I put my self
On you, that are my country: and this pelf,
Which I have got, if you do quit me, rests
To feast you often, and inuit new ghests.

THE END.
This Comoedie was first acted, in the year 1610.

By the Kings Majesty's SERVANTS.

The principal Comoedians were, RIC. BVRBADGE. IOH. LOWIN. HEN. CONDEL. ALEX.
COOK. ROB. ARMIN. IOH. HEMINGS. WILL. OSTLER. IOH. UNDERWOOD. NIC. TOOLY.
WILL. EGLESTONE.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

CATILINE HIS CONSPIRACY. A Tragoedie. Acted in the year 1611. By the Kings
MAJESTY'S Servants.

The Author B. I.

HORAT. -- His non plebecula gaudet:
Verum equitis quoque, iam migrauit ab aure voluptas
Omnis, ad incertos oculos, and gaudia vana.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. DC. XVI.

TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HONOR, AND VERTVE, THE MOST NOBLE William, EARL OF
PEMBROKE, LORD CHAMBERLAIN, etc.
MY LORD,
IN so thick, and dark an ignorance, as now almost couers the age, I crave
leave to stand near your light: and, by that, to be read. Posterity may pay
your benefit the honor, and thanks: when it shall know, that you dare, in these
^ig-giuen times, to countenance a legitimate Poem. I must call it so, against
all noise of opinion: from whose crude, and ayrie reports, I appeal, to that
great and singular faculty of judgment in your Lordship, able to vindicate
truth from error. It is the first (of this race) that ever I dedicated to any
person, and had I not thought it the best, it should have been taught a less
ambition. Now, it approaches your censure cheerfully, and with the same
assurance, that innocence would appear before a magistrate.

Your Lo. most faithful honorer, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
SYLLA'S GHOST. CATILINE. LENTVLVS. CETHEGVS. CVRIVS. AVTRONIVS. VARGVNTEIVS.
LONGINVS. LECCA. FVLVIVS. BESTIA. GABINIVS. STATILIVS. CEPARIVS. CORNELIUS.
VOLTVRTIVS. AVRELIA. FVLVIA. SEMPRONIA. GALLA. CICERO. ANTONIUS. CATO. CATVLVS.
CRASSVS. CAESAR. QV. CICERO. SYLLANVS. FLACCVS. POMTINIVS. SANGA. SENATORS.
ALLOBROGES. PETREIVS. SOVLDIERS. PORTER. LICTORS. SERVANTS. PAO^S. CHORUS.
THE SCENE ROME.

CATILINE. Act I.
SYLLA'S Ghost. Do thou not feel me, Rome? not yet? Is night
So heavy on thee, and my weight so light?
Can SYLLA'S Ghost arise within thy walls,
Less threatening, then an earthquake, the quick falls
Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads
Of thy steep towers? or shrink to their first beds?
Or, as their ruin the large Tyber fills,
Make that swell up, and drown thy seven proud hills?
What sleep is this does seize thee, so like death,
And is not it? Wake, feel her, in my breath:
Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian sound,
As a dire vapor, that had cleft the ground,
T'ingender with the night, and blast the day;
Or like a pestilence, that should display
Discouers Catiline in his study. Infection through the world: which, thus, I
do.
PLVTO be at thy counsels; and into
Thy darker bosom enter SYLLA'S spirit:
All, that was mine, and bad, thy breast inherit.
Alas, how weak is that, for CATILINE!
Did I but say (vain voice!) all that was mine?
All, that the GRACCHI, CINNA, MARIUS would;
What now, had I a body again, I could,
Coming from hell; what Fiends would wish should be;
And HANNIBAL could not have wished to see:
Think thou, and practice. Let the long-hid seeds
Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds,
Ranker then horror; and thy former facts
Not fall in mention, but to urge new acts:
Conscience of them provoke thee on to more.
Be still thy incests, murders, rapes before
Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestall nun;
Thy parricide, late, on thine own only son,
After his mother; to make empty way
For thy last wicked nuptials; worse, then they,
That blaze that act of thy incestuous life,
Which got thee, at once, a daughter, and a wife.
I leave the slaughters that thou did for me,
Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee
Thy murder of thy brother, (being so bribed)
And writ him in the list of my proscribed
After thy fact, to save thy little shame:
Thy incest, with thy sister, I not name.
These are too light. Fate will have thee pursue
Deeds, after which, no mischief can be new;
The ruin of thy country: thou were built
For such a work, and borne for no less guilt.
What though defeated once thou have been, and known,
Tempt it again: That is thy act, or none.
What all the several ills, that visit earth,
(Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth)
Plagues, famine, fire could not reach unto,
The sword, nor surfets; let thy fury do:
Make all past, present, future ill thine own;
And conquer all example, in thy one.
Nor let thy thought find any vacant time
To hate an old, but still a fresher crime
Drown the remembrance: let not mischief cease,
But, while it is in punishing, increase.
Conscience, and care die in thee; and be free
Not heaven it self from thy impiety:
Let night grow blacker with thy plots; and day,
At showing but thy head forth, start away
From this halfe-spheare: and leave Romes blinded walls
To Embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funerals,
And not recover sight, till their own flames
Do light them to their ruins. All the names
Of thy confederates, too, be no less great
In hell, then here: that, when we would repeat
Our strengths in muster, we may name you all,
And Furies, upon you, for Furies, call.
Whilst, what you do, may strike them into fears,
Or make them grieve, and wish your mischief theirs.
CATILINE. IT is decreed. Nor shall thy Fate, O Rome,
Resist my vow. Though hills were set on hills,
And seas met seas, to guard thee; I would through:
I, plough up rocks, steep as the Alps, in dust;
And laue the Tyrrhene waters, into clouds;
But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud city.
The ills, that I have done, cannot be safe
But by attempting greater; and I feel
A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish hands,
And says, they have been innocent too long.
Was I a man, bred great, as Rome her self?
One, formed for all her honors, all her glories?
Equal to all her titles? that could stand
Close up, with ATLAS; and sustain her name
As strong, as he does heaven? And, was I,
Of all her brood, marked out for the repulse
By her no voice, when I stood Candidate,
To be commander in the Pontick war?
I will, hereafter, call her step-dame, ever.
If she can loose her nature, I can loose
My pietie^ and in her stony entrails
Dig me a seat: where, I will live again,
The labor of her womb, and be a burden,
Weight^er then all the prodigies, and monsters,
That she has teemed with, since she first knew MARS.
CATILINE, AVRELIA. Who Is there?
AVR. It Is I.

CAT. AVRELIA?

AVR. Yes.

CAT. Appear,
And break, like day, my beauty, to this circle:
Vpbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long
In mounting to that point, which should give thee
Thy proper splendour. Wherefore frowns my sweet?
He kisseth them. Have ^ too long been absent from these lips,
This cheek, these eyes? What is my trespass? speak.

AVR. It seems, you know, that can accuse your self.

(...) (...) LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, CATILINE. IT is, me thinks, a morning, full of
fate!
It rises slowly, as her sollen carre
Had all the weights of sleep, and death hung at it!
She is not rosy-finger'd, but swollen black!
Her face is like a water, turned to blood,
And her sick head is bound about with clouds,
As if she threatened night, ere noone of day!
It does not look, as it would have a hail,
Or health, wished in it, as on other mornes.

CET. Why, all the fitter, LENTVLVS: our coming
Is not for salutation, we have business.

CAT. Said nobly, brave CETHEGVS. Where Is AVTRONIVS?

CET. Is he not come?

CAT. Not here.

CET. Nor VARGVNTEIVS?

CAT. Neither.

CET. A fire in their beds, and bosoms,
That so will serve their sloth, rather then virtue.
They are no Romans, and at such high need
As now.

LEN. Both they, LONGINVS, LECCA, CVRIVS,
FVLVIVS, GABINIVS, gave me word, last night,
By LVC'IVS BESTIA, they would all be here,
And early.

CET. Yes? As you, had I not called you.
Come, we all sleep, and are mere dormice; flies,
A little less then dead: more dullness hangs
On us, then on the morn. We Are spirit-bound,
In ribs of ice; our whole bloods are one stone;
And honor cannot thaw us; nor our wants:
Though they burn, hot a fevers, to our states.

CAT. I muse they would be tardy, at an hour
Of so great purpose.

CET. If the gods had called
Them, to a purpose, they would just have come
With the same tortoyse speed! that are thus slow
To such an action, which the gods will envy:
As asking no less means, then all their powers
Conioyn'd, to effect. I would have seen Rome burned,
By this time; and her ashes in an vrne:
The kingdom of the Senate, rent a-sunder;
And the degenerate, talking gown run frighted,
Out of the air of Italy.

CAT. Spirit of men!
Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much
I love these voices in thee!

CET. O, the days
Of SYLLA'S sway, when the free sword took leave
To act all that it would!

CAT. And was familiar
With entrails, as our Augures!

CET. Sons killed fathers,
Brothers their brothers.

CAT. And had price, and praise.
All hate had license given it: all rage raines.

CET. Slaughter bestrid the streets, and stretched himself
To seem more huge; whilst to his stained thighs
The gore he drew flowed up: and carried down
Whole heaps of limbs, and bodies, through his arch.
No age was spared, no sex.

CAT. Nay, no degree.

CET. Not infants, in the porch of life were free.
The sick, the old, that could but hope a day
Longer, by natures bounty, not let stay.
Virgins, and widows, matrons, pregnant wives,
All dyed.

CAT. 'Twas crime enough, that they had lives.
To strike but only those, that could do hurt,
Was dull, and poor. Some fell to make the number,
As some the prey.

CET. The rugged CHARON fainted,
And asked a navy, rather then a boat,
To ferry over the sad world that came:
The mawes, and dens of beasts could not receive
The bodies, that those souls were frighted from;
And even the graves were sild with men, yet living,
Whose flight, and fear had mixed them, with the dead.

CAT. And this shall be again, and more, and more,
Now LENTVLVS, the third CORNELIUS,
Is to stand up in Rome.

LEN. Nay, urge not that
Is so uncertain.

CAT. How!

LEN. I mean, not cleared.
And, therefore, not to be reflected on.

CAT. The SYBILL'S leaves uncertain? or the comments
Of our grave, deep, divining men not clear?

LEN. All prophecies, you know, suffer the torture.

CAT. But this, already, has confessed, without.
And so been weighed, examined, and compared,
As 't were malicious ignorance in him,
Would faint in the belief.

LEN. Do you believe it?

CAT. Do I love LENTVLVS? or pray to see it?

LEN. The Augures all are constant, I am meant.

CAT. They'had lost their science else.

LEN. They count from CINNA.

CAT. And SYLLA next, and so make you the third;
All that can say the sun is risen, must think it.

LEN. Men mark me more, of late, as I come forth!

CAT. Why, what can they do less? CINNA, and SYLLA
Are set, and gone: and we must turn our eyes
On him that is, and shines. Noble CETHEGVS,
But view him with me, here! He looks, already,
As if he shook a scepter, over the Senate,
And the awed purple dropped their rods, and axes!

(...) (...) The dangers, the repulses, judgments, wants:
Which how long will you bear, most valiant spirits?
Were we not better to fall, once, with virtue,
Then draw a wretched, and dishonored breath,
To loose with shame, when these men's pride will laugh?
I call the faith of gods, and men to question,
The power is in our hands; our bodies able;
Our minds as strong; of the contrary, in them,
All things grown aged, with their wealth, and years:
There wants, but only to begin the business,
The issue is certain.

CET. LON. On, let us go on.

CVR. BES. Go on, brave SERGIVS.

CAT. It does strike my soul,
(And, who can escape the stroke, that has a soul,
Or, but the smallest air of man within him?
To see them swell with treasure; which they power
Out in their riots, eating, drinking, building,
I, in the sea! planing of hills with valleys;
And raising valleys above hills! whilst we
Have not, to give our bodies necessaries.
They have their change of houses, manors, lordships;
We scarce a fire, or poor household Lar!
They buy rare Atticke statues, Tyrian hangings,
Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate,
Attalicke garments, and now, newfound gemmes,
Since POMPEY went for Asia, which they purchase
At price of provinces! The river Phasis
Cannot afford 'hem foul; nor Lucrine lake
Oysters enough: Circei, too, is searched
To please the witty gluttony of a meal!
Their ancient habitations they neglect,
And set up new; then, if the echo like not
In such a room, they pluck down those, build newer,
Alter them too: and, by all frantic ways,
Vex their wild wealth, as they molest the people,
From whom they force it! yet, they cannot tame,
Or overcome their riches! Not, by making
Bathes, orchards, fish-pooles! letting in of seas
Here! and, then there, forcing 'hem out again,
With mountaynous heaps, for which the earth has lost
Most of her ribs, as entrails! being now
Wounded no less for marble, then for gold.
We, all this while, like calm, benumbed Spectators,
Sit, till our seats do crack; and do not hear
The thundering ruins: whilst, at home, our wants,
Abroad, our debts do urge us; our states daily
Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: and, what
Is left, but to be crushed? Wake, wake brave friends,
And meet the liberty you often have wished for.
Behold, renown, riches, and glory court you.
Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
Me thinks (though I were dumb) th'affaire it self
The opportunity, your needs, and dangers,
With the brave spoil the war brings, should inuit you.
Use me your general, or soldier: neither,
My mind, nor body shall be wanting to you.
And, being Consul, I not doubt to effect,
All that you wish, if trust not flatter me,
And you would not rather still be slaves, then free.

CET. Free, free.

LON. It Is freedom.

CVR. Freedom we all stand for.

CAT. Why, these are noble voices! Nothing wants then,
But that we take a solemn sacrament,
To strengthen our design.

CET. And so to act it.
Differring hurts, where powers are so prepared.

AVT. Yet, ere we enter into open act,
(With favor) 'twere no loss, if 't might be inquired,
What the condition of these arms would be?

VAR. I, and the means, to carry us through?

CAT. How, friends!
Think you, that I would bid you, graspe the wind?
Or call you to th'embracing of a cloud?
Put your known valures on so dear a business,
And have no other second then the danger,
Nor other gyrlond then the loss? Become
Your own assurances. And, for the means,
Consider, first, the stark security
The common wealth is in now; the whole Senate
Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow;
Their forces all abroad; of which the greatest,
That might annoy us most, is fardest off,
In Asia, under POMPEY: those, near hand,
Commanded, by our friends; one army' in Spain,
By CNEVS PISO; the other in Mauritania,
By NVCERINVS; both which I have firm,
And fast unto our plot. My self, then, standing
Now to be Consul; with my hoped Colleague
CAIUS ANTONIUS; one, no less engaged
By'his wants then we: and, whom I'haue power to melt,
And cast in any mould. Beside, some others
That will not yet be named, (both sure, and great ones)
Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselves,
Strong, for our party: so, that no resistance

(...) (...) Her round about? Or, are they none,
Except she first become her own?
O wretchedness of greatest states,
To be obnoxious to these fates:
That cannot keep, what they do gain;
And what they raise so ill sustain!
Rome, now, is Mistress of the whole
World, sea, and land, to either pole;
And even that fortune will destroy
The power that made it: she does joy
So much in plenty, wealth, and ease,
As, now, the excess is her disease.
She builds in gold; and, to the stars;
As, if she threatened heaven with wars:
And seeks for hell, in quarries deep,
Giving the fiends, that there do keep,
A hope of day. Her women wear
The spoils of nations, in an ear,
Changed for the treasure of a shell;
And, in their loose attires, do swell
More light then sails, when all winds play:
Yet, are the men more loose then they!
More kemb'd, and bathed, and rubbed, and trimmed,
More sleek'd, more soft, and slacker limm'd;
As prostitute: so much, that kind
May seek it self there, and not find.
They eat on beds of silk, and gold;
At yuorie tables; or, wood sold
Dearer then it: and, leaving plate,
Do drink in stone of higher rate.
They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas;
Foul every brook, and bush; to please
Their wanton tastes: and, in request
Have new, and rare things; not the best!
Hence comes that wild, and vast expense,
That has enforced Romes virtue, thence,
Which simple poverty first made:
And, now, ambition does invade
Her state, with eating avarice,
Riot, and every other vice.
Decrees are bought, and laws are sold,
Honors, and offices for gold;
The peoples voices: and the free
Tongues, in the Senate, bribed be.
Such ruin of her manners Rome
Does suffer now, as she is become
(Without the gods it soon gainsay)
Both her own spoiler, and own prey.
So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly even
With us, for all the blows thee given;
When we, whose virtue conquered thee,
Thus, by thy vices, ruined be.

Act II.
FVLVIA, GALLA, SERVANT. THose rooms do smell extremely. Bring my glass,
And table hither. GALLA.
GAL. Madame.

FVL. Look
Within, in my blew cabinet, for the pearl
I'had sent me last, and bring it.

GAL. That from CLODIVS?

FVL. From CAIUS CAESAR. You'are for CLODIVS, still.
Or CVRIVS. Sirrah, if QVINTVS CVRIVS come,
I am not in fit mood; I keep my chamber:
Give warning so, without.

GAL. Is this it? madame.

FVL. Yes, help to hang it in mine ear.

GAL. Believe me,
It is a rich one, madame.

FVL. I hope so:
It should not be worn there else. Make an end,
And bind my hair up.

GAL. As 'twas yesterday?

FVL. No, nor the the other day. When knew you me
Appear, two days together, in one dressing?

GAL. Will you have it in the globe, or spire?

FVL. How thou will;
Any way, so thou will do it, good impertinence.
Thy company, if I slept not very well
A nights, would make me, an errant fool, with questions.

GAL. Alas, madame --

FVL. Nay, gentle half of the dialogue, ceas^.

GAL. I do it, indeed, but for your exercise,
As your physician bids me.

FVL. How! Does he bid you
To anger me for exercise?

GAL. Not to anger you,
But stir your blood a little: There Is difference
Between lukewarm, and boiling, madame.

FVL. JOVE!
She means to cook me, I think? Pray you, have done.

GAL. I mean to dress you, madame.

FVL. O, my IVNO,
Be friend to me! Offering at wit, too? Why, GALLA!
Where have thou been?

GAL. Why? madam!

FVL. What have thou done
With thy poor innocent self?

GAL. Wherefore? sweet madame!

FVL. Thus to come forth, so suddenly, a wit-worme?

GAL. It pleases you to flout one. I did dream
Of lady SEMPRONIA --

FVL. O, the wonder is out.

(...) (...) That has no pedigree, no house, no coat,
No ensigns of a family?

FVL. He'has virtue.

SEM. Hang virtue, where there is no blood: it is vice,
And, in him, sauciness. Why should he presume
To be more learned, or more eloquent,
Then the nobility? or boast any quality
Worthy a noble man, himself not noble?

FVL. 'Twas virtue only, at first, made all men noble.

SEM. I yield you, it might, at first, in Romes poor age;
When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough,
Or garden'd well: But, now, we have no need,
To dig, or loose our sweat for it. We have wealth,
Fortune and ease, and then their stock, to spend on,
Of name, for virtue; which will bear us out
Against all new comers: and can never fail us,
While the succession stays. And, we must glorify,
A mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker?
'Cause he has sucked at Athens? and advance him,
To our own loss? No, FVLVIA. There are they
Can speak greek too, if need were. CAESAR, and I,
Have sat upon him; so has CRASSVS, too:
And others. We have all decreed his rest,
For rising farther.

GAL. Excellent rare lady!

FVL. SEMPRONIA, you are beholden to my woman, here.
She does admire you.

SEM. O good GALLA, how do thou?

GAL. The better, for your learned ladyship.

SEM. Is this gray poulder, a good dentifrice?

FVL. You see I use it.

SEM. I have one is whiter.

FVL. It may be so.

SEM. Yet this smells well.

GAL. And clenses
Very well, madame, and resists the crudities.

SEM. FVLVIA, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now?
Which of our great Patricians?

FVL. Faith, I keep
No catalogue of'hem. Sometimes I have one,
Sometimes another, as the toy takes their bloods.

SEM. Thou have them all. Faith, when was QVINTVS CVRIVS,
Thy special servant, here?

FVL. My special servant?

SEM. Yes, thy idolater, I call him.

FVL. He may be yours,
If you do like him.

SEM. How!

FVL. He comes, not, here,
I have forbid him, hence.

SEM. VENUS forbid!

FVL. Why?

SEM. Your so constant lover.

FVL. So much the rather.
I would have change. So would you too, I am sure.
And now, you may have him.

SEM. He Is fresh yet, FVLVIA:
Beware, how you do tempt me.

FVL. Faith, for me,
He' is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone,
That gave him season. His good gifts are done.
He does not yield the crop that he was wont.
And, for the act, I can have secret fellows,
With backs worth ten of him, and shall please me
(Now that the land is fled) a myriade better.

SEM. And those one may command.

FVL. It Is true: these Lordings,
Your noble Faunes, they are so imperious, saucy.
Rude, and as boistrous as Centaures, leaping
A lady, at first sight.

SEM. And must be borne
Both with, and out, they think.

FVL. Tut, I Will observe
None of 'hem all: nor humor 'hem a jot
Longer, then they come laden in the hand,
And say, here is the one, for th'tother.

SEM. Does CAESAR give well?

FVL. They shall all give, and pay well, that come here,
If they will have it: and that jewels, pearl,
Plate, or round sums, to buy these. I Am not taken
With a cob-swan, or a high-mounting bull,
As foolish LEDA, and EVROPA were,
But the bright gold, with DANAE. For such price,
I would endure, a rough, harsh IVPITER,
Or ten such thundering gamsters: and refrain
To laugh at 'hem, till they are gone, with my much suffering.

SEM. Thou Art a most happy wench, that thus can make
Use of thy youth, and freshness, in the season:
And have it, to make use of.

FVL. (Which is the happiness.)

SEM. I am, now, feign to give to them, and keep
Music, and a continual table, to inuite'hem;

FVL. (Yes, and they study your kitchen, more then you)

SEM. Eat my self out with usury, and my lord, too,
And all my officers, and friends beside,
To procure moneys, for the needful charge
I must be at, to haue'hem: and, yet, scarce
Can I atchieue'hem, so.

FVL. Why, that is because
You affect young faces only, and smooth chinnes,

SEMPRONIA. If youl'd love beards, and bristles,
(One with another, as others do) or wrinkles --
Who Is that? Look GALLA.

GAL. It Is the party, madame.

FVL. What party? Has he no name?

GAL. It Is QVINTVS CVRIVS.

FVL. Did I not bid'hem, say, I kept my chamber?

GAL. Why, so they do.

SEM. I Will leave you, FVLVIA.

FVL. Nay, good SEMPRONIA, stay.

SEM. In faith, I will not.

FVL. By IVNO, I would not see him.

SEM. I Will not hinder you.

GAL. You know, he will not be kept out, madame.

SEM. No,
Nor shall not, careful GALLA, by my means.

FVL. As I do live, SEMPRONIA --

SEM. What needs this?

FVL. Go, say, I am a-sleepe, and ill at ease.

(...) (...) So does the Senate, too, know, you can bear.

CVR. By all the gods, that Senate will smart deep
For your vpbraidings. I should be right sorry
To have the means so to be veng'd on you,
(At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them.
But, go you on still; fare you well, dear lady:
You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud.
You will repent these moodes, and ere't be long, too.
I shall have you come about, again.

FVL. Do you think so?

CVR. Yes, and I know so.

FVL. By what augurie?

CVR. By the fair entrails of the matrons chests,
Gold, pearl, and jewels, here in Rome, which FVLVIA
Will then (but late) say that she might have shared:
And, grieuing, miss.

FVL. Tut, all your promised mountains,
And seas, I am so stalely acquainted with --

CVR. But, when you see the universal flood
Run by your coffers; that my lords, the Senators,
Are sold for slaves, their wives for bond-women,
Their houses, and fine gardens given away,
And all their goods, under the spear, at out cry,
And you have none of this; but are still FVLVIA,
Or perhaps less, while you are thinking of it:
You will advise then, Coyness, with your cushion.
And look of your fingers; say, how you were wished;
And so, he left you.

FVL. Call him again, GALLA:
This is not usual! something hangs on this
That I must win out of him.

CVR. How now, melt you?

FVL. Come, you will laugh, now, at my easiness!
But, it is no miracle: Doves, they say, will bill,
After their pecking, and their murmuring.

CVR. Yes,
And then it is kindly. I would have my love
Angry, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest
Of her behavior.

FVL. You do see, I study
How I may please you, then. But you think, CVRIVS,
It Is couetise has wrought me: if you love me,
Change that unkind conceit.

CVR. By my loved soul,
I love thee, like to it; and it is my study,
More then mine own revenge, to make thee happy.

FVL. And it is that just revenge does make me happy
To hear you prosequute: and which, indeed,
Has won me, to you, more, then all the hope
Of what can else be promised. I love valor
Better, then any lady loves her face,
Or dressing: then my self does. Let me grow
Still, where I do embrace. But, what good means
Ha'you to effect it? Shall I know your project?

CVR. Thou shall, if thou wilt be gracious.

FVL. As I can be.

CVR. And will thou kiss me, then?

FVL. As close as shells
Of cockles meet.

CVR. And print 'hem deep?

FVL. Quite through
Our subtle lips.

CVR. And often?

FVL. I will sow 'hem,
Faster, then you can reap. What is your plot?

CVR. Why, now my FVLVIA looks, like her bright name!
And is her self!

FVL. Nay, answer me, your plot:
I pray thee tell me, QVINTVS.

CVR. I, these sounds
She kisses and flatters him along still. Become a mistress. Here is harmony!
When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you
Is not with violence, but service. Cruel,
A lady is a fire: gentle, a light.

FVL. Will you not tell me, what I ask you?

CVR. All,
That I can think, sweet love, or my breast holds,
I Will pour into thee.

FVL. What is your design, then?

CVR. I Will tell thee; CATILINE shall now be Consul:
But, you will hear more, shortly.

FVL. Nay, dear love --

CVR. I Will speak it, in thine arms, let us go in.
Rome will be sacked, her wealth will be our prize;
By public ruin, private spirits must rise.
CHORUS. GReat father MARS, and greater JOVE,
By whose high auspice, Rome has stood
So long; and, first, was built in blood
Of your great nephew, that then strove
Not with his brother, but your rites:
Be present to her now, as then,
And let not proud, and factious men
Against your wills oppose their mights.
Our Consuls, now, are to be made;
O, put it in the public voice
To make a free, and worthy choice:
Excluding such as would invade
The common wealth. Let whom we name
Have wisdom, foresight, fortitude,
Be more with faith, then face endu'd,
And study conscience, above fame.
Such, as not seek to get the start
In state, by power, parts, or bribes,
Ambition's bawdes: but move the tribes
By virtue, modesty, desert.

(...) (...) Our need made thee our Consul, and thy virtue.

CAES. CATO, you will vn-doe him, with your praise.

CATO. CAESAR will hurt himself, with his own envy*

CHOR. The voice of CATO is the voice of Rome.

CATO. The voice of Rome is the consent of heaven!
And that has placed thee, CICERO, at the helm,
Where thou must render, now, thy self a man,
And master of thy art. Each petty hand
Can steer a ship becalmed; but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
His tides, his currents; how to shift his sails;
What she will bear in foul, what in fair weathers;
Where her springs are, her leakes; and how to stop 'hem;
What sands, what shelues, what rocks do threaten her;
The forces, and the natures of all winds,
Gusts, storms, and tempests; when her keele ploughs hell,
And deck knocks heaven: then, to manage her,
Becomes the name, and office of a pilot.

CIC. Which I Will perform, with all the diligence,
And fortitude I have; not for my year,
But for my life; except my life be less,
And that my year conclude it: if it must,
Your will, loved gods. This heart shall yet employ
A day, an hour is left me, so, for Rome,
As it shall spring a life, out of my death,
To shine, for ever glorious in my facts.
The vicious count their years, virtuous their acts.

CHOR. Most noble Consul! Let us wait him home.

CAES. Most popular Consul he is grown, me thinks!

CRA. How the rout cling to him!

CAES. And CATO leads 'hem!

CRA. You, his colleague, ANTONIUS, are not looked on.

ANT. Not I, nor do I care.

CAES. He enioyes rest,
And ease, the while. Let the others spirit toil,
And wake it out, that was inspired for turmoile.

CATV. If all reports be true, yet, CAIUS CAESAR,
The time has need of such a watch, and spirit.

CAES. Reports? Do you believe 'hem CATVLVS,
Why, he does make, and breed'hem for the people;
T'endeare his service to 'hem. Do you not taste
An art, that is so common? Popular men,
They must create strange monsters, and then quell'hem;
To make their arts seem something. Would you have
Such an HERCVLEAN actor in the scene,
And not his HYDRA? They must sweat no less
To fit their properties, then to express their parts.

CRA. Treasons, and guilty men are made in states
Too often, to dignifie the magistrates.

CATV. Those states be wretched, that are forced to buy
Their rulers fame, with their own infamy.

CRA. We therefore, should provide that ours do not.

CAES. That will ANTONIUS make his care.

ANT. I shall.

CAES. And watch the watcher.

CATV. Here comes CATILINE.
How does he brook his late repulse?

CAES. I know not.
But hardly sure.

CAT. LONGINVS, too, did stand?

CAES. At first: but he gave way unto his friend.

CATV. Who Is that come? LENTVLVS?

CAES. Yes. He is again
Taken into the Senate.

ANT. And made Praetor.

CAT. I know it. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls;

CAES. True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then.
CATILINE, ANTONIUS, CATVLVS, CAESAR, CRASSVS, LONGINVS, LENTVLVS. Hail
noblest Romans. The most worthy Consul,
I gratulate your honor.

ANT. I could wish
It had been happier, by your fellowship,
Most noble SERGIVS, had it pleased the people.

CATI. It did not please the gods; who'instruct the people:
And their vnquestion'd pleasures must be served.
They know what is fitter for us, then our selves;
And 'twere impiety, to think against them.

CATV. You bear it rightly, LUCIUS; and, it glads me,
To find your thoughts so even.

CATI. I shall still
Study to make them such to Rome, and heaven.
(I would withdraw with you, a little, JULIUS.

CAES. I Will come home to you: CRASSVS would not have you
To speak to him, before QVINTVS CATVLVS.

CATI. I apprehend you.) No, when they shall judge
Honors convenient for me, I shall have 'hem,
With a full hand: I know it. In mean time,
They are no less part of the commonwealth,
That do obey, then those, that do command.

CATV. O, let me kiss your forehead, LUCIUS.
How are you wronged!

CATI. By whom?

CATV. Public report.
That gives you out, to stomach your repulse;
And brook it deadly.

CATI. Sir, she brooks not me.
Believe me rather, and your self, now, of me:
It is a kind of slander, to trust rumor.

(...) (...) And some small flattery of the Senate more,
Will make him to forget.

LEN. You wrong me, LUCIUS.

LON. He will not need these spurs.

CET. The action needs'hem.
These things, when they proceed not, they go backward.

LEN. Let us consult then.

CET. Let us, first, take arms.
They that deny us just things, now, will give
All that we ask; if once they see our swords.

CAT. Our objects must be sought with wounds, not words.
CICERO, FVLVIA. IS there a heaven? and gods? and can it be
They should so slowly hear, so slowly see!
Has JOVE no thunder? or is JOVE become
Stupide as thou art? O neere-wretched Rome,
When both thy Senate, and thy gods do sleep,
And neither thine, nor their own states do keep!
What will awake thee, heaven? what can excite
Thine anger, if this practice be too light?
His former drifts partake of former times,
But this last plot was only CATILINES.
O, that it were his last. But he, before
Has safely done so much, he will still dare more.
Ambition, like a torrent, never looks back;
And is a swelling, and the last affection
A high mind can put off: being both a rebel
Unto the soul, and reason, and enforces
All laws, all conscience, treades upon religion,
And offers violence to natures self.
But, here, is that transcends it! A black purpose
To confound nature: and to ruin that,
Which never age, nor mankind can repair!
Sit down, good lady; CICERO is lost
In this your fable: for, to think it true
Tempts my reason. It so far exceedes
All insolent fictions of the tragic scene!
The commonwealth, yet panting, underneath
The stripes, and wounds of a late civil war,
Gasping for life, and scarce restored to hope;
To seek t'oppresse her, with new cruelty,
And utterly extinguish her long name,
With so prodigious, and unheard of fierceness!
What sink of monsters, wretches of lost minds,
Mad after change, and desperate in their states,
Wearied, and galled with their necessities,
(For all this I allow them) durst have thought it?
Would not the barbarous deeds have been believed,
Of MARIUS, and SYLLA, by our children,
Without this fact had rise forth greater, for them?
All, that they did, was piety, to this!
They, yet, but murdered kinsfolk, brothers, parents,
Ravished the virgins, and, perhaps, some matrons;
They left the city standing, and the temples:
The gods, and majesty of Rome were safe yet!
These purpose to fire it, to dispoile them,
(Beyond the other evils) and lay wast
The farre-triumphed world: for, unto whom
Rome is too little, what can be enough?

FVL. It Is true, my lord, I had the same discourse.

CIC. And, then, to take a horride sacrament
In humane blood, for execution
Of this their dire design; which might be called
The height of wickedness: but that, that was higher,
For which they did it!

FVL. I assure your lordship,
The extreme horror of it almost turned me
To air, when first I heard it; I was all
A vapor, when 'twas told me: and I longed
To vent it any where. 'Twas such a secret,
I thought, it would have burnt me up.

CIC. Good FVLVIA,
Fear not your act; and less repent you of it.

FVL. I do not, my good lord. I know to whom
I have vtter'd it.

CIC. You have discharged it, safely.
Should Rome, for whom you have done the happy service,
Turn most ingrate; yet were your virtue paid
In conscience of the fact: so much good deeds
Reward themselves.

FVL. My lord, I did it not
To any other aim, but for it self.
To no ambition.

CIC. You have learned the difference
Of doing office to the public weal,
And private friendship: and have shown it, lady.
Be still your self. I have sent for QVINTVS CVRIVS,
And (for your virtuous sake) if I can win him,
Yet, to the commonwealth; he shall be safe too.

FVL. I Will undertake, my lord, he shall be won.

CIC. Pray you, join with me, then: and help to work him.

(...) (...) I see your nature's right; you shall no more
Be mentioned with them: I will call you mine,
And trouble this good shame, no farther. Stand
Firm for your country; and become a man
Honored, and loved. It were a noble life,
To be found dead, embracing her. Know you,
What thanks, what titles, what rewards the Senate
Will heap upon you, certain, for your service?
Let not a desperate action more engage you,
Then safety should: and wicked friendship force
What honesty, and virtue cannot work.

FVL. He tells you right, sweet friend: It Is saving counsel.

CVR. Most noble Consul, I am yours, and hers;
I mean my countries: you' have formed me new.
Inspiring me, with what I should be, truly.
And I entreat, my faith may not seem cheaper
For springing out of penitence.

CIC. Good CVRIVS,
It shall be dearer rather, and because
Il'd make it such, hear, how I trust you more.
Keep still your former face: and mix again
With these lost spirits. Run all their mazes with 'hem:
For such are treasons. Find their windings out,
And subtle turnings, watch their snaky ways,
Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkness,
Where they are feign to creep upon their breasts
In paths never trod by men, but wolves, and panthers.
Learn, beside CATILINE, LENTVLVS, and those,
Whose names I have; what new ones they draw in;
Who else are likely; what those great ones are,
They do not name; what ways they mean to take;
And whither their hopes point: to war, or ruin,
By some surprise. Explore all their intents,
And what you find may profit the republique,
Acquaint me with it, either, by your self,
Or this your virtuous friend, on whom I lay
The care of urging you. I Will see, that Rome
Shall prove a thankful, and a bounteous mother:
Be secret as the night.

CVR. And constant, sir.

CIC. I do not doubt it. Though the time cut off
All vows. The dignity of truth is lost,
With much protesting. Who is there! This way,
Lest you be seen, and met. And when you come,
He whispers with him. Be this your token, to this fellow. Light 'hem.
O Rome, in what a sickness art thou fallen!
How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head
Is drowned in sleep, and all thy body feu'ry!
No noise, no pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
Thy lethargy is such: or if, by chance,
Thou heau'st thy eyelids up, thou do forget
Sooner, then thou were told, thy proper danger.
I did vn-reuerendly, to blame the gods,
Who wake for thee, though thou snore to thy self.
Is it not strange, thou should be so diseased,
And so secure? But more, that the first symptoms
Of such a malady, should not rise out
From any worthy member, but a base
And common strumpet, worthless to be named
A hair, or part of thee? Think, think, hereafter,
What thy needs were, when thou must use such means:
And lay it to thy breast, how much the gods
Vpbraid thy foul neglect of them; by making
So vile a thing, the author of thy safety.
They could have wrought by nobler ways: have struck
Thy foes with forked lightning; or ramm'd thunder;
Thrown hills upon 'hem, in the act; have sent
Death, like a dampe, to all their families;
Or caused their consciences to burst 'hem. But,
When they will show thee what thou art, and make
A scornful difference 'twixt their power, and thee,
They help thee by such aides, as geese, and harlots.
How now? What answer? Is he come?

LIC. Your brother,
Will straight be here; and your colleague ANTONIUS
Said, coldly, he would follow me.

CIC. I, that
Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my fear.
He is a man, against whom I must provide,
That (as he will do no good) he do no harm.
He, though he be not of the plot, will like it,
And wish it should proceed: for, unto men,
Pressed with their wants, all change is ever welcome.
I must with offices, and patience win him;
Make him, by art, that which he is not borne,
A friend unto the public; and bestow
The province on him; which is by the Senate
Decreed to me: that benefit will bind him.
It Is well, if some men will do well, for price:
So few are virtuous, when the reward's away.
Nor must I be unmindful of my private;
For which I have called my brother, and the tribunes,
My kins-folke, and my clients to be near me:

(...) (...) With the old needy troops, that followed SYLLA:
And all do but expect, when we will give
The blow at home. Behold this silver eagle,
'Twas MARIUS standard, in the Cimbrian war,
Fatal to Rome; and, as our augures tell me,
Shall still be so: for which one ominous cause,
I'haue kept it safe, and done it sacred rites,
As to a godhead, in a chapel built
Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands,
To follow it, with vows of death, and ruin,
Struck silently, and home. So waters speak
When they run deepest. Now Is the time, this year,
The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
As fatal too, to Rome, by all predictions:
And, in which, honored LENTVLVS must rise
A king, if he pursue it.

CVR. If he do not,
He is not worthy the great destiny.

LEN. It is too great for me, but what the gods,
And their great loves decree me, I must not
Seem careless of.

CAT. No, nor we envious.
We have enough beside, all Gallia, Belgia,
Greece, Spain, and Afric.

CVR. I, and Asia too,
Now POMPEY is returning.

CAT. Noblest Romans,
Me thinks our looks, are not so quick and high,
As they were wont.

CVR. No? whose is not?

CAT. We have
No anger in our eyes, no storm, no lightning:
Our hate is spent, and fumed away in vapor,
Before our hands be' at work. I can accuse
Not any one, but all of slacknesse.

CET. Yes,
And be your self such, while you do it.

CAT. Ha?
It Is sharply answered, CAIUS.

CET. Truly, truly.

LEN. Come, let us each one know his part to do,
And then be accused. Leave these untimely quarrels.

CVR. I would there were more Romes then one, to ruin.

CET. More Romes? More worlds.

CVR. Nay, then, more gods, and natures,
If they took part.

LEN. When shall the time be, first?

CAT. I think the Saturnalls.

CET. 'Twill be too long.

CAT. They are not now far off, it is not a month.

CET. A week, a day, an hour is too far off,
Now, were the fittest time.

CAT. We have not laid
All things so safe, and ready.

CET. While we'are laying,
We shall all lie; and grow to earth. Would I
Were nothing in it, if not now. These things
They should be done, e're thought.

CAT. Nay, now your reason
Forsakes you, CAIUS. Think, but what commodity
That time will minister; the cities custom
Of being, then, in mirth, and feast --

LEN. Loosed whole
In pleasure and security --

AVT. Each house
Resolved in freedom --

CVR. Every slave a master --

LON. And they too no mean aides --

CVR. Made from their hope
Of liberty --

LEN. Or hate unto their lords.

VAR. It Is sure, there cannot be a time found out
More apt, and natural.

LEN. Nay, good CETHEGVS,
Why do your passions, now, disturb our hopes?

CET. Why do your hopes delude your certainties?

CAT. You must lend him his way. Think, for the order,
And process of it.

LON. Yes.

LEN. I like not fire:
'Twill too much wast my city.

CAT. Were it embers,
There will be wealth enough, raked out of them,
To spring a new. It must be fire, or nothing.

LON. What else should fright, or terrify 'hem?

VAR. True.
In that confusion, must be the chief slaughter.

CVR. Then we shall kill 'hem brauest.

CEP. And in heaps.

AVT. Strew sacrifices.

CVR. Make the earth an altar.

LON. And Rome the fire.

LEC. 'Twill be a noble night.

VAR. And worth all SY^LA'S days.

CVR. When husbands, wives,
Grandfires, and nephews, servants, and their lords,
Virgins, and priests, the infant, and the nurse
Go all to hell, together, in a fleet.

CAT. I would have you, LONGINVS, and STATILIVS,
To take the charge of the firing, which must be,
At a sign given with a trumpet, done
In twelve chief places of the city, at once.
The flax, and sulphur, are already laid
In, at CETHEGVS house. So are the weapons.
GABINIVS, you, with other force, shall stop
The pipes, and conduits: and kill those that come
For water.

CVR. What shall I do?

CAT. All will have
Employment, fear not: Ply the execution.

CVR. For that, trust me, and CETHEGVS.

CAT. I will be
At hand, with the army, to meet those that escape.
And LENTVLVS, begirt you POMPEY'S house,
To seize his sons alive: for they are they
Must make our peace with him. All else cut off,
As TARQVINE did the poppy heads: or mowers
A field of thistles; or else, up, as ploughes
Do barren lands; and strike together flints,
And clods; th'vngratefull Senate, and the people:
Till no rage, gone before or coming after,
May weigh with yours, though horror leapt her self

(...) (...) So much his lord in mischief? when all these,
Shall, like the brethren sprung of dragons teeth,
Ruin each other; and he fall amongst 'hem:
With CRASSVS, POMPEY, or who else appears,
But like, or near a great one. May my brain
^esolue to water, and my blood turn phlegm,
My hands drop off, unworthy of my sword,
And that b'inspired, of it self, to rip
My breast, for my lost entraills; when I leave
A soul, that will not serve: and who will, are
The same with slaves, such clay I dare not fear.
The cruelty, I mean to act, I wish
Should be called mine, and tarry in my name;
Whilst, after-ages do toil out themselves,
In thinking for the like, but do it less:
And, were the power of all the fiends let loose,
With fate to boot, it should be, still, example.
When, what the Gaul, or Moore could not effect,
Nor emulous Carthage, with their length of spite,
Shall be the work of one, and that my night.
CICERO, FVLVIA, QVINTVS. I Thank your vigilance. Where Is my brother, QVINTVS?
Call all my servants up. Tell noble CVRIVS,
And say it to your self, you are my sauers;
But that is too little for you, you are Romes:
What could I then, hope less? O brother! now,
The engines I told you of, are working;
The machine 'gin's to move. Where are your weapons?
Arm all my household presently. And charge
The porter, he let no man in, till day.

QVI. Not clients, and your friends?

CIC. They wear those names,
That come to murder me. Yet send for CATO,
And QVINTVS CATVLVS; those I dare trust:
And FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
By the back way.

QVI. Take care, good brother MARCUS,
Your fears be not formed greater, then they should;
And make your friends grieve, while your enemies laugh.

CIC. It Is brothers counsel, and worth thanks. But do
As I entreat you. I provide, not fear.
Was CAESAR there, say you?

FVL. CVRIVS says, he met him,
Coming from thence.

CIC. O, so. And, had you a counsel
Of ladies too? Who was your speaker, madame?

FVL. She that would be, had there been forty more;
SEMPRONIA, who had both her greek, and figures;
And ever and anon, would ask us, if
The witty Consul could have mended that?
Or Orator CICERO could have said it better?

CIC. She Is my gentle enemy. Would CETHEGVS
Had no more danger in him. But, my guards
Are you, great powers; and th'vnbated strengths
Of a firm conscience, which shall arm each step
Taken for the state: and teach me slack no pace
For fear of malice. How now, brother?

QVI. CATO,
And QVINTVS CATVLVS were coming to you,
And CRASSVS with 'hem. I have let 'hem in,
By the garden.

CIC. What would CRASSVS have?

QVI. I hear
Some whispering 'bout the gate; and making doubt,
Whether it be not yet too early, or no?
But I do think, they are your friends, and clients,
Are fearful to disturb you.

CIC. You will change
To 'another thought anon. Have you given the porter
The charge, I willed you?

QVI. Yes.

CIC. Withdraw, and hearken.
VARGVNTEIVS, CORNELIUS, PORTER, CICERO, CATO, CATVLVS, CRASSVS. THe dore's not
open, yet.

COR. You'were best to knock.

VAR. Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in,
Rush after us.

COR. But where is CETHEGVS?

VAR. He
Has left it, since he might not do it his way.

POR. Who Is there?

VAR. A friend, or more.

POR. I may not let
Any man in, till day.

VAR. No? why?

COR. Thy reason?

POR. I am commanded so.

VAR. By whom?

COR. I hope
We are not discovered.

VAR. Yes, by revelation.
Pray thee, good slave, who has commanded thee?

POR. He that may best, the Consul.

VAR. We are his friends.

POR. All Is one.

COR. Best give your name.

VAR. Do thou hear, fellow?
I have some instant business with the Consul.
My name is VARGVNTEIVS.

CIC. Cicero speaks to them from above. True, he knows it;
And for what friendly office you are sent.
CORNELIUS, too, is there?

VAR. We are betrayed.

CIC. And desperate CETHEGVS, is he not?

VAR. Speak you, he knows my voice.

CIC. What say you to it?

COR. You are deceived, sir.

CIC. No, it is you are so;
Poor, misse-led men. Your states are yet worth pity,
If you would hear, and change your savage minds.
Leave to be mad; forsake your purposes

(...) (...) CATO, CATVLVS, CICERO, ALLOBROGES. Do; urge thine anger, still:
good heaven, and just.
Tell guilty men, what powers are above them.
In such a confidence of wickedness,
'Twas time, they should know something fit to fear.
CATV. I never saw a morn morefull of horror.

CATO. To CATILINE, and his: But, to just men,
Though heaven should speak, with all his wrath at once,
That, with his breath, the hinges of the world
Did crack, we should stand upright, and vnfear'd.

CIC. Why, so we do, good CATO. Who be these?

CATV. Ambassadors, from the ALLOBROGES,
I take 'hem, by their habits.

ALL. I, these men
Seem of another race; let us sue to these,
There Is hope of justice, with their fortitude.

CIC. Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day
We pray you to forbear us: on the morrow
What suit you have, let us, by FABIVS SANGA,
(Whose patronage your state does use) but know it,
And, on the Consul's word, you shall receive
Dispatch, or else an answer, worth your patience.

ALL. We could not hope for more, most worthy Consul.
This magistrate has struck an awe into me,
And, by his sweetness, won a more reguard
Unto his place, then all the boystrous moodes
That ignorant greatness practices, to fill
The large, unfit authority it wears.
How easy is a noble spirit discerned
From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out
In contumelies, makes a noise, and stinkes!
May we find good, and great men: that know how
To stoop to wants, and meet necessities,
And will not turn from any equal suites.
Such men, they do not succor more the cause,
They undertake, with favor, and success;
Then, by it, their own judgments they do raise,
In turning just men's needs, into their praise.

THE SENATE. PRAE. Room for the Consuls. Fathers, take your places.
Here, in the house of IVPITER, the STAYER,
By edict from the Consul, MARCUS TVLLIVS.
You'are met, a frequent Senate. Hear him speak.

CIC. What may be happy, and auspicious still
To Rome, and hers. Honored, and conscript Fathers,
If I were silent, and that all the dangers
Threatening the state, and you, were yet so hid
In night, or darkness thicker in their breasts,
That are the black contriuers; so, that no
Beam of the light could pierce hem: yet the voice
Of heaven, this morning, has spoke loud enough,
T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror;
And wake you from a sleep, as stark, as death.
I have, of late, spoke often in this Senate,
Touching this argument, but still have wanted
Either your ears, or faith: so'incredible
Their plots have seemed, or I so vain, to make
These things for mine own glory, and false greatness,
As has been given out. But be it so.
When they break forth, and shall declare themselves,
By their too foul effects, then, then, the envy
Of my just cares will find another name.
For me, I am but one: and this poor life,
So lately aimed at, not an hour yet since,
They cannot with more eagerness pursue,
Then I with gladness would lay down, and loose,
To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it.
But when I see, they'ld make it but the step
To more, and greater; unto yours, Romes, all:
I would with those preserve it, or then fall.

CAES. I, I, let you alone, cunning artificer!
See, how his gorget 'peeres above his gown;
To tell the people, in what danger he was.
It was absurdly done of VARGVNTEIVS,
To name himself, before he was got in.

CRA. It matters not, so they deny it all:
And can but carry the lie constantly.
Will CATILINE be here?

CAES. I'haue sent for him.

CRA. And have you bid him to be confident?

CAES. To that his own necessity will prompt him.

CRA. Seem to believe nothing at all, that CICERO
Relates us.

CAES. It will mad him.

CRA. O, and help
The other party. Who is that? his brother?
Quintus Cicero brings in the Tribunes, and guards. What new intelligence has
he brought him now?

CAES. Some cautions from his wife, how to behave him.

CIC. Place some of them without, and some bring in.
Thank their kind loves. It is a comfort yet,
That all depart not from their countries cause.

CAES. How now, what means this muster? Consul, ANTONIUS?

ANT. I do not know, ask my colleague, he will tell you.
There is some reason in state, that I must yield to;
And I have promised him: Indeed he has bought it,
With giving me the Province.

CIC. I profess,
It grieves me, Fathers, that I am compelled
To draw these arms, and aides for your defense;
And, more, against a citizen of Rome,
Borne here amongst you, a Patrician,
A man, I must confess, of no mean house,
Nor no small virtue, if he had employed
Those excellent gifts of fortune, and of nature,
Unto the good, not ruin of the state.
But, being bred in's fathers needy fortunes,
Brought up in's sisters prostitution,
Confirmed in civil slaughter, entering first
The commonwealth, with murder of the gentry;
Since, both by study, and custom, conversant
With all licentiousness: what could be hoped
In such a field of riot, but a course
Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest,
I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes,
Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine,
Before they touched, at my suspicion.

CAES. What are his mischiefs, Consul? you declame
Against his manners, and corrupt your own:
No wiseman should, for hate of guilty men,
Loose his own innocence.

CIC. The noble CAESAR
Speaks god-like truth. But, when he hears, I can
Convince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs,
He might be silent: and not cast away
His sentences in vain, where they scarce look
Toward his subject.

CATO. Here he comes himself.
Catiline sits down, and Cato vises, from him. If he be worthy any good man's
voice,
That good man sit down by him: CATO will not.

CATV. If CATO leave him, I Will not keep aside.

CATI. What face is this, the Senate here puts on,
Against me, Fathers! Give my modesty
Leave, to demand the cause of so much strangeness.

CAES. It is reported here, you are the head
To a strange faction, LUCIUS.

CIC. I, and will
Be proved against him.

CATI. Let it be. Why, Consul,
If in the commonwealth, there be two bodies,
One lean, weak, rotten, and that has a head;
The other strong, and healthful, but has none:
If I do give it one, do I offend?
Restore your selves, unto your temper, Fathers;
And, without perturbation, hear me speak.
Remember who I am, and of what place,
What petty fellow this is, that opposes;
One, that has exercised his eloquence,
Still to the bane of the nobility:
A boasting, insolent tongue-man.

CATO. Peace, lewd traitor,
Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man
And loves his country, would thou did so, too.

CATI. CATO, you are too zealous for him.

CATO. No;
Thou art too impudent.

CATV. CATILINE, be silent.

CATI. Nay then, I easily fear, my just defense
Will come too late, to so much prejudice.

(CAES. Will he sit down?)

CATI. Yet, let the world forsake me,
My innocence must not.

CATO. Thou innocent?
So are the Furies.

CIC. Yes, and Ate, too.
Do thou not blush, pernicious. CATILINE?
Or, has the palenesse of thy guilt drunk up
Thy blood, and drawn thy veins, as dry of that,
As is thy heart of truth, thy breast of virtue?
Whither at length will thou abuse our patience?
Still shall thy fury mock us? To what license
Dares thy unbridled boldness run it self?
Do all the nightly guards, kept on the palace,
The cities watches, with the peoples fears,
The concourse of all good men, this so strong
And fortified seat here of the Senate,
The present looks upon thee, strike thee nothing?
Do thou not feel thy counsels all laid open?
And see thy wild conspiracy bound in
With each man's knowledge? which of all this order
Can thou think ignorant (if they will but utter
Their conscience to the right) of what thou did
Last night, what on the former, where thou were,
Whom thou did call together, what your plots were?
O age, and manners! This the Consul sees,
The Senate understands, yet this man lives!
Lives? I, and comes here into counsel with us;
Partakes the public cares: and with his eye
Marks, and points out each man of us to slaughter.
And we, good men, do satisfy the state,
If we can shun but this man's sword, and madness.
There was that virtue, once, in Rome, when good men
Would, with more sharp coercion, have restrained
A wicked citizen, then the deadliest foe.
We have that law still, CATILINE, for thee;
An act as grave, as sharp: The state's not wanting,
Nor the authority of this Senate; we,
We, that are Consuls, only fail our selves.
This twenty days, the edge of that decree
We have let dull, and rust; kept it shut up,
As in a sheath, which drawn should take thy head.
Yet still thou live: and live not to lay by
Thy wicked confidence, but to confirm it.
I could desire, Fathers, to be found
Still merciful, to seem, in these maine perils
Grasping the state, a man remiss, and slack;
But then, I should condemn my self of sloth,
And treachery. Their campe's in Italy,
Pitched in the jaws, here, of Hetruria;
Their numbers daily increasing, and their general
Within our walls: nay, in our counsel! plotting
Hourly some fatal mischief to the public.
If, CATILINE, I should command thee, now,
Here, to be taken, killed; I make just doubt,
Whether all good men would not think it done
Rather too late, then any man too cruel.

CATO. Except he were of the same meal, and batch.

CIC. But that, which ought to have been done long since,
I will, and (for good reason) yet forbear.
Then will I take thee, when no man is found
So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy self,
But shall profess, it is done of need, and right.
While there is one, that dares defend thee, live;
Thou shall have leave; but so, as now thou live:
Watched at a hand, besieged, and oppressed
From working least commotion to the state.
I have those eyes, and ears, shall still keep guard,
And spiall on thee, as they have ever done,
And thou not feel it. What, then, can thou hope?
If neither night can, with her darkness, hide
Thy wicked meetings; nor a private house
Can, in her walls, contain the guilty whispers
Of thy conspiracy: if all break out,
All be discovered, change thy mind at last,
And loose thy thoughts of ruin flame, and slaughter.
Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate,
That such a day, thy Lictor, CAIUS MANLIVS,
Would be in arms. Was I deceived, CATILINE?
Or in the fact, or in the time? the hour?
I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose
Was, on the fifth (the kalends of November)
To Have slaughtered this whole order: which my caution
Made many leave the city. Can thou here
Deny, but this thy black design was hindered,
That very day, by me? thy self closed in
Within my strengths, so that thou could not move
Against a public reed? when thou were heard
To say, upon the parting of the rest,
Thou would content thee, with the murder of us,
That did remain. Had thou not hope, beside,
By a surprise, by night, to take Praeneste?
Where when thou came, did thou not find the place
Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches?
My garrisons fortified it. Thou do nothing, SERGIVS,
Thou can endeavor nothing, nay not think,
But I both see, and hear it; and am with thee,
By, and before, about, and in thee, too.
Call but to mind thy last nights business. Come,
I Will use no circumstance: at LECCA'S house,
The shop, and mint of your conspiracy,
Among your swordmen, where so many associates
Both of thy mischief, and thy madness, met.
Dare thou deny this? wherefore art thou silent?
Speak, and this shall convince thee: Here they are,
I see 'hem, in this Senate, that were with thee.
O, you immortal gods! in what clime are we?
What region do we live in? in what air?
What commonwealth, or state is this we have?
Here, here, amongst us, our own number, Fathers,
In this most holy counsel of the world,
They are, that seek the spoil of me, of you,
Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow:
Follow the sun, and find not their ambition.
These I behold, being Consul; nay, I ask
Their counsels of the state, as from good Patriots:
Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces,
I not so much as wound, yet, with my voice.
Thou wast, last night, with LECCA, CATILINE,
Your shares, of Italy, you there divided;
Appointed who, and whither, each should go;
What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen;
Your offices set down; the parts marked out,
And places of the city, for the fire;
Thy self (thou' affirmd'st) wast ready to depart,
Only, a little let there was, that stayed thee,
That I yet lived. Upon the word, stepped forth
Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care;
Two undertook this morning, before day,
To kill me in my bed. All this I knew,
Your convent scarce dismissed, armed all my servants,
Called both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients,
You sent to visit me; whose names I told
To some there, of good place, before they came.

CATO. Yes, I, and QVINTVS CATVLVS can affirm it.

CAES. He Is lost, and gone. His spirits have forsook him.

CIC. If this be so, why, CATILINE, do thou stay?
Go, where thou mean. The ports are open; forth.
The camp abroad wants thee, their chief, too long.
Lead with thee all thy troops out. Purge the city.
Draw dry that noisome, and pernicious sink,
Which left, behind thee, would infect the world.
Thou will free me of all my fears, at once,
To see a wall between us. Do thou stop
To do that now, commanded; which before,
Of thine own choice, you are prone to? Go. The Consul
Bids thee, an enemy, to depart the city.
Whither, thou wilt ask? to exile? I not bid
Thee that. But ask my counsel, I persuade it.
What is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee?
Where not a soul, without thine own foul knot,
But fears, and hates thee. What domesticke note
Of private filthiness, but is burnt in
Into thy life? What close, and secret shame,
But is grown one, with thy known infamy?
What lust was ever absent from thine eyes?
What lewd fact from thy hands? what wickedness
From thy whole body? where is that youth drawn in
Within thy nets, or caught up with thy baits,
Before whose rage, thou have not borne a sword,
And to whose lusts thou have not 'held a torch?
Thy latter nuptials I let pass in silence;
Where sins incredible on sins were heap't:
Which I not name, lest, in a civil state,
So monstrous facts should either appear to be,
Or not to be revenged. Thy fortunes, too,
I glance not a^, which hang but till next Ides.
I come to that which is more known, more public;
The life, and safety of us all, by thee
Threatened, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field,
When LEPIDVS, and TVLLVS were our Consuls,
Upon the day of choice, armed, and with forces,
To take their lives, and our chief citizens?
When, not thy fear, nor conscience changed thy mind,
But the mere fortune of the commonwealth
With-stood thy active malice? Speak but right.
How often have thou made attempt on me?
How many of thy assaults have I declined
With shifting but my body (as wee'ld say)
Wrested thy dagger from thy hand, how often?
How often has it fallen, or slip't by chance?
Yet, can thy side not want it: which, how vowed,
Or with what rites, it is sacred of thee, I know not,
That still thou make it a necessity,
To fix it in the body of a Consul.
But let me loose this way, and speak to thee,
Not as one moved with hatred, which I ought,
But pity, of which none is owing thee.

CAT. No more then unto TANTALVS, or TITYVS.

CIC. Thou came, e're-while, into this Senate. Who
Of such a frequency, so many friends,
And kindred thou have here, saluted thee?
Were not the seats made bare, upon thy entrance?
Riss'not the consular men? and left their places,
So soon as thou sat'st down? and fled thy side,
Like to a plague, or ruin? knowing, how often
They had been, by thee, marked out for the shambles?
How do thou bear this? Surely, if my slaves
At home feared me, with half th'affright, and horror,
That, here, thy fellow-citizens do thee,
I should soon quit my house, and think it need too.
Yet thou dare tarry here? Go forth, at last;
Condemn thy self to flight, and solitude.
Discharge the commonwealth, of her deep fear.
Go; into banishment, if thou wait'st the word.
Why do thou look? They all consent unto it.
Do thou expect the authority of their voices,
Whose silent wills condemn thee? While they sit,
They approve it; while they suffer it, they decree it;
And while they'are silent to it, they proclaim it.
Prove thou there honest, I Will endure the envy.
But there is no thought, thou should be ever he,
Whom either shame should call from filthiness,
Terror from danger, or discourse from fury.
Go; I entreat thee: yet, why do I so?
When I already know, they'are sent before,
That tarry for thee'in arms, and do expect thee
On th'AVRELIAN way. I know the day
Set down, 'twixt thee, and MANLIVS; unto whom
The silver eagle too is sent, before:
Which I do hope shall prove, to thee as banefull,
As thou conceiu'st it to the commonwealth.
But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say,
What mean thou MARCUS TVLLIVS? If thou know
That CATILINE be looked for, to be chief
Of an intestine war; that he'is the author
Of such a wickedness; the caller out
Of men of mark in mischief, to an action
Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason;
Why do thou send him forth? why let him escape?
This is, to give him liberty, and power:
Rather, thou should lay hold upon him, send him
To deserved death, and a just punishment.
To these so holy voices, thus I answer.
If I did think it timely, Gonscript Fathers,
To punish him with death, I would not give
The Fencer use of one short hour, to breath;
But when there are in this grave order, some,
Who, with soft censures, still do nource his hopes;
Some, that with not believing, have confirmed
His designs more, and whose authority
The weaker, as the worst men, too, have followed:
I would now send him, where they all should see
Clear, as the light, his heart shine; where no man
Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupide,
But should cry out, he saw, touched, felt, and grasp't it.
Then, when he has run out himself; led forth
His desperate party with him; blown together
Aides of all kinds, both shipwrack'd minds and fortunes:
Not only the grown evil, that now is sprung,
And sprouted forth, would be plucked up, and weeded;
But the stock, root, and seed of all the mischiefs,
Choking the commonwealth. Where, should we take,
Of such a swarm of traitors, only him,
Our cares, and fears might seem a while relieved,
But the maine peril would bide still enclosed
Deep, in the veins, and bowels of the state.
As humane bodies, laboring with fevers,
While they are tossed with heat, if they do take
Cold water, seem for that short space much eased,
But afterward, are ten times more afflicted.
Wherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew
Depart, divide themselves from good men, gather
Their forces to one head; as I said often,
Let'hem be seuer'd from us with a wall;
Let'hem leave off attempts, upon the Consul,
In his own house; to circle in the Praetor;
To girt the court with weapons; to prepare
Fire, and balls, swords, torches, sulphur, brands:
In short, let it be writ in each man's forehead
What thoughts he bears the public. I here promise,
Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my self,
That diligence in us Consuls, for my honored
Colleague, abroad, and for my self, at home;
So great authority in you; so much
Virtue, in these, the gentlemen of Rome;
Whom I could scarce restrain to day, in zeal,
From seeking out the parricide, to slaughter;
So much consent in all good men, and minds,
As, on the going out of this one CATILINE,
All shall be clear, made plain, oppressed, revenged.
And, with this omen, go, pernicious plague,
Out of the city, to the wished destruction
Of thee, and those, that, to the ruin of her,
Have taken that bloody, and black sacrament.
Thou IVPITER, whom we do call the STAYER,
Both of this city, and this empire, wilt
(With the same auspice thou did raise it first)
Drive from thy altars, and all other temples,
And buildings of this city; from our walls;
Lives, states, and fortunes of our citizens;
This fiend, this fury, with his accomplices.
And all the'offence of good men (these known traitors
Unto their country, thieves of Italy,
Joined in so damned a league of mischief) thou Will with perpetual plagues, alive, and dead,
Punish for Rome, and save her innocent head.

CATI. If an oration, or high language, Fathers,
Could make me guilty, here is one, has done it:
H' has strove to emulate this mornings thunder,
With his prodigious rhetoric. But I hope,
This Senate is more grave, then to give credit
Rashly to all he vomits, against a man
Of your own order, a Patrician;
And one, whose ancestors have more deserved
Of Rome, then this man's eloquence could utter,
Turned the best way: as still, it is the worst.

CATO. His eloquence has more deserved to day,
Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors
Did, in their good: and, that the state will find,
Which he has saved.

CATI. How, he? were I that enemy,
That he would make me: Il'd not wish the state
More wretched, then to need his preservation.
What do you make him, CATO, such a HERCULES?
An ATLAS? A poor petty in-mate!

CATO. Traitor.

CATI. He save the state? A burgess son of Arpinum.
The gods would rather twenty Romes should perish,
Then have that contumely stuck upon 'hem,
That he should share with them, in the preserving
A shed, or signe-post.

CATO. Peace, thou prodigy.

CATI. They would be forced themselves, again, and lost
In the first, rude, and indigested heap;
Ere such a wretched name, as CICERO,
Should found with theirs.

CATV. Away, thou impudent head.

CATI. Do you all back him? are you silent too?
Well, I will leave you, Fathers; I will go.
He turns sudainly on Cicero. But -- my fine dainty speaker --

CIC. What now, Fury?
Will thou assault me here?

(CHO. Help, aid the Consul.)

CATI. See, Fathers, laugh you not? who threatened him?
In vain thou do conceive, ambitious orator,
Hope of so brave a death, as by this hand.

(CATO. Out, of the court, with the pernicious traitor.)

CATI. There is no title, that this flattering Senate,
Nor honor, the base multitude can give thee,
Shall make thee worthy CATILINES anger.

(CATO. Stop,
Stop that portentous mouth.)

CATI. Or, when it shall,
I Will look thee dead.

CATO. Will none restrain the monster?

CATV. Parricide.

QVI. Butcher, traitor, leave the Senate.

CATI. I Am gone, to banishment, to please you, Fathers.
Thrust headlong forth?

CATO. Still, do thou murmr, monster?

CATI. Since, I am thus put out, and made a --

CIC. What?

CATV. Not guiltier then thou art.

CATI. I will not burn
Without my funeral pile.

CATO. What says the fiend?

CATI. I will have matter, timber.

CATO. Sing out scrich-owle.

CATI. It shall be in --

CATV. Speak thy imperfect thoughts.

CATI. The common fire, rather then mine own.
For fall I will with all, ere fall alone.

CRA. H'is lost, there is no hope of him.

CAES. Unless
He presently take arms; and give a blow,
Before the Consuls forces can be leui'd.

CIC. What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?

CATV. See, that the commonwealth receive no loss.

CATO. Commit the care thereof unto the Consuls.

CRA. It Is time.

CAES. And need.

CIC. Thanks to this frequent Senate.
But what decree they, unto CVRIVS,
And FVLVIA?

CATV. What the Consul shall think meet.

CIC. They must receive reward, though 't be not known;
Lest when a state needs ministers, they have none.

CATO. Yet, MARCUS TVLLIVS, do not I believe,
But CRASSVS, and this CAESAR here ring hollow.

CIC. And would appear so, if that we durst prove 'hem.

CATO. Why dare we not? What honest act is that,
The Roman Senate should not dare, and do?

CIC. Not an unprofitable, dangerous act,
To stir too many serpents up at once.
CAESAR, and CRASSVS, if they be ill men,
Are mighty ones; and, we must so provide,
That, while we take one head, from this foul Hydra,
There spring not twenty more.

CATO. IN prove your counsel.

CIC. They shall be watched, and looked too. Till they do
Declare themselves, I will not put 'hem out
By any question. There they stand. I Will make
My self no enemies, nor the state no traitors.

CATILINE, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, CVRIVS, GABINIVS, LONGINVS, STATILIVS. FAlse to
our selves? All our designs discovered
To this state-cat?
CET. I, had I had my way,
He' had mewed in flames, at home, not in the Senate:
IN had singed his furs, by this time.

CAT. Well, there is, now,
No time of calling back, or standing still.
Friends, be your selves; keep the same Roman hearts,
And ready minds, you' had yester-night. Prepare
To execute, what we resolved. And let not
Labor, or danger, or discovery fright you.
I Will to the army: you (the while) mature
Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides,
That you think fit, of men of all conditions,
Or any fortunes, that may help a war.
I Will bleed a life, or win an empire for you.
Within these few days, look to see my ensigns,

(...) (...) All may begin a war, but few can end it.
The Senate have decreed, that my colleague
Shall lead their army, against CATILINE,
And have declared both him, and MANLIVS traitors.
METELLVS CELER has already given
Part of their troops defeat. Honors are promised
To all, will quit 'hem; and rewards proposed
Even to slaves, that can detect their courses.
Here, in the city, I have by the Praetors,
And Tribunes, placed my guards, and watches so,
That not a foot can tread, a breath can whisper,
But I have knowledge. And be sure, the Senate,
And people of Rome, of their accustomed greatness,
Will sharply, and severely vindicate,
Not only any fact, but any practice,
Or purpose, against the state. Therefore, my lords,
Consult of your own ways, and think which hand
Is best to take. You, now, are present suitors
For some redress of wrongs; I Will undertake
Not only that shall be assured you: but
What grace, or privilege else, Senate, or people,
Can cast upon you, worthy such a service,
As you have now the way, and means, to do 'hem,
If but your wills consent, with my designs.

ALL. We covet nothing more, most worthy Consul.
And how so e're have been tempted lately,
To a defection, that not makes us guilty:
We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes,
Nor in our wills so lost, as to abandon
A friendship, prodigally, of that price,
As is the Senate, and the people of Romes,
For hopes, that do precipitate themselves.

CIC. You then are wise, and honest. Do but this, then:
(When shall you speak with LENTVLVS, and the rest?

ALL. We are to meet anon, at BRUTUS house.

CIC. Who? DECIVS BRUTUS? He is not in Rome.

SAN. O, but his wife SEMPRONIA.

CIC. You instruct me,
She is a chief.) Well, fail not you to meet 'hem,
And to express the best affection
You can put on, to all that they intend.
Like it, applaud it, give the commonwealth,
And Senate lost to 'hem. Promise any aides
By arms, or counsel. What they can desire,
I would have you prevent. Only, say this,
You'haue had dispatch, in private, by the Consul,
Of your affairs, and for the many fears
The state's now in, you are willed by him, this evening,
To depart Rome: which you, by all sought means,
Will do, of reason to decline suspicion.
Now, for the more authority of the business
They' have trusted to you, and to give it credit
With your own state, at home, you would desire
Their letters to your Senate, and your people,
Which shown, you durst engage both life, and honor,
The rest should every way answer their hopes.
Those had, pretend sudden departure, you,
And, as you give me notice, at what port
You will go out, I Will have you intercepted,
And all the letters taken with you: So
As you shall be redeemed in all opinions,
And they convicted of their manifest treason.
Ill deeds are well turned back, upon their authors:
And against an iniurer, the revenge is just.
This must be done, now.

ALL: Chearefully, and firmly.
We'are they, would rather have to undertake it,
Then stay, to say so.

CIC. With that confidence, go:
Make your selves happy, while you make Rome so.
By SANGA, let me have notice from you.

ALL. Yes.

SEMPRONIA, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, GABINIVS, STATILIVS, LONGINVS, VOLTVRTIVS,
ALLOBROGES. WHen come these creatures, the Ambassadors?
I would feign see 'hem. Are they any scholars?
LEN. I think not, madame.

SEM. Have they no greek?

LEN. No surely.

SEM. Fie, what do I here, waiting on 'hem then?
If they be nothing but mere statesmen.

LEN. Yes,
Your ladyship shall observe their gravity,
And their reservedness, their many cautions,
Fitting their persons.

SEM. I do wonder much,
That states, and commonwealths employ not women,
To be Ambassadors, sometimes! we should
Do as good public service, and could make
As honorable spies (for so THVCIDIDES
Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, CETHEGVS?

CET. Do you ask me? Am I your scout, or baud?

LEN. O, CAIUS, it is no such business.

CET. No?
What does a woman at it then?

SEM. Good sir,
There are of us can be as exquisite traitors,

(...) (...) By several messengers: who no doubt will come,
Without sense, or suspicion. Prodigal men
Feel not their own stock wasting. When I have 'hem,
I Will place those guards, upon 'hem, that they start not,

SAN. But what 'll you do with SEMPRONIA?

CIC. A states anger
Should not take knowledge either of fools, or women.
I do not know whether my joy or care
Ought to be greater; that I have discovered
So foul a treason: or must undergo
The envy of so many great men's fate.
But, happen what there can, I will be just,
My fortune may forsake me, not my virtue:
That shall go with me, and before me, still,
And glad me, doing well, though I hear ill.

PRAETORS, ALLOBROGES, VOLTVRTIVS. FLA. Stand, who goes there?

ALL. We are the ALLOBROGES
And friends of Rome.

POM. If you be so, then yield
Your selves unto the Praetors, who in name
Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
Yet, till you clear your selves, charge you of practice
Against the State.

VOL. Die friends, and be not taken.

FLA. What voice is that? Down with 'hem all.

ALL. We yield.

POM. What Is he stands out? Kill him there.

VOL. Hold, hold, hold.
I yield upon conditions.

FLA. We give none
To traitors, strike him down.

VOL. My name's VOLTVRTIVS
I know POMTINIVS.

POM. But he knows not you,
While you stand out upon these traiterous terms.

VOL. I Will yield upon the safety of my life.

POM. If it be forfeyted, we cannot save it.

VOL. Promise to do your best. I 'am not so guilty,
As many others, I can name; and will:
If you will grant me favor.

POM All we can
Is to deliver you to the Consul. Take him,
And thank the gods, that thus have saved Rome.
CHORUS. NOw, do our ears, before our eyes,
Like men in mists,
Discover, who'ld the state surprise,
And who resists?
And, as these clouds do yield to light,
Now, do we see,
Our thoughts of things, how they did fight,
Which seemed to agree?
Of what strange pieces are we made,
Who nothing know;
But, as new airs our ears invade,
Still censure so?
That now do hope, and now do fear,
And now envy;
And then do hate, and then love dear,
But know not, why:
Or, if we do, it is so late,
As our best mood,
Though true, is then thought out of date,
And empty of good.
How have we changed, and come about
In every doom,
Since wicked CATILINE went out,
And quitted Rome?
One while, we thought him innocent;
And, then, w' accused
The Consul, for his malice spent;
And power abused.
Since, that we hear, he is in arms,
We think not so:
Yet charge the Consul, with our harms,
That let him go.
So, in our censure of the state,
We still do wander;
And make the careful magistrate
The mark of slander.
What age is this, where honest men,
Placed at the helm,
A sea of some foul mouth, or pen,
Shall ouer-whelme?
And call their diligence, deceit;
Their virtue, vice;
Their watchfulness, but lying in wait;
And blood, the price.
O, let us pluck this evil seed
Out of our spirits;
And give, to every noble deed,
The name it merits.
Lest we seem fallen (if this endures)
Into those times,
To love disease: and brook the cures
Worse, then the crimes.

(...) (...) I would feign help these wretched men.

CRA. You cannot.
Who would save them, that have betrayed themselves?
CICERO, QVINTVS, CATO. I Will not be wrought to it, brother QVINTVS.
There Is no man's private enmity shall make
Me violate the dignity of another.
If there were proof against CAESAR, or who ever,
To speak him guilty, I would so declare him.
But QVINTVS CATVLVS, and PISO both,
Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge,
Have any man accused, or named falsely.

QVI. Not falsely: but if any circumstance,
By the ALLOBROGES, or from VOLTVRTIVS,
Would carry it.

CIC. That shall not be sought by me.
If it reveal it self, I would not spare
You, brother, if it pointed at you, trust me.

CATO. Good MARCUS TVLLIVS (which is more, then great)
Thou had thy education, with the gods.

CIC. Send LENTVLVS forth, and bring away the rest.
This office, I am sorry, sir, to do you.

THE SENATE. WHat may be happy still, and fortunate,
To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers,
To break these letters, and to view them round.
If that be not found in them, which I fear,
I, yet, entreat, at such a time, as this,
My diligence be not contemned. Have you brought
The weapons hither, from CETHEGVS house?
PRAE. They are without.

CIC. Be ready, with VOLTVRTIVS,
To bring him, when the Senate calls; and see
None of the rest, confer together. Fathers,
What do you read? Is it yet worth your care,
If not your fear, what you find practiced there?

CAES. It has a face of horror!

CRA. I Am amazed!

CATO. Look there.

SYL. Gods! Can such men draw common air?

CIC. Although the greatness of the mischief, Fathers,
Has often made my faith small, in this Senate,
Yet^ since my casting CATILINE out (for now
I do not fear the envy of the word,
Unless the deed be rather to be feared,
That he went hence alive; when those I meant
Should follow him, did not) I have spent both days,
And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage
Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought:
And that I might but take 'hem in that light,
Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes,
Your minds, at length, would think for your own safety.
And, now, it is done. There are their hands, and seals.
Their persons, too, are safe, thanks to the gods.
Bring in VOLTVRTIVS, and the' ALLOBROGES.
These be the men, were trusted with their letters.

VOL. Fathers, believe me, I knew nothing: I
Was travailing for Gallia, and am sorry --

CIC. Quake not, VOLTVRTIVS, speak the truth, and hope
Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word.

VOL. Then, I knew all. But truly I was drawn in
But the other day.

CAES. Say, what thou know, and fear not.
Thou have the Senate^ faith, and Consuls word,
He answers with fear and interruptions. To fortify thee.

VOL. I was sent with letters --
And had a message too -- from LENTVLVS --
To CATILINE -- that he should use all aides --
Servants, or others -- and come with his army,
As Soon, unto the city as he could --
For they were ready, and but staid for him --
To intercept those, that should flee the fire --
These men (the ALLOBROGES) did hear it too.

ALL. Yes, Fathers, and they took an oath, to us.
Besides their letters, that we should be free;
And urged us, for some present aid of horse.

CIC. The weapons and arms are brought forth. Nay, here be other testimonies,
Fathers,
CETHEGVS armourie.

CRA. What, not all these?

CIC. Here Is not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer,
That we may know the arms to all these weapons.
Come, my brave sword-player, to what active use,
Was all this steel provided?

CET. Had you asked
In SYLLA's days, it had been to cut throats;
But, now, it was to look on, only: I loved
To see good blades, and feel their edge, and points.
To put a helm upon a block, and cleave it,
And, now and then, to stab an armor through.

CIC. Know you that paper? That will stab you through.
Is it your hand? Hold, save the pieces. Traitor,
Has thy guilt waked thy fury?

CET. I did write,
I know not what; nor care not: That fool LENTVLVS
Did dictate, and I the other fool, did sign it.

CIC. Bring in STATILIVS: Does he know his hand too?
And LENTVLVS. Reach him that letter.

STA. I
Confess it all.

CIC. Know you that seal yet, PVBLIVS?

LEN. Yes, it is mine.

CIC. Whose image is that, on it?

LEN. My grandfathers.

CIC. What, that renowm'd good man,
That did so only' embrace his countrey^, and loved
His fellow citizens! Was not his picture,
Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact,
So foul --

LEN. As what, impetuous CICERO?

CIC. As thou art, for I do not know what is fouler.
Look upon these. Do not these faces argue
Thy guilt, and impudence?

LEN. What are these to me?
I know 'hem not.

ALL. No PVBLIVS? we were with you,
At BRUTUS house.

VOL. Last night.

LEN. What did you there?
Who sent for you?

ALL. Your self did. We had letters
From you, CETHEOVS, this STATILIVS here,
GABINIVS CIMBER, all, but from LONGINVS,
Who would not write, because he was to come
Shortly, in person, after us (he said)
To take the charge of the horse, which we should leuy.

CIC. And he is fled, to CATILINE, I hear.

LEN. Spies? spies?

ALL. You told us too, of the SIBYLLS books,
And how you were to be a king, this year,
The twentieth, from the burning of the Capitol.
That three CORNELII were to reign, in Rome,
Of which you were the last: and praised CETHEGVS,
And the great spirits, were with you, in the action.

CET. These are your honorable Ambassadors,
My sovereign lord.

CAT. Peace, that too bold CETHEGVS.

ALL. Besides GABINIVS, your agent, named
AVTRONIVS, SERVIVS SVLLA, VARGVNTEIVS,
And diverse others.

VOL. I had letters from you,
To CATILINE, and a message, which I'haue told
Unto the Senate, truly, word for word:
For which, I hope, they will be gracious to me.
I was drawn in, by that same wicked CIMBER,
And thought no hurt at all.

CIC. VOLTVRTIVS, peace.
Where is thy visor, or thy voice, now, LENTVLVS?
Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak thou not?
Is all so clear, so plain, so manifest,
That both thy eloquence, and impudence,
And thy ill nature, too, have left thee, at once?
Take him aside. There Is yet one more, GABINIVS,
The enginer of all. Show him that paper,
If he do know it?

GAB. I know nothing.

CIC. No?

GAB. No. Neither will I know.

CAT. Impudent head!
Stick it into his throat; were I the Consul,
Il'd make thee eat the mischief, thou have vented.

GAB. Is there a law for it, CATO?

CAT. Do thou ask
After a law, that would have broke all laws,
Of nature, manhood, conscience, and religion?

GAB. Yes, I may ask for it.

CAT. No, pernicious CIMBER.
Th'inquiring after good, does not belong
Unto a wicked person.

GAB. I but CATO
Does nothing, but by law.

CRA. Take him aside.
There Is proof enough, though he confess not.

GAB. Stay,
I will confess. All Is true, your spies have told you.
Make much of 'hem.

CET. Yes, and reward 'hem well,
For fear you get no more such. See, they do not
Die in a ditch, and stink, now you have done with 'hem;
Or beg, of the bridges, here in Rome, whose arches
Their active industry has saved.

CIC. See, Fathers,
What minds, and spirits these are, that, being convicted
Of such a treason, and by such a cloud
Of witnesses, dare yet retain their boldness?
What would their rage have done, if they had conquered?
I thought, when I had thrust out CATILINE,
Neither the state, nor I, should need to have feared
LENTVLVS sleep here, or LONGINVS fat,
Or this CETHEGVS rashness; it was he,
I only watched, while he was in our walls,
As one, that had the brain, the hand, the heart.
But now, we find the contrary! Where was there
A people grieved, or a state discontent,
Able to make, or help a war against Rome,
But these, the ALLOBROGES, and those they found?
Whom had not the just gods been pleased to make
More friends unto our safety, then their own,
As it then seemed, neglecting these men's offers,
Where had we been? or where the commonwealth?
When their great Chief had been called home? this man,
Their absolute king (whose noble grandfather,
Armed in pursuit of the seditious GRACCHVS,
Took a brave wound, for dear defense of that,
Which he would spoil) had gathered all his aides
Of ruffians, slaves, and other slaughter-men?
Given us up for murder, to CETHEGVS?
The' other rank of citizens, to GABINIVS?
The city, to be fired by CASSIVS?
And Italy, nay the world, to be laid wast
By cursed CATILINE, and his accomplices?
Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers,
Think but with me you saw this glorious city,
The light of all the earth, tower of all nations,
Suddenly falling in one flame. Imagine,
You viewed your country buried with the heaps
Of slaughtered citizens, that had no grave;
This LENTVLVS here, reigning, (as he dreamp't)
And those his purple Senate; CATILINE come
With his fierce army; and the cries of matrons,
The flight of children, and the rape of virgins,
Shriekes of the living, with the dying groans
On every side t'inuade your sense; until
The blood of Rome, were mixed with her ashes!
This was the spectacle these fiends intended
To please their malice.

CET. I, and it would
Have been a brave one, Consul. But your part
Had not then been so long, as now it is:
I should have quite defeated your oration;
And slit that fine rhetorical pipe of yours,
In The first Scene.

CAT. Insolent monster!

CIC. Fathers,
Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed
Unto some safe, but a free custody,
Until the Senate can determine farther?

SEN. It pleases well.

CIC. Then, MARCUS CRASSVS,
Take you charge of GABINIVS: send him home
Unto your house. You CAESAR, of STATILIVS.
CETHEGVS shall be sent to CORNIFICIVS;
And LENTVLVS, to PVBLIVS LENTVLVS SPINTHER,
Who now is Aedile.

CAT. It were best, the Praetors
Carried 'hem to their houses, and delivered 'hem.

CIC. Let it be so. Take 'hem from hence.

CAES. But, first,
Let LENTVLVS put off his Praetor-ship.

LEN. I do resign it here unto the Senate.

CAES. So, now, there is no offense done to religion.

CAT. CAESAR, 'twas piously, and timely urged.

CIC. What do you decree to the ALLOBROGES?
That were the lights to this discovery?

CRA. A free grant, from the state, of all their suites.

CAES. And a reward, out of the public treasure.

CAT. I, and the title of honest men, to crown 'hem.

CIC. What to VOLTVRTIVS?

CAES. Life, and fauour's well.

VOL. I ask no more.

CAT. Yes, yes, some money, thou need'st it.
'Twill keep thee honest: want made thee a knave.

SYL. Let FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
Have public thanks, and QVINTVS FABIVS SANGA,
For their good service.

CRA. They deserve it all.

CAT. But what do we decree unto the Consul,
Whose virtue, counsel, watchfulness, and wisdom,
Has freed the commonwealth, and without tumult,
Slaughter, or blood, or scarce raising a force,
Rescud us all out of the jaws of fate?

CRA. We owe our lives unto him, and our fortunes.

CAES. Our wives, our children, parents, and our gods.

SYL. We all are saved, by his fortitude.

CATO. The commonwealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland.
He is the only father of his country.

CAES. Let there be public prayer, to all the gods,
Made in that name, for him.

CRA. And in these words.
For that he has, by his vigilance, preserved
Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword,
And all her citizens from massacre.

CIC. How are my labors more then paid, grave Fathers,
In these great titles, and decreed honors!
Such, as to me, first, of the civil robe,
Of any man, since Rome was Rome, have happened;
And from this frequent Senate: which more glads me,
That I now see, yo'haue sense of your own safety.
If those good days come no less grateful to us,
Wherein we are preserved from some great danger,
Then those, wherein we are borne, and brought, to light,
Because the gladness of our safety is certain,
But the condition of our birth not so;
And that we are saved with pleasure, but are borne
Without the sense of joy: why should not, then,
This day, to us, and all posterity
Of ours, be had in equal fame, and honor,
With that, when ROMULUS first reared these walls,
When so much more is saved, then he built?

CAES. It ought.

CRA. Let it be added to our Fasti.

CIC. What tumult's that?

FLA. Here Is one TARQVINIVS taken,
Going to CATILINE; and says he was sent
By MARCUS CRASSVS: whom he names, to be
Guilty of the conspiracy.

CIC. Some lying varlet.
Take him away, to prison.

CRA. Bring him in,
And let me see him.

CIC. He is not worth it, CRASSVS.
Keep him up close, and hungry, till he tell,
By whose pernicious counsel, he durst slander
So great, and good a citizen.

(CRA. By yours
I fear, 'twill prove.)

SYL. Some of the traitors, sure,
To give their action the more credit, bid him
Name you, or any man.

CIC. I know my self,
By all the tracts, and courses of this business,
CRASSVS is noble, just, and loves his country.

FLA. Here is a libell too, accusing CAESAR,
From LUCIUS VECTIVS, and confirmed by CVRIVS.

CIC. Away with all, throw it out of the court.

CAES. A trick on me, too?

CIC. It is some men's malice.
I said to CVRIVS, I did not believe him.

CAES. Was not that CVRIVS your spy, that had
Reward decreed unto him, the last Senate,
With FVLVIA, upon your private motion?

CIC. Yes.

CAES. But, he has not that reward, yet?

CIC. No.
Let not this trouble you, CAESAR, none believes it.

CAES. It shall not, if that he have no reward.
But if he have, sure I shall think my self
Very untimely, and vnsafely honest,
Where such, as he is, may have pay t'accuse me.

CIC. You shall have no wrong done you, noble CAESAR,
But all contentment.

CAES. Consul, I am silent.

CATILINE. The Army. I Never yet knew, Soldiers, that, in fight,
Words added virtue unto valiant men;
Or, that a generals oration made
An army fall, or stand: but how much prowess
Habitual, or natural each man's breast
Was owner of, so much in act it showed.
Whom neither glory' or danger can excite,
It Is vain t'attempt with speech: for the minds fear
Keeps all brave sounds from entering at that ear.
I, yet, would warn you some few things, my friends,
And give you reason of my present counsels.
You know, no less then I, what state, what point
Our affairs stand in; and you all have heard,
What a calamitous misery the sloth,
And sleepiness of LENTVLVS, has plucked
Both on himself, and us: how, whilst our aides
There, in the citie-look'd for, are defeated,
Our entrance into Gallia, too, is stopped.
Two armies wait us: one from Rome, the other
From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are,
(Although I most desire it) the great want
Of corn, and victual, forbids longer stay.
So that, of need, we must remove, but whither
The sword must both direct, and cut the passage.
I only, therefore, wish you, when you strike,
To have your valors, and your souls, about you;
And think, you carry in your laboring hands
The things you seek, glory, and liberty,
Your country, which you want now, with the Fates,
That are to be instructed, by our swords.
If we can give the blow, all will be safe to us.
We shall not want provision, nor supplies.
The colonies, and free towns will lie open.
Where, if we yield to fear, expect no place,
Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their own fortune,
And ill used arms have left without protection.
You might have lived in servitude, or exile,
Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones;
But that you thought those things unfit for men.
And, in that thought, you then were valiant.
For no man ever yet changed peace for war,
But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose.
There Is more necessity, you should be such,
In fighting for your selves, then they for others.
He Is base, that trusts his feet, whose hands are armed.
Me thinks, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
What we will do; and all the heauen' at leisure
For the great spectacle. Draw, then, your swords:
And, if our destiny envy our virtue
The honor of the day, yet let us care
To sell our selves, at such a price, as may
Vn-doe the world, to buy us; and make Fate,
While she tempts ours, fear her own estate.

THE SENATE. SEN. What means this hasty calling of the Senate?

SEN. We shall know straight. Wait, till the Consul speaks.

POM. Fathers Conscript, bethink you of your safeties,
And what to do, with these conspirators;
Some of their clients, their freed men, and slaves
'Ginne to make head: there is one of LENTVLVS bawds
Runs up and down the shops, through every street,
With money to corrupt, the poor artificers,
And needy tradesmen, to their aid. CETHEGVS
Has sent, too, to his servants; who are many,
Chosen, and exercised in bold attemptings,
That forthwith they should arm themselves, and prove
His rescue: All will be in instant vproare,
If you prevent it not, with present counsels.
We have done what we can, to meet the fury,
And will do more. Be you good to your selves.

CIC. What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
SYLLANVS, you are Consul next designed.
Your sentence, of these men.

SYL. It Is short, and this.
Since they have sought to blot the name of Rome,
Out of the world; and raze this glorious empire
With her own hands, and arms, turned on her self:
I think it fit they die. And, could my breath
Now, execute 'hem, they should not enjoy
An article of time, or eye of light,
Longer, to poison this our common air.

SEN. I think so too.

SEN. And I.

SEN. And I.

SEN. And I.

CIC. Your sentence, CAIUS CAESAR.

CAES. Conscript Fathers,
In great affairs, and doubtful, it behooues
Men, that are asked their sentence, to be free
From either hate, or love, anger, or pity:
For, where the least of these doehinder, there
The mind not easily discernes the truth.
I speak this to you, in the name of Rome,
For whom you stand; and to the present cause:
That this foul fact of LENTVLVS, and the rest,
Weigh not more with you, then your dignity;
And you be more indulgent to your passion,
Then to your honor. If there could be found
A pain, or punishment, equal to their crimes,
I would devise, and help: but, if the greatness
Of what they have done, exceed all man's invention,
I think it fit, to stay, where our laws do.
Poor petty states may alter, upon humor,
Where, if they' offend with anger, few do know it,
Because they are obscure; their fame, and fortune
Is equal, and the same. But they, that are
Head of the world, and live in that seen height,
All mankind knows their actions. So we see,
The greater fortune has the lesser license.
They must nor favor, hate, and least be angry:
For what with others is called anger, there,
Is cruelty, and pride. I know SYLLANVS,
Who spoke before me, a just, valiant man,
A lover of the state, and one that would not,
In such a business, use or grace, or hatred;
I know, too, well, his manners, and modesty:
Nor do I think his sentence cruel (for
Against such delinquents, what can be too bloody?)
But that it is abhorring from our state;
Since to a citizen of Rome, offending,
Our laws give exile, and not death. Why then
Decrees he that? 'Twere vain to think, for fear;
When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul,
All is made safe, and certain. Is It for punishment?
Why, death's the end of evils, and a rest,
Rather then torment: It dissolues all griefs.
And beyond that, is neither care, nor joy.
You hear, my sentence would not have 'hem die.
How then? set free, and increase CATILINES army?
So will they, being but banished. No, grave Fathers,
I judge 'hem, first, to have their states confiscate,
Then, that their persons remain prisoners
IN the free towns, far off from Rome, and seuer'd:
Where they might neither have relation,
Hereafter, to the Senate, or the people.
Or, if they had, those towns, then to be mulcted,
As enemies to the state, that had their guard.

SEN. It Is good, and honorable, CAESAR, has vtterd.

CIC. Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes
All bent on me, to note of these two censures,
Which I incline to. Either of them are grave,
And answering the dignity of the speakers,
The greatness of th'affaire, and both severe.
One urges death: and he may well remember
This state has punished wicked citizens so.
The other bonds: and those perpetual, which
He thinks found out for the more singular plague.
Decree, which you shall please. You have a Consul,
Not readier to obey, then to defend,
What ever you shall act, for the republique;
And meet with willing shoulders any burden,
Or any fortune, with an even face,
Though it were death: which to a valiant man
Can never happen foul, nor to a Consul
Be immature, or to a wise man wretched.

SYL. Fathers, I spoke, but as I thought: the needs
OF th'common-wealth required.

CAT. Excuse it not.

CIC. CATO, speak you your sentence.

CAT. This it is.
You here dispute, on kinds of punishment,
And stand consulting, what you should decree
Against those, of whom, you rather should beware,
This mischief is not like those common facts,
Which, when they are done, the laws may prosequute.
But this, if you provide not, ere it happen,
When it is happened, will not wait your judgment.
Good CAIUS CAESAR, here, has very well,
And subtly discoursed of life, and death,
As if he thought those things, a pretty fable,
That are delivered us of hell, and furies,
Or of the diverse way, that ill men go
From good, to filthy, dark, and ugly places.
And therefore, he would have these live; and long too;
But far from Rome, and in the small free towns,
Lest, here, they might have rescue: As if men,
Fit for such acts, were only in the city,
And not throughout all Italy? or, that boldness
Could not do more, where it found least resistance?
It Is a vain counsel, if he think them dangerous.
Which, if he do not, but that he alone,
In so great fear of all men, stand vn-frighted,
He gives me cause, and you, more to fear him.
I am plain, Fathers. Here you look about,
One at another, doubting what to do;
With faces, as you trusted to the gods,
That still have saved you; and they can do it: But,
They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers,
Can draw their aides; but vigilance, counsel, action:
Which they will be ashamed to forsake.
It Is sloth they hate, and cowardice. Here, you have
The traitors in your houses, yet, you stand,
Fearing what to do with 'hem; Let 'hem loose,
And send 'hem hence with arms, too; that your mercy
May turn your misery, as soon as't can.
O, but they, are great men, and have offended,
But, through ambition. We would spare their honor:
I, if themselves had spared it, or their fame,
Or modesty, or either god, or man:
Then I would spare 'hem. But, as things now stand,
Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit
A greater wickedness, then you would revenge.
If there had been but time, and place, for you,
To have repaired this fault, you should have made it;
It should have been your punishment, to'haue felt
Your tardie error: but necessity,
Now, bids me say, let 'hem not live an hour,
If you mean Rome should live a day. I have done.

SEN. CATO has spoken like an oracle.

CRA. Let it be so decreed.

SEN. We are all fearful.

SYL. And had been base, had not his virtue raised us.

SEN. Go forth, most worthy Consul, we will assist you.

CAES. I Am not yet changed in my sentence, Fathers.

CAT. No matter. What be those?

SER. Letters, for CAESAR.

CAT. From whom? let 'hem be read, in open Senate;
Fathers, they come from the conspirators.
I crave to have 'hem read, for the republique.

CAES. CATO, read you it. It Is a loue-letter,
From your dear sister, to me: though you hate me.
Do not discover it.

CAT. Hold thee, drunkard. Consul.
Go forth, and confidently.

CAES. You Will repent
This rashness, CICERO.

PRAE. CAESAR shall repent it.

CIC. Hold friends.

PRAE. He Is scarce a friend unto the public.

CIC. No violence. CAESAR, be safe. Lead on:
Where are the public executioners?
Bid 'hem wait on us. On, to SPINTHERS house.
Bring LENTVLVS forth. Here, you, the sad reuengers
Of capital crimes, against the public, take
This man unto your justice: strangle him.

LEN. Thou do well, Consul. 'Twas a cast at dice,
In FORTVNES hand, not long since, that thy self
Should have heard these, or other words as fatal.

CIC. Lead on, to QVINTVS CORNIFICIVS house.
Bring forth CETHEGVS. Take him to the due
Death, that he has deserved: and let it be
Said, He was once.

CET. A beast, or, what is worse,
A slave, CETHEGVS. Let that be the name
For all that is base, hereafter: That would let
This worm pronounce on him; and not have trampled
His body into -- Ha! Art thou not moved?

CIC. Justice is never angry: Take him hence.

CET. O, the whore FORTUNE! and her bawds the Fates!
That put these tricks on men, which knew the way
To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleep:
I shall grow angry with the gods, else.

CIC. Lead
To CAIUS, CAESAR, for STATILIVS.
Bring him, and rude GABINIVS, out. Here, take 'hem
To your cold hands, and let 'hem feel death from you.

GAB. I thank you, you do me a pleasure.

STA. And me too.

CAT. So, MARCUS TVLLIVS, thou may now stand up,
And call it happy Rome, thou being Consul.
Great parent of thy country, go, and let
The old men of the city, ere they die,
Kiss thee; the matrons dwell about thy neck;
The youths, and maids, lay up, against they are old,
What kind of man thou were, to tell their nephews,
When, such a year, they read, within our Fasti,
Thy Consul-ship. Who Is this? PETREIVS?

CIC* Welcome,
Welcome, renowned soldier. What Is the news?
This face can bring no ill with it, unto Rome.
How does the worthy Consul, my colleague?

PET. As well as victory can make him, sir.
He greets the Fathers, and to me has trusted
The sad relation of the civil strife;
For, in such war, the conquest still is black.

CIC. Shall we withdraw into the house of Concord?

CAT. No, happy Consul, here; let all ears take
The benefit of this tale. If he had voice,
To spread unto the poles, and strike it through
The center, to the Antipodes; It would ask it.

PET. The streights, and needs of CATILINE being such,
As he must fight with one of the two armies,
That then had near enclosed him; It pleased Fate,
To make us th'obiect of his desperate choice,
Wherein the danger almost paiz'd the honor:
And as he riss', the day grew black with him;
And Fate descended nearer to the earth,
As if she meant, to hide the name of things,
Under her wings, and make the world her quarrie.
At this we roused, lest one small minutes stay
Had left it to be' inquired, what Rome was.
And (as we ought) armed in the confidence
Of our great cause, in form of battle, stood.
Whilst CATILINE came on, not with the face
Of any man, but of a public ruin:
His countenance was a civil war it self.
And all his host had standing in their looks,
The palenesse of the death, that was to come.
Yet cried they out like vultures, and urged on,
As if they would precipitate our fates.
Nor staid we longer for 'hem; But himself
Struck the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life.
Which cut, it seemed, a narrow neck of land,
Had broke between two mighty seas; and either
Flowed into other; for so did the slaughter:
And whirled about, as when two violent tides
Meet, and not yield. The Furies stood, on hills,
Circling the place, and trembled to see men
Do more, then they: whilst piety left the field,
Grieved for that side, that, in so bad a cause,
They knew not, what a crime their valor was.
The sun stood still, and was, behind the cloud
The battle made, seen sweating, to drive up
His frighted horse, whom still the noise drove backward.
And now had fierce ENYO, like a flame,
Consumed all it could reach, and then it self;
Had not the fortune of the commonwealth
Come PALLAS-like, to every Roman thought.
Which CATILINE seeing, and that now his troops
Covered that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunkes,
Ambitious of great fame, to crown his ill,
Collected all his fury, and ran in
(Armed with a glory, high as his despair)
Into our battle, like a Lybian lion,
Upon his hunters, scornful of our weapons,
Careless of wounds, plucking down lives about him,
Till he had circled in himself with death:
Then fell he too, to embrace it where it lay.
And as, in that rebellion against the gods,
MINERVA holding forth MEDVSA'S head,
One of the giant brethren felt himself
Grow marble at the killing sight, and now,
Almost made stone, began t'inquire, what flint,
What rock it was, that crept through all his limbs,
And, ere he could think more, was that he feared;
So CATILINE, at the sight of Rome in us,
Became his tomb: yet did his look retain
Some of his fierceness, and his hands still moved,
As if he labored, yet, to graspe the state,
With those rebellious parts.

CAT. A brave bad death.
Had this been honest now, and for his country,
As 'twas against it, who had ere fallen greater?

CIC. Honored PETREIVS, Rome, not I, must thank you.
How modestly has he spoken of himself!

CAT. He did the more.

CIC. Thanks to the immortal gods,
Romans, I now am paid for all my labors,
My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude
Your praises, triumphs, honors, and rewards,
Decreed to me: only the memory
Of this glad day, if I may know it live
Within your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience,
Which I must always study before fame.
Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
And ever is ill got, without the first.

THE END.
This Tragoedie was first Acted, in the year 1611.

By the KINGS Majesty's SERVANTS.

The principal Tragoedians were. RIC. BVRBADGE. ALEX. COOK. IOH. LOWIN. WILL.
OSTLER. RIC. ROBINSON. IOH. HEMINGS. HEN. CONDEL. IOH. UNDERWOOD. NIC. TOOLY.
WILL. EGLESTONE.


With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.

EPIGRAMMES. I. BOOK.

The Author B. I.

LONDON,

M. DC. XVI.

TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HONOR AND VERTVE, THE MOST NOBLE WILLIAM, EARL OF
PEMBROKE, L. CHAMBERLAYNE, etc.
MY LORD. While you cannot change your merit, I dare not change your title: It
was that made it, and not I. Under which name, I here offer to your Lo: the
ripest of my studies, my Epigrammes; which, though they carry danger in the
sound, do not therefore seek your shelter: For, when I made them, I had
nothing in my conscience, to expressing of which I did need a cipher. But, if I
be fallen into those times, wherein, for the likeness of vice, and facts, every
one thinks another ill deeds objected to him; and that in their ignorant and
guilty mouths, the common voice is (for their security) Beware the Poet,
confessing, therein, so much love to their diseases, as they would rather make
a party for them, then be either rid, or told of them: I must expect, at your
Lo: hand, the protection of truth, and liberty, while you are constant to your
own goodness. In thanks whereof, I return you the honor of leading forth so
many good, and great names (as my verses mention on the better part) to their
remembrance with posterity. Amongst whom, if I have praised, unfortunately,
any one, that does not deserve; or, if all answer not, in all numbers, the
pictures I have made of them: I hope it will be forgiven me, that they are no
ill pieces, though they be not like the persons. But I foresee a nearer fate to
my book, then this: that the vices therein will be owned before the virtues
(though, there, I have avoided all particulars, as I have done names) and that
some will be so ready to discredit me, as they will have the impudence to
belie themselves. For, if I meant them not, it is so. Nor, can I hope
otherwise. For, why should they remit any thing of their riot, their pride,
their self-love, and other inherent graces, to consider truth or virtue; but,
with the trade of the world, lend their long ears against men they love not:
and hold their dear Mountebanke, or Iester, in far better condition, then
all the study, or studiers of humanity? For such, I would rather know them by
their visards, still, then they should publish their faces, at their peril, in
my Theater, where CATO, if he lived, might enter without scandal.

Your Lo: most faithful honorer, BEN. IONSON.

EPIGRAMMES.
I. TO THE READER.
PRay thee, take care, that take my book in hand,
To read it well: that is, to understand.
II. TO MY BOOK.
IT will be looked for, book, when some but see
Thy title, Epigrammes, and named of me,
Thou should be bold, licentious, full of gall,
Wormwood, and sulphur, sharp, and toothed withal;
Become a petulant thing, hurl ink, and wit,
As madmen stones: not caring whom they hit.
Deceive their malice, who could wish it so.
And by thy wiser temper, let men know
Thou art not covetous of least self fame,
Made from the hazard of another shame:
Much less with lewd, profane, and beastly phrase,
To catch the worlds loose laughter, or vain gaze.
He that departs with his own honesty
For vulgar praise, does it too dearly buy.
III. TO MY BOOKE-SELLER.
THou, that make gain thy end, and wisely well,
Call'st a book good, or bad, as it does sell,
Use mine so, too: I give thee leave. But crave
For the lucks sake, it thus much favor have.
(...) (...) By that one spell he lives, eats, drinks, arrayes
Himself: his whole reuennue is, god pays.
The quarter day is come; the hostess says,
She must have money: he returns, god pays.
The tailor brings a suite home; he it 'ssayes,
Looks over the bill, likes it: and says, god pays.
He steals to ordinaries; there he plays
At dice his borrowed money: which, god pays.
Then takes up fresh commodity, for days;
Signs to new bond, forfeits: and cries, god pays.
That lost, he keeps his chamber, reads Essays,
Takes physic, tears the papers: still god pays.
Or else by water goes, and so to plays;
Calls for his stool, adornes the stage: god pays.
To every cause he meets, this voice he brayes:
His only answer is to all, god pays.
Not his poor cocatrice but he betrays
Thus: and for his letcherie, scores, god pays.
But see! the old baud has served him in his trim,
Lent him a pockie whore. She has paid him.
XIII. TO DOCTOR EMPIRICK*
WHen men a dangerous disease did escape,
Of old, they gave a cock to AESCVLAPE;
Let me give two: that doubly am got free,
From my diseases danger, and from thee.
XIIII. TO WILLIAM CAMDEN*
CAMDEN, most reverend head, to whom I owe
All that I am in arts, all that I know.
(How nothing's that?) to whom my country owes
The great renown, and name wherewith she goes.
Then thee the age sees not that thing more grave,
More high, more holy, that she more would crave.
What name, what skill, what faith have thou in things!
What sight in searching the most antique springs!
What weight, and what authority in thy speech!
Man scarce can make that doubt, but thou can teach.
Pardon free truth, and let thy modesty,
Which conquers all, be once overcome by thee.
Many of thine this better could, then I,
But for their powers, accept my piety.
XV. ON COVRT-WORME.
ALL men are worms: But this no man. In silk
'Twas brought to court first wrapped, and white as milk;
Where, afterward, it grew a butter-flye:
Which was a cater-piller. So it will dye.
XVI. TO BRAYNE-HARDIE.
HARDY, thy brain is valiant, it is confessed,
Thou more; that with it every day, dare jest
Thy self into fresh braules: when, called upon,
Scarce thy weeks swearing brings thee of, of one.
So, in short time, thou art in arrerage grown
Some hundred quarrels, yet do thou fight none;
Nor need'st thou: for those few, by oath releast,
Make good what thou dare do in all the rest.
Keep thy self there, and think thy valor right,
He that dares damn himself, dares more then fight.
XVII. TO THE LEARNED CRITIC.
MAy others fear, fly, and traduce thy name,
As guilty men do magistrates: glad I,
That wish my poemes a legitimate fame,
Charge them, for crown, to thy sole censure hye.
And, but a sprigge of bays, given by thee,
Shall out-liue gyrlands, stolen from the chaste tree.
XVIII. TO MY MERE ENGLISH CENSVRER.
TO thee, my way in Epigrammes seems new,
When both it is the old way, and the true.
Thou say, that cannot be: for thou have seen
DAVIS, and WEEVER, and the best have been,
And mine come nothing like. I hope so. Yet,
As theirs did with thee, mine might credit get:
If thou'ldst but use thy faith, as thou did then,
When thou were wont t'admire, not censure men.
Pr'y thee believe still, and not judge so fast,
Thy faith is all the knowledge that thou have.
XIX. ON SIR COD THE PERFVMED.
THat COD can get no widow, yet a knight,
I sent the cause: He wooes with an ill sprite.
XX. TO THE SAME SIR COD.
The Expense in odours is a most vain sin,
Except thou could, Sir COD, wear them within.
XXI. ON REFORMED GAM'STER.
LOrd, how is GAM'STER changed! his hair close cut!
His neck fenced round with ruff! his eyes half shut!
His clothes two fashions of, and poor! his sword
Forbidd' his side! and nothing, but the word
Quick in his lips! who has this wonder wrought?
The late'tane bastinado. So I thought.
What several ways men to their calling have!
The bodies stripes, I see, the soul may save.
XXII. ON MY FIRST DAVGHTER.
HEre lies to each her parents ruth,
MARY, the daughter of their youth:
Yet, all heavens gifts, being heavens due,
It makes the father, less, to rue.
At six months end, she parted hence
With safety of her innocence;
Whose soul heavens Queen, (whose name she bears)
In comfort of her mothers tears,
Has placed amongst her virgin-traine:
Where, while that seuer'd does remain,
This grave partakes the fleshly birth.
Which cover lightly, gentle earth.
XXIII. TO JOHN DONE.
DONE, the delight of PHOEBVS, and each Muse,
Who, to thy one, all other brains refuse;
Whose every work, of thy most early wit,
Came forth example, and remains so, yet:
Longer a knowing, then most wits do live.
And which no affection praise enough can give!
To it, thy language, letters, arts, best life,
Which might with half mankind maintain a strife.
All which I meant to praise, and, yet, I would;
But leave, because I cannot as I should!
XXIIII. TO THE PARLIAMENT.
There Is reason good, that you good laws should make^
Men's manners never were viler, for your sake.
XXV. ON SIR VOLVPTVOVS BEAST.
WHile BEAST instructs his fair, and innocent wife,
In the past pleasures of his sensual life,
Telling the motions of each petticote,
And how his GANIMEDE moved, and how his goat,
And now, her (hourly) her own cucqueane makes,
In varied shapes, which for his lust she takes:
What does he else, but say, leave to be cha^t,
Just wife, and, to change me, make woman's have.
XXVI. ON THE SAME BEAST.
THen his cha^t wife, though BEAST now know no more,
He'adulters still: his thoughts lie with a whore.
XXVII. ON SIR JOHN ROE.
IN place of scutcheons, that should deck thy hearse,
Take better ornaments, my tears, and verse.
If any sword could save from Fates, ROE'S could;
If any Muse out-liue their spite, his can;
If any friends tears could restore, his would;
If any pious life ere lifted man
To heaven; his has: O happy state! wherein
We, sad for him, may glory, and not sin.
XXVIII. ON DON SVRLY.
DON SVRLY, to aspire the glorious name
Of a great man, and to be thought the same,
Makes serious use of all great trade he knows.
He speaks to men with a Rhinocerotes nose,
Which he thinks great; and so reads verses, too:
And, that is done, as he saw great men do.
H' has tympanies of business, in his face,
And, can forget men's names, with a great grace.
He will both argue, and discourse in oaths,
Both which are great. And laugh at ill made clothes;
That Is greater, yet: to cry his own up neat.
He does, at meals, alone, his pheasant eat.
Which is maine greatness. And, at his still board,
He drinks to no man: that is, too, like a lord.
He keeps another wife, which is a spice
Of solemn greatness. And he dares, at dice,
Blaspheme god, greatly. Or some poor hind beat,
That breathes in his dogs way: and this is great.
Nay more, for greatness sake, he will be one
May hear my Epigrammes, but like of none.
SVRLY, use other arts, these only can
Style thee a most great fool, but no great man.
XXIX. TO SIR ANNVAL TILTER.
TILTER, the most may'admire thee, though not I:
And thou, right guiltless, may plead to it, why?
For thy late sharp device. I say it is fit
All brains, at times of triumph, should run wit.
For then, our water-conduits do run wine;
But that is put in, thou wilt say. Why, so is thine.
XXX. TO PERSON GVILTIE.
GVILTIE, be wise; and though thou know the crimes
Be thine, I tax, yet do not own my rimes:
'Twere madness in thee, to betray thy fame,
And person to the world; ere I thy name.
XXXI. ON BANCK THE VSVRER.
BANCK feels no lamenesse of his knottie gout,
His monyes travail for him, in and out:
And though the soundest legs go every day,
He toils to be at hell, as soon as they.
XXXII. ON SIR JOHN ROE.
WHat two brave perils of the private sword
Could not effect, not all the furies do,
That selfe-diuided Belgia did afford;
What not the envy of the seas reached too,
The cold of Mosco, and fat Irish air,
His often change of clime (though not of mind)
What could not work; at home in his repair
Was his blessed fate, but our hard lot to find.
Which shows, where ever death does please t'appeare,
Seas, serenes, swords, shot, sickness, all are there.
XXXIII. TO THE SAME.
I Will not offend thee with a vain tear more,
Glad-mention'd ROE: thou art but gone before,
Whither the world must follow. And I, now,
Breathe to expect my when, and make my how.
Which if most gracious heaven grant like thine,
Who wets my grave, can be no friend of mine.
XXXIIII. OF DEATH.
HE that fears death, or mournes it, in the just,
Shows of the resurrection little trust.
(...) (...) The children, that he keeps, GILES swears are none
Of his begetting. And so swears his IONE.
In all affections she concurreth still.
If, now, with man and wife, to will, and nill
The selfsame things, a note of concord be:
I know no couple better can agree!
XLIII. TO ROBERT EARL OF SALISBVRIE.
WHat need have thou of me? or of my Muse?
Whose actions so themselves do celebrate?
Which should thy countries love to speak refuse,
Her foes enough would fame thee in their hate.
'Tofore, great men were glad of Poets: Now,
I, not the worst, am covetous of thee.
Yet dare not, to my thought, lest hope allow
Of adding to thy fame; thine may to me,
When in my book, men read but CECILL'S name,
And what I write thereof find far, and free
From servile flattery (common Poets shame)
As thou stand'st clear of the necessity.
XLIIII. ON CHVFFE, BANCKS THE VSVRER'S KINSMAN.
CHVFFE, lately rich in name, in chattels, goods,
And rich in issue to inherit all,
Ere blacks were bought for his own funeral,
Saw all his race approach the blacker floods:
He meant they thither should make swift repair,
When he made him executor, might be heir.
XLV. ON MY FIRST SON.
FArewell, thou child of my right hand, and joy;
My sin was too much hope of thee, loved boy,
Seven years tho'wert lent to me, and I thee pay,
Exacted by thy fate, on the just day.
O, could I loose all father, now. For why
Will man lament the state he should envy?
To have so soon escaped worlds, and fleshes rage,
And, if no other misery, yet age?
Rest in soft peace, and, asked, say here does lie
BEN. IONSON his best piece of poetry.
For whose sake, henceforth, all his vows be such,
As what loves may never like too much.
XLVI. TO SIR LVCKLESSE WOO-ALL.
IS this the Sir, who, some wast wife to win,
A knighthood bought, to go a wooing in?
It Is LVCKLESSE he, that took up one on band
To pay at's day of marriage. By my hand
The knight-wright's cheated then: He Will never pay.
Yes, now he wears his knighthood every day.
XLVII. TO THE SAME.
SIr LVCKLESSE, troth, for lucks sake pass by one:
He that wooes every widow, will get none.
XLVIII. ON MVNGRIL ESQVIRE.
HIs bought arms MVNG' not liked; for his first day
Of bearing them in field, he threw'hem away:
And has no honor lost our Due'llists say.
XLIX. TO PLAY-WRIGHT.
PLAY-WRIGHT me reads, and still my verses damnes,
He says, I want the tongue of Epigrammes;
I have no salt: no bawdrie he does mean.
For witty, in his language, is obscene.
PLAY-WRIGHT, I loath to have thy manners known
In my chaste book: profess them in thine own.
L. TO SIR COD.
Leave COD, tabacco-like, burnt gummes to take,
Or fumie clysters, thy moist lungs to bake:
Arsenike would thee fit for society make.
(...) (...)
LVIII. TO GROOM IDIOT.
IDIOT, last night, I prayed thee but forbear
To read my verses; now I must to hear:
For offering, with thy smiles, my wit to grace,
Thy ignorance still laughs in the wrong place.
And so my sharpness thou no less dis-ioynts,
Then thou did late my sense, loosing my points.
So have I seen at CHRIST-masse sports one lost,
And, hood-winked, for a man, embrace a post.
LIX. ON SPIES.
SPIES, you are lights in state, but of base stuff,
Who, when you'haue burnt your selves down to the snuff,
Stink, and are thrown away. End fair enough.
LX. TO WILLIAM LORD MOVNTEAGLE.
Lo, what my country should have done (have raised
An obeliske, or column to thy name,
Or, if she would but modestly have praised
Thy fact, in brass or marble writ the same)
I, that am glad of thy great chance, here do!
And proud, my work shall out-last common deeds,
Durst think it great, and worthy wonder too,
But thine, for which I do it, so much exceeds!
My countries parents I have many known;
But sauer of my country thee alone.
LXI. TO FOOL, OR KNAVE.
THy praise, or dispraise is to me alike,
One does not stroke me, nor the other strike.
LXII. TO FINE LADY WOVLD-BEE.
FIne MADAME WOVLD-BEE, wherefore should you fear,
That love to make so well, a child to bear?
The world reputes you barren: but I know
Your 'pothecarie, and his drug says no.
Is it the pain affrights? that is soon forgot.
Or your complexions loss? you have a pot,
That can restore that. Will it hurt your feature?
To make amends, yo'are thought a wholesome creature.
What should the cause be? Oh, you live at court:
And there is both loss of time, and loss of sport
In a great belly. Write, then on thy womb,
Of the not borne, yet buried, here is the tomb.
LXIII. TO ROBERT EARL OF SALISBVRIE.
WHo can consider thy right courses run,
With what thy virtue on the times has won,
And not thy fortune; who can clearly see
The judgment of the king so shine in thee;
And that thou seek'st reward of thy each act,
Not from the public voice, but private fact;
Who can behold all envy so declined
By constant suffering of thy equal mind;
And can to these be silent, Salisburie,
Without his, thine, and all times injury?
Cursed be his Muse, that could lie dumb, or hid
To so true worth, though thou thy self forbid.
LXIIII. TO THE SAME. Upon the accession of the Treasurer-ship to him.
NOt glad, like those that have new hopes, or suits,
With thy new place, bring I these early fruits
Of love, and what the golden age did hold
A treasure, art: contemned in the age of gold.
Nor glad as those, that old dependents be,
To see thy fathers rites new laid on thee.
Nor glad for fashion. Nor to show a fit
Of flattery to thy titles. Nor of wit.
But I am glad to see that time survive*
Where merit is not sepulcher'd alive.
(...) (...) Delay is bad, doubt worse, depending worst;
Each best day of our life escapes us, first.
Then, since we (more then many) these truths know:
Though life be short, let us not make it so.
LXXI. ON COVRT-PARRAT.
TO pluck down mine, POLL sets up new wits still,
Still, it is his luck to praise me against his will.
LXXII. TO COVRT-LING.
I Grieve not, COVRTLING, thou art started up
A chamber-critick, and do dine, and sup
At MADAMES table, where thou make all wit
Go high, or low, as thou will value it.
It Is not thy judgment breeds the prejudice,
Thy person only, COVRTLING, is the vice.
LXXIII. TO FINE GRAND.
WHat is it, fine GRAND, makes thee my friendship fly,
Or take an Epigramme so fearfully:
As't were a challenge, or a borrowers letter?
The world must know your greatness is my debtor.
In-primis, GRAND, you owe me for a jest;
I lent you, on mere acquaintance, at a feast.
Item, a tale or two, some fortnight after;
That yet maintaynes you, and your house in laughter.
Item, the babylonian song you sing;
Item, a fair greek poesy for a ring:
With which a learned Madame you belie.
Item, a charm surrounding fearfully,
Your partie-per-pale picture, one half drawn
In solemn cypres, the other cob-web-lawne.
Item, a gulling imprese for you, at tilt.
Item, your mistress anagram, in your hilt.
Item, your own, sewed in your mistress smock.
Item, an epitaph on my lords cock,
In most vile verses, and cost me more pain,
Then had I made 'hem good, to fit your vain.
Forty things more, dear GRAND, which you know true,
For which, or pay me quickly', or I Will pay you.
LXXIIII. TO THOMAS LORD CHANCELLOR.
Whilst thy weighed judgments, EGERTON, I hear,
And know thee, then, a judge, not of one year;
Whilst I behold thee live with purest hands;
That no affection in thy voice commands;
That still thou art present to the better cause;
And no less wise, then skillful in the laws;
Whilst thou art certain to thy words, once gone,
As is thy conscience, which is always one:
The Virgin, long-since fled from earth, I see,
To Our times returned, has made her heaven in thee.
LXXV. ON LIP, THE TEACHER.
I Cannot think there is that antipathy
'Twixt puritanes, and players, as some cry;
Though LIP, at PAVLS, ran from his text away,
T'inueigh against plays: what did he then but play?
LXXVI. ON LVCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
THis morning, timely rapt with holy fire,
I thought to form unto my zealous Muse,
What kind of creature I could most desire,
To honor, serve, and love; as Poets use.
I meant to make her fair, and free, and wise,
Of greatest blood, and yet more good then great;
I meant the day star should not brighter rise,
Nor lend like influence from his lucent seat.
I meant she should be courteous, facile, sweet,
Hating that solemn vice of greatness, pride;
I meant each softest virtue, there should meet,
Fit in that softer bosom to reside.
Only a learned, and a manly soul
I purposed her; that should, with even powers,
The rock, the spindle, and the sheeres control
Of destiny, and spin her own free hours.
Such when I meant to feign, and wished to see,
My Muse bad, Bedford write, and that was she.
LXXVII. TO ONE THAT DESIRED ME NOT TO NAME HIM.
BE safe, nor fear thy self so good a fame,
That, any way, my book should speak thy name:
For, if thou shame, ranck'd with my friends, to go,
I Am more ashamed to have thee thought my foe.
LXXVIII. TO HORNET.
HORNET, thou have thy wife dressed, for the stall,
To draw thee custom: but her self gets all.
LXXIX. TO ELIZABETH COUNTESS OF RVTLAND.
THat Poets are far rarer births then kings,
Your noblest father proved: like whom, before,
Or then, or since, about our Muses springs,
Came not that soul exhausted so their store.
Hence was it, that the destinies decreed
(Save that most masculine issue of his brain)
No male unto him: who could so exceed
Nature, they thought, in all, that he would feign.
At which, she happily displeased, made you:
On whom, if he were living now, to look,
He should those rare, and absolute numbers view,
As he would burn, or better far his book.
LXXX. OF LIFE, AND DEATH.
THe ports of death are sins; of life, good deeds:
Through which, our merit leads us to our meeds.
How wilful blind is he then, that would stray,
And has it, in his powers, to make his way!
This world deaths region is, the other life's:
And here, it should be one of our first strifes,
So to front death, as men might judge us past it.
For good men but see death, the wicked taste it.
LXXXI. TO PROVLE THE PLAGIARY.
Forbear to tempt me, PROVLE, I will not show
A line unto thee, till the world it know;
Or that I'haue by two good sufficient men,
To be the wealthy witness of my pen:
For all thou hear'st, thou swear'st thy self did do.
Thy wit lives by it, PROVLE, and belly too.
Which, if thou leave not soon (though I am loath)
I must a libell make, and cosen both.
LXXXII. ON CASHIERD CAPT. SVRLY.
SVRLY'S old whore in her new silks does swim:
He cast, yet keeps her well! No, she keeps him.
LXXXIII. TO A FRIEND.
TO put out the word, whore, thou do me woo,
Throughout my book. 'Troth put out woman too.
LXXXIIII. TO LVCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
MADAME, I told you late how I repented,
I asked a lord a buck, and he denied me;
And, ere I could ask you, I was prevented:
For your most noble offer had supplied me.
Straight went I home; and there most like a Poet,
I fancied to my self, what wine, what wit
I would have spent: how every Muse should know it,
And PHOEBVS-selfe should be at eating it.
O Madame, if your grant did thus transfer me,
Make it your gift. See whither that will bear me.
LXXXV. TO SIR HENRY GOODYERE.
GOODYERE, I Am glad, and grateful to report,
My self a witness of thy few days sport:
Where I both learned, why wisemen hawking follow,
And why that bird was sacred to APOLLO,
She does instruct men by her gallant flight,
That they to knowledge so should toure upright,
And never stoop, but to strike ignorance:
Which if they miss, they yet should re-aduance
To former height, and there in circle tarry,
Till they be sure to make the fool their quarrie.
Now, in whose pleasures I have this discerned,
What would his serious actions me have learned?
LXXXVI. TO THE SAME.
WHen I would know thee GOODYERE, my thought looks
Upon thy wel-made choice of friends, and books;
Then do I love thee, and behold thy ends
In making thy friends books, and thy books friends:
Now, I must give thy life, and deed, the voice
Attending such a study, such a choice.
Where, though it be love, that to thy praise does move
It was a knowledge, that begat that love.
LXXXVII. ON CAPTAIN HAZARD THE CHEATER.
Touched with the sin of false play, in his punque,
HAZARD a month forsware his; and grew drunk,
Each night, to drown his cares: But when the gain
Of what she had wrought came in, and waked his brain,
Upon th'accompt, hers grew the quicker trade.
Since when, he is sober again, and all play's made.
LXXXVIII. ON ENGLISH MOVNSIEVR.
WOuld you believe, when you this MOVNSIEVR see,
That his whole body should speak french, not he?
That so much skarfe of France, and hat, and fether,
And shoe, and tie, and garter should come hither,
And land on one, whose face durst never be
Toward the sea, farther then halfe-way tree?
That he, vntrauell'd, should be french so much,
As frenchmen in his company, should seem dutch?
Or had his father, when he did him get,
The french disease, with which he labors yet?
Or hung some MOVNSIEVRS picture on the wall,
By which his damme conceived him clothes and all?
Or is it some french statue? No: 'T does move,
And stoop, and cringe. O then, it needs must prove
The new french-taylors motion, monthly made,
Daily to turn in PAVLS, and help the trade.
LXXXIX. TO EDWARD ALLEN.
IF Rome so great, and in her wisest age,
Feared not to boast the glories of her stage,
As skillful ROSCIVS, and grave AESOPE, men,
Yet crowned with honors, as with riches, then;
Who had no less a trumpet of their name,
Then CICERO, whose every breath was fame:
How can so great example dye in me,
That, ALLEN, I should pause to publish thee?
Who both their graces in thy self have more
Out-stript, then they did all that went before:
And present worth in all do so contract,
As others speak, but only thou do act.
Wear this renown. It Is just, that who did give
So many Poets life, by one should live.
XC. ON MILL. MY LADIES WOMAN.
WHen MILL first came to court, the vnprositing fool,
Unworthy such a mistress, such a school,
Was dull, and long, ere she would go to man:
At last, ease, appetite, and example wan
The nicer thing to taste her ladies page;
And, finding good security in his age,
Went on: and proving him still, day by day,
Discerned no difference of his years, or play.
Not though that hair grew brown, which once was amber,
And he grown youth, was called to his ladies chamber,
Still MILL continued: Nay, his face growing worse,
And he removed to gent'man of the horse,
MILL was the same. Since, both his body and face
Blown up; and he (too'vnwieldie for that place)
(...) (...) Willing to expiate the fault in thee,
Wherewith, against thy blood, they'offenders be.
XCIIII. TO LVCY, COUNTESS OF BEDFORD, WITH Mr. DONNES SATYRS.
LVCY, you brightness of our sphere, who are
Life of the Muses day, their morning-starre!
If works (not the authors) their own grace should look,
Whose poemes would not wish to be your book?
But these, desired by you, the makers ends
Crown with their own. Rare poemes ask rare friends.
Yet, Satyrs, since the most of mankind be
Their vn-auoided subject, fewest see:
For none ere took that pleasure in sins sense,
But, when they heard it taxed, took more offense.
They, then, that living where the matter is bred,
Dare for these poemes, yet, both ask, and read,
And like them too; must needfully, though few,
Be of the best: and amongst those, best are you.
LVCY, you brightness of our sphere, who are
The Muses evening, as their morning-starre.
XCV. TO SIR HENRY SAVILE.
IF, my religion safe, I durst embrace
That stranger doctrine of PYTHAGORAS,
I should believe, the soul of TACITUS
In thee, most weighty SAVILE, lived to us:
So have thou rendered him in all his bounds,
And all his numbers, both of sense, and sounds.
But when I read that special piece, restored,
Where NERO falls, and GALBA is adored,
To thine own proper I ascribe then more;
And gratulate the breach, I grieved before:
Which Fate (it seems) caused in the history,
Only to boast thy merit in supply.
O, would thou add like hand, to all the rest!
Or, better work! were thy glad country blessed,
To have her story wouen in thy thread;
MINERVAES loome was never richer spread.
For who can master those great parts like thee,
That live from hope, from fear, from faction free;
That have thy breast so clear of present crimes,
Thou need'st not shrink at voice of aftertimes;
Whose knowledge claymeth at the helm to stand;
But, wisely, thrusts not forth a forward hand,
No more then SALVST in the Roman state!
As, then, his cause, his glory emulate.
Although to write be lesser then to do,
It is the next deed, and a great one too.
We need a man that knows the several graces
Of history, and how to apt their places;
Where brevity, where splendour, and where height,
Where sweetness is required, and where weight;
We need a man, can speak of the intents,
The counsels, actions, orders, and events
Of state, and censure them: we need his pen
Can write the things, the causes, and the men.
But most we need his faith (and all have you)
That dares nor write things false, nor hide things true.
XCVI. TO JOHN DONE.
WHo shall doubt, DONE, where I a Poet be,
When I dare send my Epigrammes to thee?
That so alone can judge, so'alone do make:
And, in thy censures, euenly, do take
As free simplicity, to dis-auow,
As thou have best authority, t'allow.
Read all I send: and, if I find but one
Marked by thy hand, and with the better stone,
My title's sealed. Those that for claps do write,
Let pui'nees, porters, players praise delight,
And, till they burst, their backs, like asses load:
A man should seek great glory, and not broad.
XCVII. ON THE NEW MOTION.
SEe you yond' Motion? Not the old Fa-ding,
Nor Captain POD, nor yet the Eltham-thing;
But one more rare, and in the case so new:
His cloak with orient velvet quite lined through,
His rosy ties and garters so ore-blowne,
By his each glorious parcel to be known!
He wont was to encounter me, aloud,
Where ere he met me; now he is dumb, or proud.
Know you the cause? H'has neither land, nor lease,
Nor baudie stock, that trauells for increase,
Nor office in the town, nor place in court,
Nor'bout the bears, nor noise to make lords sport.
He is no favorites favorite, no dear trust
Of any Madames, has neadd squires, and must.
Nor did the king of Denmark him salute,
When he was here. Nor has he got a suit,
Since he was gone, more then the one he wears.
Nor are the Queens most honored maids by the ears
About his form. What then so swells each lim?
Only his clothes have ouer-leauen'd him.
XCVIII. TO SIR THOMAS ROE.
THou have begun well, ROE, which stand well too,
And I know nothing more thou have to do.
He that is round within himself, and straight,
Need seek no other strength, no other height;
Fortune upon him breaks her self, if ill,
And what would hurt his virtue makes it still.
That thou at once, then, nobly may defend
With thine own course the judgment of thy friend,
Be always to thy gathered self the same:
And study conscience, more then thou would fame.
Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
And ever is ill got without the first.
XCIX. TO THE SAME.
THat thou have kept thy love, encreast thy will,
Bettered thy trust to letters; that thy skill;
Have taught thy self worthy thy pen to tread,
And that to write things worthy to be read:
How much of great example were thou, ROE,
If time to facts, as unto men would owe?
But much it now auailes, what is done, of whom:
The selfsame deeds, as diversely they come,
From place, or fortune, are made high, or low,
And even the praisers judgment suffers so.
Well, though thy name less then our great ones be,
Thy fact is more: let truth encourage thee.
C. ON PLAY-WRIGHT.
PLAY-WRIGHT, by chance, hearing some toys I'had writ,
Cried to my face, they were the elixir of wit:
And I must now believe him: for, to day,
Five of my jests, then stolen, past him a play.
CI. INVITING A FRIEND TO SVPPER.
TO night, grave sir, both my poor house, and I
Do equally desire your company:
Not that we think us worthy such a ghest,
But that your worth will dignifie our feast,
With those that come; whose grace may make that seem
Something, which, else, could hope for no esteem.
It is the fair acceptance, Sir, creates
The entertaynment perfect: not the cates.
Yet shall you have, to rectify your palate,
An olive, capers, or some better sallade
Vshring the mutton; with a short-leg'd hen,
If we can get her, full of eggs, and then,
Limons, and wine for sauce: to these, a coney
Is not to be despaired of, for our money;
And, though foul, now, be scarce, yet there are clerks,
The sky not falling, think we may have larkes.
I Will tell you of more, and lie, so you will come:
Of partrich, pheasant, wood-cock, of which some
May yet be there; and godwit, if we can:
Knat, rail, and ruff too. How so ere, my man
Shall read a piece of VIRGIL, TACITUS,
LIVIE, or of some better book to us,
Of which we will speak our minds, amidst our meat;
And I Will profess no verses to repeat:
To this, if ought appear, which I know not of,
That will the pastrie, not my paper, show of.
Digestive cheese, and fruit there sure will be;
But that, which most does take my Muse, and me,
Is a pure cup of rich Canary-wine,
Which is the Mermaids, now, but shall be mine:
Of which had HORACE, or ANACREON tasted,
Their lives, as do their lines, till now had lasted.
Tobacco, Nectar, or the Thespian spring,
Are all but LVTHERS beer, to this I sing.
Of this we will sup free, but moderately,
And we will have no Pooly', or Parrot by;
Nor shall our cups make any guilty men:
But, at our parting, we will be, as when
We innocently met. No simple word,
That shall be vtter'd at our mirthfull board,
Shall make us sad next morning: or affright
The liberty, that we will enjoy to night.
CII. TO WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE.
I Do but name thee PEMBROKE, and I find
It is an Epigramme, on all mankind;
Against the bad, but of, and to be good:
Both which are asked, to have thee understood.
Nor could the age have mist thee, in this strife
Of vice, and virtue; wherein all great life
Almost, is exercised: and scarce one knows,
To which, yet, of the sides himself he owes.
They follow virtue, for reward, to day;
To morrow vice, if she give better pay:
And are so good, and bad, just at a price,
As nothing else discernes the vertue' or vice.
But thou, whose noblesse keeps one stature still,
And one true posture, though besieged with ill
Of what ambition, faction, pride can raise;
Whose life, even they, that envy it, must praise;
That art so reuerenc'd, as thy coming in,
But in the view, does interrupt their sin;
Thou must draw more: and they, that hope to see
The commonwealth still safe, must study thee.
CIII. TO MARY LADY WROTH.
HOw well, fair crown of your fair sex, might he,
That but the twilight of your sprite did see,
And noted for what flesh such souls were framed,
Know you to be a SYDNEY, though vn-nam'd?
And, being named, how little does that name
Need any Muses praise to give it fame?
Which is, it self, the imprese of the great,
And glory of them all, but to repeat!
Forgive me then, if mine but say you are
A SYDNEY: but in that extend as far
As lowdest praisers, who perhaps would find
For every part a character assigned.
My praise is plain, and where so ere professed,
Becomes none more then you, who need it least.
CIIII. TO SVSAN COUNTESS OF MONTGOMERY.
WEre they that named you, prophets? Did they see,
Even in the dew of grace, what you would be?
Or did our times require it, to behold
A new SUSANNA, equal to that old?
Or, because some scarce think that story true,
To make those faithful, did the Fates send you?
And to your Scene lent no less dignity
Of birth, of match, of form, of chastity?
Or, more then borne for the comparison
Of former age, or glory of our one,
Were you advanced, past those times, to be
The light, and mark unto posterity?
Judge they, that can: Here I have raised to show
A picture, which the world for yours must know,
And like it too; if they look equally:
If not, it is fit for you, some should envy.
CV. TO MARY LADY WROTH.
MADAME, had all antiquity been lost,
All history sealed up, and fables crossed;
That we had left us, nor by time, nor place,
Least mention of a Nymph, a Muse, a Grace,
But even their names were to be made anew,
Who could not but create them all, from you?
He, that but saw you wear the wheaten hat,
Would call you more then CERES, if not that:
And, dressed in shepherds tire, who would not say:
You were the bright OENONE, FLORA, or May?
If dancing, all would cry the Idalian Queen,
Were leading forth the Graces on the green:
And, armed to the chase, so bare her bow
DIANA'alone, so hit, and hunted so.
There Is none so dull, that for your style would ask,
That saw you put on PALLAS plumed caske:
Or, keeping your due state, that would not cry,
There IVNO sat, and yet no Peacock by.
So are you Natures Index, and restore,
In Your self, all treasure lost of the age before.
CVI. TO SIR EDWARD HERBERT.
IF men get name, for some one virtue: Then,
What man art thou, that art so many men,
All-vertuous HERBERT! on whose every part
Truth might spend all her voice, Fame all her art.
Whether thy learning they would take, or wit,
Or valor, or thy judgment seasoning it,
Thy standing upright to thy self, thy ends
Like straight, thy piety to God, and friends:
Their latter praise would still the greatest be,
And yet, they, all together, less then thee.
CVII. TO CAPTAIN HVNGRY.
Do what you come for, Captain, with your news;
That Is, sit, and eat: do not my ears abuse.
I often look on false coin, to know it from true:
Not that I love it, more, then I will you.
Tell the gross Dutch those grosser tales of yours,
How great you were with their two Emperors;
And yet are with their Princes: Fill them full
Of your Morauian horse, Venetian bull.
Tell them, what parts yo'haue taken, whence run away,
What States yo'haue gulled, and which yet keeps yo'in pay.
Give them your services, and embassies
In Ireland, Holland, Sweden, pompous lies,
In Hungary, and Poland, Turkey too;
What at Ligorne, Rome, Florence you did do:
And, in some year, all these together heaped,
For which there must more sea, and land be leaped,
If but to be believed you have the hap,
Then can a flea at twice skip in the Map.
Give your young Statesmen, (that first make you drunk*
And then lie with you, closer, then a punque,
For news) your Ville-royes, and Silleries,
I^nin's, your Nuncio's, and your Tu^lleries,
Your Archdukes Agents, and your Beringhams,
That are your words of credit. Keep your Names
Of Hannow, Shieter-huissen, Popenheim,
Hans-spiegle, Rotteinberg, and Boutersh^im,
For your next meal: this you are sure of. Why
Will you part with them, here, vnthriftely?
Nay, now you puff, tuske, and draw up your chin,
Twirle the poor chain you run a feasting in.
Come, be not angry, you are HVNGRY; eat;
Do what you come for, Captain, There Is your meat^.
CVIII. TO TRVE SOVLDIERS.
STrength of my Country, whilst I bring to view
Such as are misse-call'd Captains, and wrong you;
And your high names: I do desire, that thence
Be nor put on you, nor you take offense.
I swear by your true friend, my Muse, I love
Your great profession; which I once, did prove:
And did not shame it with my actions, then,
No more, then I dare now do, with my pen
He that not trusts me, having vowed thus much,
But's angry for the Captain, still: is such.
CIX. TO SIR HENRY NEVIL.
WHo now calls on thee, NEVIL, is a Muse,
That serves nor fame, nor titles; but does choose
Where virtue makes them both, and that is in thee:
Where all is fair, beside thy pedigree.
Thou art not one, seek'st miseries with hope,
Wrestlest with dignities, or fain'st a scope
Of service to the public, when the end
Is private gain, which has long guilt to friend.
Thou rather striu'st the matter to possess,
And elements of honor, then the dress;
To make thy lent life, good against the Fates:
And first to know thine own state, then the States.
To be the same in root, thou art in height;
And that thy soul should give thy flesh her weight.
Go on, and doubt not, what posterity,
Now I have sung thee thus, shall judge of thee.
Thy deeds, unto thy name, will prove new wombes,
Whilst others toil for titles to their tombs.
CX. TO CLEMENT EDMONDS, ON HIS CAESAR'S Commentaries observed, and translated.
NOt CAESAR'S deeds, nor all his honors won,
In these west-parts, nor when that war was done,
The name of POMPEY for an enemy,
CATO'S to boot, Rome, and her liberty,
All yielding to his fortune, nor, the while,
To have engrau'd these acts, with his own style,
And that so strong and deep, as't might be thought,
He wrote, with the same spirit that he fought,
Nor that his work lived in the hands of foes,
Vn-argued then, and yet has fame from those;
Not all these, EDMONDS, or what else put too,
Can so speak CAESAR, as thy labors do.
For, where his person lived scarce, one just age
And that, midst envy, and parts; then fell by rage:
His deeds too dying, but in books (whose good
How few have read! how fewer understood?)
Thy learned hand, and true Promethean art
(As by a new creation) part by part,
In every counsel, stratageme, design,
Action, or engine, worth a note of thine,
T'all future time, not only does restore
His life, but makes, that he can dye no more.
CXI. TO THE SAME; ON THE SAME.
WHo EDMONDS, reads thy book, and does not see
What th'antique soldiers were, the modern be?
Wherein thou show, how much the latter are
Beholding, to this master of the war;
And that, in action, there is nothing new,
More, then to vary what our elders knew:
Which all, but ignorant Captains will confess:
Nor to give CAESAR this, makes ours the less.
Yet thou, perhaps, shall meet some tongues will grutch,
That to the world thou should reveal so much,
And thence, deprave thee, and thy work. To those
CAESAR stands up, as from his vrne late rose,
By thy great help: and does proclaim by me,
They murder him again, that envy thee.
CXII. TO A WEAK GAMSTER IN POETRY.
WIth thy small stock, why art thou ventring still,
At this so subtle sport: and play'st so ill?
Think thou it is mere fortune, that can win?
Or thy rank setting? that thou dare put in
Thy all, at all: and what so ere I do,
Art still at that, and think to blow me'vp too?
I cannot for the stage a Drama lay,
Tragic, or Comic; but thou writ'st the play.
I leave thee there, and giving way, entend
An Epick poem; thou have the same end.
I modestly quit that, and think to write,
Next morn, an Ode: Thou make a song ere nigh*
I pass to Elegies; Thou meet'st me there:
To Satyrs; and thou do pursue me. Where,
Where shall I escape thee? in an Epigramme?
O, (thou cry'st out) that is thy proper game.
Troth, if it be, I pity thy ill luck;
That both for wit, and sense, so often do pluck,
And never art encountered, I confess:
Nor scarce do color for it, which is less.
Pr'y thee, yet save thy rest; give ore in time:
There Is no vexation, that can make thee prime.
CXIII. TO SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY.
SO PHOEBVS makes me worthy of his bays,
As but to speak thee, OVERBVRY, is praise:
So, where thou live, thou make life understood!
Where, what makes others great, does keep thee good!
I think, the Fate of court thy coming craved,
That the wit there, and manners might be saved:
For since, what ignorance, what pride is fled!
And letters, and humanity in the stead!
Repent thee not of thy fair precedent,
Could make such men, and such a place repent:
Nor may'any fear, to loose of their degree,
Who'in such ambition can but follow thee.
CXIIII. TO Mrs. PHILIP SYDNEY.
I Must believe some miracles still be
When SYDNYES name I hear, or face I see:
For CUPID, who (at first) took vain delight,
In mere out-formes, until he lost his sight,
Has changed his soul, and made his object you:
Where finding so much beauty met with virtue,
He has not only gained himself his eyes,
But, in your love, made all his servants wise.
CXV. ON THE TOWNS HONEST MAN.
YOu wonder, who this is! and, why I name
Him not, aloud, that boasts so good a fame:
Naming so many, too! But, this is one,
Suffers no name, but a description:
Being no vicious person, but the vice
About the town; and known too, at that price.
A subtle thing, that does affections win
By speaking well of the company'it's in.
Talks loud, and baudy, has a gathered deal
Of news, and noise, to sow out a long meal.
Can come from Tripoly, leap stools, and wink,
Do all, that longs to the anarchy of drink,
Except the duel. Can sing songs, and catches;
Give every one his dose of mirth: and watches
Whose name's vn-welcome to the present ear,
And him it lays on; if he be not there.
Tell's of him, all the tales, it self then makes;
But, if it shall be questioned, vnder-takes,
It will deny all; and forswear it too:
Not that it fears, but will not have to do
With such a one. And therein keeps it is word.
'Twill see it is sister naked, ere a sword.
At every meal, where it does dine, or sup,
The clothes no sooner gone, but it gets up
And, shifting of it is faces, does play more
Parts, then the Italian could do, with his door.
Acts old Iniquity, and in the fit
Of miming, gets the opinion of a wit.
Executes men in picture. By defect,
From friendship, is it is own fames architect.
An inginer, in slanders, of all fashions,
That seeming praises, are, yet accusations.
Described, it is thus: Defined would you it have?
Then, The towns honest Man's her errant'st knave.
CXVI. TO SIR WILLIAM IEPHSON.
IEPHSON, thou man of men, to whose loved name
All gentry, yet, owe part of their best flame!
So did thy vertue'enforme, thy wit sustain
That age, when thou stood'st up the master-braine:
Thou were the first, made merit know her strength,
And those that lacked it, to suspect at length,
'Twas not entayl'd on title. That some word
Might be found out as good, and not my Lord.
That Nature no such difference had impressed
In men, but every brauest was the best:
That blood not minds, but minds did blood adorn:
And to live great, was better, then great borne.
These were thy knowing arts: which who does now
Virtuously practice must at least allow
Them in, if not, from thee; or must commit
A desperate soloecisme in truth and wit.
CXVII. ON GROYNE.
GROYNE, come of age, his state sold out of hand
For'his whore: GROYNE does still occupy his land.
CXVIII. ON GVT.
GVT eats all day, and lechers all the night,
So all his meat he tastes over, twice:
And, striving so to double his delight,
He makes himself a thorough-fare of vice.
Thus, in his belly, can he change a sin
Lust it comes out, that gluttony went in.
CXIX. TO SIR RAPH SHELTON.
NOt he that flies the court for want of clothes,
At hunting railes, having no gift in oaths,
Cries out against cocking, since he cannot bet,
Shuns prease, for two maine causes, pox, and debt,
With me can merit more, then that good man,
Whose dice not doing well, to'a pulpit ran,
No, SHELTON, give me thee, can want all these,
But do it out of judgment, not disease;
Dare breath in any air; and with safe skill,
Till thou can find the best, choose the least ill.
That to the vulgar can thy self apply,
Treading a better path, not contrary;
And, in their errors maze, thine own way know:
Which is to live to conscience, not to show.
He, that, but living half his age, dies such;
Makes, the whole longer, then 'twas given him, much.
CXX. EPITAPH ON S. P. A CHILD OF Q. EL. CHAPEL.
Weep with me all you that read
This little story:
And know, for whom a tear you shed,
Death's self is sorry.
'Twas a child, that so did thrive
In grace, and feature,
As Heaven and Nature seemed to strive
Which owned the creature.
Years he numbered scarce thirteen
When Fates turned cruel,
Yet three filled Zodiackes had he been
The stages jewel;
And did act (what now we moan)
Old men so duly,
As, sooth, the Parcae thought him one,
He played so truly.
So, by error, to his fate
They all consented;
But viewing him since (alas, too late)
They have repented.
And have sought (to give new birth)
In bathes to steep him;
But, being so much too good for earth,
Heaven vows to keep him.
CXXI. TO BENJAMIN RVDYERD.
RVDYERD, as lesser dames, to great ones use,
My lighter comes, to kiss thy learned Muse;
Whose better studies while she emulates,
She learnes to know long difference of their states.
Yet is the office not to be despised,
If only love should make the action pris'd:
Nor he, for friendship, to be thought unfit,
That strives, his manners should proceed his wit.
CXXII. TO THE SAME.
IF I would wish, for truth, and not for show,
The aged SATVRNE'S age, and rites to know;
If I would strive to bring back times, and try
The world's pure gold, and wise simplicity;
If I would virtue set, as she was young,
And hear her speak with one, and her first tongue;
If holiest friend-ship, naked to the touch,
I would restore, and keep it ever such;
I need no other arts, but study thee:
Who prou'st, all these were, and again may be.
CXXIII. TO THE SAME.
WRiting thy self, or judging others writ,
I know not which thou have most, candor, or wit:
But both thou have so, as who affects the state
Of the best writer, and judge, should emulate.
CXXIIII. EPITAPH ON ELIZABETH, L. H.
Would thou hear, what man can say
In a little? Reader, stay.
Underneath this stone does lie
As much beauty, as could dye:
Which in life did harbor give
To more virtue, then does live.
If, at all, she had a fault,
Leave it buried in this vault.
One name was ELIZABETH,
The Other let it sleep with death:
Fitter, where it dyed, to tell,
Then that it lived at all. Farewell.
CXXV. TO SIR WILLIAM VVEDALE.
VV'DALE, thou piece of the first times, a man
Made for what Nature could, or Virtue can;
Both whose dimensions, lost, the world might find
Restored in thy body, and thy mind!
Who sees a soul, in such a body set,
Might love the treasure for the cabinet.
But I, no child, no fool, respect the kind,
The full, the flowing graces there enshrined;
Which (would the world not mis-call't flattery)
I could adore, almost t'idolatrie.
CXXVI. TO HIS LADY, THEN Mrs. CARRY.
Retired, with purpose your fair worth to praise,
Amongst Hampton shades, and PHOEBVS grove of bays,
I plucked a branch; the jealous god did frown,
And bad me lay th'vsurped laurel down:
Said I wronged him, and (which was more) his love.
I answered, DAPHNE now no pain can prove.
PHOEBVS replied. Bold head, it is not she:
CARRY my love is, DAPHNE but my tree.
CXXVII. TO ESME, LORD 'AVBIGNY.
IS there a hope, that Man would thankful be,
If I should fail, in gratitude, to thee
To whom I am so bound, loved AVBIGNY?
No, I do, therefore, call Posterity
Into the debt; and reckon on her head,
How full of want, how swallowed up, how dead
I, and this Muse had been, if thou had not
Lent timely succors, and new life begot:
So, all reward, or name, that grows to me
By her attempt, shall still be owing thee.
And, than this same, I know no abler way
To thank thy benefits: which is, to pay.
CXXVIII. TO WILLIAM ROE.
ROE (and my joy to name) thou art now, to go
Countries, and climes, manners, and men to know,
T'extract, and choose the best of all these known,
And those to turn to blood, and make thine own:
May winds as soft as breath of kissing friends,
Attend thee hence; and there, may all thy ends,
As the beginnings here, prove purely sweet,
And perfect in a circle always meet.
So, when we, blessed with thy return, shall see
Thy self, with thy first thoughts, brought home by thee,
We each to other may this voice enspire;
This is that good AENEAS, past through fire,
Through seas, storms, tempests: and imbarqu'd for hell,
Came back untouched. This man has trauail'd well.
CXXIX. TO MIME.
THat, not a pair of friends each other see,
But the first question is, when one saw thee?
That there is no journey set, or thought upon,
To Braynford, Hackney, Bow, but thou make one;
That scarce the Town designeth any feast
To which you are not a week, bespoke a guest;
That still thou art made the suppers flagge, the drum,
The very call, to make all others come:
Think thou, MIME, this is great? or, that they strive
Whose noise shall keep thy miming most alive,
Whilst thou do raise some Player, from the grave,
Out-dance the Babion, or out-boast the Brave;
Or (mounted on a stool) thy face does hit
On some new gesture, that is imputed wit?
O, run not proud of this. Yet, take thy due.
Thou do out-zany COKELY, POD; nay, Gue:
And thine own CORIAT too. But (would thou see)
Men love thee not for this: They laugh at thee.
CXXX. TO ALPHONSO FERRABOSCO, on his Book.
TO urge, my loved ALPHONSO, that bold fame,
Of building towns, and making wild beasts tame,
Which Music had; or speak her known effects,
That she remoueth cares, sadness eiects,
Declineth anger, persuades clemency,
Does sweeten mirth, and heighten piety,
And is t'a body, often, ill inclined,
No less a sovereign cure, then to the mind;
T'alledge, that greatest men were not ashamed,
Of old, even by her practice to be famed;
To say, indeed, she were the soul of heaven,
That the eight sphere, no less, then planets seven,
Moved by her order, and the ninth more high,
Including all, were thence called harmony:
I, yet, had vtter'd nothing on thy part,
When these were but the praises of the Art.
But when I have said, the proofs of all these be
Shed in thy Songs; it is true: but short of thee.
CXXXI. TO THE SAME.
WHen we do give, ALPHONSO, to the light,
A work of ours, we part with our own right;
For, then, all mouths will judge, and their own way:
The learned have no more privilege, then the lay.
And though we could all men, all censures hear,
We ought not give them taste, we had an ear.
For, if the hum'rous world will talk at large,
They should be fools, for me, at their own charge.
Say, this, or that man they to thee prefer;
Even those for whom they do this, know they err:
And would (being asked the truth) ashamed say,
They were not to be named on the same day.
Then stand unto thy self, not seek without
For fame, with breath soon kindled, soon blown out.
CXXXII. TO Mr. IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
IF to admire were to commend my praise
Might then both thee, thy work and merit raise:
But, as it is (the Child of Ignorance,
And utter stranger to all air of France)
How can I speak of thy great pains, but err?
Since they can only judge, that can confer.
Behold! the reverend shade of BARTAS stands
Before my thought, and (in thy right) commands
That to the world I publish, for him* this;
BARTAS does wish thy English now were his.
So well in that are his inventions wrought,
As his will now be the translation thought,
Thine the original; and France shall boast,
No more, those maiden glories she has lost.
CXXXIII. ON THE FAMOVS VOYAGE.
NO more let Greece her bolder fables tell
Of HERCULES, or THESEUS going to hell,
ORPHEUS, ULYSSES: or the Latin Muse,
With tales of Troyes just knight, our faiths abuse:
We have a SHELTON, and a HEYDEN got,
Had power to act, what they to feign had not.
All, that they boast of STYX, of ACHERON,
COCYTVS, PHLEGETON, our have proved in one;
The filth, stench, noise: save only what was there
Subtly distinguished, was confused here.
Their wherry had no sail, too; ours had none:
And in it, two more horride knaves, then CHARON.
Arses were heard to croake, in stead of frogs;
And for one CERBERVS, the whole coast was dogs.
Furies there wanted not: each scold was ten.
And, for the cries of Ghosts, women, and men,
Laden with plague-sores, and their sins, were heard,
Lashed by their consciences, to die, affeard.
Then let the former age, with this content her,
She brought the Poets forth, but ours th'aduenter.
THE VOYAGE IT SELF.
I Sing the brave adventure of two wights,
And pity it is, I cannot call 'hem knights:
One was; and he, for brawne, and brain, right able
To have been styled of King ARTHVRS table.
The other was a squire, of fair degree;
But, in the action, greater man then he:
Who gave, to take at his return from Hell,
His three for one. Now, lordings, listen well.
It was the day, what time the powerful Moon
Makes thee poor Banck-side creature wet it'shoone,
In it'owne hall; when these (in worthy scorn
Of those, that put out moneys, on return
From Venice, Paris, or some inland passage
Of six times to, and fro, without embassage,
Or him that backward went to Berwicke, or which
Did dance the famous Morrisse, unto Norwich)
At Bread-streets Mermaid, having dined, and merry,
Proposed t^ go to Hol'borne in a wherry:
A harder tasque, then either his to Bristo',
Or his to Antwerpe. Therefore, once more, list ho'.
A Docke there is, that called is AVERNVS,
Of some Bride-well, and may, in time, concern us
All, that are readers: but, me thinks it is od,
That all this while I have forgot some god,
Or goddess to inuoke, to stuff my verse;
And with both bombard-stile, and phrase, rehearse
The many perils of this Port, and how*
Sans'helpe of SYBIL, or a golden bough,
Or magic sacrifice, they past along!
ALCIDES, be thou succouring to my song.
Thou have seen hell (some say) and know all nookes there,
Can tell me best, how every Fury looks there,
And art a god, if Fame thee not abuses,
Always at hand, to aid the merry Muses.
Great Club-fist, though thy back, and bones be sore,
Still, with thy former labors; yet, once more,
Act a brave work, call it thy last aduentry:
But hold my torch, while I describe the entry
To this dire passage. Say, thou stop thy nose:
It Is but light pains: Indeed this Dock's no rose.
In the first jaws appeared that ugly monster,
Ycleped Mud, which, when their oars did once stir,
Belched forth an air, as hot, as at the muster
Of all your night-tubs, when the carts do cluster,
Who shall discharge first his merd-vrinous load:
Thorough her womb they make their famous road,
Between two walls; where, on one side to scar men,
Were seen your ugly Centaures, ye call Car-men,
Gorgonian scolds, and Harpyes: on the other
Hung stench, diseases, and old filth, their mother,
With famine, wants, and sorrows many a dosen,
The least of which was to the plague a cosen.
But they vnfrighted pass, though many a privy
Spoke to'hem louder, then the ox in LIVIE;
And many a sink poured out her rage anenst'hem;
But still their valor, and their virtue fenc't 'hem,
And, on they went, like CASTOR brave, and POLLVX:
Ploughing the main. When, see (the worst of all lucks)
They met the second Prodigy, would fear a
Man, that had never heard of a Chimaera.
One said, it was bold BRIAREVS, or the beadle,
(Who has the hundred hands when he does meddle)
The other thought it HYDRA, or the rock
Made of the trull, that cut her fathers lock:
But, coming near, they found it but a liter,
So huge, it seemed, they could by no means quite her.
Back, cried their brace of CHARONS: they cried, no,
No going back; on still you rogues, and row.
(...) (...) Of Hol'borne (three sergeants heads) looks ore,
And stays but till you come unto the door!
Tempt not his fury, PLVTO is away:
And MADAME CAESAR, great PROSERPINA,
Is now from home. You lose your labors quite,
Were you JOVE'S sons, or had ALCIDES might.
They cried out PVSSE. He told them he was BANKS,
That had, so often, showed 'hem merry prankes.
They laugh't, at his laugh-worthy fate. And past
The tripple head without a sop. At last,
Calling for RADAMANTHVS, that dwelt by,
A sope-boyler; and AEACVS him nigh,
Who kept an alehouse; with my little MINOS,
An ancient pur-blinde fletcher, with a high nose;
They took 'hem all to witness of their action:
And so went bravely back, without protraction.
In memory of which most liquid deed,
The city since has raised a Pyramide.
And I could wish for their eternized sakes,
My Muse had plough'd with his, that sung A-IAX.
THE FOREST.
I. WHY I WRITE NOT OF LOVE.
SOme act of Love's bound to rehearse,
I thought to bind him, in my verse:
Which when he felt, Away (quoth he)
Can Poets hope to fetter me?
It is enough, they once did get
MARS, and my Mother, in their net:
I wear not these my wings in vain.
With which he fled me: and again,
Into my ri'mes could never be got
By any a^te. Then wonder not,
That (...), my numbers are so cold,
When Love is fled, and I grow old.
II. TO PENSHVRST.
THou art not, PENSHVRST, built to envious show,
Of touch, or marble; nor can boast a row
Of polished pillars, or a roof of gold:
Thou have no lantherne, whereof tales are told;
Or stayre, or courts; but stand'st an ancient pile,
And these grudged at, art reuerenc'd the while.
Thou ioy'st in better marks, of soil, of air,
Of wood, of water: therein thou art fair.
Thou have thy walks for health, as well as sport:
Thy Mount, to which the Dryads do resort,
Where PAN, and BACCHVS their high feasts have made,
Beneath the broad beech, and the chest-nut shade;
That taller tree, which of a nut was set,
At his great birth, where all the Muses met.
There, in the writhed bark, are cut the names
Of many a SYLVANE, taken with his flames.
And thence, the ruddy Satyrs often provoke
The lighter Faunes, to reach thy Ladies oak.
Thy copp's, too, named of GAMAGE, thou have there,
That never fails to serve thee seasoned dear,
When thou would feast, or exercise thy friends.
The lower land, that to the river bends,
Thy sheep, thy bullocks, kine, and calves do feed:
The middle grounds thy mares, and horses breed.
Each bank does yield thee coneyes; and the topps
Fertile of wood, ASHORE, and SYDNEY'S copp's,
To crown thy open table, does provide
The purpled pheasant, with the speckled side:
The painted partrich lies in every field,
And, for thy mess, is willing to be killed.
And if the high swollen Medway fail thy dish,
Thou have thy ponds, that pay thee tribute fish,
Fat, aged carps, that run into thy net.
And pikes, now weary their own kind to eat,
As loath, the second draught, or cast to stay,
Officiously, at first, themselves betray.
Bright eeles, that emulate them, and leap on land,
Before the fisher, or into his hand.
Then has thy orchard fruit, thy garden flowers,
Fresh as the air, and new as are the hours.
The early cherry, with the later plum,
Fig, grape, and quince, each in his time does come:
The blushing apricot, and woolly peach
Hang on thy walls, that every child may reach.
And though thy walls be of the country stone,
They'are reared with no man's ruin, no man's groan,
There Is none, that dwell about them, wish them down;
But all come in, the farmer, and the clown:
And no one empty-handed, to salute
Thy lord, and lady, though they have no suit.
Some bring a capon, some a rural cake,
Some nuts, some apples; some that think they make
The better cheeses, bring 'hem; or else send
By their ripe daughters, whom they would commend
This way to husbands; and whose baskets bear
An emblem of themselves, in plum, or pear.
But what can this (more then express their love)
Add to thy fr^e provisions, far above
The need of such? whose liberal board does flow,
With all, that hospitality does know!
Where comes no guest, but is allowed to eat,
Without his fear, and of thy lords own meat:
Where the same beer, and bread, and selfsame wine,
That is his Lordships, shall be also mine.
And I not feign to sit (as some, this day,
At great men's tables) and yet dine away.
Here no man tells my cups; nor, standing by,
A waiter, does my gluttony envy:
But gives me what I call, and lets me eat,
He knows, below, he shall find plenty of meat,
Thy tables hoord not up for the next day,
Nor, when I take my lodging, need I pray
For fire, or lights, or liuorie: all is there;
As if thou, then, were mine, or I reigned here:
There Is nothing I can wish, for which I stay.
That found King JAMES, when hunting late, this way,
With his brave son, the Prince, they saw thy fires
Shine bright on every harth as the desires
Of thy Penates had been set on flame,
To entertayne them; or the country came,
With all their zeal, to warm their welcome here.
What (great, I will not say, but) sudden cheer
Did thou, then, make'hem! and what praise was heaped
On thy good lady, then! who, therein, reaped
The just reward of her high huswifery;
To have her linen, plate, and all things nigh,
When she was far: and not a room, but dressed,
As if it had expected such a guest!
These, PENSHVRST, are thy praise, and yet not all.
Thy lady's noble, fruitful, chaste withal.
His children thy great lord may call his own:
A fortune, in this age, but rarely known.
They are, and have been taught religion: Thence
Their gentler spirits have sucked innocence.
Each morn, and even, they are taught to pray,
With the whole household, and may, every day,
Read, in their virtuous parents noble parts,
The mysteries of manners, arms, and arts.
Now, PENSHVRST, they that will proportion thee
With other edifices, when they see
Those proud, ambitious heaps, and nothing else,
May say, their lords have built, but thy lord dwells.
III. TO SIR ROBERT WROTH.
HOw blessed art thou, can love the country, WROTH,
Whether by choice, or fate, or both;
And, though so near the city, and the court,
Art taken with neithers vice, nor sport:
That at great times, art no ambitious guest
Of Sheriffs dinner, or Majors feast.
Nor come to view the better cloth of state;
The richer hangings, or crowne-plate;
Nor throng'st (when masquing is) to have a sight
Of the short bravery of the night;
To view the jewels, stuffes, the pains, the wit
There wasted, some not paid for yet!
But can, at home, in thy securer rest,
Live, with vn-bought provision blessed;
Free from proud porches, or their gilded roofes,
Amongst loughing herds, and solid hoofes:
Along'st the curled woods, and painted meades,
Through which a serpent river leads
To some cool, courteous shade, which he calls his,
And makes sleep softer then it is!
Or, if thou list the night in watch to break,
A-bed can hear the loud stag speak,
In spring, often roused for thy masters sport,
Who, for it, makes thy house his court;
Or with thy friends; the heart of all the year,
Diuid'st, upon the lesser Dear;
In autumn, at the Partrich makes a flight,
And give thy gladder guests the sight;
And, in the winter, hunt'st the flying hare,
More for thy exercise, then fare;
While all, that follow, their glad ears apply
To the full greatness of the cry:
Or hauking at the river, or the bush,
Or shooting at the greedy thrush,
Thou do with some delight the day out-weare,
Although the coldest of the year!
The whilst, the several seasons thou have seen
Of flowrie fields, of cop'ces green,
The mowed meddowes, with the fleeced sheep,
And feasts, that either shearers keep;
The ripened ears, yet humble in their height,
And furrows laden with their weight;
The apple-haruest, that does longer last;
The hogs returned home fat from mast;
The trees cut out in log; and those boughs made
A fire now, that lend a shade!
Thus PAN, and SYLVANE, having had their rites,
COMVS puts in, for new delights;
And fills thy open hall with mirth, and cheer,
As if in SATVRNES reign it were;
APOLLO'S harp, and HERMES lyre resound,
Nor are the Muses strangers found:
The rout of rural folk come thronging in,
(Their rudeness then is thought no sin)
Thy noblest spouse affords them welcome grace;
And the great Heroes, of her race,
Sit mixed with loss of state, or reverence.
Freedom does with degree dispense.
The jolly wassall walks the often round,
And in their cups, their cares are drowned:
They think not, then, which side the cause shall leese,
Nor how to get the lawyer fees.
Such, and no other was that age, of old,
Which boasts to have had the head of gold.
And such since thou can make thine own content,
Strive, WROTH, to live long innocent.
Let others watch in guilty arms, and stand
The fury of a rash command,
Go enter breaches, meet the cannons rage,
That they may sleep with scarres in age.
And show their feathers shot, and colors torn,
And brag, that they were therefore borne.
Let this man sweat, and wrangle at the bar,
For every price, in every jar,
And change possessions, oftener with his breath,
Then either money, war, or death:
Let him, then hardest sires, more disinherit,
And each where boast it as his merit,
To blow up orphans, widows, and their states;
And think his power does equal Fates.
Let that go heap a mass of wretched wealth,
Purchased by rapine, worse then stealth,
And brooding over it sit, with broadest eyes,
Not doing good, scarce when he dies.
Let thousands more go flatter vice, and win,
By being organes to great sin,
Get place, and honor, and be glad to keep
The secrets, that shall break their sleep:
And, so they ride in purple, eat in plate,
Though poison, think it a great fate.
But thou, my WROTH, if I can truth apply,
Shall neither that, nor this envy:
Thy peace is made; and, when man's state is well,
It Is better, if he there can dwell.
God wishes, none should wrack on a strange shelfe:
To him, man's dearer, then t'himselfe.
And, howsoever we may think things sweet,
He always gives what he knows meet;
Which who can use is happy: Such be thou.
Thy morning's, and thy euening's vow
Be thanks to him, and earnest prayer, to find
A body sound, with sounder mind;
To do thy country service, thy self right;
That neither want do thee affright,
Nor death; but when thy latest sand is spent,
Thou may think life, a thing but lent.
IIII. TO THE WORLD. A farewell for a Gentlewoman, virtuous and noble.
FAlse world, goodnight: since thou have brought
That hour upon my morn of age,
Henceforth I quit thee from my thought,
My part is ended on thy stage.
Do not once hope, that thou can tempt
A spirit so resolved to tread
Upon thy throat, and live exempt
From all the nets that thou can spread.
I know thy forms are studied arts,
Thy subtle ways, be narrow straits;
Thy courtesy but sudden starts,
And what thou call'st thy gifts are baits.
I know too, though thou strut, and paint,
Yet art thou both shrunk up, and old,
That only fools make thee a saint,
And all thy good is to be sold.
I know thou whole art but a shop
Of toys, and trifles, traps, and snares,
To take the weak, or make them stop:
Yet art thou falser then thy wares.
And, knowing this, should I yet stay,
Like such as blow away their lives,
And never will redeem a day,
Enamored of their golden gyues?
Or, having escaped, shall I return,
And thrust my neck into the noose,
From whence, so lately, I did burn,
With all my powers, my self to loose?
What bird, or beast, is known so dull,
That fled his cage, or broke his chain,
And tasting air, and freedom, wull
Render his head in there again?
If these, who have but sense, can shun
The engines, that have them annoyed;
Little, for me, had reason done,
If I could not thy ginnes avoid.
Yes, threaten, do. Alas I fear
As little, as I hope from thee:
I know thou can nor show, nor bear
More hatred, then thou have to me.
My tender, first, and simple years
Thou did abuse, and then betray;
Since stird'st up iealousies and fears,
When all the causes were away.
Then, in a soil have planted me,
Where breathe the basest of thy fools;
Where envious arts professed be,
And pride, and ignorance the schools,
Where nothing is examined, weighed,
But, as it is rumor'd, so believed:
Where every freedom is betrayed,
And every goodness taxed, or grieved.
But, what we'are borne for, we must bear:
Our frail condition it is such,
That, what to all may happen here,
If It chance to me, I must not grutch.
Else, I my state should much mistake,
To harbor a divided thought
From all my kind: that, for my sake,
There should a miracle be wrought.
No, I do know, that I was borne
To age, misfortune, sickness, grief:
But I will bear these, with that scorn,
As shall not need thy false relief.
Nor for my peace will I go far,
As wandrers do, that still do rome,
But make my strengths, such as they are,
Here in my bosom, and at home.
V. Song. TO CELIA.
COme my CELIA, let us prove,
While we may, the sports of love;
Time will not be ours, for ever:
He, at length, our good will sever.
Spend not then his gifts in vain.
Suns, that set, may rise again:
But if once we loose this light,
It Is, with us, perpetual night.
Why should we defer our joys?
Fame, and rumor are but toys.
Cannot we delude the eyes
Of a few poor household spies?
Or his easier ears beguile,
So removed by our wile?
It Is no sin, loves fruit to steal,
But the sweet theft to reveal:
To be taken, to be seen,
These have crimes accounted been.
VI. TO THE SAME.
Kiss me, sweet: The wary lover
Can your favors keep, and cover,
When the common courting iay
All your bounties will betray.
Kiss again: no creature comes.
Kiss, and score up wealthy sums
On my lips, thus hardly sundred,
While you breath. First give a hundred,
Then a thousand, then another
Hundred, then unto the the other
Add a thousand, and so more:
Till you equal with the store,
All the grass that Rumney yields,
Or the sands in Chelsey fields,
Or the drops in silver Thames,
Or the stars, that guild his streams,
In the silent sommer-nights,
When youths ply their stolen delights.
That the curious may not know
How to tell'hem, as thy flow,
And the envious, when they find
What their number is, be pined.
VII. Song. THAT WOMEN ARE BUT MEN'S SHADOWS.
FOllow a shadow, it still flies you;
Seem to fly it, it will pursue:
So court a mistress, she denies you;
Let her alone, she will court you.
Say, are not women truly, then,
Styled but the shadows of us men?
At morn, and even, shades are longest;
At noone, they are or short, or none:
So men at weakest, they are strongest,
But grant us perfect, they are not known.
Say, are not women truly, then,
Styled but the shadows of us men?
VIII. TO SICKNESS.
WHy, Disease, do thou molest
Ladies? and of them the best?
Do not men, ynow of rites
To thy altars, by their nights
Spent in surfets: and their days,
And nights too, in worser ways?
Take heed, Sickness, what you do,
I shall fear, you will surfeit too.
Live not we, as, all thy stalls,
Spittles, pesthouse, hospitalls,
Scarce will take our present store?
And this age will build no more:
'Pray thee, feed contented, then,
Sickness; only on us men.
Or if needs thy lust will taste
Woman-kinde; devour the wast
Livers, round about the town.
But, forgive me, with thy crown
They maintain the truest trade,
And have more diseases made.
What should, yet, thy pallat please?
Daintiness, and softer case,
Sleeked limbs, and finest blood?
If thy leanenesse love such food,
There are those, that, for thy sake,
Do enough; and who would take
Any pains; yea, think it price,
To become thy sacrifice.
That distill their husbands land
In decoctions; and are manned
With ten Emp'ricks, in their chamber,
Lying for the spirit of amber.
That for th'oyle of Talk, dare spend
More then citizens dare lend
Them, and all their officers.
That, to make all pleasure theirs,
Will by coach, and water go,
Every stew in town to know;
Dare entayle their loves on any,
Bald, or blind, or nere so many:
And, for thee, at common game,
Play away, health, wealth, and fame.
These, disease, will thee deserve:
And will, long ere thou should starve
On their beds, most prostitute,
Move it, as their humblest suit,
In thy justice to molest
None but them, and leave the rest.
IX. Song. TO CELIA.
DRrinke to me, only, with thine eyes,
And I will pledge with mine;
Or leave a kiss but in the cup,
And I Will not look for wine.
The thirst, that from the soul does rise,
Does ask a drink divine:
But might I of JOVE'S Nectar sup,
I would not change for thine.
I sent thee, late, a rosy wreath,
Not so much honoring thee,
As giving it a hope, that there
It could not withered be.
But thou thereon did only breath,
And sent'st it back to me:
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
Not of it self, but thee.
X.
ANd must I sing? what subject shall I choose?
Or whose great name in Poets heaven use?
For the more countenance to my active Muse?
HERCULES? alas his bones are yet sore,
With his old earthly labors. T'exact more,
Of his dull godhead, were sin. I Will implore
PHOEBVS. No? tend thy cart still. Envious day
Shall not give out, that I have made thee stay,
And foundred thy hot teame, to tune my lay.
Nor will I beg of thee, Lord of the vine,
To raise my spirits with thy coniuring wine,
In the green circle of thy Iuy twine.
PALLAS, nor thee I call on, mankind maid,
That, at thy birth, made the poor Smith afraid,
Who, with his axe, thy fathers midwife played.
Go, crampe dull MARS, light VENUS, when he snorts,
Or, with thy Tribade trine, invent new sports,
Thou, nor thy looseness with my making sorts.
Let the old boy, your son, ply his old task,
Turn the stale prologue to some painted mask,
His absence in my verse, is all I ask.
HERMES, the cheater, shall not mix with us,
Though he would steal his sisters PAGASVS,
And riffle him: or pawn his PETASVS.
Nor all the ladies of the Thespian lake,
(Though they were crushed into one form) could make
A beauty of that merit, that should take
My Muse up by commission: No, I bring
My own true fire. Now my thought takes wing,
And now an Epode to deep ears I sing.
XI. EPODE.
NOt to know vice at all, and keep true state,
Is virtue, and not Fate:
Next, to that virtue, is to know vice well,
And her black spite expel.
Which to effect (since no breast is so sure,
Or safe, but she will procure
Some way of entrance) we must plant a guard
Of thoughts to watch, and ward
At the eye and ear (the ports unto the mind)
That no strange, or unkind
Object arrive there, but the heart (our spy)
Give knowledge instantly,
To wakefull reason, our affections king:
Who (in th'examining)
Will quickly taste the treason, and commit
Close, the close cause of it.
It Is the securest policy we have,
To make our sense our slave.
But this true course is not embraced by many:
By many? scarce by any.
For either our affections do rebel,
Or else the sentinel
(That should ring larum to the heart) does sleep,
Or some great thought does keep
Back the intelligence, and falsely swears,
They Are base, and idle fears
Whereof the loyal conscience so complains.
Thus, by these subtle trains,
Do several passions invade the mind,
And strike our reason blind.
Of which usurping rank, some have thought love
The first; as prove to move
Most frequent tumults, horrors, and vnrests,
In our enflamed breasts:
But this does from the cloud of error grow,
Which thus we ouer-blow.
The thing, they here call Love, is blind Desire,
Armed with bow, shafts, and fire;
Inconstant, like the sea, of whence it is borne,
Rough, swelling, like a storm:
With whom who sails, rides on the surge of fear,
And boyles, as if he were
In a continual tempest. Now, true Love
No such effects does prove;
That is an essence, far more gentle, fine,
Pure, perfect, nay divine*
It is a golden chain let down from heaven,
Whose linkes are bright, and even.
That falls like sleep on lovers, and combines
The soft, and sweetest minds
In equal knots: This bears no brands, nor darts,
To murder different hearts,
But, in a calm, and god-like unity,
Preserues community.
O, who is he, that (in this peace) enioyes
The Elixir of all joys?
A form more fresh, then are the Eden bowers
And lasting, as her flowers:
Richer then Time, and as Time's virtue, rare.
Sober, as saddest care:
A sixed thought, an eye vn-taught to glance;
Who (blessed with such high chance)
Would, at suggestion of a steep desire,
Cast himself from the spire
Of all his happiness? But soft: I hear
Some vicious fool draw near,
That cries, we dream, and swears, there is no such thing,
As this chaste love we sing.
Peace Luxury, thou art like one of those
Who, being at sea, suppose,
Because they move, the continent does so:
No, vice, we let thee know
Though thy wild thoughts with sparrowes wings do fly,
Turtles can chastely dye;
And yet (in this to express our selves more clear)
We do not number, here,
Such spirits as are only continent,
Because lust's means are spent:
Or those, who doubt the common mouth of fame,
And for their place, and name,
Cannot so safely sin. Their chastity
Is mere necessity.
Nor mean we those, whom vows and conscience
Have filled with abstinence:
Though we acknowledge, who can so abstain,
Makes a most blessed gain.
He that for love of goodness hates ill,
Is more crowne-worthy still,
Then he, which for sins penalty forbeares.
His heart sins, though he fears.
But we propose a person like our Dove,
Graced with a Phoenix love;
A beauty of that clear, and sparkling light,
Would make a day of night,
And turn the blackest sorrows to bright joys:
Whose odorous breath destroys
All taste of bitterness, and makes the air
As sweet, as she is fair.
A body so harmoniously composed,
As if Nature disclosed
All her best symmetrie in that one feature!
O, so divine a creature
Who could be false to? chiefly, when he knows
How only she bestows
The wealthy treasure of her love on him;
Making his fortunes swim
In the full flood of her admired perfection?
What savage, brute affection,
Would not be fearful to offend a dame
Of this excelling frame?
Much more a noble, and right generous mind
(To virtuous moods inclined)
That knows the weight of guilt: He will refrain
From thoughts of such a strain.
And to his sense object this sentence ever,
Man may securely sin, but safely never.
XII. Epistle TO ELIZABETH COUNTESS OF RVTLAND.
MADAME,
Whilst that, for which, all virtue now is sold,
And almost every vice, almighty gold,
That which, to boot with hell, is thought worth heaven,
And, for it, life, conscience, yea, souls are given,
Toils, by grave custom, up and down the court,
To every squire, or groom, that will report
Well, or ill, only, all the following year,
Just to the weight their this dayes-presents bear;
While it makes huishers serviceable men,
And some one apteth to be trusted, then,
Though never after; whiles it gaynes the voice
Of some grand peer, whose air does make rejoice
The fool that gave it; who will want, and weep,
When his proud patrons favors are asleep;
While thus it buys great grace, and hunts poor fame;
Runs between man, and man; 'tweene dame, and dame;
Solders cracked friendship; makes love last a day;
Or perhaps less: whilst gold bears all this sway,
I, that have none (to send you) send you verse.
A present, which (if elder writs rehearse
The truth of times) was once of more esteem,
Then this, our guilt, nor golden age can deem,
When gold was made no weapon to cut throtes,
Or put to flight ASTREA, when her ingots
Were yet unfound, and better placed in earth,
Then, here, to give pride fame, and peasants birth.
But let this dross carry what price it will
With noble ignorants, and let them still,
Turn, upon scorned verse, their quarter-face:
With you, I know, my offering will find grace.
For what a sin against your great fathers spirit,
Were it to think, that you should not inherit
His love unto the Muses, when his skill
Almost you have, or may have, when you will?
Wherein wise Nature you a dowry gave,
Worth an estate, treble to that you have.
Beauty, I know, is good, and blood is more;
Riches thought most: But, Madame, think what store
The world has seen, which all these had in trust,
And now lie lost in their forgotten dust.
It is the Muse, alone, can raise to heaven,
And, at her strong arms end, hold up, and even,
The souls, she loves. Those other glorious notes,
Inscribed in touch or marble, or the cotes
Painted, or carved upon our great-mens tombs,
Or in their windows; do but prove the wombs,
That bred them, graves: when they were borne, they di'd,
That had no Muse to make their fame abide.
How many equal with the Argiue Queen,
Have beauty known, yet none so famous seen?
ACHILLES was not first, that valiant was,
Or, in an armies head, that, locked in brass,
Gave killing strokes. There were brave men, before
AJAX, or IDOMEN, or all the store,
That HOMER brought to Troy; yet none so live:
Because they lacked the sacred pen, could give
Like life unto 'hem. Who heau'd HERCULES
Unto the stars? or the Tyndarides?
Who placed IASONS ARGO in the sky?
Or set bright ARIADNES crown so high?
Who made a lamp of BERENICES hair?
Or lifted CASSIOPEA in her chair?
But only Poets, rapt with rage divine?
And such, or my hopes fail, shall make you shine.
You, and that other star, that purest light,
Of all LVCINA'S train; LVCY the bright.
Then which, a nobler heaven it self knows not.
Who, though she have a better verser got,
(Or Poet, in the court account) then I,
And, who does me (though I not him) envy,
Yet, for the timely favors she has done,
To my less sanguine Muse, wherein she'hath won
My grateful soul, the subject of her powers,
I have already used some happy hours,
To her remembrance; which when time shall bring
To curious light, to notes, I then shall sing,
Will prove old ORPHEUS act no tale to be*
For I shall move stocks, stones, no less then he.
Then all, that have but done my Muse least grace,
Shall thronging come, and boast the happy place
They hold in my strange poems, which, as yet,
Had not their form touched by an English wit.
There like a rich, and golden pyramede,
Borne up by statues, shall I rear your head,
Above your under carved ornaments,
And show, how, to the life, my soul presents
Your form impressed there: not with tickling rimes,
Or common places, filch'd, that take these times,
But high, and noble matter, such as flies
From brains entranced, and filled with ecstasies;
Moodes, which the god-like SYDNEY often did prove,
And your brave friend, and mine so well did love.
Who wheresoere he be........
The rest is lost.
XIII. Epistle. TO KATHERINE, LADY AVBIGNY:
It Is grown almost a danger to speak true
Of any good mind, now: There are so few.
The bad, by number, are so fortified,
As what th'haue lost t'expect, they dare deride.
So both the praised, and praisers suffer: Yet,
For others ill, ought none their good forget.
I, therefore, who profess my self in love
With every virtue, wheresoere it move,
And howsoever; as I am at fewd
With sin and vice, though with a throne endew'd;
And, in this name, am given out dangerous
By arts, and practice of the vicious,
Such as suspect themselves, and think it fit
For their own cap'tall crimes, t'indite my wit;
I, that have suffered this; and, though forsook
Of Fortune, have not altered yet my look,
Or so my self abandoned, as because
Men are not just, or keep no holy laws
Of nature, and society, I should faint;
Or fear to draw true lines, 'cause others paint*
I, Madame, am become your praiser. Where,
If it may stand with your soft blush to hear,
Your self but told unto your self, and see
In my character, what your features be,
You will not from the paper slightly pass:
No lady, but, at some time, loves her glass.
And this shall be no false one, but as much
Removed, as you from need to have it such.
Look then, and see your self. I will not say
Your beauty; for you see that every day:
And so do many more. All which can call
It perfect, proper, pure, and natural*
Not taken up o'th'doctors, but as well
As I, can say, and see it does excel.
That asks but to be censured by the eyes:
And, in those outward forms, all fools are wise.
Nor that your beauty wanted not a dower,
Do I reflect. Some alderman has power,
Or cos'ning farmer of the customs so,
T'aduance his doubtful issue, and ore-flow
A Princes fortune: These are gifts of chance,
And raise not virtue; they may vice enhance.
My mirror is more subtle, clear, refined,
And takes, and gives the beauties of the mind.
Though it reject not those of FORTUNE: such
As blood, and match. Wherein, how more then much
Are you engaged to your happy fate,
For such a lot! that mixed you with a state
Of so great title, birth, but virtue most,
Without which, all the rest were sounds, or lost.
It Is only that can time, and chance defeat:
For he, that once is good, is ever great.
Wherewith, then, Madame, can you better pay
This blessing of your stars, then by that way
Of virtue, which you tread? what if alone?
Without companions? It Is safe to have none.
In single paths, dangers with ease are watched:
Contagion in the prease is soonest caught.
This makes, that wisely you decline your life,
Far from the maze of custom, error, strife,
And keep an even, and vnalter'd gaite;
Not looking by, or back (like those, that wait
Times, and occasions, to start forth, and seem)
Which though the turning world may dis-esteeme,
Because that studies spectacles, and shows,
And after varyed, as fresh objects goes,
Giddie with change, and therefore cannot see
Right, the right way: yet must your comfort be
Your conscience, and not wonder, if none asks
For truths complexion, where they all wear maskes.
Let who will follow fashions, and attyres,
Maintain their liedgers forth, for foreign wyres,
Melt down their husbands land, to pour away
On the close groom, and page, on new-yeeres day,
And almost, all days after, while they live;
(They find it both so witty, and safe to give.)
Let 'hem on poulders, oils, and paintings, spend,
Till that no usurer, nor his bawds dare lend
Them, or their officers: and no man know,
Whether it be a face they wear, or no.
Let 'hem waste body, and state; and after all,
When their own Parasites laugh at their fall,
May they have nothing left, whereof they can
Boast, but how often they have gone wrong to man:
And call it their brave sin. For such there be
That do sin only for the infamy:
And never think, how vice does every hour,
Eat on her clients, and some one devour.
You, Madame, young have learned to shun these shelues,
Whereon the most of mankind wrack themselves,
And, keeping a just course, have early put
Into your harbor, and all passage shut
Against storms, or pirates, that might charge your peace;
For which you worthy are the glad increase
Of your blessed womb, made fruitful from above,
To pay your lord the pledges of chaste love:
And raise a noble stem, to give the fame,
To CLIFTON'S blood, that is denied their name.
Grow, grow, fair tree, and as thy branches shoot,
Hear, what the Muses sing about thy root,
By me, their priest (if they can ought divine)
Before the moons have filled their tripple trine,
To crown the burden which you go withal,
It shall a ripe and timely issue fall,
(...) (...)
XV. TO HEAVEN.
GOod, and great GOD, can I not think of thee,
But it must, straight, my melancholy be?
Is it interpreted in me disease,
That, laden with my sins, I seek for ease?
O, be thou witness, that the reins do know,
And hearts of all, if I be sad for show,
And judge me after: if I dare pretend
To ought but grace, or aim at other end.
As thou art all, so be thou all to me,
First, midst, and last, converted one, and three;
My faith, my hope, my love: and in this state,
My judge, my witness, and my advocate.
Where have I been this while exiled from thee?
And whither raped, now thou but stoup'st to me?
Dwell, dwell here still: O, being euery-where,
How can I doubt to find thee ever, here?
I know my state, both full of shame, and scorn,
Conceived in sin, and unto labor borne,
Standing with fear, and must with horror fall,
And destined unto judgment after all.
I feel my griefs too, and there scarce is ground,
Upon my flesh t'inflict another wound.
Yet dare I not complain, or wish for death
With holy PAVL, lest it be thought the breath
Of discontent; or that these prayers be
For weariness of life, not love of thee.
THE END.
PART OF THE KINGS ENTERTAINMENT IN PASSING TO his Coronation.

The Author B. I. MART. Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos!


LONDON, M. D C. XVI.

At Fen-Church.
THe Scene presented it self in a square and flat upright, like to the side of
a City: the top thereof, above the Vent, and Crest, adorned with houses,
towers, and steeples, set off in prospectiue. Upon the battlements in a great
capital letter was inscribed, LONDINIVM:
According to TACITUS: Annal. l. 1^.
At SVETONIVS mira constantia, medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit,
cognomento quidem Coloniae non insigne, sed copia Negotiatorum, and commeatu
maxim celebre. Beneath that, in a less and different character, was written
CAMERA REGIA,
Which title immediately after the Norman conquest it began to have; Camd.
Brit. 374.
and by the indulgence of succeeding Princes, has been hitherto continued. In
the Freeze over the gate, it seems to speak this verse: PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
Taken out of MARTIAL, Lib. 8. Epig. 36.
and implying, that though this city (for the state, and magnificence) might
(by Hyperbole) be said to touch the stars, and reach up to heaven, yet was it
far inferior to the master thereof, who was his Majesty; and in that respect
unworthy to receive him. The highest person advanced therein, was MONARCHIA
BRITANNICA,
and fitly: applying to the above mentioned title of the city, THE KINGS
CHAMBER, and therefore here placed as in the proper seat of the empire: for,
Brit. ^^.
so the glory and light of our kingdom M. CAMDEN, speaking of London, says,
she is, totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannicique Imperij seeds, Regumque
Angliae Camera, tantum inter omneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) inter viburna
Cupressus. She was a woman, richly attyr'd, in cloth of gold and tissue; a
rich mantle; over her state two crowns hanging, with pensile shields through
them; the one lim'd with the particular coat of England, the other of
Scotland: on either side also a crown, with the like Scutchions, and peculiar
coats of France, and Ireland* In her hand she holds a scepter; on her head a
fillet of gold, inter-wouen with palm and laurel; her hair bound into four
several points, descending from her crowns; and in her lap a little globe,
inscribed upon ORBIS BRITANNICVS.
And beneath, the word DIVISVS ABORBE.
To show, that this empire is a world divided from the world, and alluding to
that of De mallij Theodor. cons. Pa^^gyri. Eclog. 1.
CLAV. -- Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
And VIRG. -- Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos.
The wreathe denotes victory and happiness. The scepter and crowns
soueraignetie. The shields the precedence of the countries, and their
distinctions. At her feet was set THEOSOPHIA,
or divine Wisdom, all in white, a blue mantle seeded with stars, a crown
of stars on her head. Her garments figured truth, innocence, and cleerenesse.
She was always looking up; in her one hand she sustained a dove, in the
other a serpent: the last to show her subtlety, the first her simplicity;
alluding to that text of Scripture, Matthew. 10.16.
Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpents, and simplices sicut columbae. Her word,
Prou. 8.15.
PER ME REGES REGNANT.


Intimating, how by her, all kings do govern, and that she is the foundation
and strength of kingdoms, to which end, she was here placed, upon a cube, at
the foot of the Monarchy, as her base and stay. Directly beneath her stood
Antiqui Genium omnium gignendurum reru^ existimarunt Deum: and tam vrbib. quam
hominib. vel caeteris rebus natum, Lil. Gre. Gy. in Synt. deor. 15. and Rosin.
Antiq. To. l. 2. c. 14
GENIUS VRBIS,


A person attyr'd rich, reverend, and antique: his hair long and white,
crowned with a wreathe of Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his
mantle of purple, and buskins of that color: He held in one hand a goblet, in
the other a branch full of little twigs, to signify increase and indulgence.
His word HIS ARMIS:
pointing to the two that supported him, whereof the one on the right hand, was
BOVLEVTES.
Figuring the council of the city, and was suited in black and purple; a
wreathe of Ciuica corona fit e fronde querna, quoniam cibus, victusque
antiquissimus querc^us capi solitus sit, Ros. lib. 10. cap. 27.
oak upon his head; sustayning for his ensigns, on his left arm a scarlet
robe, and in his right hand the Fasciculi virgarum, intra quas obligata securis
erat, sit, vt ferrum in summo fasce extaret, Ros. l. 7. c. 3. Vbi notandum est,
non debere precipitem, and solutam iram esse magistratus. Mora enim allata, and
cunctatio, dum sensim virgae soluuntur, identidem consilium mutauit
deplectendo. Quando autem vitia quaedam sunt corrigibilia, deplorata alia;
casligant virgae, quod reuocari valet, immendabile secures praecidunt, Plut.
Prob. Romans 82.
Fasces, as tokens of magistracy, with this inscription; SERVARE CIVES.


The other on the left hand.

POLEMIVS,
The warlike force of the city, in an antique coat, or armor, with a target
and sword; his helm on, and crowned with laurel, implying strength and
conquest: in his hand he bore the standard of the city, with this word,
EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.


Expressing by those several mots, connexed, that with those arms of council
and strength, the Genius was able to extinguish the kings enemies, and preserve
his citizens, alluding to those verses in SENECA, Extinguere hostem, Octa. Act.
2.
maxima est virtus Ducis.
Seruare Ciues, mayor est patriae, patri.
Underneath these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest, lay
TAMESIS.
The river, as running along the side of the city; in a skin-coate made like
flesh, naked, and blue. His mantle of sea-greene or water color, thin, and
bolne out like a sail; bracelets about his wrests, of willow and sedge, a
crown of sedge and reed upon his head, mixed with water lillies; alluding to
VIRGILS description of Tyber; -- Deus ipse loci, Aen. lib. 8.
fluuio Tyberinus amoeno,
Populeas inter senior se attollere frondes
Visus, eum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus, and crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.


His beard, and hair long, and ouer-growne. He leanes his arm upon an earthen
pot, out of which, water, with live fishes, are seen to run forth, and play
about him. His word, FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA.
A hemistich of OVIDS: Amor. l. 3. el. 5.
The rest of the verse being,
-- quid esset amor


Affirming, that rivers themselves, and such inanimate creatures, have
heretofore been made sensible of passions, and affections; and that he now,
no less pertooke the joy of his majesty's grateful approach to this city,
than any of those persons, to whom he pointed, which were the daughters of the
Genius, and six in number: who, in a spreading ascent, upon several grices,
help to beautify both the sides, The first, EVPHROSYNE,
or Gladness: was suited in green, a mantle of diverse colors, embroydred with
all variety of flowers: on her head a gyrland of myrtle, in her right hand a
crystal cruze filled with wine, in the left a cup of gold: at her feet a
tymbrell, harp, and other instruments, all ensigns of gladness, Natis in
vsum laetitiae scyphis, etc.
And in another place, Hor. Car. 1. Ode 27.
Nunc est ^ibendum, nunc pede libero
Et Ode. 37.
Pulsanda Tellus, etc.
Her word, HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES.


Stat Syl. 4. Epu. Domit.
As if this were the first hour of her life, and the minute wherein she began
to be; beholding so long coueted, and looked for a presence. The second.

SEBASIS, or Veneratio, was varied in an ash-colored suit, and dark mantle, a
veil over her head of ash color: her hands crossed before her, and her eyes
half closde. Her word, MIHI SEMPER DEVS.


Virg. Ecl. 1.
Implying both her office of reverence, and the dignity of her object, who
being as god on earth, should never be less in her thought. The third.

PROTHYMIA, or Promptitude, was attyr'd in a short tuck't garment of
flame-colour, wings at her back; her hair bright, and bound up with ribands;
her breast open, virago-like; her buskins so ribanded: She was crowned with a
chaplet of trifoly, to express readiness, and opennesse every way; in her
right hand she held a squirrell, as being the creature most full of life and
quickness: in the left a close round censor, with the perfume suddenly to be
vented forth at the sides. Her word, QVA DATA PORTA.


Aene. 1.
Taken from an other place in VIRGIL, where EOLVS at the command of IVNO, lets
forth the wind; Aene. 1.
-- ac venti velut agmine facto
Qua data porta ruunt, and terras turbine perflant.


And showed that she was no less prepared with promptitude, and alacritic,
then the winds were, upon the least gate that shall be opened to his high
command. The fourth.

AGRYPNIA, or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded with waking eyes,
and silver fringe: her chaplet of Heliotropium, or turnesole; in her one hand a
lamp, or cresset, in her other a bell. The lamp signified search and sight,
the bell warning. The Heliotropium care; and respecting her object. Her word,
SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.


Alluding to that of OVID, where he describes the office of ARGVS. -- Ipse
procul montis sublime cacumen
Occupat, Met. 1.
vnde sedens parts speculatur in omneis.
and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in her self. The fifth,
AGAPE,
Or loving affection, in crimson fringed with gold, a mantle of flame-colour,
her chaplet of red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart: The flame
expressed zeal, the red and white roses, a mixture of simplicity with love:
her robes freshnes and feruency. Her word, NON SIC EXCVBIAE.


Out of CLAVDIAN, De 4. Cons. Honor. Panegyri.
in following. -- Nec circum stantiapcila
Quam tutatur amor.
Inferring, that though her sister before had protested watchfulness, and
circumspection, yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person
of a Prince, as the love and natural affection of his subjects: which she in
the cities behalf promised. The sixth, OMOTHYMIA,
Or unanimity in blew, her roabe blew, and buskins. A chaplet of blew lillies,
showing one truth and entireness of mind. In her lap lies a sheafe of
arrows bound together, and she her self sittes weauing certain small silver
twists. Her word, FIRMA CONSENSVS FACIT.
Auxilia humilia firma, Pub. Sir. M^.
etc.


Intimating, that even the smallest and weakest aids, by consent, are made
strong: her self personating the unanimity, or consent of soul, in all
inhabitants of the city to his service.

These are all the personages, or live figures, whereof only two were speakers
(GENIUS and TAMESIS) the rest were mutes. Other dumb complements there were,
as the arms of the kingdom on the one side, with this inscription.

HIS VIREAS.
With these may thou flourish.
On the other side the arms of the city, with HIS VINCAS.
With these may thou conquer.


In the center, or midst of the Pegme, there was an Aback, or Square* wherein
this Elogie was written: MAXIMUS HIC REX EST, ET LVCE SERENIOR IPSA
PRINCIPE QVAE TALEM CERNIT IN VRBE DVCEM;
CVIVS FORTVNAM SVPERAT SIC VNICA VIRTUES,
VNVS VT IS RELIQVOS VINCIT VTRAQVE VIROS.
PRAECEPTIS ALII POPVLOS, MVLTAQVE FATIGANT
LEGE; SED EXEMPLO NOS RAPIT ILLE SVO.
CVIQVE FRVI TOTA FAS EST VXORE MARITO,
ET SVA FAS SIMILI PIGNORA NOSSE PATRI.
ECCE VBI PIGNORIBVS CIRCVMSTIPATA CORVSCIS
IT COMES, ET TANTO VIX MINOR ANNA VIRO.
HAVD METVS EST, REGEM POSTHAC NE PROXIMVS HAERES,
NEV SVCCESSOREM NON AMET ILLE SVVM.


This, and the whole frame, was covered with a curtain of silk, painted like
a thick cloud, and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawn. The
Allegory being, that those clouds were gathered upon the face of the City,
through their long want of his most wished sight: but now, as at the rising of
the Sun, all mists were dispersed and fled. When suddenly, upon silence made
to the Musickes, a voice was heard to utter this verse; Claud. de laud. Still.
lib. 3.
Totus adest oculis, aderat qui mentibus olim,


Signifying, that he now was really objected to their eyes, who before had
been only, but still, present in their minds.

Thus far the complementall part of the first; wherein was not only labored
the expression of state and magnificence (as proper to a triumphall Arch) but
the very site, fabric, strength, policy, dignity, and affections of the
City were all laid down to life: The nature and property of these Devices
being, to present always some one entire body, or figure, consisting of
distinct members, and each of those expressing it self, in the own active
sphere, yet all, with that general harmony so connexed, and disposed, as no
one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole: where also is
to be noted, that the Symboles used, are not, neither ought to be, simply
Hieroglyphickes, Emblemes, or Impreses, but a mixed character, partaking
somewhat of all, and peculiarly apted to these more magnificent Inventions:
wherein, the garments and ensigns deliver the nature of the person, and the
word the present office. Neither was it becoming, or could it stand with the
dignity of these shows (after the most miserable and desperate shift of the
Puppits) to require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter) one to write,
This is a Dog; or, This is a Hare: but so to be presented, as upon the view,
they might, without cloud, or obscurity, declare themselves to the sharp and
learned: And for the multitude, no doubt but their grounded judgments did
gaze, said it was fine, and were satisfied.

The speeches of Gratulation.
GENIUS. TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the As being the first free and natural government
of this Island, after it came to civility.
Britain stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman In respect they were all Conquests, and the
obedience of the subject more enforced.
yoke,
This point of Time has done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest gems; teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging joy, love, and amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with showtes, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally,
As thunder; for, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When Rather then the City should want a Founder, we choose to follow the
received story of Brute, whether fabulous, or true, and not altogether
unwarranted in Poetry: since it is a favor of Antiquity to few Cities, to let
them know their first Authors. Besides, a learned Poet of our time, in a most
elegant work of his Con. Tam. and Isis, celebrating London, has this verse of
her: Aemula maternae tollens sua lumina Troiae. Here is also an ancient rite
alluded to in the building of Cities, which was, to give them their bounds with
a plough, according to Virg. Aen. li. 10. In^erea Aeneas vrbem designat Aratro.
And Isidore, lib. 15. cap. 2. Vrbs vocata ab orb, quod antiquae civitates in
orbem fiebant; vel ab vr^o part aratri, quo muri designabantur, vnde est
illud. Optauitque locum regno and concludere sulco.
BRUTUS plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And I, thy GENIUS walked auspicious rounds
In every Primigenius sulcus dicitur, qui in condenda noua vrbe, tauro and
vacca designationis causa imprimitur; Hitherto respects that of Camd. Brit.
368. speaking of this City, Quicunque autem condiderit, vitali genio,
constructam fuisse ipsius fortuna docuit.
furrow; then did I forelooke,
And saw this day For so all happy days were. Plin. cap. 40. lib. 7. Not.
Hist. To which Horace alludes, lib. 1. Ode 36. Cressa ne careat pulchra dies
nota. And the other Plin. epist. 11. lib. 6. O diem laetum, not andumque mihi
candidissimo calculo. With many other in many places. Mart. lib. 8. epi. 45.
lib. 9. epi. 53. lib. 10.38. lib. 11.37. Stat. lib. 4. Syl. 6. Pers. sat. 2*
Catull. epig. 69. etc.
marked white in The Parcae, or Fates, Martianus calls them scribas ac
librarias superum; whereof Clothe is said to be the eldest, signifying in
Latin Euocatio.
CLOTHO'S book.
The several Those before mentioned of the Britain, Roman, Saxon, etc. and to
this Register of the fates allude those verses of Ovid. Met. 15. -- Cernes
illic molimine vasto. Ex are, and solido rerum tabularia ferro: Quae neque
concussum coeli, neque fulminis Iram, Nec metuunt vllas tuta atque aeterna
ruinas. Inuenies illis incisae adamante perenni Fata etc. --
circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabites you? Shall office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspi'rd? Now heaven auert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from the liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks. "Now is not every tide.

TAMESIS. TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when seas of pomp overflow
The cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than A river dividing Spain and Portugal, and by the
consent of Poets sti'ld aurifer.
TAGVS wealthy ore?
When in the flood of joy, that comes with him,
He drownes the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may Understanding Euphrosyne, Sebasis,
Prothumia, etc.
these, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.

GENIUS. Indeed, true gladness does not always speak:
"Joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the feruor of so pure a flame
As this my city bears, might lose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heat)
Know greatest JAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous sons,
Whereof my The lord Mayor, who for his year, has senior place of the rest,
and for the day was chief serieant to the king.
eldest there, thy pomp forerunnes,
(A man without my flattering, or his pride,
As worthy, as he is Above the blessing of his present office, the word had some
particular allusion to his Name, which is Renet, and has (no doubt) in time
bin the contraction of Benedict.
blessed to be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the nectar of thy sight)
The council, commoners, and multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever king had to his The city which title is touched before.
empires seat:
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reuerenc'd, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: "In a prince it is
"No little virtue, to know who are his.
To the prince.
With like devotions, do I stoop to embrace
This springing glory of thy An attribute given to great persons, sitly above
other, humanity, and in frequent use with all the greek Poets, especially
Homer. Iliad. (...) -- (...). And in the same book. (...).
godlike race;
His countries wonder, hope, love, joy and pride:
How well does he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Britain ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the maine, and knit with every shore
In bonds of marriage, kindred, and increase;
And style this land, the As Luctatius calls Parnassus, Vmbillicum terrae.
nauill of their peace.
This is your servants wish, your cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of hope, that slow minds move:
"He seeks no hire, that owes his life to love.
To the queen.
And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of queens, and An emphatical speech, and well re-enforcing her
greatness; being by this match, more than either her brother, father, etc.
glory of your name,
Whose graces do as far out-speake your fame,
As fame does silence, when her trumpet rings
You Daughter to Frederick second king of Den^marke, and Norway, sister to
Christierne the fourth now there reigning, and wife to James our Sovereign.
daughter, sister, wife of several kings:
Besides alliance, and the style of mother,
In which one title you drown all your other.
Instance, be The prince Henry Frederike.
that fair shoot, is gone before,
Your eldest joy, and top of all your store,
With Charles duke of Rothsey, and the Lady Elizabeth.
those, whose sight to us is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This city can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good advocate
To her best lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sour mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor fortune greet your grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.

TARACHE, or Tumult, in a garment of diverse, but dark colors, her hair
wild, and disordered, a foul and troubled face, about her lay s^aues, swords,
ropes, chains, hammers, stones, and such like to express Turmoile. The word
was, De Malii. Theo. cons. Panegy.
PERAGIT TRANQVILLA POTESTAS.
Claud. Quod violenta nequit: mandataque fortius vrget Imperiosa quies.
To show the benefits of a calm and facile power, being able to effect in a
state that, which no violence can. On the other side the second handmaide was
ELEVTHERIA,
or Liberty, her dressing white, and somewhat antique, but loose and free:
her hair flowing down her back, and shoulders: In her right hand she bare a
club, on her left a hat, the Characters of freedom, and power: At her feet a
cat was placed, the creature most affecting, and expressing liberty. She trod
on DOVLOSIS,
or Servitude, a woman in old and worn garments, lean and meager, bearing
fetters on her feet, and hands, about her neck a yoke to insinuate bondage,
and the word NEC VNQVAM GRATIOR.
Alluding to that other of Claud. De laud. still. li. 3.
Nunquam libertas gratior extat,
Quam sub Rege pio.
And intimated, that liberty could never appear more graceful, and lovely,
then now under so good a prince. The third handmaid was SOTERIA,
or Safety, a damsel in carnation, the color signifying cheer, and life,
she sat high: upon her head she wore an antique helm, and in her right hand a
spear for defense, in her left a cup for Medicine: at her feet was set a
pedestall upon which a serpent rowld up did lie. Beneath was PEIRA,
or Danger, a woman dispoiled, and almost naked, the little garment she has
left her, of several colors, to note her various disposition. Besides her
lies a torch out, and a sword broken (the instruments of her fury) with a net
and wolves skin (the ensigns of her malice) rent in pieces. The word, TERGA
DEDERE METVS.
Lib. 12. Epist. 6.
Borrowed from Mart. and implying that now all fears have turned their backs,
and our safety might become security, danger being so wholly deprest, and
unfurnished of all means to hurt. The fourth attendant is, EVDAIMONIA,
or Felicity, varied on the second hand, and apparelled richly; in an
embroidered robe, and mantle: a fair golden tresse. In her right hand a
Caduceus, the note of peaceful wisdom: in her left, a Cornucopia filled
only with flowers, as a sign of flourishing blessedness; and crowned with a
garland of the same. At her feet, DYSPRAGIA,
or Unhappiness, a woman bareheaded, her neck, arms, breast, and feet naked,
her look hollow and pale; she holds a Cornucopia turned downward with all the
flowers fallen out and scattered, upon her sits a raven, as the augury of ill
fortune: and the soul was REDEVNT SATVRNIA REGNA.
Out of Virgil, Eclog 4.
to show that now those golden times were returned again, wherein Peace was
with us so advanced, Rest received, Liberty restored, Safety assured, and all
Blessedness appearing in every of these virtues her particular triumph over
her opposite evil. This is the dumb argument of the frame, and illustrated
with this verse of Virgil, written in the under freeze. NVLLA SALVS BELLO:
Aeneid. lib. 11.

PACEM TE POSCIMVS OMNES.
The speaking part was performed, as within the temple where there was erected
an altar, to which at the approach of the king appears the Flamen One of the
three Flamines that as some think Numa Pompilius first instituted, but we
rather with Varro take him of Romulus institution, whereof there were only two,
He, and Dialis: to whom he was next in dignity. He was always created out of
the Nobility, and did perform the rites to Mars, who was thought the Father of
Romulus.
MARTIALIS.
And to him, GENIUS VRBIS.
The Genius we attired before: To the Flamen we appoint this habit. A long
crimson robe to witness his nobility, his typpet and sleeves white, as
reflecting on purity in his religion, a rich mantle of gold with a train to
express the digniti^ of his function. Upon his head a Scaliger in coniect. in
Varr: says Totus Pileus, vel potius velamenta, Flammeum dicebatur. vnde
Flamine^ dicti.
hat of delicate wool, whose top ended in a cone, and was thence called Apex,
according to that of Lucan. lib. 1. Attollensque Apicem generoso vertice Flamen.
This Apex was covered with a To this looks that other conjecture of Varro.
lib. 4. de lingua Latina. Flamines, quod licio in capite velati erant semper,
ac caput cinctum habeb^nt filo, Flamines dicti.
fine net of yearne which they named Apiculum, and was sustained with a Which
in their attire was called Stroppus, in their wives Inarculum.
bowd twigge of Pomegranat tree, it was also in the hot time of Summer to be
bound with ribands, and thrown behind them as Scal. Ibid. in c^n. Pone enim
regerebant apicem, ne grauis esset summis aestatis caloribus. Amenti^ enim,
quae offendices dicebantur sub mentum adductis, religabant; vt cum vellent,
regererent, and pone pendere permitterent.
Scaliger teaches. In his hand he bore a golden censor with perfume, and
censing about the altar (having first kindled his fire on the top) is
interrupted by the Genius.

Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And According to Romulus his institution, who made March the first month, and
consecrated it to his father, of whom it was called Martius, Varr. Fest. in
Frag. Martius mensis initiu^ anni fuit, and in Latio, and post Roman conditam,
etc. And Ovid. Fast. 3. A te principium Romano dicimus anno: Primus de patrio
nomine mensis erit. Vox rata sit, etc. See Macr. lib. 1. Sat. cap. 12. and
Solin. in Poly. hist. cap. 3. Quod hoc mense mercedes exoluerint magistris,
quas completus annus deberi f^^sset etc.
first account of years, of months, Some, to whom we have read this, have
taken it for a Tantologie, thinking Time enough expressed before in years, and
months. For whose ignorant sakes we must confess to have taken the better
part of this travail in noting, a thing not usual, neither affected of us,
but where there is necessity, as here, to avoid their dull censures: where in
years and months we alluded to that is observed in our former note: but by
Time we understand the present, and that from this instant, we should begin to
reckon, and make this the first, of our time. Which is also to be helped by
emphasis.
of time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to In which he was slain in the Senate.
CAESAR fatal were.
Be all thy thoughts borne perfect, and thy hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen gates
Make haste to close, as urged by thy fates;
Here ends my cities office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains does greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
,,He merits not to offend, that hastes to please.

Over the Altar was written this Inscription:
D. I. O. M. BRITANNIARVM. IMP. PACIS. VINDICI. MART. MAIORI. P. P. F. S.
AVGVSTO. NOVO. GENTIVM. CONIVNCTARVM. NVMINI. TVTELARI.

And upon the Gate, being shut,



All ills shall fly the light: Thy court be free
No less from envy, then from flattery;
All tumult, faction, and harsh discord cease,
That might perturbe the music of thy peace:
The querulous nature shall no longer find
Room for his thoughts: One pure consent of mind
Shall flow in every breast, and not the air,
Sun, moon, or stars shine more serenely fair.
This from that loud, blessed Oracle, I sing,
Who here, and first, pronounced, thee Britains king
Long may thou live, and see me thus appear,
As omenous For our more authority to induce her thus, See Fest. Auien.
paraph. in Arat. speaking of Electra, Non nunquam Oceani tamenistam surgere ab
vndis, In conuexa poli, sed sede carere sororum; Atque os discretum procul
edere, detestatam. Germanosque choros sobolis lachrymare ruinas, Diffusamque
comas cerni, crinisque soluti Monstrari effigy, etc.
a comet, from my sphere,
Unto thy reign; as that All comets were not fatal, some were fortunately
ominous, as this to which we allude; and wherefore we have Plinies testimony.
Not. Histo. lib. 2 cap. 25. Cometes in vno totius orbis loco colitur in templo
Romae, admodum faustus Diuo Augusto iudicatus ab ipso: qui incipiento eo,
apparuit ludis quos faciebat Veneri Genetrici, non multo post obitum patris
Caesaris, in collegio ab eo instituto. Namque his verbis id gaudium prodidit.
Iisipsis ludorum meorum diebus, sydus crinitum perseptem dies in regione Coeli,
quae sub septentrionibus est, conspectum. Id oriebatur circa vndecimam horam
diei, clarumque and omnibus terris conspicuum fuit. Eo sydere significari
vulgus credidit, Caesaris animam inter Deorum immortalium numina receptam: quo
nomine id insigne simulacro capitis eius, quod mox in foro consecrauimus
adiectum est. Haec ille in publicum, interiore gaudio sibi illum natum seque in
eo nasci interpretatus est. Et siverum fatemur, salutare id terrisfuit.
did auspicate
So lasting glory to AUGUSTUS state.

THE END.
A PANEGYRE, ON THE HAPPY ENTRANCE OF JAMES, OUR SOVEREIGN, TO His first high
Session of PARLIAMENT in this his Kingdom, the 19. of March, 1603 -- 4.

The Author B. I.

MART. Licet toto nunc Helicone frui.
LONDON, M. DC. XVI.

A PANEGYRE.
Heaven now not strives, alone, our breasts to fill
With joys: but urges his full favors still.
Again, the glory of our Western world
Unfolds himself: and from his eyes are hoorl'd
(To day) a thousand radia^t lights, that stream
To every nooke and angle of his realm.
His former rays did only clear the sky;
But these his searching beams are cast, to pri^
Into those dark and deep concealed vaults,
Where men commit black incest with their faults;
And snore supinely in the stall of sin:
Where Murder, Rapine, Lust, do sit within,
Carowsing humane blood in iron bowls,
And make their den the slaughterhouse of souls:
From whose foul reeking cauernes first arise
Those dampes, that so offend all good men's eyes;
And would (if not dispersed) infect the Crown,
And in their vapor her bright metal drown.
To this so clear and sanctified an end,
I saw, when reverend THEMIS did descend
Upon his state; let down in that rich chain,
That fastneth heavenly power to earthly reign:
Beside her, stoup't on either hand, a maid,
Fair DICE, and EVNOMIA; who were said
To be her daughters: and but faintly known
On earth, till now, they came to grace his throne.
Her third, IRENE, helped to bear his train;
And in her office vowed she would remain,
Till foreign malice, or unnatural spite
(Which Fates auert) should force her from her right.
With these he passed, and with his peoples hearts
Breathed in his way; and souls (their better parts)
Hast^ng to follow forth in shouts, and cries.
Upon his face all threw their covetous eyes,
As on a wonder: some amazed stood,
As if they felt, but had not known their good:
Others would feign have shew'ne it in their words:
But, when their speech so poor a help affords
Unto their zeales expression; they are mute:
And only with red silence him salute.
Some cry from tops of houses, thinking noise
The fittest herald to proclaim true joys:
Others on ground run gazing by his side,
All, as unwearied, as unsatisfied:
And every windore grieved it could not move
Along with him, and the same trouble prove.
They that had seen, but four short days before,
His gladding look, now longed to see it more.
And as of late, when he through London went,
The amorous City spared no ornament,
That might her beauties heighten; but so dressed,
As our ambitious dames, when they make feast,
And would be courted: so this Town put on
Her brightest tire; and, in it, equal shone
To her great sister: save that modesty,
Her place, and years, gave her precedencie.
The joy of either was alike, and full;
No age, nor sex, so weak, or strongly dull,
That did not bear a part in this consent
Of hearts, and voices. All the air was rent,
As with the murmr of a moving wood;
The ground beneath did seem a moving flood:
Walls, windores, roofes, towers, steeples, all were set
With several eyes, that in this object met.
Old men were glad, their fates till now did last;
And infants, that the hours had made such have
To bring them forth: Whilst riper aged, and apt
To understand the more, the more were rapt.
This was the peoples love, with which did strive
The Nobles zeal, yet either kept alive
The others flame, as does the wike and wax,
That friendly tempered, one pure taper makes.
Mean while, the reverend THEMIS draws aside
The Kings obeying will, from taking pride
In these vain stirs, and to his mind suggests
How he may triumph in his subjects breasts,
"With better pomp. She tells him first, that Kings
"Are here on earth the most conspicuous things:
"That they, by Heaven, are placed upon his throne,
"To rule like Heaven; and have no more, their own,
"As they are men, then men. That all they do
"Though hid at home, abroad is searched into:
"And, being once found out, discovered lies
"Unto as many enuies, there, as eyes.
"That princes, since they know it is their fate,
"Oft-times, to have the secrets of their state
"Betrayed to fame, should take more care, and fear
"In public acts what face and form they bear.
"She then remembered to his thought the place
"Where he was going; and the upward race
"Of kings, praeceding him in that high court;
"Their laws, their ends; the men she did report:
"And all so justly, as his care was joyed
"To hear the truth, from spite, or flattery void.
"She showed him, who made wise, who honest acts;
"Who both, who neither: all the cunning tracts,
"And thriuing statutes she could promptly note;
"The bloody, base, and barbarous she did quote;
"Where laws were made to serve the tyran'will;
"Where sleeping they could save, and waking kill;
"Where acts gave license to impetuous lust
"To bury churches, in forgotten dust,
"And with their ruins raise the panders bowers:
"When, public justice borrowed all her powers
"From private chambers; that could then create
"Laws, judges, consellors, yea prince, and state.
"All this she told, and more, with bleeding eyes;
"For Right is as compassionate as wife.
Nor did he seem their vices so to love,
As once defend, what THEMIS did reprove.
For though by right, and benefit of Times,
He ownde their crowns, he would not so their crimes.
He knew that princes, who had sold their fame
To their voluptuous lusts, had lost their name;
And that no wretch was more unblessed then he,
Whose necessary good it was now to be
An evil king: And so must such be still,
Who once have got the habit to do ill.
One wickedness another must defend;
For vice is safe, while she has vice to friend.
He knew, that those, who would, with love, command,
Must with a tender (yet a steadfast) hand
Sustain the reins, and in the check forbear
To offer cause of injury, or fear.
That kings, by their example, more do sway
Then by their power; and men do more obey
When they are led, then when they are compelled.
In all these knowing arts our prince excelled.
And now the dame had dried her dropping eyne,
When, like an April Iris, flew her shine
About the streets, as it would force a spring
From out the stones, to gratulate the king.
She blessed the people, that in shoales did swim
To hear her speech; which still began in him
And ceased in them. She told them, what a fate
Was gently fallen from heaven upon this state;
How dear a father they did now enjoy
That came to save, what discord would destroy:
And entering with the power of a king,
The temperance of a private man did bring,
That wan affections, ere his steps wan ground;
And was not hot, or covetous to be crowned
Before men's hearts had crowned him. Who (unlike
Those greater bodies of the sky, that strike
The lesser fires dim) in his access
Brighter then all, has yet made no one less;
Though many greater: and the most, the best.
Wherein, his choice was happy with the rest
Of his great actions, first to see, and do
What all men's wishes did aspire unto.
Hereat, the people could no longer hold
Their bursting joys; but through the air was rol'd
The lengthened showt, as when th'artillery
Of heaven is discharged along the sky:
And this confession flew from every voice:
Never had land more reason to rejoice.
Nor to her bliss, could ought now added be,
Save, that she might the same perpetual see.
Which when time, nature, and the fates denied,
With a twice louder shoute again they cried,
Yet, let blessed Britain ask (without your wrong)
Still to have such a king, and this king long.
Solus Rex, and Poeta non quotannis nascitur.
A PARTICVLAR ENTERTAINMENT OF THE QVEENE AND PRINCE THEIR HIGHNESS AT
ALTHROPE, AT The Right Honorable the Lord SPENCERS, on Satturday being the 25.
of June 1603. as they came first into the Kingdom;

Written by the same Author, and not before published.

The Author B. I.

LONDON, M. DC. XVI.

A SATYR.
THe invention was, to have a Satyr lodged in a little Spinet, by which her
Majesty, and the Prince were to come, who (at the report of certain Corne^s
that were divided in several places of the Park, to signify her approach)
advanced his head above the top of the wood, wondering, and (with his pipe in
his hand) began as follows.

SATYR. HEre? there? and every where?
Some solemnities are near,
That these changes strike mine ear.
My pipe and I a part shall bear.
And after a short strain with his pipe; again. Look, see; (beshrew this
tree,)
What may all this wonder be?
Pipe it, who that list for me:
I Will fly out abroad, and see.
There he leaped down, and gazing the Queen and Prince in the face, went
forward. That is CYPARISSVS face!
And the dame has SYRINX grace!
O that PAN were now in place,
Sure, they are of heavenly race.

Here he ran into the wood again, and hid himself whilst to the sound of
excellent soft Music, that was there conceald in the thicket; there came
tripping up the lawne, a beuy of Faeries, attending on MAB their Queen, who
falling into an artificial ring, that was there cut in the path, began to
dance a round, whilst their Mistress spoke as follows. FAERIE. Hail, and
welcome worthiest Queen,
Joy had never perfect been,
To the Nymphs that haunt this green,
Had they not this evening seen.
Now they print it on the ground
With their feet in figures round,
Marks that will be ever found,
To remember this glad stound.
The Satyr peeping out of the bush, said. Trust her not, you bonny-bell,
She will forty leasings tell,
I do know her pranks right well.

FAERIE. Satyr, we must have a spell,
For your tongue, it runs too fleet.

SATYR. Not so nimbly as your feet,
When about the creame-bowles sweet,
You, and all your Elues do meet.
Here he came hopping forth, and mixing himself with the Faeries skipped in,
out, and about their circle, while the Elues made many offers to catch at him.
This is MAB the mistris-Faerie,
That does nightly rob the dayrie,
And can hurt, or help the cherning,
(As she please) without discerning.

ELFE. PVG, you will anon take warning?
She, that pinches country wenches,
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper nails remembers,
When they rake not up their embers:
But if so they chance to feast her,
In a shoe she drops a tester.

ELFE. Shall we strip the skipping iester?
This is she, that empties cradles,
Takes out children, puts in ladles:
Traynes forth mid-wiues in their slumber,
With a sieve the holes to number.
And then leads them, from her borroughs
Home through ponds, and water furrows.

ELFE. Shall not all this mocking stir us?
She can start our FRANKLINS daughters,
In their sleep, with shrikes, and laughters,
And on sweet Saint ANNE'S night,
Feed them with a promised sight,
Some of husbands, some of lovers,
Which an empty dream discouers.

ELFE. Satyr, vengeance near you houers,
And in hope that you would come here
Yester-eue the lady For she was expected here on Mid-summer day at night, but
came not till the day following.
Summer,
She invited to a banquet:
But (in sooth) I con you thank yet,
That you could so well deceive her
Of the pride which began vp-heaue her:
And (by this) would so have blown her,
As no wood-god should have known her.

Here he skipped into the wood. ELFE. Mistress, this is only spite:
For you would not yester-night
Kiss him in the cock-shout light.

And came again. SATYR. By PAN, and thou have hit it right.

There they laid hold on him, and nipt him. FAERY. Fayries, pinch him black and
blue,
Now you have him, make him rue.

SATYR. O, hold, MAB: I sue.

ELFE. Nay, the devil shall have his due.

There he ran quite away and left them in a confusion, while the Faery began
again. SATYR. Pardon lady this wild strain,
Common with the SYLVAN train,
That do skip about this plain:
Elues, apply your gyre again.
And whilst some do hop the ring,
Some shall play, and some shall sing,
We Will express in every thing,
Quasi Orions ANNA.
ORANAS well-comming.
SONG. THis is she,
This is she,
In whose world of grace
Every season, person, place,
That receive her, happy be,
For with no less,
Then Bringing with her the Prince, which is the greatest felicity of
kingdoms.
a kingdoms happiness,
Does she private For households.
Lares bless,
And ours above the rest:
By how much we deserve it least.
Long live ORIANA
To exceed (whom she succeeds) our late DIANA.

FAERY. Madame, now an end to make,
Deigne a simple gift to take:
Only for the Faeries sake,
Who about you still shall wake.
It Is done only to supply,
His suspected courtesy,
Who (since THAMYRA did dye)
Has not brookt a ladies eye,
Nor allowed about his place,
Any of the female race.
Only we are free to trace
All his grounds, as he to chase.
For which bounty to us lent,
Of him vnknowledgde, or unsent,
We prepared this A jewel was given her.
complement,
And as far from cheap intent,
In particular to feed,
Any hope that should succeed.
Or our glory by the deed,
As your self are from the need.
Utter not; we you implore,
Who did give it, nor wherefore.
And when ever you restore
Your self to us, you shall have more.
Highest, happyest Queen farewell,
But beware you do not tell.

Here the Faeries hopt away in a fantastique dance, when on a sudden the
Satyr discovered himself again and came forth. SATYR. Not tell? Ha, ha, I
could smile,
At this old, and toothlesse wile.
Lady, I have been no sleeper,
She belyes the noble keeper.
Say, that here he like the groves:
And pursue no foreign loves,
Is he therefore to be deemed,
Rude, or savage? or esteemed,
But a sorry entertayner,
'Cause he is no common strayner:
After painted Nymphs for favors,
Or that in his garb he savors
Little of the nicety,
In the sprucer courtiery;
As the rosarie of kisses,
With the oath that never misses,
This, believe me on the breast,
And then telling some man's jest,
Thinking to prefer his wit,
Equal with his suite by it,
I mean his clothes: No, no, no,
Here does no such humor flow.
He can neither bribe a grace,
Nor encounter my lords face
With a plyant smile, and flatter,
Though this lately were some matter
To the making of a courtier.
Now he hopes he shall resort there,
Safer, and with more allowance;
Since a hand has governance,
That has given those customs chase,
And has brought his own in place.
O that now a wish could bring,
The god-like person of a king,
Then should even Envy find,
Cause of wonder at the mind
Of our wood-man: but lo, where
His kingly image does appear,
And is all this while neglected.
Pardon (lord) you are respected
Deep as is the Keepers heart,
And as dear in every part.
See, for instance where he sends
Here the Satyr fetched out of the wood, the Lord Spencers eldest son,
attyr'd and appointed like a huntsman.
His son, his heir; who humbly bends
Low, as is his fathers earth,
To the womb that gave you birth
So he was directed first,
Next to you, of whom the thirst
Of seeing takes away the use
Of that part, should plead excuse
For his boldness, which is less
By his comely shamefac'tnesse.
Rise up, sir, I will betray,
All I think you have to say;
That your father gives you here,
(Freely as to him you were)
To the service of this Prince:
And with you these instruments
Of his wild and Syluan trade,
Better not ACTEON had.
The bow was PHoeBES, and the horn,
By ORION often worn:
The dog of Sparta breed, and good,
As can ring within a wood;
Thence his name is: you shall try
How he hunteth instantly.
But perhaps the Queen your mother,
Rather does affect some other
Sport, as coursing: we will prove
Which her highness most does love.
Satyrs let the woods resound,
They shall have their welcome crowned,
With a brace of bucks to ground.
At that, the whole wood and place resounded with the noise of cornets, horns,
and other hunting music, and a brace of choice Dear put out, and as
fortunately killed, as they were meant to be; even in the sight of her
Majesty. This was the first nights show. Where the next day being Sunday, she
rested, and on Monday, till after dinner; where there was a speech suddenly
thought on, to induce a morrise of the clownes thereabout, who most officiously
presented themselves, but by reason of the throng of the country that came in,
their speaker could not be heard, who was in the person of Nobody, to deliver
this following speech, and attyred in a pair of breeches which were made to
come up to his neck, with his arms out at his pockets, and a cap drowning his
face. IF my outside move your laughter,
Pray JOVE, my inside be thereafter.
Queen, Prince, Duke, Earls,
Countesses; you courtly Pearls:
(And, I hope no mortal sin,
If I put less Ladies in)
Fair saluted be you all.
At this time it does befall,
We are the Huisher to a Morrise,
(A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
In the country hereabout,
But this, the choice of all the rout.
Who, because that no man sent them,
Have got NO-BODIE to present them.
These are things have no suspicion
Of their ill doing; nor ambition
Of their well: but as the Pipe
Shall inspire them, mean to skip.
They come to see, and to be seen,
And though they dance before the Queen,
There Is none of these does hope to come by
Wealth, to build another Holmby:
All those dancing days are done,
Men must now have more then one
Grace, to build their fortunes on,
Else our soles would sure have gone,
All by this time to our feet.
I not deny, where Graces meet
In a man, that quality
Is a graceful property:
But when dancing is his best,
(Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
But I am NO-BODIE, and my breath
(Soon as it is borne) has death.
Come on clownes, forsake your dumps,
And bestirre your hob-nail'd stumps,
Do your worst, I Will undertake,
Not a ierke you have shall make
Any Lady here in love.
Perhaps your Fool, or so, may move
Some Ladies woman with a trick,
And upon it she may pick
A pair of reuelling legs, or two,
Out of you, with much ado.
But see, the Hobbyhorse is forgot.
Fool, it must be your lot,
To supply his want with faces,
And some other Buffon graces,
You know how; Piper play,
And let no body hence away.
There was also another parting Speech; which was to have been presented in
the person of a youth, and accompanied with diverse gentlemen's younger sons of
the country: but by reason of the multitudinous press, was also hindered. And
which we have here adjoined. ANd will you then, Mirror of Queens, depart?
Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart?
That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
And see his Day ere it be old grow Night?
You are a Goddess, and your will be done:
Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sun
Cheeres objects far removed, as well as near;
So, where so'ere you shine, you will sparkle here.
And you dear Lord, on whom my covetous eye
Does feed it self, but cannot satisfy,
O shoot up fast in spirit, as in years;
That when upon her head proud Europe wears
Her stateliest tire, you may appear thereon
The richest gem, without a paragon.
Shine bright and fixed as the Artick star:
And when slow Time has made you fit for war,
Look over the strict Ocean, and think where
You may but lead us forth, that grow up here
Against a day, when our officious swords
Shall speak our action better then our words.
Till then, all good event conspire to crown
Your parents hopes, our zeal, and your renown.
Peace usher now your steps, and where you come,
Be Envy still struck blind, and Flattery dumb.

A PRIVATE ENTERTAINMENT of the KING and QVEENE, on May Day in the Morning, At
Sir WILLIAM CORNVVALLEIS his house, at High-gate. 1604.
By the same Author.
THe king, and queen being entered in at the gate, the PENATES, o^
household-gods received them, attired after the antique manner, with iauelines
in their hands, standing on each side of the porch, with this speech. PENATES.
1.
Leap light hearts in every breast,
Joy is now the fittest passion;
Double majesty has blessed
All the place, with that high grace,
Exceeds admiration!
2.
Welcome, monarch of this Isle,
Europes envy, and her merror;
Great in each part of thy style:
Englands wish, and Scotlands bliss,
Both France, and Irelands terror.
1.
Welcome, are you; and no less,
Your admired queen: the glory
Both of state, and comeliness.
Every line of her divine
Form, is a beauteous story.
2.
High in fortune, as in blood,
So are both; and blood renowned
By often falls, that make a flood
In your veins: yet, all these streines
Are in your virtues drowned.
1.
House, be proud; For of earth's store
These two, only, are the wonder:
In them she is rich, and in no more.
Zeal is bound their praise to sound
As loud as fame, or thunder.
2.
Note, but how the air, the spring
Concur in their devotions;
Payres of Turtles sit, and sing
On each tree, ore-ioy'd to see
In them like love, like motions.
1.
Enter sir, this longing door,
Whose glad lord naught could have blessed
Equally; (I Am sure not more)
Then this sight: saue' of your right,
When you were first possessed.
2.
That, indeed, transcended this.
Since which hour, wherein you gayn'd it.
For this grace, both he and his,
Every day, have learned to pray,
And, now, they have obtayn'd it.

Here the PENATES lead them in, through the house, into the garden, where
MERCVRY, with a second speech, received them, walking before them. MER. Retire,
you houshold-gods, and leave these excellent creatures to be entertained by a
more eminent deity. Hayle King, and Queen of the Islands, called truly
fortunate, and by you made so; To tell you, who I am, and wear all these
notable, and speaking ensigns about me, were to challenge you of most
impossible ignorance, and accuse my self of as palpable glory: It is enough
that you know me here, and come with the license of my father JOVE, who is the
bounty of heaven, to give you early welcome to the bower of my mother MAIA, no
less the goodness of earth. And may it please you to walk, I will tell you
no wonderful story. This place, whereon you are now advanced (by the mighty
power of Poetry, and the help of a faith, that can remove mountains) is the
Arcadian hill CYLLENE, the place, where my self was both begot, and borne; and
of which I am frequently called CYLLENIVS: Under yond' purslane tree stood
sometime my cradle. Where, now, behold my mother MAIA, sitting in the pride of
her plenty, gladding the air with her breath, and cheering the spring with
her smiles. At her feet, the blushing AVRORA, who, with her rosy hand, casts
her honey dewes on those sweeter herbs, accompanied with that gentle wind,
FAVONIVS, whose subtle spirit, in the breathing forth, FLORA makes into
flowers, and sticks them in the grass, as if she contended to have the
imbroyderie of the earth, richer then the cope of the sky. Here, for her
month, the yearly delicate May keeps state; and from this Mount, takes
pleasure to display these valleys, yon'd lesser hills, those statelier
edifices, and towers, that seem enamored so far off, and are reared on end,
to behold her, as if their utmost object were her beauties. Hither the Dryads
of the valley, and Nymphs of the great river come every morning, to taste of
her favors; and depart away with laps filled with her bounties. But, see! upon
your approach their pleasures are instantly remitted. The birds are hushed,
ZEPHYRE is still, the MORN forbeares her office, FLORA is dumb, and herself
amazed, to behold two such maruailes, that do more adorn place, then she can
time; Pardon, your Majesty, the fault, for it is that has caused it; and till
they can collect their spirits, think silence, and wonder the best adoration.


Here, AVRORA, ZEPHYRVS, and FLORA, began this song in three parts. SONG. SEe,
see, O see, who here is come a Maying!
The master of the Ocean;
And his beauteous ORIAN:
Why left we off our playing?
To gaze, to gaze,
On them, that gods no less then men amaze.
Up Nightingale, and sing
Iug, jug, jug, jug, etc.
Raise Lark thy note, and wing,
All birds their music bring,
Sweet Robin, Linet, Thrush,
Record, from every bush,
The welcome of the King;
And Queen:
Whose like were never seen,
For good, for fair.
Nor can be; though fresh May,
Should every day
Inuit a several pair,
No, though she should inuit a several pair.
Which ended: MAIA (seated in her bower, with all those personages about her,
as before described) began to raise her self, and, then declining, spoke. MAY.
If all the pleasures were distilled
Of every flower, in every field,
And all that HIBLA hiues do yield
Were into one broad mazor filled;
If, thereto, added all the gummes,
And spice, that from PANCHAIA comes,
The odor, that HYDASPES lends
Or PHoeNIX proves, before she ends;
If all the Air, my FLORA drew,
Or spirit, that ZEPHYRE ever blew;
Were put therein; and and all the dew
That ever rosy Morning knew;
Yet, all diffused upon this bower,
To make one sweet detayning hour,
Were much too little for the grace,
And honor, you vouchsafe the place.
But, if you please to come again,
We vow, we will not then, with vain,
And empty passe-times entertayne,
Your so desired, though grieved pain.
For, we will have the wanton fawnes,
That frisking skip, about the lawnes,
The Paniskes, and the Siluanes rude,
Satyrs, and all that multitude,
To dance their wilder rounds about,
And cleave the air, with many a shout,
As they would hunt poor Echo out
Of yonder valley, who does flout
Their rusticke noise. To visit whom
You shall behold whole beuies come
Of gaudy Nymphs, who tender calls
Well tuned (unto the many falls
Of sweet, and several sliding rills,
That stream from tops of those less hills)
Sound like so many silver quills
When ZEPHYRE them with music fills.
For these, FAVONIVS here shall blow
New flowers, which you shall see to grow,
Of which, each hand a part shall take,
And, for your heads, fresh garlands make.
Wherewith, whilst they your temples round,
An air of several birds shall sound
An Io paean, that shall drown
The acclamations, at your crown.
All this, and more then I have gift of saying,
MAY vows, so you will often come here a Masing.

MER. And MERCVRY, her son, shall venture the displeasure of his father, with
the whole bench of Heaven, that day, but he will do his mothers intents all
serviceable assistance. Till then, and ever, live high and happy, you, and your
other you; both envied for your fortunes, loved for your graces, and admired
for your virtues.


This was the mornings entertaynment; after dinner, the King, and Queen
coming again into the garden, MERCVRY the second time accosted them. MER.
Again, great pair, I salute you; and with leave of all the gods: whose high
pleasure it is, that MERCVRY make this your holy day. May all the blessings
both of earth, and heaven, concur to thank you: For till this days sun, I
have faintly inioy'd a minutes rest to my creation. Now, I do, and acknowledge
it you sole, and no less the divine benefit. If my desire to delight you,
might not divert to your trouble, I would entreat your eyes to a new, and
strange spectacle; a certain son of mine, whom the Arcadians call a god,
howsoever the rest of the world receive him: It is the horned PAN, whom in the
translated figure of a goat I begot on the fair Spartan PENELOPE; MAY, let
both your ears, and looks forgive it: These are but the lightest escapes of
our Deities. And, it is better in me, to prevent his rusticke impudence, by my
blushing acknowledgement, then, anon, by his rude, and not insolent claim, be
enforced to confess him. Yonder he keeps, and with him the wood Nymphs,
whose leader he is in rounds, and daunces, to this Syluane music. The place,
about which they skip, is the fount of laughter, or BACCHVS spring; whose
statue is advanced on the top; and from whose pipes, at an observed hour of
the day, there flows a lusty liquor, that has the present virtue to expel
sadness; and within certain minutes after it is tasted, force all the mirth
of the spleen into the face. Of this is PAN the Guardian. Lo! the fountain
begins to run, but the Nymphs at your sight are fled. PAN, and his Satyrs
wildly stand at gaze. I will approach, and question him: vouchsafe your ear,
and forgive his behavior, which (even to me, that am his parent) will no doubt
be rude enough, though otherwise full of salt, which, except my presence did
temper, might turn to be gall, and bitterness; but that shall charm him.


PAN. O, it is MERCVRY! Hollow 'hem, again,
What be all these, father? gods, or men?

MER. All humane. Only, these two are deities on earth, but such, as the
greatest powers of heaven may resign to.


PAN. Why did our Nymphs run away? can you tell?
Here be sweet beauties love MERCVRY well?
I see by their looks. How say you? great master?
Will you please to here? Shall I be your taster?

MER. PAN, you are too rude.

PAN. It is but a glass,
By my beard, and my horns, it is a health, and shall pass.
Were he a king, and his mistress a queen
This draught shall make him a petulant spleen.
But, trow, is he loose, or costiue of laughter?
I Would know, to fill him his glass, thereafter,
Sure, either my skill, or my sight does mock,
Or this lordings look should not care for the smock;
And yet he should love both a horse and a hound,
And not rest till he saw his game on the ground:
Well, look to him, Dame; beshrow me were I
Amongst these bonny-bells, you should need a good eye.
Here mistress; all out. Since a god is your skinker:
By my hand, I believe you were borne a good drinker.
They are things of no spirit, their blood is asleep,
That, when it is offered 'hem do not drink deep.
Come, who is next? Our liquour here cooles.
Ladies, I Am sure, you all have not fools
At home to laugh at. A little of this,
Taken down here in private, were not amiss.
Believe it, she drinks like a wench, that had store
Of lord for her laughter, will you have more?
What answer you, lordings? will you any, or none?
Laugh, and be fat, sir, your penance is known.
They that love mirth, let 'hem heartily drink,
It Is the only receipt, to make sorrow sink.
The young Nymph, that is troubled with an old man,
Let her laugh him away, as fast as he can.
Nay drink, and not pause, as who would say must you?
But laugh at the wench, that next does trust you.
To you, sweet beauty; nay, 'pray you come hither:
E're you sit out, yow'le laugh at a fether.
I Will never fear you, for being too witty,
You sip, so like a forsooth of the city,
Lords, for your selves, your own cups crown,
The ladies, in faith, else will laugh you down.
Go to, little blushet, for this, anan,
Yow'le steal forth a laugh in the shade of your fan.
This, and another thing, I can tell you,
Will breed a laughter, as low as your belly
Of such sullen pieces, JOVE send us not many,
They must be tickled, before they will any.
What have we done? They that want, let'hem call,
Gallants, of both sides, you see here is all.
PAN'S entertaynment: Look for no more.
Only, good faces, I reed you, make store
Of your amorous Knights, and Squiers hereafter,
They are excellent sponges, to drink up your laughter.
Farewell, I must seek out my Nymphs, that you frighted;
Thank HERMES, my father, if ought' have delighted.

MER. I am sure, thy last rudeness cannot; for it makes me seriously ashamed.
I will not labor his excuse, since I know you more ready to pardon, then he to
trespass: but, for your singular patience, tender you all abundance of
thanks; and, mixing with the Master of the place, in his wishes, make them my
diuinations: That your loves be ever flourishing as May, and your house as
fruitful: That your acts exceed the best, and your years the longest of your
predecessors: That no bad fortune touch you, nor good change you. But still,
that you triumph, in this facility, over the ridiculous pride of other
Princes; and for ever live safe in the love, rather, then the fear of your
subjects.


And thus it ended.

BEN. IONSON.

The entertainment of the two Kings of Great BRITAIN and DENMARK at
THEOBALDS, July 24. 1606.
THe Kings being entered the inner Court; above, over the porch, sat the three
Hours, upon clouds, as at the ports of Heaven; crowned with several flowers:
of which, one bore a Sunne-diall; the other, a Clock; the third, an
Hower-glasse; signifying as by their names, Law, Justice, and Peace. And for
those faculties chosen to gratulate their coming with this speech.

ENter, O longed for Princes, bless these bowers,
And us, the three, by you made happy, Hours:
We that include all Time, yet never knew
Minute like this, or object like to you.
Two Kings, the worlds prime honors, whose access
Shows eithers greatness, yet makes neither less:
Vouchsafe your thousand welcomes in this shewer;
The Master vows, not SYBILL'S leaves were truer.
Expressed to the King of DENMARK thus.

Qui colit has aedeis, ingentia gaudia adumbrans,
Cernendo Reges pace coire pares,
Nos tempestiuas, ad limina, collocat Horas,
Quod bona sub nobis omnia proueniant.
Vnum ad laetitiae cumulum tristatur abesse,
Quod nequeat signis laetitiam exprimere.
Sed, quia res solum ingentes hac part laborant
Vtcunque expressam credidit esse satis.
At, quod non potuit Dominus, suppleuit abunde
Frondoso tellus munere facta loquax.
Eccos quam grati veniant quos terra salutat!
Verior his folijs nulla SYBILLA fuit.
The Inscriptions on the walls were, DATE VENIAM SVBITIS.
DEBENTVR QVAE SVNT QVAEque FVTVRA.


EPIGRAMMES hung up.
Ad Reges Serenissimos:
SAEpe THEOBALDAE (sortis bonitate beatae)
Excepere suos sub pia tecta deos;
Haud simul at geminos: sed enim potuisse negabant:
Nec fas est tales posse putare duos.
Fortunata antehac, sed nunc domus vndique faelix,
At Dominus quanto (si licet vsque) magis!
Et licet, o MAGNI, folijs si siditis istis,
Queis HORAE summam contribuere fidem.
Ad Serenissimum IACOBVM.
Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus HORAE,
Cuius ad obsequium non satis annus erat?
Nempe quod adueniant ingentia gaudia raro,
Et quando adueniant vix datur hora frui.
Ad Serenissimum CHRISTIANVM.
Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus HORAE,
Quas Solis famulas Graecia docta vocat?
Talis ab aduentu vestro lux fulsit in aedeis,
Vt Dominus solemn crederet esse nouum.
Others, at their departure.
Ad Serenissimum IACOBVM.
HOspitio qui te caepit, famulantibus Horis,
Cedere abhinc, nulla concomitante sinit;
Nempe omneis horas veniendi duxit amicas
Sed discedendi nulla minuta probat.
Ad Serenissimum CHRISTIANVM.
Te veniente, nouo domus haec frondebat amictu;
Te discessuro, non prout ante viret:
Nempe, sub accessu solis, nouus incipit Annus,
Et, sub discessu, squalida saeuit Hyems.
The Author B. I.

An Entertainment of King JAMES and Queen ANNE, at THEOBALDS, When the House
was delivered up, with the possession, to the QVEENE, by the Earl of
SALISBVRIE, 22. of MAY, 1607.
The Prince IANVILE, brother to the Duke of GVISE, being then present.
THe King, and Queen, with the Princes of Wales, and Lorraine, and the
Nobility, being entered into the gallerie, after dinner; there was seen
nothing but a trauerse of white, acrosse the room: which suddenly drawn, was
discovered a gloomie obscure place, hung all with black silks, and in it only
one light, which the GENIUS of the house held, sadly attired; his Cornucopia
ready to fall out of his hand, his gyrland drooping on his head, his eyes
fixed on the ground; when, out of this pensive posture, after some little
pause, he brake, and began. GENIUS. LEt not your glories darken, to behold
The place, and me, her GENIUS here, so sad;
Who, by bold Rumor, have been lately told,
That I must change the loved Lord, I had.
And he, now, in the twy-light of sere age,
Begin to seek a habitation new;
And all his fortunes, and himself engage
Unto a seat, his fathers never knew.
And I, uncertain what I must endure,
Since all the ends of dest'ny' are obscure.

Here a voice was heard, from behind the darkness, which bade him, MERCVRIE.
Despair not, GENIUS, thou shall know thy fate.

And withal, the black vanishing, was discovered a glorious place, figuring
the Lararium, or seat of the household-gods, where both the Lares, and Penates,
were painted, in copper colors; erected with Columns and Architrabe, Freeze,
and Coronice, in which were placed diverse Diaphanall glasses, filled with
several waters, that showed like so many stones, of orient and transparent
hiewes. Within, as farther off, in Landtschap, were seen clouds riding, and in
one corner, a boy figuring Good Event, attyred in white, houering in the' air,
with wings displayed, having nothing seen to sustain him by, all the time the
Show lasted: At the other corner, a MERCVRIE descended, in a flying posture,
with his Caduceus on his hand, who spoke to the three PARCAE, that sat low in
a grate, with an iron roof, the one holding the rock, the other the spindle,
and the third the sheeres, with a book of Adamant lying open before them. But
first, the GENIUS surpriz'dly wonder, urged this doubt, by question. GENIUS.
WHat sight is this, so strange! and full of state!
The son of MAIA, making his descent
Unto the fates, and met with good Event.

MERCVRIE. Daughters of night, and secrecy, attend;
You, that draw out the chain of Destiny,
Upon whose threads, both lives and times depend,
And all the periods of mortality.
The will of JOVE is, that you straight do look
The change, and fate unto this house decreed,
And speaking from your Adamantine book,
Unto the GENIUS of the place it read;
That he may know, and knowing, bless his lot,
That such a grace, beyond his hopes, has got.

CLOTHO. When, underneath thy roof, is seen
The greatest King, and fairest Queen,
With Princes an unmatched pair,
One, hope of all the earth, their heir;
The other styled of Lorraine,
Their blood; and sprung from CHARLEMAINE:
When all these Glories jointly shine,
And fill thee with a heat divine,
And these reflected, do beget
And splendent Sun, shall never set,
But here shine fixed, to affright
All after-hopes of following night,
Then, GENIUS, is thy period come,
To change thy Lord: Thus, Fates do doom.

GENIUS. But is my Patron with this lot content,
So to forsake his fathers moniment?
Or, is it gain, or else necessity,
Or will to raise a house of better frame,
That makes him shut forth his posterity
Out of his patrimony, with his name?

MERCVRIE. Nor gain, nor need; much less a vain desire,
To frame new roofes, or build his dwelling higher;
He has, with mortar, busied been too much,
That his affections should continue such.

GENIUS. Do men take joy in labors, not t'enioy?
Or does their business all their likings spend?
Have they more pleasure in a tedious way,
Then to repose them at their iourneys end?

MERCVRIE. GENIUS, obey, and not expostulate;
It is your virtue: and such powers as you,
Should make religion of offending fate,
Whose doomes are just, and whose designs are true.

LACHESIS. The person, for whose royal sake,
Thou must a change so happy make,
Is he, that gouernes with his smile,
This lesser world, this greatest Isle.
His Ladies servant thou must be;
Whose second would great NATVRE see,
Or FORTUNE, after all their pain,
They might despair to make again.

ATROPOS. She is the grace of all, that are:
And as ELISA, now a star,

(...)

THE QVEENES MASQVES. The first, OF BLACKNESS: Personated at the Court, at
WHITE HALL, on the Twelu'th night, 1605.
THe honor, and splendour of these spectacles was such in the performance, as
could those hours have lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most unprofitable
work. But (when it is the fate, even of the greatest, and most absolute
births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had been done to the
study of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the people, who
(as a part of greatness) are privileged by custom, to deface their
carcasses, the spirits had also perished. In duty, therefore, to that
Majesty, who gave them their authority, and grace; and, no less then the
most royal of predecessors, deserves eminent celebration for
these-solemnities: I add this later hand, to redeem them as well from
Ignorance, as Envy, two common evils, the one of censure, the other of
oblivion.

Natu. Hist. l. 5 cap. 8.
PLINY, Poly. hist. cap. 40. and 43.
SOLINVS, Lib 4. cap. 5.
PTOLOMEY, and of late LEO Descrip. Afric.
the African, remember unto us a river in Aethiopia, famous by the name of
Niger; of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: and are the
blackest nation of the world. This Some take it to be the same with Nilus,
which is by Lucan called Melas, signifying Niger. Howsoever, Pliny, in the
place above noted, has this: Nigri slu^io eadem natura, quae Nilo, calamum,
papyrum, and ^aesdem gignit animantes. See Solin. above mentioned.
river takes spring out of a certain lake, eastward; and after a long race,
falls into the western Ocean. Hence (because it was her Majesty's will, to
have them Black-mores at first) the invention was derived by me, and presented
thus.

First, for the Scene, was drawn a Landtschap, consisting of small woods, and
here and there a void place filled with huntings; which falling, an artificial
sea was seen to shoot forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waves,
which seemed to move, and in some places the billow to

(...) (...) OCEANVS. But, what is the end of thy Herculean labors,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?

NIGER. TO do a kind, and careful fathers part,
In satisfying every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the Read Diod. Sicul. lib. 3. It is a conjecture of the
old Ethnicks, that they which dwell under the South, were the first begotten of
the earth.
first formed dames of earth,
And in whose sparckling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best judge, and most formal cause
Of all dames beauties) in their firm hiewes, draws
Signs of his feruent'st love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty grows;
Since the fixed color of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death her self (her self being pale and blue)
Can never alter their most faithful hiew;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great beauties war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brain-sicke men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all clymates, yea our purity;
As of one Notissima fabula. Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
PHAETON, that fired the world
And, that, before his heedlesse flames were hurld
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complections changed,
Are each where, since, for Alluding to that of Iuuenal, Satir. 5. Et cui per
mediam nolis occurrere noctem.
lucklesse creatures ranged.
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most ielous of their beauties) fear, and care
Possessed them whole; yea, and believing The Poets.
them,
They wept such ceaselesse tears, into my stream,
That it has, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun rises, A custom of the Aethiopes, notable in Herod. and Diod.
Sic. See Pliny. Not. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 8.
chardg'd his burning throne
With volleys of reuilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made queens of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, often, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sat, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes Plin. ibid.
never dream)
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, does never Consult with Tacitus, in vita Agric, and the Paneg.
ad Constent.
rise, or set,
But in his Journey passes by,
And leaves that Clymat of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedomes past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANVS,
What land is this, that now appears to us?

OCEANVS. This Land, that lifts into the temperate air
His snowy cliffe, is Orpheus in his Argonaut. calls it (...).
Albion the fair;
So called of Alluding to the rite of stiling princes, after the name of their
princedomes: so is he still Albion, and Neptunes son that gouernes. As also
his being dear to Neptune, in being so embraced by him.
Neptunes son, who rules here:
For whose dear guard, my self, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his empire, proud, to see him crowned
About my waves.

At this, the Moon was discovered in the upper part of the house, triumphant
in a Silver throne, made in figure of a Pyramid. Her garments White, and
Silver, the dressing of her head antique; and crowned with a Luminarie, or
Sphaere of light: which striking on the clouds, and heightened with Silver,
reflected as natural clouds do by the splendour of the Moon. The heaven,
about her, was vaulted with blue silk, and set with stars of Silver which
had in them their several lights burning. The sudden sight of which, made
NIGER to interrupt OCEANVS, with this present passion. NIGER. Whose pure,
auspicious light greetes us, thus far!
Great Aethiopia, The Aethiopians worshipd the Moon, by that surname, See
Stepha. (...). in voce AI'THOIGIION and his reasons.
Goddess of our shore,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shine on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their longings vrdg'd their eyes to see*
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.

AETHIOPIA. NIGER, be glad: Resume the native cheer.
Thy Daughters labors have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glass)
This blessed Isle does with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires
This Isle has now recovered for her name;
Where reign those beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MUSES sons have honored,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spread.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blessed Isle
Has won her ancient dignity, and style,
A world, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the world, with all his wealth, a ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
Ruled by a SVNNE, that to this height does grace it:
Whose beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past more nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honored Daughters, then;
And let them, before the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Inuit them, boldly, to the shore,
Their beauties shall be scorched no more:
This sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.

Here the Tritons sounded, and they danced on shore, every couple (as they
advanced) severally presenting their fans: in one of which were inscribed their
mixed Names, in the other a mute Hieroglyphick, expressing their mixed
qualities. Which manner of Symbol I rather chose, then Imprese, as well for
strangeness, as relishing of antiquity, and more applying to that original
doctrine of sculpture, Diod. Sicul. Herod.
which the Egyptians are said, first, to have brought from the Aethiopians.
The Names. The Symboles. The Queen. 1. EVPHORIS. 1. A golden tree, laden with
fruit. Co. of Bedford. AGLAIA. La. Herbert. 2. DIAPHANE. 2. The figure
Isocaedron of crystal. Co. of Derby. EVCAMPSE. La. Rich. 3. OCYTE. 3. A pair
of naked feet, in a river. Co. of Suffolk. KATHARE. La. Beuill. 4. NOTIS. 4.
The SALAMANDER simple. La. Effingham. PSYCHROTE. La. El. Howard. 5. GLYCYTE. 5.
A clowd full of rain, dropping. La. Sus. Vere. MALACIA. La. Wroth. 6. BARYTE.
6. An vrne' spheard with wine. La. Walsingham. PERIPHERE.

The names of the OCEANIAE were.
DORIS. PETRAEA. OCYRHOE. CYDIPPE. GLAVCE. TYCHE. BEROE. ACASTE. CLYTIA.
IANTHE. He ^^od. in T^eog.
LYCORYS. PLEXAVRE.
Their own single dance ended, as they were about to make choice of their men:
One, from the sea, was heard to call'hem with this charm, sung by a tenor
voice. SONG.
COme away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
(...)
(...) To which limits, when I had apted my invention, and being to bring news
of them from the Sea, I induced Boreas, one of the winds, as my fittest
Messenger; presenting him thus.

In a robe of Russet and White mixed, full, and bagg'd; his hair and beard
rough, and horride; his wings gray, and full of snow, and ycicles: his mantle
borne from him with wyres, and in several puffes; his feet So Paus. in Eliacis
reports him to have, as he was carved in arca Cipselli.
ending in Serpents tails; and in his hand a leaue-lesse Branch, laden with
ycicles.

But before, in midst of the Hall, to keep the state of the Feast, and Season,
I had placed See Iconolog. di Caesare Ripa.
January, in a throne of silver; his robe of ash color, long, fringed with
silver; a white mantle; his wings white, and his buskins; in his hand a Laurel
bough; upon his head an Anademe of Laurel, fronted with the sign Aquarius,
and the Character. Who, as Boreas bluster'd forth, discovered himself.

BOREAS. WHich, among these, is ALBION, NEPTVNES son?


IANVARIVS. WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who MARS were, in the wars?
Or, which is HESPERVS, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is SOL? Or can
A doubt arise, among creatures, which is Man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, then fear.

BOREAS. WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?

IANVARIVS. Do thou not know me? I too well know thee
By thy Ovid. Metam. lib. 6. near the end see -- borridus, ira, quae solit^
est illi, nimi^^que domestica, vento, etc.
rude voice, that does so hoarcely blow;
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy serpent feet, to be that rough North Wind,
BOREAS, that to my reign art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called IANVARIE;
Because by me See the offices and power of Ianus, Ovid. Fast. 1.
IANVS the year does vary,
Shutting up wars, proclayming peace, and feasts,
Freedom, and triumphs; making Kings his guests.

BOREAS. TO thee then, thus, and by thee, to that King,
That does thee present honors, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enioyn'd again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waves to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.

IANVARIVS. WHich they received, but broke their day: and yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been feign
With Two marriages; the one of the Earl of Essex, 1606. the other of the Lord
Hay, 1607.
other Rites my Feasts to entertain:
And, now the third time, turned about the year,
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.

BOREAS. IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caused their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS, Read his description, with Virg. Geor. 4. Est in Carpathi^
Neptuni gurgite vates, Caeruleus Proteus.
the gray Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek BRITANIA forth,
And there to hope like favor, as like worth.
Which NIGHT enui'd, as done Because they were before of her complexion.
in her despite,
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; lest men should deem
Her color, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That To give authority to this part of our fiction, Pliny has a chap. 95.
of his 2. book. Not. Hist. de Insulis sluctuantibus. and Card. lib. 1. de
rerum vari. and cap. 7. reports one to be in his time known, in the Lake of
Loumond, in Scotland. To let pass that of Delos, etc.
floted in the main; where, yet, she'had giu'd
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might
Should loose them thence, but their changed Sisters sight.
Whereat the Twelve (in piety moved, and kind)
Straight put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the NIGHTS sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labor, might confound them too.
For ever since with error has she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labor to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at sea, did pray,
That for the love of my The daughter of Erectheus, King of Athens, whom
Boreas ravished away, into T^race, as she was playing with other virgins by the
flood ^^ssus: or (as some will) by the fountain Cephisus.
ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heat my frostie breast,
And make me shake my snow-fill'd wings and crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse; which here I have done.

IANVARIVS. WOuld thou had not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blew'st goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st The violence of Boreas, Ovid excellently describes in the place above
quoted. Hac nubila pello, hac freta concutio, nodosaque, robora verto,
Induroque, niues, and terras grandin^ pulso.
horrors through the air, as sharp as death.

Here a second Wind came in, VVLTVRNVS, in a blue colored robe and mantle,
puff as the former, but somewhat sweeter; his face black, and on his
According to that of Vir. -- Denuntiat igneus Buros.
head a red Sun, showing he came from the East: his wings of several
colors; his buskins white, and wrought with gold. VVLTVRNVS. ALl horrors
vanish, and all name of Death,
Be all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, VVLTVRNVS, brings you news
The I Will is found, and that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, and joy. The Nights black charms are flowne.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright AETHIOPIA, the silver Moon,
As she was She is called (...), by Eurip. in Helena, which is Lucifera, to
which name we here presently allude.
HECATE, she brake them soon:
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty. For the more full and clear understanding of
that which follows, have recourse to the succeeding pages; where the Scene
presents it self.
There, their Queen
Has raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirled
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to Heavens consent can better move,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greeks are come,
Poets and Singes, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in So Terence and the Ancients called Poesy, Artem musicam.
knowledge musical;
Where, set in arbors made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these beauties to behold.
And thence in flowery mazes walking forth,
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their songs, two fountains flow, one height
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottomes spring,
And strike the air to echo what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, near the coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the fate of the Island should, and soon
Would fix it self unto thy continent,
As being the place, by destiny fore-ment,
Where they should flow forth, dressed in her attyres:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes son,
And love the miracle, which thy self have done.

Here, a curtain was drawn (in which the Night was painted,) and the Scene
discovered, which (because the former was marine, and these, yet of necessity,
to come from the sea) I devised, should be a Island floting on a calm water.
In the midst thereof was a seat of state, called the thro^e of beauty,
erected: divided into eight squares, and distinguished by so many Ionick
pilasters. In these Squares the sixteen Masquers were placed by couples:
behind them, in the center of the Throne was a tralucent Pillar, shining with
several colored lights, that reflected on their backs. From the top of which
Pillar went several arches to the Pilasters, that sustained the roof of the
Throne, which was likewise adorned with lights, and gyrlonds; And between the
Pilasters, in front, little Cupids in ^^ying posture, wauing of wreathes, and
lights, bore up the Coronice: over which were placed eight Figures,
representing the Elements of Beauty; which advanced upon the Ionick, and being
females, had the Corinthian order. The first was SPLENDOUR.
In a robe of flame color, naked brested; her bright hair loose slowing: She
was drawn in a circle of clouds, her face, and body breaking through; and in
her hand a branch, with two The Rose is called, elegantlie, by Achil. Tat. lib.
2. (...), the splendour of Plants, and is every where taken for the
Hieroglyphick, of Splendour.
Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was SERENITAS.


In a garment of bright skie-colour, a long tresse, and waued with a veil

(...) (...) As now! Echo. As now! Ecch. As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness has to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was An agreeing opinion, both with Divines and Philosophers, that the great
Artificer in love with his own Idaea, did, therefore, frame the world.
for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns, Alluding to his name of Himerus, and his signification
in the name, which is Desiderium post aspectum: and more then Eros, which is
only Cupido, exaspectu amare.
Loves lights admit no shade.
Ecch. Loves lights admit no shade.
Echo. Admit no shade.

Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind spoke to the River Thamesis, that lay along
between the shores, leaning upon his Vrne (that flowed with water,) and
crowned with flowers: with a blue cloth of Silver robe about him: and was
personated by Master THOMAS GILES, who made the Daunces.

VVLTVRNVS. RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Where with thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruitful Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.

With which the Winds departed; and the River received them into the Land, by
couples and foures, their Cupids coming before them.

Their Persons were.
The QVEENE. La. ARABELLA. Co. of ARVNDEL. Co. of DERBY. Co. of BEDFORD. Co. of
MONTGOMERY. La. ELIZA. GILFORD. L. KAT. PETER. La. ANNE WINTER. La. WINSORE.
La. ANNE CLIFFORD. La. MARY NEVILL. La. ELIZ. HATTON. La. ELIZ. GARRARD. La.
CHICHESTER. La. WALSINGHAM.
These dancing forth a most curious Dance, full of excellent device, and
change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by
the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.

SONG. SO beauty on the waters stood,
(When love had As, in the creation, he is said, by the ancients, to have done.
seuer'd earth, from flood!
So when he parted air, from fire*
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a motion he them taught,
That elder then himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet, That is, borne since the world, and, out of those
duller apprehensions that did not think he was before.
the child of earth,
For love is elder then his birth.
The song ended; they d^nced forth their second dance, more subtle, and full of
change, then the former; and so exquisitely performed; as the Kings majesty
incited first (by his own liking, to that which all others, there present
wished) required them both again, after some time of dancing with the Lords.
Which time, to give them respite, was intermitted with song; first by a treble
voice, in this manner, SONG. IF all these CVPIDS, now, were blind
As is I make these different from him, which they ^ayne, caecum cupidine, or
petulantem, as I express beneath in the third song, these being chaste Loves,
that attend a more divine beauty, then that of Loves commune parent.
their wanton brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make,
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his mother!
Which was seconded by another treble; thus, IT was no polity of court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should, with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
To which a tenor answered. SONG. YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or beauties not their beauty waighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They do not war, with different darts,
But strike a music of like hearts.
After which songs, they danced galliards, and coranto's; and with those
excellent graces, that the music, appointed to celebrate them, showed it
could be silent no longer: but by the first tenor, admired them thus, SONG. HAd
those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold There has bee^e such a profane paradoxe published.
that women have no soul,
But seen these move; they would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of men.
So they do move each heart, and eye
With the The Platonicks opinion. See also Mac. lib. 1. and 2. Some.Scip.
worlds soul, true harmony.
Here, they danced a third most elegant, and curious dance, and not to be
described again, by any art, but that of their own footing: which, ending in
the figure, that was to produce the fourth, IANVARY from his state saluted them
thus, IANVARIVS. YOur grace is great, as is your beauty, Dames;
Enough my feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, uncertain, floting to each shore,
And to whose having For what country is it thinks not her own beauty
fairest, yet?
every clime laid claim,
Each land, and nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, beauties perfect throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractiue beams, that lights these skies:
Who (though with the Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquered men.

At which they danced their last dance, into their Throne again: and that
turning, the scene closed with this full song. SONG. STill turn, and imitate
the heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights do so:
May youth and pleasure ever flow.
But let your state, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
CHO. So all that see your beauties sphaere,
May know the' Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. The Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. 'Elysian fields are here.
HYMENAEI, OR The solemnities of Masque and Barriers at a Marriage.
IT is a noble and just advantage, that the things subjected to understanding
have of those which are objected to sense, that the one sort are but
momentarie, and merely taking; the other impressing, and lasting: Else the
glory of all these solemnities had perished like a blaze, and gone out, in the
beholders eyes. So short-liu'd are the bodies of all things, in comparison of
their souls. And, though bodies oft-times have the ill luck to be sensually
preferred, they find afterward, the good fortune (when souls live) to be
utterly forgotten. This it is has made the most royal Princes, and greatest
persons (who are commonly the personaters of these actions) not only studious
of riches, and magnificence in the outward celebration, or show; (which rightly
becomes them) but curious after the most high, and hearty inventions, to
furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded upon antiquity, and solid
learnings) which, though their voice be taught to sound to present occasions,
their sense, or does, or should always lay hold on more removed mysteries.
And, howsoever some may squemishly cry out, that all endeavor of learning, and
sharpness in these transitory devices especially, where it steps beyond their
little, or (let me not wrong 'hem) no brain at all is super^luous; I am
contented, these fastidious stomachs should leave my full tables, and enjoy at
home, their clean empty trenchers, fittest for such ayrie tastes: where
perhaps a few Italian herbs, picked up, and made into a sallade, may find
sweeter acceptance, than all, the most nourishing, and sound meats of the
world.

For these men's palates, let not me answer, O Muses. It is not my fault, if I
fill them out Nectar, and they run to Metheglin.

Vaticana bibant, si delectentur.
All the courtesy I can do them, is to cry, again; (...) (...)

Sit now propitious Aides,
To Rites, so duly prized;
And view two noble Maids,
Of different sex, to UNION sacrificed.
In honor of that blessed Estate,
Which all good minds should celebrate.
Here out of a Microcosme, or Globe, (figuring Man) with a kind of contentious
Music, issued forth the first Masque, of eight men.

These represented the four That they were personated in men, has (already)
come under some Grammatical exception. But there is more then Grammar to
release it. For, besides that Humores and Affectus are both Masculine in
Genere, not one of the Specialls, but in some Language is known by a masculine
word: Again, when their influences are common to both Sexes, and more
generally impetuous in the Male, I see not, why they should not, so, be more
properly presented. And, for the Allegory, though here it be very clear, and
such as might well escape a candle, yet because there are some, must complain
of darkness, that have but thick eyes, I am contented to hold them this
Light. First, as in natural bodies, so likewise in minds, there is no disease,
or distemperature, but is caused either by some abounding humor, or perverse
affection; after the same manner, in politic bodies (where Order, Ceremony,
State, Reverence, Devotion, are parts of the Mind) by the difference, or
praedominant will of what we (metaphorically) call Humors, and Affections, all
things are troubled and confused. These, therefore, were tropically brought in,
before Marriage, as disturbers of that mystical body, and the rites, which
were soul unto it; that afterward, in Marriage, being dutifully tempered by
her power, they might more fully celebrate the happiness of such as live in
that sweet union, to the harmonious laws of Nature and Reason.
Humors, and four Affections, all gloriously attired, distinguished only by
their several Ensigns and Colors; and, dancing out on the Stage, in their
return, at the end of their dance, drew all their swords, offered to
encompasse the Altar, and disturb the Ceremonies. At which, HYMEN troubled,
spoke:


HYMEN. Save, save the virgins; keep your hallowed lights
Untouched; and with their flame defend our Rites.
The four vntemp'red Humors are broke out,
And, with their wild affections, go about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Body,
Or little world of Man, from whence these came,
Look forth, and with thy bright and Alluding to that opinion of Pythagoras;
who held, all Reason, all Knowledge, all Discourse of the Soul to be mere
Number. See Plut. de Plac. Phil.
numerous flame
Instruct their darkness, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebelled against thee.

Hereat, REASON, seated in the top of the Globe ( as in the brain, or highest
part of Man) figured in a venerable personage, her hair white, and ^rayling to
her waste, crowned with lights, her garments blue, and semined with stars,
girded unto her with a white bend, filled with Arithmeticall figures, in one
hand bearing a Lamp, in the other a bright Sword, descended, and spoke:
REASON. Forbear your rude attempt; what ignorance
Could yield you so profane, as to advance
One thought in act, against these mysteries?
Are VNION'S (...), with the Greeks value the same, that Ceremoniae with the
Latins; and imply all sorts of rites: howsoever (abusiuely) they have bin made
particular to Bacchus. See Serve. to that of Virg. Aeneid. 4. Qualis commotis
excita sacris Thyas.
orgies of so slender price?
She that makes souls, with bodies, mix in love,
Contracts the world in one, and therein JOVE;
Is Mac. in some. Scipion. lib. 1.
spring, and end of all things: yet, most strange!
Her self nor suffers spring, nor end, nor change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humors and Affections would
Have dared so rash a venture. You will say
It was your zeal, that gave your powers the sway;
And urge the masqued, and disguised pretense,
Of saving blood, and succ'ring innocence?
So want of knowledge, still begets iarres,
When humorous earthlings will control the stars.
Inform your selves, with safer reverence,
To these mysterious rites, whose mysticke sense,
REASON (which all things, but it self, confounds)
Shall clear unto you, from th'authentique grounds.

At this, the Humors and Affections sheathed their swords, and retired amazed
to the sides of the stage, while HYMEN began to rank the Persons, and order
the Ceremonies: And REASON proceeded to speak. REASON. THe Pair, which do
each other side,
Though (yet) some space does them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blessed sacrifice, to UNION.
Nor is this Altar but a sign
Of one more soft, and more divine.
The Properly that, which was made ready for the new-married Bride, and was
called Genialis, a Generandis liberia. Ser. in 6. Aeneid.
Geniall bed, where HYMEN keeps
The solemn Orgies, void of sleeps:
And wildest CUPID, waking, houers
With adoration 'twixt the lovers.
The Tead of white and blooming Thorn,
In token of increase is borne:
As See Ovid. Fast. lib. 6. Sic fatus, spinam, qua tristes pellere posset A
foribus noxas, hac erat alba, dedit.
also, with the ominous light,
To fright all malice from the Night.
Like are the Plutarch. in Quaest. Romans and Var. lib. 4. de ling. Lat.
fire, and water, set;
That, even as moisture, mixed with heat,
Helps every natural birth, to life;
So, for their Race, join man and wife.

(...) (...) Who come to deck the geniall Bower,
And bring, with them, the grateful Hour
That crowns such meetings, and excites
The married Pair to fresh delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oaths, and Vows,
Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the Joys,
And melting Toys,
That chaster LOVE allows.
CHO, Haste, haste, for HESPERVS his head down bows.

The Song ended, they daunced forth in paires, and each pair with a varied and
noble grace; to a rare and full music of twelve Lutes: led on by ORDER, the
servant of REASON, who was, there, rather a Person of Ceremony, than Use. His
under Garment was blue, his upper white, and painted full of Arithmeticall, and
Geometrical Figures; his Hair, and Beard long, a Star on his forehead, and
in his hand a Geometrical Staff: To whom, after the Dance, REASON spoke.
REASON. Convey them, ORDER, to their places,
And rank them so, in several traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Unto the Music of the Hours;
And THESE, by joining with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the virtues of the Dames.
First This Surname Juno received of the Sabines; from them, the Romans gave
it her: of the Spear, which (in the Sabine tongue) was called Curis, and was
that, which they named Hasta Caelibaris, which had stuck in the body of a slain
Sword-player, and wherewith the Brides head was dressed, whereof Fest. in Voce
Celibar, gives these reasons, Vt quemadmodum illa coniuncta fuerit cum corpore
Gladiatoris, sic ipsa cum viro sit; vel quia Matronae Iunonis Curitis in tutela
sit, quae i^a appellabatur a serenda hasta: vel quod for^es viros genituras
ominetur; vel quod nuptiali iure imperio viri subij^itur Nu^ens, quia Hasta
summa armorum, and imperij est, etc. To most of which Plutarch in his Quest.
Romans consents, but adds a better in Romul. That when they divided the Brides
hair with the point of the Spear, (...), it noted their first Nuptialles
(with the So^ines) were contracted by force, and as with enemies. Howsoever,
that it was a Custom with them, this of Ovid. Fast lib. 2. confirms. Comat
Virgineas hasta recurua comas.
CVRIS comes to deck the Brides fair Tresse.
Care of the ointments For the Surname of Vnxia, we have Mart. Capel. his
testimony, De Nupt. Phil. and Mercu* lib. 2. quod vnctionibus praeest: As also
Seruius, libro quarto Aeneid. where they both report it a fashion with the
Romans, that before the new-married Brides entered the houses of their
Husbands, they adorned the posts of the gates with woollen tawdries, or
fillets, and anointed them with oils, or the fat of wolves, and bores; being
superstitiously possessed, that such ointments had the virtue of expelling evils
from the family: and thence were they called Vxores, quasi Vnxores.
VNXIA does profess.
She was named Iuga, propter Iugum, (as Seruius says) for the yoke which was
imposed, in Matrimony, on those that were married, or (with Sex. Pomp. Fest.)
quod Iuges sunt eiusdem Iugi Pare^, vnde and Coniuges. or in respect of the
Altar (to which I have declared before) sacred to Juno, in Vico Iugario.
IVGA, her office to make one of twain:
As she was Gamelia, in sacrificing to her, they took away the gall, and
threw it behind the Altar; intimating, that (after marriage, there should be
known, no bitterness, nor hatred between the joined couple, which might
divide, or separate them: See Plutarch. Connub. Prae. This Rite I have
somewhere following touched at.
GAMELIA sees that they should so remain.
Fair The title of Iterduca she^ had amongst them, quod ad sponsi aedes,
sponsas comitabatur; or was a Protectresse of their journey. Mart. Capel. De
Nupt. Philolo. and Mercur. libro secundo.
ITERDVCA leads the Bride her way;
And The like of Domiduca, quod adoptat^s domus duceret. Mart. ibid.
DOMIDVCA home her steps does stay;
Cinxia, the same Author gives unto her, as the Defendresse of Maids, when
they had put off their girdle, in the Bridal chamb^r; To which, Festus.
Cinxiae Iunonis nomen sanctum habebatur in Nuptijs, quod initio Coniugij
salutio erat Ci^guli, quo noua Nupta erat cincta. And Arn^bius, a man most
learned in their Ceremonies, lib. 3. ad verse. Gent. says, Vnctionibus superest
Vnxia. Cingulorum Cinxia replicationi.
CINXIA the m^id, quit of her Zone, defends;
Telia signifies Perfecta, or, as some translate it, Perfectrix; with Iul. Pol^
li^r. 3. Ononast. (...) valewes Juno! Praeses Nuptiarum: who says, the
Attribute descends of (...), which (with the Ancients) si^nified Ma^iage, and
thence, were they called (...) that entered into the state. Seruius interprets it
the same with Gamel a, Aeneid. 4 ad verb. Et Iunone secunda: But it implies
much more* as including the faculty too mature and perfect; See the Greek
Scholiaste on Pind. Nem. in Him. ad Thyaeum Vliae filium Argi. (...): that is,
Nuptials are therefore called (...), because they effect Perfection of life,
and do note that maturity which should be in Matrimony. For before Nuptials,
she is called Juno (...), that is, Virgo; after Nuptials, (...), which is
adul^a, or Perfecta.
TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.

By this time, the Ladies were payred with the Men; and the whole Sixteen
ranked forth, in order, to dance: and were with the song prouok'd. SONG. NOw,
now, begin to set
Your spirits in active heat;
And, since your hands are met,
Instruct your nimble feet,
In motions, swift, and meet,
The happy ground to beat:
CHORUS. Whilst all this Roof does ring,
And each discording string.
With ^uery varied voice,
In UNION does rejoice.
Here, they daunced forth a most neat and curious measure, full of Subtilty
and Device; which was so excellently performed, as it seemed to take away that
Spirit from the Inu^ntion, which the Invention gave to it: and left it
doubt^ull, whether the Forms flowed more perfectly from the Authors brain, or
their ^eete. The strains were all notably different, some of them formed into
Letters, very signifying to the name of the Bridegroom, and ended in manner of
a chain, linking hands: To which, this was spoken. REASON. SVch was Mentioned
by Homer Ilia. ^. which many have interpreted diuersely: al Allegorically, Pla.
in Thaeteto, understands it to be the Sun, which while he circles the world
in his course, all things are safe, and preserved: others vary it Macrob (to
whose interpretation, I am specially affected in my Allusion) co^siders it
thus: in Sum. Scip. libr. 1. cap. 14. ^rgo cum ex summo Deo men's, ex mente
anima si^; anima vero and condat, and vita complete omnia quae sequuntur,
cunctaque hic vnus fulgor illuminet, and in vniuersis appareat, vt in multis
speculis, per ordinem positis, vultus vnus; Cumque omnia continuis
successionibus se sequan^ur, degenerantia per ordinem ad imum meand^:
invenietur ^ressius intuenti a summo Deo vsque ad vltimam rerum faecem vna
mutuis se vinculis religans, and nusquam interrupta connexio. Et hae^ est
Homeri Cat^^^ aure^, quam pendere de coelo in terras Deum iussisse commemorat.
To which strength and evenness of connection, I have not abiurdly likened this
uniting of Humors, and Affections, by the sacred Powers of Marriage.
the Golden Chain let down from Heaven;
And not those linkes more even,
Then these: so sweetly tempered, so combined
By UNION, and refined.
Here no contention, envy, grief, deceit,
Fear, jealousy have weight;
But all is peace, and love, and faith, and bliss:
What harmony like this?
The gall, behind the altar quite is thrown;
This sacrifice has none.
Now no affections rage, nor humors swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENUS can do naught,
Save what with shame is bought;
No father can himself a parent show,
Nor any house with prospe'rous issue grow.
O then! What deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?

The speech being ended, they dissolved: and all took forth other persons,
(men, and women,) to dance other measures, galliards, and corranto's; the
whilst this song importuned them to a fit rembembrance of the time. SONG.
Think, yet, how night does wast,
How much of time is past,
What more then winged have
Your selves would take,
If you were but to taste
The joy, the night does cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright virgin, and her happy make.
Their Daunces yet lasting, they were the second time importuned, by speech.
REASON. SEe, see! the bright Stella Veneris, or Venus, which when it goes
before the Sun, is called Phosphorus, or Lucifer; when it follows, Hesperus,
or Noctifer (as Cat. translates it.) See Cic. 2. de Not. Deor. Mar. cap. de
Nup. Phi. and Mer. l. 8. The nature of this star Pythagoras first found out:
and the present office Clau. expresses in Fescen. Attollens thalamis Idalium
iubar dilectus Veneri nascitur Hesperus.
Idalian star,
That lights lovers to their war,
Complaynes, that you her influence loose;
While thus the night-sports you abuse.

HYMEN. THe longing bridegroom, It was a custom for the man to stand there,
expecting the approach of his Bride. See Hotto. de Rit. Nupt.
in the porch,
Shows you again, the bated torch;
And thrice has IVNO Alluding to that of Virgil. Aeneid. 4. Prima and Tellus,
and Pronuba Juno Dant signum: fulsere ignes, and conscius ether Connubij, etc.
mixed her air
With fire, to summon your repair.

REASON. SEe, now she clean with-drawes her light;
And (as you should) gives place to night,
That spreades her broad, and blackest wing
Upon the world, and comes to bring
A Stat. in Epit. Fulcra, torosque deae, tenerum premit agmen Amorum. And
Claud. in Epith. Pennati passim pueri, quo quemque vocauit vmbra, iacent. Both
which, prove the Ancients faynd many Cupids. Read also Prop. Ele. 29. l. 2.
thousand several colored loves,
Some like sparrowes, some like doves,
That hop about the nuptiall-roome,
And fluttering there (against you come)
Warm the chaste bower, which Venus is so induced by Stat. Claud. and others,
to celebrate nuptials.
CYPRIA strowes,
With many a lilly, many a rose.

HYMEN. HAste therefore, haste, and call, away:
The gentle night is pressed to pay
The usury of long delights,
She owes to these protracted rites.

At this ( the whole scene being drawn again, and all ^ouer'd with clouds,
as a night) they left off their entermixed dances, and returned to their first
places; where, as they were but beginning to move, this song, the third time,
urged them. SONG. O Know to end, as to begin:
A minutes loss, in love, is sin.
These humors will the night out-weare
In their own pastimes here;
You do our rites much wrong,
In seeking to prolong
These outward pleasures:
The night has other treasures
Then these (though long concealed)
Ere day, to be revealed.
Then, know to end, as to begin;
A minutes loss, in love, is sin.
Here they danced their last dances, full of excellent delight and change, and,
in their latter strain, fell into a fair orb, or circle; REASON standing in
the midst, and speaking. REASON. HEre stay, and let your sports be crowned:
The perfect'st figure is the round.
Nor fell you in it by aduenter,
When REASON was your guide, and center.
This, this that beauteous Venus girdle, mentioned by Homer. Il^. x. which was
feigned to be variously wrought with the needle, and in it wouen Love, Desire,
Sweetness, soft Parlee, Gracefulness, Persuasion, and all the Powers of Venus.
CESTON is
Of lovers many-colour'd bliss.
Come HYMEN, make an inner ring,
And let the sacrificers sing;
Cheer up the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to JOVE,
The same shall she be to her love;
His wife: which we do rather measure
See the words of Aelius verus, in Spartian.
A name of dignity, then pleasure.
Up youths, hold up your lights in air,
And shake abroad So Cat. in Nupt. Iul. and Manlij has it. Viden', vt ^aces
splendid^s quatiunt comas? and by and by after, aureas quatiunt comas.
their flaming hair.
Now move united, and, in gate,
As you (in paires) do front the state,
With grateful honors, thank his grace
That has so glorified the place:
And as, in circle, you depart
Linked hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those bodies still remain
Whom he (with so much sacred pain)
No less has bound within his realms
Then they are with the OCEANS streams.
Long may his UNION find increase
As he, to ours, has deigned his peace.

With this, to a soft strain of music, they pa^'d once about, in their ring,
every pair making their honors, as they came before the state: and then
dissoluing, went down in couples, led on by HYMEN, the Bride, and Auspices
following, as to the nuptial bower. After them, the musicians with this song,
of which, then, only one staff was sung; but because I made it both in form,
and matter to emulate that kind of poem, which was called It had the name a
Thalam, dictum est autem, (...) cubiculum Nuptiale primo suo significatu,
(...), quod est simul genialem vitam agere. Scal. in Poet.
Epithalamium, and (by the ancients) used to be sung, when the Bride was led
into her chamber, I have here set it down whole: and do heartily forgive
their ignorance whom it chances not to please. Hoping, that nemo doctus me
iubeat Thalassionem verbis dicere non Thalassionis. EPITHALAMION. GLad time is
at his point arrived,
For which loves hopes were so long-liu'd.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no object stay,
Nor banquets (but sweet kisses)
The turtles from their blisses.
This Poem had for the most part Versum intercalarem, or Carmen Amoebaeum: yet
that not always one, but oftentimes varied, and sometimes neglected in the
same song, as in ours you shall find observed.
It Is CUPID calls to arm;
And this his last alarm.
Shrink not, soft Virgin, you will love,
Anon, what you so fear to prove.
This is no killing war,
To which you pressed are;
But fair and gentle strife
Which lovers call their life.
It Is CUPID cries to arm;
And this his last alarm.
Help youths, and virgins, help to sing
The prize, which HYMEN here does bring,
And did so lately The Bride was always feigned, to be ravished, ex gremio
matris: or (if she were wanting) ex proxima necessitudine, because that had
succeeded well to Romulus, who, by force gat wives for him, and his, from the
Sabines. See Fest. and that of Catul. Qui rapis teneram ad virli virginem.
rap
From forth the mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This night is HYMEN'S all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What star can so deserve of you?
Whose light does still adorn
Your Bride, that, ere the morn,
Shall far more perfect be,
And rise as bright as he;
When When he is Phosphorus, yet the same star, as I have noted before.
(like to him) her name
Is changed, but not her flame.
Haste, tender lady, and aduenter;
The covetous house would have you enter,
That it might wealthy be,
And you, her At the entrance of the Bride, the custom was to give her the
keys, to signify that she was absolute Mistress of the place, and the whole
disposition of the family at her care, Fest.
mistress see:
Haste your own good to meet;
And This was also another rite: that she might not touch the threshold as she
entered, but was lifted over it. Seruius says, because it was sacred to Vesta,
Plut. in Quaest. Romans remembers diverse causes. But that, which I take to come
nearest the truth, was only the avoiding of Sorcerout drugs, used by Witches
to be buried under that place, to the destroying of marriage-Amitie, or the
Power of generation, See Alexand. in Genialibu. and Christ. Landu^ upon Catul.
lift your golden feet
Above the threshold, high,
With prosperous a^gury.
Now, youths, let go your pretty arms;
The place within chant's other charms.

(...) (...) much less description, be recovered to a part of that spirit it
had in the gliding by.

Yet, that I may not utterly defraud the Reader of his hope, I am drawn to
give it those brief touches, which may leave behind some shadow of what it
was: And first of the Attyres.

That, of the Lords, had part of it (for the fashion) taken from the antique
Greek statue; mixed with some modern additions: which made it both graceful,
and strange. On their heads they wore Persick crowns, that were with scroles
of gold-plate turned outward, and wreathed about with a carnation and silver
net-lawne; the one end of which hung carelessly on the left shoulder; the other
was tricked up before, in several degrees of foulds, between the plates, and
set with rich jewels, and great pearl. Their bodies were of carnation cloth of
silver, richly wrought, and cut to express the naked, in manner of the Greek
Thorax; girt under the breasts with a broad belt of cloth of gold, imbrodered,
and fastened before with jewels: Their Labels were of white cloth of silver,
laced, and wrought curiously between, suitable to the upper half of their
sleeves; whose nether parts, with their bases, were of watchet cloth of silver,
chev'rond all over with lace. Their Mantills were of several colored silks,
distinguishing their qualities, as they were coupled in payres; the first, sky
color* the second, pearl color; the third, flame color; the fourth, tawnie:
and these cut in leaves, which were subtly tacked up, and imbrodered with
Oe's, and between every rank of leaves, a broad silver lace. They were
fastened on the right shoulder, and fell compass down the back in gracious
folds, and were again tied with a round knot, to the fastening of their swords.
Upon their legs they wore silver Greaues, answering in work to their
Labells; and these were their accoutrements.

The Ladies attire was wholly new, for the invention, and full of glory; as
having in it the most true impression of a celestial figure: the upper part of
white cloth of silver, wrought with IVNOES birds and fruits; a loose
vnder-garment, full gathered, of carnation, stripped with silver, and parted
with a golden Zone: beneath that, another flowing garment, of watchet cloth of
silver, laced with gold; through all which, though they were round, and
swelling, there yet appeared some touch of their delicate lineaments,
preserving the sweetness of proportion, and expressing it self beyond
expression. The attire of their heads did answer, if not exceed; their hair
being carelessly (but yet with more art, then if more affected) bound under the
circle of a rare and rich Coronet, adorned with all variety, and choice of
jewels; from the top of which, flowed a transparent veil, down to the ground;
whose verge, returning up, was fastened to either side in most sprightly
manner. Their shoes were Azure, and gold, set with Rubies and Diamonds; so
were all their garments; and every part abounding in ornament.

No less to be admired, for the grace, and greatness, was the whole Machine
of the Spectacle, from whence they came: the first part of which was a
MIKPOKOSMOS, or Globe, filled with Countries, and those gilded; where the Sea
was expressed, heightened with silver waves. This stood, or rather hung (for no
Axell was seen to support it) and turning softly, discovered the first Masque
(as we have before, but too runningly declared) which was of the men, sitting
in fair composition, within a mine of several metalls: To which, the lights
were so placed, as no one was seen; but seemed, as if only REASON, with the
splendour of her crown, illumined the whole Grot.

On the sides of this (which began the other part) were placed two great
Statues, feigned of gold, one of ATLAS, the other of HERCULES, in varied
postures, bearing up the Clouds, which were of Releue, embossed, and tralucent,
as Naturalls: To these, a cortine of painted clouds joined, which reached to
the vpmost roof of the Hall; and suddenly opening, revealed the three Regions
of Air: In the highest of which, sat IVNO, in a glorious throne of gold,
circled with Comets, and fiery Meteors, engendered in that hot and dry Region;
her feet reaching to the lowest: where, was made a Rainebow, and within it,
Musicians seated, figuring airie spirits, their habits various, and resembling
the several colors, caused in that part of the air by reflection. The midst
was all of dark and condensed clouds, as being the proper place, where Rain,
Hail, and other watrie Meteors are made; out of which, two concaue clouds,
from the rest, thrust forth themselves (in nature of those Nimbi, wherein, by
Homer, Virgil, etc. the gods are feigned to descend) and these carried the eight
Ladies, over the heads of the two Atlas, and Hercules, the Figures mentioned
before.
Terms; who (as the engine moved) seemed also to bow themselves (by virtue of
their shadows) and discharge their shoulders of their glorious burden: when,
having set them on the earth, both they and the clouds gathered themselves up
again, with some rapture of the beholders.

But that, which (as above in place, so in the beauty) was most taking in the
Spectacle, was the sphere of fire, in the top of all, encompassing the air,
and imitated with such art and industry, as the spectators might discern the
Motion (all the time the Shows lasted) without any Moouer; and that so swift,
as no eye could distinguish any color of the light, but might form to it
self five hundred several hiewes, out of the tralucent body of the air,
objected betwixt it, and them.

And this was crowned with a statue of IVPITER, the Thunderer.

ON the next Night, whose solemnity was of Barriers (all mention of the former
being utterly removed and taken away) there appeared, at the lower end of the
Hall, a Mist made of delicate perfumes; out of which (a battle being sounded
under the stage) did seem to break forth two Ladies, the one representing
Truth, the other Opinion; but both so alike attired, as they could by no note
be distinguished. The color of their garments were blue, their socks white;
they were crowned with wreaths of Palm, and in their hands ^ch of the^
sustained a Palm-bough. These, after the Mist was vanished,

(...) (...) And then, what rules husbands praescribe their wives!
In their eyes circles, they must bound their lives.
The moon, when farthest from the sun she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poor wives far off must never rome,
But wast their beauties, near their lords at home:
And when their lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to begged monopolies) all their pride.
When their lords list to feed a serious fit
They must be serious; when to show their wit
In jests, and laughter, they must laugh and jest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their wives men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walk on ropes:
No tumblers bide more peril of their necks
In all their tricks; then wives in husbands checkes.
Where virgins, in their sweet, and peaceful state
Have all things perfect; spinne their own free fate;
Depend on no proud second; are their own
Center, and circle; Now, and always one.
To whose example, we do still hear named
One god, one nature, and but one world framed,
One sun, one moon, one element of fire,
So, of the rest; one king, that does inspire
Soul, to all bodies, in their royal sphere:

TRVTH. And where is marriage more declared, then there?
Is there a band more strict, then that does tie
The soul, and body in such unity?
Subjects to sovereigns? does one mind display
In th'ones obedience, and the others sway?
Believe it, marriage suffers no compare,
When both estates are valew'd, as they are.
The virgin were a strange, and stubborn thing,
Would longer stay a virgin, then to bring
Her self fit use, and profit in a make.

OPINION. How she does err! and the whole heaven mistake!
Look, how a flower, that close in closes grows,
Hid from rude cattle, bruised with no ploughes,
Which the air does stroke, sun strengthen, showers shoot higher,
It many youths, and many maids desire;
The same, when cropped by cruel hand is withered,
No youths at all, no maidens have desired:
So a virgin, while untouched she does remain,
Is dear to hers; but when with bodies stain
Her chaster flower is lost, she leaves to appear
Or sweet to young men, or to maidens dear.
That conquest then may crown me in this war,
Virgins, O virgins, fly from HYMEN far.

TRVTH. Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield,
For as a lone vine, in a naked field,
Never extolls her branches, never bears
Ripe grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
Her tender body, and her highest sproote
Is quickly leuell'd with her fading root;
By whom no husbandmen, no youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th'elme her husband, many husbandmen,
And many youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a virgin does, untouched, abide
All vnmanu^'d, she grows old, with her pride;
But when to equal wedlock, in fit time,
Her fortune, and endeavor lets her clime,
Dear to her love, and parents she is held.
Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield.

OPINION. These are but words; have thou a knight will try
(By stroke of arms) the simple verity?

TRVTH. To that high proof I would have dared thee.
I Will strait fetch champions for the bride and me.

OPINION. The like will I do for Virginity.

Here, they both descended the hall, where at the lower end, a march being
sounded with drums and phises, there entered ( led forth by the Earl of
Notingham, who was lord high Constable for that night, and the Earl of
Worc'ster, Earl Marshall) sixteen knights, armed, with pikes, and swords;
their plumes, and colors, carnation and white, all richly accoutred, and
making their honors to the state, as they marched by in paires, were all ranked
on one side of the hall. They placed sixteen others like accoutred for riches,
and arms, only that their colors were varied to watchet, and white; were by
the same Earls led up, and passing in like manner, by the state, placed on the
opposite side. By this time, the bar being brought up, TRVTH proceeded. (...)
(...) THE DESCRIPTION OF THE MASQVE. With the Nuptial songs. At the Lord
Vicount HADINGTONS marriage at Court. On the Shroue-tuesday at night. 1608.
THe worthy custom of honoring worthy marriages, with these noble
solemnities, has, of late years, advanced it self frequently with us; to the
reputation no less of our court, then nobles: expressing besides (through the
difficulties of expense, and travel, with the cheerfulness of vnder-taking)
a most real affection in the personators, to those, for whose sake they would
sustain these persons. It behoues then us, that are trusted with a part of
their honor, in these celebrations, to doc nothing in them, beneath the
dignity of either. With this preposed part of judgment, I adventure to give
that abroad, which in my first conception I intended honorably fit: and (though
it has labored since, under censure) I, that know Truth to be always of one
stature, and so like a rule, as who bends it the least way, must needs do an
injury to the right, cannot but smile at their tyrannous ignorance, that will
offer to slight me (in these things being an artificer) and give themselves a
peremptoric license to judge, who have never touched so much as to the bark,
or utter shell of any knowledge. But, their daring dwell, with them. They have
found a place, to power out their follies, and I a seat, to sleep out the
passage.

The scene to this Masque, was a high, steep, red cliffe, advancing it self
into the clouds, figuring the place, from whence (as I have been, not
fabulously, informed) the honorable family of the RADCLIFFES first took their
name (a cliuo rubro) and is to be written with that Orthography; as I have
observed out of M. CAMBDEN, in his mention of the Earls of Sussex. This cliffe
was also a note of height, greatness, and antiquity; before which, on the two
sides, were erected two pilasters, chardg'd with spoils and trophies, of love,
and his mother, consecrate to marriage: amongst which were old and young persons
figured, bound with roses, the wedding garments, rocks, and spindles, hearts
transfixt with arrows, others flaming, virgins girdles, gyrlonds, and worlds
of such like; all wrought round and bold: and ouer-head two personages, triumph
and victory, in flying postures, and twice so big as the life, in place of the
arch, and holding a gyrlond of myrtle for the key. All which, with the pillars,
seemed to be of burnished gold, and embossed out of the metal. Beyond the
cliffe was seen nothing but clouds, thick, and obscure; till on the sudden,
with a solemn music, a bright sky breaking forth; there were discovered,
first two Both doves, and swannes were sacred to this goddess, and as well
with the one as the other, her chariot in induced by Ovid. l. 10. and 11.
Metamor.
doves, then two Both doves, and swannes were sacred to this goddess, and as
well with the one as the other, her chariot in induced by Ovid. l. 10. and 11.
Metamor.
swannes with silver geeres, drawing forth a triumphant chariot; in which VENUS
sat, crowned with her star, and beneath her the three Graces, or Charites,
AGLAIA, THALIA, EVPHROSYN^, all attyr'd according to their antique figures.
These, from their chariot, alighted on the top of the cliffe, and descending by
certain abrupt and winding passages, VENUS having left her star, only,
flaming in her seat, came to the earth, the Graces throwing gyrlonds all the
way, and began to speak.

VENUS. IT is no common cause, ye will conceive,
My lovely Graces, makes your goddess leave
Her state in heaven, to night, to visit earth.
Love late is fled away, my eldest birth,
CUPID, whom I did joy to call my son;
And, whom long absent, VENUS is undone.
Spy, if you can, his footsteps on this green;
For here (as I am told) he late has been.
With Alluding to the loves, in the Queens Masque before.
diverse of his brethren, lending light
From their best flames, to guild a glorious night;
Which I not grudge at, being done for her,
Whose honors, to mine own, I still prefer.
But he, not yet returning, I Am in fear,
Some gentle grace, or innocent beauty here,
Be taken with him: or he has surprised
A second PSYCHE, and lives here disguised.
Find ye no tract of his strayed feet?

GR. 1. Not I.

GR. 2. Nor I.

GR. 3. Nor I.

VE. Stay nymphs, we then will try
A nearer way. Look all these ladies eyes,
And see if there he not concealed lies;
Or in their bosoms, 'twixt their swelling breasts:
(The wag affects to make himself such nests)
Perchance, he'hath got some simple heart, to hide
His subtle shape in: I will have him cried.
And all his virtues told. That, when they know
What spright he is, she soon may let him go,
That guards him now; and think her self right blessed,
To be so timely rid of such a guest.
Begin soft GRACES, and proclaim reward
To her that brings him in. Speak, to be heard.

1. GRACE. Beauties, have ye seen this toy,
Called In this love, I express Cupid, as he is Veneris filius, and owner of
the following qualities, ascribed him by the antique and later Poets.
love, a little boy,
Almost naked, wanton, blind,
Cruel now; and then as kind?
If he be amongst ye, say;
He is VENUS runaway.

2. GRACE. She, that will but now discover
Where the winged wag does houer,
Shall, to night, receive a kiss,
How, or where her self would wish:
But, who brings him to his mother,
Shall have that kiss, and another.

3. GRACE. H' has of marks about him plenty:
You shall know him, among twenty.
All his body is a fire,
And his breath a flame entire,
That being shot, like lightning, in,
Wounds the heart, but not the skin.

1. GRACE. At his sight, the Sea Lucian. Dial. Deor.
sun has turned,
NEPTVNE in the waters, burned;
And Claud. in raptu Proserp.
Hell has felt a greater heat:
JOVE himself forsook his seat:
From the center, to the sky,
Are his Such was the power ascribd him, by all the ancients: whereof there is
extant an elegant greek Epigram, Phil. Poe. wherein he makes all the other
deities dispoyld by him, of their ensigns. Jove of his thunder, Phubu^ of his
arrows, Hercules of his club, etc.
trophaees reared hie.

2. GRACE. Wings he has, which though ye clip,
He will leap from lip, to lip,
Over liver, lights, and heart,
But not stay in any part;
And, if chance his arrow misses,
He will shoot himself, in kisses.

3. GRACE. He does bear a golden Bow
And a Quiver, hanging low,
Full of arrows, that out-braue
DIAN'S shafts: where, if he have
Any head more sharp then other,
With that first he strikes his mother.

1. GRACE. Still the fairest are his fuel.
When his days are to be cruel,
Lovers hearts are all his food;
And his bathes their warmest blood:
Naught but wounds his hand does season;
And he hates none like to Reason.

2. GRACE. Trust him not: his words, though sweet,
Seldom with his heart do meet.
All his practice is deceit;
Every gift it is a bait;
Not a kiss, but poison bears;
And most treason in his tears.

3. GRACE. Idle minutes are his reign;
Then, the straggler makes his gain,
By presenting maids with toys,
And would have ye think 'hem joys:
It Is the ambition of the elfe,
To 'haue all childish, as himself.

1. GRACE. If by these ye please to know him,
Beauties, be not nice, but show him.

2. GRACE. Though ye had a will, to hide him,
Now, we hope, yee'le not abide him.

3. GRACE. Since ye hear his falser play;
And that he is VENUS Runaway.

At this, from behind the Trophaees, CUPID discovered himself, and came forth
armed; attended with twelve boys, most antickly attyr'd, that represented the
sports, and pretty lightnesses, that accompany Love, under the titles of
IOCI, and RISVS; and are said to wait on VENUS, as she is Prefect of Marriage.
Which HORAT. consents to -- Erycina ridens, Quam Iocus circumvolat, and Cupido.
Car. lib. 1. Ode 2. CUPID. COme my little iocound sports,
Come away; the time now sorts
With your pastime: This same night
Is CVPID'S day. Advance your light.
With your Revel fill the room,
That our triumphs be not dumb.

Wherewith they fell into a subtle capriccious Dance, to as odd a Music,
each of them bearing two torches, and nodding with their antique faces, with
other variety of ridiculous gesture, which gave much occasion of mirth, and
delight, to the spectators. The Dance ended, CUPID went forward. CUPID. WEll
done Antiques: Now, my Bow,
And my Quiver bear to show;
That these Beauties, here, may know,
By what arms this feat was done,
That has so much honor won,
Unto VENUS, and her Son.

At which, his Mother apprehended him: and circling him in, with the GRACES,
began to demand. VENUS. WHat feat, what honor is it, that you boast,
My little straggler? I had given you lost,
With all your games, here.

CVP. Mother?

VEN. Yes sir, she.
What might your glorious cause of triumph be?
Ha'you shot She vrges these as miracles, because Pallas, and the Muses are
most contrary to Cupid. See Luc. Dialog. Ven. and Cupid.
MINERVA, or the Thespian dames?
Heat aged Rhea, the mother of the gods, whom Lucian, in that place makes, to
have fallen frantikely in love, by Cupids means, with Attys. So of the Moon,
with Endymion, Hercules, etc.
OPS again, with youthful flames?
Or have you made the colder Moon to visit
Once more, a sheepe-cote? Say, what conquest is it
Can make you hope such a renown to win?
Is there a second HERCULES brought to spinne?
Or, for some new disguise, leaves JOVE his thunder?

CUPID. NOr that, nor those, and yet no less a wonder;
Which to tell, I may not stay: And there slips from her.
Here Hymen, the god of marriage, entered; and was so induced here, as you have
him described in my Hymenaei.
HYMEN'S presence bids away;
It Is, already, at his night,
He can give you farther light.
You, my sports may here abide,
Till I call, to light the Bride.

HYMEN. VENUS, is this a time to quit your carre?
To stoop to earth? to leave, alone, your star,
Without your influence? and, When she is Nuptijs Praefecta, with Juno,
Suadela, Diana, and Jupiter himself. Paus. in Messeniac. and Plut. in problem.
on such a night,
Which should be crowned with your most chearing sight?
As you were ignorant of what were done
By CVPIDS hand, your all-triumphing Son?
Look on this state; and if you yet not know,
What Crown there shines, whose Scepter here does grow;
Think on thy loved Aeneas, the son of Venus, Virgil makes through-out, the
most exquisit pattern of Piety, Justice, Prudence, and all other Princely
virtues, with whom (in way of that excellence) I confer my sovereign,
applying, in his description, his own word, usurped of that Poets. Parcere
subiectis and debellar^ superbos.
AENEAS, and what name,
MARO, the golden trumpet of his fame,
Gave him, read thou in this. A Prince, that draws
By'example more, then others do by laws:
That is so just to his great act, and thought,
To do, not what Kings may, but what Kings ought.
Who, out of piety, unto peace, is vowed;
To spare his subjects, yet to quell the proud,
And dares esteem it the first fortitude,
To have his passions, foes at home, subdued.
That was reserved, until the Parcae spunne
Their whitest wool; and then, his thread begun.
Which thread, when In that monstrous conspiracy of E. Gowrie.
Treason would have burst, a soul
(To day renowned, and added to my roll)
Opposed; and, by that act, to his name did bring
The honor, to Titulo tunc crescere posses, nunc per te titulus.
be Sauer of his King.
This King, whose worth (if gods for virtue love)
Should VENUS with the same affections move,
As her AENEAS; and no less endeare
Her love to his safety, then when she did cheer,
( Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1.
After a tempest) long afflicted Troy,
Upon the Lybian shore; and brought them joy.

VENUS. I Love, and know his virtues, and do boast
Mine own renown, when I renown him most.
My CVPID'S absence I forgive, and praise,
That me to such a present grace could raise.
His champion shall, hereafter, be my care;
But speak his bride, and what her virtues are.

HYMEN. SHe is a noble virgin, styled the maid
Of the Red-cliffe, and has her dowry waigh'd;
No less in virtue, blood, and form, then gold.
Thence, where my Pillar's reared, you may behold,
(Filled with Loves Trophae^s) does she take her name.
Those Pillars did vxorious The ancient Poets, whenever they would intend any
thing to be done, with great Masterie, or excellent Art, made Vulcan the
artificer, as Hom. Iliad. S. in the forging of Achilles his armor: and Virg.
for Aeneas, Aenei. 8. He is also said to be the god of ^ire, and light.
Sometime taken for the purest beam: and by Orph. in Hy^. celebrated for the
Sun and Moon. But more specially, by Eurip. in Troad. he is made Facifer in
nuptijs. Which present office we give him here, as being calor naturae, and
praeses luminis. See Plato in Cratyl. For his description, read Pausa. in Elia.
VVLCAN frame,
Against this day, and underneath that hill,
He, and his Cyclopes, are forging still
Some strange, and curious piece, t'adorne the night,
And give these graced Nuptials greater light.

Here VVLCAN presented himself ( as ouer-hearing HYMEN) attyr'd in a cassocke
girt to him; with bare arms; his hair and heard rough; his ha^ of blue, and
ending in a Cone: In his hand, a hammer, and tongs; as coming from the Forge.
VVLCAN. WHich I have done; the best of all my life:
And have my end, if it but please my wife,
And she commend it, to the labored worth.
Cleave solid Rock, and bring the wonder forth.

At which, with a loud and full music, the Cliffe parted in the midst, and
discovered an illustrious Concaue, filled with an ample and glistering light,
in which, an artificial Sphere was made of silver, eighteen foot in the
Diameter, that turned perpetually: the Coluri were heightened with gold; so were
the Artick and Antartick circles, the Tropicks, the Aequinoctiall, the
Meridian, and Horizon; only the Zodiake was of pure gold: in which, the
Masquers, under the Characters of the twelve Signs, were placed, answering
them in number; whose offices, with the whole frame, as it turned, VVLCAN went
forward, to describe. VVLCAN. IT'is a sphere, I'haue formed round, and even,
In due proportion to the sphere of heaven,
With all his lines, and circles; that compose
The perfect'st form, and aptly do disclose
The heaven of marriage: which I title it.
Within whose Zodiac, I have made to sit,
In order of the signs, twelve sacred powers,
That are praesiding at all nuptial hours: 1. The first, in ARIES place,
respects pride
Of youth; and beauty; graces in the bride.
2. In TAVRVS, he loves strength, and manliness;
The virtues, which the bridegroom should profess.
3. In GEMINI, that noble power is shown,
That twins their hearts; and does, of two, make one.
4. In CANCER, he that bids the wife give way
With backward yielding, to her husbands sway.
5. In LEO, he that does in still the heat
Into the man: which, from the following seat,
6. Is tempred so, as he that looks from thence
Sees, yet, they keep a VIRGIN innocence.
7. In LIBRA'S room, rules he that does supply
All happy beds with sweet aequality.
8. The SCORPIONS place he fills, that make the iarres,
And stings in wedlock; little strifes, and wars:
9. Which he, in the ARCHERS throne, does soon remove
By making, with his shafts, new wounds of love.
10. And those the follower, with more heat, inspires,
As, in the GOAT, the sun renewes his fires.
11. In wet AQVARIVS stead, reigns he, that showers
Fertility upon the geniall bowres.
12. Last, in the FISHES place, sits he, does say;
In married joys, all should be dumb, as they.
And this has VVLCAN, for his VENUS, done,
To grace the chaster triumph of her son.



VENUS. ANd for this gift, will I to heaven return,
And vow, for ever, that my lamp shall burn
With pure and chasest fire; or As Catul. has it in nup. In^. and Manl.
without Hymen, which is marriage: Nit potest Venus, fama quod bona comprobet,
etc.
never shine,
But when it mixeth with thy sphere, and mine.

Here VENUS returned to her chariot with the graces: while VVLCAN calling out
the priests of HYMEN who were the musicians, was interrupted by Pyracmon, (...)
(...) Loves common wealth consists of toys;
His council are those antique boys,
Games, laughter, sports, delights,
That triumph with him on these nights:
To whom we must give way,
For now their reign begins, and lasts till day.
They sweeten HYMEN'S war,
And, in that jar,
Make all, that married be,
Perfection see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
Why stays the Bride-grome to invade
Her, that would be a matron made?
Good night, whilst yet we may
Goodnight, to you a virgin, say:
To morrow, rise the same
Your A wife, or matron: which is a name of more dignity, then Virgin. D.
Heins, in Nup. Ottonis Heurnij. Cras m^tri similis tuae redibis.
mother is, and use a nobler name.
Speed well in HYMEN'S war,
That, what you are,
By your perfection, we
And all may see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
To night is VENUS vigil kept.
This night no Bride-grome ever slept;
And if the fair Bride do,
The married say, it is his fault, too.
Wake then; and let your lights
Wake too: for they will tell nothing of your nights:
But, that in HYMEN'S war,
You perfect are.
And such perfection, we
Do pray, should be.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
That, ere the rosy-fingerd morn
Behold nine moons, there may be borne
A babe, t'vphold the fame
Of RADCLIFFES blood, and RAMSEY'S name:
That may, in his great seed,
Wear the long honors of his fathers deed.
Such fruits of HYMEN'S war
Most perfect are;
And all perfection, we
Wish, you should see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth, thou wished star.
THE MASQVE OF QVEENES, Celebrated From the house of FAME: By the QVEENE of
great BRITAIN, with her Ladies. AT WHITE HALL. Febr. 2. 1609.
IT increasing, now, to the third time of my being used in these services to
her Majesty's personal presentations, with the Ladies whom she pleases to
honor; it was my first and special regard, to see that the nobility of the
invention should be answerable to the dignity of their persons. For which
reason I chose the argument, to be, A celebration of honorable, and true fame,
bred out of virtue: observing that rule of the Hor. in Art. Poetic.
best artist, to suffer no object of delight to pass without his mixture of
profit and example. And because her Majesty (best knowing, that a principal
part of life, in these spectacles, lay in their variety) had commanded me to
think on some dance, or show, that might precede hers, and have the place of a
foil or false Masque: I was careful to decline, not only from others, but
mine own steps in that kind, since the In the Masque at my ^. Hadding. wedding.
last year, I had an anti-masque of boys: and therefore now, devised, that
twelve women, in the habit of hags, or witches, sustayning the persons of
ignorance, suspicion, credulity, etc. the opposites to good Fame, (should fill
that part; not as a Masque, but a spectacle of strangeness, producing
multiplicitie of gesture, and not unaptly sorting with the current, and whole
fall of the device.

His Majesty, then, being set, and the whole company in full expectation, the
part of the scene which first presented it self, was an ugly Hell: which
flaming beneath, smoked unto the top of the roof. And in respect all evils
are, morally, said to come from hell; as also from that observation of
TORRENTIVS upon HORACE his CANIDIA, Vid. Laeuin. Tor. Comment. in Hor. Epod.
lib. Odo. 5.
quae tot instructa venenis, ex Orci faucibus profecta videri possit: These
witches, with a kind of hollow and infernal music, came forth from thence.
First one, then two, and three, and more, till their number increased to
eleven; all differently attyr'd: some with rats on their head; some on their
shoulders; others with ointment pots at their girdles; all with spindles,
timbrels, rattles, or other veneficall instruments, making a confused noise,
with strange gestures. The device of their attire was Master JONES his, with
the invention, and architecture of the whole scene, and machine. Only, I
prescribed them their properties of vipers, snakes, bones, herbs, roots, and
other ensigns of their magic, out of the authority of ancient and late
writers, wherein the faults are mine, if there be any found; and for that cause
I confess them.

These eleven witches beginning to dance (which is an usual See the Kings
Majesty's book, (our Soueraign) of Daemonologie, Bodin. Remig. Delrio. Mal.
Maelesi. And a world of others, in the general: But let us follow particulars.
ceremony at their conuents, or meetings, where sometimes also they are
vizarded, and masqu'd) on the sudden, one of them missed their chief, and
interrupted the rest, with this speech.

SIsters, stay, we want our Amongst our vulgar witches, the honor of Dame (for
so I translate it) is given with a kind of preeminence to some special one at
their meetings: which Delrio insinuates, Disquis. Mag. l, 2. quaest. 9. quoting
that of Apuleius, lib. de Asin. aureo. de quadam caupona, Regina Sagarum. And
adds, vt scias etiam tum quasdam ab ijs hoc titulo honoratas. Which title M.
Philippo Ludwigus Elich. Daemonomagi^, quaest. 10. does also remember.
Dame;
Call upon her by her name,
And the charm we use to say,
That she quickly When they are to be transported from place to place, they
use to anoint themselves, and sometimes, the things they ride on. Beside, Apul.
testimonio, See these later, Remig. Daemonolatriae, l. 1. c. 14. Delrio.
Disquis. Mag. l. 2. quaest. 16. Bodin. Daemonoman. l. 2. c. 4. Barthol. de
Spina. quaest. de Strigib. Philippo. Ludwigus Elich. quaest. 10. Paracelsus in
magn. and occul. Philosophia, teaches the confection. Vnguentum ex carne
recens netorum infantium, in pulmenti forma coctum, and cum herbis somniferis,
quales sunt Papauer, Solanum, Cienta, etc. And Ioa. Bapti. Porta. lib. 2. Mag.
Nature. cap. 26.
anoint, and come away.
1. CHARM.
DAME, DAME, the watch is set:
Quickly come, we all are met.
These places in their own nature dire, and dismal, are reckoned up, as the
fittest from whence such persons should come: and were notably observed by that
excellent Lucan, in the description of his Erictho* lib. 6. To which we may
add this corollarie out of Agrip de occult. Philosop. l. 1. c. 48. Saturno
correspondent loca quaeuis foetida, tenebrosa, subterranea, religiosa and
funesta, vt coemiteria, busta, and hominibus deserta habitacula, and vetustate
caduea, loca obseura, and horrenda, and solitaria an^ra, cauernae, putei:
Praeterea piscinae, stagna, paludes, and eiusmodi. And in lib. 3. cap. 42.
speaking of the like, and in lib. 4. about the end, Aptissima sunt loca
plurimum experientia visionum, nocturnarumque incursionum and consimilum
phantasmatum, vt coemiteria, and in quibus fieri solent executio and criminalis
iudicij, in quibus recentibus annis publicae strages factae sunt, vel vbi
occisorum cadauera, necdu^ expiata, nec rite sepulta, recentioribus annis
subhumata sunt.
From the lakes, and from the fens,
From the rocks, and from the dens,
From the woods, and from the caves,
From the churchyards, from the graves,
From the dungeon, from the tree
That they die on, here are we.
Comes she not yet?
Strike another heat.
2. CHARM.
THe weather is fair, the wind is good,
Up DAME, o'your Delr^o Disq. Mag. l. 2. quaest. 6. has a story out of
Triezius of this horse of wood: but that which our witches call so, is
sometimes a broom staff, sometime a reed, sometime a distaffe. See Remig.
Daemonol. l. 1. c. 14. Bodin. l. 2. cap. 4. etc.
horse of wood:
Or else, tucke up your gray frock,
And saddle your The goat is the devil himself, upon whom they ride often to
their solemnities, as appears by their confessions in Rem. and Bodin. ibid.
His Majesty also remembers the story of the devils appearance to those of
Calicut, in that form, Daemonol. l. 2. c. 3.
goat, or your green Of the green cock, we have no other ground (to confess
ingeniously) than a vulgar fable of a witch, that with a cock of that color,
and a bottom of blue thread, would transport her self through the air; and so
escaped (at the time of her being brought to execution) from the hand of
justice. It was a tale when I went to school, and somewhat there is like it,
in Mar. Delr. Disqui. Mag. lib. 2. quaest. 6. of one Zijti, a Bohemian, that,
among other his dexterities, aliquoties equis rhedarijs vectum, gallis
gallinaceis ad Epirrhedium suum alligati^, subsequebatur.
cock,
And make his bridle a bottom of third,
To roll up how many miles you have rid.
Quickly come away;
For we, all, stay.
Nor yet? Nay, then,
We Will try her again.
3. CHARM.
THe owl is abroad, the bat, and the toad,
And so is the cat-a-mountayne,
The ant, and the mole sit both in a hole,
And frog peepes out of the fountain;
The dogs, they do bay, and the timbrels play,
The All this is but a periphrasis of the night, in their charm, and their
applying themselves to it with their instruments, whereof the spindle in
antiquity, was the chief: and beside the testimony of Theocritus, in
Pharmaceutria (who only used it in amorous affairs) was of special act to the
troubling of the moon. To which Martial alludes, l. 9. ep. 30. Quae nunc
Thessalico lunam deducere rhombo, etc. And l. 12. Epig. 57. Cum secta Col^ho
Luna vapulat rhombo.
spindle is now a turning;
The moon it is red, and the stars are fled,
But all the sky is a burning:
The This rite also of making a ditch with their nails, is frequent with our
witches; whereof see Bodin. Remig. Delr. Malleus, Mal. Godelman, l. 2. de
lamijs, as also the antiquity of it most viuely expressed by Hor. Satir. 8. l.
1. where he mentions the pictures, and the blood of a black lamb: All which are
yet in use with our modern witchcraft. Scalpere terram (speaking of Canidia,
and Sagana) Vnguibus, and pullam diueller^ mordicus agnam Coeperunt: Cruor in
fossam confusus, vt inde Maneis elicerent animas responsa daturas. Lanea and
essigies erat, altera cerea, etc. And then, by and by, Serpente^ atque videres
Infernas errare caneis, Lunamque rubentem, Ne foret his testis, post magna
latere sepulchra. Of this ditch Homer makes mention in Circes speech to
Ulysses. Odiss. K. about the end, (...), etc. And Ovid. Metam. l. 7. in Medeas
magic, Haud procul egesta scrobibus tellure duabus Sacra faecit* cultrosque in
gutture velleris atri Conijcit, and patulas perfundit sanguine fossas. And of
the waxen images, in Hypsipyles epistle to Jason, where he expresses that
mischief also of the needles. Deuouet absentes, simulacraque cerea fingit. Et
miserum tenues in iecur vrget acus, Bodin. Demon. l. 2. c. 8. has (beside the
known story of king Duffe out of Hector Boethius) much of the witches later
practice in that kind, and reports a relation of a french Ambassadors, out of
England, of certain pictures of wax found in a dunghill, near Islington, of
our late Queens, which rumor I my self (being then very young) can yet
remember to have been current.
ditch is made, and our nails the spade,
With pictures full, of wax, and of wool;
Their livers I stick, with needles quick;
There lacks but the blood, to make up the flood.
Quickly DAME, then, bring your part in,
Spur, spur, upon little Their little Martin is he that calls them to their
conuenticles, which is done in a humane voice, but coming forth, they find him
in the shape of a great buck goat, upon whom they ride to their meetings, Delr.
Di^q. Mag. q. 16. l. 2. And Bod Demon. l. 2. c. 4. have both the same relation
from Paulus Grillandus, of a witc^* Adueniente nacte, and hora euocabatur voce
quadam velut humana ab ipso Daemone, quem non vocant Daemonem, sed
Magisterulum, aliae Magistrum Martinettum sieve Martin^llum. Quae sic euocata,
mox sumebat pyxidem vnctionis, and liniebat corpus suum in quibusdam partibus
and membris, quo lin^to exibat ex domo, and inueniebat Magisterulum suum in
forma hirci illam expectantem apud ostium, super quo mulier equitabat, and
applicare solebat fortiter manus ad crineis, and statim hircus ille adscendebat
per aerem, and brenissimo tempore deserebat ipsam, etc.
MARTIN,
(...) (...) HAGGES. For the gathering pieces of dead flesh, Cor. Agrip. de
occul. Philosop. lib. 3. cap. 42. and lib. 4. cap. vlt. observes, that the use
was to call up ghosts and spirits, with a fumigation made of that (and bones of
carcasses) which I make my witch, here, not to cut her self, but to watch the
Raven, as Lucan's Erichtbo. lib. 6. Et quodcunque iacet nuda tellure cadauer,
Ante feras volucresque sedet: nec carpere membra Vult ferro manibusque suis,
morsusque luporum Expectat siccis raptura a faucibios artus. As if that piece
were sweeter which the Wolf had bitten, or the Raven had picked, and more
effectuous: and to do it, at her turning to the South, as with the praediction
of a storm. Which, though they be but minutes in Ceremony, being observed,
make the act more dark and full of horror.
1.
I Have been, all day, looking after
A Raven, feeding upon a quarter;
And, soon, as she turned her beak to the South,
I snatched this morsel out of her mouth.
Spuma canum, Lupi crines, nodus Hyenae, oculi Draconum, Serpentis membrana,
Aspidis aures, are all mentioned by the Ancients, in witchcraft. And Lucan
particularly, lib. 6. Huc quicquid foetu genuit Natura sinistro Miscetur, non
spuma canum, quibus vnda timori est, Viscera non Lyncis, non durae nodus Hyenae
Defuit, etc. And Ovid. Metamorphos. lib. 7. reckons up others. But for the
spurging of the eyes, let us return to Lucan, in the same book, which piece
(as all the rest) is written with an admirable height. Ast vbi sernantur saxis,
quibus intimus humor Ducitur, and tracta durescunt tabe medullae Corpora, tunc
omneis auide desaeuit in artus, Immersilque manus oculis, gaudetque gelatos
Effodisse orbeis, and sic^a pallida rodit Excrementa manus.
2.
I Have been gathering Wolves hairs,
The mad Dogs foame, and the Adders ears;
The spurging of a dead man's eyes,
And all since the evening star did rise.
Pliny writing of the Mandrake Not. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 13. and of the digging
it up, has this ceremony, Cauens esfossuri contrarium ventum, and tribus
circulis ame gladio circumscribunt, postea sodiunt ad occasum spectantes. But
we have later tradition, that the forcing of it up is so fatally dangerous, as
the groan kills, and therefore they do it with dogs, which I think but
borrowed from Josephus his report of the root Ba^ras, lib. 7. de Bell. Iudaic.
Howsoever, it being so principal an ingredient in their Magic, it was sit she
should boast, to be the plucker up of it her self. And, that the Cock did
crow, alludes to a prime circumstance in their work: For they all confess,
that nothing is so cross, or balefull to them, in their nights, as that the
Cock should crow before they have done. Which makes, that their little Masters,
or Martinets, of whom I have mentioned before, use this form, in dismissing
their conuentions. Eia, facessite propere hinc omnes, nam iam galli canere
incipiunt. Which I interpret to be, because that bird is the messenger of
light, and so, contrary to their acts of darkness. See Remig. Daemonolat.
lib. 1. cap. 4. where he quotes that of Appollonius, de vmbra Achillis,
Philostr. lib. 4. cap. 5. And Eusebius. Caesariens. in confutat. contra Hierocl.
4. de Gallicinio.
3.
I, Last night, lay all alone
Of The ground, to hear the Mandrake groan;
And plucked him up, though he grew full low;
And, as I had done, the Cock did crow.
I have touched at this before, in my note upon the first, of the use of
gathering flesh, bones, and sculs: to which I now bring that piece of Apuleius,
lib. 3. de Asino aureo, of Pamp^ile. Priusque apparatu solito instruxit foralem
ossicinam, omne genus aromatis, and ignorabiliter laminis literatis, and
infoelicium nauium durantibus clauis defletorum, sepultorum etiam, cadauerum
expositis multis admodum membris, hic nares, and digiti, illic carnosi claui
pendentium, alibi trucidatorum sernatus cruor, and extorta dentibus ferarum
trunca caluaria. And, for such places, Lucan makes his witch to inhabit them,
lib. 6. Desertaque busta Incolit, and tumulos expulsis obtinet vmbris.
4.
ANd I ha'beene choosing out this scull,
From Charnell houses, that were full;
From private Grots, and public Pits,
And frighted a Sexten out of his wits.
5. For this rite, see Barthol. de spina. Quaest. de Strigibus, cap. 8. Mall.
Mallefica. Tom. 2. where he disputes at large the transformation of witches to
cats, and their sucking, both their spirits, and the blood, calling them
Striges: which Godelman. lib. de Lamijs, would have a stridore, and auibus
foedissimis eiusdem nominis, which I the rather incline to, out of Ouid's
authority, Fast. lib. 6. where the Poet ascribes, to those birds, the same
almost that these do to the Witches, Nocte volant, puerosque petunt nutricis
egenteis, Et vitiant cunis corpora rapta suis: Carpere dicuntur lactentia
viscera rostris, Et plenum poto sanguine guttur habent.

Under a cradle I did creep,
By day; and, when the child was asleep,
At night, I sucked the breath; and rose,
And plucked the nodding Nurse by the nose.
6. Their killing of infants is common, both for confection of their ointment
(whereto one ingredient, is the fat boiled, as I have showed before out of
Paracelsus and Porta) as also out of a lust to do murder. Sprenger in Mall.
Mallefic. reports, that a witch, a midwife in the Diocoese of Basil, confessed
to have killed above forty infants (ever as they were newborn, with pricking
them in the brain with a needle) which she had offered to the devil. See the
story of the three witches in Rem. Daemonola, lib. cap. 3. about the end of
the chapter. And M. Philippo Ludwigus Elich. Quaest. 8. And, that it is no new
rite, read the practice of Canidia, Epod. Horat. lib. Ode. 5. and Lucan. lib.
6. whose admirable verses I can never be weary to transcribe. Nec cessant a
caede manus, si sanguine vino Est opus, erumpat ingulo qui primus aperto. Nec
refugit caedes, viuum si sacra cruor^m Extaque funercae poscunt trepidantia
mensae. Vulnere si ventris, non qua Natura vocabat Extrahitur partus calidos
ponendus in aris; Et quoties saeuis opus est, and fortibus vmbris Ipsa facit
Maneis. Hominum mors omnis in vsu est.

I Had a dagger: what did I with that?
Killed an infant, to have his fat.
A Piper it got, at a Church-ale,
I bad him, again blow wind in the tail.
7. The abuse of dead bodies in their witchcraft, both Porphyrio and Psellus
are grave Authors of. The one lib. de sacrif. cap. de vero cultu. The other
lib. de daemo. which Apuleius touches too, lib. 2. de Asin. aureo. But
Remigius, who deals with later persons, and out of their own mouths,
Daemonola, lib. 2. cap. 3. affirms, Haec and nostrae aetatis maleficis
hominibus moris est facere, praesertim si cuius supplicio affecti cadauer
exemplo datum est, and in crucem sublatum. Nam non solum inde sortilegijs suis
materiam mutuantur: Sed and ab ipsis carnifioinae instrumentis, rest,
vinculis, palo, ferramentis. Siquidem ijs vulgi etiam opinione inesse ad
incantationes magicas vim quandam and potestatem. And to this place, I dare
not, out of religion to the divine Lucan, but bring his verses from the same
book. Laqueum, nodosque nocenteis Ore suo rupit, pendentia corpora carpsit,
Abrasitque cruces, percussaque viscera nimbis Vulsit, and incoctas admisso sole
medullas. Insertum manibus chalibem nigramque per artus Stillantis tabi saniem,
virusque coactum Sustulit, and neruo morsus retinente perpendit.

A Murderer, yonder, was hung in chains,
The Sun and the wind had shrunk his veins;
I bit off a sinew, I clipped his hair,
I brought off his rags, that danced in the air.
8. These are Canidia's furniture, in Hora. Epod. lib. Ode. 5. Et vncta turpis
ou^ ranae sanguine, Plumamque nocturnae strigis. And part of Medeas confection,
in Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 7. Strigis infames, ipsis cum carnibus, alas. That of
the skin (to make a purse for her Fly) was meant ridiculous, to mock the
keeping of their Familiars.

THe Scrich-owles eggs, and the feathers black,
The blood of the Frogge, and the bone in his back,
I have been getting; and made of his skin
A purset, to keep Sir CRANION in.
9. Cicuta, Hyoscyomus, Ophioglosson, Solanum, Martagon, Doronicum, Aconitum,
are the common veneficall ingredients, remembered by Paracelsus, Porta, Agrippa,
and others; which I make her to have gathered, as about a castle, church, or
some vast building (kept by dogs) among ruins, and wild heaps.

ANd I ha'beene plucking (plants among)
Hemlock, Henbane, Adders-tongue,
Nightshade, Moone-wort, Libbards-bane;
And twice, by the dogs, was like to be taken.
Ossa ab ore rapta ^eiunae canis, Horace gives Canidia, in the place before
quoted. Which ieiunae, I rather change to Gardeners, as imagining such persons
to keep Mastifes for the defense of their grounds, whither this Hagge might
go also for simples: where, meeting with the bones, and not content with them,
she would yet do a domesticke hurt, in getting the Catt's brains: which is
another special ingredient; and of so much more efficacy, by how much blacker
the Cat is, if you will credit. Agrip. cap. de suffitibus.
10.
I, From the jaws of a Gardiners bitch,
Did snatch these bones, and then leaped the ditch;
Yet went I back to the house again,
Killed the black Cat, and here is the brain.
These also, both by the confessions of Witches, and testimony of Writers, are
of principal use in their witchcraft. The Toad mentioned in Virg. Geo. lib. 1.
Inuentusque cauis Bufo. Which by Pliny is called Ruheta, Not. Hist. lib. 32.
cap. 5. and there celebrated for the force in Magic. Iuuenal touches at it
twice, within my memory, Satir. 1. and 6. And of the Owls eyes, see Corn.
Agrip. de occult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 15. As of the Bats blood, and wings
there: and in the 25. chapter, with Bapt. Porta, lib. 2. cap. 26.
11.
I Went to the Toad breeds under the wall,
I charmed him out, and he came at my call;
I scratched out the eyes of the Owl before,
I tore the Batts wing; what would you have more?
After all their boasted labors, and plenty of Materials (as they imagine) I
make the Dame not only to add more, but stranger, and out of their means to
get (except the first Papan^r cornutum, which I have touched at in the
confection) as Sepulchris caprificos erutas, and cupressos funebreis, as Horace
calls them, where he arms Canidia, Epod. lib. Ode. 5. Then Agaricum Laricis,
of which, see Porta. lib. 2. de Not. Magi, against Pliny. And Basilisci, quem
and Saturni sanguinem vocant venefici, tantasque vires habere ferunt. Cor.
Agrip. de accult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 42. With the Viper, remembered by Lucan.
lib. 6. and the skins of Serpents. Innataque rubris Aequoribus custos pretiosae
vipera conchae, Aut viuentis adhuc Lybicae membrana cerastae. And Ovid, lib. 7.
Nec defuit illis Squamea Ciniphei tenuis membrana chelidri.
12. DAME.
YEs, I have brought (to help our vows)
Horned Poppie, Cypress boughs,
The Fig Tree wild, that grows on tombs,
And juice, that from the Larch-tree comes,
The Basiliskes blood, and the Vipers skin:
And, now, our Orgies let us begin. Here, the Dame put her self in the midst of
them, and began her following Invocation; wherein she took occasion, to boast
all the power attributed to Witches by the Ancients; of which, every Poet (or
the most) do give some: HOMER to CIRCE, in the Odyss. THEOCRITVS to SIMATHA,
in Pharmaceutria; VIRGIL to ALPHESIBoeVS, in his. OVID to DIPSAS, in Amor. to
MEDEA and CIRCE, in Metamorph. TIBVLLVS to SAGA; HORACE to CANIDIA, SAGANA,
VELA, FOLIA; SENECA to MEDEA, and the Nurse, in Herc. OEte. PETR. ARBITER to
his SAGA, in Frag. and CLAVDIAN to MEGaeRA, lib. 1. in Rufinum; who takes the
habit of a Witch, as these do, and supplies that historical part in the
Poem, beside her moral person of a Fury; confirming the same drift, in ours.
YOu These Inuocations are solemn with them, whereof we may see the forms, in
Ovid. Me^am. lib. 7. in Sen. Trag. Med. in Luc. lib. 6. which of all is the
boldest and most horrid: beginning, E^menides, Stigiumque nefas, panaeque
noceatu^, etc.
Fiends and Furies (if yet any be
Worse then our selves) you, that have quaked to see
These The untying of their knots is, when they are going to some fatal
business: as Sagana is presented by Horace. Expedita, per totam domum Spa^gens
Auernaleis aquas, Horret capillis, vt marinus asperis, Echinus, aut ^urrens
Aper.
knots untied; and shrunk, when we have charmed.
You, that (to arm us) have your selves disarmed,
And to our powers, resigned your whips and brands,
When we went forth, the scourge of men and lands.
You, that have seen me ride, when HECATE
Durst not take chariot; when the boistrous se^,
Without a breath of wind, has knocked the sky;
And that has thundered, JOVE not knowing why:
When we have set the elements at wars,
Made midnight see the sun, and day the stars;
When the winged lightning, in the course, has staid;
And swiftest rivers have run back, afraid,
To see the corn remove, the groves to range,
Whole places alter, and the seasons change,
When the pale moon, at the first voice down fell
Poisoned, and durst not stay the second spell.
You, that have often, been conscious of these sights;
And thou Hecate, who is called Triuia, and Triformis, of whom Virgil. Aeneid.
lib. 4. Tergeminamque Hecaten, tria virgnis ora Dianae. She was believed to
govern in witchcraft; and is remembered in all their inuocations* See Theoc. in
Pharmacent. (...), and Mede^ in Senec. Meis vocata sacris noctium sidus veni,
Pessimos indutae vultus: Front non vna minax. And ^richt. in Luc. Persephone.
nostraeque Hecatis pars vltima, etc.
three-formed star, that, on these nights
Art only powerful, to whose triple name
Thus we incline, once, twice, and thrice the same;
If now with rites profane, and foul enough,
We do inuoke thee; darken all this roof,
With present fogges* Exhale earths rott'nest vapors,
And strike a blindness through these blazing tapers.
Come, let a murmuring charm resound,
The whilst we This Rite, of burying their Materials, is often confessed in
Remig. and described amply in Hor. Sat. 8. lib. 1. Vtque Lupiharbam variae cum
dente colubrae Abdide rint furtim terris, etc.
bury all, in the ground.
But first, see every The Ceremony also, of baring their feet, is expressed by
Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 7. as of their hair. Egreditur tectis ves^es induta
recinctas, Nuda pedem, nudos humeris infusa capillos. And Horac. ibid. Pedibus
nudis passoque capillo. And Senec. in Tragaed. Med. Tibi more Gentis, vinculo
soluens comam Secreta nudo nemora lustraui pede.
foot be bare;
And every knee. HAG. Yes, dame, they are.
4. CHARM.
Deep, Here they speak as if they were creating some new feature, which the
devil persuades them to be able to do, often, by the pronouncing of words, and
pouring out of liquors, on the earth. Hear what Agrip. saits De occul. Phil.
lib. 4. near the end. In euocationibus vmbrarum fumigamus cum sanguine recenti,
cum ossibus mortuorum, and carne, cum ouis, lact^, melle, oleo, and similibus,
quae ap^^^ medium tribuunt animabus, ad sumenda corpora; and a little before.
Namque animae cognitis medijs, per quae quondam corporibus suis coniungebantur,
per similes vapores, liquores, nidoresque facile alliciuntur. Which doctrine he
had from Apuleius, without all doubt, or question, who in lib. 3. de Asin
aureo. publishes the same. Tunc decantatis spirantibus fibris lita^ vario
latice; nunc rore fontano, nunc lacte vaccino, nunc melle montano, libat and
mulsa Sic illos capillos in mutuos nexus obditos, atque nodatos, cum multis
odoribus dat vi^is carbonibus adolendos. Tunc protinus inexpugnabili Magicae
Disciplinae potestate, and cacanuminum coactorum violentia, illa corpora quorum
fumabant stridentes capilli spiritum mutuantur humanum, and sentiunt, and
audiunt, and ambulant. Et qua nidor suarum ducebat exuuiarum veniunt. All which
are mere arts of Satan, when either himself will delude them with a false
form, or troubling a dead body, makes them imagine these vanities the means:
as in the ridiculous circumstances that follow, he does daily.
O deep, we lay thee to sleep;
We leave thee drink by, if thou chance to be dry;
Both milk, and blood, the dew, and the flood.
We breathe in thy bed, at the foot, and the head;
We cover thee warm, that thou take no harm:
And when thou do wake,
Dame earth shall quake,
And the houses shake,
And her belly shall ache,
As her back were brake,
Such a birth to make,
As is the blue drake:
Whose form thou shall take.
DAME.
Never a star yet shot?
Where be the ashes? HAG. Here in the pot.
DAM. This throwing of ashes, and sand, with the flint stone, cross sticks,
and burying of sage etc. are all used (and believed by them) to the raising of
storm, and tempest. See Remig. li. 1. demon. cap. 25. Nider. Formicari. cap.
4. Bodin. Demon. lib. 2. cap. 8. And hear Godelman: lib. 2. cap. 6. Nam
quando daemoni grandines ciendi potestatem facit Deus, tum Malifica^ instruit,
vt quandoque silicet post tergum in occidentem versus proijciant, aliquando vt
arenam aquae torrentis in aerem conijciant, plerumque scopas in aquam
intingant, coelumque versus spargant, vel fossula facta and lotio infuso, vel
aqua digitum meu^ant: subinde in olla porcorum pilos bulliant, nonnunquam
trabes vel ligna in ripa transuerse collocent, and alia id genus deliramenta
efficiant. And when they see the success, they are more confirmed, as if the
event followed their working. The like illusion is of their fantasy, in
sailing in egge-shels, creeping through augur-holes, and such like, so vulgar
in their confessions.
Cast them up; and the flint stone
Over the left shoulder bone:
Into the west. HAG. It will be best.
5. CHARM.
THe sticks are a-crosse, there can be no loss,
The sage is rotten, the sulphur is gotten
Up to the sky, that was in the ground.
Follow it then, with our rattles, round;
Under the bramble, over the brier,
A little more heat will set it on fire:
Put it in mind, to do it kind,
Flow water, and blow wind.
Rouncy is over, Robble is under,
A flash of light, and a clap of thunder,
A storm of rain, another of hayle.
We all must home, in the ^gge-shell sail;
The mast is made of a great pin,
The tackle of cobweb, the sail as thin,
And if we go through and not fall in --
DAME.
This stop, or interruption showed the better, by causing that general
silence, which made all the following Noyses, enforced in the next charm, more
direful, first imitating that of Lucan. Miratur Erichtho Has fatis licuisse
moras; irataque morti Verberat immotum vino serpente cadauer, and then their
barking, howling, hissing, and confusion of noise expressed by the same Author,
in the same person. Tunc vox Lethaeos cunctis pollentior herbis Excantare deos,
confodit murmura primum. Dissona and humana multum discordia linguae. Latratus
habet illa canum, gemitusque, luporum, Quod trepidus bubo, quod strin nocturna
queruntur, Quod strident vlulantque ferae, quod sibilat anguis Exprimit, and
planctus illisae cautibus vndae, Siluarumque sonum, fractaeque tonitrua nubis,
Tot rerum vox vna suit, See Remig. too, Daemonolat. lib. 1. cap. 19.
STay. All our charms do nothing win
Upon the night; our labor dies!
Our Magicke-feature will not rise;
Nor yet the storm! We must repeat
More direful voices far, and beat
The ground with vipers, till it sweat.
6. CHARM.
Bark dogs, wolves howl,
Seas roar, woods roll,
Clouds crack, all be black,
But the light our charms do make.
DAME.
NOt yet? my rage begins to swell;
Darkness, devils, night, and hell,
Do not thus delay my spell.
I call you once, and I call you twice;
I beat you again, if you stay my thrice:
Thorough these cranyes, where I peep,
This is one of their common menaces, when their magic receives the least
stop. Hear Erichtho again, ibid. tibi pessime munde Arbiter immiclam ruptis
Titana cauernis Et subito feriere d^e. And a little before to Proserpina.
Eloquar immenso terrae sub pondere quae te Contineant, Ennaea dapes, etc.
I Will let in the light to see your sleep.
And all the secrets of your sway
Shall lie as open to the day,
As unto me. Still are you deaf?
Reach me a bough, That withered straight, as it shot out, which is called
Ramus feralis, by some, and tristis, by Senec. Trag. Med.
that never bare leaf,
To strike the air; and A deadly poisonous herb feigned by Ovid. Metamo. libr.
7. to spring out of Cerberus his foame. Pliny gives it another beginning of
name. Not. Hist. lib. 27. cap 3. Nascitur in nudis cautibus, quas aconas
vocant, and inde aconitum dixere, nullo iuxta ne puluere quidem nutriente.
Howsoever the juice of it is like that liquor which the devil gives witches to
sprinkle abroad, and do hurt in the opinion of all the magic masters.
Aconite,
To hurl upon this glaring light;
A rusty knife I rather give her, then any other, as fittest for such a
deuilish Ceremony, which Seneca might mean by sacro culto in the Tragedy,
where he arms Medea, to the like rite, (for any thing I know) Tibi nudato
pectore Moenas, sacro feriam Brachia cultro: Manet noster sanguis ad aras.
A rustie knife, to wound mine arm;
And, as it drops, I Will speak a charm,
Shall cleave the ground, as low as lies
Old shrunk-vp CHAOS, and let rise,
Once more, his dark, and reeking head,
To strike the world, and nature dead,
Until my magic birth be bred.
7. CHARM.
Black go in, and blacker come out;
At thy going down, we give thee a shout.
These shouts and clamors, as also the voice Har. Har. are very particular with
them by the testimony of Bodin. Remig. Delrio. and M. Phil. Lud^uigus, Elich.
who out of them reports it, thus. Tota turba colluniesque pessima fescanninos
in honorem Daemonum cantat obsoenissimos: Haec cauit Har. Har. Illa Diabolo,
Diabole, salta huc, salta illuc; Altera, lude hic, lude illic; Alia, Sabaath,
Sabaath. etc. Imo clamoribus, sibilis, vlulatibus, popysmis, furit, ac
debacchatur: pulueribus, velvenenis acceptu qui hominibus pedibusque spergant.
Hoo!
At thy rising again, thou shall have two,
And if thou do what, we would have thee do,
Thou shall have three, thou shall have four,
Thou shall have ten, thou shall have a score.
Hoo. Har. Har. Hoo!
8. CHARM.
A Cloud of pitch, a spur, and a switch,
To haste him away, and a whirlewind play,
Before, and after, which thunder for laughter,
And storms for joy, of the roaring boy;
His head of a drake, his tail of a snake.
9. CHARM.
ABout, about, and about,
Till the mist arise, and the lights ^lie out,
The images neither be seen, nor felt;
The woollen burn, and the waxen melt;
Sprinkle your liquors upon the ground,
And into the air; around, around.
Around, around,
Around, around,
Nor do they want music, and in strange manner given them by the devil, if
we credit their confessions in Remig. Daem. lib. 1. cap. 19. Such as the
Syrbenaean Quires were, which Athen^us remembers out of Clear^bus, Deipnos.
lib. 15. where every one sung what he would without harkening to his fellow;
like the noise of diverse oars, falling in the water. But be patient of
Remigius relation. Miris modis ill^c miscentur, ac turbantur omnia, nec vlla
oratione satis exprimi queat, quam strepant sonis inconditis, absurdis, ac
discrepantibus. Canit hic Demon ad tibiam, vel verius ad contum, aut baculum
aliquod, quod forte humi repertum buccceu tibiam admouet. Ille pro lyra equi
caluariam pulsat, ac digitis concrepat. Alius fuste vel claua grauiore quercum
tundit, vnde exauditur sonus, ac boatus veluti tympanorum vehementius
pulsatorum. Intercinunt rancide, and composito ^d litui morem elangore
Daemones; ipsumque coelum fragosa aridaque voce feriunt.
Till a music sound,
And the pase be found,
To which we may dance,
And our Charms advance.
AT which, with a strange, and sudden music they fell into a The manner also
of their dancing is confessed in Bodin. lib. 2. cap. 4. And Remig li. 1. cap.
17. and 18. The sum of which M. Phili. Lud. Elich. relates thus, in his
Daemonom. Quaest. 10. Tripudijs interdum intersunt facie libera and aperta,
interdum obducta larua, linteo, cortice, reticulo, peplo, vel alio velamine,
aut farrinario excerniculo inuolu^a. And a little after. Omnia fiunt ritu
absurdissimo, and ab omni consuetudine hominum alienissimo, dorsis inuicem
obuersis, and in orbem iunctis manibus, saltando circumeant, perinde sua
iactantes capita, vt qui oestro agitantur. Remigius adds out of the confession
of Sibilla Morelia, Gyrum semper in laeuam progredi. which Pliny observes in
the Priests of Cybile. Not. Hist. lib. 28 cap 2. and to be done with great
religion. Bodin adds, that they use broomes in their hands, with which we
armed our witches; and here we leave them.
magical dance, full of praeposterous change, and gesticulation, but most
applying to their property: who at their meetings, do call things contrary to
the custom of men, dancing back to back, and hip to hip, their hands ioin'd,
and making their circles backward, to the left hand, with strange phantastique
motions of their heads, and bodies. All which were excellently imitated by the
maker of the dance, M. HIEROME HERNE, whose right it is here to be named.

IN the heat of their dance, on the sudden, was heard a sound of loud
music, as if many instruments had made one blast; with which not only the
Hags themselves, but the hell, into which they ran, quite vanished, and the
whole face of the Scene altered, scarce suffering the memory of such a thing: But
in the place of it, appeared a glorious, and magnificent building, figuring the
house of fame, in the top of which, were discovered the 12. masquers, sitting
upon a throne triumphall, erected in form of a pyramide, and circled with all
store of light. From whom a person, by this time descended, in the furniture of
Perseus, and expressing heroique, and masculine virtue, began to speak.

HEROIQVE VERTVE.
SO should, at FAMES loud sound, and VERTVES sight,
All dark, and envious witchcraft fly the light.
The ancients expressed a brave and masculine Virtue in three figures (of
Hercules, Perseus, and Bellerophon.) Of which we choose that of Perseus, armed
as we have described him, out of Hesiod. Scuto. Herc. See Apollodor, the
Grammarian, l. 2. de Persco.
I did not borrow HERMES wings, nor ask
His crooked sword, nor put on PLVTO'S caske,
Nor on mine arm, advanced wise PALLAS shield,
(By which, my face auers'd, in open field
I slew the GORGON) for an empty name:
When VERTVE cut off TERROR, he gat FAME.
And, if when FAME was gotten, TERROR di'de,
What black ERYNNIS, or more hellish pride,
Durst arm these HAGS, now she is grown, and great,
To think they could her glories once defeat?
I was her parent, and I am her strength.
Heroique Virtue sinkes not under length
Of years, or ages; but is still the same,
While he preserues, as when he got good FAME.
My daughter, then, whose glorious house you see
Built of all sounding brass, whose columns be
Men making Poets, and those well-made Men,
Whose strife it was, to have the happyest pen
Renown them to an after-life, and not
With pride, to scorn the Muse, and die forgot;
She, that inquireth into all the world,
And has, about her vaulted Palace, hoorl'd
All rumors and reports, or true, or vain,
What utmost lands, or deepest seas contain;
(But only hangs great actions, on her file)
She, to this lesser world, and greatest I Will,
To night sounds Honor, which she would have seen
In yond' bright BEVIE each of them a Queen.
Eleven of them are of times, long gone.
PENTHESILEA, the brave Amazon,
Swift foot CAMILLA, Queen of Volscia,
Victorious THOMYRIS of Scythia,
Chaste ARTEMISIA, the Carian dame,
And fayre-hayr'd BERONICE, Aegypts fame,
HYPSICRATEA, glory of Asia,
CANDACE, pride of Aethiopia.
The Brittane honor, VOADICEA,
The virtuous PALMYRENE, ZENOBIA,
The wife, and warlike Goth, AMALASVNTA,
And bold VALASCA, of Bohemia.
(...) (...) Vel mare per medium, fluctu suspensa tumenti,
Ferret iter, celereis nec tingeret aequore plantas.
And afterward tells her attire, and arms, with the admiration, that the
spectators had of her. All which i^ the Poet created out of himself, without
nature, he did but show, how much so divine a soul could exceed her.

The third lived in the age of CYRUS, the great Persian Monarch; and made him
leave to live. THOMYRIS, Queen of the Scythians, or Massagets. A Heroine of a
most invincible, and unbroken fortitude. Who, when CYRUS had invaded her, and,
taking her only son (rather by treachery, then war, as she objected) had
slain him; not touched with the grief of so great a loss, in the iuster
comfort she took of a greater revenge, pursued not only the occasion, and
honor of conquering so potent an enemy, with whom fell two hundred thousand
soldiers: but (what was right memorable in her victory) left not a messenger
suruiuing, of his side to report the massacre. She is remembered both by In clio.
HERODOTVS and ^pit. lib. 1.
IVSTINE, to the great renown, and glory of her kind: with this Elogie. Quod
potentissimo Persarum Monarchaebello congressa est, ipsamque and vita and
castris spoliauit, ad just vlciscendam filij eius indignissimam mortem.

The fourth was honored to life in the time of XERXES, and present at his great
expedition into Greece; ARTEMISIA, the Queen of Caria: whose virtue In Polymn.
HERODOTVS, not without some wonder, records. That, a woman, a Queen, without
a husband, her son a ward, and she administering the government, occasioned
by no necessity, but a mere excellence of spirit, should embarque herself
for such a war; and there, so to behave her, as XERXES beholding her sight,
should say: Herod. in Urania.
Viri quide^ extiterunt mihi foeminae, foeminae autem viri. She is no less
renowned for her chastity, and love to her husband, MAVSOLVS, Val. Max. l. 4.
cap. 6. and A. Gel l. 10. c. 18.
whose bones (after he was dead) she preserved in ashes, and drunk in wine,
making her self his tomb: and, yet, built to his memory a monument,
deserving a place among the seven wonders of the world, which could not be done
by less then a wonder of women.

The fifth was the fair hayr'd daughter of PTOLOMAEVS PHILADELPHVS, by the
elder ARSINOE; who, married to her brother PTOLOMAEVS, surnamed EVERGETES, was
after Queen of Egypt. I find her written both BERONICE, and BERENICE. This
lady, upon an expedition of her new wedded Lord into Assyria, vowed to VENUS,
if he returned safe, and conqueror, the offering of her hair; which vow of
hers (exacted by the success) she afterward performed. But, her father missing
it, and therewith displeased, CONON, a Mathematician, who was then in
household with PTOLOMEY, and knew well to flatter him, persuaded the king that
it was taken up to heaven, and made a constellation; she wing him those seven
stars, ad caudam Leonis, which are since called Coma Beronices. Which story,
then presently celebrated by CALLIMACHVS, in a most elegant poem, CATVLLVS
more elegantly converted; wherein they call her the Magnanimous, even from a
virgin: alluding (as Astronom. lib. 2. in Leo.
HYGINVS says) to a rescue she made of her father in his flight, and
restoring the courage and honor of his army, even to a victory. Their words
are, Catul. de C^ma Beronis.
Cognoram d parua virgin magnanimam.


The sixth, that famous wife of MITHRIDATES, and Queen of Pontus, HYPSICRATEA,
no less an example of virtue then the rest; who so loved her husband, as she
was assistant to him in all labors, and hazards of the war, in a masculine
habit. For which cause (as Lib. 4. ca. 6. de Amo^. ^oning.
VALERIVS MAXIMUS observes) she departed with a chief ornament of her beauty.
Tonsis enim capillis, equo se and armis assuefecit, quo facilius laboribus and
periculis eius interesset. And, afterward, in his flight from POMPEY,
accompanied his misfortune, with a mind, and body equally unwearied. She is
solemnly registered, by that grave Author, as a notable President of
marriage-loyaltie, and love: virtues, that might raise a mean person to
equality with a Queen, but a Queen to the state, and honor of a deity.

The seventh, that renown of Aethiopia, CANDACE: from whose excellency, the
succeeding queens of that nation were ambitious to be called so. A woman, of
a most haughty spirit against enemies, and a singular affection to her
subjects. I find her celebrated by Hist. Romans l 54
DION, and Not. hist. lib 6. cap. 29.
PLINY, inuading Egypt in the time of AUGUSTUS; who, though she were enforced
to a peace by his Lieutenant PETRONIVS, does not the less worthily hold her
place here; when, every where, this Elogie remains of her fame: That she was
Maximi animi mulier, tantique in suos meriti, vt omnes d^inceps Aethiopum
Reginae eius nomine fuerint appellatae. She governed in Meroe.

The eight, our own honor, VOADICEA, or BOODICEA; By some BVNDVICA, and
BVNDVCA: queen of the Iceni. A people, that inhabited that part of our Island
which was called East-Anglia, and comprehended Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge,
and Huntington shires. Since she was borne here at home, we will first honor
her with a home-borne testimony; from the grave and diligent Ruins of Time.
SPENSER.

-- BVNDVCA Britonesse*
BVNDVCA, that victorious conqueresse,
That lifting up her brave Heroique thought
'Bo^e woman's weakness, with the Romans fought;
Fought, and in field against them thrice prevailed, etc.
To which, see her orations in story, made by Annal. lib. 14.
TAC^TVS, and Epit. Joan. X^philon. in Ner.
DION: wherein is expressed all magnitude of a spirit, breathing to the liberty
and redemption of her Country. The latter of whom, does honest her beside,
with a particular desciption. BVNDVICA, Britanica foemina, orta stirpe Regia,
quaenon solum cis cum magna dignitate praefuit, sed etiam hellum omne
administrauit; cuius animus virilis potius quam muliebris erat. And afterward,
Foemina, forma honestissima, vultu seuero, etc. All which does weigh the more
to her true praise, in coming from the mouths of Romans, and enemies. She
lived in the time of NERO.

The ninth, in time, but equal in fame, and (the cause of it) virtue, was the
chaste ZENOBIA queen of the Palmerynes, who, after the death of (...)

(...) Her house is all of echo made,
Where never dies the sound;
And, as her brows the clouds invade,
Her foot do strike the ground.
Sing then good Fame, that is out of Virtue borne:
For, who does Fame neglect, does Virtue scorn.
Here they lighted from their Chariots, and danced forth their first dance;
then a second, immediately following it: both right curious, and full of
subtle and excellent changes, and seemed performed with no less spirits, then
of those they personated. The first was to the Cornets, the second to the
Vyolines. After which, they took out the men, and danced the measures;
entertaining the time, almost to the space of an hour, with singular variety:
when, to give them rest, from the Music which attended the Chariots, by that
most excellent tenor voice, and exact singer (her Majesty's servant M. IO.
ALLIN) this Dittie was sung.

SONG. WHen all the Ages of the earth
Were crowned, but in this famous Birth;
And that, when they would boast their store
Of Worthy Queens, they knew no more:
How happier is that Age, can give
A Queen, in whom all they do live!
After it, succeeded their third dance; then which, a more numerous composition
could not be seen: Graphically disposed into Letters, and honoring the name
of the most sweet and ingenious Prince CHARLES Duke of York. Wherein, beside
that principal grace of perspicuitie, the motions were so even and apt, and
their expression so just; as if Mathematicians had lost Proportion, they might
there have found it. The Author was M. THO. GILES. After this, they danced
Galliards, and Corrantoes. And then their last dance, no less elegant (in the
place) then the rest, with which they took their Chariots again, and
triumphing about the stage, had their return to the House of Fame celebrated
with this last Song; whose notes (as the former) were the work, and honor of
my excellent friend, ALFONSO FERRABOSCO.

SONG. WHo, Virtue, can thy power forget,
That sees these live, and triumph yet?
The Assyrian pomp, the Persian pride,
Gre^kes glory, and the Romans di'de:
And who yet imitate
Their noyses, tarry the same fate.
Force greatness all the glorious ways
You can, it soon decaies;
But so good Fame shall never:
Her triumphs, as their causes, are for ever.
To conclude which, I know no worthier way of Epilogue, then the celebration of
who were the Celebraters.

The QVEENES MAJESTY. The Co. of ARVNDEE. The Co. of DERBY. The Co. of
HVNTINGTON. The Co. of BEDFORD. The Co. of ESSEX. The Co. of MONTGOMERY. The
Vicou. CRANBORNE. The La. EL. GVILFORD. The La. ANNE WINTER. The La. WINDSORE.
The La. ANNE CLIFFORD.
THE SPEECHES AT PRINCE HENRY'S BARRIERS.
The Lady of the Lake, first discovered. A Silence, calm as are my waters, meet
Your raised attentions, whilst my silver fee
Touch on the richer shore; and to this seat
Vow my new duties and mine old repeat.
Lest any yet should doubt, or might mistake
What Nymph I am; behold the ample lake
Of which I am styled; and near it MERLINS tomb
Grave of his cunning, as of mine the womb.
By this it will not ask me to proclaim
More of my self, whose actions, and whose name
Were so full feigned in British ARTHVRS court;
No more then it will fit me to report
What has before bin trusted to our squire
Of me, my knight, his fate, and my desire
To meet, if not prevent his destiny
And style him to the court of Britany;
Now when the Island has regained her fame
Entire, and perfect, in the ancient name,
And that a monarch equal good and great,
Wise, temperate, just, and stout claims ARTHVRS seat.
Did I say equal? O too prodigal wrong
Of my or'c-thirstie, and unequal tongue!
How brighter far, then when our ARTHVR lived,
Are all the glories of this place reuin'd!
What riches do I see; what beauties here!
What awe! what love! what reverence! joy! and fear!
What ornaments of counsel as of court!
All that is high and great, or can comport
Unto the style of majesty, that knows
No rival, but it self, this place here shows.
Only the house of Chivalry (how ere
The inner parts and store be full, yet here
In that which gentry should sustain) decayed
Or rather ruined seems; her buildings laid

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

(...) (...)

PAT. Nor a deuoish vit a clowd to fesh 'hem out of te bottom of te vayter.


DER. But tey musht eene come and daunch i'teyr mantels now; and snow tee how
tey can foot te fading and te fadow, and te phip adunboyne I trow.


DON. I pre dee now, let not ty sweet faysht ladies make a mock on 'hem, and
scorn to daunsh vit'hem now, becash tey be poor.


PAT. Tey drink no bonny clabbe, in fayt, now


DON. It ish better ten vsquebagh to daunsh vit PHATRICK.


PAT. By my faters hand tey vill daunsh very vell.


DER. I by St. PATRICK vill tey; for tey be nimble men.


DEN. And will leap ash light, be creesh save me, ash he tat veareste biggesht
fether in ty court, king YAMISH.


DER. For all tey have no good vindsh to blow tem heter, nor elementsh to
presherue 'hem.


DON. Nor all te four cornersh of te world, to creep out on.


PAT. But tine own Kingdoms.


DON. Tey be honesht men.


PAT. And goot men: tine own shubshects.


DER. Tou hasht very good shubshects in Ireland.


DEN. A great good many, o'great goot shubshects.


DON. Tat love ty mayesty heartily.


DER. And vil run t'rough fire, and vater for tee, over t^ bog, and te
Bannoke, be te graish of got, and graish of king,


DER. By got, tey vil fight for tee, king YAMISH, and for my mistresh tere.


DEN. And my little mayshter.


PAT. And te vfrow, ty daughter, that is in Tuchland.


DON. Tey vill spend ter heart, in rer belly for tee, as vell as ter legs, in
ter heelsh.


DER. By creesh, tey vill shpend all teyr cowesh for tee.


DEN. Pretee make mush on 'tem,


PAT. Pretee, sweet faysh do.


DON. Be not angry vit te honesh men, for te few rebelsh, and knauesh.


PAT. Nor believe no tails, king YAMISH.


DER. For, by got, tey love tee in Ireland.


DON. Pray tee, bid 'hem velcome, and got make 'hem rish for tee.


DER. Tey vill make tem shelues honesht.


DEN. Tou hasht not a hundret tousand sush men by my trote.


PAT. No, nor forty, by my hand.


DON. By iustish Delounes hant, not twenty.


DER. By my Lo. deputish hant not ten, in all ti great Britayne. Shall I call
hem to tee?


DON. Tey shit like poor men in the porsh yonder.


PAT. Shtay te peep i'sh come! hark, hark.


DER. Let vsh daunsh ten. Daunsh DENNISE.


DEN. By creesh sa' me I ha'forgot.


DON. A little till our mayshtersh be ready.


Here the Footmen had a dance, being six men, and six boys, to the
bag-pipe, and other rude music, after which they had a song, and then they
cried, Peash. Peash. Now room for our mayshters. Room for our mayshters. Then
the Gentlemen dance forth a dance in their Irish mantles, to a solemn music
of harpes: which done, the footmen fell to speak again, till they were
interrupted by a civil gentleman of the nation, who brings in a Bard. DER. How
like tow tish YAMISH? And tey had fine cloyshs now, and liueries, like tine
own men and be.


DON. But terugs make t'em shrug a little.


DER. Tey have shit a great phoyle in te cold, ant be


DON. Isht not pity te cloysh be drowned now?


PAT. Pre tee she anoter daunsh and be not veary.


GENT. He may be of your rudeness. Hold your tongues.
And let your courser manners seek some place,
Fit for their wildness. This is none, be gone.
Advance, immortal Bard, come up and view
The glad, ding face of that great king, in whom
So many prophecies of thine are knit.
This is that JAMES of which long since thou sung'st,
Should end our countries most unnatural broils;
And if her ear, then deafned with the drum,
Would stoop but to the music of his peace,
She need not with the spheres change harmony.
This is the man thou promised should redeem:
If she would love his counsels as his laws,
Her head from servitude, her feet from fall,
Her fame from barbarism, her state from want,
And in her all the fruits of blessing plant.
Sing then some charm, made from his present looks,
That may assure thy former prophecies,
And firm the hopes of these obedient spirits,
Whose love no less, then duty has called forth
Their willing powers: who if they had much more,
Would do their All, and think they could not move
Enough to honor that, which he does love.
Here the Bard sings to two harpes. SONG. 1. BOw both your heads at once, and
hearts:
Obedience does not well in parts.
It is but standing in his eye,
You Will feel your selves changed by and by,
Few live, that know, how quick a spring
Works in the presence of a king:
It Is done by this; your slough let fall,
And come forth newborn creatures all.
In this song, the Masquers let fall their mantles; and discover their masquing
apparel. Then dance forth. After the dance the Bard sing this. SONG. 2. SO
breaks the sun earths rugged chains,
Wherein rude winter bound her veins;
So grows both stream and source of price,
That lately fetterd were with ice.
So naked trees get crisped heads,
And cullord coats the roughest meads,
And all get vigor, youth, and spright,
That are but looked on by his light.

MERCVRIE VINDICATED FROM THE ALCHEMISTS AT COURT BY Gentlemen the Kings
Servants.
AFter the loud music, the Scene discovered; being a laboratory, or
Alchymists workehouse: Vulcan looking to the Registers, while a Cyclope,
tending the fire, to the Cornets began to sing. CYCLOPE. SOft, subtle fire,
thou soul of art,
Now do thy part
On weaker Nature, that through age is lamed.
Take but thy time, now she is old,
And the Sun her friend grown cold,
She will no more, in strife with thee be named.
Look, but how few confess her now,
In cheek or browe!
From every head, almost, how she is frighted.
The very age abhorres her so,
That it learnes to speak and go
As if by art alone it could be righted.

The Song ended, Mercury appeared, thrusting out his head, and afterward his
body, at the Tunnell of the middle furnace; which Vulcan espying, cried out to
the Cyclope. VVLCAN. STay, see! our Mercury is coming forth; Art and all the
Elements assist. Call forth our Philosophers. He will be gone, he will
euaporate. Dear Mercury! help. He flies. He is escaped. Precious golden
Mercury, be fixed; be not so volatile. Will none of the Sons of Art appear?


In which time Mercury having run once or twice about the room, takes breath,
and speaks. MERCVRY. NOw the place and goodness of it protect me. One
tenderhearted creature, or other, save Mercury, and free him. Never an old
Gentlewoman in the house, that has a wrinckle about her, to hide me in? I could
run into a Seruing-womans pocket now; her glove, any little hole. Some
merciful vardingale among so many, be bounteous, and undertake me: I will
stand, close, up, any where, to escape this polt-footed Philosopher, old Smug
here of Lemnos, and his smoaky family. Has he given me time to breathe? O the
variety of torment, that I have endured in the reign of the Cyclops, beyond
the most exquisite wit of Tyrannes. The whole household of 'hem are become
Alchymists (since their trade of armour-making failed them) only to keep
themselves in fire, for this winter; for the mischief of Secret, that they
know, above the consuming of coals and drawing of Vskabah. Howsoever they may
pretend under the specious names of Geber, Arnold, Lully, Bombast of Hohenhein,
to commit miracles in art and treason again' nature. And, as if the title of
Philosopher, that creature of glory, were to be fetched out of a furnace, abuse
the curious and credulous Nation of metall-men through the world, and make
Mercury their instrument. I am their Crude, and their Sublimate; their
Praecipitate, and their unctuous; their male and their female; Sometimes their
Hermaphrodite; what they list to style me. It is I, that am corroded, and
exalted, and sublimed, and reduced, and fetched over, and filtred, and washed,
and wiped; what between their salts and their sulphures; their oils, and
their tartars, their brines and their vinegers, you might take me out now a
sous'd Mercury, now a salted Mercury, now a smoked and dried Mercury, now a
pouldred and pickled Mercury: never Herring, Oyster, or Coucumer past so many
vexations: my whole life with 'hem has been an exercise of torture; one, two,
three, four and five times an hour ha'they made me dance the Philosphicall
circle, like an Ape through a hoope, or a dog in a wheel. I am their
turne-spit indeed: They eat or smell no rost-meate but in my name. I am their
bill of credit still, that passes for their victuals and house-roome. It is
through me, they ha 'got this corner of the Court to coozen in, where they
sharke for a hungry diet below stairs, and cheat upon your Under-officers,
promising mountains for their meat, and all upon Mercuries security. A poor
Page of the Larder, they have made obstinately believe, he shall be Phisician for
the Household, next Summer: they will give him a quantity of the quintessence,
shall serve him to cure kibes, or the mormall of the shinne, take away the
pustles in the nose, and Mercury is engaged for it. A child of the Scullery
steals all their coals for 'hem too, and he is bid sleep secure, he shall
find a corner of the Philosophers stone for it, under his bolster, one day, and
have the Proverb inuerted. Against which, one day I am to deliver the Buttry
in, so many firkins of Aurum potabile, as it delivers out Bombards of Budge to
them, between this and that. For the Pantry, they are at a certainty with
me, and keep a Tally, An Ingot, a loaf, or a wedge of some five pound
weight, which is nothing of nothing, a trifle. And so the Black guard are
pleased with a any lease of life (for some 999.) especially those of the
boiling house, they are to have Medeas kettle hung up, that they may souse into
it when they will, and come out renewed like so many stripped Snakes at their
pleasure. But these are petty Engagements, and (as I said) below the stairs;
Marry above here, Perpetuity of beauty, (do you hear, Ladies) health, Riches,
Honors, a matter of Immortality is nothing. They will calcine you a grave
matron (as it might be a mother of the maids) and spring up a young virgin,
out of her ashes, as fresh as a Phoenix: Lay you an old Courtier of the coals
like a sausedge, or a bloat-herring, and after they have broiled him enough,
blow a soul into him with a pair of bellows, till he start up into his
galliard, that was made when Mounsieur was here. They profess familiarly to
melt down all the old sinners of the suburbs once in half a year, into fresh
gamesters again. Get all the cracked maiden-heads, and cast'hem into new
Ingots, half the wenches of the town are Alchymie. See, they begin to muster
again, and draw their forces out against me! The Genius of the place defend
me. You that are both the Sol and Jupiter of this sphere Mercury, inuokes your
majesty against the sooty Tribe here; for in your favor only, I grow
recouer'd and warm.


At which time Vulcan entering with a troop of threedbare Alchymists, prepares
them to the first Antimasque. VVLCAN. BEgin your charm, sound music, circle
him in, and take him: If he will not obey, bind him.


They all danced about Mercury with variety of changes, whilst he defends
himself with his Caducaeus, and after the dance spoke. MERCVRIE. IT is in
vain, Vulcan, to pitch your net in the sight of the foul thus: I am no sleepy
Mars, to be caught in your subtle toys. I know what your aims are, Sir, to
tear the wings from my head, and heels, and lute me up in a glass, with my
own seals, while you might wrest the Caducaeus out of my hand, to the
adultery and spoil of Nature, and make your accesses by it, to her dishonor,
more easy. Sir, would you believe, it should be come to that height of
impudence, in mankind, that such a nest of firewormes, as these are (because
their Patron Mulciber heretofore has made stools stir, and statues dance, a
dog of brass to bark, and (which some will say, was his worst act, a woman
to speak) should therefore with their heats called Balnei, cineris, or
horse-doung, profess to outworke the Sun in virtue, and contend to the great
act of generation, nay, almost creation? it is so, though. For, in yonder
vessels which you see, in their laboratorie, they have enclosed Materials, to
produce men, beyond the deeds of Deucalion, or Prometheus (of which, one, they
say, had the Philosophers stone, and threw it over his shoulder, the other the
fire, and lost it.) And what men are they, they are so busy about, think you?
not common or ordinary creatures, but of rarity and excellence, such as the
times wanted, and the Age had a special deal of need of: such, as there was
a necessity, they should be artificial; for Nature could never have thought
or dreamt of their composition. I can remember some of their titles to you, and
the ingredients do not look for Paracelsus man among 'hem, that he promised
you out of white bread, and dele-wine, for he never came to light. But of
these, let me see; the first that occurres; a master of the Duel, a carrier of
the differencies. To him went spirit of ale, a good quantity, with the
amalgama of sugar and nutmegs, oil of oaths, sulphur of quarrel, strong
waters, valor precipitate, vapor'd over the helm with tobacco, and the rosin
of Mars with a dram of the business, for that is the word of tincture, the
business. Let me alone with the business, I will carry the business. I do
understand the business. I do find an affront in the business. Then another
is a fencer in the Mathematiques, or the townes-cunning-man, a creature of art
too; a supposed secretary to the stars; but, indeed, a kind of lying
Intelligencer from those parts. His materials, if I be not deceived, were juice
of almanacks, extraction of Ephemerides, scales of the Globe, fylings of
figures, dust of the twelve houses, conserve of questions, salt of confederacy,
a pound of adventure, a grain of skill, and a drop of truth. I saw vegitals
too, as well as minerals, put into one glass there, as adders tongue,
title-bane, nitre of clyents, tartar of false conueyance, Aurum palpabile, with
a huge deal of talk, to which they added tincture of conscience, with the
faces of honesty; but for what this was, I could not learn; only I have
ouer-heard one of the Artists say, Out of the corruption of a Lawyer was the
best generation of a Broker in suits: whether this were he or no, I know not.


VVLCAN. THou art a scorner, Mercury, and out of the pride of thy protection
here, make it thy study, to revile Art, but it will turn to thine own
contumely soon. Call forth the creatures of the first class, and let them
move to the harmony of our heat, till the slanderer have sealed up his own
lips, to his own torment.


MERCVRY. LEt 'hem come, let 'hem come, I would not wish a greater punishment
to thy impudence.


There enters the second Antimasque of imperfect creatures, with helmes of
lymbecks on their heads: Whose dance ended, MERCVRY proceeded. ARt thou not
ashamed, Vulcan, to offer in defense of thy fire and Art, against the
excellence of the Sun and Nature, creatures more imperfect, then the very
flies and insects, that are her trespasses and scapes? Vanish with thy
insolence, thou and thy Impostors, and all mention of you melt, before the
Majesty of this light, whose Mercury henceforth I profess to be, and never
again the Philosophers. Vanish, I say, that all who have but their senses, may
see and judge the difference between thy ridiculous monsters, and his absolute
features.


At which the whole Scene changed to a glorious bower, wherein Nature was
placed, with Prometheus at her feet; And the twelve Masquers, standing about
them. After they had been a while viewed, Prometheus descended, and Nature
after him, singing. NATVRE. HOw young and fresh am I to night,
To see it kept day, by so much light,
And twelve my sons stand in their Makers sight?
Help, wise Prometheus, something must be done,
To show they are the creatures of the Sun,
That each to other
Is a brother,
And Nature here no stepdame, but a mother.
CHORUS. Come forth, come forth, prove all the numbers then,
That make perfection up, and may absolve you men.
But show thy winding ways and arts,
Thy risings, and thy timely startes
Of stealing fire, from Ladies eyes and hearts.
Those softer circles are the young man's heaven,
And there more orbs and Planets are then seven,
To know whose motion
Were a Notion
As worthy of youths study, as devotion.
CHORUS. Come forth, come forth, prove all the time will gain,
For Nature bids the best, and never bad in vain.

The first dance. After which this song. PROMETHEVS. NATVRE. PRO. HOw many,
amongst these Ladies here,
Wish now they such a mother were!

NA. Not one I fear,
And read it in their laughters.
There Is more I guess would wish to be my daughters.

PRO. You think they would not be so old, for so much glory.

NA. I think that thought so told
Is no false piece of story.
It Is yet with them, but Beauties noone,
They would not Grandames be too soon.

PRO. Is that your Sexes humor?
It Is then since Niobe was changed that they have left that tumor.

CHO. Move, move again, in forms as heretofore.

NA. It Is form allures.
Then move, the Ladies here are store.

PRO. Nature is motions mother, as she is yours.

CHO. The spring, whence order flows, that all directs,
And knits the causes with the effects.

The maine dance. Then dancing with the Ladies; Then their last dance. After
which, Prometheus calls to them in song. PROMETHEVS. WHat'ha you done
So soon?
And can you from such Beauty part?
You Will do a wonder more then I.
I woman with her ills did fly,
But you their good, and them deny.

CHO. Sure each has left his heart
In pawn to come again, or else he durst not start.

NATVRE. THey are loath to go
I know,
Or sure they are no sons of mine.
There is no banquet, boys like this,
If you hope better, you will miss,
Stay here, and take each one a kiss.

CHO. Which if you can refine,
The taste knows no such cates, nor yet the palate wine.
No cause of tarrying shun,
They are not worth his light, go backward from the Sun.

THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED. In a Mask at Court, 1615. by the Lords, and
Gentlemen, the Kings servants. Loud music.
PALLAS in her chariot descending. To a softer music. Look, look! rejoice,
and wonder!
That you offending mortals are,
(For all your crimes) so much the care
Of him, that bears the thunder!
JOVE can endure no longer,
Your great ones should your less invade,
Or, that your weak, though bad, be made
A prey unto the stronger.
And therefore, means to settle
ASTRAEA in her seat again;
And let down in his golden chain
The age of better mettle.
Which deed he does the rather,
That even envy may behold
Time not enjoyed his head of gold
Alone beneath his father.
But that his care conserueth
As time, so all times honors too,
Regarding still what heaven should do,
And not what earth deserves.
A tumult and clashing of arms, heard within. But hark, what tumult from
yond' cave is heard!
What noise, what strife, what earthquake and alarmes!
As troubled Nature, for her maker, feared;
And all the iron-age were up in arms!
Hide me, soft cloud, from their prophaner eyes,
Till insolent rebellion take the field,
And as their spirits, with their counsels, rise,
I frustrate all, with showing but my shield.

Iron age presents it self, calling forth the Evils. COme forth, come forth,
do we not hear
What purpose, and, how worth our fear,
The King of gods has on us?
He is not of the iron breed
That would, though Fate did help the deed
Let shame in so upon us.
Rise, rise then up, thou Grandame vice
Of all my issue, Avarice,
Bring with thee fraud and slander,
Corruption with the golden hands
Or any subtle^ill, that stands
To be a more commander.
Thy boys, Ambition, Pride, and Scorn,
Force, Rapine, and thy babe last borne,
Smooth Treachery call hither,
Arm Folly forth, and Ignorance,
And teach them all our Pyrrhick dance,
We may triumph together,
Upon this enemy so great,
Whom, if our forces can defeat,
And but this once bring under,
We are the masters of the skies,
Where all the wealth, height, power, lies,
The scepter, and the thunder.
Which of you would not in a war
Attempt the price of any scarre,
To keep your own states even?
But, here, which of you is that he,
Would not himself the weapon be,
To ruin JOVE and heaven?
About it then, and let him feel,
The iron-age is turned to steel,
Since he begins to threat her:
And though the bodies here are less
Then were the Giants; he will confess
Our malice is far greater.

The Antimasque, and their dance, two drums, trumpets, and a confusion of
martial music: at the end of which PALLAS showing her shield. SO change, and
perish, scarcely knowing, how,
That'gainst the gods do take so vain a vow:
And think to equal with your mortal dates,
Their lives that are obnoxious to no fates,
'Twas time t'appeare, and let their follies see
Against whom they fought, and with what destinee
Die all, the can-remaine of you, but stone,
And that be seen a while, and then be none.
They metamorphos'd, and the scene changed, she calls Astraea and the golden
age. Now, now, descend you both beloved of JOVE,
And of the good on earth no less the love,
Descend you long long wished, and wanted pair,
And as your softer times divide the air,
So shake all clouds off, with your golden hair,
For spite is spent: the iron age is fled,
And, with her power on earth, her name is dead.

1. ASTRAEA. 2. AGE descending. 1.2. And are we then,
To live again,
With men?

1. Will JOVE such pledges to the earth restore
As justice?

2. or the purer ore?

PALLAS. Once more.
ASTRAEA. AGE. 2. But do they know,
How much they owe,
Below?

1. And will of grace receive it, not as due?

PALLAS. If not, they harm themselves, not you.

ASTRAEA. AGE. 1. True.

2. True.

QVIRE. Let narrow Natures (how they will) mistake,
The great should still be good for their own sake.

They are descended. PALLAS. Welcome to earth and reign.

ASTRAEA. AGE. But how without a train
Shall we our state sustain?

PALLAS. Leave that to JOVE: therein you are
No little part of his MINERVA'S care.
Expect a while.
She calls the Poets. You farre-fam'd spirits of this happy I Will,
That, for your sacred songs have gained the style
Of PHOEBVS sons: whose notes they air aspire
Of the old Egyptian, or the Thracian lyre,
That Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, Spencer hight
Put on your better flames, and larger light,
To wait upon the age that shall your names new nourish,
Since virtue pressed shall grow, and buried arts shall flourish.

Poets descend. 2. We come.

2. We come.

4. Our best of fire
Is that which PALLAS does inspire.

PALLAS. Then see you yonder souls, set far within the shade,
And in Elysian bowres the blessed seats do keep,
That for their living good, now semigods are made,
And went away from earth, as if but tamed with sleep:
These we must join to wake; for these are of the strain
That justice dare defend, and will the age sustain.

THE QVIRE. Awake, awake, for whom these times were kept,
O wake, wake, wake, as you had never slept,
Make haste and put on arie, to be their guard,
Whom once but to defend, is still reward.

PALLAS. Thus PALLAS throws a lightning from her shield.

QVIRE. The Scene of light discovered. To which let all that doubtful
darkness yield.

1. ASTREA. 2. AGE. 1. Now peace.

2. and love,

1. faith.

2. Joys,

1.2. all all increase.

POETS. 2. And strife

2. and hate,

2. and fear,

2. and pain,

4. all cease.

PALLAS. A pause. No tumor of an iron vain.
The causes shall not come again.

QVIRE. But, as of old, all now be gold.
Move, move then to these sounds.
And, do, not only, walk your solemn rounds,
But give those light and ayrie bounds,
That fit the Genij of these gladder grounds.
The first dance; after which PALLAS. Already? Do not all things smile?

ASTRAEA. But when they have enjoyed a while,
The ages quickening power:

AGE. That every thought a seed does bring,
And every look a plant does spring,
And every breath a flower:

PALLAS. Then earth vnplough'd shall yield her crop,
Pure honey from the oak shall drop,
The fountain shall run milk:
The thistle shall the lilly bear,
And every bramble roses wear,
And every worm make silk.

QVIRE. The very shrub shall Balsame sweat,
And Nectar melt the rock with heat,
Till earth have drunk her fill:
That she no harmefull weed may know,
Nor barren Fern, nor Mandrake low,
Nor Mineral to kill.

The maine dance, after which, PALLAS. But here is not all: you must do more,
Or else you do but half restore
The ages liberty.

POETS. The male and female used to join,
And into all delight did coin
That pure simplicity.
Then feature did to form advance,
And youth called beauty forth to dance,
And every grace was by.
It was a time of no distrust,
So much of love had naught of lust,
None feared a jealous eye.
The language melted in the ear,
Yet all without a blush might hear,
They lived with open vow.

QVIRE. Each touch and kiss was so well placed,
They were as sweet as they were chaste,
And such must yours be now.

Dance with Ladies. ASTRAEA. What change is here! I had not more
Desire to leave the earth before,
Then I have now, to stay;
My silver feet, like roots, are wreathed
Into the ground, my wings are sheathed,
And I cannot away.
Of all there seems a second birth,
It is become a heaven on earth,
And Jove is present here,
I feel the Godhead: nor will doubt
But he can fill the place throughout,
Whose power is every where.
This, this, and only such as this,
The bright Astraea's region is,
Where she would pray to live,
And in the amidst of so much gold,
Unbought with grace or fear unsold*
The law to mortals give.
Galliards and Coranto's. PALLAS ascending calls them. It Is now enough, behold
you here,
What JOVE has built to be your sphere,
You hither must retire.
And as his bounty gives you cause,
Be ready still without your pause
To show the world your fire.
Like lights about ASTRAEA'S throne,
You here must shine, and all be one,
In feruor and in flame.
That by your union she may grow,
And, you sustaining her, may know,
The age still by her name.
Who vows, against, or heat or cold,
To spin you garments of her gold,
That want may touch you never,
And making garlands every hour,
To write your names in some new flower,
That you may live for ever.

QVIRE. To Jove, to Jove, be all the honor given,
That thankful hearts can raise from earth to heaven.

The end.

