THE COURT OF CONSCIENCE: OR, JOSEPH'S BRETHRENS IVDGEMENT BAR.

BY THOMAS BARNES.

2. COR. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, etc.

The guiltiness of the conscience is the mother of fear. Chrysostom.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN DAVVSON for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold at
the Star under St. Peter's Church in Corne-hill and Pope's Head Alley. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL WILLIAM TOWSE Sergeant at Law, one of His MAJESTY'S
Justice of Peace in Essex: As also to the Right Worshipful, the Lady KATHERINE
BARNARDISTON, his beloved Wife, both my much respected friends. The Author
wishes the blessings of this life and the next.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IT was a saying of one of the Ambr. an Constan. Duo sunt tibi necessaria,
conscientia and fama, conscientia propter te, fama propter proximu^^.
Fathers, in an Epistle to one of his friends: Two things are needful for
thee, conscience, and credit, conscience for thy self, credit for thy
neighbor. And not without reason spoke he this; for the one is an inward
witness, the other gives an outward testimony of our doings. The one serves to
breed inward consolation, the other to bring outward commendation. But
notwithstanding the necessity of both, yet the best of the two is least
regarded, the Philosophers saying being most true: Senec. de morib. Plerique
famam, conscientiam autem pauci verentur.
Many fear their credit, but few their conscience. So it fared (as it seems)
with those ten sons of holy Jacob, who did mis-use his beloved Joseph: So
they might hide that wrong they did their brother, and save their credit with
their father, little cared they (until distress awaked them) how matters
stood in the Court within them. So also it fares with the Secret sinners, and
Civil livers of our days. To keep their name good amongst men they are very
curious, but to have a clear witness in their own conscience, they are
nothing studious. That this evil might be somewhat helped, this Treatise have
I compiled; wherein my scope is to bring men to a care of their Consciences as
well as their names, knowing the one to be as needful to clear them from
blame before the Bar of heaven, as the other to keep them from shame amongst
men. For (if Solomon says true) though a good name be better then a precious
ointment Eccl. 7.1.
Yet, A good conscience is a continual banquet Prou. 15.15.
. If any one ask the reason of this my drift: my reason is twofold. First,
because conscience is fearful in accusing. Secondly, because conscience is
faithful in recording: which two things (amongst others, according to the
tenor of the text) are principally and most largely handled in this Treatise.
And good I desire all may do in, and to the Israel of God.

To your Worships I thought good to dedicate the same: though worthier papers
were fitter for your Patronage. If I were not confident of acceptance: I
should not presume to present you with it. Albeit, indeed it had been fit
that my first friends, should have had my first fruits, yet I hope my second
public labors in this kind, will not be unwelcome. Howsoever, I owe them,
your Worships undeserved favors shown me, challenge the same, and more at my
hands. If you please to vouchsafe them the reading. I doubt not but you shall
find something profitable, though plainly delivered in an homely style. If you
please to afford them the protection, being so simple and small as they are,
you shall get me into stronger bonds, continually to wish to both your
Worships, what John did on the behalf of the Elect Lady, and Noble Gaius,
even to your souls: Grace, peace and mercy 2. Ioh. 3.
: to your bodies health and prosperity 3. Ioh. 2.
: For which he promises to pray, who is

Your Worships at command, in and for the Lord. THOMAS BARNES.

The Table of the first part,
In this text are two parts, 1. Certain Accusers touching whom note 1. The
occasion that brought them in, in this word AND, wherein 1. The meaning, page
1. 2. The 1. Doctrine of the text, that affliction does often awake conscience,
and move to confession, page 6. where 1. Proof. page 8. 2. Use threefold. 1.
Reproof. page 12. 2. Exhortation twofold, 1. To make a right use of
affliction. p. 14. 2. To be patient in affliction. p. 19.
3. Information of 2. things, 1. Why God afflicts his people. p. 17. 2. That
God by affliction will have glory from the reprobate. page. 18.



2. What manner of persons these accusers were, They said one to another, where
1. The meaning. page 6. 2. The 2. doctrine of the Text. That conscience
accuses. wherein 1. Proof. page 21. 2. An objection answered. page 23. 3. A
doubt removed, p. 26. 1. Confutation. page 31. 2. Consolation. page 35. 3.
Terror page 42. 4. Exhortation both to get and keep a good conscience, page
47. where are also set down helps. 1. To get a good conscience, and to be
cured of a bad. page 50. 2. To keep a good conscience, and to be kept from an
evil. page 62.

4. Use four fold.




THE COURT OF CONSCIENCE: OR, JOSEPH'S BRETHRENS IVDGEMENT BAR.
GENESIS 42.21. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our
brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we
would not hear: therefore is this distress come upon us.


NOr to trouble you with any tedious Preface: The sum and scope of the Text.
this Scripture being given by inspiration (as all divine Scripture is,) and
written for our learning, does comprehend in it a Judicial act of Divine
providence, in bringing to judgment that same mischievous fact committed by
ten of Jacobs sons, against Joseph their innocent, and harmless brother.

The division.
In which act (as it ordinarily falls out in Judicial cases,) two
circumstances offer themselves to our consideration.

1. The accusers at this Bar.

2. The accusation it self.

The first is laid down in the beginning of the verse. And they said one to
another. The second in the clause of the verse, we are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us.

The first part subdivided and interpreted.
Touching the first (which we must first handle) we may note two particulars.
First the occasion that moved the accusers to come in: Secondly, the persons,
who these accusers were.

AND, the occasion is intimated, which stands thus.

A great dearth in Jacobs days, reigns in all the lands about Egypt: And (as
it is the lot of Gods dearest servants, to be common sharers with other in
common calamities) that good old father with his whole family was pinched with
it, as well as other places. At which pinch, hearing of a great Corne-master in
Egypt (little thinking it had been his son Joseph, for whom he had laid
aside his mourning weed so long ago) he calls his ten sons unto him,
commands them to hasten into Egypt, to this man: to buy and bring home some
food for his household. At his command, thither they speed themselves;
whither, no sooner were they come, but this Governor (their brother Joseph,
whom they had once mis-used, though never dreaming it should be he) seems (in
an holy policy to use them harshly, Verse 9.
charge them to be Spies, would not accept of the Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Apology they made for themselves, puts them into Ward three days, Verse.
17.
would not suffer them to go home with corn (for which they came; but on
condition, that one of them should remain his prisoner, until the rest went
home and fetched their brother Benjamin, (whom they had spoke off) to bring him
to him Verse. 15.19.20.
.

These brethren meeting with this harsh and unexpected entertainment, begin to
be somewhat troubled in their minds, and each one by his countenance (as it is
likely) coniecturing, and guessing at the disturbed motions in another mind,
by reason of these straights, fall to that parley amongst themselves, which is
recorded in the present text. The sense of the word And.
Now then if any shall ask, wherefore this word [And] serves in the beginning
of the text, when as there is no sentence before, to be fitly joined to this
speech. I answer, though it does not join words and sentences, or sentence and
sentence together: yet it coupleth mind and mouth, foregoing thoughts, and
follow words, implying that such thoughts as arose in their minds about Joseph's
usage of them, gave the occasion, and produced those words of accusation which
the text has in it. So is the occasion: The parties who brought in the
accusation (in these words, They said one to another,) you understand already,
to be the ten sons of Jacob, Judah, Simeon, Leui, Dan and the rest, each
ones proper conscience by this occasion, bringing in a several indictment
against himself, for the wrong formerly offered unto Joseph.

Hence then we have two lessons to take forth.

1. That afflictions are of notable use to awake the conscience, and make a man
confess his faults.

2. That an evil conscience is an accusing conscience.



Distress does occasion many times touch of Conscience, and confession of
sins.
These brethren of Joseph, having dealt most unnaturally with him their brother,
lay a sleep in that sin of theirs, so long as the day of prosperity lasted,
without any compunction of conscience for it, without making any confession of
it: But now when they see themselves in great distress, pinched with penury at
home, used hardly abroad, where they hoped for the supply of their wants,
thrust into prison, charged falsely to be spies, could not (in their own
thinking) be believed, when they defend themselves; now I say that they
perceive themselves in these straits, they begin to buckle, the conscience is
pricked, and the fault is confessed mutually amongst themselves; which before
(as it is like) they were more ready to laugh at, then grieve for. Put a
malefactor deservedly upon the rack, A simile.
and you shall get that from him in confession, which otherwise he purposed
never to have revealed. So let but afflictions rack the body many times, sin
will rack the soul, and the tongue will confess the guiltiness of the
heart. Examples, both of Elect, and Reprobate, may be produced for the proof
of this.

First, concerning the Elect, how afflictions have thus wrought with them, the
example of Jonah does declare. So long as he was let alone, he disobeyed the
voice of God, fled from the face of God, and slept spiritually in the bottom
of his sin, as corporally in the bottom of the ship, but when the Lord
shook the ship wherein he was, with the violence of the wind; threatened
present destruction to him, and all those that were with him in the ship;
then he could cry out, and confess, for my sake, for my sin, this great
tempest is upon you Ion. 1.12.
. Memorable and not unknown, is the story of Manasseh: 2. Chron. 33. from the
1. verse to the 14.
Who in the time of his prosperity, reigning in his pomp, rebelled against the
God of heaven, reared up the Altars of Baal, made groves to worship the whole
Host of heaven, sacrificed his children to Moloch, observed times, used
enchantments, followed witchcraft, dealt with familiar spirits, wrought much
evil himself in the sight of the Lord, made his subjects to err, and to do
worse then the heathen; And so long as his peace lasted, we do not read that
ever he confessed one of his abominations to God, or to man, in token of any
remorse for the same. But when the Lord brought the Captains of the Host of
the King of Assyria upon him, who took him among the thorns, bound him with
fetters, carried him into Babylon, and when he was thus in affliction, then he
could beseech the Lord, humble himself before the God of his fathers, and pray
unto him; and so by consequent make confession of his sins before him. David's
mouth shall also teach this truth. Psalm. 32.
Psalm. 32. Day and night (says he in the 4. verse) thy hand was heavy upon
me; and mark what follows in the 5. verse. I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, mine iniquity did I not hide. Yea, affliction will move the minds, and
extort confession from the mouths of Reprobates also. The the thunder and
hail, and judgment of locusts upon Egypt, can make Pharaoh himself to
confess, and say, I have sinned this time, the Lord is righteous; I and my
people are wicked Exodus 9.27.
. I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you Cha. 10.16.
. The very news and tidings of affliction to come, upon Ahab, his wife, and
posterity, can make Ahab, (though he were one, that sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord) yet even to rend his clothes, put
sackecloath upon his flesh, fast and go softly, 1. King. 21 from the 21. verse.
to the 28.
and confess his iniquity: Insomuch, that we may truly say of a great many,
that their days of affliction are their Beat. Rhen. an. in Tert. l. de patien.
p. 2. Natales agnitiones.
birth-dayes of confession.



Paraeus in Genesis Col. 2029. Afflictiones sunt lex practica.
. Now without the law, Sin is dead, not perceived, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 7.9.
But when the law comes, is when a sense of Gods wrath is stirred up in us,
not only by the preaching of the law, but also by afflictions, then sin
reuiueth, as the same Apostle shows, is felt and called to mind, which being
recorded, is also confessed. For though the confession of sin does not always
follow the remembrance of it, yet the remembrance of it, does always go
before the acknowledgement of it.

Reproof of those that are senseless of sin in the time of affliction.
of the senselessness and stupidity of those who lie under the burden of
afflictions, having the hand of God upon them most grievously, some in their
bodies, some in their name, some in their estate, sometimes positiuely
exercised with the presence of judgments, sometimes priuatiuely visited with
the deprivation of outward benefits, and yet all will not avail to work upon
their consciences, and to make them confess their sins, acknowledge their
abominations before the Majesty of heaven; Nay, they will rather justify
themselves, as if they were wronged by God, and had not deserved such severity
of punishment. How, or how does affliction loose its force in them? how
unuseful is the day of adversity, to such senseless ones? it is a sign that
that man is of a desperate disposition, and in a desperate condition, whom
troubles and crosses, which are many for the number, weighty in measure, not
light in quality, not small in quantity, can work no contrition; can, wring
no confession from. This is that which made the Lord, so pathetically in the
mouth of one of his Prophets, expostulate with the hard-hearted and rebellious
Israelites. Why should ye be stricken any more? yet the more I smite you, the
more you sin against me: as far as I can see; as benefits cannot draw you
to contrition, no more can my rod bring you to confession. In another Prophet,
thus he speaks. In vain have I smitten your children, they received no
correstion Ierm. 2.30.
. What an heavy case is this, that this, even this, brings God into such
controversy with his own people, whom by external privileges, he had
visibly married unto himself? What? not in adversity seek the Lord Hos. 5.15.
? what? in distress (with Ahaz) yet more and more 2. Chron. 28.22.
trespass and trespass against him? well might one say oh unhappy persons,
whom stripes mollify not Sult. in Is. c. 1. p. 33. In felices autem qui nec
virberibus molescunt.
. Well may I say; Not happy they whom troubles move not to lay open their
sins, in the sight of the Almighty. Use 2. Exhortation to be touched, for to
make confession of sin in time of affliction.
Far oh far be it from Us (Beloved) to be so stupid. Personal afflictions
upon some of us: General upon most of us: The stream of our coin we
complain runs low, our corn grows dear, markets bad, the earth denies her
foizon unto us, and more eminent plagues then these (by all probabilities) are
imminent over us, and like to vex us, and shall none of these, not all of
these work upon us, and prevail with us, to confess to God what is the cause
of these tragical prologues, these beginning of sorrows? provoke we our
selves to this duty? learn we as the Prophet advises us, to take words unto
our selves Hos. 14.2.
, and say, Lord we have sinned against thee, and fallen from thee by our
iniquity. Oh let not Pharaoh rise up in judgment against us: Propound we the
pattern of these brethren my text speaks off, unto our selves. As distress
moved them, so let distress move us to acknowledge, how dishonourably we
have dealt with the Lord, how injuriously with our brethren, how strangely we
have neglected the day and means of salvation, how strongly we have affected
the way and means of damnation. When we taste of the bitterness and
sharpness of the fruit, look we to the bitter tree whereon it grows with
watery eyes, and sorrowful spirits; Mourn not so much for the cross, as the
cause of it: talk not so much of the trouble, as the ground of it, which are
thy sins and thy transgressions. If afflictions work not upon thy conscience
to make thee contrite, in soul, and willing to confess thy sins to God?
what will: whatsoever therefore the distress be, either for the quality,
degree or time of it that thou lie under, make but this wholesome use of it
to thy soul, at length to mourn for thy sins at last, to acknowledge thy
abominations without any more ado, let a word prevail with thee, and the
Lord bless it that it may. As man's necessity is Gods opportunity to show mercy:
So thy adversity, is thy opportunity, to confess thine iniquity and deplore
thy misery, which if thou do neglect, what know thou whither ever thou
shall have the like call, the like occasion again. Wherefore I trow it is best
humbling a man's self, when he is best fitted for it, and never fitter is he,
then in time of adversity.

Lord is greatly delighted. Wherefore when ye see Christians bare and needy,
and to want those things which others have in great abundance otherwise
visited, cease to marvel at it, the Lord loves to have their consciences kept
waking, and their tongue kept walking against their own sins before him; and
he knows prosperity to be a great entrance to either of these, and very
dangerous to lull conscience, and tie up the tongue, and therefore he gives
them a Michaiahs portion, feeds them with 1. King. 22.27.
bread of affliction, and water of adversity: and blessed be God that by any
dealing of his (how tedious soever to the flesh) they may be kept with
remorsefull hearts, and ready tongues to acknowledge their daily infirmities
before his Majesty.

upon the conscience, and produce confession, even sometimes in the wicked
themselves, then we may see that the Lord will have glory from the wicked, he
can make an Ahab, a Pharaoh, etc. to give unto him the praise of his own
justice, and to confess that he is righteous and they wicked, and that there
is no injustice in him, deal he never so rigorously with them.

Beat Rhenan. in Tertull 469. Magistram virtutis ducem salutaris itineris.
one calls the mistress of virtue, a guide in the way to felicity, without
which (as Solomon shows) a man cannot find mercy at the hands of God? God
forbid we should be impatient for this, fall out with Gods providence for this
In quo igitur sapiens and bonus vir a malis, and in sipientibus differt, visi
quod habet invictam Patientiam qua stulti carent. Lactan. De vero cultu. lib.
6. ca. 18.
. Wherein I pray, does a wise and good man differ from wicked men and fools,
but only in this, that he has that patience which a fool wants. We find
(in Scripture) that the Patriarchs, Prophets, and all the just ones, which were
types and figures of Christ, did keep nothing more to the praise of their
virtues, then this, they had learned patience Cypr. de bono patien. fol. 105.
Inuenimus denique and patri archas, etc.
. As, therefore (beloved) we pray, thy will be done, so let us resolve, we will
patiently submit unto it, knowing that if we possess our souls in patience,
much good will redound unto us.

An evil conscience is an accuser.
I leave the first point, and come unto the second. That an evil conscience
has an accusing office. This truth has its ground thus. These ten sons of
Jacob had an evil conscience, guilty of wrong done to their brother Joseph,
and now (upon occasion of some distress) it accuses them, it articleth
against them. What means the trembling of Adam at Gods voice in the garden
after he had eaten the forbidden fruit Genesis 3.10
? What meant the quaking of Foelix at Paul's Sermon of Temperance and justice,
and the judgment to come Act. 24.16.
, after he had been incontinent with Orusilla, and plaide the tyrant over his
subjects Gualt. in Act. Hom. 105. p. 265. 266.
? What means the perplexity of Herod Ascalonites, So Eusebius. calls him.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
after he heard of the birth of Christ, who (as he thought) was like to put him
beside his throne? what means the fear which Herod the fox had, that John
the Baptist was risen from the dead, after he had unjustly taken his head away
from him Mark. 6.16.
? what mean (I say) all these, and the like examples if it were not the
property, of an ill conscience to accuse a man of the sins that he
commits. Hence it is that Eliphaz says to Job. The wicked man fears all
his days, the sound of trembling is always in his ears Job. 15.20.
. And does not the Apostle speak of an accusing property which the conscience
has, in the second chapter of the Romans at the 15. verse?



Now of the Law, there is a twofold work) (as In Epist. ad Romans p. 227. 228.
Legis duplex est opus, Impletiones, Notitiae.
Brentius observes,) The work of fulfilling it, the work of knowledge, the
latter of which two the Apostle means in that place. Now this work of
knowledge, is to distinguish betwixt good and bad, things honest and dishonest,
which work even the wickedest have by nature engraven in their hearts: for in
some measure they know what is honest and to be done, what is dishonest and not
to be done, when they then shall leave that which they know they must do, and
perpetrate that which they know they must not do, must not their conscience
needs accuse them, and condemn them?

answer: Bernards distinction Cited by Hemingius Syntag. 161 162. Mala and
tranquilla, mala and turbata.
that there is a two fold evil conscience Quiet, and Unquiet.


An evil conscience and unquiet, is without all question of an accusing
nature: none denies it. As for an evil conscience and quiet, that is, when a
man is swallowed up in the depth of sin, that he does not so much, as
entertain one thing about repentance, but blind-folded is lead from one
wickedness to another: and them that have such a conscience, the Apostle
calls (...).
past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
yet such as have lost all judgment, or compunction of heart, given over to a
reprobate sense. Now this kind of evil conscience, though it does not always
execute the acts of excusing, yet still it has the habit, the quality of
accusing: and when it comes to be awakened, it will not only accuse, but also
torment most grievously, most intollerably. And as for those that have such a
conscience, they cannot be said to be quiet, or at peace properly (as you take
peace for the tranquillity of the mind) but rather to be secure, seared,
obdurate and hardened: then which nothing can be worse, nothing more miserable.
So then when we see the wickedest livers, to have (as the word deemeth, the
merriest lives; it is not from peace of conscience, but from a seared
conscience, it is not because their conscience has no accusing power, but
because it does not always execute its accusing office, for it never wants
matter to accuse. * For besides, them, which does vex, and molest them most
grievously, insomuch that Salomons saying may be verified of them: in the
midst of laughter, the heart is heavy.

Before I come to the use: I must answer a question.

First, for the ground: the conscience does accuse either upon a good ground or
a false: upon a good ground it accuses, when being informed truly, either by
the light of nature, or the light of grace, of things to be done or left
undone, it tells a man of his fault, in the neglect of the one, in the
practice of the other, as for example: David knew by the light of nature, that
he should do to others, as he would they should do to him; and that as he
would not have any man wrong him, either in his wife or life; so no more should
he wrong his brother in the same kind: he knew also by the Law of God, that
neither murder nor adultery were to be committed, here is the ground: Now
upon this ground his heart smites him, when Nathan comes to him, his conscience
tells him, that he, even he had sinned in wronging his brother, both in his
life, and his wife: in committing murder against the one, adultery with the
other. Thus did Joseph's brethrens conscience accuse them here, for doubtless
they had learned, that cruelty was not to be exercised against a natural
brother, the word and nature had taught them this: and therefore after they had
wronged him, their conscience accuse them.

Secondly, upon a bad ground, the consciencc accuses, when an erroneous
principle is laid; as for a Mass Priest to be accused and troubled in his
mind, for neglecting his Mass and Popish devotions, or a Lay-papist for
perusing the Scriptures, when as it is not against the word of God, either to
neglect the one, or peruse the other.

Secondly, for the consequents that do follow the accusing of the conscience,
they are these. First, sorrow for the offense accused of, whither it be
omissiue or commissiue, or for the punishment which the conscience tells the
delinquent he is liable unto. Secondly, fear either to commit the like offense
again, or to undergo the punishment due for that transgression. Thirdly,
security arising either from the right appeasement of the conscience, or from
the perverse stopping of the checkes of conscience. Now for the direct
answering of the question out of these premises, this is that which I have to
say, that always an accusing conscience is not an evil conscience. And this I
can make good out of the premised distinctions. That conscience that accuses
upon a good ground, and tells the offender, he has directly transgressed the
Law of God, and withal produces the best of these consequent effects before
spoken off. That conscience which stirs up fear to fall into the like sin
again, that works godly sorrow for the sin committed, that breeds
security in assurance of reconciliation: that conscience, though it accuses,
yet cannot properly be termed evil, but rather tender, and full of remorse: on
the contrary, if the conscience be terrified upon Popish grounds, if after the
accusing office of the conscience; yea, upon a good ground also the party
sorrows more for the punishment deserved, then the sin committed; if he
fears rather the falling of the punishment upon his head, then dashing
himself again upon the rock of the same or the like sin: And lastly, if he
grows secure by stopping the mouth, and neglecting the checkes of conscience,
these are true signs that the conscience is evil which accuses, but if
otherwise the conscience may possibly accuse and yet not be evil nor unclean.
This I thought good to answer it coming necessarily in our way. I will deteine
you no longer from the uses which which are: For reproof, comfort, terror,
and duty. The three former concern some, with some difference definitely, the
latter respects all without difference indefinitely.

whose consciences can tell them, that thus and thus, they deceived such and
such, so and so they have deceived others, at such a time they committed such a
villainy: in such a place, such impiety: here they wrought filthiness, there
unrighteousness, etc. neither were they so much as ever moved for this sin,
they never relented for it, never repented of it, and yet (I say) they are of
opinion (and will not be beaten from it) that they have good and very good
consciences; when as alas: how can it be, this being true that an evil
conscience, is an accusing conscience, and so on the other side, an accusing
conscience, for the most part an evil conscience. What do thou man talk of
a good conscience, when it is always like the troubled waters casting up dirt
and filthiness in thine own face; when as it is continually ringing a peale
of thine abominations in thy ears? thou a good conscience; when thou
swearest, lie, cheatest, playest the unmerciful, incontinent, intemperate
beast, slanderest thy neighbor; sit and speak against thine own
mothers son, breakest Gods Sabbaths, despisest Gods ordinances: It goes
against thy conscience (as thou rudely professest) to regard a Preacher, or
respect a professor, or walk according to an holy profession; thou a good
conscience I say? No no; If indeed, (thy conscience smiting thee upon good
ground) thou were but drawn to hearty sorrow for thy offenses, to an holy
fear not to commit them again, it were something; then thou might be
believed, when thou boastest of thy self as free from an evil conscience? but
otherwise, thou art to be reproved for vainglorious bragging. fear not
death) when as indeed they fear nothing more: Or put case thou say true
(as I said) when thou affirmest, thy mind is not crazed: the more horror
remains for thee against the time of thine awaking; insomuch, that as David
said, he should be satisfied with the light of Gods countenance shining upon
him after his rising, thou art like on the other side to be terrified with the
goades of thine own conscience speaking against thee, at the time of thy
rowsing, unless the Lord be the more gracious unto thee. I conclude
therefore, it is a great folly (most worthy of reproof) in thee, to think
thou have not an evil conscience, when thy conversation is unclean, abounding
with noisome evils, as matter of just accusation against thee.

those that have good consciences; their happiness is unspeakable, their
condition most peaceable; for if so be an evil conscience be always of an
accusing quality, then their good conscience is always of an excusing
property. Excusing property (I say) or quality, for I deny not but a good
conscience may and does exercise many a time accusing actions. The heart of
David may smite him, for taking away Vriahs life, for defiling Vriahs wife 2.
Sam. 12.13.
for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment 1. Sam. 24.4.
, for numbering his people contrary to Gods commandment 2. Sam. 24
, I know Peter's conscience did article against him, for denying and forswearing
his Lord and Master Math. 26.75.
* and there is never a Christian but can witness with me, that his own
conscience tells him daily of his daily faylings; yet I say, his conscience is
not an habitual accuser, as to do nothing else but accuse him, or as though
it had nothing else in it self, but just matter of accusation against him:
this (I say) he is freed from, which an evil man is not. And rather it has an
accusing power: now for a man's conscience to have an excusing habit and
quality, what a sweet and comfortable thing is it? What? free from the
terrors of a tormenting soul? free from the wounds of spirit, which mortal
strength cannot bear? what man can but admire this? what heart will not exalt
and rejoice to feel this? For indeed of all others, they are most troubled.
I cannot be so at peace in my self, as I feign would be, my conscience is
ever and anon about my ears? thou have not yet attained unto that spirit of
adoption, to witness to thy spirit in that full measure that thou art the
child of God, happily thou art but yet in the way to attain unto it. It may
be thou woundest thy conscience, by being something too ventrous upon that
which thou have no warrant for, If it be so; then I do not much marvel that
thou can not have that quiet thou do desire; and well will it prove for
thee at the last, that thy conscience does so smite thee. But what of this?
have thou no cause therefore to rejoice in the goodness of thy conscience? Thy
conscience accuses thee upon a good ground, does it? thou fear the sin
more then the punishment, thou sorrowest for the offense done, more then for
the scourge due, do thou not? thou art willing to hear thy conscience
speak, and thou say? Conscience do thine office, by the grace of God I will
not check thee, nor stop up mine ears against thee; thou art careful to
have thy conscience pacified by the right mean, even by the assurance that
through Christ his blood, thou art purged from the sin which thy conscience
smites thee for, art thou not? If yea; then know thou to thy comfort, that
though thy conscience (when there is reason for it) does execute some accusing
acts against thee, yet habitually it will prove to be an excuser of thee.
Wherefore do not thou by this cavil cheat thy self of the comfort that
belongs unto thee. If thy conscience be at ods with thee upon some good ground,
give all diligence to get it appeased with the assurance of Gods love, and cast
not down thy self out of measure, as if thy conscience had nothing else but
matter to accuse thee off. And to increase thy comfort upon this ground,
meditate thou of the benefits of an excusing conscience: as namely, The
benefits of an excusing conscience. Quaenam summa boni? meus quae sibi conscia
recti, Auson.
first an excusing conscience will answer and outweigh all the accusations for
sin, and such and such acts of sin as can be brought in to molest the soul,
for such a conscience is purified by the blood of Christ, freed from the guilt
of sin, has to object Christ's merits against its own de-merits, the
obiecting of which upon good ground, will answer all the spiteful cauils of
the malicious tempter. Secondly, 2. Benefi.
an excusing conscience will be a rock of comfort in the time of distress,
when thou lie upon thy sick bed it will accheere thee, as Ezekiah did, when
he said, Isa. 38.3.
Lord remember how I have walked before thee in truth, with a perfect heart,
etc. When the world takes her wings and flies away from thee, when thy earthly
friends forsake thee, and dispute against thee, and all humane helps fail
thee, this will be a cordial and consolation unto thee. 3. Benefi.
And which is last of all, and yet best of all, it will go with thee to the
judgment seat of Christ, defy the devil to his face, acquit thee and
absolve thee of all the crimes which ever thou were, either justly by the
accusing acts of it, or unjustly by the spite of Satan and his wicked
instruments charged withal. Lo this is the good, the gain here; hereafter,
that an excusing conscience does and will bring thee; and yet thy good
conscience has this excusing quality. Why art thou then so dejected thou
Christian, and why is thy soul so sad within thee; the Lord comfort thee upon
this ground, the Lord (with this) speak peaceably unto thy soul.

Mat. 27.5.
yet like a mastiffe curre at last it will awake and be about thy ears; and
when it awaketh, who can stop the voice, who can allay the fury of it? thy
wit cannot do it, take Achitophel 2. Sam. 17
for witness; Thy wealth cannot do it, take Judas for example. Thy authority
can not do it, take Julian for thy proof. Thy Neque cibus voluptatem praebet,
neque amicorum colloquia talem refocillare, vel liberare, ab vrgente anxietate
possunt. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 19.
sweet bitte and iouiall company cannot do it, take Dan. 5. Object.
Balshazzar for warrant. But what if my conscience does accuse me? what of
that? is it any great matter? Thou shall know that when thou tryest it. And in
the mean time (for what I can answer thee in this impudent demand) this I say
to thee. To have an accusing conscience, habitually is not only to be deprived
of the sweet benefits of an excusing conscience, which I spoke off in the
former use, but also in stead of them, to meet with the contrary
inconveniences. First, thine accusing conscience will outweigh all the good
deeds that ever thou have done, thy prayers, alms, temperate, civil,
neighbour-like carriage and behavior, and the like: It shall little avail
thee to allege any of these things to thy comfort, when thy evil conscience
is up in arms against thee; A simile.
Let a man be justly accused at some temporal bar for rape, incest,
murdering of the innocent, or any felony that deserves death, what will it
boot him to plead his gentility, his hospitality, and that he has been a
good friend to the commonwealth, etc. if so be his accuser comes in strongly
against him, and resolves to prosecute him to the very death? Alas, what would
it have aduantaged Judas to have alleged his preaching, his doing of
miracles, his casting out of devils: Achitophel his policy, and providence for
the State and commonwealth, when as their evil consciences did torment them,
the one for betraying his innocent Master, the other for plotting treason
against his lawful Sovereign? I tell thee when conscience is a doing its
accusing office, it will neither hear of thy honesty, nor civility, nor
liberality, nor any thing else good in it self, that has been done by thee
for corrupt ends, but it will take them all, as if they had never been done:
yea accuse thee for failing in the manner.

Secondly, Conscientia mala been sperare non potest. Aug. in Psalm. 31.
it will deny thee comfort in time of distress: when thy body is tormented
with corporal diseases, and thou lie tossing and tumbling from one side of the
bed to the other, and feign would have ease. When thy corn, cattle,
substance, goods are taken away from thee and thou brought to poverty, when
scarcity pincheth thee, when friends leave thee, and enemies set against thee,
to have content and quiet within, it were some comfort, but (oh miserable
person) that is not to be had, thy conscience is buffeting thee, and vexing
thee within, dealing with thee as the consciences of these brethren, with them
suggesting matter of terror unto them in the time of their outward extreamitie.

And lastly, when thy accusing conscience comes at the bar with thee after this
life, it will be a co-partner with that Apoc. 12.10.
accuser of the brethren Satan against thee, to the utter overthrow, and
everlasting confusion. Now go to thou seared sinner, thou stiff-necked
offender, ask in scoffing wise, what matter it is if thy conscience do accuse
thee. Lo, thou see what a matter it is; And were it not that I wanted a
tongue to express, and then an eye to behold, an heart to consider the
fearfulness of thy condition, it could not choose but be like the sight of
the figures that Balshazzar saw upon the wall, or else like the sound of the
Sermon that the Jews heard Saint Peter preach Act. 2.
, even an occasion to make thy loins shake and thy joints tremble, thy heart
soft, and thy soul humble, what? no comfort to be reaped by thee, in the best
actions thou performest? In likelihood to be left like a desolate forlorn and
comfortless creature in the time of distress? in ieopardie to have the sting
of conscience persuing of thee to Gods judgment bar, the worm of
conscience, gnawing on thee, for evermore after thy few and evil days be
ended? what can be more terrible, more woeful? Verily, if the thought of these
things prevail not to humble thee, these terrors are as like to overtake thee
as death it self, then which nothing is more sure, more certain. The Lord
therefore move thy heart with this, if it be his holy will. Amen.

that they would give all diligence both to attain and retain consciences
that are good, both to be freed of and preserved from consciences that are
evil. The exercise of this twofold duty, took up a great deal of Saint
Paul's care, as appears in sundry protestations (of his diligence in this
kind) in the several Epistles which he writes unto the Churches. Now if the
worthy example of that worthy Apostle be to be followed by us in any thing
that ever he did, it is to be imitated and followed in this; and that so much
the rather, because of the ground to persuade to, and the motive to enforce the
duty, which the doctrine in hand affords; telling us that an evil conscience
is an accusing, a vexing, a tormenting conscience. Now tell me who would be
willing to be pestered with a tormenting conscience? who takes any pleasure to
have the darts of the Almighty dagging at the heart; or the arrows of the
Almighty drinking up of the spirit? Quiet of soul and tranquillity of mind
is that that All do naturally desire. The ungodly themselves wish for peace,
and rather then they would be without it, they will content themselves with a
false peace, with carnal security. And there is none that lives unto whom
terrors and tortures internal and inward are not tedious and irksome, would
we then be freed and preserved from such terrors, such wounds, such daggers?
would we have true peace, and sound tranquillity indeed? then let (as I said)
endeavor to get good consciences if we want them, and to keep them if we have
them, or when we shall attain unto them.

And for better furtherance in so weighty a duty as this is, I will commend to
Gods blessing and thine use, two ranks or sorts of rules. In the first whereof
I will prescribe remedies to cure the malady of an evil conscience, or set
down means to bring thee to a good conscience. In the second I will prescribe
antidotes to keep thee from falling into the same disease of an evil
conscience again, or acquaint thee with helps to keep thy conscience sound
and good if it be so already. In both of which before thou go any further,
I desire at thy hands a resolution to use both, so neither I in writing this,
nor thou in reading shall loose our labor.

Remedies to cure an evil, or means to get a good conscience.
For the first, I mind to lay a ground out of which to draw the rules, or some
of the rules at least, and that ground shall be the definition or description
of a good conscience and a bad.

Pisca. in 1. Tim. 1. Obs. 24. What a good conscience is.
Some define a good conscience thus.

A good conscience, is the judgment of our mind approouing that which we do,
as pleasing to good, because that we our selves please God through Christ, and
because we study to please him, with a serious purpose of walking according to
his will.

Others more briefly thus.

A good conscience, is a joy, Heming. Syntag. 161.
springing out of the remembrance of a life holily and honestly led, or a
confidence of sin remitted.

As for a bad conscience, I take it to be contrary to the good, and may be
defined either, first thus.

A bad conscience is the censure of the mind, What a bad conscience is.
disallowing that which we do as displeasing to God, insomuch as neither our
persons do please him through Christ, nor (as our consciences tell us) we
study to please him in our lives with a steadfast purpose of heart to conform
unto his will.

Or secondly thus: An evil conscience, is a trembling and fear arising out of
the remembrance of a life lewdly and wickedly led. This ground by these
descriptions thus laid, I draw out these directions, for the getting of a
good, and ridding of an evil conscience.

1. Remedy of an evil conscience.
The first is the spirit of discerning, a judgment to discern of things that
differ. For it is requisite that a good conscience should be informed upon a
good ground, true principles, now how can that be, except a man has judgment
to try and discern the ground, whither it be sound or false? It is the office
of conscience, either to allow or disallow, but how can it allow of what is
good, or disallow that which is evil, except the party has knowledge both of
good and evil, that is, what is good, and what is evil. A right understanding
heart, and a good conscience; a blind mind, and a bad conscience; are
ordinarily yoaked together. If Papists did not make ignorance the mother of
devotion. If our generation of unwise and carnal ones did not like to live in
blindness of heart without saving knowledge, both the one and the other would
have better consciences then they have. My counsel therefore to thee, is this,
to get those chains of darkness wherewithal thy heart is fettered, pulled
off, and those mists of ignorance, with which thy understanding is darkened
removed away, that thou may be able to discern of things that differ, that
so the right information of thy mind, may prove to be a mean of the sound
reformation of thy conscience, and so that goodness may be restored to it,
which by nature thou art quite bereaved and deprived off.

2. Remedy.
Secondly, when thou have attained unto a sound judgment, and can put a
difference betwixt good and evil, then it shall be good for thee to approve
of, the one to disallow the other. For when men against the light of their own
knowledge, shall like Julian Socr. hist. lib. 3. cap. 1.
and Ecebolius Id ibid. c. 11.
disallow of that which is good, and like the Scribes and Pharisees approve of
that which is evil, is it possible for them, so long as they so remain, to be
remedied and cured of their evil consciences?

Paul prays on the behalf of the brethren at Philippi, that they might
approve of things that are excellent Phil. 1.10.
, which prayer he would have never made, had not he seen it, a matter very
useful and needful against an evil, and for a good and honest conscience, to
approve of things honest according to the excellency of the same: We see men
and women, to dislike of hearing of Sermons in public assemblies, of offering
up sacrifice in their private families, of making profession of religion; and
they like better of being present at stage plays, the very theaters of lust:
For so Tertullian calls it. lib. de Spectaculis. 694. Theatrum veneris.
Of ryoting in Tauernes, and tap-houses, being (as they are abused) the very
schools of the devil: they approve better of allowing inordinate courses.
And hence it comes to pass that their consciences are so vile and evil as
they are. Deal plainly with me now, do thou in good earnest desire a good
conscience; like of that which is good, as most worthy to be loved, dislike of
that which is evil, as most worthy to be hated, and in time thou shall find
thy love so strongly inflamed toward the one; thy hatred so soundly sharpened
against the other; that thy conscience shall be clear before God, and honest
toward men.

3. Remedy.
Thirdly, hearken to the chekes of conscience; be willing to hear conscience
speak, and to take a careful view of those articles, which it presents unto
thee, and brings in against thee.

Seneca Epist. lib. 1. Epistola 43. ad calcem. O te miserum si contemnis hunc
testem.
O miserable man that thou art, (could the heathen say) if thou contemnest this
witness. When thy conscience sets upon thee, as Nathan did upon David, thou
art the man; or thou art the woman that have failed in this duty, fallen into
this iniquity, omitted that good, committed that evil; think in thy heart it
is verily true, and say in thy self, as David to Nathan: I have sinned.

In the fourth place, 4. Remedy.
sorrow thou after a godly manner, for those evils which thy conscience (being
rightly informed) charge thee withal; imitate Saint Peter's conuerts; who no
sooner were accused in their consciences by occasion of his Sermon, of that
crime of crucifying Christ, but they were pricked, touched with remorse and
sorrow for the same. Oh if as often as thy conscience smites thee, thou had
but the grace with Ephraim to smite thy thigh and say, 5. Remedy.
what have I done, thou would grow to have a great deal better conscience
then thou have.

Fifthly, Faith is helpefull and necessary in this work: For he that is wholly
diseased with unbelief (says one Iodoch. Willich. in 1. Tim. 1.19. Qui in
fidelitatis morbo laborat, huius non potest esse bona conscientia.
) his conscience cannot be good. This is plainly intimated by Saint Paul to
the Hebrews, in a comparison which there he uses Heb. 9.13, 14.
. If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifiing of the flesh: How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot
to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God? In
which words by an analogy betwixt the type and the antitype, the Apostle
proves the efficacy of Christ's cleansing; which cleansing he calls the
purifying of the conscience from dead works, yea from sin which brings
death, and is lived in, by men that are spiritually dead. Now if the conscience
cannot be cleansed from sin but by the blood of Christ, then it cannot
become good, but by faith which apprehends the blood of Christ to our
purging. And besides, if so be a good conscience be, (as is expressed in the
first definition Page 66.
,) the judgment of the mind, approouing of that which we do as pleasing to
God, because our persons please God, or else (as is showed in the second
definition) a confidence of sin remitted, what does this argue but a
necessity of faith, to get a good conscience, by which faith (as it apprehends
the righteousness of Christ) both our persons come to please God, and our
souls are confident of the pardon of our sins? Well then would thou be
purged from an evil conscience? do this; when thy conscience (being rightly
informed) has accused thee as guilty of such and such sins, and thou be
heartily sorry and truly humbled for the same, get thee by faith to the
fountain of Christ's blood, bathe thee in it, seek to have thy conscience
appeased by the assurance of the pardon of thy sins through Christ Jesus
alone, make this thy maine drift of giving attendance upon Gods ordinances, and
thy evil conscience will be as effectually cleansed from those evils that make
it be, as by the legal cleansings in the ceremonial law, flesh was wont to
be purged from leprosy, pestilence, or any such like filthy contagion.

6. Remedy.
Lastly, the study and practice of a godly life, breeds and brings a good
conscience; And this help the last clause in the first definition of a good
conscience affords, where is proved that therefore a good conscience does
approve of what we do as good, as well because we have an earnest study and
serious purpose of walking according to Gods will, as because we know our
persons pleasing to God through faith in Christ. And Saint Peter makes it good,
in his first Epistle third chapter, 15, and 16. verses, where speaking of a
good conscience, he ioynes withal, both a sanctifying the Lord God in our
hearts, that is, a study and serious purpose to serve him, and also a good
conversation in Christ, to stop the mouths of those that are ready to accuse
us as evil doers, that is a practice of the works of righteousness, giving
us to understand that it is impossible to have a good conscience, except we
lead and purpose and study to lead a godly life.

These are the rules I thought good to lay down for thy furtherance in getting
a good conscience; If having used the same heretofore thou have found it
already, or by Gods blessing shall obtain it afterward; to the end thou may
keep it, mark a word or two more: and then I will bring thee out of this
point, wherein I have held thee longer then I thought at the first.

How to keep a good conscience.
And to this purpose, I will lay down one general caution, out of which I will
draw the whole direction, and that is, it shall be good for thee, to take heed
of offering any wrong or violence thereunto: Simile.
If it be as we commonly use to say, it is great pity to enforce an entire
friend to inconveniences against his will; it is much more pity to enforce a
good conscience, (whereunto no earthly friend is comparable, both in regard of
the good that it does us in the time of prosperity, and the comfort it brings
us in the day of adversity? Now the conscience is enforced, or has violence
offered unto it two ways, either when we would have it more large then it
should be, or more straight then it need be.

First, the conscience is made more large then it should be, presuming, or
venturing further in the omission of some duty, or in the giving place to some
infirmity, then there is warrant. Unto which presumption there are these five
steps or degrees.

1. How the by-conscience is made too large. Degrees to presumption, which tend
to make the conscience too large.
which we know to be unlawful, that such a duty were not required, which we
know to be strictly enjoined.



upon this question, that it may be very gainefull and commodious, if we do
take some liberty to our selves in this kind.

as good Christians as I am, better men then I am, have done thus and thus,
have neglected this and this, and therefore I may be bold without any great
danger, etc.

God is merciful, we are in his favor, his love cannot alter, and I know not
what. And so by consequent from all this premises, a presumptuous perpetrating
of the offense. By these degrees, we come to presume, and to stretch
conscience (to the wounding of it,) beyond its bounds, which is one kind of
enforcing of it.

Secondly, the Conscience comes to be streightened three manner of ways: 2.
How the conscience is made too straight.
first by ignorance in the nature of the obligation, and subjection of the
conscience* secondly, by yielding unto doubtings: thirdly, by a kind of
temporary despair, either of Gods providence to relieve us in our temporal
wants and dangers, or of his readiness to accheere us in our spiritual
desertions.

That the first of these evils does streighten the conscience, it is plain by
this argument. Whatsoever does cause scrupulous distraction or distracting
scruple, does bring the conscience into streights. But ignorance in the nature
of the binding and subiecting of the conscience does cause scrupulous
distraction. Therefore such an ignorance streightens the conscience. For when
the Christian knows not thoroughly what things bind the conscience. Wherein
conscience is to be subject, how far forth things bind, nor how or in what
cases, with what conditions conscience is to submit, must it not needs bring
him into a world of distractions? How can it otherwise be?

Secondly, that yielding to doubtings, do straighten the conscience, it is
clear, because doubtings are enemies to the peace of the conscience, which
peace is the Cordis delectatio est cordis dilatatio. August.
consciences sweet enlargement. Unto this peace also despair of Gods
providence, either over the outward man in the time of affliction, or over the
soul, in the time of desertion, is an adversary; therefore thirdly despair
must needs also distress the conscience.

Well then, would thou keep a good conscience, as a continual feast,
observe in general, two rules. Allow no larger bounds to thy conscience, then
with warrant thou may by vain presumption. Bring thy conscience into no
more thraldom and bondage then thou need.

To help thee in the first, Subordinate helps, to the observing of the first
general rule.
that thou may not presume: mark these particulars.

First, do not wish in thy heart any unlawful thing to be lawful, that thou
might the safelier commit it, nor any necessary duty indifferent, that thou
might not be tied unto it.

Secondly, if thou be well informed of the unlawfulness of any evil, of
the necessity of any duty, abjure the court of faculties in thy conscience,
enquire not after a dispensation for thy self in special, expostulate not
whither thou may, or may not, commit it, or neglect it.

3. Be not of conceit that neglect of any holy or necessary duty, or the
committing of any sin can be gainefull and aduantageable to thy outward
state. For it is a silly gain that is purchased with a wound to the spirit,
and a crack to the conscience.

4. Set not the infirmities of believers before thine eyes for imitation, but
for caution, not to embolden thee, to do as they did, but to make thee the
more obseruant of thine own ways, least that thou should do as they did.
For every fat stands upon its own bottom; and little peace will thou have
to imitate any mortal man, in that which is offensive to thy God.

5. Conclude not that thou will but do the deed once, or twice, or seldom;
For sin is like a serpent, if it gets but in the head, it will get in the
whole body, and it is a clinging and encroaching guest, whereof thou can not
be so soon rid as thou listest, after thou have given entertainment unto it:
neither think thou may be the bolder, because thou art in Gods favor,
which can never change nor alter: thou art not so sure of heaven, but that the
devil (though he cannot rob thee of it) yet can make thee question it to the
perplexing of thy soul. Take heed (I say) that by these steps thou climbest
not up the ladder of presumption, for then that there is no greater enemy, to
an holy and blameless life, the maintaining of which holy life, is the
greatest preservative to a good conscience that can be.

Secondly, as thus by presuming, thou must not stretch thy conscience.
Subordinate helps to the second general rule.
So to the end thou may not streighten conscience, thou must do three
things.



Now for thy better information in this, know that some things bind the
conscience immediately or properly; What binds the conscience immediately viz.
Law, Gospel.
some things, mediately or improperly. First immediately, that does bind the
conscience, which has most absolute power and authority in it self over the
conscience, and thus the Law and Gospel binds the conscience; or the word of
God comprehended in the books of the Old and New Testament. First, for the Law.

That is threefold, moral, judicial, ceremonial. 1. Law, and that either as
moral, judicial, ceremonial.


The moral Law respects the duties of love which we owe to God and our
neighbor, comprised in the first and second table, now to know how this binds
conscience, 1. How the moral Law binds the conscience.
these two rules must be observed. That the second table must give place to
the first, insomuch that if two duties come in opposition one to the other, and
the first table binds the conscience to the one, Two rules to show how the
moral law binds the conscience.
the second to the other, simply by it self, that duty which is enjoined in
the first, must be performed rather then that which is prescribed in the second.

The rule amplified.
To amplify it. The second table binds me to perform all testimonies of love
to my neighbor; the first to execute all offices of piety toward God; Such
and such a testimony of love to my neighbor, may in some case not stand with
my piety toward God: in this case my conscience must submit it self, rather
to the pleasing of God, then pleasing of man. Albeit, in some case we are to
neglect some duties to God, that we may relieve the present necessity of our
brother, which is warranted by that rule of Christ; I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.

That the general Law must give way to the special. Take an example, or two.
Thou shall do no murder: The rule examplified.
Thou shall not steal are general laws. Abraham take thy son, thine only
son Isaac, and offer him up in sacrifice Genesis 22.22.
. Every woman shall borrow of her neighbor, and of her that soiourneth in the
house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and ye shall spoil the Egyptians
Exodus 3, 22.
, were special commandments. Both of these, even general and special, do
bind the conscience: In this case, which must Abraham and the Israelites
chiefly submit unto? To the special; he must attempt to sacrifice, his son,
notwithstanding this, Thou shall do no murder. They must rob the Egyptians of
their jewels and treasures, notwithstanding that precept; Thou shall not
steal. Why? because the special had at that time more power over the
consciences of Abraham, and the Israelites then the general.

2. How the judicial law binds the conscience.
From the moral to come to the Judicial law; which was of use to prescribe the
Mosaicall form of civil government, concerning the order offices of
Magistrates and Magistracy, judgments, punishments, contracts, difference of
government, to the end that public justice might be maintained, peace
continued, and the contempt of Gods law revenged.

This Law so far binds the conscience now, as it is ever duly grounded
upon the moral, and where the same reason holds thus, as it did in them and
other nations by the light of nature practiced in the same manner.

3. How the ceremonial law binds conscience.
Thirdly, the ceremonial Law (which treats of rites and ceremonies enjoined
in the Old Testament, to be observed about the outward worship of God) is to
be reduced to three distinct times, according to which times, three rules may
be given to show how far forth conscience is subject to that.

Before the death of Christ, the ceremonial law did bind the consciences of
the Jews, and the Jews only, not of the Gentiles. For betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, there was a wall of separation.

From the death of Christ, to the overthrow of the Jewish government, the
ceremonial law lost the force of binding, and became an indifferent thing,
either to be used or not to be used. Hence it was that Paul circumcised
Timothy, but would not circumcise Titus. And the Act. 15.
council at Jerusalem, decreed that the Church should abstain for a time from
things strangled, and from blood; the cause of which decree was the weakness
of some who of Jews were made Christians. As yet they did not fully understand
the liberty of the new Testament, therefore for their weakness sake, it was
granted that they might use some Jewish ceremonies for a time.

after the euersion of the Jewish government, and the promulgation of the
Gospel, more largely and clearly the ceremonial law altogether ceased. For
from that time, the liberty of Christians and freedom from Jewish ceremonies,
was so conspicuous that none of the godly could allege their ignorance
herein. Wherefore very well say the Schools, Leges ceremoniales iam sunt
mortuae, and mortiferae.
Ceremonial laws are now dead and deadly. Thus we see the nature of the
laws, authority over the conscience.

2. How the Gospel binds.
Now we will see how the Gospel binds the conscience. For the better
understanding of which, we must know that the Gospel does not bind the
consciences of those that are not called, but only of them that are called.
That it does not bind the uncalled, it is plain. Because as they which sin
without the Law, shall perish without the Law Romans 2.12.
; so they which sin without the Gospel, shall perish without the Gospel,
but they which perish without the Gospel, are not bound by the Gospel;
therefore the uncalled are not bound by the Gospel. Secondly, that it binds
these that are called, I mean separated from Pagans and Infidels, it is
manifest also by this reason. All those that are called, shall be judged at the
last day by the Gospel, as is to be seen, Romans 2.16. Ioh. 3.15.18. But it is
necessary that that same thing, by which men shall be judged after this life,
should bind their consciences in this life: therefore the Gospel binds the
consciences of the called.

hypocrites are called into the Church, and if they be bound to believe their
salvation, they are bound to believe that which is false, for the promises of
the Gospel, concerning the favor of God, pardon of sin, etc. belong not to
them. I answer, they desire truly to be in the number of Christ's true
Disciples. But to be the true scholars and Disciples of Christ, to learn of
him, to follow him, hypocrites do not seriously desire: therefore their
consciences are not absolutely bound to believe their own salvation.

Thus thou understand how conscience is to be subject to things that do
immediately bind it.

Now as touching the things that do bind it mediately, Things mediate to to
oblige conscience.
(that is, not of themselves, but by virtue of that obligatory power, that they
have from the word of God) they are four: first, the laws of man: secondly,
oaths: thirdly, vows: fourthly, promises.

Concerning the first, how far forth conscience is to submit to humane laws,
thou shall know if thou markest these four rules following.

Concerning the first, how humane laws do bind we shall know, Rules to
understand the subjection of conscience to Man's laws.
if we ponder these four Rules.

Laws of men, whither they be Civil or Ecclesiastical, do bind the
conscience so far forth as they are agreeable to Gods Law. 2. As they
conserve order, or keep from confusion and do not take away Christian
liberty. 3. For if they have these conditions, they are obligatorie, and
binding by virtue of the fifth commandment. Honor, thy father, and particular
precept given by Saint Paul; Let every soul be subject to the higher power
Romans 13.1.
. But if it so fall out, that these laws constituted by men, be not about
things indifferent, but good in themselves, that is to say commanded of God,
then they are not properly humane but divine: and therefore do altogether
bind the conscience. Lastly, if those laws do prescribe things that are
evil, they are so far from having any power over the conscience, that the
conscience is most strictly bound not to obey them Act 4.19. Conscientijs velle
dominari est arcem coeli inuadere.
. Wherefore we plainly affirm against the opinion of the Papists, that neither
Civil nor Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, has any CONSTRAINING or compulsiue
power immediately and directly over the conscience: so that it was well said of
Maximilian the Emperor, to seek to domineere over the conscience, is
impudently to invade the tower of heaven; And of Cited by Alstedius in Theol.
Cas. c. 2 p. 10. Tria sunt homini impossibilia, etc.

Psychotyranno plusquam Pharaonicam, and Phalaricam.


Stephanus King of Polonia, Three things are impossible to man, to make
something of nothing, to know things to come, and to rule or Lord it over the
conscience. That same Psychotyranny, therefore of the Papist which is most
cruel, most Pharonicall, do we detest and abhor.

laws of man have so far an obligatory power in the conscience, that the
violating of them, especially if it be joined either with the offense of their
brethren or contempt of authority, it is justly to be accounted for a sin
against God, though not immediately.

laws of men, are either of things necessary without which an order, and
decorum cannot be kept in the Church, or else of things indifferent. Those that
are of things necessary, do bind by the force of that divine law written by
Paul, Let all things be done decently and in good order Cor.
. They that are of things merely indifferent do not bind so strictly, except
the neglect of the same, occasioneth offense to the weak, or be with contempt
of Ecclesiastical authority.

This for information about the mediate binding of conscience, by humane laws.

Secondly, An oath binds conscience, How an oath bind conscience.
if it has these four conditions. First, if (for the matter of it) it be of
things certain and possible. Secondly, if (for manner) it be made or taken
without guile, sincerely and honestly. Thirdly, if (for the end) it be to Gods
glory, or the public good. Fourthly, if (for the author) it be taken by those
who have power so to bind themselves. Therefore Herod's oath did not bind his
conscience, because it did not tend to Gods glory, and was of a thing beyond
his commission, with warrant to perform. But if an oath has (I say) those
conditions, it binds by the virtue of that commandment which Moses lays
down. Numb. 30.2. If a man swear an oath, to bind his soul with a bond, he
shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of
his mouth.

Now in the third place, for the subjection of conscience to vows. 3. How
vows bind conscience.
We must understand that vows are of three sorts, moral, ceremonial, and
free. A moral vow, is that promise of moral obedience to the law of God made
in Baptism, renewed in the Lords Supper. And this binds all Christians at all
times. A ceremonial vow, is a promise of ceremonial obedience in the Old
Testament, such as was the vow of the Nazarites Leu. 27.
. And this did only bind those who made it. A free vow, is a promise of
performing some outward thing, undertaken for the cause of exercising piety,
as vows of fasting or the like, for furtherance in the exercise of prayer, of
repentance, etc. And this is of a binding power, if there be in it; first, a
congruitie with the word of God; secondly, no repugnancie with our calling;
thirdly, if it be no spoyler of Christian liberty; and finally, be not made
out of an opinion of any meriting thereby. If (I say) it be thus qualified and
limited, it binds conscience by the power of that divine precept; which is in
Eccles. 5.4, 5. When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not to pay it; Better it
is thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay.

Lastly, that thou may know how promises do bind the conscience; 4. How
promises bind conscience.
thou must observe this rule. That a simple promise (I mean distinguished from
a promise, mixed and bound with an oath, it does oblige and bind the conscience
at the will of him, to whom it is made, so that if he to whom thou make it,
will release thee from the performance of it, thou art free See promises are
debts.
: if he require it, thou art bound in conscience to make it good; if so be it
has these requisites.

If it be first not against Gods word: secondly, not against honesty: thirdly,
if thou be such an one as have power to bind thy self by such a promise:
fourthly, if he whom thou have made it unto, did not circumuent, and get thee
in by guile and deceit to make it: fifthly, if the performance of it remain
possible and lawful. If it has these conditions; it binds by virtue of the
ninth commandment. Thus of these things considerable about the binding and
subjection of conscience, must thou get knowledge and information of, if thou
would not streighten conscience, and so would preserve the goodness of
it.

2. Help against straightening conscience.
Secondly, thou must take heed of yielding to doubtings; of yielding I say, For
tempted to doubt thou shall be, be thy conscience never so good, but yield not
to the same; hold Satan work at the staves end, and when he shall shoot his
darts in this kind against thee, telling thee, God is thy enemy, thou art not
his child, heaven shall not be opened unto thee, hell fire is prepared for
thee: (notwithstanding, all thy professing and pains taking) bear them off
with the shield of faith. If thou let go the soundness of thy confidence,
thou will shrewdly diminish the goodness of thy conscience. The keeping of
faith and a good conscience are joined together, they that make havoc of the
one, will easily make shipwreck of the other; take heed therefore of dashing
thy faith upon the rock of doubtings by yielding unto them. 3. Subordinate
help.
And to conclude, take heed also of rushing upon the rock of despair; when
the Lord lays his hand in wisdom upon thee, and thou art tempted to despair
of ever obtaining any help from him. When (for reasons best known to
himself) he shall withdraw the light of his countenance, which with joy thou
were once wont to behold, and thou shall then be tempted to think, he will
never visit thee with his favor again: yield not to these temptations, be
not out of hope; but nourish, cherish, and maintain thy hope still howsoever.
For there can be no better way to keep thy conscience good and sound, then to
maintain thy faith against doubtings, and thy hope against temptations tending
to despair. Thus at length I have found an end of this point, the success
whereof I commit to God, the use whereof I commend to thee; hastening now to
the second part of the text. Which is

The second part of the Text.
The accusation it self, which these accusers brought in against themselves, in
these words.

The Table of the second part.
2. The Accusation which the Accusers bring in, in which note 1. The division
and interpretation together, where 1. The form, H. V. We are verily guilty,
with the meaning of it. p. 89. 2. The matter which is a case of wrong, in which
wrong we have 3. things, 1. The object or party wronged, H. V. concerning our
brother, with the sense. p. 89. 2. The Subject or wrong it self aggrauated by
two phrases. 3. The Effect, H. V. Therefore is this distress come upon us:
with the meaning. p. 91. 1. We saw the anguish of his soul, with the sense. p.
90. 2. When he besought us, we would not hear, with the sense. p. 90.


2. The doctrines which are, 1. Propounded together, appearing to be five in
number. page 92. 2. Handled a part. The first, or third in the order of the
text. (That in confession of sin, we must be ingenious,) page 93. The second
or fourth, (That conscience is a faithful recorder,) page 101. The third or
fifth in order, (That by how much the nearer bonds we are tied to one another,
by so much the sorer torment shall we meet within our consciences,) page 123.
The fourth or sixth in order,) That they shall be requited, like for like which
offer wrong,) page 130. The fifth or last in the Text, (That not to pity
others in their distress, is to shut up the bowels of others against us in our
distress. page 142. To the end.



We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress
come upon us.
WHEREIN we have to note, The second part sub-diuided, and the words
interpreted promiscuously.
both the form and the matter of the accusation.

1. The form in these words [We are verily guilty] that is, even we Judah,
Since Leui, and the rest of us brethren, are most certainly, truly without all
flattery guilty. 2. The matter in the residue of the verse, which is a case of
injury or wrong; where we are to consider: first, the object: secondly, the
subject: thirdly, the effect of the wrong. 1. The object was Joseph, he was the
man to whom they had done the wrong, which they accuse themselves off here,
and him they call brother [concerning our brother] for so he was indeed, by
fathers side, though not by mothers side. 2. The subject of the wrong or the
wrong it self, (which they had offered that their brother) they do aggrauate
against themselves by two phrases; first, [wee saw the anguish of his soul,]
that is to say: we wretches after we had first cast him into the pit, and then
sold him to the Midianites, we could look upon his distress and perplexity,
with dry eyes without tears, and so our eyes were unmerciful unto him:
secondly, [when he besought us, we would not heare] yea, whereas it had
behooued us upon the very sight of his anguish, to have deceased from our
cruelty; he did beseech us, entreat us to spare him, and let him alone, yet we
were so hard-hearted, that we would not condescend unto his entreaty, and so
our hearts and ears were unmerciful unto him. Thirdly, the effect of the
wrong following, in these words: [therefore is this distress come upon vs]
yea, therefore we are now served like for like, this distress of us being
charged for spies, clapped up in prison, cannot be heard to plead and
apologize for our selves, one of us must now be laid up in chains, and God
knows how cruelly he shall be used ere we come again: this distress is come
upon us. If we join these branches together in a paraphrase, we may imagine
these brethren to bring in this accusation against themselves in these terms.

Come brethren come, The paraphrase.
why stand we pausing with our selves, what this hard-ship means, whence it
comes? We even we are most certainly without any dissembling or flattery,
guilty of offering great wrong to our own brother, the son of our aged
father, we cast him into the pit, we sold him into the hands of Barbarous
Merchants, we looked upon him and laughed at him, when we saw the dreamer in
perplexity, he entreated us by the bond of fraternity with tears to spare
him, not to deal so hardly with him, and we stopped our ears against his cry,
we regarded not his request, would show no kindness to him, have no compassion
on him, therefore are we brought into this misery. Now lo we, we are paid
home to the full, we are recompensed like for like; This governor of the land
looks upon the anguish of our soul, we entreat him, he will not vouchsafe to
hear us, nor believe us. This is the sum, here is the sense.

The conclusions follow, and are five.

1. Confession of sin must be ingenuous.

2. Conscience keeps a true register.

3. By how much nearer bonds we are tied to one another, by so much sorer
torment are we like to feel in our consciences for the wrongs we do them.

4. God requites like for like to the wrong doer.

5. They that are pitiless to their brethren in the time of their distress,
shall find others pitiless to themselves in their distress.

In the confessing of faults, we must be ingenuous, Confession of sins must
be ingenuous.
that is, we must deal truly without hypocrisy, thoroughly without secrecy or
hiding any of our evils; so dealt these brethren of Joseph here, charging
themselves to be verily guilty, without fayning or doubting, or laying the
fault upon one another; and every particular in the wrong, do they without
hiding confess and acknowledge, as first how they had looked upon and laughed
at his distress: secondly, how they had stopped their ears against his cry.
This ingenuity we find in David, who when he was found guilty by Nathans
sermon; he confessed his whole sin. I have sinned against the Lord. 2. Sam.
12.13.
Mark, he does not say, I have committed adultery alone, or I am guilty of
murder only, but he says, I have sinned. I am truly guilty of all that thou
have charged me withal. Neither says he, I have sinned against Bathsheba,
against Vriah only, but against the Lord, as well as they; Just so deals he
in confession, after he had sinned in numbering the people; where he confesses
that he had not simply sinned, but sinned greatly in that which he had done 2.
Sam. 24.10.
. This is evident in Nehemiahs prayer Nehem. 1.6, 7.
, where making confession, he does not only confess his own sins, but the
sins of the people, wherein he acknowledged himself to have a share,
neither does he only confess their sins of commission, in saying, we have
dealt very corruptly against thee, but also of omission, saying, we have not
kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments which thou
command thy servant Moses. The very like we have in Daniels prayer, and
confession. We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, etc. Neither have we hearkened to thy servants,
the Prophets, which spoke in thy name, Dan. 9.5, 6.
etc.

And the rather must we deal thus ingenuously in the confession of sin,
because we must forsake all sin, and sorrow for all sin in good earnest,
now if all sin must be sorrowed for, and that without all hypocrisy, if all
sin must be abandoned, and in good earnest abandoned, then it must as
generally as seriously be confessed and acknowledged.

Reproof.
who are so far from confessing all their sins, that they will confess
none of them, like the proud Pharisee justifying themselves, when as Publicanes
and harlots, who amongst the Jews were accounted commonly the worst of the
people, are like to enter into the kingdom of heaven as soon as they? Do not
they also offend this rule, who will confess some of their sins, but not all
of them? if they be noted for swearing, drunkenness, or some other profane
acts they have committed, happily they will confess them unto God, unto men,
but for their more secret evils, which man cannot directly charge them withal,
these they confess not, these they acknowledge not, neither to God who is able
to pardon them, nor to men who are fit to pray for them, to give direction unto
them, how to be freed from the same.

Against both these sorts, I may urge not only the present example in my text
for their reproof; but also the words of an holy father of the Church. Aug. in
lib. 50. hom. 12. circa finem. Tu fecisti, tu reus es, si autem dicas non ego
fec^, vbicunque verba excusa re volueris, peccatum tuum manet in te, etc.
Thou have sinned, thou art guilty. If therefore thou shall say, I HAVE NOT
SINNED, excuse those words how thou will, thy sin remains in thee, of sin
thou art guilty, and not only of that sin, which thou did lately commit
(and wilt not confess) but also of pride, because thou will not confess. And
does it indeed appear by that father that not to confess sin, is an
addition to sin, an argument of pride and want of humility? then think thou
what little wrong I do thee, to reprove thee, who either scornest to confess
thy sins at all, or refusest so ingenuously to open them all to the Lord, as
thou ought, which tell me, thou would obtain pardon for all, would
thou not? thou would not be condemned for any, would thou? I tell thee,
except thou do A speech often used by S Augustine.
agnoscere, God will not ignoscere, without confession no remission. For the
acknowledging of our faults, is the abolishing of our faults Confessio enim
peccatorum, abolitio delictorum Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 19.
. Oh folly then that it is for thee whosoever thou be, to make thy soul
liable to confusion hereafter, for want of a sincere and ingenuous confession
of thy sins in this life. I would I could persuade thee to the contrary, oh
that the Lord would be pleased to make me an instrument of teaching thee better
wisdom. Exhortation.
Get thee I pray thee, get thee into some secret place, sift the corners of thy
soul, deal ingenuously and plainly with the Lord; think it not enough to
confess some of thy sins, but all of them, not only the less but also the
greater, and the less as well as the greater, bring before him all the
circumstances, the manner how, the time when, the occasions whereon, the means
by which the mercies against which thou have committed the same. A caution.
I persuade thee not to auriculer confession as the Church of Rome enioynes her
penitents; but to that which David, and Peter, and Paul have used; to confess
to God, and in case of necessity to some faithful Minister, to some Christian
brother: when as otherwise thy conscience cannot be settled and satisfied.
Plurimum enim ad peccatae emendanda valet confessio. Chrysostom. in Gen Hom. 9.
Alas, what will it avail thee to hide any of thy sins, when as the Lord
knows all thy sins. And how can thou truly amend any one, when as thou will not acknowledge every one. How highly does one of the Aug. ad fra. in
Heremo. Hom. 30. 2.

Dissipatrix vitiorum, restauratrix virtutum, etc.


Ancients extol this duty, calling it, the dispeller of vices, the restorer of
virtues, the oppugner of Devils. Oh holy and admirable confession, thou
stoppest up the mouth of hell, thou openest the gates of heaven. Nothing shall
remain in judgment against them, who are by this purged from their sins. I
might use many arguments to persuade to this, but time would fail me, neither
does the text in hand require it of me; The treatises of repentance have done
it for me, only that which I wish thee unto, is ingenuitie in confessing to
abhor hypocrisy and do it sincerely, to avoid partiality, and do it
thoroughly, as well concerning sins of omission as commission, of failing in
the manner of good duties, as neglecting the matter; plain dealing is always
the best, and is that which will bring most rest unto thy soul. Hoping that
this shall suffice to move thee, I leave this doctrine and proceed to the next
which is this.

That the conscience keeps a faithful register. Conscience is a faithful
recorder.
See here what a true record of that wrong offered to Joseph, the consciences
of these brethren took, and kept.

It had set down every circumstance in the same, how they had been pitiless
unto him, stopped up their ears against him, yea (as it is very probable) how
they had gulled their aged father concerning him, making him believe that some
evil beast had devoured him; Conscience had not lost one whit of the cruelty,
the villainy they had committed against him, but had set down every jot and
title of the same. Such an infallible register of Jobs deeds, did the
conscience of Job take, the particulars whereof, it presents unto him in the
time of his extreamitie, as is evident in sundry places of his book. In one
place remembering his perseverance in grace, his love to the word. My feet has
held his steps, his ways have I kept, and not declined. Neither have I gone
back from the commandment of his lips: I have esteemed the words of his
mouth more then mine appointed food Job 23.11, 12.
. In another place presenting his justice and righteousness, his charity and
mercifulness to the poor Chap. 29.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
. I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless and him that had none
to help him; The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, I
caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I put on righteousness and it
clothed me, my judgment was as a robe and a diadem. I was eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame. I was a father to the poor, etc. In another
place remembering his obedience: I made a covenant with mine eyes, that I would
not look upon a maid to lust after her. I have not walked with vanity,
neither has my foot hasted to deceit, that whole 31. chapter being nothing
else but a register of his obedience, which his conscience had set down before
for his comfort against that time of need; What shall I speak of David,
Ezekiah and the rest, whose goodness was recorded in their own consciences,
whatsoever the wicked did go about to accuse, and oppose them withal. What a
faithful register of Pharaohs injuries against the Israelites Exodus 10.16.
, of the Israelites against Samuel 1. Sam. 12.14.
, of Saules against David Chap. 24.17.
, of Ananias and Saphira against the Primitive Church Act. 5.2.
, all their consciences had taken, the word of God does record, and some of
their own mouths did report. Hence it is that conscience is compared to a
book; For look as in a book, men set down things which they would have
faithfully remembered, so the conscience takes notice of those things which man
must and shall remember. Hence is that usual proverb amongst us. The
conscience is a thousand witnesses. Why so?

the conscience, will have the conscience keep, must be faithful, and hence
it is, that it takes and keeps so infallible a bill and accounts.

contemplative, or practical.
2. There is election. 3. There is judgment or the faculty of iudicatory. Now
each of these performs a several office. First, Intelligence contemplative,
has an office (...) out, (...) principles and grounds for information;
Intelligence practical, to make or draw out practical minors, for practical
syllogismes, from those principles which contemplation finds out, or, if you
will more plainly, it is of office to show truly what we have done, or what we
have not done for our own particular. Secondly, Election is of use to join
majors to those minors, that is to show us that that is good or not good, evil
or not evil which we have done. Thirdly, judgment or the judicial faculty
(as I said) is exercised in pronouncing the reward, or the punishment due for
what we have done. Now then if conscience be busied about true grounds for
information, if secondly upon these grounds it shows us directly what
particular things We have done, nor not done, if thirdly, it shows the
quality of the things that we have done, and that they be either such as
ought to be done, or ought not to be done; if finally it pronounces truly the
reward due, or the punishment due, must it not needs take a faithful account,
and be a faithful recorder of our deeds? I can see nothing to the contrary.
If Job or David, etc. have the gift of general understanding in the word, of
particular or practical understanding of themselves and their own actions, if
they can conclude from that word that such things ought to be avoided or
performed, and that they in justice and equity are so and so to be rewarded,
is it much to be marueiled, that their consciences could so faithfully report
unto them their own innocence and integrity; Truly no more to be wondered at,
then if a man should set down some true exploite done by some other in a note
book, when he has a faithful informer, to acquaint him, with what the
exploite was, who the person was that did it, when the time of the doing of it
was; and what reward he had for his labor after he had done it.



The first is the glory of God. If the heavens declare the glory of God as
David shows, Psalm. 19.1.
and the firmament show forth his handy work, undoubtedly the conscience of
man can do no less. The one is the book of nature as well as the other, It is
true, there is some difference betwixt them, for the one is internal written
on the inside, the other external written on the outside; yet herein they
agree, that both of them contain in them Lectures of the Makers praises. Is
his wisdom magnified in the book of the creatures? And is it not as well in
the book of the conscience? Is his goodness manifest in the one, and not
conspicuous in the other? Does the one show forth the praise of his power, and
not the other declare the glory of his greatness? Wonderful is the Lord in
all works Mirandum sane opificium Dei in hominibus est conscientia. Heming
Synt. p. 156.
? wonderful also in this one of his works: His wisdom wonderful, his mercy
wonderful, his power wonderful, I may add also his justice wonderful. His
wisdom (I say) for all the Art of man cannot invent so exquisite a thing,
cannot pen so faithful a record as conscience is. Prognosticators that fetch
their wisdom from the Persians, who were once accounted the great Sophists of
the world Diogen. Laert Vit. Phylosoph. l. 1. p. 12.
; Historians that fetch their knowledge, either by the eye from that which they
behold, or by the ear from that which they hear may compose Kalenders, pen
Volumes, yet may fail in many things they set down, and deceive themselves and
their readers? but in this volume of man's conscience, whatsoever the Lord of
the conscience sets down, be it good or evil, it is most infallibly and
undoubtedly true. 2. His Quod and ipsum diuinae misericordiae est, quae hominem
generi concessit, vt vnicuique nostrum nisi tum esset in deprauabile iudicium
conscientiae etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 4.
mercy is wonderful, in that he gives a man so faithful a recorder, to set
down all the good acts that for Gods glory he undertakes and performs; and
to suggest unto his thoughts all his failings, that he may quickly turn unto
the Lord from them and recover. 3. His power is wonderful in that he can rule
the conscience in despite of Satan, to excuse a man with the register of his
integrity, let Satan tempt him to despair, to accuse a man with the records
of his iniquities, let the devil labor what he can to make him secure.
Lastly, his justice is wonderful, in that he has made this conscience as a
continual witness in the wicked man's heart, to challenge him without failing
for every thing wherein he is guilty; wherefore (good Reader) whenever thou
think upon the faithfulness of conscience in keeping of records, be not
forgetful to give the Lord the due glory of these his attributes, appearing
and showing forth themselves in this wonderful and admirable work of the
conscience.

conscience will record it, and set it down, that is most certain. The
twy-light will little avail the adulterer to take his fill of lust in; the
night will little profit the swaggerer to be drunk in; the dark shop will
little advantage the deceiuer to cheat in; The wiping of the mouth, the
cleansing of the out side of the cup, the new moons, the spreading abroad of
the hands, etc. will little avail the hypocrite, to devour widows houses
withal, to cover his injustice, the malice in his heart, the blood in his
hands withal. Conscience has such piercing eyes, that it can see in the
dark, it is such an excellent Scriuener, it can write in the dark. Go thou
about the deeds of darkness after the darkest manner that can be, it takes
notice of all, it will pen down every jot, tittle, and circumstance in all. I
tell thee in the Court of thy Conscience the Law is written, that thy faults
may abound, in thy remembrance, and that it may bring Vt and vetera and
latentia de licta in lucem pro ducat. Brent. in Romans 1343.
both thy old and secret sins to light; beware therefore in any case, not
only of open and gross sins, but also of secret and close sins. It was
well said of a Tertull. de Idololat. p. 735. cur enim and lateas, cum
ignorantia alterius tuam conscientiam contamines.
Divine. Why keep thou close, when as with the ignorance of another thou
defilest thine own conscience. It was well said by an Senec. l. 1. ep. 43. ad
calcem. Si turpiae quid refert neminem scire, cum tu scias.
Heathen. If the thing be dishonest which thou do, what will it avail,
though no man know it, if thou thy self be privy to it. Yea what will it
profit thee, though all men should praise thee, if thine own conscience does
accuse thee Gregor. in Ezekiel hom. 9. Quid enim prodest si omnos laudent, and
conscientia accusat. Mihi sufficit conscientia mea. Aug. ad fr. Her. 5.53.
. Therefore (I say) avoid that which is abominable in Gods sight: let not the
most secret place encourage thee to any sinful practice, always remembering
this, that thy secretest evils are not only set before the sight of Gods
countenance, but also noted down in the book of thine own conscience, which
one day shall be opened to thine eternal shame, without serious and speedy
repentance.

Math. 12.24.
John Baptist a Demoniacke, Math. 11.18.
Paul a seducer Act. 19.26. Chap. 24.5
Steven a Blasphemer Act. 6.23.
; But have thou recourse to thy conscience. That same inward witness and
judge, that (I say) has taken a faithful record of what thou art and have
been, and if that defends thee, what hurt can it be to thee though all should
disgrace thee Quid poterit obesse, fi omnes derogent and sola conscientia
defendat. Gregor. in Ezekiel. hom. 9.
. For look as the Sicophants false praises cannot heal an evil conscience,
no more can the Slaunderers contumelious speeches, wound a good conscience. Do
others accuse thee of drunkenness, and thine own conscience testify thy
sobriety, others charge thee with felony, and thy own conscience witness
the contrary? do others rail on thee for hypocrisy, and thy own conscience
witness thy sincerity? etc. Believe thy conscience, which is a faithful
testimony, and cannot deceive thee against all those lying obloquies,
wherewith evil mouths go about to deprave thee. The Ovid. Fastor. lib. 4.
Consciamens recti fama mendacia ridet.
Heathen could say, that A mind conscious of its own honesty, laughes to
scorn lying infamy. Be then the reports that are maliciously and falsely
raised of thee, what they can be, let the innocence of thy conscience be a
Murus a heneus esto nil conscire sibi, etc. Horat. Epist. l. 1. Epist. ad
Maecenaten. Ambros. de offic Been sibi conscius falsis non debet moueri
conuitijs, nec aestimare plus ponderis in alieno esse conuitio quam in suo
testimonio.
brazen wall unto thee to bear and beat of those discomforts which by that
mean may be occasioned in thy soul. For (as Ambrose says worthily. He that
has a clear conscience ought not to be troubled, at false slanders, neither
must he esteem another man's reproachful tale against him, of more weight then
his own private testimony within him. Look thou poor Christian, more to thy
conscience then fame, for Falli namque saepe poterit fama, conscientia nunquam.
Senec. Epist. 72.
fame may oftentimes be deceived, but conscience never in the things which it
records.

day of judgment, to have our consciences produce to our comcomfort, and our
glory, our holy thoughts and meditations, our devout prayers and ciaculations,
our virtues of loving, fearing, depending on, serving, honoring the God of
heaven, our tears and sighs for our own sins, and the sins of the times,
our ardent wishes, conscionable endeauours for Sions welfare, our denials of
our selves, our works of charity toward the souls, persons, states and
names of others, our goodly counsels, Christian instructions, holy examples,
given to them that are yoaked with us, that are under our government, that
dwell by us, that are acquainted with us? Oh how sweet, how comfortable a a
thing (I say) will it be unto us, to find a bedrole, a catalogue of such
things as these are, when these sealed books (sealed to the world-ward) of our
consciences come to be opened and unclasped? Oh (beloved) if we would have
conscience faithfully relate these things then, let us carefully labor to have
our share in these virtues, let us conscionably practice these things now, that
conscience may record them, and keep them, against such aftertimes; For
whatsoever we commit to it, it is an infallible, and trusty keeper of it. It is
(as Hugo de Anima. l. 2. c. 9. Aureum Reclinatorium, Arca foederis, Thesauris
Regis.
one calls it) a golden closet, the Arc of the covenant, the Kings
storehouse: intimating thus much, that like as in a closet a woman lays up
her best Jewels, like as in his treasury, a King stores up his richest
treasures, against the time and need of use, like as in the Arc were reserved
the rod of Aaron, and pot of Manna, for a memorial to the Israelites: So in a
good conscience the precious gemmes of inward graces, the heavenly treasures,
the budding rod of outward virtues, are reserved and kept in store, for the
Christian that has them, to be used by him, when time serves, when need
requires, to be remembered of him to his private comfort, and to his glory
amongst others, when there is need of the memorial. Not one tear shed for
thy sins, by way of hearty repentance, not one prayer made to Gods Majesty
out of a devout and contrite spirit, not one duty performed in a conscionable
obedience to Gods will, not a cup of cold water given to a disciple, in the
name of a Disciple, but as God sees it, so conscience notes it: how frequent,
how abundant then in these and the like years, in these and the like duties
ought thou to be, that this faithful notary of thy conscience may be
stuffed with good things for thy comfort, not with evil for thy terror. What
need of pressing has this duty, in regard of the desperate carelessness of
most people? who regard not how empty of grace, how full of sin their hearts
be, how void of good fruits, how abounding with evil fruits, their lives be?
They care not what Items for murder, for theft, for wantonness, for usury,
briberie, blasphemy, hypocrisy, cosenage, pride, malice, neglect of the works
of piety to God, of mercy toward their neighbor, they commit to the book of
their conscience, as though it were a book never to be opened; as though the
doctrine in hand were an untruth, and conscience an unfaithful parchment,
either full of blancks, or lies? In stead of praying, they will swear, in
stead of blessing, they curse, in stead of fearing God, they dare him, of
loving him, they hate him, of trusting in him, they murmr against him, of
frequenting his house, they frequent the stews, the tavern, the playhouse,
in stead of a righteous carriage toward man, their conversation is
unrighteous, in stead of a sober carriage in regard of themselves, they are
most intemperate, unruly, neither can reason, nor religion, bridle their
affections. Poor CONSCIENCE has nothing but THESE things to record, for the
time present, to report, to bring forth in time to come; which is a most
lamentable thing to consider. I would these desperate creatures, would go toc
Nature to school. An evil conscience (says that) may oftentimes be safe, yet
it is never secure, that is to say, although an evil man's conscience be many
times without present terror, yet it is never so careless, but it is a
recorder, in taking account of thoughts, words, and deeds, it is never idle.
There Is Natures position: what is the use she makes of it? Mark what
follows. Therefore thou shall commit nothing to conscience, Itaque nihil ei
commiseris nisi quod amico comittere possis.
but what thou may commit to a friend. And what that is, every one almost
knows; To friends secrets are committed, and if our secretest deeds be good,
conscience will be our friend to blaze them forth to our comfort and renown,
and that most faithfully, vndeceiueably, though the world takes no knowledge,
makes no acknowledgement of the same.



That by how much the stronger the bonds be, By offering wrong to break the
bonds of union, is an aggrauation of the hearts horror.
whereby men are tied to one another, by so much the sorer the torment is like
to be in the conscience, for the wrongs they offer to one another. It was the
breach of the bond of brotherhood that (no doubt) increased the horror of
these brethren in this their distress, does not their speech bewray as much?
We are verily guilty concerning OUR BROTHER; this same BROTHER, stuck much in
their stomach. It was the wronging of his Father, his loving Father, who had
given him his patrimony, affected him dearly, shown kindness to him
continually, which made the inward gripes the stronger, and the outward cries
the louder, of the young prodigal Luke 15.18.21.
. It was the betraying of his Master, his kind Master (who had called him to
an Apostleship, betrusted him with the Stewardship (whom he was so bound unto,
that if need had required, he should rather have been prodigal of his own
blood for his sake, then have betrayed his innocent blood,) that increased the
horror, the heart-smart of Judas Math. 27.3.
. It was no doubt the spoiling of the life, the defiling of the wife of his
Servant, his trusty and faithful servant Vriah, (who lay watching and warring
in the open fields for David's sake, whom David was beholding unto for his love
and service,) that did augment the trouble of David's conscience, when the Lord
in mercy awaked him 2. Sam. 12.13. Psalm. 51.
. Did you never read nor hear of Nero, how that the murder of his mother,
(whom nature bound him to) and the slaughter of his kindred, (whom the same
bond tied him to) did so vex and torment him, that neither day nor night could
he be quiet, but still he thought his mothers ghost did appear unto him, and
the furies of hell were ready at hand to torment him Sueton. in vit. Neronis.
c. 34. 35.
? The like is storied of Alexander, who having slain a dear friend of his
named Clytus, who had in love shown his readiness to have died for Alexander
Curt. lib. 8. p. 119. si moriendum est pro te, Clytus est primus.
, was so terrified in his mind, that he would have killed himself with that
weapon wherewith he slew Clytus, if his guard had not prevented him, he lay
groueling upon the earth, filled the whole court with miserable howling and
outcries, asked those that stood by him, whither they could suffer such a
wretch as himself was to live, cloistered up himself in his tent, and would
have pined himself to death, if his servants had not by strong hand compelled
him to take meat, still this being his pitiful song Et ego seruatorum meorum
latro reuertar in patriam. Curt. lib. citat. page 120. 121. 122.
, I shall return into my own country a murderer of my SAVERS, (my Sauers,)
this aggrauated his horror, this (questionless) added to his terror, that he
should so wrong one, that had rather been his sauer then his enemy, whose
love he was bound (as the light of nature taught him) to have rewarded in a
better kind. Thus we see the truth of the point, how that the strength of
bonds, to tie us to one another, does increase the perplexity of the
conscience for those injuries we do or shall offer to one another.

are violent against your own kindred, the father rising up against the son,
the son against the father, the mother against the daughter, the daughter
against the mother, husband against wife, wife against husband, brother against
brother, sister against sister: a man's enemies being not only of his own
house, but also of his own blood; Hear you I say, this word of the Lord, take
it in by the ear, and apply it to the heart. Poor wretches, what wrong do
you offer your own consciences? you pile up horror for them, you treasure up
terror against them. The stronger the knots be to bind you to unity, the sorer
shall your anguish be for your fruits of enmity. Achitophel stood but in a
civil relation to David, as a subject to his Prince, yet he was terrified for
giving evil counsel against him 2. Sam. 17.23.
, They Iaylor but in a domestical relation to Paul and Silas, as a Iaylor to
his prisoners, yet he was affrighted for laying bolts upon them Act. 16.24.30.
. And do you think that you may offer unnatural violence, to those; betwixt
whom and you there is natural reference, and your consciences will never
accuse you? as sure as can be you are deceived. Let but brethren in the same
Ecclesiastical function, fellow Magistrates in the same temporal vocation,
fellow servants in the same family, fellow neighbors in the same country,
offer wrong to one another. I cannot warrant THEM security from stings of
conscience. But to deal cruelly with thine own yoake-fellow, to hate, to
revile, to abuse thy parents, whom thou ought to love, honor, and obey, to
be with out natural affection to thine own children, who are thine own
bowels, to deal doggedly with thy near kindred, and unkindly with those of
whose kindness thou have so bountifully tasted, is a thing so horrible, so
injurious, that I dare warrant thee will cost stings intolerable, yea (without
repentance,) wounds of conscience incurable. For if it be Illa est vera
innocentia, quae nec inimiconocet. August. in Psalm.
true innocence, not to hurt a deadly foe, then it must needs be injury in
grain to wrong a dear friend; and the greatest sins must have the greatest
punishments, of which punishments torture of conscience is one, yea the
greatest in this life, if it produces despair, as it many times does. If
therefore it be thy hap to hear or read this, who art at enmity with those
to whom thou art tied by the bonds of nature or kindness, let me entreat
this at thy hands, that thou would labor with the serious meditation of
this, upon thine inordinate and violent affections, that it may cause thee to
relent, for thy former enmity, and break in sunder those bars of
contention, whereby thy heart has been bolted up against thy brother so long
a time.

That Retaliation is Gods Law.
The fourth point follows:

That the Lord requites like for like to the wrong doer. Just as these brethren
had dealt with Joseph, so (so in their own apprehension at least) are they
dealt withal themselves; Therefore is this distress come upon us. As we
sowed, so we reap, as we measured, so is it measured to us again. We looked
upon Joseph's distress, this man looks upon our, we would not hear our
brother speaking for himself, this man now will not hear us, we carried home
to our father a false tale of Joseph's death, now (will we, will we) we shall
be compelled to carry him too true news of the bonds of one of our brethren.
If this were not a truth, wherefore was that law of giving life for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning,
wound for wound, Exodus 21.24, 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 2.4. Chap. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 19.21.
etc. It was the decree of the Lord against the Babylonians, that the Medes and
Persians, should deal with them, as they had dealt with the Israelites, as
appears in the book of Jeremy. I will recompense them according to their
deeds, and according to the works of their own hands Iere. 25.14.
. Put your selves in array against Babylon, all ye that bend the bow, etc. take
vengeance upon her as she has done, so do unto her Iere. 50.14, 15.
. As Babylon has caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall
the slain of all the earth Ier. 5.49.
. Much to this effect is that of Ezekiel: As I live (says the Lord) I will do
according to thine anger, and according to the envy which thou have used out of
thy hatred against them Ezekiel. 35.11.
. Where he threatens to deal cruelly with the Edomites, as he had dealt
unmercifully with the Israelites. The very same is repeated by Obediah in the
15. and 16. verses of his prophecy. As thou have done, it shall be done to
thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head, for as ye have drunk upon
mine holy mountain, so shall all the heathen drink continually. It is not
unknown what Samuel said, and did to Agag King of Amaleck. As thy sword made
women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse among women. And Samuel
hewed Agag in pieces, before the Lord in Gilgal 1. Sam. 15.30.
. Job, For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to
find according to his ways Job 34.11.
. Now if it be the office of that justice, to deal with men according to their
works, must not that man that offers wrong to his neighbor, look to meet
with the like at the hand of another? Preoccupatio.
Unless humiliation, and restitution prevent it, he may undoubtedly look for
it, or else for some heavier punishment in the stead thereof, either here, or
hereafter.

lips from unjust thoughts, words, and deeds against one another; May the
serious consideration of this point be? I persuade my self, there is none of
us would be content to have injury offered our selves by others: Why, oh why
then shall we delight to offer wrong to others, our selves? would thou not
loose the life of thy child? take not away then the life of thy servant,
another man's child. For Absolons blood did pay for Vriahs 2. Sam. 18.14.
. Would thou not have the adulterer enter into thy bed? defile not thou the
marriage bed of thy neighbor, for David's adultery committed with Bathsheba,
was requited with the defiling of his own concubines by his own son 2. Sam.
16.22.
. Would thou not have others disdain and disregard thee? disdain thou not,
disregard thou not other men? for if Ismaels hand be against every man, every
man's hand shall be against him Genesis 16.12.
. Would thou not have others set traps for thee? spread thou no nets, dig
thou no pits for another: for if Haman seeks the ruin of the Jews, Esther
shall plotte his overthrow Compare Esther 3. with Chap. 7.6.
. Would thou not have another wisdom work the confusion? use not thy wit
for another harm: For if Achitophels wit be against the Lords Anointed,
Hushais wisdom shall confound his 2. Sam. 17.7, 8.
. Would thou not be slandered? slander not; would thou not be cosened?
deceive not: would thou not be oppressed? oppress not: would thou not
have another man increase his revenues upon thy ruin, stuff not thine own
bags with the beggering of others: would thou not leave thy wife, thy
children, a prey to the extortioners, oppressors and cormorants gullet, to
have the state that thou bequeathest them, the inheritance thou leauest them,
devoured by him, consumed of him, after thou art dead and gone? rob not the
orphane of his inheritance, deceive not the widow of her maintenance, while
thou live; for if thou do, their wrongs will cry for vengeance, and never
lin until either in thy self, or thy seed, thou be paid home in the like
kind: would thou not have thy children (if thou have or shall have any) rob
thee of the honor they owe thee? cut not thou thy parents short of that duty
thou owe them: If thou be under their charge, show thy duty by obeying
their command. If God has blessed thee with the worlds good above them, show
thy thankfulness, by releeuing their wants. If thou beeft advanced to places
of honor above them, show thy respect by reuerencing their persons, as Solomon
did Bathshebas 1. King. 2.19.
. If they hap to slip and fall (as the best do) show thy love by covering
their frailties, as Sem and Iaphet did Noah's nakedness Genesis 9.23.
. Otherwise, look for irreuerence, unnatural affection, disobedience, blazing
thy faults, from thy children as a just recompense returned unto thee. Lastly,
would thou not have thy servants undutiful, unfaithful to thee? when thou
shall come to have any under thee? deal thou then neither undutifully nor
unfaithfully with thy master. In a word, what we would not that others should
do to us, let us not do to them. For evil shall be to the evil doer; and
the distributive Justice of the Almighty does measure out the like portion to
man, that man measures to his brother.

No man so deceived as I am: but have thou not been a deceiuer thy self? thou
criest out, none so slandered, so disgraced, oppressed unjustly, iniuried as I
have been; but have not thou slandered, disgraced, oppressed, wronged others?
Thou make thy moan, that thou have a cross yoake-fellow over thou had
before, before a loving husband, now a cruel one, before a kind courteous
wife, now an unkind and kirst one. But how did thou use thy former
yoake-fellow, how dealtest thou with her, how behaued'st thou thy self toward
him? it may be currishly, crabbedly. Thou complainest of the disobedience of
thy children, how that they will not be conformable to thee, will not be ruled
by thee, they are prodigal against thy will, marry without thy consent, and
thou can not keep them within compass: Thou complainest of the idleness,
and untrustiness of thy servants; except thy eye be always on them, thou
can have no work done by them, thou dare not trust them, they are so
lime-fingred, thou dare scarce speak to them, they are so saucy tongued. It
may be when thou were in the condition of a child, thou were as disobedient to
thy parents, it may be thou have been out nights and days in base company
against their liking, it may be thou have bin stubborn at their threats,
disobedient to their voice, it may be (without all respect of piety and
honesty) thou did match thy self against their liking. Peradventure, when
thou were a servant, thou were unruly, untrusty, idle, saucy thy self. When
these and the like wrongs cause thee to complain; Pause a little with thy
self, and say; Have not I done thus and thus with others, as others do with
me: The Lord (thou see) does requite wrong for wrong, into the bosom of the
wrong doer; And it may be upon examination, thou may find thy self guilty
of the same offense; If thou do, then give unto God the glory of his
distributive justice, and say as Adonibezek did, when his thumbes and great
toes were cut off. As I have done, so God has requited me Judge. 1.7.
. And if thou have not yet repented, or so soundly repented as thou should,
repent at length and cease to do evil in that kind. But if so be upon
examination, thou find thine own innocence, or having been so guilty have
repented, and yet art thus and thus wronged still, bear thy cross with
patience, beseech God to sanctify it unto thee, to humble thee by it, and make
it a preservative for thee, against doing the like wrongs thy self, though
thou should have never so fit occasions, never so strong temptations to the
same. So much for that doctrine.

They that are pitiless to others in their misery, others shall as little
pity them in theirs.
The next and last thus. That they shall find little pity at the hands of
others in their distress, who have been without pity to their brethren, in
the time of their distress. This could these brethren confess here. That
Joseph's pitiless carriage, (as they received it at that time) toward them,
was caused by their own want of pity toward him in the time of his misery.
The comparing of the 137. Psalm, with the thirteenth of Isaiah, verse 18. will
make this good. Out of the former place, we may gather how pitiless to the
captive Jews, the Babylonians were flouting and gibering at them ( Psalm. 137.3.
Sing us one of the songs of Sion:) And in the Isa. 13.18
latter, we find how pitiless and Medes and Persians should be to THEM,
being called upon by God, by a prophetical Apostrophe, to dash their young men
to pieces before their eyes, to have no pity on the fruits of their womb,
neither should their eye spare their little children. This particular, has
some witness, from James his general Iam. 2.13.
; He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. Because
thou have spoiled many nations (says Habakuck speaking to the cruel
Chaldeans) that is pittilessely used many people, therefore the remnant of the
people shall spoil thee Hab. 2.8.
, yea deal pittilessely with thee. For when men fall to the spoil, then they
rage like wild beasts with little pity, if with any at all.

who mind not the griefs of them that are in misery: who threw their brethren
into the pit, the prison for small trifles, and will not be persuaded to
release them: who have the cry of the poor at their gates, at their doors,
and will not be moved to relieve them: who hear the news of the troubles of
Gods people at this day, sounding in their ears, and yet are not provoked to
regard them. Is it proprobable that these men shall have mercy shown them in
the time of their misery? Probable? no, not possible, except repentance change
them, and compassion cloth them to make them better. For if they be blessed
that are full of mercy Mat. 5.7.
, their happiness partly consisting in this, that they shall obtain mercy,
then they are wretched who are void of pity, and this is one piece of their
wretchedness, that they find little pity at the hands either of God or man.
Tell me (Naball) if the Lord should ever strip thee of thy abundance (as he
can do it in a moment, for he that gave all can take all at his pleasure) who
think thou should succor thee, when thou refusest to hear the poor man's
cry? Tell me thou that forgettest Jerusalem, if the Lord in his just justice
should suffer those hellish firebrarnds the Jesuitical faction, to set our
land on fire, to stir up civil dissension amongst us (as they have at this
day done in France) if he should send a fierce nation against us, let in the
enemy upon us, unto which and more then which the abominations of the land
have opened a wide gap already; what eye (think thou) would pity thee,
what hand would spare thee, when as neither thy heart yearneth, nor eye watreth
at the desolation of Gods pleasant portion Ierem. 12.10.
, at the great affliction of the Lords heritage in our neighbor nations? Tell
me thou malicious one (who seem to be made all of Revenge) that throwest thy
brother into prison, (as these my text speaks off did Joseph into a pit) for a
dream, a trifle, that threatnest to have his skin, swearest not to leave him
worth a groate, trouncest him up and down, from post to pillar, from court to
court, from assize to to assize, for little or nothing almost, tell me (I say)
how look thou to escape the like measure? Is there never a prison, never a
bench, never a bar, no like extreamitie, and rigor of law for thee? Are
there not as merciless ones, as pitiless ones, to vex, spoil and undo
thee, upon as slight an occasion as thou molestest thy brother, if thou do but
give it? In a word, whoeuer thou be, who put of all pity, and cloathest
thy self with cruelty, is it impossible think thou, for thee to be
unmercifully dealt withal thy self, if thou do, thou art much mistaken.
For (as the Senec. de Clemen. l. 1. cap. 25. Nam talem vtrums, a tergo sequitur
eversio, odia venena, gladij.
Heathen could tell us,) ruin, hatred, poisons, swords do follow such an one
at the hard heels.

make our moan to them. Relieve we the wants of others, others will relieve
ours; Mourn for others troubles, others will mourn for ours; Comfort we
others in their sorrows, others will comfort us in ours. If according to the
heavenly pattern we be merciful; our heavenly Father will take such order,
that pity shall be shown us in midst of our adversity.

FINIS.

