THE CHARACTERS of Two royal Masks. The one of BLACKNESS, The other of
BEAVTIE. personated By the most magnificent of Queens ANNE Queen of great
Britain, etc. With her honorable Ladies, 1605. and 1608. at White hall: and
Invented by BEN: IONSON.

Ovid. -- Salve festa dies, meliorque reuertere semper.
Imprinted at London for Thomas Thorp, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Tigers head in Paul's Churchyard.

THE QVEENES MASQVES. The first, of Blackness: personated at the Court, at
White Hall, on the Twelu'th night. 1605.
THE honor, and splendour of these Spectacles was such in the performance, as
could those hours have lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most
unprofitable work: But (when it is the fate, even of the greatest, and most
absolute births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had been done
to the study of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the
people, who (as a part of greatness) are privileged by Custom, to deface
their carcasses, the spirits had also perished. In duty, therefore, to that
Majesty, who gave them their authority, and grace; and, no less then the
most royal of predecessors, deserves eminent celebration for these
solemnities: I add this later hand, to redeem them as well from ignorance, as
envy, two common evils, the one of Censure, the other of Oblivion.

Natu. Hist. lib. 5 cap 8.
PLINY, Poly hist. cap. 40. and 43.
SOLINVS, Lib 4. cap. 5
PTOLOMAEE, and of late LEO Descrip. Afric.
the African, remember unto us a river in Aethiopia, famous by the name of
Niger; of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: and are the
blackest nation of the world. This Some take it to be the same with Nilus,
which is by Lucan called M^las, signifying Niger. Howsoever, Pliny, in the
place above noted, has this: Nigri fl^u^o cadem natura, quae N^lo, calamum,
papyrum, and casdem gigni^ an. mantes. See Solin. above mentioned.
river takes spring out of a certain Lake, eastward; and after a long race,
falls into the western Ocean. Hence (because it was her Majesty's will, to
have them Black-mores at first) the invention was derived by me, and presented
thus.

First, for the Scene, was drawn a Landtschape, consisting of small woods, and
here and there a void place filld with huntings; which falling, an artificial
Sea was seen to shoot forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waves,
which seemed to move, and in some places the billow to break, as imitating
that orderly disorder, which is common in nature. In front of this Sea were
placed six The form of these (...), with their trumpets, you may read lively
describd, in Ovid. Met^m. lib. 1. Caeruleu^ Tritona vocat. etc and in Virgil,
A^ne^d l^b. 10. Hunc (...) imm^n^s (...). and se^^^nt.
Tritons, in moving, and sprightly actions, their upper parts humane, save that
their hairs were blew, as pertaking of the Seacolour: their desinent parts,
fish, mounted above their heads, and all varied in disposition. From their
backs were borne out certain light pieces of Taffata, as if carried by the
wind, and their Music made out of wreathed shells. Behind these, a pair of
Sea-Maides, for song, were as conspicuously seated; between which, two great
Sea-horses (as big as the life) put forth themselves; the one mounting aloft,
and writhing his head from the other, which seemed to sinck forwards; so
intended for variation, and that the Figure behind, might come of better:
Li^ian in PHGO^. (...) presents Nilus so. Equa fli^^^atili insia^ntem. And
Statius Neptune, in The^.
upon their backs, OCEANVS and NIGER were advanced.

OCEANVS, presented in a humane form, the color of his flesh, blew; and
shadowed with a robe of Sea-greene; his head gray, and The Ancients induced
Oceanus always with a Buss he^di propter ^^m ventoru^, a quibus incitatur, and
impellit^r: vel quia Tauris (...) fremitu^ emittat, vel quia tanquam Taurus
suribundus, in littera seratur. Eurip'd. in Oreste.. (...) And R^uers sometimes
were so called. Look Virg. de Tib^ri, et Eridan^. Geor. 4. A^n^id. 8. Hor.
car. lib. 4. Ode. ^4. and Eurip. in Iore.
horned; as he is described by the Ancients: his beard of the like mixed color*
he was gyrlonded with Alga, or Sea-grasse; and in his hand a Trident.

NIGER, in form and color of an Aethiope; his hair, and rare beard curled,
shadowed with a blew, and bright mantle: his front, neck, and wrists adorned
with Pearl, and crowned, with an artificial wreath of Cane, and Paper-rush.

These induced the Masquers, which were twelve Nymphs, Negro's; and the
daughters of NIGER; attended by so many of the The Daughters of Oceanus, and
^ethys. See Hesiod in Theago* Orphe. in Him. and Virgil in Georgie.
OCEANIAE which were their Light-bearers.

The Masquers were placed in a great concaue shell, like mother of Pearl,
curiously made to move on those waters, and rise with the billow; the top
thereof was stuck with a cheu'ro^ of lights, which, indented to the proportion
of the shell, struck a glorious beam upon them, as they were seated, one
above another: so that they were all seen, but in an extrauagant order.

On sides of the shell, did swim six huge Sea Monsters, varied in their
shapes, and dispositions, bearing on their backs the twelve Torch bearers; who
were planted there in several graces; so as the backs of some were seen; some
in purfle, or side; others in face; and all having their lights burning out of
Whelks, or Murex shells.

The attire of the Masquers was alike, in all, without difference: the colors,
Azure, and Silver; but returned on the top with a scrole and antique dressing
of Feathers, and Jewels interlaced with ropes of Pearl. And, for the front,
ear, neck, and wrists, the ornament was of the most choice and orient Pearl;
best setting of from the black.

For the Light bearers, Sea-greene, moved about the skirts with gold and silver
^^eir hair loose, and flowing, gyrlanded with Sea-grasse, and that stuck with
branches of Coral.

These thus presented, the Scene behind, seemed a vast Sea (and united with
this that flowed forth) from the terminaton, or horizon of which (being the
level of the State, which was placed in the upper end of the Hall) was drawn,
by the lines of Prospectiue, the whole work shooting downwards, from the eye;
which decorum made it more conspicuous, and caught the eye a far of with a
wandering beauty. To which was added an obscure and cloudy night-piece, that
made the whole set of. So much for the bodily part. Which was of Master YNIGO
JONES his design, and act.

By this, one of the Tritons, with the two Sea-Maides, began to sing to the
others loud Music, their voices being a tenor, and two trebles.

SONG.
SOund, sound aloud
The welcome of the orient Flood,
Into the West;
Fair, NIGER, All Rivers are said to be the sons of the Ocean: for, as the
Ancients thought, out of the vapors, exhaled by the heat of the Sun,
Rivers, and Fountains were begotten. And both by Orph. in Hymn* and Homer
Iliad. (...) Oceanus is celebrated tanquam Pater, and origo dijs, and rebus,
quia nihil sine humec^atione nascitur, aut puirescit.
son to great OCEANVS,
Now honored, thus,
With all his beauteous race:
(...) though but black in face,
Yet, are they bright,
And full of life, and light.
To prove that Beauty best,
Which not the color, but the feature
Assures unto the creature.
OCEANVS. BE silent, now the Ceremonies done.
And NIGER, say, how comes it, lovely Son,
That thou, the AETHIOPES River, so far East,
Art seen to fall into the extremest West
Of me, the King of floods, OCEANVS,
And, in mine Empires heart, salute me, thus?
My ceaselesse current, now amazed stands!
To see thy labor, through so many lands,
There wants not enough, in nature, to authorize this part of our fiction, in
seperating Niger, from the Ocean, (beside the fable of Alph^us, and that, to
which Virgil alludes of Arethusa in his 10. Eclog. Sic tibi, cum fluctus
subterlabere Sicanos, Doris amara suam non intermisicat vndam) examples of
Nilus, Jordan, and others, whereof see Nican. lib. 1. de flumin. and Plut* in
vita Syllae. even of this our river (as some think) by the name of Melas.
Mix thy fresh billow, with my brackishe stream;
And, in thy sweetness, stretch thy diadem,
To these far distant, and vn-equall'd skies
This squared Circle of celestial bodies:

NIGER. Divine OCEANVS, it is not strange at all,
That (since the immortal souls of creatures mortal,
Mix with their bodies, yet reserve for ever
A power of separation) I should sever
My fresh streams, from thy brackish (like things fixed)
Though, with thy powerful saltnes, thus far mixed.
" Virtue, though chained to earth, will still live free;
" And Hell it self must yield to industry.

OCEANVS. But, what is the end of thy Herculean labors,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?

NIGER. TO do a kind, and careful Fathers part,
In satisfiyng every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the Read Diod. Sicul. lib. 3. It is a conjecture of the
old Ethnicks, that they, which dwell under the South, were the first begotten
of the earth.
first formed Dames of earth,
And in whose sparckling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best Judge, and most formal Cause
Of all Dames beauties) in their firm hewes, draws
Signs of his feruent'st Love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty grows;
Since the fixed color of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death her self (her self being pale and blew)
Can never alter their most faith-full hew;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great Beauties war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brain-sicke men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all clymates, yea our purity;
As of one Notissima fabula. Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
PHAETON, that fired the world
And, that, before his heedles flames were hurld
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complexctions changed,
Are each where, since, for Alluding to that of Iuuenall, Satir. 5. Et cui per
m^diam nolis occurrerenoctem.
luckles creatures ranged.
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most jealous of their beauties) fear, and care
Posess'd them whole; yea, and believing The Poets.
them,
They wept such ceasles tears, into my stream,
That it has, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun rises, A custom of the Aethiopes, notable in Herod and Diod*
Sic. See Pliny. Not. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 8.
chardg'd his burning throne
With volleys of reuilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made Queens of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, often, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sat, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a Face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes Plin. ibid.
never dream)
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, does never Consult with Tacitus. in vita Agric. and the Paneg.
ad Constant.
rise, or set,
But in his Journey passes by,
And leaves that Clymat of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedomes past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANVS,
What Land is this, that now appears to us?

OCEANVS. This Land, that lifts into the temperate Air
His snowy cliffe, is Orpheus in his Argonaut. calls it (...).
Albion the fair;
So called of Alluding to that rite of stiling Princes, after the name of their
Princedomes: so is he still Albion, and Neptunes son that gouernes. As also
his being dear to Neptune, in being so embraced by him.
Neptunes Son, who rules here:
For whose dear guard, my self, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his Empire, proud, to see him crowned
Above my waves.

At this, the Moon was discovered in the upper part of the house, triumphant
in a Silver throne, made in figure of a Pyramid. Her garments White, and
Silver, the dressing of her head antique; and crowned with a Luminarie, or
Sphaere of light: which striking on the clouds, and heightened with Silver,
reflected as natural clouds do by the splendour of the Moon. The Heaven, about
her, was vaulted with blew silk, and set with Stars of Silver which had in
them their several lights burning. The sudden sight of which, made NIGER to
interrupt OCEANVS, with this present passion. The Aethiopians worshipd the
Moon, by that surname. See Stepha. (...). in voce (...) and his reasons.


NIGER. -- O see, our silver Star!
Whose pure, auspicious light greetes us, thus far!
Great Aethiopia, Goddess of our shore,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shine on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their Longings vrdg'd their eyes to see.
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.

AETHIOPIA. NIGER, be glad: Resume thy native cheer.
Thy Daughters labors have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright Face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glass)
This blessed Isle does with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires,
This Isle has now recovered for her name;
Where reign those Beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MUSES Sons have honored,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spread.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blessed Isle
Has won her ancient dignity, and style,
A World, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the World, with all his wealth, a Ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
Ruled by a SVNNE, that to this height does grace it:
Whose Beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past mere nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honored Daughters, then;
And let them, before the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Inuit them, boldly, to the shore,
Their Beauties shall be scorched no more:
This Sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.

Here the Tritons sounded, and they daunced on shore, every couple (as they
advanced) severally presenting their Fans: in one of which were inscribed their
mixed Names, in the other a mute Hieroglyphick, expressing their mixed
quallities. Which manner of Symbol I rather chose, then Imprese, as well for
strangeness, as relishing of antiquity, and more applying to that original
doctrine of sculpture, Diod. Sicul. Herod.
which the Aegiptians are said, first, to have brought from the Aethiopians.

The Names. The Symboles. The Queen. 1 EVPHORIS. 1 A golden Tree, laden with
fruict. Co: of Bedford. 1 AGLAIA. La: Herbert. 2 DIAPHANE. 2 The figure
Isocaedron of cristall. Co: of Derby. 2 EVCAMPSE. La: Rich. 3 OCYTE. 3 A pair
of naked feet, in a River. Co: of Suffolk 3 KATHARE. La: Beuill. 4 NOTIS. 4
The Salamander simple. La: Effingham. 4 PSYCHROTE. La: El: Howard. 5 GLYCYTE. 5
A clowd full of rain, dropping. La: Sus: Vere. 5 MALACIA. La: Wroth. 6 BARYTE.
6 An vrne' spheard with wine. La: Walsingham 6 PERIPHERE.

The names of the OCEANIAE were.
Hesiod. in. Theog.
DORIS. PETRAEA. OCYRHOE. CYDIPPE. GLAVCE. TYCHE. BEROE. ACASTE. CLYTIA. IANTHE.
LYCORYS. PLEXAVRE.
Their own single Dance ended, as they were about to make choice of their
Men: One, from the Sea, was heard to call'hem with this charm, sung by a tenor
voice.

SONG.
Come away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
Sirens of the land, then they
To doubt the Sirens of the Sea.
Here they daunc'd with their men, several measures, and corranto's. All which
ended, they were again accited to sea, with a Song of two Trebles, whose
cadences were iterated by a double Echo, from several parts of the Land.

SONG.
DAughters of the subtle Flood,
Do not let Earth longer intertayne you;
I. Ecch. Let Earth longer intertaine you.
2. Ecch, Longer intertaine you.
It Is to them, enough of good,
That you give this little hope, to gain you
1. Ecch. Give this little, hope to gain you.
2. Ecch. Little hope, to gain you.
If they love,
You shall quickly see;
For when to flight you move,
They Will follow you, the more you flee
1. Ecch. follow you, the more you flee.
2. Ecch. The more you flee.
If not, impute it each to others matter;
They are but Earth, and what you vowed was Water.
1. Ecch: but earth and what you vowed was Water.
2. Ecch: earth and what you vowed was Water.
1. Ecch. And what you vowed was Water.
2. Ecc: You vowed was Water.
AETHIOPIA. I Nough, bright Nymphs, the night grows old,
And we are greiu'd, we can not hold
You longer light: But comfort take.
Your Father, only, to the Lake
Shall make return: Your selves with feasts,
Must here remain the Ocean's guests.
Nor shall this veil, the Sun has cast
Above your blood, more Summers last.
For which, you shall observe these rites.
Thirteen times thrice, on thirteen nights,
(So often as I fill my Sphaere
With glorious light, throughout the year)
You shall (when all things else do sleep
Save your chaste thoughts) with reverence, steep
Your bodies in that purer brine,
And wholesome dew called Ros-marine:
Then with that soft, and gentler foam,
Of which the Ocean, yet, yields some,
Whereof bright Venus, Beauties Queen,
Is said to have begotten been,
You shall your gentler limbs ore-laue,
And for your pains, perfection have.
So that, this night, the year gone round,
You do again salute this ground;
And, in the beams of yond' bright Sun,
Your faces dry, and all is done.

At which in a Dance they returned to the Sea, where they took their Shell;
and, with this full Song, went out.

SONG.
NOw Dian, with her burning face,
Declines apace:
By which our Waters know
To ebb, that late did flow.
Back Seas, back Nymphs; but, with a forward grace,
Keep, still, your reverence to the place:
And shout with joy of favor, you have won,
in sight of Albion, Neptunes Son.
So ended the first Masque, which (beside the singular grace of Music and
Daunces) had that success in the nobility of performance; as nothing needs to
the illustration, but the memory by whom it was personated.

THE SECOND MASQVE. Which was of Beauty; was presented in the same Court, at
White Hall, on the Sunday night, after the twelfth Night. 1608.
TWo years being now past, that her Majesty had intermitted these delights,
and the third almost come; it was her Highness pleasure again to glorify the
Court, and command that I should think on some fit presentment, which should
answer the former, still keeping the^ the same persons, the Daughters of
NIGER, but their beauties varied, according to promise, and their time of
absence excused, with four more added to their Number.

To which limitts, when I had apted my invention, and being to bring news of
them, from the Sea, I induced Boreas, one of the winds, as my fitest
Messenger; presenting him thus.

In a robe of Russet, and White mixed, full, and bagg'd: his hair, and beard
rough: and horrid; his wings gray, and full of snow, and icycles. His mantle
borne from him with wires, and in several puffes; his feet So Paus. in Eliacis
reports him to have, as he was carved in ar^^ Cips^lli.
ending in serpents tails; and in his hand a leaueles Branch, laden with
icycles.

But before, in midst of the Hall; to keep the State of the feast, and season;
I had placed See, Iconolog. di Cesare Ripa.
January, in a throne of Silver; His robe of Ashcoullor long, fringed with
Silver; a white mantle: His wings white, and his buskins: In his hand a
laurel bough, upon his head an Anademe of laurel, fronted with the sign
Aquarius, and the Character. Who as Boreas blusterd forth, discovered himself.

BOREAS. WHich, among these is Albion, Neptunes Son?

IANVARIVS. WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who Mars were, in the wars?
Or, which is Hesperus, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is Sol? Or can
A doubt arise, among creatures, which is man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, then fear.

BOREAS. WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?

IANVARIVS. Do thou not know me? I, to well, know thee
By thy Ovid Metam: lib. 6. near the end see. -- horridas i^a, quae soli^a est
^lli, nimiu^que domestica, vento, etc.
rude voice, that does so hoarcely blow,
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy Serpent feet, to be that rough North-winde,
Boreas, that, to my reign, art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called January;
Because by me See the offices, and power of Ianus. Ovid. ^ast. 1.
Ianus the year does vary,
Shutting up wars, proclayming peace, and feasts,
Freedom, and triumphs: making Kings his guests.

BOREAS. TO thee then, thus, and by thee, to that King,
That does thee present honors, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enioyn'd again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waves to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.

IANVARIVS. WHich they received, but broke their day: and yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been feign
With Two marriages; the one of the Earl of Essex. 1606. the other of the Lord
Hay. 1607.
other rites my Feasts to intertayne:
And, now the Third time, turned about the year
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.

BOREAS. IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caused their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS, Read his description, with Virg. Geor. 4. Est in Carpathio
Neptuni gurgite vates, Caeruleus Proteus.
the gray Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind, (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek BRITANIA forth,
And there, to hope like favor, as like worth.
Which Night envied, as done Because they were before of her complexion.
in her despite,
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; least men should deem
Her coulor, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at Sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That To give authority to this part of our fiction. Pliny has a Chap. 95. of
his 2. book. Not. Hist. de Insulis fluctuantib^^* and, Card. lib. 1 de rerum
vari^. et. Cap. vij. reports one, to be in his time known, in the Lake of
Loumond, in Scotland. to let pass that of Delos. etc.
floted in the main; where, yet, she' had giu'd sight.
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might)
Should loose them thence, but their changed Sisters
Whereat the Twelve (in piety moved, and kind)
Straight, put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the Nights sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labor, might confound them too.
For, ever since, with error has she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labor to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at Sea, did pray,
That for the love of my The daughter of Erectheus, King of Athens, whom
Boreas ravished a way, into Thrace, as she was playing with other virgins by
the flood Ilissus: or (as some will) by the Fountain Cephisus.
ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heat my frosty breast,
And make me shake my Snow-fill'd wings, and crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse: which here I have done.

IANVARIVS. WOuld thou had not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blew'st goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st The violence of Boreas Ovid excellently describes in the place above
quoted.

Hac nubila pello, hac freta concutio, nodosaque robora verto, Induroque.
niues, et terras grandine pulso.


horrors through the air, as sharp as death.

Here a second Wind came in, VVLTVRNVS, in a blew coulored robe and mantle,
pufft as the former, but somewhat sweeter; his face black, and on his
According to that of Vir. Denuntiat igneus Eu^^^.
head a red Sun, showing he came from the East: his wings of several
coullors; his buskins white, and wrought with Gold.

VVLTVRNVS. ALL horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Be all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, Vulturnus, brings you news
The I Will is found, and that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, and joy. The Nights black charms are flowne.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright Aethiopia, the Silver Moon,
As she was She is called (...), by Eurip. in Helena. which is Lucifera, to
which name we here presently allude.
Hecate, she brake them soon:
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty. For the more full and clear understanding of
that which follows, have recourse to the succeeding pages; where the Scene
presents it self.
There, their Queen
Has raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirld
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to Heavens consent can better move,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greeks are come,
Poets, and Singers, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in So Terence. and the Ancients called Poesy, Artem musicam.
knowledge musical;
Where, set in Arb^rs made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these Beautyes to behold.
And thence, in flowery mazes walking forth
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their Songs, two Fountaynes flow, one hight
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottomes spring,
And strike the Air to echo what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, nere thy coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the Fate of the Island should, and soon
Would fix it self unto thy continent,
As being the place, by Destiny fore-ment,
Where they should slow forth, dressed in her attyres:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their Beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes Son,
And love the miracle, which thy self have done.

Here, a Curtine was drawn (in which the Night was painted.) and the Scene
discovered. which (because the former was marine, and these, yet of necessity,
to come from the Sea) I deuisd, should be an Island, floting on a calm water.
In the middst thereof was a Seat of state, called the Throne of Beauty,
erected: divided into eight Squares, and distinguished by so many Ionick
pilasters. In these Squares the sixteen Masquers were placed by couples:
behind them, in the center of the Throne was a tralucent Pillar, shining with
several colored lights, that reflected on their backs. From the top of which
Pillar went several arches to the Pilasters, that sustained the roof of the
Throne, which was likewise adorned with lights, and gyrlonds; And between the
Pilasters, in front, little Cupids in flying posture, wauing of wreaths, and
lights, bore up the Coronice: over which were placed eight Figures,
representing the Elements of Beauty; which advanced upon the Ionick, and being
females, had the Corinthian order. The first was SPLENDOUR. In a robe of flame
color, The Rose is called, elegantly, by Achil. Tat. lib. 2. (...), the
splendor of Plants, and is every where taken for the Hi^roglyphick of
Splendor.
naked brested; her bright hair loose flowing: She was drawn in a circle of
clouds, her face, and body breaking through; and in her hand a branch, with
two Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was SERENITAS. In a garment of
bright skye-colour, a long tresse, and waued with a veil of diverse colors,
such as the golden sky sometimes shows: upon her head a clear, and fair
Sun shining, with rays of gold striking down to the feet of the figure. In
her hand a As this of Serenity., applying to the Optics reason of the
Rainebowe* and the Myt^o^^gists making her the Daughter of Electra.
Crystal, cut with several angles, and shadowed with diverse colors, as
causd by refraction. The third GERMINATIO. In green; with a Zone of gold
about her Wast, crowned with Myrtle, her hair likewise flowing, but not of so
bright a color: In her hand, a branch of So Hor. lib. 1. Od. 4. makes it the
ensign of the Spring. Nunc decet ^ut viridi nitidum caput impedire myrto, aut
sl^re, terrae quem ferunt solutae. etc.
Myrtle. Her socks of green, and Gold. The fourth was LAETITIA. IN a Vesture
of diverse colors, and all sorts of flowers embroidered thereon. Her socks so
fitted. A They are every where the tokens of gladness, at al feasts, sports.
Gyrland of flowers in her hand; her eyes turning up, and smiling, her hair
flowing, and stuck with flowers. The fifth TEMPERIES. IN a garment of Gold,
Silver, and colors weaued: In one hand she held a The sign of temperature,
as also her girlond mixed of the four Seasons.
burning Steel, in the other, an Vrne with water. On her head a gyrland of
flowers, Corn, Vine-leaues, and Olive branches, enter-wouen. Her socks, as her
garment. The sixth VENVSTAS. IN a Silver robe, with a thin subtle veil over
her hair, and it: P^arles, with the auntients, were the special
Hieroglyphics of loveliness, in quibus nitor tantum and leuor expetebantur.
Pearl about her neck, and forhead. Her socks wrought with pearl. In her hand
she bore several colored So was the Lilly, of which the most delicate City
of the Persians was called Susae: signifiyng that kind of flower, in their
tongue.
Lillies. The seventh was DIGNITAS. IN a dressing of State, the hair bound up
with fillets of gold, the Garments rich, and set with jewels, and gold;
likewise her buskins, and in her hand a The sign, of honor, and dignity.
Golden rod. The eight PERFECTIO. IN a Vesture of pure Gold, a wreath of Gold
upon her head. About her body the Both that, and the Compass are known
ensigns of perfection.
Zodiac, with the Signs: In her hand a Compass of gold, drawing a circle.

On the top of all the Throne, (as being made out of all these) stood

HARMONIA. A Personage, whose dressing had something of all the others, and had
her robe painted full of Figures. Her head was compassed with a crown of Gold,
having in it She is so described in Iconolog. di Cesare Ripa, his reason of 7.
jewels, in the crown, alludes to Pythagoras his comment, with Mac. lib. 2.
Some. Sci. of the seven Planets and their Spheres.
seven jewels equally set. In her hand a Lyra, whereon she rested.

This was the Ornament of the Throne. The ascent to which, consisting of six
steps, was covered with a The inducing of many Cupids wnts not defense, with
the best and most received of the Ancients, besides Prop. Stati. Claud. Sido:
Apoll especially Phil. in Icon. Amor. whom I have particularly followed, in
this description.
multitude of Cupids (chosen out of the best, and most ingenuous youth of the
Kingdom, noble, and others) that were the Torch-bearers; and all armed, with
Bows, Quiuers, Wings, and other Ensigns of Love. On the sides of the Throne,
were curious, and elegant Arbors appointed: and behind, in the back part of the
I Will, a Grove, of grown trees laden with golden fruict, which other little
Cupids plucked, and threw each at other, whilst on the ground They were the
notes of Loveliness and sacred to Venus. See Phil. in that place, mentiond.
Leuerets picked up the bruised apples, and left them half eaten. The
Ground-plat of the whole was a subtle indented Maze: And, in the two foremost
angles, were two Fountains, that ran continually, the one Of youth.
Hebe's, the other Of pleasure.
Hedone's: In the Arbors, were placed the Musicians, who represented the Shades
of the old Poets, and were attired in a Priest-like habit of Crimson, and
Purple, with Laurel gyrlonds.




The colors of the Masquers were varied; the one half in Orenge-tawny, and
Silver: the other in Sea-greene, and Silver. The bodies and short skirts of
White, and Gold, to both.

The habit, and dressing (for the fashion) was most curious, and so exceeding
in riches, as the Throne whereon they sat, seemed to be a Mine of light, stroke
from their jewels, and their garments.

This Throne, (as the whole Island moved forward, on the water,) had a circular
motion of it own, imitating that which we call Motum mundi, from the East to
the West, or the right to the left side. For so Hom. Ilia. M. vndersta^ds by
(...), Orientalia mundi: by (...), Occidentalia. The steps, whereon the Cupids
sat, had a motion contrary, with Analogy, ad motum Planetarum, from the West
to the East: both which turned with their several lights. And with these three
varied Motions, at once, the whole Scene shot it self to the Land.

Above which, the Moon was seen in a Silver Chariot, drawn by Virgins, to
ride in the clouds, and hold them greater light: with the Sign Scorpio, and
the Character, placed before her.

The order of this Scene was carefully, and ingeniously disposed; and as
happily put in act (for the Motions) by the Kings Master Carpenter. The
Paynters, I must needs say, (not to belie them) lent small color to any, to
attribute much of the spirit of these things to their pen'cills. But that must
not be imputed a crime either to the invention, or design.

Here the loud Music ceased; and the Musicians, which were placed in the
Arbors, came forth through the Mazes, to the other Land: singing this full
Song, iterated in the closes by two Eccho's, rising out of the Fountains.

SONG.
WHen Love, at first, did move
From So is he faind by Orpheus, to have appeared first of all the Gods:
awakend by Clotho, and is therefore called Phanes, both by him, and Lactantius.
out of Chaos, brightned
So was the world, and lightened,
As now! Ecch. As now! Ecch. As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness has to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was An agreeing opinion, both with Divines and Philosophers, that the great
Artificer in love with his own Idaea, did, therefore, frame the world.
for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns, Alluding to his name of Himerus, and his signification
in the name, which is Desiderium posta spectum: and more then Eros, which is
only Cupido, ex aspectu amare.
Loves lights admit no shade.
Ecch. Loves lights admit no shade.
Ecch. Admit no shade.
Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind, spoke to the River Thamesis that lay along
between the shores, leaning upon his Vrne (that flowed with water,) and
crowned with flowers; with a blew cloth of Silver robe about him: and was
personated by Master THOMAS GILES, who made the Daunces.

VVLTVRNVS. RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Wherewith thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruictfull Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.

With which the Winds departed; and the River received them into the Land, by
couples and foures, their Cupids coming before them.

Their Persons were.
The QVEENE. La. ARABELLA. Co. of ARVNDEL. Co. of DERBY. Co. of BEDFORD. Co. of
MONTGOMERY. La. ELIZ. GILFORD. La. KAT. PETER. La. ANNE WINTER. La. WINSORE.
La. ANNE CLIFFORD. La. MARY NEVILL. La. ELIZ. HATTON. La. ELIZ. GARRARD. La.
CHICHESTER. La. WALSINGHAM.
The dancing forth a most curious Dance, full of excellent device, and
change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by
the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.

SONG.
SO Beauty on the waters stood,
(When Love had As, in the Creation, he is said, by the Ancients, to have done.
seuer'd earth, from flood!
So when he parted air, from fire,
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a Motion he them taught,
That elder then himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet, That is, borne since the world, and, out of those
duller apprehensions that did not think he was before.
the child of earth,
For Love is elder then his birth.
The Song ended; they Daunced forth their second Dance, more subtle, and full
of change, then the former; and so exquisitely performed; as the Kings Majesty
incited first (by his own liking, to that which all others, there present,
wished) required them both again, after some time of dancing with the Lords.
Which time, to give them respite, was intermitted with Song; first by a treble
voice, in this manner.

SONG
IF all these Cupids, now, were blind
As is I make these different from him, which they feign caecum cupidine^, or
petulantem. as I express beneath in the third song. these being chaste Loves,
that attend a more divine beauty, then that of Loves commune parent.
their wanton Brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his Mother!
Which was seconded by another treble; thus.

SONG.
IT was no polity of Court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should* with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
To which a tenor answered.

SONG.
YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or Beauties not their beauty waighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They do not war, with different darts,
But strike a music of like hearts.
AFter which Songs, they daunc'd Galliards, and C^ranto's; and with those
excellent Graces, that the Music, appointed to celebrate them, showed it
could be silent no longer: but by the first Tenor, admit'd them thus.

SONG.
HAd those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold There has been such a profane Paradoxe published.
that women have no soul,
But seen these move; They would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of Men.
So they do move each heart, and eye
With the The Platonicks opinion. See also Mac. lib. 1. and 2. Some. Scip.
Worlds soul, true Harmony.
Here, they daunc'd a third most elegant, and curious Dance, and not to be
described again, by any art, but that of their own footing: which, ending in
the figure, that was to produce the fourth, January from his state saluted
them, thus,

IANVARIVS. YOur grace is great, as is your Beauty, Dames;
Enough my Feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your Seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, uncertain, floting to each shore,
And to whose having For what Country is it thinks not her own beauty
fairest, yet?
every Clime laid claim,
Each Land, and Nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, Beauties perfect Throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destenies,
And his attractiue beams, that lights these Skies:
Who (though with the Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquered men.

At which they daunc'd their last dance, into their Throne again: and that
turning, the Scene closed with this full Song.

SONG.
STill turn, and imitate the Heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights do so:
May Youth and Pleasure ever flow.
But let your State, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
Cho So all that see your Beauties sphaere
Cho May know the Elysian Fields are here.
Echo. The Elysian feilds are here.
Echo. Elysian feilds are here.
The end.

