THE TRVE INQVISITION. OR THE SAD SOVLES SEARCH: Preached at Newport, May 29.
1632. in the Primary Visitation of the Worshipful Mr. EDWARD BVRBYE
Archdeacon of Winton.

By W. JONES, B. of D. Preacher to the Isle of Wight, and Vicar of Arreton.

Let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6. 4 LONDON Printed by William Jones
dwelling in Red-crosse-streete, 1633.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, MASTER EDWARD BVRBYE, Archdeacon of Winton
Sir
UPON your word, this sermon was made and preached. And though the importunity
of some drew it to the press beyond my intent: yet it is desirous to return
unto you again, that under the wings of your protection, it may remain as a
faithful witness of my unfeined desire, of the reformation of the whole
Deanery of the Isle of Wight To which if you according to your place, shall put
your helping hand, and deal courageously, the Lord shall be with you: and we
shall not cease praying, that you may be an ancient and honorable Father in
Israel.

From my study at Arreton, June 1. 1632. Your Worships at command in the Lord
Jesus, WILLIAM JONES.

THE TRVE INQVISITION, OR THE SAD SOVLES SEARCH.
LAMENTATIONS 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the
Lord.
IT IS Very probable that when the Jews were going into captivity, as it is
threatened, Ierm. 25. then Jeremy made this book of Lamentations; wherein he
first sets down the greatness of Gods judgments.

Secondly, the heinousness of their sins.

Thirdly, he exhorts the people to repentance.

Fourthly, he invites them to lay hold on Gods mercy by faith.

The words of my Text are the sum of the whole book, which may be thus
rendered in a few more words.

Ye see, my dear Countrymen, how the Lord has afflicted us; and doubtless
the cause is our sins. It shall therefore be our wisdom to examine our
selves narrowly, wherein we have transgressed; and then to return into the
path of Gods Commandments, that he may have mercy upon us, and remove his
judgments from us.

Now behold the judgments of God have long hovered over our land: Wherefore as
Jeremy then called the Jews to search their ways; so is it seasonable for
every Minister of the Gospel among us, to call his people to examination of
their ways, that the feirce wrath of God may be turned from us.

And for my part at this time I am called to make a visitation Sermon: ye see
the Visitors are come to inquire concerning all our ways. What fitter
exhortation then can I make, than this of the wise Prophet? Let us search and
try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

In this exhortation I observe two parts; the first stands in searching and
trying our ways: the second, in turning again to the Lord.

Concerning the former part in those words, Let us search and try our ways, I
note three particulars.

First, who be the persons summoned in the particle us.

Secondly the act, which is twofold, search, and try.

Thirdly the object to be searched and tried, our ways.

Touching the first, the persons summoned in the particle, us; No question but
Jeremy speaks to the body of the Jews, including himself. For though he was
a righteous man, yet he knew as David says, Psalm. 143. 2. That in Gods sight,
no man living is justified. To the whole Congregation of Israel therefore does
Jeremy speak, including himself when he says, Let us search, etc.

In like manner at this time, do I direct my speech to the whole Deanery of
the Isle of Wight, not excluding my self, or any of my brethren of the
Ministry.

Nay more, including you also right Worshipful that are come to visit us, and
all your officers from the highest to the lowest; yea and all that have any
hand in this days visitation, as Churchwardens and sidemen, Plainetiffes,
Defendants, and witnesses, all that prove Wills, or take upon them the
administration of other men's goods: in a word, to you all that hear me this
day, as also to my self, do I say in the word of the Lord, Let us search and
try our ways. For though perhaps some among us are not such heinous sinners as
others; yet we cannot but confess if we will speak the truth, that in many
things we sin all: and therefore have just cause every one to search and try
our ways; wherefore I say again and again, Let us all and every one of us,
search and try our ways.

I do not deny but it is the part of the Magistrate, and the duty of the
Minister, and Churchwardens, and all swornemen, to search and try the ways of
all that are committed to their charge; and woe be unto them if they do not:

But yet it is laid as a burden upon every particular person to search
himself, according to that 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man, i. every man, examine him
self, and again, Let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6. 4.

Neither shall we think it strange, that every man is called to the strict
examination of himself, if we mark the reason.

For first, they to whom the care of others is committed, many times are
careless.

Secondly, no man can take notice of all another wanderings; The heart is
deceit full above measure, who can search it? Ier. 17, 9.

Thirdly, Every one of us shall give account to God of himself, Romans 14, 12.
Every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6. 5.

It Is true, if the Magistrate, and Minister, and other overseers, warn not the
wicked whom they epsy, but let them go on in sin, God will require their
blood at their hands; but yet they shall dye in their sins, and bear their
own punishment, Ezec. 33. 8. Which being so, every one that is wise will
ponder his own paths; Every one that has understanding will search and try
his own ways.

So ye have the first particular, every man, high or low, rich or poor,
learned or unlearned, bond or free, must search and try his own ways.

The second particular to be considered is the Act, which is twofold, search,
and try.

By searching, we must understand a narrow looking into our courses by taking
special view of them all.

David expresses the meaning when he says, Psalm. 119. 59. I considered my
ways, that is, as other translations have it, I thougt on my ways, or, I
called all my ways to my remembrance. So then being in my text commanded to
search our ways, it is as if we had been enjoined to ponder all our ways, or
to call to our remembrance, as much as we can, all our bypast thoughts,
words, and deeds.

Moreover when we have searched, or taken special notice of all our ways, we
are commanded in the second place to try them, that is, to weigh them in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and prove them by the touchstone of Gods word,
whether they be good and current, or not.

Behold then thy Duty, whosoever thou art. Thou must often enter into serious
examination and consideration of all thy ways: thou must every day ponder with
thy self, whether thy conversation be suitable to Gods will or not.

Concerning this searching and trying in worldly matters, we are for the most
part very wise: he that has a flock of sheep, will have a shepherd to handle
them daily. He that has much land, will have a bay liffe to oversee it
continually. Ye need not bid the merchant try his silver and gold, and search
his other commodities. Who does not often talk and inquire concerning the
estate of his body?

But concerning the estate of our souls, we are too too negligent. I may say
of our days as Jeremy 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright,
no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one
turns to his course as the horse rusheth into the battle.

Unto whom shall I compare the men of this generation? certainly they are like
the people of Laish: Judge. 18. 27. The children of Dan came unto Laish, a quiet
people and without mistrust, and smote them with the edge of the sword, etc.

Even so, though we hear daily, that the Divill like a roaring Lion goes
about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and that our lusts daily war
against our souls, 1 Pet. 2. 11. and that the whole world lies in wickedness,
1 Ioh. 5. 19. yet we lie still snorting in our sins.

Yea more, though it be most apparent that the Lord has whet his sword, and
prepared instruments of death, as the plague, famine, and the sword, which have
in our country and among our neighbors, devoured many thousands, and ten
thousands within these few years, yet we are not moved hereby to search and
try our ways: We sleep like a man upon the top of a Maste.

Thus much for the second particular, the twofold act, search and try.

I come to the third particular, which is the object, or what we must search
and try, namely, our ways.

And here by this word ways, we must understand our thoughts, words, and
works: So they are often termed in the Scripture, Genesis 6. 12. All flesh had
corrupted his way, i. all mankind had polluted their manners, they were grown
dissolute in their thoughts, words, and deeds.

Now, our thoughts, words and deeds are termed our ways, because by them we
walk as twere to heaven or hell, as by the Kings high way we pass from town
to town. He that thinks good thoughts, speaks good words, and does good
works, is walking in the way to heaven. Bona opera sunt via regn: i. good
works are the way to the kingdom of heaven; Which God has ordained that we
should walk in them, Ephe. 2. 10.

He that thinks evil thoughts, speaks evil words, does evil deeds, is
walking in the way to hell. Prove. 7. 27. Solomon says The house of a whore is
the way to hell: i. whoremongers and adulterers are walking in the ready way
that leads to hell.

The like may be said of the practice of any sin, in thought, word, or deed;
it is the way to hell.

So then, whereas the Prophet says, Let us search and try our ways, It Is as if
he had said, Let us examine our thoughts, words and deeds; Let us consider
wherein we have transgressed the Commandments of God, or done ought against
his will.

And here it is to be noted that he says our ways, not other men's ways: In
this search we must have an eye to our own thoughts, words and deeds.

This is a singular point of wisdom; But very many of us fail most grossly
therein. We are for the most part like those whom St. August. 10. Confess.
calls, Curiosum genus hominum ad Cognoscendum vitam alienam, desidiosum ad
Corrigendum suam: We are curious in searching other men's ways, negligent in
correcting our own.

I do not deny but a man may take notice of his neighbors wanderings, and
rebuke him too; it is the Lords own Commandment, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall
freely rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. And verily we have
all much to answer for, because we have not seasonably reproved our offending
neighbors.

But the course that I now tax, is, that many are so buysie in searching other
men's ways, that they neglect their own: and yet they think themselves wise
men. But a wiser than the wisest says, Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise, thou
shall be wise for thy self. Yea the heathen man Platarch de Curiosit. says,
(...) It Is the end of Philosophy, to know a man's own evils. And the Orator
says very well, Ne quicquam sapit qui sibi non sapit, He is wise in vain,
that is not wise for himself.

Wherefore let us carefully hearken to the counsel of the wisdom of God,
which says, Prove. 4. 25. Let thy eye lids direct thy way before thee; ponder
the path of thy feet: And let all thy ways be ordered aright. And whereas he
says, Let all thy ways be ordered, it gives me occasion to put you in mind,
that he that will make a true search, must search all his ways, and try all
his thoughts, words, and deeds. It Is not sufficient to examine some, or many of
our ways: but we must ponder all our ways. If a Ship spring three leakes,
and only two be stopped, the third will sink the Ship. If a man have two
greevous wounds in his body, and take order to cure only one, that which is
neglected will kill him.

Quidve exempta juvat spinis de pluribus una? Even so if we having diverse lusts
which fight against our souls, do mortify but some of them, it is to no purpose.

God cannot endure these halfe-services. He that will be a man after Gods own
heart, must with David, Ps. 119. 104. utterly abhor all falswais.

The Pharisees were very precise in manythings; yet Christ calls them
hypocrites, and cries woe unto them, because they walked not circumspectly in
all their ways.

The truth is, he that unfeinedly bends his mind against any one sin, hates
all sins; and he that favors himself in any one sin never so small,
never so secret: this man hates no sin heartily, what show soever he makes.
He may perhaps eschew some sins, for some sinister respects, as namely
because they will not sort with his ordinary courses; or are not ageeable to
his complexion; or would hinder him more another way; or because he is taken up
of so many other unclean spirits, that give him no leisure for these.

Who will contend the covetous Crib, for hating prodigality, and excess in
meat, drink, and apparel? Who knows not that he hence reaps no small
advantage?

What considerate man will think the better of a prodigal spend thrift,
because he hears him rail against this or that miserable Churl?

Judas was angry at the waste of the box of precious ointment, and said it
might have bin sold and given to the poor: But it was not because he loved the
poor, or hated waste, but because he carried the bag and was a thief.

The Pharisees were very strict in tything Mint, Annise and Cummin, but if they
had done this sincerely, they would not have neglected the weightier matters of
the Law. For he that looks to some of his ways in obedience unto Gods
Commandment, for the same reason must and will look unto all: And he that
has not an eye to all his ways, in truth regards none.

So then let all that hear me this day, take special notice that we are all
summoned this day, to search and try all our ways: I say again; we are all
bound and commanded, to search and try all our ways. Though in regard of some
of our courses we are applauded in the world, and know that we have done
worthily; yet we must proceed further, and narrowly search and examine all our
whole conversation, and all the passages of our life. 1 Samuel 15. 13. when Saul
returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, he said unto Samuel, Thou
blessed of the Lord, I have performed the commandment of the Lord: And yet ye
know, he had spared Agag the King, and the fat cattle, contrary to the
commandment.

In like manner there be very many in these days, who think themselves good
Christians, because they have done and do many good things, and eschew many
evil ways: They hear the word preached, they pray, they come to the Lords
table, they give alms; they are no murderers, adulterers, thieves; Hereupon
they conclude, as Saul did, they have performed the commandment of the Lord:
whereas if they would search and try all their ways, they would see that they
come far short in other points. For though they hear Gods word duly, they
hate to be reformed: though they keep some part of the Lords day holy, they
spend some other part profanely: though they often call upon Gods name
devoutly, they oftener take his name in vain most fearfully. Though they steal
not their neighbors good, they rob him of his good name: though they will not
strike with the sword, their hearts are full fraught with murderous and
malicious thoughts.

For this cause we must search and try all our ways; we must suffer no one to
escape without due examination.

Moreover, if upon sound trial of our own personal ways, we be able to say
truly with Ezechiah, Isay 38. 3. we have walked before God in truth, and with
a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in his sight, and as David
says Ps. 18. 23. have kept our selves from our own iniquity; yet we must not
here cease searching; we must proceed to searchand try all the ways of those
that are committed unto our charge, because we must answer unto God for them.

Job was a man perfect and upright, and one that feared God and eschewed evil,
by Gods own testimony, Job 1. 8. yet Job thought not this enough, but
continued sanctifying his children, and offering sacrifice for them, Job. 1. 5.

Go thou and do likewise. Thou must be as careful in searching and trying
all the ways of thy servants and children, etc. as thine own; wherein because
Eli failed, he was fearfully plagued by the Lord, 1 Samuel 4.

To conclude this point, if thou be a private man, thou must not pry into the
ways of thy neighbors: but concerning those abominations which are openly
committed in the land, thou art bound with them, Ezech 9. 4. to bewail the
same: But if thou art a Magistrate, thou must search out and reform all abuses
in thy quarter: thou must not bear the sword in vain: For thou art the
Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.
4.

Lastly, though this course of searching and trying our ways, must be taken
principally when God visits us with any plague: or when the Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Magistrate (as now) comes to inquire concerning our ways; yet
ought it to be daily and continually used, because we are apt to go astray
continually, and to wander every moment. But the most convenient time, for this
searching and trying all our ways, by St. Chrysostom and others, is thought
to be every evening.

Thus have I showed unto you a point of singular wisdom, to be put in practice
every day by all men, all the days of their lives.

Many therefore of this generation, are not so wise as they would be accounted,
because either altogether, or in part, they neglect this duty of searching and
trying their ways.

Some (let all things go how they will) pass their days in sottish security,
and never say to their own souls so much as, What have I done, until with
the rich glutton, they be suddenly plunged into hell.

Others, though they be earnestly exhorted to search and try their ways, will
by no means entertain any counsel in this kind, but go on resolutely as they
have done.

In this rank stand, first our recusant Papists, who will do as their Fathers
and Grandfathers have done, tell them what ye can.

Secondly of this number are very many profane wretches, which seem to hate
instruction, and put off all admonition with a scoff.

Thirdly, here also may be ranged much people, men and women, who having
entered into some unlawful course, wherein they find, either pleasure, as
Herod in his brother Philips wife, Luke 3. or profit, as the Craftsmen in
making Shrines for the Temple of Diana, Acts 19. 25. or honor, as Naaman in
going with his Mr. to his idolatrous house, 2 Kings 5. cannot endure to hear,
that they must search and try their ways, because they are resolved whatsoever
they hear not to change their course.

Such are in these days our common Stage Players, gamehousekeepers,
ministrells, jesters, typlers, stews, usurers, etc.

All these abhor this searching and trying of their ways. They will not endure
to have the lawfullnesse of their courses called in question.

Others there are which perform this duty but only in part, and of these
there are diverse sorts; first, are they which do but talk of it, as Felix,
Acts 24. 25. who when Paul preached of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come, trembled, but said, Go thy way, and when I have a convenient
time, I will send for thee: but he never sent.

Even so many in these days, when they hear a searching Sermon, say here is
good Doctrine, it is pity but it should be followed, but after that time never
think upon it again.

Secondly, some are almost persuaded to search their ways, as Agrippa who said
to Paul, Acts 26. 28. Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. But this
almost will not serve the turn.

Thirdly, some search and try their ways, but friendly as Ahab, 1 Kings 21.
27. when he heard Elias threatening, rent his clothes and put on sackcloth and
fasted, etc. But as soon as the storm was over, he was the same man: Even so
now, when God sends any judgment, public or private, there be many that will
cast down their countenance, and speak humbly, and mournfully; but when God
ceases the plague, their submission is ended.

Fourthly some seem to search and try their ways soundly, but it is only some
of their ways; others must not be touched. We have an example in Herod, Mark.
6. 20. Herod when he heard John did many things at his preaching: But when
John told him of his incest with his brothers wife, he could no longer bear,
but cast John into prison.

Even so now, there are not a few which are persuaded to search and try many of
their ways, but they will by no means examine all: And among these, first,
some search only great and gross sins, as may appear, because they usually
say, I am no whore, nor thief, I am no murderer, no adulterer; and yet they
abound with lesser sins.

Secondly, some strain at a gnat, and swallow a Camel: they are very precise
in searching out some small faults, and yet suffer grand sins to reign
without control.

Thirdly, some are zealous for the first table; they abhor Atheism, they hate
Idols, they will not swear, nor break the Sabbath: but they little regard the
second table: for they oppress, defraud and wrong their neighbors many ways
without scruple.

Fourthly some will stand upon their Justification, that they deal justly and
charitably with all men; but yet make no bones of taking Gods name in vain, or
breaking the Sabbath.

Fifthly, some seem so to look to their ways, that they cannot greatly be taxed
for the open breach of the first or second table, as they concern God and
their neighbor: but touching their own persons, they are very irregular; they
walk not soberly, temperately, humbly; but proudly, wantonly, or riotously.

In the fifth place, some search and try all their own ways, but they are
negligent in searching and trying the ways of those that are committed to
their charge.

In the sixth place, some seem fully to put this precept in execution; they
search and try all their ways, and the ways of their friends and families,
and set all in a good course: but on a sudden, upon some temptation of wealth,
pleasure or honor, they start back and with Demas embrace this present world.

Thus ye see how many are defective in the due performance of this maine, and
most necessary duty of searching and trying their ways. What remains but that
I exhort every one of you, to take special notice of the sore of his own
heart; I mean the particular case wherein he has offended, touching this
searching and trying of his ways, that so for the time to come, he may better
perform the same.

I press this duty of searching and trying our ways the rather, because I
find that many among the heathen have done it very diligently. Cicero de
senectute, brings in Cato saying, Quid quoque die dixerim, audierim, egerim,
commemoro vesperi, i. What I have said, heard, done, every day, I recount at
evening. Seneca lib. 3. de Ira, cap. 36. says that Sextius was wont every
night to call himself to a reckoning, saying, Quod hodie malum tuum sanasti,
i. what evil of thine have thou cured this day? Again, Seneca says of
himself, that he was wont without fail, every night to examine himself upon
his bed, concerning the foregoing day. I might cite many more, but others have
done it; and these are enough to cry shame upon us Christians, if we will not
practice such an excellent duty, which has so many commandments, promises,
and threatenings in the Scripture.

Besides, there is no course in the world which is more avayleable, either to
bring us into Gods favor, or to keep us from wandering, than this daily
searching and trying of our ways.

For the first, one says very well, Illam animam diligit Deus quae se
sinecessatione considerat, et sine simalatione judicat, God loves that soul,
which without ceasing searches it self, and without guile judges it self: and
if we would thus judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor.
11. 31.

Secondly, there is no better means to keep us from wandering, than this daily
searching and trying our ways. If we would stand upon our watch, and daily
examine all our thoughts, words and deeds, only concerning these two questions,
whence they come, and whither they tend; it is impossible we should fall into
sin, at least lie in sin as we commonly do.

For want of this searching and trying their ways, it is, that all the
posterity of Adam fall so foully.

Nay, if Eve had tried the words of the Serpent; or Adam considered the gift of
his wife; neither the one, nor the other had eaten the forbidden fruit.

If Cain had but said to his soul, when he went about to kill Abel, what art
thou now about to do? he would never have done it.

If David had tried his strange lust, when he first saw Vriahs wife, he would
have made a covenant with his eyes as Job did.

All the fearful falls of the children of God when they were negligent, are
so many testimonies, that without this daily searching and trying our ways, we
cannot be safe, and no marvel. For no sin appears at the first in its own
proper hue, but masked, and in the likeness of some virtue. If therefore we
neglect this point of wisdom: I mean, if we do not daily search and try our
ways, we must needs entertain some vice in stead of virtue.

For neglect of this searching and trying, it comes to pass that in these
days, there be so many drunkards, fornicators swearers, etc. The drunkard
says to his mates, Come sirs, shall we go play the good fellows? he will not
say for shame, shall we go and be drunk? then few but would seem to abhor
the motion.

The fornicator, that he may compass his desire, comes to a maid, and promises
her present marriage. How many have been thus deluded? and yet few will take
heed.

The swearer alleages for himself, that either he is constrained to swear, or
that he swears nothing but the truth.

In like manner, all other sins come stealing upon us under virtuous names:
Pride in apparel and building, will be styled neatness; covetousness,
thrift; riotous behavior and filthy talk, merriment; malice, a good stomach;
revenge, courage; prodigality, a kind heart, etc.

If therefore we be not careful to search and try all our ways, ye see how
easily we may be deceived.

On the other side, if we daily and truly search and try every course that is
propounded to us, before we adventure upon it, we shall be preserved from many
sins, as we may see by the example of Joseph, Genesis 39. 7. Joseph's Masters
wife, an honorable woman, cast her eyes upon Joseph, and she said, lie with
me. Joseph trying and examining the motion, answers v. 9. how can I do this
great wichednesse, and sin against God?

In like manner if we would try and examine all motions which are made to us,
we should be innocent from great offenses.

But perhaps some will say unto me as David does, Psalm. 19. 12. Who can
understand his errors? if we cannot understand them, how shall we search and
try them?

I answer, when I say that every man must search and try all his ways, I do
not imagine that every one can presently understand all his errors; Satan by
his subrilty will so blind us; the world by evil customs will so sway us;
the flesh by her sweet allurements will so be witch us, that though we be never
so circumspect in searching, some small faults will escape a long time.

But if we heartily pray for the pardon of all secret faults, and continue
daily to use all wholesome means to find them out, God will accept our honest
endeavor.

But ye will say further, what means must we use in searching and trying our
ways?

Answ. The Philosophers make reason, the touchst one of all our actions. To
reason also some of the Fathers seem to ascribe too much. But the truth is,
humane reason is so corrupt since the fall of Adam, that it is not fit to be
the chief in this buisnesse.

But thanks be to God we have (...), a more sure word, as it is called 2 Pet.
1. 19. to this if we take heed we do well.

This word was given by inspiration, 2 Pet. 1. 21. This word is pure,
inlightning the eyes, Psalm. 19. 8. It Is a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119. 105.
It Is able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. It Is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, v.
16. In a word, The word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any
two edged sword, peircing even to the deviding asunder of the soul and spirit,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12.
Lastly, we shall be judged by the word, at the day of judgment, Ioh. 12. 48.
To. 2. 16. All which considered, it is most plain, that the word of God is the
best light and rule to search and try all our actions.

And now if all we, which are here gathered together, should examine our ways
by this word of God, certainly many of them would be found very crooked.

It is not possible for me in the short space allotted for this exercise, to
touch all our ways: I will therefore meddle only with those, which are most
properly inquirable at this visitation Court.

And because the messenger of God, must be as God himself, no respecter of
persons, I will begin with the chief and mine own Coat, and tell them
wherein their ways are thought, not to be agreeable to Gods word.

And because Right Worshipful, you and your officers, come to inquire what
fame there goes of us, I think it very requisite, to inform you first what
fame goes of your selves, that ye may take occasion to search and try your
own ways, before ye meddle with others.

This then is the common fame of the country, that, whether it be through the
fault of the chief Magistrate, and his official, Commissary, or Surrogates,
or Register, or Sumners; offenders are not ordinarily censured, according to
the nature of their offense. And that the great and rich, get through your
Ecclesiastical nets, as easily as hornets through the spiders web. But that
the poorer sort stand excommunicated a long time, though they be never so
penitent, only because they have no money to pay.

Moreover, that in your visitation Courts, most of you are more greedy of
gain, than sollicitous for reformation, which is the maine end of these
assemblies.

Lastly, that in your Consistory, you and the Procters prolong trifling causes,
for the multiplying of fees: and that factious plaintiffes, which wage law for
the vexation of their neighbors, find too favorable entertainment.

Now for my part, I do not accuse any man, but if these reports be true: then
I must needs admonish you in the word of the Lord, Iam. 4. 8. that ye cleanse
your hands, and purify your hearts, and be afflicted, and mourn and weep.
And I pray you remember as Saint Paul says, Romans 13. 4. that you bear not the
sword in vain. Remember also what the rock and God of Israel said to David, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

Wherefore as good Iehosaphat said to his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Take heed
what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
judgment; wherefore now let the fear of God be upon you, take heed and do
it. For there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of Gifts.

Gifts, as God says, Deuteronomy. 16. 19; blind the eyes of the wise.

Lastly, to all the officers of this Court, I say in the name of the Lord, as
John Baptist said to the Publicans, Luke 3. 13. Exact no more than is appointed
you, remembering that extortion is a damnable sin. And what shall it profit a
man to win the whole world, and loose his own soul? says Christ Mat. 16.
26.

In the second place, touching us Ministers, there be many complaints that we
do not according to the word of the Lord, take heed to our selves, and the
flocks, over which the holy Ghost has made us overseers.

Some of us are careless touching our own lives; we are not examples to our
people, as the Spirit commands, 1 Timothy 4. 12, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. Yea it is verified of some of us which
was spoken, Hos. 4.9. There shall be like people, like Priest.

Again, though the Spirit charge us all, 2 Timothy 4, before God and the Lord
Jesus, to preach the word, and be instant in season, out of season; to reprove,
rebuke, exhort: Yet diverse of us, are more careful in feeding our selves, than
in feeding our flocks.

But above all, we are said to be generally defective, in that most necessary
part of our office, Catechizing, whereunto we have of late years been so
often exhorted, both by our Kings and Bishops. I know what most do allege,
that parents and Masters, will not cause their children and servants to come to
be Catechized; but I know withal, that if we had been as zealous in the
Lords cause, as we are for the most part for our own Commodities, we might
have done a great deal more good this way than we have done.

Wherefore, my dear brethren, I beseech you all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
who has committed his lambs, as well as his sheep to our care; let us all
with one heart, and with all our might, set upon this most laudable and
profitable exercise of Catechizing; without which, we shall do little good by
our preaching.

The third sort of people that are agents in this visitation Court, are the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, who are bound by oath to present unto the Judge all
offenders.

But except there be some notorious crime which they think cannot ly hid,
they use to present omnia been; and herein they think they deal very wisely.
For as I have heard some of them say, we shall bring fees to the Court, and
nothing shall be the better.

But I pray you consider, in the mean time ye forswear your selves, and
incur the heavy wrath of God. For God will not take it for an excuse that ye
say, though we should present, the Judge will not reform. The Judge shall
bear his own burden; and what a fearful thing it is for you to fall into the
hands of the living God, by that abominable sin of perjury?

Wherefore what conceit soever ye have had here tofore, touching these
visitation Courts. Now I admonish you in the name of him who shall judge both
quick and dead, present all offenders against the Canons without fear or
favor: ye are ordained as the eyes and watchmen of the Judge in every parish.
And if ye were careful according to your oath, wherewith you bind your
souls every visitation, to present drunkards, swearers, raylers, scolds,
slanderers, ribaudes, sowers of discords, fornicators, adulterers, Sabbath
breakers, etc. Doutlesse iniquity would not abound in every parish as it does.

Lastly, I may say to the whole Congregation, and to every sort and degree,
from the highest to the lowest, that if we would search and try our ways by
the rule of Gods word, they will appear very irregular* yea more, those things
wherein we walk most suitable to Gods will, it is to be feared, we do them only
superficially, and for form and fashion, rather than for conscience and
obedience to God and his word. We which are Gods Ministers, for the most part
preach for form, and ye which profess your selves to be Gods people, hear
for form. For when the sermon is ended, we all depart, and think upon it no
more, as if we had fully done our duty in speaking, and ye in hearing, and
there were no more required at our hands.

This is the cause why though there be so much Preaching in the land daily, yet
there is very small progress in piety.

Which being so, what remains, but that I admonish you all and my self also,
in the words of the second part of my text, to turn again to the Lord?

This is the only course for all that have gone astray, as you may see, Joel
2. 12. 13. there the Lord exhorts the sinful Jews, and all that have sinned
as they did, saying, Turn ye even to me withal your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your hearts and not your
garments, and turn to the Lord your God: for he is gracious, and merciful,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. i. If
we weep and rent our hearts for all our wanderings, and turn from all our
by-pathes to serve the Lord, in sobriety, righteousness, and godliness, God
will remove from us, all the plagues and judgments which he has sent or
threatened. But if we go on in our evil ways, then the Lord will power down
his vialls of indignation upon us: God will wound the hairy scalp of such as go
on still in their trespasses, Psalm. 68. 21. Wherefore I say again for a
conclusion, let us thoroughly search and try all our ways, and whiles it is
called to day begin to turn to the Lord our God with all our hearts, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: Oh let us rent and tear our
souls with godly sorrow for all our transgressions of Gods ordinances, and
especially at this time, for our formal and perfunctory usage of these
visitation Courts, which are ordained merely, for the reformation of the
faults of the Country; so shall not iniquity be our destruction: for the Lord
desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live.

This repentance unto life he give us, who gave himself for us, even Jesus
Christ our righteousness. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be
honor and power everlasting, Amen.

FINIS.

