CHLORIDIA.

RITES TO CHLORIS AND HER NYMPHS.

Personated in a Masque, at Court.

By the Queens Majesty And her Ladies.

At Shroue-tide.

1630.

Vnius tellus ante coloris erat.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley.

CHLORIDIA.
THe King, and Queens Majesty, having given their command for the Invention of
a new argument, with the whole change of the Scene, wherein her Majesty, with
the like number of her Ladies, purposed a presentation to the King. It was
agreed, it should be the celebration of some Rites, done to the Goddess
Chloris, who in a general counsel of of the Gods, was proclaimed Goddess of
the flowers, according to that of Ovid, in the Fasti.

Arbitrium tu Dea floris habe.

And was to be stellified on Earth, by an absolut decree from Jupiter, who
would have the Earth to be adorned with stars, as well as the Heaven.

Upon this hinge, the whole Invention moved.

The ornament, which went about the Scene, was composed of Foliage, or leaves
heightened with gold, and enterwouen with all sorts of flowers; and naked
children, playing, and climbing among the branches; and in the midst, a great
garland of flowers, in which was written, CHLORIDIA.

The Curtain being drawn up, the Scene is discovered, consisting of pleasant
hills, planted with young trees, and all the lower banks adorned with flowers.
And from some hollow parts of those hills, Fountaynes come gliding down,
which, in the farre-of Land-shape, seemed all to be converted to a river.

Over all, a serene sky, with transparent clouds, giving a great luster to the
whole work, which did imitate the pleasant Spring.

When the Spectators had enough fed their eyes, with the delights of the
Scene, in a part of the air, a bright cloud begins to break forth; and in it,
is sitting a plumpe Boy, in a changeable garment, richly adorned, representing
the mild Zephyrus. On the other side of the Scene, in a purplish cloud,
appears the Spring, a beautiful Maid, her upper garment green, under it, a
white robe wrought with flowers; A garland on her head.

Here Zephyrus begins his dialogue, calling her forth, and making narration of
the Gods decree at large, which she obeyes, pretending, it is come to Earth
already: and there begun to be executed, by the Kings favor, who assists with
all bounties, that may be either urged, as causes, or reasons of the Spring.

The first Song.
ZEPHYRVS. Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad news, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heaven, of Earth shall have no odds,
But one shall love another:
Their glories they shall mutual make,
Earth look on Heaven, for Heavens sake;
Their honor's shall be even:
All emulation cease, and iarres;
Jove will have Earth to have her stars
And lights, no less then Heaven.

SPRING. It is already done, in flowers
As fresh and new as are the hours,
By warmth of yonder Sun.
But will be multiplied on us,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRVS
Like favor we have won.

ZEPHYRVS. Give all to him: His is the dew,
The heat, the humor,

SPRING. -- All the true -- Beloved of the Spring!

ZEPHYRVS. The Sun, the Wind, the Verdure!

SPRING. -- All, That wisest Nature cause can call
Of quickening any thing.

At which, Zephyrus passes away through the air, and the Spring descends to
the Earth: and is received by the Naiades, or Napeae; who are the Nymph's,
Fountaynes, and Servants of the season --

The second Song.
FOVNTAYNES. Fair Maid, but are you come to dwell,
And tarry with is here?

SPRING. Fresh Fountaynes, I am come to tell
A tale in yond'soft ear,
Whereof the murmr will do well:
If you your parts will bear.

FOVNTAYNES. Our purlings wait upon the Spring.

SPRING. Go up with me, then: help to sing
The story to the King.

Here the Spring goes up, singing the argument to the King; and the Fountaynes
follow with the close.

SPRING. Cupid has taken offense of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Council, he was so deserted,
Not to be called into their Guild
But slightly passd by, as a child.

FOVNTAYNES. Wherein he thinks his honor was perverted.

SPRING. And though his Mother seek to season,
And rectify his rage with reason,
By showing he lives yet under her command,
Rebellious he, does disobey,
And she has forced his arms away.

FOVNTAYNES. To make him feel the Justice of her hand.

SPRING. Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his speed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and stir up lealousy,
To make a party against the Gods,
And set Heaven, Earth, and Hell at odds.

FOVNTAYNES. And raise a chaos of calamity.

The Song ended, the Nymphs fall into a dance, to their voices, and
instruments, and so return into the Scene.

THE ANTIMASQVE.
First Entry. A part of the under ground opening, out of it enters a
Dwarfe-Post from Hell, riding on a Curtall, with cloven feet, and two
Lacqueys: These dance, and make the first entry of the Antimasque. He alights,
and speaks.

POSTILION. Hold my stirrup, my one Lacquey; and look to my Curtall, the
other: walk him well, Sirrah, while I expatiate my self here in the report of
my office! oh the Furies! how I am ioyed with the title of it! Postillion of
Hell! yet no Mercury. But a mere Cacodaemon, sent hither with a packet of
news! news! never was Hell so furnished of the commodity of news! Love has
bin lately there, and so entertained by Pluto, and Proserpine, and all the
Grandees of the place as, it is there perpetual Holy Day: and a cessation of
torment granted, and proclaimed for ever! Halfe-famish'd Tantalus is fallen to
his fruit, with that appetite, as it threaten's to undo the whole company of
Costardmungers, and has ariuer before him, running excellent wine lxion is
loosed from his wheel, and turned Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch
friskals, and leads Laualtos, with the Lamiae! Sisyphus has left rolling the
stone, and is grown a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gamesters, Parsons
in hell, and gives them odds: upon Tityus his breast, that (for fix of the nine
aeres) is counted the subtlest bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies
are at a game called nine pins, or keilles, made of old usurers bones, and
their souls looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Never was there
such freedom of sport. Danaus daughters have broke their bottomless tubs,
and made bonfires of them. All is turned triumph there. Had hell gates bin
kep't with half that strictness as the entry here has bin to night, Pluto
would have had but a cola Court, and Proserpine a thin presence, though both
have a vast territory We had such a stir to get in, I and my Curtall, and my
two Lacqueys all ventured through the eye of a Spanish needle, we had never
come in else, and that was by the favor of one of the guard who was a
womans-tayler, and held open the passage. Cupid by commission has carried
Iealoufie from Hell, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimulation, with other Goblins, to
trouble the Gods. And I am sent after post, to raise Tempest, Winds,
Lightnings, Thunder, Rain, and Snow, for some new exployt they have against
the Earth, and the Goddess Chloris, Queen of the flowers, and Mistress of the
Spring. For joy of which I will return to my self, mount my Bidet, in a
dance; and coruet upon my Curtall.


The speech ended, the Postillion mounts his Curtall, and with his Lacqueys,
danceth forth as he came in.

2 Entry. Cupid, Jealousy, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimulation, dance together.

3 Entry. The Queens Dwarf, richly apparrel'd, as a Prince of Hell, attended
by 6 infernal Spirits; He first danceth alone, and then the Spirits: all
expressing their joy, for Cupids coming among them.

4 Entry. Here the Scene changes, into a horrid storm. Out of which enters
the Nymph Tempest, with four Winds. they dance.

5 Entry. Lightnings, 3 in number, their habits gliste ring, expressing that
effect, in their motion.

6 Entry. Thunder alone dancing the tunes to a noise, mixed, and imitating
thunder.

7 Entry. Rain, presented by 5 persons all swollen, and clouded over, their
hair flagging, as if they were wet, and in their hands, balls full of sweet
water, which, as they dance, sprinkle all the room.

8 and last Entry. Seven with rugged white heads, and beards, to express Snow,
with flakes on their garments, mixed wi^h hayle. These having danced, return
into the stormy Scene, whence they came.

Here, by the providence of Juno, the tempest on an instant cease: And the
Scene is changed into a delicious place, figuring the bower of Chloris. Where,
in an arbor fayn'd of Goldsmiths work, the ornament of which was borne up
with Terms of Satyrs, beautified with Festones, garlands, and all sorts of
fragrant flowers. Beyond all this, in the sky a far of appeared a Rainebow,
In the most eminent place of the Bower, sat the Goddess Chloris, accompanied
with fourteen Nymphs, their apparel white, embroydered, with silver, trimmed
at the shoulders with great leaves of green, embroydered with gold, falling
one under the other. And of the same work were their bases, their head-'tires
of flowers, mixed with silver, and gold, with some sprigs of Aegrets among, and
from the top of their dressing, a thin veil hanging down.

All which beheld,

The Nymphs, Rivers, and Fountaynes with the Spring, sung this rejoicing Song.
Song. 3.
RIVERS, SPRING, FOVNTAYNES. Run out, all the Floods, in joy with your silver
feet;
And have to meet, the enamored Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountaynes sing:
The story of the flowers; preserved by the Hours;
At Juno's soft command, and Iris showers;
Sent to quench jealousy, and all those powers
Of Loves rebellious war:
Whilst Chloris sits a shining star
To crown, and grace our jolly song, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.

Which ended, the Goddess, and her Nymphs descend the degrees, into the room,
and dance the entry of the grand-masque.

After this, another Song by the same persons, as before. Song. 4,
RIVERS, FOVNTAYNES. Tell a truth, gay Spring, let us know
What feet they were, that so
Impres't the Earth, and made such various flowers to grow!

SPRING. She that led, a Queen was at least,
Or a Goddess, above the rest:
And all their graces, in her self expres't!

RIVERS, FOVNTAYNES. O'it were a fame, to know her name!
Whether she were the root;
Or they did take the impression, from her foot.

The Masquers here dance their second dance. Which done,

The farther Prospect of the Scene changes into air, with a low Land-shape,
in part covered with clouds: And in that instant, the Heaven opening, Juno, and
Iris are seen, and above them many aerie spirits, sitting in the clouds.

Song. 5.
IVNO. Now Juno, and the Air shall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our discolourd bow. Iris, what news?

IRIS. The air is clear, your bow can tell,
Chloris renowned, Spite fled to Hell;
The business all is well. And Cupid sues-

IVNO. For pardon. Does he?

IRIS. He sheds tears
More then your Birds have eyes.

IVNO The Gods have ears.
Offenses, made against the Deities,
Are soon forgot-

IRIS. If who offends, be wife.

Here, out of the Earth, arises a Hill, and on the top of it, a globe, on
which Fame is seen standing with her trumpet, in her hand; and on the Hill,
are seated four Persons, presenting, Poesy, History, Architecture, and
Sculpture: who together with the Nymphs, Floods, and Fountaynes, make a full
Quire, at which, Fame begins to mount, and moving her wings, flies, singing
up to Heaven:

FAME. Rise golden Fame, and give thy name a birth

CHORUS. From great and generous actions, done on Earth.

FAME. The life of Fame is action.

CHORUS. Understood
That action must be virtuous, great, and good!

FAME. Virtue it self by Fame is often protected,
And dies despised --

CHORUS. Where the Fames neglected

FAME. Who has not heard of Chloris, and her bower
Fair Iris act, employed by Juno's power
To guard the Spring, and prosper every flower,
Whom Jealousy and Hell thought to devour?

CHORUS. Great actions often obscurd by time, may lie,
Or envy --

FAME But they last to memory.

POESY. We that sustain thee, Learned Poesy

HISTORY. And I, her sister, severe History.

ARCHITECTVRE. With Architecture, who will raise thee high,

SCVLPTVRE. And Sculpture, that can keep thee from to dye.

CHORUS. All help lift thee to eternity.

JVNO. And Juno, through the air, does make thy way,

IRIS. By her serenest Messenger of Day.

FAME. Thus Fame ascend's, by all degrees, to Heaven:
And leaves a light, here, brighter, then the seven.

CHORUS. Let all applaud the sight.
Air first, that gave the bright
Reflections, Day or Night!
With these supports of Fame,
That keep alive her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Fount's, Rivers, every thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Resound, and sing
The honor's of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queen of Flowers;
The sweetness of all Showers;
The ornament of Bowres;
The top of Par-amours!

Fame, being hidden in the clouds, the hill sinkes: and the Heaven closes.

The Masquers dance with the Lords. The End.
The Names of the Masquers as they sat in the Bower.
The Queen.
Countess of Carlisle. Countess of Oxford. Lady Strange. Countess of
Borkeshire. Lady Anne Cauendish. Countess of Carnaruan. Countess of Newport.
Lady Penelope Egertn. M. Porter. M. Dor. Savage. La. Howard. M. Eliz. Savage.
M. Anne Wepon. M. Sophia Cory.

