VOXBELLI, OR, AN ALARVM TO WAR.



LONDON, Printed by H.L. for Nathanael Newbery. 1626.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Horatio Veere, Knight, Baron of Tilbury, etc. all
blessings wished, that concern this life, and that which is to come.
Right Honorable;
I Am not ignorant, that great is the mischief and misery of war; than which
(as (...). Maxim. Tyrius. Dissert. 14. p. 143.
one says) nothing amongst humane occurrences is more sorrowful, less
pleasant: Theat. Mund p. 85.
Beasts, in their kind, having more rest, and pleasure than they whose life is
led in warfare. For whereas the beast sleeps the night in its cave and den, the
Soldier takes his rest at the sign of the Moon, 2. Cor. 11.27.
in watchings often, in fastings often; subject to the violence of all Martial
storms, uncertain what the event and success will be: whose office is, upon
the Trumpets sound, either mortem far, or infer, to slay or be slain; and
neither of both, without some prejudice. If he falls, his wife, his children,
his kindred, his country have the loss of him: if he conquers, his rising is
the ruin of others; his riches the spoil of others, his joy the mourning of
others: insomuch, that he may cry out as Marcus Aurelius did (when after many
victories, he received his Triumph in Rome): When I saw the poor captives in
iron chains, desolate Widows bereaved of their husbands, disconsolate Orphans
deprived of their parents, a great deal of treasure gotten by force, and
thought upon the number of those that were dead; albeit I outwardly triumphed,
yet inwardly lamented, and wept tears of blood. In times of war, Countries are
wasted, Cities dispoyled, Temples profaned, Religion despised, equity
suppressed, humanity defaced; and what cruelty, what impiety not notoriously
practiced? All this considered, I may (possibly) be censured by critical
carpers, for setting pen to paper on such a subject, and especially for
inciting to so bloody a business. But (the call being not mine but the Lords)
I shall the more willingly bear the burden of any undeserved blame, if what I
have written may prevail to provoke them whom it concerns, to a readiness to
succor the distressed Church in foreign parts. If it be demanded what has
emboldened me to crave your Honors patronage for these few papers; I can
answer, nothing, but partly your love to Christ his cause, as you are a
Believer; and partly your place in Gods field, as a warlike Commander. If the
Author be thought presumptuous, notwithstanding these motives, censure his
boldness at your pleasure; but I beseech you be pleased to shelter the Matter
(not needless for these times) from the worlds displeasure: so shall you
engage him to be a suitor to the Throne of Grace, for your Honors prosperity
in war and peace, who is

Your Hon: ready to be commanded in the Lord, THO: BARNES.

VOX BELLI.
IT is a saying of one of the Fathers, in a written discourse to one of his
friends; Facito aliquid operis, ut te semper diabolus inveniat occupatum.
Hieron ad Rust. Monach.
Be always doing something, that Satan may never find thee doing nothing. The
slothful person does the wiseman send to the silly Pismyre, to learn her
ways Prove. 6.6.
. The Apostle charged the Thessalonian Church, that he that would not labor
should not eat 2. These. 3.10.
. And our Savior himself pronounces that servant blessed, whom when his
Master comes, he shall find doing Luke 12.43.
. All this, to give us to understand, that Nider Fornic. l. 1. c. 1. p. 9.
idleness is permitted to none: emploiment (the Hieron. ad Rust. Monach.
Devils disquieter) is required of Nid. supr.
all. For the sluggard takes no care but to Leo Ser. 5. in Epiph.
pamper his belly; makes his life odious, Sen. Epi. 19.
and beastly, Bernard.
disableth nature to do its duty Cassian. l. 10.
, defiles his soul with a world of iniquities Senec. Epist. 19.
, diseaseth his body with abundance of maladies, and exposes Prosp Aqui. de
vit. contempl.
both to eternal misery, in an utter exclusion from Gods blessed presence in
his Kingdom of glory. Now, because not to be well exercised is to be ill
exercised Chrysostom. de virt. and vitio.
, and the doing of that which is naught, is as bad, if not worse, as the doing
of nothing: Therefore the maine object of our exercise, must be Gods business.
Now, in as much as the Lord has many and differing works for man to do;
works of peace, (he being the God of Peace 2. These. 3.16.
:) works of blood, (he being a man of War Isa 42.13.
) neither of these must be omitted, when need requires, and occasion serves
for the doing of them. Which thing the Prophet Jeremy taking into due
consideration, (being also a Prophetical Diviner of Moabs destruction,) could
not but earnestly incite to this work of the Lord, of not withholding the sword
from blood. He was not ignorant that peace is a Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 40. p. 244.
better, yea a blesseder Synes. orat. de regn. p 14.
thing than war; and that Basil. Seleuc. orat. 23. p. 207.
for one army of men to come bandied like enemies against another, is (as an
Ancient once spoke) both grievous and cruel: In which respect, Blessed are the
Peacemakers, (our Saviors text Matthew. 5.9.
,) would (to our seeming) a great deal more fitly have dropped from his pen.
But it seems, he knew withal, that a lawful war is to be preferred before
an unlawful peace; and that war with Moab, would be as well Isreal's peace,
as the Chaldees victory: ( (...). Arist. de Repub. l. 8. c. 15. Propter pacem
bellum paratur. Synes. orat. de Reg. p. 14.
peace and Est enim belli finis victoria. Plutarch. Scipio. in vitis to 3. lat.
edit. in 4. p. 465.
victory being the ends of war.) For which reason, this good man, Gods
Penman, must be borne with, though he writes a Text in red letters, having the
sword for his pen, blood for his ink, the curse for his style.

Ier. 48.10.
Cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood.
A Text so terrible, that at the first it made me fearful to meddle with it;
especially, when I contemplated with my self, that it would compel me to
speak of curses and woes in a land of grace: of blood and blows in a land of
peace. But when I considered that there are Canaanites to be smitten at home,
Christians to be succored abroad, I took heart to venture this field;
persuading my self, it would not prove unprofitable: albeit, I am caused to
doubt of the acceptablenesse of it, by the consciousnesse of my weakness to
weild my weapon as I should.

The words (being a commination or threatening) do cut themselves into two
pieces; a Quid, and a Quis, The parts.
a Subject, and an Object. A thing threatened, a party threatened.

The Subject or thing threatened, is malediction, [Cursed.] The Object or man
threatened, is [hee that keeps back his sword from blood.] From the first
(which must first be handled) we may collect this point, Doct. 1. Gods Prophets
were wont to threaten.
That it was the practice of Gods Prophets in former ages, to denounce the
Curse in their Sermons at sometimes. They did not always come with peace,
peace, and words of blessing in their mouths. Their songs (like Psalm. 101.1.
David's) had a due mixture, and were composed of judgment, as well as mercy.
The word Cursed (as here you see, and elsewhere may see) flows from the
mouth, falls from the pen of old Jeremy, Ier. 11.3. and 17.5.
for all he was so tender boweld, so merciful hearted a man. The writings of
Moses are full of Curses. Twenty times at least in the book of Deuteronomie,
has he this phrase up, Cursed be he that does this, and Cursed be be that
does that. Read a whole catalogue in the 27. chapter, from the 15. verse to
the end; in the 28. chapter, from the 16 verse to the 21. The Prophet Esaias is
in the same strain. The CURSE has devoured the earth Isa. 24.6.
. The sinner being an hundred years old, shall be ACCURSED and 65.20.
. So is Malachy, Cursed be the deceiver Mal. 1.14.
. I will send a CURSE upon you, and will CURSE your blessings: yea, I have
CURSED them already and 2.2.
. Ye are CURSED with a CURSE and 3.9.
. And so were the rest of the holy Prophets. Never a one amongst them all, did
always abstain from thundering, from threatening, as is very manifest in their
writings. Neither need we marvel any whit at it: For they had both cause to
do it, and a call unto it.

First, they had cause to threaten. In their times the omitted, or but coldly
performed; forbidden courses were eagerly followed, delightfully walked in. Wh^
mean else the many and manifold complaints of the Lord against Israel for her
sins, against Jacob for her transgressions? Now the righteous God has so
ordered, that where the breach of the Law goes before, the curse of the Law
must follow after Deuteronomy. 28.15.16. (...). Theod. quaest. 34. in Deuteronomy. p. 170.
. Which wise and just ordinance of the Lord, his holy Prophets having weighed,
could not, did not, spare to spend the arrows of the Laws rigorous curses,
when they saw most to have swerved, and all prone to swerve from the Laws
righteous courses. Had not David (who was a Prophet as well as a King) just
cause to declaime woes, when the men of his time did rebelliously decline Gods
ways? Cursed be the proud which do err, or because they err, from thy
Commandments Psalm. 119.21.
.

call to this service. The same God that gave them a charge, and charter, to
comfort some, Isa. 40.1.
sealed them a commission to curse others; as knowing (...). Theod. quaest. 36.
in Deuteronomy. p. 172.
wicked men to be sooner moved, better wrought upon by menaces, than promises.
Ieremie's commission we may read at large in the beginning of his Prophecy.
See, I have set thee this day over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to
root out, to pull down, to destroy. I will utter my judgments against them,
touching all their wickedness: Thou therefore gird up thy loins, arise, and
speak unto them all that I command thee Ier. 1.10.16.17.
. Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem. Ier. 2.2.
. Ezekiels call and commission to this, we have in the second and third
chapters of his Prophecy, where we may read that the Lord himself set him
upon his feet Exek. 2.1.
, put courage into his heart Ibid. ver. 6.
, words into his mouth cha. 9.1.2.3.
, cha. 2.9.10.
spread before him, opened unto him the Legal Roll writ on both sides with
lamentation, mourning, and woe, which he was to Ezekiel. 3.4.
preach, and read in the deaf ears of rebellious Israel. Upon the like
warrant did the other Prophets do the like work. It was their privilege to
denounce the Curse, therefore it was their practice.

Which being so, us, that are Gods Messengers, for speaking to them at some
times in the terrible language of the Law. Speak we comfortably to all at all
times, they can well bear it. Preach we curses against any at any time, they
cannot endure it: So Sim. Cassian. de relig. Christ. l. 6 c. 1. fol. 132. col.
1.
grievous to man's ear is Gods Word, when it convinces him of sin, or goes
about (with an holy violence) to pluck him from the world, and save him from
hell; as the threatenings of it are for all these purposes. Why may not we do
as our Predecessors the Prophets did? Is our Charter less? nay, is not our
Commission larger than theirs was? John Baptist, who was greater than the rest
of the Mat. 11.11.
Prophets (as well in respect of Bucer. in Mat. 11.
his office of preaching Christ after he was borne, as of his act Euthym. ca.
19. in Mat. 11.
of acknowledging Christ, by springing in the womb before he was borne) was
less than the least in the kingdom of Heaven; that is, not only less than
the blessed souls of glorified Saints, in actual happiness Lyr. in Mat. 11.
, or less in nature than Stella in Luc. to. 1. fol. 179 col. 2.
the Celestial Angels, which ever stand in Gods glorious presence; but also
less than the least of Christ's holy Apostles: less than the Calv. in Mat. 11.
Ministers of the Gospel, who are the last in time of the Ministerial
function, of the least esteem in the worlds opinion. Now, that John thundered,
may not we then threat? Did God bid Jeremy utter his judgments, Moses curse,
and Malachie condemn; and does he forbid us to do the like? I confess we
are Ministers of the Gospel, Interpreters of the new Covenant, and in that
respect, do differ from the Prophets, the Legis Interpretes, and custodes
Prophetae erant. Scult. in Isa. ca. 1 page 9.
Keepers, the Interpreters of the old. Must we for that cause never preach nor
press the Law? Ah frivolous and groundless conclusion. The Gospel it self
is a law; the law of Grace, the law of Faith 1. Cor. 9.21.
. It has a Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in Mat. Euthym. in Man. c 5. fol. 26. C.F.
commanding, a forbidding authority, as well as the Law. Does the Law forbid
the practice of sin, the Gospel forbids the principle of sin Nazianz.
orat. 42. p. 691. Basil. edit. lat.
. The one forbids the end, the other the beginning: The one does not more
powerfully strike at the Isid. Pelu^. l. 1. epist. 458.
branches and fruit, actual transgression, than the other does at the root,
original corruption. Not that the Law meddles not with concupiscence at all;
but is not Lombard l 3. epist 40. A. fol. 300.
so universally, so eminently, so Hag. Apparat. Evang. ca. 15. sect. 13. pa. 51.
evidently against it as the Gospel is. Yea, this Theophil. Praefat. in Mat.
Gospel does threaten punishment, as well as the Law: He that believes not,
is condemned already John 3.18.
. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed 1. Cor. 16.22.
. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, to render vengeance on all
those that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel 2. These. 1.8.
. Are not these sentences in the New Testament? Now, has the Gospel it self,
it is sour, as well as it is sweet; it is bottles of venegar, as well as it is
barrells of wine; And must we Ministers of the Gospel, in every passage of
every Sermon, deliver forth sweet wine? never any tart vinegar, be it never so
needful, never so useful? Our blessed Savior, the sweetest Angel of peace
that ever came into the world; holy Paul, the most Evangelicall Preacher since
Christ, that ever the Church had, and the rest of the holy Apostles, were not
so stinted, so straightened; but they had their Vae's, their (...) The very word
of the Septuagint in our Text which is translated cursed.
, their woes and maledictions, in their Sermons and sayings Confer with these
Scriptures. Mat. 11.21.22. c. 18.7. c. 23.13 and saepius eodem capite. Luc.
6.2.25.26. c. 11.42.43.44. etc. Ioh 7.49. Gal 3.10 ver. 13. Jude ver. 11. Apoc.
8.13. c. 9. ver. 12. c. 11.1. c. 12.12.
: Why then should we, the Apostles successors, have a tie from threatening put
upon our tongues?

Object. Answ.
But will you compare with the blessed Apostles? I answer, we do not, we dare
not. Personal comparisons we may not make betwixt them and us; yet every
branch and limme of our Ministerial function we must maintain. As we are
inferior to the Apostles, in respect of infallibility of judgment about
fundamental truths, and eminency in other gifts and graces; so we differ
from them in other things: First, our calling is not so immediate as theirs
was; Means of Arts and Tongues, provided for the purpose, must fit us for the
work of the Ministry. Fishermen, and Toll-gatherers, may not now run
immediately, as Peter and Matthew might, and did, from their boats and nets,
and seats of custom, (as the manner of some illiterate, merely unquallified
Artificers is,) to become Doctors of the Law. Secondly, we have not such
revelations as they had; nor thirdly, the gift of Prophecy; nor fourthly, of
miraculous faith: All which the Apostles had in common with the Prophets
Sculter^n Isa. c 1. conc. 1 p. 7. 8.
: yet notwithstanding these differences, Christ's beloved Disciple, S. John,
heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the SEVEN ANGELS, Go your
way, power out the Vialls of the wrath of God upon the earth Revel 16.1*
. that is, he foresaw the Ministers of the Gospel in Parae. in Apoc col. 805.
Richard de S Vict. p 2. l. 5. sup. Apocal. c. 2. fol. 99. C.
these times, to have commission given them from the God of heaven, to power
forth Gods curses (comminatorily in their Sermons) upon the heads of Ibid.
earthly minded men. And indeed, Tunc enim producit Paradisus lignum scientiae
boni and mali, quando Praedicator regnum Dei proponit bonis, and quando malis
supplicium inferni exponitur. Rampeog. figur. Biblic. p. 272.
then Paradise produces the Tree of knowledge, of good and evil, when the
Preacher promises mercies to the good, threatens judgment against the bad.
Had we no cause to curse, it were another matter: but in these times iniquity
does so abound, and Plerique hac tempestate mortales ita peccatorum sordibus
volutantur. Hier. Ferrariens. Triumph crucis proem. p. 1.
mortal men do so wallow in sins sordid filth, that we must of necessity
at sometimes be the sons of thunder. Let none therefore be so merciless to
themselves, so injurious to us, as to find fault when we threaten: Merciless
they are to themselves, in that they would have us to let them have liberty to
sin to death without control, having no stomach (as indeed they should have
Rampeog. figur. Biblic. p. 272.
) to eat of that Paradise fruit, of the knowledge of the evil of punishment,
which may make them abhor the evil of sin. And injurious they are to us,
in that they would have us bring the guilt of their blood upon our own heads,
while (like Locusts (one of the plagues of Egypt Exodus 10.
) which loves the spring time, and fat pastures) hopping to their houses,
feeding at their Tables, and fawning upon them for their favor and gifts, we
should sooth them in their sins, and so spoil their souls. I would not
willingly have passed this point, without a word of advise to my brethren in
the Ministry, that they would not spare to direct legal curses against
godless men for their lawless courses: but that I would without longer stay
lead you on to the second part of the Text, the party threatened, or the object
of the threatening. [He that keeps back (or withholdeth) his sword from
blood.]

Part. 2.
I will not here be curious in a subdivision, lest I prove ridiculous in
observation, and by a Fryer-like straggling into quaint descants, more pleasing
to the flesh, than wholesome for the soul, I bring my self within the
compass of the guilt of taking Gods Name in vain. Let us hold our selves to
the approvedest, profitablest method of handling Scripture Texts; first,
commenting, and searching out the meaning: next, concluding, and fetching out
the matter.

1. The Interpretation.
The first may we dispatch in a word or two, the words are so plain. Cursed be
[HE] what he? either the whole body of the Chaldaean or Babylonian Army, or
any particular member, especially the King and head of that body. [That
withholdeth his sword.] Mark, he does not say, that puts not out, as implying
without a call: but, that keeps back, or (as Arias Montanus) that Qui
prohibet.
forbids, or (as the Septuagint) that (...).
exempteth, as though he would plead a privilege for his sword, to keep
scabbard, when he is commanded to pluck it forth. [From bloud] Whose blood?
the blood of the Moabites, a proud, disobedient, envious, malicious people,
noted enemies to Gods Church, and branded for guilty of many heinous crimes;
some of which I shall touch upon anon. You have the meaning.

The matter next (whose course comes now) multiplies upon us into many points;
2. The matter, which consists in Doctrinall points.
some indirect, some direct: all which to handle, twice as much time as I
entend for this subject would not suffice us. We will name no more than we
intend to handle, we will handle no more, than we may well dispatch within the
compass of a reasonable time; and they shall be these three.

First, Doct. 2. or 1. from the second part.
that God sometimes smites one wicked man by the ^^nd of another.

Secondly, that the sword may not be stretched out to blood without a call.

Thirdly, that to bid the sword keep scabbard, when God calls it forth,
exposes to the Curse.

Of these in their order. And first of the first. Solet Deus malos per malos
punire. Parae. in Genesis col. 1074.
God sometimes draws the sword of one wicked man against another. Here the
Chaldaeans, an impious, idolatrous people, are summoned to battle against the
Moabites; and Jeremy, Gods Prophet, brings Israel, Gods people, the certain
news and tidings of it. In the Hoc primum bellum legitur in historijs mundi,
nec profanae habent tam antiquum, ne dum antiquius ullum. Ib. col. 1069.
first field that was ever fought, which did happen, as some reckon, in the
Ergo 84. anno circiter aetatis Abrami haec gesta videntur: mundi anno 2092.
Ibid. col. 1071.
fourscore and fourth year of Abraham's age, the 2092. of the world, we have
ten wicked Kings hard at it, five against five in the Vale of Siddim Gen 14.
the first 13. verses.
. In the book of Judges, we shall find the unrighteous Midianites sheathing
their swords in their own bowels, and every man drawing upon his neighbor
Judge. 7.20.22.
. When the Tribes of Israel grew corrupted, the Lord threatened by his servant
Esaias, that every one should eat the flesh of his own arm, Manasseh Ephraim,
and Ephraim Manasseh, and that they both should be against Judah Isa. 9.21.
. The same Prophet foretold the destruction of Babylon by the Medes and
Persians Isa. 13.27.
; the overthrow of the Egyptians by the hands of the Assyrians Isa. 19.2.
. Saul, a graceless reprobate man, put Amalek (a Deuteronomy. 25.19.
cursed people) to the edge of the sword 1. Sam. 15.7.
. Iehu an Idoll-server, an imitator of Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, 2.
Kin. 10.29
draws his blade, makes it red in the blood of the followers of Baal 2. King
10. ver. 19. ad 28.
. Adramalech and Sharezer, wicked birds of an evil egg, laid violent hands on
their own father, proud Senacherib Isa. 37.38. Reason negative.
. What truth more backed with multitude of testimonies, than this is? If any
would know the reason of this, I answer, It is not because God delights in
cruelty, or takes pleasure to see men imbrue their hands in one another blood;
for, as (...). Mac. hom. 16, 231, 236,
he is void of all sin himself, so he neither is, nor can be the author
or approver of any iniquity, notwithstanding he be both the Fulgent de
Praedest. ad Monim l. 1. p. 295.296.
orderer and Ibid.
avenger of it. As Macar. hom. 16. p. 236.
no darkness can comprehend his light, no impurity communicate with his
holiness; so his light can abide no darkness, his Majesty can away with no
wickedness. The chiefest good cannot take pleasure in any evil, the
sovereign and supreme Mercy cannot delight in any cruelty. He will indeed
laugh at the wickeds destruction, and mock when their fear comes Pro
1.26.27.
: yet he laughs not, joys not to see men sinning, in destroying one another.
And therefore no evil or cruel disposition in God, can be the ground of our
assertion. Quest.
What then? Answ. Reasons affirmative. 1.
I answer, first his Will, secondly his Wisdom; both concurring to set forth
the glory of his Justice. First, his Will is the ground of it. Sin (being the
transgression of his Law 1. Ioh 3.16.
, an horrible Salv. de provid Dei. l. 4. p. 120.
injury to his sacred Diety, a Salv. de prove. l. 1. p. 29.
thing that beats his ears, and knockes at heaven gates) necessarily calls
for Theophyl. ad Autolyc. l. 2 p. 114. D.
punishment at the hand of his Justice. Of the infliction of which punishment
(both for the matter, manner, and means of it) his will is his rule. If it be
his will that Angels shall be the instruments of executing his judgments,
then the destroying Angel is sent forth. If it be his will that Iehu shall
destroy Ahabs family, Iehu is anointed, and appointed to the purpose. If it
be his will that the Daughter of Sion shall thresh the Nations, HER horns
shall be made as iron, her hooues as brass Mich. 4.13.
, to that work. If on the other side, it be his will to give the Land of Egypt
to the king of Babell, that king of Babell shall surprise her multitude, spoil
her spoil, take her prey, and it shall be the wages of his Army Ezekiel. 29.19.
. It is his pleasure to smite one wicked person by the hand of another; and
therefore it is, that one evil man is punished in Gods Justice, by an other as
bad as himself.

His wisdom, as well as his will, is another reason: Shall the scholar
prescribe the Master what rod to smite with? shall man teach God what sword to
fight with? He, whose the Judgment is, knows what instrument to choose, to
use, without the direction of any other. When therefore you see one wicked man
stretching forth his hand, striking with his sword against another, Nation
against Nation, as Chaldaea against Moab; say as the Prophet does, This comes
forth from the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working Isa. 28.29.
.

A point very useful, if we rightly improve it. First, Instruction in two
conclusions. Conclusion. 1.
it affords two conclusions for information of judgment. 1. That the wars
betwixt the Pope and the Turk, are no argument that the Pope is better than
the Turk. I know that Babylonian Prelate arrogates to himself, as a
superiority above all Princes, so an excellency above all persons in the world;
as though in place and grace he were superior to all, inferior to none: but,
in my judgment, in baseness and badnesse, the Turk himself goes not beyond
him. Their cursed Kingdoms began much at the same time. In the year 607.
Boniface the third, or rather Maleface, challenged by disputes, and obtained by
gifts, of that Traitor Phocas (who by murder usurped his Masters Empire) the
blasphemous title of universal Bishop, just when Mahomet that Turkish Deceiver
did arise, and assumed to himself the proud title of a great Prophet sent from
God: So that when that Vincent. Beluacensis. l. 23. c. 39 Chalcondil. de Reb.
Turc. l. 3. Naucler. and Danae in August. de haeres. ca. 96.
Turkish Antichrist arose in the Eastern parts, this Popish Antichrist arose
in the Western. Since which time, if either of the twain have exceeded the
other in robberies, in murders, in whoredoms, in sorceries, in riots, in
insolences, in inhumanity, in maintaining their Religion by sword and cruelty
( which they could not possibly uphold by Vt quod ratione, and honestate
defendi non poterat ferino impetu decerneretur. Savanorol. triumph. cruc. l. 4.
c. 7. p. 212.
reason and honesty) it may easily be proved, the Pope is the man. For, 1. did
Vincent. Specul. hist. l 23. c. 41.
theevish Mahomet ever rob his own Churches, as did Platin. in Bonifac.
Boniface the seventh, who robbed Peter's in Rome of all the Jewels and precious
things he could find in it? Did Vincent. Spec. hist. l. 23. c. 41.
murtherous Mahomet ever slay so many of his Idolatrous Clergy, as did Ben.
Card.
Gregory the seventh, who poisoned six Popes to make himself a way to the
Papacy; as did Cyprian. de Va^era in Urban. 6.
Vrbane the sixth, w^^ put five of his Cardinals into sackes, and drowned them,
because they favored Clement the seventh? which did Hinc ori^^^ schisma
pessimum, seu schisma ^ 2. omnium s^b^^matum quae ante fuerunt p^ssi^^um, and
subtilissimum. Werner. Fascicul. tempor. fol 86.
breed the most pestilent schism (as their own Writers record) that ever was
in the Roman Church before. We read of a Euthym. Zigaben. in Elench. Ismaelit.
Dove that Mahomet had, which he made the people believe was the holy Ghost,
which came to reveal things unto him; and by that trick gate fame to himself
amongst the vulgar: But we never heard of any devices he had, by compact with
the Devil, to help himself to preferment; as did Platin. vit. Pontif. edit.
in octav. Paris. an. 1555. fol. 154.
Silvester the second, who by sorcery and bribery, gate the Bishopric of
Ravenna, the Archbishopricke of Rhemes, and the Popedom of Rome.

Mahomet was unclean and incestuous, but there have been Popes which have
been more filthy in this kind; as Alexander the sixth, who (for Mahomets
Ludov. viv. de verit. fidei l. 4. p. 487.
one) had Onuphr. in Alexand 6.
six bastards at the least: and Pope Nicholas the third, who had a child by a
Concubine, with hair and nails like a Bear, as their own histories report
Cyprian. de Valor. in Nichol. 3.
: And Huldric. Augustan. vel potius Volusian. Carthagin in Epist. ad Nichol. 1.
many others of them, who have no less than broke out into unnatural lusts,
even such as the Apostle speaks of, Romans 1.27.

As touching insolency and cruelty to uphold their Kingdoms by, there is no
comparison betwixt them Lud. viv. de verit. Fid. l. 4. p. 489.
: Mahomet acknowledged himself far inferior to Moses and Christ; the Pope
2. These. 2.
exalts himself above all that is called God: suffering himself to be
called Extravag. cum Inter. Joan. 22.
the Lord God; his Sacr. Cerem. lib. 2. sect. 7. c. 6. fol. 85. edit. Colon. in
octavo.
Apostolical seat, the seat of God; and the Ibid. fol. 84. 86.
sword which he gives some Prince or other, on Christmas day, the Sign of
that power which he has in heaven and earth, and to rule from sea to sea, to
the ends of the world.

The one threatened but confiscation of goods, captivity of wife, bondage of
children, or loss of temporal life, to them that would not believe his
writings, nor confess him to be a Prophet sent from God: The other damneth
with curses, to the pit of hell, the souls of all those, who do either oppose
his power, which is a usurped power, or gainsay his Canons, which are (for
the most of them) contrary to truth, full of blasphemy. I list not any longer
to warble upon this string: you have heard the harmony betwixt them both, and
that Turkish Deceiver to be inferior in villainy (if not for kind, yet for
degree) to this Romish Impostor. Now then, if Mahomet himself, who is branded
in story for a most vicious, profane, profligate fellow, for a traitor, for a
man of blood, for an whoremonger, for an idolater, for a deceiver, for a
blasphemer, (making God himself the author of his cruelty, a pandar for his
impurity, the founder of his idolatry, and the authorizer of all his impiety)
and for all kind of wickedness, what not? If he, even he, I say, came
behind some Popes in some cursed practices, why should this man of sin now,
(whose mystery of iniquity works every year more dangerously than other)
challenge to himself, or have given him by his Parasites, a priority in
goodness before those Turkish Emperors ( Mahomets successors) who have been
juster, chaster, milder, and every way better than ever Mahomet was? I go not
about to extenuate the Turks wickedness in the least measure; for they are a
profane seed, a viperous brood, utter enemies to the Cross of Christ,
differing from Christians both in religion and manners: But I only enquire,
upon what ground it can be proved, that the Turk is worse than the Pope; some
of his own Popish faction having not known what to make of him, affirming him
to be Clementinarum. lib. 1. proem. fol. 3. col. 1. Glos. lit. K.
neither God, nor yet a man, a certain wonderful thing, and stupor mundi,
monster of the world as I interpret it. If they say, that the Roman Popes have
always been at open enmity with the Turks; have warred upon them, sometimes
gotten the day of them As did Benedict the eighth Platin. in vit. Pontif. fol.
157. And Clemens the seventh. anno 1532. Sleidan. comment. l. 8. fol. 128.
edit. in 16. Conclusion 2.
: and therefore they are better; the doctrine in hand does argue the
insufficiency of that argument. For, were the Chaldaeans ever a whit better
than the Moabites, because they were Gods instruments to destroy Moab? Evil
men may quarrel, two parties may cut the throats of one another, and the best
of them both be stark naught. This is the first Conclusion.

The second is this, That it is as lawful a thing to press the bad, for
Military service in times of war, as to employ the good; yea, in the ordinary
service of common soldiers, I doubt not it may stand as well with true piety,
as State Policy, to spend the worst first, and spare the best to the last
extremity: albeit, it is to be wished, that none might go forth but under
good Governors, and religious Commanders. War in it self is a punishment
for sin Levit. 26.24.25.
. As it comes from our lusts Iam. 4.1.
, so it comes for our lusts.

Culpam sanguineo sequitur Bellona flagello. It is well observed by one
(commenting upon the two first verses of the third chapter of Judges,) that
Fer. in Iud. p. 391.
so long as the Israelites kept covenant with God, they had no need of arms;
but after they had once broken covenant with him, and sinned against him, they
are feign to learn the art, and try the fortune of war. And some have
supposed that Mars was feigned by the Poets, to be the God of war, because he
did first invent weapons, set men in battle array, and execute other warre-like
exploites, just at such times as he was intended to punish the wicked. Now if
war be a punishment for sin, who fitter to taste it, than the lewdest men,
that most deserve it? Again, war may prove a means to make men better. I
confess, we ordinarily see the contrary true, that followers of the field, are
no followers of the faith; and amongst common soldiers, you shall easily find
the corruptest men, to Lud. viv in Epist. ad Henr. 8. Angl. Reg.
whom it is a sport, to destroy houses, to rob Churches, to ravish virgins, to
ruinate cities; yea whose principal glory is to do good to no man, to hurt
all men, without all regard of God, the Judge of the whole world; who carry
such blind souls in filthy bodies, as that they can neither fear the
indignation of God, nor hear with patience the admonitions of men, bidding the
Almighty to depart from them, saying, We desire not the knowledge of thy
Ways, as though they were to be ordered by no rule, to be conformable to no
right, but had license to carry all laws with their swords in their sheaths,
and to do what ever their wicked hearts led them to. I confess, I say, all
this to be true; yet notwithstanding, through Gods blessing Providentia divina
solet corruptos hominum mores bellis emendare. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 1. c. 1.
tom. 5.
war may be, and indeed is a means to amend some, Arist. de Rep. l. 8. c. 15.
to make them just, sober, chaste, good, whereas peace makes them wanton,
wicked, intemperate, grown over with the rust of idleness, and so slaves to
all kind of naughtiness. And is it not pity, that one soul should be lost
for lack of any means, which may do it good? If the daily fear and danger
of death, which is stirred up in a wicked man (if he be not desperately secure)
when he is amongst the Pikes, may stir him up, to lay about him for a better
life, and so avail to save his soul; it were a thousand pities he should not
see the Pikes, nor be sent to field. I speak this the rather, that I may
incite such as have the office of pressing in these needful times, committed
unto them, to be careful to cleanse the City, and rid the Country as much as
may be of those straggling vagrants, loytering fellows, and lewd livers (so
they be fit for service) which do so swarm amongst us. It is a great deal
fitter for themselves, and better for our Kingdom, that they be watching in
garrison, exercising arms, and fighting in field for our friends, against our
enemies, than ranging our streets, haunting our tavernes, tippling in our
tap-houses, fidling in faires, jetting on stages, and lying like burdens upon
the shoulders of our State; yea (which is worse) daring the Almighty to his
very face, and pulling down with both hands as fast as they can, his heavy
judgments upon the whole Nation. If it be demanded, how can a blessing be
expected upon the service of such soldiers? how can we look that the work
of the Lord should prosper in such sinful hands? You have an answer in the
point we are upon, The Lord smites one wicked man by the hand of another. It
cannot be denied that we have cause to be grieved, that some of them who are
gone already, have carried along with them the guilt of such outrages as they
committed in some countries of our own, which they passed through; and I know
we have just reason to fear, that some of them (at least) shall soundly pay
for that their wickedness: yet we have as good ground to hope, that their
violence at home, shall be no hinderance to Gods cause abroad, from
prospering, from prevailing; especially, considering that we have Ioshuah's and
Gideons in our Armies, and a legion of prayers, like an armed band, daily
striving with the Lord of Hosts, that he would be pleased not to remember
their sins to our judgment, but rather to be mindful of his own covenant,
and merciful to his own inheritance. Let this serve for the first use.

Use 2. Terror to the wicked.
Secondly, let terror to the wicked be another use: Had passionate Jeremy
uttered this Text in Moabs hearing, I do imagine it would have made her ears
tingle, and her heart tremble, to consider that the Chaldaeans are summoned by
so terrible, so forcible an argument, to take sword against her. Why should not
our present doctrine work the like effect of horror and trembling in all those
amongst us, who are like to Moab, godless, graceless, and malicious men, when
it does so plainly tell them, that God can plague them by wicked men, as bad
as, yea perhaps many degrees worse than themselves? Should the Lord arm the
Elements against them, which are so needful, so useful to man? Should he bid
the air infect them with a noisome pestilence, the water drown them by
overflowing her banks, the fire burn them by transgressing its bounds, the
heavens to deny them their influence, the earth her foyzen, it were a terrible
thing. To command wild beasts to devour them, the Bear to tear them, the
Lion to rent them, the Loapard to prey upon them; were more terrible. Should he
command his Angels, Basil. Seleuc. orat. 5. p. 42.
who (hating sin with an intenstine hatred) are ready to smite the hairy
scalpe of any one, Cae sarii dial. 1 inter opera Naz. p. 1104.
that goes on with an impenitent heart in impious courses: Should the Lord (I
say) command them to be as a Ibid.
Surgeons knife, or an Husbandmans tools, to cut them off, to root them out
(like infectious members from the body of mankind, like superfluous branches
from his Vine, like noisome weeds from the Garden of his Church) were more
terrible, more unendurable; But to make wicked men the instruments of executing
his wrath upon the children of wrath, I am not able to express how exceedingly
more fearful this is. When the Prophet David did pray against his slanderous
enemies under the person of Judas, he begins his imprecations thus; Psalm. 109.6.
Set thou a WICKED man over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand. It
seems, he thought he could not wish a greater judgment against his
adversaries (but one, viz. a delivery over into the Devils hands) than to have
some wicked man their tormentor: and when there was no remedy, but that
himself must be scourged for his sin of numbering the people, 2. Sam. 24.14.
and the Lord in mercy offered him his choice of three rods, he chose rather to
fall into the hands of that living God, who is a consuming fire, than into the
hands of man. Heb. 12.29.
Which choice he would never have made, had he not known, that whereas the
justice of God is a merciful justice, the mercies of the wicked are cruel.
Prove. 12.10.
Moab had better a thousand times have had the people of God come armed against
her, than a people so godless, so merciless as the Chaldaeans were, to be
called upon to take sword against her. So thou had better have any of the
rest of the creatures against thee, than a wicked man, and more mercy may
thou meet with at its hands. An infected air may be corrected, an unbounded
fire may be quenched, overswelling waters may be assuaged, devouring beasts may
be restrained, yea, by the prayer of a Moses, by the zeal of a Phineas the
destroying Angel may be appeased; but the rage of the wicked is unreasonable,
unsatiable: What mercy can thou look for from him, at whose hands Christ
himself does still suffer many injuries, much ignominy and reproach? yea, who
is an adversary to himself, as every wicked man is? Thou may be sure that
he, who is led about of so many lusts, will not cease to lay upon thee, what
pride, malice, envy, hatred, covetousness, (such merciless masters and
commanders) shall command him, if thou be but once (in Gods justice to
avenge thy wickedness) left unto such an executioner. Tremble therefore, and
sin no more with so high an hand, you proud presumptuous offenders: for it is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a wicked man, whose justice is
iniquity, and whose very charity is cruelty it self.

^se 3. Comfort.
Thirdly, this may comfort us, and strengthen our confidence, in the certainty
of their overthrow, who are professed enemies to Gods people. For rather than
such shall escape ruin without repentance, the Lord will arm their own side
against them, and make men, as wicked as themselves, instruments of executing
his judgments upon them. It was for Isreal's comfort (as Calvin Calv. in Ier.
c. 48 v. 10.
observes upon the Text) that Jeremy foretold Moabs overthrow by the
Chaldaeans sword. In like manner propound to your selves this point out of
Ieremies words, to your comfort; and assure your selves, that although the
enemies of Sion be many and malignant, powerful and politic, yet deliverance
shall come: Hest. 4.14.
and rather than that Romish Whore shall always continue to suck the blood of
Gods Saints, some Heathenish power, some Pagan Idolater shall soake his blade
in her blood, and her soldiers and followers shall one day find, how like a
Prophet one of their side once spoke, when he said, Oh you Romanists, Lud Viv.
de vit. sub Turc. page 17.
who love your liberty, and stand much upon your immunities, think with your
selves, how base, how poor, how dishonorable, how slavish a life you are like
to lead under Paganish enemies, who will use you like beasts, rather than men:
which hard condition shall be Gods just vengeance upon you, Id. Ibid. p. 21.
for your cruelty against his Church, of which you do profess your selves
members. And so let us leave the first point of the the second part of our
Text, and come to the second, which stands thus.

That the sword must not be stretched out to blood, Doct. 3. The sword must
keep scabbard, until it be called forth, and has a good warrant to strike.
without a just cause, and a good call. The sword may not drink blood without
warrant. The holy Ghost does not say here, Cursed be he that puts not out
his sword to blood before he be called, but, Cursed be he that holds back
his sword from blood, when he is willed and warranted to dip it, to dye it in
the same. David had neither call, nor cause to besmeare his sword with Vriah's
blood, and how great a sin he did commit, who knows not, that knows the
story, or has but heard how God chastized him according as he told him, that
the sword should never depart from his house? how Nathan reproved him, Thou art
the man, and himself cried peccavi for it? 2. Sam. 12.7.10.13.
Doeg had no call from God to slay in one day fourscore and five of the Lords
Priests, and how heinous and unlawful a fact that was, both the refusal of
Saul's servants to do it, 1. Sam. 22.17.18. Psalm. 52.1.2. 1. King. 22.37.
though their master commanded them, and David's just complaint, and crying out
against him, do declare. Had not Ahab ill success, when he went up to battle
against Ramoth Gilead against Gods will? Did it not cost that good king Josiah
his life, 2. Chr. 35.22.23. John 18.11. Matthew. 26.52. Stel. in Luc. c. 22.
when he would needs draw out his sword against Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt,
without Gods warrant, yea contrary to Gods word in Pharaohs mouth? When Peter
pulled out his sword, and cut off the high Priests servants ear, our Savior
bade him put up again, telling him plainly, that he that did smite with the
sword, should perish by the sword. By which speech, he did not so much hinder
Peter for the present, from a good action, which he might do (as one thinks)
but he reproved him, Aug. in Johan. tract. 11^.
and took him up roundly for what he had done. Now wherefore did he
reprehend him? What? Eu^hym. in Mat. c. 56. fol. ^67.
because it is never lawful for any man to defend Gods cause with the sword,
as some have thought? No. Why then? because Peter's fleshly and unregenerate
part did rashly rush upon this action, without any respect to his Masters will,
without any warrant from his Masters call: which planely argues, that the
smiting with the sword without a call, was not permitted by Christ to Peter,
nor any other. I hope you do not expect many arguments for this, when one or
two may serve for all.

that it strives to preserve it how it can; how much more precious is the life
of man, by which man himself enjoyes many excellent benefits, and the God of
heaven gets much honor? Therefore we had need be sure that we have special
cause, before we venture upon a work that takes away the life of such a
creature as man is, lest we rashly entrench so far upon Gods honor, and so
wrongfully cut off man from the possession of blessing enjoyed by life, as we
will never be able to answer. For man's life is never to be extinguished, but
when it is an hinderance to Gods glory, and altogether hurtful to humane
society; and not then neither, but by such as are appointed by God to that
work.

Samuel, 1. Sam. 15.33. Ios. 10.26.
who hewed Agag in pieces without any show of compassion; as we see in Ioshuah,
who hanged up the five Heathenish kings without any commiseration. Now we
know, that the Scripture does every where almost call upon us for the contrary;
to be merciful, to put upon our selves the bowels of tender compassion, to
cloth our selves with goodness, with kindness, to do good to all, to love
our enemies. And therefore we had need have a special care, that we have a
special call to put this habit upon us, lest we exercise a lawless cruelty,
when, and where we should show lawful mercy; and lest when we should
compassionately spare the effusion of blood, we do unadvisedly spill it, and
by that means bring upon our own heads the guilt of blood: which is a very
fearful and heavy thing.

This is a doctrine I do desire may be remembered by our reverend Judges,
lives of men are brought in question before them: Oh what good may it make them
do, what evil may it keep them from! how may it make them rid the innocent
out of the bloud-hunters claws, and set them free from the hands of those
wretches, whose false tongues (a bloodthirsty desire, arising from malicious
covetousness) do set on work to give in evidence against them! Would they
but consider at that time, that the sword of justice must not touch the blood
of any man, without a just and important cause; oh what prayers would they make
to God to guide them! what pains will they take in sifting of causes, in
sounding of witnesses, in examining of evidences, in boulting out all appendant
circumstances, that they will not pass sentence upon the party, except he be
worthy of death indeed? or if they do, the fault shall be more in the Jurors,
than in any negligence in themselves to search the truth, or want of conscience
to pass sentence, as out of the seat, and in the sight of God himself. I
touch but upon this string; Isocr. Epist. 2. p. 803. A cont. praefat. affix.
stratag. Satan.
I have more pertinent uses to apply my self unto. The first whereof I fear
me will be harsh, because, (as that Orator told Philip, great Alexanders
father) men love rather to be praised than reproved. But if I be harsh, I must
crave pardon: a twofold evil, too common in our times. A gross error in some,
a rash practice in others, do necessarily call for a just reproof.

Use 2. Reproof twofold. 1.
The error is, that to give the stabbe for a cross word, or to challenge the
field upon every slender occasion, is a sign of true fortitude: and that he
is a base gull, no rightly valorous, nor magnanimous Gentleman, that will
pocket up the least injury, and not prosecute it to the very drawing of blood
from him that offers it. Of these erroneous spirits and furious sparks, I
would gladly know, what proofs they can give, that true valor consists in
such exploits, what call men have to express their fortitude by such private
quarrels. Is the thwarting of their humor, the stirring of their choler a
call sufficient, cause warrantable enough? they want grace or wit if once they
think it. Now Duells without a call to them, are lawless things; and did ever
any man, Divine or Pagan, teach and avouch that lawless things are truly
praiseworthy? There are some enemies I confess, whose blood to shed is a very
laudable action; but in heat of blood to shed Christian blood, is a
condemnable vice in the eyes of God, yea, what is further from true fortitude,
than this is? The magnitude of the mind is proved by this, that it is capable
of eternity (as a Father speaks); Bern. in Cantic. ser 80.
not by this, that it scorneth to put up the pettiest injury. True valor
consists in patience and humility, not in anger or unbridled fury. For men to
dog one another to the field, that they may wreake their wrath the one upon the
other, and take away life the one from the other, is a manifest badge of a base
mind, an evident token of a villainous spirit; and dare any applaude it for a
mark and sign of a brave courage and valiant spirit? Basil. Seleu. orat. 5 p.
38.
Oh applause (as one said once on occasion of Cains churlish answer to God, Am
I my brothers keeper?) Oh voice more execrable than the murder it self! oh
impious and irreligious sentence! This is to justify wickedness it self,
this is to applaude the manifest breach of the sixth Commandment in a heinous
kind. To stretch out the sword before God commands, to strike with the sword
when God forbids, call you this true Valor? Valor! it is (as Augustine Aug.
in Psalm. 58. To 8.
says of confidence in man's own merits) a mad valor then, a reproveable, a
damnable valor.

What? A damnable valor,

Yes, even then, a damnable valor, Cowardice: For he is conquered by his angry
passions, like a coward, that falls to fighting for a few reproaches; and it is
a foolish thing to account a person a man of courage, who like a vanquished
slave, lies prostrate at the feet of the lust of anger. Tell me I pray, did not
David do a more noble exploit by bearing with patience the cursings of Shimei,
than he should have done if he had drawn his sword and slain him with it?
To lay snares for blood, for a few cross words, is a greater injury, than
those cross words can be: and a thousand times better it is, injuriam far,
quam infer, to suffer wrong, Basil. Seleu. orat. ult. p. 407. Aug. in psa. 92.
than offer it, to bear the lesser, than do the greater: At this bearance,
thine anger shall break and split in pieces, thy courage, thy strength shall
hold its own. For, he is a man of metal indeed, who can generously bear
all adverse accidents. Had but such challenges a good end, were such single
combats, which are more grounded on malice, than on the law of Arms, useful
or gainefull in their issue, there were some reason to commend them. But their
fruit and issue being for the most part so fearful, so woeful, Bern in
sermon. ad milit. Templ. cap. 2. fol. 83. Q.
that the slayer commits a deadly sin, the party slain (without Gods
greater merey) is sent to hell, thou art to be condemned, if thou do not
condemn them.

It may be objected, the victor gets glory by his conquest, and gains a name
to be the better champion.

Eras. Enchirid. mil Christ. p. 136. 137.
A sorry glory, God wot, that being true which Erasmus writes, That to be
praised for sinful things of sinful men, is false glory, and true
ignominy. Reform thine error therefore here worthily taxed, whoever thou be,
that think those men the bravest sparks, whose wounding swords a petty
injury can call forth to take revenge, without a call from God; lest, if this
error sticks to thee still, thou fallest like Cain, upon the least
provocation, to imbrue thy hands in thy brothers blood: and when thou have done
it, be so far from repenting, as to contest with God as Cain did, and out of
thine envious, malicious, and hateful heart, rather to grieve that thy
murdered brother has not another life for thee to take away also. Which pass
should thou ever come unto, a remarkable horror might take hold upon thee,
a guilty conscience ever vex thee, the gnawing whereof, death it self (though
thou should desire it) would rather increase by infinite degrees, than ease
in the least measure.

2. Branch of reproof.
Secondly, there is a generation amongst us, who in such troublesome times as
these be, steal from their Parents, run from their Masters, tendering their
service, to take sword in hand, when they have neither wit to weild it, nor
strength to fight with it: the shop or the school, being fitter for them, than
the field. Their rashness also does this doctrine reach at (for they are old
enough to hear a reproof.) Silly yonguelings, they do inconsiderately
venture on they know not what. Where is their warrant to run to war? The
sword must not kill, till it has a call. Dulce bellum inexpertis, War is
sweet until they have tasted of it. When they hear the Cannons roar, the
Armor clatter, the Air thunder, the Lances shiver, the Heavens resound with
hideous outcries of parties slain; when they see the Swords glittering, the
Pikes piercing; one with a leg off, another without an arm; one lie scrambling
on the earth on this side, another lie tumbling in blood on that side the
enemies looking fiercely, striking furiously, doubling blows upon them,
threatening death unto them, were there no more men in the world than
themselves; then peradventure (wanting the fortitude which the field requires)
they will repent their rashness, Campus fortem postulat. Ennod. Panegyr.
Theoderico Regi. page 318.
wishing they had waited for a better call, and not so theevishly stole away. I
tax not Voluntaries who are fit for service; I blame not them that have a
call: but I find fault with such as in a discontented, or new fangled humor,
will venture upon the pikes, being altogether unable, unfit to bear arms;
whose stay at home would be a great deal more acceptable to God, more
profitable to man. He that fightes without asound, is no soldier; Chrysol.
sermon. 14. p. 58.
wrath carries him to valor; his adventure is perilous, not virtuous; he
seeks rather to perish than to vanquish, as one speaks. Did an Dion.
Chrysostom. orat. 38.
heathen man once most justly complain against the Nicomedians, because for
Pestilence and Earthquakes they did accuse their gods; but for stirring up to
war, they did applaude their men: accounting the perswaders to battle the
best Orators, when to use such persuasions too there was neither need nor
cause? with better warrant may I blame such yongulings as account those men
most worthy to be hearkened to who egg and entice them into the field when (as
having neither skill nor strength to use their weapons for lack of years) they
are like to be more burthenous, than helpful to the army. If they perish by
the sword, they do but reap the fruit of their own rashness. And now enough
of reproof.

Thirdly and lastly, Saul-like to run thy self upon thine own sword. To
neither of these have thou a call; to do either of these is a grievous sin.
For the first of these, what says the Scipture? Genesis 9.6. 1. Ioh. 3.15.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. The murderer has
not eternal life abiding in him. He that takes away his brothers life, may
hear God tell him, The voice of thy brothers blood cries from off the earth
against thee. Vitam sustulisti, Basil Seleue. orat. 5. page 38. 39.
sed non vocem abstulisti. Thou have spilt his life, but thou can not stop
his mouth; thou have armed his blood as an accuser against thee, thou have
provoked the immortal God to be an adversary unto thee. Some such noise as
this may sound in his ears, which is most hideous, horrid, and fearful to
hear. To the latter very aptly speaks an Ancient, Aug. in Ioh. cap. 3.
By how much the nearer to a man the murdered is, by so much the crueller is
the murderer. He therefore that murthereth himself, is the worst murderer,
because none is nearer to a man than himself. Job resolved to wait all the
days of his appointed time, until his changing came. He made not post-haste
away before his time; albeit one would think he had as great cause to have
done it (had it been lawful) as ever any had, whether we consider the
tortures of his body, or the terrors of his soul. Senec. Ep. 24.
The Heathen could tell us, that a good man must not fly out of this life, but
depart out of it. He must stay in this world till God bid him go; he must
not, like a discontented Tenant, warn himself out of this earthly tabernacle
against his Landlords revealed will, lest like the foolish fish, he leap out
of the pan into the fire, and so find by woeful experience the truth of our
present point, That the sword must not be dipped in any blood without a call.

D^ct 4 For the sword to keep scabbard when God calls it o^^, pr^^^kes his
displeasure, as a^ accu^^ed thing.
And now I am descended to the last and largest point of all, being the very
upshot of the Text, That to withhold the sword from blood when there is just
cause and a lawful call, is a dangerous thing, displeasing to God, exposing to
the Curse.

A doctrine set down so plainly by our Prophet here, that Habak. 2.2.
he that runs may read it, [Cursed be he that keeps back his sword from
bloud]: and backed so firmly by testimony, by example, and by the contrary,
that none but the incredulous can once doubt of it. The testimony is Deborah's
in her song. Judge. 5.23.
Curse ye Merosh (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the
mighty: that is to say, Fer. in Iud. c. 5. page 407.
because they kept their swords in their sheaths, when they should have fought
in his cause, for his Church. The example is Readiness, who was accursed in his
affairs, and had his kingdom rent from him, for sparing the life of the King
of Amalek, when God had given him a charge to cut him off. 1. Sam. 15.8.23.
The contrary is set down by the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezech. 29.20.
who tells us that Nebuchadnezzar (though a wicked King) had the land of Egypt
given him as his pay for his pains, in punishing the people of Egypt with his
sword, according to the command which God gave him to do it. The rewarding of
such a work, when it was done, with a temporal blessing, does intimate, that
to leave such a work undone, when the Lord calls to it, procures the Curse
temporal at least.

Is not the stretching out the sword to blood sometimes Gods work? Is it not a
work as from him, for him? Is not his command the ground of it? Is not the
bringing of his own counsels to pass (in the destroying of some to the glory
of his justice, in the relieving of others to the praise of his mercy) the end
of it? But to omit the work of the Lord, is a cursed thing, (For if
remissness in such a work (as appears in the former part of the verse) then
much more the total omission of it, exposes to the Curse. Cursed be he that
does the work of the Lord NEGLIGENTLY.
) therefore to withhold the sword from blood when God requires it, must needs
be an accursed thing. It proves impiety to show pity at such a time. Mercy
then is a foolish mercy, and he that shows it, verifies that saying of an
heathen man, It is an hard thing to be merciful and wise at the same instant.
Agesilaus apud Plut. Apopth. Moral. in tom. 2. page 191. Graecol. edit.
To be merciful to him whom God would have destroyed by the sword, and to be
wise enough to provide for himself an escape from the curse, is very difficult.

I would now apply my self to apply the point, but that I must first explain
it by the object and the motive cause; I mean, by answering two questions:
first, against whom? secondly, for what? the sword is commanded forth by God,
that so we may know when we have a good call to the battle. Both which I
entend to dispatch with as much brevity as I can.

Quest. 1. Against whom God calls forth the sword.
For the first: Our Text tells us, that it was Moabitish blood which the
Chaldaeans swords were to be sheathed in; the Moabites, their enemies, were
they to wage battle with, not with their own countrymen, allies and friends.
The Lord gave charge to Reheboam King of Judah, not to make war with Jeroboam
King of Israel; 1. King. 12.24.
and why? because Israel and Judah were sisters and friends. The Lord was angry
with the Ephraimites, so that he slew two and forty thousand of them for
quarrelling and contending with Iephtah their brother. Judge. 12.6.
Those valiant Kings and Captains which we read of in Scripture, have still
fought with their own, and Gods enemies; as David with the Philistims, Iosuah
with the Canaanites, Iehosaphat with the Moabites, Nehemiah with the Ammonites,
etc. The Lord never taught their hands to war, nor their fingers to fight,
with any but such as they were.

Object. Mat. 5.44. Luke 6.27.28.
But how stands this, with that counsel of our Savior, Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, pray for them that persecute you? Is to war with
them, to love them? Is to join battle with them, to bless them?



always call a man to wage war with his enemies; but when the sword is
called forth, it must know our foes, not our friends, for the object of its
strokes. Bernard Bern. sermon ad Milit. Templ. c. 3. f. 83. col. 4. li^. R.
said well, Our very enemies are not to be killed, if they can by any means
else be curbed from infesting, from oppressing the Church; but when that
cannot be, it is a great deal better, that the rod be cut with the sword, than
still rest upon the back of the Righteous, and cause them to put forth their
hands to iniquity. Our Lords counsel to love our enemies, does no whit
prejudice the just causes of war. If the cause be good, neither the effect,
Bern. ad. Milit. Templ. ca p. 1. fol. 83. col. 4 P
nor issue can be naught, though the blood of thousands be spilt by it. Our
next task therefore, must be to give in our answer to the second demand, viz.
Quest. 2. What be the causes of a just war.
For what causes the Lord gives warrant to wage war with our foes? What? is
it to give satisfaction to the unreasonable motion of rash anger? to compass
that honor, that applause amongst men, which we ambitiously aspire to? to get
our enemies possessions, which we unlawfully covet? merely to be made Lords of
Sea and of Land? or to rule by our selves without Competitor? I know carnal
men (both amongst Plut. de. Consol. ad Apol. to. 2. Graecol. edit. 108. A.
Salust in Catil.

Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 38. fol. 317. 318. Tul. Epist. Fam. l. 8. Epist. antepenult.


Infidells and Bern. ad Mil. Templ. c. 2. fol. 83. col. 4. Q.
Christians) have in former times made war for these causes. And at Tacit.
hist. 4.
this day these vices are to such persons, the chiefest bellows to blow this
fire. For what but these, makes Rome, Spain, and Austria stir up such
combustions, as have of late been kindled, and do yearly flame more and more
in the Christian world?

But are these just causes?

No, no, there is neither equity nor Bern. ad Mil. Templ. c. 2. fol. 83.
safety in them. They are rather Robbers than Soldiers, who are led to field
only by these motives.

What then are just causes? Such as for which Moab was to be wasted by the
Chaldaean sword. What were they?

These five sins, as you may see, if you consult but with some verses in this
present chapter.

1. Monstrous pride. 2. Insolence against God. 3. Insulting over the Church. 4.
Tumultuousnesse and rebellion. 5. False-heartednesse.
Which vices in other enemies as well as Moab, have been Gods warrant to his
own Worthies, to fight his battles in the old Testament.

First (I say) monstrous Pride. We have heard of the pride of Moab [He is
exceeding proud] even of his haughtiness and his pride, Isa. 16.6. Ier.
48.29.32.33.
his loftiness and arrogancy: Therefore the spoiler is fallen upon thy Summer
fruits, and joy and gladness is taken away from the land of Moab.

Secondly, Insolence against God. The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is
broken, says the Lord. Make ye him drunken, Verse. 25 26.
for he magnified himself against the Lord. Moab shall be destroyed from being
a people, because he magnified himself against the Lord. Verse. 42.


Thirdly, Insulting over the Church, is another cause of just destruction by
the sword. Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he shall also be in derision:
For was not Israel a derision unto thee, since thou spakest of him? thou
skippedst for joy. Verse. 29.27.
Goliah's vaunts against the host of Israel, put the stone into David's sling,
which pierced his temples; put the sword into David's hand, which parted his
head from his body, and so discomfited his insolent Army of uncircumcised
Philistims. 1. Sam. 17.


Fourthly, for Tumultuousnesse and Rebellion, evident is that which we find
toward the end of this chapter. I will bring upon it, even upon Moab, the
year of their visitation, says the Lord. A fire shall come forth out of
Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sion, which shall devour the corner of
Moab, Verse. 44.45.
and the crown of the head of the TVMVLTVOVS ones. And what was it else, but
the suppressing of Rebellion, that moved the Israelites to make war upon the
Beniamites? Judge. 20.12 26.


Fifthly, for False-heartednesse; pretenses of unity, and yet practices of
enmity: you may collect it out of the 30. verse, where Moabs wrath and lies are
joined together, and noted as a cause of the Chaldaeans coming, by Gods
appointment, against her to destroy her.

While I thought with my self how I might improve this point, many particulars
offered themselves: amongst those many, I made choice of three.

First, Anabaptisticall Sect, That it is not lawful for true Christians to
make war. Are Christians prohibited to do that same thing, which if the
Chaldaeans did not, they were threatened to be cursed? What work is there,
which may lawfully be done for the Lord, by any that are his enemies, which
may not in some cases, for some causes, with some cautions, be done by his
friends? In this same question (Whether a Christian Magistrate may lawfully
make war?) the state of it lies not in unnecessary war: When Kings and
Princes, through an ambitious and covetous desire to enlarge their own
territories, and to encroach upon other men's rights, without Gods warrant, do
take sword in hand, and bid battle with it; we detest it, we abhor it, and
persuade our selves, that the authors of such wars, have an heavy account to
give to God, for the abundance of innocent blood that is ordinarily shed, for
the rapines, burnings, whoredoms, devastations, etc. which do usually attend
them. But we speak of a necessary defensive war: When a Christian Prince,
partly to preserve the lives, liberties, and religion of his own subjects;
partly to relieve his Allies abroad, which are near unto him, both in the
flesh and in the Lord, when they are oppressed by the common adversary, shall
make war, it is not only lawful, but also so needful, that did he not
do it, he should highly displease God, as being an unnatural father to his
country, and an unkind friend to them, whom he does owe, and should show most
kindness unto. In these cases he does not, Romans 13.
he ought not to bear the sword in vain, what ever the Anabaptists say to the
contrary. If we should tell that generation, that Abraham made war with the
Sodomites, Genesis 14. Genesis 17. Ioshuah passim. Judge. 6. Judge. 13.14. 15 chapters.
Moses with the Amalekites, Iosuah with the Canaanites, Gideon with the
Midianites, Sampson with the uncircumcised Philistims; and Gods encouraging and
prospering them in this work, is a notable argument of the lawfulness of it:
I know they will yield to us in that, holding it lawful in the time of the old
Testament to make war. But where (say they) is it warranted in the New? Where
warrented! Why where is it condemned? Does John Baptist condemn it? Soldiers,
military men, came to him, asked him what they should do; and what is his
answer to them? Luke 3.
not leave your station, forsake your garrison, give over your military kind
of life; but, be content with your wages, do no man wrong. Neither did
Christ, nor any of his Apostles, disallow it. The Capernaite Centurion remained
a soldier after he became a Christian. Christ did not bid him cease the field,
after he had truly embraced the faith. He commended his believing: Matthew. 8.
Act. 10.
Verily, I have not found such faith in Israel; he condemned not his calling,
his being a Centurion. The like may be said of Cornelius, the Captain of the
Italian band, whose Captaineship continued after his conversion: neither was it
condemned by Peter, when he preached unto him, and bestowed Baptism upon him.

Object. Isa. 2.4.
Yea but Isaiah prophesied of the times of the Gospel in the new Testament,
when he said, They shall beat their swords into plow-sheares, and their
spears into pruninghookes: Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn war any more: Therefore Christians may not make
war now under the Gospel.

I answer, there, is not to forbid Magistrates a necessary war against the
enemies of their lives, and Gods cause: but to show what peace should be
betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles by the preaching of the Gospel; which was
accomplished when our Peacemaker, Ephesians. 2.14.
Christ Jesus, brake down the partition wall betwixt them and us; and when, in
a time of dearth, the Church of the Gentiles in Graecia did send relief, even
above their power, 2. Cor. 8.1.
to the Church of the Jews in Syria. They have many other cavills, scarce
worth the spending of our ink and paper, which of purpose I pass over, lest
in such an argument as this, I prove tedious to the Reader.

Secondly, Use 2. Terror.
I may here take just occasion to preach terror unto all those, whom God has
endued with strength of body, so that they might be fit in time of need, to
stand their country in good stead, by bearing the sword against her enemies;
and they waste this strength and ability of theirs, some on wine, some on
women, some by one kind of riotous living, some by another, and so indispose
themselves for all good offices at home in peace, for all good service in the
wars abroad. The natural gift which God has given them, they should perfect
by art, by commendable exercises either in military matters, or some lawful
calling; and they, either by a sottish idleness, or a bestiall
licentiousness, disable themselves to make such use of their bodies, as they
are given them for. The time may come, when God may summon these voluptuous
ones to stretch out the sword to blood, yea and threaten against them the
terrible Curse if they do not do it. This Curse, how can they then escape,
when their bodies, weakened by sin, shall make them refuse to follow this
call, and cause them to be readier with the Kitchin-Curre that Plutarch
speaks of, to run to the pot, than with the generous Greyhound to the field?

Thirdly, is it so, that to withhold the sword from blood when the Lord calls
it forth, procures the Curse? Use 3. Exhortation.
then go thou Text of ours, thou short sentence of old Jeremy, that authentic
Prophet: go (I say) into all Brittanne; be as a trumpet to her inhabitants, to
sound an alarm unto war. Thou stand upon their shelves, lie upon their
deskes, art in their houses, as the other sentences of the Bible be: Oh round
them in their ear, present thy self to their eyes, that the sight of thee may
make them stir in the Lords quarrel, who have been backward all this while,
and make them constant that have begun, until they have done the work of
the Lord. Thou may be the bolder in thine importunity, now the royal head
of great Brittanne, our dread Sovereign, has taken the course to exempt his
kingdoms from this Curse, by beginning to draw his weapon for the help of the
Lord against the mighty: and the Lord grant, that like the sword of Jonathan,
it may never return empty. Now, now (I say) never lin crying, never lin
sounding in his subjects ears, until Jehovah repaires the ruins of Sion, and
settle more peace in the Christian world. And inasmuch, as I have gone thus
far in discourse upon thee, give me leave to give thy Presse-money to this
work. And now, O England, where shall I begin? whom shall I first call upon?
Might I be suffered (and do no wrong to the Text) to speak in an allegory, I
would begin with mine own calling, and wish them (as many Champions amongst
them have already done) to dag their pens, dipped in the Fount of holy Writ, as
far into the body of Heretical Divinity, as Ehud did his dagger into Eglon's
bowels, Judge. 3.20. Ib. ver. 25.
that Errors servants, may like Eglons, be ashamed. Next, I could entreat the
temporal Magistrate, to stretch forth the sword of his authority, to the
spilling of the blood of those dangerous enemies, gross impieties, who have
got such strength in these evil times. Finally, I could advise every
Christian, to use a Metaphorical weapon, not hypocrisy (which wounds
religion under a color of devotion) but the sacrificing knife, Chrysol. sermon.
^. page 28.
that sharp weapon, the sword of Repentance, which may lay ableeding their
mightiest corruptions, that they may never prevail, nor bear rule again. But
the stream of my exhortation must not run in this improper channel. The Text
does not enjoine it, though the times do well require it. I must go more
literally to work, and say to this Kingdom, as Moses to Ioshuah, Choose out
men, and go out to fight. Blessed be he that keeps not back his sword from
blood. Go out and fight? why? what is there a Moab in the world? and does Moab
provoke us, or provoke God to call us, to draw sword against her? Yes, both.

First, there is a Romish Antichrist, a Popish Faction: and therefore a Moab in
the world. For the Romish beast which now rages, How the Pope and his Faction
are like to Moab. 1. In their originalls.
in many particulars may be compared with that wicked Moab, so often mentioned
in the old Testament.

First, Moab was a child of Incest, begat by Lot in his drunken fit, of one of
his daughters. So Antichrist is an incestuous brat, bred of Religio peperit
divitias.
Religion the Mother, and of Riches the Child. The Christian Emperors in the
first age after Christ, endowed the Church with great revennues, bestowed upon
Relgion much substance. Religious Bishops grew drunk with riches; intoxicated
with honors: in this their drunken fit committed filthiness with worldly
wealth, and begat that monster, the Romish Whore.

Secondly, was Moab an Idolater? had he his Idol, and abomination, Chemosh? 1.
King. 12.33.
Who grosser Idolaters than Papists be, who have a multitude of Idols, and
abominations?

Thirdly, the Moabites were not only Idolaters themselves, but also enticers
of others to Idolatry, calling the Israelites to the sacrifices of their gods,
Number. 25.2.
and drawing Solomon himself, notwithstanding his wisdom, to build an high
place for their Idol Chemosh. 1. King. 11.7.
Does not the Romish Moab draw the whole world to wonder after him; poisoning
the Princes of the earth with his Idolatries, and perverting them,
notwithstanding their wisdom? Who knows not how bold his Factors have been
to entice our Gospellers to their Masses and superstitious services? How many
Gentlemen have their filthy Cages, their Popish houses beyond the Seas, robbed
of their sons, deprived of their daughters?

Isa. 15.17.
Fourthly, Moab got abundance by wrong. Antichrist has raised himself to his
rule and riches, which is uncountable, by secret villainy and open violence.

Judge 11.17.
Fifthly, Moab would not let Israel pass through his land to their place: no more
will Antichrist permit Protestants, by a free use of their conscience, to pass
through his countries quietly, to the kingdom of heaven. They of our side that
have to do there, unless they be very wary, are in daily danger of the
bloody Inquisition. They that dye there, when they lie on their deathbeds, are
molested by the Priests with proffers of fopperies and fooleries unto them.

Sixthly, did the King of Moab send Balaam on his Ass to curse Israel? so the
Romish King of the Romish Moab sends abroad his Bulls, Number. 22.
Balaams and Asses to curse and condemn Gods people.

Lastly, (for I omit many things) it was prophesied in the old Testament, that
Moab should be smitten with the star of Jacob. Number. 24.17.
It is likewise prophesied in the new 2. These. 2.7.
Testament, that the man of sin shall be consumed by the breath of the Lords
mouth, and with the brightness of his coming.

There is a Moab then in the world, O England, a fit object for thy sword, a
meet foe to fight withal.

Yea, but what cause has England to take sword against Moab? what injury,
what wrong have the Romanists done her?

What causes? No 2. The same sins as causes of destruction by the sword, in the
Roman Papacy now, that were in Moab in Ieremies time. 1. The pride of Papists.
2. These. 2.4.
less than the Chaldaeans had to make their sword red with Moabs blood.

First, have we not heard of the pride of Rome? how that man of sin sits
in the Temple of God, exalting himself above all that is called God? Have not
we heard of a Sun and a Moon? of a Universal Vicar of Christ, and a
Catholic King? of pompous Cardinals, haughty Bishops, and proud Prelates?

Secondly, 2. Their insolence against God.
does not Romish Moab magnify himself against the Lord; adding to his Word,
and taking from it what he pleases? How sawcily does he make himself the
Lords Competitor in title, in supremacy, in authority, to devise Laws, and
coin Articles of Faith, to make a Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, and Limbus
Infantum, to Gods Heaven and Hell? giving his Priests power (as he presumes)
to make a man, a god-man, flesh blood, and bones of a piece of bread; trampling
Gods statutes under his feet, to set up his own blasphemous inventions? and is
not England wronged egregiously, while the God of England is thus dishonored?

Thirdly, who have ever more injuriously opposed, 3 Insulting over the Church.
more imperiously insulted over the Church, than Papists have? Do not they
laugh in their sleeves that they have gulled us with sugared words, and fair
pretenses? Do they not rejoice in the ruins of the Palatinate of Rhine? and
are glad to see the Sun of another Elizabeth's glory in the eclipse? How has
the Romish Emperor insulted over the person of noble Palatine, Cancel. Hisp.
page 65.
calling him in base and contumelious terms, a slave or vassaile, and that to
the face of the English Ambassador? They that have read the book of Martyrs,
have often seen how those Romish wolves did crow over the lambs of Christ,
when once they had gotten them in their paws. In deriding Israel, and
reproaching Sion, ancient Moab came never near them.

Fourthly, these Romish Moabites are a tumultuous brood, confederate in
Faction against the Church and Religion. The croaking Frogs of this Fen, the
Priests and Jesuits, call the Princes of the earth to battle against the
Saints. Judge. 3.12.13
Moab once gathered Ammon and Amaleck to fight against Israel, so does the Pope
his Princes and Vassailes at this day. What a tumultuous compact was there
betwixt them, in buying and selling the Palsgraves possessions? Cardinal
Lodowick is the cardinal man in that business: he sets down this position,
That it is more just and profitable, Cancel. Hisp. page 79. 81.
that some Catholic Prince possess the Palatinate, than that Count
Frederick (a Calvinist, an emulous Prince of the Imperial dignity, and a
perpetual enemy to the house of Austria) be restored. Upon this position,
Cancel. Hisp. page 90. Ibid. p. 97 98.
Bishop Caraffa, the Popes Legate at Vienna concludes upon Bavaria to be the
fittest man. The Emperor next, resolves upon it, he shall be the man: and this
resolution forsooth, he cannot alter, without the offense of Almighty God.
Having set down this resolution with himself, he dispatcheth a Capuchine
Friar, called Hyacinthus, Ibid. p. 96. Ibid. p. 116.
to negotiate the business with the King of Spain, because the determination
of that translation depended upon Spain. To work therefore the Spanish King
the better to his will, the Popes Legate with the Emperor, Ib. 108 111.
by letter after letter, sollicites the Capuchine to slack no diligence in the
business. In the mean time, Ib. 96 98. 101.
the Emperor writes to Don Balthazar Zuniga, Councellor of State in the
Spanish Court. Cardinal Lodowick importuneth the Popes Legate at Bruxells,
Ibid.
to work the Infanta to this Faction also. Now lest the King of great
Brittanne by his Legate, (the Earl of Bristow, mediating with Spain about the
restitution of the Palatinate to his son again) should hinder the
proceedings, Ibid. p. 106.
the Pope forsooth, must devise a way to satisfy him, after the Palatinate
should be settled upon Bavaria. Ibid. p. 117
Well, the conclusion is, Spain conjoines in this cursed confederacy, and
concludes the business in four Articles.

First, That Bavaria shall restore the upper Austria.

Secondly, That Bavaria shall content himself with the Electorall voice, and
upper Palatinate only.

Thirdly, That Spain should have the lower Palatinate, and Bavaria disclaim
all title thereto.

Fourthly, That the Emperor and Spanish King shall make a league together, to
make an offensive and defensive war against whomsoever should resist their
proceedings.

Were not here Moabs tumultuous ones? Was not here Geball, and Ammon, and
Amalak, Philistia and those of Tire, joined together against Gods Israel?

In which confederacy, how falsely they dealt under fair pretenses, appears by
this, that while Spain spoiled the daughter of her dominions, he glozed with
the father, and pretended a marriage with the brother. And while the Emperor
promised our King to stay the execution of the proscription against the
Palatinate, Cancel. Hisp. p. 67. Ibid. 75. Ibid. 77. Ibid 78.
Bavaria proceeded in the same, and the Emperor thanked him for it, encouraged
him in it. The doctrine of equivocation is so well studied of these Romish
Moabites, that in most of their waightiest affairs with Protestant Princes,
lies and falsehoods strike the greatest stroke: pretenses of unity, and
practices of enmity, are found no where more than amongst them.

These things considered, never had Chaldaea greater cause to fight with Moab,
than we with Rome: Vti olim de Philippo Macedonico dixit Demostheues
Atheniensibus. orat. Olynt. 1.
and if ever with her, then now, while the blood of the Saints shed by her, do
call for vengeance; and while the snares which she lays for the blood royal
of the British race, besides other manifest wrongs, do call us Britains to
go forth against her. Now, a necessity to this work lies upon us. Fit purses
for contribution must now stand open, fit persons for execution are now called
upon: neither (as I conceive) can any good reason be given, why either of both
should now be spared. Gird your swords therefore upon your thighs, O you
valiant ones, and ride on with courage and renown. Our Iehosaphat summons
against this Moab: what rank, what degree amongst the Gentry, amongst the
Commonalty of his dominions, may not account it their glory, to have an hand in
this enterprise?

For the Gentry, the golden bubble upon the breast, Vid. Alexand. ab Alexand. l.
5. c. 16. and Draud. in Sched Reg. page 315. 316.
little moons upon the shoes, gold rings upon the hands, golden chains about
the neck, garments of purple given by Princes (the ancient Ensigns of
nobility) were but joys to grace nobility with, in comparison to heroicke
exploites in Gods cause, for the Church her right. Oh that Gentlemen, fit for
this service, would delight more to wear their arms in field, than to paint
them in their houses, grave them in their seals, place them in their portalls,
and weave them in their Sumpter-cloathes. Then, to be sure, their holding of
Arms would not be so much for worldlings to behold them, as for the Church to
be beholding to them for the same.

For the Commonalty. If the generous sort must take sword against Moab, and it
be their glory so to do; then let not the meaner and vulgar sort think it any
disparagement to go forth under them. When Presses come, if their places and
charge will permit it, (as Officers that press, ought to have a special
regard to that, and to do nothing for sinister respects) let not them frame
worthless pretenses to shift their Princes call. If they hide their heads,
when they should encourage their own hearts in Gods cause that calls on them;
if they choose rather (as the manner of some is) to starve in woods, than to
stir to wars, or coin lies and falsehoodes to delude the Officers: I do
not see how they can escape the Curse which the Text ^oth speak of, and bring
a blessing upon their heads. Be bold therefore in the Lord, and be strong in
the power of his might: you could never stir in a more needful time; your
sword now may do more acceptable service for the Lord, than it could have done
for many years. When Moab is curbed, Judge. 3.30. Isa. 16. ult. chap. 25.10.
Israel shall have rest; when Moabs glory is abated, and trodden down as straw
for the dunghill, then distressed Sion shall have glory, and her scattered
stones in our neighbour-nations shall be gathered together again. If you say,
we could be content to be forward, were we sure of success: I answer, doubt
not of that, Ios. 7. Judge. 5.15.
if Chemesh, if Achan, if the divisions of Ruben, if secret well-wishers to the
Romish cause, and slightnes in seeking to the God of all Armies, do not cross
us. Let the abomination of Moab be kept under amongst us at home, and the
mighty of Moab shall not conquer us abroad. Let such men as hide the Babylonish
garment in the rotten tents of their Popish hearts, who (having a face for the
Prince, and an heart for the Pope) would be glad of an opportunity to betray
their country for a wedge of gold, have nothing to do in our Camps. Let not
the Nobles of Judah send letters to Tobiah, nor reveal the matters of Nehemiah
to him. Neh. 6.17, 19.
Let Popish Ladies have no acquaintance with State-secrets, (for then Balaam
and Balak shall be sure to know them:) Let the loyal subjects with an
unanimous consent, add sinews to the war, and let not corrupt Officers make
those sinews to shrink. In a word, let the Lord be sought carefully in all
our proceedings, and then the God of Jacob will be with us, the Lord of Hosts
will fight for us, and prosper our handy-worke. Bern. ad Milit. Templ. c. 2.
Securi igitur procedite milites, and intrepido animo inimicos crucis Christi
propellite. In the bowels of Christ Jesus put forth your hands to the work of
the Lord: let not your spirits fail in your bodies, let not your swords rust
in their sheaths, let not your coin fret in your chests. And you that can do
nothing this way, with your purses or with your persons, fight with your
prayers to the God of heaven; be morning and evening in his presence Chamber
with your suites: tell him, that for Sions sake you cannot be silent, nor yet
will be, until he has made bare his arm in his own cause, clothed his
foes with the robes of shame, and compassed his Saints with songs of
deliverance.

FINIS.

