THE JOY OF TEARS Or CORDIALS OF COMFORT, SPRINGING UP IN the region of sorrow.

Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Matthew. 5. Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. GAUDIA POST LACHRYMAS



Published with the most gracious license and privilege of GOD Almighty, King
of Heaven and Earth, the penult day of July, Anno Dom. 1635.

To the Christian Reader.
FRom this one simple Herb of true remorse
Behold what precious liquor does proceed:
The virtue whereof is of such a force,
That joy in midst of sorrow it does breed.
On mourning morsels it is good to feed,
And most convenient for a sinners state:
Make much (my Christian friend) of this blessed seed.
The way to Sion is a thornie gate.
Be not detaind therefra, though Flesh should hate,
And tax thee for a greeting Puritan:
Thy Lord with groans and tears had great debate,
And patiently endurd the mocks of man.
In this clear fountain daily bathe thy heart,
And with good Marie choose that better part,
Since blameless Truth dar scarce appear,
No marvel I my name forbear.
THE JOY OF TEARS.
BOth night and day my bones are pierced with grief,
Oh if my wounds be deep! who can them cure
No sweetness now, no joy, peace nor relief,
Ease is away, mirth I may not endure.
My pains increase, sins guilt does them procure*
Fears me beset, belike GOD is my foe:
Faith, hope and love are hid with clouds impure,
Expect I can nothing but wrath and woe.
Entrusting much my heart I truth forgo,
Menstrous I am, no creature more vile,
More foul, more filthy: yea though earth no more
In it containd, yet I would all defile.
Great cause I have each moment to deplore
My want of that which should my soul decore.
Judgments I justly merit and deserve,
Often do I fail, often hear I Peter's cock:
From GODS commands most frequently I swerve,
I love to dwell within a rotten stock.
Trifling allurements hold me from Christ's flock,
False foolish pleasures do beguile my sight:
Lost is my strength, through bearing of sins yoke,
Hourly I err, in taking wrong for right.
Excuse my self I will no^ for my might,
My thoghts, my words, my ways, my works, my pai^*
My wit, my will are great unfriends to light
I can not see what profit me constrains.
In me no worth which Wisdom can commend,
Good LORD I pray thee help, reform, amend.
I know thy mercies far all sins exceed,
Thrice blessed are they in whom the same abide*
Except against the holy Ghost no seed
Of sin outbreaketh which they can not hide.
To thee I cry, from whom I often backslide,
Father, forgive my faults both great and small:
Let out thy streams, come in with thy springtide,
With joy of heart receave a prodigal.
Establish me, least I again should fall:
Make sure my steps, confirm me by thy grace:
Remove the curtains, and partition wall
Of guiltiness, thine image which deface,
Against thee alone I have made great assaults:
Give place to Mercy, pardon all my faults.
CHRIST'S ANSWER.
REjoice thy self in me, sweet Jesus says,
Winters of mourning make much for thy good:
Early and late for thee my Spirit prays.
Eternal life receave through my rich blood.
When God was angry in the gape I stood,
I suffered all his justice could require:
Enter in rest, I stopped have hels flood,
Sealed is thy peace, possess thy souls desire.
In the mean time weep, weep, and do not tire:
The seeds of te^r^s bring forth great cropes of joy:
Thy mourning days wi^ suddenly expire,
I see what way thy sobs thou do employ,
Thy sighs, thy groans, thy vexed and troubled mind*
For grieving me constrain me to be kind.
In heart I feel more joy than tongue can tell,
Oh if I could my Savior magnify!
No longer (by his grace) will I rebel,
Enlargd he has his bounty toward me.
Come, come, draw near ye Saints, come, taste and see
Flaggons of comfort, which will make you glad.
Lo, how the pledges of GODS amity
Erect my sprit; which formerly was sad.
Earths whole delights if at my will I had,
Misprise I would, for draughts of such sweet wine:
More other things to seek is to be mad,
In greatest straits this is the best propine.
My soul, praise thou the Lord with thy whole might
Who has received thee kindly in his sight.
I have a pleasant birth, yet I must cry
O 1 Samuel 4.2^.
Ichabod! O captive Ark once free!
Now Philistims with peace possess; all my
Excellency is gone, I wish to die.
Life, pleasure, joy withdraw your selves from me,
Fraughted I am, and overchargd with grief:
Light of mine eyes is faild, I can not see:
Elies last end, naught else can bring relief.
Entered in Bethell have men of mischief,
Making GODS laws to be of no respect:
Though once they seemd well settled in belief,
Yet now their craft and falsehood they detect.
With filthy smoke the house, of prayer they fill,
And there intend to change all things at will.
Jerusalem is of her freedom spoild,
Orders of men's devising there be placed:
True CHRIST is bound, thief Barrabas assoild.
Esaw much praised, Jacob much disgracd.
The heritage of GOD is all defacd,
Formalities to substance are preferred:
Laws are imposd grievous to be embracd*
Earths fatness upon Judas is conferd.
Eye weep, heart groan, black birds my mirth have mard
Moon has no light, the Sun his beams withdraws:
The mouth of godly Zephanie is bard,
Because the truth in honesty he shows.
Fountains of life which make Gods city glad
Are filled with earth, clear springs can not be had.
Stalf of religion greatly does decay,
The door of holy discipline is closd:
Romes-cocatrice the lambs of God betray,
To subtle dangers they be much exposd.
Good people who are zealously disposd,
The benefit of peace can not enjoy:
No persons are so mightily opposd,
As they who Babels building would destroy.
The powers of darkness their whole strength employ,
In their defense who the Popes liveray wear:
But neither night nor day cease to annoy
The sheep of Christ in whom grace does appear.
The hopes of bragging Papists are encreast,
Now when they see Gods servants so oppressed.
Edoms cursed children wickedly insult,
Wounds of the beast again by them are cured:
With death and hell they craftily consult,
And make the Gospels lamp to be obscurd.
High courts of justice are be them procurd,
Where wickedness is stablisht by decree:
And where heavens heirs are wrongously injurd,
And Amos words are judged heresy.
In Babylon upon the willow tree
My harp is hanged, for Sion I must weep:
Yet they in scorn require some mirth from me,
And Hebrew songs, my sorrows are most deep.
Let my tongue be within my mouth tied fast
If I rejoice while Sions griefs be past.
Gods captive Ark I long to see restord:
Old days of mercy doubtless then would co^
No land like Scotland was so well decord,
Each hungry soul did there receive a crum.
Tabrets of power now dead pypes are become,
Flammes of strange fire provoke GODS jealousy:
Locusts of hell prevail much over some,
Edens fair orchard wants fertility.
Exilements, fines, confines commissions be
Made against all these who would their hearts keep pure*
Time-servers get honor and dignity,
Idolaters full liberty procure.
None of an upright judgment dar appear,
The hands are weakened which Christ's image bear.
I much lament to see GODS Saints so feared,
That few, alace, sound Tenets dar profess:
I much lament, to see men who compeard
Once in defense of light, the light suppress.
I much lament to see such sleepiness,
When Christ's best friends are thrald in burgh and town.
I much lament to see who do possess
The chair of truth, which should hold errors down.
I much lament to see a popish crown
Upon the head of Christ's once glorious bride.
I much lament to see men get renown,
Who daily both from faith and truth do slide.
Oh if I had in secret mine alone
A cottage, where I might these ills bemone.
Join, join with me, ye Saints, in prayers and tears,
O Lord hear, help, consider Joseph's case:
The splendour of Kirk beauty disappeares,
Enthrond are they who Romish rites embrace.
Through fire and water woolfs thy lambs do chase:
False brethren vex thy flock who truth retain:
Look to thy spouse which they seek to deface,
Her cause defend, let thy foes woe sustain.
Ensnare them all who make thy sheep complain,
And fight against thine ancient liberties:
Much they conspire, much untruth they maintain,
In thy chair they spew forth their damned lies.
Thy verity in corners is confind,
The wrong thou gets scarce can it be defind.
Where once thou had a throne Prince Mammon sits,
Destroying that which built was by thy Sprit:
And building that which many pregnant wits
Does captivat, and grieve each Isralite,
Good Jeremy who was thy favorite
Perceaving how thy glory was empard,
A wilderness he thought most requisite,
Nothing but tears and groans he did regard,
What christian man with him can be compard?
Heartbreaking grief like his can not be found:
Careful was he to have thy house repard,
Which now, alace, is brought down to the ground.
His lamentations, zeal, and fervencie
Thou have reserved to the posterity.
And for what else but that thy children dear
May thereby learn to mourn for Sions wrack,
And to deplore the boastings which they hear
Of Bashans bulls, who truth would captive take.
Earth-Mammonists count not what shifts they make,
Providing they may come to their intent:
Sound reasoning they purposly hold back,
And in Christ's mistick body make a rent.
Thou must arise, thy terror must be sent,
To stop the madness of their wicked rage,
And to compel their fury to relent,
Which so bursts forth in this malicious age.
Thy temple clenge, thine heritage reform,
Make all things to thy pattern be conform.
For Sions sake I can not be at rest,
To her relief while thou incline thine ear:
H^ar thou her not, now when she is distressed,
Then close mine eyes, my life I count not dear.
Thy foes insult, O how thou do forbear?
And suffer them on earth to be extold?
In thy behalf no subject dar appear,
To vindicat thy truth so much controld,
Look how thy Servants names are all enrold
In registers, as men deserving shame:
Only because thy crown they do uphold,
And will not thy sworn covenant disclame.
Be Agent for thy Spouse, supply her wants,
And hear the groanings of thy weeping Saints*
The Lords exhortatorie and expostulatorie reply
GRievd Saints I much affect, says Isra'ls GO^
Who sigh and sob for Sions woeful state:
I have her humbled under man's sharp rod,
That she may learn to keep my well path'd gate,
Apostasy extremely I do bate,
Vngrately has she gone from her first love:
Carnal respects have caused her of late
Forsake her crown, and the Beasts mark approve.
Oh if she would from Babell yet remove.
Oh if she would turn home again to me.
Then would I make my presence from above
Her corners all with light to beautify.
I, as I live, delight not in her death,
I rather would she might evite my wrath.
My Covenant I charge her to renew,
Or else a cup of trembling she shall drink:
Will Worship I command her to eshew,
At such a sin my justice can not wink.
Her whoorishnesse gives me cause to forethink,
That ever I her wedded to my wife:
What reason has she from my truth to shrink?
Am I not able to preserve her life?
Should fear or danger of a wodden knife
Debar her from obedience to my will?
Should she provock my clemency to strife,
And move me with mine anger her to kill?
O how my lovelie nature she does cross!
I would her save, she will her own self loss.
Saul's sinful fact who killed the Gibeonits
I wish she would remark attentively:
More easy shall it be to Gomorrhits
Then to these who their faith do falsify.
I will not fail to punish perjurie,
In whomsoever I the same perceive:
She needs not think to plead immunitie,
Her slyding back no coverture can have.
I gave her life, I brought her from the grave,
I her enriched, I made her glory shine:
I ransond her when she was Satan's slave,
I filled her flaggons with my choicest wine.
No fabric had in any former age
Such heaven out pillars as mine heritage.
Her name was famous the whole earth throughout,
Her precious stones shined clearer than bright gold:
My pleasure was to walk her To^ers about,
Her carved work was heavenly to behold.
Armies with banners terrible and bold
Amazed were, and fled before her face:
Her walls were thick, her bulwarks manifold,
She without stroke of s^ord her foes did chase.
Now dogs and swine possess mine holy place,
Judah does walk contrare to my des^re,
No cons^ien^e makes she errors to embrace,
Nor to profane mine Altar with strange fire.
Land-monsters she has chosen her to lead,
Who seek advancement above me her head.
My stat^ts, orders, comely government
She has rejected to her open shame:
With my prescriptions she is not content,
Her ways, her words, her works the same proclaim.
Bethaven has become my Bethels name,
Her filthiness in her shirts does appear:
Her solemn feasts and sabboths I disclame,
Her sighs, her sobs, her groans I will not hear:
Her ^^st, her dross pollute my fountains clear,
With might and main Romes rites she does defend:
How can I any longer her forbear?
My Sprite she forces with her to contend.
I look she should acknowledge her offense,
^ut ^o how she my love does recompense.
Who would have thought she would have me renounced,
And taken uncouth lovers by the hand?
Who would have thought her mouth would have pronounced
Such damned errors, as my truth gainstand?
Should she repugne to my most just command?
Can I permit my glore to be transferd
To other gods? Surely it can not stand
With that which my reveald will has averred.
Long have I spared, long have I wrath deferd,
Long have I her invited to repent:
Long has my goodness on her been conferd,
Long has she made my spirit to lament.
Lost is my labor, wasted is mine oil,
I reap no profit of my long some toil.
Where is her light? her crown? her ornaments?
Her chain of love? her peace? her purity?
Her fruitful gardens? her fair continents?
Her rights? her seals of Life and Liberty?
All she has sold unto her enemy,
Her vomit she has licked up again:
Great is her craft, great is her treachery,
Her purposes and projects are most vain.
In her no honest dealing does remain,
My perfect pattern she has overthrown:
Doubtless on her my judgments I would rain*
If secret wailers were from her withdrawn.
Lot must be brought to Zoar ere I can
Shoure down my fury upon sinful man.
Ye Mourners therefore leave not off to weep,
Your faithful pr^yers and tears my hands do bind:
For Sions sake because your wounds are deep,
A good and gracious success you shall fince.
Your melting hearts make my wrath flee behind,
Your peace is made, let Dragons fret and fume:
My light your joy, shall make their eyes stone-blind,
Though now they think my Cedars to consume.
To your comfort my promises resume,
In your distress I will not you forsake:
Through my strong arm you boldly may presume,
To make the stoutest brambles all to quake.
I am your rock, against me who can prevail?
Earth shall decay, your strength shall never fail.
ALL endless praise be to my blessed LORD,
O Soul rejoice, thy groans he does approve:
From time to time his benefits record,
Extol his Name, him praise for his free love.
Be zealous, steadfast, constant, do not move,
Faiths-fruit is worth all pains thou can sustain:
Look to that glore hid up to their behove,
Who valiantly his born down truth maintain.
Elishaes words against all attempts retain, 2 King 6.16

Mo be for Christ than mortal eye can see:
In suffering for his cause none needs complain,
The cross way leads to felicity.
When days of Christian conflicts are expird,
More joy will come than ever heart desird.
I know my plainness will be much reviled,
Obloquious raylings I must strive to bear:
None so maligned as Gods dearest child,
Edicts soul-vexing daily he may hear.
Black to call black what Christian should forbear*
Frettings of men like wind will pass away:
Luck warmness all should shun who God would fear
Esthers example Saints encourage may.
Earnest was she to fast both night and day:
Hamans great malice deeply piercd her heart:
Most wisely she her credit did assay:
In the kings presence she took the Jews part:
No contrare law could her stop, nor withhold,
From pleading stoutly with a courage bold.
This femal-pleader lets me understand,
That GOD by weakest means gets greatest glore:
And when the stronger ships sink in deep sand,
The weaker vessel often comes safe to shore.
The naked truth is ay advancd the more,
When there is least appearance of support:
Though Potentats intend to cross her sore,
Yet shall she flourish in a fruitful sort.
The darts of wicked men she can retort
Upon themselves wherewith they think to shed
The blood of these who Christianly dehort,
From idol-feasts where with souls are misled.
Her life, her crown, her jewels none shall get,
Who for a part of earth would heaven wodset.
Let Demas and Diotrephes take heed,
Who heavenly substance for earths trash would sell*
The Truth alone can help in time of need,
No other birthright can redeem from hell.
The way to life all other paths excel,
True godliness in it has twofold gain,
Of grace and glore, more than man's tongue can tell*
Hence comes that gold which ever shall remain.
Proud Ishmalites this treasure which disdain.
Shall never dwell upon Mount Sion hill:
Nor shall enjoy the comfort of that rain,
Nor of those drops which mercy does distill.
None, none but they who love, maintain, defend
The Truth oppressed shall get a blessed end.
The Authors epilogue.
I am but sinful dust,
From God is my record,
To me belongs shame,
All glory to the Lord.

