The Affectionate Shepherd. Containing the Complaint of Daphnis for the love
of Ganymede.

Amor plus mellis, quam fellis, est.

LONDON, Printed by John Danter for T. G. and E. N. and are to be sold in
Saint Dunstones Church-yeard in Fleetstreet. 1594.

To the Right Excellent and most beautiful Lady, the Lady PENELOPE RICH.
Fair lovely Lady, whose Angelique eyes
Are Uestall Candles of sweet Beauties Treasure,
Whose speech is able to inchaunt the wise,
Converting Joy to Pain, and Pain to Pleasure;
Accept this simple Toy of my Souls Duty,
Which I present unto thy matchles Beauty.
And albeit the gift be all too mean,
Too mean an Offering for thine Iuorie Shrine;
Yet must thy Beauty my just blame susteane,
Since it is mortal, but thy self divine.
Then (Noble Lady) take in gentle vvorth,
This newborn Babe which here my Muse brings forth.
Your Honors most affectionate and perpetually devoted Shepherd: DAPHNIS.

The Tears of an affectionate Shepherd sick for Love. OR The Complaint of
Daphnis for the Love of Ganimede*
SCarce had the morning Star hid from the light
Heavens crimson Canopie with stars bespangled,
But I began to rue the unhappy sight
Of that fair Boy that had my heart entangled;
Cursing the Time, the Place, the sense, the sin;
I came, I saw, I viewd, I slipped in.
If it be sin to love a sweet-fac'd Boy,
(Whoseamber locks trust up in golden tramels
Dangle adowne his lovely cheeks with joy,
When pearl and flowers his fair hair enamels)
If it be sin to love a lovely Lad;
Oh then sin I, for whom my soul is sad.
His Iuory-white and Alablaster skin
Is staind throughout with rare Vermillion red,
Whose twinkling starrie lights do never blin
To shine on lovely Uenus (Beauties bed:)
But as the Lilly and the blushing Rose,
So white and red on him in order grows.
Upon a time the Nymphs bestird themselves
To try who could his beauty soonest win:
But he accounted them but all as Elues,
Except it were the saire Queen Guendolen,
Her he embraced, of her was beloved,
With plaints he proved, and with tears he moved.
But her an Old Man had been suitor too,
That in his age began to doat again;
Her would he often pray, and often woo,
When through old age enfeebled was his Brain:
But she before had loved a lusty youth
That now was dead, the cause of all her ruth.
And thus it happened, Death and Cupid met
Upon a time at swilling Bacchus house,
Where dainty cates upon the Board were set,
And Goblets full of wine to drink carouse:
Where Love and Death did love the licor so,
That out they fall and to the fray they go.
And having both their Quiuers at their back
^ild full of Arrows; The One of fatal steel;
The other all of gold; Deaths shaft was black,
But Loves was yellow: Fortune turned her wheel;
And from Deaths Quiver fell a fatal shaft,
That under Cupid by the wind was waft.
And at the same time by ill hap there fell
Another Arrow out of Cupids Quiver;
The which was carried by the wind at will,
And under Death the amorous shaft did shiuer:
They being parted, Love took up Deaths dart,
And Death took up Loves Arrow (for his part.)
Thus as they wandered both about the world,
At last Death met with one of feeble age:
Wherewith he drew a shaft and at him hurld
The unknown Arrow; (with a furious rage)
Thinking to strike him dead with Deaths black dart,
But he (alas) with Love did wound his heart.
This was the doting fool, this was the man
That loved fair Guendolena Queen of Beauty;
She cannot shake him off, do what she can,
For he has vowed to her his souls last duty:
Making him trim upon the holy days;
And crowns his Love with Garlands made of Baies.
Now does he stroke his Beard; and now (again)
He wipes the driuel from his filthy chin;
Now offers he a kiss; but high Disdain
Will not permit her heart to pity him:
Her heart more hard than Adamant or steel,
Her heart more changeable than Fortunes wheel.
But leave we him in love (up to the ears)
And tell how Love behau'd himself abroad;
Who seeing one that mourned still in tears
(a young man groaning under Loves great Load)
Thinking to ease his Burden, rid his pains:
For men have grief as long as life remains.
Alas (the while) that unawares he drue
The fatal shaft that Death had dropped before;
By which deceit great harm did then ensue,
Stayning his face with blood and filthy goare.
His face, that was to Guendolen more dear
Than love of Lords, or any lordly Peer.
This was that fair and beautiful young man,
Whom Guendolena so lamented for;
This is that Love whom she does curse and ban,
Because she does that dismal chance abhor:
And if it were not for his Mothers sake,
Even Ganimede himself she would forsake.
Oh would she would forsake my Ganimede,
Whose sugared love is full of sweet delight,
Upon whose forehead you may plainly read
Loves Pleasure, grau'd in yuorie Tables bright:
In whose fair eye balls you may clearly see
Base Love still staind with foul indignity.
O would to God he would but pity me,
That love him more than any mortal wight;
Then he and I with love would soon agree,
That now cannot abide his Suitors sight.
O would to God (so I might have my fee)
My lips were honey, and thy mouth a Be.
Then should thou suck my sweet and my fair flower
That now is ripe, and full of honey-berries:
Then would I lead thee to my pleasant Bower
Filled full of Grapes, of Mulberries, and Cherries;
Then should thou be my Waspe or else my Be,
I would thy hiue, and thou my honey be.
I would put amber Bracelets on thy wrests,
Crownets of Pearl about thy naked Arms:
And when thou sitst at swilling Bacchus feasts
My lips with charms should save thee from all harms:
And when in sleep thou tookst thy chiefest Pleasure,
Mine eyes should gaze upon thine eyelids Treasure.
And every Morn by dawning of the day,
When Phoebus rises with a blushing face,
Siluanus Chappel-Clarkes shall chaunt a Lay,
And play thee hunts-vp in thy resting place:
My Coote thy Chamber, my bosom thy Bed;
Shall be appointed for thy sleepy head.
And when it pleases thee to walk abroad,
(Abroad into the fields to take fresh air:)
The Meades with Floras treasure should be strowde,
(The mantled meaddowes, and the fields so fair.)
And by a silver Well (with golden sands)
I Will sit me down, and wash thine yuory hands.
And in the sweltring heat of summer time,
I would make Cabinets for thee (my Love:)
Sweet Smelling Arbours made of Eglantine
Should be thy shrine, and I would be thy Dove.
Cool Cabinets of fresh green Laurel boughs
Should shadow us, ore-set with thicke-set Eughes.
Or if thou list to bathe thy naked limbs,
Within the Crystal of a Pearle-bright brook,
Paued with dainty pibbles to the brims;
Or clear, wherein thy self thy self may look;
We Will go to Ladon, whose still trickling noise,
Will lull thee fast asleep amids thy joys.
Or if thoult go unto the River side,
To angle for the sweet fresh water fish:
Armed with thy implements that will abide
(Thy rod, hook, line) to take a dainty dish;
Thy rods shall be of cane, thy lines of silk,
Thy hooks of silver, and thy bayts of milk.
Or if thou love to hear sweet Melody,
Or pipe a Round upon an Oaten Reed,
Or make thy self glad with some myrthfull glee,
Or play them Music whilst thy flock does feed;
To Pans own Pype I Will help my lovely Lad,
(Pans golden Pype) which he of Syrinx had.
Or if thou dare to climb the highest Trees
For Apples, Cherries, Medlars, Pears, or Plumbs,
Nuts, Walnuts, Filbeards, Chest-nuts, Ceruices,
The hoary Peach, when snowy winter comes;
I have fine Orchards full of mellowed fruit;
Which I will give thee to obtain my suit.
Not proud Alcynous himself can vaunt,
Of goodlier Orchards or of brauer Trees
Than I have planted; yet thou will not grant
My simple suit; but like the honey Bees
Thou suckst the flower till all the sweet be gone;
And love me for my Coin till I have none.
Leave Guendolen (sweet heart) though she be fair
Yet is she light; not light in virtue shining:
But light in her behavior, to impair
Her honor in her Chastities declining;
Trust not her tears, for they can wantonnize,
When tears in pearl are trickling from her eyes.
If thou will come and dwell with me at home;
My sheep-cote shall be strowd with new green rushes:
We Will haunt the trembling Prickets as they rome
About the fields, along the hauthorne bushes;
I have a pie-bald Curre to hunt the Hare:
So we will live with dainty forest fare.
Nay more than this, I have a Garden-plot,
Wherein there wants nor herbs, nor roots, nor flowers;
(Flowers to smell, roots to eat, herbs for the pot,)
And dainty Shelters when the Welkin lowers:
Sweet Smelling Beds of Lillies and of Roses,
Which Rosemary banks and Lauender incloses.
There grows the Gilliflowre, the Mynt, the Dayzie
(Both red and white,) the blew-veynd-Violet:
The purple Hyacinth, the Spyke to please thee,
The scarlet did Carnation bleeding yet;
The Sage, the Sauery, and sweet Margerum,
Isop, Time, and Eyebright, good for the blind and dumb.
The Pinke, the Primrose, Cowslip and Daffadilly,
The Hare-bell blue, the crimson Cullumbine,
Sage, Lettis, Parsley, and the milke-white Lilly,
The Rose, and speckled flower called Sops in wine,
Fine pretty King-cups, and the yellow Boots,
That grows by Rivers, and by shallow Brooks.
And many thousand more (I cannot name)
Of herbs and flowers that in gardens grow,
I have for thee; and Coneyes that be tame,
Young Rabbets, white as Swan, and black as Crow,
Some speckled here and there with dainty spots:
And more I have two mylch and milke-white Goats.
All these, and more, I Will give thee for thy love;
If these, and more, may tycethy love away:
I have a Pidgeon-house, in it a Dove,
Which I love more than mortal tongue can say:
And last of all, I Will give thee a little Lamb
To play withal, new weaned from her Dam.
But if thou will not pity my Complaint,
My Tears, nor Vows, nor Oaths, made to thy Beauty;
What shall I do? But languish, die, or saint,
Since thou do scorn my Tears, and my Souls Duty:
And Tears contemned, Vows and Oaths must fail;
For where Tears cannot, nothing can prevail.
Compare the love of fair Queen Guendolin
With mine, and thou shall ee how she does love thee:
I love thee for thy qualities divine,
But She does love another Swain above thee:
I love thee for thy gifts, She for her pleasure;
I for thy Virtue, She for Beauties treasure.
And always (I am sure) it cannot last,
But sometime Nature will deny those dimples:
In steed of Beauty (when thy Blossom's past)
Thy face will be deformed, full of wrinckles:
Then She that loved thee for thy Beauties sake,
When Age draws on, thy love will soon forsake.
But I that loved thee for thy gifts divine,
In the December of thy Beauties waning,
Will still admire (with joy) those lovely eine,
That now behold me with their beauties baning:
Though January will never come again,
Yet April years will come in showers of rain.
When will my May come, that I may embrace thee?
When will the hour be of my souls ioying?
Why do thou seek in mirth still to disgrace me?
Whose mirth's my health, whose griefe's my hearts annoying.
Thy bane my bale, thy bliss my blessedness,
Thy ill my hell, thy weal my welfare is.
Thus do I honor thee that love thee so,
And love thee so, that so do honor thee,
Much more than any mortal man does know,
Or can discern by Love or Iealozie:
But if that thou disdainst my loving ever;
Oh happy I, if I had loved never.
Finis.
Plus fellis quam mellis Amor.
The second Days Lamentation of the Affectionate Shepherd.
NExt Morning when the golden Sun was risen,
And new had bid good morrow to the Mountains;
When Night her silver light had locked in prison,
Which gave a glimmering on the crystal Fountains:
Then ended sleep: and then my cares began,
Even with the vprising of the silver Swan.
Oh glorious Sun quoth I, (viewing the Sun)
That lightenst every thing but me alone:
Why is my Summer season almost done?
My Springtime past, and Ages Autumn gone?
My Haruest's come, and yet I reapt no corn:
My love is great, and yet I am forlorn.
Witness these watrie eyes my sad lament,
(Receiving cisternes of my ceafeles tears)
Witness my bleeding heart my souls intent,
Witness the weight distressed Daphnis bears:
Sweet Love, come ease me of thy burdens pain;
Or else I die, or else my heart is slain.
And thou loue-scorning Boy, cruel, unkind;
Oh let me once again entreat some pity:
May be thou will relent thy marble mind,
And lend thine ears unto my doleful Dittie:
Oh pity him, that pity craves so sweetly;
Or else thou shall be never named meekly.
If thou will love me, thou shall be my Boy,
My sweet Delight, the Comfort of my mind,
My Love, my Dove, my Sollace, and my Joy;
But if I can no grace nor mercy find,
I Will go to Caucasus to ease my smart,
And let a Vulture gnaw upon my heart.
Yet if thou will but show me one kind look,
(A small reward for my so great affection)
I Will grave thy name in Beauties golden Book,
And shroud thee under Hellicons protection;
Making the Muses chaunt thy lovely praise:
(For they delight in Shepherds lowly lays.)
And when thou art weary of thy keeping Sheep
Upon a lovely Down, (to please thy mind).
I Will give thee fine ruffe-footed Doves to keep,
And pretty Pigeons of another kind:
A Robbin-red-brest shall thy Minstrell be,
Chirping thee sweet, and pleasant Melody.
Or if thou will go shoot at little Birds
With bow and boult, (the Thrustle-cocke and Sparrow)
Such as our Country hedges can afford's;
I have a fine bow, and an yuorie arrow:
And if thou miss, yet meat thou shall lack,
I Will hang a bag and bottle at thy back.
Will thou set springes in a frostie Night,
To catch the long-billd Woodcocke and the Snype?
(By the bright glimmering of the Starrie light)
The Partridge, Phaesant, or the greedy Crype?
I Will lend thee lyme-twigs, and fine sparrow calls,
Wherewith the Fowler silly Birds inthralls.
Or in a mystie morning if thou will
Make pit-falls for the Lark and Pheldifare;
Thy prop and sweake shall be both ouer-guilt:
With Cyparissus self thou shall compare
For gins and wyles, the Oozels to beguile;
Whilst thou under a bush shall sit and smile.
Or with Hare-pypes (set in a muset hole)
Will thou deceive the deep-earth-deluing Coney?
Or will thou in a yellow Boxen bole
Taste with a wooden splent the sweet lythe honey?
Clusters of crimson Grapes I Will pull thee down;
And with Vine-leaues make thee a lovely Crown.
Or will thou drink a cup of new-made Wine
Froathing at top, mixed with a dish of Cream;
And Straw-berries, or Bil-berries in their prime,
Bathed in a melting Sugar-Candie stream:
Bunnell and Perry I have for thee (alone)
When Vynes are dead, and all the Grapes are gone.
I have a pleasant noted Nightingale,
(That sings as sweetly as the silver Swan)
Kept in a Cage of bone; as white as Whale,
Which I with singing of Philemon wan:
Her shall thou have, and all I have beside;
If thou will be my Boy, or else my Bride.
Then will I lay out all my Lardarie
(Of Cheese, of Cracknells, Curds and Clowted-creame)
Before thy malcontent ill-pleasing eye:
But why do I of such great follies dream?
Alas, he will not see my simple Coat;
For all my speckled Lamb, nor milk-white Goat.
Against my Birthday thou shall be my guest:
We Will have Greene-cheeses, and fine Silly-bubs;
And thou shall be the chief of all my feast.
And I will give thee two fine pretty Cubs,
With two young Whelps, to make thee sport withal,
A golden Racket, and a Tennis-ball.
A gilded Nutmeg, and a race of Ginger,
A silken Girdle, and a drawn-worke Band,
Cuffs for thy wrists, a gold Ring for thy finger,
And sweet Rose Water for thy Lilly-white hand,
A Purse of silk, bespangd with spots of gold,
As brave a one as ere thou did behold.
A pair of Knives, a green Hat and a Feather,
New Gloves to put upon thy milk-white hand
I Will give thee, for to keep thee from the weather;
With Phoenix feathers shall thy Face be fand,
Cooling those Cheeks, that being cooled wexe red,
Like Lillyes in a bed of Roses shed.
Why do thy Coral Lips disdain to kiss,
And suck that Sweet, which many have desired?
That Baulme my Bane, that means would mend my miss:
Oh let me then with thy sweet Lips b'inspired;
When thy Lips touch my Lips, my Lips will turn
To Coral too, and being cold ice will burn.
Why should thy sweet Loue-locke hang dangling down,
Kissing thy girdle-steed with falling pride?
Although thy Skin be white, thy hair is brown:
Oh let not then thy hair thy beauty hide;
(...) thy Lock, and sell it for gold wier:
(The purest gold is tryde in hottest fire).
Faire-long-haire-wearing Absolon was killed,
Because he wore it in a bravery:
So that which gracde his Beauty, Beauty spild,
Making him subject to vile slavery,
In being hanged: a death for him too good,
That sought his own shame, and his Fathers blood.
Again, we read of old King Priamus,
(The hapless sire of valiant Hector slain)
That his hair was so long and odious
In youth, that in his age it bred his pain:
For if his hair had not been half so long,
His life had been, and he had had no wrong.
For when his stately City was destroyed,
(That Monument of great Antiquity)
When his poor heart (with grief and sorrow cloyd)
Fled to his Wise (last hope in misery;)
Pyrrhus (more hard than Adamantine rocks)
Held him and halde him by his aged locks.
These two examples by the way I show,
To prove th'indecencie of men's long hair:
Though I could tell thee of a thousand more,
Let these suffice for thee (my lovely Fair)
Whose eye's my star; whose smiling is my Sun;
Whose love did end before my joys begun.
Fond Love is blind, and so art thou (my Dear)
For thou see not my Love, and great desert;
Blind Love is fond, and so thou do appear;
For fond, and blind, thou greeust my greeuing heart:
Be thou fond-blinde, blinde-fond, or one, or all;
Thou art my Love, and I must be thy thrall.
Oh lend thine yuorie forehead for Loves Book,
Thine eyes for candles to behold the same;
That when dim-sighted ones therein shall look
They may discern that proud disdainefull Dame;
Yet claspe that Book, and shut that Cazement light;
Lest the one obscurde, the other shine too bright.
Sell thy sweet breath to'th'daintie Musk-ball-makers;
Yet sell it so as thou may soon redeem it:
Let others of thy beauty be pertakers;
Else none but Daphnis will so well esteem it:
For what is Beauty except it be well known?
And how can it be known, except first shown?
Learn of the Gentlewomen of this Age,
That set their Beauties to the open view,
Making Disdain their Lord, true Love their Page;
A Custom Zeal does hate, Desert does rue:
Learn to look red, anon wax pale and wan;
Making a mock of Love, ascorne of man.
A candle light, and covered with a veil,
Does no man good, because it gives no light;
So Beauty of her beauty seems to fail,
When being not seen it cannot shine so bright.
Then show thy self and know thy self withal,
Lest climing high thou catch too great a fall.
Oh foul Eclipser of that fair sunshine,
Which is entitled Beauty in the best;
Making that mortal, which is else divine;
That stains the fair which Women steeme not least:
Get thee to Hell again (from whence thou art)
And leave the Center of a Woman's heart.
Ah be not staind (sweet Boy) with this vilde spot,
Indulgence Daughter, Mother of mischaunce;
A blemish that does every beauty blot;
That makes them loathed, but never does advance
Her Clyents, fautors, friends; or them that love her;
And hates them most of all, that most reprove her.
Remember Age and thou can not be proud,
For age pulls down the pride of every man;
In youthful years by Nature it is allowde
To have self-will, do Nurture what she can;
Nature and Nurture once together met,
The Soul and shape in decent order set.
Pride looks aloft, still staring on the stars,
Humility looks lowly on the ground;
The One menaceth the Gods with civil wars,
The other toils till he have Virtue found:
His thoughts are humble, not aspiring hye;
But Pride looks haughtily with scornful eye.
Humillity is clad in modest weeds,
But Pride is brave and glorious to the show;
Humillity his friends with kindness feeds,
But Pride his friends (in need) will never know:
Supplying not their wants, but them disdaining;
Whilst they to pity never need complaining.
Humillity in misery is relieved,
But Pride in need of no man is regarded;
Pity and Mercy weep to see him grieved
That in distress had them so well rewarded:
But Pride is scornd, contemnd, disdaind, derided,
Whilst Humblenes of all things is provided.
Oh then be humble, gentle, meek, and mild;
So shall thou be of every mouth commended;
Be not disdainful, cruel, proud, (sweet child)
So shall thou be of no man much condemned;
Care not for them that Virtue do despise;
Virtue is loathde of fools; loud of the wise.
O fair Boy trust not to thy Beauties wings,
They cannot carry thee above the Sun:
Beauty and wealth are transitory things,
(For all must end that ever was begun)
But Fame and Virtue never shall decay;
For Fame is toombles, Virtue lives for aye.
The snow is white, and yet the pepper's black,
The one is bought, the other is contemned:
Pibbles we have, but store of Ieat we lack;
So white comparde to black is much condemned:
We do not praise the Swanne because she is white,
But for she does in Music much delight.
And yet the siluer-noted Nightingale,
Though she be not so white is more esteemed;
Sturgion is dun of hew, white is the Whale,
Yet for the daintier Dish the first is deemed;
What thing is whiter than the milke-bred Lilly?
That knows it not for naught, what man so silly?
Yea what more noysomer unto the smell
Than Lillies are? what is sweeter then the Sage?
Yet for pure white the Lilly bears the Bell
Till it be faded through decaying Age;
House-Doues are white, and Oozels Blacke-birds be;
Yet what a difference in the taste, we see?
Compare the Cow and Calfe, with Ewe and Lamb;
Rough hayrie Hydes, with softest downy Fell;
Hecfar and Bull, with Weather and with Ram,
And you shall see how far they do excel;
White Kine with black; black Coney-skins with gray,
Kine, nesh and strong; skins, dear and cheap always.
The whitest silver is not always best,
Lead, Tynne, and Pewter are of base esteem;
The yellow burnisht gold, that comes from The East,
And West (of late invented) may beseem
The worlds rich Treasury, or Mydas eye;
(The Rich man's God, poor man's felicity.)
Bugle and Ieat, with snow and Alablaster
I will compare: White Dammasin with black;
Bullas and wheaton Plumbs, (to a good Taster,)
The ripe red Cherries have the sweetest smacke;
When they be green and young, they are sour and naught;
But being ripe, with eagernes they are baught.
Compare the Wyld-cat to the brownish Beauer,
Running for life, with hounds pursued sore;
When Hunts-men of her pretions Stones bereaueher,
(Which with her teeth sh'had bitten off before):
Restoratiues, and costly curious Felts
Are made of them, and rich imbroydred Belts.
To what use serves a piece of crimbling Chalk?
The Agget stone is white, yet good for nothing:
Fie, fie, I am ashamed to hear thee talk;
Be not so much of thine own Image doting:
So fair Narcissus lost his love and life.
(Beauty is often with it self at strife).
Right Diamonds are of a russet hieu,
The brightsome Carbuncles are red to see too,
The Saphyre stone is of a watchet blue,
(To this thou can not choose but soon agree too):
Pearls are not white but gray, Rubies are red:
In praise of Black, what can be better sed?
For if we do consider of each thing
That flies in welkin, or in water swims,
How every thing increases with the Spring,
And how the blacker still the brighter dims:
We cannot choose, but needs we must confess,
Sable excels milk-white in more or less.
As for example, in the crystal clear
Of a sweet stream, or pleasant running River,
Where thousand forms of fishes will appear,
(Whose names to thee I cannot now deliver:
The blacker still the brighter have disgraced,
For pleasant profit, and delicious taste.
Salmon and Trout are of a ruddie color,
Whiting and Dare is of a milk-white hiew:
Nature by them (perhaps) is made the fuller,
Little they nourish, be they old or new:
Carp, Loach, Tench, Eeles (though black and bred in mud)
Delight the tooth with taste, and breed good blud.
Innumerable be the kinds, if I couid name them;
But I a Shepherd, and no Fisher am:
Little it skills whether I praise or blame them,
I only meddle with my Ew and Lamb:
Yet this I say, that black the better is,
In birds, beasts, fruit, stones, flowers, herbs, metals, fish.
And last of all, in black there does appear
Such qualities, as not in yuorie;
Black cannot blush for shame, look pale for fear,
Scorning to wear another liuorie:
Black is the badge of sober Modesty,
The wonted wear of ancient Grauetie.
The learned Sisters suit themselves in black,
Learning abandons white, and lighter hues:
Pleasure and Pride light colors never lack;
But true Religion does such Toys refuse:
Virtue and Gravity are sisters grown,
Since black by both, and both by black are known.
White is the color of each paltry Miller,
White is the Ensign of each common Woman;
White, is white Virtues for black Vices Pillar;
White makes proud fools inferior unto no man:
White, is the white of Body, black of Mind,
(Virtue we seldom in white Habit find.)
Oh then be not so proud because thou art fair,
Virtue is only the rich gift of God:
Let not selfe-pride thy virtues name impair,
Beat not green youth with sharp Repentance Rod:
(A Fiend, a Monster, a misshapen Devil;
Virtues foe, Vices friend, the root of evil.)
Apply thy mind to be a virtuous man,
Auoydill company (the spoil of youth;)
To follow Virtues Lore do what thou can,
(Whereby great profit unto thee ensuth:)
Read Books, hate Ignorance; (the Foe to Art,
The Damme of Error, Envy of the heart.)
Serve Jove (upon thy knees) both day and night,
Adore his Name above all things on Earth:
So shall thy vows be gracious in his sight,
So little Babes are blessed in their Birth:
Think on no worldly woe, lament thy sin;
(For lesser cease, when greater griefs begin).
Swear no vain oaths; hear much, but little say;
Speak ill of no man, tend thine own affairs,
Bridle thy wrath, thine angry mood delay;
(So shall thy mind be seldom cloyd with cares:)
Be mild and gentle in thy speech to all,
Refuse no honest gain when it does fall.
Be not beguild with words, prove not ungrateful,
Relieve thy Neighbor in his greatest need,
Commit no action that to all is hateful,
Their want with wealth, the poor with plenty feed:
Twit no man in the teeth with what thou have done;
Remember flesh is frail, and hatred shun.
Leave wicked things, which Men to mischief move,
(Least cross mis-hap may thee in danger bring,)
Crave no preferment of thy heavenly Jove,
Nor any honor of thy earthly King:
Boast not thy self before The Almighty's sight,
(Who knows thy heart, and any wicked wight).
Be not offensive to the peoples eye,
See that thy prayers hearts true zeal affords,
Scorn not a man that is salne in misery,
Esteem no tatling tales, nor babbling words;
That reason is exiled always think,
When as a drunkard rayles amidst his drink.
Use not thy lovely lips to loathsome lies,
By crafty means increase no worldly wealth;
Strive not with mighty Men (whose fortune flies)
With temperate diet nourish wholesome health:
Place well thy words, leave not thy friend for gold;
First try, then trust; in ventring be not bold.
In Pan repose thy trust; extol his praise
(That never shall decay, but ever lives):
Honor thy Parents (to prolong thy days),
Let not thy left hand know what right hand gives:
From needy men turn not thy face away,
(Though Charity be now yclad in clay).
Hear Shepherds often (thereby great wisdom grows),
With good advice a sober answer make:
Be not remoou'd with every wind that blows,
(That course do only sinful sinners take).
Thy talk will show thy fame or else thy shame;
(A prattling tongue does often purchase blame).
Obtain a faithful friend that will not fail thee,
Think on thy Mothers pain in her childbearing,
Make no debate, least quickly thou bewail thee,
Visit the sick with comfortable chearing:
Pity the prisner, help the fatherless,
Revenge the Widows wrongs in her distress.
Think on thy grave, remember still thy end,
Let not thy winding-sheete be staind with guilt,
Trust not a fained reconciled friend,
More than an open foe (that blood has spilt)
(Who tutcheth pitch, with pitch shall be defiled)
Be not with wanton company beguiled.
Take not a flattring woman to thy wife,
A shameless creature, full of wanton words,
(Whose bad, thy good; whose lust will end thy life,
Cutting thy heart with sharp two edged swords:)
Cast not thy mind on her whose looks allure,
But she that shines in Truth and Virtue pure.
Praise not thy self, let other men commend thee,
Bear not a flattring tongue to glauer any,
Let Parents due correction not offend thee:
Rob not thy neighbor, seek the love of many;
Hate not to hear good Counsel given thee,
Lay not thy money unto Usury.
Restrain thy steps from too much liberty,
Fulfill not th'enuious man's malicious mind;
Embrace thy Wife, live not in lechery;
Content thy self with what Fates have assignde:
Be ruled by Reason, Warning dangers save;
True Age is reverend worship to thy grave.
Be patient in extreme Adversity,
(Man's chiefest credit grows by doing well,)
Be not high-minded in Prosperity;
Falsehood abhor, no lying fable tell.
Give not thy self to Sloth (the sink of Shame,
The moath of Time, the enemy to Fame.)
This leare I learned of a Bel-dame Trot,
(When I was young and wild as now thou art):
But her good counsel I regarded not;
I marked it with my ears, not with my heart:
But now I find it too-too true (my Son)
When my Age-withered Spring is almost done.
Behold my gray head, full of silver hairs,
My wrinckled skin, deepefurrowes in my face:
Cares bring Old Age, Old Age increases cares;
My Time is come, and I have run my Race:
Winter has snow'd upon my hoarie head,
And with my Winter all my joys are dead.
And thou loue-hating Boy, (whom once I loved)
Farewell, a thousand-thousand times farewell;
My Tears the Marble Stones to ruth have moved;
My sad Complaints the babbling Echoes tell:
And yet thou would take no compassion on me,
Scorning that cross which Love has laid upon me.
The hardest steel with fire does mend his miss,
Marble is mollifyde with drops of Rain;
But thou (more hard than Steel or Marble is)
Do scorn my Tears, and my true love disdain;
Which for thy sake shall everlasting be,
Wrote in the Annalls of Eternity.
By this, the Night (with darkness ouer-spred)
Had drawn the curtains of her cole-blacke bed;
And Cynthia muffling her face with a clowd,
(Lest all the world of her should be too proud)
Had taken Conge of the sable Night,
(That wanting her cannot be half so bright;)
When I poor forlorn man and outcast creature
(Despairing of my Love, despisde of Beauty)
Grew malcontent, scorning his lovely feature,
That had disdaind my euer-zealous duty:
I hy'd me homeward by the Moone-shine light;
Forswearing Love, and all his fond delight.
FINIS.
The Shepherds Content. OR The happiness of a harmles life. Written upon
Occasion of the former Subject.
OF all the kinds of common Country life,
Me thinks a Shepherds life is most Content;
His State is quiet Peace, deuoyd of strife;
His thoughts are pure from all impure intent,
His Pleasures rate sits at an easy rent:
He bears no malice in his harmles heart,
Malicious meaning has in him no part.
He is not troubled with the afflicted mind,
His cares are only over silly Sheep;
He is not unto Iealozie inclinde,
(Thrice happy Man) he knows not how to weep;
Whilst I the Treble in deep sorrows keep:
I cannot keep the Mean; for why (alas)
Griefs have no mean, though I for mean do pass.
No Briefes nor Semi-Briefes are in my Songs,
Because (alas) my grief is seldom short;
My Prick-Song's always full of Largues and Longs,
(Because I never can obtain the Port
Of my desires: Hope is a happy Fort.)
Prick-song (indeed) because it pricks my heart;
And Song, because sometimes I ease my smart.
The mighty Monarch of a royal Realm,
Swaying his Scepter with a Princely pomp;
Of his desires cannot so steare the Healme,
But sometime falls into a deadly dumpe,
When as he hears the shrilly-sounding Trumpe
Of foreign Enemies, or homebred Foes;
His mind of grief, his heart is full of woes.
Or when bad subjects against their Sovereign
(Like hollow hearts) unnaturally rebel,
How careful is he to suppress again
Their desperate forces, and their powers to quell
With loyal hearts, till all (again be well:
When (being subdued) his care is rather more
To keep them under, than it was before.
Thus is he never full of sweet Content,
But either this or that his joy debars:
Now Noblemen against Noblemen are bent,
Now Gentlemen and others fall at iarrs:
Thus is his Country full of civil wars;
He still in danger sits, still fearing Death:
For Traitors seek to stop their Princes breath.
The whylst the other has no enemy,
Without it be the Wolf, and cruel Fates
(Which no man spare): when as his disagree
He with his sheep-hooke knaps them on the pates,
Schooling his tender Lambs from wanton gates:
Beasts are more kind than Men, Sheep seek not blood
But country caytiues kill their Countries good.
The Courtier he fawn's for his Princes favor,
In hope to get a Princely rich Reward;
His tongue is tipped with honey for to glauer;
Pride deals the Deck whilst Chance does choose the Card,
Then comes another and his Game has mard;
Sitting betwixt him, and the morning Sun:
Thus Night is come before the Day is done.
Some Courtiers careful of their Princes health,
Attend his Person with all diligence
Whose hand's their heart; whose welfare is their wealth,
Whose safe Protection is their sure Defense,
For pure affection, not for hope of pence:
Such is the faithful heart, such is the mind,
Of him that is to Virtue still inclinde.
The skillful Scholar, and brave man at Arms,
First plies his Book, last fights for Countries Peace;
The One fears Oblivion, the other fresh Alarmes:
His pains nere end, his travails never cease;
His with the Day, his with the Night increase:
He studies how to get eternal Fame;
The Soldier fights to win a glorious Name.
The Knight, the Squire, the Gentleman, the Clown,
Are full of crosses and calamities;
Lest fickle Fortune should begin to frown,
And turn their mirth to extreme miseries:
Nothing more certain than incertainties;
Fortune is full of fresh variety:
Constant in nothing but inconstancy.
The wealthy Merchant that does cross the Seas,
To Denmark, Poland, Spain, and Barbary;
For all his riches, lives not still at ease;
Sometimes he fears ship-spoyling Pyracie,
Another while deceit and treachery
Of his own Factors in a foreign Land:
Thus does he still in dread and danger stand.
Well is he tearmd a Merchant-Venturer,
Since he does venture lands, and goods, and all:
When he does travel for his Traffic far,
Little he knows what fortune may befall,
Or rather what misfortune happen shall:
Sometimes he splits his Ship against a rock;
Loosing his men, his goods, his wealth, his stock.
And if he so escape with life away,
He counts himself a man most fortunate,
Because the waves their rigorous rage did stay,
(When being within their cruel powers of late,
The Seas did seem to pity his estate)
But yet he never can recover health,
Because his joy was drowned with his wealth.
The painful Plough-swaine and the Husbandman
Rise up each morning by the break of day,
Taking what toil and drudging pains they can,
And all is for to get a little stay;
And yet they cannot put their care away:
When Night is come, their cares begin afresh,
Thinking upon their Morrowes business.
Thus every man is troubled with unrest,
From rich to poor, from high to low degree:
Therefore I think that man is truly blessed,
That neither cares for wealth nor poverty,
But laughs at Fortune and her foolerie;
That gives rich Churles great store of gold and fee,
And lets poor Scholars live in misery,
O fading Branches of decaying Bays
Who now will water your dry-wither'd Arms?
Or where is he that sung the lovely Lays
Of simple Shepherds in their Country Farms?
Ah he is dead the cause of all our harms:
And with him did my joy and sweet delight;
The clear to Clouds, the Day is turned to Night.
SYDNEY, The Siren of this latter Age;
SYDNEY, The Blasing-starre of Englands glory;
SYDNEY, The Wonder of the wise and sage;
SYDNEY, The Subject of true Virtues story:
This Siren, Star, this Wonder, and this Subject;
Is dumb, dim, gone, and mard by Fortunes Object.
And thou my sweet Amyntas virtuous mind,
Should I forgetthy Learning or thy Love;
Well might I be accounted but unkind,
Whose pure affection I so often did prove:
Might my poor Plaints hard stones to pity move;
His loss should be lamented of each Creature,
So great his Name, so gentle was his Nature.
But sleep his soul in sweet Elysium,
(The happy Haven of eternal rest:)
And let me to my former matter come,
Proving by Reason, Shepherds life is best,
Because he harbors Virtue in his Breast;
And is content (the chiefest thing of all)
With any fortune that shall him befall.
He sits all Day lowd-piping on a Hill,
The whilst his flock about him dance apace,
His heart with joy, his ears with Music fill:
Anon a bleating Weather bears the Bace,
A Lamb the Treble; and to his disgrace
Another answers like a middle Mean:
Thus every one to bear a Part are feign.
Like a great King he rules a little Land,
Still making Statutes, and ordayning Laws;
Which if they break, he beats them with his Wand:
He does defend them from the greedy Jaws
Of rau'ning Woolues, and Lions bloody Paws.
His Field, his Realm; his Subjects are his Sheep;
Which he does still in due obedience keep.
First he ordaines by Act of Parliament,
(Holden by custom in each Country Town)
That if a sheep (with any bad intent)
Presume to break the neighbor Hedges down,
Or haunt strange Pastures that be not his own;
He shall be pounded for his lustines,
Until his Master find out some redres.
Also if any prove a Strageller
From his own fellows in a foreign field,
He shall be taken for a wanderer,
And forced himself immediately to yield,
Or with a wyde-mouth'd Mastiue Currre be killed.
And if not claimd within a twelue-months space,
He shall remain with Landlord of the place.
Or if one stray to feed far from the rest,
He shall be pincht by his swift pye-bald Curre;
If any by his fellows be oppressed,
The wronger (for he does all wrong abhor)
Shall be well bangd so long as he can stir.
Because he did anoy his harmeles Brother,
That meant not harm to him nor any other.
And last of all, if any wanton Weather,
With briers and brambles tear his fleece in twain,
He shall beforc'd to abide cold frosty weather,
And pouring showers of rattling storms of rain,
Till his new fleece begins to grow again:
And for his rashness he is doomed to go,
without a new Coat all the Winter throw.
Thus does he keep them still in awful fear,
And yet allows them liberty enough;
So dear to him their welfare does appear,
That when their fleeces gin to waxen rough,
He combs and trims them with a Rampicke bough,
Washing them in the streams of silver Ladon,
To cleanse their skins from all corruption.
Another while he wooes his Country Wench
(With Chaplets crowned, and gaudy girlonds dight)
Whose burning Lust her modest eye does quench,
Standing amazed at her heavenly sight,
(Beauty does ravish Sense with sweet Delight)
Clearing Arcadia with a smoothed Browe
When Sun-bright smiles melts flakes of driven snow.
Thus does he frollicke it each day by day,
And when Night comes draws homeward to his Coat,
Singing a Ijgge or merry Roundelay;
(For who sings commonly so merry a Noate,
As he that cannot chop or change a groate.)
And in the winter Nights (his chief desire)
He turns a Crabbe or Cracknell in the fire.
He leads his Wench a Country Horne-pipe Round,
About a May Pole on a Holy Day;
Kissing his lovely Less (with Garlands Crowned)
With whoopping heigh-ho singing Care away;
Thus does he pass the merry month of May:
And all th'yere after in delight and joy,
(Scorning a King) he cares for no annoy.
What though with simple cheer he homely sares?
He lives content, a King can do no more;
Nay not so much, for Kings have many cares:
But he has none; except it be that sore
Which young and old, which vexes rich and poor,
The pangs of Love. O! who can vanquish Love,
That conquers Kingdoms, and the Gods above?
Deepe-wounding Arrow, hart-consuming Fire;
Ruler of Reason, slave to tyrant Beauty;
Monarch of hearts, Fuel of fond desire,
Prentice to Folly, foe to fained Duty,
Pledge of true Zeal, Affections moitie;
If thou kilst where thou will, and whom it list thee,
(Alas) how can a silly Soul resist thee?
By thee great Collin lost his liberty,
By thee sweet Astrophel forwent his joy.
By thee Amyntas wept incessantly,
By thee good Rowland lived in great annoy;
O cruel, peevish, vylde, blind-seeing Boy:
How can thou hit their hearts, and yet not see?
(If thou be blind, as thou art faind to be).
A Shepherd loves no ill, but only thee;
He has no care, but only by thy causing:
Why do thou shoot thy cruel shasts at me?
Give me some respite, some short time of pausing:
Still my sweet Love with bitter luck thou art sawcing:
Oh, if thou have a mind to show thy might;
Kill mighty Kings, and not a wretched wight.
Yet (O Enthraller of infranchizd hearts)
At my poor heart if thou will needs be aiming,
Do me this favor show me both thy Darts,
That I may choose the best for my hearts mayming,
(A free consent is priuiledgd from blaming:
Then pierce his hard heart with thy golden Arrow,
That thou my wrong, that he may rue my sorrow.
But let me feel the force of thy lead Pyle,
What should I do with love when I am old?
I know not how to flatter, fawn, or smyle;
Then stay thy hand, O cruel Bow-man hold:
For if thou strik'ft me with thy dart of gold,
I swear to thee (by Jove's immortal curse)
I have more in my heart, than in my purse.
The more I weep, the more he bends his Brow;
For in my heart a golden Shaft I find:
(Cruel, unkind) and will thou leave me so?
Can no remorce nor pity move thy mind?
Is Mercy in the Heavens so hard to find?
Oh, then it is no marvel that on earth,
Of kind Remorce there is so great a dearth,
How happy were a harmles Shepherds life,
If he had never known what Love did mean:
But now fond Love in every place is rife,
Staining the purest Soul with spots unclean,
Making thick purses, thin; fat bodies, lean:
Love is a fiend, a fire, a heaven, a hell;
Where pleasure, pain, and sad repentance dwell.
There are so many Danaes now a days,
That love for lucre; pain for gain is sold:
No true affection can their fancy please,
Except it be a Jove to rain down gold
Into their laps, which they wide open hold:
If legempone comes, he is received,
When Uix haud habeo is of hope bereaved.
Thus have I showed in my Country vain
The sweet Content that Shepherds still enjoy;
The mickle pleasure, and the little pain
That ever does awayte the Shepherds Boy:
His heart is never troubled with annoy.
He is a King, for he commands his Sheep;
He knows no woe, for he does seldom weep.
He is a Courtier, for he courts his Love;
He is a Scholar, for he sings sweet Ditties;
He is a Soldier, for he wounds does prove;
He is the same of Towns, the shame of Cities:
He scorns false Fortune, but true Virtue pitties.
He is a Gentleman, because his nature
Is kind and affable to every Creature.
Who would not then a simple Shepherd be,
Rather than be a mighty Monarch made?
Since he inioyes such perfect liberty,
As never can decay, nor never fade:
He seldom sits in doleful Cypress shade,
But lives in hope, in joy, in peace, in bliss:
Ioying all joy with this content of his.
But now good-fortune lands my little Boat
Upon the shore of his desired rest:
Now must I leave (awhile) my rural noate,
To think on him whom my soul loves best;
He that can make the most unhappy, blessed:
In whose sweet lap I Will lay me down to sleep,
And never wake till Marble-stones shall weep.
FINIS.
SONNET.
Lo here behold these tributarie Tears,
Paid to thy fair, but cruel tyrant Eyes;
Lo here the blossom of my youthful years,
Nipt with the fresh of thy Wraths winter, dies,
Here on Loves Altar I do offer up
This burning heart for my Souls sacrifice;
Here I receive this deadly-poysned Cu,
Of Circe charmed; wherein deep Magickelyes.
Then Tears (if you be happy Tears indeed),
And Heart (if thou be lodged in his breast),
And Cup (if thou can help despair with speed);
Tears, Heart, and Cup conioyne to make me blessed:
Tears move, Heart win, Cup cause, ruth, love, desire,
In word, in deed, by moan by zeal, by fire.
FINIS.
THE COMPLAINT OF CHASTITY. Briefly touching the cause of the death of
Matilda Fitzwalters an English Lady; sometime loved of King John, after
poisoned. The Story is at large written by Michael Dreyton.
YOU modest Dames, inricht with Chastity.
Mask your bright eyes with Vestaes sable Veil,
Since few are left so fair or chaste as she;
(Matter for me to weep you to bewail):
For many seeming so, of Virtue fail;
Whose lovely Cheeks (with rare vermilion tainted)
Can never blush because their fair is painted.
O faire-foule Tincture, stain of Woman-kinde,
Mother of Mischief, Daughter of Deceate,
False traitor to the Soul, blot to the Mind,
Usurping Tyrant of true Beauties seat,
Right Cousner of the eye, lewd Follies bait,
The flag of filthiness, the sink of shame,
The Devils dye, dishonor of thy name.
Monster of Art, Bastard of bad Desire,
Il-worshipt Idol, false Imagerie,
Ensign of Vice, to thine own self a lier,
Silent Inchaunter, minds Anatomy,
Sly Bawd to Lust, Pandor to Infamy,
Slander of Truth, Truth of Difsimulation;
Staining our Clymate more than any Nation.
What shall I say to thee? thou scorn of Nature,
Black spot of sin, vylde lure of lechery;
Injurious Blame to every faemale creature,
Wronger of time, Broker of treachery,
Trap of green youth, false Women's witcherie,
Handmaid of pride, highway to wickedness;
Yet pathway to Repentance, nerethelesse.
Thou do entice the mind to doing evil,
Thou setst dissension twixt the man and wife;
A Saint in show, and yet indeed a devil:
Thou art the cause of every common strife;
Thou art the life of Death, the death of Life;
Thou do betray thy self to Infamy,
When thou art once discerned by the eye.
Ah, little knew Matilda of thy being,
Those Times were pure from all impure complexion;
Then Love came of Desert, Desire of seeing,
Then Virtue was the mother of Affection;
(But Beauty now is under no subjection)
Then women were the same that men did deem,
But now they are the same they do not seem.
What faemale now entreated of a King
With gold and jewels, pearls and precious stones,
Would willingly refuse so sweet a thing?
Only for a little show of Virtue ones:
Women have kindness grafted in their bones.
Gold is a deepe-perswading Orator,
Especially where few the fault abhor.
But yet she rather deadly poison chose,
(Oh cruel Bane of most accursed Clime;)
Than stain that milke-white Mayden-virgin Rose,
Which she had kept unspotted till that time:
And not corrupted with this earthly slime,
Her soul shall live: inclosd eternally,
In that pure shrine of Immortality.
This is my Doom: and this shall come to pass;
For what are Pleasures but still-vading joys?
Fading as flowers, brittle as a glass,
Or Potters Clay, crossed with the least annoyes;
All things in this life are but trifling Toys:
But Fame and Virtue never shall decay,
For Fame is Toomblesse, Virtue lives for aye.
FINIS.
Hellens Rape. OR A light Lantern for light Ladies. Written in English
Hexameters.
Lovely a Less, so love da Less, and (alas) such a loving (Less
Less, for a while (but a while) was none such a sweet bonny Love-
As Helen, Maenelaus loving, loved, lovely, a loue-lasse,
Till spite full Fortune from a loue-lasse made her a loue-lesse
Wife. From a wise woman to a witles want on abandond,
When her mate (unawares) made war es in Peloponessus,
Adultrous Paris (then a Boy) kept sheep as a shepherd
On Ida Mountain, unknown to the King for a Keeper
Of sheep, on Ida Mountain, as a Boy, as a shepherd:
Yet such sheep he kept, and was so seemly a shepherd,
Seemly a Boy, so seemly a youth, so seemly a Younker,
That on I Would was not such a Boy, such a youth, such a Younker.
Son now reconciled to the Father, fained a letter
Sent him by Jupiter (the greatest God in Olympus)
For to repair with speed to the brauest Grecian Haven,
And to redeem again Hesyone lately revolted
From Troy by Ayax, whom she had newly betrothed.
Well, so well he told his tale to his Aunt Amaryllis
That A maryllis, (his Aunt,) obtained of his aged
Sire, that he sent him a ship, and made him Capten of Argus.
Great store went to Greece with lust-bewitched Alexis,
Telamour, and Tydias: with these he sliceth the salt seas,
The salt seas slicing, at length be comes to the firm land,
Firm land, an ancient Island called old Lacedaemon.
Argus (eye full Earl) when first the ken of a Castle
He had spide, bespake: (to the Mate, to the men, to the Mates-man)
Lo behold of Greece (quoth he) the great Cytadella,
(Ycleaped Menela) so tearmd of Deliaes Husband:
Happy Helen, Women's most wonder, beautiful Helen.
Oh would God (quoth he) with a flattring Tongue he repeated:
Oh would God (quoth he) that I might deserve to be husband
To such a happy huswife, to such a beautiful Helen.
This he spoke to entice the mind of a lecherous young man:
But what spurs neednow, for an untamed Titt to be trotting:
Or to add old Oil to the flame, new flax to the fire.
Paris heard him hard, and gave good ear to his harkening.
And then his love to a lust, his lust was turned to a fire,
Fire was turned to a flame, and flame was turned to a burning
Brand: and mothers Dream was then most truly resolved.
Well so far they are come, that now they are come to the Castle,
Castle all of stone, yet every stone was a Castle:
Every foot had a Fort, and every Fort had a fountain,
Every fountain a spring, and every spring had a spurting
Stream: so strong without, within, so stately a building,
Never before was seen: If never before Polyphoebe
Was seen: was to be seen, if nere to be seen was Olympus.
Flovvers were framd of flints, Walls Rubies, Rafters of Argent:
Pauements of Chrisolite, Windovvs contrived of a Crystal:
Vessels were of gold, with gold was each thing adorned:
Golden Webs more vvorth than a vvealthy Souldan of Egypt,
And her self more worth than a wealthy Souldan of Egypt:
And her self more worth than all the wealth she possessed;
Self? indeed such a self, as thundering Jove in Olympus,
Though he were father could find in his heart to be husband.
Embassage ended, to the Queen of fair Lacedaemon;
(Happy King of a Queen so fair, of a Country so famous)
Embassage ended, a Banquet brave was appointed:
Sweet Repast for a Prince, fine Iunkets fit for a Kings son.
Biskets and Carawayes, Comfets, Tart, Plate, Ielly, Ginge-bread,
Lymons and Medlars: and Dishes more by a thousand.
First they fell to the feast, and after fall to a Dancing,
And from a Dance to a Trance, from a Trance they fell to a falling
Either in others arms, and either in arms of another.
Pastime ouer-past, and Banquet duly prepared,
Devoutly pared: Each one hies home to his own home,
Save Lord and Lady: Young Lad, but yet such an old Lad,
In such a Ladies lap, at such a slipperie by-blow,
That in a world so vvide, could not be found such a vvilie
Lad: in an Age so old, could not be found such an old lad:
Old lad, and bold lad, such a Boy, such a lusty Iuuentus.
Well to their work they go, and both they iumble in one Bed:
Work so well they like, that they still like to be vvorking:
For Aurora mounts before he leaves to be mounting:
And Astraea fades before she faints to be falling:
(Helen a light Huswife, now a light some star in Olympus.)
FINIS.

