A PLAIN DESCRIPTION OF THE BARMVDAS, NOW CALLED SUMMER ISLANDS.

With the manner of their discovery ANNO 1609. by the shipwreck and admirable
deliverance of Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers, wherein are truly set
forth the commodities and profits of that Rich, Pleasant, and Healthful
COVNTRIE.

WITH An Addition, or more ample relation of diverse other remarkable matters
concerning those Islands since then experienced, lately sent from thence by one
of the Colonie now there resident.

ECCLESIASTES 3:11. God has made every thing beautiful in his time.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby, for W. Welby. 1613.

TO THE TRVLY HONORABLE AND RIGHT WORTHY KNIGHT SIR THOMAS SMITH TREASVRER for
the Colonies and Companies of VIRGINIA: and Governor of Muscouia, East India,
North-west Passage, and SUMMER Islands Companies.
HONORABLE SIR, the wisest of Men, or rather the wisdom of God tells us,
Eccles. 3.1.
that there is a time for all things: and that the great God, who at his own
will began time it self, does at his own Time begin all things else: the
foolishness of men may ask and muse why was this so soon, and that so late?
but the wisdom of God knows what is fit for every time: And surely amongst
the sensible signs, and evident demonstrations of Gods all-gouerning
providence, this is not the least, that he brings not forth his mighty works
altogether, but makes every thing beautiful in his time. Eccl. 3.1^.
And as in his creation he made not al at once, but produced them in their
several days: so in his gubernation, he reueileth not the knowledge of all
things in one Age, but discouers them in the several ages of the World. And if
man ask why God does thus, holy David gives the answer; The Lord has so done
his marvailous works, that they should be had in remembrance; Psalm. 111.4.
for were they all in one age (such is our corruption) they would be less
observed and sooner forgotten, but being declared in their several times,
every Age finds matter to magnify God; And therefore He whose glorious name is
to be praised for ever, reueils some marvelous thing in every generation,
Psalm. 72.19.
that so his name may be praised from Generation to Generation.

Man's works are for the most part (as Christ says of the Wine that is served
in at feasts) best at first, and afterward worse: but with God it is
contrary; for as in the Creation, though every days work was good, yet each
days was better then the former, and the last best of all: Genesis 1.
So in his dispensation and government of the world, all knowledge was not
reueiled, nor all good things made known at the first, but day unto day
utters, and night to night (and why not also, Psalm. 19.2.
age unto age) teaches knowledge. And hence is it that as great secrets in
nature, and as admirable perfections in art, and as rare inventions, and
profitable experiments (every way) are daily discovered in these latter ages,
as were in the former. There be not yet two hundred years past since the
admirable art of Printing was found out, It began about the year 1450
an invention so excellent and so useful, so much tending to the honor of
God, the manifestation of the truth, propagation of the Gospel, restoration of
learning, diffusion of knowledge, and consequently the discovery and
destruction of Popery, that the Pope and Popish Politicians wish it had never
been, and have bestowed many a secret curse upon him that first reueiled it;
and no marvel, for it hastens and helps forward his confusion more then all
the Mechanicke mysteries in the World. Nor is yet four hundred years ago,
since the superadmirable use of the Loadstone was found out. The attraction of
iron unto it was seen by Aristotle, and the Ancients, and it amazed them: But
the correspondencie it has with the Pole-starre, and consequently the
excellent use of it for Navigations (being one of the greatest wonders of the
world) was not known to them; nay (which is more strange) not to the Apostles
themselves; for had it been, surely Saint Paul and his company had not been
almost half a year in his voyage betwixt Iudaea and Italy, Acts 27.
and that through so many difficulties, and at last shipwreck; Nor would it
have been said, that when neither Sun nor Star appeared for many days,
Verse. 20.
all hope of being saved was taken away. For when neither Sun nor Star
appears; yet by the help of this poor dead Creature, the Pilot can tell
where he is, and knows his course, more certainly now in the wide and
unmeasurable Ocean, then they could in the narrow Mediterran Sea; and more
easily now will an ordinary Seaman go to the West Indies, then S. Paul with
all the knowledge God had then reueiled, from Jerusalem to Rome: for howsoever
the Lord was miraculously powerful in the Apostles, and glorious and
wonderful in the Primitive Church, in giving knowledge of tongues, and other
learning, and power of miracles, yet he did bound and limit it at his own
pleasure, and reserved this and other of his wonderful works to be made
kno^wne in the later times, that so all men in all ages may know, that though
all things perish, Psa. 102.26
yet God endures; and though all creatures wax old as a garment, yet He is the
same still and for ever.

It is yet but a hundredth years ago, that (after the world had scarce dreamed
of any other habitable place of the earth, more then Asia, Afric, and Europe)
God discovered to vulgar knowledge another, and as it were the new world of
America, which if it had been foretold in the elder ages, millions of men
would never have believed it. And that we in this present and perverse age may
also know, that Times and Seasons are in Gods hand, Acts 1.
He has vouchsafed amongst the many excellent inventions and wonderful
discoueries of these times, to make known to us of the poor Virginian
plantation, and by us to the world, the hidden and long concealed truth,
touching the state of the Barmuda Islands. Who did not think till within these
four years, but that those Islands had been rather a habitation of Devils,
then fit for men to dwell in? who did not hate the name when he was on Land,
and shun the place when he was on the Seas? But behold the misprision and
misconceits of the world! For true and large experience has now told us, it is
one of the sweetest Paradises that be upon the earth. Let them hearken to this
and make use of it, that mislike all new inventions, and suspect all new
discoueries, and hold it for a rule, That whatsoever is new is naught. If any
had said seven years ago, the Barmuda Islands are not only accessible and
habitable, but also fertile, fruitful, plentiful, and a safe, secure,
temperate, rich, sweet, and healthful habitation for Man and especially for
English bodies; oh how loudly would he have been laughed at, and hist our of
most men's companies! And yet no more then He would have been who four hundred
years ago should have told the world, that by the use and help of a stone a
man should more safely sail upon the Ocean, round about the earth, then
formerly in the narrow Seas: Or then He who two hundred years ago should have
said, there was an Art by which all writing of books should be saved, and
that two men should Print more in a day, then two hundred can write: Or then He
who 100.t years ago did tell us, there was another world, as it were under
our feet, wherein men lived like us, and a richer part of the world then ours.
And yet all these are now proved true before our eyes, and all the world can
witness it; and who is he that feels not the benefit of these three
blessings? Now therefore let the jealous and suspicious world bear his due
reproof, and let God have his due glory and praise, who brings to light
things that lie hid in darkness, and reueiles his marvelous works in his
due time. And let the Planters and Patrons of the Virginia Colonies take heart
and comfort themselves; for that God, who by discovering these Islands to them
has delivered the world from that old inueterate error, and given them the
rightful possession (under God and his Majesty) of so rich so wholesome, and
healthful Islands, which may be as nurseries to Virginia, has hereby let the
world see that he will uphold that Christian plantation, if men should be so
base and beastly to forsake it. But (worthy Sir) if other men were like you, I
needed not to make that (If) if all as able as you were as willing, and forward
as you, we should soon see a flourishing Christian Church, and Commonwealth
in Virginia; But let this be your comfort, there is One that is more able, is
also more willing then you, even the God of heaven and earth: it is his work
you manage, and his cause you have in hand; he may work with comfort that
works with God and for God; he that works with God is sure to prevail; he that
works for God is sure to be rewarded. You know good Sir (and you better then
many) that He is well kept whom God keeps, and know also that he shall be
roially rewarded whom God rewards. And know further for your comfort, that
though the burden lie upon you and a few more, yet are there many honorable and
worthy men of all sorts, who will never shrink from you: Go on therefore with
courage and constancy, and be assured that though by your Honorable
Embassages, and imploiments, and by your charitable and virtuous courses, you
have gained a worthy reputation in the world, yet nothing that you ever did or
suffered more honors you in the eyes of all that are godly-wise, then your
faithful and unwearied prosecution, your continual and comfortable assistance
of these foraine Plantations. A work so honorable to God, our Religion, our
King, and our Country; so comfortable to the Souls of the poor Saluages, and
so profitable to the Adventurers (that of Virginia for our Posterities, but
this of the Barmudas for the present) as the like (for all these put together)
has not been attempted in the Christian world these many Ages. And be cause
it is the glory of God to declare his works: I cannot but commend your
wisdoms in publishing those strange and welcome news from the Barmudas: the
style is base and broken, I confess, but it better beseemes the bare and naked
truth. Now then let the Christian world rejoice to see, that God is worshipped
in the Devils Islands, and that English men live safely and sweetly there
where never any lived before them. It is almost four years ago since our
valorous Commanders Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers, with a hundred
and fifty Persons more, were in a terrible tempest cast away upon these
Islands, and so found it, when they sought it not: and though they suffered
shipwreck upon the Rocks that compass these Islands (as all other did that ever
pitched upon them) yet were they preserved every man; which never befell any but
themselves, such was the favor of God unto them; And there they lived in
health and safety almost a year, when all the world held them dead, and had
lived there till this day, and for ought we know, for ever, had they not made
themselves two little ships of Cedar, in which they went to Virginia, yet
leaving two men in the Islands, whom Sir George Summers coming back again from
Virginia the same year, and our Colonie sent thither the last year, found in
health and good liking: Our Colonie, consisting of some threescore men, has
now been there almost a year, from whom we receive this plain and simple,
but comfortable Narration, and to whom we now send a supply, not of victuals,
or such provisions, for they need none such, but of men and women, for
habitation and plantation; which by the blessing of God now goes away this
present month, there to plant a Christian Church, to endure to the worlds end,
where never man dwelt before, since the worlds beginning: Oh happy men who
there find God and his Angels, where the world thought had been nothing, but
the Devil and his Swine into which he entered. The God that led them to it,
saved them upon it, Math. 8.31, 32.
fed them in it, and sends us so comfortable news from it, still bless it and
defend it, and all his children in it, and all that now or hereafter go to it,
and all that love it, and assist the plantation of Gods Church in it: Peace be
upon them and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Amen. And to you my Brethren
that be there and have the honor to lay the first foundation of Gods Church
there, and to you much honored Knight, and the rest, who by your care and
charge do bear the burden, and maintain the life of such glorious actions
which lie neglected in this base and unworthy world; for this your holy and
heroical resolutions, and your love therein appearing to the Lord Jesus Christ
and his holy Gospel, to our King and Country, I profess and deuote my self
in all offices and duties of a Christian

Your Servant in Christ Jesus. W. C.

To the Reader.
Good Reader, this is the first Book published to the world touching Summer
Islands: but who shall live to see the last? A more full and exact description
of the Country, and Narration of the nature, site, and commodities, together
with a true History of the great deliverance of Sir Thomas Gates and his
Company upon them, which was the first discovery of them; thou may surely
expect, if God will, to come into thy hands. This short Narration, in the mean
time, shall rather prepare thee for it, then prevent thee of it.

A DISCOVERY OF THE BARMVDAS, NOW CALLED THE SUMMER Islands.
I Being in ship called the seaventure, with Sir Thomas Gates our Governor,
Sir George Summers, and Captain Newport, three most worthy honored Gentlemen,
(whose balour and fortitude the world must needs take notice of, and that in
most Honorable designs) bound for Virginia, in the height of thirty degrees
of northerly Latitude, or there abouts: we were taken with a most sharp and
cruel storm upon the five and twentieth day of July, Anno 1609. which did not
only separate us from the residue of our fleet, (which were eight in number)
but with the violent working of the Seas our ship became so shaken, torn, and
leaked, that she received so much water as covered two tire of hogsheads above
the ballast; that our men stood up to the middles, with buckets, baritos, and
kettles, to bail out the water, and continually pumped for three days and
three nights together, without any intermission; and yet the water seemed
rather to increase, then to diminish: in so much that all our men, being
utterly spent, tired, and disabled for longer labor, were even resolved,
without any hope of their lives, to shut up the hatches, and to have committed
themselves to the mercy of the sea, (which is said to be merciless) or rather
to the mercy of their mighty God and Redeemer, (whose mercies exceed al his
works) seeing no help, nor hope, in the apprehension of man's reason, that any
mothers child could escape that inevitable danger, which every man had
proposed and digested to himself of present sinking. So that some of the^
having some good and comfortable waters in the ship, fetched them, and drunk
one to the other, taking their last leave one of the other, until their more
joyful and happy meeting in a more blessed world; when it pleased God out of
his most gracious and merciful providence so to direct and guide our ship,
(being left to the mercy of the sea) for her most advantage; that Sir George
Summers sitting upon the poope of the ship, (where he sat three days and
three nights together, without meals meat, and little or no sleep) couning
the ship to keep her as upright as he could (for otherwise she must needs
instantly have foundred) most wishedly and happily descried land; whereupon he
most comfortably encouraged the company to follow their pumping, and by no
means to cease bayling out of the water, with their buckets, baricos, and
kettles; whereby they were so ouer-wearied, and their spirits so spent with
long fasting, and continuance of their labor, that for the most part they were
fallen asleep in corners, and wheresoever they chanced first to fit or lie:
but hearing news of land, wherewith they grew to be somewhat revived, being
carried with will and desire beyond their strength, every man busled up, and
gathered his strength and feeble spirits together, to perform as much as their
weak force would permit them: through which weak means, it pleased God to
work so strongely as the water was staid for that little time, (which as we
all much feared, was the last period of our breathing) and the ship kept from
present sinking, when it pleased God to send her within half an English mile
of that land that Sir George Summers had not long before descried: which were
the Islands of the Barmudas. And there neither did our ship sincke, but more
fortunately in so great a misfortune fell in between two rocks, where she
was fast lodged and locked, for further budging: whereby we gained not only
sufficient time, with the present help of our Boat, and Skiffe, safelye to
set and convey our men ashore, (which were one hundred and fifty in number) but
after wards had time and leisure to save some good part of our goods and
provision, which the water had not spoiled, with all the tackling of the ship,
and much of the iron about her, which were necessaries not a little avail able
for the building and furnishing of a new ship and pinnace, which we made
there, for the transporting and carrying of us to Virginia. But our delivery
was not more strange in falling so opportunely and happily upon the land, as
our feeding and preservation was beyond our hopes, and all men's expectations,
most admirable. For the Islands of the Barmudas, as every man knows that has
heard or read of them, were never inhabited by any Christian or Heathen people,
but ever esteemed, and reputed, a most prodigious and enchanted place,
affoording nothing but gusts, storms, and foul weather; which made every
Nauigator and Mariner to avoid them, as Scylla and Charibdis; or as they would
shun the Devil himself; and no man was ever heard to make for the place, but
as against their wills, they have by storms and dangerousnesse of the rocks,
lying seven leagues into the Sea, suffered shipwreck; yet did we find there
the air so temperat, and the Country so abundantly fruitful of all fit
necessaries for the sustentation and preservation of man's life, that most in a
manner of all our provisions of bread, beer, and victual, being quite
spoiled, in lying long drowned in salt water; notwithstanding, we were there
for the space of nine months (few days over) not only well refreshed,
comforted, and with good satietie contented, but out of the abundance thereof,
provided us some reasonable quantity and proportion of provision, to carry us
for Virginia, and to maintain our selves, and that company we found there,
to the great relief of them, as it fell out in their so great extremities, and
in respect of the shortness of time, until it pleased God, that by my Lord de
la Wars coming thither, their store was better supplied. And greater, and
better provision we might have made, if we had had better means for the
storing and transportation thereof. Wherefore my opinion sincerely of this
Island is, that whereas it has been, and is still accounted, the most
dangerous, unfortunate, and most forlorn place of the world, it is in truth
the richest, healthfullest, and pleasing land, (the quantity and bigness
thereof considered) and merely natural, as ever man set foot upon: the
particular profits and benefits whereof, shall be more especially inserted, and
hereunto annexed, which every man to his own private knowledge, that was
there, can avouch and justify for a truth. Upon the eight and twentieth day of
July 1609. (after the extremity of the storm was something qualified) we fell
upon the shore at the Barmudas; where after our General Sir Thomas Gates, Sir
George Summers, and Captain New port, had by their provident carfulness
Landed all their men, and so much of the goods and provisions out of the ship,
as was not utterly spoiled, every man disposed and applied himself to search
for, and to seek out such relief and sustentation, as the Country afforded:
and Sir George Summers, a man mu^ed to extremities, (and knowing what thereunto
belonged) was in this service neither idle nor backward, but presently by his
careful industry went, and found out sufficient of many kind of fishes, and so
plentiful thereof, that in half an hour he took so many great fishes with
hooks, as did suffice the whole company one day. And fish is there so
abundant, that if a man step into the water, they will come round about him;
so that men were feign to get out for fear of biting. These fishes are very
fat and sweet, and of that proportion and bigness, that three of them will
conveniently lade two men: those we called rock-fish. Besides there are such
abundance of Mullets, that with a seane might be taken at one draught one
thousand at the least, and infinite store of pilchards, with diverse kinds of
great fishes, the names of them unknown to me: of crayfishes very great ones,
and so great store, as that there has been taken in one night with making
lights, even sufficient to feed the whole company a day. The Country affords
great abundance of Hogs, as that there has been taken by Sir George
Summers, who was the first that hunted for them, to the number of two and
thirty at one time, which he brought to the company in a boat, built by his
own hands. There is Foul in great number upon the Islands, where they breed,
that there has been taken in two or three hours, a thousand at the least;
the bird being of the bigness of a good Pidgeon, and lays eggs as big as Hen
eggs upon the sand, where they come and lay them daily, although men sit down
amongst them; that there has been taken up in one morning by Sir Thomas Gates
men, one thousand of eggs: and Sir George Summers men, coming a little
distance of time after them, have stayed there whilst they came and laid their
eggs amongst them, that they brought away as many more with them; with many
young birds very fat and sweet. Another Sea foul there is that lies in little
holes in the ground, like unto a cony-hole; and are in great numbers, exceeding
good meat, very fat and sweet (those we had in the winter) and their eggs are
white, and of that bigness, that they are not to be known from Hen eggs. The
other birds eggs are speckled, and of a different color: there are also great
store and plenty of Herons, and those so familiar and tame, that we beat them
down from the trees with stones and staves; but such were young Herons:
besides many white Herons, without so much as a black or gray feather on them,
with other small birds so tame and gentle, that a man walking in the woods with
a stick, and whistling to them, they will come and gaze on you, so near that
you may strike and kill many of them with your stick; and with singing and
hollowing you may do the like. There are also great store of Tortoses, (which
some call Turtles) and those so great, that I have seen a bushel of eggs in
one of their bellies, which are sweeter then any Hen egg: and the Tortose it
self is all very good meat, and yields great store of oil, which is as
sweet as any butter; and one of them will suffice fifty men a meal, at the
least: and of these has heene taken great store, with two boats, at the least
forty in one day. The Country yields diverse fruits, as prickled pears, great
abundance, which continue green upon the trees all the year; also great
plenty of Mulberries, white and red: and on the same are great store of
Silke-wormes, which yield cods of silk, both white and yellow, being some
course, and some fine. And there is a tree called a Palmito tree, which has a
very sweet berry, upon which the hogs do most seed; but our men finding the
sweetness of them, did willingly share with the hogs for them, they being very
pleasant and wholesome, which made them careless almost of any bread with
their meat; which occasioned us to carry in a manner all that store of flower
and meal we did or could save, for Virginia. The head of the Palmito tree is
very good meat, either raw or sodden, it yields a head which weighs about
twenty pound, and is far better meat, then any cabbidge. There are an
infite number of Cedar trees, (the fairest I think in the world) and those
bring forth a very sweet berrie, and wholesome to eat. The Country (for as
much as I could find my self, or hear by others) affords no venomous creature,
or so much as a Rat or Mouse, or any other thing unwholesome. There is great
store of Pearl, and some of them very fair, round, and Oriental; and you
shall find at least one hundred seed of Pearl in one Oyster; there has
been likewise found some good quantity of Amber Greece, and that of the best
sort. There are also great plenty of whales, which I conceive are very easy
to be killed, for they come so usually, and ordinarily to the shore, that we
heard them oftentimes in the night a bed; and have seen many of them near the
shore, in the day time. There was borne upon the Barmudas, at the time of our
being there, two children, the one a man child, there baptized by the name of
Barmudas: and a woman child, baptized by the name of Barmuda: as also there
was a marriage between two English people upon that Island. This Island, I mean
the maine Island, with all the broken Islands adjacent, are made in the form of
a half Moon, but a little more rounder, and divided into many broken Islands
and there are many good harbors in it, but we could find but one especial.
place to go in, or rather to go out from it, which was not altogether free
from some Danger, where there is three Fathoms water at the entrance thereof,
but within, six, seven, or eight Fathoms at the least, where you may safely
lie Land-locked, from the danger of all Winds and Weathers, and moore to the
Trees. The coming into it is so narrow and straight between the Rocks, as
that it will with small store of Munition be fortified, and easily defended,
against the forces of the Potentest King of Europe, such advantage the place
affoords. There are also plenty of Hawks, and very good Tobacco, as I
think, which through forgetfulness, I had almost omitted. Now having finished
and rigged our ship, and Pinnesse, the one called the Deliverance, the Pinnace
which we built there, the Patience, we prepared and made our selves ready,
to ship for Virginia, having powdered some store of Hogs flesh for provision
thither, and the company thereof, for some reasonable time: but were compelled
to make salt there for the same purpose, for all our salt was spent and
spoiled, before we recovered the shore. We carried with us also a good portion
of Tortoise-oyle, which either for frying or baking did us very great pleasure,
it being very sweet, nourishing, and wholesome: the greatest defects we found
there, was tar and pitch for our ship and pinnace, in stead whereof we were
forced to make lime there of a hard kind of stone, and use it: which for the
present occasion and necessity, with some war we found cast up by the Sea,
from some ship wrack, served the turn to pay the seames of the pinnace Sir
George Summers built, for which he had neither pitch nor tar: so that God in
the supplying of all our wants, beyond all measure, showed himself still
merciful unto us, that me might accomplish our intended voy age to Virginia,
for which I confidently hope, he does yet reserve a blessing in store, and to
the which I presume every honest and religious heart will readily give their
Amen. when all things were made ready, and commodiously fitted, the wind
coming fair, we set sail and put off from the Barmudas, the tenth day of
May, in the year 1610. and arrived at James town in Virginia, the four and
twentieth day of the same Month: where me found some threescore persons
living. And being then some three weeks or there abouts passed, and not hearing
of any supply, it was thought fitting by a general consent, to use the best
means for the preservation of all those people that were living, being al in
number two hundred persons. And so upon the eight of June one thousand six
hundred and ten, we embarked at James Town, not having above fourteen days
virtuall, and so were determined to direct our course for New Foundland, there
to refresh us, and supply our selves with victual, to bring us home; but it
pleased God to dispose otherwise of us, and to give us better means. For being
all of us shipped in four pinnaces, and departed from the town, almost down
half the River, we met my Lord de la War coming up with three ships, wet
furnished with victual, which revived all the company, and gave them great
content. And after some few days, my Lord understanding of the great plenty
of Hogs and Fish was at the Barmudas, and the necessity of them in Virginia,
was desirous to send thither, to supply himself with those things, for the
better comforting of his men, and the plantation of the Country. Whereupon Sir
George Summers being a man best acquainted with the place, and being willing to
do service unto his Prince and Country, without any respect of his own private
gain, and being of threescore years of age at the least, out of his worthy
and valiant mind, offered himself to undertake to perform with Gods help
that dangerous voyage for the Barmudas, for the better relief and comfort of
the people in Virginia, and for the better plantation of it, which offer my
Lord de la War very willingly and thankfully accepted: and so upon the
nineteenth of June, Sir George Summers embarked himself at James town in a
small Barge of thirty tonne, or thereabout, that he built at the Barmudas:
wherein he labored from morning until night, as duly as any workman does
labor for mages, and built her all with Cedar, with little or no iron work at
all: having in her but one boult, which was in the kilson: notwithstanding
thanks be to God, she brought us in safety to Virginia, and so I trust he will
protect him, and send him well back again, to his hearts desire, and the great
comfort of all the company there.

AN ADDITION SENT HOME BY THE LAST SHIPS from our Colonie in the Barmudas
BEing bound for the Summer Islands, in the ship called the Plough, we
embarked the 28. of April 1612. So passing down to Grauesend, we anchored at
Tilbery hope until the fifth of May. The wind coming fair, we put forth
and came to the Downs the sixth of May, where we stayed till the ninth. And
then setting forward, we had a fair and comfortable passage, and by Gods
blessing found so direct a course, that on the eleventh of July in the morning
betwixt nine and ten of the clock we discried our hoped and desired Islands,
and in the afternoon of the same day about three a clock we arrived in a very
safe harbor near S. Georges Island, there we landed all our men and women, and
had been at an anchor abdue an hour before we could hear of our three men
which had been left there. As soon as we had landed all our company, we went
all to prayer, and gave thanks unto the Lord for our safe arrival; and
whilst we were at prayer, we saw our three men come rowing down to us, the
sight of whom did much rejoice us: so they welcomming us, and we the like to
them again, we sung a Psalm and praised the Lord for our safe meeting, and
went to supper.

The next day being the Sabbath day, which we dedicated to God in the best
manner we could, we abode still in the foresaid Island with all the rest of our
company till monday morning, being the thirteenth of July: then we went up
with our ship and company higher into the harbor, to the place where these
three men had planted themselves. And whereas many English men would have
thought that we should have found these three men either dead, or more like
savage then civil, I assure you al my friends and acquaintance (and so
generally to all my country men in England) we found them civil, honest and
religious, and making conscience of their ways: you shall not hear an oath
proceed out of their mouths; vain and idle talk they used not: and it seemed
apparently unto our eyes that they have not been idly given. For howsoever to
be but three of them left in such a desolate place not inhabited, nor assured
of any to come to them: would have made most men fainted in any thing they
should have took in hand; yet was it not so with these me^: nay they showed
unto us a good example, who are now come to them. For they have planted corn,
great store of wheat, Beans Tobacco and Mellons, with many other good things
for the use of man: besides they have wrought upon timber, in squaring and
sawing of Cedar trees, for they intended to build a small Pinnace to carry them
into Virginia, being almost out of hope and comfort of our coming; because
Captain Dauies his time was to have been with them long before we came. And
thus they spent their time in labor, employing themselves in one good action or
other.

Now to certify you the truth of the state of the Country, I am loath to write
that which I have seen, by reason you would condemn my writing (as I fear)
and think it to be but false reports come from us to draw more company hither,
for I perceive the world is given too much to such surmises. But why should I
fear to write that which I know to be true, when as all the ships company
will or may approve it, but cannot reprove it? As first the Captain, the
Master and his Mate, and all the rest of the Sailors: first I will begin with
the Fish and Fowls which the Country does yield.

We were no sooner come within a league of the land, but a company of Fish, as
it were, met us, and never left us til we were come to an ankor within the
harbor; and as soon as we had passed over our business, and all things safe
and in order, with a hook and line we took more then all our whole company
was able to eat, so that there was enough to feed many more. The next day
after the Sabbath we went with our net and boat, and if we would have loaded
two boats we might; and so may you do day by day, Fishes do so abound, and
they be of these sorts, Mullets, Breames, Hogge-fish, Rock-fish and Lobstars,
with more sorts of other Fish which I cannot name.

Turkles there be of a mighty bigness; one Turkle will serve or suffice
three or four score at a meal, especially if it be a she Turkle, for she
will have as many eggs as will suffice fifty or threescore at a meal; this I
can assure you, they are very good and wholesome meat none of it bad, no not
so much as the very guts and maw of it, for they are exceeding fat, and make as
good tripes as your beasts bellies in England. And for Foul we went the
third day of our arrival unto the Bird-Ilands (as we call them) and using
neither stick nor stone-bow, nor gunne, we took them up with our hands so
many as we would, that every one of the company were to have some three, some
four a piece; three for a child, boy or girl, for a man four; then reckon
what those that served some fourscore people did amount unto. But this is for
certain, if we would have brought away twice so many more we might, but our
order is not to take Fish or Foul but for one or two meals, because that by
reason of the flies, and heat of the country, they will not keep, especially
these two months, June and July, and some part of August.

Some six days after our coming, we sent out for Hogs, so the company
which went out brought home some: for the meat of them, I hold your mutton of
England not of so sweet and pleasant a taste.

Fowls there are of diverse sorts, but amongst all there is a bird like unto
yours, which you call in England a Crow, which though they talk in the Barmuda
language, yet their tongues shall walk as fast as any English woman's: we
cannot go up into the woods, but they will follow after us with such an
outcry, that it would fret a man to hear them; they are very good meat, fat,
and as white flesh as a Chicken, we many times make some of them leave their
talking with stones or cudgels, for they will sit and face you hard at your
hand.

And whereas it is reported that this Land of the Barmudas, with the Islands
about it (which are many, at the least an hundred) are enchanted and kept with
evil and wicked spirits; it is a most idle and false report. God grant that
we have brought no wicked spirits with us, or that there comes none after us,
for we found none there so ill as our selves, nor the three men never saw any
evil or hurtful thing in the Land all the time since their coming, and we
hane found the like since our landing: no nor any noisome thing or hurtful,
more then a poor fly which tarries not above two or three months.

For the inclination of the weather, considering in what climate it lies, we
have had for the space of some forty days no rain, but very cool and fresh
gales of wind, yet in the daytime very hot; but we agree with it very well,
and not a man that has lien sick or diseased, but all likes well, and
follows and imployes themselves to one business or other.

For the fruits which the Land yields, they be the Mulberie, great store, and
Pears which have in them a red liquor, as the Pomgranat has, or somewhat
redder, but very wholesome: if you eat an hundred at one time, you shall never
surfeit of them; if you eat some proportion of them they will bind, but if you
exceed in eating of them, then are they of the contrary operation: yet never
any that hurt themselves by them, eat they never so many. It is certain that
one man eat above a peck of them in some ten hours, and was never the worse.
We have a kind of Berrie upon the Cedar tree, very pleasant to eat; and for
the Palmito tree, the top of it is a great deal sweeter and wholesomer then
any Cabedge.

In some of our Islands there grows Pepper, but not so good as our Indian
Pepper: diverse sorts of other good things there is, which the several times of
the year bring forth one after another; but the top of the Palmito tree is in
season and good all the year.

For the ground, I hold it the richest ground to bear forth fruit, (whatsoever
one shall lay into it) that is in the world, and very easy and light for
digging; so that if a man will labor, he may turn up a great quantity in a
day, for it is a fat sandy ground, and of color a brownered.

After the time of our landing many of the company dug certain plats of
ground, and sowed diverse sorts of seeds to make trial of the ground, and for
certain they were seen above the ground sprung up the fourth day after their
sowing: and amongst all the rest of the seeds, the Cowcumber and the Mellon
were forward: we have set and sowed fourscore and one sorts of seeds, it was
ten days before the ships coming away, and for the most part they are all
come up.

Of necessity I must needs mention the Palm Tree once again, I have found it
so good; take a hatchet and cut him, or an augar and bore him, and it yields a
very pleasant liquour, much like unto your sweet wines; it bears likewise a
berry in bigness of a prune, and in taste much like.

Also we have Olives grow with us, but no great store: many other good
excellent things we have grow with us, which this short time will not permit me
to write of so largely as I might; but this is of truth, that Hogs, Turkles,
Fish and Foul do abound as dust of the earth: for Ambergris and Pearl we
have not had leisure in so few days since our arrival to go look out for
the one, or to fish for the other, but the three men which were left there,
have found of them both. Also they have made a great deal of Tobacco, and if
some would come that have skill in making it, it would be very commodious both
to the Merchant, and to the maker of it. And for the Silke-worme, if any were
brought over, and some of skill to use them, there would be very much good done
with them, for the very Spider in these our Islands does weaue perfect fine
Silk, both yellow and white.

The Timber of the Country consists of three sorts, the one is the Cedar,
very fine Timber to work upon, of color read, and very sweet: the other
sorts we have no name for, for there is none in the company has seen the
like in other Countries, before we came, some did think it to be Lignum vitae,
but it is not so, it is very fine wood, of color yellow, and it bears a
leaf like unto a Walnut, and the rine or bark is much like a Malnut tree, and
the bark, if one taste of it, will bite ones tongue, as if it were Ginney
Pepper, that wood also is very sweet; the other is much like unto the second,
but only it is white; the Palm Tree is no timber, but it grows up of a great
height, and no tree grows like unto it; for other trees as they grow up in
length, so they grow in bigness, but the Palm Tree the higher it grows, so
the smaller it grows: there is another kind of wood, which some also think
is Lignum vitae, and some of it is come over for example.

Other kind of trees there be, but no timber trees they are; but amongst all
the rest there grows a kind of tree called. Mangrowes, they grow very
strangely, and would make a man wonder to see the man's of their growing,
whereof you shall hear at more leisure.

Also amongst all the fores of Fish, there is one very strange Fish, and
bew^ifull to behold, we call it an Angell-fish (as well it may be) for as you
see the picture of an Angel made, so is this, and it shows of many colors
both in the water swimming, and out of the water, and as dainty a fish of meat
as a Salmon, or rather better.

The plentiful time of our fruits is in your Winter, from October till it be
May, or about the latter end of May is the plentifullest time of our fruits but
some we have all the year of one fruit or other.

The Climate I hold to be very good, and agreeable with our constitutions of
England, and for the virtuall very wholesome and good: for the three men which
were left there are very fat and fair, not tanned or burned in the Sun so much
as we which came last, and they say themselves they never were sick all the
time of their being there, and one of them has been there three years and
upwards, (one Christopher Carter by name, a Buckingham-shire man, borne in
wickham or thereabouts.)

And for such extraordinary weather, for thunder and lightning, as it is
reported of these Islands, I can see no such matter, but more temperate and
better weather then you have in England: we have gone a hunting, and lien out
night by night for Hogs: and if we had been wette by weather or by wading,
we may lay us down so wette to sleep with a Palmetree leaf or two under us,
and one above us, and we sleep soundly without any taking cold or being
disturbed with any thing else: your aires in England are far more subject to
diseases then these Islands are.

Whales there are great store at that time of the year, when they come in,
which time of their coming is in February, and tarry till June. Likewise
there comes in two other Fishes with them, but such, as the whale had rather
be without their company; one is called a Sword-fish, the other a Threasher;
the Sword-fish swimmes under the whale, and pricketh him upward; the Threasher
keeps above him, and with a mighty great thing like unto a flaile, he so
bangeth the Whale, that he will roar as though it thundered, and does give
him such blows, with his weapon, that you would think it to be a crack of
great shot.

Hasty occasion of business does make me write somewhat hastily, and leave
out many things which were fit to be spoken of, wherefore against my will I
am forced to leave my work, which I have begunue, before I come into the
midst of it, but I hope it will suffice you that are my friends to pass it
over in the best manner you can, for there is much broken English of it, and
badly penned: regard I pray you the matter, not the manner, the truth of the
story, and not the style.

But this I say to them that have adventured in Virginia, especially to such as
think they shall lose by that worthy action: let them do the like to us, and I
make no doubt but we shall in short time give them satisfaction.

For our Enchanted Islands which is kept, as some say, with spirits, will wrong
no friend nor foe, but yield all men their expectations:

If we can praise God for so great a blessing and labor to make benefit of it
to his glory, the honor of our Religion, the strength of our Country, and good
of our selves. And if you in England will do what is fit for you, as we will,
by Gods help, what is fit for us, we hope shortly to see the day that men shall
say, Blessed be God that suffered Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers to
be cast away upon these Islands.

A Copy of the Articles which Master R. MORE, Governor Deputy of the Summer
Islands, propounded to the Company that were there with him to be subscribed
unto, which both he and they subscribed the second of August, in his house,
Anno 1612. which about the same time he sent into England to the worshipful
Company of the Adventurers.
WE who have here under subscribed our names, being by the great goodness of
God safely arrived at the Summer Islands, with purpose here to inhabit, do
hereby promise and bind our selves to the performance of the several Articles
hereafter following, and that in the presence of the most glorious God, who
has in mercy brought us hither.

First, We do faithfully promise, and by these presents solemnly bind our
selves euer-more to worship that aforesaid only true and everliving God, who
has made the Heavens, and the Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is, and
that according to those rules that are prescribed in his most holy Word, and
ever to continue in that faith into the which we were baptized in the Church of
England, and to stand in defense of the same against all Atheists, Papists,
Anabaptists, Brownists, and all other Heretics and Sectaries whatsoever,
dissenting from the said Word and Faith.

Secondly, because the keeping of the Sabboth-day holy is that wherein a
principal part of Gods worship does consist, and is as it were the Key of all
the other parts thereof, we do therefore in the presence aforesaid promise,
That we will set apart all our own labors and imploiments on that day,
unless it be those that be of mere necessity, much more vain and
unfruitful practices, and apply our selves to the hearing of Gods word,
Prayer, and all other exercises of Religion in his word required, to the
uttermost of our power.

Thirdly, Seeing the true worship of God and a holy Life cannot be severed,
we do therefore promise in the presence aforesaid, That to the uttermost of
our power we will live together in doing that which is just, both toward God
and Man, and in particular we will forbear to take the most holy name of God
in vain, in ordinary swearing by it, or any other thing, or by scoffing, or
vain abusing of his most holy Word, or to use cursing, or filthy speeches, or
any other thing forbidden in Gods most holy Word, as also to live together
without stealing one from another, or quarrelling one with another, or
slandering one of another: And to avoid all things that stand not with the
good estate of a Christian Church and well governed Commonwealth, as also to
embrace the contrary, as Justice, and Peace, Love, and all other things that
stand with the good and comfort of Society.

Fourthly, Whereas we are here together far remote from our native soil of
England, and yet are indeed the natural Subjects of our most royal and
gracious King JAMES of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc. We do therefore in the presence aforesaid solemnly promise
ever more to continue the loyal Subjects of our said Sovereign King, his
Heirs and Successors, and never to revolt from him, or them, unto any other
whatsoever, but evermore to acknowledge his Supreme Government.

Fifthly, Whereas we were sent hither by diverse Adventurers of the City of
London, and other parts of the Realm of England, we do here in the presence
aforesaid promise to use all diligence for the good of the Plantation, and not
to purloine or imbesell any of the prohibited Commodities out of the general
estate, but to use all faithfulness as it becomes Christians to do, as also
to be obedient to all such Governor or Governors, or their Deputy or
Deputies, as are, or shall be by them sent to govern us; As also to yield all
reverence toward the Ministry or Ministers of the Gospel, sent, or to be
sent.

Sixthly and lastly, We do here in presence aforesaid promise, the Lord
assisting us, that if at any time hereafter any foreign power shall attempt to
put us out of this our lawful possession, not cowardly to yield up the same,
but manfully to fight as true English men, for the defense of the Commonwealth
we live in, and Gospel we profess, and that whiles we have breath we will
not yield to any, that shall invade us upon any conditions whatsoever.

FINIS.

