ADRASTA: OR, THE WOMAN'S SPLEEN, And LOVES CONQVEST.

A Tragi-comedie.

Never Acted.

Horat. -- Volet haec sub lace videri,
Iudicis argutum quae non form dat acumen.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Ivie-lane, next to the Exchequer Office.

1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL And others His Friends and
Musophilus: EUGENIUS wishes Pierian love, benevolent aspect, and candid
Censure.
HAving long since (honored Gentlemen, and friends) finished this Play, and
fitted it for the Stage, I intended to have had there the Promethean fire of
Action infused into it: being thereto encouraged by the general good liking
and content, which many of you vouchsafed to receive in the hearing of it;
which way it never yet miscarryed, but still had all that the ear could give
it: and with whom some prime wits of both the Universities, and those that were
learned in this faculty (competent Judges enough) have in their free and open
Censures unanimously accorded. This I say was encouragement enough for me to
prefer this little Gloweworme (which I had, as yet, only fostred and kept warm
with mine own breath) to the Stage, and to bring it into that Noble nursery of
Action, where Dramatick Poems usually and rightly take their Degrees of
applause from them that can best judge, the Spectators; that, as it had been
before only demissa per aurem, it might be now at length Oculis subjecta
fidelibus. But the Players, upon a slight and half view of it, refused to do
it that right; The reason I well know not, unless perhaps it had not in it so
much Witchcraft in Poetry, as, now t is known, the Stage will bear. Be what
will, it has again been under the file since they saw it: and now by the
earnest impulse of some particular friends, necessity concurring, my self also
willing to avoid farther trouble and care for it, that it might not hinder the
conception of things more worthy your care and sight; I was, unwillingly,
forced to publish it to the World; where being freely exposed to all censures,
I doubt not but many a dogg-tooth'd Cynick will have a snap at it: But I know
already they will not be worth my anger, and therefore should be loath to spend
any part of my Title upon them; only I wish them to note this saying well:
Another work to reprehend
How easy it is? how hard to mend?


In the mean time I do submit it wholly to the learned judgments of you all
(Gentlemen) for whose delight it was conceived and written; To you do I
repair both for defense and candor: hoping that you will vindicate this
harmless piece from the rash censures of malevolent and unskilful Judges,
whilst I take leave to say; -- Ambubaiarum Collegii Alumni.
Demetri teque Tigelli,
Discipulorum inter jubeo plorare Cathedras.
What tho it was never acted? I hold the deep and solid ear a more faithful
messenger to the understanding, than the eye: Grave Auditors are still welcomer
to the Muses, than light Spectators: such I mean as applaud only of toys and
bables (Poscentes Vestro multum diversa palato) are like Americans merely
taken with bells, rattles, and Hobby-horses, not relishing the perfection of
nature nor solid Art, though Industry labor to feed them with both at once.
But this excuse is left for them: Invincible Ignorance satisfies before God and
man. This hope remains to us, Non omnes eadem mirantur amantque What though it
never took the Degree of the Stage? I presume you are all Learned (Gentlemen)
and know better how to judge by the care, than by the eye, though both may
exercise their functions here: As well a fool as a good Physician may come
from Padua: and an Ass may graduate himself at Athens. Wherefore now
(Gentlemen) if you be lovers of the Muses (and such I would have you all) I
need not then doubt of your benevolent aspects, which will soon beget a candid
censure. I make but one Musophilus of you all, to whom (as it were) Uno in
multis, I dedicate my endeavors bestowed upon this Poem, hoping to find in you
all, severally, that fundamental similitude and common Ration in your loves to
Learning, by which you may easily retribute that recompense to these Labors,
which the Stage denied

Your true Honorer, JOHN JONES Eugen.

The Actors names.
PROLOGVE.

Cosmo a Duke. Adrasta his Duchess. Lucilio their Son. Lady Julia a widow.
Althea her daughter. Antonio a Courtier and friend to Lucilio. Camilla the Lady
Julia's women. Fioretta the Lady Julia's women. Rigazzo a Page to Lucilio.
Alastor a villain but a Coward. Assassino a Blade or desperate fellow. Micale
a Witch. Sarvia her daughter. Navarchus a Master of a Ship. One Mariner or
Ship-man. Mr Frailware a Grocer and Constable. Mistress Ambrosia Frailware his
wife. Debora her maid. Mr Damasippus a lecherous Stoike. Mistress Abigail his
wife. Damon two Shepherds. Arminio two Shepherds. Laurinda a Shepherdess. A
messenger.


EPILOGVE.

The Scene Florence.

A little before the Prologue comes forth, enters one of the Actors and sits
down on the Stage as a stranger, awhile after enters the Prologue and stumbles
at his legs. Gent. HOw now Prologue! is your mind so much on your part, that
you must run over men as you go?


Prol. The fault was yours sir, that would so carelessly sit in his way, that
was to do his part by you; tho we hope to run over some before we have ended;
and yet without any Cynicall observation, especially of the wise.


Gent. Why for Iuvenal's sake? what has thy new tunn'd Poetry vented? will you
rail? will you be satiricall, and bite? and rub the City with salt?


Prol. Faith sir you must know, that the giddy loosenes of vicious humors, does
so rankle in most parts of our time's imposthum'd gallantry, that it is a hard
thing Satyram non scribere: and therefore we are desirous to lance it a
little, and give the sore an issue, that vanity seeing the foulness of the
matter which made it swell to such a seeming greatness, may loathe it self,
and seek a cure for the disease.


Gent. Do yoe hear Prologue! your Author is a fool: is he desirous to buy
Fame at such a rate, that he will smart for it? will not examples move him? can
he not live private, but he must be meddling with Tigillinus? Did he never hear
of the Proverb, that it is better railing at Hercules then at a Clown to his
face? I prithee tell him of it, and let him know, it is better live still private
and unknown, then have our smarts to every ear be blown.


Prol. Troth it is true sir, I Will put him in mind of it.


Gent. I prithee do, and tell him withal, that so choice an Audience desires
not to glut their ears with others infamy, nor ever wished their mirth should
feed upon the rank distemperature of other men's vices; but come to behold a
Scene merry and harmless, as free from sower invectives, as fulsome bawdery:
as for those whose dull palats can relish nothing, unless it be sawced with
the verjuice of a tarte pen, be hostile enemies to their pishes and meawings,
and scorn to beg or buy a reconciling; their defects make them desperate, and
their envy cannot blast an unbeholding wit: to the candor of the rest, any
mirth will be more pleasing than railing: some harmless and innocent humor,
that may pass with allowance of the times, will be welcomer to them, and safer
to you.


Prol. Sir in our Authors name I thank you: and would you but please to speak
with him your self --


Gent. I will presently, and dissuade his intention, and yet I doubt not but to
give sufficient contentation to his Auditors, whose patience I fear I have
wronged by interrupting their Prologue. exit.


Prol. I should have opened the Argument of our Play, but stumbling on this
stranger, makes me doubtful what we shall have -- howsoever --


Prologue.
The self distrust that guides his bashful pen
Wills him entreat your patience, and if then
This slight work please you, time more purely spent
Shall once more sweat to better your content:
Lighter defects a serious Muse amends;
And slight beginnings have some perfect ends.
THE VVOMANS SPLEEN, AND LOVES CONQVEST: A Tragi-Comedie.
Actus 1.
Scena 1.
Enter Antonio and Rigazzo the Page. Page. SIgnior Antonio, pray how did you
like the Mask we had here to night, for my Lord Lucilio's ben venuto?


Anto. Well of a wooden one, set forth by a Dancer and an Architect, as the
fashion is.


Page. Alas Signior, there must be something to prolong and strengthen these
devices, when Poets, in favor of the ignorant, are feign to leave 'hem so
short winded, and almost speechless.


Anto. So sir; But now tell me Rigazzo, what have you learned all this time
you have been with your Lord at the University?


Page. More than I can reckon Signior, and yet I have the Art of memory to
help me.


Anto. As what sir?


Page. I can name you all the Alehouses and Tavernes in Athens, and most part
of the Bawdy-houses; marry to know them all, only Night, that has been some
scores of years acquainted with 'hem, and the Devil that gathers their rents,
could teach me: and indeed I was too young to be their scholar, else I might
have been a better proficient in them too.


Anto. I think sir your time was spent in such studies.


Page. No, not all Signior, I can steal as desperately as a Pursivant; fiddle
the Geese, Ducks, Hens, Lambs, and Calves, five mile round by book; and cover
the matter as smoothly as your Citizen does his perjury, and your Stoic his
Lechery: for I had most sober Graduates for my Tutors in all.


Anto. 'Twas pity your Rogueship had not proceeded Master of Art in the
faculty of theeving.


Page. It Is no matter Signior for thieves to proceed Masters of Art, when so
many Masters of Art do proceed thieves, and that is the least conversion, you
know Signior.


Anto. Are you so nimble at your Logic sir?


Page. As a hungry Scholar at a Henroost.


Anto. Take heed you labor not your self out o'breath, your learning's but
short winded.


Page. Long enough to run with a Stoic, Signior. I may be able to read
morality, get me some night-geere, and a red Nose, and then I am most
illustriously complete.


Anto. Away, the Duke. Sound Cornets or Hoboyes.


Enter Cosmo the Duke, Adrasta his Duchess, Lucilio their Son, Lady Iulia,
Althea, etc. Duke. Thus has our cost and best invention sweat
To seal your welcome from the Athenean Schools:
And trust me son, your thanks are much in debt
Unto these Ladies, whose too prodigal loves
Have searched for jewels, thus to do you grace.

Lucil. My Lord, I do acknowledge it a debt
As to their loves: Only your Princely care
To grace our new return has so surpassed
The former expectation we conceived,
That I am forced now to confess I live
A desperate bankerout to your royal favors.

Duke. Your good deserts may soon requite our love,
But tell us, How does learning flourish now
In Athens?

Lucil. Just as Virtue at the Court;
For with the times affecting ignorance
'T has banished true industrious labor thence;
And vicious loosnesse finding none resist,
Has so ingros'd the most refined wits,
And by the terrors of her sensual threats,
Bred such deluding Crocodiles in their brains,
That like the thirsty swift Egyptian dogs,
They scarcely taste of those fair sevenfold streams,
Into whose depth their industry should dive:
And having only got a seeming face
Of superficial knowledge, amongst the gross
And beast-like sense-conceiving multitude,
They most ambitiously seek and pursue
Vulgar applause for their poor outside skill,
"And by such mudwall stayres do often rise
"Up to the top of abused dignities.

Duke. How can deserving virtue flourish then,
If sacred learning be so slightly sought?

Lucil. As twinn-borne sisters, both do share alike
Their equal portions in the worlds esteem,
For in those hallowed places, which a true
And careful liberality did consecrate
As pure religious shrines to god like Skill,
Where Virtue richly invested with her best
And precious ornaments, might give a full
And glorious luster like a noone-tide Sun;
There ugly Vice, even in the basest forms,
Climing by steps of Art up to the height
Of horror, stands in a praecipit^,
And thrust but one step farther, with her fall
Will crush her self, and overwhelme the world.

Duke. To grieve at this, were in these senseless times
To become monstrous; and to feel no grief,
Were to be senseless with the times themselves.

Lucilio courts Althea Aside Duch. Observe him good my Lord, and let your eye
Be jealous now --

Duke. Have patience good Adrasta,
We strive in vain to bandy with loves power
And unresisted Charter of the gods,
Which time and absence never could violate.

Alth. -- As is your soul. aside. Althea to Lucilio.

Lucil. O be prodigious then!
And in despite of custom let the world
See that it is possible a woman's mind
Can rest in one: you must be valiant too,
And dare th'affrighting dangers that we meet,
I fear we have swelling passages to wade,
"For we must feel amidst a world of evils,
"A woman's Spleen, worse than the worst of devils.

Duke. Now Lady Iulia let this confirm your welcome,
And yours Althea: trust me I could wish
The season so disposed, since that our sons
Happy and safe return has made us glad,
That we might dedicate a longer time
To harmless mirth: but now the night grows old,
And we shall wrong your patience too too much.

Exeunt all but the Duchess and Lucilio. Duch. Must it be so? Have all those
lavish signs
Of undeserved favors heapt on you
By your too careful father, and our self,
Been spurs to your contempt? Or could the sweets
Of our affection prodigally cast,
Make you not relish what your duty owes?
Else did you think because they always ran
In such an uncheckt current to your will,
That no ingratitude could make the ebb?
O impious times! wherein a parents care,
When she has combated the pangs of death
To give her children life; stood all her time
Like to a careful Centinell for their youth,
And spent the nights in pensive watchfulness,
(Forcing soft nature to forbear her rest)
To plott their good; must all be frustrated?
And by a child's proud will see all things crossed?
Their Parents hopes, and their own fortunes lost?
How has our love to thee? our wishes toiled
To build thy passage to a higher sphere,
And by some noble match to raise thy House,
And must thy base attempts look downward still?
Mongrell our blood? and set a lasting scarre
Upon our progeny, by fixing thus
Thy stubborn passions on base Iulia's child?

Luci. Madam, not to yield what Nature makes us owe,
Were to be made less reas'nable than beasts;
And nothing's more against a generous mind,
And freeborne spirit, than foul Ingratitude:
Yet must your Grace remember that we take
Nor all from Parents: the hand of heaven and Fate
Does by the last infusion of the soul
Give the rich form, and by a secret tract,
And unavoyded path, leads us to what
Seems good to it; and though our minds be free
In this impulse, we love by Destiny.
I must confess I love; nor was the flame
Of my affection, when it kindled first,
Like to a paper fire, that with a blaze
Of lust, begins and ends at once, and leaves
Naught but black infamy behind: nor can
The least dishonor stain our Dukedomes title
From her, whose Blood stands firm by long descents,
Even in the heart of unbought nobleness,
Whose Reputation's sound, Revenues fair,
Beauty able to enrich a Dukedom, and deserts
To be an Empress. Were then our fortunes raised
By those high steps to which I should aspire
To join with greatness, I must join with vice,
"For they are often observed to join their hands,
"And he not stoops that stays where Virtue stands.

Duch. Has Athens taught you be an Orator?
Degenerous boy, I Will cool your virtuous flame,
And make thee rue the baseness of thy choice. Exit.

Lucil. How deep a conflict do my thoughts endure
'Twixt Love and Duty! Were not a mothers tongue
That wronged thy worth Althea, I would have torn it
From out th'injurious throat in thy revenge,
"And held it to their eyes, to let them see
"How it had wronged it self by wronging thee. Exit.

Enter Mistress Frailware and the Page. Mistress Frail. By my troth I am glad to
see thee well my little
Gallow-clapper; how have thou done this many a day? ha!

Page. Faith prettily well Mistress Fraileware, as a man of my profession might;
I had all the chief trades in the City to help me do well.


Mistress Frail. What trades were they, thou were too young for any occupation
yet.


Page. Not above three years at most: but I earned something with working and
waiting on my Lord, as Tankard-bearers, Laborers, and Servingmen do: I stole
and cozened, as Tailors, Shopkeepers and Cutpurses do; I let out my Lords
books, and took money for the use of'hem, as the later ends of gouty Merchants
do: and yet for all this I was forced (as many of you Citizens are) to go
many times to bed with a hungry conscience.


Mistress Frail. You Will never leave your crackery, but tell me prithee sirrah,
is Athens a fine Town? What be these College, like? did thou go to school
there?


Page. O, an excellent place for a woman that will use trading: You shall have
the Scholars lie at your sweet Frailes night and day; they be forced to
sweeten their disputations with Grocers reasons: and custom could not but make
your husband one of the head men of the City presently.


Mistress Frail. Now by my troth I think it were a very good place for a stale
shopkeepers wife of the City to set up in: of my conscience, a woman of our
occupation might thrive there.


Page. I, and she were down never so low, the scholars would do it -- and how
does Master Damasippios the lecturing Stoic? When was he here?


Mistress Frail. Do remember him? let me see -- of my honesty, I never saw him
since his last moral Lecture against the sins of the flesh -- yes heaven
forgive me to swear, now I remember me, the same day my husband went a
duck-hunting; and then he came hither, and brought me many good things: will thou go to him again sometimes for me? I Will give thee some figs and Tobacco.


Page. Yours to command; I Will smoke in your business then in faith.


Mistress Frail. Prithee come to me when my husband is out of the shop. exit.


Page. Adieu the two desiring sins of the City. Avarice and Lechery: if I do
not meet with your moral venery, would I might go lousy, and have but three
pence to play with this month. Exit Page.


Enter Duchess and Alastor. Duch. Come good Alastor! be but secret now,
And I shall live indear'd unto thy faith;
The matter much imports us; and in case
That my rewards should dye with me, the State
Will one day thank thee for it. I have his seal,
His hand and style exactly counterfeit:
Then hear thy charge; Thou must this evening haste
Covertly to the Lady Iulia's house --
But can be secret?

Alast. As your own thoughts Madam,
I can stick as close to any piece of villainy
As a Punk to a Farmers son new gentiliz'd;
And when besides so many good angels tempt,
They are enough -- to make a woman keep counsel.

Duch. Well then; make means to speak there with Althea,
Tell her thou come from Lord Lucilio,
Who in important business has employed thee;
I know she will take thy message privately:
Deliver her this letter; seem that Lucilio
Has none but thee on whom he can rely
In this so dangerous an enterprise:
She upon this will-bee more free and open
To the design: then mark her, good Alastor!
Observe each word and gesture that she uses;
If thou can wring a look that may discover
But a consenting thought, it will suffice:
For when offending lives withstand our will,
We must seem good, though we determine ill. exit.

Alast. Here Is a villainous pitfall to stifle a poor wench in; who can be a
beggar, now, that is not afraid to be damned? well, I can no more tell how to
thrive without doing villainy, than greatness can without doing injury. Pretty
piece of man's flesh I my heart will leap when I see thee come off the Rock
like a Mag-Pie; and I shall wish, for thy sake, that nature had made women a
little lighter, all of feathers, that they might have taken hurt by no manner of
falling: but pity is a thing clean out of fashion, and the high way to
irreparable Beggary; I Will none of it. exit.


Enter Lucilio, Antonio, Page. Anto. Nay good my Lord yield not your self so
much
To these unseason'd Passions, that do sit
Like midnight on your thoughts; me thinks the air
Of Athens should have purged these humors quite:
In troth, my Lord, the world will condemn you,

Lucil. Of what Antonio?

Anto. Why of melancholy.
Which some define is weakness in a Lord,
And in a Lady pride or fullennesse,
But in a wise man it is flatt foolery.

Lucil. Prithee forbear Antonio; let me in silence
Vent out the cares that overwhelme my soul;
Thou know how deep an angry mothers spleen
Wounds the soft love that I am forced to bear
To my Altheas virtues. How can I choose
But weep away my youth, when I remember
The dreadful oppositions which my soul
Has formerly sustained for her; the cares
That have out-runne my years, and like to corsives
Have eat into my flesh, there seized upon
All faculties of life, and spread their venom
Through every vein and sinew of my heart?

Anto. It Is your own fault, that thus will spend your self
In such extremes of passion, that increase
The number of your griefs above your spirit;
Faith it is unmanly done; call you this love?

Lucil. Antonio, thou mistak'st the name of love
In thy Lucilio, if thou conceiv'st it dull
And sprightlesse melancholy, whose corroding humor
Feeds on the faint dejection of a mind
That dares not meet an apprehensive thought
Of least misfortune, but it basely yields:
I have held up, thou know, against all plots
A woman's wit could manage or invent,
Or cause the Duke my father countenance
To blow out the chaste flame of my affection,
Have laid my breast open to envy's spite,
And suffered even to banishment it self;
If I may tearm't a banishment from her
Who is all things to me, divine Althea,
Life, Country, fortune; all that this world calls happy.

Anto. Strange Symptoms of affection!

Lucilio, Say, Antonio,
Was it not Banishment? that even when Jove
Had licensed us in heaven, and meant to send
Himen to earth in white and Priestly robes
To join our hands, as Cupid had our hearts;
Then to be taken hoodwinkt from my hopes,
And sent in haste from Court, just in the harvest
Of my desires, to combat with the Arts,
The air and clime of Athens, whilst the Sun
Trebled his course to the Celestial Ram.

Anto. Yet know my Lord that your indulgent Parents
Out of their Princely care intended it
But as a course of Physic, to recover
Your lovesick thoughts, hoping that Time and Absence,
Joined with the precepts of Philosophy
Might purge you to a remissness of affection,
And by degrees conquer this moldy passion.

Lucil. All which supposed remedies dear friend,
Set the disease a working, much less cure it:
True love, Antonio, is immutable,
A divine Charter of affection
Confirmed in heaven, and can by no prescript
Of Art or Nature ever be restrained.
-- Nullis amor est medicabilis herbis,
-- Nec prosunt Arts.

Anto. Yet since in vain you strive
To bandy with a mother, me thinks Love
Tired in the depth of woe, should call your Reason
To a new choice fitting your Birth and Fortunes.

Lucil. Call woes to woes, I am resolved to try
The worst of spleen: and since her virtuous thoughts
Have daign'd to meet affection, that on wings
Of true borne faith has raised it self, to claspe
With her deserts, the most austerest tempest
Envy can shower upon our innocent loves,
Shall never dis-joyne us.

Anto I have done my Lord.

Lucil. Then prithee Antonio, let me in peace retire,
I feel some strange events lie at my heart
My thoughts cannot presage: I fear, my friend,
I have but dreamed as yet, but now mine eyes
Must wake to meet true solid miseries.

Exit. Lucilio. Anto. To see how strong love is, and the command
It has o'r humane hearts! Poor Lord, I know
Thy true-borne griefs are firm, and that chaste faith
Never conceived to wave with floating likeness;
Makes thee thus sink into the depth of sorrow.

Page. Nay, good Signior follow him, put him out of the humor, or else he will
turn madman shortly.


Anto. Why sir?

Page. Because he that's first a Scholar, next in love, the year after, is
either an arrant fool or a stark madman.


Anto. How came your knavery by such experience?

Page. As fools do by news, some body told me so, and I believe it. But in
good earnest I had forgot to tell my Lord of the message he sent me in.


Anto. Whither in the name of Mercury was that?

Page. To see how the Lady Donna Fiozza did.

Anto. Oh! how does her beauteous Ladyship?

Page. Sick, terrible sick.

Anto. Physic defend! prithee of what disease?

Page. Yesterday her Monkey had a fall off the side table, and ever since she
has had a strange fit of an ague.


Anto. How does her Lord?

Page. Faith not well neither, and therefore he begins to be most sparingly
virtuous.


Anto. The pox he does.

Page. On my fidelity you are the foul mouth'dst gallant that ever wore
Cloves in's Gummes: you say an Italian Count has the pox.


Anto. Your neater word good Galateo?

Page. By this light you Courtiers be the dullest creatures living; you learn
nothing but flattery and begging. You must know sir in a Nobleman it is abusive;
no; in him the Sarpigo; in a Knight the Grincomes; in a Gentleman the
Neopolitan scabb; and in a Servingman or Artificer the plain Pox: Just as your
saying goes, that Noblemen be never drunk, but take a surfeit; Scholars be
ill at ease; and poor men only they are drunk, yet all is but one disease:
There Is an old rhyme for you: adieu Signior, I must to my Lord.


Anto. Farewell hedge-pike. Exeunt.

Enter Althea and Alastor. Alth. Did my Lord so far impart the business to
your self?

Alast. He did, and does intend to use my help alone in effecting of his
project.


She gives him a letter and money. Alth. I prithee return him this answer, and
be silent.

Alast. Sweet villainy, thou art the thrivingst trade under heaven. Exit.


Alth. Warm blood assist me! how has wonder seized
The frozen passages that slowly guide
My shivering spirits up to the seat of life!
Murder the Duke! now innocence forbid,
And let our selves be as out loves, unstained.
Tyrannous affection! can thy transforming power
Enforce our passions thus beyond our selves?
Rob us of nature and the sense of man?
Seize all our actions? force us to forget
That we are children? and with loves finger blot
Clean from our thoughts the piety we owe
To them that gave us life? Carry us headlong
To such a gulf of sin? where we must drown
Our selves, our honor, and that secure content
A guiltless conscience brings to innocence!
Ah dear Lucilio! how are thy virtues dimmed
In my best thoughts, that like a Crystal mirror
Still held the shapes of thy deserving actions
Vnspottedly resembl'd! what spirit of night
Has mixed it self with those untainted vows
Thy never yet ambitious soul poured forth
To attend our loves? Some Angel, dear Lucilio,
Descend into thy fancy to persuade thee
By all the bands Love, Duty, Nature, Heaven,
Can bring to bind thee in a tender fear
Of roughly breathing on the softest air
That touches but his safety, to desist.
From this unnatural act of paricide.
Fatal experience speaks; and makes it good,
They stand not firm that rise by steps of blood.

exit. Enter the Duke and Duchess. Duke. Urge me no more: the white unspotted
hand
Of never treacherous justice, shall not blush
By our imbrewing it in bleeding innocence.
Nor shall posterity in after times,
Seeking examples of black tyranny.
Find our names registered in the Catalogue
Of those whose deeds have given wide infamy
Life to attend their memory, and brand it
With shame, more durable than brass or marble.

Duch. Yet good my Lord respect your falling State,
Let not that watchful eye that never slept
In careful pursuit of your peoples good,
As now regardlesse of your houses Honor,
Be dazell'd with imaginary fear
Of mere supposed injustice. Shall foul mouthed rumor.
Besprinkle our whole race with Iulia's blood,
And follow it into posterity
As a live witness of your loose neglect?
Methinkes those politic rules of government
Which you have studied, should at last inform
Your scrupulous conscience, making it to know,
What often does seem injustice, is not so.

Duke. Can there be more than shedding guiltless blood?

Duch. They highly offend that let their Countries good.

Duke. They let no good, that never did deny it.

Duch. It Is guilt to live when as their deaths may buy it.

Duke. But it is not good that is bought at such a rate.

Duch. No price is great that makes Kings fortunate.

Duke. They be not fortunate that rise by vice.

Duch. Who stays till Virtue lifts will never rise;
And therefore dearest Lord by those chaste vows
Which first I brought unto your nuptial bed;
By that attractive beauty which mine eyes
Once gave your youthful thoughts to feed upon,
Prevent this mischief, let the strumpet die,
Whose baseness stains your ever princely blood,
By sitting sole Commandresse in the thoughts
Of our degenerate son, the only hope
Just heaven and nature now has left your Throne.
Let not that god of fools, soft Conscience, then,
That seldom finds a name amongst perfect Statesmen,
Sway your experienced wisdom, but provide
Your honor live, when all your self have died.

Duke. Death to mine eyes, I must see thee kneel,
Thy words have charmed my soul, benumbed my thoughts
Against the stinging touch of sharp remorse;
I will resolve her death, nor shall she live
That stands 'twixtfull content and thy desires.
But how shall swift winged fame, my dear Adrasta,
Be held from loud proclaming our disgrace?
Policy will's some seeming cause be had
To make that good which justice knows for bad.

Duch. Leave that to me; I have procured from her
A letter, whose points but changed transfer the sense,
This in the public Sessions being read,
And she acknowledging the hand and seal,
Will be a most sufficient testimony
Of traitorous attempts against your State
And person, which the gross multitude
Will never scanne, but confidently, hold
Her condemnation just.

Duke. We Will then give order
For her attachment and imprisonment
Mean while your self may with persuasive words
Prepare Lucilio's mind to meet her death.
So's justice wronged, and innocence must die, aside.
When they withstand a woman's tyranny. exeunt.

Actus 2.
Scena 1.
Enter Mistress Frailware and Mistress Abigail. Mistress Frail. I Will ensure you
it is true Mistress Abigail, my Husband was called from my side at midnight by
the Dukes Pursivant at Arms, commanded to bring his weapon ready with him,
because they would reprehend my Lady Iulia's daughter in her bed; nay, I am
served so many times in the year; and if it were not for a little honor we
have by being the Constables wife of the Parish, or leave to build a new Pue in
the Lecture house, or meeting at the Quest-house sometimes; we had better
never be in authority, than have so many hewings and cryings, such
pasportings; that the whole year while our Husbands be Magistrates, we be very
widows, for any feeling we have of the^; and if we had not their company in
the day sometimes, we should eene forget we were married: it is too true Mistress
Abigail: but you have a happy turn.


Mistress Abig. Indeed Mistress Frailware our Husbands should not be troubled
with common business; and Master Damasippus does meditate and practice his
Principles by my side till nine a Clock many times. But I pray, what did you
hear was the cause of my Lady Iulia's daughters contamination?


Mistress Frail. O, why she was in love with my young Lord Lucilio, and would
have, God bless us, stabb'd' the Duke with a panado, and then be married where
the Duchess would or no.


Mistress Abig. Now Jove forsend it! How desperate be these princock Gentlewomen
when they be in love! they will venture upon any weapons: I marvel themselves be
not afraid of stabbing: I warrant you she will to the Rock for it.


Mistress Frail. I cannot tell that; but a Friend I have in the Court was here
before break of day and told me all.


Mistress Abig. Lord Mistress Frailware have you any friends in the Court?


Mistress Frail. I these seven years, Mistress Abigail, have I had friends there,
and acquaintance too, I thank my beauty, three years before I was married.
I Will tell you Mistress Abigail, these Courtiers be the finest, sweetest smelling
Gentlemen that be; they will have some friends in the City now and then, for
varieties sake, but they will pick and choose: and for mine own part I Will ensure
you, that before I was married, of a browne-wench, mark what I say, to speak
of a browne-wench, I was as sweet a creature as lived. There was a Nobleman
here in Florence -- I, there was a Knight too that would eat but little meat
except -- how ever it was my hap to fell figs in the City; I Will ensure you
that my flesh was so tender, that if a fellow with a strong breath had kissed
me, all my lips would have blister'd. I wore my silk Stockins then, and my
Bodkins of beaten Gold, I thank my own wit, and had Velvet Cloakes, and Velvet
Coloches come to see me.


Mistress Abig. Doubtless you were one of the happiest living, to have such
blessings: I would to heavens my husband, or I, might have an Office under
these Courtiers, that I might have friends at Court too.


Mistress Frail. I Will ensure you Mistress Abigail, many of 'hem be able to do a
woman a good pleasure sometimes; and yet there be some again that promise more
than all their strength can perform too, when they be put to it; for alas,
Courtiers do for so many, that they cannot do for all: for mine own part, I
have tried 'hem, and tried 'hem again; and some of 'hem have stood to me very
sufficiently and friendly, when I have come to see the Masking and
Beare-baiting there.


Mistress Abig. God's my pity, is there Beare-baiting at Court? do the Ladies
love Beare-baiting?


Mistress Frail. O, abomination: they will so shift for corners and places to be
at it, that their waiting gentlewomen can seldom come to the pastime. And how
does your good husband Master Damasippus?


Mistress Abig. In good deed la not well: he has been ill at ease ever since
the other night.


Mistress Fra. Ah sweet man! he does so labor, and labor to fill us with
morality, that he is even tired out in the City amongst us.


Enter Master Frailware and his man with Holboards. Master Frail. Fie upon it:
how heavy this authority sits upon us! ever since midnight in the Dukes
business! but it stands us upon it; it is for the credit of the City: we must
do more than one bare Office, or we cannot be good subjects. Here take in my
weapon. Exit man.


Mistress Frail. In Faith it is a fine time o'day to come home at: Gods my
precious, do you think to leave me so still? from twelve a Clock till I rise
I must he alone dreaming, and dreaming, sometimes that you are dead; sometimes
that I am with child, and a lust for a thing that I cannot have; sometimes
again that you have fallen down the Stayres, and broke your back; and such
fearful dreams that I cannot rest an hour, because I can do nothing but
dream.


Master Frail. O, good wife! we be for this year Magistrates Officers of
place, men of employment, the upholders of the City, the eyes of the
Commonwealth: and therefore when matters of State call, we must come with
wisdom, and with severity answer our Vocation.


Mistress Frail. Focation me no Vocation: for as true as I am married, if you
put me in such frights by going away, and leaving me in the dark, I Will get me
a bedfellow shall stick closer to me, so I will; cannot you have a Deputy as
well as an Alderman? I hope you are in authority too.


Mistress Abig. O patience dear Mistress Frailware! patience with your Spouse:
my husband told me that patience was one of the ten moral virtues.


Mistress Frail. I Mistress Abigail, if a woman had such a husband as you have,
that were able to put patience into a woman; she might easily be content and
have mortal virtues enough too.


Master Frail. Nay prithee Duck be quiet: when the Sessions are past we shall
have more leisure; mean while lets in, and drink this fury over in a cup of
Canary. Come Mistress Abigail.


Exeunt. Enter Lucilio with a bag, as if apparel were in it. Antonio. Lucil.
Let it suffice Antonio that thy friend
Entreats thy silence; nor let thy curious love
Question our farther projects; leave to enquire
Till time and rumor shall disclose the Plot
Of my intentions, whose unexpected end
Shall stand beyond preventions murdering sight,
And turn the edge of spleen upon it self:
Thus much I will impart unto thy faith;
What fits thee not to know, leave to desire.

Anto. My Lord impute it not to curiousness
That I have urged your patience to unfold
What you intend; for by the hallowed name
Of zealous friendship, which my heart retains
Engraved by your deserts, it is only love
That makes me thus seem jealous of your good
However would your Grace but try my faith
By making it a partner in your ils,
Till having passed these storms, and been approved
Inviolably firm, it may deserve
The name of friend to which't has long aspired,

Lucil. Nay, now thou complement'st and do afflict
The tender love thy faith has bred in me.
I tell thee friend I must not trust the air
'Twixt thee and me; the nights concealing shades
Shall never hear't disclosed: not that I fear
Thy friendly silence; but the barren plot
Of my invention, will admit but me
Into the doubtful scene; I must alone
Finish the Act my hopeless love began.
O my Antonio! could my sorrows pour
Into thy breast but half what I conceive,
What could the spleen of potent envy add
To the vast heaps of mischief, that do lie
Upon my grovelling fortunes, now cast down
Beneath the base of misery and grief?
When I must stand like to a senseless marble
Frozen into a stone with strong respect
Of filial duty, and see Althea dye,
Thrown down by my ambitious love, that aimed
At her transcendent virtues. This wounds my heart,
And puts a fire to the cold melancholy
That has so long possessed my chillied spirits,
And bids them seek revenge, that when fraud thinks
To seize upon the neck of innocence,
The repercussive flame that will result
From their abhorred deeds, shall singe their wings,
And make them fall as low as were their actions,
Where they shall lie and view the ugly shapes
Of all those mischiefs that attend oppression.
But now conceal me friend, and be no more
Inquisitive of the particulars,
Report will soon divulge the scope of all.
If absence cause inquiry after me.
Let fall some speeches that I am withdrawn
To a retired privatenesse awhile,
Until Althea's Tragedy be o'r,
Not able to affront my ruined hopes.
Nor stand Spectator at her guiltless death.
So fare thee well, and if we never meet
Remember that I lived and died thy friend.

Anto. Do not torment my soul, but let me share
Those passages of danger, that oppose
Their hideous jaws against your innocent hopes;
For at no greater rate man sels his breath,
Then with a friend to buy a faithful death.

Luci. Thy words Antonio cannot add an Atome
To the full love that is harbored in my breast
Of thy true real worth: then be content.
And leave me, for it is impossible that more
Than my unhappy self can be contained
Or have an Action within the narrow limits
Of my designs.

Anto. Then thus I take my leave
With as much feeling pain, as if my foul
Were by some violence shot from out my bowels,
Farewell my Lord, my vows and wishes guard you
From awkward Fate, whilst I 'twixt hope and fear
Attend the issue of these strange attempts.

Exit Antonio. Lucil. So now Lucillo arm thy self for death,
That from thy blood she may regaine a life
And freedom, whom thy weak affection sold
To undeserved slaughter and black infamy.
Immoved powers! we must not ask you why
And yet methinkes I could expostulate
The reason of this mixture in the frame
Of all our Universe! why every perfect good
Is girt with such a multitude of ils?
Not the most sacred and puissant Throne
Of divine Justice (whose Majestic form
Bears a resemblance of that Power Supreme
That equals Kings and Slaves, by giving each
Deserved vengeance for their actions
Can stand secure, but all the brood of hell,
Bribes, Respects, Envy, and what ever perverts
The strictest line of virtuous equity,
Will press up to the Judgment Seat, and there
Transform the beauteous picture of the Godhead
Into the hateful shapes of tyranny,
Of blood and murder -- But I forget my self,
And like en angry woman, chide the Heavens,
When I should do. Fortune and stealth assist
My just adventures; and a friendly sleep
Seize all the eyes and ears that would pursue
Our harmless Stratagems. This is the window,
If my directions fail not, that does imprison her,
Whom Virtue, Nature, and the mild aspect
Of all the Constellations sweat to make
A freeborn Empress --

He throws a stone up to the window; Althea looks out. Alth. Whose that?


Lucil. Lucilio.


Alth. O my dear Lord!

Lucil. How fares my Althea?

Alth. As one that lives but in the arms of death,
And like a frost-kill'd worm is half revived
By your fair presence, whose desired sight
Makes a warm blood post through my trembling veins
To tell my heart this news, that ere I die
I once shall speak to you: But I must chide
You Grace my Lord, that would so stain your love
With soulest spots of blood.

Lucil. Blood to their souls that thought it, for by
The never appaled heart of innocence,
The newborn babes first smiles were never more chaste
Then was my breast from thoughts of murder. O Althea!
What will a woman loath, that is all possessed
With wrath, and has the killing voice of Justice
Tuned to pronounce her merciless revenge?
The sword by her steeled conscience edged to slaughter,
And undefended lives to work upon?

Alth. It was your seal and hand that did persuade
Me to the murder, but my self returned
Disswasive arguments to beat you from't.

Lucil. It was my seal, which by my mothers charge
It Is thought the Page stole out, without suspect,
As I conceive, of mischief; all the rest
Was merely counterfeit. But be advised,
And I will choke the hungry throat of Treason,
That gapes for blood, with such a working pill,
As it shall loath to swallow, and vomit up
Their bloody plots in sick repentance.

Alth. No my dearest Lord, let me in contentment die,
Since you are innocent, and in my Tomb
Bury your danger, that have thus long sat
A heavy burden to your happiness.

Lucil. Long may thou live until the gods, Althea,
Shall summon thee from hence to make a star,
And grant Commission to the winged Post
Of heaven, to steal away thy soul in sleep:
That Divine mould was not ordained to suffer
A painful shipwreck in thy life's departure.

Alth. 'Twill sweeten much the bitterst throes of death
When I shall think my laboring soul does work
For my Lucilio's rest: then let my guiltless Ghost
Securely pass up to the fields of peace,
For I am weary and would gladly die.

Lucil. Urge it no more, the very sound of death
Wished to thy innocence, comes like a clappe
Of armed thunder to mine ears, and thou
Shall live, though I should search the utmost tortures
Tyranny did ere invent, to find a death
Might ransom thee: and therefore if thy love
Does yet respect Lucilios constancy,
Resolve and second me: Dispute no more,
But make some means to let me down a line,
That I may fasten this disguise unto it.
She lets down a line, to which he fastens the disguise, There draw it up, and
put it on with speed,
Suspicions eye dogs every step I tread.
She draws up the bag, and while she is clothing. How strong is sad
affliction on my State!
When I must steal a death, and think me blessed if none
Do interrupt my passage to destruction.
Oh that the paths of Fate so strange and invious
Should lead us into life, and through a Maze
Of chances, bring us to such unpassable periods,
That we must leap the banks, and give our breath
To shun the ills that do encounter us.
Come, have you yet dispatched?

Alth. I have my Lord; but what of this?

Lucil. Then once more lend your line.
Having again let down the Line, she draws up a Ladder of Cords. Fasten
those Hooks to your window, and come down.
She fastens the Hooks above, he below: And then coming down he receives
her. A more troublesome descent then from the Rock,
But your fall gentler. So: Now fly Althea,
And live as happy as my unhappy love
Had made thee miserable: time may be
More friendly to thee, and beget some means
That thou may one day sit amidst thy friends --
Nay, do not weep Althea; thou shall see
This will work both our freedoms; and if I die,
My silent Ghost shall in the pleasingst forms
At mid-noon days come often to visit thee.
Farewell -- They kiss, and he offers to go up.

Alth. What means your Grace?

Lucil. To out-runne treachery, and win a Goal
That shall enrich my name, make envy swell,
And drown her self in overflowing Gall.

Alth. I Will meet the ugliest shapes that ever Death
Appeared to Nature in, before I Will leave
Your Grace exposed to danger for my life.

Lucil. No more, for I have vowed what I intend,
And if thou do withstand it, to make this hour
The last of breathing to me: therefore be gone;
I Will lie at Stake my self, that you may steer
No interrupted course; and since the law
Gives Virgins leave to plead and die concealed,
I with this Scarf here will be your Attorney:
Hasten your flight, least mischief find you slow,
We shall both fare the better. At the Parks end
By a Fount that rises from the Chaulky Bank,
Camilla stays with your Viaticum:
She Will be thy partner in thy banishment.
Once more farewell; and, if I die, for ever.

Alth. And if you die I shall not long outlive you.
He goes up into the window. In what a sad dilemma stands my soul
In this divulsion between love and danger!
Yet bless mine eyes once more with sight of you.

Lucil. Farewell Althea.

Alth. Dearest Lord farewell.

Lucil. Again farewell Althea! all the favors
Of Guardian Angels, and mild'st influences
Propitious Heaven retains, wait on thy sufferings. Exeunt.

Enter Alastor and another Servant setting the Bar, and laying Cushions.
Alast. Come dispatch, the Duke's at hand.


Serve. I wonder he sits himself in judgment to day.


Alast. The matter in question is great.


Serve. Many think the poor Gentlewoman is innocent.


Alast. They be fools to say so.


Serve. Why, is it a folly to speak what they think?


Alast. I, as very a folly as to be virtuous indeed: Do imagine twill gain
any thing but hate?


Serve. Yet many dare pawn their lives that she is guiltless.


Alast. None but such as were predestined never to be great; they be tender
conscienc'd dunces: they never leatn'd Esops Fables.


Serve. Why for that?


Alast. Do not remember the tale of the Lion that banished all horned beasts
from Court?


Serve. That was a madd Lion in faith --


Alast. That then the Fox went away as banished too, because if the Lion
should say his pricked ears were Horns, what then?


Serve. But she was thought ever virtuous and modest.


Alast. She would not have been guilty so soon else: shall a swaggering
wench that will take Tobacco eight and forty times in four and twenty hours;
talk bawdy as familiar as an Oyster wife; retain seven servants with good
backs, and a weak husband to keep Dogs from door; have no privilege above
suspected virtue?


Serve. Faith I remember when I went to School, my Master used to tell us a
Verse or two out of a Poet -- and hic damnatus inani -- Iudicio: I ha'forgot
the Poets name, but I remembered the Verse by another, where he instructs
creatures of our faculty.


Alast. Why what does he teach us?


Serve. Nay nothing but tells us only, that if we will thrive by service, we
must be either close Panders, palpable flatterers, or cozening Villains.


Alast. A good Servingmans Tutor was that Poet I warrant him.


Exeunt. Enter the Duke at one door, with Antonio, Page, and other Attendants.
At the other door Lucilio in Altheas apparel, his face covered with a Scarf,
brought in by a Pursivant at Arms, Frailware and others with Holbeards, as a
Prisoner to the Bar. Damasippus. Attend. Give back there, and let the
prisoner stand forth.

Duke. How did we think, that when the storms of war
Were with our danger, care, and cost expelled
From out these confines, and the warmth of peace
Turned like a Spring to shine within your bounds,
We should have sat secure? Or after all
Those toiles, that spent our strength, dried up our blood,
Hastened the hand of time to seize our hairs,
Before his date, and only in pursuit
Of your (loved people) safty and content;
Our own now fainting weariness of age
Should taste that freedom which our labors bought
In plenteous fullness for the poorest swain?
And we have closed the Evening of our age
Within a fearlesse slumber? But how weak
Are all the hopes that wretched Princes feign!
When in the calm of peace, while we suppose
Our perils banished, and our selves ingirt
With such impenetrable love, as we
Embrace our people with, then stand our lives
Exposed to thickest dangers, which concealed
Do strike the deeper, and are warded less.
Such is the misery that follows State,
That when we want abroad, we find at home
Foes to besiege our lives. The discontent
Of some aggrieved spirits, that think we stand
'Twixt their desires and them; and which is worse,
The idle passions of unbridl'd youth,
Rather than miss those hopes enflamed lust
Has fired within their thoughts, will overturne
Whole States, and climb up to their aimed ends
By our heaped slaughters: Yet I least had thought
Such Tragic Acts had known a woman's breast,
Nor if I could, Althea, would your life
(Strong to retort suspicion) once permit
Our least mistrust to stain your virtuous name:
And had we not by heavens appointment found
Under your hand and seal the firmest proofs
Of tempting our own blood to paricide;
Suspicions strongest proofs had never induced
Our never lightly credulous belief
To harbor your dislike? But should we now
Neglect our safety, and our Countries good,
When all the Providence of Fate conspires
To bring those treacherous practices to light,
Which Heaven abhorres; we should contemn the Heavens,
Abuse that form of justice we sustain,
And stand as guilty of those wastefull ruins
Our cruel mildness gives your actions scope
To call upon your Country and our selves.
We therefore by the Laws denounce you guilty
Of Treason against our person and the State.

Lucil. Were it for life my Lord I stood to speak,
I scarce would give the breath that I must spend
To save that life: But since your Grace does know
A woman's prejudice has doomed our death,
For my names life I Will speak, and not for mine;
If infamy might die when we do die,
I would be silent: for know my gracious Lord.
I scorn to beg a life, but come all armed
In such a complete innocence, as dares
Meet angry injustice in the jaws of death.
And without trembling stand his violence.
But that these Acts of blood, these horrid crimes
Of paricide, of lust, and hellish sin,
Which will outlive our Tombs, and make our names
Come hateful to posterities Records.
Should have a birth within a Virgins breast
That never yet was conscious of a wish,
Against your desired safety; I must take leave
To tell your Grace, that it was merely feigned
By the bloody hand of Envy, to cut off
That sacred band of love the Heavens have knit
'Twixt your sons heart and my chaste innocence.
Nor do I tax your justice for my death,
But do impute it most to his fond love,
That by protests of virtue and desire,
Drew my believing soul to his affects;
For when my fears urged these ensuing ils,
His uncontain'd affection breaking forth
In signs of extreme passion, so consumed
My powers, that had my thoughts been cold as Snow,
His zeal poured out in such inflaming vows
Would melt them.

Duke. We must check your impudence,
That swells beyond the bounds we did expect
Your modesty should have observed: you wrong
Our son, and in our son our selves; know you
This hand and seal?

Lucil. I do my honored Lord,
Yet were that Hand and Seal never found guilty
Of conceived wrong against or your Son or you.

Duke. 'Twill speak it self, call it to witness then.

One reads the Letter.
MY Lord the attempt is dangerous and foul, therefore desist not; to enjoy the
sweets our present Nuptials would being could I endure your hand stained with
such an Action. More when we meet: fear not; but -- Heaven and Fate will
second virtue. Be still your self, and I will rest

Yours more than mine. ALTHEA.


Duke. Had you a privilege to shroud the blush
Your conscious guilt casts against the eyes of Heaven
As from our sight you do conceal the Die
That writes your Acts in shame upon your Cheeks,
You might deny these proofs, and swear them feigned;
But that all-seeing power that notes the wild
And secretst passages of man's conceit,
Detesting those foul crimes of lust and blood,
Reveals your Acts. Stand therefore, and from the Seat
Of Justice hear your doom; since your ambitious hopes
Soared up, and by our Blood did mean to climb
Into that Seat which Nature and our right
Had given to us: be therefore from the Rock
Thrown with your hopes, that your example teach
How low they fall, that climb above their reach.
And you Antonio we charge to see
The execution speedily performed. Exit cumsuis.

Manent Lucilio, Antonio, Page, Damasippus. Lucil. As sweet as cooling dew
comes to the breast
Of scorched Autumn, so Deaths slumber falls
On oppressed innocence. And good Antonio,
Since it is your charge to see us dead, let me
Entreat this favor that my body be
Speedily interred: and pray you tell the Duke
That I request his Grace not grieve too much
Hereafter, for what I willingly now sought,
And he against his will made me to find.
Then that I may have a litttle space in private
To bid the world farewell; and this is all
A dying Virgin begs, and for your friend
Lucilio's sake you must not now deny it.

Anto. Wonder of women! could my attemps but yield
Half what my heart conceives, these limbs should die,
As many several deaths as they contain
Conduits of life, to make your innocence live,
For your Lucilios sake, whose woes will swell
Poor Lord, like to a winde-driven Ocean,
When he shall hear you dead, and bear him down
To some disastrous end.

Lucil. You are deceived,
Dear friend; Lucilio's woes end with my life.
Nor will a thought of grief, a tear or sigh
Trouble his peaceful sleeps when I am dead.
But I shall strain your patience too far, and give
The Duke a cause to blame your too much favor.

Exeunt. The Page pulls Damasippus back to speak with him. Dam. My little least
of any thing, thou parcel of man, what is the news with thee?


Page. News from the Fortunate Islands Master Damasippus: The very Elysium of
your delight, and delicious Nectar of pleasure; Mistress Ambrosia Frailware
commands half her self to your learned conceits, and the rest to the heat
of your inferior Moralities.


Dam. O the odoriferous flower of Florence! How does she?


Page. In able strength and strong appetite: and earnestly entreates this
evening your presence at Supper: her Husband will be forced by Oath business
to be absent; and therefore you must feed her with the fruits of your company,
and you shall be fed with the strength of confirming meats that edify.


Dam. Thy reward shall overtake thee: I will first accompany this Lady to her
death, and prepare and strengthen her according to morality, and then I will
be ready to give all moral comfort to the sweet desires of our dear Paramour.
Exit.


Page. I Will meet your moral comfort with such a Physical counter-buffe, that
I Will spoil your tilting for that night in faith.


Exit. Actus 3.
Scena 1.
Enter Antonio, Lucilio following, and by him Damasippus at going to the Rock,
the executioner, Frailware and others with Holbeards. Damasippus. ANd as I told
you sweet Lady, make your reconcilement with the world, that you be not
hindered from your death: if you owe any thing, you must forgive and forget it,
that you may dye according to morality.


Lucil. I thank your labor Master Damasippus,
I hope my peace with heaven and earth's confirmed,
And you shall need trouble your self no farther.
But you Antonio, whose deserving trust
Must be a witness of the latest gasp
Our fainting soul shall draw, tell to the world
How undivided was the tender love
Betwixt Althea and Lucilio's life:
And let me vow't into thy full belief,
That the soft Air faun'd with the cooling breath
Of a mild Summers Evening from the West
Was not less murderous than Althea's wish --
Nay weep not man, we cannot weep our selves,
We do entreat this death to end our woes,
Not to increase them. Farewell Antonio;
And if in after times you hear our friends
Sigh for our hapless death, bid them desist;
We did but quench the thirst envy had chased us into.
-- Come honest friend
Discharge your Office, for sorrow 'gins to fit
Heavy upon our heart that feign would rest.

The Executioner with one more leads him up to the Rock, where he begins to
bind his hands, first asking him forgiveness. Execut. Madam, forgive me your
death.

Lucil. Which here I do
As freely as I wish my weari'd Ghost
May find a fearelesse passage through the strange
And uncouth shades that leads our souls to Rest

Enter the Lady Iulia running with her hair dishevelled. Iulia. Where shall I
run to meet, that, which beheld
Kills with a deadlyer wound then do the eyes
Or coldest poison of a Basiliske.
She sees them on the Rock. Althea stay -- and let thy wretched Parent
Take the last farewell of her dying child.
She runs up to them. Ah why did Nature make my unhappy womb
Fruitful by thee, and yet reserve mine age
To outlive the extremities of grief, and see
Thy dismal end by an untimely death?
Was I reserved for this? Or were the crimes
Of our black guilt so horrid in the eyes
Of Heaven, that nothing but the fatal scourge
Of severe justice in the woefull'st form
Could expiate our sin? How were I blessed
If the first instant that imparted life
To thy scarce featured self (joy to my womb)
Had been the last in which we both had breathed!

Lucil. Madam! do not afflict your self, nor let your cares
Live from our death; Althea cannot dye,
But with her innocence does buy a life
That shall extend her worth beyond the reach
Of Time and Envy. Therefore as you respect
Your daughters peaceful happiness, take truce
With sorrow but till we be dead, and Heaven
That still protects the innocent, will show
How just it is in plaguing those that strive
By treacherous plots to oppress innocent lives.

Iulia. Can thou persuade the Ocean in a storm
To leave her swelling? Or a Bullet shot
To stop its passage? No Althea! no!
The lightest Arrow is not more powerful sent
Unto his Mark than we are thrown to death.
Therefore farewell, I Will haste to meet thee there,
Where no injustice nor oppressing tyranny
Shall sever our embraces; and let this kiss
Seal up that vow upon thy dying lips --
She offers to kiss Lucilio, and putting by his Scarf he is known. What Is
here? has sorrow so transformed thy shape?
Or dulled the wonted vigor of my sight,
That it sees nothing right proportioned?

Lucil. Madam conceal me for Althea's love,
Who lives, but banished only for a while;
And let me die that she may freely live;

Iulia. My Lord Lucilio, do you mock my woes?
O where is Althea? have you murdered her?
And come to upbraid the miseries we feel?
Is 't not enough that I must lose that stay
On which my aged widdowhood relied;
But you must jest at anguish? Is not our blood
Enough to satisfy the thirst of Treason,
But you must swallow more? I Will not conceal
Your murdering plotts, but lay these Actions open
To the wide worlds eyes; and leave the rest,
In hope that Heaven, who does your treacheries view,
As you have dealt, so they may deal with you.

She throws off his Scarf. Exit Iulia. Lucilio offers to throw himself off
the Rock. Serve. What means my Lord?

Lucil. To dye as I am doomed,
Therefore let me go.

Serve. Antonio, lend your help
To save the Prince, whom you have brought to death.

Anto. My heart! force him to live, or by the Seat
Of Justice, you shall die as many deaths
As you have Arteries.

Lucil. Then we must live to see those griefs alive
Which death would end, and life will but revive.

Anto. Post to the Duke before, and let him know
The strangeness of the accident.

Exit Servant, Frailware and Page. Lucil. Antonio: know that I ever held thy
faith till now
True to thy friend, and thought thou would assist
His misery, which thou had richly done
If I had dyed.

Anto. O honored Lord, be these
Your harmless attempts that you concealed
With such a nice reservedness from your friend?
Come good my Lord, let us repair to Court
That now stands wondering at this strange report.

Exeunt. Enter Page and Frailware. Page. My Head's in labor with a jest Master
Constable, and I have a warrant to your authority to see me well delivered
on it.


Frail. I can drink Sack, and talk bawdy for a need, if it come within the
compass of my Office.


Page. Why there be two ingredients then to the composition of a Midwife, and
if you will be ruled in the Action, we shall laugh and lie down, and have an
excellent banquet at the delivery.


Frail. Gi'me thy warrant then, and I Will serve it as greedily as a beggarly
Vndersherife does an Action of slander: But what is it? what is it boy?


Page. Faith sir, the common danger that haunts men of your place, fills
Theaters, and gives many of your Landlesse Gallants their gilt Spurs, and
their feathers.


Frail. Vnshale it, unshale it,


Page. Why Sir, in sober City Italian, that man of little wit, less learning,
and no honesty M. Damasippus the Stoic means this Evening with pure morality
to --


Frail. What sir?


Page. Cuckold you sir.


Frail Body o'mee! that emblem of hypocrisy; he looks as cold and mortified
as a Capon of a weeks killing.


Page. Hang him Lobster, he is as hot as a Cocksparrow, and as irreligious as
as a Low Country Lombard: He Is good for nothing but that which men keep old
Stallions for: he would have done rarely well after Deucalions flood, or five
hundred of 'hem now for the new plantation -- But in faith I would be revenged
on him.


Frail. Revenged? I Will give up my shop to be revenged on him, turn Summer to
plague him with Citations --


Page. And then out-bribe him, that he shall find no mercy in the Bumme-Court.


Frail. Or else I will be stern in my authority, set him in the Stocks, and
set the Stocks at mine own door --


Page. Or else I would hire some Jew to make him factious, And then get him
banished to Amsterdam to saw Brazill.


Frail. Or hire a Witch to take away his Instrument of lust, and then he will
hang himself in his own girdle.


Page. Or get some body to promise him some Books and a new Gown to deny the
plurality of the gods, then inform against him, and go drunk to see him
burnt.


Frail. Else I Will get him Carted, and lie with his wife the while.


Page. I, and send him word of it when he is in the Cart.


Frail. Some dreadful vengeance or other my offended Authority shall take on
him. I protest I never mistrusted it.


Page. Alas no; I knew you were a true Cuckold innocent.


Frail. A Cuckold innocent: what is that?


Page. One of the eight Tribes into which your liverie is divided -- Nay, nay,
nay sober Master Constable, be not dejected; let not your head sink before it
has full lading: for look you, I Will show you the dignity of your estate: your
Cuckoldhood sir is more worshipful than the best of all the four and twenty
Companies; Because in some ages you have had some of the best of all those
Companies Fellows of the Liverie. Secondly, you have had all states and ranks
belonging to it. Sylla, Domitian and Claudius, great Emperors of the world,
never cared to be free of the Goldsmiths or Merchant-Taylors Hall, yet they
were huge Cuckolds. Thirdly, you have your wit in choosing approved, which must
of necessity show you to have been wise men, and therefore most commonly you
are in Offices. Fourthly you have sometimes better men to be your followers
than your self, for they be glad to follow and come after, where you have
been before. Fifthly, you have others to work for the propagation of your
name, while you be idle, and reap the fruits of their labors. And lastly, it
makes your way to heaven Master Constable, infallible for if you die quickly,
you die an innocent -- But let me be your Pilot, and if I do not learn you a
course to pay this Puffin, this all Priapus, this Goat rampant in's own
kind, let my wit be for ever cracked.


Frail. If thou could do it in some bitter manner.


Page. Trust me not else -- for look you Sir, if it were a Courtier of a good
perfume, and rich Garter; or a Gallant of the new fashion, with fresh insides;
nay, an 'twere a barren Alderman that would visit his Wench secretly, and were
in the way to authority, why, 'twere something tolerable. But to be horned by a
Sir, that is no Knight, one that will lie as fast as an Alminack-maker, a
thred-bare-grogran-worsted-lack-Latin! it is insufferable.


Frail. O it is, I know it is.


Page. Your only revenging remedy, then, is prevention in the same kind,
which you shall most dexterously atchieve me duce, id esh, si ego dux fuero,
little Master Constable.


Frai. How sweet boy, how?


Page. Do you but invite Mistress Abigail to Supper this evening, who knows
nothing of her husbands being there, and leave the rest to my providence.


Frail. I Will do it Boy in faith, I will, I will indeed Boy.


Page. About it then, I Will meet you at your coming back and give directions
for the rest. Exeunt


Enter the Duchess disguised, and Mycale a Witch Mical. Your Grace has been
exceeding patient
To undergo these pains, and come to us.

Duch. Good Micale I was unfortunate
I had not known thy skill and used it sooner;
For since Heavens power denies me just revenge
And means, to work my will, I Will search the depth
Of hels dark'st Angels, but I will dissolve
That firm linked band of love: and to that end
Shrouded in this disguise I came to thee
That thou may let some nimble spirit slip
From out the powerful Circle after her;
And with thy spells pursue her unto death.

Mical. Madam, It shall be speedily performed
Please you a while retire into this room
And wait the ceremonious hour, while we
Prepare us for the sacrifice, and provide
Those powerful ingredients which we use
In the confection of our charms,

Duch. I will. Exit Duchess.
Song.
Mic. Sarvia! Sar. Mother! Mic. Take thy flight
While the Moon affords thee light,
While the Dog-Starre shines downright
On the powerful Aconite,
And the Herbs appear in sight.
Sar. Away and wash your body white
In the spring, and cleanse you quite,
For I Will soon the Shepherd fright,
And bring home to mend the right
A female Lamb as black as night.
Mic. Haste then, quick retune thee home.
Do not tho forget the stone
In the Toade, nor Serpents bone,
Nor the Mandrake though he groan,
Pull him up, he is our own.
Sar. I Will steal besides (let me alone)
The great black Cat from jumping Jone,
And make the Nurse and Mother moan
When their fatlings throat is shown:
Mic. Haste then, quick return thee home.

Enter Lucilio and Antonio. Lucil. Where be we now Antonio! is not this life
On the far side of death, and sinkes beyond
A non existens? Had thou not made thy friend
Blessed in thy faith, if thou had yielded way
To my desires, and I had clearly leapt
From the maine top of mischief, and fallen short
Of these calamities? Oh the gross oversight
Of our mistaking nature, that is so base
To buy a draught of air with seas of ills!
Or think we benefit a friend, when we
Do turn his houre-glasse to make life run;
Though every minute hailes down misfortune thick
As it does Sand into the empty receptacle.

Anto. Nay, give me leave to tell your Grace my Lord,
This strong desire of death, that has possessed
Your will thus far, does not express the signs
Of that true valor your spirit seems to bear;
For it is not courage, when the darts of chance
Are thrown against our State, to turn our backs,
And basely run to death; as if the hand
Of Heaven and Nature had lent nothing else
To oppose against mishap, but loss of life,
Which is to fly and not to conquer it.
For know it were true valors part, my Lord,
That when the hand of chance had crushed our States,
Ruined all that our fairest hopes had built,
And thrown't in heaps of desolation;
Then by those ruins for our thoughts to climb
Up, till they dared blind fortune to the face,
And urged her anger to increase those heaps,
That we might rise with them, and make her know
We were above, and all her power below.
Why this my Lord would prove us men indeed.
But when affliction thunders o'r our Roof,
To hide our heads, and run into our graves
Shows us no men, but makes us fortunes slaves.

Lucil. Antonio, thou would turn Philosopher
To do thy friend a kindness; but it is not words
Our business asks, we must have action now.
Thou see my fathers anger for this freeing
Althea from her death, swells like a tide
Half flowne, that labors against an adverse wind,
And does command us leave the Court awhile,
And pass for Greece (as if our travail could
Be Bawd unto the chastity of faith
That Is vowed to virtue) when my long wearied mind,
Already's toyling in a pilgrimage
Up to the shrine of Natures rich perfections:
Therefore Antonio thou must take the shape
Of all (save misery) that I contain:
And for I know my fathers jealousy
Will entertain all rumors that are left
Where ere my name pass; thou must be Lucilio:
And so my name travail alone with thee
It will suffice; for fame does sometimes gull
The best intelligence. Then shape thy course
Farthest from Athens, to those parts of Greece
Where I am least known.

Anton. Pardon me my Lord
If I consent not: for should your safety call
To leap the Tyrrhene Cliffs into the maine,
Stand in the face of a fired Canon,
Or hale a sleeping Lion from the way
Where you must pass, my love would force me run
Against the edge of danger for your life.
But this is only a pretended show
To win our absence, that none may interrupt
Your torrent of impatience, that posts
Like melted Snow from off the Apenine
Down to destruction.

Luci. Thou art curious still
With our intentions, and mistak'st me much.
Beleev't Antonio if I might have dyed
When the vast flood of spleen was at the full,
And thought to overflow whole worlds of love:
When Envy stood a tip-toe to catch hold,
And pull down innocence to trample on it,
And sweet Revenge was at her on to speak
From my bruised bones; then death had been a heaven:
But now my head's turned brass, and speaks times past,
And hardened is against the worst of ils,
Though every frown my angry mother gives
Should come like hammers against my forehead,

Anton. May I beleev't my Lord,

Lucil. By Heaven I will,
And so resolve: yet for thy farther trust,
I will be open to thee; my meaning is
To put off name and habit for a while,
Till I have found Althea, and knit that knot
Which hell it self shall never violate;
And therefore carry rumor still with thee,
That it may have no leisure to descry
What I embrace. Farewell Antonio!
And prithee let this evening be the last
Of thy delay: Heaven will be my friend,
And send content, or give my woes an end.

Exit Lucilio. Anton. Soft, I Will not leave you to go seek that end: your name
shall travail, but I Will not carry it. Though you have vowed not to procure your
death; you are in love -- manet.


Enter Alastor and Assassino quarrelling. Alast. D'sfoote Sir, your speeches be
peremptory.


Assas. Why Sir, I said it, and I say it again, that the Dukes Son was a
fool, and a madman, to venture his life for ere a woman's love in Italy.


Alast. I yield Sir, 'twas a mad part to venture a painful death for a woman,
when a woman will venture nothing, but she will have pleasure at one end of it,
for the life of a man; yet the Dukes Son was not a madman for it.


Assas. I say he was.


Alast. I say you lie -- Assassino gives him a blow;
D'foote Sir, you will not strike me?

Assass. Yes, and whip thee with Birch in the Nose.


Exit stalking. Anton. Bravely performed Alastor, it is politiquely done, be
noble and do not strike.


Alast. Why sir, this is not mine own sword.


Anton. And therefore thou had no authority to use it: Come I have other
business for thee, that shall gain thee gold.


Alast. I thank you sir, for indeed I had a suit to you before.


Anton. It is the better trade of the two by half: I know thou can beg
valiantly: but to the business. Thou know my Lord Lucilio goes away in
disgrace 'twixt banishment and travail: he is not well, and therefore would
stay behind a while unknown: only thou must go before and put on his name,
that the world may take notice of his passage, and hold rumor busy, till he
comes privately and overtakes thee -- But come to my lodging, where I Will dispose
of farther particulars, and furnish thee with apparel and crowns for thy
journey.


Alast. I attend you sir. exeunt.


A Table set forth covered with a cloth. Enter Mistress Frailware. Mistress
Frail. Why Debora I say! why Debora.


Debor. Anon forsooth. -- within.


Mistress Frail. Come bring away the Napkins quickly, and make ready here,
(these heavy Ars'd wenches are so slow) and do you hear, bid one of the Boys
fetch me a Pint of Oligant, Bulls Blood, and a quart of Canary; and look that
the white Broth with Eringoes and Marrow be not over-boyl'd; I know M.
Damasippus loves it well.


Enter Damasippus. Damas. Joy and peace of mind be to my dear Pupil, let me
give thee a moral kiss.


Mistress Frai. In pure morality M. Damasippus, you are most heartily welcome
-- Would this wench would come away that we had Supper once.


Damas. That word has eternized thee my sweet Ambrosia; and thy name is
written in Elysium among Jove's paramours: Wherefore let the beloved of Jove
feast and banquet according to morality.


Enter Debora with Supper. Mistress Frail. You are so full of learned sayings
still: I have studied too a great while, would I could read once.


Dam. Soul of the world! thou shall be illuminated without reading, for I
will infuse knowledge into thee, and thou shall be repleate.


Mistress Fra. Can you do so M. Damasippus?


Dam. I can my Summum bonum: and thou shall have the Mandragoras for thy
fecundity; and I will free thee from the vicious note of sterility.


Mistress Fra. O the blessings of these Philosophers! Come sweet M. Damasippus,
sit, and lets sup quickly.


Dam. Content.


Enter Debora running. Debor. O Mistress! my Master and Mistress Abigail are
coming up the street together.


Dam. Thunder from heaven confound 'hem, and the fire of Aetna consume their
steps.


Mistress Fra. Charitable M. Damasippus, get in here till I can shift 'hem --
so, it is well, She hides him.


Enter Master Frailware and Mistress Abigail. Master Fra. Good Mistress Abigail,
I was sure before he was not here. How now wife! at high Supper! and Wine! and
Iunkets! and knacks! and all alone! this feast would have beseem'd thy friends
and Neighbors, the worshipful of the Parish, our fellow Magistrates: but I
thank thee for it, I have a stomach now as sharp -- as if I would eat for
anger. I would not for a pound I were to beguile any one of his Supper to
night, Come sit Mistress Abigail.


Abig. Mistress Frailware will you sit by your husband?


Mistress Fra. No forsooth, my stomach does so wamble: when Supper was dressing
methought I could eat such a deal; and now the sight of -- the meat does so
fill me: I pray Husband bring Mistress Abigal into my Chamber, I think I shall
be very ill.


Master Frail. By and by duck, we follow thee -- so, sit as close to me now as
mine Office, and here is a health in Canary to the formal Cuckold thy Husband.


Abi. Fie M. Frailware that you will have such a fearful word in your mouth.


Master Frail. Hang him, he is a Goat, and thou have, and shall make him
deserve it.


Abigail. I must confess he has a stinking breathe indeed; and that I have
traversd the paths of goodfellowship for your sake.


Master Fra. I, and wilt do still, though thy Husband heard thee say so.


Abig. I and will do it though my husband heard me.


M. Fra. Why now thou speak like a sister of the Lecture, and according to
moralitiy.


Abig. Nay I have been forward enough to you M. Frailware, ever since my first
marriage: for in good earnest I did marry M. Damasippus, only because I saw the
Philosophers wives go with the first of the Parish, and so forth -- but my
heart --


M. Fra. Let the City have it wench, and let my fine pure formal piece of
Stoicity wear out six grogran Elbowes with pleading moralities, and
counterfeit railing against the sins of the flesh; spend all he can flatter
from women to play the Epicure; and then make ragged Lectures and exercises in
Cellars and Gravel Pits for a collection of seven pence, ere thou giv'st him
so much as a good wish.


Abig. Nay so he shall; for truly he is grown a very Pharao, a hard-hearted
Mirmidon to me of late.


M. Fra. A ficus for him whoreson Crab; he plays the Goat rampant abroad I
hear.


Ab. It eene makes me many times wish him in his grave, that he might sleep
and I were free.


M. Fra. Thou art free now my sweet Ab: come, gi'me a threave of kisses -- who
would live tied to such a Bull of Basin.


Enter Page disguised like a Fiddler. Page. Will please you have any Music?


M. Fra. Music! most opportunely welcome; we will make a night on it now: strike
up Tigellius.


Abig. Away with him profane Tavern-Leech.


Master Fra. Nay prithee Mistress Abigail have patience.


Abig. I will not hear it.


Master Fra. By this kiss you must -- play on sirrah -- Music is a noble
Science.


Ab. Well this fit would cost me an exercise if my Husband knew it: but I can
endure any thing for your sake sweet M. Frailware.


Master Fra. God a mercy --

Damasippus moves under him What an earthquake! more Devils in the Vault? are
you fired, and will blow us up? who have we here?


Page. The very'st Cuckold of a dozen.


Master Fra, Neighbor Damasippus! now by my authority welcome into the
Livery: we will have a company shortly.


Abig. O, my husband! I will go to an exercise presently, that the gods may
appease your wrath. exit.


Master Fra. I see our wives will bring us to all the venerable degrees of the
City, before they have done.


Dam. Frailware, I will curse thee from the Temple of Diana; and thou shall be
excarnify'd by dogs.


Master Fra. We are Acteons both: let us knock heads.


Page. Step before him and shut the door, I have a plot against his Beard. ha
ha ha -- exeunt.


Enter Duchess and Micale. Duch. Now tell us Micale
What Sacrifice was that held you so long,
And would not admit our presence?

Mic. Madam, I must disclose more than the secrecy
Of our ruled Discipline will well permit,
If I reveal each Act particular,
And form that that dread Sacrifice includes.
But what I may without the prejudice
Of our strict and inviolable Canons,
Your Grace shall know, Just at the depth of night,
(Which time is Ceremonious) I went down
To a clear Fountain, where I bathed and cleans'd me
From head to foot? Then took a female Lamb
Black as the night, and digging first a hole
That might receive the sacrificed blood,
I opened all the Veins that traversed
The neck, until I left the carcass dry:
Then with a hallowed Knife I separate
The head, and splatted it. That done, I heapt
A pile of consecrated fire, whereon
Now burns the body of the Holocaust.
Then took I Infants fat, and lukewarm blood
Drawn from it is throat, mingled with Viper Wine,
And distilled Hemlock, with the Mandrakes root,
Nightshade, Moonwort, and dreadful Aconite,
Which to the flame I powered with Milk and Honey,
A holy banquet to great Hecate
Whom we invoke; and leave the sacred fire.
Soon as our backs are turned, we hear a noise
In hideous shapes, that would affright and shake
The constant'st force of Natures best Male courage:
Yet must we not look back whence they proceed,
For then all is frustrate; but as the fire consumes
The offerings imposed, the groanings cease,
And then appear the Spirits which we implore,
And which will never appear unless first pleased
With some oblation.

Duch. How do you point the forms which they assume?


Mic. Each has his private Charm, peculiar for the shape which pleases most,
and is least fearful.


Enter Sarvia with a Looking-glass. Sar. Mother the noise is done,
The flames grow pale and dim, and in dark shows
Speak the approaching horror which they feel.

Mic. Be gone and leave us then -- Now Madam sit,
Takes the glass. And in this glass behold what Magic feature
There rises from the earth to do you service.

She sets the Duchess so that the Spirit may rise behind them both looking in
the glass together. The first Spirit rises from under the Stage, (so of the
rest) and softly passing along, goes out. Duch. What Spirit is this?


Mic. This is a common spirit of much practice; it goes in the form of a young
Gentlewoman worn out of service, and keeps her residence in the Suburbs, till
she has engrossed all the diseases of the City, which she delivers by whole
sale to her customers: From sixteen to four and twenty; she is for none but
Bever Hats, Gold Lace, and Taffety Linings: Before thirty she falls to Roaring
Boys, Sharks, Servingmen and Artificers: from thence to Porters and
Skavingers; till freed by all degrees, she becomes a Nurse of the Trade by five
and forty; then many times a six penny Witch, and so back again to an
everlasting Devil.


The second Spirit rises. Duch. What is this?


Mic. This is a Spirit Madam that takes many times the habit of an old
Gentlewoman, gets into Ladies familiarities, and teaches the tempers of
Complexion; the composition of meats that strengthen and provoke luxury: the
use of quelque chooses and Dildoes: has Aretine at her fingers ends. 'Twas she
that first invented double Locks, and a suit of Keys to every Office: She
exalted the horn of the Buttery, and made the Silver Bole neglect the company
of the black Jack: and preferred a Bill against eating Breakfasts and sitting
up late, to the prejudice of Tallow-Chandlers. In fine, she sets Families
together by the ears, and flattering her self into great men's expenses,
becomes the bane of Hospitality.


Duch. It Is a familiar Spitit, methinkes I could be acquainted with her -- But
who is this?


The third Spirit. Mic. O this is a Devil of many shapes, and indeed Madam
seldom at leisure, that we can have any use of him. He fawnes him into
services of place, and persuades men, otherwise morally civil, from the chaste
Sheets of their beautiful and virtuous marriages: becomes an Intelligencer, and
panders them to Milk-maids, Kitchin-wenches, and Oyster-wives. He refuses no
deed that heaven abhorres, and Hell trembles at, so his Lord sin with him. He
is a very chained slave to his Masters vices, and leaves him in nothing but
Actions of honor and virtue. An other time he is a concealed Druggist or
Apothecary, puts on the name of a great Traviller, poisons at an hour, and is
in great request.


Duch. Speak to him good Micale, and let him know our business.


Mic. Stay then thou Spirit of night, and by the power
The chief commander of your shades has lent,
I do adjure thee tell where lives Althea?
The Spirit whispers Micale behind. He tells me Madam, in the Mountains far
from hence.

Duch. But how shall we procure her death?


He whispers Micale as before. Mic. By poison! gi'mee something then that kills
Past Cure, and speedily -- it is sufficient.
He gives her a Violl and exit. I have a nimble Spirit at command
That by an ointment which we do apply
To parts of our marked bodies, is at hand,
Who posts us through the regions of the air,
When often we meet at solemn festivals,
Or do admit a novice to the oath
Of our abstruse and powerful discipline:
Leave it to us, and ere to morrowes Sun
Touch but three Points of West beyond Mid-noone,
My self will see Althea dead.

Duch. Thanks gentle Micale, for thou have eased me much,
I Will not forget thy pains, nor leave thy skill
Without regard, for we have much to know.

Mic. It Is a curious age Madam, and we are full
Of business now, so many come to know
Who shall survive, their Husbands or themselves;
And then how long; whom they shall marry next:
What place and opportunity must meet
To raise their titles; with a million more
Of women's questions -- But the day begins
To look upon us.

Duch. I must hasten then
Least some misfortune do discover me:
Farewell Micale, hell prosper our design.

Mic. Fear it not Madam, I will not sleep nor eat,
Till by Althea's death I jointly free
Your Son and House from Cupids Tyranny. exeunt.

Actus 4.
Scena 1.
Enter Althea and Camilla disguised like Shepheardesses. Althea. THe day grows
hot, and with the climing Sun
That mounts to th'height of noone, our cares do fly
Drawn on by fear and grief, to deep despair.
Lets rest under this shade until the sindging Ray a little has withdrawn it
self.

Came. And gladly too, for I am as weary of travel, as I am of a Shepherds
life.


Alth. I Camilla, the desire of being public is the disease of our Sex: we
think the Countries free breathing spaciousness a prison, where the loss of
liberty is the want of company. But if there were one of us, whose contents
were not without her, she would shun that common concurse of eyes, as she does
the opinion of deformity; and perceive that the best perfection had no greater
enemy than public aspects.


Came. This is forced now, and savours not of your temper and woman's seasoning,
to hold Paradoxes against nature, and opinions opposite to our own feelings.
'Sprecious Madam, if Nature framed us to please, how can we please where is none
to be pleased but Beasts and Birds, whose apprehension was never made capable of
proportion, and therefore regard it not.


Althea. And therefore condemn us of unnaturalness, that when beauty was
equally shared 'twixt them and us, they respect it as it is; whilst we,
blinded by reasonable sense, conceive it the richest gift Heaven could give,
study it above the soul, and equal to life, tho it merely touch our outsides,
as clothes do.


Came. Nay dear Mistress, let us talk a little now like our selves like women;
and tell me whether an excellent Quality forced from operation, or a rare
piece of work held from sight, be not a wrong to the Author, as well as the
thing? O they were fowly deceived that sought perfection in a Nunnery!


Alth. That's the error of our ambition, that while we take our aim at
admiration, by publikenesse and common flattery, we miss that repute among the
wisest, which our beauties not prostituted would infallibly merit; because
every thing, though less perfect, yet less common, is more admired, as we see
in the Sun and a Comet.


Came. You are Bookish still: and I Will stand to it yet, there is no woman but
loves them both: and therefore being natural to our Sex, why should it be
termed unnaturalness in us, to cherish beauty, or wish the perfection of
civil men's amiable society, when that ever begets love, and love is ever
seco^ded with flattery. I like a Wench that is pure metal, and spirit, and the
very foul of her kind; that when a Lord wantons her, will forsake her home,
give off her father and competent means to the poor of the Parish; stick to
the City, like a Prodigal to the Counter, that cannot be drawn out by all the
friends, he has; lives clearly by her wits, yet reasonable honest too and all
to be flattered.


Alth. Such Camilla be the disgrace of their Sex: whose appetites change with
variety; and taint the general name of women with the vicious note of
inconstancy.


Camill. That Is the folly of men, to term inconstancy vicious in us, for were
they not so prone to wrong us, they would never expect it, but know that to be
too constant to them, were to be too disloyal to our selves, which I hope
never came nigh a woman's wit.


Alth, Yet it is the perfection of virtue to lose by the exercise.


Came. By the pleasures of change, I swear this constancy is a mortal sin,
and not a virtue in any of us.


Alth. A sin! and mortal!


Came. A sin, and most mortal, because most against nature, and brings many of
us to lead Apes in Hell. To lose the sweets of youth, the very Nectar of
Nature, and frustrate the end of our Creation; can this be less than a mortal
sin?


Alth. It Is a work of merit, and they be Saints worthy to have their names
written upon the Altar of Chastity. It Is beloved of Heaven, and sometimes
fortunately rewarded here.


Came. As for example --

Alth. My self you mean.


Camill. I am no Divine, spite of the time I must speak my thoughts.


Alth. Why then it is I,

Althea. Why then it is you: would any woman breathing, that had her 5 senses,
and no red head, no blew lips nor raw Nose, no desperate fortunes, nor cracked
reputation, but walked upright in the face of the world, and in the April of
her age, so devote her self to one, that she must undergo these miseries,
when by renouncing him, she may underlie so many commodities? To turn Savage
here, and hold conference with none but hills and sheep, when she might have
variety of fashions, wits, and breathes to Court her at home. I protest I would
love over a whole Playhouse of Gallants first.


Alth, I could be angry with thee Camilla, for I Will first be treacherous to my
own soul, ere buy content or kingdoms with perfidiousnesse.


Came. God reward you, for man will never.


Alth. Virtue is rich, and rewards it self: and if my wrongs merit Lucilios
safety, Heaven redouble 'hem.


Enter Micale like a Shepherdess with a Bottle and a Bagg. Mic. Now Micale
thou have the sight of them,
And art already 'spy'd; cast out the bait.

Alth. What is she? Sure some voluntary occasion has driven her this way.


Came. It Is some Camelion perhaps, that lives upon the breath of news, and
comes to intelligence us here.


Mic. What, no salute! methinkes the furious heat
Should make 'hem soon inquisitive to know
What I came laden with into these Mountains,
Which yield no other juice but Crystal Springs:
I have a Liquor here to quench their thirst,
Physic to purge them from their loving humors,
And that aspiring mind that does invest
Altheas hopes within a Duchess style.

She sits down and plucks out her Viands. Came. Faith Mistress my stomach takes
this for an invitation, I have a great appetite to be acquainted with the
honest Shepherdess, for I am dry at heart, though my teeth water.


Alth. Yet be not impudent, invite not thy self.


Came. Why no, I shall do as custom and fashion forces us in wooing, forbear
and be coy, look to be invited and prayed, when we be ready to starve: I Will to
her and dine, that is past resolving -- Come will you go?


Alth. Not I.


Came. Your reason?


Alth. Because I have none to go.


Came. Nor I to stay -- Shepherdess proface: I think your feast be neither
gluttonous nor miserable, that thus you make it in the sight of heaven.


Mic. It Is the Countries privilege fair Shepherdess to shun both: will it
please you sit and eat?


Came. Your kindness makes me presume, yet I fear to be over bold.


Mic. Command and try, these Hill-Inhabitants dissemble not.


Came. I have a melancholy friend here by, whom discontent makes scarce
sociable: yet perhaps company and your Bottle would infuse a little spirit, and
make a Sunshine on her thoughts.


Mic. You are too blame if you left her then, solenesse feeds melancholy:
please you we go and sit with her?


Came. That were to trouble your kindness.


Mic. Nay you mistake me then, methinks Shepherds should not know these Court
complements, more then that does the Countries honesty.


They rise and go to Althea. Came. Come, rouse your self, and meet a banquet
that comes freely to you.


Alth. I cannot eat.


Mic. Why then you cannot live.


Alth. And therefore I cannot eat, because I cannot live.


Mic. Yet strengthen Nature, and outlive sorrow.


Alth. 'Twere Tytius plague, to renew strength for grief to feed on.


Mic. And to let sorrow keep you fasting were to starve with Tantalus.


Alth. A hard choice for me the while.


Came. Virtuous constancy; thou art beloved of Heaven, and fortunately rewarded.


Alth. Peace good Echo.


Mic. Come Nymph, you must be joviall, these love griefs avail you nothing:
men perhaps laugh at 'hem.


Came. Why true: here is a health and wisdom to you

Alth. Both to your self, I am not sick.


Mic. Pledge her fair Nymph.


Came. See what a company of religious fools we maids be, to sigh and hang
the head for ere a rough-hewne-stubble cheek on 'hem all, when a Crab-fac'd
Cynick, that has neither land nor hansomnesse, will scoff at affection, and
say he knows four Wenches, who if they were stamped and strained, so, that he
might draw out the virtue of one, the beauty of another, the witty good nature
of a third, and the Portion of a fourth; he could make a reasonable good Wife
for ere a younger brother in the land.


Mic. By Pan but such a wife would right well fit a Worshipful Heir.


Came. Nay that were pity faith, then fools should trouble two houses. Come
will you take your Liquor?


Alth good Spirit leave thy tempting: my heart grows cold and pants, as if it
did presage some fatal ill stood nigh me.


Mic. These be the dreams of love: here take a draught, and waken imagination,
fancy is strong with you.


Alth. I think so too; pray heaven it be no more.


Mic. Great Brimo, shall our labor be frustrate!
I Will frame a lie shall make her hang her self
For grief, since poison fails -- yet taste a little,
The City yields no better Cordial to banish fears.

Alth. I cannot drink -- were you in the City late?


Mic. I was, and saw a heavy spectacle,
The Dukes sole Heir, who taking the disguise
Of a condemned Lady, that stood tainted
Of Treason, was thrown down from off the Rock,
And, by the privilege of Law that gives
Our Virgins leave to plead and dye concealed,
Until his Funeral, was still unknown.
Since when, the Duke to satisfy the wrath
His ignorance had bred by such a loss
Unto the State, has burnt the guiltless mother
Of that young Lady, persecutes her Kin,
Raced their ancient House, and vows the death
Of her, who yet is fled, and none knows where.

Alth. Oh -- She sownes.

Mic. Are you poisoned with a lie? -- What ailes you Less?
What fainting?

Alth. I am not well; good Shepherdess
Leave us a while; I thank thee for her meat,
But the Sauce comes worse than poison to my breast.

Mic. Then fare you well: I am sorry to have bin the Messinger of that afflicts
you -- and kills not presently, aside.
Although I hope this lie proves to thy heart,
Poison more rank then ere was used by Art.

exit Micale. Alth. O we have lived too long Camilla, and
Out-slept the hour in which we should have dyed,
Plagues, guilt and mischief have o'rtaken us,
Because we slack'd, and would not quit the world
To rest in pure white Tombs of innocence,

Came. I fear some of us shall recompense our sloth too soon, for I am
wondrous ill.


Alth. Poor wench, these news have wounded thee.


Came. Not to dissemble, no: but from the Wine
I tasted of the Bottle, went a cold
Through every vein, that settling at my heart,
Shuts up the passages of life, and fills
The Organs of my powers with such a frost
As kills the spirits that should harbor it.

Alth. Does Hell conspire with envy then to persecute
Our misery? and sent some fiend to take
That shape, that never till now did shrowed so foul a sin.

Came. My soul grows faint and weary of her house,
And Death claims right in all my Vital parts:
Help me Althea! help me Mistress!
Or bury me at least, and close mine eyes,
Death is the best -- Camilla dies.

Alth. Of all life's miseries. She rubs her to get life.
Dead -- stark dead --
It is not much I ask the Angry heavens,
Lend but my wits to die, I crave no more:
Or if you have a further punishment
Reserved, be mild, and hurl it quickly on me
With its full weight -- Poor wench, I have no tools
To break the earth, nor means to bury thee:
Thou have not killed a Mother, nor a Prince,
Nor been the ruin of thy Family;
Is It such a guilt to bear me company,
That thou must dye, and want what Homicides,
And Malefactors find? -- a grave! Here take
This Scarf, Lucilio was wont to wear it;
Tell him thou have it for thy Shroud, and I
Am gone to meet him, and have only begged
A truce with fatal mischief, whilst I hie,
That where he dyed, there I may likewise die.
Poor soul farewell. exit.

Enter Damon and Arminio two Shepherds. Laurinda a Shepherdess with green
Strewings. Dam. Come, hands to work, it is the Festival
Of our Silvanus, we must round entrench
The place fittest for dancing.

Laur. And strew the banks
On which the Summer Lord and Lady sit
To see the sports, with these rich spoils of May.

Arm. Our Shepherds will be frolic then, and lose
No Ceremony of their ancient mirth.

Dam. I like 'hem well: the curious preciseness
And all-pretended gravities of those
That sought these ancient harmless sports to banish,
Have thrust away much ancient honesty.

Armin. I do believe you: it is the exercise
Of such, only to seem, and to be thought,
What they are not, holy. They keep the feast
Of our great Pan, with more than needful strictness,
And take upon 'hem to be great oath-haters,
When all is but dissembling, and their Devotions
Like Witches charms, disguised with seeming good
To bear out wickedness.

Dam. Then they have reason, for they that live by shows must paint fair.


Lau. Alas, what is here? a Shepherdess asleep!


Dam. Sweet benefit of our life, to whom a Turfe gives a more secure sleep,
than a Palace does a Monarch.


Laur. But this is death, not sleep.


Arm. Why then she is absolutely blessed: Nature has given her an acquitance from
the reckonings of fortune and misery.


Laur. We must in charity bury her.


Dam. To your Tools then, we can do no less: though it be scarce in fashion
now to be charitable. They digg the Grave.


Laur. Fashion is a Traviller, and Shepherds cannot follow it.


Arm. I Laurinda, it travels into all Nations the world o'r.


Laur. And therefore should go round.


Dam. And therefore does go round, blindfold, like a Mill-Horse, who thinks
he goes forward, yet keeps his course circular. But now Laurinda what further
Ceremony can you devise for this Funeral? poor hapless Coarse!


Laur. To mourn for we know not whom, and when peradventure death was the
beginning of her happiness, were to abuse our selves, and be sorry she could
be no longer miserable.

She strewes on her. I Will strew my flowers on her Virgin Hearse,
And rob another Meddow for the sports,
The place affords no other Ceremony.

Arm. Yes, we must have a Country Song for her farewell from the earth, and
welcome to the earth.


Laur. I Will do my best, though it be unseasonable to sing at burials.


Dam. Poor Wench, even in the flower of her age! although I knew thee not, yet
for thy memory I Will change with thee --

He takes the Scarf from her face, and covers it with a cloth. Your hand
Arminio.

They take her up and bury her. SONG.
Laur. Die, die, ah die!
We all must die:
It Is Fates decree,
Then ask not why.
When we were framed the Fates consultedly
Did make this law, That all things borne should die.
Yet Nature strove
And did deny
We should be slaves
To Destiny:
At which they heap
Such misery
That Natures self
Did wish to die:
And thankt their goodness that they would foresee
To end our cares with such a mild Decree.
-- Farewell and sleep for ever.

Enter Antonio disguised. Ant. It Is too late, I have missed him, and all my
labor's lost. Speed you shepherds and your work.


Armin. Sir, you are welcome, but our sad work is sped already, and so are
they for whom we work.


Ant. Why is it sad then if both be sure of speeding?


Arm. Because Sir the bestspeed our labor can have, is the sad end of their
life for whom we work. We have buried the dead.


Anton. It Is well that Charity is not run the Country then. But whom have
you buried?


Armin. One doubtless as unfortunate as unknown, a stranger sure in these
parts, and as she seemed, a maid: further particulars we know not: but
pitying she should want a burial, as we came by and saw her dead, we gave
her that which earth denies to no misfortune, a poor grave.


Dam. And took from off her face this Scarf, blessed with the last kiss her
dying lips could give.


Anton. O my apprehensive soul!


He catches the Scarf. Dam. What mean you Sir? do you know it?


Anton. I too too well. Poor Lord that wont'st to wear
this Relic, which is now left for an Index
To turn thee to thy woes. Good Shepherd
Grant me thus much and bestow it on me.

Dam. Faith Sir since I perceive you long for it, you shall prevail: and if
she were of your acquaintance, keep it as a monument of her untimely death.
So fare you well Sir.


Exeunt Shepherds. Anton. Too timelesse death that killed two hearts in one!
And now Lucilio, where ere thou liv'st,
Here we may jointly finish both our labors,
Since here lies buried all thy hopes and fears.
Too virtuous maid Althea! could the earth
Yield thee no better place to enshrine thee in:
Yet can its baseness never dim thy name,
That shall be sung into posterity
By a whole race of Virgins, and thy Fame
Shall be a Tomb more durable to thee
Then Brass or Marble. So farewell Althea!
I Will straight return this news to thy sad mother,
That she may give with some solemnities
Thy unhappy death its latest exequies. exit.

Enter Lucilio disguised like a Country man. Lucil. Slave to affliction, that
must still pursue
The shadows of my hopes, clasping the winds
To feed the hunger of my discontent,
And set aloft by greatness, stand exposed
To every clap of Fortunes thundering,
Still banished from the sight of sweet content
That sits below me. Had my birth but bin
As free from height as from ambition:
I might have slept under a silent roof,
And eat securely of a Country Feast,
Bound to no Ceremonious paths of State,
Nor forced to torture mine affections,
Or chain them till they sterve to some deformed
Remedy of love, and change our lives content
For a bare title, that forsooth must come
To edge a line of words, and make our names swell
To fill the ambitious thirst of greedy age --
How easily could I forget my self
By looking still upon thee, honest habit!
And could I find her, whom the tyranny
Of love has made me seek, I would not tread
So many weary steps back for a Dukedom. exit.

Enter Page disguised as before, and Master Frailware. Page. Now Master
Constable, how like you this project? Do I not draw all things to the life?


Frail. Excellent Boy! for a searching brain thou might have made a
Head-borrough.


Page. What an ambidextrous shaver have I got to do the feate?


Fra, Can he draw teeth I wonder?


Page. I, who doubts it? it is the semi-sphere of his Profession: why do you
ask?


Frail. because I would have this hateful Stoiks two rows of teeth drawn,
for trespassing at my Table.


Page. You Will save nothing by that, for the want of teeth will make him come
the oftener to your wifes White-broth, her Marrow, and Eringoes, who will
likewise cram him up with Potatoes, Oysters, metamorphis'd Mushromes, and such
like self-swallowing provocatives, that will run down his throat as glibbie,
as your pills of Butter, and make as much haste into his Belly, as they will
make out again into hers.


Frail. How thou do charge my head with scruples!


Page. No; the way to destroy all fundamental reference between him and your
wife hereafter, and to spoil him for ever giving fresh sap unto your horns,
let his offensive member be now lopt off, before the Sun enters the Ram.


Frail. And what then Boy?


Page. Why when we have reduced him to this impotent state, we will straight
divest him, and trusse him up naked in a Wheele-barrow, and send him home in
the posture of an innocent, with his hands cleaving to the outsides of his
knees, and his nose between his two Thumbes.


Fra. Content; and we will go pawn his clothes the while, and be drunk with
the money.


Page. Stay, this is a little two Tragical, now I think on it: we will spare
his wifes night-peece for her sake, till the next conjunction -- Damasippus
cries out within. Hark -- our Checkerman has him by the Poll already: now
Master Constable stand close to your revenge, dissemble a fear a while, we
shall be summoned straight. They step aside.


Enter one disguised like a Devil Barber pulling forth Damasippus by the
Beard. Bar. Come out you unpoll'd Stoic, it is time you had the courtesy of my
Razer.


Dam. Good sir, I need it not.


Bar. I Will force it on you sir: as I am Pluto's Barber in Ordinary I will
trim you, come, I long to do it, therefore sit down, and make your Beard
ready for dissection -- we must have help I see; Constable come hither, come I
say, and fear not, but do your Office, force him to fit, if your Authority
be strong enough: you trembling slave come help.


Page. I come, I come sir.


Frail. Damasippus I command you to sit in the devils name.


They set him in a Chair. Bar. So, hold him there. Now Damasippus before my
mortal Razer seize your moral Beard, what can you say to save it?


Dam. Oh sir, it is an Ornament and special gravity belonging to our Sect.


Barb. Impossible that hair should argue wit; I rather think it does eclipse
a good disputative face, and makes you look more like a Traveling Greek, then
an Italian Stoic.


Dam. Yet for Antiquitie-sake spare me these hairs that never yet were cut.


Barb. How! Nunquam tondenti Barba cadebat?


Damas. Never since 'twas a Beard sir, it is yet tipped with the Down, the
relics of my youth, and in a primitive state.


Barb. Why then sir the antiquity of this your primitive Beard shows you to
have been a rank enemy to our Profession.


Dam. Why sir, I kept it for that end that Nature gave it, as a garment to
cloathe the face of age in winter.


Bar. Yet know Damasippus, tho it keep your face lukewarm, then; it breeds a
frost in your Liver, devours the radical humor of your body, and endangers
you to a Consumption: But in Summer, especially the Dog-dayes, such a Dung-mix
of hair, and vast foregrowne Beard as this, were enough to keep your Chin
sweating, nine days together, and turn every hair of these to Snakes.


Page. Most devillishly argued.


Barb. Now Saturn, Vertumnus, and the god of Sheep-sheare guide my hand -- He
cuts off his Beard.


Dam. Oh, oh --


Barb. Hold, I have almost done.


Page. Shave him close.


Fra. And wash him too in Lethe-water, that he may forget his way to my house.


Barb. So, let him rise.


Frail. Why this was quickly done.


Page. And valiantly suffered.


Barb. Now Damasippus, in hope that you will heareafter be a reformed man, I Will
be no more a Devil.


Page. Nor Fiddler I.


Fra. Would I could cast my head too.


Dam. O you damned Villains! have you betrayed me thus to shame and horror!


Bar. Be not angry Damasippus: now the Antependium of your face is off, you
have a more Sibiline aspect a great deal.


Page. True, he looks now just like a Goose returned out of an inchaunted
hole without her feathers.


Dam. Just Nemesis inspire me with revenge
That these unlectur'd miscreants may drink
Of the like Cup.

Frailw. We have already Damasippus, our wives have mingled it.


Page. And you have both tasted of the horn of abundance --


Bar. That your heads may be exalted like a brace of Bucks --


Frail. According to morality virtuous Damasippus.


exeunt. Enter Lady Iulia weeping, and Assassino: she brings the Scarf
Antonio carried out. Iul. Thou art dearly welcome good Assassino:
Now cease to wonder why I sent for thee;
I had a daughter once, Assassino,
A comfort to mine age, life to my veins,
A living Image of her fathers virtues,
Fair, modest, and which is half monstrous
In these polluted times, inwardly chaste:
I do remember such a one I had.

Ass. And have still Madam, for rumor says she lives.


Iul. No, no, poor Girl, rumor has often belied her.
See thou this Scarf?

Assas. I Madam, what of that?


Iul. And doe'st not see the letters writ in blood,
That tell me she is dead, murdered, and on
The Mountains buried in obscure contempt?

Assas. Madam not I,

Iul. Why no, I thought as much.
But look Assassino, if thou had felt
The gripes of woe that have through pierced my soul,
Seen an appalling sight would make thee tremble,
Or through the spectacles of love did view
A loss as dear as heaven, thou would discern
These bloody Characters, and meet her pale Ghost
In every slumber, begging with silent shows
And deep fetched groans a mothers slow revenge.

Assas. Good Madam, I am sorry for it --

Iul. Then to recount the wrongs, the infamy
Heapt on her youth, when by most treacherous plots
She was attaint of murder, and became
The mark for every vulgar tongue to spit
Slander and treason on her fair report;
And last her undeserved imprisonment --

Assas. By heavens 'twas a foul abuse; what were best to do?

Iul. And now to force her fly her dearest Country,
Friends, hopes, contents, twixt opposite love and hate,
To live in obscure exile, poor, forlorn,
Suspicious still of death, and flying that,
To wade each hour deep into misery,
To meet another death before her, and sink
Under the double hand of murder, not
Into a Tomb, but a poor Mountain grave,
No rites nor obsequies at her interment,
Buried without a tear, unpitied, unrespected.

Assas. Before Heaven Madam I would revenge it.

Jul. My soul Assassino labors for revenge;
Yet I Am a woman, and can sprinkle them
But with a few salt tears, and curse, and pray,
Which is a weak foundation for my revenge
To climb and over-looke them.

Assa. You have friends: call in the enemy, and mutine.

Iul. That Is full of hazard, for a peace being sworn,
The enterprise may make them happier,
Us still more miserable: But if my grief
Were armed with such a hand, as would o'rturne
The frame of all those hopes for which they sweat,
And spurn that in the dust, which they would raise
With hateful deeds, up to the point of state:
That I might see them grieve, and wail the loss
Which now afflicts my careful widdowhood,
Know what it were to lose a child, sole comfort
Of their declining years, and send their a-
Ged Coarses to the grave, hopeless of issue.

Assas. To make away the Prince; it is that you mean,

Iul. Thou art within me already?
And mark Assassino how easy it is,
Since time, occasion, travail, and his solenesse,
Thy self not known, gives advantageous means
To second thine attempt: do but resolve
And Fate will straight resolve to second thee
In such a righteous and just revenge.

Assas. Madam the enterprise is dangerous,
And though I have a daring spirit that bids
Me undertake the deep'st attempts of blood
For your revenge, and in so just a quarrel,
Yet must you think the danger I shall pass
Cannot but highly merit recompense.

Jul. Vow't; and propose the sum; my House, my Purse,
My Means, and whatsoever is mine is thine:
Be bold and faithful, I Will ever hold thee dear,
Call thee our Houses Champion, and the hand
Of heaven's justice marked to punish sin,
And plague the guilty thoughts of tyranny.

Ass. But Madam the report of his passage is so obscure,
That I can hardly learn which way he took.

Iul. I have dogged the rumor of his journey, and can
Exactly inform thee, come take directions,
And gold to furnish thee.

Assas. Then I resolv't;
And he shall die.

Iul. Now thou do power fresh youth
Upon my hairs, newly reviv'st my soul,
Put'st spirits to my heart dried up with sighs,
And make fresh blood traverse my empty veins,
For the sweet'st heaven the spleenes of women find
Is full revenge to our aggrieved mind.

Exeunt. Enter Alastor solus, in rich apparel, disguised for the Prince.
Alast. It Is strange I hear not from the Prince, nor Antonio, who promised to
meet me here, where I have now stayed three days in expectance, and had the
wind bin fair, must have passed for Greece -- Before Heaven it is a gallant
thing to be a Lord, if but in name, you shall be so applauded in every vanity,
scurrill jest, and impious action: A Satin Thersites that stalks among the
Pesants like the Stork that Jupiter sent among the frogs, will so bend and bow
to your little Toe, fawn and protest your excellencies; Si been ructavit --
Sirectum minxit -- I would I had the faith that some have, I would never be
unlorded again. Before Heaven I must begin to fawn, and get my self created:
This service done for the Prince is a good step to it.

Enter a Captain of a Ship. Now Captain, the winde's unconstant still, every
where save where to steed us.


Cap. Womanish my Lord, womanish.


Alast. Indeed their levity has gotten them now that Simile appropriated.


Cap. But they showed other Cards before they won it, too.


Alast. Nay, that is enough in faith.


Cap. Yet they had more.


Alast. As what!


Cap. Why their tongues, which fill houses, as the bustling of Winds do
Climates: they overturne Families, and States, as winds do Trees, Towers,
Ships. And for your diversity of winds you have your diversity of women: for
your whirlewindes that claspe and carry a thing in the air, till it fall dashed
to pieces; you have of your Females that will claspe and bear you, till at
your next fall you will think one piece will scarce hang by another. For your
freezing winds, you have them that will breed such a frost in your bones, that
change of weather will make 'hem as rotten as the ground after a sudden thaw:
And for your blitting and burning winds, you have of them too, that will blast
and scorch most ambidextrously. Only the difference is, that there be but
sixteen points in the Card, where the wind can be unprofitable to a man: but
a woman has for the most part, the whole compass of her Card unprofitable,
which contains two and thirty points at least.


Alast. Then the Gra^marians methinkes did ill to make Ventus of the Masculine
Gender.


Cap. The Gra^marians my Lord were mere Scholars, and mere Scholars be
mere fools, and mere fools are easily deceived in matter of Gendring.


Alast. Impossible sir, they couple Genders by Book.


Capt. Right my Lord: so they all study Riders Dictionary, and therefore become
excellent Horsemen.


Enter Navarchus a Master of a Ship. Navar. News from Court to your Grace; a
stiff robustious Letter-Carrier makes much inquiry where he may be delivered
of some matters he has been in travail withal.


Alast. Cozenage and dissimulation help me, it is impossible to escape
discovering. D'sfoote I must walk stately, look scornfully, talk simply, and
be Noble at all points now. But it falls out something fortunately to be in the
Evening: let him have entrance.


Enter Assassino disguised. Assas. Health to your Grace.


Alast. As much to them that bring it: how fare our friends at Court?


Assa. As wanting no part of welfare but your wished presence.


Alast. Have you ought to impart that concerns us?


Assas. I have my Lord, and must have private conference with your Grace.


Alast. Attend us then on the Litto, where I Will presently meet you, and take
this soft Evening breath.


Assas. Heaven, Air, Place, Time, and all will fit thy death.


Exit Assas. Alast. By Jove methinks I begin to be my Craftes-Master and Lord
it handsomely. If it were as easy for a Villain to be a Lord, as a Lord to be
a villain, I would write noble instantly: get me a Herald for seven
shillings, or a frown to forswear himself, and draw my Pedigree as deep as
Romulus. Captain, as the wind serves, either on the Litto, or at my Lodging.
exit.


Capt. We will attend your Grace.


Nav. It Is strange that such a personage should thus obscurely travel.


Capt. Tush Navarchus, our commonwealth is among fishes, and our policy with
the winds, and therefore no marvel if Courtiers tricks savor not on our
palats.


Navar. Yet fearing disgrace above damnation, and loving a popular esteem more
then heaven; methinkes obscurity should fright 'hem.


Capt. Faith no; for you shall have a Courtier of the first Velvet head, when
the tide runs low, and in a place unknown, will familiarly turn you to his
old trade, accoutre his palfrey most neatly, and thank obscurity for drowning
the unfit honor he had lately slipped on and off.


Navar. It Is a disease indeed they have, to feel no touch of future honor,
nor taste any thing more than what lies before 'hem.


Capt. Tut, they be wise in that, for their conception being precipitate, and
their births rash, they knew their glories birth would be like the flies I
have seen by a River in Egypt, that begin to live in the morning, are at full
age by noone, and die before Sun set: and therefore their honor feeds like
mothes upon apparel, and objects merely present -- flashes -- flashes.


Navar. But such an imputation cannot stain his honor, whose grain taken in
the die of a Dukes blood, stands immaculate spite of all fortunes.


Capt. It Is true, and therefore peradventure parsimony invites him to this
obscurity, for I Will assure you, that to be miserable, and not fight, are grown
to be two right honorable qualities, --


Enter a Shipman. Shipm. Captain, you stand talking here of a Cock and a Bull,
while our rich fare is gone another way.


Capt. Who? my Lord the Prince?


Shipm. I your Lord the Prince.


Navar. Which way, for profits sake?


Shipm. That way that many Lords do for profits sake: downwards, downwards.


Cap. Prithee speak not in enigmas; be understood.


Shipm. In plain Dagger terms the Prince is slain.


Navar. D'foot it is sharp news.


Capt. By whom?


Shipm. Why, that swart Rutter that brought the message from Court, delivered
it in such keen terms, that it went to his heart: and when he had done,
tumbled him off the Litto into the water to catch Whitings. But two Merchants
spying it, raised the people and took him, and now the Governor is gone a
fishing after the Body.


Cap. This amazes me, done so suddenly.


Shipm. Death's a quick Carver when he comes in that shape.


Navar. Who set him on says he?


Shipm. Some valiant Squire or other, who is yet unknown, nor will the
Governor urge the knowledge, but sends him back to Court, that the Duke may
take notice of all.


Cap. Come, lets to the the Litto, and set our helps to find the Body.


Both. Content. Exeunt


Actus 4.
Scena 1.
Enter the Duke and a Messinger. Duke. But have you found the body?


Mess. We have my Lord
With long laborious search, it was three Tides
Locked in the arms of Neptune, who at length
Enforced by maine constraint resigned it up,
But all the face so mangled and deformed,
That but his clothes, naught could have made it known,
The which embalmed we straight closed up in Lead,
And with the murderer brought it to your Grace,
That after his due exequies performed,
You might quench sorrow in revenge, and draw
His blood, whose hand has spilt best part of yours.

Duke. Thou art deceived, good friend, 'twas not his hand,
But the just hand of Heaven that whips my sins,
And through my Veins powers out the innocent blood
Which I had spilt before; the hand that holds
The equal Balance to discern the weight
'Twixt Princes justice and their tyranny,
Measures their blessings and their plagues, alike,
To their fair virtues or black infamies,
And makes the horrid acts of murderous minds
But instruments of plague to punish guilt;
And pay us in the coin with which we hoped
To buy our gluttonous surfets. Such is the state
Of Princes privilege, that we may run
Into the depth of sin, and uncontrolled
Pull vengeance on our heads, while the smooth hand
Of pestilent flattery claps us on the back,
And gives us edge to villainy, till they see
Misery and desolation close us round;
Then they fly back, and gaze, as on a place
Stricken with furious thunder in a storm:
When every vulgar hand has laws, and fear
Of prying authority to hold him back,
And friendly enemies to upbraid him with
His faults, and keep him in the bounds of mercy,
Only our height bereaves us of these helps,
And we are soothed in vices, till we run
Beyond the reach of grace, and stand within
The shot of heaviest vengeance, which seldom comes
Short of our merits -- O my son! my son!
I shall grow madd with grief: my frighted conscience
Opens the Book, where I do view my sins,
And feel the furies with their wounding whips
Lashing my guilty soul to penitence.

Mess. I was unhappy
To be the messenger of this ill news. exeunt.

Enter Lucilio disguised as before, meeting at the other door Fioretta, her
hair down, strewing the way with green herbs and flowers. Luci. Who Is this?
Fioretta the Lady Iulia's woman? My heart! what means her habit?

Fioretta sings this following to some mournful tune. Come Lovers bring your
cares,
Bring sigh-perfumed sweets,
Bedew the grave with tears,
Where death and virtue meets:
Sigh for the hapless hour
That knit two hearts in one,
And only gave love power
To die when 'twas begun.

Lucil. Saving your mirth fair Lady, what preparation's this?


Fior. a Bridal sir; true love and greatness be divorced, and now they be
both going to be married to misfortune.


Lucil. 'Twas a marriage long since, my self was at the wedding: But be a
little plainer, and tell me who it is to be married?


Fior. Indeed Sir, Beauty, Virtue, and too much faith for a woman, are going to
the cold arms of a sullen Churl, one that consumes ere he lets go: yet he
is better than your other husbands are; he forsakes them not, leaves them not
in misery, he wooes them not with flatteries, and poisons with unkindnesse:
he never swears, and lies, but continues faithful till Doomes-day. Who be
you?


Lucil. A stranger in your City, a poor Husbandman.


Fior. A poor Husband? then thou art a poor dissembler, a poor murderer: O
you husbands kill more than scurvie Physicians, or a plaguey Summer. But art a
stranger?


Lucil. A very stranger here.


Fior. Why that is all one, thou can not be a stranger to her fame, if thou
have lived but a month in the world. Poor innocent Althea makes her last
marriage, and I am one of her Bridemaids.


Lucil. To whom for loves sake?


Fior. To her grave for love's sake, an honest Husband: it is better then the
Dukes son, that sent her from the City, to dye in the Mountains? Ah 'twas
unkindly done, not to go nor send after her! yet poor Lord he is killed,
dead too now, and has met her Hearse here --

So those two souls that never were borne to have

A Nuptial Bed, have found a Nuptial Grave.

Beauty and Virtue strove
Who should adorn her most,
Till faith conspired with love,
And all their labors crossed.

Lucil. Antonio killed! Althea buried!
Then thou have lived Lucilio to behold
The height of mischief, and the worst of chance,
And thou may dare thy angry Stars to inflict
What ere they can effect, that is worse than this.
Murderd thy friends! ruined their ancient names!
Hateful to thy Parents, loathsome to thy self!
O it is high time to die, and I do wrong
Althea's constancy to breath an hour
After I know she has prevented me.
Methinkes I hear love chide my backwardness.
And tell me how unworthy I am grown,
To have two friends so firmly virtuous,
Constant and loyal, and outlive them both,
Yea be their Murderer, and stand alive
Spectator at their funeral, as I would bid
The rest weep on, whilst I give aim to tears,
And mark who grieves most deep at my foul actions.

Lucilio stands aside. Enter at one door the Coarse of the Dukes supposed
Son, borne by Mourners, and following it the Duke and Duchess, with others,
in mourning robes. At the other door, the Hearse for Althea, with the Scarf
which Antonio brought from the Shepherds, laid a cross it, and borne by four
maids in black, with their hair disheveld, and Garlands of dead Myrtle, or
other leaves, on their heads, her Mother with some Mourners following. Torches
before both, and meeting they stay. Duke. So then, let Fortune make a period
here,
Since we are met just in the midst of woe,
And stand upon the Center of mishap.
Whence we may see the full circumference
Of all that Sphere, that bounds the power of Fate.
Come Madam we will mix our tears a while,
Dropping them jointly on the Marble Tombs
Of our dead Issue, till the stones receive
Large Characters of grief, carved by the drops
That ceaselesse flow from our too late laments.

Iul. Great Lord, if woes with woes may be compared,
Or to the measure of our cause of grief
We might in sad contention drop our tears,
Shower for your drop, Pound for your dram of woe
My breast and eyes would yield, which now are grown
A boundless harbor for the depth of care.
For though we meet in this, that both have lost
The dearest treasures of desired life,
Yet has your Grace a partner in distress
A comfort to the residue of your years,
And therefore hope that Heaven may yet restore
This ruin of your House. Besides you have
The body of your son, on whose dead Coarse
You may bestow your tears, and honor him
With fitting place and Royal exequies:
When Heaven has shut those comforts from my heart,
Left me a widow to sustain the weight
Of all this burden, and no partner else
To bring mine aged hairs unto the grave
But still repining grief: and am denied
The ashes of my child, on whose cold Hearse
Mine eyes might pay those tributary tears
Which her misfortune, and my woes exact,
And only can embrace an empty shrine.
Yet my good Lord, I often forget my cares
To grieve at yours, and wish Althea's death
Might have sufficed the anger of the Fates,
Without Lucilio's blood, whose guiltless fall
Has struck a sadness through th'appalled looks
Of all your subjects, made them stand amazed,
And wonder there should live upon the earth
Envy enough to blast such graceful hopes.

Duke. Let me be open Madam to your love,
It Is but the doom of Justice I sustain;
I know I wronged your daughters innocence,
And only know it now, for plagues make known
That, often, for sin, which once we thought was none.

Iul. No my good Lord, she was not innocent,
In that she bounded not her loosest thoughts
Within our element but would admit
The dangerous fires, of ambitious love
Into her Virgin breast, that is safelyest knit
Where all proportion justly equals it.

Duch. Wrong not her worth good Madam, the power of death
Is weak to stain her name, and we were blessed.
If such perfection, joined unto our Blood,
Had with our son succeeded in the Throne
Of this unhappy and dejected State.
Believe me Madam I did ever love
Althea's Virtues, and was inly glad
When by that Stratagem my son had freed
Her innocence (as I protest I thought)
And wished her escape as safe from that injustice
As could my heart desire.

Iul. Alas good Madam, I have felt your Grace
Still loving to my daughters poor deserts,
And nothing did increase my sorrows more
Then that I wanted means how to requite
Your Graces love.

Duke. Come, we forget our selves in Ceremonies,
And waste the time, whose every instant yields
Scarce space enough for that large task of grief
Sorrow exacts each instant from our hearts,
Good Madam we will consecrate one Tomb
To both their Memories; and since in life
Their hearts were so united by Loves hand,
In death their Graves shall join: so will ourselves
Bequeath the remnant of our days from hence,
You to sad cares, and we to penitence.

Exeunt the Torch-Bearers and both Coarses joining; the Duke, Duchess, L.
Iulia, etc. following. Lucil. You to sad cares, and we to poenitence --
Why then you will feed upon the bitter fruits
Of your ambition, and by experience find,
Virtue, not Honor is heaven unto the mind.
Dear Father, I conceive your grief, as true
As is my love, and feel methinkes a sting,
That spurs me onward to prevent the plagues
My loss will bring upon your hoary age,
And makes me think I hear the frequent voice
Of potent Nature whisper to mine ear
The duty that I owe, and bids me meet
Those mischiefs quickly, by discovering me:
But the perswasion's weak when I must owe
More then a duty, or all Natures self
To the chaste merits of Althea's love,
Who was the first I murdered; then the name
Of holy friendship, which my request abused
In loved Antonio, whom I murdered next:
My debt's above a life, which though I give,
My ghost must be a slave to pay the rest,
And their deserts stand yet unsatisfied.
But o ye Spirits of truth! whose constant faiths
Merit perhaps to hear these last laments
My dying soul powers forth; be pleased to take
The poor oblation of a loathsome life,
Which I as gladly vow unto your loves,
As misery would turn it self to bliss.
And since I was a murderer to your worths,
I Will choose that death that murderers do pass;
And thou had lived Antonio, if thy love
Had not before withheld me from the fall,
And saving only me has murdered all. exit.

Enter Antonio and Lady Iulia. Anton. Madam,
My love to you and to that virtuous Lord
Could do no less: I do assure your Ladyship
The murderer has confessed, in hope of life,
The circumstances, means, and opportunity
Which you so fitly urged, and has incensed
The Duke so violently against your self,
That he has vowed your death, and does intend
A sharp revenge to all your family.
And but I know Lucilio yet does live,
Believe me Madam I should hate the fact,
And be the first should feed my thirsty eyes
With their best blood, that spilt least part of his.

Iul. Alas Antonio, what would you have me do,
When I beheld my daughter murdered thus
'Twixt love and hate, and I no means of help
To take revenge, or comfort to my grief?

Anto. Well Madam let us not stand to expostulate
The cause; the act was foul, and (but the hand
Of Heaven turned it from him against who^ you meant it)
Hateful, and worthy of the deep'st revenge.
Your way is now to shun the furious wrath
The Duke's enflamed with, and for a while
Lie close in some disguise, till the lost Prince
Make his return, who doubtless will ere long
Give notice to my self where he remains:
And for your farther assurance Lady, I Will take
Some strange attire with you, and we will both
Be present at the Execution.
Where you shall hear perhaps the latest words
The murderer will speak against your self,
And in the presence of the Duke avouch
Your guiltiness.

Iul. Thanks good Antonio, There the gift is free,
When it is bestowed on deepest misery. Exeunt.

Enter Althea in her Shepherdesses apparel over her own, which she putting
off lays aside. Alth. Lie there thou gentle weed, that have prolonged
A weary life, thou whose dissembling shape
Has helped me reach the place which drew that life
As an attractive Lodestone to it is end.
Some friendly Passinger will for this reward
Bestow perhaps a burial on my Coarse;
And be my death as freely exempt from sight.
As is my grief, that never innocent eyes
May be infected with those fumes of guilt
My latest gasp breathes forth, reserved till now
To be unfortunate in all save this,
That I shall sacrifice my dearest blood
Upon that Altar where Lucilio dyed,
And let one air receive our joined spirits
And sacrifices to Faiths Deity.
She goes up the Rock quickly, and standing ready. And witness now you
zealous thoughts of love,
Witness the vows my affection held so dear,
Enter Lucilio in his own habit, and walks a turn. My soul comes
unconstrained to you dear Lord,
And parts as freely from a gladsome heart,
As ere it wished to enjoy the lively sight
Of your desired presence -- She spies him as below.
-- Awake my fancy, do mine eyes conspire
To aggravate my grief, or does the strong
Imagination of my loss present the shape
Of his dead person to my troubled sense?

Lucil. What strange confused passions 'gin to raise
A stormy combat 'twixt my mind and death!
Though safely now arrived within the Port
Where for exchange of breath I shall regaine
The long desired presence of her soul
That hovers in expectation of my coming.

Alth. Methinkes I sleep, that, thus illusive shows
Do mock my apprehension: or is it decreed
That even in death I must endure affliction?
And die in height of woe? How like his pace,
His gesture, shape, and countenance! true constant spirit!
(That would not be unless thou might be true)
Did not my greedy sight distract my thoughts
To feed upon thy shadow, and make me forget
My business next in hand: I should have flowne
To be a shadow, and have walked with dead
Lucilio -- As hearing somewhere the voice of his name.

Lucil. Lucilio! was it my fond conceit? or else (my self Standing betwixt the
bounds of life and death)
Her ghost, that looks each minute for my approach,
Thinks my stay long, and calls upon my name?
I come Althea, swift as break the winds
From out the Eolian Caves, give me but space
To take my flight from off that --
He looks up to the Rock, and seeing her stand a while amazed. Bright Angel!
Goddess! whatsoever thou art
That have assumed that shape to adorn thy state,
And give a better luster to thy Deity;
Do not delude my woes, nor make my death
More miserable then my self have done.

Alth, It does invite me speak, and with his silent looks
Seems to entreat a word, yet my faint heart
Throbbing with fear, denies to second speech.

Lucil. Be what thou will; I know no spirit of night
Durst to attempt that form, that never was made
But to invest a soul more fair and pure
Then are the Spheres. Ghost! Angel! Goddess! Nymph!
Speak, daine a word to tell me what thou art,
That thus appearst in such a glorious shape
To intercept my death? Art thou an Angel
That thus would show the world what they have lost
By seeing her heavenly form? Or art thou else
Some spirit of Diviner excellence
That have put on that shadow, thine own nature
To beautify? Or does Althea's ghost
Come thus to meet and chide my slothfulness?
Or has thy worth chaste Nymph, deserved to escape
The hand of death, and made thy perfect self
All soul, immortal, and an unmixt spirit,
That those rich virtues which great nature heapt
In thy creation, might by envious death
Never be dissolved, nor the cold senseless earth
Embrace and taint thy pure delicious beauty,
For which the Stars grew envious to the world?
What ere thou art, if thou have sense of grief
But correspondent to the shape thou bear,
Add not more torment to the depth of woe
That does accompany my death, and urge
No more the sight and memory of her
Whom I have wronged; envy has left me naught
But life to yield in satisfaction,
Which here I come to tender as thy due:
Or if thou doubtst the payment, and did come
To take a view how willingly I dyed;
Then be my witness that the chased Stagge
Flies not more swiftly to the cooling streams
Then I to death --

He runs up to the Rock, where both meeting, show passions of fear. Alth.
Stay.


Lucil. Speak.


Alth. O stay dear love!


Lucil. Speak, speak thou heavenly spirit,
And tell me since thy self art made Divine,
What makes thee come in confines of the wretched,
And mix thy self with us whose earthly loades
Detain us yet in life and misery?

Alth. Why, I do live.


Lucil. I know thou do, thou were not framed to die,
Nor at thy birth, when Heaven and Nature joined
To give thee those rich Dowries thou enjoy'st,
Did they intend to make such excellence
Mortal and subject to the stroke of death.
But where deficient Nature could extend
Her force no farther to preserve thy life,
Heaven would supply the want, and turn thy state
To immortality, yet why should thou,
When I have seen thy Funerals performed,
Come to afflict me, and augment my grief?

Alth. Sweet love, if you do live, as fear and hope
'Twixt adverse passions make me doubtful yet,
Know that I live as when we parted last,
Nor ere was yet interred.

Lucil. No, no, the earth grew feeling of her loss,
And grieving to be robbed of such a jemme,
Refused to shut that treasure in her womb
Where foul corruption must have tainted it:
Or did my fortunes yet beyond thy death
Pursue thee farther, and bereaving first
Thy innocent life, in some forsaken wood
Leave thee unburyed, and thy restless ghost
Comes now to seek a Sepulcher of me?

Alth. Great Lord, recall your self, and give me leave
To speak what will resolve this doubtful maze
In which your senses wander, and can find
No passage out. Since I last left your Grace
Traveling in that disguise, I lost indeed
Camilla, poor Companion of my cares:
But hearing that your self in shape of me
Was by your Fathers doom thrown off this Rock,
Knowing my sufferance guilty of your death,
I came to end my life where you had dyed,
And expiate the murder with my blood
Where 'twas committed on your guiltless self,
Reserved by Heavens mild hand to this blessed hour
Wherein our innocent loves might once more meet
In spite of envy.

Lucil. Lives my Althea then?
Then live Althea still! But speak no more
Lest the vast Tide of joy o'rwhelme my soul,
And kill as quick as grief: Or my sad heart
Unable to sustain this burden of wonder,
Sink and yield vanquished. I have much to ask,
But let it rest: yet tell me how thou far'dst
In this long banishment? -- stay, who comes yonder?
Now the wind's turned, and fortunes lavish hand
Powers down content beyond expectation.

Enter Duke and Duchess with Officers bringing Assassino to execution, after
them the L. Iulia and Antonio both disguised. Duke. Come thou inhumane murderer
of my son,
Traitor unto thy Countries state and safety,
And now before the stroke of Justice seize
Thy hateful life, resolve the wondering world
Why the slight motives of a woman's words
Should win thee to so foul and horrid crimes?

Assas. What I have said your self are witness to,
Nor needs it be renewed; nor can I add
One word or syllable to make it more.

Duke. Then let the Execution proceed,
That we may do this latest Exequie
To his wronged ghost, which is to see his blood
Revenged with blood of those that murdered him,
As we have vowed to do, and not to leave
These weeds of sorrow, till we have consumed
The race and name of them that did conspire
In this abhorred Action: And would it might
Suffice the injuries we did his life,
Thus to revenge his too untimely death;
And from that height --
He sees them on the Rock, and stands amazed. Am I awake, or dream I? Is it
my fancy
Breeds this delusive show in my weak brain?
Or do their souls come to condemn our guilt,
More co^scious of their death, then who^ we have brought
To die for it? See, do thy dazzled eyes
Perceive that object which my self beholds:
Or is it some shadow that abuses me?
And none but me?

Duch. My son my Lord, my son!
More known by's ghost, then if his living form
Had met mine eyes: o speak to him my Lord!

Duke. If thou be such as is thy semblance,
By all that duty that thy life did owe
Unto a Parent; by the Bands once due,
Of Love and Nature, that unites the souls
Of children and their careful nourishers,
I do adjure thee tell, why in this amidst
Of day you come thus to renew our grief?
What has there wanted to your Funerals,
When we have wept us dry, and spent our tears
More thick than winter showers upon your Hearse?
Done all the Rites and Exequies were due
To your interring? And have vowed revenge
To all that did conspire in that foul Act
Of thy too guiltless murder

Lucil. Know that we are returned
From out those Seats of Bliss where we were placed
By your unjust proceedings, to make known
That what you did was against the will of Fate.
For see, what you denied upon the earth,
The power of Heaven does grant, and has confirmed
Our long-borne loves with an Eternal peace:
Where our two souls in sweetest union knit,
Enjoy their Nuptials out of Envies reach.
Yet know there are some punishments reserved
For the vile Treasons practiced in pursuit
Of our unmerited wrongs; and that their sin
Is marked for plagues, that seek by force to break
The League that Love and Faith do jointly knit.

Duke. Then let 'hem fall, we are prepared for woes
Though shot as thick as Hail from out the Clouds,
Our guilt is greater than those punishments,
Or all our future plagues can expiate.
The Duke and Duchess both kneel. Yet on our bended knees thus low to earth
As we did both conspire in that foul plott
We here entreat your pardons, and withal
Wish the offended Heavens would be appeased
With Vows and Orisons; and would your ghosts
Forget those injuries we did your loves
And rest in peace with us, and with the world.

Lucil. Father we will, but should we live again,
You would not yet relent, and yield our loves
The sufferance you see the Heavens have done.

Duke. By Heavens I would; nor should the potent'st hand
Of earth resist your present Nuptials.

Lucil. Then we will be ghosts no more, but ever sue
For your mild sufferance of our happiness.

Come down, both kneel. Duke. Wonder and amazement do not oppress me!


Duch. O we are blessed beyond desert!


Alth. Yet is my joy but small amidst your many,
Since you have burnt my innocent Mother,
And razd our Family.

Iul. No my dear daughter, see I safely live
Never blessed till now, and now o'r-joyd with bliss,

Lucil. Then joys would be complete had I not lost
By thy vile murderous hand so dear a friend.

Anton. Your friend still lives, and never felt his life
Sweet till this instant, when I may behold
These joys combined.

Duke. Why then there nothing wants
But celebration of your Nuptials,
Which we will do with greater signs of joy,
Then we had grief in your supposed Funerals.
But whose death is this murderer guilty of?

Ant. Only Alastors, a fellow as wicked as himself.

Duke. We give him then his life, but banish him
From our Dominions: and for this strange event
We will expect a farther leisure
To hear the whole discovery of the chance,
And leave the rest to mirth, that shall command
In all our Feasts, and whom we will Crown as King,
To be chief Lord in all our Banqueting.

Exeunt omnes. Omnia vincit amor; and nos cedamus amori.
The Epilogue.
IVdging Spectators all, for this we know,
That either you are such, or should be so,
Now to your censures lowly as his mind
Our Author all submits, and hopes to find
In such a fair assembly no such eyes
As scoute at Theaters, and come like flies
To taint the innocent'st labors with their tongues,
Raising their richest gains from others wrongs:
If such an envious Canker hap to lurk
Here, and has only sat to tax the work
With curious scanning; let that envy know
He scorns his censure only, and can show
Against all such labored hisses, Perseus Shield,
In such a fearlesse Pen as never shall yield,
'Till his cold merits do his worth bewray,
Or make himself a mewing Statua.
Nor is he of those self-admiring Apes
That think none's features fair, whose birth escapes
Their laboring brains; he hears and sees, and knows,
And yields all reverence to the worth of those
Whom solid Art extols, and unto such
He humbly vailes his Scene, that for the touch
Of unaffecting censures hither came;
He sought your mirth more than a Poets name.
FINIS.

