EPICOENE, OR The silent Woman. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1609. By the
Children of her Majesty's REVELS.

The Author B. I.

HORAT. Vt sis tu similis Coeli, Byrrhique latronum,
Non ego sim Capri, neque Sulci. Cur metuas me?
LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, and are to be sold by John Brown at his
shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1620.

TO THE TRVELY NOBLE, BY ALL TITLES, Sir Francis Stuart:
SIR,
MY hope is not so nourished by example, as it will conclude, this dumb piece
should please you, by cause it has pleased others before: but by trust, that
when you have read it, you will find it worthy to have dis-pleas'd none. This
makes, that I now number you, not only in the Names of favor, but the Names of
justice, to what I write; and do, presently, call you to the exercise of that
noblest, and manlyest virtue: as coveting rather to be freed in my fame, by the
authority of a Judge, then the credit of an Undertaker. Read therefore, I
pray you, and censure. There is not a line, or syllable in it changed from the
simplicity of the first Copy. And, when you shall consider, through the
certain hatred of some, how much a man's innocence may be endangered by an
uncertain accusation; you will, I doubt not, so begin to hate the iniquity
of such natures, as I shall love the contumely done me, whose end was so
honorable, as to be wiped off by your sentence.

Your unprofitable, but true lover, BEN. IONSON.

The Persons of the Play.
Morose, A Gentleman that loves no noise. Daup. Eugenie, A Knight, his nephew.
Clerimont, A Gentleman, his friend. True-wit, Another friend. Epicoene, A young
Gent. supposed the silent Woman. Ioh. Daw, A Knight, her servant. Amorous la
Fool, A Knight also. Thom. Otter, A land, and sea Captain. Cutberd, A Barber.
Mute, One of Morose his servants. Mad. Haughty, Ladies Collegiates. Mad.
Centaure, Ladies Collegiates. Mrs. Mauis. Ladies Collegiates. Mrs. Trusty. The
Lady Haughties woman. Mrs. Otter. The Captains wife. Pretenders. Parson.
Pages. Servants.
THE SCENE LONDON.

EPICOENE, OR The silent Woman.
PROLOGVE.
TRuth says, of old, the art of making Plays
Was to content the people; and their praise
Was to the Poet money, wine, and bays.
But in this age, a sect of Writers are,
That, only, for particular likings care,
And will taste nothing that is populare.
With such we mingle neither brains, nor breasts;
Our wishes, like to those (make public feasts)
Are not to please the Cooks tastes, but the guests.
Yet, if those cunning palates hither come,
They shall find guests entreatie, and good room;
And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
That, when they leave their seats, shall make 'hem say,
Who wrote that piece, could so have wrote a Play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to present all Custard, or all Tart,
And have no other meats, to bear a part,
Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
The Poet prays you then, with better thought
To sit; and, when his Cates are all in brought,
Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
Be fit for Ladies: some for Lords, Knights, Squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and Citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Fryars.
Nor is it, only, while you keep your seat
Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eat
A week at Ord'narie^, on his broken meat:
If his Muse be true,
Who commends her to you.
Another. THe ends of all, who for the Scene do write,
Are, Occasioned by some persons impertinent exception. or should be, to
profit, and delight.
And still 't has been the praise of all best times,
So persons were not touched, to tax the crimes.
Then, in this Play, which we present tonight,
And make the object of your ear, and sight,
On forfeit of your selves, think nothing true,
Lest so you make the maker to judge you.
For he knows, Poet never credit gained
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well feigned.
If any, yet, will (with particular slight
Of application) wrest what he does write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
They make a Libell, which he made a Play.

Act I.
Scene I.
Clerimont, Boy, True-wit. He comes out making himself ready. HAVE you got the
Song yet perfect I ga'you, Boy?


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Cle. Let me hear it.


Boy. You shall, Sir, but i'saith let no body else.


Cle. Why, I pay?


Boy. It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in Town, Sir, besides me a
perfect deal of ill will at the Mansion you wot of, whose Lady is the
Argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing under a man that comes there.


Cle. I think, and above a man too, if the truth were racked out of you.


Boy. No faith, I Will confess before, Sir. The Gentlewomen play with me, and
throw me of the bed; and carry me into my Lady; and she kisses me with her
oiled face; and puts a Perruke of my head; and asks me an^ I will wear her
Gown; and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow of the ear, and calls me
Innocent, and lets me go.


Cle. No marvel, if the door be kept shut against your Master, when the
entrance is so easy to you -- well Sir, you shall go there no more, lest I
be feign to seek your voice in my Ladies Rushes, a fortnight hence, Sing,
Sir. Boy sings.


True. Why, here is the man that can melt away his time, and never feels it!
what, between his Mistress abroad, and his Engle at home, high Fare, soft
Lodging, fine Clothes, and his Fiddle; he thinks the hours ha'no wings, or
the day no Post-horse. Well, Sir Gallant, were you struck with the Plague this
minute, or condemned to any capital punishment to morrow, you would begin
then to think, and value every Article of your time, esteem it at the true
rate, and give all for it.


Cle. Why, what should a man do?


True. Why, nothing: or that, which when it is done, is as idle. Harken after the
next Horse-race, or Hunting-match; lay Wagers, praise Puppy, or Pepper-corne,
White-foot, Franklin; Horses of the time. swear upon White-maynes party; sp^nd
aloud, that my Lords may hear you; visit my Ladies at night, and be able to
give 'hem the Character of every Bowler, or Better of the Green. These be the
things, wherein your fashionable men exercise themselves, and I for company.


Cle. Nay, if I have thy authority, I Will not leave yet. Come, the other are
considerations, when we come to have gray heads, and weak hammes, moist eyes,
and shrunk members. we think she sleeps: nor, when the doors are shut,
should men be inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for us to see their
Perrukes put on, their false Teeth, their Complexion, their Eyebrows, their
Nails? you see guilders will not work, but enclosed. They must not discover,
how little serve, with the help of art, to adorn a great deal. How long did
the Canuas hang before Ald-gate? were the people suffered to see the Cities
Love, and Charity, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and
burnished? No. No more should Servants approach their Mistresses, but when they
are complete, and finished.


Cle. Well said, my True-wit.


True. And a wise Lady will keep a guard always upon the place, that she may
do things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a Chamber, where the
poor Madame, for haste, and troubled, snatched at her Perruke, to cover her
baldness: and put it on, the wrong way.


Cle. O prodigy!


True. And the vn-conscionable Knave held her in Complement an hour, with that
reuerst face, when I still looked when she should talk from the the other side.


Cle. Why, thou should have releeu'd her.


True. No faith, I let her alone, as we will let this argument, if you please,
and pass to another, When saw you Dauphine, Eugenie?


Cle. Not these three days. Shall we go to him this morning? he is very
melancholique, I hear.


True Sick of the Uncle? is he? I met that stiff piece of Formalitie, his
Uncle, yesterday, with a huge Turbant of Night-Caps on his head, buckled over
his ears.


Cle. O, that is his custom when he walks abroad. He can endure no noise, man.


True. So I have heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made?
they say, he has been upon diverse Treaties with the Fish-wiues, and
Orenge-women; and Articles propounded between them: marry, the
Chimney-sweepers will not be drawn in.


Cle. No, nor the Broome-men: They stand out stiffely. He cannot endure a
Costard-monger, he swounes if he hear one.


True. Me thinks, a Smith should be ominous.


Cle. Or any Hammer-man. A Brasier is not suffered to dwell in the Parish, nor
an Armorer. He would have hanged a Pewterers' prentice once up on a
Shroue-tuesdayes Riot, for being of that Trade, when the rest were quit.


True. A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau^boyes?


Cle. Out of his senses. The Waights of the City have a Pension of him, not to
come near that Ward. This Youth practiced on him, one night, like the
Bell-man; and never left till he had brought him down to the door, with a
Long-Sword: and there left him flourishing with the Air.


Boy. Why, Sir! he has chosen a street to lie in, so narrow at both ends,
that it will receive no Coaches, nor Carts, nor any of these common noyses: and
therefore, we that love him, devise to bring him in such as we may, now and
then, for his exercise, to breath him. He would grow restie else in his ease.
His Virtue would rust without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to
come down with the Dogs of some four Parishes that way, and I thank him,
he did; and cried his Games under Master Morose's windore: till he was sent
crying away, with his head made a most bleding Spectacle to the multitude. And,
another time, a Fencer, marching to his Prize, had his Drum most tragically
run through, for taking that street in his way, at my request.


True. A good Wagge. How does he for the Bells?


Cle. O, in the Queens time, he was wont to go out of Town every Satterday
at ten a clock, or on Holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sickness, the
perpetuity of ringing has made him devise a room, with double walls, and
treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calle'd: and there he lives by
Candlelight. He turned away a man last week, for having a pair of new
Shoes, that creak'd. And this fellow wayts on him now, in Tennis-court Sockes,
or Slippers sol'd with Wool: and they talk each to other, in a Trunk. See
who comes here.


Act I. Scene II.
Dauphine, Tru-wit, Clerimont. HOw now! what all you Sirs? dumb?


True. Struck into stone almost, I am here, with Tales of thine Uncle! There
was never such a Prodigy heard of.


Daup. I would you would once loose this subject, my masters, for my sake. They
are such as you are, that have brought me into that predicament, I am, with him.


True. How is that?


Daup. Marry, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. He thinks, I, and my
company are Authors of all the ridiculous Acts, and Moniments are told of him.


True. Slid, I would be the Author of more, to vex him, that purpose deserves
it: it gives thee law of plaguing him. I Will tell thee what I would do. I would
make a false Almanake; get it printed: and then have him drawn out on a
Coronation day to the Tower-Wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the
Ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! he cannot, man. Art not thou next of blood, and
his Sisters Son?


Daup. I but he will thrust me out of it, he vows, and marry.


True. How! that is a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venture on a
Wife?


Cle. Yes: why, thou art a stranger, it seems, to his best trick, yet. He has
imployd a fellow this half year, all over England, to harken him out a dumb
woman; be she of any form, or any quality, so she be able to bear children:
her silence is Dowry enough, he says.


True. But, I trust to God, he has found none.


Cle. No, but he has heard of one that is lodged in the next street to him, who
is exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but six words a
day. And her he is about now, and shall have her.


True. Is It possible! who is his agent in the business?


Cle. Marry, a Barber, one Cut-berd: an honest fellow, one that tells Dauphine
all here.


True. Why, you oppress me with wonder! A woman, and a Barber, and love no
noise!


Cle. Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knacke with his
Sheeres, or his fingers: and that continence in a Barber he thinks so emient
a virtue, as it has made him chief of his counsel.


True. Is the Barber to be seen? or the Wench?


Cle. Y^^, that they are.


True. I p^ay thee, Dauphine, let us go thither.


Daup I have some business now: I cannot in faith.


True. You shall have no business shall make you neglect this, Sir, we will make
her talk, believe it; or if she will not, we can give out, at least so much
as shall interrupt the Treaty: we will break it. Thou art bound in conscience,
when he suspects thee without cause to torment him.


Daup. Not I, by any means. I ll give no suffrage to 't. He shall never ha
that plea against me, that I opposed the least phant'sie of his. Let it lie
upon my Stars to be guilty, I Will be innocent.


True. Yes, and be poor, and beg; do, innocent: when some Groom of his has
got him an Heir, or this Barber, if he himself cannot. Innocent! I pray thee,
Ned, where lies she? let him be innocent, still.


Cle. Why, right over against the Barbers; in the house, where Sir John Daw
lies.


True. You do not mean to confound me!


Cle. Why?


True. Does he, that would marry her, know so much?


Daup. Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much finer!
what is his christen-name? I have forgot.


Cle. Si Amorous La-foole.


Boy. The Gentleman is here below, that ownes that name.


Cle. Heart, he is come, to inuit me to Dinner, I hold my life.


Daup. Like enough: pray thee, let us have him up.


Cle. Boy, marshall him.


Boy. With a Truncheon, Sir?


Cle. A way, I beseech you. I Will make him tell us his Pedigree, now; and what
meat he has to Dinner; and, who are his Guests; and, the whole course of his
fortunes: with a breath.


Act I. Scene IIII.
La-Foole Clerimont, Dauphine. S'Aue, dear Sir Dauphine, honored Master
Clerimont.


Cle. Sir Amorous! you have very much honested my Lodging, with your presence.


La-f. Good faith it is a fine Lodging! almost, as delicate a Lodging, as mine.


Cle. Not so, Sir.


La-f. Excuse me, Sir, if it were in the Strand, I assure you. I am come, Master
Clermont, to entreat you wait upon two or three Ladies, to dinner, to day.


Cle. How, Sir! wait upon 'hem? did you ever see me carry Dishes?


La-f. No, Sir, dispense with me; I meant, to bear 'hem company.


Cle. O, that I will, Sir. The doubtfulnesse of your phrase, believe it, Sir,
would breed you a quarrel, once an hour, with the terrible Boys, if you
should but keep 'hem fellowship a day.


La-f. It should be extremely against my will, Sir, if I contested with any man.


Cle. I believe it, Sir; where hold you your Feast?


La-f. At Tom Otters, Sir.


Daup. Tom Otter? what is he?


La-f. Captain Otter, Sir; he is a kind of Gamester: but he has had command,
both by Sea, and by Land.


Daup. O, then he is animal amphibium?


La-f. I, Sir: his Wife was the rich China-woman, that the Courtiers visited so
often, that gave the rare entertaynment. She commands all at home.


Cle. Then, she is Captain Otter?


La-f. You say very well, Sir: she is my Kins-woman, a La-Foole by the Mother
side, and will inuit, any great Ladies, for my sake.


Daup. Not of the La-Fooles of Essex?


La-f. No, Sir, the La-Fooles of London.


Cle. Now, h'is in.


La-f. They all come out of our House, the La-fooles of the North, the
La-fooles of the West, the La-Fooles of the East, and South -- we are as
ancient a Family, as any is in Europe -- but I my self am descended lineally
of the French La-Fooles -- and, we do bear for our Coat Yellow, or Or,
checkered Azure, and Gules, and some three or four Colors more, which is a
very noted Coat, and has, sometimes been solemnly worn by diverse Nobility
of our House -- but let that go, Antiquity is not respected now -- I had a
brace of fat Does sent me Gentlemen, and half a dosen of Phesants, a dosen or
two of God wits, and some other Foul, which I would have eaten, while they are
good, and in good company -- there will be a great Lady, or two, my Lady
Haughty, my Lady Centaure, Mistress Dol Mauis -- and they come a'purpose, to see
the silent Gentlewoman, Mistress Epicoene, that honest Sir John Daw has promised
to bring thither -- and then, Mistress Trusty, my Ladies Woman, will be there
too, and this Honorable Knight, Sir Dauphine, with your self, Master
Clerimont -- and we will be very merry, and have Fiddlers, and dance -- I have
been a mad Wag, in my time, and have spent some Crowns since I was a Page
in Court, to my Lord Lofty, and after, my Ladies Gentleman-usher, who got me
knighted in Ireland, since it pleased my elder Brother to dye -- I had as fair
a gold Ierkin on that day, as any was worn in the Iland-Voyage, or at Caliz,
none disprays'd, and I came over in it hither, showed my self to my friends,
in Court, and after went down to my Tenants, in the Country, and suruai'd my
Lands, let new Leases, took their Money, spent it in the eye of the Land here,
upon Ladies -- and now I can take up at my pleasure.


Daup. Can you take up Ladies, Sir?


Cle. O, let him breathe, he has not recouer'd.


Daup. Would I were your half, in that commodity --


La-f. No, Sir, excuse me: I meant Money, which can take up any thing. I have
another Guest, or two, to inuit, and say as much to, Gentlemen. I Will take my
leave abruptly, in hope you will not fail -- Your Servant.


Daup. We will not fail you, Sir precious La-Foole; but she shall, that your
Ladies come to see: if I have credit, before Sir Daw.


Cle. Did you ever hear such a Wind-fucker, as this?


Daup. Or, such a Rooke, as the other! that will betray his Mistress, to be
seen. Come, it is time, we prevented it.


Cle. Go.


Act II.
Scene I.
Morose, Mute. CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this
Trunk, to save my Servants the labor of speech, and mine ears, the discord
of sounds? Let me see: all Discourses, but mine own, afflict me, they seem
harsh, impertinent, and irksome. Is it not possible, that thou should
answer me, by Signs, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? speak not, though I
question you. You have taken the Ring, off from the street door, as I bad you?
answer me not, by speech, but by silence; unless, At the breaches, still the
fellow makes legs, or signs it be otherwise ( --) very good. And, you have
fastened on a thick quilt, or flockbed, on the outside of the door; that if
they knock with their Daggers, or with Brick-bats, they can make no noise? but
with your leg, your answer, unless it be otherwise ( --) very good. This
is not, only, fit modesty in a Servant, but good state, and discretion in a
Master. And you have been with Cutberd, the Barber, to have him come to me? (
--) good. And, he will come presently? answer me not but with your leg,
unless it be otherwise: if it be otherwise, shake your head, or shrugge (
--) so. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wise in these! and it is a frugall, and
comely gravity. How long will it be, ere Cutberd come? stay, if an hour,
hold up your whole hand; if half an hour, two fingers; if a quarter, one; (
--) good: half a quarter? it is well. And have you given him a Key, to come in
without knocking? ( --) good. And, is the Lock oyld, and the Hinges, to day? (
--) good. And the Quilting of the stayres no where worn out, and bare ( --)
very good. I see, by much doctrine, and impulsion, it may be effected: stand
by. The Turk, in this divine discipline, is admirable, exceeding all the
Potentates of the Earth; still waited on by Mutes; and all his Commands so
executed; yea, even in the War (as I have heard) and in his Marches, most of
his Charges, and directions, given by Signs, and with silence: and exquisite
art! and I am heartily ashamed, and angry oftentimes, that the Princes of
Christendom, should suffer a Barbarian, to transcend 'hem in so high a point
of felicity. I will practice it, hereafter. How now? oh! oh! what Villain?
what Prodigy of Mankind is that? look. Oh! One winds a Horn without.
Again. cut his throat, cut his throat: what Murderer, Hell-hound, Devil can
this be?


Mut. It is a Post from the Court --


Mor. Out Rogue, and must thou blow thy Horn, too?


Mut. Alas, it is a Post from the Court, Sir, that says, he must speak with
you, pain of death --


Mor. Pain of thy life, be silent.


Act II. Scene II.
True-wit, Morose, Cutherd. BY your leave, Sir (I am a stranger here) is your
name, Master Morose? is your name, Master Morose? F^shes! Pythagoreans all!
this is strange! What say you, Sir, nothing? Has Harpocrates been here, with
his Club, among you? well Sir, I will believe you to be the man, at this time:
I will venture upon you, Sir. Your friends at Court commend 'hem to you, Sir --


( Mor. O men! O manners! was there ever such an impudence?) True. And are
extremely sollicitous for you, Sir.


Mor. Whose Knave are you!


True. Mine own Knave, and your Compere, Sir.


Mor. Fetch me my Sword --


True. You shall taste the one half of my Dagger, if you do (Groom) and you,
the other, if you stir, Sir: be patient, I charge you, in the Kings Name, and
hear me without insurrection. They say, you are to marry? to marry! do you
mark, Sir?


Mor. How then, rude companion!


True. Marry, your friends do wonder, Sir, the Thames being so near, wherein
you may drown so handsomely; or London Bridge, at a low fall, with a fine
leap, to hurry you down the stream; or, such a delicate Steeple, in the
Town, as Bow, to vault from; or, a brauer height, as Paul's, or, if you
affected to do it nearer home, and a shorter way, an excellent Garret Windore,
into the street; or, a Beam, in the said Garret, with this Halter; which they
have sent, and desire, He shows him a halter that you would sooner commit
your grave head to this knot, then to the Wed-locke nooze; or, take a little
Sublimate, and go out of the World, like a Rat; or a Fly (as one said) with a
Straw in your Arse: any way, rather, then to follow this Goblin Matrimony.
Alas, Sir, do you ever think to find a chaste Wife, in these times? now? when
there are so many Masks, Plays, Puritan Preachings, Mad-folkes, and other
strange fights to be seen daily, private and public? if you had lived in
King Etheldred's time, Sir, or Edward the Confessors, you might, perhaps have
found in some cold Countrey-Hamlet, then, a dull frostrie Wench, would have
been contented with one man: now, they will as soon be pleased with one
leg, or one eye. I Will tell you, Sir, the monstrous hazards you shall run
with a Wife.


Mor. Good Sir! have I ever cosen'd any friends of yours of their Land? bought
their Possessions? taken forfeit of their Morgage? begged a Reuersion from
'hem? bastarded their Issue? what have I done, that may deserve this?


True. Nothing, Sir, that I know, but your itch of Marriage.


Mor. Why? if I had made an Assassinate upon your Father; vitiated your Mother;
ravished your Sisters --


True. I would kill you, Sir, I would kill you, if you had.


Mor. Why? you do more in this, Sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all
facinorous Acts, that could be named, to do that you do --


True. Alas, Sir, I am but a Messenger: I but tell you, what you must hear. It
seems, your friends are careful after your souls health, Sir, and would have
you know the danger (but you may do your pleasure, for all them, I persuade
not, Sir) If, after you are married, your Wife do run away with a Vaulter, or
the Frenchman that walks upon Ropes, or him that daunces the Ijg, or a Fencer
for his skill at his Weapon, why it is not their fault; they have discharged
their consciences: when you know what may happen. Nay, suffer valiantly, Sir,
for I must tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If she be
fair, and young, vegetous, no Sweet-meates ever drew more Flies; all the
Yellow Doublets, and great Roses in the Town will be there. If foul, and
crooked, she will be with them, and buy those Doublets and Roses, Sir. If rich,
and that you marry her Dowry, not her; she will reign in your House, as
imperious as a Widow. If Noble, all her Kindred will be your Tyrannes. If
fruitful, as proud as May, and humorous as April; she must have her Doctors,
her Mid-wiues, her Nurses, her longings every hour: though it be for the
dearest morsel of man. If learned, there was never such a Parrat; all your
Patrimony will be too little for the Guests, that must be invited, to hear
her speak Latin and Greek: and you must lie with her in those Languages too,
if you will please her. If precise, you must feast all the silenced Brethren,
once in three days; salute the Sisters; entertayne the whole Family, or Wood
of 'hem; and hear long-winded Exercises, Singings, and Catechisings, which you
are not given to, and yet must give for: to please the zealous Matron your
Wife, who, for the holy cause, will cosen you, over and above. You begin to
sweat, Sir? but this is not half, in faith: you may do your pleasure
notwithstanding, The Mute is stealing away. as I said before, I come not to
persuade you. Upon my faith, Master Seruingman, if you do stir, I will beat
you.


Mor. O, what is my sin! what is my sin?


True. Then, if you love your Wife, or rather, dote on her, Sir: O, how she will
torture you! and take pleasure in your torments! you shall lie with her but
when she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion: or it must be
for that Jewel, or that Pearl, when she does; every half hours pleasure
must be bought anew: and with the same pain, and charge, you wooed her at
first. Then, you must keep what Servants she please; what company she will;
that friend must not visit you without her license; and him she loves most
she will seem to hate eagerliest, to decline your jealousy; or, faigne to
be jealous of you first; and for that cause go live with her she-friend, or
Cosen at the College, that can instruct her in all the Mysteries, of writing
Letters, corrupting Servants, taming Spies; where she must have that rich
Gown for such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; be
served in silver; have the Chamber filled with a succession of Grooms,
Footmen, Vshers, and other Messengers; besides Embroyderers, Iewellers,
Tyre-women, Sempsters, Fether-men, Perfumers; while she feels not how the Land
drops away; nor the Acres melt; nor foresees the change, when the Mercer has
your Woods for her Veluets; never weighes what her Pride costs, Sir: so she may
kiss a Page, or a smooth chinne, that has the despair of a Beard; be a
States-woman, know all the News, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath,
what at Court, what in Progress; or, so she may censure Poets, and Authors,
and styles, and compare'hem, Daniel with Spenser, Johnson with the the other
youth, and so forth; or, be thought cunning in Controversies, or the very
knots of Divinity; and have, often in her mouth, the state of the question:
and then skip to the Mathematiques, and demonstration and answer, in Religion
to one; in state, to another, in baud'ry to a third.


Mor. O, o!


True. All this is very true, Sir. And then her going in disguise to that
Coniurer, and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soon you
shall die? next, if her present Servant love her? next that, if she shall have
a new Servant? and how many? which of her Family would make the best Baud,
Male, or Female? what precedence she shall have by her next match? and sets
down the answers, and believes 'hem above the Scriptures. Nay, perhaps
she will study the Art.


Mor. Gentle Sir, have you done? have you had your pleasure of me? I Will think of
these things.


True. Yes Sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going
afoot, and lies in, a month, of a new face, all Oil, and Bird-lime; and rises
in Asses Milk, and is clens'd with a new fucus: God b'w'you, Sir. One thing
more (which I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may
have made a conuayance of her Virginity aforehand, as your wise Widows do
of their states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, Sir: who can tell?
or if she have not done it yet, she may do, upon the Wedding day, or the night
before, and antidate you Cuckold. The like has bin heard of, in nature. It Is no
devised impossible thing, Sir. God b'w'you: I Will be bold to leave this Rope
with you, Sir, for a remembrance. Farewell Mute.


Mor. The Horn again Come, have me to my Chamber: but first shut the door.
O, shut the door, shut the door: Is he come again?


Cut. It Is I, Sir, your Barber.


Mor. O Cutberd, Cutberd, Cutberd! here has been a cutthroate with me: help
me in to my bed, and give me Physic with thy counsel.


Act II. Scene III.
Daw, Clerimont, Dauphine, Epicoene. NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her
own charges: it is nothing to me, Gentlemen. But she will not be invited to the
like Feasts, or Guests, every day.


Cle. They dissuade her, privately. O, by no means, she may not refuse -- to
stay at home, if you love your reputation: 'Slight, you are invited thither of
purpose to be seen, and laughed at by the Lady of the College, and her
shadows. This Trumpeter has proclym'd you.


Daup. You shall not go; let him be laughed at in your stead, for not bringing
you: and put him to his extemporall faculty of fooling, and talking loud to
satisfy the company.


Cle. He will suspect us, talk aloud. 'Pray, Mistress Epicoene, let us see your
Verses; we have Sir John Daw's leave: do not conceal your Servants merit,
and your own glories.


Epi. They Will prove my Servants glories, if you have his leave so soon.


Daup. His vain glories, Lady!


Daw. Show 'hem, show 'hem, Mistress, I dare own 'hem.


Epi. Judge you, what glories?


Daw. Nay, I Will read 'hem my self, too: an Author must recite his own Work.
It is a Madrigall of Modesty.

Modest, and fair, for fair and good are near
Neighbors, how ere. --

Daup. Very good.


Cle. I, Is It not?


Daw. No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.

Daup. Excellent!


Cle. That again, I pray 'Sir John.


Daup. It has some thing in it like rare wit, and sense.


Cle. Peace.


Daw. No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I praise sweet Modesty, I praise
Bright Beauties rays:
And having praised both Beauty' and Modestee,
I have praised thee.

Daup. Admirable!


Cle. How it chimes, and cries tinke in the close, divinely!


Daup. I, it is Seneca.


Cle. No, I think it is Plutarch.


Daw. The dor on Plutarch, and Seneca, I hate it: they are mine own
imaginations, by that light. I wonder those fellows have such credit with
Gentlemen!


Cle. They are very grave Authors.


Daw. Grave Asses! mere Essaists! a few loose Sentences, and that is all. A man
would talk so, his whole age, I do utter as good things every hour, if they
were collected, and observed, as either of 'hem.


Daup. Indeed! Sir John?


Cle. He must needs, living among the Wits, and Braueries too.


Daup. I, and being President of 'hem, as he is.


Daw. There Is Aristotle, a mere common place-fellow; Plato, a Discourser;
Thucidides, and Liuic, tedious and dry; Tacitus, an entyre knot: sometimes
worth the untying, very seldom.


Cle. What do you think of the Poets, Sir John?


Daw. Not worthy to be named for Authors. Homer, an old tedious prolixe Ass,
talks of Curriers, and Chines of Beef. Virgil, of dunging of Land, and Bees.
Horace, of I know not what.


Cle. I think so.


Daw. And so Pindarus, Lycophron, Anacreon, Catullus, Seneca the Tragoedian,
Lucan, Propertius, Tibullus, Martial, Iuuenal, Ausonius, Statius, Politian,
Valerius Flaccus, and the rest --


Cle. What a sacke-full of their names he has got!


Daup. And how he powers 'hem out! Politian, with Valerius Flaccus!


Cle. Was not the Character right, of him?


Daup. As could be made, in faith.


Daw. And Persius, a crabbed Cockescombe, not to be endured.


Daup. Why? whom do you account for Authors, Sir John Daw?


Daw. Syntagma Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Canonici, the
King of Spaines Bible.


Daup. Is the King of Spaines Bible an Author?


Cle. Yes, and Syntagma.


Daup. What was that Syntagma, Sir?


Daw. A Civil Lawier, a Spaniard.


Daup. Sure, Corpus was a Dutchman.


Cle. I, both the Corpusses, I knew 'hem: they were very corpulent Authors.


Daw. And, then there is Vatablus, Pomponatius, Symancha, the other are not to
be received, within the thought of a Scholar.


Daup. Fore God, you have a simple learned Servant, Lady, in Titles.


Cle. I wonder that he is not called to the Helm, and made a Councellor!


Daup. He is one extraordinary.


Cle. Nay, but in Ordinary! to say truth, the State wants such.


Daup. Why, that will follow.


Cle. I muse, a Mistress can be so silent to the dotes of such a Servant.


Daw. It Is her Virtue, Sir. I have written somewhat of her silence too.


Daup. In Verse, Sir John?


Cle. What else?


Daup. Why? how can you justify your own being of a Poet, that so slight all
the old Poets?


Daw. Why? every man, that writes in Verse, is not a Poet; you have of the
Wits, that write Verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that live by it,
the poor fellows that live by it.


Daup. Why? would not you live by your Verses, Sir John?


Cle. No, 'twere pity he should. A Knight live by his Verses? he did not make
'hem to that end, I hope.


Daup. And yet the noble Sidney lives by his, and the Noble Family not ashamed.


Cle. I, he professed himself; but Sir John Daw has more caution: he will not
hinder his own rising in the state so much! do you think he will? Your
Verses, good Sir John, and no Poems.


Daw. Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
Deny't who can.

Daup. Not I, believe it: your reason, Sir.


Daup. Nor is it a Tale,
That Female Vice should be a Virtue Male,
Or Masculine Vice, a Female Virtue be:
You shall it see
Proved with increase,
I know to speak, and she to hold her peace.
Do you conceive me Gentlemen?


Daup. No faith, how mean you with increase, Sir John?


Daw. Why, with increase is, when I court her for the common cause of Mankind;
and she says nothing, but consentire videtur: and in time is grauida.


Daup. Then, this is a Ballad of Procreation?


Cle. A Madrigall of Procreation, you mistake.


Epi. 'Pray give me my Verses again, Servant.


Daw. If you you will ask 'hem aloud, you shall.


Cle. See, here is Tru-wit again!


Act II. Scene IIII.
Clerimont, Tru-wit, Dauphine, Cutherd, Daw, Epicoene. WHere have thou been,
in the name of madness! thus accoutred with thy Horn?


True. Where the sound of it might have pierced your senses, with gladness, had
you been in eare-reach of it. Dauphine, fall down and worship me: I have
forbid the Banes, Lad. I have been with thy virtuous Uncle, and have broke the
match.


Daup. You have not, I hope.


True. Yes faith; and thou should hope otherwsse, I should repent me: this
Horn got me entrance, kiss it. I had no other way to get in, but by fayning
to be a Post; but when I got in once, I proved none, but rather the contrary,
turned him into a Post, or a Stone, or what is stiffer, with thundering into him
the incommodities of a Wife, and the miseries of Marriage. If ever Gorgon were
seen in the shape of a woman, he has seen her in my description. I have put
him off of that sent, for ever. Why do you not applaud, and adore me, Sirs?
why stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy of the benefit.


Daup. Did not I tell you? mischief! --


Cle. I would you had placed this benefit somewhere else.


True. Why so?


Cle. Slight you have done the most inconsiderate, rash, weak thing, that ever
man did to his friend.


Daup. Friend! if the most malicious enemy I have, had studied to inflict an
injury upon me, it could not be a greater.


True. Wherein? for gods sake! Gent, come to your selves again.


Daup. But I presaged thus much before, to you.


Cle. Would my lips had been soldred, when I spoke on it. Slight, what moved
you to be thus impertinent?


True. My Masters, do not put on this strange face to pay my courtesic: off
with this Visor. Have good turns done you and thank 'hem this way?


Daup. Fore Heaven, you have undone me. That, which I have plotted for, and
been maturing now these four Months, you have blasted in a minute: now I am
lost, I may speak. This Gentlewoman was lodged here by me of purpose, and, to
be put upon my Uncle, has professed this obstinate silence for my sake, being my
entyre friend; and one, that for the requital of such a fortune, as to marry
him, would have made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are
utterly miscarryed by this unlucky accident.


Cle. Thus it is, when a man will be ignorantly officious; do services, and not
know his why: I wonder what courteous itch possessed you! you never did absurder
part in your life, nor a greater trespass to friendship, to humanity.


Daup. Faith, you may forgive it, best: 'twas your cause principally.


Cle. I know it, would it had not.


Daup. How now, Cutberd? what news?


Cut. The best, the happiest that ever was, Sir. There has been a mad
Gentleman with your Uncle, this morning, (I think this be the Gentleman) that
has almost talked him out of his wits, with threatening him from Marriage --


Daup. On, I pray thee.


Cut. And your Uncle, Sir, he thinks 'twas done by your procurement; therefore
he will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if he like her, he says,
and that she be so inclining to dombe, as I have told him, he swears, he
will marry her, to day, instantly, and not defer it a minute longer.


Daup. Excellent! beyond our expectation!


True. Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew, it would be thus.


Daup. Nay, sweet Tru-wit, forgive me.


True. No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weak
part.


Cle. Will thou ascribe that to merit, now, was mere fortune?


True. Fortune? mere Providence. Fortune had not a finger in it. I saw it must
necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is never false to me in these
things. Show me, how it could be otherwise.


Daup. Nay, Gentlemen, contend not, it is well now.


True. Alas, I let him go on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he
pleased.


Cle. Away thou strange instifier of thy self, to be wiser then thou were, by
the event.


True. Event! By this light, thou shall never persuade me, but I foresaw it,
as well as the Stars themselves.


Daup. Nay, Gentlemen, it is well now do you two entertain Sir John Daw, with
discourse, while I send her away with instructions.


True. I Will be acquainted with her, first, by your favor.


Cle. Master Tru-wit, Lady, a friend of ours.


True. I am sorry, I have not known you sooner, Lady, to celebrate this rare
virtue of your silence.


Cle. Faith, an' you had come sooner, you should have seen, and heard her well
celebrated in Sir John Daw's Madrigalls.


True. Jack Daw, God save you, when saw you La-Foole?


Daw. Not since last night, Master Tru-wit.


True. That Is Miracle! I thought you two had been inseparable.


Daw. He Is gone to inuit his Guests.


True. Gods so! tls true! what a false memory have I toward that man! I am one:
I met him e'ne now, upon that he calls his delicate fine black Horse, rid into
a foame, with posting from place to place, and person to person, to give hem
the cue --


Cle. Left they should forget?


True. Yes: there was never poor Captain took more pains at a Muster to show
men, then he, at this meal, to show friends.


Daw. It is his Quarter-feast, Sir.


Cle. What! do you say so, Sir John?


True. Nay, Jack Daw will not be out, at the best friends he has, to the Talent
of his wit: where is his Mistress, to hear and applaud him? is she gone!


Daw. Is Mistress Epicoene gone?


Cle. Gone before, with Sir Dauphine, I warrant to the place.


True. Gone before! that were a manifest injury; a disgrace and a half: to
refuse him at such a Festival time, as this, being a Bravery, and a Wit too.


Cle. Tut, he will swallow it like Cream: he is better read in Iure Civilly,
then to esteem any thing a disgrace is offered him from a Mistress.


Daw. Nay, let her eene go; she shall sit alone, and be dumb in her
Chamber, a Week together, for John Daw, I warrant her: does she refuse me?


Cle. No, Sir, do not take it so to heart: she does not refuse you, but a
little neglect you. Good faith, Tru-wit, you were too blame to put it into his
head, that she does refuse him.


True. She does refuse him, Sir, palpably: how ever you mince it. An' I were as
he, I would swear to speak never a word to her, to day, for it.


Daw. By this light, no more I will not.


True. Nor to any body else, Sir.


Daw. Nay, I will not say so, Gentlemen.


Cle. It had been an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could
have drawn him to it.


Daw. I Will be very melancholique, in faith.


Cle. As a Dog, if I were as you, Sir John.


True. Or a Snaile, or a Hog-louse: I would roll my self up for this day,
in troth, they should not unwind me.


Daw. By this Pick-tooth, so I will.


Cle. It Is well done: he begins already to be angry with his teeth.


Daw. Will you go, Gentlemen?


Cle. Nay, you must walk alone, if you be right melancholique, Sir John.


True. Yes Sir, we will dog you, we will follow you a far off.


Cle. Was there ever such a two yards of Knighthood, measured out by Time, to
be sold to laughter?


True. A mere talking Mole! no Mushrome was ever so fresh. A fellow so utterly
nothing, as he knows not what he would be.


Cle. Let Us follow him: but first, let us go to Dauphine, he is houering about
the House, to hear what news.


True. Content.


Act II. Scene V.
Morose, Epicoene, Cutberd, Mute. WElcome Cutberd; draw near with your fair
charge: and, in her ear, softly entreat her to vnmasque ( --) So. Is the door
shut? ( --) enough. Now, Cutberd, with the same discipline I use to my Family,
I will question you. As I conceive, Cutberd, this Gentlewoman is she, you have
provided, and brought, in hope she will fit me in the place and person of a
Wise? Answer me not, but with your leg, unless it be otherwise: ( --)
very well done, Cutberd. I conceive, besides, Cutberd, you have been
preacquainted with her birth, education, and qualities, or else you would not
prefer her to my acceptance, in the weighty consequence of Marriage. ( --)
this I conceive, Cutberd. Answer me not but with your leg, unless it be
otherwise. ( --) Very well done Cutberd. Give aside now a little, He goes about
her, and viewes her. and leave me to examine her condition, and aptitude to my
affection. She is exceeding fair, and of a special good favor; a sweet
composition, or harmony of limbs: her temper of beauty has the true height of
my blood. The Knave has exceedingly well fitted me without: I will now try her
within. Come near, fair Gentlewoman: let not my behavior seem rude, though
unto you, being rare, it may happily appear strange. ( --) Nay, Lady, She
curtsies. you may speak, though Cutberd, and my man, might not: for, of all
sounds, only, the sweet voice of a fair Lady has the just length of mine
ear. I beseech you, say Lady, out of the first fire of meeting eyes, (they
say) love is stricken; do you feel any such motion, suddenly shot into you,
from any part you see in me? ha, Lady? ( --) Alas, Lady, these answers by
silent curt'sies, from you, are too courtlesse, and simple. Curt'sie. I have
ever had my breeding in Court: and she that shall be my Wife, must be
accomplished with Courtly, and audacious ornaments. Can you speak, Lady?


Epi. Judge you, forsooth. She speaks softly.


Mor. What say you, Lady? speak out, I beseech you.


Epi. Judge you, forsooth.


Mor. OF my judgment, a divine softness! but can you naturally, Lady, as I
enjoin these by doctrine and industry, refer your self to the search of my
judgment, and (not taking pleasure in your tongue, which is a woman's chiefest
pleasure) think it plausible, to answer me by silent gestures, so long as my
speeches iumpe right, with what you conceive? Curt'sie. ( --) Excellent!
Divine! if it were possible, she should hold out thus! Peace, Cutherd, thou
art made for ever, as thou have made me, if this felicity have lasting: but I
will try her further. Dear Lady, I am Courtly, I tell you, and I must have
mine ears banqueted with pleasant, and witty Conferences, pretty Girds,
Scoffs, and Dalliance in her, that I mean to choose for my Bed-pheere. The
Ladies in Court, think it a most desperate impair to their quickness of wit,
and good carriage, if they cannot give occasion for a man to court 'hem; and,
when an amorous Discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to continue
it, as himself: and do you alone so much differ from all them, that, what
they (with so much circumstance) affect, and toil for, to seem learned, to
seem judicious, to seem sharp, and conceited, you can bury in your self,
with silence? and rather trust your graces to the fair conscience of Virtue,
then to the Worlds, or your own Proclamation?


Epi. I should be sorry else.


Mor. What say you, Lady? good Lady, speak out.


Epi. I should be sorry, else


Mor. That sorrow does fill me with gladness! O Morose! thou art happy above
Mankind! pray that thou may contain thy self. I will only put her to it
once more, and it shall be with the utmost touch, and test of their Sex. But
hear me, fair Lady, I do also love to see her, whom I shall choose for my
Heicfar, to be the first and principal in all Fashions; praecede all the Dames
at Court, by a sortnight; have her Counsel of Tailors, Linneners, Lace-women,
Embroyderers, and sit with 'hem sometimes twice a day, upon French
Intelligences; and then come forth, varyed like Nature, or oftener then she,
and better, by the help of Art, her aemulous Servant. This do I affect. And
how will you be able, Lady, with this frugalitie of speech, to give the
manifold (but necessary) instructions, for that Bodies, these Sleeves, those
Sirkts, this Cut, that Stitch, this Embroydery, that Lace, this Wire, those
Knots, that Ruff, those Roses, this Girdle, that Fan, the the other Skarfe,
these Gloves? ha! what say you, Lady.


Epi. I Will leave it to you, Sir.


Mor. How, Lady? pray you, rise a note.


Epi. I leave it to Wisdom, and you, Sir.


Mor. Admirable Creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sin against
so sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print, on those divine lips, the
seal of being mine. Cutberd, I give thee the Lease of thy House free: thank
me not, but with thy leg ( --) I know what thou would say, she is poor, and
her friends deceased; she has brought a wealthy dowry in her silence, Cutberd:
and in respect of her poverty, Cutberd, I shall have her more loving, and
obedient, Cutberd. Go thy ways, and get me a Minister presently, with a soft,
low voice to marry us, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but brief as
he can; away: softly, Cutberd. Sirrah, conduct your Mistress into the dining
Room, your now-Mistris. O my felicity! how I shall be revenged on mine
insolent Kinsman, and his plots to fright me from marrying! This night I will
get an Heir, and thrust him out of my blood like a Stranger; he would be
knighted, forsooth, and thought by that means to reign over me, his Title
must do it: no Kinsman, I will now make you bring me the tenth Lords, and the
sixteenth Ladies Letter, Kinsman; and it shall do you no good, Kinsman. Your
Knighthood it self shall come on it is knees, and it shall be rejected; it
shall be sued for it is fees to execution, and not be redeemed; it shall cheat
at the twelue-peny Ordinary, it Knighthood, for it is Diet all the Terme-time,
and tell Tales for it in the Vacation, to the Hostess: or it Knighthood shall
do worse; take Sanctuary in Cole-harbor, and fast. It shall fright all it
friends, with borrowing Letters, and when one of the foure-score has brought
it Knighthood ten shillings, it Knighthood shall go to the Cranes, or the
Bear at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in fear: it shall not have money to
discharge one Tavern reckoning, to inuit the old Creditors, to forbear it
Knighthood; or the new, that should be, to trust it Knighthood. It shall be
the tenth name in the Bond, to take up the commodity of Pipkins and stone Iugs;
and the part thereof shall not furnish it Knighthood forth, for the attempting
of a Bakers Widow, a brown Bakers Widow. It shall give it Knight-hoods name,
for a stallion, to all gamesome Citizens Wives, and be refused; when the
Master of a Dancing School, or ( How do you call him) the worst Reueller in
the Town is taken: it shall want Clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to fool
to Lawyers. It shall not have hope to repair it self by Constantinople,
Ireland, or Virginia; but the best, and last fortune to it Knighthood shall
be, to make Dol Teare-sheet, or Kate-Common, a Lady: and so, it Knighthood
may eat.


Act II. Scene VI.
Tru-wit, Dauphine, Clcrimont, Cutberd. ARe you sure he is not gone by?


Daup. No, I staid in the shop ever since.


Cle. But, he may take the other end of the Lane.


Daup. No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hither.


True. What a Barbarian it is to stay then!


Daup. Yonder he comes.


Cle. And his charge left behind him, which is a very good sign, Dauphine.


Daup. How now Cutberd, succeeds it, or no?


Cut. Past imagination, Sir, omnia secunda; you could not have prayed, to have
had it so well: Saltat senex, as it is in the Proverb, he does triumph in his
felicity; admires the party! he has given me the Lease of my House too! and,
I am now going for a silent Minister to marry 'hem, and away.


True. Slight, get one of the silenced Ministers, a zealous Brother would
torment him purely.


Cut. Cum priuilegio, Sir.


Daup. O, by no means, let us do nothing to hinder it now when it is done and
finished, I am for you: for any devise of vexation.


Cut. And that shall be within this half hour, upon my dexterity, Gentlemen.
Contriue what you can, in the mean time, bonis auibus.


Cle. How the Slave does Latin it!


True. It would be made a Jest to Posterity, Sirs, this days mirth, if ye will.


Cle. Be shrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.


Daup. And, for my part. What is it?


True. To translate all La-Fooles company, and his Feast hither, to day, to
celebrate this Bride-ale.


Daup. I marry, but how will it be done?


True. I Will undertake the directing of all the Ladie-Guests thither, and then
the meat must follow.


Cle. For Gods sake, let us effect it: it will be an excellent Comoedy of
affliction, so many several noyses.


Daup. But are they not at the other place already, think you?


True. I Will warrant you for the Colledge-honours: one of their faces has not the
priming color laid on yet, nor the other her Smock sleek'd.


Cle. O, but they will rise earlier then ordinary, to a Feast.


True. Best go see, and assure our selves.


Cle. Who knows the House?


True. I Will lead you, were you never there yet?


Daup. Not I.


Cle. Nor I.


True. Where have you lived then? not know Tom Otter!


Cle. No: for Gods sake, what is he?


True. An excellent Animal, equal with your Daw, or La-Foole, if not
transcendent; and does Latin it as much as your Barber: he is his Wifes
Subject, he calls her Princess, and at such times as these, follows her up
and down the House like a Page, with his Hat off, partly for heat, partly for
reverence. At this instant, he is marshalling of his Bull, Bear, and Horse.


Daup. What be those, in the name of Sphinx?


True. Why Sir? he has been a great man at the Beare-Garden in his time: and
from that subtle sport, has taken the witty denomination of his chief carousing
Cups. One he calls his Bull, another his Bear, another his Horse. And then he
has his lesser Glasses, that he calls his Dear, and his Ape; and several
degrees of 'hem too: and never is well, nor thinks any entertaynment perfect,
till these be brought out, and set of the Cupbord.


Cle. For Gods love! we should miss this, if we should not go.


True. Nay, he has a thousand things as good, that will speak him all day. He
will rail on his Wife, with certain common places, behind her back; and to
her face --


Daup. No more of him. Let Us go see him, I petition you,


Act III.
Scene I.
Otter, Mrs. Otter, Tru-wit, Clerimont, Dauphine. NAy, good Princess, hear me
pauca verba.


Mrs. Ot. By that light, I Will a' you chained up, with your Bul-dogges, and
Beare-dogges, if you be not civil the sooner. I Will send you to kennell,
in faith. You were best bait me with your Bull, Bear, and Horse? Never a time,
that the Courtiers, or Collegiates come to the House, but you make it a
Shrouetuesday! I would have you get your Whitsonti^e-Veluet-Cap, and your
staff in your hand, to entertain 'hem: yes in troth, do.


Ott. Not so Princess, neither, but under correction, sweet Princess, gi'me
leave -- these things I am known to the Courtiers by. It is reported to them
for my humor, and they receive it so, and do expect it. Tom Otters Bull,
Bear, and Horse is known all over England, in rerum natura.


Mrs. Ot. Fore me, I will na-ture 'hem over to Paris-Garden, and na-ture you
thither too, if you pronounce them again. Is a Bear a fit Beast, or a Bull,
to mix in society with great Ladies? think in your discretion, in any good
polity.


Ott. The Horse then, good Princess.


Mrs. Ot. Well, I am contented for the Horse: they love to be well horsed, I
know. I love it my self.


Ott. And it is a delicate fine Horse. Poetarum Pegasus. Under correction,
Princess, Jupiter did turn himself into a -- Taurus, or Bull, under
correction, good Princess.


Mrs. Ot. By my integritiy, I Will send you over to the Banke-side, I Will commit
you to the Master of the Garden, if I hear but a syllable more. Must my house,
or my roof, be polluted with the scent of Bears, and Bulls, when it is
perfumed for great Ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married
you? That I would be Princess, and reign in mine own House: and you would
be my subject, and obey me? What did you bring me, should make you thus
peremptory? Do I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will,
among your Gamesters, to vex and torment me, at such times as these? Who gives
you your maintenance, I pray you? who allows you your Horsemeat, and
Mans-meat? your three Suits of Apparel a year? your four pair of Stockings,
one Silk, three Worsted? your clean Linen, your Bands, and Cuffes when I can
get you to wear 'hem? It Is mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with
Courtiers, or great Personages, to speak to you out of their Coaches, and come
home to your House? Were you ever so much as looked upon by a Lord, or a Lady,
before I married you: but on the Easter, or Whitson-holy-dayes? and then out at
the Banqueting House windore, when Ned Whiting, or George Stone, were at the
stake?


True. (For Gods sake, let us go staue her off him.)


Mrs. Ot. Answer me to that. And did not I take you up from thence, in an
old Greasy Buffe-Doublet, with Points; and Green Vellet Sleeves, out at the
elbowes? you forget this.


True. (She Will worry him, if we help not in time.)


Mrs. Ot. O, here are some of the Gallants! Go to, behave your self
distinctly, and with good morality; Or, I protest, I Will take away your
exhibition.


Act III. Scene II.
Tru-wit, Mrs. Otter, Cap. Otter, Clerimont, Dauphine, Cutberd. BY your leave,
fair Mistress Otter, I Will be bold to enter these Gentlemen in your
acquaintance.


Mrs. Ot. It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, Sir.


True. How does my noble Captain? Is the Bull, Bear, and Horse, in rerum
natura still?


Ott. Sir. Sic visum superis.


Mrs. Ott. I would you would but intimate 'hem, do. Go your ways in, and get
Tosts, and Butter, made for the Wood-cocks. That Is a fit Province for you.


Cle. Alas, what a tyranny, is this poor fellow married too.


True. O, but the sport will be anon, when we get him loose.


Daup. Dares be ever speak?


True. No Anabaptist ever railed with the like license: but mark her Language
in the meane-time, I beseech you.


Mrs. Ot. Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My Cousin, Sir Amorous, will be
here briefly.


True. In good time, Lady. Was not Sir John Daw here, to ask for him, and the
company?


Mrs. Ot. I cannot assure you, Mr. Tru-wit. Here was a very melancholy Knight
in a Ruff, that demanded my subject for some body, a Gentleman, I think.


Cle. I, that was he, Lady.


Mrs. Ot. But he departed straight, I can resolve you.


Daup. What an excellent choice phrase, this Lady expresses in?


True. O, Sir! she is the only authentical Courtier, that is not naturally
bred one, in the City.


Mrs. Ot. You have taken that report upon trust, Gentlemen.


True. No, I assure you, the Court gouernes it so, Lady, in your behalf.


Mrs. Ot. I am the Servant of the Court, and Courtiers, Sir.


True. They are rather your Idolaters.


Mrs Ot. Not so, Sir.


Daup. How now, Cutberd? Any cross?


and indeed, so ashamed of her injury to you, that she desires you to forgive
her, and but grace her Wedding with your presence to day -- She is to be
married to a very good fortune, she says, his Uncle, old Morose: and she
willed me in private to tell you, that she shall be able to do you more
favors, and with more security now, then before.

Daw. Did she say so, in faith?


Cle. Why, what do you think of me, Sir John! ask Sir Dauphine.


Daup. Nay, I believe you. Good Sir Dauphine, did she desire me to forgive her?


Cle. I assure you, Sir John, she did.


Daw. Nay then, I do with all my heart, and I Will be iouiall.


Cle. Yes, for look you Sir, this was the injury to you. La-Foole intended
this Feast to honor her Bridale day, and made you the property to inuit the
College Ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, she should
have appeared (as his friend) to have given you the dor. Whereas now, Sir
Dauphine has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of satisfaction,
that you shall bring all the Ladies to the place where she is, and be very
iouiall; and there she will have a Dinner, which shall be in your name: and so
disappoint La-Foole, to make you good again, and (as it were) a sauer in the
man.


Daw. As I am a Knight, I honor her, and forgive her heartily.


Cle. About it then presently, Tru-wit is gone before to confront the Coaches,
and to acquaint you with so much, if he meet you. Join with him, and it is
well. See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be very
iouiall.


La-F. Are the Ladies come, Sir John Daw, and your Mistress? Sir Dauphine! you
are exceeding welcome, and honest Master Clerimont. Where Is my Cossen? did you
see no Collegiats, Gentlemen?


Daup. Collegiats! Do you not hear, Sir Amorous, how you are abused?


La-F. How Sir!


Cle. Will you speak so kindly to Sir John Daw, that has done you such an
affront?


La-F. Wherein Gentlemen? let me be a Sut or to you to know, I beseech you!


Cle. Why Sir, his Mistress is married to day, to Sir Dauphines Uncle, your
Cosens Neighbor, and he has diuerted all the Ladies, and all your company
thither, to frustrate your provision, and stick a disgrace upon you. He was
here, now, to have enticed us away from you too: but we told him his own, I
think.


La-F. Has Sir John Daw wronged me so in-humanely?


Daw. He has done it, Sir Amorous, most maliciously, and trecherously: but if
you will be ruled by us, you shall quit him in faith.


La-F. Good Gentlemen! I Will make one, believe it. How I pray?


Daup. Marry Sir, get me your Phesants, your Godwits, and your best meat, and
dish it in Silver Dishes of your Cosens presently, and say nothing, but clap me
a clean Towell about you, like a Sewer; and bare-headed, march before it with a
good confidence ('it is but over the way, hard by) and we will second you, where
you shall set of the Board, and bid 'hem welcome to it, which shall show it is
yours, and disgrace his preparation utterly: and, for your Cosen, whereas she
should be troubled here at home with care of making and giving welcome, she
shall transfer all that labor thither, and be a principal guest her self,
sit ranked with the Colledge-Honors, and be honored, and have her Health
drunk as often, as bare, and as loud as the best of 'hem.


La-F. I Will go tell her presently. It shall be done, that is resolved.


Cle. I thought he would not hear it out, but 'twould take him.


Daup. Well, there be Guests, and meat now; how shall we do for Music?


Cle. The smell of the Venison, going through the Street, will inuit one noise
of Fiddlers, or other.


Daup. I would it would call the Trumpeters thither.


Cle. Faith, there is hope, they have intelligence of all Feasts. There Is good
correspondence betwixt them, and the London-Cookes. It Is twenty to one but we
have 'hem.


Daup. 'Twill be a most solemn day for my Uncle, and an excellent fit of mirth
for us.


Cle. I, if we can hold up the aemulation betwixt Fool and Daw, and never
bring them to expostulate.


Daup. Tut, flatter 'hem both (as Tru-wit says) and you may take their
understandings in a Purse-net. They Will believe themselves to be just such men
as we make 'hem, neither more nor less. They have nothing, not the use of
their senses, but by tradition.


Cle. See! Sir Amorous has his Towell on already. He enters like a Sewer Have
you persuaded your Cossen?


La-F. Yes, it is very faesible: she will do any thing, she says, rather then
the La-Fooles shall be disgraced.


Daup. She is a Noble Kinswoman. It will be such a pest'-ling device, Sir
Amorous! It will pound all your enemies practices to poulder, and blow him up
with his own mine, his own train.


La-F. Nay, we will give fire, I warrant you.


Cle. But you must carry it privately, without any noise, and take no notice by
any means --


Ott. Gentlemen, my Princess says, you shall have all her Silver Dishes,
festinate: and she is gone to alter her Tire a little, and go with you --


Cle. And your self too, Captain Otter.


Daup. By any means, Sir.


Ott. Yes Sir, I do mean it: but I would entreat my Cosen Sir Amorous, and
you Gentlemen, to be Suitors to my Princess, that I may carry my Bull, and my
Bear, as well as my Horse.


Cle. That you shall do, Captain Otter.


La-F. My Cosen will never consent, Gentlemen.


Daup. She must consent, Sir Amorous, to reason.


La-F. Why, she says they are no decorum among Ladies.


Ott. But they are decora, and that is better, Sir.


Cle. I, she must hear argument. Did not Pasiphae, who was a Queen, love a
Bull? and was not Calisto, the Mother of Arcas, turned into a Bear, and made a
Star, Mistress Vrsula, in the Heavens?


Ott. O God! that I could have said as much! I will have these Stories painted
in the Beare-garden, Ex Ouidij Metamorphosi.


Daup. Where is your Princess, Captain? pray' be our Leader.


Ott. That I shall, Sir.


Cle. Make haste, good Sir Amorous.


Act III. Scene IIII.
Morose, Epicaene, Parson, Cutberd. SIr, there is an Angel for your self, and
a brace of Angels for your cold. Muse not at this manage of my bounty, It is
fit, we should thank Fortune, double to Nature, for any benefit she conferres
upon us; besides, it is your imperfection, but my solace. The Parson speaks,
as having a cold.


Par. I thank your Worship, so is it mine, now.


Mor. What says he, Cutberd?


Cut. He says, Praesto, Sir, whenever your Worship needs him, he can be
ready with the like. He got this cold with sitting up late, and singing
Catches with Cloth-workers.


Mor. No more. I thank him.


Par. God keep your Worship, and give you much joy with your fair Spouse. He
coughes. (Vmh, vmb.)


Mor. O, o, stay Cutberd! let him give me five shillings of my money back. As
it is bounty to reward benefits, so is it equity to mulct injuries. I will have
it. What says he?


Cut. He cannot change it, Sir


Mor. It must be changed.


Cut. Cough again.


Mor. What says he?


Cut. He will cough out the rest, Sir.


Par. (Vmh, Again. vmh, vmh.)


Mor. Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I forgive it. --


Epi. Fie, Master Morose, that you will use this violence to a man of the
Church.


Mor. How!


Epi. It does not become your gravity, or breeding, (as you pretend in Court)
to have offered this outrage on a water-man, or any more boystrous creature,
much less on a man of his civil Coat.


Mor. You can speak then!


Epi. Yes, Sir.


Mor. Speak out I mean.


Epi. I Sir. Why, did you think you had married a Statue? or a Motion, only?
one of the French Puppets, with the eyes turned with a Wire? or some innocent
out of the Hospital that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth,
and look upon you.


Mar. O immodestie! a manifest woman! what Cutberd?


Epi. Nay, never quarrel with Cutberd, Sir, it is too late now. I confess, it
does bate somewhat of the modesty I had, when I writ simply Maid: but I hope,
I shall make it a stock still competent, to the estate, and dignity of your
Wife.


Mor. She can talk!


Epi. Yes indeed, Sir.


Mor. What, Sirrah. None of my Knaves there? where is this Impostor, Cutberd?


Epi. Speak to him, fellow, speak to him, I Will have none of this coacted,
unnatural dumbness in my house, in a Family where I govern.


Mor. She is my Regent already! I have married a Penthesilea, a Semiramis, sold
my liberty to a Distaffe!


Act III. Scene V.
Tru-wit, Morose, Epicoene. Where Is Master Morose?


Mor. Is he come again! Lord have mercy upon me.


True. I wish you all joy, Mistress Epicoene, with your grave and honorable
match.


Epi. I return you the thanks, Master Tru-wit, so friendly a wish deserves.


Mor. She has acquaintance, too!


True. God save you Sir, and give you all contentment in your fair choice,
here. Before I was the Bird of night to you, the Owl but now I am the
Messenger of Peace, a Dove, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to
the celebration of this good hour.


Mor. What hour, Sir?


True. Your Marriage hour Sir. I commend your resolution, that (notwithstanding
all the dangers I laid before you, in the voice of a Night-Crow) would yet go
on, and be your self. It shows you are a man constant to your, own ends,
and upright to your purposes, that would not be put off with left handed cries.


Mor. How should you arrive at the knowledge of so much!


True. Why, did you ever hope, Sir committing the secrecy of it to a Barber,
that less then the whole Town should know it? you might as well have told it
to the Conduit, or the Bake-house, or the Infant'ry that follow the Court, and
with more security. Could your Gravity forget so old and noted a remnant, as,
lippis and tonsoribus notum, Well Sir, forgive it your self now, the fault,
and be communicable with your friends. Here will be three or four
fashionable Ladies, from the College to visit you presently, and their train
of Minions, and Followers.


Mor. Bar my doors! bar my doors! where are all my eaters? my mouths
now? baire up my doors, you Varlets.


Epi. He is a Varlet, that stirs to such an office. Let 'hem stand open. I
would see him that dares move his eyes toward it. Shall I have a Barricado
made against my friends, to be barred of any pleasure they can bring in to me
with honorable visitation.


Mor. O Amazonian impudence!


True. Nay faith, in this, Sir, she speaks but reason: and me thinks is more
continent then you. Would you go to bed so presently, Sir, before noone? a man
of your head, and hair, should owe more to that reverend Ceremony, and not
mount the Marriage Bed, like a Towne-Bull, or a Mountayne-Goate; but stay the
due season; and ascend it then with Religion, and fear. Those delights are to
be ste^ep'd in the humor, and silence of the night; and give the day to other
open pleasures, and iollities of Feast, of Mufique, of Revels, of Discourse:
we will have all, Sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.


Mor. O, my torment, my torment!


True. Nay, if you endure the first half hour, Sir, so tediously, and with
this irksomeness; what comfort, or hope, can this fair Geutlewoman make to her
self hereafter, in the consideration of so many years as are to come --


Mor. Of my affliction. Good Sir, depart, and let her do it alone.


True. I have done, Sir.


Mor. That cursed Barber!


True. (Yes faith, a cursed Wretch indeed, Sir.)


Mor. I have married his Citterne, that is common to all men. Some plague above
the plague --


True. (All Egypts ten Plagues)


Mor. Revenge me on him.


True. It Is very well, Sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I Will assure you
he will bear 'hem. As, that he may get the Pox with seeking to cure it, Sir?
Or, that while he is curling another man's hair, his own may drop off? Or, for
burning some Male-baudes Lock, he may have his brain beat out with the
Curling-Iron?


Mor. No, let the Wretch live wretched. May he get the Itch, and his Shop so
lousie, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.


True. (I, and if he would swallow all his Balls for Pills, let not them purge
him)


Mor. Let his Warming-Pan be ever cold.


True. (A perpetual Frost underneath it, Sir)


Mor. Let him never hope to see fire again.


True. (But in Hell, Sir)


Mor. His Chayres be always empty, his Scissors rust, and his Combs mould in
their Cases.


True. Very dreadful that! (And may he loose the invention, Sir, of caruing
Lanternes in Paper)


Mor. Let there be no Baud carted that year, to employ a Basin of his: but
let him be glad to eat his Sponge, for Bread.


True. And drink lotium to it, and much good do him.


Mor. Or, for want of Bread --


True. Eat Eare-Waxe, Sir. I Will help you. Or draw'his own Teeth, and add
them to the Lute-string.


Mor. No, beat the old ones to poulder, and make Bread of them.


True. (Yes, make meal of the Milstones.)


Mor. May all the Botches, and Burns, that he has cured on others, break out
upon him.


True. And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himself, Sir: or, if he do
remember it, let him have scraped all his Linen into Lint for it, and have not a
ragge left him, to set up with.


True. That falls out often, Madame, that he that thinks himself the
Master-wit, is the Master-foole. I assure your Ladyship, ye cannot laugh at her.


Hau. No, we will have her to the College: and she have wit, she shall be one
of us.! shall she not Centaure? we will make her a Collegiate.


Cen. Yes faith, Madame, and Mauis, and she will set up a side.


True. Believe it Madame, and Mistress Mauis, she will sustain her part.


Mau. I Will tell you that, when I have talked with her, and tried her.


Hau. Use her very ciuilly, Mauis.


Mau. So I will, Madame.


Mor. Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus ever.


True. In the the mean time, Madame, would but your Ladyship help to vex him
a little: you know his disease, talk to him about the Wedding Ceremonies, or
call for your Gloves, or --


Hau. Let me alone. Centaure, help me. Master Bridegroom, where are you?


Mor. O, it was too miraculously good to last!


Hau. We see no Ensigns of a Wedding, here; no Character of a Brideale: where
be our Skarfes, and our Gloves? I pray you, give 'hem us. Let Us know your
Brides Colors, and yours, at least.


Cen. Alas, Madame, he has provided none.


Mor. Had I known your Ladyships Painter, I would.


Hau. He has given it you, Centaure, in faith. But do you hear Master Morose, a
Jest will not absolve you in this manner. You that have sucked the Milk of the
Court, and from thence have been brought up to the very strong meats, and
Wine, of it; been a Courtier from the Biggen, to the Nightcap: (as we may
say) and you, to offend in such a high point of Ceremony, as this and let your
Nuptials want all marks of solemnity! How much Plate have you lost to day
(if you had but regarded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through your
mere Rusticitie?


Mor. Madame --


Hau. Pardon me, Sir, I must insinuate your errors to you. No Gloves? no
Garters? no Skarfes? no Epithalamium? no Masque?


Daw. Yes, Madame, I Will make an Epithalamium, I promised my Mistress, I have
begun it already: will your Ladyship hear it?


Hau. I, good Jack Daw.


Mor. Will it please your Ladyship command a Chamber, and be private with hour
friend? you shall have your choice of Rooms, to retire to after: my whole
House is yours. I know, it has been your Ladishis errand, into the City, at
other times, how ever now you have been unhappily diuerted upon me* but I
shall be loath to break any honorable custom of your Ladyships. And
therefore, good Madame --


Epi. Come, you are a rude Bridegroom, to entertayne Ladies of honor in this
fashion.


Cer. He is a rude Groom, indeed.


True. By that light, you deserve to grafted, and have your Horns reach from
one side of the Island, to the other. Do not mistake me, Sir, I but speak
this, to give the Ladies some heart again, not for any malice to you.


Mor. Is this your Brau^, Ladies?


True. As God help me, if you utter such another word, I Will take Mistress Bride
in and begin to you, in a very sad cup, do you see? Go too, know your
friends, and such, as love you.


Act III. Scene VII.
Clerimont, Morose, Tru-wit, Dauphine, La-Foole, Otter, Mrs. Otter, etc. BY
your leave, Ladies. Do you want any Music? I have brought you variety of
noyses. Play, Sirs, all of you.


Mor. Music of all sorts. O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot upon me! This
day, I shall be their Anuile to work on, they will grate me asunder. It Is
worse then the noise of a Saw.


Cle. No, they are Hair, Rosin, and Guts. I can give you the Receipt.


True. Peace, Boys.


Cle. Play, I say.


True. Peace, Rascals. You see who is your friend now, Sir? Take courage, put on
a Martyrs resolution. Mock down all their attemptings, with patience. It Is
but a day, and I would suffer heroically. Should an Ass exceed me in
fortitude? No. You betray your infirmity with your hanging dull ears, and
make them insult: bear up bravely, and constantly. Look you here, Sir, what
honor is done you unexpected, La-Foole passes over sewing the ^eate. by your
Nephew; a Wedding Dinner come, and a Knight Sewer before it, for the more
reputation: and fine Mistress Otter, your Neighbor, in the Rump, or Tail of it.


Mor. Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.


True. I warrant you, Sir, she will not transform you. Look upon her with a
good courage. Pray you entertayne her, and conduct your Guests in, No? Mistress
Bride, will you entreat in the Ladies? your Bridegroom is so shame-fac'd, here
--


Epi. Will it please your Ladyship, Madame?


Hau. With the benefit of your company, Mistress.


Epi. Servant, pray you perform your duties.


Daw. And glad to be commanded, Mistress.


Cen. How like you her wit, Mauis.


Mau. Very prettily, absolutely well.


Mrs. Ot. It Is my place.


Mau. You shall pardon me, Mistress Otter.


Mrs. Ot. Why, I am a Collegiate.


Mau. But not in ordinary.


Mrs. Ot. But I am.


Mau. We Will dispute that within.


Cle. Would this had lasted a little longer.


True. And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captain Otter, what news?


Ott. I have brought my Bull, Bear, and Horse, in private, and yonder are the
Trumpetters without, and the Drum, Gentlemen.


Mor. O, o, o. The Drum, and Trumpets sound,


Ott. And we will have a rouse in each of 'hem, anon, for bold Britons, in faith.


Mor. Follow, follow, follow.


Act IIII.
Scene I.
Tru-wit, Clerimont, Dauphine. WAs there ever poor Bridegroom so tormented?
or man indeed?


Cle. I have not read of the like, in the Chronicles of the Land.


True. Sure, he cannot but go to a place of rest, after all this Purgatory.


Cle. He may presume it, I think.


True The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neesing, the farting,
dancing, noise of the Music, and her masculine, and loud commanding, and
urging the whole Family, makes him think he has married a Fury.


Cle. And she carries it up bravely.


True. I, she takes any occasion to speak: that is the height on it.


Cle. And how so berly Dauphine labors to satisfy him, that it was none of
his plot!


True. And has almost brought him to the faith, in the article. Here he comes.
Where is he now? what is become of him, Dauphine?


Daup. O, hold me up a little, I shall go away in the jest else. He has got
on his whole Nest of Night-caps, and locked himself up, in the top of the
House, as high as ever he can climb from the noise. I peeped in at a cranny,
and saw him sitting over a crosse-beame of the roof, like him of the Sadiers
Horse in Fleetstreet, vp-right: and he will sleep there.


Cle. But where are your Collegiates?


Daup. With-drawne with the Bride in private.


True. O, they are instructing her in the Colledge-Grammar. If she have grace
with them, she knows all their secrets instantly.


Cle. Me thinks, the Lady Haughty looks well to day, for all my disprayse of
her in the morning. I think, I shall come about to thee again, Tru-wit.


True. Believe it, I told you right. Women ought to repair the losses, time and
years have made in their features, with dressings. And an intelligent Woman,
if she know by her self the least defect, will be most curious, to hide it:
and it becomes her. If she be short, let her sit much, lest when she stands,
she be thought to sit. If she have an ill foot, let her wear her Gown the
longer, and her Shoo the thinner. If a fat Hand, and scald Nails, let her
carue the less, and act in Gloves. If a sour breath, let her never discourse
fasting: and always talk at her distance. If she have black and rugged Teeth,
let her offer the less at laughter, especially if she laugh wide, and open.


Cle. O, you shall have some women, when they laugh, you would think they
brayed, it is so rude, and --


True. I, and others, that will stalk i'their gait like an Estrich, and take
huge strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I love measure in the feet, and
number in the voice: they are Gentlenesses, thaa oft-times draw no less then
the face.


Daup. How came thou to study these Creatures so exactly? I would thou
would make me a Proficient.


True. Yes, but you must leave to live in your Chamber then a month together
upon Amadis de Gaul, or Don Quixote, as you are wont; and come abroad where
the matter is frequent, to Court, to Tiltings, public Shows, and Feasts, to
Plays, and Church sometimes: thither they come to show their new Tyres too, to
see, and to be seen. In these places a m^n shall find whom to love, whom to
play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold cuer. The variety arrests his
judgment. A Wench to please a man comes not down dropping from the seeling,
as he lies on his back droning a Tobacco Pipe. He must go where she is.


Daup. Yes, and be never the near.


True. Out Heretic. That diffidence makes thee worthy, it should be so.


Cle. He says true to you, Dauphine.


Daup. Why?


True. A man should not doubt to over come any Woman. Think he can vanquish
'hem, and he shall, for though they deny, their desire is to be tempted.
Penelope her self cannot hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last.
You must persevere, and hold to your purpose. They would solicit us, but that
they are afraid. Howsoever, they wish in their hearts we should solicit
them. Praise them, flatter. 'hem, you shall never want Eloquence, or trust:
even the chastest delight to feel themselves that way rubbed. With Praises you
must mix Kisses too. If they take them, they will take more. Though they strive,
they would be overcome.


Cle. O, but a man must beware of force.


True. It is to them an acceptable violence, and has ofttimes the place of the
greatest courtesy. She that might have been forced, and you let her go free
without touching though she then seem to thank you, will ever hate you after:
and glad in the face, is assuredly sad at the heart.


Cle. But all women are not to be taken always.


True. It Is true. No more then all Birds, or all Fishes. If you appear learned
to an ignorant Wench, or iocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why she
presently begins to mistrust herself. You must approach them in their own
height, their own line: for the contrary makes many that fear to commit
themselves to noble and worthy fellows, run into the embraces of a Rascal.
If she love Wit, give Verses, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem,
to have good. If Valor, talk of your Sword, and be frequent in the mention of
Quarrels, though you be staunch in fighting. If actiuity be seen o'your Barbary
often, or leaping over stools, for the credit of your back. If she love good
clothes or dressing have your learned Counsel about you every morning, your
French Tailor, Barber, Linnener, etc. Let your Poulder, your Glass, and your
Comb, be your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your
head, then the safety: and wish the Commonwealth rather troubled, then a
hair about you. That will take her. Then if she be covetous and craving, do
you promise any thing, and perform sparingly: so shall you keep her in
appetite still. Seem as you would give, but be like a barren field that yields
little, or unlucky Dice, to foolish, and hoping Gamesters. Let your gifts be
flight, and dainty, ra her then precious. Let cunning be above cost. Give
Cherries at time of year, or Apricots; and say they were sent you out of the
Country, though you bought 'hem in Cheap-siae. Admire her Tyres; like her in
all fashions; compare her in every habit to some Deity; invent excellent
Dreams to flatter her, and Riddles; or, if she be a great one, perform
always the second parts to her: like what she likes, praise whom she praises,
and fail not to make the Household and Servants yours, yea the whole Family,
and salute 'hem by their names: ('it is but light cost if you can purchase' hem
so) and make her Physician your Pensioner, and her chief woman. Nor will it
be out of your gain to make love to her too, so she follow, not usher, her
Ladies pleasure. All blabbing is taken away, when she comes to be a part of the
crime.


Daup. On what Courtly lap have thou late slept, to come forth so sudden and
absolute a Courtling?


True. Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkening after
these Mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence, Dauphine. Speak, art thou
in love in earnest?


Daup. Yes by my troth am I: 'twere ill dissembling before thee.


True. With which of 'hem, I pray thee?


Daup. With all the Collegiates.


Cle. Out on thee. We Will keep you at home, believe it, in the Stable, and you
be such a Stallion.


True. No, I like him well. Men should love wisely, and all women: someone for
the face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please
the touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the ear; and where the
Objects mix, let the senses so too. Thou would think it strange, if I
should make 'hem all in love with thee a fore Night!


Daup. I would say thou had the best Philtre in the World, and could do
more then Madame Medea, or Doctor Foreman.


True. If I do not, let me play the Mounte-banke for my meat while I live, and
the Bawd for my drink.


Daup. So be it, I say.


Act IIII. Scene II.
Otter, Clerimont, Daw, Dauphine, Morose, Tru-wit, La-Foole, Mrs. Otter. O
Lord, Gentlemen, how my Knights and I have mist you here!


Cle. Why, Captain, what Service? what Service?


Ott. To see me bring up my Bull, Bear, and Horse to fight.


Daw. Yes faith, the Captain says we shall be his Dogs to bait 'hem.


Daup. A good employment.


True. Come on, let us see a course then.


La-F. I am afraid my Cousin will be offended if she come.


Ott. Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I have placed the Drum and the
Trumpets, and one to give 'hem the sign when you are ready. Here Is my Bull
for my self, and my Bear for Sir John Daw, and my Horse for Sir Amorous. Now
set your foot to mine, and yours to his, and --


La-F. Pray God my Cousin come not.


Ott. Saint George, and Saint Andrew, fear no Cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et
rauco strepuerunt cornuacantu.


True. Well said, Captain, in faith: well fought at the Bull.


Cle. Well held at the Bear.


True. Low, low, Captain.


Daup. OF the Horse has kicked off his Dog already.


La-F. I cannot drink it, as I am a Knight.


True. Gods so, off with his Spurs, somebody.


La-F. It goes again my conscience. My Cousin will be angry with it.


Daw. I have done mine.


True. You fought high and fair, Sir John.


Cle. At the head.


Daup. Like an excellent Beare-Dogge.


Cle. You take no notice of the business I hope.


Daw. Not a word, Sir, you see we are iouiall.


Ott. Sir Amorous, you must not aequiuocate. It must be pulled down, for all
my Cousin.


Cle. Sfoot, if you take not your drink, they will think you are discontented
with some thing: you will betray all, if you take the least notice.


La-F. Not I, I Will both drink, and talk then.


Ott. You must pull the Horse on his knees, Sir Amorous: fear no Cousins.
Iacta est alea.


True. O, now he is in his vain, and bold. The least hint given him of his Wife
now will make him rail desperately.


Cle. Speak to him of her.


True. Do you, and I Will fetch her to the hearing of it.


Daup. Captain he- Otter, your she- Otter is coming, your Wife.


Ott. Wife! Buz. Titinilitium. There Is no such thing in nature. I confess,
Gentlemen, I have a Cook, a Laundresse, a House-Drudge, that serves my
necessary turns, and goes under that title: But he is an Ass that will be so
vxorious, to tie his affections to one Circle. Come, the name duls appetite.
Here, replenish again: another bout. Wives are nasty, sluttish Animalls.


Daw. O, Captain.


Ott. As ever the Earth bare, tribus verbis. Where Is Master Tru-wit?


Daw. He Is slipped aside, Sir.


Cle. But you must drink, and be iouiall,


Daw. Yes, give it me.


La-F. And me, too.


Daw. Let Us be iouiall.


La-F. As iouiall as you will.


Ott. Agreed. Now you shall have the Bear, Cousin, and Sir John Daw the Horse,
and I Will have the Bull still. Sound Tritons of the Thames. Nunc est bibe^dum,
nunc pede libero --


Mor. Morose speaks from above: the Trumpets sounding. Villains, Murderers,
Sons of the Earth, and Traitors, what do you there?


Cle. O, now the Trumpets have waked him, we shall have his company.


Ott. A Wife is a sciruy Clogdogdo; an unlucky thing, a very foresaid
Beare-whelpe, without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia.


Daup. Why did you marry one then, Captain?


Ott. His Wife is brought out to bear him. A pox -- I married with six
thousand pound, I. I was in love with that. I have not kissed my Fury these
forty weeks.


Cle. The more to blame you, Captain.


True. Nay, Mistress Otter, hear him a little first.


Ott. She has a breath worse then my Grand-mothers, profecto.


Mrs. Ot. O treacherous Liar. Kiss me sweet Master Tru-wit, and prove him a
slandring Knave.


True. I Will rather believe you, Lady.


Ott. And she has a Perruke, that is like a pound of Hemp, made up in
Shoo-thrids.


Mrs. Ot. O Viper, Mandrake!


Ott. A most vile face! and yet she spends me forty pound a year in Mercury,
and Hogs-bones. All her Teeth were made in the Black- Friars: both her
eyebrows in the Strand, and her Hair in Siuer-street. Every part of the Town
ownes a piece of her.


Mrs. Ot. I cannot hold.


Ott. She takes her self asunder still when she goes to bed, into some
twenty Boxes; and about next day noone is put together again, like a great
Germane Clock: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole
House, and then is quiet again for an hour, but for her quarters. Have you
done me right, Gentlemen?


Mrs. Ot. No, Sir, I Will do you right with my quarters, with my quarters.


Ott. She falls upon him and beats upon him, O, hold, good Princess.


True. Sound, sound.


Cl^. A battle, a battle.


Mrs. Ot. You notorious stinkardly Beareward, does my breath smell?


Ott. Under correction, dear Princess: look to my Bear, and my Horse,
Gentlemen.


Mrs. Ot. Do I want Teeth, and Eyebrows, thou Bul-Dogge?


True. Sound, sound still.


Ott. No, I protest, under correction --


Mrs. Ott. I, now you are under correction, you protest: but you did not
protest before correction, Sir. Thou Judas, to offer to betray thy Princess!
I Will make thee an example --


Mor. Morose descends with a longsword I will have no such examples in my
House, Lady Otter.


Mrs. Ot. Ah --


Mor. Mistress Mary Ambree, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell Hounds,
Stentors, out of my doors, you sons of noise and tumult, begot on an ill
May Day, or when the Gally-foist is a-float to Westminster! A Trumpetter could
not be conceived but then!


Daup. What ailes you, Sir?


Mor. They have rent my Roof, Walls, and all my Windores asunder, with their
brazen throats.


True. Best follow him, Dauphine.


Daup. So I will.


Cle. Where Is Daw, and La-Foole?


Ott. They are both run away, Sir. Good Gentlemen, help to pacify my
Princess, and speak to the great Ladies for me. Now must I go lie with the
Bears this fortnight, and keep out of the way, till my peace be made, for
this scandale she has taken. Did you not see my Bull-head, Gentlemen?


Cle. Is It not on, Captain?


True. No: but he may make a new one, by that, is on.


Ott. O, here it is. And you come over, Gentlemen, and ask for Tom Otter,
we will go down to Ratcliffe, and have a course in faith: for all these
disasters. There Is bona spet left.


True. Away, Captain, get off while you are well.


Cle. I am glad we are rid of him.


True. You had never been, unless we had put his Wife upon him. His humor is
as tedious at last, as it was ridiculous at first.


Act IIII. Scene III.
Haughty, Mistress Otter, Mauis, Daw, La-Foole, Cenraure, Epicoene, Tru-wit,
Clerimont. WE wondered why you shreek'd so, Mistress Otter.


Mrs. Ot. O God, Madame, he came down with a huge long naked Weapon in both
his hands, and looked so dreadfully! Sure, he is beside himself.


Mau. Why, what made you there, Mistress Otter?


Mrs. Ot. Alas, Mistress Mauis, I was chastising my subject, and thought nothing
of him.


Daw. Faith, Mistress, you must do so too. Learn to chastize. Mistress Otter
corrects her Husband so, he dares not speak, but under correction.


La-F. And with his Hat off to her: 'twould do you good to see.


Hau. In sadness it is good, and mature counsel: practice it, Morose. I Will
call you Morose still now, as I call Centaure, and Mauis: we four will be all
one.


Cen. And you will come to the College, and live with us?


Hau. Make him give Milk, and Honey.


Mau. Look how you manago him at first, you shall have him ever after.


Cen. Let him allow you your Coach, and four Horses, your Woman, your
Chambermaid, your Page your Gentleman-usher, your French Cook, and four
Grooms.


Hau. And go with us, to Bed'lem, to the China Houses, and to the Exchange.


Cen. It will open the gate to your fame.


Hau. Here Is Centaure has immortalized her self, with taming of her wild Male.


Mau. I, she has done the Miracle of the Kingdom.


Epi. But Ladies, do you count it lawful to have such plurality of Servants,
and do 'hem all graces?


Hau. Why not? why should women deny their Favors to men? Are they the
poorer, or the worse?


Daw. Is the Thames the less for the Dyers Water, Mistress?


La-F. Or a Torch, for lighting many Torches?


True. Well said, La-Foole; what a new one he has got!


Cen. They are empty losses, women fear, in this kind.


Hau. Besides, Ladies should be mindful of the approach of age, and let no
time want his due use. The best of our days pass first.


Mau. We are Rivers, that cannot be called back, Madame: she that now
excludes her Lovers, may live to lie a forsaken Beldame, in a frozen Bed.


Genesis It Is true, Mauis: and who will wait on us to coach then? or write, or
tell us the news then? Make Anagrams of our names, and inuit us to the
Cockpit, and kiss our hands all the Play-time, and draw their weapons for our
honors?


Hau. Not one.


Daw. Nay, my Mistress is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here
be in presence have tasted of her favors.


Cle. What a neighing Hobbyhorse is this!


Epi. But not with intent to boast 'hem again, Servant. And have you those
excellent Receipts, Madame, to keep your selves from bearing of Children?


now to comfort a poor Gentlewoman? Ay me! what fortune had I to marry a
distracted man?

Daw. I Will tell you, Mistress --


True. How rarely she holds it up!


Mor. What mean you, Gentlemen?


Epi. What will you tell me, Servant?


Daw. The Disease in Greek, is called Mayia, in Latin, Insania, Furor, vel
Ecstasis melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit
fanaticus.


Mor. Shall I have a Lecture read upon me alive?


Daw. But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, Mistress? and Phrenetis is only
delirium, or so --


Epi. I, that is for the Disease, Servant: but what is this to the cure? we are
sure enough of the Disease.


Mor. Let me go.


True. Why, we will entreat her to hold her peace, Sir.


Mor. O, no. Labor not to stop her. She is like a Conduit-pipe, that will
gush out with more force, when she opens again.


Hau. I Will tell you, Morose, you must talk Divinity to her altogether, or
moral Philosophy.


La-F. I, and there is an excellent Book of moral Philosophy, Madame, of
Raynard the Fox, and all the Beasts, called Dones Philosophy.


Cen. There is, indeed, Sir Amorous La-Foole.


Mor. O misery!


La-F. I have read it, my Lady Centaure, all over to my Cousin, hers.


Mrs. Ot. I, and it is a very good Book as any is, of the Modernes.


Daw. Tut, he must have Seneca read to him, and Plutarch, and the Ancients; the
Modernes are not for this Disease.


Cle. Why, you discommended them too, to day, Sir John


Daw. I, in some Cases: but in these they are best, and Aristotle's Ethics.


Mau. Say you so, Sir John? I think you are decelu'd: you took it upon trust.


Hau. Where Is Trusty, my woman? I Will end this difference. I pr'y thee, Otter,
call her. Her Father and Mother were both mad, when they put her to me.


Mor. I think so. Nay, Gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exercise, I know a
Marriage Ceremony, which I must endure.


Hau. And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cured with the Sick-mans Salve;
and the other with Greens Groats-worth of wit.


True. A very cheap Cure, Madame.


Hau. I, it is very faesible.


Mrs. Ot. My Lady called for you, Mistress Trusty: you must decide a
Controversy.


Hau. O Trusty, which was it you said, your Father, or your Mother, that was
cured with the Sick-mans Salve?


Trus. My Mother, Madame, with the Salve.


True. Then it was the Sick-womans Salve.


Trus. And my Father with the Groats-worth of wit. But there was other means
used: we had a Preacher that would preach folk asleep still; and so they were
prescribed to go to Church, by an old Woman that was their Physician, thrice a
Week --


Epi. To sleep?


Trus. Yes forsooth: and every night they read themselves asleep on those
Books.


Epi. Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure
those Books.


Mor. Oh.


La-F. I can help you with one of 'hem, Mistress Morose, the Groats-worth of
wit.


Epi. But I shall disfurnish you, Sir Amorous: can you spare it?


La-F. O, yes, for a Week, or so; I Will read it my self to him.


Epi. No, I must do that, Sir: that must be my office.


Mor. Sure, he would do well enough, if he could sleep.


Mor. No, I should do well enough, if you could sleep. Have I no friend that
will make her drunk? or give her a little ladanum? or opium?


True. Why, Sir, she talks ten times worse in her sleep.


Mor. How!


Cle. Do you not know that, Sir? never ceases all night.


True. And snores like a Porcpisce.


Mor. O, redeem me, Fate, redeem me, Fate. For how how many causes may a man
be diuorc'd, Nephew?


Daw. I know not truly, Sir.


True. Some Divine must resolve you in that, Sir, or Canon Lawyer.


Mor. I will not rest, I will not think of any other hope or comfort till I
know.


Cle. Alas, poor man.


True. You Will make him mad indeed, Ladies, if you pursue this.


Hau. No, we will let him breathe, now a quarter of an hour, or so.


Cle. By my faith, a large Truce.


Hau. Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?


Daw. It is his Nephew, Madame.


La-F. Sir Dauphine, Eugenie.


Cen. He looks like a very pitiful Knight --


Daw. As can be. This Marriage, has put him out of all.


La-F. He has not a penny in his Purse, Madame --


Daw. He is ready to cry all this day.


La-F. A very Sharke, he set me in the nicke the other night at Primero.


True. How these Swabbers talk!


Cle. I, Otters Wine has swelled their humors above a Springtide.


Hau. Good Morose, let us go in again. I like your couches exceeding well:
we will go lie, and talk there.


Epi. I wait on you, Madame.


True. 'Slight, I will have 'hem as silent as Signs, and their Posts too, e're
I have done. Do you hear, Ladie-Bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble
Wench, continue this Discourse of Dauphine within: but praise him exceedingly.
Magnify him with all the height of affection thou can. (I have some purpose
in it) and but beat off these two Rookes, Jack Daw, and his fellow, with any
coffeehouse hither, and I Will honor thee for ever.


Epi. I was about it, here. It angered me to the soul, to hear 'hem begin to
talk so malepert.


True. Pray thee perform it, and thou win'st me an Idolater to thee,
everlasting.


Epi. Will you go in, and hear me do it?


Cle. No, I Will stay here. Drive 'hem out of your company, it is all I ask:
which cannot be any way better done, then by extolling Dauphine, whom they
have so slighted.


Epi. I warrant you: you shall expect one of 'hem presently.


Cle. What a cast of Kastrils are these, to hawke after Ladies, thus?


True. I, and strike at such an Eagle as Dauphine.


Cle. He will be mad, when we will tell him. Here he comes.


Act IIII. Scene V.
Clerimont, Tru-wit, Dauphine, Daw, La-Foole. O Sir, you are welcome.


True. Where Is thine Uncle?


Daup. Run out o'doores in's Night-caps, to talk with a Casuist, about his
Divorce. It works admirably.


True. Thou would have said so, and thou had been here! The Ladies have
laughed at thee, most Comically, since thou wentst, Dauphine.


Cle. And asked, if thou were thine Uncles keeper?


True. And the brace of Babouns answered, yes; and said, thou were a pitiful
poor fellow, and did live upon posts: and had nothing but three Suits of
Apparel, and some few Beneuolences that Lords ga'thee to fool to hem, and
swagger.


Daup. Let me not live, I Will beat 'hem. I Will bind 'hem both to grand Madames
Bed. posts, and have 'hem bayted with Monkeyes.


True. Thou shall not need, they shall be beaten to thy hand, Dauphine. I have
an Execution to serve upon 'hem, I warrant thee shall serve: trust my plot.


Daup. I, you have many plots! So you had one, to make all the Wenches in love
with me.


True. Why, If I do not yet before night, as near as it is; and that they do
not every one inuit thee, and be ready to scratch for thee: take the morgage
of my wit.


Cle. Before God, I Will be his witness; thou shall have it, Dauphine: thou
shall be his Fool for ever, if thou do not.


True. Agreed. Perhaps 'twill be the better estate. Do you observe this
Gallerie? or rather Lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of Studies, at each end
one: here will I act such a Tragi-comoedy between the Cuelphes, and the
Ghibellines, Daw and La-Foole -- which of 'hem comes out first, will I seize
on: (you two shall be the Chorus behind the Arras, and whip out between the
Acts, and speak.) If I do not make 'hem keep the peace, for this remnant of
the day, if not of the year, I have faild once -- I hear Daw coming: Hide,
and do not laugh, for Gods sake.


Daw. Which is the way into the Garden, trow?


True. O, Jack Daw! I am glad I have met with you. In good faith, I must have
this matter go no further between you. I must have it taken up.


Daw. What matter, Sir? Between whom?


True. Come, you disguise it -- Sir Amorous and you. If you love me, Jack, you
shall make use of your Philosophy now, for this once, and deliver me your Sword.
This is not the Wedding the Centaures were at, though there be a shee-one here.
The Bride has entreated me I will see no blood shed at her Bridal, you saw
her whisper me ere-while.


Daw. As I hope to finish Tacitus, I intend no Murder.


True. Do you not wait for Sir Amorous?


Daw. Not I, by my Knighthood.


True. And your Schollership too?


Daw. And my Schollership too.


True. Go to, then I return you your Sword, and ask you mercy; but put it not
up, for you will be assaulted. I understood that you had apprehended it, and
walked here to brave him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in
regard of your honor.


Daw. No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good fileds
as could be.


True. Trust not you to that Visor. I saw him since Dinner with another face: I
have known many men in my time vexed with losses, with doeths, and with
abuses, but so offended a Wight as Sir Amorous, did I never see, or read of.
For taking away his Guests, Sir, to day, that is the cause: and he declares it
behind your back; with such threatenings and centempts -- He said to Dauphine,
you were the errandst Ass --


Daw. I, he may say his pleasure.


True. And swears you are so protested a Coward, that he knows you will never
do him any manly or single right, and therefore he will take his course.


Daw. I Will give him any satisfaction, Sir -- but fighting.


True. I, Sir, but who knows what satisfaction he will take? blood he thirsts
for, and blood he will have: and where-abouts on you he will have it, who
knows but himself?


Daw. I pray you, Master Tru-wit, be you a Mediator.


True. He puts him up. Well, Sir, conceal your self then in this study, till
I return. Nay, you must be content to be locked in: for, for mine own
reputation I would not have you seen to receive a public disgrace, while I
have the matter in managing. Gods so, here he comes: keep your breath close,
that he do not hear you sigh. In good faith, Sir Amorous, he is not this way,
I pray you be merciful, do not murder him; he is a Christian as good as you:
you are armed as if you sought a revenge on all his Race. Good Dauphine, get
him away from this place. I never knew a man's choler so high, but he would
speak to his friends, he would hear reason. Jack Daw, Jack Daw! a-sleepe?


Daw. Is he gone, Master Tru-wit?


True. I, did you hear him?


Daw. O God, yes.


True. What a quick ear fear has?


Daw. But is he so armed, as you say?


True. Armed? did you ever see a fellow, set out to take possession?


Daw. I, Sir.


True. That may give you some light, to conceive of him: but it is nothing to the
principal. Some false Brother in the house has furnished him strangely. Or, if
it were out of the house, it was Tom Otter.


Daw. Indeed, he is a Captain, and his Wife is his Kinswoman.


True. He has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword to mow you off at the knees.
And that Sword has spawned such a Dagger! -- but then he is so hung with
Pikes, Halberds, Peitro^ells, Calliuers, and Muskets, that he looks like a
Justice of Peace's Hall: a man of two thousand a year, is not sess'd at so
many weapons, as he has on. There was never Fencer challenged at so many
several Foyles. You would think he meant to murder all Saint Pulehres Parish.
If he could but victual himself for half a year, in his breeches, he is
sufficiently armed to overrun a Country.


Daw. Good Lord, what means he, Sir! I pray you Master Tru-wit, be you a
Mediator?


True. Well, I Will try if he will be appeased with a Leg or an Arm, if not you
must die once.


Daw. I would be loath to loose my right Arm, for writing Madrigalls.


True. Why, if he will be satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, all is
one to me. You must think, I Will do my best.


Daw. Good Sir, do.


Cle. He puts him up again, and then came forth. What have thou done?


True. He will let me do nothing, man, he does all before me, he offers his
left arm.


Cle. His left wing, for a Jack Daw.


Daw. Take it, by all means.


True. How! Maime a man for ever, for a jest? what a conscience have thou?


Daup. It Is no loss to him: he has no employment for his Arms, but to eat
spoone-meat. Beside, as goods maime his body as his reputation.


True. He is a Scholar, and a Wit, and yet he does not think so. But he
looses no reputation with us, for we all resolved him an Ass before. To your
places again.


Cle. I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.


True. Look, you will spoil all: these be ever your tricks.


Cle. No, but I could hit of somethings that thou will miss, and thou will say
are good ones.


True. I warrant you. I pray forbear, I Will leave it off, else.


Daup. Come away, Clerimont.


True. Sir Amorous!


La-F. Master Tru-wit.


True. Whither were you going?


La-F. Down into the Court, to make water.


True. By no means, Sir, you shall rather tempt your breeches.


La-F. Why, Sir?


True. Enter here, if you love your life.


La-F. Why! why!


True. Question till your throat be cut, do: dally till the enraged soul find
you.


La-F. Who Is that?


True. Daw it is: will you in?


La-F. I, I, I Will in: what is the matter?


True. Nay, if he had been cool enough to tell us that, there had been some
hope to atone you, but he seems so implacably enraged.


La-F. 'Slight, let him rage. I Will hide my self.


True. Do, good Sir. But what have you done to him within, that should provoke
him thus? you have broke some Jest upon him, a-fore the Ladies --


La-F. Not I, never in my life, broke Jest upon any man. The Bride was praising
Sir Dauphine, and he went away in snuff, and I followed him, unless he took
offense at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge all the horse
full.


True. By my faith, and that may be, you remember well: but he walks the round
up and down, through every room of the house, with a Towell in his hand,
crying, where is La-Foole? who saw La-Foole? and when Dauphine, and I, demanded
the cause, we can force no answer from him, but (o revenge, how sweet art
thou! I will strangle him in this Towell) which leads us to conjecture, that
the maine cause of his fury is for bringing your meat to day, with a Towell
about you, to his discredit.


La-F. Like enough. Why, and he be angry for that. I Will stay here, till his
anger be blown over.


True. A good becoming resolution, Sir. If you can put it on of the sudden.


La-F. Yes, I can put it on. Or, I Will away into the Country presently.


True. How will you get out of the house, Sir? He knows you are in the house,
and he will watch you this se'n-night but he will have you. He Will out-wait a
Seriant for you.


La-F. Why, then I Will stay here.


True. You must think, how to victual your self in time, then.


La-F. Why, sweet Master Tru-wit, will you entreat my Cousin Otter, to send me
a cold Venison Pasty, a Bottle or two of Wine, and a Chamber Pot.


True. A stool were better, Sir, of Sir A-iax his invention.


La-F. I, that will be better indeed: and a Pallat to lie on.


True. O, I would not advise you to sleep by any means.


La-F. Would you not, Sir? why, then I will not.


True. Yet, there is another fear --


La-F. Is there, Sir? What is it?


True. No, he cannot break open this door with his foot, sure.


La-F. I Will set my back against it, Sir. I have a good back.


True. But, then if he should batter.


La-F. Batter! if he dare, I Will have an Action of Batt'ry, against him.


True. Cast you the worst. He has sent for poulder already, and what he will
do with it, no man knows: perhaps blow up the corner of the house where be
suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, Sir John Daw, He
faines as if one were present, to fright the other, who is run in to hide
himself. he is not this way: what will you do? before God, you shall ha^^g no
petar de here. I Will dye rather Will you not take my word? I never knew one but
would be satisfied. Sir Amorous, there is no standing out. He has made a
petarde of an old brass Pot, to force your door. Think upon some
satisfaction or terms, to offer him.


La-F. Sir, I Will give him any satisfaction. I dare give any terms.


True. You Will leave it to me, then?


La-F. I, Sir. I Will stand to any conditions.


True. He calls forth Clerimont, and Dauphine. How now, what think you, Sirs?
were it not a difficult thing to determine, which of these two feared most.


Cle. Yes, but this fears the brauest: the other a whiniling daftard, Jack
Daw: but La-Foole, a brave heroique coward! and is afraid in a great look, and
a stout accent. I like him rarely.


True. Had it not been pity, these two should ha'beene concealed?


Cle. Shall I make a motion?


True. Briefly. For I must strike while it is hot.


Cle. Shall I go fetch the Ladies to the Catastrophe?


True. Vmh? I, by my troth.


Daup. By no mortal means. Let them continue in the state of ignorance, and
err still: think 'hem wits, and fine fellows, as they have done. 'Twere
sin to reform them.


True. Well, J will have 'hem fetched, now I think on it, for a private purpose
of mine: do, Clerimont, fetch 'hem, and discourse to 'hem all that is past, and
bring 'hem into the Gallery here.


Daup. This is thy extreme vanity, now: thou think thou were undone, if
every Jest thou make were not published.


True. Thou shall see, how unjust thou art, presently. Clerimont, say it was
Dauphine's plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift be not for thy good.
There Is a Carpet in the next room, put it on, with this Scarf over thy face,
and a Cushion of thy head, and be ready when I call Amorous. Away --. John Daw.


Daw. What good news, Sir?


True. Faith, I have followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you
were a Knight, and a Scholar; and that you knew fortitude did consist magis
patiendo quam faciendo, magis ferendo quam feriendo.


Daw. It does so indeed, Sir.


True. And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my
troth, in my conceit, too much.


Daw. What was it, Sir.


True. Your upper lip, and six of your fore-teeth.


Daw. 'Twas unreasonable.


True. Nay, I told him plainly, you could not spare 'hem all. So after long
argument ( pro and con, as you know) I brought him down to your two
Butter-teeth, and them he would have.


Daw. O, did you so? why, he shall have 'hem.


True. But he shall not, Sir, by your leave. The conclusion is this, Sir,
because you shall be very good friends hereafter, and this never to be
remembered, or vpbrayded; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such
thing to you in his own person: he is to come here in disguise, give you five
kicks in private, Sir, take your Sword from you, and lock you up in that
Study, during pleasure. Which will be but a little while, we will get it
released presently.


Daw. Five kicks? he shall have six, Sir, to be friends.


True. Believe me, you shall not ouer-shoot your self, to send him that word by
me.


Daw. Deliver it, Sir. He shall have it with all my heart, to be friends.


True. Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and heartily too, upon these
terms, he shall have me to enemy while I live. Come, Sir, bear it bravely.


Daw. O God, Sir, it is nothing.


True. True. What Is six kicks to a man, that reads Seneca?


Daw. I have had a hundred, Sir.


True. Sir Amorous. No speaking one to another, Dauphine comes forth, and kicks
him. or rehearsing old matters.


Daw. One, two, three, four, five. I protest, Sir Amorous, you shall have six.


True. Nay, I told you should not talk. Come give him six, and he will needs.
Your Sword. Now return to your safe custody: you shall presently meet before
the Ladies, and be the dearest friends one to another -- Give me the Scarf,
now, thou shall beat the other barefaced. Stand by, Sir Amorous.


La-F. What Is here? A Sword.


True. I cannot help it, without I should take the quarrel upon my self: here
he has sent you his Sword --


La-F. I ll receive none on it.


True. And he wills you to fasten it against a wall, and break your head in
some few several places against the Hilts.


La-F. I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my own blood.


True. Will you not?


La-F. No. I ll beat it against a fair flat wall, if that will satisfy him:
If not, he shall beat it himself, for Amorous.


True. Why, this is strange starting off, when a man undertakes for you! I
offered him another condition: will you stand to that?


La-F. Yes, I am content, at the blunt.


True. Then you must submit your self to be hood-winked in this Skarse, and
be led to him, where he will take your Sword from you, and make you bear a
blow, over the Mouth, Gules, and tweakes by the Nose, Sans number.


La-F. I am content. But why must I be blinded?


True. That Is for your good, Sir: because, if he should grow insolent upon
this, and publ^sh it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope he will not do)
you might swear safely and protest, he never beat you to your knowledge.


La-F. O, I conceive.


True. I do not doubt, but you will be perfect good friends upon it, and not dare
to utter an ill thought one of another, in future.


La-F. Not I, as God help me, of him.


True. Nor he of you, Sir. If he should -- Come, Sir. All hid, Sir John.


La-F. Oh, Sir John, Sir John. Dauphine enters to tweake him, Oh, o-o o o o Oh
--


True. Good Sir John, leave tweaking, you will blow his Nose off. It Is Sir John's
pleasure, you should retire into the Study. Why, now you are friends. All
bitterness between you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by,
Damon and Pythias upon it: and embrace with all the rankness of Friendship that
can be. I trust, we shall have 'hem tamer i'their Language hereafter.
Dauphine, I worship thee. Gods will, the Ladies have surprised us!


Act IIII. Scene VI.
Having discouerd part of the past Scene above: Haughty, Centaure, Mauis,
Mistress Otter, Epicoene, Trusty, Dauphine, Tru-wit, etc. CEntaure, how our
judgments were imposed on by these adulterate Knights!


Cen. Nay, Madame, Mauis was more deceived then we, 'twas her commendation
vtter'd 'hem in the College.


Mau. I commended but their wits, Madame, and their braueries. I never looked
toward their valors.


Hau. Sir Dauphine is valiant, and a wit too, it seems.


Mau. And a bravery too.


Hau. Was this his project?


Mrs. Ot. So Master Clerimont intimates, Madame.


Hau. Good Morose, when you come to the College, will you bring him with you?
He seems a very perfect Gentleman.


Epi. He is so Madame, believe it.


Cen. But when will you come, Morose?


Epi. Three or four days hence, Madame, when I have got me a Coach, and
Horses.


Hau. No, to morrow, good Morose, Centaure shall send you her Coach.


Mau. Yes faith, do, and bring Sir Dauphine with you.


Hau. She has promised that Mauis.


Mau. He is a very worthy Gentleman, in his exteriors, Madame.


Hau. I, he shows he is judicial in his clothes.


Cen. And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, Madame, that have their faces
set in a Brake!


Hau. I, and have every hair in form!


Mau. That wear purer Linen then our selves, and profess more neatness,
then the French Hermaphrodite!


Epi. I Ladies, they, what they tell one of us, have told a thousand, and are
the only Thieves of our fame: that think to take us with that Perfume, or with
that Lace, and laugh at us vn-conscionably when they have done.


Hau. But, Sir Dauphines carelessness becomes him.


Cen. I could love a man, for such a Nose!


Mau. Or such a Leg!


Cen. He has an exceeding good eye, Madame!


Mau. And a very good Lock!


Cen. Good Morose, bring him to my Chamber first.


Mrs. Ot. Please your Honors, to meet at my House, Madame?


True. See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken I warrant thee.


Hau. You have vnbrac'd our brace of Knights, here, Master Tru-wit.


True. Not I, Madame, it was Sir Dauphines inginer: who, if he have disfurnish'd
your Ladyship of any guard, or service by it, is able to make the place good
again, in himself.


Hau. There Is no suspicion of that, Sir.


Cen. God so, Mauis, Haughty is kissing.


Mau. Let us go too, and take part.


Hau. But I am glad of the fortune (beside the discovery of two such empty
Caskets) to gain the knowledge of so rich a Mine of Virtue, as Sir Dauphine.


Cen. We would be all glad to style him of our friendship, and see him at the
College.


Mau. He cannot mix with a sweeter society, I Will prophecy, and I hope he
himself will think so.


Daup. I should be rude to imagine otherwise, Lady.


True. Did not I tell thee, Dauphine? Why, all their actions are governed by
crude opinion, without reason or cause; they know not why they do any thing:
but as they are informed, believe, judge, praise, condemn, love, hate, and in
aemulation one of another, do all these things alike. Only, they have a
natural inclination swayes 'hem generally to the worst, when they are left to
themselves. But, pursue it, now thou haft 'hem.


Hau. Shall we go in again, Morose?


Epi. Yes, Madame.


Cen. We Will entreat Sir Dauphines company.


True. Stay, good Madame, the inter-view of the two friends, Pylades and
Orestes: I Will fetch 'hem out to you straight.


Hau. Will you, Master Tru-wit?


Daup. I, but noble Ladies, do not confess in your countenance, or outward
bearing to 'hem any discovery of their follies, that we may see, how they
will bear up again, with what assurance, and erection.


Hau. We will not, Sir Dauphine.


Cen. Mau. Upon our honors, Sir Dauphine.


True. Sir Amorous, Sir Amorous. The Ladies are here.


La-F. Are they?


True. Yes, but slip out by and by, as their backs are turned, and meet Sir
John here, as by chance, when I call you. Jack Daw.


Daw. What say you, Sir?


True. Whip out behind me suddenly: and no anger in your looks to your
Adversary. Now, now.


La-F. Noble Sir John Daw! where have you been?


Daw. To seek you, Sir Amorous.


La-F. Me! I honor you.


Daw. I prevent you* Sir.


Cle. They have forgot their Rapiers!


True. O, they meet in peace, man.


Daup. Where Is your Sword, Sir John?


Cle. And yours, Sir Amorous?


Daw. Mine! my Boy had it forth, to mend the handle, cene now.


La-F. And my gold handle was broke too, and my Boy had it forth.


Daup. Indeed, Sir? How their excuses meet!


Cle. What a consent there is, in the handles?


True. Nay, there is so in the points too, I warrant you.


Mrs. Ot. O me! Madame, he comes again, the mad man, away.


Act. IIII. Scene VII.
Morose, Tru-wit, Clerimont, Dauphine. He had sound the two Swords drawn
within. WHat make these naked weapons here, Gentlemen?


True. O, Sir! here has like to been muder since you went! A couple of Knights
fallen out about the Brides favors: we were feign to take away their weapons,
your house had been begged by this time else --


Mor. For what?


Cle. For Man slaughter, Sir, as being accessory.


Mor, And, for her favors?


True. I, Sir, heretofore, not present. Clerimont, carry 'hem their Swords,
now. They have done all the hurt they will do.


Daup. Have you spoke with a Lawyer, Sir?


Mor. O, no! there is such a noise in the Court, that they have frighted me
home, with more violence then I went! such speaking, and counter-speaking, with
their several voices of Citations, Appellations, Allegations, Certificates,
Attachments, Intergatories, References, Conuictions, and Afflictions indeed,
among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noise here is silence to it! a kind of
midnight!


True. Why, Sir, if you would be resolved indeed, I can bring you hither a very
sufficient Lawyer, and a Learned Divine, that shall inquire into every least
scruple for you.


Mor. Can you Master Tru-wit?

Yes, and are very sober grave persons, that will dispatch it in a Chamber,
with a whisper, or two.


Mor. Good Sir, shall I hope this benefit from you, and trust my self into
your hands?


True. Alas, Sir! your Nephew, and I, have been ashamed, and oft-times mad
since you went, to think how you are abused. Go in, good Sir, and lock your
self up till we call you, we will tell you more anon, Sir.


Mor. Do your pleasure with me, Gentlemen; I believe in you: and that
deserves no delusion --


True. You shall find none, Sir: but heapt, heapt plenty of vexation.


Daup. What will thou do now, Wit?


True. Recover me hither Otter, and the Barber if you can, by any means,
presently.


Daup. Why? to what purpose?


True. O, I Will make the deepest Divine, and grauest Lawyer, out of them two, for
him --


Daup. Thou can not man, these are waking Dreams.


True. Do not fear me. Clap but a Civil Gown with a Welt, of the one; and a
Canonical Cloak with Sleeves, of the other: and give 'hem a few terms in
their mouths, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and complete a Parson,
for this turn, as may be wished, trust not my Election. And, I hope without
wronging the dignity of either Profession, since they are but persons put on,
and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters Latin, I remember.


Daup. Yes, and Otter too.


True. Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this Case, to his no comfort,
let me be thought a lack Daw, or La-Foole, or any thing worse, Go you to
your Ladies, but first send for them.


Daup. I will.


Act V.
Scene I.
La-Foole, Clerimont, Daw, Manis. WHere had you our Swords, Master Clerimont?


Cle. Why, Dauphine took 'hem from the madman.


La-F. And he took 'hem from our Boys, I warrant you?


Cle. Very like, Sir.


La-F. Thank you good Master Clerimont. Sir John Daw, and I are both beholden
to you.


Cle. Would I knew how to make you so, Gentlemen:


Daw. Sir Amorous, and I are your Servants, Sir.


Mau. Gentlemen, have any of you a Pen-and-Inke. I would feign write out a
Riddle in Italian, for Sir Dauphine, to translate.


Cle. Not I, in troth Lady, I am no Scriuener.


Daw. I can furnish you, I think, Lady.


Cle. He has it in the Haft of a Knife, I believe!


La-F. No, he has his Box of Instruments.


Cle. Like a Surgean!


La-F. For the Mathematiques: his Squire, his Compasses, his Brass Pens, and
Black-lead, to draw Maps of every place, and person, where he comes.


Cle. How, Maps of persons!


La-F. Yes, Sir, of Nomentack, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia,
and of Mistress, Mistress Epicane.


Cle. Away! he has not found our her Latitude, I hope.


La-F. You are a pleasant Gentleman, Sir.


Cle. Faith, now we are in private, let us wanton it a little, and talk
waggishly. Sir John, I am telling Sir Amorous here, that you two govern the
Ladies, where e're you come. you carry the Feminine Gender before you.


Daw. They shall rather carry us before them, if they will, Sir.


Cle. Nay, I believe that they do, withal -- But, that you are the prime-men
in their affections, and direct all their actions --


Daw. Not I: Sir Amorous is.


La-F. I protest, Sir John is.


Daw. As I hope to rise in the state, Sir Amorous, you have the person.


La-F. Sir John, you have the person, and the Discourse too.


Daw. Not I, Sir. I have no discourse -- and then you have actiuitie beside.


La-F. I protest, Sir John, you come as high from Tripoly, as I do every whit:
and lift as many joined stools, and leap over 'hem, if you would use it --


Cle. Well, agree on it together Knights; for between you, you divide the
Kingdom, or Commonwealth of Ladies affections: I see it, and can perceive a
little how they observe you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell strange
Stories, my Masters, if you would, I know.


Daw. Faith, we have seen somewhat, Sir.


La-F. That we have -- Vellet Petticoates, and wrought Smocks, or so.


Daw. I, and --

Nay, out with it, Sir John: do not envy your friend the pleasure of hearing,
when you have had the delight of tasting.


Daw. Why -- a -- do you speak, Sir Amorous.


La-F. No, do you, Sir John Daw.


Daw. In Faith, you shall.


La-F. In Faith, you shall.


Daw. Why, we have been --


La-F. In the great Bed at Ware together in our time. On, Sir John.


Daw. Nay, do you, Sir Amorous.


Cle. And these Ladies with you, Knights?


La-F. No, excuse us, Sir.


Daw. We must not wound reputation.


La-F. No matter -- they were these, or others. Our bath cost us fifteen
pound, when we came home.


Cle. Do you hear, Sir John, you shall tell me but one thing truly, as you
love me.


Daw. If I can, I will, Sir.


Cle. You lay in the same house with the Bride, here?


Daw. Yes, and conuerst with her hourly, Sir.


Cle. And what humor is she of? is she coming, and open, free?


Daw. O, exceeding open, Sir. I was her Servant, and Sir Amorous was to be.


Cle. Come, you have both had favors from her? I know, and have heard so much.


Daw. O, no, Sir.


La-F. You shall excuse us, Sir: we must not wound reputation.


Cle. Tut, she is married, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and
therefore speak plainly: how many times, in faith? which of you lead first? Ha?


La-F. Sir John had her Mayden-head, indeed.


Daw. O, it pleases him to say so, Sir, but Sir Amorous knows what is what, as
well.


Cle. Do thou in faith, Amorous?


La-F. In a manner, Sir.


Cle. Why, I commend you Lads. Little knows Don Bride groom of this. Nor
shall he, for me.


Daw. Hang him, mad Ox.


Cle. Speak softly: here comes his Nephew, with the Lady Haughty. He Will get
the Ladies from you, Sirs, if you look not to him in time.


La-F. Why, if he do, we will fetch 'hem home again, I warrant you.


Act V. Scene II.
Haughty, Dauphine, Centaure, Mauis, Clerimont. IAssure you, Sir Dauphine, it
is the price and estimation of your virtue only, that has embarked me to
this adventure, and I could not but make out to tell you; nor can I repent me
of the act, since it is always an argument of some virtue in our selves, that
we love and affect it so in others.


Daup. Your Ladyship sets too high a price, on my weakness.


Hau. Sir, I can distinguish Gemmes from Peebles --


Daup. (Are you so skillful in Stones?)


Hau. And, howsoever I may suffer in such a judgment as yours, by admitting
equality of rank, or society, with Centaure or Mauis --


Daup. You do not, Madame, I perceive they are your mere Foyles.


Hau. Then are you a friend to truth, Sir. It makes me love you the more. It
is not the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are not apprehensiue
of an eminent perfection, but love flat, and dully.


Cen. Where are you, my Lady Haughty.


Hau. I come presently, Centawe. My Chamber, Sir, my Page shall show you; and
Trusty, my woman, shall be ever a wake for you: you need not fear to
communicate any thing with her, for she is a Fidelia. I pray you wear this
Jewel for my sake, Sir Dauphine. Where Is Mauis, Centaure?


Cen. Within, Madame, a writing. I Will follow you presently. I Will but speak a
word with Sir Dauphine.


Daup. With me, Madame?


Cen. Good Sir Dauphine, do not trust Haughty, nor make any credit to her,
what ever you do besides. Sir Dauphine, I give you this caution, she is a
perfect Courtier; and loves no body, but for her uses: and for her uses, she
loves all. Besides, her Phisicians give her out to be none of the cleerest,
whether she pay 'hem or no, Heaven knows: and she is abode fifty too, and
pargets! See her in a fore-noone. Here comes Mauis, a worse face then she!
you would not like this, by Candlelight. If you will come to my Chamber one of
these Mornings early, or late in an Evening, I Will tell you more. Where Is
Haughty, Mauis?


Mau. Within, Centaure.


Cen. What have you, there?


Mau. An Italian Riddle for Sir Dauphine, (you shall not see it in faith,
Centaure.) Good Sir Dauphine, solue it for me. I Will call for it anon.


Cle. How now, Dauphine? how do thou quit thy self of these Females?


Daup. 'Slight, they haunt meelike Fayries, and give me Jewels here, I cannot
be rid of 'hem,


Cle O, you must not tell, though.


Daup. Mass, I forgot that: I was never so assaulted. One loves for virtue,
and bribes me with this. Another loves me with caution, and so would possess
me. A third brings me a Riddle here, and all are jealous: and rail each at
other.


Cle. He reads the Paper. A Riddle? pray le' me see it? Sir Dauphine, I chose
this way of intimation for priuacie. The Ladies here, I know, have both hope,
and purpose, to make a Collegiate and Servant of you. If I might be so
honored, as to appear at any end of so noble a Work, I would enter into a
fame of taking Physic to morrow, and continue you it four or five days, or
longer, for your visitation. Mauis. By my faith, a subtle one! Call you this a
Riddle? What Is their plain dealing, trow?


Daup. We lack Tru-wit, to tell us that.


Cle. We lack him for somewhat else too: his Knights reformados are wound up
as high, and insolent, as ever they were.


Daup. You jest.


Cle, No Drunkards, either with Wine or Vanity, ever confessed such Stories of
themselves. I would not give a Flies leg, in ballauce against all the women's
reputations here, if they could be but thought to speak truth: and, for the
Bride, they have made their affidauit against her directly --


Daup. What, they have lain with her?


Cle. Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place
where. I had almost brought 'hem to affirm that they had done it, to day.


Daup. Not both of 'hem.


Cle. Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would have set
it down under their hands.


Daup. Why, they will be our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.


Act V. Scene III.
Tru-wit, Morose, Otter, Cutberd, Clerimont, Dauphine. O, Are you here? Come
Dauphine, Go call your Uncle presently. I have fitted my Divine, and my
Canonist, dyed their Beards and all: the Knaves do not know themselves they
are so exalted, and altered. Preferment changes any man. Thou shall keep one
door, and I another, and then Clerimont in the midst, that he may have no
means of escape from their cauilling, when they grow hot once again. And then
the women (as I have given the Bride her instructions) to break in upon him,
in the l'enuoy. O, 'twill be full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come, Master
Doctor, and Master Parson, look to your parts now, and discharge 'hem bravely:
you are well set forth, perform it as well. If you chance to be out, do not
confess it with standing still, or humming, or gaping one at another: but go
on, and talk alowd, and eagerly, use vehement action, and only remember your
terms, and you are safe. Let the matter go where it will: you have many will
do so. But at first, be very solemn, and grave like your garments, though you
lose your selves after, and skip out like a brace of Iugglers on a Table. Here
he comes! set your faces, and look superciliously, while I present you.


Mor. Are these the two learned men?


True. Yes, Sir, please you salute 'hem?


Mor. Salute 'hem? I had rather do any thing, then wear out time so
unfruitfully, Sir. I wonder, how these common forms, as God save you, and you
are well-come, are come to be a habit in our lives! or, I am glad to see you!
when I cannot see, what the profit can be of these words, so long as it is no
whit better with him, whose affairs are sad, and grievous, that he hears this
salutation.


True. It Is true, Sir, we will go to the matter then. Gentlemen, Master Doctor,
and Master Parson, I have acquainted you sufficiently with the business, for
which you are come hither. And you are not now to inform your selves in the
state of the question, I know. This is the Gentleman, who expects your
resolution, and therefore, when you please, begin.


Ott. Please you, Master Doctor.


Cut. Please you, good Master Parson.


Ott. I would hear the Canon law speak first.


Cut. It must give place to positive Diunitie, Sir.


Mor. Nay, good Gentlemen, do not throw me into circumstances. Let your
comforts ar^iue quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoording me my
peace, if so I shall hope any. I love not your Dispurations, or your
Court-tumults. And that it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My Father,
in my education, was wont to advise me, that I should always collect, and
contain my mind, not suffering it to flow loosely; that I should look to what
things were necessary to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the
one and eschewing the other. In short, that I should endeare my self to rest,
and avoid turmoile: which now is grown to be another nature to me. So that I
come not to your public pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect
those things, that make for the dignity of the Commonwealth: but for the
mere avoiding of clamours, and impertinences of Orators, that know not how to
be silent. And for the cause of noise, am I now a suitor to you You do not
know in what a misery I have been exercised this day, what a torrent of
evil! My very House turns round with the tumult! I dwell in a Windmill! The
perpetual about motion is here, and not at Eltham.


True. Well, good Master Doctor, will you break the ice? Master parson will
wade after.


Cut. Sir, though unworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.


Ott. It Is no presumption, Domine Doctor.


Mor. Yet again!


Cut. Your question is, for how many causes a man may have diuortium legitimum,
a lawful Divorce. First, you must understand the nature of the word Divorce, a
diuertendo --


Mor. No excursions upon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.


Cut. I answer then, the Canon Law affords Divorce but in few cases, and the
principal is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim
impedimenta, twelve impediments (as we call 'hem) all which do not dirimere
contractum, but irritum reddere matrimonium, as we say in the Canon Law, not
take away the bond, but cause a nullitie therein.


Mor. I understood you, before: good Sir, avoid your impertinencie of
Translation.


Ott. He cannot open this too much, Sir, by your favor.


Mor. Yet more!


True. O, you must give the learned men leave, Sir. To your impediments, Master
Doctor.


Cut. The first is impedimentum erroris.


Ott. Of which there are several species.


Cut. I, as error personae.


Ott. If you contract your self to one person, thinking her another.


Cut. Then, error fortunae.


Ott. If she be a Beggar, and you thought her rich.


Cut. Then, error qualitatis.


Ott. If she prove stubborn, or headstrong, that you thought obedient.


Mor. How? is that, Sir, a lawful impediment? One at once, I pray you
Gentlemen.


Ott. I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, Sir.


Cut. Master Parson says right. Nec post nuptiarum benedictionem. It does
indeed but irrita reddere sponsalia, annull the Contract: after Marriage it is
of no obstancy.


True. Alas, Sir, what a hope are we fallen from, by this time!


Cut. The next is conditio: if you thought her free borne, and she prove a
bondwoman, there is impediment of estate and condition.


Ott. I, but Master Doctor, those seruitudes are subla^^e, now, among us
Christians.


Cut. By your favor, Master Parson --


Ott. You shall give me leave, Master Doctor.


Mor. Nay, Gentlemen, quarrel not in that question; it concerns not my case:
pass to the third.


Cut. Well then, the third is votum. If either party have made a vow of
Chastity. But that practice, as Master Parson said of the other, is taken away
among us, thanks be to discipline. The fourth is cognatio: if the persons be
of kin, within the degrees.


Ott. I: do you know, what the degrees are, Sir?


Mor. No, nor I care not, Sir: they offer me no comfort in the question, I am
sure,


Cut. But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognatio
spiritualis. If you were her Godfather, Sir, then the Marriage is incestuous.


Ott. That comment is absurd, and superstitious, Master Doctor. I cannot endure
it. Are we not all Brothers and Sisters, and as much a kin in that, as
Godfathers, and God-daughters?


Mor. O me! to end the Controversy, I never was a Godfather, I never was a
Godfather id my life, Sir. Pass to the next.


Cut. The sift is crimen adulterij: the known Case. The sixth, cultus
disparitas, difference of Religion: have you ever examined her what Religion
she is of?


Mor. No, I would rather she were of none, then be put to the trouble of it!


Ott. You may have it done for you, Sir.


Mor. By no means, good Sir, on to the rest: shall you ever come to an end,
think you?


True. Yes, he has done half, Sir. (On, to the rest) be patient, and expect,
Sir.


Cut. The seventh is, vis: if it were upon compulsion, or force.


Mor. O no, it was too voluntary, mine: too voluntary.


Cut. The eighth is, ordo: if ever she have taken holy Orders.


Ott. That Is superstitious, too.


Mor. No matter, Master Parson: would she would go into a Nunnerie yet.


Cut. The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, Sir, to any other before.


Mor. I thrust my self too soon into these Fetters.


Cut. The tenth is, publica honestas: which is inchoata quaedam affinitas.


Ott. I, or affinitas orta ex sponsalibus: and is but leave impedimentum.


Mor. I feel no air of comfort blowing to me, in all this.


Cut. The eleventh is, affinitas ex fornicatione.


Ott. Which is no less vera affinitas, then the other Master Doctor.


Cut. True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.


Ott. You say right, venerable Doctor. And, nascitur ex co, quod per coniugium
duae personae efficiuntur vna caro --


Mor. Hey-day, now they begin.


Cut. I conceive you, Master Parson. Ita per fornicationem aeque est verus
pater, qui sic generat --


Ott. Et vere filius qui sic generatur --


Mor. What Is all this to me?


Cle. Now it grows warm.


Cut. The twelfth, and last is, si forte coire nequibis.


Ott. I, that is impedimentum grauissimum. It does utterly annull, and
annihilate, that. If you have manifestam frigiditatem, you are well, Sir.


True. Why, there is comfort come at length, Sir. Confess your self but a man
unable, and she will sue to be diuorc'd first.


Ott. I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, and insanabilis, as Paralysis,
Elephantiasis, or so --


Daup. O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, Gentlemen.


Ott. You say troth, Sir, and as it is in the Canon Master Doctor.


Cut. I conceive you, Sir.


Cle. Before he speaks.


Ott. That a Boy, or child, under years, is not fit for marriage, because he
cannot reddere debitum. So your omnipotentes --


True. Your impotentes, you whoreson Lobster.


Ott. Your impotentes, I should say, are minime apti ad contrahenda matrimonium.


True. Matrimonium? We shall have most vn-matrimoniall Latin, with you:
Matrimonia, and be hanged.


Doup. You put 'hem out, man.


Cut. But then there will arise a doubt, Master Parson, in our Case, post
Matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (do you conceive me, Sir?)


Ott. Very well, Sir.


Cut. Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere came pro sorore.


Ott. Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely Apostaticall.


Cut. You shall pardon me, Master Parson, I can prove it.


Ott. You can prove a Will, Master Doctor, you can prove nothing else. Does
not the Verse of your own Caxan say, Haec socianda vetant connubia, facta
retractant --


Cut. I grant you, but how do they retractare, Master Parson?


Mor. (O, this was it, I feared.)


Ott. In aeternum, Sir.


Cut. That Is false in Divinity, by your favor.


Ott. It Is false in humanity, to say so. Is he not prorsus inutilis ad
Thorum? Can he praestare fidem datam? I would feign know.


Cut. Yes: how if he do conualere?


Ott. He cannot connulere, it is impossible.


True. Nay, good Sir, attend the learned men, they will think you neglect 'hem
else.


Cut. Or, if he do simulare himself frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?


Ott. I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.


Daup. (They dispute it very learnedly, in faith.)


Ott. And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positive.


Mor. Good Sir, let me escape.


True. You will not do me that wrong, Sir?


Ott. And therefore, if he be manifest frigidus, Sir --


Cut. I, if he be manifest frigidus, I grant you --


Ott. Why, that was my conclusion.


Cut. And mine too.


True. Nay, hear the conclusion, Sir.


Ott. Then frigiditatis causa --


Cut. Yes, causa frigiditatis --


Mor. O, mine ears!


Ott. She may have libellum diuortij, against you.


Cut. I, diuorty libellum she will sure have.


Mor. Good Eccho's, forbear.


Ott. If you confess it.


Cut. Which I would do, Sir --


Mor. I will do any thing --


Ott. And clear my self in Foro Conscientiae --


Cut. Because you wanc indeed --


Mor. Yet more?


Ott. Exercende potestate.


Act V. Scene IIII.
Epicoene, Morose, Haughty, Centaure, Mauis, Mistress Otter, Daw, Tru-wit,
Dauphine, Clerimont, La-Foole, Otter, Cutherd. I Will not endure it any longer.
Ladies, I beseech you help me. This is such a wrong, as never was offered to
poor Bride before. Upon her Marriage day, to have her Husband conspire against
her, and a couple of Mercinary Companions, to be brought in for forms sake, to
persuade a Separation! If you had blood, or virtue in you, Gentlemen, you would
not suffer such Eare-wigs about a Husband, or Scorpions, to creep between Man
and Wife --


Mor. O, the variety, and changes of my torment!


Hau. Let 'hem be cudgelled out of doors, by our Grooms.


Cen. I Will lend you my Footman.


Mau. We Will have our men blanket 'hem in the Hall.


Mrs. Ot. As there was one, at our House, Madame, for peeping in at the door.


Daw. Content, in faith.


True. Stay, Ladies, and Gentlemen, you will hear, before uproceed?


Mau. I'lld have the Bridegroom blanketted, too.


Cen. Begin with him first.


Hau. Yes, by my troth.


Mor. O, Mankind Generation!


Daup. Ladies, for my sake forbear.


Hau. Yes, for Sir Dauphines sake.


Cen. He shall command us.


La-F. He is as fine a Gentleman of his inches, Madame, as any is about the
Town, and wears as good colors when he lift.


True. Be brief, Sir, and confess your infirmity, she will be a-fire to be
quit of you, if she but hear that named once, you shall not entreat her to
stay. She Will fly you, like one that had the marks upon him.


Mor. Ladies, I must crave all your pardons --


True. Silence, Ladies.


Mor. For a wrong I have done to your whole sex, in marrying this fair, and
virtuous Gentlewoman --


Cle. Hear him, good Ladies.


Mor. Being guilty of an infirmity, which before I conferred with these
learned men, I thought I might have conceald --


True. But now being better informed in his conscience by them, he is to
declare it, and give satisfaction, by asking your public forgiveness.


Mor. I am no man, Ladies.


All. How!


Mor. Utterly vn-abled in nature, by reason of frigiditie, to perform the
duties, or any the least office of a Husband.


Mau. Now, out upon him, prodigious creature!


Cen. Bridegroom un carnate.


Hau. And would you offer it to a young Gentlewoman?


Mrs. Ot. A Lady of her longings?


Epi. Tut, a device, a device, this, it smells rankly, Ladies. A mere comment of
his own.


True. Why, if you suspect that, Ladies, you may have him searched.


Daw. As the custom is, by a Jury of Physicians.


La-F. Yes faith, 'twill be brave.


Mor. O me, must I undergo that!


Mrs. Ot. No, let women search him, Madame: we can do it our selves.


Mor. Our on me, worse!


Epi. No Ladies, you shall not need, I Will take him with all his faults.


Mor. Worst of all!


Cle. Why, then it is no Divorce, Doctor, if she consent not?


Cut. No, if the man be frigidus, it is de part vxoris, that we grant Libellum
diuorty, in the Law.


Ott. I, it is the same in Theology.


Mor. Worse, worse then worst!


True. Nay, Sir, be not utterly dis-heartned, we have yet a small relike of
hope left, as near as our comfort is blown out. Clerimont, produce your brace
of Knights. What was that, Master Parson, you told me in errore qualitatis e'ne
now? Dauphine, whisper the Bride, that she carry it as if she were guilty, and
ashamed.


Ott. Mary Sir, in errore qualitatis (which Master Doctor did forbear to urge)
if she be found corupta, that is, vitiated or broken up, that was pro virgin
desponsa, espoused for a Maid --


Mor. What then, Sir?


Ott. It does dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere too.


True. If this be true, we are happy again, Sir, once more. Here are an
honorable brace of Knights, that shall affirm so much.


Daw. Pardon us, good Master Clerimont.


La-F. You shall excuse us, Master Clerimont.


Cle. Nay, you must make it good now, Knights, there is no remedy, I Will eat
no words for you, nor no men: you know you spoke it to me?


Daw. Is this Gentleman-like-like, Sir?


True. Jack Daw, he is worse then Sir Amorous: fiercer a great deal. Sir
Amorous, beware, there be ten Dawes in this Clerimont.


La-F. I Will confess it, Sir.


Daw. Will you, Sir Amorous? will you wound reputation?


La-F. I am resolved.


True. So should you be too, Jack Daw: what should keep you off? she is but a
woman, and in disgrace. He Will be glad on it.


Daw. Will he? I thought he would ha 'beene angry.


Cle. You will dispatch, Knights, it must be done, in faith.


True. Why, an' it must it shall, Sir, they say. They Will never go back. Do
not tempt his patience.


Daw. It is true indeed, Sir.


La-F. Yes, I assure you, Sir.


Mor. What is true Gentlemen? what do you assure me?


Daw. That we have known your Bride, Sir --


La-F. In good fashion. She was our Mistress, or so --


Cle. Nay, you must be plain, Knights, as you were to me.


Ott. I, the question is, if you have carnaliter, or no.


La-F. Carnaliter? what else, Sir?


Ott. It is enough: a plain nullitie.


Epi. I am vn-done, I am vn-done!


Mor. O, let me worship and adore you, Gentlemen!


Epi. I am undone!


Mor. Yes, to my hand, I thank these Knights: Master Parson, let me thank you
otherwise.


Cen. And, have they confessed?


Mau. Now out upon 'hem, Informers!


True. You see, what creatures you may bestow your favors on, Madames.


Hau. I would except against 'hem as beaten Knights, Wench, and not good
Witnesses in Law.


Mrs. Ot. Poor Gentlewoman, how she takes it!


Hau. Be comforted, Morose, I love you the better for it.


Cen. So do I, I protest.


Cut. But Gentlemen, you have not known her, since matrimonium?


Daw. Not to day, Master Doctor.


La F. No, Sir, not to day.


Cut. Why, then I say, for any act before, the matrimonium is good and perfect:
unless, the worshipful Bridegroom did precisely, before witness demand, if
she were virgo ante nuptias.


Epi. No, that he did not, I assure you, Master Doctor.


Cut. If he cannot prove that, it is ratum coniugium, notwithstanding the
premises. And they do no way impedire. And this is my Sentence, this I
pronounce.


Ott. I am of Master Doctors resolution too, Sir: if you made not that demand,
ante nuptias.


Mor. O my heart! will thou break? will thou break? this is worst of all
worst worsts! that Hell could have devised! Marry a Whore! and so much noise!


Daup. Come, I see now plain confederacy in this Doctor, and this Parson, to
abuse a Gentleman. You study his affliction. I pray' be gone companions. And
Gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for having parts with 'hem. Sir, will it
please you hear me?


Mor. O, do not talk to me, take not from me the pleasure of dying in
silence, Nephew.


Daup. Sir, I must speak to you. I have been long your poor despised
Kins-man, and many a hard thought has strengthened you against me: but now it
shall appear if either I love you or your peace, and prefer them to all the
World beside. I will not be long or grievous to you, Sir. If I free you of this
unhappy match absolutely, and instantly after all this trouble, and almost in
your despair, now --


Mor. (It cannot be.)


Daup. Sir, that you be never troubled with a murmr of it more, what shall I
hope for, or deserve of you?


Mor. O, what thou will, Nephew! thou shall deserve me, and have me.


Daup. Shall I have your favor perfect to me, and love hereafter?


Mor. That, and any thing beside. Make thine own conditions. My whole estate
is thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.


Daup. Nay, Sir, I will not be so unreasonable.


Epi. Will Sir Dauphine be mine enemy too?


Daup. You know, I have been a long Suter to you, Uncle, that out of your
estate, which is fifteen hundred a year, you would allow me but five hundred
during life, and assure the rest upon me after: to which I have often, by my
self and friends tendered you a writing to sign, which you would never
consent, or incline too. If you please to effect it now --


Mor. Thou shall have it, Nephew. I will do it, and more.


Daup. If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall have
power instantly, before all these, to revoke your act, and I will become, whose
Slave you will give me to, for-euer.


Mor. Where is the Writing? I will seal to it, that, or to a Blanke, and write
thine own conditions.


Epi. O me, most unfortunate wretched Gentlewoman!


Hau. Will Sir Dauphine do this?


Epi. Good Sir, have some compassion on me.


Mor. O, my Nephew knows you belike: away Crocodile.


Cen. He does it not sure, without good ground.


Daup. Here, Sir.


Mor. Come Nephew: give me the Pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seal to
what thou will, for my deliverance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliver it
thee as my Deed. If there be a word in it lacking, or writ with false
Orthographie, I protest before -- I will not take the advantage.


Daup. Then here is your release, (...) Sir: you have married a Boy: a
Gentleman's son, that I have brought up this half year, at my great charges,
and for this composition, which I have now made with you. What say you, Master
Doctor? this is iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?


Ott. Yes Sir, in primo gradu.


Cut. In primo graou.


Daup. He pulls off their beards, and aisguise. I thank you, good Doctor
Cutberd, and Parson Otter. You are beholden to 'hem, Sir, that have taken this
pains for you: and my friend, Master Tru-wit, who enabled 'hem for the
business. Now you may go in and rest, be as private as you will, Sir. I Will
not trouble you, till you trouble me with your Funeral, which I care not how
soon it come. Cutberd, I Will make your Lease good. Thank me not, but with your
leg, Cutberd. And Tom Otter, your Princess shall be reconciled to you. How
now, Gentlemen! do you look at me?


Cle. A Boy.


Daup. Yes, Mistress Epicoene.


True. Well, Dauphine, you have lurch'd your friends of the better half of the
Garland, by concealing this part of the plot: but much good do it thee, thou
deseru'st it, Lad. And Clerimont, for thy unexpected bringing in these two to
confession, wear my part of it freely. Nay, Sir Daw, and Sir La-Foole, you see
the Gentlewoman that has done you the favors! we are all thankful to you, and
so should the womankind here, specially for lying on her, though not with her!
You meant so, I am sure? But, that we have stuck it upon you to day, in your
own imagined persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the Champion of the sex,
should beat you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which Ladies receive
from such Cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or fortune can
make you hope to enjoy their bodies, will yet lie with their reputations, and
make their fame suffer. Away you common Moths of these, and all Ladies honors,
Go, travail to make legs and faces, and come home with some new matter to
be laughed at: you deserve to live in an Air as corrupted, as that wherewith
you feed rumor. Madames, you are mute, upon this new Metamorphosis! but here
stands she, that has vindicated your fames. Take heed of such insectae
hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you have discovered any Mysteries to
this young Gentleman. He is (a'most) of years, and will make a good Visitant
within this twelue-month. In the mean time, we will all undertake for his
secrecy, that can speak so well of his silence. Spectators, if you like this
Comoedie, rise cheerfully, and now Morose is gone in, clap your hands. It may
be, that noise will cure him, at least please him.


THE END.

