LONDONS LOOKING BACK TO JERUSALEM, OR, GODS IVDGEMENTS UPON OTHERS, ARE TO BE
OBSERVED BY US.

Jeremiah. 44.2.3. verse. 1. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel:
Ye have seen all the evil, that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all
the Cities of Judah: and behold this day, they are desolate, and no man
dwells therein.

2. Because of the wickedness which they have committed, to provoke me to anger,
etc.

August. 7. 1630.

Preached at Paul's Cross by JOHN JONES Mr. of Arts, Curate and Lecturer; at S.
Michaels Basenshaw.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES dwelling in Red-crosse-streete, 1633.

TO THE RIGHT, HONORABLE SIR NICOLAS RAYNTON, KNIGHT, LORD MAYOR of the City
of LONDON. Together with the Right Worshipful his brethren, the Sheriffs, and
Aldermen of the same City.
W. I. desires all blessings spiritual, and temporal to be powered upon you
in this life, and eternal blessedness in the life to come.
RIGHT Honorable
And Right worshipful, I am bold to present unto you this Sermon, preached at
Paul's Cross, because the Author had so intended, after that the importunity
of some Christian friends had prevailed with him to have it published; which
Sermon, is entitled Londons looking back to Jerusalem, according as God send
Jerusalem to look to Shilo, what he did unto it, for the wickedness that was in
it, which was his text handled: And what the sins of Jerusalem were this
sermon does plainly discover, as pride, fulness of bread, and idlnes, contempt
of Gods Ordinances and ministry; And hereby we may be admonished of that
general outward formality in Religion; but where is the life and power, in a
holy walking with God? where is the earnest contending for the faith once given
unto the Saints?

God has advanced your Honor to this place of dignity: stand fast, to that
charge, which God and his Majesty has put into your hands, to cut off the
cords of all prophanesses, and Sabbath breaking, etc. And the Lord make you
zealous for his glory; to stand fast in that liberty: wherein Christ has set
you free. Receive this Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, as a testimony
of his, for your loves to Gods Church, in maintaining so many Preachers at
home, and abroad, which draws the great blessing of God upon you, and the
City for the same (as it was his speech on his death bed) receive it Right
Honorable, and Right worshipful Company of Haberdashers, from whom he received
some yearly stipend while he lived, his Lectureship being but small; Read it
Right Honorable, and Right worshipful; and the Lord writ it in the tables of
every one of your hearts, that you may avoid the judgments of the wicked, and
enjoy the blessings prepared for the righteous, and that for the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake: to whom be given all honor and glory, now, and for evermore.
Amen.

Your Honors, and Worships daily Orator, WILL. JONES.

This Psalm, CXiX. The sixth part, he gave to be sung before his Sermon.
41
THy mercyes great and manifold,
let me obtain (O Lord:)
Thy saving health let me enjoy,
according to thy word.
So shall I stop the slanderous mouths,
of lewd men and unjust:
For in thy faithful promises,
stands my comfort and trust.
The word of truth within my mouth,
let ever still be pressed:
For in thy judgementes wonderful,
my hope does stand and rest.
And whilst that breath within my breast,
does natural life preserve:
Yea till this world shall be dessolude,
thy laws will I observe.
So walk will I as set at large,
and made free from all dread:
Because I sought how for to keep,
thy precepts and thy reed.
Thy noble acts I will describe,
as things of most great fame:
Even before Kings I will them blase,
and shrink no whit for shame.
I will rejoice then to obey,
thy worthy hestes and will:
Which evermore I have loved best,
and so will love them still.
My hands will I lift to thy laws,
which I have dearly sought:
And practice thy commandments,
in will, in deed, and thought.
Master Jones his Prayer before his Sermon.
MOst great and glorious Lord God, who by thy Almighty power have created the
Heaven and the Earth, and by thy unsearchable wisdom governest and guidest the
same: we vile and base wretches, that have defiled the Heavens by our sins,
and cursed the earth by our transgressions, do prostrate our selves in all
humility before the throne of thy Divine Majesty: beseeching thee to look upon
us not in justice, but in mercy; not as we are in our selves, but in the face
and countenance of thy Son Jesus Christ. In our selves we are altogether
unworthy to come into thy holy presence, to tread upon holy ground, or to
meddle with holy things. This day is holy, set apart by thine own self for
thine own holy worship: this place is holy, it is thy own sanctuary, thy
ordinances are holy, and the service in which we are employed, is a holy
service. But we are most unholy, impure in our very beginnings, impure in our
proceedings; all over polluted with sin: in all the faculties of our souls,
in all the members of our bodies: in the notions and imaginations of our minds,
in the motions and inclinations of our wills, in the affections and desires of
our hearts, in the words of our mouths, in the works of our hands: we are
poor, and wretched, and blind, and naked, high-minded, vaine-minded,
worldly-minded, false-hearted, full of hypocrisy, full of security, full of
infidelity, wanting in charity, wanting in knowledge, in zeal, intemperance,
in patience; deficient in all grace, abundant in all sin, we have sinned
against all the means of grace: thy word, thy Sacraments, thy Sabbaths, thy
Christ, thy Spirit; we have sinned against all the times of grace: we have
sinned in the times of our childhood, in the times of our youth, and our riper
years not only in the times of ignorance, but since we have known thy will:
not only through infirmity, but presumptuously: we have sinned against all thy
attributes, we have abused thy patience, provoked thy anger: we have sinned
against thy Judgments, which should have enforced us to obedience; against thy
mercies, which should have allured us and led us to repentance: we have sinned
against all thy creatures, against heaven, and against earth: against all thy
works; against the work of creation, by defacing thy Image; against the work
of thy preservation, by distrusting thy providence: against the work of
redemption, by our infidelity; against thy law, which is the rule of
righteousness, against the Gospel of grace and salvation; against our vow made
unto thee in our baptism: we have broken the first vow that ever we made, and
never since have been faithful in our promises unto thee: against our own
purposes and promises made unto thee in our prayers, and that before our
calling, and since our calling: in our general calling, and in our particular
callings: we have failed and sinned since it has pleased thee of thy free
mercy to translate us out of the powers of darkness into the kingdom of thy
dear Son. What shall we do that have thus sinned against thee, o thou
preserver of men? whither shall we go from thy spirit, or whither shall we sly
from thy presence? If we ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if we make our
bed in the deep, thou art there: if we take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand find us. No
darkness can cover us from thy all-seeing eye, no place can shelter us from
thy almighty hand: thy judgments can follow us, and thy vengeance take hold on
us whithersoever we go. What then shall we do in this perplexity? In all
humility we cast down our selves before the throne of thy mercy, bewailing
our misery, with bleeding hearts and throbbing souls deploring our misery,
imploring thy mercy, condemning our selves, confessing our sins; promising,
purposing and resolving with all our hearts to forsake our sins. Though we
are out of measure sinful, yet thou art out of measure merciful: thou art
infinite in mercy, and with thee is plenteous redemption. The greater our sins
are, the greater shall be the glory of thy mercy, and of thy Sons merits, in
forgiving our sins, which are so many and so great. Pardon therefore, we pray
thee, all our sins past: wash us from them in the pure laver of thy Sons blood.
It is not the river Jordan, nor all the rivers of Damascus, that can cleanse us
from our spiritual leprosy: only thy Son, thine only Son, and that pure
fountain of thy Sons blood, which thou have opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness. In that
blood we beseech thee to wash us from our sins, from the guilt of sin, from the
punishment of sin, from the power of sin, with that blood purge our consciences
from dead works, and quicken us by thy Spirit unto a new life, that we may
serve thee the true and ever-living God, zealously without fear, universally
without partiality, sincerely without hypocrisy, constantly without apostasy,
in all righteousness and true holiness all the days of our lives: that the
end of our life may be the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our
souls. And although we are unworthy to pray for our selves, yet in the name of
thy Son we are bold to enlarge our prayers for thy whole Church, howsoever
distressed or whersoever dispersed throughout the parts of the whole earth.
Give thy Gospel a free passage, repair the ruins of Sion, build up the
broken walls of Jerusalem, and with the breath of thy nostrills blow down the
walls of Jericho. In thy due time put an end to the troubles of the Church
abroad. Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand; and do not
pluck it out of thy bosom? how long oh Lord, how long will thou suffer the
blood of thy servants to be spilt upon the ground? Thou that did once hear
and regard the blood of Abel, one man crying for vengeance; will thou not hear
the blood of many thousands? What advantage can thou have in giving over thy
own children to the fury of their enemies? shall thy enemies triumph, and thy
children perish? shall thy enemies rejoice and thy children mourn? shall the
light of thy Gospel be eclipsed, the splendor of thy glory obscured, thy
temple defiled, thy name dishonored, thy truth slandered? Are they of Babylon
better than they of Sion? or is there any other people that knows thee
besides Israel? or what generation has so believed thy covenant as Jacob?
Arise then oh Lord, arise, plead thy own cause, honor thy own name, defend
thy own altar, fight thy own battle, protect thy own people: behold the
pride of the wicked, and send thy wrath upon their heads: throw down the
forces of all them that have purposed cruel things against thy Sanctuary,
against the top of Sion, thy hallowed house, the place where thine honor
dwells. Make every nation to acknowledge that thou art the God of all power,
that there is none other that protects thy Church and truth but thou only.
Protect thy Church and truth among us, and all that thou have placed in
authority over us; especially his sacred Majesty, Charles, by thy gracious
providence King of great Britain, France and Ireland defender of the true,
ancient, Catholic Apostolic faith, and in all causes, and over all persons,
as well Ecclesiastical as civil, next under thee and thy Son Christ,
supreme governor. Bless we beseech thee his royal consort Queen Mary:
beseeching thee that with Mary she may choose the better thing that cannot be
taken from her. Bless the present pledges of our succeeeding hopes, Prince
Charles, with lady Mary his sister. O Lord grant that as they grow in years,
so they may grow in grace and favor with thee and with men. Bless the rest of
the Royal progeny beyond the scaes, the Lady Elizabeth with her princely
issue, when thou seem best, settle them again, in their former inheritance,
that they may be nursing Fathers and mothers unto thy Church. Bless the Right
Honorable the privy Council, the true hearted Nobility and Gentry of our
Land, the Reverend Judges, all unto whom thou have committed the sword of
justice, all Ministers unto whom thou have committed the sword of the spirit,
what names or titles soever distinguished; whether Archbishops Bishops, or
inferior Pastors. And that there may be a continual supply of able men to
govern both in Church and common wealth, bless all nurseries of good
learning, especially the two famous Universities of this Land, Cambridge and
Oxford, water the young plants that are in both of them, with the dew of thy
grace that they may grow up as Cedars in Lebanon for the building of Sion. And
comfort all that are comfortless oh thou Father of comfort, and God of all
consolation, visit the sick, strengthen the weak, heal the wounded, bind up
the broken hearted, gather the dispersed redeem them that are enthralled,
relieve them that are impoverished, succor them that are tempted, restore them
that are fallen by infirmity, and establish them that stand by thy free
spirit. Finally, give a blessing we pray thee, to this our meeting, in this thy
house upon this thy day: to speak and to hear thy holy word, O Lord God I am
a child, and cannot speak, I am of polluted lipes, and slow of speech, but
thou art he that can give sight to the blind, and speech to the dumb,
therefore untie the strings of my stamering tongue, and touch it with a coal
from thine alter, my doctrine shall drop as does the rain and as the dew upon
the grass. And for this thy people, touch their ears and their hearts with
the finger of thy blessed spirit that they may hear thy word attentively,
conceive it rightly, believe it readily, apply it wisely; treasure it upon
their memories, faithfully practice it, in their life and conversations
conscionably so all our understandings may be enlightened, our hearts purified,
our conscience spacified, our sinful lives reformed and our souls saved yea,
the whole man at length glorified in the land of the living. And that in and
through thy dear soon, our only Savior Jesus Christ, in whose name and
words, we pray: Our Father etc.

JEREMY 7.12. But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh; where I set my
name at the first: and see what I did unto it for the wickedness of my people
Jsrael.


SVCH is the lenity and long animitie of Almighty God, that before he proceeds
to the punishment of sinners he gives them many warnings; before he sends the
storm shall not now profit you that are wicked, but you and your temple shall
be destroyed. The temple is not more excellent than another place; but for the
Arc and the Alter: indeed it is somewhat more adorned, but all the excellency
and sanctity lie in them. And were not these as well in Shiloh? yet
notwithstanding it was ruinated. So that it is but a folly in you to wax proud
of these things, as if their sanctity without your sanctity could save you from
the wrath to come. Therefore, for the abating of your pride and the rectifying
of of your confidence, Go ye to my place etc.

Which text, though at first sight, seems not shoot. Yea, he does often show
us his bow, but takes neither string, nor shaft into his hand. Thou have showed
the people hard things, Psalm. 60.3. Showed, not imposed: he shows his bow,
before he shootes; and his rod, before he lays it on. So true is that speech
of the Church, Lam. 3.33. The Lord does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men. Search the rolls of holy writ, and there ye shall observe
him, sometimes grieving for sin, sometimes complaining of it, sometimes
threatening of it, sometime proposing to us the execution of his judgments upon
others for such and such sins: as here to Jerusalem, that she might see her
miserable condition and fall to speedy deprecation, to her and her inhabitants,
he propounds Shiloh, as a spectacle of his justice, and that for those sins
of which Jerusalem was as deeply guilty as ever Shiloh was. Ite ad locum meum
in Silo, etc.

The ^ choose but set a sudden stop and period to their prosperity: yet did they
trust for safety in the outward badges of their religion, and especially in
their Temple, saying, The Temple of the Lord, etc. The temple of the Lord is
holy and glorious and reverenced of all: how is it possible that any should
destroy the temple of the Lord, or vanquish the city in which that temple is?
Oh, says Jeremy, trust ye not in such lying words: for the holiness of the
place does little avail a people, if they themselves be not holy in their
lives. For proof of which go but unto Shiloh: the holiness of the place in
Shiloh (where at first the holy Tabernacle staid for a long time, and the Ark
before which the name of God was invocated, and the worship of sacrifices
administered) did nothing profit the people of Israel, when they gave themselves
to wickedness, but together with them that place was rejected of the Lord: so
the temple of Solomon shall not now profit you that are wicked, but you and
your temple shall be destroyed. The temple is not more excellent than another
place; but for the Arc and the Alter: indeed it is somewhat more adorned, but
all the excellency and sanctity lie in them. And were not these as well in
Shiloh? yet notwithstanding it was ruinated. So that it is but a folly in you
to wax proud of these things, as if their sanctity without your sanctity could
save you from the wrath to come. Therefore, for the abating of your pride and
the rectifying of of your confidence, Go ye to my place etc.

Which text, though at first sight, seems not to meddle with matters present
now, of near home, but past and far off, matters of another Meridian, aloof
from us as far as Shiloh, or Jerusalem; concerning not Christians, but Jews,
mentioning not our wickedness but theirs, the wickedness of the People
Israel: Yet as the Sun, though it rise in the East, sets in the West, by that
time the Text has gone its circuit, it may come to set far from where it
rose: as Nathan though he began with a parrable of two men and a sheep, yet
brought it about in the end to, Thou art the man.

In our Text there is a journey prescribed, yea a double journey, the one
corporal, Go; that respects the body: the other spiritual, see; that respects
the mind. Or if you like it better, here is a direction to a double action, Go
and see.

1. Ite, go ye: and that is amplified by two circumstances, the time and the
place: besides which ye may add the consideration of the persons, Ye, Go
ye. And 1. the persons are the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 2. the time is now,
go presently, for delay breeds danger. And 3. for the place it has a double
description:

1. Nominall, it is Shiloh.

2. Real, it is the place where God did set his name at the first.

1 What that place was possessively.
In which latter are diverse particulars to be observed. 1. proprietary or
owner of it, God; my place, says the Lord; which shows the glory of it: for
that must needs be glorious which is the place of God, 1 King. 8.11.
the King of glory, But the whole world is Gods as well as Shiloh was: true,
but this is his in special respects, set down in the next passage, expressing
the reason, why Shiloh was so glorious. it was a priveledged place, for 1. God
did set his name there: and not only so, but 2. 2 What that place was
positively.
he set it there at the first. There Is the glory of the place, the sanctity and
previledge of the place, and the antiquity of each. Go ye now etc. there is the
first act.

The second follows, Videte, See: not only Go, Ioh. 1.46.
but Go and see, as Philip to Nathaniell, Come and see: When ye are come to
Shiloh, be not idle there, but open your eyes and see, employ your minds and
consider, What I did unto it for the wickedness, etc.

1. Observe what was done unto it, the calamity that befell it:

2. Who was the Author of that calamity, I, says the Lord:

3. What was the impulsive cause that provoked the Lord to inflict that
calamity, Wickedness.

4. Whose wickedness it was that could so far provoke him as to reject his
own place Shiloh, the wickedness of his own people Israel: Where wickedness
reigns, God will not spare that place, though it be Shiloh, nor that people
though it be Israel, Go ye now etc.

I will handle the text two ways. First, Exegetically or Paraphrastically, by
way of explication: then Diadactically or Doctrinally, by way of instruction.
And I begin with the first act, Ite, Go ye.

Men for the most part are like the snaile, always carrying her house on her
back. Commonly we love a sedentary life, and are loath to leave our cushion,
unwilling to disease our selves, Vtinam hoc esset laborare, said he that lay
along and stretched himself. As the slothful man is Socors, that is, Sine cord,
without a heart; wanting affection and courage to do what he knows: so is he
Piger, that is Pede aeger; he lackes a foot to convey him to any honest
employment. Like those secure ones overwhelmed in the general deluge, he can
sit still, and laugh and sing, till the water stop his wind and he be drowned.
But wisdom is not gotten by sitting at home in Hemicyclo, in an half mooned
chair, or by lurking in a corner: as Solon Socrates, Caesar, Plato, Cicero,
and other Pagans knew well, who, to purchase wisdom, exposed themselves to the
tempests of foreign climates. And God himself, that they might learn
wisdom, does here send the Jews out of their own City. Ite, Go ye. So long
as you contain your selves within the narrow compass of your domestical
seat, like sheep in a pinfold, ye stand gazing upon the beauty of your city,
the outward splender of your temple, and admiring at those goodly gifts, with
which it is enriched, not admitting the least thought of a change. Let me
therefore council you no longer to shroud your selves in your city, but
measure a few steps, Go out of your own place and take notice how things pass
abroad, Go.

2. And Go ye; ye the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ye that stand so much upon
your outward prerogatives, that look for safety in my sanctuary, be your
sins never so many. Ye are the fittest scholars to take out that lesson
which I am about to teach, but out of your own school. Therefore Go ye, Ye
that sleep in the chair of security, supposing there is nothing good but that
which ye know, no house comodious but your own, no air to live in but where
ye breath, no life like that which ye lead in darkness and ignorance, Go
ye. Go from your chair or bed, where ye sleep in security; go from your
sensual pleasures, bewitching pastimes, brutish pashion, beastly companions;
Go from your customarie coldness and stupiditie, Go from your self-conceited
oppinions and imaginations, it is to you that are secure that I do here direct
my speech, lifting up my voice like a trumpet, and row sing you up from that
sleeping stool of yours. Therefore Go ye, ye your selves personally, stand
not to the report of others, but go your selves unto the place, and see with
your own eyes What I did unto it.

3. And Go now too: make no delay, Now is the only sure part of our time, that
which is past, is come and gone: that which is to come may peradventure never
come. Till to morrow, till this evening, till an hour hence we have no
assurance. Now therefore; or, if not Now, as near Now, with as little distance
from it as may be, Go ye to my place.

4. My place, that the next, be not extravagant, straggle not to those places
to which your own lusts invite you, that is to follow Judas, who went to his
own place: Act. 1.
go not on neither in the way that ye have begun but go whether I direct you;
ad locum meum, to my place; to go thither will be worth your labor indeed. So
that this license of travel is limited and bounded, as you see. Some there are
that love travel as their life, so they may be gadding, they care not to what
place it be: they dare breath in the poisonous air of Italy, and touch the
very pommell of the Chair of pestilence: So the Devil plays the Marshall and
takes them up, because they straggle abroad without a warrant or pasport. We
can never have comfort in any travel or journey, except it be so bounded as
this in our text. Go ye, says the Lord, ad locum meum, to my place.

5. My place which was: was, and is not: God sometimes calls them his people
which were not his people; Romans 9.25.
and that his place which was not his place: and on the otherside sometime they
which were his people cease to be his people, and that which was his place
cease to be his place. My place which was: was, and is not.

6. Was at Shiloh: that's the next, God sends them not out of their own coasts
into a foreign country, as he did Abraham, nor yet to a remote place in their
own country; Go, says he, to Shiloh, that's not far, ye have the name of
the place and cannot miss it, nay, ye cannot but know it, it being but six
miles distant from your Metropolis, Jerusalem.

This Shiloh was once my place, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6.
that which I chose for my self, above all other places. For the understanding
of which read, Josh. 18.1. There ye shall find that after the Cananites were
subdued unto the Israellites, and a place to be appointed, where the people
might meet for divine service, God put it into their hearts to make choice of
Shiloh. 1. Because of the beauty and glory of it, Josephus, speaking of this
matter, says: Lib. 5. c. 1. Antiquit.
they placed the sacred Tabernacle in the City of Shiloh, and sets down this
as the reason of; (...). For it seemed to be a meet place by reason of the
beauty of the same, where the Arc might remain, till such time as their
affairs of State permitted them to build a Temple. Secondly, Because of the
convenience of it for the whole people to meet there, being situate about the
midst of the land of promise, as I said not above six miles distant from
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 5.5.
which was even in the midst, the navell of the land, as Josephus terms it To
which some apply that text. Ezekiel. 38.12.
. Thirdly, because it did belong to Ephraim, which was more warlike then the
other tribes, Psalm. 78.9.
and so more able to defend the place of Gods worship. Fourthly, principally,
because their captain Ioshuah was of Josh. 19.49, 50, 51. and Number. 13.8.
Ephraim, he who assembled them to determine of the place: and where he dwelt
and had decreed their solemn meetings, there they persuaded themselves upon
good ground, that the observation of the Law and sacred rites would be more
exact. For these reasons, and especially by the direction of God, who had made
choice of that place, they set up the Tabernacle of the Congregation at Shiloh,
appointed that as a fixed seat for the Tabernacle, which before had been in
continual motion; and for the Arc which was within it, that all the Jews
might repair unto it in their chief solemnities, being to worship God with
the oblation of their Sacrifices and first fruits, as we read of Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1.3. He went up out of his City yearly, to worship and to Sacrifice unto
the Lord in Shiloh. In this respect Shiloh was the place of God, my place,
says the Lord, the place where I did set my name, that is, Calvin in loc.
Vbi volui arcam residere, where I made my Ark to dwell (for 2 Samuel 6.2.
the Arc is called by the name of God, and the Hebrew word imports a fixed
residence:) my place, the place where I appointed my worship and the use of my
ordinances, by which I am made known unto you, as a man is made known by his
name. And which is yet more, I did not only set my name there, but did set it
there at the first, In principio, before your Temple was built, nay, before it
was known that mount Sion should be the place where I would have a Temple
built, then was Shiloh my place, consecrated to my service. All this
considered, First, the propinquity of the place, it is Shiloh, and that's but
six miles distant from your City: Secondly, the glory of the place, together
with the sanctity of it, that it is my place, that which I made choice of above
all other places in the world, there to set my name, to settle my Ark and
Tabernacle and divine worship. Thirdly, the antiquity of the place and
privileges of it, that I did set my name there at the first, long before the
Temple of Jerusalem was thought on; I say, all this considered, it will be
worth your labor to follow my council in this, Go ye now etc.

But to go thither, is not all, that were soon done; to an Ite you must add
a Videte, Go and see, as the King of Israel said to his servants, 2 Kings 7.14.
Your feet, your ankles, your locomotive faculty, were given you to go; the
spheres of your eyes, these lights, this sharpnes of sight, were given you to
see: you are neither lame, nor blind, therefore Ite and videte, Go and see.
The Philosopher Arist. lib. de sensu et sensato c. 2.
concludes against the Platonists, that the fight draws most after the Element
of water; for Arist. de Gener and Corrupt l. 2. c. 2.
as water is hardly kept within his own, or without the limits of his
neighbor Elements: so the sight, denied by nature to see it self, is never
satisfied Prove. 27.20.
with gazing upon other creatures, The eye is not satisfied with seeing,
Eccles. 1.8. (...), a volubitate Scapula
And there is not more volubillity Prove. 27.20.
in the eye, then curiosity in the mind, of man, to behold strange and uncouth
sights. If such objects be near, no locks can hold us, we must out to see.
Then what needs such a precept as this in our Text, Ite and videte, Go and
see? Yes: for it is not barely to see, to cast their eyes where they list
themselves, but to fix them upon that object to which God directs them. See,
says he, what I did unto Shiloh, for etc.

Mark the calamity which befell that place, which is in situation so near
you, in antiquity beyond you, in glory and sanctity sometimes equal to that
Temple wherein ye trust. The calamity of it is recorded. 1 Samuel 4. Where ye
shall read, that the Israelites being smitten by the Philistims and in great
distress, they sent for the Arc out of Shiloh, trusting that the Arc (being
a pledge of Gods presence and assistance) might then save them out of the hands
of their enemies, as if their sins were not of force to sever the power of
God from the Arc, and to make a divorce between the truth and the figure.
Well, the Arc is brought, and in it the Law written in tables, but it had
been better if they had had the Law written in their hearts, when the Arc
came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth
rang again. Here Is great joy, but to little purpose; they triumph before the
victory and without the victory; for they triumph without God, Calvin. Hom. 17.
in lib 1. Sam.
nay against God do they erect their trophies of triumph, not being reconciled
unto him by faith and repentance. The vanity of their triumph may appear by
the issue of the battle: for at the presence of the Arc they received a
greater overthrow then before. The slaughter was very great, for there fell of
Israel 3 0000. footmen, Their young men were consumed and their Priests
slain: yea, the Arc it self, the pledge of Gods favor and succor, the
strength and glory of Israel was taken by the enemies. And (as S. Jerome apud
Sanctiu^ in Ier. 7.1^. Sic etiam Pelican. ibid.
observes) the place, where Shiloh was, is utterly ruinated and made desolate.
Howsoever, Shiloh forfeited her Charter, and lost her former privileges
Christophor a Castro. ibid. 1 Samuel 7.1.
the residence of the Arc. For after the Philistimes had brought it to
Bethshemesh, it was fetched to Kiriath-jearim, and so carried from place to
place, but never more to Shiloh; where it had continued from the days of
Ioshuah to the death of Eli, 369. years, Ghisler in Ier. 7 12.
according to the Chronology of the Hebrews, or 351. according to the
Computation of other Authors. This was the calamity which befell Shiloh, it
ceased for ever to be the place of Gods worship: which came not to pass by
chance, but by the Divine providence. See, says the Lord, what I did unto it.
The Philistims were but my instruments in this work; I, the chief Agent. Non
vires ferri, Anson. Epigr. 5.
sed ferientis agunt. I did it.

And yet I did it not out of any hatred, but in my justice; not because I
desired their woe, but because I was provoked by their sin, even the
Wickedness of my people Israel. My people, for so were they in Shiloh as well
as you in Jerusalem, My people, not only as all by right of possession, but as
you by the right of confederation and the grace of acceptance. But such is the
righteousness of my nature, such the purity, of mine eyes, that I cannot with
approbation behold sin, no, Amos 3.2.
not in mine own people. If they, whom I have so much honored as to be my
people, will so dishoner me as to commit wickedness against me, I cannot but
glorify my self by doing justice upon the^. The^ consider this ye that now
profess your selves to be my people, and glory so much in the beauty of your
temple, Go ye now etc. Hitherto be it spoken of the words exegetically: I now
come to handle them Doctrinally. And now task your wits and your memories and
keep pace with me; for within the compass of the time I shall run over
these five observations, all of them naturally deduced, not tyranously enforced
from the words.

1. Where God does set his name, that's the peculier place of God.

2. The holiness of the place cannot protect a people, except there be
holiness in the persons, who inhabit that place.

3. It is God who inflicts judgment upon a place or people. See, says he,
what I did.

4. It is the wickedness of a people which provokes him to judgment, I did
it, says he, for the wickedness of my people.

5. The judgments of God inflicted upon others are to be observed by us:
especially, if they be such as light upon his own place and people. And this
is the maine point which the text drives at. For to this end does the Lord send
them of Jerusalem to school (as it were) unto Shiloh: Go ye now etc.

Observa. 8.1
1. Where God does set his name, or place his worship and ordinances, that is the
peculier place of God. My place, says the Lord here; and My house, Ier. 11.15.
thy house, says the Saints Psalm. 84.5. and 42.4.
; his banqueting Cant. 2.4. Psalm. 11.4. and 74.7. and 26.8. 2 Chronicles. 6.41.
house says the Spouse; his holy Temple, says Cant. 2.4. Psalm. 11.4. and
74.7. and 26.8. 2 Chronicles. 6.41.
David, the dwelling place of his name, the place where his honor dwells.
set his name, 2 Chronicles. 6 4 1.
or settle his worship and ordinances: that is his dwelling place, and his
resting place. He is in every place, but does not dwell or rest in every place.
The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven, Psalm. 11.4. He
is so in his Temple, as he is in heaven: that which heaven is above, is his
Temple beneath, in heaven and so in his Temple, he is present after a special
manner; in heaven is his glorious presence, in his Temple on earth his gracious
presence; his Psalm. 27.4.
beauty, and Exodus 40.34.
his glory too in some sort; his face and countenance. When shall I come and
appear before God? Psalm. 42.2. Hebr. Before the face of God: for the face,
countenance and special presence of God is in his holy Temple. When Caine
departed from the family of Adam, which was then the only place where God was
worshipped, it is said he went out from the presence of the Lord. Genesis 4.16.
because where he is worshipped, there is his special presence, where Christ
promises in those words, Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
I will be there in the midst among them. There, how? not only so as I am
every where, but in a more singular manner; I will be there by the presence of
my grace and assistance of my spirit. In the time of the Law God was worshipped
before the Arc, and the Ark was called by the name of the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.2.
and when the Arc removed, they spoke to it as to the Lord; Rise up, Lord, and
let thine enemies be scattered, Number 10.34. The reason was, because the Arc was
a sign to the people of Gods presence among them. So now are our Churches,
wherein God is worshipped.

2. As there is Gods gracious presence, so there is his gracious Protection,
and therefore the place where he is worshipped, is his peculiar place. It is
like those Cities of refuge, which God appointed among the Israelites, whither
he that had offended might fly for safety. The walls of Salomons Temple were
carved round about with figures of Cherubims, 1 King. 6.29.
and palm trees, and open flowers within and without. The palm trees and
flowers, did type out the Saints (that grow up like palme-trees in the house of
God) together with the variety of their gifts: the Cherubims signified the
Angels, by whose Ministry God protects his people, and that in a special
manner when they are in his house. Psalm. 27.5. and 91.1.
That is Gods pavilion, wherein he hides his children; the secret place and the
shadow of the Almighty, that is, the defense (or as it is in the Greek
translation) The protection of the Almighty when the incestuous person was cast
out of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1 20.
it is laid, he was delivered up to Satan, Calvin. and P. Matyr in 1 Cor. 5.5.
the like is spoken of Hymeneus and Alexander Calvin. and P. Matyr in 1 Cor.
5.5.
: to Satan, that is, to the tyranny of Satan Calvin. and P. Matyr in 1 Cor.
5.5.
to the power of the evil er of the evil Angels: they wanted the protection
of God and his good Angels, and so do all those that are excluded the Church.
The first Adam was placed in Paradise that he might dress and keep it: so
(says Bernard Bern. In dedicatione Eccles. Ier. 6.
) is the second Adam in his Church, which is a Paradise, or garden of delight,
to defend and keep it.

3. Where God is worshipped, there is his special blessing, that attends his
ordinances. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they go from strength to
strength, So Psalm. 65.4.
the Lord will give them grace and glory: grace, by the means of grace here,
and glory hereafter. Psalm. 84.4. etc. When God promises to give special
blessings, he promises to give them in his house and within his walls. Isay.
56.5, 7. Contrariwise, when God threatens to withdraw his blessings from a
people, he excludes them his house. Hos. 9.4.15
Now if Gods special presence, and special protection, and special blessing
be there, where he is worshipped, then that must needs be the peculiar place
of God.

What terror should this strike to the hearts of those, that offer any violence
to this place, If any man destroy the Temple of God, him will God destroy. 1
Cor. 3.17. But who are they, that be culpable in this kind? Not only open
enemies that by devastation lay it wast, but also secret enemies that undermine
it, by Schisms and Sacrilege.

1. Schismatics, Such as as make rents in the Church, dividing themselves from
the unity of it, and scorning the authority of it, do offer great violence
to the peculiar place of God. Nam proditores quidem siunt, quicunque in hoc
Domini castrum in^micos eius introducere moliuntur, quales sunt vtique
detractores Deo odibiles, qui discordias seminant, nutriunt scandala inter
fratres. Sicut enim in pace factus est locus Domini, sic in discordia locu
diabolo fieri manifestum est etc Bern. in de dicatione Eccles. Ier. 3.
They betray it into the hands of the enemies, and instead of Gods house, they
make it speluneam daemomorum, a den of Devils, says Bernard, Nil
dissociabile firmum est. Prudent. Psychom. S. Bern. in de dicat. Eccles. Ier. 1.
A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Stones of one building that
jarre one with another, will ruin the whole house. Sola conjunctio facit domum
Ia. Ier. 2.
. It is union that makes a house: wood and stones disunited cannot do it. Let
those violent and turbulent spirits consider and think on this, by whom
division and discord is fomented in the house of God: they go about to ruinate
this house, and to drive God himself away from it. For (as Bernard notes) he
will not abide in such a Kingdom where there is division, nor in such a house
which is near to desolation. To these factious spirits I propound for an
example Corah and his accomplices, so severely punished for this sin: because
they had made a Schism in the Church, God made a Schism in the earth, the
ground clave asunder, the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up. Number.
16.31.

But not only by Schism, by Sacrilege also is violence offered to the
peculiar place of God: when the goods of the Church; things sacred and
sequestered from common use, are alienated and taken away by the felonious hands
of sacrilegious catchpolles. A sin too common amongst us: the region of it
being white, and ready for harvest, and calling for a sickle from heaven to cut
it down. As Epist. 1^. Anno 1088. cited by D. Tillest^ in his Animadversions
upon Seldom.
Ivo Carnotensis once complained, so may every Godly man at this day: Multa
inordinata video in domo Dei, quae me torquent; maxim quod apud nos, qui
altari non serviunt, de altari vivunt. I see many things out of order in Gods
house, which do perplexe me; especially this, that they do live of the alter,
who do not serve at the Altar; Church-locusts, whose lips no lettice likes but
sacred Manna: and they in the the mean time that serve at the Alter, may
starve at the alter. I cannot here pass by the words of a Reverend Bishop of
this See; D. King in his Lectures on Jonas.
Time was religion did eat up policy, and the Church devoured the
commonwealth, but now policy eats up religion, and the Commonwealth devoures
the Church. Men are professed Politicians; let the Commonwealth flourish, and what
care they for the Church? Now Munus offerendi is turned into Munus auferendi;
and old Oblation is turned into Ablation. Our Gentiles (Heathens I had almost
said) do break into Gods house, and like bold thieves do ransacke and
pillage it, and with more then heathenish petulancy trample underfoote the
Ministers of the Gospel. We need not with that order of popish Priests, pull on
ourselves a voluntary beggary, for Gentlemen have enforced us to it of
necessity. We may now cease studying of sermons, and study for bread to put in
our mouths: like the Jews under the oppression of Pharaoh, when we should
make brick, we are forced to gather straw; when we should work in our
vocation, we must look out for sustenance, we must set our heads and our
hands to work together, we must be Orators and Arators, Preachers and
Plow-men, teachers and tent-makers: as if we had the extraordinary
dispensation of Preaching which S. Paul had, when he labored with his hands
and lived by his work. Dionysius took from an Image a golden covering,
pretending that it was too hot for summer, and too cold for winter, and gave
one of wool, saying, that that was fit both for summer and winter. So deal
the sacrilegious persons of this age, cursed Impropriators, corrupt Patrons,
Barterers and purloyners of holy things, all those that under pretense and
color of Law, custom, composition, prescription, do cut short the Minister
of his proper portion; they take from the Minister his gold, which (say they)
would make him proud, idle, covetous; Cicero pro Ros^io Amarino.
and give him wool, that will make him humble and laborious. Yet can they
themselves (without pride sure) wear gold on their spurs, who will not
endure a Minister to have gold in his purse. The Orator tells the grave Judges
and Senators in the Guild hall at Rome of a fellow called Fimbria, intolerably
audacious, who stabbing Quintus Scaeuola at the funerals of Caius Marius,
boasted of the favor that he showed unto him, Quod non totum telum corpore suo
receperit, that he had not thrust his dagger up to the hiles in his body. This
fellow has scattered his brood among us, there being too many that have been
spawned of him; who having seized upon a great part of the Churches Patrimony,
think it no small kindness they have showed us, that they have not shred us of
altogether, God is beholden to them for letting his house stand; though for the
maintenance of his house and of his worship in his house, they have been so
bold with him, as either to share half, or leave him none. Now as the Eagle in
the Fable, that was shot flying in the air, did much lament, when she saw her
self to be shot with an arrow that was feathered with a plume of her own
wing: so may Religion mourn, when she sees her self thus wronged, by such as
will seem most to be of her own side. They pretend purging, but intend
pilling: they D. Pridcaup ser^ on Rev. 2.4.
are sweeping Gods house and prying into every corner, not to restore the groat
that is lost, but to take away the penny that is left. To whom I may speak in
the words of Damasus: Qua front, Damas Decre^. 3.
qua conscientia oblationes vultis accipere? With what face or conscience can
ye receive tithes and oblations, that discharge no part of the Ministerial
function in Gods house? You say, that they were taken from idle drones and
fat bursten-bellied Monks and Friars. But why are they now detained and kept
back from laborious and painful Pastors? The foundations are cast down: but
what have the righteous done? Psalm. 11.3. The foundations of the Church which
should support religion, tenths and maintenance, are cast down, because of
supersticious abusers; but what have the righteous done, that these things
should be taken from them? but alas why should I touch that sore which is all
dead flesh? you may say to me, as on did to Luther, when he began to preach
against the Popes Supremacy and tyranny, you had as good hold your peace.
This wickedness is so powerful that you will never be able to prevail
against it. Get you to your study, and say, Lord have mercy on us and procure
your self no ill will. But be it good will, or be it ill will, we come hither
to speak the truth: and for Sions sake I will not hold my peace. Who knows
whether the Lord may be pleased to open the heart of one Lydia, Act. 16.14.
to attend to the things which are spoken? Consider then the danger of this
sin: Prou. 20.25. It is a snare to a man to devour holy things. As the
feathers of an Eagle, laid with the feathers of other birds, are said to
consume them: so holy things, the goods of the Church, mingled with private
men's patrimonies, do devour them. Male parta, male dilabuntur: which may be
observed by the Crane in Emblem, that having swallowed a wrongful prey,
Au^^us Gelius N^tt. Alloc. l. 3. c. 9.
could not digest it. When Scipio robbed the Temple of Tholossa, there was not
a man that carried away any of the gold, who ever prospered after it. That gold
was not more fatal to the followers of Scipio, than the stolen goods of the
Church have been unfortunate to the Gentry of our land. They have proved
gangreenes to their whole estate, and as knot-grasse to dogs, which being
eaten keeps them from thriving: so that in the end these robbers, or their
posterity prove beggars. Aug. ad Macedon. Epist. 54. Dum. alienum rapis, a
diabolo raperis, et quamd in id detines, a diabolo detineris: retines aurum,
and prodis coelum: unjust detines rem alienam, and just amittis haereditatem
tu am: iniustum lucrum, sed iustum damnum: lucrum in arca, sed damnum in
coscicutia: percat mundi lucrum, per quod fit animae damnum.
But that is not the worst: remember that of S. Augustine Multi in hac vita
manducant quod postea apud in feros digerunt Many devour that in this life,
which they shall digest in hell. And again, Si in ignem mittitur, qui non
dedit rem propriam, vbi mittendus qui in vasit alienam? etc. If he be decreed
to the fire, which gave not his own: whither is he to be sent that has robbed
another? whilst thou snatchest from another, the Devil snatcheth away thee:
and so long as thou withholdest it, the Devil withholdeth thee: thou retainest
gold, and loses thine inheritance: an unjust gain but a Just loss. Lucre in
thy coffer, but condemnation in thy conscience: a mischeife on that money that
brings destruction to the soul. If this be to ingrosse the portion and
possession of the Lord, if this be to rob the house of God, who dares lay
sacrilegious hands upon it? Oh meddle not with that which is consecrated to
God: as Pilates wife sent her husband word, have thou nothing to do with that
just man: Matthew. 27.17. so, have thou nothing to do with Gods portion: do not
forage his Church defraud his Ministers, this is to rob God himself. Mal.
3.10. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we
robbed thee, ye make your selves ignorant, as if ye knew not that ye had
robbed me in my tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
robbed me, even this whole nation: ye have joined your selves in one to rob
me of my portion, thinking the commonnesse of the offense to be every man's
particular justification therefore ye are heavily accursed. Enough to terrify
those sacrilegious pioners of Gods house, that say with them, Psalm. 83.12. Let
us take to our selves the houses of God in possession. But I have spoken
sufficiently touching this kind of violence, offered to the peculiar place of
God. I pass now to another.

Further, they are here to be taxed, who carry themselves irreverently in the
place of Gods worship, which is the peculiar place of God, not a Barbers shop,
nor an Apothecaries house, nor a common court, but the place of Angels and
Archangels, the Kingdom of God, yea heaven it self Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom.
36.
. Many by their indecent behavior do so vilify this place, as if it were the
worst of all others, worse then their own houses, as S. Chrysostom Ibid.
complained in his time: for there is order observed, but in the Church (says
he) is such disorder, such confusion, such laughing, and sleering, and nodding,
and whispering, such a stir and noise, that there is little or no difference
made between the Church and an alehouse; nay between the Church and a
Playhouse, nay, between the Church and a brothelhouse, no difference made at
all. I would to God this our irreverence were not a just occasion to the
Romanists to scandalize our religion. S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 24. exhorts us so to
carry our selves in the Church, that if an unbeleever come in, he may say, God
is there, and God is in us, and may be drawn to join with us in the worship
of God. But if such a one should come into some of our Congregations, and
observe the carriage of many, he will well say, what Lord do this people serve,
that are so irreverent? Mal. 1.10. The Lord said to the Jews in the like case,
I have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand: and
v. 6. he tells them, that they despised his name and made his table
contemptible. It is our sin at this day. We make his table contemptible, his
throne contemptible, his house contemptible, his word contemptible, and all
contemptible, by our indecent behavior in the place of his worship. Therefore
I say in this case, as the Prophet did to them in the like, Mal. 1.9.
I pray you beseech God that he will be gracious unto us: Beseech him with
broken and bleeding hearts to be gracious unto us in the pardoning of this
sin. Mac. 1.9. Mac. 2.3. Mac. 2.15.
Remember how Antiochus was punished for profaning the house of God; so
Heliodorus, Nicanor, Belshazzar; Dan. 5.
when Christ was in his humiliation he whipped out such, showing by that base
punishment that they are not sonns, but slaves: and will he not then punish
these now, being so highly exalted? When King Ahashuerosh conceived that Haman
would have forced Queen Ester, he took it the worse because it was in his
house, Est. 7.8.
Will he force the Queen before me in the house? A man of the poorest
condition cannot abide to see his house abused: and shall God endure to see his
abused? He cannot, he will not: therefore beware of that. Let it ever be our
care, when we enter in to the house of God, where Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
behold us, to do nothing any way unbeseeming that place.

To conclude this point: If the place where God is worshipped be his peculiar
place, let us think upon the glory of this place, this land, I mean) this
Kingdom wherein we live. Here is the place where God does set his name, settle
his worship and ordinances, as once he did in Shiloh, and afterward at
Jerusalem. Israel and England, though they lie in a diverse climate, may be
said right Parallels; not in Cosmographicall, but in Theological respects.
Nay, we do herein far transcend them: they had only a drop to refresh
themselves, we have the whole streams of Gods mercies poured upon us: they had
only the green blade of corn, we have the plentiful increase as in the time
of harvest; they had the shadow, we the substance; they had a glympse of the
Sun, we have him in the full strength: they had the Paschall lamb to
expiate sins typically; we have the lamb of God to take them away really.
Ioh. 1.29. Gal. 4.
They were Alphabetarij and Abecedarij, young beginners, learning their A B C
under the tutorship of the law: but to us the Gospel is give^, wherein our
saving health is spread before our believing eyes, without any shadow cast over
the beauty of it. We behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open
face, 2 Cor. 3.18. we feed upon the true Manna, and drink of the water of life
freely. Oh let us thankefully embrace our transcendent happiness.

Plato was thankful to nature (as we read in Lactant.) 1. For that he was
borne a man, Lactant. l. 3 divin. Just. c. 19
not a beast. 2. A man, not a woman. 3. A Greecian, not a Barbarian. 4. An
Athenian, not a Theban; and finally, that he was borne in the time of Socrates.
But much more thankful should we be to the God of nature, for that we are
borne, not Pagans, but Christians; and in such a place as England, where heaven
stands open, which to other parts is barred on the outside, with ignorance or
misbeliefe. England is the place of Gods worship, therefore the peculiar place
of God; so that we may say, as it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 46.7.
The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge: we have his
special presence, his special protection, his special blessing; and that so
long as ever we continue to serve him in holiness and righteousness, not one
minute longer. 2. Observat.
For the holiness of the place cannot protect a people, except there be
holiness in the persons who inhabit that place: which is the second point,
that falls next into our consideration.

Shiloh was a holy place, glorious for sanctity and for the antiquity of that
sanctity: yet because the inhabitants of it were not holy, both they and it
were exposed to the fury of the enemy. Joan. Papp^ in Ier. 7.12.
Though God in the old Testament would be worshipped o^^ly in that place, where
himself had set the memory of his name: yet did he not so tie the memory of
his name to any certain place, but that fot the impiety of the people, he
changed the place of his Tabernacle and Temple

In the new Test. (because the Gospel was to be published through the whole
world) that distinction of places is taken away; the time is now come, when
neither in the mountain of Samaria, nor yet at Jerusalem, John 4.
men shall worship God by any such tie. Now every place is so long (no longer)
the Temple and habitation of God, as there shall be found in it true faith and
holiness of life. But where these cease, where superstition and heresy do
corrupt faith, and wickedness succeeds in the room of holiness, Matt. 21.43.
there the like judgment is to be feared which befell Shiloh; that God will
remove his kingdom of grace from such a place or people, and give it to a
Nation that will bring forth the fruits of it. Jerusalem might go to Shiloh,
and England may go to Jerusalem, to learn this lesson, that the holiness of
a place cannot protect a people, except etc. Consider Jerusalem, the City of
the great King, the throne of God, the place of holy worship and perfect joy:
tell her turrets and mark well her bulwarks, carry in your minds the Idaea
of her gloryes, Joseph. de bello Iudaico. l. 7. ca. 7, 8, 9, 14, 17.
how she was great among the provinces, princess among the nations, the joy
of the whole earth; and then on a sudden behold her Temple and houses burning,
the smoke of the fire waving in the air, and hiding the light of the sun,
the flame rising up to heaven, as if they would ascend as high as their sins
had erst done; her old and young, rich and poor, high and low, matrons,
virgins, mothers, infants, Princes and Priests, Prophets and Nazarites,
famished, fettered, scattered, consumed. Here Is a master piece of Gods justice
for sin: Jerusalem once so glorious is now become a heap of stones, that holy
city, yea, that whole country is now become a ploughed field, laid wast under
the feet of Pagans; And the place of divine Oratory become a den of Dragons.
Ghiesler in Ier. 7.12.
Go from Jerusalem to the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, Ephesus,
Smyrna, Nice, Laodicea, Antiochia, to all the Eastern and * African Churches,
sometime glorious Sanctuaries of the most high, consecrated to his service:
when the inhabitants thereof became polluted, they were rejected of the Lord,
who discarded their Idols and gave their land to be inhabited by Zijm and
Ochim, Turks and Infidels. The more gloriously the sun and summer have
apparrelled a tree, the more we admire the blasting; but when God has planted
a people in his own holy ground, (as he did Adam in Paradise, Israel in Shiloh
and Jerusalem) watered it with the dewes of grace, shined on it with the beams
of mercy, spent much care and cost upon it; if this people brings forth no
fruit or bad fruit, no marvel, if there goes out a curse, Never fruit grow on
thee more; no marvel; if God bestow no more care nor cost upon it, but
suffers it to be laid wast: as he sometimes threatened to do to his Vineyard,
Isay 5.5. I will take away the hedge thereof, I will break down the wall
thereof, I will lay it waste. I, says the Lord. For such alterations and
subversions, are not to be ascribed to fortune, destiny, stars, planets or
the like, but to God himself, which is our next point.

3. Observat.
It is God who inflicts judgment upon a place, or people. See, says he, what I
did, Go ye now etc. It was he that forsook the Tabernacle at Shiloh, he that
delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies hands:
he gave his people over unto the sword, and was wroth with his inheritance,
etc. Psalm. 78.60.61. It was he that gave the sword a charge against Ashkelon,
Ier 47 9 Ie^ ^6.^5. Ier. ^0.25. Ier. 19.3.
that swept away the valiant men of Egypt, that opened his Armorie and brought
forth weapons of indignation to smite Babylon; it is he that thus threatens
Jerusalem, Ier. 18.11. I frame evil against you, and devise a devise against
you. I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever hears, his ears
shall tingle. Whatsoever calamities befall us, public or private, they are
from God: He is the Author of all our Tragedies, and has written out for us,
and appointed to us, the several parts, which we are to act in them.

The more to blame then are those impatient Spirits, that in the case of
calamity are sick of the fret, not looking up to the hand of God, but fretting
at the men and the means by which God does afflict them: like the Ethiopians,
who detest the Sun, because it scorcheth them with immoderate heat; or like
cursed mastives, that break their teeth in gnawing those iron chains,
wherewith their Master ties them, and in biting the staff with which he beats
them, as if a staff could smite, or a chain bind, without an hand to use it
It will be more laudable for us to imitate the Saints, Psalm. 44.9. Job 1.21.
Chrysostom. in 1. Ep. ad These.
who in every calamity did own the hand of God. The Lord has given, says
Job; the Lord has taken away, etc. (...), etc. What do thou say, the Lord
has taken away? the thief had taken away, the Sabeans had taken away his
oxen, the Chaldeans had taken away his Camells: true, yet Job complains not of
them, but looks up to the hand of God. So should we in the like case. Does
the plague come? look up to God: does the sword come? look up to God: does
dearth come, poverty, ignominy, or any other calamity? Act it upon God. 2.
Sam. 14 19.
As David inquired of the woman of Tekoah, if the hand of Ioab was not with her
in the close plea, and artificial atonement which she made for Absalom; in
all our distresses let us inquire, if there be not the hand of God in them,
and inquiring we shall find it so: which when we have done, let us with
patience resign up our selves into his hands, saying, (as the Church, Mic.
7.9.) I will bear the indignat^on of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him. 4. Observe.
For it is our sin which kindles the indignation of God, and provokes him to
judgment, which is our next point. See what I did unto it for the wickedness
of my people Israel.

Wickedness was that cloud, in which all the storms that fell on Shiloh were
engendered. It lies in the power of sin and wickedness, to make the most
fruitful land barren, and the most blessed place accursed: A truth that may
well pass for current, and being coined in the mint of Gods word, Psalm.
107.34. God turns a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of
the inhabitants that dwell therein, Aug.
Civitatis eversio, morum, non murorum casus. The ruin of a city, is not so
soon wrought by the weakness of the walls, as by the lewdness of their lives
that are the inhabitants. Were the walls of a city stronger then those of
Babylon, the sins within would hurl down the walls without. Hos. 13.9.
Intra muros hostis: thy perdition is of thy self o Israel. The Heathen
Historian Abundant voluptates desiderium per luxum atque libidinem pereundi
perdendique omnia invexere. Live. Heylin.
observed, that Rome began to loose all, when sin abounded most amongst all,
Romes utter overthrowing was nothing else but their vices abounding and sins
overflowing.

An English Gentlemen at their expulsion out of France, was demanded by a
French Cavalier when they would return again: his answer was feeling and
pithie, When your sins (quoth he) are greater than ours. He knew well that
for sins Kingdoms are translated from one people to another, and that a land
spues out her inhabitants for the iniquity of them that dwell therein. A. Gell.
Noct. Attic. l. 3.^9.
In A Gellius, mention is made of the horse of Sejanus, called Sejus, this
horse, a goodly horse to look on, but whosoever owned it, was still
unfortunate. Such a thing is sin, unfortunate to all: whatsover person or
nation does harbor it, can never prosper. S. Cyprian writes thus to Demetrian
and others, who imputed to Christian religion pestilence, sword, famine, and
all the evils which then fell out in the world: Ye are discontented to see
God displeased, ye are angry that God is thus angry, as if ye could deserve
from him any good by living ill, as if all these evils of punishment were not
less than the evils of your sins. Hos. 2.14.
God of himself is gracious, merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness,
not willing to punish, except he be provoked: but if we provoke him by sin,
we are sure to feel the punishment. Look into Paradise, look into hell,
look into heaven, look upon earth, and every where ye shall meet examples
to confirm this.

1. Look into Paradise, Genesis 3.
where God placed our first parents, and enriched them with all sorts of
blessings; so soon as they fell into disobedience and did eat of the
forbidden fruit, they were cast out: and as the sentence was gone out of Gods
mouth, so the sword of justice, 2 Es^^ 7.^^.
follows to execute, they must die and all their posterity. All must die in
them, since all have sinned in them.

Secondly, look into hell, see the unmercifulness of Dives punished,
according to the rule of justice. Desideravit guttam, qui non dedit micam, Aug.
Luke 16.
He begged a drop of water and could not have it, because he denied a crumme of
bread before, when Lazarus begged it.

Thirdly, 2. Pet. 2.4.
Look into heaven and see sin punished there: God spared not the Angels that
sinned, not those glorious inhabitants of heaven, but cast them down to hell.
And art thou better or dearer than the Angels?

Fourthly, look upon earth, and see there innumerable punishments, both
personal and national, inflicted for sin. Every story is a Chronicle of
this truth, and the whole world but the practice. Genesis 7.11.
For sin God sluced out floods from the sea and opened the windows of
heaven, taking away the retentive power from the clouds, that they might power
down unmeasurably to drown the old world; for sin he rained down fire from
heaven to consume Sodom, and opened the jaws of the earth to swallow Corah:
Number. 16.31.
for sin he sent Jerusalem into captivity, Ier. 40.2. Ier. 33.15. Ier. 30.15.
and suffered Shiloh to be msde desolate, Go ye now, etc.

See what I did unto it: consider how I deprived it of my mercies, and made it
a spectacle of my justice. So true is that, Ier. 2.3. Evil shall come upon
sinners. The evil of sin, is but an earnest laid down for the evil of
punishment. If sin be the herald going before, punishment will be the
attendant, and follow after. When disobedience has played her part, then
vengeance comes upon the stage. Should I turn over every leaf of sacred writ,
and search all Fathers, and all writers divine and humane, by innumerable
testimonies, I should evince this truth, that sin hales on punishment. It is
so sure a concomitant of sin, that oftentimes the word which signifies sin,
is translated punishment Zach. 14.19
: as if sin and punishment were termini convertibiles, Raro antecedentem
scelestum Descruit pede poena claudo.
in a manner all one. Happily it is sometimes punished slowly, but always
surely. For a while it may with a boldned face out brave virtue, and so
flourish as if vice were the only favorite of heaven: but, if we have time
for observation, we shall see it halting on a crutch, and blushing for shame.
It winds about men, like a subtle river, (seeming only to run on his
course) does yet search as it runs, gliding so slily by, as if it scarcely
touched the bank, yet still eats something in it. Plut. de sc^^ numinis ultione.
Isiodor Peleusiot lib. 1. Epist. 6.
(...): Gods justice is like a mill: it may be late, ere it does grind a man
for sin, but when once it begins to do it, it grinds him to powder. On
whomsoever this stone shall fall, it will grind him to powder Mat. 21.44.
. Gods patience being abused, is turned into fury; and then horrendum est, etc.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the loving God: Heb. 10.31.
Aquinas Aquin. sum. p. 3. q. 86. art. 4.
(not amiss) gives this reason why men must be punished for sin: The
disorder of sin (says he) cannot be reduced to the order of justice, but by
punishment: for it is just that he, who, more than he ought, has followed his
will, should suffer something against his will. This may be the way to reform
him to Gods will. Though the anvile being beaten upon does wax harder, yet
being put into the fire it becomes soft: so sinners may be softened by
punishment, that are hardened by mercies.

Secondly, if God should never punish sin, wicked men would think God
altogether like themselves, and conclude him a pertaker in their sins Psalm.
50.21. An ill tempered body, the more it is fed with good nourishment, the
worse it is: so an ill tempered soul, with the untempered mortar of sin,
becomes worse for the mercy and lenity of God.

Thirdly, if God should never punish sin, wicked men would set at naught al
his ministers, and conclude them false Prophets in denouncing judgments that
never come upon them. Ier. 5.12, S Chrysostom in Epist. ad Rom Hom 25.
13, 14. Therefore (says Chrysostom) does God punish many in this world, that
because they will not believe ((...)) the words of commination, they may
believe ((...)) the deeds of execution.

Fourthly, when sin is ripened, God is much provoked, and it is then an
easing of him to punish sin. Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries and
avenge me on mine enemies, Isay 1.24. Till he is thus eased, he is by our
sins pressed under us, as a cart that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13. Our
sins disturb God in the highest heaven, they cry unto him for vengeance, as
the sins of Sodom did, Genesis 18. And if our sins cry, shall not he (that
made the ear) hear? justice is his nature, and it is a righteous thing with
him to recompense sin with punishment, 2 Thessalonians 1.6. Upon those words of the
Lord, ( Ier 4.3, 4. S^w not among thorns, lest my fury come forth like fire,
and burn that none can quench it, because of the wickedness of your doings:
Ghist. in loc.
) It is observed by some, that sins are as thorns, which do easily kindle
the fire of Gods wrath. His wrath Id. in Ier. 15.14.
is otherwise as a fire covered with embers; his divine love, I mean, (which
is as warm embers) does cover his wrath: but our sins, as a violent wind,
do blow away those embers; and then his wrath appears, then his fury breaks
forth like fire, and burns that none can quench it.

I want time to handle the last observation, therefore jointly to apply this
with the precedent points: Ye have heard, first, that it is God, who inflicts
judgment. Secondly, that he does it not except he be provoked by wickedness;
and if he be so provoked, he will do it. Thirdly, and that to his own place
and people.

Behold here how we may come to lose all our prerogatives, Churches, Cities,
prosperity, Application.
safety, peace, Gospel, and what not? by running the courses of wickedness.
Who can number the blessings we have enjoyed? The world can tell that of all
the trees in the garden we are the Vine; amongst all flowers, we are the
lilly; 2 Esdr. 5.23
amongst all fowls, we are the dove; amongst all cities, we have Shiloh and
Jerusalem. Upon us God has with a full hand powered those blessings, which he
has but sprinkled upon others: temporal, I mean, as well as spiritual
blessings. All other countries are in some things defective; Sands Trav. l. 4.
but England, like a provident parent, does minister unto us whatsoever is
useful; foraigne additions but only tending to vanity and luxury. The summer
burns us not, nor does the winter benumme us. We may sit and sing under our
own fig trees, -- Penitus toto divisos orb Britannos. Vir.
and drink the wine of our own vineyeards. As in situation, so in felicity,
our beloved Isle is wholly disioyned from all the world. They that have
traveled the Belgicke Provinces, can witness the miserable footsteps of
war, Eccl. ^.
and the tyranny of desolation: Churches and Cities have no more monuments,
but the ruined foundations, to testify that they were. Whereas peace is within
our walls, and prosperity within our Palaces. Our artificers may sing in their
shops, husbandmen may cheerfully follow the plough, and students peaceably
apply their books. We hear not the murdering pieces about our ears, we see
not our Churches and houses flaming over our heads; we fear not rapes and
outrageous violences to be offered to our wives, our daughters, our matrones,
and our virgins. We feel not the rifling of our houses, the ransacking of our
temples, the spoiling of our goods, nor the miserable insolency of our
insulting enemies. We see not the wife breathing out her life in the arms of
her husband; nor the tender babe, snatched from the mothers breasts, either
bleeding dead on the paveme^t, or sprawling on the merciles pikes. We see not
the high way strewed with breathless carcasses, nor our streets swimming with
blood. We cannot judge of the terrors of war, but by report and hearsay.
Though God has tossed our neighbour-nations, and made them like a wheel, and
as the stubble before the wind; yet this Island, or Britain, our dear
Country, has stood like the Center, with unmooved firmness. Oh how happy
might we be, if our iniquity did not envy our prosperity, nor our wickedness
make way to our wretchedness? Whether it come to pass, Ex Daemonis injuria,
vel Ex hominis incuria, from the Devils malice, or man's neglect, so it is, that
for so many talents of Gods blessings, we give him not a dram of service.
Nay, we give him the worst of all things, who has given us the best of all
things. For his blessings heapen, and shaken, and thrust together, we give him
iniquities pressed down, and yet running over. As Archimedes tomb was
over-growne with thorns, Cic. Tusculan. quaest. lib. 5.
when Cicero came to visit it: so is our land with heaps of vices. From the
Cedar to the shrubbe, from the Eagle to the wren, from the highest to the
lowest, from the youngest to the oldest; we have all corrupted our ways. Sin
was wont to love privacy, as if she walked in fear, like one in danger of an
Arrest: but now she dares show her face without blushing. Though the heavens
blush at the view, and the earth sweat at the burden of so vile sinners, and
the Prophets proclaim open shame and confusion against them: yet they neither
shrink at the shame, nor feel the horror, nor fear the revenge. Now may we
see the truth of that Praemonition, 2. Tim. 3.1.
In the last days perilous times shall come. The times are now so perilous,
that it is scarce safe to be an honest man. Virtue, like Joseph for his
goodness, is brought to the stocks and yrons. Look upon this Angle of the
world; for so, we think ANGLIA signifies: how does it swarm with all
abominations? with oppression, extortion, prophanenes, uncleannes,
unmercifulness, envy, malice, pride, fraud, briberie, luxury, and the rest?
for to name all particulars is impossible. We need rather tears to bewail
them than a tongue to report them. And, if the whole land be so full of sin,
shall we think this City free? Nay, this is the Pontifical seat of sin,
where she is never non-resident. As many lines meet at the Center: so all sins
by a general confluence to this place. Holinshed Chron. Ann. 1. of Q. Mary.
Grimstone State of the Empire. p. 566
The word of Stephen Gardener, L. Chancellor, to Sr. Thomas White, L. Major in
the star Chamber. My L. take heed to your charge, the City of London is a
whirlpoole, and a sink of evil rumors, there they be bred, and from thence
spread into all parts of this Realm. There is a common Proverb in Germany,
that the Country of Suabe alone is able to furnish all Germany with strumpets,
Franconia with rogues and beggars, Bohemia with heretics, Bavaria with
thieves, Westphalia with perjurers and false witnesses, and the Marquisat of
the Rhine with gluttons. I would to God, that London alone could not furnish
all England with all these; with strumpets, rogues, beggars, heretics,
thieves, false witnesses, gluttons; and with any others, that are audacious in
sin. Our wickedness is such, and so much, that it is all, if the idolatry of
Rome, or the blasphemy of Turkey, can go beyond it. Rev. 3.1.
I know there are a few names in Sardis, that have not defiled their garments;
some amongst us, that make conscience of their ways: but what are these in
comparison of the rest? How many ignorant are there, to one that has sound
knowledge? how many swearers, to one that fears an oath? how many oppressors,
adulterers and hypocrites to one truly religious? As Jerusalem justified Sodom,
so we may well justify Jerusalem; abounding in all damnable abominations.

What then can we expect but that God should stint the influence of his favor
toward us, withdraw from us all his blessings, power upon us the full vials of
his wrath, and make us a spectacle of his justice, as he did Shiloh and
Jerusalem?

We are now by reason our sins, circled round with imminent dangers,
destruction with saile-stretcht wings hovers over our heads, and a cloud of
mischief is ready to break upon us. Not to mention other particulars,
material in this kind, the glory of our nation has of late bin eclypsed, the
lively luster whereof was ere while so resplendent, that it dazzled the eyes of
all such as were near or about us; God has not gone out with our armies, but
has suffered our enemies to prevail; our young men and our strong men of the
highest rank have fallen by the sword. So that, as fluttering birds fly
wondering about the Owl, our friends have wondered, our foes rejoiced at our
ill success; hissing and clapping their hands, to see our glory swallowed up.
Whence this but from our sins Indeed we do commonly impute it unto other
causes, but we forget our sins, which are the principal.
?

Besides, the massacring Angel, that harbinger of death, does again visit
our land; God for our sins does now send the pestilence home to our doors,
this his pursevant rides circuit in our City, Country, and University; and
catches men as with a snare, perhaps when they most have from him, and will
not be rid away, so long as our sins invite him to tarty. Our sins are the
cart-ropes that hale down the plague and all other judgments upon us; they
are the enemies that ring our knelles and proclaim our funerals; they are the
thick clouds which hinder the Sunshine of our prosperity; they are the false
strumpets that make a divorce between Gods mercy and our safety; they are the
traitors that forfeit into Gods hands all those privileges, which we have
hitherto injoied. And shall we still twist these cart-ropes and strengthen the
hands of these enemies? shall we still increase these clouds, and foster these
strumpets and traitors? Nay, rather let us bethink our selves of some remedy
against that misery which is like to fall upon us. ENGLAND has now for her
sins (as it were) many swords drawn out against her, and shall she provide no
buckler? Her own brood is ready to bite out her belly, to put out her candle,
to shake her foundations, and shall we not look about us?

Where are you, ye deputies of Moses, ye sons of the Highest, into whose
hands God has put a sword of authority, for no other purpose but to strike at
sin? Will ye suffer it to rust in the sheath, or hold it in your hand and
never strike? Will ye, like Iehojakim, sit beaking your selves before the fire
of ease and rest, and wholly neglect the discharge of that high place to which
God has called you? Or will ye for a bribe sell your connivence (and withal
your conscience) where ye should give your punishment? Hos. 5.7. and 6.^ 12.
Will ye turn righteousness into wormwood, judgment into gall, and the fruit
of rightousnesse into hemlocke?

Mistake me not, I aim at no particular person; and I trust you will not
condemn the poor swallows for chattering and using their voice, agreably to
nature. Bessus Plut. de sera numinis ultione.
surmised they cried against him, that he had killed his Father. If the speech
meet with any of you in particular, it is not in my intent, but in the event.
Nor do I lay the fault upon Magistrates in general, that all sorts of sins
are so rise amongst us. Yet (to speak truth) when I consider how powerfully
the Ministers of this land, especially, they of this City, do labor to beat
down sin, I begin to think there is some want of courage or diligence in
the Magistrate: and that he himself is persuaded, that if he would do his
best, many disorders might be repressed. The unhappy Cynicke, Diogenes.
when he saw the boy play the idle pack, went and beat his master. So when we
see the forenamed sins fly about, as fiery serpents, we must blame the
Magistrate, and say with the Prophet, Psalm. 58.1
Is it true? do ye judge the thing that is right and execute with an upright
heart? Do not our laws strike at many disorders that are common amongst us?
Have we no law against rash swearing? God be thanked, we have: but where is the
execution? Have we no law against Sabbath breaking? yes against that too. Yet
is it openly profaned. The reformation of these two (to omit many others) I
would commend to this Honorable Bench, but that me thinks I hear my friends
telling me, what Sadolet said to Erasmus. Erasmus would prove that worshipping
of images might well be abolished. I grant (quoth Sadolet) thy opinion is good:
but this should not be handled because it will not be granted. Sir Francis
Bacon Apotheg. 29.
When Lycurgus was to reform and alter the state of Sparta, in the
consultation, one advised, that it should be reduced to an absolute popular
equality. But Lycurgus said to him; Sir, begin it in your own house. If the
Magistrate would begin to reform things amiss in his own house, there were
hope of amendment. It is not my practice to scan Magistrates, nor to rake into
their actions: but this I have heard from some of your own Bench, that by
reason of your solemn meetings, and feastings this day at the house of the
Magistrate, the day is scarcely so well sanctified there as it ought to be. I
know not whether it be so or not, let them look to it whom it does concern.
Howsoever, the counsel of a reverend Bishop of our Church, Babington on exodus
c. 1^.
in such a case, is not to be misliked. So ought we to dress meat upon holy
days, that ever we have a care of the salvation of them that dress it: who
being created and redeemed as we our selves be, ought not so evermore to be
kept at this service, as that never they may hear the word, receive the
Sacrament, and praise God in the congregation with his people. For that should
be to eat the flesh of them, and to drink the blood of them most cruelly,
yea, to bury them in our bellies: 2 Samuel 23.16.
and for our bodies to destroy their souls for ever. Rather remember David's
refusal to drink the water that was bought so dear; and provide so that the
one being done, the other may not be left undone. I know well, that Magistrates
are called Gods, because they represent his Majesty and magnificence on earth,
in which respect much is to be granted them: but yet (by your leave) such
should remember, that the nearer they are to heaven in greatness, the nearer
they should be unto it in goodness; that as God has honored them, so they
should honor him. I take not upon me to prescribe in this case, yet me thinks
some other day as well as this, might serve the turn for solemn feasts, if
custom were not more prevalent than conscience. Magis nos docere debet
judicium veritatis, qua^ prae ^ iudicium consuetudinis. Aug. in psalm. 105,
Therefore among your manifold consultations, I beseech you to think upon the
redress of this, and withal of the publicque and gross profanation of this
day.

But I must crave pardon, for I fear that through prolixity I have
transgressed, whilst the zeal of Gods glory has enlarged my discourse against
the transgressions of the time.

Yet may I with leave strain my discourse one pegge higher: and I will promise
not to be over-bold with your patience.

There is a sin, too much practiced in this City, Deuteronomy. 25.15, Pro. 11.1.
which (the Scripture says) is an abomination to the Lord; and it should be so
to his Vicegerent, the Magistrate. I mean fraud, in selling by false balance,
unjusts weights and measures; and in cunning conveyances, in weighing or
meating; such as cheat the buyer. They say, there are some who in stead of Troy
weights use Venice weights, which are very deceitful and not warranted by law:
Silk-men.
they say, that amongst * Grocers, Bakers, Colemeaters, Victuallers and diverse
others, there is much fraud used in this kind and to the great detriment of his
majesty's subjects. I am not a shamed to name these things in this place, when
they require reformation. There are laws (no doubt) enacted against this
injustice: but these laws without execution are but a dead letter. It is in you
(Right Honorable) to put life into these laws, as Elisha did into the
Shunamites son, and to set them upon their feet: it is in you, to take away
these exactions from Gods people, and to maintain the true weight and balance.
There is another disorder, which had almost slipped my memory; they say, that the
provision, which the Country brings in to serve the City, cannot be bought by
householders but at a dear rate and at the second hand; the hands (I mean) of
regrators and hucksters that forestall the market. Shall these things pass
uncontrolled, unpunished, unreformed? God forbid. The mentioning of these
particulars, some may think not so fit in a sermon. But the care is taken, let
them think what they please; I am sure this exaction and injustice does
displease God. The poor people already smart for it, and (if it be not
punished) the whole land may smart for it. No question, you know many other
particulars, in this, and other kinds, which require speedy reformation:
therefore set your selves to the work. Let it be your care (Right Honorable)
to punish these and all others sins: do something this year, that may cause
you to be had in remembrance hereafter. Be not unmercifull to your Country,
whilst you are over-mercifull to offenders, but punish offenders and strike at
the root of sin, for sin strikes at the root, and shakes the foundation of
our land.

In brief, let inferiors as well as superiors, every one in his several
place put his hand to this work. Every one that loves his nation, that favors
religion, that wishes the continuance of the Gospel, desires speace and
prosperity unto our kingdom, let him co^secrat his hands to pull down the
kingdom of sin. Down wih it, down with it, even to the ground. So long as
sin reigns, our kingdom cannot flourish: but the sinews of our state will
shrink, our policy will be no better than lunacy, and our glory be turned
into ignominy. It is not our profession of the Gospel, nor any other
prerogative, that can in this case defend us. Did not God punish Shiloh his
own place: and Israel his own people? Did he not permit the Chaldeans to
destroy the Temple built by Solomon; the Romans to overthrow the second Temple;
the Turks to overthrow the Christian Churches in Asia and Europe, Sir Walter
Raleigh Hist. of the world l. 2. c. 15 1.
when the people became wicked? The Trojans believed, that while their
Palladium, or the Image of Minerva, was kept in Troy, the City should never be
overturned; the Christians in the last fatal battle against Saladine did
carry into the field, as they were made believe, the very cross whereon Christ
died, and yet they lost the battle, their bodies, and the wood: as the
Israelites did the Arc, when they fetched it into the camp, from Shiloh.
Therefore trust not to the sign, but to the substance of Gods worship; it is
not the profession, but the practice of religion, Eccl. 7.10.
that can guard us. Look we therefore to that, and this we cannot do, except we
abandon our sins. Therefore abandon your sins, cast away from you all your
transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, pull those Scorpions out of your
bosoms, weed these nettles out of the garden of your hearts, spue out this
gall of bitterness, break off these bonds of iniquity. Say not thou (if thou
would chop Logic with God) what is the cause that the former days were
better than these? Theophrastus makes it the character of a pratler, (...).
Theophrast. Charact. (...).
to find fault with the present times, and to say men are now worse than
before. We all cry out, the days are evil, while we help to make them
worse. All complain all censure, none amend. The Scribe points to the
Publican, the proud gallant points to the miserable churl; the well conceited
hypocrite blames the dissolute, and the dissolute lays the fault on the
hypocrite, that the days are evil. But if every one would mend one, the times
would then be better. Therefore let every one begin at home. It was the proud
Pharisee that broke his neighbors head, the poor Publican smote his own
bosom. Luke 18.11.


To conclude all: God has highly advanced us into his favor, he has honored
this nation of ours above all the nations in the world; for shame let not us
out-sinne all the nations in the world; for, if we out-act them in sin, we
must out-suffer them in punishment. For our sins past let us seriously humble
our selves, and by faith lay hold on Christ, that they may be pardoned: and for
time to come let us implore the assistance of Gods Spirit, that we may be able
by his power to mortify our sins. So shall that cloud of judgment be
dissolved, which hangs over our heads; so shall that fire of wrath be
quenched, which is already kindled, so shall that sword of vengeance be put
again into his sheath which is already drawn out, but has not stricken home,
so shall Gods blessings fall down upon us, like gracious showers; spiritual,
temporal, eternal blessings; personal and national blessings; whole miriads
of blessings. Happy, o happy, are the people that are in such a case: blessed,
o blessed is that people, that have the Lord for their God. This blessedness
we beg at thy hands o blessed Father, and that for the sake of our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ, to who^ with thine own Majesty and blessed Spirit, be
ascribed all honor and glory, now and evermore.

FJNJS.

