THE FOVNTAINE OF SELF-LOVE. Or CYNTHIAS REVELS.

As it has been sundry times privately acted in the Blackfriars by the
Children of her Majesty's Chapel. Written by BEN: JOHNSON.

Quod non dant Proceres, dabit Histrio.
Haud tamen inuideas vati, quem pulpita pascunt.
Imprinted at London for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Flower de-Luce and Crown. 1601.

The number and names of the Actors.
1. Cynthia. 2. Mercury. 3. Cupid. 4. Hesperus. 5. Echo. 6. Criticus* 7. Arete.
8. Amorphus. 9. Phantaste. 10. Asotus. 11. Argurion. 12. Hedon. 13. Philautia.
14. Anaides. 15. Moria. 16. Prosaites. 17. Cos. 18. Morus. 19. Gelaia. 20.
Phronesis. 21. Thauma. 22. Tim E.
Mutes.
AD LECTOREM.
Nasutum volo, nolo polyposum. Praeludium.
Enter three of the Children. 1. PRay you away; why Children? Gods so* what do
yo^ mean?


2. Mary that you shall not speak the Prologue Sir.


3. Why? do you hope to speak it?


2. I, and I think I have most right to it; I am sure I studied it first.


3. That's all one, if the Author think I can speak it better.


1. I plead possession of the Cloak: Gentles, your suffrages for Gods sake.

Why Children, are you not ashamd? come in there.


Within. 3. 'Slid, I Will play nothing in the Play: unless I speak it.


1. Why? will you stand to most voices of the Gentlemen? let that decide it.


3. O no Sir Gallant; you presume to have the start of us there, and that makes
you offer so bountifully.


1. No, would I were whipped, if I had any such thought; try it by Lots either.


2. Faith, I dare tempt my Fortune in a greater venture then this.


3. Well said resolute Jack: I am Content too; so we draw first. make the Cuts.


1. But will you not snatch my Cloak while I am stooping?


3. No, we scorn^ treachery.


2. Which Cut shall speak it?


3. The shortest.


1. Agreed: Draw. -- The shortest is come to the shortest. Fortune was not
altogether blind in this: Now Children, I hope I shall go forward without your
E^uy.


2. A spite of all mischeiuous luck: I was once plucking at the other.


3. Stay Jack: 'Slid I Will do somewhat now before I go in, though it be nothing
but to revenge my self of the Author; since I speak not his Prologue. I Will go
tell all the Argument of his Play aforehand, and so stale his Invention to the
Auditory before it come forth.


1. O do not so.


At the breaches in this speech following, the other two Boys interrupt him.
2. By no means.


3. First the Title of his Play is CYNTHIAS Revels, as any man (that has hope
to be saved by his Book) can witness; the Scene, GARGAPHIA: which I do
vehemently suspect for some Fustian Country; but let that vanish. Here is the
Court of Cynthia; whither he brings Cupid (travailing on foot) resolved to
turn Page: By the way Cupid meets with Mercury, (as that is a thing to be
noted* take any of our Play-bookes without a Cupid, or a Mercury in it, and
burn it for an Heretic in Poetry) -- Pray thee let me alone: Mercury, he,
(in the nature of a Coniurer) rayses up Echo: who weeps over her L^ue, or
Daffodill Narcissus, a little; sings; cursses the Spring wherein the pretty
foolish Gentleman melted himself away: and there is an end of her -- Now, I am
to inform you, that Cupid, and Mercury do both become Pages: Cupid attends on
Philautia, ^r Self-love, a Court^ Lady: Mercury follows Hedon the voluptuous
Courtier; one that ranks himself even with Anaides, or the impudent Gallant,
(and, that is my part:) a Fellow that keeps Gelaia.
Laughter the daughter of Moria.
Folly (a wenche in Boys attire) to wait ^n him -- These, in the Court, meet
with Amorphus, or the Deformed, a Trauailer that has drunk of the Fountain,
and there tells the wonders of the Water; they presently d^spatch away their
Pages with Bottles to fetch of it, and themselves go to visit the Ladies: But
I should have told you -- Look, these Emets put me out here: that with this
Amorphus, there comes along a Citizenss heir, Asotus, or the Prodigal, who
(in Imitation ^f the Traveler, that has the Co^.
Whetstone, following him*) entertaines the Prosaites
Beggar, to be his Attendant. -- Now the Nymphs, who are Mistresses, to these
Gallants, are Philautia, Self-love; Phantaste, A light Wittiness; Argurion,
Money; and their Guardian, Mother Moria; or Mistress Folly. --


2 Pray thee no more.


3. There Cupid strikes Money in love with the Prodigal; makes her doat upon
him, give him Jewels, Bracelets, Carkanets, etc. all which (he most
ingeniously) departs withal, to be made known to the other Ladies, and
Gallants; and in the heat of this, increases his train with the Morus.
Fool to follow him, as well as the Beggar -- By this time your Beggar begins
to wait close, who is returned with the rest of his fellow Bottle-men -- There
they all drink save Argurion, who is f^lne into a sudden Apoplexy --


1. Stop his mouth.


3. And then there is a retired Criticus.
Scholar there, you would not wish a thing to be better contemned of a Society
of Gallants, then it is: and he applies his ser^ice (good Gentleman) to the
Lady Arete, or Virtue, a poor Nymph of Cynthias train, that is scarce able to
buy her self a Gown, you shall see her play in a Black Roabe anon: A
Creature, that (I assure you) is no less scorned, then himself. Where am I
now? at a stand?


2. Come, leave at last yet.


3. O, the Night is come, ('it was somewhat dark, me thought) and Cynthia intends
to come forth: That helps it a little yet. All the Courtiers must provide for
Revels; they conclude upon a Masque, the devise of which, is -- what will you
ravish me? that each of these Vices, being to appear before Cynthia, would
seem other then indeed they are: and therefore assume the most neighboring
Virtues as their masquing Habites -- I Would cry a Rape but that you are Children.


2. Come, we will have no more of this Anticipation; to give them the Inuentory
of their Cates aforehand, were the discipline of a Tavern, and not ^itting
this Presence.


1. Tut, this was but to show us the happiness of his Memory* I thought at
first he would have playde the Ignorant Critique with every thing along as he
had gone; I expected some such Devise.


3. O you shall see me do that rarely; lend me thy Cloak.


1. Soft Sir, you will speak my Prologue in it?


3. No, would I might never stir then.


2. Lend it him, lend it him:


1. Well, you have sworn?


.3 I have. Now Sir; suppose I am one of your Gentile Auditors, that am come in
(having paid my money at the Door with much ado) and here I take my place,
an^ sit down: I have my three sorts of Tobacco, in my Pocket, my Light by me;
and thus I Begin. By Gods so, I wonder that any man is so mad, to come to see
these raskally Tits play here -- They do act like so many Wrens or Pismires --
not the fifth part of a good Face amongst them all -- And then their Music is
abominable -- able to stretch a man's E^res worse, then ten -- Pillories, and
their Ditties -- most lamentable things, like the pitiful Fellows that make
them -- Poets. By Gods lid, and 'twere not for Tobacco -- I think -- the very
stench of 'hem would poison me, I should not dare to come in at their Gates --
A man were better visit fifteen Iayles -- or a dozen or two of Hospitals --
then once adventure to come near them. How is it? well?


1. Excellent; give me my Cloak.


3. Stay; you shall see me do another now: but a more sober, or better-gather'd
Gallant; that is (as it may be thought) some Friend, or well-wisher to the
House: And here I Enter.


1. What? upon the Stage too?


2. Yes: and I step forth like one of the Children, and ask^ you; Would you
have Stool Sir?


3. A Stool Boy?


2. I Sir, if you will give me six Pence, I Will fetch you one.


.3 For what I pray thee? what shall I do with it?


2. O God Sir! will you betraye your Ignorance so much? why, throne your self
in state on the Stage, as other Gentlemen use Sir.


3. Away Wag: what would thou make an Implement of me? Slid the Boy takes me
for a piece of Prospectiue (I hold my life) or some silk Curtine, come to
hang the Stage here: Sir Crack^ I am none of your fresh Pictures, that use to
beautify the decayed dead Arras, in a public Theater.


2. It Is a sign Sir, you put not that Confidence in your good Clothes, and your
better Face, that a Gentleman should do Sir. But I pray you Sir, let me be a
Suitor to you, that you will quit our Stage then, and take a Place, the Play is
instantly to begin.


3. Most willingly my good wag: but I would speak with your Author, where is he?


2. Not this way, I assure you Sir, we are not so officiously befriended by
him, as to have his Presence in the Tiring-house, to prompt us aloud, stamp at
the Booke-holder, swear for our Properties, curs^e the poor Tire-man, rail
the Music ^ut of tune, and sweat for every venial trespass we commit, as
some Author would, if he had such ^ine Ingles as we: well, it is but our hard
Fortune.


3. Nay Crack be not dishartned.


2. Not I Sir: but if you please to confer with our Author by Attorney, you
may Sir: our proper self here stands for him.


3. Tro^h, I have no such serious affayre to negotiate with him; but what may
very safely be turned upon thy trust: It is in the general behalf of this
fair Society here, that I am to speak; at least the more judicious part of
it: which seems much distasted with the immodest and obsce^e writing of many,
in their Plays. Besides, they could wish, your Poets would leave to be
Promooters of other men's Jests; and to way-lay all the stale Apophthegmes, or
old Books, they can hear of (in Print or otherwise) to farce their Scenes
withal: That they would not so penuriously gleane wit, from every Landresse,
or Hackney-man; or derive their best grace (with servile Imitation) from Common
Stages, or Observation of the Company, they converse with; as if their
Invention lived wholly upon another man's Trencher. Again; that feeding their
friends with nothing of their own, but what they have twice, or thrice Cooked)
they should not wantonly give out, how soon they had dressed it; nor how many
Coaches came to carry away the broken-meate, besides Hobby-horses and Foote^
cloth Nags.


2. So Sir, this is all the Reformation you seek?


3. It is: do not you think it necessary to be practisd, my little wag?


2. Yes; where there is any such ill^habited Custom received.


3. O, I had almost forgot it too: they say, the Vmbrae, or Ghosts of some
three or four Plays, departed a dozen years since, have been se^ne walking
on your Stage here; Take heed Boy, if your House be haunted with such
Hob-goblins* 'twill fright away all your Spectators quickly.


2. Good Sir. But what will you say now, if a Poet (untouched with any breath of
this disease) find Gods Tokens upon you, that are of the Auditory? As some one
Ciuet- Wit among you, that knows no other Learning, then the price of Satin
and Veluets; nor other Perfection, then the wearing of a Neat Suit; and yet
will censure as desperately as the most professed Critique in the house:
presuming, his Clothes should bear him out in it. Another (whom it has
pleased Nature to furnish with more Beard, then Brain) prunes his Mustaccio;
lispes; and (with some score of affected Oaths) swears down all that sit
about him; That the old Hieronimo, (as it was first acted) was the only best,
and Iudiciously-pend Play, of Europe. A third great-bellied Iugler talks of
twenty years since, and when Monsieur was here; and would enforce all Wit to
be of that fashion, because his Doublet is still so. A fourth mis-calles all by
the name of Fustian, that his grounded Capacity cannot aspire too. A fifth only
shakes his Bottle Head, and out of his Corky Brain, squeezes out a
pittifull-learned Face, and is silent.


3. By my Faith, Jack, you have put me down: I would I knew how to get off
with any indifferent Grace: Here take your Cloak, and promise some
satisfaction in your Prologue, or (I Will be sworn) we have ward all.

Exit.
2. Tut fear not Sall: this will never distaste a true Sense. Be not ^ut, and
good enough: I would thou had some Sugar Candyed, to Sweeten thy Mouth.

Exit.
Prologus.
IF gracious silence, sweet Attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
(The lights of judgments throne) shine any where;
Our doubtful author hopes, this is their Sphaere
And therefore opens he himself to those,
To other weaker Beams, his labors close;
As loathe to prostitute their virgin strain,
To every vulgar, and adulterate brain.
In this alone, his Muse her sweetness has,
She shuns the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves. nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or fomy praise, that drops from common Jaws;
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What Merit is: Then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, instead of honored Bays,
About his Poesy; which (he knows) affoords,
Words above Action: matter, above words.
Exit. Actus Primus,
Scena prima.
Cupid. Mercury. WHo goes there?

Mer. It Is I, blind Archer.


Cup. Who? Mercury?


Mer. I.


Cup. Farewell.


Mer. Stay Cupid.


Cup. Not in your company Hermes, except your hands were riueted at your back.


Mer. Why so my little Rouer?


Cup. Because I know, you have not a finger, but is as long as my quiver,
(cousin Mercury,) when you please to extend it.


Mer. Whence derive you this speech Boy?


Cup. O! it is your best policy to be Ignorant: you did never steal Mars his
sword out of the sheath; you? nor Neptunes Trident; nor Apolloes Bow; no, not
you? Alas your palms ( Jupiter knows) they are as tender as the foot of a
foundred Nag, or a Ladies face new Mercuried; they will touch nothing.


Mer. Go to (Infant) you will be daring still.


Cup. Daring? O Ianus, what a word is there? why my light fether-heeld Cousse,
what are you, any more then my uncle Jove's Pandar, a Lackey that runs on
errands for him, and can whisper a light message to a loose wenche with some
round volubility, wait at a table with a Trencher, and warble upon a Crowde a
little; One that sweepes the Gods drinking room every morning, and sets the
Cushions in order again which they threw one at another head ouernight?
Here Is the Catalogue of all your Imploiments now. O no, I err: you have the
Marshalling of all the Ghostes too, that pass the Stigian ferry; and I suspect
you for a share with the old Sculler there, if the truth were known; but let
that escape: one other peculiar virtue you possess* in lifting or
Lieger-du-maine (which few of the house of Heaven have else besides) I must
confess; But (me thinks) that should not make you set such an extreme distance
twixt your self and others, that we should be said too ouerdare in speaking to
your nimble Deity: So Hercules might challenge a priority of us both, because
he can throw the Bar farther* or lift more Ioyndstooles at the arms end then
we. If this might carry it; then we (who have made the whole body of Divinity
tremble at the twange of our Bow, and inforste Saturnius himself to lay^ by
his curld front, Thunder, and three forkd-fiers, and put on a Masking suit, too
light for a reueller of eighteen to be seen in --


Mercu. How now my dancing Braggart in Decimo sexto? charm your skipping
tongue, or I Will --


Cup. What? use the virtue of your Snakie Tipstaffe there upon us?


Mer. No Boy, but the stretched vigor of mine arm about your ears; you have
forgot since I took your heels up into air, (on the very hour I was borne)
in sight of all the benche of Deities, when the silver roof of the Olympian
Palace rung again with the applause of the fact.


Cup. O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; for my mother
Venus (at the same time) but stoupt to embrace you, and (to speak by
Metaphore) you borrowed a Girdle of hers, as you did Jove's Scepter (while he
was laughing) and would have done his thunder too, but that, it was too hot for
your itching fingers.


Mer. It Is well sir.


Cup. I heard you but looked in at Vulcans Forge the other day, and entreated a
pair of his new Tongs along with you for company: It Is joy on you (I faith)
that you will keep your hooked tallons in practice with any thing. Slight, now
you are on earth, we shall have you filche Spoones and Candlesticks rather then
fail: pray Jove the perfumed Courtiers keep their Casting-bottles,
Pick-toothes, and Shittle-cockes from you, or our more ordinary Gallants their
Tabaco-boxes, for I am strangely jealous of your nails.


Mer. Nere trust me Cupid, but you are turned a most acut^ gallant of late, the
edge of my wit is clear taken off with the fine and subtle stroke of your
thin-ground tongue, you fight with too poinant a phrase, for me to deal with.


Cup. O Hermes, your craft cannot make me confident, I know my own steel to
be almost spent, and therefore entreat my peace with you in time: you are too
cunning for me to encounter at length, and I think it my safest ward to close.


Mer. Well for once, I Will suffer you to come within me wag, but use not these
strains too often, thei^e stretch my patience. Whether might you march now?


Cup. Faith (to recover thy good thoughts) I Will discover my whole project. The
Huntresse and queen of these groves, Diana (in regard of some black and
^nuious slanders howerly breathd against her for her divine justice on Acteon
as she prete^ds) has here in the vale of Gargaphy proclaimd a solemn revels,
which she will grace with the full and royal expense of one of her cleerest
moons: In which time it shall be lawful for all sorts of ingenuous persons,
to visit^ her palace, to court her Nymphs, to exerci^e all variety of
generous and noble pastimes, as well to intimate how far she treads such
malicious imputations beneath her, as also to show how clear her beauties are
from the least wrinckle of Austerity, they may be chardgd with.


Mer. But what is all this to Cupid?


Cup. Here do I mean to put off the title of a God, and take the habit of a
Page, in which disguise (during the Interim of these revels) I will get to
follow some one of Dianas maids, where (if my bow hold, and my shafts fly
but with half the willingness and aim they are directed) I doubt not but I
shall really redeem the minutes I have lost by their so long and ouer-nice
proscription of my Deity, from their court.


Mer. Pursue it (druine Cupid) it will be rare.


Cup. But will Hermes second me.


Mer. I am now to put in act an especial designement from ^y father Jove, but
that performd, I am for any fresh action that offers it self.

Exit.
Cup. Well then we part.

Mer. Farewell good wag,
Now to my charge, Echo, fair Echo speak,
It Is Mercury that calls thee; ^orrowfull Nimphe:
Salute me with thy repercussi^e voice,
That I may know what cauerne of the earth,
Contains thy ayery spirit: how, or where,
I may direct my speech, that thou may hear,

SCENA. 2.
Echo, Mercury. Echo. Here.

Mer. So nigh.

Echo. I.

Mer. Know (gentle soul) then, I am sent from Iou^,
Who (pitying the sad burden of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words*
To vent thy passion for Narcissus death)
Commands that now (after three thousand years,
Which have bin excercisde in Iunoes spite,)
Thou take a corporal figure and ascend,
Enricht with vocal, and articulate power,
Make haste sad Nymph: thrice does my winged rod,
Strike th 'obsequious earth to give thee way,
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, Echo rise,
Here, by this Fountain where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Sh^in'd in this yellow flower, that bears his name

Each. His name reuiues and lifts me up from earth.
Ascendit O which way shall I first convert my self?
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak,
That (in a moment) I may be delivered,
Of the prodigions grief I go with all?
Se^, see, the morning fount whose spring weeps yet,
Th'vntimely fate of that too-beauteous boy,
That Trophaee of self love, and spoil of nature,
Who (now transformd into this drooping flower)
Hangs the repentant head, back, from the stream;
As if it wished: Would I had never looked,
In such a flattering mirror. O Narcissus,
Thou that wast once (and yet art) my Narcissus,
Had Echo but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropped away her self in tears,
Till she had all turned water; that in her,
(As in a truer glass) thou mighst have gazed,
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection:
But Self love never yet could look on truth,
but with blear'd beams; Slieke flattery and she:
Are twin-borne sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you sever one, the other dies.
Why did the Gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthy thoughts to make thee proud of it?
Why do I ask? it is now the known disease
That beauty has, to bear to deep a sense,
Of her own selfe-conceiued excellence.
O had thou known the worth of heavens rich gift,
Thou would have turned it to a truer use,
And not (with lean and covetous ignorance)
Pined in continual eying that bright Gem,
The glance whereof to others had bine more,
Then to thy famisht mind the wide worlds store;
" So wretched is it to be merely rich:
Witness thy youths dear sweetes, here spent untasted;
Like a fair Taper, with his own flame wasted.

Mer. Echo be brief, Saturnia is abroad;
And if she hear, she will storm at Jove's high will:

Echo. I will (kind Mercury) be brief as time,
Vouchsafe me I may do him these last Rites,
But kis^e his flower, and sing some mourning strain:
Over his watery hearse.

Mer. Thou do obtain,
I were no son to love should I deny thee;
Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
The humourous air shall mix her solemn tunes,
With thy sad words: strike Music from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.

Cant.
SLow, Slow Fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
yet flower, yet, o faintly gentle springs;
List to the heavy part the Music bears,
" Woe weeps out her division when she sings*
Droope herbs, and flowers,
fall grief in showers;
" Our beauties are not ours:
O I could still
(Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,)
drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since Natures pride, is now awither'd Daffadill.

Mer. Now have you done?

Echo. Done presently (good Hermes) bide a little;
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while,
But eene to taste the place, and I am vanished:

Mer. Forgo thy use and liberty of tongue,
And thou may dwell on earth, and sport thee there;

Echo. Here young Action ^ell, pursued, and torn
By Cynthi^s wrath (more egar then his hounds;)
And here, (ay me the place is fatal) see,
The weeping Niobe, translated hither
From P^rygian mountains: and by Phaebe reared
As the proud Trophaee of her sharp revenge.

Mer. Nay but here*

Each. But here, oh here, the Fountain of self love:
In which Latona, and her careless Nymphs,
(Regardles of my sorrows) bath themselves,
In hourly pleasures.

Mer. Stint thy babbling tongue;
Fond Echo, thou prophanst the grace is done thee:
So idle worldlings (merely made of voice:)
Censure the powers above them. Come away,
Jove calls thee hence, and his will brooks no stay.

Each. O stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe,
In ayery garments and then (faith) I go:
Henceforth, thou treacherous, and murdering spring,
Be ever called the Fountain of self love:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
(As an inseperate plague) that who but tastes,
A drop thereof, may (with the instant touch)
Grow dotingly enamored on themselves.
Now Hermes I have finished.

Mer. Then thy speech,
Must here forsake thee Echo, and thy voice:
(As it was wount) rebound but the last words, Fare well.

Echo. Well.
Exit. Now Cupid I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.

SCENA. 3.
Amorphus. Echo. Mercury. Amo. Dear spark of beauty make not so fast away:


Echo. Away.


Mer. Stay let me observe this portent yet.


Amo. I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaure, nor your Satyr, nor your
Hyaena, nor your Babion, but your mere traueler, believe me:


Echo. Leave me.


Mer. I gest it should be some traveling Motion pursu'de Echo so.


Amo. Know you from whom you fly? or whence?


Echo. Hence.

Exit.
Amo. This is somewhat above strange: a Nimphe of her feature and ^ineament to
be so preposterously rude; well; I will but cool my self at yon' Spring and
follow her.


Mer. Nay then I am familiar with the issue; I Will leave you too.

Exit.
Amo. I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her Symmetry would have
dard so improportionable and abrupte a digression. Liberal and divine Founte,
suffer my prophan^ hand to take of thy bounties. By the purity of my taste,
here is most Ambrosiack water; I will sup of it again. By thy favor sweet
Founte. See, the water (a more running, subtle, and humorous Nimphe then she)
permits me to touch, and handle her: what should I infer? If my behauiours
had been of a cheap, or customary garb; my Accent, or phrase, vulgar; my
Garments trite; my Countenance illiterate; or vnpractizd in the encounter of a
beautiful and braue-attirde Piece, then I might (with some change of coullor)
have suspected my faculties: but (knowing my self an Essence so sublimated,
and refin'de by Travail; of so studied, and well exercisde a gesture; so alone
in fashion, able to make the face of any Statesman living, and to speak the
mere extraction of language; One that has now made the sixth return upon
venture; and was your first that ever enricht his country with the true laws of
the Duello; whose Optiques have drunk the spirit of beauty, in some eight
score and eighteen Princes Courts, where I have resided, and bin there
fortunate in the Amors of three hundred, forty, and five Ladies (all nobly
descended) whose names I have in Catalogue: to conclude; in all so happy, as
even Admiration her self does seem to fasten her kisses upon me: Certes I do
neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor favor, the least steame, or fume of a
reason, that should inuit this foolish fastidious Nymph so peeuishly to
abandon me: well let the memory of her fleet into Air; my thoughts and I am
for this other Element, water.


SCENA. 4.
Criticus. Asotus. Amorphus. Crit. What? the well-dieted Amorphus become a
Water-drinker? I see he means not to write verses then.


Asot. No Criticus? why?


Crit. Quia nulla placere diu* nec viuere carmina possunt, quae scribuntur
aquae po^oribus.


Amor. What say you to your Helicon?


Crit. O, the Muses, well! that is ever excepted.


Amor. Sir, your Muses have no such water I assure you; your Nectar, or the
Juice of your Nepenthe is nothing to it; it is above your Metheglin, believe it.


Asot. Metheglin! what is that Sir? may I be so Audacious to demand?


Amo. A kind of Greek Wine I have met with Sir in my Travails: it is the
same that Demosthenes usually drunk, in the composure of all his exquisite and
Mellifluous Orations.


Crit. That Is to be argued, (Amorphus) if we may credit Lucian, who in his
(Enicomium Demosthenis) affirms, he never drunk but water in any of his
Compositions.


Amo. Lucian is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe my own Travels,
before all the Lucians of Europe; he does feed you with fictions, and leasings.


Crit. Indeed (I think) next a Traveler he does prettily well.


Amo. I assure you it was Wine, I have tasted it, and from the hand of an
Italian Antiquary, who deriues it authentically from the Duke of Ferrara's
Bottles. How name you the Gentleman you are in rank with there, Sir?


Crit. It Is Asotus, son to the late deceased Philargyrus the Citizen.


Amorphus. Was his Father of any eminent place, or means?


Crit. He was to have bin Praetor next year.


Amo. Ha! A pretty formal young Gallant (in good soothe) pity, he is not
more gentilely propagated. Heark^ you Criticus: you may say to him what I am,
if you please; though I affect not popularity, yet I would be loathe to stand
out to any, whom you shall voutchsafe to call friend.


Crit. Sir, I fear I may do wrong to your sufficiencies in the reporting
them, by forgetting or misplacing some one; your self can best inform him of
your self Sir, except you had some Catalogue or Inuentory of your faculties
ready drawn, which you would request me to show him for you, and him to take
notice of.


Amo. This Criti^us is sower: I will think Sir.


Crit. Do so Sir. O heaven, that any thing (in the likeness of man) should
suffer these rackt extremities, for the vttring of his Sophisticate good parts.


Asot. Criticus, I have a suit to you; but you must not deny me: pray you make
this Gentleman and I friends.


Crit. Friends! Why? is there any difference between you?


Asotus. No: I mean acquaintance, to know one another.


Crit. O now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me before.


Asot. In good faith he is a most excellent rare man I warrant him.


Crit. Slight, they are mutually enamored by this time.


Asot. Will you sweet Criticus?


Crit. Yes, yes.


Asot. Nay, but when? you will defer it now, and forget it?


Crit. Why, is it a thing of such present necessity, that it requires so violent
a dispatch?


Asot. No, but (would I might never stir) he is a most rauishing man; good
Criticus you shall endeare me to you, in good faith law.


Crit. Well your longing shall be satisfied Sir.


Asot. And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and how well he left
me, and that I am his heir.


Crit. Leave it to me, I Will forget none of your dear graces I warrant you.


Asot, Nay I know you can better marshall these affairs then I can. -- O Gods
i will give all the world (if I had it) for abundance of such acquaintance.


Crit. What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to bestow this
reciprocal brace of Cockscombes, one upon another?


Amor. Since I troad on this side the Alps, I was not so frozen in my
invention; let me see: to accost him with some choice remnant of Spanish, or
Italian? that would indifferently express my languages now, mary then, if he
should fall out to be Ignorant, it were both hard, and harshe. How else? step
into some discourse of S^ate, and so make my induction? that were above him
too; and out of his element I fear Feign to have seen him in Venice? or Padua?
or some face near his in simillitude? it is too pointed, and open* No; it must
be a more queint, and collateral devise: As -- stay; to frame some
encomiastique speech upon this our Metropolis, or the wise Magistrates thereof,
in which pollitique number, it is ods but his father filled up a rome? descend into
a particular admiration of their Justice; for the due measuring of Coals,
burning of Cans, and such like? As also their religion, in pulling down a
superstitious Cross, and advancing a Venus; or Priapus, in place of it? ha?
twill do well. Or to talk of some Hospital, whose walls record his father a
BENEFACTOR? or of so many Buckets bestowd on his parish church in his life
time, with his name at length (for want of arms) trickt upon them; Any of
these? or to praise the cleanesse of the street wherein he dwelt, or the
provident painting of his posts against he should have been Praetor, or
(leaving his parent) come to some special ornament about him self, as his
Rapier, or some other of his accoutrements? I have it: Thanks gra^ious Minerua.


Asot. Would I had but once spoke to him, and then --


Amor. It Is a most curious and neatly-wrought band this same, as I have seen
Sir.


Asot. O God Sir.


Amor. You forgive the humor of mine eye in observing it?


Asot. O Lord Sir, there needs no such Apology I assure you.


Crit. I am anticipated: they will make a solemn deed of gift of themselves you
shall see.


Amor Your Rose too does most grace-fully in troath.


Asot. It Is the most gentile and received Wear now Sir.


Amor. Believe me Sir (I speak it not to humor you) I have not seen a young
gentleman (generally) put on his clothes with more judgment.


Asot. O, it is your pleasure to say so, Sir.


Amor. No, as I am virtuous (being altogether vntrauel'd) it strikes me into
wonder.


Asot. I do purpose to travel (Sir) at Spring:


Amor. I think I shall affect you sir, this last speech of yours has begun to
make you dear to me.


Asot. O God Sir, I would there were anything in me Sir, that might appear
worthy the least worthiness of your worth Sir, I protest Sir, I should endeavor
to show it Sir, with more then common regard Sir.


Crit. O here is rare Motley, Sir.


Amor. Both your desert, and your endeavors are plentiful, suspect them not:
but your sweet disposition to travail (I assure you) has made you another
My-selfe in mine eye, and struck me enamored on your beauties.


Asot. I would I were the fairest Lady of France for your sake Sir, and yet I
would travail too.


Amor* O you should digress from your self else: for (believe it) your
Travail is your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Italian says) virendi
pronto all' Attioni, makes you fit for Action.


Asot. I think it be great charge though Sir.


Amor. Charge? why it is nothing for a gentleman that goes private, as your
self, or so; my Intelligence shall quitt my charge at all times: Good faith
this Hat has possessed mine eye exceedingly; it is so pretty, and fantastique;
what? is it a Beauer.


Asot. I Sir. I Will assure you it is a Beauer, it cost me six crowns but this
morning.


Amor. A very pretty fashion (believe me) and a most nouel kind of trim:
your Button is conceipted too.


Asot. Sir, it is all at your service.


Amor. O pardon me.


Asot. I beseech you Sir, if you please to wear it you shall do me a most
infinite grace.


Crit. Slight, will he be praisde out of his clothes?


Asot. By heaven Sir, I do not offer it you after the Italian manner; I would
you should conceive so of me.


Amor. Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your curte^ies, especially
being invited by so proper a distinction; may I pray your name Sir.


Asot. My name is Asotus Sir.


Amor. I take your love (gentle Asotus) but let me win you to receive this in
exchange. --


Crit. 'Hart, they will change dublets anon.


Amor. And (from this time) esteem your self in the first rank of those few
whom I profess to love; what make you in company of this scholle^ here? I will
bring you known to gallants as Anaides, Hedon the courtier, and others, whose
society shall render you grac'de, and respected; this is atriuiall fellow, too
mean, too coarse for you to converse with.


Asot. Slid, this is not worth a crown, and minecost me six but this morning.


Crit. I looked when he would repent him, he has beg^nne to be sad a good while.


Amor. Sir, shall I say to you for that Hat? be not so sad, be not so sad; it is
a Relic I could not so easily have departed with, but as the Hierogliphick of
my affection; you shall alter it to what form you please, it will take any
block; I have varied it my self to the three thousandth time, and not so few:
It has these virtues beside; your head shall not ak^ under it; nor your brain
leave you, without license; It will preserve your comple^ion to eternity; for
no beam of the Sun (should you wear it under Zona Torrida) has force to
approach it by two else. It Is proof against thunder, and enchantment: and was
given me by a great man (in Russia) as an especially-priz'd present; and
constantly affirmed to be the hat that acompanied the politic Ulysses, in his
tedious, and ten years Travails.


Asot. By Jove I will not depart withal, whosoever would give me a Million.


SCENA. 5.
Cos. Prosaites. Criticus. Amorphus. Asotus. Cos. Save you sweet bloods: does
any of you want a creature, or a dependant?


Crit. Be-shrow me a fine blunt slave.


Amor. A page of good timber; it will now be my grace to entertain him first,
though I casheere him again in private: how art thou called?


Cos. Cos Sir, Cos.


Crit. Cos? How happily has Fortune furnished him with a Whetstone?


Amor. I do entertain you Cos: conceal your quality till we be private; if
your parts be worthy of me, I will countenance you; if not, catechize you;
Gentles shall we go?


Asot. Stay Sir; i will but entertain this other fellow, and then -- I have a
great humor to taste of this water too, but i will come again alone for that
mark the place; what is your name, youth?


Pros. Prosaites? Sir.


Asot. Prosaites? A very fine name Criticus? is it not?


Crit. Yes, and a very ancient Sir, the Beggar;


Exeunt. Asot. Follow me good Prosaites: Lets talk.


Crit. He will rank even with you (ere't be long)
If you hold on your course: O vanity,
How are thy painted beauties doated on,
By light, and empty Idiots? how pursu'de
With open, and extended appetite?
How they do sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raisd on their toes, to catch thy ayery forms,
Still turning giddy, till they reele like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour,
With the long irksomeness of following time?
O how dispisde, and base a thing is Man,
If he not strive t'erect his groueling thoughts
Above the strain of flesh. 'But how more cheap^
When, even his best and understanding part,
(The crown, and strength of all his faculties)
Floates like a dead drowned body, on the stream
Of vulgar humor, mixed with commonst dregs?
I suffer for their guilt now, and my Soul
(Like one that looks on ill affected eyes)
Is hurt with mere Intention on their follies:
Why will I view them then? my Sense might ask me:
Or is it a Rarity, or some new Object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O would it were, therein I could afforde
My Spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties: so Vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul, and were it not
That those (that woo her) greet her with locked eyes
(In spite of all the Impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd Custom daubes her cheeks withal)
She would betray her loathed and leprous face,
And fright th'enamor'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy leuity,
(How antique and ridiculous so ere
It suit with us) yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, then avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We ac^e ou^ Mimick tricks with that free license,
That lust, that pleasure, that security,
As if we practiced in a Past-boord case,
And no one saw the Motion, but the Motion.
Well, check thy passion, least it grow too loud:
^While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.
Exit.
Finis Actus Primi.
ACTVS SECVNDVS.
SCENA. 1.
Cupid. Mercury. Cup. Why this was most unexpectedly followed (my divine
delicate Mercury) by the Beard of Jove, thou art a precious Deity.


Mer. Nay Cupid leave to speak improperly; since we are turned cracks, lets
study to be like cracks: practice their language, and behauiours, and not with
a dead Imitation. Act freely, carelessly, and capricciously, as if our veins
ran with Quicksilver, and not utter a phrase, but what shall come forth
steept in the very brine of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.


Cup. That Is not every ones happiness ( Hermes) though you can presume upon
the ^asinesse and dexterity of your wit, you shall give me leave to be a little
Jealous of mine; and not desperately to hazard it after your capring humor.


Mer. Nay then Cupid, I think we must have you hoodwinckt again, for you are
grown too provident, since your eyes were at liberty.


Cup. Not so ( Mercury) I am still blind Cupid to thee:


Mer. And what to the Lady Nymph you serve?


Cup. Troath Page, Boy, and Sirrah: these are all my titles.


Mer. Then thou have not altered thy name with thy disguise.'


Cup. O No, that had bin Supererogation, you shall never hear your Courtier
call but by one of these three.


Mer. Faith then both our Fortunes are the same.


Cup. Why? what parcel of man have thou lighted on for a Master?


Mer. Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare not affirm him to
be any thing else then a Courtier. So much he is, during this open time of
Revels, and would be longer, but that his means are to leave him shortly
after: his name is Hedon, a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures. --


Cup. Hedon? he uses much to my Ladies chamber, I think.


Mer. How is she called, and then I can show thee?


Cup. Madame Philautia.


Mer. O I, he affects her very particulerly indeed. These are his graces. he
does (besides me) keep a Barbar, and a Monkey: He has a ri^ch wrought
Waste-coate to intertaine his vis^tants in, with a Cap almost suitable: His
Curtains and Bedding are thought to be his own; his bathing Tub is not
suspected. He loves to have a F^ncer, a Pedant, and a Musician seen in his
lodging a mornings.


Cup. And not a Poet?


Mer. Fie no: himself is a Rimer, and that is a thought better than a Po^t: he
is not lightly within to his Mercer, no, though he come when he takes Phisique,
which is commonly after his play. He beats a Tailor very well, but a
Stocking-seller admirably; and so consequently any one he owes money too, that
dares not resist him. He never makes general inuitement, but against the
publishing of a new Suit, mary then, you shall have more drawn to his lodging,
then come to the launching of some three ships; especially if he be fur^ishd
with supplies for the retiring of his old Wardrobe from pawn; if not, he
does hire a stock of Apparel, and some forty or fifty pound in Gould for that
forenoone to show: He Is thought a very necessary Perfume for the Presence, and
for that only cause welcome thither: six Millaners shops affoorde you not the
like sent. He courts Ladies with how many great Horse he has rid that morning,
or how o^t he has done the whole, or the half Pommado in a seuen-night before;
and sometime ve^ters so far upon the virtue of his Pomander, that he dares
tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at Tennis that week* but wiselye
conceales so many dozen of Balls he is on the score. Here he comes that is all
this.


SCENA. 2.
Hedon. Anaides. Gelaia. Cupid. Mercury. Hedon. Boy.


Mercu. Sir.


Hedon. Are any of the Ladies in the Presence?


Mer. None yet Sir.


Hedon. Give me some Gold, More.


Ana. Is that thy Boy Hedon?


Hedo. I, what think thou of him?


Ana. Shart, Il'd gelde him; I warrant he has the Philosophers stone.


Head. Well said my good Melancholy devil: Sirah, I have deuisde one or two of
the pretiest Oaths (this morning in my bed) as ever thou heardst, to protest
withal in the Presence.


Ana. Pray thee lets heere'hem.


Head. Soft thoult vse'hem before me.


Ana. No (damn me then) I have more oaths then I know how to utter, by this
air.


Head. Faith'one is; By the tip of your ^are, Sweet Lady, Is It not pretty, and
Gentile?


Ana. Yes for the person it is applied to, a Lady. It should be light, and --


Head. Nay the other is better, exceeds it much: The Invention is farther fet
too; By the while valley that lies between the Alpine hills of your bosom, I
protest -- etc.


Ana. Well, you traueld for that Hedon.

Mer. I, in a Map, where his eyes were but blind guides to his understanding it
seems.


Head. And then I have a Salutatio^ will nick all; by this Caper: ho^


Ana. How is that?


Head. You know I call Mada^ Philautia, my Honor, and she calls me her Ambition.
Now (when I meet her in the Presence anon) I will come to her, and say, Sweet
Honor, I have hitherto con^ented my Sense with the Lillies of your hand; but
now I will taste the Roses of your lip; and (withal) kiss her: to which she
cannot but blushingly answer: Nay now you are too Ambitious, And then do I
reply; I cannot be too Ambitious of Honor, sweet Lady. Wilt not be good? ha?
ha?


Ana. O Assure your ^oule.


Head. By heaven I think 'twill be excellent, and a very politic atchiuement
of a kiss.


Ana. I have thought upon one for Moria of a sudden too if it take.


Head. What is it, my dear mischief?


Ana. Mary, I will come to her, (and she always wears a Muffe if you be
remembered) and I will tell her: Madame your whole self cannot but be perfectly
wise: for your hands have wit enough to keep themselves warm.


Head. Now (before Jove) admirable: look, thy Page takes it too, by Phoebus, my
sweet facetious Rascal, I could eat Water-gruell with thee a month, for this
Jest, O my dear Rogue.


Ana. O (by Hercules) it is your only dish, above all your Potatos, or
Oyster-pyes in the world.


Head. I have ruminated upon a most rare Wish too, and the Prophecy to it, but
I Will have some friend to be the Prophet; As thus: I do wish my self one of my
Mistress Ciopino's. Another demands: Why would he be one of his Mistress
Ciopinos? A third answers, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall
say, That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then do I prophecy,
Pride will have a fall: and he shall give it her.


Ana. I Will be your Prophet* By gods so, it will be most exquisite, th^^ art a
fine Inuentious Rogue, Sirah.


Head. Nay and I have Posies for Rings too, and Riddles, that they dream not of.


Ana. Tut they will do that, when they come to sleep on the^ time enough; but were
thy devises never in the Presence yet Hedon?


Head. O no, I disdain that.

Ana. Twere good we went before then, and brought the acquainted with the room
where they shall act, least the strangenes of it put them out of countenance,
when they should come forth.


Exeunt. Cup. Is that a Courtier too.


Mer. Troth no; he has two essential parts of the Courtier, Pride and
Ignorance (I mean of such a Courtier, who is (indeed) but the Za^i to an exact
Courtier) mary, the rest come somewhat after the Ordinary Gallant. It Is Impudence
it self Anaides; one, that speaks all that comes in his cheeks, and will
blush no more then a Sackbut. He lightly occupies the Iesters room at the
table, and keeps laughter, Gelai^ (a wench in pages atire) following him in
place of a Squire, whom he (now and the^) tickles with some strange ridiculous
stuff, uttered (as his land came to him) by chance: He will censure or
discourse of any thing, but as absurdly as you would wish: His fashion is not
to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes; He never drinks
below the Salt: He does naturally admire his wit, that wears Gold-lace, or
Tissue; Stabs any man that speaks more contemptibly of the Scholar then he.
He is a great proficient in all the illiberall Sciences, as Cheating, Drinking,
Swaggering, Whoring, and such like; never kneeles, but to pledge Health's nor
prays, but for a Pipe of pudding Tabaco. He will blaspheame in his shirt; The
oaths which he vomits at one supper, would maintain a Town of garrison in good
swearing a twelue-moneth: One other genuine quality he has, which crowns all
these; and that is this; to a Friend in want, he will not depart with the
weight of a soldard Groat, least the world might censure him prodigal, or
report him a Gull: Mary, to his Cocatrice or Punquetto; half a dozen Taffata
gowns or Satin Kirtles, in a pair or two of month's, why they are nothing.


Cup. I commend him he is one of my clients.


SCENA. 3.
Amorphus, Asotus; Cos; Prosaites, Cupid, Mercury. Amor. Come Sir. You are now
within reguarde of the Presence, And see, the priuacie of this room, how
sweetly it offers it offers it self to our retired intendments, Page, cast a
vigilant, and enquiring eye about, that we be not rudely surprised, by the
aproch of some ruder-stranger.


Cos. I warrant you Sir. I Will tell you when the Woolfe enters fear nothing.


Mer. O what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being the invisible
Spectators of this strange show now to be acted?


Amor Plant your self there Sir: And observe me. You shall now, as well be the
Ocular as the Eare-witnesse, how clearly I can refell that Paradox, or rather
Pseudodoxe of those, which hold the face to be the Index of the mind, which
(I assure you) is not so, in any Politic creature; for Instance, I will now
give you the particular, and distinct face of every your most noted Species of
persons; As your Merchant, your Schol^er, your Soldier, your Lawyer, Courtier,
etc. And each of these so truly, as you would swear (but that your eye sees
the variation of the lineament) it were my most proper, and Genuine aspect:
(...) for your Merchants, or City face; It Is thus: a dull (...) face; still
looking in a direct line, forward: There is no (...) matter in this face. Then
have you your Students, or Ac^demique face, which is here, an honest, simple,
and Methodicall face; But somewhat more spread then the former. The third is
your Soldiers face: A menacing, and astounding face, that looks broad, and
big: the grace of this face consists much in a Beard. The Anti face to this,
is your Lawyers face; a contracted, subtle, and Intricate face: full of
quirkes, and turnings; A Labyrinthaean face, now angularly, now circularly,
every way aspected. Next is your Statists face, a serious, solemn, and
supercilious face, full of formal, and square gravity* the eye (for the most
part) arteficially and deeply shadowed, there is great judgment required in the
making of this face. But now to come to your face of faces; or Courtiers face:
it is of three sorts: (according to our subdiuision of a Courtier; Elementary,
Practique, and Theorique: your Courtier Theorique, is he that has arrived to
his fardest, and does now know the Court rather by speculation, then practice;
and this is his face: A fastidious, and oblique face; that looks, as it went
with a Vice, and were screwed thus. Your Courtier Practique is he that is yet
in his Path, his Course, his Way, and has not touched the Puntillio or point of
hopes; this face is here: A most promising, open, smooth, and ouerflowing face,
that seems as it would run, and power it self into you; your Courtier
Elementary is one but newly entered, or as it were in the Alphabet
Vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la, of Courtship: Note well this face, for it is this you must
practice.


Asot. I Will practice 'hem all, if you please Sir.


Amor. I; here after you may: and it will not be altogether an ungrateful
study. For let your soul be assured of this (in any Rank or profession
whatsoever) the most general, or Mayor part of Opinion, goes with the face,
and (simply) respects nothing else. Therefore: if that can be made, exactly,
curiously, exquisitely, thoroughly, It is enough: But (for the present) you
shall only apply your self to this face of the Elementary Courtier, A light,
reuelling, and protesting face, now blushing, now smiling which you may help
much with a wanton wagging of your head, thus; (a feather will teach you) or
with kissing your finger that has the Ruby, or playing with some string of
your band* which is a most quaint kind of Melancholy besides. Where is your
Page? call for your Casting Bottle, and place your Mirror in your Hat, as I
told you; so. Come, look not pale, observe me: set your face, and enter,


Amor. O for some excellent Painter, to have ta'^e the copye of all these faces.


Aso. Prosaites.


Amor. Fie, I premonisht you of that; In the Court, Boy, or Sirrah.


Cos. Master Lupus in -- O it is Prosaites.


Asot. Sirrah, prepare me my Casting-bottle, I think I must be enforst to
purchase me another Page, you see how at hand Cos waits here.


Exeunt. Mor. So will he too in time.


Cup. What Is he Mercury?


Mer. A notable Finch. One that has newly entertained the Beggar to follow
him, but cannot get him to wait near enough. It Is Asotus the heir of
Philargirus: but first I Will give you the others Caracter, which may make his the
clearer? He that is with him is Amorphus, A Traveler, One so made out of the
mixture and shreds of forms, that himself is truly deformed: He walks most
commonly with a Cloue or Picktoothe in his mouth, He Is the very Minte of
Compl^ment; All his behauiours are printed, his face is another volume of
Essays; and his beard an Aristarchus. He speaks all cream, skimd, and more
affected then a dozen of waiting women; He Is his own promooter in every
place: The wife of the Ordinary gives him his diet to maintain her table in
discourse, which (indeed) is a mere Tyranny over her other guests: for he will
vsurp all the talk: Ten Cunstables are not so tedious. He is no great shifter;
once a year his Apparel is ready to revolt; He does use much to arbitrate
quarrels, and fights himself exceeding well (out at a window.) He will lie
cheaper then any Beggar, and louder then most Clockes; for which he is right
properly accommodated to the W^etstone his page. The other gallant is his Zani,
and does most of these tricks after him; sweats to imitate him in every thing
(to a hair) except a Beard, which is not yet extant: he does learn to eat
Anchoues, and Caueare because he loves 'hem, speaks as he speaks; looks,
walks, goes so in Clothes and fashion, is in all, as he were molded of him.
Marry (before they met) he had other very pretty sufficiencies, which yet he
retains some light Impression of: As frequenting a dancing school, and
grievously torturing strangers, with inquisitio^ after his grace in his
Galliard; He buys a fresh acquaintance at any rate; his Eye, and his Raiment
confer much together as he goes in the street; He treads nicely, like a fellow
that walks upon ropes, especially the first Sunday of his Silkstockings, and
when he is most neat and new, you shall stripp him with commendations.


Cup. Here comes another.


Mer. I, but one of another strain Cupid: This fellow weighs somewhat.


Criticus passes by. Cup. His name Hermes?


Mer. Criticus. A creature of a most perfect and divine temper; One, in whom
the Humors and Elements are peaceably met, without aemulation of Precedencie:
he is neither too fantastickly Melancholy; too slowly Plegmatick, too lightly
Sanguine, or too rashly Choleric, but m al, so composd and ordered; as it is
clear, Nature was about some full work, she did more then make a man when she
made him; His discourse is like his behavior, uncommon, but not unpleasing; he
is prodigal of neither: He strives rather to be (that which men call)
Judicious, then to be thought so; and is so truly learned that he affects not
to show it: He will think, and speak his thought, both freely; but as distant
from deprauing any other man's Merit, as proclaming his own: For his valor,
it is such, that he dares as little to offer an Injury, as receive one. In sum,
he has a most Ingenious and sweet spirit, a sharp and seasoned wit, a straight
judgment. and a strong mind; constant and unshaken: Fortune could never
break him, or make him less, he counts it his pleasure to despise pleasures,
and is more delighted with good deeds then Goods, It is a competencie to him
that he can be virtuous. He does neither covet, nor fear; he has too much
reason to do either: and that commends all things to him.


Cup. Not better then Mercury commends him.


Mer. O Cupid, it is beyond my deity to give him his due praises; I could leave
my Place in heaven, to live among Mortals, so I were sure to be no other then
he.


Cup. Slight, I believe he is your Minion; you seem to be so ravished with him.


Mer. He Is one, I would not have awry thought darted against willingly.


Cup. No, but a straight shaft in his bosom, I Will promise him, if I am
Cithereas son.


Mer. Shall we go Cupid?


Cup. Stay and see the Ladies now; they will come presently. I Will help to paint
them.


Mer. What lay Couller upon Color* that affoordes but an ill blazon.


Argurion passes by. Cup. Here comes Metal to help it, the Lady Arg^rion.


Mer. Money, money.


Cup. The same: A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy disposition, humourous as
the Air, she will run from Gallant to Gallant (as they sit at Primero in the
Presence) most strangely, and seldom stays with any; She spreades as she
goes: To day you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning and to
morrow as Melancholy as midnight. She takes special pleasure in a close,
obscure lodging, and for that cause visits the City so often, where she has
many secret and true-concealing favorites. When she comes abroad she is more
loose and scattering then dust, and will fly from place to place, as she were
rapt with a whirle-winde. Your young Student (for the most part) she affects
not, only salutes him* and away: A Poet or a Philosopher she is hardly brought
to take any notice of, no, though he be some part of an Alchimist. She loves a
Player, well; and a Lawyer infinitely: but your Fool above all. She can do much
in the Court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever, no door but flies open
to her; her presence is above a Charm: The woorst in her is want of keeping
s^ate, and to much descending into inferior and base offices, She Is for any
course Employment you will put upon her, as to be your Procurer or Pandar.


Mercu. Peace Cupid; here comes more work for you, another Caracter or two.


SCENA. 4.
Phantaste, Moria, Philautia, Mercury, Cupid. Pha. Stay sweet Philautia; I Will
but change my fann, and go presently.


Mor. Now (in very good serious) Ladies, I will have this order reuerst, the
Presence must be better maintained from you; A quarter past eleven, and n'ere a
Nymph in Prospectiue; beshrew my hand, there must be a reformed Discipline. Is
that your new Ruff sweet Lady Bird? by my truth it is most Intricately rare.


Mer. Good Jove, what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be?


Cup. This Madam Moria, Guardian of the Nimphs: One that is not now to be
persuaded of her Wit, she will think herself wise against all the Judgments
that come. A Lady made all of voice, and Air, talks any thing of any thing:
She is like one of your Ignorant Po^tasters of the time; who when the have got
acquainted with a strange word, never rest t^ll they have wrong it in, though
it loosen the who^e fabric of their Sense.


Mer. That was pretty and sharply noted Cupid.


Cup. She will tell you Philosophy was a fine Reueller, when she was young and
a Gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was thought to be the
Dame-Dido, and Hallen of the Court; As also, what a sweet Dog she had this
time four year, and how it was called Fortune, and that (if the fates had not
cut his thread) he had been a Dog to have given entertainment to any Gallant
in this kingdom.


Mer. O I pray thee no more, I am full of her.


Cupid. Yes (I must needs tell you) She composes a Sackpos^et well; and would
court a young Page sweetly, but that her breath is against it.


Mer. Now her breath (or some thing more strong) protect me from her; the other,
the other, Cupid.


Cup O, that is my Lady and Mistress Madam Philautia: She admires not herself
for any one particularity, but for all; She is fair, and she knows it; She
has a pretty light wit too, and she knows it; She can dance, and she knows
that too; play at Shittle-cock, and that too: No quality she has, but she shall
take a very particular knowledge of, and most Lady-like commend it to you; you
shall have her at any time read you the History of her self, and very subtly
run over another Ladies sufficiences to come to her own.

She has a good superficial judgment in Painting; and would seem to have so
in Poetry. A most complete Lady in the opinion of some three beside herself.


Phi. Faith, how liked you my quipp to Hedon, about the garter? wast not witty?


Mor. Exceeding witty and Integrate: you did so Aggrauate the Jest withal.


Phi. And did I not dance moouingly last night?


Mor. Moouingly; out of measure (in troth) Sweet Lady.


Mor. A happy commendation, to dance, out of measure.


Mor. Save only you wanted the swimi the turn; O! when I was atfourteene --


Phi. Nay that's mine own from any Nymph in the Court) I am sure on it)
therefore you mistake me in that Guardian; both the swim, and the trip, are
properly mine; every body will affirm it, that has any judgment in dancing:
I assure you.


Pha, Come now Philautia I am for you, shall we go?


Phi. I good Phantaste; What? have you changed your headtire?


Pha. Yes faith; the other was so near the common, it had no extraordinary
grace; besides, I had worn it almost a^ day in good troath.


Phi. I Will be sworn, this is most excellent for the devise, and rare. It Is after
the Italian print we looked on the other night.


Pha. It Is so: by this fan, I cannot abide any thing that sauors the poor
ouer-worne cut, that has any kindred with it; I must have variety, ^* this
mixing in fashion I hate it worse, then to burn Juniper in my Chamber I
protest.


Phi. And yet we cannot have a new peculiar Court-tyre, but these Retainers
will have it; these Suburb sunday-waiters, these Courtiers for High days, I
know not what I should call 'hem. --


Pha. O I, they do most pitifully Imitate; but I have a tire a coming (I
faith) shall --


Mor. In good certain, Madame, it makes you look most heavenly; but (lay your
hand on your heart) you never skind a new beauty more prosperously in your life,
nor more supernaturally; look good Lady, sweet Lady look.


Phi. It Is very clear, and well believe me. But if you had seen mine
yeasterday when it was young, you would have -- who is your Doctor Phantaste?


Pha. Nay that's counsel Philautia, you shall pardon me: yet (I Will assure you)
he is the most dainty, sweet, absolute rare man, of the whole College. O! his
very looks, his discourse, his behavior, all he doo's is Physic I protest.


Phi. For heavens sake his name; good, dear, Phantaste --


Pha. No, no, no, no, no, no, (believe me) not for a Million of heavens: I will
not make him cheap. Fie --


Exeunt. Phi. There is a Nymph too of a most curious and elaborate strain,
light, all motion, an Vbiquitary, she is every where, Phantaste --


Mer. Her very name speaks her; let her pass. But are these ( Cupid) the
stars of Cynthias Court? do these Nymphs attend upon Di^na?


Cup. They are in her Court ( Mercury) but not as Stars; these never come in
the presence of Cynthia: the Nymphs that make her train, are the divine
Arete, Timae, Phronesis, Thauma, and others of that high sort. These are
privately brought in by Moria in this licencious time, against her knowledge;
and (like so many Meteors) will vanish when she appears.


SCENA. 5.
Prosaites. Gelaia. Cos. Mercury. Cupid. Pro. Cant.
COme follow me my Wagges, and say as I say.
There Is no riches but in Rags; hey day, hey day;
You that profess this art. Come away; come away:
And help to bear a part. Hey day; hey day.
Beare-wards, and Blackingme^.
Corne-cutters, and Carmen.
Sellers of mar-king stones.
Gatherer's up o^ Marow-bones
Pedlers, and Puppit-players.
Sow-gelders, and Sooth-saiers.
Gypsies and ^aylers,
Rat-catchers* and Raylers,
Beadles, and Ballad-singers.
Fiddlers, and Fadingers.
Thomalins, and Tinkers.
Scauengers, and Skinkers.
There goes the Hare away.
Hey day, Hey day.
Bawds and blind Doctors.
Paritors, and spittle Proctors.
Chemists, and Cuttlebungs.
Hookers, and Horne-thums.
With all cast commanders.
turned Post-knights, or Pa^dars.
Iuglers, and Iesters. ^eggar^ rhyme.
Borrowers of Testers.
And all the troop of trash
That're allied to the lash,
Come, and Join with your ^ags
Shake up your muscle-bags.
For Beggary bears the sway,
Then singe cast care away,
Hey day, hey day.

Mer. What? those that were our fellow Pages but now, so soon preferred to be
Yeomen of the Bottles? the mystery, the mystery, good wagges?


Cup. Some diet drink, they have the guard of.


Pro. No Sir, we are going in quest of a strange Fountain, lately found out.


Cup. By whom?


Cos. My Master o^ the great discouerer, Amorphus.


Mer. Thou ha^^ well entitled him Cos, for he will discover all he knows.


Gelaia. I and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.


Pro^^. O the good traveling Gentleman yonder, has causd such a drought (...)
the Presence, wi^h reporting the wonders of this new water; that all the
Ladies, and Gallants ^^e languishing upon the Rushes, like so many pounded
Ca^tle (...) the midste of (...), sighing one to another, and gasping, as if
each of them expected a Cock from the Fountain, to be brought into his mouth^
and (without we return quickly) they are all (as a youth would say) no better
then a few Trowts cast a shore, or a dish of Eeles in a Sand-bag.


Mer. Well then, you were best dispatch and have a care of them, Come Cupid,
thou and I Will go peruse this dry wonder.


Finis Actus Secundi.
ACTVS TERTIVS.
SCENA. 1.
Amorphus. Asotus. Amor. Sir, let not this discountenance, or dis-gallant you a
whit, you must not sink under the first disaster; It is with your young
Grammattical Courtier, as with your Neophyte-Player, a thing usual to be
daunted at the first presence, or enter-view: you saw, there was Hedon and
Anaides, (far more practisd gallants then your self) who were both out, to
comfort you: It is no disgrace, no more, then for your aduenturous Reueller to
fall by some in-auspicious chance in his Galliard, or ^or some subtle
Politician to undertake the Bastinado, that the State might think worthily of
him, and respect him as a man well beaten to the world. What? has your Tailor
provided the property (we spoke of) at your Chamber, or no?


Aso. I think he has.


Amor. Nay* (I entreat you) be not so flat, and melancholique, erect your
mind: you shall redeem this with the Courtship I will teach you against
afternoon: Where eat you to day?


Asot. Where you please Sir, any where I.


Amor. Come let us go and taste some light dinner, A dish of she would Caueare, or
so, and after you shall practice an hour at your lodging, some few forms
that I have remembered; If you had but (so f^rre) gathered your spirits to you,
as to have taken up a Rushe (when you were out) and wagd it, thus; or clensde
your tee^h with it, or but turn'de aside, and fa^^de some business to whisper
with your Page, till you had recouer'd your self, or but found some slight
stain in your stocking, or any other pretty Invention (so it had been
sudden,) you might have come off with a most clear and Courtly grace.


Asot. A poison of all, I think I was forespoake, I.


Amor. No, I do partly aim at the cause (which was omenous indeed) for as you
enter at the door, there is oppos'de to you the frame of a Wolf in the
Hangings, which (your eye taking suddenly) gave a false Alarm to the heart;
and that was it called your blood out of your face, and so disordred the whole
rank of your spirits: I beseech you labor to forget it.


Exeunt. SCENA. 2.
Hedon. Anaides. Head. Heart, was there ever so prosperous an Invention thus
vnluckely perverted, and spoyld, by a whoore-sonne Bookworme, a Candle-waster?


Ana. Nay, be not impatient, Hedon.


Head. Slight, I would feign know his name.


Ana. Hang him poor Grogran Rascal, pr'y thee think not of him: I Will send for
him to my lodging, and have him blanketted when thou will, man.


Head. By gods so; I would thou could. Look, here he coms. Laugh at him,
laugh at him. Ha, ha, ha.


Criticus passes by. Ana. Fough, he smells all Lamp-oyle, with studying by
Candlelight.


Hedon. How confidently he went by us; and carelessly! never moved! nor stird
at any thing! Did you observe him?


Ana. I a pox on him, let him go, D^rmouse: he is in a dream now; He has no
other time, to sleep but thus when he walks abroad, to take the air.


H^d. Gods precious, this afflicts me more then all the rest, that we should so
particulerly direct our Hate, and Contempt against him; and he to carry it thus
without wound or passion! it is insufferable.


Anai. 'Slid, (my dear Envy) if, thou but say the word now, I Will undo him
eternally for thee.


Hedon. How sweet Anaides?


Anai. Marry half a score of us get him in (one night) and make him pawn his
wit for a supper.


Head. Away, thou have such unseasonable Jests. By this heaven I wonder at
nothing more then our Gentlemen Vshers; that will suffer a piece of Serge, or
Perpetuana, to come into the Presence: me thinks, they, should (out of their
Expe^ience) better distinguish the silken disposition of a Courtier, then to
let such terrible course Rags mix with 'hem, able to fret any smooth or
gentile Society to the threads, with their rubbing Devises.


Ana. Damn me, if I should adventure on his company once more, without a suit
of Buffe, to defend my wit: he does nothing but stabbe the slave: how
mischeiuously he crossed thy devise of the Prophecy there? And Moria she comes
without her Muffe too; and there my invention was lost.


Head. Well, I am resolved, what I Will do.


Ana. What, my good spirituous Spark?


Head. Marry, speak all the venom I can of him; and poison his reputation in
every place where I come.


Ana. Before god most Courtly.


Head. And if I chance to be present where any question is made of his
sufficiencies, or of any thing he has done private or public; I Will censure it
slightly, and ridiculously --


Ana. At any hand beware of that, so you may draw your own judgment,
insuspect; No, I Will instruct thee what thou shall do, and by a safer means:
approve any thing thou hear^st of his, to the receiud opinion of it; but if it
be extraordinary, give it from him to some other, whom thou more particulerly
affectst, that is the way to plague him, and he shall never come to defend
himself: Sblood, I Will give out all he do^ is dictated from other men: and
swear it too (if thou wilt have me) and that I know the time, and place, where he
stoale it: though my soul be guilty of no such thing; and that I think out of
my heart, he hates such barren shi^ts; yet to do thee a pleasure and him a
disgrace, I Will damn my self, or do any thing.


Head. Gramercies my dear Devil: we will put it seriously in practice, I faith.


Exeunt. SCENA. 3.
Criticus. Crit. Do good Detraction, do: and I the while
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile.
Poor pitteous Gallants, what lean idle sleights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their steru'd Hopes!
As if I knew not how to entertain
These Straw-deuises; but of fo^ce must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
Why should I care what every Dor does buzze*
In credulous ears? it is a Crown to me,
That the best judgments can report me wronged;
Them Liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps (upon the rumor of their speeches)
Some grieved friend will whisper, Criticus,
Men speak ill of thee: So they be ill men,
If they spoke worse, twere better: For of such
To be disprais'd, is the most perfect praise.
What can his Censure hurt me, whom the world
Has censured vile before me? If good Chre^tus,
Euthus, or Phronimus, had spoake the words,
They would have moved me; and I should have called
My thoughts and Actions to a strict account
Upon the hearing: But when I remember
It Is Hedon and Anaides: Alas, then,
I think but what they are, and am not stirred:
The one, a light voluptuous Reueller,
The other a strange arrogating Puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk (as they are wont) not as I merit;
Traduce by Custom, as most Dogs do bark,
Do nothing out of judgment, but disease;
Speak ill, because they never could speak well:
And who'ld be angry with this race of Creatures?
What wise Physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantique man? the same affects
That he does bear to his sick Patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these:
And I do count it a most rare Revenge,
That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their Malice.
For that is the mark of all their enginous drifts,
To wound my Patience (how soever they seem
To aim at other objects) which if mist,
Their Enuy's like an Arrow shot upright,
That in the fall endangers their own heads.

SCENA. 4.
Arete. Criticus. Aret. What Criticus? where have you spent the day*
You have not visited your jealous friends?

Crit. Where I have seen (most honored Arete,)
The strangest Pageant, fashioned like a Court,
(At least I dreamp't I saw it) so di^^us'd,
So painted, pyed, and full of Rainbow strains;
As never yet (either by Time, or Place)
Was made the food to my distasted Sense:
Nor can my weak imperfect Memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were conuolu'd within this thrifty Room.
Here, stalks me by, a proud, and spangled Sir,
That looks three handfuls higher then his fore-top;
Sauors himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself: One that will speak
More dark and doubtful then six oracles;
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
Is his own Chronicle, and scarce can eat
For registring himself; is waited on,
By Mimiques, Iesters, Pandars, Parasites,
And other such like Prodigies of men.
He past; there comes some subtle Proteus: One
Can ^hange, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Houers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which (with cross face) he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: One that dares
Do deeds worthy the Hurdle, or the Wheel,
To be thought some body; and is (in sooth)
Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
Criminibus debent hortos, praetoria, mensas:

Aret. You tell us wonders Criticus.

Crit. Tut, this is nothing.
There stands a Neophyte, glazing of his face,
Against his Idol enters; and repeats,
(Like an imperfect Prologue, at third Music)
His part of speeches, and confederate Jests
In passion to himself; Another swears
His Scene of Courtship over, and then seems
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
A third, is most in Action; swims, and frisks,
Plays with his mistress paps, salutes her pomps;
Will spend his Patrimony for a Garter,
Or the least fether in he^ bounteous Fan:
A fourth, he only comes in for a Mute,
Diuides the Act with a dumb show, and Exit,
Then must the Ladies laugh: straight comes their Scene;
A sixth times worse Confusion then the Rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this man's Eye;
Another of his Lip, a third, his Nose;
A fourth commend his Leg, a ^ifth his Foot,
A sixth his Hand, and every one a lim;
That you would think the poor distorted Gallant
Must there expire: Then fall they in discourse
Of Tires, and Fashions; how they must take place:
Where they may kiss; and whom: when to sit down;
And with what grace to rise: if they salute,
What courtesy they must use; such Cob-web stuff,
As would enforce the commonst sense abhor
The Arachnean workers.

Aret. Patience Criticus.
This knot of Spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webbes swept out of Cynthias Court,
When once her glorious Deity appears,
And but presents it self in her full light:
Till when, go in: and spend your hours with us
Your honored friends Timae, and Phronesis,
In contemplation of our Goddess name:
Think on some sweet, and choice Invention now,
(Worthy her serious, and illustrous Eyes)
That from the merit of it we may take
Desier'd occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to Cynthia:
It is the pride of Arete to grace
Her studious lovers; and (in scorn of Time,
Envy, and Ignorance) to lift their state
Above a vulgar height. True Happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in the worth, and choice; Nor would I have
Virtue, a popular Reguard pursew;
Let them be good that love me, though but few.

Crit. I kiss thy hands, diuinest Arete,
And vow my self to thee, and Cynthia.

Exeunt. SCENA. 5.
Amorphus. Asotus. Amo. A little more forward; So Sir. Now go in, dis-cloake
your self, and come forth. Tailor; bestow thy absence upon us; and be not
prodigal of this secret, but to a dear Customer. It Is well entered Sir. Stay
you come on too fast; your Pace is too impetuous. Imagine this to be the
Palace of your Pleasure, or Place where your Lady is pleased to be seen:
First you present your self thus; and spying her you fall off, and walk some
two turns; in which time it is to be supposed your Passion has sufficiently
whited your Face? then (stifling a sigh or two, and closing your lips) with a
trembling boldness, and bold terror; you advance your self forward. Try thus
much I pray you.


Asot. Yes Sir, (pray god I can light on it) Here I come in you say: and
present my self?


Amor. Good.


Asot. And then I spy her, and walk off?


Amor. Very good.


Asot. Now sir I stif^le, and advance forward?


Amor. Trembling.


Asot. Yes Sir, trembling. I shall do it better when I come to it. And what must
I speak now?


Amor. Mary you shall say; Dear Beauty, or sweet Honor, or by what other
title you please to remember her) me thinks you are Melancholy. This is if she
be alone now and discompanied.


Asot. Well Sir, I Will enter again; her title shall be My dear Lindabrides.


Amor. Lindabrides?


Asot. I Sir, the Emperor Alicandro's Daughter, and the Prince M^ridians
sister (in the Knight of the Sun) she should have been married to him, but
that the Princess Clari^iana --


Amor. O you betray your reading.


Asot. Nay sir, I have read History: I am a little Humanitian. Interrupt me
no^, good Sir. My dear Lindabrides, My dear Lindabrides, My dear
Lindabrides, me thinks you are Melancholy.


Amor. I, and take her by the Rosie-fingerd hand.


Asot. Must I so? O: My dear Lindabrides, me thinks you are Melancholy.


Amor. Or thus Sir. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet
Music, rich Fare, brave Attires, soft Beds, and silken thoughts, attend this
dear Beauty.


Asot. Believe me that is prerty: All variety of diuino pleasures, choice
sports, sweet Music, rich Fare, brave Attires, soft Beds, and silken
thoughts, attend this dear Beauty.


Amor. And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coyly recoyle, and
signify your repulse; you are to re-enforce your self with, More then most
fair Lady; let not the Rigor of your just disdain thus coursly censure of
your servants zeal: and (with-all) protest her, To be the only, and absolute
vn-paraeleld Creature, you do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence, in
this Court, Corner of the world, or Kingdom.


Asot. This is hard by my faith: I Will begin it all again.


Amor. Do so, and I will Act it for your Lady.


Asot. Will you vouchsafe sir? All variety of divine pleasures, choice Sports,
sweet Music, rich Fare, brau^ Attire, soft Beds, and silken thoughts, attend
this dear Beauty.


Amor. So Sir, pray you a way.


Asot. More then most fair Lady, let not the Rigor of your just disdain, thus
coursly censure of your s^ruants zeal. I protest you are the only and absolute
vn-aparailed --


Amo. Vn-paraleld.


Asot. Vn-paraleld Creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and
reverence, in this Court, Corner of the world, or kingdom.


Amor. This is if she abide you: But now; put case she should be Passant when
you enter, as thus: you are to frame your Gate ther'after, and call upon her:
Lady, Nymph, Sweet Refuge, Star of our Court: Then if she be Guardant,
here: you are to come on, and (^aterally disposing your self,) swear by her
blushing and well coulored cheek: the bright dye of her hair, her Iuorie
teeth, or some such white and Innocent oath, to induce you. If Reguardant;
then, maintein your station, Brisk, and Irpe, show the supple motion of your
plyant body: but (in chief) of your knee, and hand, which cannot but arride
her proud Humor exceedingly.


Asot. I conceive you sir, I shall perform all these things in good time, I
doubt not, they do so hit me.


Amo. Well Sir, I am your Lady; make use of any of these beginnings, or some
other out of your own invention: and prove how you can hold up, and follow
it. Say, Say.


Asot. Yes Sir: my dear Lindabrides.


Amo. No, you affect that Lindabrides too much: And (let me tell you) it is not
so Courtly. Your Pedant should provide you some parcels of French, or some
pretty Commodity of Italian to commence with, if you would be exotic, and
exquisite.


Asot. Yes Sir, he was at my lodging the other morning, I gau^ him a Doublet.


Amo. Double your benevolence, and give him the Hose too; cloathe you his body,
he will help to apparaile your mind. But now, see what your proper Genius
can perform alone, without adiection of any other Minerua.


Asot. I comprehend you sir.


Amo. I do stand you Sir: fall back to your first place. Good; passing well:
Very properly pursewd.


Asot. Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient Lady. What are you all alone.


Amo. We would be Sir, if you would leave us.


Asot. I am at your beauties appointment: bright Angel; but --


Amo. What but?


Asot. No harm, more then most fair feature.


Amo. That touch relished well.


Asot. But I protest.


Amo. And why should you protest?


Asot. For good will ( dear esteemed Madam) and I hope your Ladyship will so
conceive of it: If ever you have seen great TAMBERLAINE.


Amor. O that Blanke was excellent: if you could pick out more of these
Play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you) embroyder or damask your
discourse with them (persuade your soul) it would iudiciouslye commend you:
Come, this was a well-dischar'gd and auspicious Bout: prove the second.


Asot. Lady, I cannot swagger it in Black and Yellow.


Amo. Why if you can Revel it in White Sir, it is sufficient.


Asot. Say you so Sweet Lady? Lan, tede de, de, dant, dant, dant, dante, etc.
No (in good faith) Madame, whoseuer told your Ladyship so, abused you; but I
would be glad to meet your Ladyship in a measure.


Amor. Me Sir? beelike you measure me by your self then?


Asot. Would I might Fair Feature.


Amor. And what were you the better, if you might?


Asot. The better it please you to ask, Fair Lady.


Amo. Why this was rauishing, and most acutely continew'd; Well, spend not your
humor too much, you have now competently exercised your Conceit: This (once or
twice a day (will render you an accomplished, elaborate, and well leueled
Gentleman; convey in your Courting-stock, we will (in the heat of this) go
visit the Nymphs Chamber.


Finis Actus tertij.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
SCENA. 1.
Phantaste. Philautia. Argurion. Moria. Cupid. Phan. I would this water would
arrive once our trauayling friend so commended to us.


Arg. So would I, for he has left all us in travail, with expectation of it.


Pha. Pray Jove, I never rise from this Couch, if ever I thirsted more for a
thing, in my whole time of being a Courtier.


Phi. Nor I, I Will be sworn; the very mention of it sets my lips in a worse
heat, then if he had sprinkled them with Mercury. Reach me the glass Sirah.


Cup. Here Lady.


Mor. They do not peele sweet charge? do they?


Phi. Yes a little Guardian.


Mor. O it is a imminent good sign. Ever when my lips do so, I am sure to
have some delicious good drink or other approaching.


Arg. Mary and this may be good for us Ladies: for (it seems) it is far-fet by
their stay.


Moria. My pallat for yours ( dear Honor) it shall prove most elegant I
warrant you: O, I do fancy this gear that's long a coming, with an
unmeasurable strain.


Pha. Pray thee sit down Philautia, that Rebatu beecoms thee singularly.


Phi. Is It not queynt?


Pha. Yes faith: me thinks thy seru^nt Hedon is nothing so obsequious to thee,
as he was wont to be; I know not how, He Is grown out of his Garb a-late,
he is warp't*


Mor. In trueness, and so me thinks too, he is much converted.


Phi. Tut; let him be what he will, it is an Animal^ I dream not of. This tire
(me thinks) makes me look very Ingenuously, quick, and spirited: I should be
some Laura, or some Delia me thinks.


Mor. As I am wise (fair honors) that title she gave him, to be her Ambition,
spoild him: Before, he was the most propitious, and obseruant young Nouice. --


Pha, No, no; you are the whole heaven awry Guardian, it is the swaggering
tilt-horse Anaides draws with him there, has been the diuerter of him.


Phi. For Cupids sake speak no more of him; would I might never dare to look
in a Mirror again, if I respect ere a Marmaset of them all, otherwise, then I
would a Fether, or my Shittle-cock, to make sport with, now and then.


Pha. Come sit down; troath (and you be good Beauties) lets run over 'hem all
now: Which is the properst man amongst them? I say the Trauailer, Amorphus.


Phi. O fie on him: he looks like a Dutch Trumpetter in the battle of Lepanto,
in the gallery yonder; and speaks to the tune of a country Lady, that comes
ever in the rere ward, or train of a Fashion.


Mor. I should have judgment, in a feature sweet Beauties.


Pha. A body would think so, at these years.


Mor. And I prefer another now, far before him, A million at least.


Pha. Who might that be Guardian?


Mor. Mary (fair Charge) Anaides.


Pha. Anaides? you talked of a tune Philautia, there is one speaks in a Key:
like the opening of some Justices gate, or a Post-Boyes horn, as if his voice
feared an Arrest for some ill words it should give, and were loath to come
forth.


Phi. I, and he has a very imperfect face.


Pha. Like a squeezed Orange, sower, sower.


Phi. His Hand's too great to; by at least a strawes breadth.


Pha. Nay he has a worse fault then that too.


Phi. A long heel?


Pha* That were a fault in a Lady rather then him: No, they say he puts of the
Calves of his legs with his Stockings every night.


Phi. Out upon him: turn to another of the Pictures for Gods sake. What says
Argurion? whom does she commend before the rest?


Cupid. I hope I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer.


Mor. Troth I made the motion to her Lady-ship for one to day in the Presence,
but it appeared she was other ways furnished before; She would none.


Pha. Who was that Argurion?


Mor. Mary the little, poor, plain Gentleman in the black there.


Pha. Who? Criticus?


Arg. I, I, he; A fellow that no body so much as looked upon, or regarded, and
she would have had me done him particular grace.


Pha. That was a true trick of your self Moria, to persuade Argurion affect
the scholar.


Arg. Tut; but she shall be no chooser for me. In good faith I like the Citizens
son there Asotus, me thinks, none of them all come near him.


Pha. Not Hedon?


Arg. Hedon, in troth no. Hedon's a pretty slight Courtier* and he wears his
clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; marry his face is but indifferent, and
he has no such excellent body. No; the other is a most delicate youth, a sweet
face, a straight body, a well proportioned leg, and foot, a white hand, a
tender voice.


Phi. How now Argurion?


Pha. O you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a Copy of him upon us.


Phi. Why she doates more palpably upon him, then ere his Father did upon her.


Pha. Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it; if she could doat more
it were not amiss: He is an exceeding proper youth, and would have made a most
neat Barber-surgeon, if he had been put to it in time.


Phi. Say you so? me thinks* he looks like a Tailor already.


Pha. I, that had said on one of his Customers suites.


Arg. Well Ladies, Jest on: the best of you both would be glad of such a servant.


Mor. I, I Will be sworn would they: Go to Beauties, make much of Time, and
Place, and Occasion, and Opportunity, and Favorites, and things that belong to
them; for I Will ensure you, they will all relinquish; they cannot endure above
another year; I know it out of future experience, and therefore take
exhibition, and warning: I was once a Reueller my self, and though I speak it
(as mine own Trumpet) I was then esteemd --


Phi. The very Marchpane of the Court I warrant?


Pha. And all the Gallants came about you like flies, did they not?


Mor. Go to; they did somewhat, that is no matter now. Here comes Hedon.


SCENA. 2.
Hedon. Anaides. Mercury. Phantaste. Philautia. Moria. Argurion. Cupid. Head.
Save you sweet and clear beauties: By the spirit that mooues in me, you are
almost pleasingly bestowed Ladies. Only, I can take it for no good Omen, to
find mine Honor so dejected.


Phi. You need not fear Sir, I did of purpose humble my self against your
coming, to decline the pride of my Ambition.


Head. Fair Honor, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be your sweet pleasure,
I shall loose that Title; I will (as I am Hedon) apply my self to your
bounties.


Phi. That were the next way to distitle my self of Honor: O no, rather be
still Ambitious I pray you.


Head. I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleases you to be your
self Lady. Sweet Phantaste, Dear Moria, most beautiful Argurion. --


Anai. Farewell Hedon.


Head. Anaides, Stay: wether go you?


Anai. 'Slight, what should I do here? and you engrose them all for your own
use, it is time for me to seek out.


Head. I engrose 'hem? Away mischief, this is one of your extrauagant Jests
now, because I began to salute 'hem by their names --


Anai. Faith you might have spar'de us Madame Prudence the Guardian there,
though you had more couetously aymde at the rest.


Head. 'Shart, take 'hem all man; what speak you to me of aiming or Covetous?


Anai. I, say you so? nay then, have at 'hem: Ladies, here is one has
distinguished you by your names already; It shall only become me, to ask; How
you do?


Head. Gods so, was this the disseigne you trauel'd with?


Pha. Who answers the Brazen head? it spoke to some body?


Anai. Lady Wisdom, do you Interpret for these puppets?


Mor. In truth, and sadness (Honors) you are in great offense for this; go
too, the Gentleman (I Will undertake with him) is a man of fair living, and able
to maintain a Lady in her two Coaches a day, besides Pages, Munkeys, and
Parachitos, with s^tch attendants as she shall think meet for her turn; and
therefore there is more respect requirable, how soever you seem to conniue:
Hark you Sir, let me discourse a syllable with you. I am to say to you, these
Ladies are not of that close, and open behavior, as happily you may suspend;
their Cariadge is well known to be such as it should be, both gentle and
extraordinary.


M^r. O here comes the other Pair.


SCENA. 3.
Amorphus. Asotus. Hedon. Anaides. Mercury. Cupid. Phantaste. Philautia.
Argurion. Moria. Amor. That was your Fathers Love, the Nymph Argurion. I would
have you direct all your Courtship thither, if you could but endeare your self
to her affection, you were eternally engallanted.


Asot. In truth Sir? pray Phoebus I prove fauorsome in her fair eyes.


Amor. All divine mixture, and increase of beauty, to this bright B^uy of
Ladies; and to the male- Courtiers Complement, and Courtesy.


Head. In the behalf of the Males, I gratefie you Amorphus.


Phan. And I of the Females.


Amor. Succinctly spoken: I do vale to both your thanks, and kiss them; but
primarily to yours, Most ingenious, acute, and polite Lady.


Phi. Gods my life, how he does all to be qualify her! Ingenious, Acute, and
Polite? as if there were not others in place, as Ingenious, Acute, and Polite,
as she.


Head. Yes, but you must know Lady, he cannot speak out of a Dictionary method.


Phan. Sit down sweet Amorphus. When will this water come think you?


Amor. It cannot now be long fair Lady.


Cup. Now observe Mercury.


Asot. How most Ambiguous beauty? Love you? that I will by this Hand-kercher.


Mer. 'Slid he draws his oaths out of his pocket.


Arg. But will you be constant?


Asotus. Constant Madame? I will not say for Constantnesse, but by this Pursse
(which I would be loath to swear by, unless 'twere embroidered) I protest
(more then most fair Lady) you are the only, absolute and vn-paraleld
Creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence in this Court,
Corner of the world, or Kingdom, Me thinks you are Melancholy.


Arg. Does your heart speak all this?


Asot. Say you?


Mer. O he is groaping for another oath.


Asot. Now by this Watch (I marle how forward the day is) I do unfeignedly vow
my self ('Slight it is deeper then I took it, past five) yours entirely
addicted, Madame.


Arg. I require no more dearest Asotus, henceforth let me call you mine; and
in remembrance of me, voutchsafe to wear this Chain, and this Diamond.


Asot. O god sweet Lady.


Cup. There are new oaths for him: what? does Hermes taste no Alteration in
all this?


M^r. Yes, thou have struck Argurion enamored on Asotus methinkes?


Cup. Alas no; I am no body, I: I can do nothing in this disguise.


M^rcu. But thou have not wounded any of the rest, Cupid?


Cup. Not yet: it is enough that I have begun so prosperously.


Arg. Tut, these are nothing to the Gems I will howerly bestow upon thee: be
but faithful and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my richest bounties:
behold here my Bracelets from mine Arms.


Asot. Not so good Lady, By this Diamond.


Arg. Take 'hem; wear 'hem: my Jewels, Chain of Pearl, Pendants, all I have.


Asot. Nay then, by this Pearl You make me a Wanton.


Cup. Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus in swearing?


Mer. O, no, there is away to weane him from this: the Gentleman may be
reclaimed.


Cup. I, if you had the ayring of his apparel Cosse, I think.


Asot. Loving? 'twere pity I should be living else, believe me. Save you Sir.
Save you sweet Lady, Save you Mounsieur Anaides; Save you dear Madame.


Ana. Doo'st thou know him that saluted thee, Hedon?


Hedon. No, some idle Fungoso I warrant you.


Ana. 'Sbloud, I never saw him till this morning, and he salutes me as
familiarly, as if we had known together, since the first year of the siege of
Troy.


Amor. A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter. Confine your self to
your fortunes.


Phi. For gods sake lets have some Ri^dles or Purposes; hough.


Pha. No faith, your Prophecies are best, the 'tother are stale.


Phi. Prophecies? we cannot all ^it in at them; we shall make a confusion: no;
what calde you that we had in the forenoone?


Pha. Substantives, and Adjectives. Is It not Hedon?


Phi. I that, who begins?


Pha. I have thought; speak your Adjectives Sirs?


Phi. But do not you change then.


Pha. Not I, Who says?


Mor. Odoriferous.


Phi. Popular.


Arg. Humble.


Anai. White-liuer'd.


Hedon. Barbarous.


Amor. Pythagoricall.


Hedon. Yours Signior.


Asot. What must I do Sir?


Amor. Give forth your Adjective with the rest; as Prosperous, Good, Fair,
Sweet, Well.


Head. Any thing that has not bin spoken.


Asot. Yes Sir: Well-spoken shall be mine.


Pha. What? ha you all done.


Omnes. I.


Pha. Then the Substantive is Breeches. Why Odoriferous Breeches Guardian?


Mor. Odoriferous, because Odoriferous: that which contains most variety of
savor, and smell, we say is most Odoriferous: now Breeches I presume are
incident to that variety, and therefore, Odoriferous Breeches.


Pha. Well, we must take it howsoever, who is next. Philautia.


Phi. Popular.


Pha. Why Popular Breeches?


Phi. Mary that is, when they are not content to be generally noted in Court;
but will press footth on common Stages, and Brokers stalls, to the public
view of the world.


Pha. Good: why Humble Breeches? Argurien.


Arg. Humble, because they use to be sat upon; besides if you tie 'hem not up,
their property is to fall down about your heels.


Mer. She has worn the Breeches it seems which have done so.


Phan. But why White-liuerd?


Anai. Why? 'Sharte are not their linings white? besides, when they come in
swaggering company, and will pocket up any thing; may they not properly be
said to be White-liuerd?


Phan. O yes, we cannot deny it. And why Barbarous, Hedon?


Hedon. Barbarous, because commonly when you have worn^ your Breeches
sufficiently, you give them to your Barbar.


Amor. That Is good: but now Pythagoricall?


Pha. I, Amorphus. Why Pythagoricall Breeches?


Amor. O most kindly of all, it is a conceit of that Fortune; I am bold to hug
my brain for.


Phan. How is it, E^quisite Amorphus?


Amor. O I am rapt with it, it is so fit, so proper, so happy.


Phi. Nay do not rack us thus?


Amor. I never truly relisht my self before. Give me your ears. Breeches
Pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration into several shapes.


Moria. Most rare in sweet troth. Mary this young Gentleman, for his
Well-spoken --


Phan. I, why Well-spoken Breeches?


Asot. Well-spoken: mary well-spoken, because whatsoever they speak is well
taken, and whatsoever is well taken, is well-spoken.


Moria. Excellent: believe me.


Asot. Not so Ladies neither.


Hedon. But why Breeches now?


Phan. Breeches quasi Beare-riches; when a gallant bears all his Riches in
his Breeches.


Phi. In good faith these unhappy Pages, would be whipped for staying thus.


Moria. Beshrew my hand, and my heart else.


Amor. I do wonder at their protraction.


Anai. Pray God my whore have not discovered her self to the raskally Boys,
and that be the cause of their stay.


Asot. I must suit my self with another Page; this idle Prosaites will never
be brought to wait well*


Mor. Sir I have a kinseman I could willingly wish to your service, if you
would deigne to accept of him.


Asot. And I shall be glad (most sweet Lady) to embrace him; where is he?


Mor. I can fetch him Sir, but I would be loath to make you turn away your
other Page.


Asot. You shall not most sufficient Lady, I will keep both: pray you lets go
see him.


Exeunt. Arg. Whether goes my Love?


Asot. I Will return presently; I go but to see a Page with this Lady.


Anaid. As sure as Fate it is so; she has opened all: A pox of all
Cocatrices. Damn me if she have playde loose with me, I Will cut her throat
within a hayres breadth, so it may be heald again.

Exit.
Mercu. What is he Jealous of his Hermaphrodite?


Cup. O I, this will be excellent sport.


Phi. Phantaste, Argurion, what? you are suddenly stroke me thinks; for Gods
will lets have some Music till they come. Ambition reach the Lyra I pray you.


Hedon. Any thing to which my Honor shall direct me.


Phi. Come Amorphus; cheer up Phantaste.


Amor. It shall be my pride fair Lady to attempt all that is in my power. But
here is an Instrument that (alone) is able to infuse soul in the most
melancholique, and dull disposde Creature upon earth; O! let me kiss thy fair
knees: Beauteous ^ares attend it.


Hedon. Will you have the Kiss Honor.


Phi. I good Ambition.


Ode.
O That Joy so soon should wast!
or so sweet a bliss
as a Kiss,
Might not for ever last!
So sugared, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on Roses,
When the Morn her self discloses,
is not so precious:
O, rather then I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should be my wishing
That I might dye kissing.
Hedon. I made this Ditty and the Note to it upon a kiss that my Honor gave
me; how like you it Sir.


Amor. A pretty Air; in general I like it well. But in particular, your long
die-Note did arride me most, but it was somewhat too long: I can show one,
almost of the same nature, but much before it, and not so long; in a
Composition of mine own: I think I have both the Note, and Ditty about me.


Head. Pray you Sir see.


Amor. Yes there is the Note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke not. I will
read the Ditty to your Beauties here, but first I am to make you familiar with
the occasion, which presents it self thus. Upon a time, going to take my leave
of the Emperor, and kiss his great hands; there being then present, the
Kings of France, and Arragon, the Dukes of Sauoy, Florence, Orleance, Bourbon,
Brunswick, the Lantgrau^, Count Palatine, all which had severally feasted me;
besides infinite more of inferior persons, as Earls, and others: it was my
chance (the Emperor detained by some other affayre) to wait him the fifth
part of an hour, or much nere it* In which time (retiring my self into a
Bay-window) I encountered the Lady Annabel neice to the Empress, and ^ister to
the king of Arragon; who (having never before ey de me, but only heard the
common report of my Virtue, Learning, and Travail) fell into that extremity of
passion, for my love, that she there immediately sounded: Physicians were sent
for; she had to her chamber; so to her bed; where (languishing some few days)
after many times calling upon me, with my name in her mouth, she expirde. As
that (I must needs say) is the only fault of my Fortune, that as it has ever
bin my hap to be sewed to by all Ladies, and Beauties where I have come; so, I
never yet soiourn'd, or rested in that place, or part of the world, where some
great and admirable fair Creature died not for my love.


Mer. O the sweet power of travail, are you guilty of this Cupid?


Cup. No Mercury; and that his page (Cos) knows, and he were here present to
be sworn.


Phi. But how does this draw on the Ditty Sir.

Mor. O she is to quick with him; he has not devised that yet.


Amor. Marry some hour before she departed, she bequeathed to me this Glou^;
which the Emperor himself took care to send after me, in six Coaches,
covered all with black-veluet, attended by the state of his Empire; all which
he freely gave me, and I reciprocally (out of the same bounty) gave it to the
Lords that brought it: only reserving, and respecting, the gift of the
deceasde Lady, upon which I composed this Ode, and set it to my most affected
Instrument the Lyra.


Ode.
THou more then most sweet Glove,
Unto my more sweet Love;
Suffer me to store, with kisses
This empty lodging, that now misses
The pure Rosy hand that ware thee,
Whiter then the Kid that bare thee:
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
Cupids self has kissed it ofter,
Then ere he did his mothers Doves,
Supposing her the Queen of Loves
That was thy Mistress
Best of Gloves.
Mer. Blasphemy, Blasphemy Cupid.


Cup. I, I Will revenge it time enough; Hermes.


Phi. Good Amorphus, let us here it sung.


Amor. I care not to do that, since it pleases Philautia to request it.


Head. Here Sir.


Amor. Nay play it I pray you, you do well, you do well: how like you it Sir?


He sings. Head. Very well in troath.


Amor. But very well? O you are a mere Mammo^hrept in judgment then: why do
you not observe how excellently the Ditty is affected in every place? that I do
not marry a word of short quantity, to a long Note* nor an ascending Syllable
to a discending Tone. Besides upon the word Best there, you see how I do enter
with an odd Minnum, and drive it thorough the Brief, which no intelligent
Musician (I know) but will affirm to be very rare, extraordinary, and
pleasing.


Mer. And yet not fit to lament the death of a Lady for all this.


Cup. Tut here be they will swallow any thing.


Phantast. Pray you let me have a copy of it Amorphus.


Phi. And me too, in troath I like it exceedingly.


Amor. I have denied it to Princes, nevertheless to you (the true Female
Twins of Perfection) I am won to depart withal.


Head. I hope I shall have my Honors copy.


Pha. You are Ambitious in that Hedon. Enter Anaides.


Amor. How now Anaides? what is it has coniur'd up this distemperature in the
circle of your face?


Anai. 'Sblod what have you to do? A pox of God o'your filthy travailing Beard;
hold your tongue.


Head. Nay, do hear mischief?


Anai. Away Musk-cat.


Amor. I say to thee: Thou art rude, impudent, course, impolisht; a Frapler,
and base.


Head. Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half a years haunting
of Ordinaries wrought in this fellow? that came with a Tuff-taffata Ierkin to
Town but the other day, and now he is turned Hercules, he wants but a Club.


Anai. Sir, I will garter my hose with your guts; and that shall be all.

Exit.
Mercur. 'Slid what rare fire works be here? flash, flash.


Pha. What Is the matter Hedon? can you tell?


Head. Nothing but that he lacks money, and thinks weel^ lend him some to be
friends.


Enter Asot. Mor. Morus. Asot. Come sweet Lady* in good truth i will have it, you
shall not deny me; Morus persuade your Aunt I may have her picture, by any
means.


Morus. Yes Sir: good Aunt now, let him have it; he will use me the better, if
you love me, do good Aunt.


Moria. Well, tell him he shall have it.


Morus. Master, you shall have it, she says;


Asot. Shall I? thank her good Page.


Cup. What has he entertaind the Fool?


Mer. I, heel wait close you shall see, though the Begg^r hang off.


Morus. Aunt my master thanks you.


Moria. Call him hither.


Morus. Yes: master.


Moria. Yes in very truth, and gave me this Pursse, and he has promised me a
most fine Dog; which he will have drawn with my Picture, and desires most
vehemently to be known to your Ladyshipps.


Pha. Call him hither, it is good groping such a Gull.


Moria. Master Asotus. Master Asotus.


Asot. For Gods sake, let me go: you see, I am called to the Ladies.


Argu. Will thou forsake me then?


Asotus, Gods so, what would you have me do?


Moria. Come hither master Asotus; I do ensure your Ladyships, he is a
Gentleman of a very worthy desert; and of a most ^ounti^ull nature. You must
show and insinuate your self responsible, and equivalent now to my
commendment. Good Honors grace him.


Asot. I protest (more then most fair Ladies) I do wish all variety of divine
ple^sure, choice sport, sweet Music, rich Fare, brave A^^yres, soft Beds,
and silken Thoughts, attend these fair Beauties. Will it please your Ladyship
to wear this Chain of Pearl, and this Diamond for my sake.


Arg. O.


Asot. And you Madam this Jewel, and Pendants.


Arg. O.


Phan. We know not how to deserve these bounties out of so slight merit,
Asotus.


Phi. No in faith, but the'rs my Glove for a favor.


Phan. And soon after the Revels I will bestow a Garter on you.


Asot. O Lord Ladies, it is more grace then ever I could have hoped, but that
it pleases your Ladyships to extend; I protest it is enough that you but take
knowledge of my -- if your Ladyships want embroydered Gowns, Tyres of any
Fashion, Rebatus, Jewels, or Carkanets, any thing what soever; if you vouchsafe
to accept.


Cup. And for it they will help you to Shoo-tyes, and devises.


Asot. I cannot utter my self (Dear Beauties) but; you can conceive --


Arg. O.


Phan. Sir we will acknowledge your service doubt not; henceforth you shall be
no more Asotus to us, but our Golde-Finch, and we your Cages.


Hedon. O God Madams, how shall I deserve this? if I were but made acquainted
with Hedon now; I Will try: pray you away.


Mer. How he prays Money to go away from him.


Asot. Amorphus, a word with you: heeres a Watch I would bestow upon you, pray
you make me known to that Gallant.


Amor. That I will Sir. Mounsieur Hedon I must entreat you to exchange
knowledge with this Gentleman.


Head. It Is a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirste after Sir. Good
Mounsieur Asotus.


Asot. Good Mounsieur Hedon, I would be glad to be loved of men of your Rank,
and spirit, I protest. Please you to accept this pair of Bracelets Sir, they
are not worth the bestowing.


Mer. O Hercules; how the Gentleman purchases? this must needs bring Argurion
to a consumption.


Head. Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such Bounty. I fear.


Asot. O Lord Sir; your acquaintance shall be sufficient. And if at any time
you need my Bill or my Bond.


Arg. O, O.


Argurion swones. Amor. Help the Lady there.


Moria. Gods dear, Argurion. Madam, how do you?


Arg. Sick.


Phan. Have her forth and give her air.


Asot. I come again straight Ladies.


Mer. Well, I doubt all the Phisique he has, will scarce recover her; she is
too far spent.


Exeunt Asotus, Morus, Argurion. SCENA. 4.
Anaides. Gelaia. Cos. Prosaites. Philautia. Phantaste. Moria. Amorphus* Hedon.
Phi. O here is the Water come: fetch Glasses Page.


Gelaia. Heart of my body heeres a coil indeed with your ^ealous humors.
Nothing but Whore, and Bitch, and all the villainous swaggering names you can
think on? 'Slid take your Bottle, and put it in your guts ^or me, I Will see
you poxt ere I follow you any longer?


Anai. Nay good Punke, sweet Rascal; damn me if I am Jealous now.


Gelaia. That Is true indeed, pray lets go.


Moria. What Is the matter there?


Gelaia. Slight he has me upon Intergatories, (nay my Mother shall know how you
use me) where I have been? and why I should stay so long? and how is it
possible? and with-all calls me at his pleasure; I know not how many
Cocatrices, and things.


Moria. In truth and sadness, these are no good Epithites


Anaides: to bestow upon any Gentlewoman; and (I Will ensure you) if I had known
you would have dealt thus with my Daughter, she should never have fancied you
so deeply, as she has done. Go too.


Anai. Why do you he^re Mother Moria. Heart.


Moria. Nay I pray you Sir do not swear.


Anai. Swear? why? Sblood I have sworn before now I hope. Both you and your
daughter mistake me; I have not honored Arete that is held the worthyest Lady
in the Court (next to Cynthia) with half that observance and respect, as I
have done her in private, howsoever outwardly I have carried my self careless
and negligent. Come you are a foolish Punke, and know not when you are well
employde. Kiss me. Come on. Do it I say.


Moria. Nay, indeed I must confess she is apt too misprision. But I must have
you leave it Minion.


Enter Asotus. Amor. How now Asotus? how does the Lady?


Asot. Faith ill. I have left my Page with her at her lodging.


Head. O here is the rarest Water that ever was tasted; fill him some.


Prosai. What? has my Master a new Page?


Mer. Yes a kinsman of the Lady Morias: you must wait better now, or you are
casheer'd Prosaites.


Anai. Come Gallants; you must pardon my foolish humor, when I am angry, that
any thing crosses me, I grow impatient straight. Here I drink to you.


Phi O that we had five or six Bottles more of this liquor.


Pha. Now I commend your judgment Amorphus: who is that knockes? look Page.


Moria. O most delicious, a little of this would make Argurion well.


Pha. O no give her no cold drink by any means.


Anai. Sblood, this water is the spirit of Wine, I Will be hanged ^lse.


Cup. Heeres the Lady Arete Madam.


SCENA. 5.
Arete. Phantaste. Philautia. Moria. Anaides. Gelaia. Cos. Prosaites. Amorphus.
Asotus. Hedon. Mercury. Cupid. Arete. What at your Beuer Gallants?


Moria. Wilt please your Lady-shipp drink, it is of the new fountain water.


Arete. Not I, Moria; I thank you: Gallants you must provide for some solemn
Revels to night, Cynthia is minded to come forth, and grace your sports with
her presence; therefore I could wish there were some thing extraordinary to
entertain her.


Amo. What say you to a Masque?


Head. Nothing better, if the Invention or Project were new and rare.


Arete. Why, I Will send for Criticus, and have his advise; you will be ready in
your endeavors;


Pha. Yes* but will not your Lady-ship stay?


Arete. Not now Phantaste.

Exit.
Phi. Let her go, I pray you; good Lady Sobriety, I am glad we are rid of her.


Pha. What a set Face the gentlewoman has, as she were still going to a
Sacrifice?


Phi. O she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a look.


Moria Of all Nimphs 'i^he Court I cannot away with her: it is the coursest
thing --


Phi. I wounder how Cynthia can affect her so above the rest! Here be they are
every way as fair as she, and a thought, fayrer, I trow.


Pha. I, and as ingenious, and conceipted as she.


Moria. I and as politic as she, for all she sets such a Forehead on it.


Phi. Would I were dead if I would change to be Cynthia.


Pha. Or I.


Moria. Or I.


Amor. And there is her Minion Criticus; why his advise more then Amorphus? have
I not Invention, before him? Learning, to better that Invention, above him? and
Travail. --


Anai. Death, what talk you of his Learning? he understands no more then a
schoole-Boy; I have put him down my self a thousand times (by this Air) and
yet I never talked with him but twice in my life; you never saw his like: I
could never get him to argue with me, but once, and then because I could not
construe a piece of Horace at first sight, he went away and laughed at me. By
Gods will, I scorn him, as I do the sodden Nymph that was here even now; his
mistress Arete: And I love my self for nothing else.


Head. I wonder the Fellow d^e's not hang himself, being thus scorned, and
contemned of us that are held the most accomplished Society of Gallants!


Mer. By your selves none else.


Head. I protest, if I had no Music in me, no Courtship; that I were not a
Reueller and could dance, or had not those excellent qualities that give a man
Life, and Perfection, but a mere poor Scholar as he is, I think I should
make some desperate way with my self; whereas now (would I might never breath
more) if I do know that Creature in this kingdom, with whom I would change.


Cup. This is excellent: well I must alter this soon.


Mer. Look you do Cupid.


Asot. O I shall tickle it soon; I did never appear till then. Slid I am the
ne^tliest-made Gallant in the company, and have the best presence; and my
dancing -- I know what the Usher said to me the last time I was at the
school; would I might lead Philautia in the measure, and 'tweere gods will. I
am most worthy, I am sure.


Enter Morus. Morus. Master I can tell you news, the Lady kissed me yonder, and
played with me; and says she loved you once, as well as she does me, but that
you cast her of.


Asot. Peace my most esteemed Page.


Morus. Yes.


Amor. Gallants, think upon your Time, and take it by the forehead; Anaides,
we must mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance. Mounsieur Asotus.


Anai. I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, Amorphus.


Asot. Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you Sir. Nay I begin to know
my self now.


Amor. O, you must continue your Bounties.


Asot. Must I? why i will give him this Ruby on my finger.


Head. Come Ladies; but stay we shall want one to Lady it in our Masque in place
of Argurion.


Anai. Why my page shall do it, Gelaia.


H^d. Troth and he'^e do it well, it shall be so.


Exeunt. Asot. Do you here Sir, I do heartily wish your acquaintance, and I
partly know my self worthy of it; please you Sir, to accept this poor Ruby in
a Ring Sir. The Poe^ie is of my own devise* Let this blush for me Sir.


Anai. So it must for me, too. For I am not ashamed to take it.

Exit.
Morus. Sweet man, by my troath master I love you; will you love me to? for
my Aunts sake? I Will wait well you shall see, I Will still be here. Would I might
never stir, but you are in gay clothes.


As^t. As for that Morus, thou shall see more here after, in the mean time, by
this Ay^e, or by this Fether, i will do as much for thee as any Ga^lant shall do
for his Page whatsoever, in this Court, corner of the world, or Kingdom.


Exeunt. Mercury. I wounder this gentleman should affect to keep a ^oole, me
thinks he makes sport enough with him self.


Cup. Well Prosaites tweere good you did wait closer.


Pro. I, I Will look to it; it is time.


Cos. We are like to have sumptuous Reuells to night Sirs.


Mer. We must needs when all the choicest Singularities of the Court are up in
Pantofles, nere a one of them, but is able to make a whole show of it self.


Head. Sirah a Torch, a torch.


Hedon within. Mercury. O what a call is there? I will have a Canz^net made
with nothing in it but (...); and the Burden shall be. I come.


Exeunt Omnes. SCENA. 6.
Arete. Criticus. Crit. --.A masque, bright Aret^^
Why tweere a labor more for Hercules.
Better, and sooner durst I undertake:
To make the different seasons of the Year,
The Winds, or Elements to sympathize;
Then their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure: They agree?
What though all Concord's borne of Contraries?
So many Follies will confusion prove*
And like a sort of iarring Instruments,
All out of tune; because (indeed) we see
There is not that Analogy twixt Discords,
As between things but merely opposite.

Aret. There is your error; for as H^^mes wande
Charms the disorders, of tumultuous Ghosts,
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light then Natures did arrive;
So, what could never in it self agree,
Forgets the eccentrick property,
And at her sight turns forthwith regular,
Whose scepter guides the flowing Ocean:
And though it did not, yet the most of them
(Being either Courtiers, or not wholly rude)
Respect of Majesty, the Place, and Pres^nce,
Will ke^pe them within Ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masqu'd like others: for (in troth) not so
T'incorporate them, could be nothing else
Then like a State vngouern'd, without laws; or
A body made of nothing but diseases;
The one, through impotencie poor, and wretched;
The other for the Anarchy absurd.

Crit. But Lady, for the Reuellers themselves;
It would be better (in my poor conceit,)
That others were employed; for such as are
Unfit to be in Cynthias Court, can seem
No les^e unfit to be in Cynthias sports.

Aret. That is not done (my Criticus) without
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind;
Who (holding true intelligence, what Follyes
Had crept into her Palace) she resolved,
Of sports, and Triumphs; under that pretext,
To have them muster in their Pomp and Fullness:
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the Reformation she intends.

Crit. I now conceive her heavenly drift in all;
And will apply my spirits to serve thy will:
O thou, the very power by which I am;
And but for which, it were in vain to be;
Chief next Diana, Virgin, heavenly fair*
Admired Arete, (of them admired
Whose souls are not enkindled by the sense)
Disdeigne not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.

Arete. Leave to suspect us: Criticus shall find
As we are now most dear, we will prove most kind.

Aret^ With^^. Arete. Hark, I am called.
Exit.
Crit. I follow instantly,
Phoebus Apollo: if with ancient Rites,
And due Devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate Paeans on thy golden Shrine,
Or sung thy Triumphs in a lofty strain;
Fit for a Theater of Gods to hear:)
And thou the other son of mighty Io^^
Cyllenian Mercury (sweet Maias joy)
If in the busy tumults of the mind,
My path thou ever have illumined:
For which, thine Altars I have often per^um'de,
And decked thy Statue with discoulored flowers:
Now thrive Invention in this glorious Court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
Cynthia may grace, and give it life by sight.
Exit.
Finis Actus quarti.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
SCENA. 1.
Hesperus. Cynthia. Arete. Time. Phronesis. Thauma. Hymnus.
Hesp. QVeene and Huntresse, chaste, and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep,
Seated, in thy silver Chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
Hesperus entreats thy light,
Goddess excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare it self to interpose;
Cynthias shining Or be was made
Heaven to clear, when day did close:
Bless us then with wished sight,
Goddess excellently bright.
Lay thy Bow of Pearl apart.
And thy Christ all-shining Quiver;
Give unto the flying Heart,
Space to breath, how short soever.
Thou, that makst a day of night,
Goddess excellently Bright.
Exit.
C^nt^. When has Diana, like an envious wretch*
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world the precious v^e
Of hoorded wealth, withheld her friendly aid?
Mon'thly we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our Virgin-waxen torch,
To burn, and blaze while nutriment does last:
That once consumed, out of Jove's treasury
Anew we take, and stick it in our Sphere
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men,
Their looked for light. Yet what is their desert?
" Bounty is wronged, interpreted as due;
" Mortals can challenge not a Ray but right,
" Yet do exspect the whole of Cynthias light:
But if that Deities withdrew their gifts,
For humane Follies, what should men deserve
But Death and Darkness? It behoo^es the high,
For their own sakes to do things worthily.

Arete. Most true, most sacred goddess; for the Heavens
Receive no good of all the good they do:
Nor Jove, nor you, nor other heavenly Power,
Are fed with Fumes, which do from Incense rise,
Or Sacrifices reeking in their gore:
Yet for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper Good it is, that they be so;)
You well are pleased with Odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the Race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when,

Cyn. Else noble Arete, they would notblame,
And tax for or unjust, or for as proud
Thy Cynthia, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starry crown:
Such is our Chastity, which safely scorns,
Not Love (for who more fervently does love
Immortal Honor, and divine Renown?)
But giddy Cupid, Venus frantic son.
Yet Arete, if by this vayled light
We but discovered (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations, stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame,
With note of lightness, from these Revels near:
Not, for the Empire of the Universe
Should Night or Court, this whatsoever shine
Or grace of ours, unhappily enjoy.
" Place, and Occ^sion are two privy Thieues;
" And from poor innocent Ladies, often steal
" (The best of things) an honorable Name:
" To stay with Follyes, or where Faults may be,
" Infers a Crime, although the party free.

Aret. How Cynthianly (that is how worthily
And like her self) the matchless Cynthia speaks!
Infinite Iealousies, infinite Reguards,
Do watch about the true virginity:
But Phoebe lives from all not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free,
" Thy Presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
" What Is done in Cynthias sight, is done secure.

Cynt. That then so answered (Dearest Arete)
What the Argument, or of what sort, our Sports
Are like to be this night; I not demand.
Nothing which Duty, and desire to please
Bears written in the for^head, comes amiss^;
But unto whose Invention, must we owe,
The complement of this nights furniture?

Aret. Excellent Goddess, to man's, whose worth,
(Without Hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
One (at least) studious, of deserving well:
And (to speak truth) indeed deserving well,
" Potentiall merit stands for actual,
" Where only Opportunity does want,
" Not Will, nor Power: both which in him abound.
One whom the Muses, and Minerua love;
For whom should they more love then Criticus,
Whom Phoebus (though not Fortune) holds dear?
And (which conuinceth excellence in him*)
A principal admirer of your self:
Even* through th'vngentle injuries of Fate,
And difficulties, which do virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears. What other things
Of farther note, do lie unborn in him,
Them I do leave for cherishment to show.
And for a Goddess graciously to judge.

Cynt. We have already judged him Arete:
Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities,
Which Times, and vicious Persons cast on them:
Our self have ever vowed to esteem
(As Virtue, for it self) so Fortune, base;
Who first in Worth, the same be first in Place.
Nor farther notice ( Arete) we crave
Then thine approualls sovereign warranty:
Let, be thy care, to make us known to him;
" Cynthia shall brighten what the World made dim*

SCENA. 2. THE FIRST MASQVE.
Cupid like Anteros. Ante. Clear Pearl of Heaven, and not to be farther
ambitious in titles) Cynthia. The fame of this illustrious night, among others
has also drawn these four fair Virgins from the Palace of their Queen
Perfection (a word, which makes no sufficient difference, twixt hers, and
thine) to visit thy Imperial Court: for she their Sovereign Lady, not finding
where to dwell among men, before her teturne to heaven: advised them wholly to
consecrate themselves to thy Celestial service, as in whose clear Spirit
(the proper Element, and Sphare of virtues) they should behold not her alone,
(their ever honored Mistress) but themselves) more truly themselves) to live
enthronised. Her self would have commended them vnt^ thy favor more
particularly, but that she knows no commendation is more auailable with thee
then that of proper virtue: Nevertheless, she wild them to present this
Crystal Mound, a note of Monarchy, and Symbol of Perfection, to thy more
worthy Deity; which as here by me they most humbly do, so amongst the Rarities
thereof, that is the chief, to show whatsoever the world has excellent,
howsoever remote and various. But your irradiate judgment will soon discover
the secrets of this little Crystal world. Themselves (to appear the more
plainly) because they know nothing more odious then false pretexts: have chosen
to express their several qualities thus in several coulors.

1 The first in Citron coullour is natural Affection, which given us to
procure our good, is sometime called Storge, and as every one is nearest to
himself, so this Handmaid of Reason, allowable Self-love, as it is without
harm, so are none without it: Her place in the Court of Perfection was to
quicken minds in the pursuit of Honor. Her device is a Perpendicular Level
upon a* Cube or Square. The word, SE SVO MODVLO: alluding to that true measure
of ones self, which as every one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous in
thy divine example.

2 The second in Green is Aglaia, delectable and pleasant Conversation, whose
property it is to move a kindly delight, and sometime not without laughter:
Her office to entertain assemblies, and keep societies together with fair
familliarity. Her device within a Ring of clouds, a Heart with shine about it,
the word, CVRARVM NVBILA PELLO. An Allegory of Cynthias light, which no less
cleares the Sky, then her ^ayre M^rthe the heart.

3 The third, in discoul^ur'd Mantle spangled all over, is Euphantaste, a well
conceited Wittiness, and imployde in honoring the Court with the riches of
her pure Invention. Her device upon a Petasus, or Mer^nriall Hat, a Crescent.
The word; SIC LAVS INGENII: Inferring that the praise and glory of wit, does
ever increase, as does thy growing Moon.

4 The fourth in White is Apheleia, a Nymph as pure and s^^ple as the Soul, or
as an abrase Table, and is therefore called Symplicity; without foulds, without
pleights, without coullour, without counterfeit: and (to speak plainly)
Plainness it self. Her device is no Device. The word under her silver
Shield: OMNIS ABEST FVCVS, alluding to thy spotless self, who art as far
from Impurity, as from Mortality.

My self (Celestial Goddess) more fit for the Court of Cynthia, then the
Arbors of Cythere, am called Anteros, or Loves enemy; the more welcome
therefore to thy Court, and the fitter to conduct this Quaternio, who as they
are thy professed Votaries, and for that cause adversaries to Love, yet thee
(Perpetual Virgin) they both love, and vow to love eternally.


SCENA. 3.
Cynthia. Arete. Criticus. Cynthia. Not without wounder, nor with out delight,
Mine eyes have veiwd in Contemplations depth,
This work of wit, divine, and excellent:
What Shape? what Substance? or what unknown Power
In virgins habit crowned with Laurel leaves
And Olive branches wouen in between,
On Sea-girt Rock like to a Goddess shin^s?
O front! O face! O all celestial sure
And more then mortal! Arete, behold
Another Cynthia, and another Queen,
Whose glory (like a lasting Plenilun^)
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane.
Not under heaven an Object could be found
More fit to please; let Criticus approach,
Bounty forbids to paull our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favor after view:
" The time of Grace is, when the Cause is new.

Arete. Lo here the man (celestial Delia)
Who (like a Circle bounded in it self,)
Contains as much, as Man in fullness may.
Lo here the man; who, not of usual earth,
But of that nobler, and more precious mould
Which Phoebus self does temper, is composed;
And, who (though all were wanting to reward,
Yet, to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy Favors gain is his Ambitions most,
And labors best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.

Cynthia. With no less pleasure, then we have beheld,
This precious Crystal, work of rarest wit,
Our eye does read thee, now, our Criticus;
Whom Learning, Virtue, and our Favor last,
Exempteth from the gloomy Multitude.
" With common eye the Supreme should not see.
Hence forth be ours, the more thy self to be.

Crit. Heavens purest light, whose Orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy Praise; (diuinest Cynthia)
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thy (save therein) unworthy Criticus:
Does find himself? for ever shine thy Fame;
Thine Honors ever, as thy Beauties do;
In me they must, my dark worlds chiefest Lights;
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed Arete has pleased to name
As marks, which my'ndeuors steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.

SCENA. 4. THE SECOND MASQVE.
Mercury as a Page. Mer. Sister of Phoebus to whose bright Orb we owe, that we
not complain of his Absence; These four Brethren (for they are Brethren and
sons of Eutaxia, a Lady known, and highly beloved of your resplendent Deity)
not able to be absent, when Cynthia held a solempnity, officiously insinuate
themselves into thy presence: For as there are four Cardinal virtues, upon
which the whole Frame of the Cour^ does move, so are these the four
Cardinal properties without which the Body of Complement moves not. With
those four silver Iauelins (which they bear in their hands) they support in
Princes Courts the state of the Presence, as by office they are obliged; which
though here they may seem superfluous, yet for Honors sake they thus presume
to visit thee, having also bin imployde in the Palace of Queen Perfection.
And though to them, that would make themselves gracious to a Goddess,
Sacrifices were fitter then Presents or Impresses, yet they both hope thy
favor, and (in place of either) use several Symboles containing the titles of
thy imperial Dignity.

1 The hit hermost in the changeable blew, and green Roabe, is the
commendably-fashionate Gallant Eucosmos; whose Courtly Ha^it is the grace of
the Presence, and delight of the surueying eye: whom Ladies understand by the
names of Neat, and Elegant. His Symbol is DIVAE VIRGINI, in which he would
express thy Deities principal glory, which has ever bin Virginity.

2 The second in the rich Acoutrement, and Roabe of Purple empaled with Gold,
is Eupathes; who intertaines his mind with an harmless, but not incurious
variety: All the Objects of his senses are Sumptuous, himself a Gallant, that
without excess can make use of superfluities: go ritchly in Imbroyders,
Jewels, (and what not?) without Vanity; and fare delicately without Gluttony:
and therefore (not without cause) is universally thought to be of fine humor.
His Symbol is DIVAE OPTIMAE. An attribute to express thy Goodness in which
thou so resemblest love thy father.

3. The third in the blush-collourd Suit is Eutolmos, as duly respecting
others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by the title of Good
Audacitie, to Courts and courtly assemblies, a guest most acceptable. His
Simbole is DIVAE VIRAGINI, To express thy hardy Courage, in chase of Savage
beasts which harbor in Woods, and Wilderness.

4. The fourth in Watchet-Tinsell, is the kind, and truly Benefique Eucolos.
Who imparteth not without respect, but yet without difficulty: and has the
happiness to make every kindness seem double, by the timely, and freely
bestowing thereof, he is the chief of them who (by the vulgar) are said to be
of Good Nature. His Symbol is DIVAE MAXIMAE. An Adiunct to signify thy
greatness, which in heaven, earth, and hell is formidable.


SCENA. 5. THE MASQVES Join.
Cupid, Mercury. Cup. Is not that Amorphus the Traveler?


Mer. As though it were not? do you not see how his legs are in travail with
a Measure?


Cup. Hedon, thy master is next.


Mer. What will Cupid turn Nomenclator, and cry them?


Cup. No faith, but I have a Comedy toward, that would not be lost for a
kingdom.


Mer. In good time, for Cupid will prove the Comedy.


Cup. Mercury, I am studying how to match them.


Mer. How too mismatch them, were harder.


Cup. It is the Nymphs must do it, I shall sport my self with their passions
above measure.


Mer. Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I fear thou have not
Arrows for the purpose.


Cup. O yes, here be of all sorts, Flightes, Rouers, and Butshafts. But I can
wound with a Brandish, and never draw Bow for the matter.


Mer. I cannot but believe it my invisible Archer, and yet me thinks you are
tedious.


Cup: It behoues me to be somewhat circumspect Mercury, for if Cynthia here the
twange of my Bow, sneele go near to whip me with the string; therefore to
prevent that, I thus discharge a Brandish upon -- it makes no matter which of
the couples: Phantaste, and Amorphus at you.


Mer. Will the shaking of a shaft, strike'hem into such a Fever of Affection?


Cup. As well as the wink of an Eye: but I pray thee hinder me not with thy
prattle.


Mer. Jove forbid I hinder thee. Marry all that I fear is Cynthias presence,
which with the could of her Chaste^y, casts such an Antiperistasis about the
place, that no heat of thine will tarry with the Patient.


Cup. It wiltarry the rather, for the Antiperistasis will keep it in.


Mer. I long to see the experiment.


Cup. Why their marrow boyles already, or they are all turned Eunuchs.


Mer. Nay and't be so, I Will give ouerspeaking, and be a Spectator only.


They dance the 1. Strains. Amor. Cynthia (by my bright soul) is a right
exquisite, and spendidious Lady; yet Amorphus I think has seen more
fashions, I am sure more Countries; but whether I have or no: what need we gaze
on Cynthia, that have our self to admire?


Phan. O excellent Cynthia; yet if Phantaste sat where she does, and had such
attire on her head (for attire can do much) I say no more; but Goddesses are
Goddesses, and Phantaste is as she is. I would the R^u^ls were done once, I
might go to my School of Glass again, and learn to do my self right after
all this Ruffling.


Mer. How now Cupid? here is a wonderful change with your Brandish? do you not
hear, how they doat?


Cup. What Prodigy is this? no Word of Love? no Mention? no Motion?


Mer. Not a word my little H^ll-fire, not a word.


Cup. Are my Darts enchanted? is their vigor gone? is their virtue --


Mer. What? Cupid turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha.


Cup. Laughes Mercury?


Mer. Is Cupid angry?


Cup. Has he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?


Mer. A rare Comedy, it shall be entitled; Cupids.


Cup. Do not scorn us Hermes.


Mer. Chollar and Cupid are two fiery things; I scorn 'hem not. But I see that
come to pass which I presaged in the beginning.


Cup. You cannot tell: perhaps the Physic will not work so soon upon some,
as upon others. It may be the Rest are not so resty.


Mer. Ex vngue, you know the old Adage; as these, so are the remainder.


Cup. I Will try: this is the same Shafte with which I wounded Argurion.


Mer. I, but let me save you a labor Cupid: there were certain Bottles of
Water fetched, and drunk off, (since that time,) by these Gallants.


Cup. Jove strike me into earth: The Fountain of Self-love?


Mer. Nay faint not Cupid.


Cup. I remembered it not.


Mer. Faith it was omenous to take the name of Anteros upon you, you know not
what Charm or Enchantment lies in the word: you saw I durst not venture upon
any Devise in our presentment: but was content to be no other then a simple
Page. Your Arrows properties (to keep deco^um) Cupid, are suited (it should
seem) to the nature of him you personate.


Cup. Indignity not to be borne.


M^r. Nay rather an attempt to have bin forborne.


Cup. How might I revenge my self on this insulting Mercury? there is Criticus
his Minnion: he has not tasted of this water? it shall be so.

They dance the 2. strain. Is Criticus turned Dotard on himself too?


Mer. That follows not, because the venom of your sha^ts cannot pierce him.


Cup. As though there were one Antidote for these, and another for him?


Mer. As though there were not? or as if one Effect might not arise of diverse
causes? what say you to Cynthia, Arete, Phronesis Tim E, and others there?


Cup. They are divine.


M^r. And Criticus aspires to be so.


Cup. But that shall not serve him.


M^r. It Is like to do prettily well at this time. But Cupid is grown too
covetous, that will not spare one of a Multitude.


Cup. One is more then a Multitude.


Mer. Aretes favor makes any one shot proof against thee Cupid.

They dance the 3. strain. I pray thee light Hony-Bee, remember thou art not
now in Adonis garden, but in Cynthias presence, where thorns (...) garrison
about the Roses. Soft Cynthia speaks.


Cynthia. Ladies and gallants,
To give a timely period to our sports,
Let us conclude them, with declining night;
Our Empire is but of the darker half:
And if you judge it any recompense*
For your fair pains, to have earnd Di^^as thanks;
Diana grants them: and bestows their crown
To gratefie your acceptable Zeal.
For you are they, that not (as some have done)
Do censure us, as too severe, and sower,
But as (more rightly) Gracious to the Good;
Although we not deny, unto the Proud,
Or the Profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so Actaeon by presuming far,
Did (to our grief) incur a fatal doom;
And so, swollen Niob^ (comparing more
Then he presumed) was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no Crime to ^^^er sacred Bowers,
And hallowed Places with impure aspect
Most lewdly to pollute? Seems it no crime,
To brave a Deity? let Mortals learn
To make Religion of offending Heaven;
And not at all to censure powers divine:
To Men, this Argument should stand for firm,
" A Goddess did it; therefore it was good:
" We are not cruel, nor delight in blood.
But what have serious Repetitions
To do with Revels, and the sports of Court?
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation; Let suffice
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious, and lewd Blasphemies;
For we are no less Cynthia, then we were,
Nor is our Power (but as our Self) the same:
Though we have now put on no tire of shine
But mortal eyes vndazled may endure.
" Years, are beneath the Spears; and Time makes weak,
" Things under Heaven; not Powers which govern Heaven:
And though our Self be in our self, secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunity from thence; Lo this is all:
" Honor has store of spleen, but wants Gall.
Once more, we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your taken toil, which here let take an end:
And that we not mistake your several worths*
Nor you our Favor; from your selves remove,
What makes you not your selves; those clouds of Masque:
" Particular pains, particular thanks do ask.
They Vnmasque. -- Are we contemned?
Is there so little awe of our Disdeigne,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the Court?
And (without forhead) bouldly press so far*
As farther none? (...) apt is Lenity
To be abusd? Seu^rity to be loathed?
And yet, how much more does the s^eming Face
Of neighbor Virtues, and their borrowed Names,
Add of lewd Boldness to loose Vanities?
Who would ha^n^ thought that Philautia durst,
Or have usurped noble Storge's name?
Or with that theft have ventred on our eyes?
Who would have thought that all of them should hope,
So much of our conniuence, as to come
To grace themselves, with Titles not their own?
Instead of Medicines have we Maladies?
And such Impostumes, as Phantaste is,
Grow in our Palace? we must lance these sores,
Or all will putrify: Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud then this;
Take off our veil, that shadows may depart,
And shapes appear, beloved Arete. So.
Another Face of things presents it self
Then did of late: what? Featherd Cupid masqu'd?
And masqu'd like to Anteros? but, more strange!
Dear Mercury our Brother, like a Page,
To countenance the ambush of the Boy?
Nor ends our discovery as yet;
Gelaia like a Nymph, that but ere while
(In male attire,) did serve Anaides?
Cupid came hither to find sport and Game,
Who, heretofore has been too conversant
Among our train; but never felt Revenge:
And Mercury bare Cupid company:
Cupid, we must confess this Time of mirth
(Proclaimd by us) gave Opportunity,
To thy attempts, although no Privilege;
Tempt us no farther, we cannot endure
Thy presence longer: Vanish, Hence, Away.
Exit Cupid. You Mercury, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this Plot, you have the deepest hand:
But (for we mean not a Censorian tasque
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe)
Dear Arete, and Criticus, to you
We give the charge; Impose what pains you please:
Th'incurable cut of, the rest reform;
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since Revels were proclaimd, Let now none bleed.

Arete. How well Diana can distinguish Times?
And sort her Censures? keeping to her self
The doom of Gods, leaving the rest to us?
Come, cite them Criticus and then proceed.

Crit. First Philautia (for she was the first)
Then light Gelaia, in Aglaias name,
Thirdly Phantaste, and Moria next,
Main follies all, and of the Female crew;
Amorphus, or Eucosmos counterfeit,
Voluptuous Hedon taken for Eupathes,
Brazen Anaides, and Asotus last,
With his too Pages Morus, and Prosaites;
And thou the Trauailers Evil, Cos, approach,
Impostors all, and male Deformities.

Arete. Nay forward, for I delegate my power,
And will, that at thy mercy they do stand
Whom they so often, so plainly scornd before:
" It Is virtue which they want, and wanting it,
" Honor no garment to their backs can fit.
Now Criticus, use your Discretion.

Crit. Adored Cynthia, and bright Arete;
Another might seem fitter for this tasque
Then Criticus, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindicatiue,
Or mindful of Contempts, which I contemned
As done of Impotence) must be remiss;
Who as I was the Author in some sort,
To work their knowledge into Cynthias sight,
So should be much seuerer to revenge
The indignity, hence issuing to her Name:
But there is not one of these, who are vnpaind,
Or by themselves unpunished; for Vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns Delight it self to Punishment.
But we must forward to define their Doom;
You are Offenders, that must be confessed.
Do you confess it?

Omnes. We do.

Crit. And that you merit sharp Correction?

Omnes. We do.

Crit. Then we (reserving unto Delias grace,
Her farther pleasure, and to Arete
What Delia grants) thus do sentence you.
That from this place (for Penance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of Self-love)
You (two and two) singing a Palinode,
March to your several homes by Nio^es stone,
And offer up two tears a piece thereon;
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called Weeping Cross:
Because it stands cross of Cynthias way,
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
And after penance thus performed, you pass
In like set order; not as Midas did
To wash his Gold off into Tagus stream;
But to the Well of Knowledge, Helicon,
Where, purged of your present Maladies,
(Which are nor few, nor s^ender) you become
Such as you feign would seem; and then return
Offering your service to great Cynthia.
This is your Sentence, if the Goddess please
To ratefie it with her high Consent:
" The scope of wise Mirth unto fruit is bent.

Cyn. We do approve thy Censure Criticu^*
Which Mercury, thy true propitious friend,
(A D^ity, next Jove, beloved of us,)
Will undertake to see exactly done.
And for this service of Discovery
Performed by thee, in honor of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
As shall become our Bounty, and thy Place.
" Princes that would their People should do well,
" Must at themselves begin, as at the heads;
" For men by their example pattern out
" Their Imitations, and reguard of Laws:
" A virtuous Court, a world to virtue draws.

Exeunt, Cynthia, Arete, etc. Palinodia.
Amo. From Spanish shrugs, French faces, Smirks, Irps, and all affected Humors.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Phan. From secret friends, sweet Servants, Loves, Doves, and such Phantastique
Humors.


Chorus. ^ood Mercury defend us.


Amor. From stabbing of Arms, Flap-dragons, Healths, Whiffes, and all such
swaggering Humors.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Phan. From wauing of Fannes, coy Glaunces, Glicks, Cringes, and all such
simpring Humors.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Amo. From making love by Attorney, courting of Pupp^ts, and paying for new
acquaintance.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Phan. From perfumed Dogs, Monkeys, Sparrowes, Dildos, and Parachitos.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Amo. From wearing Bracelets of Hair, Shoo-tyes, Gloves, Garters, and Rings
with Poesies.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Phan. From Pargetting, Painting, Slieking, Glazing, and Renewing old riueld
Faces.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Amo. From Squiring to Tilt-yards, Play Houses, Pageants, and all such Public
places.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Phan. From entertaining one Gallant to gull another, and making Fools of
either.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


Amo. From Belying Ladies favors, Noble-mens countenance, coining counterfeit
Employments, vainglorious taking to them other men's Services, and all
selfe-louing Humors.


Chorus. Good Mercury defend us.


CANT.
NOw each one dry his weeping Eyes,
and to the Well of Knowledge have;
Where purged of your Maladies,
we may of sweeter waters taste:
And with refined voice report,
The Grace of Cynthia, and her Court.
Finis Actus quinti and vltimi.
Epilogus*
GEntles, be it known to you, since I went in
I am turned Rimer; and do thus begin:
The Author (jealous, how your sense does take
His trauayles) has enjoined me to make
Some short, and Ceremonious Epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a Rogue:
He ties me to such Laws, as quite distract
My thoughts; and would a Year of time exact.
I neither must be Faint, Remiss, nor Sorry,
Sower, Serious, Confident, nor Peremptory:
But betwixt these. Lets see? to lay the blame
Upon the Childrens Action, that were lame.
To crave your Favors with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the Writers faculty;
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The Play, might tax the Maker of Self-love.
I Will only speak, what I have heard him say;
By God it is good, and if you liked, you may,
FINIS.
Ecce rubet quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit.
Hoc volo: nunc nobis carmina nostra placent.


