EVERY MAN IN his Humor.

As it has been sundry times publicly acted by the right Honorable the Lord
Chamberlain his servants.

Written by BEN. JOHNSON.

Quod non dant proceres, dabit Histrio.
Hand tamen inuidias vati, quem pulpita pascunt.
Imprinted at London for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Church-yarde. 1601.

The number and names of the Actors.
Lorenzo senior. Prospero. Thorello. Stephano. Doctor Clement. Bobadilla.
Musco. Cob. Giulliano. Lorenzo junior. Biancha. Hesperida. Peto. Matheo. Pizo.
Tib.
EVERY MAN in his Humor.
ACTVS PRIMVS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Lorenzo di Pazzi Senior, Musco. NOw trust me, here is a goodly day
toward. Musco, call up my son Lorenzo: bid him rise: tell him, I have some
business to employ him in.


Mus. I will, sir, presently.

Lore. se. But hear you, sirrah;
If he be at study, disturb him not.

Mus. Very good, sir.
Exit Musco.
Lore. se. How happy would I estimate my self,
Could I (by any mean) retire my son,
From one vain course of study he affects?
He is a scholar (if a man may trust
The lib'rall voice of double-toung'd report)
Of dear account, in all our Academies.
Yet this position must not breed in me
A fast opinion, that he cannot err.
My self was once a student, and indeed
Fed with the selfsame humor he is now,
Dreaming on naught but idle Poetry:
But since, Experience has awakt my sprit's,
Enter Stephano. And reason taught them, how to comprehend
The sovereign use of study. What, cousin Stephano?
What news with you, that you are here so early?

Steph. Nothing: but ^ene come to see how you do, uncle.

Lore. se. That Is kindly done, you are welcome, cousin.

Steph. I, I know that sir, I would not have come else: how does my cousin,
uncle?


Lore. se. Oh well, well, go in and see; I doubt he is scarce stirring yet.


Steph. Uncle, before I go in, can you tell me, and he have ^'re a book of the
sciences of hawking and hun^ing? I would feign borrow it.


Lor. Why I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?

Step. No wusse; but i will practice against next year: I have bought me a hawke,
and bells and all; I lack nothing but a book to keep it by.


Lor. Oh most ridiculous.

Step. Nay look you now, you are angry uncle, why you know, and a man have
not skill in hawking and hunting now a days, i will not give a rush for him; he
is for no gentleman's company, and (by Gods will) I scorn it I, so I do, to
be a consort for every hum-drum; hang them scroiles, there is nothing in them
in the world, what do you talk on it? a gentleman must show himself like a
gentleman, uncle I pray you be not angry, I know what I have to do I trow, I
am no nouice.


Lor. Go to, you are a prodigal, and selfe-wild fool,
Nay never look at me, it is I that speak,
Take It as you will, i will not flatter you.
What? have you not means inow to wast
That which your friends have left you, but you must
Go cast away your money on a Buzzard,
And know not how to keep it when you have done?
Oh it is brave, this will make you a gentleman,
Well Cosen well, I see you are e'ene past hope
Of all reclaim; I so, now you are told on it, you look another way.

Step. What would you have me do trow?

Lor. What would I have you do? mary
Learn to be wise, and practice how to thrive,
That I would have you do, and not to spend
Your crowns on every one that humors you:
I would not have you to intrude your self
In every gentleman's society,
Till their affections or your own desert,
Do worthily inuit you to the place.
For he that's so respectlesse in his course,
Often sels his reputation vile and cheap.
Let not your carriage, and behavior taste
Of affectation, lest while you pretend
To make a blaze of gentry to the world
A little puff of scorn extinguish it,
And you be left like an unsavory snuff,
Whose property is only to offend.
Cosen, lay by such superficial forms,
And entertain a perfect real substance,
Stand not so much on your gentility,
Enter a ser^ingman. But moderate your expenses (now at first)
As you may keep the same proportion still.
Bear a low sail: soft who is this comes here.

Ser. Gentlemen, God save you.

Step. Welcome good friend, we do not stand much upon our gentilitie; yet I
can assure you mine uncle is a man of a thousand pound land a year; he has
but one son in the world; I am his next heir, as simple as I stand here, if
my cosen die: I have a fair living of mine own too beside.


Ser. In good time sir.

Step. In good time sir? you do not flout, do you?

Ser. Not I sir.

Step. And you should, here be them can perceive it, and that quickly too: Go
too, and they can give it again soundly, and need be.


Ser. Why sir let this satisfy you. Good faith I had no such intent.


Step. By God, and I thought you had sir, I would talk with you.


Ser. So you may sir, and at your pleasure.

Step. And so I would sir, and you were out of mine vncle^ ground, I can tell
you.


Lor. Why how now cosen, will this nere be left?

Step. Horson base fellow, by Gods lid, and't were not for shame, I would.


Lor. se. What would you do? you peremptory Ass,
And yowle not be quiet, get you hence.
You see, the gentleman contaynes himself
In modest limits, giving no reply
To your vnseason'd rude comparatiues;
Yet yowle demean your self, without respect
Either of duty, or humanity.
Go get you in: fore God I am ashamed
Exit Steph. Thou have a kinsmans interest in me.

Ser. I pray you, sir, is this Pazzi house?

Lor. se. Yes mary is it, sir.

Ser. I should enquire for a gentleman here, one Signior Lorenzo di Pazzi; do
you know any such, sir, I pray you?

Lore se. Yes, sir: or else I should forget my self*

Ser. I cry you mercy, sir, I was requested by a gentleman of Florence (having
some occasion to ride this way) to deliver you this letter.


Lor. se. To me, sir? What do you mean^? I pray you remember your curt'sy.

To his dear and most elected friend, Signior Lorenzo di Pazzi. What might the
gentleman's name be, sir, that sent it? Nay, pray you be covered.


Ser. Signior Prospero.

Lore. se Signior Prospero? A young gentleman of the family of Strozzi, is he
not?


Ser. I, sir, the same: Signior Thorello, the rich Florentine merchant married
his sister.


Enter Musco. Lore. se. You say very true. Musco.

Mus. Sir.

Lore. se. Make this Gentleman drink, here.
I pray you go in, sir, and't please you.
Exeunt. Now (without doubt) this letter's to my son.
Well: all is one: I Will be so bold as read it,
Be it but for the styles sake, and the phrase;
Both which (I do presume) are excellent,
And greatly varied from the vulgar form,
If Prospero's invention gave them life.
How now? what stuff is here?
Sirrah Lorenzo, I muse we cannot see thee at Florence: S'blood, I doubt, Apollo
has got thee to be his Ingle, that thou come not abroad, to v^s^t thine old
friends: well, take heed of him; he may do somewhat for his household
servants, or so; But for his Retayners, I am sure, I have known some of them,
that have followed him, three, four, five year together, scorning the world
with their bare heels, and at length been g^ad for a shift, (though no clean
shift) to lie a whole winter, in half a sheet, cursing Charles wayne, and the
rest ^f the stars intolerably. But (quis contra diuos?) well; Sirrah, sweet
villayne, come and see me; but spend one minute in my compa^y, and it is enough:
I think I have a world of good le^ts for thee* oh sirrah, I can show thee two
of the most perfect, rare, and absolute true Gulls, that ever thou saw, if
thou will come. S'blood, invent some famous ^^morable lie, or other, to flap
thy father in the mouth withal: thou have been father of a thousand, in thy
days, (...) could be no Poet else: any sciruy roguish excuse will serve;
say thou com^st but to fetch wool for thine Inke-borne. And then too, thy
Father will say thy wits are a wooll-gathering. But it is no matter; the worse,
the better. Any thing is good enough for the old man. Sirrah, how (...) thy
Father should see this now? what would he think^ of me? Well, (howeuer I write
to thee) ^ reverence him in my soul, for the general good all Florence
delivers of him. Lorenzo, I conjure thee (by what, let me see) by the depth of
our love, by all the strange sights we have seen in our days, (I or nights
either) to come to me to Florence this day. Go to, you shall come, and let your
Muses go spinne for once. If thou will not, s'hart, what is your gods name?
Apollo? I; Apollo If this melancholy rogue (Lorenzo here) do not come, grant,
that he do turn Fool presently, and never hereafter, be able to make a good
Jest, or a blanke verse, but live in more penury of wit and Invention, then
either the Hall-Beadle, or Poet Nuntius.

Well, ^t is the strangest letter that ever I read.
Is this the man, my son (so often) has praised
To be the happiest, and most precious wit
That ever was familiar with Art?
Now (by our Ladies blessed son) I swear,
I rather think him most unfortunate,
In the possession of such holy gifts,
Being the master of so loose a spirit.
Why what unhallowed ruffian would have writ,
With so profane a pen, unto his friend?
The modest paper eene looks pale for grief
To feel her virgin-cheeke defilde and staind
With such a black and criminal inscription.
Well, I had thought my son could not have straied,
So far from judgment, as to mart himself
Thus cheapely, (in the open trade of scorn)
To geering folly, and fantastique (...)
But now I see opinion is a fool,
And has abusde my senses. Musco.

Enter Musco. Mus. Sir.

Lor. se. What is the fellow gone that brought this letter?

Mus. Yes sir, a pretty while since.

Lor. se. And where is Lorenz^?

Mus. In his chamber sir.

Lor. se. He spoke not with the fellow, did he?

Mus. No sir, he saw him not.

Lor. se. Then Musco take this letter, and deliver it unto Lorenzo: but sir,
(on your life) take you no knowledge I have opened it.


Mus. O Lord sir, that were a jest in deed.
Exit Mus.
Lor. se. I am resolved I will not cross his journey.
Nor will I practice any violent mean,
To stay the hot and lusty course of youth.
For youth restraind straight grows impatient,
And (in condition) like an eager dog,
Who (never so little from his game withheld)
Turns head and leapes up at his masters throat.
Therefore i will study (by some milder drift)
To call my son unto a happier shrift.
Exit.
SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Lorenzo junior, with Musco. Mus. Yes sir, (on my word) he opend it, and
read the contents*


Lor. iu. It scarce contents me that he did so. But Musco did thou observe
his countenance in the reading of it, whether he were angry or pleased?


Mus. Why sir I saw him not read it.

Le. iu. No? how know thou then that he opend it?

Mus. Marry sir because he charged me (on my life) to tell no body that he
opend it, which (unless he had done) he would never fear to have it reueald.


Lo. iu. That's true: well Musco hie thee in again,
Least thy protracted absence do lend light,
Enter Stephan. To dark suspicion: Musco be assurde
I Will not forget this thy respective love.

Step. Oh Musco, did thou not see a fellow here in a whatsha-callum doublet;
he brought mine uncle a letter even now?


Mus. Yes sir, what of him?

Step. Where is he, can thou tell?

Mus. Why he is gone.

Step. Gone? which way? when went he? how long since?

Mus. Its almost half an hour ago since he rid hence.

Step. Horson Scanderbag rogue, oh that I had a horse; by Gods lidde i would fetch
him back again, with heave and ho.


Mus. Why you may have my masters bay gelding, and you will.


Step. But I have no boots, that's the spite on it.

Mus. Then its no boot to follow him. Let him go and hang sir.

Step. I by my troth; Musco, I pray thee help to trusse me a little; nothing
angers me, but I have waited such a while for him all vnlac'd and untrust
yonder, and now to see he is gone the other way.


Mus. Nay I pray you stand still sir.

Step. I will, I will: oh how it vexes me.

Mus. Tut, never vex your self with the thought of such a ba^e fellow as he.


Step. Nay to see, he stood upon points with me too.


Mus. Like enough so; that was, because he saw you had so few at your hose.


Step. What? Have thou done? God a mercy, good Musco.


Mus. I marle, sir, you wear such ill-fauourd course stockings, having so good
a leg as you have.


Step. Fo, the stockings be good enough for this time of the year; but I Will
have a pair of silk, e're it be long: I think, my leg would show well in
a silk hose.


Mus. I before God would it rarely well.


Step. In sadness I think it would: I have a reasonable good leg.


Mus. You have an excellent good leg, sir: I pray you pardon me, I have a
little haste in, sir.


Step. A thousand thanks, good Musco.
Exit. What, I hope he laughs not at me; and he do --

Lo. iun. Here is a style indeed, for a man's senses to leap over, e're they
come at it: why, it is able to break the shinnes of any old man's patience in
the world. My father read this with patience? Then will I be made an Eunuch,
and learn to sing Ballads. I do not deny, but my father may have as much
patience as any other man; for he uses to take physic, and often taking
physic, makes a man a very patient creature. But, Signior Prospero, had your
swaggering Epistle here, arrived in my fathers hands, at such an hour of his
patience, (I mean, when he had taken physic) it is to be doubted, whether I
should have read sweet villaynt here. But, what? My wise cousin; Nay then, I Will
furnish our feast with one Gull more toward a mess; he writes to me of two,
and here is one, that is three, Ifayth. Oh for a fourth: now, Fortune, or never
Fortune.


Step. Oh, now I see who he laughed at: he laughed at some body in that letter.
By this good light, and he had laughed at me, I would have told mine uncle.


Lo. iun. Cousin Stephano: good morrow, good cousin, how fare you?


Step. The better for your asking, I will assure you. I have been all about to
seek you; since I came I saw mine uncle; and in faith how have you done this
great while? Good Lord, by my troth I am glad you are well cousin.


Lor. ^u. And I am as glad of your coming, I protest to you, for I am sent for
by a private gentleman, my most special dear friend, to come to him to
Florence this morning, and you shall go with me cousin, if it please you, not
else, I will enjoin you no further then stands with your own consent, and the
condition of a friend.


Step. Why cousin you shall command me and't were twice so far as Florence to
do you good; what do you think I will not go with you? I protest.


Lo. iu. Nay, nay, you shall not protest.


Step. By God, but I will sir, by your leave i will protest more to my friend then
i will speak of at this time.


Lo. iu. You speak very well sir.


Step. Nay not so neither, but I speak to serve my turn.


Lo. iu. Your turn? why cousin, a gentleman of so fair sort as you are, of so
true carriage, so special good parts; of so dear and choice estimation; one
whose lowest condition bears the stamp of a great spirit; nay more, a man so
graced, gilded, or rather (to use a more fit Metaph^r) tinfoyld by nature,
(not that you have a leaden constitution, couze, although perhaps a little
inclining to that temper, and so the more apt to melt with pity, when you
fall into the fire of rage) but for your luster only, which reflects as bright
to the world as an old Ale-wiues pewter again a good time; and will you now
(with nice modesty) hide such real ornaments as these, and shadow their
glory as a Millaners wife does her wrought stomacher, with a smoakie lawne or
a black cipresse? Come, come, for shame do not wrong the quality of your
desert in so poor a kind: but let the Idea of what you are, be portraied in
your aspect, that men may read in your looks; Here within this place is to be
seen, the most admirable rare and accomplished work of nature; Cousin what
think you of this?


Step. Marry I do think of it, and I will be more melancholy, and
gentlemanlike then I have been, I do ensure you.


Lo. iu. Why this is well: now if I can but hold up this humor in him, as it is
begun, Ca^so for Florence, match him and she can; Come cousin.


Step. I Will follow you. Le. iu. Follow me? you must go before.


Step. Must I? nay then I pray you show me good cousin.


Exeunt. SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Signior Matheo, to him Cob. Mat. I think this be the house: what howgh?


Cob. Who Is there? oh Signior Matheo. God give you good morrow sir.


Mat. What? Cob? how do thou good Cob? do thou inhabit here Cob?


Cob. I sir, I and my lineage have kept a poor house in our days.


Mat. Thy lineage monsieur Cob? what lineage, what lineage?


Cob. Why sir, an ancient lineage, and a princely: mine ancetri^ came from a
kings loins, no worse man; and yet no man neither, but Herring the king of
fish, one of the monarchs of the world I assure you. I do fetch my pedigree
and name from the first read herring that was eaten in Adam, and Eues kitchen:
his Cob was my great, great, mighty great grandfather.


Mat. Why mighty? why mighty?


Cob. Oh its a mighty while ago sir, and it was a mighty great Cob.


Mat. How know thou that?


Cob. How know I? why his ghost comes to me every night.


Mat. Oh unsavory jest: the ghost of a herring Cob.


Cob. I, why not the ghost of a herring Cob, as well as the ghost of Rashero
Baccono, they were both broild on the coals: you are a scholar, vpsolue me
that now.


Mat. Oh rude ignorance. Cob can thou show me, of a ge^tleman, one Signior
Bobadilla, where his lodging is?


Cob. Oh my guest sir, you mean?


Mat. Thy guest, alas? ha, ha.


Cob. Why do you laugh sir? do you not mean signior Bobadilla?


Mat. Cob I pray thee advise thy self well: do not wrong the gentleman, and
thy self too. I dare be sworn he scorns thy house he. He lodge in such a
base obscure place as thy house? Tut, I know his disposition so well, he would
not lie in thy bed if ^hould'st give it him.


Cob. I will not give it him. Mass I thought (somewhat was in it) we could not
get him to bed all night. Well sir, though he lie not on my bed, he lies on my
bench, and't please you to go up sir, you shall find him with two cushions
under his head, and his cloak wrapped about him, as though he had neither won
nor lost, and yet I warrant he never cast better in his life then he has
done to night.


Mat. Why was he drunk?


Cob. Drunk sir? you hear not me say so; perhaps he swallowed a tavern token,
or some such devise sir; I have nothing to do withal: I deal with water and
not with wine. Give me my tankard there, ho. God be with you sir, its six a
clock: I should have carried two turns by this, what ho? my stopple come.


Mat. Lie in a waterbearers house, a gentleman of his note? well i will tell him
my mind.

Exit.
Cob. What Tib, show this gentleman up to Signior Bobadilla: oh and my house
were the Brazen head now, faith it would eene cry more fools yet: you should
have some now, would take him to be a gentleman at the least; alas God help
the simple, his father's an honest man, a good fishmonger, and so forth: and
now does he creep and wriggle into acquaintance with all the brave gallants
about the town, such as my guest is, (oh my guest is a fine man) and they
^lout him inuinciblie. He uses every day to a Marcha^ts house (where I serve
water) one M. Thorellos; and here is the jest, he is in love with my masters
sister, and calls her mistres: and there he sits a whole afternoon sometimes,
reading of these same abominable, vile, (a pox on them, I cannot abide them)
rascally verses, Poetry, poetry, and speaking of E^terludes, it will make a
man burst to hear him: and the wenches, they do so geere and ti^e at him;
well, should they do as much to me, Ild forswear them all, by the life of
Pharaoh, there is an oath: how many waterbearers shall you hear swear such an
oath? oh I have a guest (he teaches me) he does swear the best of any man
christened: By Phoebus, By the life of Pharaoh, By the body of me, As I am
gentleman, and a soldier: such dainty oaths; and withal he does take this
same filthy roaguish Tobacco the finest, and cleanliest; it would do a man good
to see the fume come forth at his nostrils: well, he owes me forty shillings
(my wife lent him out of her purse; by sixpence a time) besides his lodging; I
would I had it: I shall have it he says next Action* Helter skelter, hang
sorrow, care will kill a cat, vptailes all, and a pox on the hangman.

Exit. Bobadilla discouers himself: on a bench; to him Tib.


Bob. Hostess, hostess.


Tib. What say you sir?


Bob. A cup of your small beer sweet hostess.


Tib. Sir, there is a gentleman below would speak with you.


Bob. A gentleman, (Gods so) I am not within.


Tib. My husband told him you were sir.


Bob. What ha plague? what meant he?


Mat. Signior Bobadilla.


Matheo within. Bob. Who Is there? (take away the basin good hostess) come up
sir.


Tib. He would desire you to come up sir; you come into a cleanly house here.


Mat. God save you sir, God save you.


Enter Matheo. Bob. Signior Matheo, is it you sir? please you sit down.


Mat. I thank you good Signior, you may see, I am somewhat audacious.


Bob. Not so Signior, I was requested to supper yesternight* by a sort of
gallants where you were wished for, and drunk to I assure you.


Mat. Vouchsafe me by whom good Signior.


Bob. Marry by Signior Prosper^, and others, why hostess, a stool here for
this gentleman.


Mat. No haste sir, it is very well.


Bob. Body of me, it was so late ere we parted last night, I can scarce open
mine eyes yet; I was but new risen as you came: how passes the day abroad sir?
you can tell.


Mat. Faith some half hour to seven: now trust me you have an exceeding fine
lodging here, very neat, and private.


Bob. I sir, sit down I pray you: Signior Matheo (in any case) possess no
gentlemen of your acquaintance with notice of my lodging.


Mat. Who I sir? no.


Bob. Not that I need to care who know it, but in regard I would not be so
popular and general, as some be.


Mat. True Signior, I conceive you.


Bob. For do you see sir, by the heart of my self (except it be to some
peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am extraordinarily engaged, as your
self, or so) I would not extend thus far.


Mat. O Lord sir I resolve so.


Bob. What new book have you there? what? Go by Hier^^imo.


Mat. I, did you ever see it acted? is it not well pend?


Bob. Well pend: I would feign see all the Poets of our time pen such another
play as that was; they I prate and swagger, and keep a stir of a^te and
devises, when (by Gods so) they are the most shallow pitiful fellows that
live upon the face of the earth again.


Mat. Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this book: Oh eyes, no
eyes but fountains fraught with tears; there is a conceit: Fountains fraught
with tears. Oh life, no life, but lively form of death: is it not excellent?
Oh world, no world, but mass of public wrongs; O Gods me: confusde and filled
with murder and misdeeds. Is It not simply the best that ever you heard? Ha,
how do you like it?


Bob. It Is good.


Mat. To thee the purest object to my senc^,
The most refined essence heaven couers,
Send I these lines, wherein I do commence
The happy state of true deserving lovers.
If they prove rough, vnpolish't, harsh and rude,
Haste made that waste; thus mildly I conclude.

Bob. Nay proceed, proceed, where is this? where is this?


Mat. This sir, a toy of mine own in my nonage: but when will you come and see
my study? good faith I can show you some very good things I have done of
late: that boot becomes your leg passing well sir, me thinks.


Bob. So, so, it is a fashion gentlemen use.


Mat. Mass sir, and now you speak of the fashion, Signior Prosperos elder
brother and I are fallen out exceedingly: this other day I happened to enter into
some discourse of a hanger, which I assure you, both for fashion and
workmanship was most beautiful and gentlemanlike; yet he condemned it for the
most pide and ridiculous that ever he saw.


Bob. Signior Giuliano, was it not? the elder brother?


Mat. I sir, he.


Bob. Hang him Rooke he? why he has no more judgment then a malt horse. By S.
George, I hold him the most peremptory absurd clown (one a them) in
Christendom: I protest to you (as I am a gentleman and a soldier) I never
talked with the like of him: he has not so much as a good word in his belly,
all iron, iron, a good commodity for a smith to make hobnailes on.


Mat. I, and he thinks to carry it away with his manhood still where he
comes: he brags he will give me the bastinado, as I hear.


Bob. How, the bastinado? how came he by that word trow?


Mat. Nay indeed he said cudgill me; I tearmd it so for the more grace.


Bob. That may be, for I was sure it was none of his word: but when, when said
he so?


Mat. Faith yesterday they say, a young gallant a friend of mine told me so.


Bob. By the life of Pharaoh, and't were my case now, I should send him a
challenge presently: the bastinado? come hither, you shall challenge him; i will
show you a trick or two, you shall kill him at pleasure, the first stockado if
you will, by this air.


Mat. Indeed you have absolute knowledge in the mystery, I have heard sir.


Bob. Of whom? of whom I pray?


Mat. Faith I have heard it spoken of diverse, that you have very rare skill
sir.


Bob. By heaven, no, not I, no skill in the earth: some small science, know my
time, distance, or so, I have professed it more for noblemen and gentlemen's use,
then mine own practice I assure you. Hostess, lend us another bedstaffe here
quickly: look you sir, exalt not your point above this state at any hand, and
let your poyneard maintain your defense thus: give it the gentleman. So sir,
come on, oh twine your body more about, that you may come to a more sweet
comely gentlemanlike guard; so indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus:
now stand fast on your left leg, note your distance, keep your due proportion
of time: oh you disorder your point most vilely.


Mat. How is the bearing of it now sir?


Bob. Oh out of measure ill, a well experienced man would pass upon you at
pleasure.


Mat. How mean you pass upon me?


Bob. Why thus sir? make a thrust at me; come in upon my time; control your
point, and make a full carriere at the body: the best practiced gentlemen of
the time term it the passado, a most desperate thrust, believe it.


Mat. Well, come sir.


Bob. Why you do not manage your weapons with that facility and grace that you
should do, I have no spirit to play with you, your dearth of judgment makes
you seem tedious.


Mat. But one very sir.


Bob. Fie veney, most gross denomination, as ever I heard: oh the stockado
while you live Signior, note that. Come put on your cloak, and we will go to
some private place where you are acquainted, some tavern or so, and we will se^d
for one of these fencers, where he shall breath you at my direction, and then
i will teach you that trick, you shall kill him with it at the first if you
please: why i will learn you by the true judgment of the eye, hand and foot, to
control any man's point in the world; Should your adversary confront you with a
pistol, it were nothing, you should (by the same rule) control the bullet,
most certain by Phoebus: unless it were haile-shot: what money have you about
you sir?


Mat. Faith I have not past two shillings, or so.


Bob. It Is somewhat with the least, but come, when we have done, we will call up
Signior Prospero; perhaps we shall meet with Coridon his brother there.


Exeunt* SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Thor^llo, Giuliano, Piso. Tho. Piso, come hither: there lies a note
within upon my deske; here take my key: it is no matter neither, where is the boy?


Piso. Within sir, in the warehouse.


Thor. Let him tell over that Spanish gold, and weigh it, and do you see the
delivery of those wares to Signior Bentiuol^: i will be there my self at the
receipt of the money anon.


Piso. Very good sir.

Exit Piso.
Tho. Brother, did you see that same fellow there?


Giu. I, what of him?


Tho. He is e'ene the honestest faithful servant, that is this day in
Florence; (I speak a proud word now) and one that I durst trust my life into
his hands, I have so strong opinion of his love, if need were.


Giu. God send me never such need: but you said you had somewhat to tell me,
what is it?


Tho. Faith brother, I am loath to utter it,
As fearing to abuse your patience,
But that I know your judgment more direct,
Able to sway the nearest of affection.

Giu. Come, come, what needs this circumstance?

Tho. I will not say what honor I ascribe
Unto your friendship, nor in what dear state
I hold your love; let my continued zeal,
The constant and religious regard,
That I have ever carried to your name,
My carriage with your sister, all contest,
How much I stand affected to your house.

Giu. You are too tedious, come to the matter, come to the matter.


Tho. Then (without further ceremony) thus.
My brother Prospero (I know not how)
Of late is much declined from what he was,
And greatly alterd in his disposition.
When he came first to lodge here in my house,
Never trust me, if I was not proud of him:
Me thought he bare himself with such observance,
So true election and so fair a form:
And (what was chief) it showed not borrowed in him,
But all he did became him as his own,
And seemd as perfect, proper, and innate,
Unto the mind, as collor to the blood,
But now* his course is so irregular,
So loose affected, and deprived of grace.
And he himself withal so far fallen off
From his first place, that scarce no note remains,
To tell men's judgments where he lately stood;
He Is grown a stranger to all due respect,
Forgetful of his friends, and not content
To stale himself in all societies,
He makes my house as common as a Mart,
A Theater, a public receptacle
For giddie humor, and diseased riot,
And there, (as in a Tavern, or a stews,)
He, and his wild associates, spend their hours,
In repetition of lascivious ^e^ts,
Swear, leap, and dance, and revel night by night,
Control my servants: and indeed what not?

Giu. Faith I know not what I should say to him: so God save me, I am eene at
my wits end, I have told him enough, one would think, if that would serve:
well, he knows what to trust to for me: let him spend, and spend, and
domineere till his heart ache: and he get a penny more of me, I Will give him this
^are.


Tho. Nay good Brother have patience.


Giu. S'blood, he mads me, I could eat my very flesh for anger:
I marle you will not tell him of it, how he disquiets your house*

Tho. O there are diu^ers reasons to dissuade me,
But would your self vouchsafe to travail in it,
(Though but with plain, and easy circumstance,)
It would, both come much better to his sense,
And savor less of grief and discontent.
You are his elder brother, and that title
Confirms and warrants your authority:
Which (seconded by your aspect) will breed
A kind of duty in him, and regard.
Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
It would but add contempt, to his neglect,
Heap worse on ill, rear a huge pile of hate,
That in the building, would come tottring down,
And in her ^uines, bury all our love.
Nay more then this brother; (if I should speak)
He would be ready in the heat of passion,
To fill the ears of his familiars,
With often reporting to them, what disgrace
And gross disparagement, I had proposed him.
And then would they straight back him, in opinion,
Make some loose comment upon every word,
And out of their distracted fantasies;
Contriue some slander, that should dwell with me.
And what would that be think you? mary this,
They would give out, (because my wife is fair,
My self but lately married, and my sist^r
Here soiourning a virgin in my house)
That I were jealous: nay, as sure as death,
Thus they would say: and how that I had wronged
My brother purposely, thereby to find
An apt pretext to banish them my house.

Giu. Mass perhaps so.

Tho. Brother they would believe it: so should I
(Like one of these penurious quack-slaluers,)
But try experiments upon my self,
Open the gates unto mine own disgrace,
Lend bare-ribd envy, opportunity.
To stab my reputation, and good name.

Enter Boba. and Matheo. Mat. I will speak to him.


Bob. Speak to him? away, by the life of Pharaoh you shall not, you shall not
do him that grace: the time of day to you Gentleman: is Signior Prospero
stirring?


Giu. How then? what should he do?


Bob. Signior Thorello, is he within sir?


Tho. He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.


Giu. Why do you hear? you.


Bob. This gentleman has satisfied me, I Will talk to no Scauenger.


Giu. How Scauenger? stay sir stay.


Exeunt. Tho. Nay Brother Giuliano.


Giu. S'blood stand you away, and you love me.


Tho. You shall not follow him now I pray you, Good faith you shall not.


Giu. Ha? Scauenger? well go to, I say little, but, by this good day (God
forgive me I should swear) if I put it up so, say I am the rankest -- that
ever pist. S'blood and I swallowe this, I Will near draw my sword in the sight
of man again while I live; I Will ^it in a Barn with Madge-owlet first,
Scauenger? 'Hart and I Will go near to fill that hug^ timbrell slop of yours
with somewhat and I have good luck, your Garagantua breech cannot carry it
away so.


Tho. Oh do not fret your self thus, never think o^'t.


Giu. These are my brothers consorts these, these are his Cumrades, his walking
mates, he is a gallant, a Caueliero too, right hangman cut, God let me not live,
and I could not find in my heart to swinge the whole ne^t of them, one after
another, and begin with him first, I am grieved it should be said he is my
brother, and take these courses, well he shall hear on it, and that tightly
too, and I live In Faith.


Tho. But brother, let your apprehension (then)
Run in an easy current, not transported
With heady rashness, or devouring choler,
And rather carry a persuading spirit,
Whose powers will pearce more gently; and allure,
The imperfect thoughts you labor to reclaim,
To a more sudden and resolved assent.

Giu. I, I, let me alone for that I warrant you.
Bell ring^.
Tho. How now? oh the bell rings to breakefast.
Brother Giuliano, I pray you go in and bear my wife company:
I Will but give order to my servants for the dispatche of some business and come
to you presently.

Exit Guil. Enter Cob. What Cob? our maids will have you by the back (In Faith)
For coming so late this morning.

Cob. Perhaps so sir, take heed some body have not the^* by the belly for
walking so late in the evening.

Exit.
Tho. Now (in good faith) my mind is somewhat easd,
Though not repo^d in that security,
As I could wish; well, I must be content,
How e're I set a face on it to the world,
Would I had lost this ^inger at a vente,
So Prospero had never lodged in my house,
Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
Of wanton gallants, and young reuellers,
That any woman should be honest long.
Is It like, that factious beauty will preserve
The sovereign state of chastity vnscard,
When such strong motives muster, and make head
Against her single peace? no, no: beware
When mutual pleasure swayes the appetite,
And spirits of one kind and quality,
Do meet to parlee in the pride of blood.
Well (to be plain) if I but thought, the time
Had answered their affections: all the world
Should not persuade me, but I were a cuckold:
Mary I hope they have not got that start.
For opportunity has balkt them yet,
And shall do still, while I have eyes and ears
To attend the imposition of my heart,
My presence shall be as an Iron Bar,
Twixt the conspiring motions of desire,
Yea every look or glaunce mine eye objects,
Shall check occasion, as one does his slave,
When he forgets the limits of prescription.

Enter Bia^cha, with Hesperida. Bia. Sister Hesperida, I pray you fetch down
the Rose water above in the closet: Sweet heart will you come in to breakfast.


Exit Hesperida. Tho. And she have ouer-heard me now?


Bia. I pray thee (good Musse) we stay for you.


Tho. By Christ I would not for a thousand crowns.


Bia. What ayle you sweet heart, are you not well, speak good Musse.


Tho. Troth my head aches extremely on a sudden.


Bia. Oh Jesus!


Tho. How now? what?


Bia. Good Lord how it burns? Musse keep you warm, good truth it is this new
disease, there is a number are troubled withal: for Gods sake sweet heart,
come in out of the air.


Tho. How simple, and how subtle are her answers?
A new disease, and many troubled with it.
Why true, she heard me all the world to nothing.

Bia. I pray thee good sweet heart come in; the air will do you harm in troth.


Tho. I Will come to you presently, it will away I hope.

Bia. Pray God it do.
Exit.
Tho. A new disease? I know not, new or old.
But it may well be called poor mortals Plague;
For like a pestilence it does infect
The houses of the brain: first it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment, and from thence,
Sends like contagion to the memory,
Still each of other catching the infection,
Which as a searching vapor spreads it self
Confusedly through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought or motion in the mind
Be free from the black poison of suspect.
Ah, but what error is it to know this,
And want the free election of the soul
In such extremes? well, I will once more strive,
(Even in despite of hell) my self to be,
And shake this fever off that thus shakes me.
Exit.
ACTVS SECVNDVS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Musco disguised like a soldier. Musco. S'blood, I cannot choose but laugh
to see my self translated thus, from a poor creature to a creator; for now
must I create an intolerable sort of lies, or else my profession looses his
grace, and yet the lie to a man of my coat, is as ominous as the (...) oh sir,
it holds for good policy to have that outwardly in vilest estimation, that
inwardly is most dear to us: So much for my borrowed shape. Well, the troth
is, my master intends to follow his son drie-foot to Florence, this morning:
now I knowing of this conspiracy, and the rather to insinuate with my young
master, (^or so must we that are blew waiters, or men of service do, or else
perhaps we may wear motley at the years end, and who wears motley you
know:) I have got me before in this disguise, determining here to lie in
ambuscado, and intercept him in the midway: If I can but get his cloak, his
purse, his hat, nay any thing so I can stay his journey, Rex Regum, I am made
for ever in faith: well, now must I practice to get the true garb of one of
these Launce-knights: my arm here, and my: Gods so, young master and his
cousin.


Enter Lo. iu. and Step. Lo. iu. So sir, and how then?


Step. Gods foot, I have lost my purse, I think.


Lo. iu. How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?


Step. I cannot tell, stay.


Mus. S'lid I am afeard they will know me, would I could get by them.


Lo. iu. What? have you it?


Step. No, I think I was bewitched, I.


Lo. iu. Nay do not weep, a pox on it, hang it let it go.


Step. Oh it is here, nay and it had been lost, I had not cared but for a ^et
ring Marina ^ent me.


Lo. iu. A iet ring? oh the poesy, the poesy?


Step. Fine in faith: Though fancy sleep, my love is deep: meaning that though
I did not fancy her, yet she loved me dearly.


Lo. iu. Most excellent.


Step. And then I sent her another, and my poesy was; The deeper the sweeter,
I Will be judged by Saint Peter.


Lo. iu. How, by S. Peter? I do not conceive that.


Step. Marry, S. Peter to make up the meeter.


Lo. iu. Well, you are beholding to that Saint* (...) helped you at your need;
thank him, thank him.


Mus. I will venture, come what will: Gentlemen, please you change a few
crowns for a very excellent good blade here; I am a poor gentleman, a
soldier, one that (in the better state of my fortunes) scornd so mean a
refuge, but now its the humor of necessity to have it so: you seem to be
gentlemen well affected to martial men, else I should rather die with silence,
then live with shame: how e're, vouchsafe to remember it is my want speaks,
not my self: this condition agrees not with my spirit.


Lo. iu. Where have thou served?


Mus. May it please you Signior, in all the provinces of Bohemia, Hungaria,
Dalmatia, Poland, where not? I have been a poor seruitor by sea and land, any
time this xiiij. years, and followed the fortunes of the best Commanders in
Christendom. I was twice shot at the taking of Aleppo, once at the relief of
Vienna; I have been at America in the galleyes thrice* where I was most
dangerously shot in the head, through both the thighs, and yet being thus
maimed I am void of maintenance, nothing left me but my scarres, the noted
marks of my resolution.


Step. How will you sell this Rapier friend?


Mus. Faith Signior, I refer it to your own judgment; you are a gentleman,
give me what you please.


Step. True, I am a gentleman, I know that; but what though,
I pray you say, what would you ask?

Mus. I assure you the blade may become the side of the best prince in Europe.


Lo. iu. I, with a velvet scabberd.


Step. Nay and't be mine it shall have a velvet scabberd, that is flat, ^'de
not wear it as'tis and you would give me an angel.


Mus. At your pleasure Signior, nay it is a most pure Toledo.


Step. I had rather it were a Spaniard: but tell me, what shall I give you for
it? and it had a silver hilt --


Lo. iu. Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold there is a shilling friend,
take thy Rapier.


Step. Why but I will buy it now, because you say so: what shall I go without a
rapier?


Lo. iu. You may buy one in the city.


Step. Tut, i will buy this, so I will; tell me your lowest price.


Lo. iu. You shall not I say.


Step. By Gods lid, but I will, though I give more then it is worth.


Lo. iu. Come away, you are a fool.


Step. Friend, i will have it for that word: follow me.


Mus. At your service Signior.


Exeunt. SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Lorenzo senior. Lore. My laboring spirit being late oppressed
With my sons folly, can embrace no rest,
Till it has plotted by advise and skill,
How to reduce him from affected will
To reasons manage; which while I intend,
My troubled soul begins to apprehend
A farther secret, and to meditate
Upon the difference of man's estate:
Where is deciphered to true judgments eye
A deep, conceald, and precious mystery.
Yet can I not but worthily admire
At natures art: who (when she did inspire
This heat of life) placed Reason (as a king)
Here in the head, to have the marshalling
Of our affections: and with sovereignty
To sway the state of our weak empe^ie,
But as in diverse commonwealthes we see,
The form of government to disagree:
Even so in man who searches soon shall find
As much or more variety of mind.
Some men's affections like a fullen wife,
Is with her husband reason still at strife.
Others (like proud Arch-traitors that rebel
Against their sovereign) practice to expel
Their liege Lord Reason, and not shame to tread
Upon his holy and anointed head.
But as that land or nation best does thrive,
Which to smooth-fronted peace is most procliue,
So does that mind, whose fair affections ranged
By reasons rules, stand constant and unchanged,
Else, if the power of reason be not such,
Why do we attribute to him so much?
Or why are we obsequious to his law,
If he want spirit our affects to awe?
Oh no, I argue weakly, he is strong,
Enter Musco. Albeit my son have done him too much wrong.

Mus. My master: nay faith have at you: I am flesht now I have sped so well:
Gentleman, I beseech you respect the estate of a poor soldier; I am ashamed of
this base course of life (God's my comfort) but extremity prouokes me to it,
what remedy?


Loren. I have not for you now.


Mus. By the faith I bear unto God, gentleman, it is no o^^dinarie custom,
but only to preserve manhood. I protest to you, a man I have bin, a man I may
be, by your sweet bounty.


Lor. I pray thee good friend be satisfied.


Mus. Good Signior: by Jesus you may do the part of a kind gentleman, in lending
a poor soldier the price of two cans of beer, a matter of small value, the
King of heaven shall pay you, and I shall rest thankful: sweet Signior.


Loren. Nay and you be so importunate --


Mus. Oh Lord sir, need will have his course: I was not made to this vile use;
well, the edge of the enemy could not have abated me so much: it is hard when a
man has served in his Princes cause and be thus. Signior, let me derive a
small piece of silver from you, it shall not be given in the course of time, by
this good ground, I was feign to pawn my rapier last night for a poor supper,
I am a Pagan else: sweet Signior.


Loren. Believe me I am rapte with admiration,
To think a man of thy exterior presence,
Should (in the constitution of the mind)
Be so degenerate, infirm, and base.
Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practice such a servile kind of life?
Why were thy education never so mean,
Having thy limbs: a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves to thy election.
Nay there the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous Gentleman,
Or honest labor; nay what can I name,
But would become thee better then to beg?
But men of your condition feed on sloth,
As does the Scara^e on the dung she breeds in,
Not caring how the temper of your spirits
Is eaten with the rust of idleness.
Now before God, what e're he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While you insist in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin not th^ne but his.

Mus. Faith signior, I would gladly find some other course if so*


Loren. I, you would gladly find it, but you will not seek it.


Mus. Alas^e sir, where should a man seek? in the wars, there is no assent by
desert in these days, but: and for service would it were as soon purchased as
wished for (Gods my comfort) I know what I would say.


Loren. What Is thy name.


Mus. Please you: Portensi^.


Loren. Portensio?
Say that a man should entertain thee now,
Would thou be honest, humble, just and true.

Mus. Signior: by the place and honor of a soldier.


Loren. Nay, nay, I like not these affected oaths; Speak plainly man: what
think thou of my words?


Mus. Nothing signior, but wish my fortunes were as happy as my service should
be honest.


Loren. Well follow me, i will prove thee, if thy deeds Will carry a proportion
to thy words.

Exit Lor.
M^s. Yes sir straight, i will but g^rter m^ ^ose; oh that my belly were hoopt
now, for I am ready to burst with laughing. S^lid, was there ever seen a fox
in years to betray himself thus? now shall I be possessed of all his
determinations, and consequently and my young master well he is resolved to
prove my honesty: faith and I am resolved to prove his patience: oh I shall
abuse him intollerablie: this small piece of service will bring him clean out
of love with the soldier for ever. It Is no matter, let the world think me a
bad counterfeit, if I cannot give him the slip at an instant: why this is
better then to have staid his journey by half, well i will follow him; oh how I
long to be employed.

Exit.
SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Prospero, Bobadilla, and Mathe^. Mat. Yes faith sir, we were at your
lodging to seek you too.


Pros. Oh I came not there to night.


Bob. Your brother delivered us as much.


Pros. Who Giuliano?


Bob. Ciuliano* Signior Prospero, I know not in what kind you value me, but
let me tell you this: as sure as God I do hold it so much out of mine honor and
reputation, if I should but cast the least regard upon such a dunghill of
flesh; I protest to you (as I have a soul to be saved) I never saw any
gentlemanlike part in him: and there were no more men living upon the face of
the earth, I should not fancy him by Phoebus.


Mat. Troth nor I, he is of a rusticall cut, I know not how: he does not carry
himself like a gentleman.


Pros. Oh Signior Matheo, that is a grace peculiar but to a few; quos aequus
amauit Jupiter.


Mat. I understand you sir.


Enter Lorenzo junior, and Step. Pros. No question you do sir: Lorenzo; now on
my soul welcome; how do thou sweet rascal? my Genius? S'blood I shall love
Apollo, and the m^d Thespian girls the better while I ^ue for this; my dear
villain, now I see there is some spirit in thee: Sir these be they two I writ
to thee of, nay what a drowsy humor is this now? why do thou not speak?


Lo. Iu. Oh you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter.


Pros. Why was it not rare?


Lo. Iu. Yes i will be sworn I was never guilty of reading the like, match it in
all Pli^ies familiar Epistles, and i will have my judgment burnd in the ^are for
a rogue, make much of thy vain, for it is inimitable. But I marle what Camel
it was, that had the carriage of it? for doubtless he was no ordinary beast
that brought it.


Pros. Why?


Lo. Iu. Why say thou? why do thou think that any reasonable creature,
especially in the morning, (the sober time of the day too) would have taine my
father for me?


Pros. S'blood you jest I hope?


Lo. Iu. Indeed the best use we can turn it too, is to make a jest on it now:
but i will assure you, my father had the proving of your copy, some hour before I
saw it.


Pros. What a dull slave was this? But sirrah what said he to it in faith?


Lo. Iu. Nay I know not what he said. But I have a shrewd guess what he thought.


Pro. What? what?


Lo. Iu. Mary that thou are a damned dissolute villain, And I some grain or
two better, in keeping thee company.


Pros. Tut that thought is like the Moon in the last quarter, twill change
shortly: but sirrah, I pray thee be acquainted with my two Zanies here, thou will take exceeding pleasure in them if thou hearst them once, but what strange
piece of silence is this? the sign of the dumb man?


Lo. Iu. Oh sir a ki^sman of mine, one that may make our Music the fuller and
he please, he has his humor sir.


Pros. Oh what is it? what is it?


Lo. Iu. Nay: i will neither do thy judgment, nor his folly that wrong, as to
prepare thy apprehension: i will leave him to the mercy of the time, if you can
take him: so.


Pros. Well signior Bobadilla: signior Matheo: I pray you know this Gentleman
here, he is a friend of mine, and one that will well deserve your affection, I
know not your name signior, but I shall be glad of any good occasion, to be more
familiar with you.


Step. My name is signior Stephano, sir, I am this Gentleman's cousin, sir his
father is mine uncle; sir, I am somewhat melancholy, but you shall command
me sir, in whatsoever is incident to a Gentleman.


Bob. Signior, I must tell you this, I am no general man, embrace it as a most
high favor, for (by the host of Egypt) but that I conceive you, to be a
Gentleman of some parts, I love few words: you have wit: imagine.


Step. I truly sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.


Mat. Oh Lord sir, it is your only best humor sir, your true melancholy, breeds
your perfect fine wit sir: I am melancholy my self diverse times sir, and then
do I no more but take your pen and paper presently, and write you your half
score or your dozen of sonnets at a sitting.


Lo. iu. Mass then he vtters them by the gross.


Step. Truly sir and I love such things out of measure.


Lo. iu. I faith, as well as in measure.


Mat. Why I pray you signior, make use of my study, it is at your service.


Step. I thank you sir, I shall be bold I warrant you, have you a close stool
there?


Mat. Faith sir, I have some papers there, toys of mine own doing at idle
hours, that you will say there is some sparks of wit in them, when you shall see
them.


Prosp. Would they were kindled once, and a good fire made, I might see self
love burnd for her heresy.


Step. Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy enough?


Lo. iu. Oh I, excellent.


Prosp. Signior Bobadilla? why muse you so?


Lo. iu. He is melancholy too.


Bob. Faith sir, I was thinking of a most honorable piece of service was
performed to morrow; being S Marks day: shall be some te^ years.


Lo. iu. In what place was that service, I pray you sir?


Bob. Why at the beleagring of Ghibell^tto, where, in less then two hours,
seven hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in Europe, lost their lives upon
the b^each: i will tell you gentlemen, it was the first, but the best leaug^^ that
ever I beheld with these eyes, except the taking in of (...) last year by the
Genowayes, but that (of all other) was the most fatal and dangerous exploit,
that ever I was ranged in, since I first bore arms before the fa^e of the
enemy, as I am a gentleman and a soldier.


Step. So, I had as liefe as an angel I could swear as well as that gentleman.


Lo. iu. Then you were a seruitor at both it seems.


Bob. Oh Lord sir: by Phaeton I was the first man that entered the breach, and
had I not effected it with resolution, I had been slain if I had had a million
of lives.


Lo. iu. Indeed sir?


Step. Nay and you heard him discourse you would say so: how like you him?


Bob. I assure you (upon my salvation) it is true, and your self shall confess.


Prosp. You must bring him to the rack first.


Bob. Observe me iudicially sweet signior: they had planted me a demi
culuering, just in the mouth of the breach; now sir (as we were to ascend)
their master gunner (a man of no mean skill and courage, you must think)
confronts me with his Linstock ready to give fire; I spying his intendement,
discharged my Petrinell in his bosom, and with this instrument my poor
Rapier, ran violently upon the Moors that guarded the ordinance, and put them
pell-mell to the sword.


Pros. To the sword? to the Rapier signior.


Lo. iu. Oh it was a good figure observed sir: but did you all this signior
without hurting your blade.


Bob. Without any impeach on the earth: you shall perceive sir, it is the most
fortunate weapon, that ever rid on a poor gentleman's thigh: shall I tell you
sir, you talk of More glay, Excaliber, Durindana, or so: tut, I lend no credit
to that is reported of them, I know the virtue of mine own, and therefore I
dare the boldlier maintain it.


Step. I marle whether it be a Toledo or no?


Bob. A most perfect Toledo, I assure you signior.


Step. I have a countriman of his here.


Mas. Pray you let us see (...): yes faith it is.


Bob. This a Toledo* pis^^.


Step. Why do you pish signior?


Bob. A Fleming by Phoebus, i will buy them for a guilder a pece^ and i will have a
thousand of them.


Lo. iu. How say you cousin, I told you thus much.


Pros. Where bought you it sig^ior?


Step. Of a scuruy rogue Soldier, a pox of God on him, he swore it was a
Toledo.


Bob. A prouant Rapier, no better.


Mat. Mass I think it be indeed.


Lo. iu. Tut now it is too late to look on it, put it up, put it up.


Step. Well I will not put it up, but by Gods foot, and ere I meet him --


Pros. Oh it is past remedy now sir, you must have patience.


Step. Horson conny-catching Rascal; oh I could eat the very hilts for anger.


Lo. iu. A sign you have a good Ostrich stomach Cousin.


Step. A stomach? would I had him here, you should see and I had a stomach.


Pros. It Is better as it is: come gentlemen shall we go?


Enter Musce. Lo. iu. A miracle cousin, look here, look here.


Step. Oh, Gods lid, by your leave, do you know me sir.


Mus. I sir, I know you by sigh^.


Step. You sold me a Rapier, did you not?


Mus. Yes marry did I sir.


Step. You said it was a Toled^ ha?


Mus. True I did so.


Step. But it is none.


Mus. No sir, I confess it, it is none.


Step. Gentlemen bear witness, he has con^est it. By Gods lid, and you had
not confessed it --


Lo. iu. Oh cousin, forbear, forbear.


Step. Nay I have done cousin.


Pros. Why you have done like a Gentleman, he has confessed it, what would you
more?


Lo. iu. Sir how do thou like him.


Pros. Oh its a precious good fool, make much on him: I can compare him to
nothing more happily, then a Barbers virginals; for every one may play upon him.


Mus. Gentleman, shall I entreat a word with you?


Lo. iu. With all my heart sir, you have not another Toledo to sell, have ye?


Mus. You are pleasant, your name is signior Lorenzo as I take it.


Lo. iu. You are in the right: S'bloud he means to catechize me I think.


Mus. No sir, I leave that to the Curate, I am none of that coat.


Lo. iu. And yet of as bare a coat; well, say sir.


Mus. Faith signior, I am but servant to God Mars extraordinary, and indeed
(this brass varnish being washed off, and three or four other tricks sublated)
I appear yours in reuersion, after the decease of your good father, Musco.


Lo. iu. Musco, s'bloud what wind has blown thee hither in this shape.


Mus. Your Easterly wind sir, the same that blew your father hither.


Lo. iu. My father?


Mus. Nay never start, it is true, he is come to town of purpose to seek you.


Lo. iu. Sir Prospero: what shall we do sir, my father is come to the city.


Pros. Thy father: where is he?


Mus. At a Gentleman's house yonder by Saint A^thonies* where he but stays my
return; and then --


Pros. Who Is this? Musco?


Mus. The same sir.


Pros. Why how comst thou trans-muted thus?


Mus. Faith a devise, a devise, nay for the love of God, stand not here
Gentlemen, house your selves and i will tell you all.


Lo. iu. But art thou sure he will stay thy return?


Mus. Do I live sir? what a question is that?


Pros. Well we will prorogue his expectation a little: Musc^ thou ^halt go with
us: Come on Gentlemen: nay I pray thee (good rascal) droope not, s'hart and
our wits be so gowty, that one old plodding brain can outstrip us all, Lord I
beseech thee, may they lie and starve in some miserable spittle, where they may
never see the face of any true spirit again, but be perpetually haunted with
some churchyard Hobgoblin in s^cul^ secul^rum.


Mus. Amen, Amen.


Exeunt. ACTVS TERTIVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Thor^llo, and Piso. Pis. He will expect you sir within this half hour.


Tho. Why what is a clock?


Pis. New stricken ten.


Tho. Has he the money ready, can you tell?


Pis. Yes sir, Baptista brought it yesternight.


Tho. Oh that is well: fetch me my cloak.
Exit Piso. Stay, let me see; an hour to go and come,
I that will be the least: and then 'twill be
An hour, before I can dispatch with him;
Or very near: well, I will say two hours;
Two hours? ha? things never drempt of yet
May be contrived, I and effected too,
In two hours absence: well I will not go.
Two hours; no flee^ing opportunity
I will not give your treachery that scope.
Who will not judge him worthy to be robbed,
That sets his doors wide open to a thief,
And shows the felon, where his treasure lies*
Again, what earthy spirit but will attempt
To taste the fruit of beauties golden tree,
When leaden sleep seals up the dragons eyes?
Oh beauty is a Project of some power,
Chiefly when opportunity attends her:
She will infuse true motion in a stone,
Put glowing fire in an Icie soul,
Stuff peasants bosoms with proud Caesar's spleen,
Power rich device into an empty brain:
Bring youth to follies gate: there train him in,
And after all, extenuate his sin.
Well, I will not go, I am resolved for that.
Go carry it again, yet stay: yet do too,
I will defer it till some other time.

Enter Piso. Piso. Sir, signior Platano will meet you there with the bo^d.


Tho. That Is true: by Jesus I had clean forgot it.
I must go, what is a clock?

Pis. Past ten sir.


Tho. 'Hart, then will Prospero presently be here too,
With one or other of his loose consorts.
I am a Jew, if I know what to say,
What course to take, or which way to resolve.
My brain (me thinks) is like an hower-glasse,
And my imaginations like the sands,
Run dribling forth to fill the mouth of time,
Still chaung'd with turning in the ventricle.
What were I best to do? it shall be so.
Nay I dare build upon his secrecy? Piso.

Piso. Sir.


Tho. Yet now I have bethought me to, I will not. Is Cob within?


Pis. I think he be sir.


Tho. But he will prate too, there is no talk of him.
No, there were no course upon the earth to this,
If I durst trust him; tut I were secure,
But there is the question now, if he should prove,
Rimarum plenus, then, s'blood I were Rook^.
The state that he has stood in till this present*
Does promise no such change* what should I fear then?
Well, come what will, i will tempt my fortune once.
Piso, thou may deceive me, but I think thou love me Piso.

Piso. Sir, if a servants zeal and humble duty may be termed love, you are
possessed of it.


Tho. I have a matter to impart to thee, but thou must be secret, Piso.


Pis. Sir for that --


Tho. Nay hear me man; think I esteem thee well,
To let thee in thus to my private thoughts;
Piso, it is a thing, sits nearer to my crest,
Then thou art ware of: if thou should reveal it --

Pis. Reveal it sir?


Tho. Nay, I do not think thou would, but if thou should:


Pis. Sir, then I were a villain: Disclaim in me for ever if I do.


Tho. He will not swear: he has some meaning su^e,
Else (being urged so much) how should he choose,
But lend an oath to all this protestation?
He is no puritan, that I am certain of.
What should I think of it? urge him again,
And in some other form: I will do so.
Well Piso, thou have sworn not to disclose; I you did swear*

Pis. Not yet sir, but I will, so please you.


Tho. Nay I dare take thy word.
But if thou will swear; do as you think good,
I am resolved without such circumstance.

Pis. By my souls safety sir I here protest,
My tongue shall never take knowledge of a word
Delivered me in compass of your trust.

Tho. Enough, enough, these ceremonies need not,
I know thy faith to be as firm as brass.
Piso come hither: nay we must be close
In managing these actions: So it is,
(Now he has sworn I dare the safelier speak;)
I have of late by diverse observations --
But, whether his oath be lawful yea, or no, ha^
I will ask counsel ere I do proceed:
Piso, it will be now too long to stay,
We Will spy some fitter time soon, or to morrow.

Pis. At your pleasure sir.


Tho. I pray you search the books against I return For the receipts twixt me
and Platan^.


Pis. I will sir.


Tho. And hear you: if my brother Prospero Chance to bring hither any
gentlemen Ere I come back: let one straight bring me word.


Pis. Very well sir.


Tho. Forget it not, nor be not you out of the way.


Pis. I will not sir.


Tho. Or whether he come or no, if any other, Stranger or else? fail not to
send me word.


Pis. Yes sir.


Tho. Have care I pray you and remember it.


Pis. I warrant you sir.


Tho. But Piso, this is not the secret I told thee of.


Pis. No sir, I suppose so.


Tho. Nay believe me it is not.


Pis. I do believe you sir.


Tho. By heaven it is not, that is enough. Marry, I would not thou should
utter it to any creature living. Yet I care not.

Well, I must hence: Piso conceive thus much,
No ordinary person could have drawn
So deep a secret from me; I mean not this,
But that I have to tell thee: this is nothing, this.
Piso, remember, silence, buried here:
No greater hell then to be slave to fear.
Exit Tho.
Piso. Piso, remember, silence, buried here:
Whence should this flow of passion (trow) take head? ha?
Faith i will dream no longer of this running humor.
For fear I sink, the violence of the stream
Already has transported me so far,
That I can feel no ground at all: but soft,
Enter Cob. Oh it is our water bearer: somewhat has crossed him now.

Cob. Fasting days: what tell you me of your fasting days* would they were
all on a light fire for me: they say the world shall be consumed with fire and
brimstone in the latter day: but I would we had these ember weeks, and these
villainous fridaies burnt in the mean time, and then --


Pis. Why ^ow now C^b, what moves thee to this choler? ha?


Cob. Collar fir^ swounds I scorn^ your collar, I sir am no colliers horse sir,
never ride me with your collar, and you do, i will show you a iades trick.


Pis. Oh you will slip your head out of the collar: why Cob you mistake me.


Cob. Nay I have my rewme, and I be angry as well as another, sir.


Pis. Thy rewme; thy humor man, thou mistakest.


Cob. Humor? macke, I think it be so indeed: what is this humor? it is some
rare thing I warrant.


Piso. Marry i will tell thee what it is (as it is generally received in these
days) it is a monster bred in a man by self love, and affectation, and fed by
folly.


Cob. How? must be (...)


Pis. Oh I* humor is nothing if it ^e not ^ed, why, did thou (...) hear of
that? it is a common phrase, Feed my (...).


Cob. I Will none on it: humor, auaunt, I know you not, be gone. Let who will make
hungry meals for you, it shall not be I: Feed you quoth (...) blood I have
much ado to feed my self, especially on these (...) days ^oo, and't had been
any other day but a fasting day* (...) on them all for me: by this light one
might have done God good service and have drowned them (...) in the flood two
or three hundred thousand year^^ ago, oh I do stomach them hugely: I have a
mawe now, and't were for (...) Be^isses horse.


Pis. Nay, but I pray thee Cob, what makes thee so out of love with fasting
days?


Cob. Marry that, that will make any man out of love with them, I think:
their bad conditions and you will needs know: First, they are of a Flemmish
breed I am sure on it, for they rau^e up more butter then all the days of the
week beside: next, they stink of fish miserably: Thirdly, they will keep a man
devoutly hungry all day, and at night send him supperlesse to bed.


Pis. Indeed these are faults Cob.


Cob. Nay and this were all, 'twere something, but they are the only known
enemies to my generation. A fasting day no sooner comes, but my lineage goes to
rack, poor Cobbes they smoke for it, they melt in passion, and your maids
too know this, and yet would have me turn Hannibal, and eat my own fish and
blood: Pul^so* a red Herri^^
my princely couze, fear nothing; I have not the heart to devour you, and I
might be made as rich as Golias: oh that I had room for my tears, I could
weep salt water enough now to preserve the lives of ten thousand of my kin: but
I may curse none but these filthy Almanacks; for and't were not for them, these
days of persecution would never be known. I Will be hanged and some Fishmongers
son do not make on'them, and puts in more fasting days then he should do,
because he would utter his fathers dried stockfish.


Pis. S'oule peace, thou wilt be beaten like a stockfish else: here is Signior
Math^^. Now must I look out for a messenger to my Master.


Exeunt Cob and Piso. Enter Matheo, Prosper^, Lo. junior, Bobadilla, Stephan^,
Musco. SCENA SECVNDA.
Pros. Beshrew me, but it was an absolute good jest, and exceedingly well
carried.


Lo. iu. I and our ignorance maintained it as well, did it not?


Pros. Yes faith, but was it possible thou should not know him?


Lo. iu. Fore God not I, and I might have been ioind patten with one of the
nine worthies for knowing him. S'blood man, he had so writhe^ himself into the
habit of one of your poor Dispar^i^'s here, your decayed, ruinous, worme-eaten
gentlem^n of the round: such as have vowed to sit on the skirts of the city,
let your Provost and his half dozen of halberders do what they can; and have
translated begging out of the old hackney pace, to a fine easy amble, and made
it run as smooth of the tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling, into the likeness of
one of these lean Pirgo's, had he molded himself so perfectly, observing
every trick of their action, as varying the accent: swearing with an
Emphasis. Indeed all with so special and exquisite a grace, that (had thou
seen him) thou would have sworn he might have been the Tamberlaine, or the
Agamemnon on the rout.


Pros. Why Musco: who would have thought thou had been such a gallant?

Lo. i^. I cannot tell, but (unless a man had iuggled begging all his life time,
and been a weauer of phrases from his infancy, for the apparrelling of it) I
think the world cannot produce his Rival.


Pros. Where got'st thou this coat I marl'e.

Mus. Faith sir, I had it of one of the devils near kinsmen, a Broker.

Pros. That cannot be, if the proverb hold, a crafty knave needs no broker.

Mus. True sir, but I need a broker, Ergo no crafty knave.

Pros. Well pu^ off, well put off.

Lo. i^. Tut, he h^'s more of these shifts.

Mus. And yet where I have one, the broker has ten sir.

Enter Piso. Piso. Francisco: Martino: never a one to be found now, what a
spite's this?

Pros. How now Piso? is my brother within?

Pis. No sir, my master went forth e'ene now: but Signio^ Gi^l^ano is within.
Cob, what Cob: is he gone too?

Pros. Whither went thy master? Pis^ can thou tell?

Piso. I know not, to Doctor Cle^^n^s, I think sir. Cob.
Exit Pis^.
Lo. iu. Doctor Clement, what is he? I have heard much speech of him.

Pros. Why, do thou not know him? he is the Go^^alioner^ of the state here,
an ex^ellent rare ciuilian, and a great scholar, but the only mad merry old
fellow in Europe: I showed him you the other day.


Lo. iu. Oh I remember him now; Good faith, and he has a very strange presence
me thinks, it shows as if he stood out of the rank from other men. I have
heard many of his jests in Padua: they say he will commit a man for taking the
wall of his horse.


Pros. I or wearing his cloak of one shoulder, or any thing indeed, if it
come in the way of his humor.

Pis. Gasper, Martin^, Cob: S'hart, where should they be trow?

Enter Piso. Bob. Signior Thorello's man, I pray thee vouchsafe us the lighting
of this match.

Pis. A pox on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe? Francisco, Cob.
Exit.
Bob. Body of me: here is the remainder of seven pound, since yesterday was
seven night. It Is your right Trinidad^: did you never take any, signior?


Step. No truly sir? but i will learn to take it now, since you commend it so.

Bob. Signior believe me, (upon my relation) for what I tell you, the world
shall not improve. I have been in the Indies (where this herb grows) where
neither my self, nor a dozen Gentlemen more (of my knowledge) have received
the taste of any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and
twenty weeks, but Tobacco only. Therefore it cannot be but it is most divine.
Further, take it in the nature, in the true kind so, it makes an Antidote,
that (had you taken the most de^dly poisonous simple in all Florence, it should
expel it, and clarify you, with as much ease, as I speak. And for your green
wound, your Bals^^um, and your -- are all mere gull^ries, and trash to it,
especially your Trinidado: your (...) is good too: I could say what I know of
the virtue of it, for the exposing of rewmes, raw humors, crudities,
obstructions, with a thousand of this kind; but I profess my self no
quacke-saluer: only thus much: by H^rcul^s I do hold it, and will affirm it
(before any Prince in Europe) to be the most sovereign, and precious herb,
that ever the earth tendered to the use of man.


Lo. iu. Oh this speech would have done rare in a potheca^ies mouth.

Pis. I* close by Saint A^thonies: Doctor Clements.

Enter Piso and Cob. Cob. Oh, Oh.

Bob. Where Is the match I gave thee?

Pis. S'blood would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were at Sancto Domingo.
Exit.
Cob. By gods dey^es: I marle what pleasure of felicity they have in taking
this rogish Tobacco: it is good for nothing but to choke a man, and fill him
full of smoke, and imbers: there were four died out of one house last week
with taking of it, and two more the bell went for yester-night, one of them
(they say) will never escape it, he voyded a bushel of ^oote yester-day, upward
and downward. By the stocks; and there were no wiser men then I, I Would have it
present death, man or woman, that should but deal with a Tobacco pipe; why, it
will sti^le them all in the'nd as many as use it; it is little better then rats
bane.


Enter Piso. All. Oh good signior; hold, hold.

Bob. You base cullion, you.

Pis. Sir, here is your match; come, thou must needs be talking too.

Cob. Nay he will not meddle with his match I warrant you: well it shall be a
dear beating, and I live.

Bob. Do you prate?

Lo. iu. Nay good signior, will you regard the humor of a fool? away knave.

Pros. Piso get him away.
Exit Piso, and Cob.
Bob. A horson filthy slave, a turd, an excrement. Body of Caesar, but that I
scorn to let forth so mean a spirit, i would have stabbed him to the earth.


Pros. Mary God forbid sir.

Bob. By this fair heaven I would have done it.

Step. Oh he swears admirably: (by this fair heaven:) Body of Caesar: I shall
never do it, sure (upon my salvation) no I have not the right grace.


Mat. Signior will you any? By this air the most divine Tobacco as ever I
drunk.

Lo. iu. I thank you sir.

Step. Oh this Gentleman does it rarely too, but nothing like the other. By
this air, as I am a Gentleman: by Phoebus.


Exit Bob. and Mat. Mus. Master glaunce, glaunce: Signior Prospero.

Step. As I have a soul to be saved, I do protest;

Pros. That you are a fool.

Lo. iu. Cousin will you any Tobacco?

Step. I sir: upon my salvation.

Lo. iu. How now cousin?

Step. I protest, as I am a Gentleman, but no soldier indeed.

Pros. No signior, as I remember you served on a great horse, last general
muster.

Step. I sir that is true: cousin may I swear as I am a soldier, by that?

Lo. iu. Oh yes, that you may.

Step. Then as I am a Gentleman, and a soldier, it is divine Tobacco.

Pros. But soft, where is signior Matheo? gone?

Mus. No sir, they went in here.

Pros. Oh let us follow them: signior Matheo is gone to salute his mistress,
sir now thou shall hear some of his verses, for he never comes hither
without some shreds of poetry: Come signior Stephano, Musco.


Step. Musco? where? is this Musco?

Lo. iu. I, but peace cousin, no words of it at any hand.

Step. Not I by this fair heaven, as I have a soul to be saved, by Phoebus.

Pros. Oh rare! your cousins discourse is simply suited, all in oaths.

Lo. iu. I, he lacks nothing but a little light stuff, to draw them out
withal, and he were rarely fitted to the time.


Exeunt. ACTVS TERTIVS, SCENA TERTIA.
E^ter Thorell^ with Cob. Tho. Ha, how many are there, say thou?

Cob. Marry sir, your brother, Signior Prosp^r^.

Tho. Tut, beside him: what strangers are there man?

Cob. Strangers? let me see, one, two; mass I know not well there is so many.

Tho. How? so many?

Cob. I, there is some five or six of them at the most.

Tho. A swarm, a swarm,
Spite of the Devil, how they sting my heart!
How long have thou been coming hither Cob?

Cob. But a little while sir.

Tho. Did thou come running?

Cob. No sir.

Tho. Tut, then I am familiar with thy haste.
Ban^ to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
I that before was rankt in such content,
My mind attired in smoothe silken peace,
Being free master of mine own free thoughts,
And now become a slave? what, never sigh,
Be of good cheer m^n: for thou art a cuckold,
It Is done, it is done: nay when such flowing store,
Plenty it self falls in my wives lap,
The Cor^u-copi^ will be mine I know. But Cob,
What entertainment had they? I am sure
My sister and my wife would bid them welcome, ha?

Cob. Like enough: yet I heard not a word of welcome.

Tho. No, their lips were sealed with kisses, and the voice
Drowned in a flood of joy at their arrival,
Had lost her motion, state and faculty.
Cob, which of them was it that first kissed my wife?
(My sister I should say) my wife, alas,
I fear not her: ha? who was it say thou?

Cob. By my troth sir, will you have the truth of it?

Tho. Oh I good Cob: I pray thee.

Cob. God's my judge, I saw no body to be kissed, unless they would have kissed
the post, in the middle of the warehouse; for there I left them all, at their
Tobacco with a pox.


Tho. How? were they not gone in then e're thou came?

Cob. Oh no sir.

Tho. Spite of the Devil, what do I stay here then? Cob, follow me.
Exit. Tho.
Cob. Nay, soft and fair, I have eggs on the spit; I cannot go yet sir: now
am I for some diverse reasons hammering, hammering revenge: oh for three or
four gallons of vinegar, to sharpen my wits: Revenge, vinegar revenge, russet
revenge; nay, and he had not line in my house, it would never have grieved me;
but being my guest, one that i will be sworn, my wife has lent him her smock
off her back, while his own shirt ha been at washing: pawnd her neckerchers
for clean bands for him: sold almost all my platters to buy him Tobacco; and
yet to see an ingratitude wretch: strike his host; well I hope to raise up an
host of furies for it: here comes M. Doctor.


Enter Doctor Clement, Lorenzo sen* Peto. Clem. What Is Signior Thorello gone?

Pet. I sir.

Clem. Heart of me, what made him l^aue us so abruptly How now sir; what make
you here? what would you have, ha?

Cob. And't please your worship, I am a poor neighbor of your worships.

Clem. A neighbor of mine, knave?

Cob. I sir, at the sign of the water-tankerd, hard by the green lattice: I
have p^ide scot and lott^ there any time this eighteen years.


Cl^m. What, at the green lattice?

Cob. No sir: to the parish: mary I have seldom escaped scot* free at the
lattice.

Clem. So: but what business has my neighbor?

Cob. And't like your worship, I am come to crave the peace of your worship.

Clem. Of me, knave? peace of me, knave? did I e're hurt thee? did I ever
threaten thee? or wrong thee? ha?

Cob. No god's my comfort, I mean your worships warrant, for one that has
wronged me sir: his arms are at too much liberty, I would feign have them
bound to a treaty of peace, and I could by any means compass it.


Loren. Why, do thou go in danger of thy life for him?

Cob. No sir; but I go in danger of my death every hour^ by his means; and I
die within a twelue-moneth and a day, I may swear, by the laws of the land,
that he killed me.


Clem. How? how knave? swear he killed thee? what pretext? what color have
thou for that?

Cob. Mary sir: both black and blew, color enough, I warrant you I have it
here to show your worship.

Clem. What is he, that gave you this sir?

Cob. A Gentleman in the city sir.

Clem. A Gentleman? what call you him?

Cob. Signior Bobadilla.

Clem. Good: But wherefore did he beat you sir? how began the quarrel twixt
you? ha: speak truly knave, I advise you.


Cob. Marry sir, because I spoke against their vagrant Tobacco, as I came by
them: for nothing else.

Clem. Ha, you speak against Tobacco? Peto, his name.

Pet. What Is your name (...)?

Cob. Oliver C^b, sir set Oli^er Cob, sir.

Clem. Tell Oli^er Cob he shall go to the iayle.

Pet. (...) Cob, master Doctor says you shall go to the iayle.

Cob. Oh I beseech your worship for gods love, dear master Doctor.

Clem. Nay gods precious: and such drunken knaves as you are come to dispute of
Tobacco once; I have done: away with him.


Cob. Oh good master Doctor, sweet Gentleman.

Lore. Sweet Oliver, would I could do thee any good; master Doctor let me
entreat sir.

Clem. What? a tankard-bearer, a threadbare rascal, a beggar, a slave that
never drunk out of better the^ pispot mettle in his life, and he to deprave,
and abuse the virtue of an herb, so generally receyu'd in the courts of
princes, the chambers of nobles, the bowers of sweet Ladies, the cabbins of
soldiers: Peto away with him, by gods passion, I say, go too.


Cob. Dear master Doctor.

Loren. Alas poor Oliver.

Clem. Peto: I: and make him a warrant, he shall not go, I but fear the knave.

Cob. O divine Doctor, thanks noble Doctor, most dainty Doctor, delicious
Doctor.

Exeunt Peto with Cob. Clem. Signior Lorenzo: Gods pity man, Be merry, be
merry, leave these dumpes.

Loren. Troth would I could sir: but enforced mirth (In my weak judgment)
h'as no happy birth.
The mind, being once a prisoner unto cares,
The more it dreams on joy, the worse it fares.
A smyling look is to a heavy soul,
As a guilt bias, to a leaden bowl,
Which (in it self) appears most vile, being spent.
To no true use; but only for ostent.

Clem. Nay but good Signior: hear me a word, hear me a word, your cares are
nothing; they are like my cap, soon put on, and as soon put off. What? your
son is old enough, to govern himself; let him run his course, it is the
only way to make him a stayed man: if he were an unthrift, a ruffian, a
drunkard or a licentious liver, then you had reason: you had reason to take
care: but being none of these, Gods passion, and I had twice so many cares, as
you have, I Would drown them all in a cup of sack: come, come, I muse your
parcel of a soldier returns not all this while.


Ex^^^t. SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Gi^lian^, with Bia^cha. Giul. Well sister, I tell you true: and you will
find it so in the end.

Bia. Alas brother, what would you have me to do? I cannot help it; you
see, my brother Pr^spero he brings them in here, they are his friends.


Giu. His friends? his friends? s'blood they do nothing but haunt him up and
down like a sort of unlucky Sprites, and tempt him to all manner of villainy,
that can be thought of; well, by this light, a little thing would make me play
the devil with some of them; and't were not more for your husbands sake, then
any thing else, I Would make the house too hot for them; they should say and
swear, Hell were broken loose, e're they went: But by gods bread, it is no
bodies fault but yours: for and you had done as you might have done, they
should have been damned e're they should have come in, e're a one of them.


Bia. God's my life; did you ever hear the like? what a strange man is this?
could I keep out all them think you? I should put my self against half a
dozen men? should I? Good faith you would mad the patient'st body in the world, to
hear you talk so, without any sense or reason.


Enter Matheo with Hesperida, ^^badilla, Stephan^, L^re^zo i^, Pr^sp^r^, M^sco.
Hesp. Servant (in troth) you are too prodigal of your wit^ treasure; thus to
power it forth upon so mean a subject, as my worth?


Mat. You say well, you say well.

Gi^. Hoyday, hear is stuff.

L^. i^. Oh now stand close: pray God she can get him to read it.

Pr^s. Tut, fear not: I warrant thee, he will do it of himself with much
impudency.

H^s. Servant, what is that same I pray you?

M^t. Mary an El^gi^, an Elegi^, an oddetoy.

Gui. I to mock an Ape with all, Oh I^su.

Bi^. Sister, I pray you lets hear it.

Mat. Mistress I Will re^de it if you please.

Hes. I pray you do servant.

G^i. Oh hears no foppery. Sblood it freates me to the galle to think on it.
Exit.
Pros. Oh I, it is his condition* peace: we are farely ridd^ of him.

Mat. Faith I did it in an h^mor: I know not how it is, b^t please you come
near signior: this gentleman has i^dgement, he knows how to cens^re of a* --
I pray you ^ir* you can judge.


Step. Not I sir: as I have a soul to b^ saved, as I (...).

Lo. iu. Nay its well; so long as he does ^ot forsw^^^^ himself.

Bob, Signior you abuse the excell^ncie of your mistress^, and her fair
sister. Fie while you live ^uoyd this prolixity.

Mat. I shall sir: well, Incip^r^ dulce.

L^. iu. How, Inciper^ dulce? a sweet thing to be a Fool indeed.

Pr^s. What, do you take Incipe^^ in that sense?

Lo. i^. You do not you? Sblood this was your villainy to gull him with a mott^.

Pros. Oh the Benchers phrase: Pau^a ver^^, (...).

Mat. Rare creature let me speak without offense,
Would God ^y rude woo^ds ^ad the influence:
To rule thy thoughts, as (...) f^yr^ looks do mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner, who is thine.

L^. iu. S'hart, this is in Hero and Leander?

Pros. Oh I: peace, we shall have more of this.

Mat. Be not unkind and fair mish^^en st^ffe*
Is of beh^^^^ur boisterous and rough:
How like you that signior, (...) he shakes his head like a bo^tle, to feel
and there be any brain in it.


Mat. But observe the Catastroph^ now,
And I in duty will exceed all other.
As you in beauty do excel lo^^s ^^ther.

Lo iu. W^ll (...) have him free of the brok^^s, for he vtters nothing but
stolen remnant^.

Pros. Nay good Critique forbear.

Lo. iu. A pox on him, hang him ^ilching rogue, s^eale from the dead? its
worse then sacrilege.

Pros. Sister vvh^t have you hear? (...) I pray you lets see.

Bia. Do you let them go so lightly sister.

Hes. ^es ^ayth when they come lightly.

Bia. I but if your servant should hear you, he would take it heauely.

Hes. No matter he is able to bear.

Bia. So are Asses.

H^s. so is he.

Pros. Signior Matheo, who made these verses? they are excellent good.

Mat. Oh God sir, its your pleasure to say so sir. Faith I mad^ them (...) this
morning.

Pros. How ex^empo^e?

Mat. I would I might be damnd else: ask signior Bo^adill^. He saw me write
them, (...) the: (pox^ on it) the Miter yonder.


Mus. Well, and the Pope knew he cursed the Miter it were enough to have him
excommunicated ^ll the Ta^erns in the town.


Step. Cosen how do you like this gen^lem^ns vers^^.

Lo. iu. Oh admirable, the best that (...) I heard.

Step. By this fayr^ ^eauens, they are admirable, The best that ever I heard.

Enter Giuliano. Giu. I am vexed I can hold never a bone o^ me s^ill, Sblood I
think they mean to build a Tabernacle ^eare, well?

Pros. Sister you have a simple servant hear, that crowns your beauty with
such Encomions and Devises, you may see what it is to be the mistress of a
vv^t, that can make your perfections so transeparent, that every bleare eye may
look thorough them, and see him drowned over head and ears, in the deep
well of desire. Sister Biancha I marvel you get you not a servant that can
^ime and do ^rickes too.


Giu. Oh monster? ^mpudence it self; tricks?

Bi^. Tricks, brother? what tricks?

Hes. Nay, speak I pray you, what trick^s?

Bia. I, never spare any body hear: but say, what tricks?

Hes. Passion of my heart? do tricks?

Pros. Sblood hears a trick^ vied, and reuied: why you monkies you? what a
cat^er waling do you keep? has he not given you rymes, and verses, and tricks.


Giu. Oh see the Devil?

Pros. N^y, you lamp of virginity, that take it in snuff so: come and
cherish this tame poetical ^ury in your servant, you will be begd else shortly for
a concealment: go to, reward his muse, you cannot give him less then a
shilling in conscience* for the book he had it out of cost him a te^ton at the
least, how now gallants, L^renzo, s^^gnior Bobadill^? what all sons of
scilence? no spirit.


Giu. Come you might practice your Ruff^an tricks somewhere else, and not
hear I wisse: this is no Tavern, nor no place for such exploites.


Pros. Shart how now.

Giu. Nay boy, never look askaunce at me for the matter; i will tell you o^ it by
Gods bread? I, and you and your compan^ons mend your selves when I have done.


Pros. My companions.

Gui. I your companions ^ir, so I say? Sblood I am not affrayed of you nor them
neither, you must have your Poets, and your caueleeres, and your fools follow
you up and down the city, and hear they must come to dominee^e and swagger?
sirrah, you Ballad singer, and Sl^ps your fellow there, get you out; get you
out: or (by the will of God) I Will cut of your ears, go to.


Pros. Sblood stay, lets see what he dare do: cut of his ears you are an ass,
touch any man hear, and by the Lord i will run my rapier to the hilts in thee.


Gui. Yea, They all draw, enter Piso and some more of the house to part them,
the w^^en make a great cry.
that would I feign see, boy.

Bia. Oh (...) Piso, Math^^ murder.

Hes. Help, help, Piso.

Lo. iu. Gentlemen, Prospero, forbear I pray you.

B^b. Well sirrah, you Hollofernus: by my hand I will pinck thy flesh full of
holes with my rapier for this, I will by this good heaven: nay let him come,
let him come, gentlemen by the body of S. George i will not kill him. The ^ffer t^
figh^ again and are parted.



Piso. Hold, hold forbear:

Gui. You whoreson bragging coystryll.

Enter Thorello. Tho. Why, how now? what is the matter? what stir is hear,
Whence springs this quarrel, P^^o where is he?
Put up your weapons, and put of this rage.
My wife and sister they are cause of this,
What, Pizo? where is this kna^e.

Pizo. Hear sir.

Pros. Come, lets go: this is one of my brothers ancient humors this?

Steph. I am glad no body was hurt by this ancient humor.

Exit Prospero, L^renzoi^. Musco, St^ph^^^, B^^adillo, Matheo, Tho. Why how now
brother, who enforst this braule.

Gui. A sort of lewd rakehelles, that care neither for God nor the Devil, And
they must come hear to read Ballads and Rogery' and Trash, I Will mar the knot
of them ere I sleep perhaps: especially signior Pit^agorus, he that's al manner
of shapes: and Songs and sonne^s, his fellow there.


Hes. Brother indeed you are to violent,
To sudden in your courses, and you know
My brother Prosperus temper will not bear
Any reproof, chiefly in such a presence,
Where every slight disgrace he should receive,
Would wound him in opinion and respect.

Gu. Respect? what talk you of respect among such
As had neither spark of manhood nor good manners,
By God I am ashamed to hear you^ respect?
Exit.
Hes. Yes there was one a ciuil^ gentleman,
And very worthily demeand himself.

Tho. Oh that was some love of yours, sister.

H^s. A love of mine? infayth I would he were No others love but mine.

Bia. Indeed he seemd to be a gentleman of an exceeding fair disposition, and
of very excellent good (...).

Exit He^p^^^d^, Bi^^cha. Tho. Her love, by Jesus: my wises minion,
Fair disposition? excellent good parts?
S'hart, these phr^ses are intolerable,
Good parts? how should she know his parts? well* well*
It is too plain, ^oo clear: Piz^* come hither.
What are they gone?

Pi. I sir they went in.

Tho. Are any of the gallants within?

Pi. No ^ir they are all gone.

Tho. Art thou sure o^ it?

Pi. I sir I can assure you.

Tho. Pizo what gentleman was that they praised so?

Pizo. One they call him signior Lorenzo, a fair young gentleman sir.

Tho. I, I thought so: my mind gave me as much:
Sblood i will be hanged if they h^^e not hid him in the house,
Some where, i will go s^arch, Piz^ go with me,
Be true to me and thou shall find me bo^ntifull.

Exe^^t. SCENA QVINTA.
Enter CoB, to him Tib. Cob. What Tib, Tib, I say.

Tib. How now, wh^t cuckold is that knock^^ so hard? Oh husband is it you, what is
the n^wes?

C^b. Nay you have stonnd me I faith? you hue given me a knock on the
forehead, will stick by me: cuckold? Swoundes cuckolde?


Tib. Away you fool did I know it was you that knocked, Come, come, you may
call me (...) bad when you list.

Cob. May I? swoundes Tib you are a whore:

Tib. S'hart you lie in your throat.

Cob. How the lie? and in my throat too? do you long to be stabd, ha?

Tib. Why you are no soldier?

C^b. Mass that's true, when was Bobadilla hear? that Rog^e, th^^ (...),
that fencing* B^rgullian? i will tickle him I faith.

Ti^. Why what is the matter?

Cob. Oh he has basted me rarely, sumptiously: but I have it hear will s^use
him, oh the doctor, the honestest old Trojan in all Italy, I do honor the very
^lea of his dog: a plague on him he (...) me once in a villainous filthy fear:
marry it vanished away (...) smook^ of To^^cco: but I was smookt soundly first,
I thank the Devil, and his good Angel my guest: well wife: or Tib (which
you will) get you in, and lock the door I charge you, let no body into you:
not Bobbadilla himself; nor the di^ell in his likeness; you are a woman; you
have flesh and blood enough in you; therefore be not tempted; keep the door
shut upon all cummers.


Tib. I vv^rrant you there shall no body enter hear without my consent.

C^^. Nor with your consent sweet Tib and so I leave you.

Tib. Its more then you know, whether you leave me so.

Cob. How?

Tib. Why sweet.

Cob. Tut (...) sour, thou art a flower,
Keep close thy door, I ask no more.

Exeunt. SCENA SEXTA.
Enter Lorenzoiu. Pr^spero, Stephano, Musco. Lo^. iu. Well Musco perform this
business happily,
And thou make a conquest of my love forever,

Pros. I faith now let thy spirits put on their best habit,
B^t at any hand remember thy message to my brother.
For there is no other means to start him?

M^s. I warrant you sir, ^^are nothing I have a nimble soul that has wakt all
my imaginatiue forces by this time, and put then* in true motion: what you
have poss^st me withal? ^le discharge it amply sir. Make no question.

Exit M^sc^.
Pros. That's well said Musco: faith sirrah how do thou, aproue my wit in
this devise?

L^. iu. Troth well, howsoever? but excellent if it take.

Pros. Take man: why it cannot choose* but take* if the circumstances miscarry
not, but tell me zealo^sly: do tho^ affect my sister Hesperida as thou
pretendest?


Lo. iu. Prospero by Jesus.

Pros. Come do not pro^est I believe thee: I faith she is ^ virgin of good
^rnament, and much modesty, un esse I conc^iud very w^rthely o^ her, thou
should not have her.


Lo. iu. Nay I think it a question whether I shall ha^^ her for all that.

Pros. Sblood thou shall have her, by this light thou shall?

Lo. iu. Nay do not swear.

Pros. By S. Mark thou shall have her: i will go fetch her presently, point but
where to meet, and by this hand i will bring her?


Lo. iu* Hold, hold, what all policy dead? no prevention of mischiefs
stirring.

Pros. Why, by what shall I swear by? thou shall have her by my soul.

Lo. iu. I pray the have patience I am satisfied: Prosp^ro omit no off^red
occasion, that may make my desires complete I beseech thee.


Pros. I warrant thee.

Exeunt. ACTVS QVAR^VS,
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Lorenzo senior, Peto, ^^^ting M^sco. Peto. Was your man a soldier sir.

Lo. I a knave I took him up begging upon the way,
This morning as I was cumming to the city,
Oh? h^are he is; come on, you make fair speed:
Why? whereon Gods name have you been so long?

Mus. Mary (Gods my co^^ort) where I thought I should have had little comfort
of your worships service:

Lo. How so?

Mus. Oh God sir? your cumming to the city, and your entertaynement of men,
and your sending me to watch; indeed, all the circumstances are as open to
^our son as to your self.


Lo. How should that be? unless that villain M^s^o
Have told him of the letter, and discovered
All that I strictly chargd him to conceal? it is so.

Mus. I faith you have hit it: it is so indeed.

Lo. But how should he know thee to be my man.

Mus. Nay, ^ir, I cannot tell; unless it were by the black art? is not your
son a scholar sir?

Lo. Yes; but I hope his soul is not allied
To such a devilish practice: if it were,
I had just cause to weep my part in him,
And curse the time of his creation.
But where did thou find them Po^t^nsio?

Mus. N^y sir, rather you should ask where the found me? for i will be sworn I
was going along in the street, thinking nothing, when (of a suddayne) one
calls, Sig^ior Lorenzo^ man: another, he cries soldier: and thus half a
dosen of them, till they had go* me within doors, where I no sooner came* but
out flies their rapiers and all bent against my breast, they swore some two or
three hundredth oaths, and all to tell me I was but a dead man, if I did not
confess where you were, and how I was employed, and about what, which when
they could not get out of me: (as Gods my judge, they should have killed me
first) they locked me up into a room in the top of a house, where by great
miracle (having a light heart) I slidde down by a bottom of packthread into
the street, and so escaped: but ma^ster, thus much I can assure you, for I heard
it while I (...) locked up: there were a great many merchants and rich citizens
wives with them at a banquet, and your son Signior Lorenzo* has poynted one
of them to meet anon at one Cobs house, a waterbearers? that dwelles by the
wall: now there you shall be sure to take him: for fail he will not.


L^. Nor will I fail to break this match, I doubt not;
Well: go thou along with master doctors man,
And stay there for me? at one C^bs house say thou.
Exit.
Mus. I sir, there you shall have him: when can you tell? much wench, or much
son: sblood when he has stayed there three or four hours, traveling with
the expectation of somewhat; and at the length be delivered of nothing: oh the
sport that I should the^ take to look on him if I durst but now I mean to
appear no more before him in this shape: I have another trick to act yet? oh
that I were so happy, as to light upon an ounce now of this doctors clarke: God
save you (...),


Peto. I thank you good sir.

Mus. I have made you stay somewhat long sir.

Peto. Not a w^it sir, I pray you what sir do you mean: you have been lately
in the wars sir it seems.

Mus. I Marry have I sir.

Peto. Troth sir, I would be glad to bestow a pot^le of wine of you if it
please you to accept it.

Mus. Oh Lord sir.

Peto. But to hear the manner of you seruises, and your devises in the wars,
they say they be very strange, and not like those a man reads in the Roman
histories.


Mus. Oh God no sir, why at any time when it please you, I shall be ready to
descourse to you what I know: and more to somewhat.


Peto. No better time then now sir, we will go to the Meer^m^ide there we shall
have a cup of neat wine, I pray you sir let me request you.


Mus. I Will follow you sir, he is mine own I faith.
Exeunt. E^ter Babadillo, Lorenzo iu, Matheo, Step^ano. Mat Signi^r did you
ever see the like cloune of him, where we were to day^: signior Prosperos
brother? I think the vvh^le ^arth cannot show his like by Jesus.


L^. We were now speaking of him, signior Bobadill^ tells me he is fallen
foul of you two.

Mat. Oh I sir, he threatened me with the bastinado.

Bo. I but I think I taught you atrick this morning for that.
You shall kill him without a^l question: if you be so minded*

Mat. Indeed it is a most excellent trick.

Bo. Oh you do not give spirit enough to your motion, you are too dull, too
tardie: oh it must be done like lightning, hay?

Mat. Oh rare.

Bob. Tut it is nothing and't be not done in a --

Lo. iu. Signior did you never play with any of our mais^ers here.

Mat. Oh good sir.

B^b. Nay for a more instance of their preposterous humor, there came three or
^oure of them to me, at a ge^tlemans house, where it was my chance to be
resident at that time, to intre^te my presence at their schole^, and withal so
much importund me, that (I protest to you as I am a gentleman) I was ashamd of
their rude demeanor out of all measure: well, I told them that to come to a
public school they should pardon me, it was opposite to my humor but if so
they would attend me at my lodging, I protested to do them what right or
favor I could, as I was a gentleman* etc.


Lo. ^u. So sir, then you tried their skill.

Bob. Alas soon tried: you shall hear sir, ^ithin two or three days after,
they came, and by Jesus go^^ signior believe me, I graced them^exceedingly,
showed them some ^wo or three trick^s of prevention, has got them sinc^
admirable credit, they cannot deny this; and yet now they (...), and why?
because I am excellent, and for no other (...) earth.


Lo. iu. This is strange and vile as (...) I h^ard.

Bob. I will tell you sir upon my first coming to the ci^ie, they assaulted me
some three, four, five, six, of them together as I have walked alone, in diverse
places of the city; as upon ^he exchange, at my lodging* and at my ordinary:
where I have driven them before me the whole length of a street, in the open
view of all our gallan^s, pitying to hurt them believe me; yet all this lenety
will not depresse their spleen: they will be doing with the Pismier, ray^i^g a
hi^l, a man may spurn abroad with his foot at pleasure: by my soul I could
have sla^ne them all, but I delight not in murder: I am loath to ^ea^e any other
but a bastinado for them, and yet I ho^ld it good policy not to go disarmd,
for though I be skillful, ^ may be suppressd with multitudes.


Lo. iu* I by Jesus may you sir and (in my conceit) our whol^ nation should
sustain the loss by it, if it were so.

^ob. Alas no: what is a peculier man, to a nation? not seen.

Lo iu. I but your skill sir.

Bob. Indeed that might be some loss, but who respects it? I will tell you
Signior (in private) I am a gentleman, and live here obscure, and to my self:
but were I known to the Duke (observe me) I would undertake (upon my head and
life) for the p^blique benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire
lives of his subjects ingenerall, but to save the one half: nay there parts
of his y^erely charges, in houlding wars generally against all his enemies?
and how will I do it think you?


Lo* iu. Nay I know not, nor can I conceive.

Bo. Marry thus, I would select 19 more to my self, throughout the land,
gentlemen the^ should be of good spirit; strong and able constitution, I would
choose the^ by an instinct, a trick that I have: and I would teach these 19. the
special tricks, as your P^nt^, ^our Reuerso, your Stoccato, your Imbroccato,
your Pass^do, your Montaunto, till they could all play very near or altogether
as well as my self* this done; say the enemy were forty thousand strong: we
twenty would come into the field the tenth of March, or there abouts; and would
challendge twenty of the enemy? they could not in there honor refuse the
combat: well, we would kill them: challenge twenty more, kill then; twenty
more, kill then; twenty more, kill them too; and thus would we kill every man,
his twenty a day, that's twenty score; twenty score, that's two hundredth; two
hundredth a day, five days a thousand: forty thousand; forty times five, five
times forty, two hundredth days killes them all, by computation, and this will
I venture my life to perform: provided there be no treason practiced upon us.


Lo. iu. Why are you so sure of your hand at all times?

Bob. Tut, never mistrust upon my soul.

Lo. iu. Mass I would not stand in signior G^uliano state, then;
And you meet him, for the wealth of Florence.

Bob. Why signior, by Jesus if he were hear now: I would not draw my w^apon on
him, let this gentleman do his mind but I will bastin^do him (by heaven) and
ever I meet him.


Mat. Faith and i will have a fling (...) him.

Enter Giuliano and goes o^t again. Lo. iu. Look yo^der he goes I think.

Gui. Sblood what luck have I, I cannot meet with these br^gging rascals*

Bo^. It^ not h^: is it?

Lo. iu. Yes faith it is he?

Mat. I Will be hanged then if that were he.

Lo. iu. Before God it was he: you make me swear.

Step. Upon my salvation it was h^^.

Bob. Well had I thought it had been he: he could not have gone so, but I
cannot be induced to believe it was he yet.

Enter Giulliano. Giu. Oh gallant have I found you? draw to your tools, draw,
or by Gods will i will thresh you.

Bob. Signior hear me?

Gui. Draw your weapons then:

Bob. Signior, I n^uer thought it till now: body of S. George, I have a
vvarrant of the peace served on me even now, as I came along by a vvaterbearer,
this gentleman saw it, signior Mat^^^.


Gi^. The peace* Sblood, you will not draw?

Math^o runs away. He b^ates him and disarm^s him. Lo. iu. Hold signior hold,
under thy favor forbear.

Giu. Prate again as you like this you vvhoreson cowardly rascal, you will
control the point you? your consort he is gone? had he stayed he had shard
with you infayth.

Exit Giulliano.
Bob. Well gentlemen bear witness I was bound to the peace, by Jesus.

Lo. iu. Why and though you were sir, the law alowes you to defend your
self; that's but a poor excuse.

Bob. I cannot t^ll; I never sus^^yned the like disgrace (by heaven) sure I
was struck with a Plannet then, for I had no power to touch my vve^pon.

Exit.
Lo. iu. I like enough I have heard of many that have been beaten under a
plannet; go get you to the Surgions, sblood and these be your tricks, your
passados, and your Mountauntos ilenone of them: oh God that this age should
bring forth such creat^res? come cosen.


Step. Mass i will have this cloak.

Lo. ^u. Gods will: its Giullianos.

Step. Nay but it is mine now, another might have tan^ it up as well as I, i will
vv^^^e it so I will.

Lo. iu. How and he see it, heel ^h^llen^e it ass^ur^ your self.

Step. I but he shall not have it* i will s^y I bo^ght it.

Lo. iu. Advise you cosen, ta^e heed he give not you as much.

Exe^^t. Enter Thorello, Pr^spero* Bianch^ Hesperida. Tho. Now trust me
Pr^s^^ro you were much to blame,
T'incense your brother and disturb the peace,
Of my poor^ house, for there be s^ntinelles,
That ^uery minute vvatch to give alarames,
Of civil war, without adiection,
Of your assistance and occasion.

Pros. No harm done brother I vvarrant you: since there is no harm done,
anger costs a man nothing: and a tall man is never his own man til he be
angry, to keep his valor in obscurity: is to keep himself as it were in a
cloke-bag: what is a musition unless he play? what is a tall man unless he
fight? for indeed all this my brother stands upon absolutely, and that made me
fall in with him so resolutely.


Bia. I but what harm might have come of it?

Pros. Might? so might the good warm clothes your husband wears be poysond
for any thing he knows, or the wholesome wine he drunk even now at the
table.


Tho. Now God forbid: O me? now I remember,
My wife drunk to me last; and changd the cup,
And bad me vvare this cursed suit to day,
See, if God suffer murder undiscovered?
I feel me ill; give me some Mithredate,
Some Mithredate and oil; good sister fetch me,
O, I am sick at heart: I burn, I burn;
If you will save my life go fetch it me.

Pr^s. Oh strange humor my very breath has poysond him.

Hes. Good brother be content, what do you mean, The strength of these
extreme conceits will kill you?

Bi^. Be^hrew your heart blood, brother Prospero, For putting such a toy into
his head.

Pros. Is a fit similie, a toy? will he be poysond with a similie*
Broth^^ Thor^ll^, what a strange and vain imagination is this?
For shame be wiser, of my soul there is no such matter.

T^o. Am I not sick? how am I then not poysond? Am I not poysond? how am I
then so sick?

Bia. If you be sick, your own thoughts make you sick.

Pr^s. His iealoucie is the poison he has taken.

Enter Musco like the doctors man. Mus. Signior Thorello my m^^ster doctor
Clement salutes you, and de^ires to speak with you, with all speed possible.


Tho. No time but now? well, i will wait upon his worship, Pizo, Cob, i will seek
them out, and set them sentinell^^ till I return. Pizo, Cob, Pizo.

Exit.
Pros. Musco, this is rare, but how gotst thou this apparel of the doctors man.

Mus. Marry sir. My youth would needs bestow the wine of me to hear some
martial discourse; where I so marsha^d him, that I made him monstrous drunk,
and because too much heat was the cause of his distemper, I stripped him stark
naked as he lay along a sleep, and borrowed his sewt to deliver this
counterfeit message in, leaving a rustie armoure, and an old brown bill to
watch him; till my return: which shall be when I have paund his apparel, and
spent the moni^ perhaps.


Pros. Well thou art a mad knave Musco, his absence will be a good subject
for more mirth: I pray the return to thy young master Lorenzo, and will him
to meet me and Hesperida at the Friery presently: for here tell him the house
is so sturde with jealousy, that there is no room for love to stand upright
in: but i will use such means she shall come thither, and that I think will
meet best with his desires: Hye thee good Musco.


Mus. I go sir.
Exit.
Enter Thorello to him Pizo* Tho. Ho Pizo, Cob, where are these villains troe?
Oh, art thou there? Pizo hark thee here:
Mark what I say to thee, I must go forth;
Be careful of thy promise, keep good watch,
Note every gallant and observe him well,
That enters in my absence to thy mistrisse;
If she would show him rooms, the jest is stale,
Follow them Pizo or else hang on him,
And let him not go after, mark their looks?
Note if she offer but to see his band,
Or any other amorous toy about him,
But praise his leg, or foot, or if she say,
The day is hot, and bid him feel her hand,
How hot it is, oh that's a monstrous thing:
Note me all this, sweet Pizo; mark their sighs,
And if they do but vvisper break them off,
I Will bear thee out in it: vvilt thou do this?
Will thou be true sweet Pizo?

Pi. Most true sir.

Tho. Thanks gentle Pizo: where is Cob? now: Cob?

Exit Thorello Bia. He Is ever calling for Cob, I vvonder how he imployes Cob
so.


Pros. Indeed sister to ask how he imployes Cob, is a necessary question for
you that are his wife, and a thing not very easy for you to be satisfied in:
but this i will assure you Cobs wife is an excellent baud indeed: and oftentimes
your husband hauntes her house, marry to what end I cannot altogether accuse
him, imagine you what you think convenient: but I have known fair hides
have foul hearts ear now, I can tell you.


Bia. Never said you truer then that brother? Pizo fetch your cloak, and go
with me, i will after him presently: I would to Christ I could take there I
faith.


Exeunt Pizo and Biancha. Pros. So let them go: this may make sport anon, now
my fay^e sister Hesperida: ah that you knew how happy a ting it vv^re to be
fair and bewtifull?


Hes. That touches not me brother.


Pros. That's true: that's even the fault of it, for indeed beauty stands a
woman in no stead, unless it procure her touching: but sister whether it touch
you or not, it touches your bewties, and I am sure they will abide the touch,
and they do not a plague of al ceruse say I, and it touches me to inpart,
though not in thee. Well, there is a dear and respected friend of mine sister,
stands very strongly affected toward you, and has vowed to inflame whole
bonefires of zeal in his heart, in honor of your perfections, I have already
engaged my promise to bring you where you shall hear him conferme much more
then I am able to lay down for him: Signior Lorenzo is the man: what say you
sister shall I entreat so much favor of you for my friend, is too direct and
attend you to his meeting? upon my soul he loves you extremely, approve it
sweet Hesperida will you?


Hes. Hayth I had very little confidence in mine own costancie if I durst not
meet a man: but brother Prospero this motion of your savors of an old knight
adventurers servant, me thinks.


Pros. What Is that sister.


Hes. Marry of the squire.


Pros. No matter Hesperida if it did, I would ve such an one for my friend,
but say, will you go?


Hes. Brother I will, and bless my happy stars.


Enter Clement and Thorello. Clem. Why what villainy is this? my man gone on a
false message, and run away when he has done, why what trick is there in
it trow? 1.2.3.4. and 5.


Tho. How: is my wife gone forth, where is she sister?

Hes. She Is gone abroad with Pizo.


Tho. Abroad with Pizo? oh that villain dors me.
He has discovered all unto my wife,
Beast that I was to trust him: vvhither went she?

Hes. I know not sir.


Pros. I Will tell you brother vvhither I suspect she is gone.


Tho. Whither for gods sake?


Pros. To Cobs house I believe: but keep my counsel.


Tho. I will, I will, to Cobs house? does she haunt Cobs,
She Is gone a purpose now to cuckold me,
With that lewd rascal, who to win her favor,
Has told her all.

Clem. But did you mistress see my man bring him a message.


Pros. That we did master doctor.


Clem. And vvhither went the knave?


Pros. To the Tavern I think sir.

C^^m. What did Thorello give him any thing to spend for the message he brought
him? if he did I should commend my man's wit exceedingly if he would make
himself drunk, with the joy of it, farewell Lady, keep good rule you two: I
beseech you now: by Gods marry my man makes me laugh.

Exit.
Pros. What a mad Doctor is this? come sister lets away.
Exeunt.
Enter Matheo and Bobadillo. Mat. I vvonder signior what they will say of my
going away: ha?

Bob. Why, what should they say? but as of a discreet gentleman.
Quick, wary, respectfull of natures,
Fair liniamentes, and that's all.

Mat. Why so, but what can they say of your beating?

Bob* A rude part, a touch with soft wood, a kind of gross battery used,
laid on strongly: borne most patiently, and that's all.


Mat. I but would any man have offered it in Venice?

Bob. T^ut I assure you no: you shall have there your Nobilis, your Gentelezza,
come in bravely upon your reuerse, stand you close, stand you ferme, stand you
fair, save your retricato with his left leg, come to the assaulto with the
right, thrust with brave steel, defy your base wood. But wherefore do I awake
this remembrance? I was bewitched by Jesus: but I will be reuengd.


Mat. Do you hear is it not best to get a warrant and have him arested, and
brought before doctor Clement.

Bob. It were not amiss would we had it.

Enter Musco. Mat. Why here comes his man, lets speak to him.

Bob. Agreed, do you speak.

Mat. God save you sir.

Mus. With all my heart sir?

Mat. Sir there is one Giulliano has abusd this gentleman and me, and we
determine to make our amends by law, now if you would do us the favor to
procure us a warrant for his arest of your master, you shall be well
considered I assure, I faith sir.


Mus. Sir you know my service is my living, such favors (...) these gotten of
my master is his only preferment, and therefore you must consider me, as I
may make benefit of my place.


Mat. How is that?

Mus. Faith sir, the thing is extraordinary, and the gentleman may be o^ great
account: ye^ be what he will, if you will lay me down five crowns in my hand,
you shall have it, othe^wise no^.


M^t. H^w shall we do signio^? you have no money.

Bob* Not a cr^s^e by Jesus.

M^t. N^r I (...) God but two pence: left of my tw^ shi^l^ngs in the mo^n^ng
for wine and (...) let us give him some p^^ne.


B^b. P^wn^? we have none to the value of his demand.

Mat. Oh Lo^d, ^an, ^le ^awne this jewel in my ^are, and you may pawn your
silk sto^kins, and pull up your boots, they will near be mi^t.


Bob. Well and there be no remedy: i will step aside and put them of.

Man. Do you hear sir, we have no store of money at this time, but you shall
have good pawnes, look you sir, this Jewel, and this gentleman's silk
stockins, because we would have it di^patcht ere we went to our chambers.


Mus. I am content sir, I will get you the warrant presently what is his name say
^ou (Giulliano.)

Man. I, I, Giulliano.

Mus. What manner of man is he?

Mat. A tall big man sir, he goes in a cloak most commonly of silk rus^et:
laid about with russet lace.

Mus. Ti^ very good sir.

Mat. Here sir, here is my jewel?

Bob. And hear are stockins.

Mus. Well gentlemen i will procure this vvaarrant presently* and appoint you a
varlet of the city to s^rue it, if you will be upon the Realto anon, the varlet
shall meet you there.


Mat. Very good sir I vvish no better.

Exeunt Bobadilla and Matheo. Mus. This is rar^, now will I go pawn this
cloak of the doctors m^ns at the brokers for a varlets suit, and be the varlet
my self, and get either more pawnes, or more money of Giulliano for my arrest.

Exit.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Lorenzo seni^r. Lo. se. Oh hear it is, I am glad I have found it now,
Ho? who is within hear^?

Enter Tib. Tib. I am within sir, what is your pleasure?

Lo. se. To know who is within besides your self.

Tib. Why sir, you are no constable I hope?

Lo. se. O fear you the constable? then I doubt not*
You have some guests within deserve that fear,
I Will fetch him straight.

Tib. A Gods name sir.

Lo. se. Go to, tell me is not the young Lorenzo here?

Tib. Young Lorenzo, I saw none such sir, of mine honesty.

Lo. se. Go to, your honesty flies too lightly from you: There Is no way but
fetch the constable.

Tib. The constable, the man is mad I think.

Claps t^ the d^^re. Enter Pizo, and Biancha* Pizo. Ho, who keeps house here?

Lo. se. Oh, this is the female copese^mate of my son.
Now shall I meet him straight.

Bia. Knock Pizo pray thee.

Pi. Ho good wife.

Tib. Why what is the matter with you.

Enter Tib. Bia. Why woman, grieves it you to open your door^? Belike you get
something to keep it shut.

Tib. What mean these questions pray (...)

Bia. So strange you make it? is not Thorello my tried husband here.

Lo. se. Her husband?

Tib. I hope he needs not to be tried here.

Bia. No dame: he hoth it not ^or need but pleasure.

Tib. Neither for need nor pleasure is he here.

Lo. se. This is but a devise to balke me with al; Soft, whoes this?

Enter Thorello. Bia. Oh sir, have I fore-stald your honest market?
Found your close walks? you stand amazd now, do you?
I faith (I am glad) I have smokt you yet at las^;
What Is your jewel trow? In: come lets see her;
Fetch forth your huswife, dame; if she be fayrer
In any honest judgment then my self,
I Will be content with it: but she is change,
She feeds you fat; she soothes your appetite,
And you are well: your wife an honest woman,
Is meat twice sod to you sir; A you trecher.

Lo. se. She cannot counterfeit this palpably.

Tho. Out on thee more then strumpets impudency,
Stealst thou thus to thy hauntes? and have I taken,
Thy baud, and thee, and thy companion?
This hoary headed letcher, this old goat
Close at your villainy, and would thou scuse it,
With this stale harlots jest, accusing me?
O old incontinent, do thou not shame,
When all thy powers inchastitie is spent,
To have a mind so hot? and to entise
And feed the intisements of a lustful woman?

Bia. Out I defy thee I, desembling wretch:

Tho. Defy me strumpet? ask thy paunder here* Can he deny it? or that wicked
elder.

Lo. sen. Why hear you signior?

Tho. Tut, tut, never speak,
Thy guilty conscience will discover thee:

Lo. se. What l^nacie is this that haunts this man?

Enter Giulliano. Giu. Oh sister did you see my cloak?

Bia. Not I, I see none.

Giu. Gods life I have lost it then, saw you Hesperida?

Tho. Hesperida? is she not at home

Giu. No she is gone abroad, and no body can tell me of it at home.
Exit.
The. Oh he^uen,? abroad? what light? a harlot too?
Why? why? hark you, has she? has she not a brother?
A brothers house to keep? to look unto?
But she must fling abroad, my wife has spoyld her,
She takes right after her, she does, she does,
Well you goody b^u^ and --
Enter Cob. That make your husband such a hoddy dod^;
And you young apple squire, and old cuckold m^ker,
I Will have you every one before the Doctor,
Nay you shall answer it I chardge you go.

Lo. se M^rry with ^ll my h^rt, i will go ^^^lingly: how have I vvrongd my self
in coming here.

By. G^ with thee? i will go with thee to thy sh^me* I warrant thee.

Cob. W^y what is the matter? what is here to do?

Tho. What Cob art thou here? oh I am abusd,
And in thy house, was never man so vvrongd.

Cob. Slid in my house? who vvrongd you in my house?

Tho. Marry young lu^t in old, and old in young here,
Thy wifes their baud, here have I taken them.

Cob. Do you here? Cob beats his wife.
did I not charge you keep your do^es shut here, and do you let them lieopen
for all co^mers, do you scratch.


Lo. se. Friend have patience if she have done wrong in this let her answer it
before the M^gistrate.

Cob. I, come, you shall go before the Do^t^r.

Tib. Nay, I will go, i will see and you may be aloud to beat your poor wife
thus at every cucko^dly knaves pleasure, the Devil and the Pox t^ke you all
for me: why do you not go now.


The. A bitter queen, come we will have you tamd.
Exeunt
Enter Musco alone. Mus. Well of all my disguises yet now am I most like my
self being in this va^lets suit, a man of my present profession never
counterfeites till he lay hold upon a debtor, and says he rests him, for then
he bringes him to al manner of unrest; A kind of little kings we are, bearing
the diminitiue of a mace made like a young Hartechocke that always car^ies
Pepper and salt in it self, well I know not what danger I under go by this
exploi^e, pray God I come well of.


Enter Bobadilla and Matheo. Mat. See I think yonder is the varlet.

Bob. Lets go inquest of him.

Mat. God save you friend, are not you here by the appointment of doctor
Clemants man.

Mus. Yes and please you sir, he told me two gentlemen had wild him to procure
an arest upon one signior Giulliano by a vvarrant from his master, which I
have about me.


Mat. It is honestly done of you both, and see where he coms you must arest,
upon him for Gods sake before he beware.


Enter S^ephano. Bob. Bear back Matheo?

Mus. Signior Giulliano* I arest you sir in the Dukes name.

Step. Signior Giulli^^o? am I signior Giulliano? I am one signior Stephano I
tell you, and you do not well by Gods slid to arest me, I tell you truly; I
am not in your masters books, I would you should well know I: and a plague
of God on you for making me afraid thus.


Mus. Why, how are you deceived gentlemen?

Bob. He wears such a cloak, and that deceived us, But see here a coms,
officer, this is he.

Enter Giulliano. Giu. Why how now signior gull: are you a turned flincher of
late* come deliver my cloak.

Step. Your cloak sir? I bought it even now in the market.

Mus Sign^or Giulliano I must arest you sir*

Giu. Arrest me sir, at whose suite?

Mus. At these two gentlemen's.

Giu. I obey thee varlet; but for these villianes --

Mus. Keep the peace I charge you sir, in the Dukes name Sir.

Giu. What Is the matter varlet?

Mus. You must go before master doctor Clement sir, to answer what these
gentlemen will object against you, hark you sir, I will use you kindly.


Mat. We Will be even with you sir, come signior Bobadilla* we will go before and
prepare the doctor: varlet look to hi^.


E^eunt Bobadilla and Matheo. Bob. The varlet is a tall man by Jesus.

Giu. Away you rascalles, Signior I shall have my cloak.

St^p. Your cloak: I say once again I bought it, and i will keep it.

Giu. You will keep ^t?

St^p. I, that I will.

Giu. Verlet stay, here is thy fee arrest him.

Mus. Signior Step^ano I arrest you.

Step. Arrest me? there take your cloak: i will none of it.

Giu. Nay that shall not serve your turn, varlet, bring him away, i will go^ with
thee now to the doctors, and carry him along.


Step. Why is not here your cloak? what would you have?

Giu. I care not for that.

Mus. I pray yo^ sir.

Giu. Never talk of it; I will have him answer it.

Mus. Well sir then i will leave you, i will take this gentleman's word for his
appearance, as I have done yours.

Giu. Tut i will have no words taken, bring him along to answer it.

Mus. Good sir I pity the gentleman's case, here is your money again.

Giu. Gods br^ad, tell not me of my money, bring him away I say.

Mus. I warrant you, he will go with you of himself.

Giu. Yet more ado?

Mus. I have made a fair mashe of it.

Step. Must I go?

Exeunt. Enter doctor Clement, Thorello, Lorenzo, se. Bianc^a, Pizo, Tib, a
servant or two of the Doctors. Clem. Nay but stay, stay give me leave; my
chair sirrah? you signior Lorenzo say you went thither to meet your son.


Lo. se. I sir.

Clem. But who directed you thither?

Lo. se. That did my man sir?

Clem. Where is he?

Lo. se. Nay I know not now, I left him with your clarke,
And appointed him to stay here for me.

Clem. About what time was this?

Lo. s^* Marry between one and two as I take it.

Clem. So, what time came my man with the message to you Signior Thorello?

Tho. After two sir.

Clem. Very good, but Lady how that you were at Cobs: ha?

Bia. And please you sir, i will tell you: my brother Pr^sper^ told me that Cobs
house was a suspected place.

Clem. So it appears me thinks; but on,

Bia. And that my husband used thither daily;

Clem. No matter, so he use himself well.

Bia. True sir, but you know what grows by such haunts oftentimes.

Clem. I, rank fruits of a jealous brain Lady: but did you find your
husband there in that case, as you suspected.

Tho. I found her there sir.

Clem. Did you so? that alters the case; who ga^e you knowledge of your wi^es
being there*

Tho. Marry that did my brother Prospero.

Clem. How Prospero, first tell her, then tell you after? where is Prospero.

The. Gone with my sister sir, I know not vvhither.

Clem. Why this is a meare trick, a devise; you are gulled in this most
grossly: alas poor vvench were thou beaten for this, how now ^irha what is
the matter? Enter one of the Do. men.


Ser. Sir there is a gentleman in the court without desires to speak with your
worship.

Clem. A gentleman? what is he?

Ser. A Soldier, sir, he says*

Clem. A Soldier? fetch me my armor, my sword, quickly a soldier speak
with me, why when knaves, -- come on, come on, hold my cap there, so; give
me my gorget, my sword stand by ^ will end your matters anon; let the
soldier enter, now sir what have you to say to me?


E^ter Bobadillo and Matheo. Bob. By your worships favor.

Clem. Nay keep out sir, I know not your pretense, you send me word ^ir you
are a soldier, why sir you shall be answered here, here be them have been
amongst sould^^rs. Sir your pleasure.


Bob. Faith sir so it is: this gentleman and my self have been most violently
vvronged by one signior Giullian^: a gallant of the city here and for my own
part I protest, being a man in no sort given to this filthy humor of
quarreling, he has asaulted me in the way of my peace: dispoyld me of mine
honor, disarmd me of my weapons, and beaten me in the open streets: when I
not so much as once offered to resist him.


Clem. Oh Gods precious is this the soldier? here take my armor quickly,
twill make him swoone I fear; he is not fit to look on it, that will put up a
blow.


E^ter Servant. Mat. Andt pleas^ your worship he (...) bound to the peace.

Clem. Why, and he were sir, his hands* were not bound, were they?

Ser. There is one of the varlets of the city, has b^ought two gentlemen here
upon arest sir.

Clem. Bid him come in, set by the picture: now sir, what? signior Giulliano?
is it you that are arested at ^ignior freshwaters suit here.


Enter M^s. with Gin. and Stephano. Giu. I faith master Doctor, and here is
another brought at my suite.

Clem. What are yo sir.

S^ep. A gentleman sir^ oh uncle?

Clem. Uncle? who, Lore^zo?

L^. se. I Sir.

Step. Gods my witness my vn^^e, I am vvrongd here monstrously, he charge
me with stealing of his cloak, and would I might never stir, if I did not
find it in the street by chance.


Giu. Oh did you find it now? you said you bought it (...) while?

Step. And you said I stole it, nay now my uncle is here I care not.

Clem. Well let this breath a while; you that have cause t^ complain there,
stand forth; had you a vvarrant for thi^ arrest.


Bob. I andt please your worship.

Clem. Nay do not speak in passion so, where had you it?

Bob. Of your clarke sir.

Clem. That's well and my clarke can make warrants, and my hand not at them;
where is the vvarrant? varlet ha^^ you it?


Mus. No sir your vvorshippes man bid me do it; for these gentlemen and he
would be my discharge.

Clem. Why signior Giullian^, are you such a nouice to be arrested and never
see the vvarrant?

Giu. Why sir, he did not arrest me.

C^e^. No? how then?

Giu. Marry sir he came to me and said he must arrest me, (...) he would use
me kindly, and so forth.

Clem. Oh Gods pity, was it so sir, he must arrest you: gi^e me my long
sword there: help me of; so, come on sir varlet, I must cut of your legs
si^ha; nay stand up i will use you kindly; I mu^^ cut of your legs I say.


Mus. Oh good sir I beseech you, nay good master doctor, Oh* good sir.

Clem. I must do it^ there is no remedy;
I must cut of you^ legs sirrah.
I must cut of your ears, you rascal I must do it;
I must cut of your nose, I must cut of your head.

Mus. Oh for God sake good Master Doctor.

Clem. Well rise how do thou now? do thou feel thy self well? have thou
no harm?

Mus. No I thank God sir and your good worship.

Clem. Why so I said I must cut of thy legs, and I must ^ut of thy arms, and
I must cut of thy head: but I did not do it: so you said you must arrest this
gentleman, but you did not arrest him you knave, you sl^ue, you rogue, do you
say you must arrest sirrah: away with him to the iayle, i will teach yo^ a ^r^^ke
for your must.


Mus. Goo^ M. Doctor I beseech you be good to me.

Clem. Marry a God: away with him I say.

Mus. Nay sblood before I go to prison, i will put on my old brazen face, and
disclaim in my vocation* I Will discover that's flat, and I be committed, it shall
be for the committing of more (...) then this, hang (...) I loos^ the least
grain of my fam^.


Clem^ Why? when knave? by Gods marry, i will clappe thee by the heel^s (...).

Mus. Hold, hold I pray you.

Clem. What the (...)? stay there.

Mus. Faith sir before I go to this house of bondage, I have a case to unfold
to your worship: which (that it may appear more plain unto your worshippes
view) I do thus first of all uncase, and appear in mine own proper nature,
servant to this gentleman: and known^ by the name of Musco.


Lo. se. Ha? Musco.

Step. Oh uncle, Musco has been with my cosen and I all this day.

Clem. Did not I tell you there was some devise.

Mus. Nay good M. Doctor since I have laid my self thus open to your worship:
now stand strong for me, till the progress of my tale be ended, and then if my
wit do not deserve your countenance: Slight throw it on a dog, and let me
go hang my self.


Cle. Body of me a merry knave, give me a boule of Sack, signior Lorenzo, I
bespeak your patience in particular, marry your ears ingenerall, here knave,
Doctor Clement drinks to thee.


Mus. ^ pledge M. Doctor and 't were a sea to the bottom.

C^e. Fill his boule for that, fill his boule: so, now speak freely.

Mus. Indeed this is it will make a man speak freely. But to the point, know
then that I Musc^ (being somewhat more t^usted of my master then reason
required and knowing his intent to Fl^rence) did assume the habit of a poor
soldier in wants, and minding by some means to intercept his journey in the
mid way, tw^xt the grandg and the city, I encountered him, where begging of him
in the most accomplished and true garb (as they term it) contrary to al
expectation, he reclaimed me from that bad course of life; entertained me into
(...) se^^ice, employed me in his business possessed me with his secrets, which I
no sooner had received* but (seeking my young master, and finding him at this
gentleman's house) I revealed all mos^amply: this done, by the d^uise of signior
Pros^ero, and him together, I returned (^s the Raven did to the Arc) to mine
old maist^r again, told him he should find his son in what manner he knows,
at one Cobs house, where indeed he never meant to come, now my master lie to
maintain the jest, went thither, and ieft me with your worships clarke: who
being of a most fine supple disposition (as most of your clerks are) proffers
me the wine, which I h^d the grace to accept very easily, and to the tavern we
went: there after much ceremony, I made him drunk in kindness, stripped him
to his shurt, and leaving him in that cool vain, departed, frolic, courtier
like, having obtained a suit: which suit fitting me exceedingly well, I put on,
and usurping your m^ns phrase and action, carried a message to Signior Thorello
in your name: which message was merely devised but to procure his absence,
while signior Prospero might make a conueiance of Hesperida to my master.


Cl^m. Stay, fill me the boule again, here; twere pity of his life would
not cherish such a spirit: I drink to thee, fill him wine, why now do you
perceive the trick of it.


The. I, I, percei^e well we were all ab^sed*

L^. se. Well what remedy?

Cle^. Where is Lorenz^, and Prospero can thou tell?

M^s. I sir, they are at supper (...) the M^^r^maid, where I left your man.

Clem. Sirrah go vvar^e them ^^ther presently before me: and if the hour of
your fellowe^ resurrection become bring him to. But forward, forward, when
thou had been at Thorre^^^s.


Exit (...). M^s. M^rry sir (coming along the street) these two g^^tlemen
meet me, and very strongly supposing me to be yo^^ vvorship^ scribe, (...) me
to pro^ure them a vvarr^^t, for the arrest of signior (...), I promised them
upon some pair ^f silk stockins or a jewel, or so, to do it, and to get a
varlet of the city to serve it, which varlet I appointed should meet them
upon the Realto (...) such an hour, they no sooner gone, b^t I in a mere hope
of more g^ine by signior Gi^lli^n^, went to one of S^^ans old Ingles ^ broker,
and there pa^nd your man^ liuerie, for a varlets suite, which here with my
self, I offer unto your worships consideration.


Cle^. Well give me thy hand: Proh. superi ing^nium (...) quis n^scit Ho^erum.
Il^i^s (...) si l^tuisset op^^? I admire thee I honor thee, and if thy master,
or any man here be angry with thee, I shall suspect his wit while I know him
for it, do^ you hear Signior Thorell^, Signior Lorenz^, and the rest of my
good friends, I pray you let me have peace when they come, I h^^e sent for the
two gallants and Hesperida, Gods marry I musi have yo^ friends, how now? what
noyseis there?


Enter s^ru^nt, then Peto. Ser. Sir it is Pet^ is come hom^.

Cle. Peto bring him hither, bring him hither, what how now signior drunckard,
in arms against me, ha? your reason your reason for this.


Pe. I beseech your worship to pardon me.

Cle^. Well, sirrah tell him I do pardon him.

Pe. Truly sir I did happen into bad company by chance and they cast me in a
sleep and stripped me of all my clothes.

Cl^m. Tut this is not to the purpose touching your armor, what might your
armor signify.

Pe. Marry (...) hung in the room where they stripped me, and I borrowed it of
on of the drawers, now in the evening to come home in, because I was loath to
come through the street in my shurt.


Ent^r Lorenzo i^nior, Prospero, Hespe^ida. Clem. Well disarme him, but its no
matter let him stand by, who be these? oh young gal^ants; welcome, welcome, and
you Lady, nay never scatter such amazed looks amongst us, Qui nil potest
sperare desperet nihil.


Pros. Faith M. Doctor that's even I, my hopes are small, and my despair shall be
as little. Brother, sister, brother what cloudy, cloudy? and will (...)
sunshine on these looks appear, well since there is such a tempest toward,
i will be the porpuis, i will dance: wench be of good cheer, thou have a cloak for
the rain yet, where is he? S'hart how now, the picture of the prodigal, go to
i will have the calfe dressed for you at my charges.


Le. se. Well son L^renzo, this days work of yours has much deceived my
hopes, troubled my peace, and stretched my patience further then became ^he
spirit of duty.


Cle. Nay Gods pity signior Lorenzo you shall urge it no more come since you
are here, i will have the disposing o^ all, but first signior Giulliano at my
request take your cloak agayn^.


G^u. Well sir I am content.

Cle. Stay now let me see, oh signior Snow^liuer I had almost forgotten him,
and your Genius there, what does he suffer for a good conscience to? does he
bear his cross with patience.


Mu. Nay they have scarce one c^os between the^ both to bear.

Clem. Why do thou know him, what is he? what is he?

Mus. Marry search his pocket sir, and the^e show you he is an Author Sir.

Cle. Dic mihi musa virum: are you an Author sir, give me leave a little, come
on sir, i will make verses with you now in honor of the Gods, and the Goddesses
for what you dare extempore; and now I begin.

Mount the my P^legon muse, and testify,
How Saturn sitting in an Ebon cloud,
Disro^d his podex, white as iuorie,
And through the welkin thundered all aloud. there is for you sir.

Pros. Oh he writes not in that height of style.

Clem. No: we will come a step or two lower then.
From Catadupa and the banks of Nile,
Where only breeds your monstrous Crocodile:
Now are^ we purposd for to fetch our style.

Pros. Oh too far fetched for him still master Doctor:

C^em. I, say you so, lets entreat a sight of his vain then?

Pros. Signior, master Doctor desires to see a sight of your vain, nay you
must not deny him.

Cle. What; all this verse, body of me he carries a whole realm; a common
wealth of paper in his hose, lets see some of his sub^ects.

Unto the boundless ocean of thy beauty,
R^nnes this poor river, chargd with streams of zeal,
Returning thee the tribute of my duty:
Which here my youth, my plaints, my love reue^le.
Good? is this your own invention*

Mat. No sir* I translated that o^t of a book, called Delia.

C. Oh but I would see some of your own, some of your own.

Mat. Sir; here is the beginning of a sonnet I made to my mistress.

Cle^. That that: who? to Madd^^a Hesperida is she your mistress.

Pros. It pleases him to call her so, sir.

Clem. In Summer time when Phoebus golden rays.
You translated this too? did you not?

Pros. No this is invention; he found it in a ballad.

Mat. Faith sir* I had most of the conceit of it (...) of a ballad i^deede.

Clem. Conceit, fetch me a couple of torches, sirrah, I may see the conceit:
quickly? its very dark?

Giu. Call you this poetry?

Lo. iu. Poetry? nay then call blasphemy, religion;
Call Devils, Angels; and Sin, piety:
Let all things be preposterously transchangd.

Le^ se. Why how now son? what? are you startled now?
Has the brize pricked you? ha? go to; you see,
How abiectly your Poetry is ranckt, in general opinion.

Le. iu. Opinion, O God let gross opinion sinck and be damnd
As deep as Barathrum,
If it may stand with your most wished content,
I can refell opinion and approve,
The state of poe^ie, such as it is,
Blessed, aeternall, and most true divine:
Indeed if you will lock on Po^^ie,
As she appears in many, poor and lame,
Patcht up in remnants and old worn rags,
Half starud for want of her peculi^r food:
Sacred invention, then I must conferme,
Both your conceit and censure of her merrite,
But view her in her glorious ornaments,
Attired in the majesty of art,
Set high in spirit with the precious taste,
Of sweet philosophy, and which is most,
Crowned with the rich traditions of a soul,
That hates to have her dignity prophand,
With any relish of an earthly thought:
Oh them how proud a presence does she bear.
Then is she like her self fit to be seen,
Of none but grave and consecrated eyes:
Nor is it any blemish to her fame.
That such lean* ignorant, and blasted wits,
Such brainlesse guls, should utter their stolen wares
With such aplauses in our vulgar ears:
Or that their slubberd lines have current pass,
From the fat judgments of the multitude,
But that this barren and infected age,
Should set no difference twixt these empty spirits,
And a true Poet: then which reverend name,
Nothing can more adorn humanity.

Enter with torches. Clem. I Lorenzo, but election is now gouernd altogether by
the influence of humor, which instead of those holy flames that should direct
and light the soul to eternity, hurles forth nothing bu^ smooke and
congested vapors, that stifle her up, and berea^e her of al sight and motion.
But she must have store of Ell^bor^, given her to purge these gross
obstructions: oh that's well said, give me thy torch, come lay this stuff
together. So, give fire? there, see, see, how our Poets glory shines brighter,
and brighter, still, still it incr^^seth, oh now its at the highest, and now it
declines as fast: you may see gallants, Sic transit gloria mundi. Well now my
two Signior out sides, stand forth, and l^nd me your large (...), to ^
sentence, to a sentence: first you signior shall this night to the cage, and so
shall you sir, from thence to morrow mor^ing, you signior shall be carried to
the market cross, and be there bound: and so shall yo^ sir, in a large motlie
coat, with ^ rod at your girdle; and you in an old suite of sa^kcloth, ^^d
the ashes of your papers (save the ashes sirrah) shall mourn all day, and at
night both together sing some ballad of repentance very pitteously, which you
shall make to the t^^e of Wh^ list t^ lead^ and a soldiers life, Sirrah bil
man, embrace you this torch, and light the gentlemen to their lodgings, and
because we tender their safety, you shall watch them to night, you are
provided for the purpose* away and look to your charge with an open eye sirrah.


Bob. Well I am ar^d in soul against the worst of fortune.

Mat. Faith so should I be, and I had slept on it.

Pe. I am armd too, but I am not like to sleep on it.

Mus. Oh how this pleases me.

Exeunt. C^em. Now Signior Th^^ello, Giulliano, Prospero, Bi^ncha.

Step. And not me sir.

Clem. Yes and you sir: I had lost a sheep and he h^d no^ bleated, I must have
you all friends: but first a word wit^ you young gallant, and you Lady.


Giu. Well brother Prospero by this good light that shines here I am loath to
kindle fresh coals, but and you had come in my walk within these two hours I
had given you that you should not have clawne of again in have, by Jesus I had
done it, I am the arrenst rogue that ever bre^thd else, but now beshrew my heart
if I bear you any malice in the earth.


Pros. Faith I did it but to hold up a jest: and help my sister to a husband,
but brother Thor^llo, and sister, you have a spice of the yealous yet both of
you, (in your hose I mean,) come do not dwell upon your anger so much, lets
all be smoth fore headed once again.


Tho. He plays upon my fore head, brother Giulliano, I pray you tell me one
thing I shall ask you: is my foreheade any thing rougher then it was wont to
be.


Giu. Rougher? your forehead is smoth enough man.

Tho. Why should he then say? be smoth foreheaded,
Unless he iested at the smothnesse of it?
And that may be; for horn is very smoth;
So are my brows* by Jesus, smoth as horn?

Bia. Brother had he no haunt thither in good faith?

Pros. No upon my soul.

Bia. Nay then sweet heart: nay I pray the be not angry, good faith i will never
suspect thee any more, nay kiss me sweet musse.

Tho. Tell me Bi^^cha, do not you play the woman with me.

Bia. What Is that sweet heart.

Tho. Dissemble?

Bia. Dissemble?

Tho. Nay do not turn away: but say I faith was it not a match appointed
twixt this old gentleman and you?

Bia. A match.

Tho. Nay if it were not, I do not care: do not weep I pray thee sweet
Biancha, nay so now? by Jesus I am not jealous, but resolved I have the
faythfulst wife in Italy.

For this I find where jealousy is fed,
Horns in the mind^, are worse then on the head.
See what a drove of horns fly in the air,
Wingd with my cle^^sed, and my credulous breath:
Watch them suspicious eyes, watch where they fall,
See see, on heads that think they have none at all.
Oh what a ple^^uous world of this will come,
When air raynes horns, all men besure of some.

Clem. Why that's well, come then: what say you are all agreed? does none^stand
out.

Pr^s. None but this gentleman: to whom in my own person I owe all duty and
affection: but most seriously entreat pardon, for whatsoever has past in
these occurrants, that might be contrary to his most desired content.


Lo. Faith sir it is a virtue that persues,
Any ^aue rude and vncomposed spirits,
To make a fair construction and indeed
Not to stand of, when such respective means,
Inuit a general content in all.

Clem. Well then I conjure you all here to put of all coffeehouse, first you
Signior L^renz^ your cares; you, and you, your iealosie: you your anger, and
you your wit sir: and for a peace offering, here is one willing to be sacrifised
upon this altar: say d^ you approve my motion?


Pros. We do i will be mouth for all.

Clem. Why then I wish them all joy, and now to make our evening happiness
more full: this night you shall be all my guestes: where we will enjoy the very
spirit of mirth, and carouse to the health of this Heroic spirit, whom to
honor the more I do inuest in my own robes, desiring you two Giulliano, and
Pr^spero, to be his supporters, the train to follow, my self will leade^,
vsherd by my page here with this honorabl^ verse. Claudite iam riuos pueri sat
pr^ta biberunt.


FINIS.

